





How to Live Longer and Feel Better 














HOW TO LIVE LONGER 


AND FEE BETTER 


Linus Pauling 


IS 

W. H. Freeman and Company 
New York 






Illustrations on pages 68, 70, and 71 by George Kelvin. 

Drawings on pages 6, 40, 105, 235, and 264 by Sidney Harris. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Pauling, Linus, 1901- 

How to live longer and feel better. 

Bibliography: p. 

Includes index. 

1. Nutrition. 2. Vitamins in human nutrition. 

3. Orthomolecular therapy. 4. Health. I. Title. 

RA774.P38 1986 613.2 85-25321 
ISBN 0-7167-1781-6 
ISBN 0-7167-1775-1 (pbk.) 

Copyright © 1986 by W. H. Freeman and Company 

No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, 
electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording, nor may it 
be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise copied for public 
or private use, without written permission from the publisher. 

Printed in the United States of America 

1234567890 H 4321089876 



To 

Arthur M. Sackler 






































. 
















Contents 


Introduction ix 

I THE REGIMEN / 

1 Good Nutrition for a Good Life 3 

2 A Regimen for Better Health 8 

3 The Old Nutrition and the New 77 

4 Proteins, Fats, Carbohydrates, and Water 

5 Foods as the Source of Heat and Energy 

6 Two Eating Problems 36 

II THE NEW NUTRITION 45 

7 How Vitamins Were Discovered 47 

8 Vitamins and Evolution 55 

9 Vitamins in the Body 64 

10 Biochemical Individuality 81 


vm 


CONTENTS 


III ORTHOMOLECULAR MEDICINE 91 

11 Orthomolecular Medicine Defined 93 

12 The Immune System 100 

13 The Common Cold 107 

14 Influenza and Other Infectious Diseases 123 

15 Wounds and Their Healing 136 

16 Muscular Activity 141 

17 The Heart 145 

18 Cardiovascular Disease 153 

19 Cancer 163 

20 The Brain 181 

21 The Allergies 196 

22 Arthritis and Rheumatism 202 

23 The Eye, the Ear, and the Mouth 207 

24 Aging: Its Moderation and Delay 212 

IV VITAMINS AND DRUGS 223 

25 Organized Medicine and the Vitamins 225 

26 Vitamins and Drugs Compared 237 

27 The Low Toxicity of Vitamins 249 

28 The Side Effects of Vitamins 257 

V HOW TO LIVE LONGER AND FEEL BETTER 269 
29 A Happy Life and a Better World 271 

Bibliography 275 

About the Author 307 


Index 313 







Introduction 


This book discusses some simple and inexpensive measures that you can 
take to lead a better and longer life, with greater enjoyment and fewer 
illnesses. The most important recommendation is that some vitamins be 
taken every day to supplement the vitamins that you get in your food. The 
best amounts of the supplementary vitamins and the best way to take them 
are discussed in the first chapters of the book, and the reasons for taking 
them are discussed in the following chapters. 

I am a scientist, a chemist, physicist, crystallographer, molecular biolo¬ 
gist, and medical researcher. Twenty years ago I became interested in the 
vitamins. I discovered that the science of nutrition had stopped developing. 
The old professors of nutrition who had helped to develop this science fifty 
years ago seemed to be so well satisfied with their accomplishment that they 
ignored the new discoveries that were being made in biochemistry, molecu¬ 
lar biology, and medicine, including vitamins and other nutrients. Although 
a new science of nutrition was being developed, these old professors of 
nutrition continued to teach their students the old ideas, many of them 
wrong, such as that no person in ordinary health needs to take supplemen¬ 
tary vitamins and that all that you need to do for good nutrition is to eat 
some of each of the “four foods” each day. 


X 


INTRODUCTION 


As a result of this poor teaching, many nutritionists and dieticians today 
still practice the old nutrition, with the result that the American people are 
not as healthy as they should be. Physicians also contribute to this problem. 
Most of them have received only a small amount of instruction in nutrition 
(most of it, of course, out of date) in medical school, and since then have 
been kept so busy in their care of their patients as not to have time to follow 
the new developments about vitamins and other nutrients. 

When I discovered that the new developments in the field of nutrition 
were being ignored I became so interested that for twenty years most of my 
effort has been devoted to research and education in this field. I have been 
fortunate in this work to have had and to continue to have the collaboration 
of many able scientific and medical investigators in Stanford University and 
Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine. 

Fifteen years ago many people were already convinced, on the basis of 
their own experience, that an increased intake of vitamin C provides some 
protection against the common cold, even though most physicians and au¬ 
thorities in the field of nutrition continued to describe vitamin C as having 
no value in controlling the common cold or any other disease except its 
specific deficiency disease, scurvy. When I examined the medical literature 
I found that a number of excellent studies had been carried out, and that 
most of them showed that vitamin C does have value in controlling the 
common cold. My concern about the failure of the medical authorities to 
pay the deserved attention to the existing evidence caused me to write my 
book Vitamin C and the Common Cold . 

When this book was published it received favorable comment from some 
reviewers, but was quite strongly criticized by others. The discussion that 
followed stimulated a number of investigators, including Professor George 
Beaton, head of the Department of Nutrition in the School of Hygiene of 
the University of Toronto, to begin controlled trials. These trials all sup¬ 
ported the conclusion that vitamin C has value in controlling the common 
cold. As a result, the medical and nutritional authorities no longer claim 
that vitamin C has no value in connection with the common cold, although 
they may contend that the amount of protection provided by it is not great 
enough to justify the bother and expense of taking the vitamin. 

In the course of my continued studies of vitamin C I learned that this 
vitamin exerts a general antiviral action and provides some protection not 
only against the common cold but also against other viral diseases, includ¬ 
ing influenza, mononucleosis, hepatitis, and herpes. The common cold is a 
nuisance, but is not very dangerous. Only rarely does it lead to complica¬ 
tions that cause death. Influenza (the flu), on the other hand, is a very 
serious and dangerous disease. In the great influenza pandemic of 



INTRODUCTION 


xi 


1918-1919 the disease was contracted by about 85 percent of the popula¬ 
tion in all countries and killed about 1 percent, including many healthy 
young adults—the estimated total number of deaths being about 20 million. 
An outbreak of influenza in early 1976 with a virus similar to that of the 
1918-1919 pandemic also caused great concern. It is important to know 
that a good intake of vitamin C can improve your general health in such a 
way as to provide significant protection against these diseases. In addition, 
good intakes of vitamin C and other vitamins can improve your general 
health in such a way as to increase your enjoyment of life and can help in 
controlling heart disease, cancer, and other diseases and in slowing down 
the process of aging. All of these questions are discussed in this book. 

I hope that the book will help many people to avoid serious illness and 
will enable them to lead and to enjoy healthier and longer lives. 

I thank Mrs. Dorothy Munro, Mrs. Corrine Gorham, Mrs. Ruth Reyn¬ 
olds, Dr. Ewan Cameron, Dr. Zelek Herman, Dr. Linus Pauling, Jr., Dr. 
Crellin Pauling, Dr. Kay Pauling, Dr. Armand Hammer, Mr. Ryoichi 
Sasakawa, and Dr. Emile Zuckerkandl for their help. I am grateful to Dr. 
Abram Hoffer, Dr. Humphry Osmond, and Dr. Irwin Stone for having 
aroused my interest in vitamins about twenty years ago, and to Linda 
Chaput and her associates in W. H. Freeman and Company for their help 
in the publication of this book. I am especially grateful to my friend Gerard 
Piel for his continued encouragement and his contributions to the book. 

Linus Pauling 

Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine 

440 Page Mill Road 
Palo Alto , California 94306 
September 1, 1985 















How to Live Longer and Feel Better 






I 


THE REGIMEN 













1 


Good Nutrition for a Good Life 


I believe that you can, by taking some simple and inexpensive measures, 
lead a longer life and extend your years of well-being. My most important 
recommendation is that you take vitamins every day in optimum amounts 
to supplement the vitamins that you receive in your food. Those optimum 
amounts are much larger than the minimum supplemental intake usually 
recommended by physicians and old-fashioned nutritionists. The intake of 
vitamin C they advise, for example, is not much larger than that necessary 
to prevent the dietary-deficiency disease scurvy. My advice that you take 
larger amounts of C and other vitamins is predicated upon new and better 
understanding of the role of these nutrients—they are not drugs—in the 
chemical reactions of life. The usefulness of the larger supplemental intakes 
indicated by this understanding has been invariably confirmed by such 
clinical trials as have been run and by the first pioneering studies in the 
new epidemiology of health. 

By the proper intakes of vitamins and other nutrients and by following a 
few other healthful practices from youth or middle age on, you can, I 
believe, extend your life and years of well-being by twenty-five or even 
thirty-five years. A benefit of increasing the length of the period of well¬ 
being is that the fraction of one’s life during which one is happy becomes 
greater. Youth is a time of unhappiness; young people, striving to find their 





4 


CHAPTER 1 


places in the world, live under great stress. The deterioration in health as 
the result of age usually makes the period before death a time of unhappi¬ 
ness again. There is evidence that there is less unhappiness associated with 
death at an advanced age than at an early age. 

For such reasons it is sensible to take the health measures that will 
increase the length of the period of well-being and the life span. If you are 
already old when you begin taking vitamin supplements in the proper 
amounts and following other practices that improve your health, you can 
expect the control of the process of aging to be less, but it may still amount 
to fifteen or twenty years. 

For most of the statements in the following chapters I give reference to 
the published reports of the observations on which the statements are based. 
It is not possible, however, for me to substantiate in the same way the 
foregoing statements of my beliefs about the increase in the length of the 
period of well-being and the length of life. I have formed these beliefs on 
the basis of my knowledge of a great many observations about the effects of 
vitamins in varying amounts on animals and human beings under various 
conditions of good or poor health, including some significant epidemiologi¬ 
cal studies. There is, however, no single study to which I can point as 
showing with high statistical significance that the amount of benefit is as 
great as I believe it to be. One complication, discussed in a later chapter, is 
that human beings differ from one another; they show a pronounced bio¬ 
chemical individuality. It is far easier to obtain reliable information about 
the factors determining the health of guinea pigs or monkeys than of hu¬ 
man beings, and I have relied to some extent on the studies made on these 
and other animal species. 

I am, for example, impressed by the fact that the Committee on the 
Feeding of Laboratory Animals of the U.S. National Academy of 
Sciences-National Research Council recommends far more vitamin C for 
monkeys than the Food and Nutrition Board of the same U.S. National 
Academy of Sciences-National Research Council recommends for human 
beings. I am sure that the first committee has worked hard to find the 
optimum intake for the monkeys, the amount that puts them in the best of 
health. The second committee has not made any effort to find the optimum 
intake of vitamin C or of any other vitamin for the American people. In its 
Recommended Daily Allowances, so well publicized that they are referred 
to on breakfast-cereal boxes by the initials RDA, the committee rations the 
vitamins at not much above the minimum daily intake required to prevent 
the particular deficiency disease that is associated with each of them. 

No evidence compels the conclusion that the minimum required intake of 
any vitamin comes close to the optimum intake that sustains good health. 
The best supplementary amounts of the vitamins and the best way to take 



GOOD NUTRITION FOR A GOOD LIFE 


5 


them I discuss in the first chapters of this book, and the reasons for taking 
them in the chapters that follow. As you will see, I think that vitamin C is 
the most important in the sense that the value of increasing the intake of 
this vitamin beyond that supplied by an ordinary diet is greater than for the 
other vitamins, but the other vitamins are also important. 

When it comes to concern about health, an important question is the 
extent to which a person in the United States should depend on his or her 
physician. At the present time the main job of the physician is to try to cure 
the patient when he or she appears in the office with a specific illness. The 
physician usually does not make any great effort to prevent the illness or to 
strive to put the person consulting him or her in the best of health. 

A remarkable book has been published recently (1984) by Dr. Eugene 
D. Robin, professor of medicine and physiology in Stanford Medical 
School. Its title is Matters of Life and Death: Risks vs. Benefits of Medical 
Care. In it the author discusses the drawbacks of present-day medicine as 
well as its strengths. His thesis is that there are “serious flaws in the basic 
processes by which diagnostic and therapeutic measures are introduced and 
used in medicine” and that “potential or actual patients can reduce the risks 
and increase the benefits of their medical care if they are familiar with the 
flaws in medicine.” Robin writes that if you pay attention to your own 
health and do not see the “doctor as God,” you can avoid serious errors in 
your own care. “You will be advised,” he says, “to consult doctors only 
when you believe that you are truly ill. By restricting your medical encoun¬ 
ters to those that are absolutely necessary you will be avoiding the risks 
inherent in most diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.” 

“This advice,” Robin says, “tends to slight an important function that 
doctors have assumed in our society: dealing with patients whose main 
problem is an unhappy life. It is your privilege to consult a doctor for that 
purpose, but you should know that few doctors have high cure rates for 
unhappy lives, so that the chances of obtaining real help are small. More¬ 
over, your visit may start a series of potentially dangerous medical tests and 
treatments. If, as a result of reading this book, you see that even a decision 
to consult a doctor is a serious and potentially risky one, that it requires 
some estimate of potential risks as well as potential benefits, you will have 
spent your time well. 

“You will be cautioned to avoid hospitalization unless you are seriously 
ill and only a hospital has the facilities for your treatment. Many hospital¬ 
izations are unnecessary. Hospitals can be dangerous places.” 

Robin does not discuss vitamins in his book. This omission is probably 
the result of his having no more knowledge about vitamins that most other 
physicians have. If he knew more about vitamins, he might have warned his 
readers to be careful about accepting their doctor’s advice about vitamins 




6 


CHAPTER 1 


and other aspects of nutrition, because most physicians and surgeons re¬ 
ceived little instruction in this field in medical school and have picked up 
much misinformation since their graduation. 

It is particularly important that you not let your doctor stop your vitamin 
supplements when you are hospitalized. That is when you have the greatest 
need for them. 

In April 1970, I wrote to Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, the man who first 
separated ascorbic acid, which is another name for vitamin C, from the 
plant and animal tissues in which it occurs. I asked his opinion about 
vitamin C, especially with relation to the optimum rate of intake. He gave 



"lx> UKe SoMEr O '? THAT PU&VeMliVEr 

50 MUCH AfcOUT. 
























GOOD NUTRITION FOR A GOOD LIFE 


7 


me permission to quote part of his answering letter, as follows. “As to 
ascorbic acid, right from the beginning I felt that the medical profession 
misled the public. If you don’t take ascorbic acid with your food you get 
scurvy, so the medical profession said that if you don’t get scurvy you are all 
right. I think that this is a very grave error. Scurvy is not the first sign of 
the deficiency but a premortal syndrome, and for full health you need much 
more, very much more. I am taking, myself, about 1 g a day. This does not 
mean that this is really the optimum dose because we do not know what 
full health really means and how much ascorbic acid you need for it. What 
I can tell you is that one can take any amount of ascorbic acid without the 
least danger.” 

The medical profession and the powerful medical institutions and enter¬ 
prises in this country have taken to calling themselves the health profession, 
health centers, and health companies. This is a misnomer for what is really 
the sickness industry. I like the definition of health set out in the constitu¬ 
tion of the World Health Organization, which states “Health is a state of 
complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the ab¬ 
sence of disease and infirmity.” 

The World Health Organization constitution goes on to say “The enjoy¬ 
ment of the highest attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental 
rights of every human being without regard to race, religion, political belief 
and economic or social condition.” This is a right that only a minority of the 
world population can yet enjoy. It is a right open to the lucky people of this 
country who have the material wealth to make it real. It is a right that is 
open to you. All that you need to do is to assert it by sensible behavior. 
What is more, thanks to the new science of nutrition, you can today multi¬ 
ply the benefits of healthy habits by taking, every day, the optimum 
amounts of the essential vitamins. 

No one knows the state of health of a person better than the person 
himself or herself. It is important to think about one’s health and to act in 
such a way as to improve it. 



2 


A Regimen for Better Health 


The measures that you take to improve your health and prolong your life 
should not be so burdensome and disagreeable as to interfere seriously with 
the quality of your life and make it difficult for you to continue with the 
regimen day after day, year after year. Compliance is very important. The 
regimen described in the following paragraphs is of such a nature that you 
should be able to adhere to it rigorously, day after day, for the rest of 
your life. 

The regimen does not include every health measure of which I have 
knowledge. Moreover, it does not take into account the special nutritional 
needs of individuals. For example, persons with a tendency toward arthritis 
might benefit by increases in vitamin C, niacinamide, and vitamin B 6 . The 
regimen is instead an average or basic one, which should benefit nearly 
every person in the United States. Additional benefits may result from 
changes made in response to biochemical individuality. The steps of the 
regimen are as follows: 

1. Take vitamin C every day, 6 grams (g) to 18 g (6000 to 18,000 milli¬ 
grams [mg]), or more. Do not miss a single day. 

2. Take vitamin E every day, 400 IU, 800 IU, or 1600 IU.* 


*IU stands for International Unit, the quantity of a vitamin (or other substance) specified in 
accordance with an international convention adopted by the World Health Organization. 


i 





A REGIMEN FOR BETTER HEALTH 


9 


3. Take one or two Super-B tablets every day, to provide good amounts 
of the B vitamins. 

4. Take a 25,000 IU vitamin A tablet every day. 

5. Take a mineral supplement every day, such as one tablet of the 
Bronson vitamin-mineral formula, which provides 100 mg of calcium, 
18 mg of iron, 0.15 mg of iodine, 1 mg of copper, 25 mg of magne¬ 
sium, 3 mg of manganese, 15 mg of zinc, 0.015 mg of molybdenum, 
0.015 mg of chromium, and 0.015 mg of selenium. 

6. Keep your intake of ordinary sugar (sucrose, raw sugar, brown sugar, 
honey) to 50 pounds per year, which is half the present U.S. average. 
Do not add sugar to tea or coffee. Do not eat high-sugar foods. Avoid 
sweet desserts. Do not drink soft drinks. 

7. Except for avoiding sugar, eat what you like—but not too much of 
any one food. Eggs and meat are good foods. Also, you should eat 
some vegetables and fruits. Do not eat so much food as to become 
obese. 

8. Drink plenty of water every day. 

9. Keep active; take some exercise. Do not at any time exert yourself 
physically to an extent far beyond what you are accustomed to. 

10. Drink alcoholic beverages only in moderation. 

11. DO NOT SMOKE CIGARETTES. 

12. Avoid stress. Work at a job that you like. Be happy with your family. 

The main feature of this regimen is the vitamin supplements. Taking 
them need not be burdensome. It is easy to get in the habit of taking your 
vitamins every day, and it is important to do so. 

The great advantage of this regimen over other proposed methods of 
prolonging life and improving health is that it is firmly based on the new 
science of nutrition that has been developed only during recent years. The 
greatest difference between this new science and the old nutrition is the 
recognition that vitamins taken in the optimum amounts have far greater 
value than when taken in the usually recommended small amounts, shown 
in the illustration on page 10. Moreover, with the optimum intake of sup¬ 
plementary vitamins there is no longer so much need to stress other dietary 
measures, such as decreasing the intake of animal fat and not eating eggs. 
The regimen that I recommend permits compliance, day after day, year 
after year. A burdensome or disagreeable regimen will not be followed by 
many people. The quality of life is enhanced when one is liberated from 
these dietary restrictions. 



10 


CHAPTER 2 


1000 g 

500 

200 

100 

50 

20 

10 

5 

2g 
1000 |xg 
500 

200 

100 

50 

20 

10 

5 

2 mg 
1000 |xg 
500 

200 

100 

50 

20 

10 

5 

2 



Water 


Carbohydrates, starch 



Fats 

Protein 

Chlorine 

Sodium 

Potassium 

Leucine, methionine, phenylalanine 
Lysine, valine, isoleucine 
Threonine 

Calcium, phosphorus 

Tryptophan 

Magnesium 



Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 
a-Tocopherol (vitamin E) 
Niacin 

Pantothenic acid 
Iron 

Pyridoxine (vitamin BJ 
Copper 

Riboflavin (vitamin B,) 

Fluorine 

Vitamin A 

Thiamine (vitamin B,) 

Folic acid 

Biotin 

Iodine 


Cvanocobalamin (vitamin B 12 ) 


1 M-g 


Recommended daily allowances (RDA) These allowances, set by the Food and 
Nutrition Board of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council, 
specify for adult males the amounts of thirty-three nutrients needed for preventing overt 
manifestation of deficiency disease in most persons. The list includes four macronutrients— 
water, carbohydrates, fats, and protein—and twenty-nine micronutrients to be taken daily 
in food and supplements. The RDA for vitamins typically fall short of the optimum intakes 
required for the best of health. Other nutrients, probably or possibly required, not shown 
here, are the essential fatty acids, para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), choline, vitamin D, 
vitamin K, selenium, chromium, manganese, cobalt, nickel, zinc, molybdenum, vanadium, 
tin, and silicon. 












A REGIMEN FOR BETTER HEALTH 


77 


The discovery of vitamins three quarters of a century ago and the recog¬ 
nition that they are essential elements of a healthy diet was one of the most 
important contributions to health ever made. Of equal importance was the 
recognition about twenty years ago that the optimum intakes of several of 
the vitamins, far larger than the usually recommended intakes, lead to 
further improvement in health, greater protection against many diseases, 
and great value as an adjunct to the appropriate conventional therapy in 
the treatment of diseases. The principal way in which vitamin C and other 
vitamins function is by strengthening the natural protective mechanisms of 
the human body, especially the immune system, and by increasing the 
effectiveness of enzymes in catalyzing biochemical reactions. 

The optimum daily amounts of vitamins are far larger than the amounts 
that can be obtained in food, even by selecting foods for their high vitamin 
content. The only way to obtain the amounts of vitamins that put you in the 
best of health is to take vitamin supplements. For example, to obtain the 
18,000 mg of vitamin C that I take each day I would have to drink more 
than 200 large glasses of orange juice. 

To secure my recommended intakes of supplementary vitamins and min¬ 
erals, shown in the table below, I take only four tablets a day. These are 
one 800-IU vitamin E capsule, one Super-B tablet, one vitamin and min¬ 
eral tablet, and one 25,000-IU vitamin A capsule. I take them in the 
evening. I take much of my vitamin C in the morning, before breakfast, 
12 g (three level teaspoonfuls) of pure crystalline ascorbic acid either dis¬ 
solved in orange juice to buffer it or in water with a small amount of baking 
soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate) added to make an effervescent drink. 


Recommended daily adult intakes of vitamins 



RDA 

Williams 

Allen* 

Leibovitz 1 

This book 

Vitamin G 

60 mg 

2500 mg 

1500 mg 

2500 mg 

1000-18,000 mg 

Vitamin E 

10 IU 

400 IU 

600 IU 

300 IU 

800 IU 

Vitamin A 

5000 IU 

15,000 IU 

15,000 IU 

20,000 IU 

20,000-40,000 IU 

Vitamin K 

none 

100 mg 

none 

none 

none 

Vitamin D 

400 IU 

400 IU 

300 IU 

800 IU 

800 IU 

Thiamine, B, 

1.5 mg 

20 mg 

300 mg 

100 mg 

50-100 mg 

Riboflavin, B 2 

1.7 mg 

20 mg 

200 mg 

100 mg 

50-100 mg 

Niacinamide, B 3 

18 mg 

200 mg 

750 mg 

300 mg 

300-600 mg 

Pyridoxine, B 6 

2.2 mg 

30 mg 

350 mg 

100 mg 

50-100 mg 

Cobalamin, B 12 

3 mg 

90 mg 

1000 mg 

100 mg 

100-200 mg 

Folacin 

400 mg 

400 mg 

400 mg 

400 mg 

400-800 mg 

Pantothenic acid 

none 

150 mg 

500 mg 

200 mg 

100-200 mg 


*Harrell et al., 1981. 
Leibovitz, 1984. 






12 


CHAPTER 2 


Vitamin C may also be taken as sodium ascorbate or calcium ascorbate. If I 
feel tired later in the day or feel that I have been exposed to a cold virus, I 
take a few 1-g tablets or another spoonful of ascorbic acid. 

At this writing, in the year 1985, the four tablets I take every day plus 
the 18 g of vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid, fine crystals) cost me by mail order, 
postage paid, (from Bronson Pharmaceuticals, 4526 Rinetti Lane, La 
Canada, Calif. 91011) the total sum of 41 cents a day. If I were to take, 
instead, the six tablets of the Roger J. Williams Fortified Insurance 
Formula, offered in the Bronson catalog, containing somewhat smaller 
amounts of these nutrients plus some others, the cost would be 37 cents a 
day. Thus these vitamin-mineral supplements, which can mean the differ¬ 
ence for you between ordinary poor health and really good health, need cost 
you only as much as one small chocolate bar. 

Even if, as a cancer patient, you were to take 50 g of vitamin C per day, 
it would cost only 78 cents, and with the other vitamins and minerals only 
$1.00 altogether, a negligible cost in comparison with the other expenses 
for a patient's care. 

The values of the RDA given in the table on page 11 are those for adult 
males from the 1980 edition of the Recommended Dietary Allowances; 
the values for women and children are somewhat different. The Williams 
values are for the Fortified Insurance Formula of Professor Roger J. 
Williams; the Williams tablets also contain para-aminobezoic acid, biotin, 
choline, inositol, rutin, and eleven minerals (calcium, magnesium, phospho¬ 
rus, iron, zinc, copper, manganese, chromium, molybdenum, iodine, and 
selenium). The Allen formula also contains eight minerals. Brian Leibovitz 
(in his book Carnitine ) also recommends biotin, choline, inositol, bioflavo¬ 
noids, and ten minerals. 

The essential minerals differ from the vitamins in that overdoses of min¬ 
erals may be harmful. Do not increase your vitamin intake by taking a 
large number of vitamin-mineral tablets. Limit your mineral intake to the 
recommended amounts. 

It is important not to stop the vitamin supplements, even for a single day. 
We know that there is a rebound effect on stopping the intake of vitamin C, 
such as to increase temporarily the risk of disease (Chapters 13 and 19). 
There may be similar rebound effects also for the other water-soluble vita¬ 
mins, although none has been reported. 

In general, the sensible way to buy vitamins is to check the prices and to 
buy the cheapest. It is required by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) that the contents be stated on the label. There are probably a few 
unscrupulous companies, but usually the label can be relied on. 

The range of prices for essentially the same items is far larger for vita¬ 
mins than for most consumer goods, such as beefsteak or a television set. 



A REGIMEN FOR BETTER HEALTH 


13 


When I began checking the prices of vitamins fifteen years ago, I found that 
one company was selling a solution of vitamin C said to be specially pre¬ 
pared for old people at one thousand times the price of ordinary vitamin C, 
and another company was selling vitamin C tablets at one hundred times 
the ordinary price. I no longer find such tremendous overpricing, but if you 
do not check you might pay five times or even ten times the proper amount. 

The catalog of a reliable company can be used as a reference standard, or 
you may check the advertisements in Prevention magazine. 

It is wise not to buy vitamins from a salesman and not to buy from a 
company that does not have a price list that would permit you to compare 
prices. 

Sometimes the effort is made to charge a higher price by using names 
that have little significance, such as Rose Hips Vitamin C (ordinary vita¬ 
min C with a little rose-hip powder added), chelated vitamins and miner¬ 
als, “natural” vitamins, etc. Also, brands prescribed by a physician may cost 
four times as much as the proper price. 

Most vitamin preparations are stable. Ascorbic acid in the form of fine 
crystals or crystalline powder kept in a brown or opaque white bottle is 
stable indefinitely and can be kept for years. Dry tablets are also reason¬ 
ably stable and can be kept for years in a brown or opaque white bottle. 
Solutions of ascorbic acid may be oxidized when exposed to air and light. A 
solution of ascorbic acid in water may, however, be kept for several days in 
a refrigerator without significant oxidation. 

You may have to use some care not to be taken in by unscrupulous 
companies. After I had recommended pure vitamin-C crystals or powder in 
my book Vitamin C and the Common Cold I saw an advertisement for 
“Vitamin C Powder” at a price just under $10 per kilogram (kg). I bought 
a bottle from the company, which was based in Kansas City, Missouri, and 
found in small print on the label the statement, “Each level tablespoonful 
contains 500 mg of ascorbic acid.” A level tablespoonful is about 14 g. 
Accordingly the preparation contains only 36 g of ascorbic acid in 1000 g of 
powder; only one twenty-eighth of the powder is ascorbic acid, and the 
price is $280 per kilogram of vitamin C, not $10. I wrote to the FDA about 
this misrepresentation and received in reply a statement that the FDA 
could do nothing about the matter. I then wrote to the Federal Trade 
Commission, which issued a cease-and-desist order on the company. 

The most important part of my recommended regimen is to take the 
optimum amounts of the vitamins every day. This need not, as I have 
shown, involve swallowing more than a half-dozen tablets a day. My main 
other recommendation about diet (see Chapter 6) is to decrease your intake 
of sucrose (ordinary sugar, including raw sugar, brown sugar, syrup, and 
honey). You can improve your health significantly by reducing your sugar 



14 


CHAPTER 2 


intake to half the U.S. average of 100 pounds per year, and you can do it by 
never putting sugar in tea or coffee, avoiding soft drinks, and eating sweet 
desserts and candy only rarely. 

As to your diet otherwise, I think that you should for the most part eat 
what you like, rather than try to follow a restrictive diet that you have 
trouble conforming to and that does not add to your pleasure in life. Eat the 
foods that you like (except the high-sugar foods), but do not eat such large 
amounts as to make you overweight. 

It is a good idea not to eat large amounts of meat. One quarter of a 
pound of meat provides 25 g of protein, about half the recommended 
amount per day. If your high intake of vitamin C keeps your serum choles¬ 
terol below 200 mg per deciliter (dl), there is no need for you to take special 
care to eliminate animal fat from your diet or to avoid drinking milk and 
eating eggs, both of which are good foods. 

About 10 percent of adult Europeans and most Asians and Africans have 
digestive problems when they drink milk. At the end of infancy they stop 
making lactase, which is an enzyme involved in digesting milk sugar (lac¬ 
tose). Milk is a good food, especially as a source of calcium (about 500 mg 
per pint). The lactase-deficient person can, however, eat cheese, which is 
also high in calcium. 

Even though a major reason for eating fruits and vegetables is to obtain 
vitamins, and this need may be satisfied by taking vitamin supplements, it 
is a good idea to include fruits and vegetables in the diet. 

A moderate amount of regular exercise is good; also sleeping seven or 
eight hours a night, avoiding stressful situations, having an occupation that 
you like, and in general, enjoying life. 

It is wise not to rely entirely upon dietary supplements for other essential 
nutrients, although they can be obtained as such in tablet and in other 
forms. “Essential” in this usage designates substances not manufactured in 
the body: certain amino acids and fats and many of the vitamins. The 
essential amino acids are not required as a dietary supplement if an ade¬ 
quate supply of protein is ingested. Moreover, although it is believed that 
the most important essential nutrients for humans are known, there is still 
the possibility that some have remained undiscovered. For this reason I 
agree with the first recommendation of the specialists in nutrition that 
everyone should eat a balanced diet, with a good amount of green vegeta¬ 
bles, well prepared, and fresh fruits, such as oranges and grapefruit. 

Since human beings show biochemical individuality, there is the possibil¬ 
ity that a person may respond in an unusual way to an increased intake of 
vitamin C. Because vitamin C is required as an essential nutrient, and all 
of our ancestors tolerated it for millions of years, it is very unlikely that 
anyone would have a serious allergic response to it. There is, however, a 



A REGIMEN FOR BETTER HEALTH 


75 


slight possibility of allergy to the filler, if tablets are taken in preference to 
the powder, which is pure crystalline ascorbic acid. It is, of course, wise to 
increase or decrease the daily intake of this nutrient gradually. 

A few months of experience should be enough to tell you whether the 
amount of ascorbic acid that you are ingesting approximates the desirable 
amount, the amount that provides protection against the common cold. 
That amount in the nutrition of older people can also reduce the misery of 
arthritis and carpal tunnel syndrome and many other ailments. If you take 
1 g per day and find that you have developed two or three colds during the 
winter season, it would be wise to try taking a larger daily quantity. 

Also, if you are exposed to a cold, by having been in contact with a 
person suffering from a cold, or if you have become chilled by exposure or 
tired by overwork or lack of sleep, it would be wise to increase the amount 
of vitamin C ingested. 

It is wise to carry some 1000-mg tablets of ascorbic acid with you at all 
times. At the first sign that a cold is developing, the first feeling of scratchi¬ 
ness of the throat, presence of mucus in the nose, or muscle pain or general 
malaise, begin the treatment by swallowing two or more 1000-mg tablets. 
Continue the treatment for several hours by taking an additional two tab¬ 
lets or more every hour. 

If the symptoms disappear quickly after the first or second dose of ascor¬ 
bic acid, you may feel safe returning to your usual regimen. If, however, 
the symptoms continue, the regimen should be continued, with the inges¬ 
tion of 10 g to 20 g of ascorbic acid per day. The physician Edme Regnier 
has pointed out (1968) that his observations indicate that when a cold is 
suppressed or averted by the use of an adequate amount of vitamin C the 
viral infection does not disappear at once but remains suppressed, and that 
it is accordingly important that the vitamin-C regimen be continued for an 
adequate period of time. 

It may be worthwhile to help control a cold by the topical application of 
a solution of sodium ascorbate, made by dissolving 3.1 g of sodium ascor¬ 
bate in 100 milliliters (ml) of water. Braenden (1973), who has reported 
success in curing most colds or markedly alleviating the symptoms by this 
method, recommends introducing twenty drops of this solution into each 
nostril with an eye dropper. He has pointed out that in this way a local 
concentration of ascorbate a thousand times the value produced by oral 
administration can be reached. 

Ascorbic acid is inexpensive and harmless, even when it is ingested in 
large amounts. A common cold, when it develops, may involve serious dis¬ 
comfort and suffering, inconvenience, reduced efficiency, and even disabil¬ 
ity for some days. Moreover, it may lead to the complications of more 
serious infections. It is accordingly better to overestimate the amount of 



16 


CHAPTER 2 


ascorbic acid needed to control the cold than to underestimate it. It may be 
desirable to increase the intake to the bowel tolerance limit, as discussed in 
Chapter 14. You must remember, too, to be on the lookout for the first 
symptoms of the cold and to be prepared to take immediate action. If you 
wait a day, or even a few hours, and if you take too small an amount of the 
vitamin, the cold may reach the stage where it cannot be stopped. 

It is fortunate that vitamins are so cheap that even the high-potency 
supplements can be afforded by nearly every person in this country. My 
own rather large intake costs less than a can of soft drink, such as root beer, 
each day. 

You should develop a simple regimen about your supplementary vita¬ 
mins, such that you do not forget to take them. Also, you should develop 
good habits about moderate exercise, eating healthful foods that appeal to 
you, avoiding sucrose, not smoking, drinking large amounts of water, and 
drinking alcoholic liquors only in moderation, in such a way as not to be a 
burden to you but rather a pleasure, so that you have no trouble in continu¬ 
ing the regimen. The goal is to lead a good and satisfying life, free to as 
great an extent as possible from the suffering caused by poor health. 

As the value of the optimum intakes of supplementary vitamins becomes 
known, it may well be recognized that the last period of the twentieth 
century, as well as the first period, has involved discoveries about vitamins 
that have not only already led to great improvement in human health and 
well-being but also can lead to even greater improvement in the future. 




3 


The Old Nutrition and the New 


The world of today is different from that of one hundred years ago. We 
now have a much greater understanding of nature than our grandparents 
had. We have entered the atomic age, the electronic age, the nuclear age, 
the age of jet planes, television, and modern medicine and its wonder drugs. 
For the good of our health, we should also recognize that this is the age of 
vitamins. 

The world has been changed by the discoveries made by scientists. Some¬ 
times the changes have occurred rapidly. For example, the fission of the 
nuclei of uranium atoms was discovered in 1938; and by 1945, after a crash 
program, nuclear bombs had been devised, constructed, and used in war. 
Insulin was discovered by Sir F. G. Banting, C. H. Best, J. J. R. McLeod, 
and J. B. Collip in 1922, and within a couple of years thousands of diabetic 
patients were being kept alive and in reasonably good health by injection of 
this hormone. Sometimes, however, there is a surprising delay. One of the 
best known examples is penicillin. This important substance was discov¬ 
ered in 1929 by Alexander Fleming, who showed that it exerted antibacte¬ 
rial action, but it began to be used therapeutically only in 1941, by W. H. 
Florey and E. B. Chain. 

An older example is the delay in accepting the idea that childbed fever 
could be prevented by having the doctor wash his hands after delivering one 




18 


CHAPTER 3 


infant before going to the next one. The American writer and physician 
Oliver Wendell Holmes in 1843 published an article on the contagiousness 
of this disease. It brought him bitter personal abuse. In 1847 the Hungar¬ 
ian physician Ignaz Philipp Semmelweiss recommended that physicians 
wash their hands in chlorinated water between deliveries. In his clinic in 
Vienna and then in Budapest he himself was able to reduce the puerperal 
mortality rate from the terrible value of 16 percent to 1 percent. Reaction¬ 
ary physicians nonetheless rejected his ideas for years. He became embit¬ 
tered and insane before he died in 1865. 

The discovery of vitamins during the first third of the twentieth century 
and the recognition that they are essential elements of a healthy diet was 
one of the most important contributions to health ever made. Of equal 
importance was the recognition, about twenty years ago, that the optimum 
intakes of several of the vitamins, far larger than the usually recommended 
intakes, lead to further improvement in health, greater protection against 
many diseases, and enhanced effectiveness in the therapy of diseases. The 
potency of vitamin C and other vitamins is explained by the new under¬ 
standing that they function principally by strengthening the natural protec¬ 
tive mechanisms of the body, especially the immune system. The nutritional 
establishment has shown itself to be, however, as sluggish in recognizing 
this discovery as the medical establishment was in its response to Holmes 
and Semmelweiss. 

As early as 1937 Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, the scientist who isolated vitamin 
C, had said that vitamins, used in the proper way, could have fantastic 
results in improving human health. Yet even now, a half century later, the 
old-fashioned nutritionists, speaking with the authority of the Food and 
Nutrition Board of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences-National Re¬ 
search Council, continue to ignore the evidence about the value of the 
optimum intakes of these important substances. They persist in recom¬ 
mending no more than the minimum supplementary intakes, established by 
clinical experience a half century and more ago, necessary to prevent the 
diseases associated with deficiency of the vitamins in the diet. Their recom¬ 
mendations stand in the way of wider popular understanding and practice 
of the new nutrition. 

The optimum intakes of the vitamins shown in the table in Chapter 2 
and urged in this book are also based upon evidence from clinical trials and 
experience. That evidence is illuminated by understanding gained through 
the powerful new methods of molecular biology; we know and are learning 
to know better just what role each vitamin molecule plays in the chemistry 
of the body. Thus, by the classic interaction of clinic and laboratory, molec¬ 
ular biology explains what the clinic finds, and the clinic confirms the 
optimum intakes commended by molecular biology. 



THE OLD NUTRITION AND THE NEW 


19 


My interest in the question of the nature of life and the structure of the 
characteristic molecules in the human body and other living organisms 
began in 1929. That was when Thomas Hunt Morgan and most of the 
younger men who had collaborated with him in locating Mendel’s gene, the 
basis of heredity, in the chromosomes in the nucleus of the cell came from 
Columbia University to the California Institute of Technology to organize 
the new Division of Biological Sciences. I had been trained in physics and 
chemistry. With my interest now drawn to genetics, I formulated a theory 
of the phenomenon of crossing-over of chromosomes, which I presented at a 
biology symposium but did not publish in a scientific journal. Then in 1935 
I began, with my students and other collaborators, to study the structure 
and properties of hemoglobin and other proteins, the structure of antibodies 
and the nature of immunological reactions, and the abnormal structures of 
protein molecules that show up in sickle-cell anemia and other molecular 
diseases. 

In 1963 I decided to investigate the molecular basis of mental disease. 
During the next ten years my associates and I, with the support of grants 
from the Ford Foundation and the National Institute of Mental Health, 
carried out studies of the biochemistry and molecular basis of mental retar¬ 
dation and schizophrenia, as well as of the phenomenon of general anesthe¬ 
sia (Pauling, 1961). It was this work that led me to become interested in 
vitamins. 

In 1964 I read the reports of two psychiatrists, Dr. Humphry Osmond 
and Dr. Abram Hoffer, who were working in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 
Canada. I read with astonishment that they were giving as much as 50 
grams per day of a vitamin (B3, either niacin or niacinamide) to some 
patients with acute schizophrenia. I knew that this vitamin is required in 
the amount of 5 milligrams (mg) per day to prevent the deficiency disease 
pellagra, which seventy years ago was causing hundreds of thousands of 
people to suffer from diarrhea, dermatitis, and dementia, and then to die. 

What astonished me was the very low toxicity of a substance that has 
such very great physiological power. A little pinch, 5 mg, every day, is 
enough to keep a person from dying of pellagra, but it is so lacking in 
toxicity that ten thousand times as much can be taken without harm. Vita¬ 
min C is equally lacking in toxicity. The difference between these sub¬ 
stances and drugs led me to coin the word orthomolecular to describe them 
(see Chapter 11). 

The fact that a deficiency in the intake of vitamin B3 leads to the mental 
illness associated with pellagra caused me to check the medical literature. I 
found that persons with a deficiency in vitamin B12 usually become psy¬ 
chotic even before they become anemic. Mental disturbances, I found, are 
also associated with deficiencies of vitamin C (depression), vitamin B1 (de- 



20 


CHAPTER 3 


pression), vitamin B6 (convulsions), folic acid, and biotin, and there is 
evidence that mental function and behavior are also affected by changes in 
the amounts in the brain of any of a number of other substances that are 
normally present (Chapter 20). 

My interest in the vitamins was focused on vitamin C about twenty years 
ago by a letter I received from a biochemist named Irwin Stone. I had met 
him when I addressed a dinner meeting in New York City the previous 
month. He began his letter by reminding me that I had expressed in my 
lecture a desire to live for the next fifteen or twenty years. Saying that he 
would like to see me remain in good health for the next fifty years, he was 
sending me a description of his high-level vitamin-C regimen, which he had 
developed during the preceding three decades. My wife and I began to 
follow the regimen recommended by Stone. We noticed an increased feeling 
of well-being, and especially a striking decrease in the number of colds that 
we caught, and in their severity. 

In the introduction to my book Vitamin C and the Common Cold (1970), 
I wrote: “Dr. Stone was, of course, exaggerating. I estimate that complete 
control of the common cold and associated disorders would increase the 
average life expectancy by two or three years. The improvement in the 
general state of health resulting from ingesting the optimum amount of 
ascorbic acid might lead to an equal additional increase in life expectancy.” 

It is my opinion now, after an additional fifteen years of study in this 
field, that for most people the improvement in health and longevity associ¬ 
ated with the ingestion of the optimum amount of vitamin C probably lies 
in the range of twenty to twenty-five years of well-being, with an additional 
increase from the optimum intake of other vitamins. As I have already 
conceded, I can cite no reference for this estimate, but some of the reasons I 
believe in it are given in the following chapters of this book. 

During the period 1966 to 1970 I gradually became aware of the exis¬ 
tence of an extraordinary contradiction between the opinions of different 
people about the value of vitamin C in preventing and ameliorating the 
common cold. Many people believe that vitamin C helps prevent colds; on 
the other hand, most physicians at that time denied that this vitamin has 
much value in that regard. For example, in the discussion of the treatment 
of the common cold in his excellent book Health (1970) Dr. Benjamin A. 
Kogan made the following statement: “Research has shown that vitamin C, 
in the form of fruit juice, however pleasant, is useless in preventing or 
shortening colds.” Dr. John M. Adams did not mention vitamin C in this 
book Viruses and Colds: the Modern Plague (1967). More recent books by 
physicians contain statements such as the following, from What You Should 
Know about Health Care before You Call a Doctor by G. T. Johnson 



THE OLD NUTRITION AND THE NEW 


27 


(1975): “I would again, however, like to stress that there is no evidence to 
support the contention that vitamin C prevents the common cold and only 
shaky evidence to suggest that it may lessen the effects of colds.” 

In the Book of Health of the American Health Foundation (1981), edited 
by Dr. Ernst L. Wynder, readers are advised against taking massive doses 
of a particular vitamin and are told that “The evidence that taking a huge 
quantity [of vitamin C]—1,000 milligrams a day or more—will avert the 
common cold is tenuous.” There is a suggestion of a little progress, how¬ 
ever, in the statement on page 578 that “Some studies indicate that rela¬ 
tively large doses of vitamin C can reduce the duration of the symptoms, 
although the results remain controversial.” 

I found myself embroiled in controversy on this question by an article 
about vitamin C in the magazine Mademoiselle in November 1969. I was 
quoted as supporting the use of large amounts of vitamin C. Dr. Fredrick 
J. Stare, then head of the department of nutrition at the Harvard School of 
Public Health, who was described by Mademoiselle as “one of the country’s 
Big Names in nutrition,” was thereupon invoked to refute my opinion. He 
was quoted as saying, “Vitamin C and colds—that was disproved twenty 
years ago. I’ll tell you about just one very careful study. Of five thousand 
students at the University of Minnesota, half were given large doses of C, 
half a placebo. Their medical histories were followed for two years—and 
no difference was found in the frequency, severity, or duration of their 
colds. And yes, stores of C are depleted in massive, lingering infection—not 
in week-long colds.” 

The study to which Dr. Stare was referring had been carried out by 
Cowan, Diehl, and Baker; the article describing their results was published 
in 1942 (see Chapter 13). When I read this article, I found that the study 
involved only about four hundred students, rather than five thousand, and 
it was continued for half a year, not two years, and it involved use of only 
200 mg of vitamin C per day, which is not a large dose. Moreover, the 
investigators reported that the students receiving the vitamin C had 31 
percent fewer days of illness per subject than those who did not receive the 
vitamin. 

The fact that Stare, as well as the investigators themselves, had not 
considered a decrease by 31 percent in the days of illness to be significant 
suggested to me that an examination of the medical literature might provide 
more information about this matter. I found in the August 1967 issue of the 
journal Nutrition Reviews a brief, unsigned article in which a number of 
studies of vitamin C and the common cold were mentioned. The conclusion 
reported was that “there is no conclusive evidence that ascorbic acid has any 
protective effect against, or any therapeutic effect on, the course of the 



22 


CHAPTER 3 


common cold in healthy people not depleted of ascorbic acid. There is also 
no evidence for a general antiviral, or symptomatic prophylactic effect of 
ascorbic acid.” It is no coincidence that Dr. Fredrick J. Stare was listed at 
this time as editor of Nutrition Reviews. 

I examined the reports mentioned in this article and found that my own 
conclusions, on the basis of the studies themselves, were almost entirely 
different from those expressed in the article. Like the Cowan, Diehl, and 
Baker study, they showed a difference between the subjects given vitamin C 
and the control subjects in accordance with my argument for vitamin C, the 
difference tending to increase with the size of the dose of the vitamin 
administered. 

We may ask why the physicians and authorities on nutrition have re¬ 
mained so lacking in enthusiasm about a substance that was reported four 
decades ago to decrease the amount of illness with colds by 31 percent, 
when taken regularly in rather small daily amounts. I surmise that several 
factors have contributed to this lack of enthusiasm. In the search for a drug 
to combat a disease the effort is usually made to find one that is 100 percent 
effective. (I must say that I do not understand, however, why Cowan, 
Diehl, and Baker did not repeat their study with use of larger amounts of 
vitamin C per day.) Also, there seems to have existed a feeling that the 
intake of vitamin C should be kept as small as possible, even though this 
vitamin is known to have extremely low toxicity. This attitude is, of course, 
proper for drugs, substances not normally present in the human body and 
almost always rather highly toxic, but it does not apply to vitamin C. 
Another factor has probably been the lack of interest on the part of the drug 
companies in a natural substance that is available at a low price and cannot 
be patented. This is a pity; for here is a substance that holds the possibility 
of eliminating the common cold from human experience. 

An old friend of mine, Rene Dubos, pointed out in one of his books that 
it is not the viruses and bacteria we are exposed to that kill us—something 
else kills us. When there is an epidemic, some people die and other people 
do not die. What is the difference between them? It is this difference that 
kills. I believe that often it is too little vitamin C that permits some people 
to succumb. 

The common cold, and influenza as well, are infections by viruses that 
circulate, sometimes in epidemics, throughout the world. They rapidly die 
out, however, in a small, isolated population. If the incidence of colds and 
influenza could be decreased enough throughout the world—as it might be 
by the use of vitamin C for prevention and therapy—these diseases would 
disappear. I foresee achievement of this goal, perhaps within a decade or 
two, in some parts of the world. Some period of quarantine of travelers 



OLD NUTRITION AND THE NEW 


23 


might be needed, so long as a major part of the world’s people are poverty- 
stricken and especially subject to infectious diseases because of malnutri¬ 
tion, including lack of ascorbic acid in the proper amount. 

To achieve this goal a change in the attitude of the public and of patients 
may be required. A person with a cold or the flu should feel that he or she 
should go into isolation in order not to spread the virus to other people, and 
social pressure should operate to help him or her to act in such a way as not 
to harm others. We have recently experienced a change in feeling about the 
“right” of cigarette smokers to pollute the atmosphere and distress non- 
smokers. A similar change in feeling about the “right” of people to spread 
their viruses and infect others, so long as they themselves are able to stagger 
about, would benefit the world. 

After twenty years of research and public education in the new nutrition, 
I believe that I can detect some progress in the attitude of the medical 
profession toward the new nutrition’s findings and recommendations. De¬ 
spite the intransigence of official opinion, I see the attitude of practicing 
physicians toward ascorbic acid and the other vitamins undergoing signifi¬ 
cant change. They are responding to the new evidence that has been gath¬ 
ered, some of which I review in this book. It is being more widely recog¬ 
nized that the intake of vitamins, and of some nonessential nutritional 
factors as well, can be varied in such a way as to produce a significant 
improvement in general health and a decrease in the incidence and severity 
of disease. 

Ultimately, it will be common knowledge that the optimum daily intakes 
of vitamins are far larger than what can be had in food, even by selecting 
foods for their high vitamin content. The major reason argued for eating 
fruits and vegetables is to obtain vitamins. 

The availability of vitamins does not mean that you should not include 
fruits and vegetables in your diet. It is true that for more than eighty years 
science-fiction writers have been writing about a world of the future in 
which people would not eat ordinary food but instead would swallow a 
tablet or two each day. We have now gone part-way toward this goal in 
that the need to eat large amounts of fruits and vegetables in order to have 
enough vitamins to keep us alive has been eliminated. By taking a few 
vitamin tablets we can obtain not only the minimum requirement that may 
be furnished by the natural foods eaten in sufficient quantity but the opti¬ 
mum intake that puts and keeps us in the best of health. We may ask how 
much further modern nutritional science and molecular biology might take 
us. The answer is that our nutritional needs can never be met by a few 
tablets per day. A rather large amount of fuel is required to provide the 
energy to keep us warm and to run the biochemical processes in our bodies 



24 


CHAPTER 3 


that permit us to function and to work. That requirement comes to about 
2500 kilocalories of food energy per day. To obtain this much food energy, 
about 1 pound, dry weight, of starch or the sugar glucose must be ingested. 
What is more, the body requires certain fats it does not itself manufacture, 
and it must be supplied with protein to replace the protein of its principal 
working parts as they wear out in the course of a day. A diet of this sort is 
available, as will be discussed in the next chapter, and it consists of much 
more than a few tablets. 





4 


Proteins, Fats, 
Carbohydrates, and Water 


Living organisms require daily intake of nutrients, substances from outside 
the body that, ingested and assimilated in the tissues, permit growth and 
preserve good health, provide energy, and replace loss. Certain substances 
are required in large amounts. These are the macronutrients; they are four 
in number: proteins, fats, carbohydrates, and water. Other substances, the 
micronutrients, are required in small amounts: certain minerals, the vita¬ 
mins, and the essential fats and essential amino acids (building blocks of 
protein). The latter are called essential because the organism does not man¬ 
ufacture them, although it manufactures other fats and amino acids. 

In this chapter, in a book otherwise concerned with one class of 
micronutrients, we consider the macronutrients, taking them in the order in 
which they are listed above. 

The human body contains tens of thousands of different proteins, which 
serve different purposes. Hair and fingernails consist of fibers of a protein 
called keratin; muscle is composed of fibers of myosin and actin. Another 
fibrous protein, collagen, strengthens the skin, blood vessels, bones, teeth, 
and the intercellular cement that holds the cells in various organs and 
tissues together. Globular proteins, in solution in the body fluids, serve as 
enzymes to speed up the chemical reactions that are essential to life. Cer¬ 
tain proteins serve other special functions. Hemoglobin, for example, the 




26 


CHAPTER 4 


red protein in the red cells of the blood, carries molecules of oxygen from 
the lungs to the other parts of the body, where it is used to burn molecules 
of food in order to provide energy. 

Proteins are long chains of amino-acid residues. There are more than 
twenty different amino acids. The nature of the protein is determined by 
the sequence of these different amino acids in the chain. Amino acids are 
rather small molecules, consisting of between ten and twenty-six atoms of 
hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur; at least one of the atoms is 
nitrogen, as shown in the illustration in Chapter 9. 

Most protein chains contain a few hundred amino-acid residues. The 
molecule of adult hemoglobin contains four chains, two with 140 residues 
and two with 146 residues each. As might be expected for structural mole¬ 
cules, proteins are characterized by the arrangement of their component 
amino acids in the three dimensions of space as well as by the sequence of 
the residues in the chain. The simplest, natural three-dimensional structure 
assumed by a chain of identical asymmetrical amino acids, bonded head to 
toe at the same angle, is the so-called alpha helix (see illustration in Chap¬ 
ter 9). In hair, the keratin chains are coiled in the alpha helix, like a spring. 
In a globular protein such as hemoglobin or the digestive enzyme trypsin, 
there are straight segments, alpha-helix coils, but the chain folds back on 
itself to become nearly spherical. In silk the chains are stretched out to 
nearly their maximum length. 

The amino-acid sequence for the same proteins in different animals is 
different. All mammals have hemoglobin in the red cells of their blood, but 
the hemoglobin molecules are different in their amino-acid sequence. Be¬ 
cause of the difference in the blood proteins (and also the blood carbohy¬ 
drates) of different animals we cannot safely transfuse blood from another 
species of animal into a human being. As Dr. Karl Landsteiner discovered 
in 1900, the blood of different human beings also may be different in such a 
way as to make transfusion of blood from one person to another dangerous 
to the recipient, unless tests have shown that the two persons have the same 
blood type. 

When the food that we eat is digested in the stomach and intestines the 
protein molecules are broken down by the digestive enzymes into their 
component amino acids. The protein molecules in the food (from meat, fish, 
vegetables, grains, cheese, and milk) are so large that they cannot pass 
through the intestinal walls into the bloodstream, but the small molecules of 
the amino acids and of glucose from the breakdown of the long carbohy¬ 
drate chains of starch can pass through. The blood carries these small 
molecules to the tissues throughout the body. They enter the cells, and the 
amino acids are then reassembled into long chains with the sequences that 



PROTEINS, FATS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND WATER 


27 


are characteristic of human proteins, under the guidance of the molecules of 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in the nuclei of our tissue cells that determine 
our nature. 

Our bodies are continually wearing out and being renewed. For exam¬ 
ple, our red cells live only about one month. They are then broken down, 
and the hemoglobin molecules are split into amino acids. Some of the amino 
acids are used to make new protein molecules, but some are oxidized to 
water, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen-containing urea, which is excreted in 
the urine. Because some of the amino acids are used as fuel in this way, our 
bodies can keep in amino-acid balance (usually called nitrogen balance) 
only by adding some amino acids; that is, by eating some protein. With too 
small an intake of protein a child will stop growing, and a child or adult 
may die of protein starvation, even when the intake of fat and carbohydrate 
is adequate. Protein starvation is called kwashiorkor (from an African word 
in a region with a high-corn diet). Marasmus is energy starvation, and 
marasmus-kwashiorkor involves both deficiencies in the diet. These dis¬ 
eases cause many deaths in the overpopulated and underdeveloped coun¬ 
tries and some in the affluent countries. 

The amount of protein required for amino-acid balance for an adult is 
proportional to body weight. It is about 0.45 grams (g) per kilogram (kg), 
0.20 g per pound. The Food and Nutrition Board recommends 30 percent 
larger amounts, 0.26 g per pound for adults. Infants need about 1.0 g per 
pound, young children about 0.60 g per pound, older children and adoles¬ 
cents 0.50 or 0.40 g per pound. 

Most adult Americans ingest two or three times the recommended 
amount of proteins. The excess not required for building new protein mole¬ 
cules is burned, for energy, along with the fats and carbohydrates, and 
probably no harm is done by the excess intake to people in reasonably good 
health. A high intake of protein means that a large amount of urea must be 
excreted in the urine. The excretion of urea requires work by the kidney, 
and increased intake of protein increases the burden on the kidney. People 
with impaired kidney function, such as those with only one kidney or who 
have suffered damage from nephritis, can avert further kidney damage by 
limiting protein to the amino-acid-balance level. Care must be taken not to 
go below this level. 

Although all of the amino acids are present in the proteins in the human 
body, not all of them need to be in the food because most of them are 
manufactured by the body. Those that must be obtained in the food, the 
essential amino acids, are histidine, leucine, isoleucine, lysine, methionine, 
phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine. The amounts required 
for an adult young man range from 0.50 g per day for tryptophan to 2.20 g 



28 


CHAPTER 4 


per day for leucine, methionine, and phenylalanine. These amounts are 
provided by a mixed diet including animal protein (meat, fish, eggs) but not 
by a vegetarian diet, which may be especially low in lysine and methionine. 

Everybody knows what fat is—hog fat (lard) and beef or sheep fat (tal¬ 
low). It has a greasy feel, is insoluble in water, and is an important con¬ 
stituent of foods and of the human body. Its chemical nature was discovered 
about 1820 by the French chemist Michel Eugene Chevreul, who died in 
1889, at age 103. (I assume that he was not fat, or he would not have lived 
so long.) The Roman author Pliny the Elder mentions in his book on 
natural history that the Germans were making a soap solution by boiling 
fat with the ashes of plants (potash). In 1779 the Swedish chemist K. W. 
Scheele discovered that a detergent solution contained not only soap, the 
potassium salt of a fatty acid, but also an oily, sweet-tasting, water-soluble 
liquid that we now call glycerine or glycerol. 

Clevreul discovered that ordinary fats consist of glycerol with three mole¬ 
cules of a fatty acid attached. A representative fat is glyceryl tripalmitate; 
its atomic composition is diagrammed this way: 

H 2 G—OOC(CH 2 ) l 4 CH 3 
HC—OOC(CH 2 ) 14 CH 3 
H 2 c— OOC(CH 2 ) 14 CH 3 

This fat is said to be “saturated” by hydrogen (H) because hydrogen atoms 
occupy the four bonds of each carbon (C) atom that are not attached to 
other carbon atoms or to oxygen (O). Other saturated fats have a smaller or 
larger number of CH 2 groups in the hydrocarbon side chains. Unsaturated 
fats have fewer hydrogen atoms; that is, they are not saturated with hydro¬ 
gen. There are more unsaturated side chains in liquid fats (oils) than in 
solid fats. 

These fat molecules are called triglycerides. When you receive a report 
on the analysis of your blood, there may be values for total cholesterol, 
HDL, LDL, and triglycerides. The amount of triglycerides is nothing 
other than the amount of fat in the blood plasma. Cholesterol, HDL, and 
LDL are molecules made by the processing of fat. 

Fat is an important constituent of the diet as a source of metabolic en¬ 
ergy. It also has value in helping to move the fat-soluble vitamins across the 
intestinal wall into the bloodstream. 

In 1929 it was discovered that young rats show slow growth, kidney 
deterioration, and infertility on a diet containing only saturated fats. Be¬ 
tween 1930 and 1956 different investigators discovered seven unsaturated 



PROTEINS, FATS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND WATER 


29 


fatty acids that are necessary, essential, in small amounts for normal 
growth and life for rats and other animals. Presumably human beings also 
require intake of these essential fatty acids. Only a few observations have 
been made on human beings on a very low fat diet; they showed an abnor¬ 
mal basal metabolism rate, increased incidence of infections, and a tendency 
to dermatitis. It is believed that a diet containing the usual amount of fat 
provides sufficient amounts of the essential fatty acids. There is some evi¬ 
dence, however, that an increased intake of two of them, linoleic acid and 
gamma-linolenic acid, may have protective value against atherosclerosis 
and cancer. 

Carbohydrates were given this name because chemists noticed that these 
substances (various sugars, starch, glycogen, and cellulose) have formulas 
C + H 2 0, that is, hydrated carbon. For example, glucose and fructose are 
C 6 H 12 0 6 , sucrose is C I2 H 22 0 12 . In fact, there are no water molecules in 
these substances; instead, there are carbon atoms and one or two hydro¬ 
gen atoms attached to them along with the oxygen atoms and hydroxyl 
groups (OH). 

Starch is the principal carbohydrate food. It is found in all fruits and 
vegetables. An intake of 300 g would provide 50 percent of an average daily 
requirement of energy. Providing energy is the principal function of the 
carbohydrates in our food. Many fruits and some vegetables also contain 
significant amounts of the simple sugars glucose and fructose, as well as 
the disaccharide sucrose, ordinary sugar, which contains both glucose and 
fructose. 

When starch is digested by the enzymes in the saliva and gastric juice, it 
combines with water and breaks down to form the small molecules of 
glucose, which pass through the walls of the intestines into the bloodstream 
and are transported to the cells all over the body. There they are burned to 
provide the energy that we need to operate our biochemical mechanisms, to 
do work, and to keep warm. The glucose that is present in foods also enters 
the bloodstream and is handled in the same way. Human beings and their 
predecessors have been accustomed to metabolizing about 300 g of glucose 
(mostly from starchy foods) every day for millions of years. 

The situation with fructose is different from that with glucose. Human 
beings have always ingested some fructose, in the fruits and honey that 
were part of their diet. Until about two hundred years ago the average 
daily intake of fructose was quite small, only about 8 g. Then, as ordinary 
sugar (sucrose) from sugar beets and sugarcane began to be generally avail¬ 
able the daily intake of fructose rose tenfold, to about 75 g per day. 

The reason for this great increase in the intake of fructose is that when 
sucrose is ingested it reacts with water to form equal amounts of glucose 



30 


CHAPTER 4 


and fructose. Each 100 g of sucrose gives 53 g of glucose and 53 g of fruc¬ 
tose; that is why it is referred to as a disaccharide. In the United States we 
eat about 100 pounds of sugar (sucrose) per year. This is 125 g per day, 
corresponding, when it is digested, to 66 g of fructose per day. With about 
8 g from fruits and honey, the average daily intake becomes 74 g per day. 

Our bodies have been accustomed to metabolizing only 8 g of fructose per 
day. It is accordingly not surprising that the nearly tenfold overload causes 
problems. There is little doubt that this great intake of fructose, to which 
human beings have been subjected only during the last century, is the cause 
of many of our ills, as will be discussed in Chapter 6. 

Water is the fourth major nutrient. It is required for life in the amount 
of about one liter (1) per day, partially to produce urine to carry off the 
harmful substances that have been extracted from the blood by the filtering 
processes that operate in the two million filtering units (nephrons) in the 
kidneys. A larger intake of water, preferably about 3 1 (more than 3 quarts) 
per day, is needed for the best of health. A good habit is to drink a glass of 
water every hour. Soft drinks provide water, but they are undesirable be¬ 
cause of the sugar or the sugar substitutes that they contain. Carbonated 
water, orange juice, and other fruit juices are good sources of water, as is 
also beer, in limited amount. 

One reason for a high intake of water is that it leads to a high volume of 
urine; this reduces the burden on the kidneys, which excrete a dilute urine 
with less work than they do a concentrated urine. That is especially impor¬ 
tant for persons with impaired kidney function. 

Another reason is that with a high intake of water there is less chance 
that crystals of one kind or another will form out of the body fluids. Gout 
results from the formation of crystals of sodium urate in the joints and 
tendons, and pseudo-gout from the similar crystallization of calcium 
pyrophosphate dihydrate. Urinary calculi (kidney stones) involve the for¬ 
mation of masses of crystals held in a protein matrix. The crystals are 
calcium and magnesium phosphates and urates or, less commonly, cystine. 
About 1 percent of people have a tendency to form these stones. The forma¬ 
tion can be averted by keeping the water intake high, never allowing the 
urine volume to drop. 

The various classes of foods—meats, fish, fruits and vegetables, grains 
and nuts, dairy products—all have value in providing protein, fat, carbo¬ 
hydrates, minerals, vitamins, and other valuable micronutrients, such as 
gamma-aminobenzoic acid, choline, lecithin, and the ubiquinones. The 
amounts of these important constituents are different in different foods, and 
it is wise to have a varied diet, one that appeals to you, and to supplement it 
with the important vitamins and minerals in order to get them in the 
optimum amounts. 



PROTEINS, FATS, CARBOHYDRATES, AND WATER 


31 


The servings of meat and fish must be kept small in order to keep the 
total protein intake down to the recommended amount, 0.8 g per kilogram 
body weight. 

Ovolactovegetarians, who accept eggs and milk but not meat and fish, 
can keep in good health by taking supplementary vitamins and minerals. 
Strict vegetarians need to select their vegetable foods with care to insure 
that they have the proper intake of those vegetables that provide the essen¬ 
tial amino acids that are present in only small amounts in most vegetable 
foods. 

The intake of fat should be limited, but enough should be eaten to pro¬ 
vide the essential fats. 

Fruits, vegetables, grains, and nuts should be eaten in a satisfying variety 
and amount. Fruits and vegetables provide some protein and fat, large 
amounts of carbohydrates, and also vitamins, minerals, and other micro¬ 
nutrients. A high intake was needed in past centuries in order to provide 
the minimum amounts of these micronutrients, as well as carbohydrate for 
energy. In the new era of modern nutrition the optimum intakes of vita¬ 
mins, more than can conveniently be provided by fruits and vegetables, are 
available in supplements, as discussed throughout this book. It is wise, 
nonetheless, to supplement the vitamin supplements with a good intake of 
fruits and vegetables. 

Seeds and nuts are low in vitamins and high in protein and fat as well as 
carbohydrate and total energy. For example, a 1-ounce snack of almonds 
provides 180 kilocalories (kcal) of food energy, 5 g of protein, 16 g of fat, 
and 6 g of carbohydrate. A similar snack of peanuts provides 170 kcal of 
energy, 7 g of protein, 14 g of fat, and 5 g of carbohydrate. 

The amount of carbohydrate eaten should be kept down to the amount 
that permits the ingested fat to be burned rather than deposited in the body. 
You may have to limit your consumption of alcohol and of nuts and other 
snacks, as well as the size of your meals. The intake of sucrose (white 
sugar, brown sugar, raw sugar, honey, candy, sweet desserts) should be 
kept low. Corn syrup consists of glucose, and it is an acceptable sweetener 
unless sucrose has been added to make it sweeter—check the label. The 
obesity and atherosclerosis, the two most common nutritional afflictions 
arising from bad habits with respect to the macronutrients, that follow 
upon violation of these simple rules are discussed in Chapter 6. 



5 


Foods as the Source of 
Heat and Energy 


One of the characteristics of human beings is that they are able to do work. 
They also are able to keep warm in a cold environment. A source of energy 
is required for doing work and keeping warm. 

Many of the substances in our food that enter the bloodstream—the fats 
and the amino acids as well as the carbohydrates—are burned in the cells of 
our tissues and organs to provide the energy for various biochemical reac¬ 
tions, including those in our muscles that permit us to do physical work and 
those that generate the heat energy to keep us warm. This process of burn¬ 
ing is the enzyme-catalyzed combination of the fuel molecules with oxygen 
molecules that are distributed through the body by the blood. The hydrogen 
atoms burn to water, H 2 0, and the carbon atoms to carbon dioxide, C0 2 , 
which is carried to the lungs and exhaled. The nitrogen atoms form urea, 
H 4 N 2 CO, which is excreted in the urine. 

The average amount of food energy required by men is 2000 to 3500 
kilocalories (kcal) per day and for women 1600 to 2400. Young people 
require more and old people less. The quantity 2500 kcal is the average 
daily amount. 

This amount of energy could heat a bathtub full of water (increasing the 
temperature of 25 gallons of water from 50°F to 100°F). If it could all be 
used to do work, it could lift a weight of 1400 pounds to the top of a mile- 






FOODS AS THE SOURCE OF HEAT AND ENERGY 


33 


high mountain. With these calculations in mind, we can understand that 
we need more food in the winter than in the summer, in cold climates than 
in warm climates, and that heavy physical work or strenuous exercise in¬ 
creases the need for food. 

The concept of food energy was discovered in 1842 by a young German 
physician, Julius Robert Mayer (1814-1878). He was the ship’s surgeon 
on a Dutch ship sailing to Java when he wondered why the sailors, who 
were doing just as much work every day, ate much less food in the Indian 
Ocean than in the North Sea, and why the hard-working sailors ate more 
than the officers. He concluded that the food that a person ingests provides 
a certain amount of energy, which can be used either for heat or for work. 
At the same time the English physicist James Prescott Joule was making 
experiments (reported in 1843) to determine the relation between work and 
heat. These two thoughtful persons discovered the very important physical 
law called the conservation of energy. 

The energy values of a food can be determined by burning a weighed 
amount of the food and measuring the amount of heat given off. It is 
convenient to give the values for a standard amount, 100 grams (g, or V /2 
ounces) of the food. The energy values are 900 kcal per 100 g of fat, 415 
kcal per 100 g of starch, and about 430 kcal per lOOg of protein. The 
values for the sugars are a little smaller than for starch: 395 kcal per 100 g 
for sucrose, lactose (milk sugar), and maltose (malt sugar, a disaccharide 
made from starch by action of an enzyme), and 375 kcal per 200 g for 
glucose and fructose. 

In the table below there are given values of the fractions of the energy 
provided by fat, protein, and carbohydrate in several diets—the average 
American diet, the diet recommended by the U.S. Senate Select Committee 
on Nutrition and Human Needs, and an intermediate diet. The third diet 
contains more fat and less carbohydrate than that of the Senate Committee. 


Energy distribution of some diets. 



Present U.S. 
diet 

Dietary 

goal' 

Intermediate 

diet 

Fat 

42% 

30% 

40%(1000 kcal/day) 

Protein 

12% 

12% 

10%(250 kcal/day) 

Carbohydrate 

46% 

58% 

50%(1250 kcal/day) 

Starch 

20% 

38% 

30% 

Naturally occurring sugars 

6% 

10% 

10% 

Sucrose 

20% 

10% 

10% 

TOTAL 

100% 

100% 

100%(2500 kcal/day) 


1 Dietary Goals for the United States. Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. (1976). 






34 


CHAPTER 5 


Part of the reason for recommending the intermediate amount of fat is that 
we need the essential fats, and we obtain these essential fats almost entirely 
in the food that we eat. 

A diet with 10 percent of the energy provided by protein and giving 2500 
kcal requires 58 g of protein. To keep the protein intake down to this level 
requires that the intake of meat and fish be limited. Half a pound of 
beefsteak provides more than 58 g of protein, allowing for no other protein 
foods. One egg provides 6 g; one glass of milk 8 g; one slice of bread 3 g; one 
serving of baked beans 8 g; one serving of potatoes, green beans, or other 
vegetable 2 to 6 g; a serving of breakfast cereal 4 to 8 g. Lamb, pork, and 
fish contain 15 to 20 percent protein, beef about 30 percent. The intake of 
meat and fish should be kept to about a quarter of a pound per day. 
Probably the greatest benefit of all offered by the recommended diet comes 
from decreasing the intake of sucrose, ordinary sugar, as is discussed in the 
next chapter. 

Much interest in the value of meat in the diet was created over half 
a century ago by observations made by the Arctic explorer Vilhjalmur 
Stefansson. He was born in Manitoba, Canada, of Icelandic parents, in 
1879, and when he was only a year or two old he (and his parents) lived 
mainly on fish for a year, because of a famine in the area. After graduating 
from the University of Iowa, studying anthropology for three years at Har¬ 
vard, and making two archaeological trips to Iceland, he began his Arctic 
research in 1905. He lived with the Eskimos for a year, learning their 
language and culture, and he concluded that it was possible to remain in 
reasonably good health on the Eskimo diet of meat alone, eaten as the 
Eskimos eat it. 

By 1926 he had lived a total of nine years on a meat-only diet, during 11 
and a half years spent in the arctic. The longest period that he ate no food 
other than meat was nine months. A study of him made in 1922, when he 
was forty-three, showed him to be in the state of health expected for his age 
(Lieb, 1926); for example, his blood pressure was 115/55. He died at the 
age of eighty-two. 

Because of Stefansson’s claim that it was possible to be healthy on a diet 
of meat only, a carefully planned experiment was carried out with 
Stefansson and another arctic explorer, beginning in 1927. For one year the 
two men ate nothing but meat (beef, lamb, veal, pork, chicken, both fat and 
lean portions, and also at times liver, kidney, brain, bacon, and bone mar¬ 
row). Stefansson also ate some eggs, butter, and fish, when he had trouble 
obtaining meat while traveling. The meat was usually boiled or stewed, but 
they ate some raw marrow. They drank no milk. They were in a hospital 
under observation for the first six months and then resumed their usual 
activities but adhered to their diet. They reported that they had no craving 




FOODS AS THE SOURCE OF HEAT AND ENERGY 


35 


for other foods. They complained, however, that the boiled mutton was 
not so good as the musk ox, caribou, or mountain sheep described in 
Stefansson’s autobiography, Discover (1962). They were carefully studied 
throughout the year, with the conclusion that they were in as good health at 
the end of the year as at the beginning. 

The diet contained about 230 g of fat, 120 g of protein, and only 5 to 10 g 
of carbohydrate per day. The high intake of animal fat did not seem to 
harm them (Torry and Montu, 1931). 

Their tolerance for glucose was low at the end of the year but became 
normal within two weeks on a mixed diet. 

It is remarkable that they did not develop vitamin-deficiency diseases on 
the exclusively meat diet. Presumably fresh meat contains a minimum sup¬ 
ply of vitamin C and other vitamins. Stefansson (1918) reported that three 
of the seventeen members of the Canadian Arctic Expedition became 
scorbutic during the winter of 1916-1917. These three had been eating 
some foods in a cache that had been left by an earlier expedition. They 
developed scurvy, whereas the others, who ate only fresh meat, did not. 

I do not conclude that a meat diet is the best, even though fresh meat may 
alone provide the minimum amounts of all nutrients, with the fat providing 
most of the energy. Vitamin supplements and a mixed diet, with a limited 
intake of sugar, lead to the best health. 

Stefansson’s experience has its relevance to public anxiety about fat in 
the diet. That anxiety was awakened in 1955, when President Dwight 
David Eisenhower suffered a coronary occlusion. The president’s cardiolo¬ 
gist, Paul Dudley White of the Harvard Medical School, took the occasion 
to instruct the public about the role of cholesterol in atherosclerosis and to 
advise reduction in the intake of fat-containing foods. Stefansson was 
moved to challenge White with his own good health on a high-fat diet and 
his observations of the health of the Eskimos he knew so well. He con¬ 
cluded with the rhetorical question: u We eat carbohydrates, fat, and pro¬ 
tein. We make gunpowder from saltpeter, sulfur, and charcoal. How can 
we say which one makes the explosion?” White withdrew his doctrinaire 
stricture and wrote a chastened introduction to a new edition of 
Stefansson’s account of his dietary adventures published under the title The 
Fat of the Land. 

The energy content of alcohol is discussed in the following chapter. 



6 


Two Eating Problems 


It is from the numerous deficiency diseases, caused by lack of essential 
elements in the diet, that the students of nutrition first learned about the 
micronutrients and the various ways in which they serve the healthy orga¬ 
nism. Today, in the well-off and well-fed industrial countries of the world, 
the science of nutrition is learning to contend with afflictions that attend 
overabundance rather than deficiency of the macronutrients. Efforts to 
manage the two most common of these afflictions, obesity and atherosclero¬ 
sis , generate more controversy, if that is possible, than that which attends 
discussion of the micronutrients, especially the vitamins. 

Obesity is the condition of being grossly overweight, excessively fat, 
much beyond the normal weight for the person’s height and build. It consti¬ 
tutes a serious problem for many people. 

The normal weights for women between 5 feet and 6 feet tall are 116 to 
155 pounds, with leeway of about 10 or 15 pounds each way, depending on 
build. For men between 5 feet 4 inches and 6 feet 4 inches the values are 
135 to 185 pounds, with leeway of 15 to 20 pounds. Overweight by 25 
percent is accompanied by some inconvenience, by 40 percent increased 
incidence of illness, and by shortening of life expectancy by four years. 
Overweight by 50 percent causes much inconvenience, a more than doubled 
incidence of illness, and a ten-year decrease in life expectancy (Pauling, 
1958). 




TWO EATING PROBLEMS 


37 


In past centuries and millennia the deposition of fat in the human body 
has served an important purpose. The supply of food was often irregular. 
When plentiful food was at hand, as when a mastodon was killed, people 
ate as much as they could. The protein (excess amino acids) and carbohy¬ 
drates (glucose) were burned in the body cells to provide the needed energy, 
and the fat was stored in deposits under the skin and elsewhere in the body, 
in order that it might be burned later, to prevent death by starvation when 
food became scarce. 

We may conclude that the way to prevent the excessive deposition of fat 
is to restrict the intake of all food—protein, carbohydrate, and fat—to the 
quantity required every day for heat and work. There is little gain from 
restricting just one kind of food. Even if fat is restricted, there is still some 
fat in the diet, and if there is enough carbohydrate to provide the energy 
needs, this fat will be deposited and will lead to obesity. 

No crash diet or fad diet can solve the obesity problem, because these 
diets are so disagreeable and such a continuing nuisance that the obese 
person soon gives up. A successful treatment is one that will be adhered to, 
year after year. To achieve such continued compliance the diet should ap¬ 
peal to the appetite. It is not the kind of food that controls the body weight, 
but it is instead the total food energy, in relation to size, build, and amount 
of exercise. The food should be the kind that pleases the person, but the 
amounts eaten must be limited. 

This point has been emphasized by Brian Leibovitz in his 1984 book, in 
which he criticizes various fad diets for control of weight and improvement 
of health. Representative of his comments are his statements about the 
Pritikin diet. On the jacket of Nathan Pritikin’s book The Pritikin Promise: 
28 Days to a Longer , Healthier Life there is the following exhortation: 

Follow my safe 28-day diet and exercise program and I 
promise you: 

You’ll feel really alive every day; 

You’ll reduce risk of heart disease, diabetes, high 
blood pressure, breast and colon cancer; 

You’ll lose weight without hunger. 

Leibovitz comments: 

The Pritikin program is a low-protein, low-fat, and high- 
carbohydrate regimen, and to its credit it emphasizes the importance 
of unrefined foods. Oil, butter, salt, sugar, and red meats are not 
allowed on the Pritikin plan. Since neither butter nor oils are allowed, 
foods must be broiled or steamed. The Pritikin diet, while basically 



38 


CHAPTER 6 


sound, suffers from two major drawbacks, however. To begin, it is 
unnecessarily Spartan. Although there are some good reasons to cut 
down on excessive consumption of meat, dairy products, oil, butter, 
salt, and sugar,... it is not necessary to eliminate them entirely from 
the diet. In my experience, because it is so strict, many who try the 
Pritikin diet have trouble staying on it. 

The moral is: do not be extreme; for example, do not adopt a single-food 
diet, such as the Zen Macrobiotic diet, which involves eliminating foods 
until only brown rice is eaten. Adhering to such a diet can result in death. 
Instead, adopt eating habits that are sensible and also satisfying to you, so 
that you can adhere to them year after year. 

A common tragic outcome of faddism in dieting and the anxiety caused 
by the difficulty of observing fad diets is the anorexia nervosa that seizes 
adolescent girls. It is estimated that between 5 and 20 percent of adolescents 
(95 percent female) with anorexia nervosa die of protein, energy, and vita¬ 
min starvation. Often the young person has a voracious appetite (called 
bulimia), but a large meal is followed by induced vomiting. This disease, 
which is not associated with poverty or scarcity of food, seems to be psycho¬ 
logical, the result of a fear of becoming overweight. Anorexia nervosa 
is a serious disease. The patient requires expert treatment, including 
psychotherapy. 

Many actions can be taken to improve one’s health without interfering 
seriously with the enjoyment of life. A sensible control of the diet is one 
such action. Another is the regular use of dietary supplements, which is the 
theme of this book. 

One point that must not be forgotten in weight control is that alcohol is a 
food. Potable alcohol, ethanol (C 2 H 5 OH), has a rather high heat of com¬ 
bustion, 700 kilocalories (kcal) per 100 grams, closer to that of fat (900) 
than of carbohydrate (400). One jigger (1.5 ounces) of strong liquor (80 to 
100 proof) provides 100 to 120 kcal. One pint of beer provides 160 kcal. 
One glass of wine provides 100 to 150 kcal. Accordingly a moderate 
drinker, inbibing two or three drinks a day, may receive 300 to 400 kcal of 
food energy from the alcohol, and a heavy drinker may receive 1000 to 
1500 kcal, as much as one half of the daily energy requirement. 

One result is that heavy drinkers get fat. Moreover, even moderate 
drinkers have an added tendency toward obesity. To lose weight you must 
cut down on your intake not only of protein, carbohydrate, and fat, but also 
of alcohol. 

Another effect of a high intake of alcohol is that the drinker doesn’t eat 
very much and may begin to suffer from a deficient intake of vitamins and 



TWO EATING PROBLEMS 


39 


minerals, unless he or she takes vitamin-mineral supplements. In a study 
of randomly selected residents in San Mateo County, California, H. D. 
Chope and L. Breslow found that moderate drinkers are healthier than 
teetotallers but that heavy drinkers, who consume more than four drinks 
per day, are less healthy. Part of their poor health may be the result of 
vitamin-mineral malnutrition. 

Especially in this country, there are few people who have not heard that 
the diseases of the heart and circulatory system, the number one cause of 
death, have been associated with fat in the bloodstream. With this knowl¬ 
edge in mind, almost everyone accepts the further proposition, advanced by 
many physicians and most nutritionists, that high concentration of fat in 
the bloodstream is caused by high intake of fat in the diet. 

John Yudkin, professor of physiology in Queen Elizabeth College of 
London University (1945-1954), professor of nutrition and dietetics (1954— 
1971), and now emeritus professor of nutrition, has a different view of the 
matter. He has presented his view in a series of scientific papers and in the 
book Sugar: Chemical 3 Biologicaland Nutritional Aspects of Sucrose, 
edited by Yudkin, Edelman, and Hough (1971). He has summarized his 
findings for the lay public in his book Sweet and Dangerous (1972). 

Yudkin traced the widely held theory about fat to a paper by Ancel Keys, 
of the University of Minnesota. “In 1953,” wrote Yudkin, Keys “drew 
attention to the fact that in six different countries there was a highly sug¬ 
gestive relationship between the intake of fat and their death rates from 
coronary disease. This was certainly one of the most important contribu¬ 
tions made to the study of heart disease. It has been responsible for an 
avalanche of reports by other research workers throughout the world; it has 
changed the diets of hundreds of thousands of people; and has made huge 
sums of money for producers of foods that are incorporated into these 
special diets.” 

Against the general public acceptance of the proposition that coronary 
heart disease is caused by a high intake of animal fat (saturated fat) and the 
eating of foods containing cholesterol, Yudkin himself has shown that for 
the same countries the correlation of coronary disease with intake of sugar 
is much better than that with intake of fat. He found that persons who 
develop coronary disease have been ingesting more sucrose, ordinary sugar, 
than those who have not developed the disease, and he remarks that “no one 
has ever shown any difference in fat consumption between people with and 
people without coronary diseases, but this has in no way deterred Dr. Keys 
and his followers.” Yudkin’s observation has been confirmed by a large- 
scale, long-term epidemiological study of the population of Framingham, 
Massachusetts, conducted under the auspices of the National Institute of 



40 


CHAPTER 6 


Health, which showed no correlation between the intake of fat and the 
incidence of heart disease. Nevertheless, perhaps in part because of the now 
huge economic interest in the link between fats in the food and cholesterol 
in the blood, the naive one-to-one correspondence persists in physicians’ 
advice and in the public mind. The idea is dying hard, as we shall see in 
Chapter 16. 

Coronary heart disease, which occurred very rarely seventy-five years 
ago, is today one of the principal causes of death. In 1957 Yudkin reported 
a study of the death rate from coronary disease in fifteen countries in 
relation to the average intake of sugar. The annual coronary death rate per 
100,000 persons increases steadily from 60 for an intake of 20 pounds of 
sugar per year to 300 for 120 pounds per year, and then more sharply to 
about 750 for 150 pounds per year. In 1964 and 1967 Yudkin and his 



























TWO EATING PROBLEMS 


41 


coworkers reported the results of two studies of the average intake of su¬ 
crose (during the period of some years before they had developed the dis¬ 
ease) of sixty-five male patients in London with myocardial infarction or 
peripheral arterial disease, and also of fifty-eight male control subjects, of 
whom some were healthy and some were patients hospitalized with other 
diseases. The patients with heart disease were 45 to 65 years old, with 
average 56.1, and the control subjects were in the same age range, with 
average 55.1. 

The mean sugar intake of the men who developed cardiovascular disease 
was 140 pounds per year, and that of the controls was 80 pounds per year. 
This difference has very high statistical significance, the calculated confi¬ 
dence level being greater than 99.999 percent. We are led to the conclusion 
that men with a large intake of sucrose have a far larger chance of develop¬ 
ing heart disease in the age range forty-five to sixty-five than those with a 
small intake of sucrose. A second study gave essentially the same results. 

Yudkin’s work has been criticized on the ground that his method of 
determining the intake of sucrose, by questioning the patient, within three 
weeks after his hospitalization, about his normal eating habits, was un¬ 
reliable. He carried out an investigation to check this point and concluded 
that this method is as reliable as the much more elaborate method usually 
used by nutritionists. 

Coronary disease, including angina pectoris, which because of its striking 
symptoms would surely not have been ignored by the physicians of earlier 
centuries, seems to be a disease of modern times. It has been reported in the 
medical literature only during the last hundred years. The increasing inci¬ 
dence of the disease closely parallels the increasing consumption of sugar. It 
is not at all correlated with the consumption of animal fat (saturated fat) or 
of total fat. 

Yudkin quotes several studies that indicate strongly that sucrose, and not 
animal fat, is the villain in the heart-disease story. Dr. A. M. Cohen in 
Jerusalem found that Yemenite Jews who had been in Israel only ten years 
or less had very little coronary disease, whereas those who had been in 
Israel twenty-five years had a high incidence of the disease. In the Yemen 
their diet had been high in animal fat and low in sugar, and in Israel they 
had adopted the usual high-sugar diet of the country. This observation 
shows clearly that a diet high in saturated fat does not necessarily lead to a 
high incidence of coronary disease, and it supports Yudkin’s conclusion that 
a high-sucrose diet does lead to coronary disease. 

Moreover, the East African Masai and Sumburu tribes live mostly on 
milk and meat and accordingly have a high consumption of animal fat; 
nevertheless, they have very little heart disease. In the past the black popu¬ 
lation in South Africa as a whole had almost no coronary disease; during 




42 


CHAPTER 6 


the last ten years their consumption of sugar has increased greatly, and the 
incidence of coronary disease is rising rapidly. 

The epidemiological evidence that there is a correlation between the 
amount of cholesterol in the blood, if not in the diet, and the incidence of 
heart disease is convincing. When the level of cholesterol is decreased, the 
incidence of coronary disease decreases. The procedure that has been rec¬ 
ommended to decrease the level of cholesterol is to cut down the intake of 
eggs, meat, and other foods that contain cholesterol. The cholesterol in¬ 
gested in food does not, however, go directly into the bloodstream. It may be 
that another procedure is even better than reducing the intake of choles¬ 
terol. This procedure is to change our intake of nutrients that are known to 
be involved in the synthesis and destruction of cholesterol in our bodies. 
Yudkin has convincingly put the sugar sucrose in this category. 

As explained in Chapter 4, the metabolism of sucrose yields in its first 
step equal quantities of glucose and fructose. Glucose proceeds directly into 
the metabolic steps that yield its energy to the biochemical machinery of the 
cells of the body. Fructose metabolism goes in part by a different route such 
that it produces acetate, which is a precursor of the cholesterol that we 
synthesize in our liver cells. 

It has been shown in a trustworthy clinical study that the ingestion of 
sucrose leads to an increase in the cholesterol concentration in the blood. 
This important study was reported by Milton Winitz and his associates in 
1964 and 1970. These investigators studied eighteen subjects, who were 
kept in a locked institution, without access to other food, during the whole 
period of the study (about six months). After a preliminary period with 
ordinary food, they were placed on a chemically well-defined small-mole¬ 
cule diet (seventeen amino acids, a little fat, vitamins, essential minerals, 
and glucose as the only carbohydrate). The only significant physiological 
change that was found was in the concentration of cholesterol in the blood 
serum, which decreased rapidly for each of the eighteen subjects. The aver¬ 
age concentration in the initial period, on ordinary food, was 227 milli¬ 
grams per deciliter. After two weeks on the glucose diet it had dropped to 
173, and after another two weeks to 160. The diet was then changed by 
replacing one quarter of the glucose by sucrose, with all of the other dietary . 
constituents kept the same. Within one week the average cholesterol con¬ 
centration had risen from 160 to 178, and after two more weeks to 208. 
The sucrose was then replaced by glucose. Within one week the average 
cholesterol concentration had dropped to 175, and it continued dropping, 
leveling off at 150, 77 less than the initial value (see the illustration on 
page 43). 

This important experiment, in which the only change made was to re¬ 
place some of the glucose in the diet with sucrose and then return to the 



TWO EATING PROBLEMS 


43 


STAGE 1 



Weeks 

Cholesterol in the blood In a locked ward eighteen male experimental subjects received 
at first ordinary food and then a rigorously specified diet in which protein requirements 
were met by amino acids, the bulk requirement by essential fats, and the carbohydrate 
requirement by glucose. Four stages in the experiment are charted here. STAGE 1: For the 
first four weeks the subjects ate ordinary food. STAGE 2: From the fourth to the eighth 
week, their diet contained only glucose as carbohydrate. STAGE 3: From the eighth week 
to the twelfth week, their source of carbohydrate was mixed: 75 percent glucose and 25 
sucrose. STAGE 4: After the twelfth week, their diet returned to glucose (as in stage 2). 
Note that their blood cholesterol decreased significantly each time the sucrose was 
eliminated. 


sucrose-free diet, shows conclusively that an increased intake of sucrose 
leads to an increased level of blood cholesterol. Because of the relation 
between bloodstream cholesterol and heart disease, this experiment ties the 
consumption of sucrose directly to increased incidence of heart disease. 
Moreover, the sucrose-cholesterol effect has its biochemical basis estab¬ 
lished in the fact that fructose, formed in the digestion of sucrose, undergoes 
reactions in the body leading to acetate, which is then in part converted to 
cholesterol. This clinical trial conducted by Winitz and his collaborators 
strongly supports the conclusion reached by Yudkin that sugar (sucrose) is 
dangerous as well as sweet. 

The ordinary diet, with 20 percent of the food energy from sucrose, 
corresponds to an average intake of 125 g per day, 100 pounds per year. To 
cut this intake in half greatly improves the health, decreasing the chance of 
developing heart disease and other diseases, lowering the blood cholesterol, 
and strengthening the body’s natural defense mechanisms. 

























44 


CHAPTER 6 


You can decrease your intake of sucrose by half very easily by developing 
some good habits. 

1. Keep away from the sugar bowl. Do not add sugar to your tea or 
coffee. A rounded teaspoonful of sugar weighs 9 g. Each time that you 
refrain from adding it to your cup of coffee or tea you decrease your 
intake of sucrose by that amount. 

2. Do not eat prepared breakfast cereals (frosted cereals) with added 
sugar. Some of these cereals are 50 percent sugar. When you eat a 
2-ounce serving you eat 28 g of sucrose. Eat sugar-free cereals, and add 
only a small amount of sugar. 

3. Do not eat sweet desserts regularly. As Yudkin has pointed out, this 
does not mean that when you are a guest you should refuse to eat the 
dessert your hostess has prepared. 

4. Do not drink soft drinks (carbonated beverages), except club soda (car¬ 
bonated water). The usual 6-ounce bottle or can of a cola drink con¬ 
tains 17 g of sucrose. If you were to drink four of them per day and eat 
the ordinary American diet, your sucrose intake would be 155 pounds 
per year, and, according to Yudkin, you would be fifteen times as likely 
to die of heart disease at an early age as if you restricted your intake to 
50 pounds per year by following these rules. 

A glass of ginger ale contains 14 g of sucrose, a glass of cream soda 17 g, 
a glass of fruit-flavored soda (citrus, cherry, grape, strawberry, Tom Col¬ 
lins mix, other) 20 g, a glass of root beer 18 g, a glass of tonic water 
(quinine water) 14 g. 

I do not recommend the diet sodas, in which the sucrose is replaced by 
artificial sweeteners, because I am worried about the possible toxicity of 
these nonorthomolecular substances. The soft drink that I recommend for 
every person except those on a low-sodium diet is club soda, which contains 
no sucrose. I also recommend water. 

If you keep your intake of sugar down, vitamin C can supply the rest of 
your insurance against high cholesterol concentration in your bloodstream. 
As I explain in Chapter 18, where we return to the subject of heart disease, 
vitamin C is involved in the biochemistry of the synthesis and destruction of 
cholesterol in our bodies. 



II 


THE NEW NUTRITION 


























■ 

' 























































7 


How Vitamins Were Discovered 


Scurvy, beriberi, pellagra, pernicious anemia, and rickets are diseases that 
over past millennia caused a tremendous amount of suffering and millions 
of deaths. We know today that each of these diseases is the result of a 
deficiency in the amount of an important kind of molecule in the organs 
and tissues of the body. Scurvy results from an insufficient supply of vita¬ 
min C; beriberi, from an insufficient supply of vitamin B, (thiamine); pel¬ 
lagra, from an insufficient supply of vitamin B 3 (niacin). Pernicious anemia 
results from an insufficient amount of vitamin B 12 (cobalamin) in the blood, 
caused by the failure of the patient to synthesize a substance that carries the 
vitamin across the intestinal wall. Rickets (defective bone growth) is caused 
by a lack of vitamin D in the diet or by insufficient exposure of the skin to 
sunlight. This knowledge, which has been obtained only during the last one 
hundred years, has led to nearly complete control of the diseases in the 
developed countries and to great improvement in the general health of their 
populations. 

Scurvy has been known for centuries, but it was not until 1911 that its 
cause was clearly recognized to be a dietary deficiency. Until the 1880s the 
disease was common among sailors on board ships taking long voyages. It 
also frequently broke out among soldiers in an army on campaign, in com¬ 
munities in times of scarcity of food, in cities under siege, and in prisons 




48 


CHAPTER 7 


and workhouses. Scurvy plagued the California gold miners 140 years ago 
and the Alaskan gold miners 90 years ago. 

The onset of scurvy is marked by a failure of strength, by depression, 
restlessness, and rapid exhaustion on making an effort. The skin becomes 
sallow or dusky. The patient complains of pain in the muscles. He is 
mentally depressed. Later his face looks haggard. His gums ulcerate, his 
teeth drop out, and his breath is fetid. Hemorrhages of large size penetrate 
the muscles and other tissues, giving him the appearance of being exten¬ 
sively bruised. The later stages of the disease are marked by profound 
exhaustion, diarrhea, and pulmonary and kidney troubles, leading to death. 

The ravages of scurvy among the early sea voyagers were terrible. On a 
long voyage the sailors lived largely on biscuits, salt beef, and salt pork, 
which contain very little vitamin C. Between 9 July 1497 and 30 May 
1498 the Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama made the voyage of discov¬ 
ery of the sea route around Africa to India, sailing from Lisbon to Calicut. 
During this voyage 100 of his crew of 160 died of scurvy. In the year 1577 
a Spanish galleon was found adrift in the Sargasso Sea, with everyone on 
board dead of scurvy. Late in 1740 the British admiral George Anson set 
out with a squadron of six ships manned by 961 sailors. By June 1741, 
when he reached the island of Juan Fernandez, the number of sailors had 
decreased to 335, more than half of his men having died of scurvy. The 
conqueror of Mexico, Hernando Cortes, discovered Baja California in 1536 
but had to turn back before discovering California itself because his sailors 
were dying of scurvy. 

The idea that scurvy could be prevented by a proper diet developed only 
slowly. In 1536 the French explorer Jacques Cartier discovered the St. 
Lawrence River and sailed upstream to the site of the present city of 
Quebec, where he and his men spent the winter. Twenty-five of the men 
died of scurvy, and many others were very sick. A friendly Indian advised 
them to drink tea made of the leaves and bark of the arbor vitae tree, Thuja 
occidentalis. The treatment was beneficial. The leaves or needles of this 
tree were later shown to contain about 50 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 
grams. 

The sixteenth-century English admiral Sir John Hawkins found that on 
a very long voyage the crew suffered from scurvy in proportion to the 
length of time they were restricted to dry foods. They recovered rapidly as 
soon as they had access to a supply of succulent plants, including citrus 
fruits. 

Since fresh fruits and vegetables are obviously the most difficult of all 
supplies to maintain on shipboard, efforts were made to find a substitute 
capable of marine transport. 

In 1747, while in the British naval service, the Scottish physician James 
Lind carried out a now-famous experiment with twelve patients severely ill 




HOW VITAMINS WERE DISCOVERED 


49 


with scurvy. He placed them all on the same diet, except for one item, one 
or another of the reputed remedies that he was testing. To each of two 
patients he gave two oranges and one lemon per day; to two others, cider; to 
the others, dilute sulfuric acid, or vinegar, or sea water, or a mixture of 
drugs. At the end of six days the two who had received the citrus fruits 
were well, whereas the other ten remained ill. Lind carried out further 
studies, which he later described in his book A Treatise on Scurvy (1753). 

The experiences of the great English explorer Captain James Cook in 
controlling scurvy are particularly striking. Cook was the son of a day 
laborer on a farm in Yorkshire. As a boy he showed unusual ability, and at 
eighteen he was apprenticed to a ship owner, who encouraged him in his 
study of mathematics and navigation. After he joined the navy he advanced 
rapidly and became one of the world’s greatest explorers. 

The story of his dealing with scurvy among his crews on his Pacific 
voyages during the period 1768 to 1780 has been told by Kodicek and 
Young in Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London (1969). These 
authors quote the following song by the sailor T. Perry, a member of the 
crew of Cook’s flagship H.M.S. Resolution: 


We were all hearty seamen, no colds did we fear 

And we have from all sickness entirely kept clear 
Thanks be to the Captain, he has proved so good 
Amongst all the Islands to give us fresh food. 


This song, written two hundred years ago, indicates that Cook’s sailors 
believed that something in the fresh food provided them with protection 
against colds, as well as against other diseases. 

Captain Cook made use of many antiscorbutic agents. Whenever the 
ships reached shore he ordered the sailors to gather fruits, vegetables, ber¬ 
ries, and green plants. In South America, Australia, and Alaska the leaves 
of spruce trees were gathered and made into an infusion called spruce beer. 
Nettletops and wild leeks were boiled with wheat and served at breakfast. 
Cook began one voyage with a supply of 7,860 pounds of sauerkraut, 
enough to provide 2 pounds per week for a period of a year for each of the 
seventy men on board his first flagship, the Endeavour. (Saukerkraut con¬ 
tains a good amount of vitamin C, about 30 milligrams [mg] per 100 
grams.) The result of his care was that, despite some illness, not a single 
member of his crew died of scurvy during his three Pacific voyages, carried 
out at a time when scurvy was still ravaging the crews of most vessels on 
such protracted expeditions. Cook’s scientific contributions were recognized 
by his election as a Fellow of the Royal Society of London, which awarded 
him the Copley Medal for his work on the prevention of scurvy. 



50 


CHAPTER 7 


Although the most intelligent travelers since the time of Hawkins had 
expressed their opinion that the juice of citrus fruits—principally oranges, 
lemons, and limes—was a good substitute for fresh fruit and vegetables in 
preventing scurvy, acceptance by the public was slow. Such juice was ex¬ 
pensive and troublesome to carry, so skippers and ship owners found it 
expedient to be skeptical. In the controversy some attempts to find a solu¬ 
tion involved using orange, lemon, and lime juice that had been boiled 
down to a syrup. But they were unsuccessful. We know today that most of 
the ascorbic acid in the juice was destroyed by this process. Controversy 
over the value of fresh citrus juice continued. Finally, however, in 1795, 
forty-eight years after Lind had carried out his striking experiment, the 
British Admiralty ordered that a daily ration of fresh lime juice (not boiled 
to a syrup) be given to the sailors. Scurvy soon disappeared from the British 
Navy. From this salutary practice the British sailor came to be known as a 
“Lime-juicer,” or “Limey.” 

The spirit of free enterprise remained dominant in the British Board of 
Trade, however, and scurvy continued to ravage the British merchant ma¬ 
rine for seventy years longer. Not until 1865 did the Board of Trade pass a 
similar lime-juice regulation for the merchant marine. 

At the present time scurvy, complicated by other deficiency diseases, is 
found in populations that are ravaged by starvation and severe malnutri¬ 
tion, usually as a result of poverty. In the United States scurvy is also 
occasionally observed in people who are not poverty-striken: among infants 
six to eighteen months old who are fed a formula without vitamin supple¬ 
ment and such persons as middle-aged or elderly bachelors or widowers 
who for convenience and through ignorance ingest a diet deficient in the 
essential nutrients. 

E. Cheraskin, W. M. Ringsdorf, Jr., and E. L. Sisley in their book The 
Vitamin C Connection (1983) recount the story of a forty-eight-year-old 
woman in California who came to the hospital because of pain, indigestion, 
and swelling of the abdomen. Over a period of four years she had six 
surgical operations. Each time the abdomen was found to be full of blood. 
In the effort to prevent the recurrent bleeding, her ovaries, uterus, appen¬ 
dix, spleen, and part of the small intestine were removed. Finally, after 
four years, a doctor asked her what she ate and found that her diet con¬ 
tained essentially no fruits or vegetables and that she took no supplemen¬ 
tary vitamins. She was getting a little vitamin C in her food, enough to keep 
her from dying of scurvy but not enough to keep her blood vessels strong 
enough to prevent internal bleeding. Her blood level of vitamin C was only 
0.06 mg per deciliter. When she was put on 1000 mg of vitamin C per day 
she regained normal health, qualified, however, by the surgery she had 
endured (Cook and Milligan, 1977). 



HOW VITAMINS WERE DISCOVERED 


51 


Not many people in the United States develop this sort of incipient 
scurvy. I believe, however, for reasons discussed throughout this book, that 
most of the American people suffer from a mild or even rather serious 
prescorbutic condition and also from deficiencies in other essential nutri¬ 
ents. The regular intake of supplements of vitamin C and other vitamins 
and minerals, in addition to a good diet and other health practices, can lead 
to a better life for almost every person. 

The article on scurvy in the eleventh edition of the Encyclopedia Britan - 
nica (1911) states that the incidence of scurvy depends upon the nature of 
the food and that it is disputed whether the cause is the absence of certain 
constituents in the food or the presence of some actual poison. 

The study of another vitamin-deficiency disease, beriberi, was then in a 
similar state. Beriberi was prevalent in eastern Asia, where rice is the 
staple food, and also in the Pacific islands and South America. It involves 
paralysis and numbness, starting from the legs and leading to cardiac and 
respiratory disorders and to death. In the Dutch East Indies, about one 
hundred years ago, soldiers, sailors, prisoners, mine workers, plantation 
workers, and persons admitted to a hospital for minor ailments were dying 
of the disease by the thousands. Young men in seemingly good health some¬ 
times died suddenly, in terrible distress through inability to breathe. 

In 1886 a young Dutch physician, Christiaan Eijkman, was asked by the 
Dutch government to study the disease. For three years he made little 
progress. Then he noticed that the chickens in the laboratory chickenhouse 
were dying of a paralytic disease closely resembling beriberi. His studies of 
the chickens’ disease were suddenly brought to an end, when the chickens 
that had not yet died recovered and no new cases developed. He found, on 
investigating the circumstances, that the man in charge of the chickens had 
been feeding them, from 17 June to 27 November, on polished rice (with 
the husks removed) prepared in the military hospital kitchen for the hospi¬ 
tal patients. Then a new cook took charge of the kitchen; he refused, as 
Eijkman was to report in his address accepting the Nobel Prize for physiol¬ 
ogy and medicine in 1929, to “allow military rice to be taken for civilian 
chickens.” The disease had broken out among the chickens on 10 July and 
disappeared during the last days of November. 

It was immediately confirmed that a diet of polished rice causes death of 
chickens in three or four weeks, whereas they remain in good health when 
fed unpolished rice. A study of 300,000 prisoners in 101 prisons in the 
Dutch East Indies was then made, and it was found that the incidence of 
beriberi was three hundred times as great in the prisons where polished rice 
was used as a staple diet as in those where unpolished rice was used. 

Eijkman found that he could isolate an extract from the bran of the rice 
that had protective power against beriberi. At first he had thought that 




52 


CHAPTER 8 


some substance in the bran acted as an antidote for a toxin assumed to be 
present in polished rice, but by 1907 he and his collaborator, Gerrit Grijns, 
had concluded that the bran contains a nutrient substance that is required 
for good health. 

In the meantime a number of investigators had been studying the nutri¬ 
tional value of foods. It was shown that for good health certain minerals are 
needed (compounds of sodium, potassium, iron, copper, and other metals), 
as well as proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. The Swiss biochemist Lunin 
found in 1881 that mice died when they were fed a mixture of purified 
protein, carbohydrate, fat, and minerals, whereas those fed the same diet 
with the addition of some milk survived. He concluded that “a natural food 
such as milk must therefore contain besides these known principal ingredi¬ 
ents small quantities of unknown substances essential to life.” Similar ob¬ 
servations were made in the same laboratory (in Basel) ten years later by 
another Swiss biochemist, Socin, who found that small amounts of either 
egg yolk or milk, in addition to the purified diet, sufficed to keep the mice 
in good health. In 1905 the Dutch physiologist Pekelharing found that very 
small amounts of the unknown essential substances in milk were enough to 
keep the animals in good health. Between 1905 and 1912 the English 
biochemist F. Gowland Hopkins carried on similar studies with rats. His 
results were announced in 1911 and published in detail in 1912. Hopkins 
shared the 1929 Nobel Prize with Eijkman. 

In 1911 Casimir Funk, a Polish biochemist then working in the Lister 
Institute in London, published his theory of “vitamins,” based upon his 
review of the existing knowledge about diseases associated with faulty nu¬ 
trition. He suggested that four such substances are present in natural foods 
and that they serve to provide protection against four diseases—beriberi, 
scurvy, pellagra, and rickets. Funk coined the word vitamine from the 
Latin word vita (“life”) and the chemical term amine 3 a member of a class 
of compounds of nitrogen, which includes, of course, the amino acids. 
Later, when it was found that some of these essential substances do not 
contain nitrogen, the word was changed to vitamin. 

In the meantime the American investigator E. V. McCollum had been 
studying nutritional factors at the University of Wisconsin. He and his 
coworkers reported in 1913 the need for two “necessary” food factors, one 
soluble in fats and one in water. In 1915 he named them “fat-soluble A” 
and “water-soluble B.” This was the start of the modern nomenclature of 
the vitamins. The vitamin that prevents scurvy was then named water- 
soluble C, and the one that prevents rickets was named fat-soluble D. 
When “water-soluble B” was found to contain not only the protective agent 
against beriberi but also several others, they were given the names B,, B 2 , 
and so on to B 17 . Some of these substances have been found not to be 





HOW VITAMINS WERE DISCOVERED 


53 


vitamins, their requirement for life and health being uncertain, but the 
names B,, B 2 , B 3 , B 6 , and B 12 are still used. 

During the following years a number of efforts were made to isolate pure 
vitamin C from lemon juice and other foods. The pure vitamin was finally 
obtained in 1928, by Albert Szent-Gyorgyi. He was working on another 
problem and at first did not know that his new substance was vitamin C. 
He named the substance hexuronic acid. Szent-Gyorgyi was given the 
Nobel Prize for physiology and medicine for 1937 in recognition of his dis¬ 
coveries concerning the biological oxidation processes, with especial refer¬ 
ence to vitamin C and to the role of fumaric acid in these processes. 

Szent-Gyorgyi was born in Budapest in 1893. He studied medicine in 
Budapest and immediately began his career as an investigator in the fields 
of physiology and biochemistry. While he was working in the Netherlands 
in 1922 he began a study of the oxidation reactions that cause a brown 
pigmentation to appear in certain fruits, such as apples and bananas, as 
they decay. In the course of these studies he found that cabbages contain a 
reducing agent (an agent that can combine with oxygen) that prevents the 
formation of the brown pigment, and that the adrenal glands of animals 
contain the same reducing agent or a similar one. Because of his interest in 
physiological oxidation-reduction reactions he began to try to isolate this 
reducing agent from the plant tissues and from adrenal glands. 

In 1927 Szent-Gyorgyi received a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foun¬ 
dation, permitting him to spend a year in the laboratory of F. Gowland 
Hopkins in Cambridge, England. Here he succeeded in isolating the sub¬ 
stance from plant tissues and from the adrenal glands of animals. He then 
spent a year at the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, where he suc¬ 
ceeded in obtaining 25 grams (g) of the substance, which he had called 
hexuronic acid. In 1930 he returned to Hungary, where he found that 
Hungarian paprika contains large amounts of the substance. He and his 
collaborators, and also the American investigators Waugh and King, 
showed in 1932 that Szent-Gyorgyi’s substance was vitamin C. Szent- 
Gyorgyi himself had found that the chemical formula of the substance is 
C 6 H 8 0 6 . He gave some of the crystalline material to the English sugar 
chemist W. M. Haworth, who determined its structural formula, establish¬ 
ing the atom-to-atom connections in the molecule (to be discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 9). Szent-Gyorgyi and Haworth then changed its name to 
ascorbic acid, meaning the acidic substance that prevents and cures scurvy. 

Haworth demonstrated also the two chemical reactions by which the 
sugar dextrose or glucose, a carbohydrate with the formula C 6 H l2 0 6 , is 
made to give up four hydrogen atoms to be transformed to C 6 H 8 0 6 , with 
two molecules of water as byproduct. Essentially the same reactions are 
conducted by the living cells that manufacture vitamin C and by the chemi- 




54 


CHAPTER 7 


cal reactors that make the identical “synthetic” vitamin C. The very sim¬ 
plicity of the molecule and its manufacture from glucose, the principal fuel 
sustaining life in tissue cells, suggest the importance of vitamin C and 
explain its ubiquity in the tissues of the body. 

Two twentieth-century American chemists, Robert R. Williams and 
Roger J. Williams, have made important contributions to our knowledge 
about the B vitamins. Their parents were missionaries, and they were born 
in India. R. R. Williams worked for many years as director of chemical 
research for Bell Telephone Laboratories in New York City on problems 
such as improving the electrical insulation on submarine cables. He set up a 
laboratory in his home and devoted his spare time to trying to isolate the 
substance in rice hulls that protects against beriberi. After years of work 
he and his collaborators, R. R. Waterman (his son-in-law) and E. R. 
Buchman, succeeded in isolating the substance, which they named thia¬ 
mine, in determining its chemical constitution, and in devising ways of 
synthesizing it, making it available at a low price for improving the health 
of people all over the world. 

R. J. Williams, when he was professor of chemistry at Oregon State 
University in 1933, discovered another B vitamin, which he named panto¬ 
thenic acid. Later, at the University of Texas, he studied a factor in extracts 
from yeast and liver that had been reported in 1931 and 1938 by other 
investigators to be effective in controlling anemia in animals. In 1941 he 
and his students had decided that it was a vitamin, which they named 
folic acid. 

In 1916 the American physician J. Goldberger reported that the disease 
pellagra, which was causing great suffering and many deaths among the 
poor people in the southern United States, could be prevented by improved 
nutrition (milk and eggs) and in no other way. Then in 1937 the American 
biochemist C. A. Elvehjem and his students at the University of Wisconsin 
showed that niacin or niacinamide cured a similar disease, blacktongue, in 
dogs, and in the same year these substances, vitamin B 3 , were shown to cure 
pellagra in human beings. 

There are interesting stories that might be recounted about the other 
vitamins. For example, after some red crystals of a cobalt compound that 
has an astounding protective effect against pernicious anemia had been 
isolated, the greatest organic chemists in the world were unable to deter¬ 
mine the chemical constitution of the substance. Today called vitamin B 12 , 
it is a complex molecule containing 183 atoms of carbon, hydrogen, nitro¬ 
gen, oxygen, phosphorus, and cobalt. Its structure was ultimately resolved 
by an X-ray crystallographer, Dorothy Hodgkin, at Oxford University. 
For this work she was given the Nobel prize for chemistry in 1964. While 
there is more to tell about the history of how vitamins were discovered, let 
us turn now to their role in the physiology of good health. 



8 


Vitamins and Evolution 


We are accustomed to thinking of human beings as the highest of all species 
of living organisms. In one sense they are: They have achieved effective 
control over a large part of the earth and have even begun to extend their 
realm as far as the moon and Mars. But in their biochemical capabilities 
they are inferior to many other organisms, including even unicellular orga¬ 
nisms, such as bacteria, yeasts, and molds. 

The red bread mold ( Neurospora ), for example, is able to carry out in its 
cells a great many chemical reactions that human beings are unable to 
carry out. The red bread mold can live on a very simple medium, consisting 
of water, inorganic salts, an inorganic source of nitrogen, such as ammo¬ 
nium nitrate, a suitable source of carbon, such as sucrose, and a single 
vitamin, biotin. All other substances required by the red bread mold are 
synthesized by it, using its internal biochemical mechanisms. The red bread 
mold does not need to have any amino acids in its diet, because it is able to 
synthesize all of them and also to synthesize all of the vitamins except 
biotin. 

The red bread mold owes its survival, over hundreds of millions of years, 
to its great biochemical capabilities. If, like humans, it were unable to 
synthesize the various amino acids and vitamins, it would not have sur¬ 
vived, because it could not have solved the problem of obtaining an ade¬ 
quate diet. 





56 


CHAPTER 8 


From time to time a gene in the red bread mold undergoes a mutation, 
such as to cause the cell to lose the ability to manufacture one of the amino 
acids or vitaminlike substances essential to its life. This mutated spore gives 
rise to a deficient strain of red bread mold, which could stay healthy only 
with an addition to the diet that suffices for the original type of the mold. 
The scientists G. W. Beadle and E. L. Tatum carried on extensive studies 
of mutated strains of the red bread mold, when they were working in 
Stanford University, beginning about 1938. They were able to keep the 
mutant strains alive in the laboratory by providing each strain with the 
additional food that it needed for good health, as shown by a normal rate of 
growth. 

It was mentioned in Chapter 7 that the substance thiamine (vitamin Bl) 
is needed by human beings to keep them from dying of beriberi, and that 
chickens fed on a diet that contains none of this food also die of a neurologi¬ 
cal disease resembling beriberi. It has been found, in fact, that thiamine is 
needed as an essential food for all other animal species that have been 
studied, including the domestic pigeon, the laboratory rat, the guinea pig, 
the pig, the cow, the domestic cat, and the monkey. We may surmise that 
the need of all of these animal species for thiamine as an essential food, 
which they must ingest in order not to develop a disease resembling beriberi 
in human beings, resulted from an event that took place more than five 
hundred million years ago. 

Let us consider the epoch, early in the history of life on earth, when the 
early animal species from which present-day birds and mammals have 
evolved populated a part of the earth. We assume that the animals of this 
species nourished themselves by eating plants, possibly together with other 
food. All plants contain thiamine. Accordingly the animals would have in 
their bodies the thiamine that they had ingested with the foodstuffs that 
they had eaten, as well as the thiamine that they themselves synthesized by 
use of their own synthetic mechanism. Now let us assume that a mutant 
animal appeared in the population, an animal that, as the result of the 
impact of a cosmic ray on a gene or of the action of some other mutagenic 
agent, had lost the biochemical machinery that still permitted the other 
members of the species to manufacture thiamine from other substances. 
The amount of thiamine provided by the ingestion of food would suffice to 
keep the mutant well nourished, essentially as well nourished as the un¬ 
mutated animals. The mutant would have an advantage over the unmutated 
animals, in that it would be liberated from the burden of the machinery for 
manufacturing its own thiamine. As a result, the mutant would be able to 
have more offspring than the other animals in the population. By reproduc¬ 
tion the mutated animal would pass its advantageously mutated gene along 
to some of its offspring, and they too would have more than the average 
number of offspring. Thus in the course of time this advantage, the advan- 




VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


57 


tage of not having to do the work of manufacturing thiamine or to carry 
within itself the machinery for this manufacture, could permit the mutant 
type to replace the original type. 

To recapitulate: Many different kinds of molecules must be present in 
the body of an animal in order that the animal be in good health. Some of 
these molecules can be synthesized by the animal; others must be ingested 
as foods. If the substance is available as a food, it is advantageous to the 
animal species to rid itself of the burden of the machinery for synthesiz¬ 
ing it. 

It is believed that, over the millennia, the ancestors of human beings 
were enabled, over and over again, by the availability of certain substances 
as foods, including the essential amino acids and the vitamins, to simplify 
their own biochemical lives by shuffling off the machinery that their ances¬ 
tors had needed for synthesizing these substances. Evolutionary processes of 
this sort gradually, over millions of years, led to the appearance of new spe¬ 
cies, including man. 

Some interesting experiments concern competition between strains of or¬ 
ganisms that require a certain substance as food and those that do not 
require the substance, because they have the ability to synthesize it them¬ 
selves. These experiments were carried out at the University of California, 
Los Angeles, by Zamenhof and Eichhorn, who published their findings in 
1967. They studied a bacterium, Bacillus subtilis, by comparing a strain 
that had the power of manufacturing the amino acid tryptophan and a 
mutant strain that had lost the ability to manufacture it. If the same num¬ 
bers of cells of the two strains were put in a medium that did not contain 
any tryptophan the strain that could manufacture tryptophan survived, 
whereas the other strain died out. If, however, some cells of the two strains 
were put together in a medium containing a good supply of tryptophan, the 
scales were turned. The mutant strain, which had lost the ability to manu¬ 
facture the amino acid, survived, and the original strain, with the ability to 
manufacture the amino acid, died out. The two strains of bacteria differed 
only in a single mutation, the loss of the ability to manufacture tryptophan. 
We are hence led to conclude that the burden of using the machinery for 
tryptophan synthesis was disadvantageous to the strain possessing this abil¬ 
ity and hampered it, in its competition with the mutant strain, to such an 
extent as to cause it to fail in this competition. The number of generations 
(cell divisions) required for takeover in this series of experiments (starting 
with an equal number of cells, to a million times as many cells of the 
victorious strain) was about fifty, which would correspond to only about 
fifteen hundred years for humans (thirty years per generation). 

We may say that Zamenhof and Eichhorn carried out a small-scale 
experiment about the process of the evolution of species. This experiment, 
and several others that they also carried out, showed that it can be advanta- 




58 


CHAPTER 8 


geous to be free of the internal machinery for synthesizing a vital substance, 
if the vital substance can be obtained instead as a food from the immediate 
environment. 

Most of the vitamins required by humans for good health are also re¬ 
quired by animals of other species. Vitamin A is an essential nutrient for 
all vertebrates for vision, maintenance of skin tissue, and normal develop¬ 
ment of bones. Riboflavin (vitamin B 2 ), pantothenic acid, pyridoxine (vita¬ 
min B 6 ), nicotinic acid (niacin), and cyanocobalamin (vitamin B 12 ) are re¬ 
quired for good health by the cow, pig, rat, chicken, and other animals. It is 
likely that the loss of the ability to synthesize these essential substances, like 
the loss of the ability to synthesize thiamine, occurred rather early in the 
history of animal life on earth, when the primitive animals began living 
largely on plants, which contain a supply of these nutrients. 

Irwin Stone pointed out in 1965 that, whereas most species of animals 
can synthesize ascorbic acid, humans and other primates that have been 
tested, including the rhesus monkey, the Formosan long-tail monkey, and 
the ringtail or brown capuchin monkey, are unable to synthesize the sub¬ 
stance and require it as a supplementary vitamin. He concluded that the 
loss of the ability to synthesize ascorbic acid probably occurred in the com¬ 
mon ancestor of the primates. A rough estimate of the time at which this 
mutational change occurred is twenty-five million years ago (Zuckerkandl 
and Pauling, 1962). 

The guinea pig and an Indian fruit-eating bat are the only other 
mammals known to require ascorbic acid as a vitamin. The red-vented 
bulbul and some other Indian birds (of the order Passeriformes) also re¬ 
quire ascorbic acid. The overwhelming majority of mammals, birds, am¬ 
phibians, and reptiles have the ability to synthesize the substance in their 
tissues, usually in the liver or the kidney. The loss of the ability by the 
guinea pig, the fruit-eating bat, the red-vented bulbul, and other passeri- 
form birds probably resulted from independent mutations in populations of 
these species of animals living in an environment that provided an ample 
supply of ascorbic acid in the available foodstuffs. 

We may ask why ascorbic acid is not required as a vitamin in the food of 
the cow, pig, horse, rat, chicken, and many other species of animals that do 
require the other vitamins needed by humans. Ascorbic acid is present in 
green plants, along with these other vitamins. When green plants became 
the steady diet of the common ancestor of humans and other mammals, 
hundreds of millions of years ago, why did not this ancestor undergo the 
mutation of eliminating the mechanism for synthesizing ascorbic acid, as 
well as those for synthesizing thiamine, pantothenic acid, pyridoxine, and 
other vitamins? 

I think the answer is that for optimum health more ascorbic acid was 
needed that could be provided under ordinary conditions by the usually 



VITAMINS AND EVOLUTION 


59 


available green plants. Part of the extra amount is needed by animals 
because ascorbic acid is required for the synthesis of collagen, as will be 
explained in Chapter 9. This protein is present in large amounts in the 
bodies of animals but not in plants. 

Let us consider the common precursor of the primates, at a time about 
twenty-five million years ago. This animal and his ancestors had for hun¬ 
dreds of millions of years continued to synthesize ascorbic acid from the 
glucose in the foods that they had ingested. Let us assume that a population 
of this species of animals was living, at that time, in an area that provided 
an ample supply of food with an unusually large content of ascorbic acid, 
permitting the animals to obtain from their diet approximately the amount 
of ascorbic acid needed for optimum health. A cosmic ray or some other 
mutagenic agent then caused a mutation to occur, such that the enyzme in 
the liver that catalyzes the conversion of L-gulonolactone to ascorbic acid 
was no longer present in the liver. Some of the progeny of this mutant 
animal would have inherited the loss of the ability to synthesize ascorbic 
acid. These mutant animals would, in the environment that provided an 
ample supply of ascorbic acid, have an advantage over the ascorbic-acid- 
producing animals, in that the mutants had been relieved of the burden of 
constructing and operating the machinery for producing ascorbic acid. Un¬ 
der these conditions the mutant would gradually replace the earlier strain. 

A mutation that involves the loss of the ability to synthesize an enzyme 
occurs often. Such a mutation requires only that the gene be damaged in 
some way or be deleted. (The reverse mutation, leading to the ability to 
produce the enzyme, is difficult, and would occur only extremely rarely.) 
Once the ability to synthesize ascorbic acid has been lost by a species of 
animals, that species depends for its existence on the availability of ascorbic 
acid as a food. 

The fact that most species of animals have not lost the ability to manu¬ 
facture their own ascorbic acid shows that the supply of ascorbic acid avail¬ 
able generally in foodstuffs is not sufficient to provide the optimum amount 
of this substance. Only in an unusual environment, in which the available 
food provided unusually large amounts of ascorbic acid, have circumstances 
permitted a species of animal to abandon its own powers of synthesis of this 
important substance. These unusual circumstances occurred for the precur¬ 
sor of humans and other primates, for the guinea pig, for the Indian fruit¬ 
eating bat, and for the precursor of the red-vented bulbul and some other 
species of passeriform birds, but they have not occurred, through the hun¬ 
dreds of millions of years of evolution, for the precursors of most other 
animals. Thus the consideration of evolutionary processes, as presented in 
the foregoing analysis, indicates that the ordinarily available foodstuffs 
might well provide nearly the optimum amounts of thiamine, riboflavin, 
niacin, vitamin A, and other vitamins that are required as essential nutri- 




60 


CHAPTER 8 


ents by all mammalian species, but be deficient in ascorbic acid. For this 
food, essential for humans but synthesized by many other species of ani¬ 
mals, the optimum rate of intake is indicated to be larger than the rate 
associated with the ingestion of the ordinarily available diet. 

Thus, while the loss of the capacity to synthesize vitamin C conferred 
some evolutionary advantage on the primates and other lines, this genetic 
deletion also exposed them to some risk. Dr. Claus W. Jungeblut, a pioneer 
as early as the 1930’s on the use of vitamin C for the therapy of infectious 
disease, advanced an interesting argument, new to me, in a letter to me on 
10 February 1971: . . One might even go a step further here by asking 

why the guinea pig, of all common laboratory animals, shares with man 
certain physiological characteristics that include susceptibility not only to 
scurvy but also to anaphylactic shock, diphtheritic intoxication, pulmonary 
tuberculosis, a poliomyelitis-like neurotropic virus infection, and last but 
not least a form of viral leukemia that is indistinguishable from its human 
counterpart. None of the vitamin-C-synthesizing laboratory animals (rab¬ 
bits, mice, rats, hamsters, etc.) answer positively to this call.” 

I have checked the amounts of various vitamins present in 110 raw, 
natural plant foods, as given in the tables in the metabolism handbook 
published by the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biol¬ 
ogy (Altman and Dittmer, 1968). When the amounts of vitamins corre¬ 
sponding to one day’s food for an adult (the amount that provides 2500 
kilocalories [kcal] of energy) are calculated, it is found that for most vita¬ 
mins this amount is about three times the daily allowance recommended by 
the Food and Nutrition Board. For ascorbic acid, however, the average 
amount in the daily ration of the 110 plant foodstuffs is 2.3 grams (g), 
about forty times the amount recommended as the daily allowance for a 
person with a caloric requirement of 2500 kcal per day (see table on fac- 
ing page). 

It is almost certain that some evolutionarily effective mutations have 
occurred in humans and their immediate predecessors rather recently 
(within the last few million years) such as to permit life to continue on an 
intake of ascorbic acid less than that provided by raw plant foods containing 
a high content of ascorbic acid. These mutations might involve an increased 
ability of the kidney tubules to pump ascorbic acid back into the blood from 
the glomerular filtrate (dilute urine, being concentrated on passage through 
the tubules) and an increased ability of certain cells to extract ascorbic acid 
from the blood plasma. The adrenal glands have been found to be richly 
supplied with ascorbic acid, extracting it from the blood and employing it 
in the synthesis of adrenalin, the all-important mobilizer of the body in 
response to stress; the supply of ascorbic acid in the adrenals may be avail¬ 
able to the rest of the body by return to the bloodstream when the supply 



VITAMINS AND EVOLUTION 


61 


Water-soluble content (mg) of 110 raw natural plant foods (referred to amount giving 2500 
kcal of food energy). 



Thiamine 

Riboflavin 

Nicotinic 

acid 

Ascorbic 

acid 

Nuts and grains (11) 

3.2 

1.5 

27 

0 

Fruit, low-C (21) 

1.9 

2.0 

19 

600 

Beans and peas (15) 

7.5 

4.7 

34 

1000 

Berries, low-C (8) 

1.7 

2.0 

15 

1200 

Vegetables, low-C (25) 

5.0 

5.9 

39 

1200 

Average for 110 foods 

5.0 

5.4 

41 

2300 

Intermediate-C foods (16) 

7.8 

9.8 

77 

3400 

Collards 

10.8 

17 

92 

5000 

Chives 

7.1 

11.6 

45 

5000 

Cabbage 

6.2 

5.0 

32 

5100 

Brussels sprouts 

5.6 

8.9 

50 

5700 

Cauliflower 

10.0 

9.3 

65 

7200 

Mustard greens 

8.9 

18 

65 

7800 

Kale 




8200 

Broccoli spears 

7.8 

18 

70 

8800 

Black currants 

2.3 

2.3 

14 

9300 

Parsley 

6.8 

15 

68 

9800 

Hot red chili peppers 

3.8 

7.7 

112 

14200 

Sweet green peppers 

9.1 

9.1 

57 

14600 

Hot green chili peppers 

6.1 

4.1 

115 

15900 

Sweet red peppers 

6.5 

6.5 

40 

16500 


Nuts and grains: almonds, filberts, macadamia nuts, peanuts, barley, brown rice, whole grain rice, 
sesame seeds, sunflower seeds, wild rice, wheat. 

Fruit (low in vitamin C, less than 2500 mg): apples, apricots, avocados, bananas, cherries (sour 
red, sweet), coconut, dates, figs, grapefruit, grapes, kumquats, mangoes, nectarines, peaches, pears, 
pineapple, plums, crabapples, honeydew melon, watermelon. 

Beans and peas: broad peas (immature seeds, mature seeds), cowpeas (immature seeds, mature 
seeds), lima beans (immature seeds, mature seeds), mung beans (seeds, sprouts), peas (edible pod, 
green mature seeds), snapbeans (green, yellow), soybeans (immature seeds, mature seeds, sprouts). 

Berries (low-C, less than 2500 mg): blackberries, blueberries, cranberries, loganberries, raspberries, 
currants, gooseberries, tangerines. 

Vegetables (low-C, less than 2500 mg): bamboo shoots, beets, carrots, celeriac root, celery, corn, 
cucumber, dandelion greens, eggplant, garlic cloves, horseradish, lettuce, okra, onions (young, mature), 
parsnips, potatoes, pumpkins, rhubarb, rutabagas, squash (summer, winter), sweet potatoes, green 
tomatoes, yams. 

Intermediate-C foods (2500-4900 mg): artichokes, asparagus, beet greens, cantaloupe, chicory 
greens, Chinese cabbage, fennel, lemons, limes, oranges, radishes, spinach, zucchini, strawberries, swiss 
chard, ripe tomatoes. 


from nutrition runs low. On general principles we can conclude, however, 
that these mechanisms require energy and are a burden to the organism. 
The optimum rate of intake of ascorbic acid might still be within the range 
given above, 2.3 g per day or more, or might be somewhat less; and, of 
course, there is always the factor of biochemical individuality, discussed in 
Chapter 10. 






62 


CHAPTER 8 


It is not unreasonable to think that over the last millions of years the 
human body has adjusted somewhat to the food that was available and was 
eaten, so that the amounts of various nutrients in the food might be an 
indication of the optimum intakes of these nutrients. During the past few 
years paleontologists, anthropologists, and other scientists have obtained a 
great amount of information about the foods eaten by primitive human 
beings during the period from forty thousand years ago to the development 
of agriculture ten thousand years ago. Studies have also been made of the 
few hunter-gatherer societies that have survived until recently or until the 
present time. A review of the subject of paleolithic nutrition was published 
in 1985 by Dr. S. Boyd Eaton and Dr. Melvin Konner of the School of 
Medicine and the Department of Anthropology of Emory University, At¬ 
lanta, Georgia. This article has provided much of the basis for the follow¬ 
ing paragraphs. 

Five million years ago fruits and other vegetable foods were the main 
dietary constituents of the primates. It was about then that the lines leading 
to present-day humans and apes diverged. The ancestors of human beings 
began eating increasing amounts of meat. Modern man {Homo sapiens) 
developed about forty-five thousand years ago. His diet was about 50 per¬ 
cent vegetable material and 50 percent meat, including fish, shellfish, small 
animals, and large animals. 

As agriculture developed, about ten thousand years ago, which greatly 
increased the use of grains as food, the amount of vegetables in the diet 
became as great as 90 percent, with a drastic decline in the amount of meat. 
European humans thirty thousand years ago, with a high intake of meat, 
were about 6 inches taller than their descendants after the development of 
agriculture. Eaton and Konner state that “The same pattern was repeated 
later in the New World: the Paleo-indians were big-game hunters 10,000 
years ago, but their descendants, in the period just before European con¬ 
tact, practiced intensive food production, ate little meat, were considerably 
shorter, and had skeletal manifestations of suboptimal nutrition, which 
apparently reflect both the direct effects of protein-calorie deficiency and 
the synergistic interaction between malnutrition and infection. Since the 
Industrial Revolution, the animal-protein content of Western diets has be¬ 
come more nearly adequate, as indicated by increased average height: we 
are now nearly as tall as were the first biologically modern human beings. 
However, our diets still differ markedly from theirs, and these differences 
lie at the heart of what has been termed ‘affluent malnutrition’.” 

Eaton and Konner point out that the quality of modern meat is different 
from that of Paleolithic meat. Domesticated animals are fatter than wild 
animals. Meat now often contains 25 to 30 percent fat, whereas game 



VITAMINS AND EVOLUTION 


63 


contains only about 4 percent fat. The vegetable foods are also different. 
Hunter-gatherers eat roots, beans, nuts, tubers, fruits, flowers, and edible 
gums but only small amounts of cereal grains, such as wheat, oats, and rice, 
which constitute a large part of our modern diet. 

Eaton and Konner point out that the late Paleolithic diet compares with 
the present American average diet in the following ways: more protein, less 
fat; the same amount of carbohydrate (but more starch, less sucrose); the 
same amount of cholesterol (about 600 milligrams [mg] per day); more 
fiber (36 g vs. 20 g per day); much less sodium; more potassium and more 
calcium; much more vitamin C (400 mg per day vs. 88 mg per day). They 
conclude that “The diet of our remote ancestors may be a reference stan¬ 
dard for modern human nutrition and a model for defense against certain 
‘diseases of civilization.’” 





9 


Vitamins in the Body 


It was the vitamin-deficiency diseases, as we saw in Chapter 7, that led to 
the discovery of the vitamins. The sharp definition and the severity of the 
symptoms of these diseases testify to the fact that each of the vitamins plays 
a decisive role in one or more of the vital processes in the cells and tissues of 
the body. So specific and immediate is the efficacy of a given vitamin in its 
action upon the deficiency disease with which it is identified that one might 
take it to be a “wonder drug.” One needs to be reminded that vitamins are 
foods. They catalyzed the evolution of our species. They remain essential to 
our existence and our health. 

A striking characteristic of human beings and other living organisms is 
that they carry out thousands of different chemical reactions between sub¬ 
stances that under ordinary conditions would not react with one another. 
Every day we burn about a pound of fuel, carbohydrate (mainly glucose) 
and fat, to provide body heat and energy. This combination takes place at 
body temperature, 98.6°F. But we know that these substances—starch, 
sugar, butter, etc.—do not burn at ordinary temperatures. It may even be 
hard to make them burn at a much higher temperature. For example, if 
you take a cube of sugar (sucrose) and hold the flame of a burning match to 
one corner, you will find that some of the sugar will melt, but it will not 
catch fire. 






VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


65 


How is it possible for living organisms to make carbohydrates and fats 
react with oxygen (burn) at body temperature? The answer is that they 
make use of auxiliary substances that have the power to speed up chemical 
reactions without any change in themselves. These substances are called 
catalysts; they are said to catalyze the reactions. 

If you put a very small amount of cigarette ash (if you know someone 
who still smokes) on the corner of a cube of sugar and touch a match flame 
to it, the sugar will catch fire and will continue to burn until the cube is 
consumed. The burning takes place on the surface of the ash particles, 
which themselves remain unchanged, so that a little bit of ash can catalyze 
the combustion of a large amount of sugar. 

The catalysts in the human body are called enzymes (named after the 
Greek word for yeast); yeast contains enzymes that accelerate the process of 
fermentation, the conversion of glucose into alcohol by reaction with oxy¬ 
gen. They are proteins, with large molecules, often containing ten thousand 
or twenty thousand atoms. They are highly specific in their enzymatic 
activity, often able to speed up only a single biochemical reaction or a few 
similar ones. There may be as many as fifty thousand different kinds of 
enzymes in the body of a single human being. 

Some enzymes are pure protein, just a folded chain of amino-acid resi¬ 
dues. Others consist of a protein molecule with something added, an addi¬ 
tion required to give it the ability to catalyze its specific chemical reaction. 
This added part is called a coenzyme. 

Both metals and vitamins (or substances made from vitamins, such as 
thiamine diphosphate, made by combining thiamine, vitamin B,, and phos¬ 
phoric acid) serve as coenzymes in many enzyme systems in the human 
body. For example, the molecule of alcohol dehydrogenase, which catalyzes 
the oxidation of alcohol to acetate in the liver, contains two atoms of zinc, 
which are required for its enzymatic activity. One enzyme, cysteamine oxi¬ 
dase, contains an atom of iron, an atom of copper, and an atom of zinc. The 
reason that a trace element such as molybdenum is required in extremely 
small amounts is that it serves as a coenzyme, permitting the active enzyme 
to work over and over again in catalyzing a chemical reaction that is essen¬ 
tial for health. In the same way only a small daily intake of a vitamin may 
be required (a few millionths of a gram of B l2 ), but through its catalytic 
activity it produces a far larger amount of some vital substance. 

Most of the vitamins are known to serve as coenzymes in a number of 
enzyme systems. Pantothenic acid, for example, is a part of coenzyme A, 
which combines with the protein apoenzymes (passive enzymes) to give 
active enzymes required for many reactions. One of these reactions is the 
conversion in the brain of choline to acetylcholine, one of the messengers 
involved in brain activity. Nicotinamide, one form of vitamin B 3 , is an 




66 


CHAPTER 9 


essential part of two important coenzymes, diphosphopyridine nucleotide 
and triphosphopyridine nucleotide. There is some evidence that these co¬ 
enzymes are involved in two hundred enzyme systems, and in fact the 
number may be much greater. Vitamin B 6 , usually as pyridoxal phosphate, 
is required as a coenzyme for more than one hundred known enzyme sys¬ 
tems, and the other vitamins, with vitamin C an exception, also serve as 
coenzymes. 

Often the apoenzyme available in the body is only partially converted to 
active enzyme. The amount of active enzyme can be increased by increasing 
the intake of the vitamin that serves as coenzyme. This effect is an impor¬ 
tant part of the rationale behind the modern science of nutrition, with its 
emphasis on optimum intakes. 

The devastating symptoms of scurvy, expressed in the wasting and disin¬ 
tegration of the tissues of the body, suggested a large and ubiquitous pres¬ 
ence in the body for the factor in nutrition we know today as vitamin C. 
Fortunately the disease yielded to the simple therapy of supplying a small 
ration of the foods that contain the vitamin. The therapy worked its cure 
long before the vitamin was identified and still longer before its biochemical 
role began to be as well understood as it is today. While much remains to 
be learned, more is known about the function of vitamin C than of any 
other vitamin. For that reason, as well as for its well-established supreme 
importance, we shall here consider at closer range what vitamin C—also 
called ascorbic acid—is, what it does in the body, and how it works. 

Ascorbic acid is a white, crystalline powder, which dissolves readily in 
water. Its solution has an acidic taste, resembling that of orange juice. It is 
a weak acid, somewhat stronger than acetic acid found in vinegar, but 
weaker than citric acid (in lemons and grapefruit), lactic acid (in sour milk 
and sauerkraut), and tartaric acid (in grapes). In body fluids, which are 
usually neither acidic nor basic, ascorbic acid is completely dissociated into 
an ascorbate ion and a hydrogen ion. The hydrogen ion combines with 
basic groups of proteins or with a bicarbonate (HC0 3 ) ion. It is the ascor¬ 
bate ion that participates in the many physiological reactions that require 
vitamin C, especially the scurvy-preventing synthesis of the critically im¬ 
portant protein collagen. 

Vitamin C may also be taken as the salts of ascorbic acid, in particular 
sodium ascorbate and calcium ascorbate. These molecules dissolve in the 
body fluids to produce ascorbate ions, which have the same properties and 
physiological action as the ascorbate ion from ascorbic acid. Vitamin C may 
thus be taken by mouth, in solution or in tablet form, as ascorbic acid, as 
sodium ascorbate, or as calcium ascorbate. Only the latter two, the salts, 
can be taken by intravenous injection, however, because the acid solution 
damages the veins or tissues. 



VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


67 


The ways in which ascorbic acid functions in the human body relate first 
to the fact that it engages on both sides of the universal oxidation-reduction 
reaction that subtracts or adds hydrogen atoms to a molecule. It is readily 
oxidized to dehydroascorbic acid by the surrender, to oxidizing agents, of 
the two hydrogen atoms (designated by the symbol H) shown attached to 
the two oxygen atoms (O) at the top of the structural diagrams of the two 
molecules displayed below: 


HO 


\ 


OH 

o 


o 

/ 

X 



C = C 


c — c 


CH C 


CH C 


\ / \ 


\ / 

X 

O 0 

HCOH 

0 

o 


H,COH 


Ascorbic acid 


h 2 coh 

Dehydroascorbic acid 


(For the structure of ascorbic acid in three-dimensional space, see the illus¬ 
tration on page 68.) 

This action is readily reversible, for dehydroascorbic acid acts as a strong 
oxidizing agent, and by picking up two hydrogen atoms is reduced to ascor¬ 
bic acid. It is likely that the reducing power of ascorbic acid and the oxidiz¬ 
ing power of dehydroascorbic acid are responsible for some of the physio¬ 
logical properties of the substance. 

The synthesis of collagen, for which vitamin C is essential, proceeds in 
the body as one of its major manufacturing enterprises. A person who is 
dying of scurvy stops making this substance, and his body falls apart—his 
joints fail, because he can no longer keep the cartilage and tendons strong, 
his blood vessels break open, his gums ulcerate and his teeth fall out, his 
immune system deteriorates, and he dies (Cameron, 1976). 

Collagen is a protein, one of the thousands of different kinds of proteins 
in the human body. Most proteins occur in only small amounts; the various 
enzymes, for example, are so powerful in their ability to cause specific 
chemical reactions to take place rapidly that only a gram or two or even a 
few milligrams may be needed in the body. There are a few exceptions. In 
the red cells of the blood there is a great amount of hemoglobin, amounting 
to 1 percent of a person’s weight. Hemoglobin, however, does not get the 
prize. There is even more collagen in the skin, bones, teeth, blood vessels, 
eye, heart, and, in fact, essentially all parts of the body. Collagen as strong 
white fibers, stronger than steel wire of the same weight, and as yellow 



68 


CHAPTER 9 






VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


69 


elastic networks (called elastin), usually together with macropolysaccha¬ 
rides, constitutes the connective tissue that holds our bodies together. 

When bones, skin, cartilage, and other parts of the animal body are 
boiled in water for a long time, the molecules are hydrolyzed (react with 
water molecules) to form smaller molecules, called gelatin. Gelatin is a 
reasonably good food, but it lacks the essential amino acids phenylalanine 
and tryptophan. Soup stock is a gelatin solution, and aspic and, of course, 
gelatin desserts are based on gelatin. 

Like other proteins, collagen consists of polypeptide chains; the long 
chains of this fibrous molecule contain about one thousand amino-acid resi¬ 
dues, about sixteen thousand atoms. It differs from almost all other proteins 
in being substantially composed of but two amino acids, glycine and hy- 
droxyproline. Collagen is a kind of supermolecule, however, in its three- 
dimensional architecture. The polypeptide chains of the two amino acids, 
alternating with one another and punctuated by the presence of certain 
other amino acids, are coiled in a left-handed helix. Three of these helical 
strands are twisted around one another, like the strands of a rope, in a 
right-handed superhelix, to compose the complete molecule (see the draw¬ 
ing on page 70 and 71 and the photograph on page 72). 

Understandably, the synthesis of this structure proceeds in steps. While 
it has been known for half a century that vitamin C is essential to the 
manufacture of collagen, the process is only now yielding to inquiry. It ap¬ 
pears that vitamin C is involved at every step. 

First a three-stranded structure is assembled, with the amino acids gly¬ 
cine and proline as its principal components. This is not yet collagen but its 
precursor, procollagen. A recent study shows that vitamin C must have an 
important role in its synthesis. Prolonged exposure of cultures of human 
connective-tissue cells to ascorbate induced an eightfold increase in the 


Molecular structure of vitamin C Ascorbic acid has a distinctive shape or configuration 
in three-dimensional space, shown here in the conventional ball (atoms) and stick (atomic 
bonds) model, that underlies its function in the biochemistry of the body. Four carbon atoms 
(indicated by the letter C) and an oxygen atom (O) form a central pentagonal ring, shown 
tilted at an angle to the plane of the page. The four bonds on each carbon atom—which give 
organic molecules their endless structural diversity—bind each of them to four other atoms 
or to three others with a double bond binding one of the three. The bottom carbon in the 
ring holds a large side group, which extends upward above the plane of the page. Attached 
to the two carbons in this side group are two hydroxyl groups, an oxygen atom with an 
attached hydrogen. Vitamin C is needed for the vital hydroxylation reactions that introduce 
hydroxyl groups into many other molecules, notably the adrenal hormone and the collagen 
molecule that forms connective tissue (see the illustration on page 70). The shape of the 
vitamin-C molecule fits it, hand and glove style, to the shape of the enzymes with which it 
works in these reactions. 





70 


CHAPTER 9 


Structure of collagen The collagen molecule is stronger than steel wire of the same 
weight. One of the most abundant proteins, it supplies the body’s connective tissue, the 
natural plastic of which the body is largely made. Vitamin C plays essential roles in its 
synthesis, apparently at every stage (see page 68). 

Collagen owes its properties not only to its chemical composition but also to the physical 
arrangement of its component atoms in three-dimensional space. The atoms—of carbon, 
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen—are organized in three polypeptide chains. Each of these 
chains is coiled in a left-handed helix, and the three chains are twisted around one another, 
as the strands of a rope, to form a right-handed superhelix, one full turn of which is shown 
schematically at left on the opposite page. 

The illustration on this page shows the arrangement of the atoms in one full turn of the 
left-handed helix of the polypeptide chain (in the small box on the opposite page) in the 
conventional ball (atoms) and stick (atomic bonds) model. A polypeptide chain is assembled 
by the head-to-toe linkage of amino acids by peptide bonds. These bonds tie the nitrogen 
atom (N) in one amino acid to a carbon atom (C) in another. 

In the three peptide groups in the full turn of the helix shown here, note the double bond 
that ties the carbon to the nitrogen in the middle peptide group. This is the peptide bond; it 
could as well be shown binding the carbon to the oxygen (O), as it is in the peptide groups at 
the top and bottom of the turn. The resonating of the bond between these two alignments 
holds the six atoms of the peptide group flat in a plane. (The six atoms, from the top, are a 
carbon festooned with two hydrogen [H] or with one hydrogen and a side group [R], which 
are outside the plane, the carbon, 
the oxygen bonded to the carbon, 
the nitrogen, the hydrogen bonded 
to the nitrogen, and a second 
festooned carbon.) By contrast, the 
single bond that links the nitrogen 
to the festooned carbon that is 
shared with the neighboring peptide 
group permits the planar peptide 
groups to rotate about a common 
axis and form the helix. 

Some 1000 peptide groups 
composed of 16,000 atoms make 
up the thin fiber of the collagen 
molecule, 2800 angstroms (1 A is 
one hundred-millionth of a 
centimeter) long and only 72 A 
thick. The long collagen molecules 
link up to form still longer strands. 

These strands, with the collagen 
molecules overlapping by a quarter 
of their length (700 A), line up and 
cross-link to form the collagen fibril 
at far right. The periodic striations 
in the collagen fibril (see 
electromicrograph on page 72) 
reflect the linkage and cross-linkage 
of the overlapping molecules of 
collagen in the fibril. 





VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


71 





































72 


CHAPTER 9 



Collagen fibrils Dark bands spaced approximately 700 angstroms (A) apart appear 
where the intricate fine structures of collagen molecules (overall length approximately 2800 
A) overlap (see the illustration on page 71). (Courtesy of Dr. Jerome Gross, Massachusetts 
General Hospital ) 



VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


73 


synthesis of collagen with no increase in the rate of synthesis of other 
proteins (Murad et al., 1981). Since the production of procollagen must 
precede the production of collagen, vitamin C must have a role in this 
step—the formation of the polypeptide chains of procollagen—along with 
its better understood role in the conversion of procollagen to collagen. 

That conversion involves a reaction that substitutes a hydroxyl group, 
OH, for a hydrogen atom, H, in the proline residues at certain points in the 
polypeptide chains, converting those residues to hydroxyproline. This hy- 
droxylation reaction secures the chains in the triple helix of collagen. The 
hydroxylation, next, of the residues of the amino acid lysine, transforming 
them to hydroxylysine, is then needed to permit the cross-linking of the 
triple helices into the fibers and networks of the tissues. 

These hydroxylation reactions are catalyzed by two different enzymes: 
prolyl-4-hydroxylase and lysyl-hydroxylase. Vitamin C also serves with 
them in inducing these reactions. It has recently been shown by Myllyla 
and his colleagues that, in this service, one molecule of vitamin C is de¬ 
stroyed for each H replaced by an OH (Myllyla et al., 1984). 

We have come upon two big reasons why we require for good health 
much larger amounts of vitamin C than are present in the plants we use as 
food. First, there is the body’s continuing need for the synthesis of large 
amounts of collagen for growth and for replacement of the collagen 
degraded by daily wear and tear. Second, vitamin C, in the critical reac¬ 
tions that assemble collagen in the tissues, does not serve merely as a cata¬ 
lyst but is destroyed. 

The function of vitamin C involves another aspect of the molecule: its 
architecture in the three dimensions of space. Vitamin C is a chiral sub¬ 
stance: its molecules have handedness. (The word chiral is derived from the 
Greek word cheir 3 which means “hand.”) Ascorbic acid is often called L- 
ascorbic acid, to identify the molecules as left-handed (L for levo, “left”) 
rather than right-handed (D for dextro, “right”). Like a single hand, the 
molecule of L-ascorbic acid is not identical with its mirror image (see illus¬ 
tration on page 68). 

Chirality may almost be said to be characteristic of life. It is true that 
some inorganic substances are chiral: the mineral quartz, for example, 
forms right-handed and left-handed crystals, as do some other minerals, but 
living organisms have exploited chirality to a far greater extent than has the 
inorganic part of nature. The organic molecules that life processes build 
around the carbon atom derive their chirality from a property of carbon 
atoms. On its four bonds carbon may gather four different kinds of atoms or 
groups; such molecules must be either right-handed or left-handed and, like 
hands, differ from their mirror image. 

Our principal macronutrients are carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. All 
of the carbohydrates are chiral. This fact is illustrated in some of their 






74 


CHAPTER 9 


names. Glucose is also called dextrose; its molecules may be considered to 
be right-handed. Our principal food starch, which is a sort of polymer (a 
condensation product of glucose, with elimination of water), may also be 
said to be right-handed. Starch is digested to form glucose by enzymes that 
are themselves chiral—these enzymes can digest ordinary right-handed 
starch (D-starch), but not left-handed starch. Fructose (fruit sugar) is also 
called levulose; it may be said to be a left-handed sugar. Its left-handed- 
ness accounts for the fact that it is not all burned for its energy content, 
as glucose is, but serves in part as a raw material for the synthesis of 
cholesterol. 

Most of the fats are not chiral, but some related substances (lipids) are. 
An example is vitamin E: D-alpha-tocopherol and L-alpha-tocopherol have 
different vitamin-E activity. 

Proteins are chiral. These extremely important macromolecules (a hu¬ 
man being may synthesize fifty thousand different kinds of protein mole¬ 
cules to do different jobs in the body) consist of long chains of amino-acid 
residues, all of which are chiral, except those of the simplest amino acid, 
glycine. It is a remarkable fact that all of the more than twenty amino acids 
that make up the proteins in human beings, in other animals, and in plants 
have the same handedness: they are all L-amino acids, except for glycine, 
which is identical with its mirror image. 

We can understand now why living organisms are made of only one kind 
of amino acids. The principal ways in which the chains of amino-acid 
residues are folded in stable proteins are known, and we can see that these 
structures are stable when they are made of one kind, either the D kind or 
the L kind, but they cannot be made with D and L mixed. 

The earth might just as well be populated with living organisms made 
with D-amino acids as with those made with L-amino acids. A man who 
was suddenly converted into an exact mirror image of himself would not at 
first know that anything had changed; he could drink water, inhale air and 
use the oxygen molecules in it for combustion, exhale carbon dioxide, and 
carry on other bodily functions just as well as ever—so long as he did not 
eat any ordinary food. If he were to eat ordinary plant or animal food, he 
would find that he could not digest it. (In Lewis Carroll’s Through the 
Looking Glass Alice said, “Perhaps looking-glass milk isn’t good to drink.” 
We know now that she was right in her surmise.) 

This mirror-image man could be kept alive only on a diet containing 
synthetic D-amino acids, made in the chemical laboratory. He could not 
have any children, unless he could find a wife who had been subjected to 
the same process of reflection into a mirror image of her original self. Also 
he would die of scurvy, even if he had plenty of ordinary vitamin C, be¬ 
cause vitamin C is itself a chiral molecule, L-ascorbic acid. 



VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


75 


The chirality of L-ascorbic acid may be plainly seen in the diagram of its 
structure in three-dimensional space shown on page 68. The carbon atom 
(C) at the bottom of the pentagonal ring has attached to it a carbon atom on 
one side of it in the ring and an oxygen (O) on the other, a hydrogen (H) 
atom, and a side group of nine atoms. These four different attached entities 
make this carbon atom chiral. That is, the mirror image of this atom and its 
attachments differs from it as the mirror image of a hand differs from the 
hand. 

The first atom of the side chain, a carbon, is also chiral. It also has four 
different entities attached to it: the pentagonal ring, a hydroxyl group (an 
oxygen atom and attached hydrogen atom), a hydrogen atom, and a carbon 
(with two hydrogens and a hydroxyl group attached to it). 

Ascorbic acid has accordingly four stereoisomers—four molecules with 
identical atomic constituents linked to one another in the same order but 
arrayed differently in three-dimensional space. We may therefore call the 
molecule shown in the illustration LL and the others LD, DL, and DD. LL is 
the ordinary vitamin C, L-ascorbic acid. DD is its exact mirror image, with 
properties exactly the same as those of L-ascorbic acid (unless they involve 
chirality)—the same melting point and the same solubility in water—but 
one rotates the plane of polarized light in a clockwise way and the other in 
the opposite way (but through exactly the same angle). But the DD sub¬ 
stance, which is called D-xyloascorbic acid, has no vitamin-C activity. The 
substances LD and DL, which are mirror images of each other, also provide 
no protection against scurvy. 

This fact shows that the action of vitamin C does not depend simply on 
its activity as a reducing or oxidizing agent, which it has in common with 
its stereoisomers. Instead it depends upon the shape of its molecules, which 
presumably fit into a complementary cavity in the hydroxylation enzymes 
with which it works in the synthesis of collagen and thereby forms a reac¬ 
tive complex. Further study is needed to determine the structure of these 
enzymes and of others that can form such complexes with vitamin C. There 
are probably many different kinds, because vitamin C carries on so many 
different functions in our bodies. 

The hydroxylation reaction, which vitamin C promotes in the synthesis 
of collagen, has a role in many other physiological processes. A substance 
called carnitine, for example, helps to supply the fuel that energizes the 
contraction of muscle fiber. Its synthesis from the amino acid lysine takes 
place through five successive reactions, each catalyzed by a specific enzyme. 
The second and fifth involve hydroxylation, for which vitamin C is needed. 
In the adrenal glands, hydroxylation reactions mediated by vitamin C, 
present in large amounts, similarly convert the amino acid tyrosine first to 
dopa, then to dopamine and at last to noradrenaline in the manufacture of 




76 


CHAPTER 9 


the all-important hormone adrenaline, which floods the body in moments of 
stress and activates the muscles for flight or fight. In this critical cycle the 
ascorbic acid is reconstituted from semidehydroascorbate by a special elec¬ 
tron-transport mechanism, and so the vitamin is not destroyed. 

This review of the function of vitamin C in the biochemistry of the body 
explains why we require large intakes of this vitamin, larger than those of 
other vitamins and larger than is supplied by the usual quantities of vegeta¬ 
bles and fruits consumed in the diet. Setting aside the factor of biochemical 
individuality, to be discussed in the next chapter, for a moment, we may ask 
what is the optimum daily supplementary intake of vitamin C. 

Plants need only small amounts of this vitamin. They do not manufac¬ 
ture collagen to make their structures strong; they use a carbohydrate, 
cellulose, for this purpose. I have checked the amounts of various vitamins 
present in 110 raw, natural plant foods, as given in the tables in the metab¬ 
olism handbook published by the Federation of American Societies for 
Experimental Biology (Altman and Dittmer, 1968). When the amounts of 
vitamins corresponding to one day’s food for an adult (the amount that 
provides 2500 kilocalories [kcal] of energy) are calculated, it is found that 
for most vitamins this amount is about three times the RDA of the Food 
and Nutrition Board. For ascorbic acid, however, the average amount in 
the daily ration of the 110 plant foodstuff's is 2300 milligrams (mg), about 
forty times the amount recommended as the daily allowance for a person 
with a requirement of 2500 kcal per day (see the table in Chapter 8). This 
calculation suggests that the Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) ought 
to prescribe at least forty times its stingy 60 mg of Vitamin C. 

The average ascorbic-acid content of the fourteen plant foodstuff's richest 
in this vitamin is 9.4 grams (g) per 2500 kcal. Peppers (hot or sweet, green 
or red) and black currants are richest of all the foods in the table, with 15 g 
per 2500 kcal. 

The foregoing argument represents an extension and refinement of argu¬ 
ments advanced by the biochemists G. H. Bourne and Irwin Stone. In 1949 
Bourne pointed out that the food ingested by the gorilla consists largely of 
fresh vegetation, in quantity such as to give the gorilla about 4500 mg of 
ascorbic acid per day, and that before the development of agriculture 
humans existed largely on green plants, supplemented with some meat. He 
concluded that “it may be possible, therefore, that when we are arguing 
whether 10 to 20 mg of vitamin C a day is an adequate intake we may be 
very wide of the mark. Perhaps we should be arguing whether 1000 or 
2000 mg a day is the correct amount.” Stone (1966a) quoted this argument 
and supplemented it by consideration of the rate of manufacture of ascorbic 
acid by the rat. The rat under normal conditions is reported to synthesize 
ascorbic acid at a rate between 26 mg per day per kilogram of body weight 





VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


77 


(Burns, Mosbach, and Schulenberg, 1954) and 58 mg per day per kilogram 
of body weight (Salomon and Stubbs, 1961). If the assumption is made that 
the same rate of production would be proper for a human being, a person 
weighing 70 kilograms (kg, 154 pounds) should ingest between 1800 and 
4100 mg per day under ordinary circumstances. 

Other animals, including the goat, cow, sheep, mouse, squirrel, gerbil, 
rabbit, cat, and dog, also manufacture ascorbic acid at a high rate, averag¬ 
ing about 10,000 mg per day for 70 kilograms (kg) (154 pounds) of their 
body weights (Chatterjee et al., 1975). It is hard to believe that these ani¬ 
mals would make this large amount of ascorbic acid if it were not beneficial 
to them, and it is also hard to believe that humans are so much different 
from other animals that they can keep in the best of health with only two- 
hundredths of the amounts that animals use. If the need for ascorbic acid in 
our diet were really as small as the RDA published by the Food and 
Nutrition Board, then the mutation that deprived the primates of the ca¬ 
pacity to synthesize their own vitamin C would surely have occurred six 
hundred million years ago, and dogs, cows, pigs, horses, and other animals 
would be obtaining ascorbic acid from their food, instead of manufacturing 
it in their liver cells. I conclude, therefore, that 2300 mg per day is less than 
the optimum rate of intake of ascorbic acid for an adult human being. 

In general, the dietary requirements of humans have been found to be 
closely similar to those of other primates, and studies of vitamin C in these 
primates should yield valuable information about the optimum human in¬ 
take of this vitamin. Monkeys are used in large numbers of medical re¬ 
search. As I mentioned in Chapter 1, much effort has been devoted by the 
Subcommittee on Laboratory Animal Nutrition to finding the intakes of 
various nutrients that puts them in the best of health. These careful studies 
have led to the formulation of several, rather similar recommended diets for 
laboratory monkeys. The amount of ascorbic acid in these diets lies in the 
range of 1.75 g per day to 3.50 g per day, scaled up to 70 kg of body weight; 
the 1.75 g per day scaled from the prescription for rhesus monkeys (Rine¬ 
hart and Greenberg, 1956) and 3.50 g per day from that for squirrel mon¬ 
keys (Portman et al., 1967). These monkeys weigh only a few kilograms, 
but there is little doubt that the need for ascorbic acid is proportional to 
body weight, for the amounts manufactured by animals that have the abil¬ 
ity to make this substance are found to be rather closely proportional to 
body weight over a tremendous range, from a 20-g mouse to a 70-kg goat. 
From these studies with monkeys we may conclude that the requirement of 
vitamin C by humans might lie in the range of 1.75 g to 3.5 g per day. 

Additional evidence has been provided by a study of the optimum intake 
of ascorbic acid by guinea pigs. Yew (1973) found that observations of 
growth rates both before and after surgical stress; recovery times after anes- 



78 


CHAPTER 9 


thesia; and the times needed for scab formation, wound healing, and the 
production of hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine during wound healing all 
support the conclusion that young guinea pigs ordinarily need about 5.0 mg 
per 100 g of body weight per day and that under stress the needs are even 
higher. For humans the corresponding intake is 3.5 g per day under ordi¬ 
nary conditions, a larger amount under stress. 

Why have not similar studies been carried out with human beings? Part 
of the answer is that it is much harder to study humans than animals. 
Another part is that many physicians and nutritionists seem to have ac¬ 
cepted the idea that vitamin C has no value for human beings except to 
prevent scurvy and that it would be a waste of effort to attempt to deter¬ 
mine the optimum intake. Still another aspect of this matter is that these 
authorities persist in ignoring the many studies that have been carried out 
demonstrating that an intake of several grams per day leads to improved 
health. 

I conclude that the optimum daily intake of ascorbic acid for most adult 
human beings lies in the range 2.3 g to 10 g. The amount of individual 
biochemical variability (Chapter 10) is such that for a large population the 
range may be as great as from 250 mg to 20 g or more per day. 

These amounts are much larger than the RDA of vitamin C published of 
the Food and Nutrition Board, as previously noted. The recommendation 
of this board, said to be designed for the maintenance of good nutrition of 
practically all healthy people in the United States, is 35 mg per day for 
infants, 45 mg per day for children, increasing to 60 mg per day for adults 
(80 for pregnant women and 100 for lactating women). In making its 
recommendation the board stated that the minimum daily intake of ascorbic 
acid needed to prevent scurvy is about 10 mg, and that the somewhat larger 
amounts recommended should provide a generous increment for individual 
variability and a surplus to compensate for potential losses in food. The 
idea that beneficial effects would result from a larger intake of ascorbic acid 
was rejected, on the basis of reports that physical and psychomotor per¬ 
formances of men had not been improved by supplements of between 70 mg 
and 300 mg of ascorbic acid per day, and that the occurrence of bleeding 
gums in military personnel was not affected by supplements of 100 mg or 
200 mg per day for periods of three weeks. There are, however, many 
published reports about beneficial effects of vitamin C ingested in larger 
amounts. 

Ascorbic acid is not a dangerous substance. It is described in the medical 
literature as “virtually nontoxic.” Guinea pigs that were given, orally or by 
intravenous infusion (of sodium ascorbate, the sodium salt of ascorbic acid), 
0.5 percent of their body weight per day for a period of days showed no 
symptoms of toxicity (Demole, 1934). This amount corresponds for a hu¬ 
man being to about 350 g (three quarters of a pound) per day. Many dogs 





VITAMINS IN THE BODY 


79 


and cats have been given large doses for control of distemper, influenza, 
rhinotracheitis, cystitis, and other diseases, with beneficial results and no 
signs of toxicity (Belfield and Stone, 1975; Belfield, 1978, 1982). The 
amount used was 1 g per pound of body weight per day, injected intrave¬ 
nously (in two doses, morning and afternoon), corresponding to about 150 g 
per day for an adult human being. Human beings themselves have taken 10 
to 20 g of vitamin C every day for twenty-five years with no development of 
kidney stones or other side effects (Klenner, 1971; Stone, 1967). Patients 
with glaucoma have been treated with about 35 g of vitamin C (0.5 g per kg 
body weight) each day for more than seven months (Virno et al., 1967; 
Bietti, 1967). The only side effect reported was looseness of the bowels 
during the first three to four days. Patients with viral diseases or schizo¬ 
phrenia have received as much as lOOg per day with no symptoms of 
toxicity (Klenner, 1971; Herjanic and Moss-Herjanic, 1967). One cancer 
patient has taken 130 g per day for nine years, with benefit. A large 
amount (several grams) of ascorbic acid taken without other food may cause 
an upset stomach and looseness of the bowels in some people, but more 
serious side effects have not been reported. 

Ascorbic acid may be described as no more toxic than ordinary sugar 
(sucrose), and far less toxic than ordinary salt (sodium chloride). There is 
no reported case of the death of any person from eating too much ascorbic 
acid, nor, indeed, of serious illness from this cause. 

It might be possible to ingest from the food we eat the amount of vitamin 
C that I recommend as optimum. This would require, however, a cuisine 
loaded with peppers (hot or sweet, green or red) and black currants. Other 
plant foods afford less than the 350 mg of vitamin C per 100 g measured in 
these foods. Orange juice, lemon juice, lime juice, grapefruit juice, tomato 
juice, mustard greens, spinach, and brussel sprouts contain a good quantity 
of ascorbic acid, from 25 mg to 100 mg per 100 g. Green peas and green 
beans, sweet corn, asparagus, pineapple, tomatoes, gooseberries, cranber¬ 
ries, cucumbers, and lettuce contain from 10 mg to 25 mg per 100 g. Some¬ 
what smaller amounts—less than 10 mg per 100 g—are found in eggs, 
milk, carrots, beets, and cooked meat. (See the table on page 61.) 

The ascorbic acid in foodstuffs is easily destroyed by cooking at high 
temperatures, especially in the presence of copper and to some extent of 
other metals. Cooked foods usually retain only about half of the ascorbic 
acid present in the raw foods. The loss of the vitamin can be kept to a 
minimum by cooking for a short period of time, with a minimum amount of 
water and with the water not discarded, because it has extracted some of 
the vitamin from the food. 

A good ordinary diet, including green vegetables and orange or tomato 
juice, may provide 100 mg of ascorbic acid per day. Many people, however, 
do not obtain even this rather small amount. A 1971-1972 study by the 




80 


CHAPTER 9 


Health Resources Administration of the U.S. Department of Health, Edu¬ 
cation, and Welfare of 10,126 people aged one to seventy-four in ten repre¬ 
sentative geographical areas of the country found that half of the people 
received less than 57.9 mg of vitamin C per day and about one-third of the 
people received less than the RDA of 60 mg per day for an adult (Abraham 
et al., 1976). Only 30 percent had a daily intake greater than 100 mg, and 
only 17 percent greater than 150 mg. The average intake of people below 
the poverty level is 78 percent of that of the whole population, and 57 
percent of them receive less than the RDA. 

Fortunately, this important dietary requirement may be met in any 
amount desired—from the optimum daily intake to the larger therapeutic 
amounts which we shall consider later in this book—by ingesting supple¬ 
mental quantities of the pure substance, crystalline ascorbic acid, or one of 
its salts. 




10 


Biochemical Individuality 


The genetic mutation that deleted the capacity to manufacture vitamin C in 
the primate line presents one vivid example of the countless genetic vari¬ 
ations from which natural selection produced the diversity of biological 
organisms we know in the world today. Such biochemical insight permits 
us to see evolution, as it were, from the inside. It gives a quantitative mea¬ 
sure of the wealth of differences among individuals within a single species 
upon which natural selection acts in choosing the “fittest.” It shows each of 
us human beings to possess a biochemical individuality that is scarcely 
expressed in (but only partly accounts for) the differences we observe in one 
another. 

Let us consider some genetic characteristic, such as the weight of the liver 
relative to the total weight of the human being or the concentration of a 
certain enzyme in the red cells of the blood. It is found that, when a sample 
of a hundred human beings is studied, this characteristic varies over a wide 
range. The variation often is approximately that given by the standard, 
bell-shaped probability function. It is customary to say that the “normal” 
range of values of the characteristic is that range within which 95 percent 
of the values lie and that the remaining 5 percent of the values, represent¬ 
ing the extremes, are abnormal. If we assume that five hundred characteris¬ 
tics are independently inherited, then we can calculate that there is only a 




82 


CHAPTER 10 


small chance, 3 percent, that one person in the whole population of the 
world would be normal with respect to each of these five hundred char¬ 
acteristics. 

It is estimated, however, that a human being has a complement of one 
hundred thousand genes, each of which serves some function, such as con¬ 
trolling the synthesis of an enzyme. The number of characteristics that can 
be variable, because of a difference in the nature of a particular gene, is 
presumably somewhere near one hundred thousand rather than only five 
hundred; and accordingly we reach the conclusion that no single human 
being on earth is normal (within the range that includes 95 percent of all 
human beings) with respect to all characteristics. This calculation is, of 
course, oversimplified. It helps emphasize, however, that human beings 
differ from one another and that each human being must be treated as an 
individual, biologically as well as morally. 

The species Homo sapiens is more heterogeneous, with respect to genetic 
character, than most other animal species. Nevertheless, heterogeneity has 
been found also for laboratory animals such as guinea pigs. It was recog¬ 
nized long ago that guinea pigs fed the same scurvy-producing diet, con¬ 
taining less than 5 milligrams (mg) of ascorbic acid per day per kilogram of 
body weight, differed in the severity of the scurvy that they developed and 
in the rapidity with which they developed it. A striking experiment was 
carried out in 1967 by Williams and Deason. These investigators obtained 
some male weanling guinea pigs from an animal dealer. After a week of 
observation during which the guinea pigs were on a good diet, including 
fresh vegetables, they were placed on a diet free of ascorbic acid or with 
known amounts added. They were divided into eight groups, each of ten to 
fifteen guinea pigs, with one of the groups receiving no ascorbic acid and 
the other groups receiving varying amounts through a pipette into the 
mouth. About 80 percent of the animals receiving no ascorbic acid or only 
0.5 mg per kilogram per day developed signs of scurvy, whereas only about 
25 percent of those receiving between 1 mg and 4 mg per kilogram per day, 
and none of those receiving 8 mg per day or more, developed these signs. 
These results agree with the customary statement that about 5 mg per kilo¬ 
gram per day of ascorbic acid is required to prevent scurvy in guinea pigs. 

It was observed, however, on the one hand, that two animals receiving 
only 1 mg per kilogram per day remained healthy and gained weight over 
the entire period of the experiment (eight weeks). One of them showed a 
total gain in weight larger than that for any animal receiving two, four, 
eight, or sixteen times as much ascorbic acid. 

On the other hand, seven of the guinea pigs receiving 8, 16, or 32 mg per 
kilogram per day were unhealthy and showed very small growth during the 
first ten days on the diet. They were then provided with a larger amount of 
the vitamin, five of them with 64 mg per kilogram per day and two of them 



BIOCHEMICAL INDIVIDUALITY 


83 


with 128 mg per kilogram per day. These animals showed a remarkable 
response: whereas they had grown only 12 grams (g), on the average, in a 
period of ten days on the smaller amounts of ascorbic acid, their growth 
during the ten-day period after beginning to receive the larger amounts 
was, on the average, 72 g. The indicated conclusion is that these animals, 
seven of the thirty that were given between 8 mg and 32 mg per kilogram 
per day, required more vitamin C for good health than the others. Williams 
and Deason (1967) reached the conclusion that there is at least a twentyfold 
range in the vitamin-C needs of individual guinea pigs in a population of a 
hundred. They pointed out that the population of human beings is presum¬ 
ably not more uniform than that of the guinea pigs used in their experi¬ 
ments and that accordingly the individual variation in the vitamin-C needs 
of humans is probably just as great. 

I have accepted their conclusion, and similar conclusions reached by 
other investigators, in suggesting that the optimum rate of intake of ascor¬ 
bic acid by human beings may extend over a wide range, perhaps the 
eightyfold range from 250 mg per day to 20 g per day or an even wider 
range. 

Vitamin C has been under investigation, reported in thousands of scien¬ 
tific papers, ever since it was discovered fifty years ago. The reader of this 
book might well be justified in asking first, why the range of values of the 
optimum intake of this important substance was not reliably determined 
long ago and, second, why no one can tell him or her what amount to take 
to be in the best of health. Part of the answer to the first question is that 
only a very small amount of the vitamin, perhaps 10 mg per day, is enough 
to keep most people from developing scurvy, and physicians and nutrition¬ 
ists accepted the idea that no larger amount is needed. Even though some 
physicians had observed forty or fifty years ago that amounts a hundred or 
a thousand times larger have value in controlling various diseases, as de¬ 
scribed elsewhere in this book, the medical profession and most scientists 
ignored the evidence. 

Another part of the answer to this first question is that studies that 
would yield the answer can be carried out only with great effort and at 
great expense. It is much easier to investigate some powerful drug that has 
an immediate beneficial effect on the patient (although it is harder to check 
the possible long-term damage that the powerful drug may do to some 
fraction of the people for whom it is prescribed). Several excellently 
planned and executed epidemiological studies involving nutritional and 
other factors in relation to the incidence of disease and the chance of death 
at various ages have been carried out. In some of these studies the nature of 
the ingested food has been tabulated, and the amounts of vitamin C and 
other vitamins in the diet have been calculated using tables giving the 
vitamin contents of various foods. Some of these studies show that the 




84 


CHAPTER 10 


incidence of disease and the chance of death at each age are less for people 
with a larger intake of vitamin C (and also for some other vitamins) than 
for those with a smaller intake. In these studies, however, the intakes of 
vitamin C are small; usually, for example, 0 mg to 50 mg per day for the 
low-intake group and between 50 mg and 100 mg for the high-intake 
group. 

In their San Mateo County, California, study, Lester Breslow and his 
colleagues in 1948 interviewed 577 randomly selected residents of the 
county who were fifty years old or older. They obtained much information 
about their state of health and about environmental, behavioral, and nutri¬ 
tional factors that might affect it. After seven years they examined the death 
records and compared the age-corrected death rates for the subpopulations 
related to the different factors. Of all of these factors, the intake of vitamin 
C was found to have the greatest correlation with the age-corrected death 
rate, even greater than that for cigarette smoking (Chope and Breslow, 
1955). 

Whereas cigarette smokers have at each age twice the chance of dying 
that a nonsmoker has, the persons with a lower intake of vitamin C (calcu¬ 
lated from the content of vitamin C in the food that they ate) had a chance 
of dying 2.5 times greater than the persons with a higher intake of the 
vitamin. The amount of illness was also correspondingly greater. This dif¬ 
ference means that the length of the period of good health and of life was 
ten years greater for the persons with the higher intake than for those with 
the lower intake of vitamin C. The dividing line was 50 mg per day, 
approximately equal to the recommended dietary allowance. The average 
intake of the low-intake group was 24 mg per day and that of the high- 
intake group was 127 mg per day.* It is interesting that drinking a large 
glass of orange juice each day (about 90 mg of ascorbic acid in 6 ounces of 
juice) or taking a 100-mg tablet each day would put a person in the high- 
intake group. 

Part of the improvement in health in the high-intake group may be 
attributed to other substances in the foods that provided the extra vitamin 
C. There is no doubt that orange juice, lettuce and other vegetables, and 
fruits contain important nutrients in addition to vitamin C. But the effect of 
a higher intake of vitamin A in improving the health was found in the San 
Mateo study to be only half as great as that of vitamin C, and the effect of 


*These averages are calculated on the assumption that the distribution of intakes for each of 
the two groups is the same as that for the corresponding groups (age over sixty) in the First 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1971-72 (Abraham, Lowenstein, and Johnson, 
1976). 




BIOCHEMICAL INDIVIDUALITY 


85 


niacin, one of the B vitamins, was only one-quarter as great. The foods 
with a high content of vitamin A and niacin, although they have value in 
improving the health, are not so valuable as those with a high content of 
vitamin C. 

When vitamin C is taken by mouth, most of it is absorbed into the blood 
through mucous membranes of the mouth and the upper part of the small 
intestine. If the amount taken is rather small, up to 250 mg, about 80 
percent is absorbed into the blood. With larger doses the amount absorbed 
is less, about 50 percent for a dose of 2 g and still smaller for larger doses 
(Kulber and Gehler, 1970). Accordingly it is more economical to ingest 
vitamin C in smaller doses, such as 1 g every three hours, than to take a 
single, much larger dose once a day. Also, a quantity of sodium ascorbate 
injected into the bloodstream is more effective in the treatment of disease 
than the same amount taken by mouth. 

For a small daily intake of ascorbic acid, up to about 150 mg, the concen¬ 
tration in the blood plasma is nearly proportional to the intake: this concen¬ 
tration is about 5 mg per liter for a daily intake of 50 mg, 10 mg per liter 
for 100 mg, and 15 mg per liter for 150 mg. Above an intake of 150 mg per 
day the concentration in the blood increases much less with increasing 
intake, reaching about 30 mg per liter for an intake of 10 g per day (ascor¬ 
bic acid plus dehydroascorbic acid; Harris, Robinson, and Pauling, 1973). 

The reason for this change when the intake exceeds about 150 mg per 
day is that a larger amount of the vitamin then begins to be excreted in the 
urine. One of the functions of the kidney is to clear the blood of unwanted 
and harmful molecules, the molecules of toxic substances that have got into 
the blood through the food or impure air or of waste products such as urea, 
the compound of nitrogen that is formed when old protein molecules in the 
body are degraded. Every twenty minutes the entire volume of the blood 
passes by a set of molecular filters in the two million glomeruli of the 
kidney. In the glomeruli the capillaries through which the blood is flowing 
have small holes in them. These holes, the pores of the glomerular filter, 
are small enough that the protein molecules in the blood, such as the anti¬ 
bodies (globulins) that protect us against disease, cannot pass through 
them, but water molecules and other small molecules, such as those of blood 
sugar (glucose) and ascorbic acid, can pass through. The blood pressure 
operates to push part of the water of the blood, together with its burden of 
small molecules, through these pores into a surrounding capsule.* The 


*A seriously ill person or a person in shock may have such low blood pressure that he cannot 
produce any urine. 





86 


CHAPTER 10 


glomerular filtrate, with its dilute urine, is produced in amounts of about 
180 liters (1) per day, thirty-six times the volume of the blood itself. We 
cannot stand to lose so much water, and fortunately there is a mechanism to 
concentrate the urine to the usual volume of one or two 1 a day. As the 
glomerular filtrate moves along through tubules toward the vessels that 
carry the urine to the bladder, molecular pumps in the walls of the tubules 
transfer most of the water back into the bloodstream.* The blood sugar is 
valuable as a fuel for the body, and it would not be good to lose it. Accord¬ 
ingly, there are special tubular pumps to pump the glucose molecules back 
into the blood. There are also special pumps for other important molecules, 
including those of vitamin C. 

This is fortunate, because if the process of tubular reabsorption of vita¬ 
min C did not operate, even a big dose of the vitamin would be nearly 
completely excreted in an hour or two. In fact, a person who ingests 100 mg 
per day excretes only about 10 mg in the urine. As discussed in Chapter 7, 
the necessity of conserving our supply of ascorbic acid arose when our 
ancestors lost the ability to synthesize it and we were required to depend 
on what we could obtain in our food. We have developed the mechanism 
of tubular reabsorption to such an extent that it works nearly perfectly 
(pumping 99.5 percent of the ascorbate in the glomerular filtrate back into 
the bloodstream) until it reaches the limit of its pumping capacity. This 
limit is reached when the concentration in the blood plasma equals about 
14 mg per liter, corresponding to a daily intake of about 140 mg. 

On the one hand, when the discovery was made that at higher intakes 
than 140 mg per day a greatly increased amount of vitamin C is excreted in 
the urine, the idea developed that at 140 mg per day the tissues of the body 
are saturated with the vitamin and are beginning to reject any additional 
amount. Although this idea is false, it continues to be advanced in the 
medical and nutritional literature, and the intake of 140 mg per day, corre¬ 
sponding to the so-called tissue saturation, is considered to be an upper 
limit to the amount of vitamin C required for “ordinary good health.” 

An argument similar to those developed in Chapter 9, on the other hand, 
leads us to the conclusion that this intake, at which the tubular pumps 
reach their capacity, is a lower limit to the optimum intake (Pauling, 1974). 
Let us compare a tubular pump for ascorbic acid that pumps until the 


*The process of concentrating the urine is regulated by the antidiuretic hormone, which is 
secreted by the pituitary gland. Some people develop a rather rare illness, diabetes insipidus, 
involving an insufficient output of this hormone; their urine volume may reach 40 liters per 
day, requiring them to drink an equal amount of water. 





BIOCHEMICAL INDIVIDUALITY 


87 


concentration of ascorbic acid in the blood is 14 mg per liter with one that 
operates only until concentration is 13 mg per liter. The second pump is 7 
percent smaller than the first and requires 7 percent less energy, which is 
provided by the food that we burn as fuel, for its operation. The smaller 
pump would accordingly be less of a burden to us than the larger one. Then 
why should we have developed the larger pump? The answer surely is that 
we need the larger pump to conserve the extra 7 percent of vitamin C. 
Hence the limit to which tubular reabsorption has been developed repre¬ 
sents a lower limit to the optimum intake of vitamin C. This lower limit is 
more than twice the Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) set by the 
Food and Nutrition Board. 

If a large amount of vitamin C is taken, 62 percent of the amount that 
enters the bloodstream is excreted in the urine, so that only about 38 per¬ 
cent remains in the body to carry on its valuable functions. It is, however, 
good to have vitamin C in the urine. It protects against urinary infections 
and also against cancer of the bladder, as will be shown in Chapter 20. 

Moreover, that fraction of a large dose of vitamin C taken by mouth that 
remains in the intestines has value. DeCosse and his coworkers studied the 
effect of 3 g per day of ascorbic acid in controlling the growth of adeno¬ 
matous polyps of the rectum in people who have inherited the tendency to 
develop them (1975). This polyposis is serious because the polyps usually 
develop into a malignant cancer. In a group of eight patients, the polyps 
regressed completely in two and partially in three. 

The appearance of vitamin C in the urine has been used by nutritional 
authorities as an argument against a high intake. Dr. Fredrick J. Stare in 
his book Eating for Good Health (1969) states that 60 mg or 70 mg per day 
is enough: “An extra amount of the vitamin cannot be stored in the body 
and is simply excreted. You don’t need vitamin-C pills under normal cir¬ 
cumstances.” These statements are repeated by him in his latest book Panic 
in the Pantry (Whelan and Stare, 1975). The statements are not true. 

The observations that have been made on the concentration of ascorbate 
in the blood plasma corresponding to the capacity of the mechanism of 
tubular reabsorption in different people give some information about bio¬ 
chemical individuality with respect to vitamin C. In one study, with nine¬ 
teen subjects, the capacity varied between 10 mg and 20 mg per liter 
(Friedman, Sherry, and Ralli, 1940). Similar variation has been found by 
other investigators. 

Ascorbic acid is present in the various body fluids and organs, especially 
the leukocytes and the blood. Its concentration in the brain is also high. 
When a person with an insufficient supply of ascorbic acid ingests a quan¬ 
tity of it, it moves very rapidly from the blood serum into the leukocytes, 
other cells, and organs such as the spleen. The amount remaining in the 



88 


CHAPTER 10 


blood serum may be so small, less than the capacity of the mechanism of 
tubular reabsorption, that very little is eliminated in the urine. 

A test was developed long ago (Harris and Ray, 1935) to show the 
avidity with which the tissues remove ascorbic acid from the blood serum. 
This test, called a loading test, involves giving the subject a certain amount 
of vitamin C by mouth or by injection, collecting the urine for the following 
six hours, and analyzing it for ascorbic acid. If an oral dose of about 1 g is 
given, most people whose blood serum is not depleted of the vitamin elimi¬ 
nate about 20 to 25 percent of it in the urine in six hours. 

A person who eliminates a smaller fraction of the ingested ascorbic acid 
may do so either because he or she has been living on a diet containing an 
insufficient quantity of the vitamin, such that the tissues are depleted, or 
because some biochemical abnormality of his or her body operates to re¬ 
move ascorbate from the blood serum very rapidly, perhaps by converting it 
rapidly into other substances. It was reported by VanderKamp in 1966 that 
patients with chronic schizophrenia required a loading dose of ascorbic acid 
about ten times greater than that required by other persons to cause the 
appearance of a certain amount in the urine. This observation was verified 
by Herjanic and Moss-Herjanic (1967). 

The results of another loading test are shown in the illustration on page 
89 (Pauling and others, Chapter 2 in Hawkins and Pauling, 1973). In this 
study forty-four patients recently hospitalized with acute schizophrenia and 
forty-four other subjects were given 1.76 grams of ascorbic acid by mouth, 
and the fraction excreted in the urine in six hours was measured. There 
was a twentyfold individual variation in this fraction, from 2 percent to 40 
percent, with the schizophrenic patients excreting only about 60 percent as 
much as the others. This variation is probably partly nutritional and partly 
genetic in origin. The distribution functions suggest that there are three 
kinds of human beings with respect to their handling of ascorbic acid, the 
low excretors, the medium excretors, and the high excretors. This idea has 
not, however, been thoroughly tested as yet. 

Some of the subjects in this study were given 1.76 g of ascorbic acid every 
day for eight days, and the fraction excreted in the six hours after the last 
dose was determined. Of sixteen low excretors (less than 17 percent ex¬ 
creted), eight had moved out of the low-excretor class, whereas the excre¬ 
tion of the other eight remained low. This observation suggests that these 
persons have an abnormal way of handling their ingested vitamin C. They 
might require much larger intake to be in good health. 

Several serious genetic diseases, such as phenylketonuria, galactosemia, 
and methylmalonicaciduria are discussed in Chapter 11. Of the many such 
diseases now known, some can be controlled by a large intake of an appro- 



BIOCHEMICAL INDIVIDUALITY 


89 



3 4 5 8 10 15 20 25 30 10 

Ascorbic acid, percent recovery 


Vitamin C and schizophrenia In a 1973 study, forty-four patients hospitalized with 
acute schizophrenia and forty-four Stanford University students took a 1.76-gram dose of 
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) by mouth. Researchers measured the fraction of the dose excreted 
in the urine over the next six hours. Many of the students (upper curve) eliminated about 
25 percent of the ascorbic acid, a somewhat smaller group eliminated about 20 percent, 
and some of the students eliminated a still smaller amount. The lower curve, for the 
schizophrenic patients, seems to show three similar groups, with the two peaks shifted to the 
left, indicating elimination of smaller amounts of ascorbic acid, and with a larger fraction of 
the patients eliminating only a small amount of the vitamin. The 17 percent line divides low 
excretors from high excretors. 


priate vitamin. It is harder to recognize a mild genetic disease than a seri¬ 
ous one, but the mild genetic diseases may in the aggregate cause more 
suffering than the serious ones, because so many more people suffer from 
them. It is likely that many of the low excretors of ascorbic acid shown in 
the illustration above have a genetic defect such that a low intake of vitamin 
C is more damaging to them than to other people. For them a larger intake 
of the vitamin may be essential if they are to avoid a short and miserable 
life. At the present time it is very difficult to determine the nutritional 
needs of an individual person except by trial of various intakes, but we may 
hope that reliable clinical tests that show the individual needs will be devel¬ 
oped before long. 






































































































Ill 


ORTHOMOLECULAR 

MEDICINE 

































Orthomolecular Medicine Defined 


I believe that in general the treatment of disease by the use of substances, 
such as ascorbic acid, that are normally present in the human body and are 
required for life is to be preferred to treatment by the use of powerful 
synthetic substances or plant products, which may, and usually do, have 
undesirable side effects. Such substances as vitamin C and most of the other 
vitamins are remarkable for their low toxicity and absence of side effects 
when taken in amounts larger than those usually available in the diet. I 
have coined the term orthomolecular medicine for the preservation of good 
health and the treatment of disease by varying the concentrations in the 
human body of substances that are normally present in the body and are 
required for health (Pauling 1968B). Dr. Bernard Rimland (1979) has 
emphasized my point by suggesting that conventional medicine, which uses 
drugs, be called toximolecular medicine. 

Death by starvation, kwashiorkor, beriberi, scurvy, or any other defi¬ 
ciency disease can be averted by providing an adequate daily intake of 
carbohydrates, essential fats, proteins (including the essential amino acids), 
essential minerals, and thiamine, ascorbic acid, and other vitamins. To 
achieve the best of health, the rate of intake of essential foods should be 
such as to establish and maintain the optimum concentrations of essential 
molecules, such as those of ascorbic acid. 




94 


CHAPTER 11 


An example of orthomolecular medicine is the treatment of diabetes 
mellitus by the injection of insulin. Diabetes mellitus is a hereditary dis¬ 
ease, usually caused by a recessive gene. The hereditary defect results in a 
deficient production by the pancreas of the hormone insulin. The primary 
action of insulin is to cause an increase in the rate of extraction of glucose 
from the blood into the cells, where it can be metabolized. In the absence of 
insulin the concentration of glucose in the blood of the patient becomes 
much greater than normal, resulting in manifestations of the disease. 

Insulin extracted from cattle pancreas or pig pancreas differs only 
slightly in its molecular structure from human insulin, and it has essen¬ 
tially the same physiological activity. The injection of cattle insulin or pig 
insulin in a human is essentially the provision of the normal concentration 
of insulin in the body of the patient; it permits the metabolism of glucose to 
take place at the normal rate and thus serves to counteract the abnormality 
resulting from the genetic defect. Insulin therapy is accordingly an example 
of orthomolecular therapy. Its major disadvantage is that the insulin can 
only be introduced into the bloodstream by injection. 

Another example of orthomolecular treatment of this disease, if it is not 
serious, is by adjusting the diet, regulating the intake of sugar, especially, in 
such a way as to keep the glucose concentration in the blood within the 
normal limits. A third example is increasing intake of vitamin C to decrease 
the need for insulin. Dice and Daniel (1973) reported from the study of one 
diabetic subject that for each gram of L-ascorbic acid taken by mouth the 
amount of insulin required could be reduced by two units. 

A fourth way to control diabetes, by using so-called oral insulin, a drug 
taken by mouth, does not constitute an example of orthomolecular medi¬ 
cine, because oral insulin is a synthetic drug, foreign to the human body, 
which may have undesirable side effects. 

Another disease that is treated by orthomolecular methods is phenyl¬ 
ketonuria. It results from a genetic defect that leads to a decreased amount 
or effectiveness of an enzyme in the liver that in normal persons catalyzes 
the oxidation of one amino acid, phenylalanine, to another, tyrosine. Ordi¬ 
nary proteins contain several percent of phenylalanine, providing a much 
larger amount of this amino acid than a person needs. The concentration of 
phenylalanine in the blood and other body fluids of the patient becomes 
abnormally high, if he or she is on a normal diet, causing mental deficiency, 
severe eczema, and other manifestations. The disease can be controlled by a 
diet, beginning in infancy, that contains a smaller amount of phenylalanine 
than is present in ordinary foods. In this way the concentration of phenylal¬ 
anine in the blood and other body fluids is kept to approximately the 
normal level, and the manifestations of the disease do not appear. 



ORTHOMOLECULAR MEDICINE DEFINED 


95 


A somewhat similar disease, which can also be controlled by ortho¬ 
molecular methods, is galactosemia. It involves the failure to manufacture 
an enzyme that carries out the metabolism of galactose, which is a part of 
milk sugar (lactose). The disease manifests itself in mental retardation, 
cataracts, cirrhosis of the liver and spleen, and nutritional failure. These 
manifestations are averted by placing the infant on a diet free of milk sugar, 
with the result that the concentration of galactose in the blood does not 
exceed the normal limit. 

A conceivable sort of orthomolecular therapy for phenylketonuria or 
other hereditary diseases involving a defective gene would be to introduce 
the gene (molecules of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA), separated from the 
tissues of another person, into the cells of the person suffering from the 
disease. For example, some molecules of the gene that directs the synthesis 
of the enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of phenylalanine to tyrosine 
could be separated from liver cells of a normal human being and introduced 
into the liver cells of a person with phenylketonuria. This sort of change in 
the genetic character of an organism has been carried out for microorga¬ 
nisms but not yet for human beings, and it is not likely that it will become 
an important way of controlling genetic defects until many decades have 
passed. 

Another possible method of orthomolecular therapy for phenylketonuria, 
resembling the use of insulin in controlling diabetes, would be the injection 
of the active enzyme. There are two reasons why this treatment has not 
been developed. First, although it is known that the enzyme is present in 
the liver of animals, including humans, it has not yet been isolated in 
purified form. Second, the natural mechanism of immunity, which involves 
the action of antibodies against proteins foreign to the species, would oper¬ 
ate to destroy the enzyme prepared from the liver of animals of another 
species. This mechanism in general prevents the use of enzymes or other 
proteins from animals other than humans in the treatment of diseases of 
human beings. 

There is still another possible type of orthomolecular therapy. The mole¬ 
cules of many enzymes consist of two parts: the pure protein part, called the 
apoenzyme, and a nonprotein part, called the coenzyme. The active en¬ 
zyme, called the holoenzyme, is the apoenzyme with the coenzyme attached 
to it. Often the coenzyme is a vitamin molecule or a closely related mole¬ 
cule. It is known, for example, that a number of different enzymes in the 
human body, catalyzing different chemical reactions, have thiamine diphos¬ 
phate, a derivative of thiamine (vitamin Bl), as coenzyme. 

In some cases of genetic disease the enzyme is not absent but is present 
with diminished activity. One way in which the defective gene can operate 



96 


CHAPTER 11 


is to produce an apoenzyme with abnormal structure, such that it does not 
combine readily with the coenzyme to form the active enzyme. Under ordi¬ 
nary physiological conditions, with the normal concentration of coenzyme, 
perhaps only 1 percent of the abnormal apoenzyme has combined with the 
coenzyme. According to the principles of chemical equilibrium, a larger 
amount of the abnormal apoenzyme could be made to combine with the 
coenzyme by increasing the concentration of the coenzyme in the body 
fluids. If the concentration were to be increased one hundred times, most of 
the apoenzyme molecules might combine with the coenzyme, to give essen¬ 
tially the normal amount of active enzyme. 

There is accordingly the possibility that the disease could be kept under 
control by the ingestion by the patient of a very large amount of the vitamin 
that serves as a coenzyme. This sort of orthomolecular therapy, involving 
only a substance normally present in the human body (the vitamin), is, in 
my opinion, the preferable therapy. 

An example of a disease that sometimes is controlled in this way is the 
disease methylmalonicaciduria. Patients with this disease are deficient in 
the active enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of a simple substance, 
methylamalonic acid, to succinic acid. It is known that cyanocobalamin 
(vitamin B 12 ) serves as the coenzyme for this reaction. It is found that the 
provision of very large amounts of vitamin B 12 , giving concentrations about 
a thousand times the normal concentration, causes the reaction to proceed 
at the normal rate for many patients. 

The use of very large amounts of vitamins in the control of disease, called 
megavitamin therapy, is an important procedure in orthomolecular medi¬ 
cine. It is my opinion that in the course of time it will be found possible to 
control hundreds of diseases by megavitamin therapy. For example, Abram 
Hoffer and Humphry Osmond demonstrated, as was mentioned in Chapter 
3, that many patients with schizophrenia are benefitted by megavitamin 
therapy (Hoffer, 1962; Hoffer and Osmond, 1966). Their treatment in¬ 
cludes the administration of nicotinic acid (niacin) or nicotinamide (niacin¬ 
amide) in amounts of 3 grams (g) to 18 g per day, together with 3 g to 18 g 
per day of ascorbic acid, and good amounts of other vitamins (Hawkins and 
Pauling, 1973; Pauling, 1974b). 

It is usually thought that a drug that is claimed to be a cure for many 
different diseases cannot have any value against any one of them. Yet there 
is evidence, summarized in this book, that a large intake of vitamin C helps 
to control a great many diseases: not only the common cold and the flu, but 
also other viral and bacterial diseases, such as hepatitis, and also quite 
unrelated diseases, including schizophrenia, cardiovascular disease, and 
cancer. There is a reason for this difference between vitamin C and ordi¬ 
nary drugs. On the one hand, most drugs are powerful substances that 



orthomolecular medicine defined 


97 


interact in a specific way with one kind of molecule or tissue or agent of 
disease in the body so as to help to control a particular disease. The sub¬ 
stance may, however, interact in a harmful way with other parts of the 
body, thus producing the side effects that make drugs dangerous. 

Vitamin C, on the other hand, is a normal constituent of the body, re¬ 
quired for life. It is involved in essentially all of the biochemical reactions 
that take place in the body and in all of the body’s protective mechanisms. 
With the ordinary intake of vitamin C these reactions and mechanisms do 
not operate efficiently; the person ingesting only the 60-milligram (mg) 
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) is in what might be called ordi¬ 
nary poor health—what the physicians and nutritionists call “ordinary 
good health.” The optimum intake of vitamin C, together with other health 
measures, can provide really good health, with increased protection against 
all diseases. That increase in protection is secured, as we shall see in Chap¬ 
ter 12, by strengthening the immune system, a process in which vitamin C 
plays a crucial role. The optimum intake is necessarily large. When that 
lesson is learned and practiced, the protection provided by vitamin C may 
well be the most important of all methods of orthomolecular medicine. 
While less is known about the other vitamins, there is no doubt that, used 
in the proper amounts, they also can be of great value. 

In the chapters that follow, we shall consider the ways in which supple¬ 
mental intake of the vitamins can prevent many diseases, sustain the body’s 
resistance to the stress and damage of illness, and provide effective therapy 
in a manner preferable to that by drugs and, when necessary, in association 
with drugs and other conventional methods of treatment. 

If no mention is made of some disease, readers should not conclude that 
improved nutrition is not helpful. For many diseases and medical problems 
there are reports about the apparent effectiveness of a high intake of one 
vitamin or the use of some other orthomolecular substance. Reports of this 
sort are usually not published in the standard medical journals, but they 
may be found, for example, in Prevention magazine. The reports may not 
be reliable; the writer may have reached the unjustified conclusion that the 
improvement in health that occurred when he or she increased the intake of 
a vitamin was caused by that increase, when in fact it was just a coinci¬ 
dence. If the same report is made many times, however, it may be given 
some credence, even though medical investigators have, because of their 
lack of interest in vitamins, failed to carry out any definitive studies. 

It is especially important to try improved nutrition in the effort to control 
“incurable” diseases, as was pointed out by Cheraskin and Ringsdorf 
(1971), who gave multiple sclerosis as one of their examples. A recommen¬ 
dation to try a drug when there is not strong evidence for its probable 
effectiveness should not be made, of course, because drugs are dangerous. 



98 


CHAPTER 11 


It is fortunate that vitamins are so lacking in toxicity and harmful side 
effects that this caveat does not apply to them. 

I remember a young physician who came to my home thirteen years ago 
and said, “Dr. Pauling, you saved my life. I was dying of chronic hepatitis, 
but I heard about high-dose vitamin C, and it has cured me.” 

Since then good studies of the value of vitamin C in the prevention and 
treatment of hepatitis have been made (Chapter 14), but there are other 
diseases for which such studies have not yet been carried out. One of these 
is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), brought to public attention as the 
disease of which the famous Yankee outfielder Lou Gehrig died. In August 
1985 I received a letter from a physician who described himself in the 
following way: “I am a medical ‘miracle.’ I’ve suffered from ALS for over 
eight years, with loss of function pretty well localized, and no spreading. I 
take between 12 and 20 grams of ascorbic acid every day, avoid fats and 
greases, and take at least 200 mg of a full B complex every day.” 

The acceptance of orthomolecular medicine would surely help somewhat 
to solve one of the great present-day problems, the high cost of health care. 
In 1965 the total public and private spending on health care in the United 
States was $40 billion; in twenty years it has increased tenfold, to $400 
billion (Report of the Department of Health and Human Services, 1985). 
The increasing cost of medical care, amplified by inflation, accounted for 
76 percent of this increase and population growth for 11 percent. The cost 
of health care was 6 percent of the gross national product in 1965 and 11 
percent in 1985. This increase reflects both the rapid rise in charges for 
medical services (after corrections for inflation) and the increasing avail¬ 
ability of expensive high-technology methods of diagnosis and treatment. A 
recent discussion (Atkins et al., 1985) of high-tech cardiology mentioned 
some of the new technologies now in use: telemetry units for monitoring 
arrythmias, diagnostic cardiac catheterization, invasive electrophysiologic 
assessments, permanent artificial pacemakers, electrocardiography and 
Doppler studies for assessing cardiac function, nuclear imaging, open-heart 
surgery, and heart transplantation. The discussion went on to new technol¬ 
ogies soon to be applied: magnetic resonance imaging; high-speed comput¬ 
erized tomography scanning of the heart; and implantable “cardioverters” 
that automatically correct potentially lethal arrhythmias. Additional tech¬ 
nologies include implantable defibrillators in high-risk patients to restore 
the cardiac beat after arrest, artificial heart implantation, and laser angi- 
oscopy to visualize atherosclerotic coronary plaques directly and to guide 
the “recanalizing” of obstructive narrowing. 

Among the problems associated with this development are the very high 
cost and the pressures from both patients and physicians to make sometimes 
inappropriate use of the techniques. Dr. George A. Beller, of the Univer- 



ORTHOMOLECULAR MEDICINE DEFINED 


99 


sity of Virginia, listed ten forces that operate against cost containment in 
cardiology: First, physicians are motivated to provide the highest quality of 
care possible, regardless of cost. Second, most physicians are still on a fee- 
for-service basis. Third, physicians are paid the highest premium for per¬ 
forming technologically sophisticated procedures. Fourth, physicians are 
likely to try to convince hospital administrators to acquire the latest innova¬ 
tions. Fifth, the administrators are under pressure to increase the hospital’s 
share of patients in the face of competition and therefore view it desirable to 
acquire these technologies. Sixth, patients are attracted to hospitals offering 
the latest equipment, services, and modern technologies. Seventh, suppliers 
of high-tech goods and services have an interest in continued growth. 
Eighth, some physicians feel pressured to order tests that they know are 
probably unnecessary because a consultant has written them as suggestions 
in the patient’s chart. If the patient does not do well, failure to follow the 
consultant’s advice could be considered negligent in court. The fear of a 
malpractice suit is certainly an inhibiting factor in cost containment. Ninth, 
it is often difficult to distinguish tests that are undertaken for clinical re¬ 
search from tests that are necessary for clinical management. Tenth, the 
need for an ultimate diagnosis has been a prevailing factor in cardiologic 
practice. 

Beller also pointed out that another force is our society’s special sympa¬ 
thy for those who are suffering. He quoted Gregory Pence of the University 
of Alabama as saying, “Medical costs are uncontrollable because we lack 
moral agreement about how to deny medical services. Deciding how to say 
‘no,’ and to say it with honesty and integrity, is perhaps the most profound, 
most difficult moral question our society will face in the coming years.” 

These are difficult problems. I believe that orthomolecular medicine can 
contribute to their solution. Vitamins are much less expensive than drugs. 
The amount of suffering caused to the patient by the treatment should be 
taken into consideration—a high intake of vitamins improves the state of 
well-being of the patient and helps to control the unpleasant side effects of 
some conventional therapies. Finally, if the aim of medical care is not 
merely to cure sickness but to promote health, then it should be foremost in 
the physician’s mind that improved nutrition can help the patient signifi¬ 
cantly in reaching the goal of a good and satisfying life. 



12 


The Immune System 


Our bodies are protected from onslaughts from both without and within by 
our natural protective mechanisms. The most important of these is the 
immune system. By keeping that system operating as effectively as possible 
we can make a significant contribution to our own good health. 

When vitamins were first isolated and investigated half a century ago 
it was observed that a deficiency in any one of several of them resulted 
in impairment of the immune system, such as a decrease in the number 
of leukocytes in the blood and in a decreased resistance to infection. The 
vitamins required for good immunity are vitamin A, vitamin B 12 , panto¬ 
thenic acid, folacin, and vitamin C. These are also the vitamins that seem to 
strengthen the immune system when they are taken in amounts larger than 
those usually recommended. The effect on the immune system is greatest 
for vitamin C. I shall discuss the evidence in this chapter. 

When we were discussing the immune system in relation to cancer in our 
book Cancer and Vitamin C (Cameron and Pauling, 1979), Dr. Ewan 
Cameron and I wrote that the immunological defense system has the diffi¬ 
cult task of distinguishing foe from friend by first recognizing “nonselP’ 
(the invading vectors of disease, such as bacteria or malignant cells) as 
distinct from “self 5 (the normal cells). Recognition depends upon the evalu¬ 
ation of differences in molecular structure. For the viral and bacterial vec- 




THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 


101 


tors of disease these differences are striking, and their recognition is rela¬ 
tively easily accomplished, whereas for the cancer cells the differences are 
slight, and the immune mechanisms must be highly competent in order to 
be effective. As pictured by Lewis Thomas, former president of the Memo¬ 
rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the immune system functions as a 
police force, constantly patrolling the body and checking the cells, keeping 
an eye open for cells that have become malignant, and, when they have 
been recognized, destroying them. 

There is much evidence that vitamin C is essential for the efficient work¬ 
ing of the immune system. The mechanisms of the immune system involve 
certain molecules, mainly protein molecules that are present in solution in 
the body fluids, as well as certain cells. Vitamin C is involved both in the 
synthesis of many of these molecules and in the production and proper 
functioning of the cells. 

Antibodies (also called immunoglobulins) are rather large protein mole¬ 
cules, each molecule consisting of about fifteen thousand or twenty-five 
thousand atoms. A human being is able to make about a million different 
kinds of antibody molecules. Each kind is able to recognize a particular 
group of atoms, called a haptenic group or hapten, carried in its antigen, a 
foreign molecule. Most people do not make antibodies that can combine 
with haptens. Those unfortunate people who do so suffer from a special 
sort of disease, an “autoimmune” disease; it is possible that lupus erythe- 
matosis and glomerular nephritis may be such diseases. 

The haptenic groups in an antigen stimulate the cells in the body that 
manufacture the corresponding specific antibodies to divide and to form a 
clone of a large number of cells. These new cells liberate the specific anti¬ 
bodies into the blood, where they can combine with the antigenic molecules 
or cells and mark them for destruction. 

It has been found that an increased intake of vitamin C leads to the man¬ 
ufacture of more antibody molecules. Increase in antibodies of types IgG 
and IgM was reported by Vallance (1977). He studied subjects who for 
nearly a year were isolated in a British research station in Antarctica, out 
of contact with any sources of new infection, which, by stimulating immu¬ 
noglobulin production, would have introduced a disturbing factor. Prinz 
and his coworkers gave 1 gram (g) of vitamin C to twenty-five healthy male 
university students and a placebo to twenty similar subjects. After seventy- 
five days they found that for the vitamin-C subjects there was a significant 
increase in the serum levels of the immunoglobulins IgA, IgG, and IgM 
(Prinz et al., 1977, 1980). A similar dependence of the production of anti¬ 
bodies on the intake of vitamin C has also been observed in guinea pigs, 
which share our dependence on outside sources for a supply of this vitamin. 

IgA is the form of antibody that is present in the largest amount (to¬ 
gether with some IgM) in nasal secretions; it is largely responsible for the 



102 


CHAPTER 12 


antiviral action of these secretions. All three forms are present in blood and 
interstitial fluid, IgM in the largest amount. 

Bacterial cells and malignant cells that have been identified as foreign by 
the molecules of specific antibodies adhering to them have to be prepared 
for destruction by combination with some other protein molecules, the com¬ 
ponents of complement, that are present in the bloodstream. There is some 
evidence that vitamin C is involved in the synthesis of the Cl-esterase com¬ 
ponent of complement and that the amount of this important substance 
increases with increase in the intake of this vitamin. Without this impor¬ 
tant component of complement the whole complement cascade is inoperable 
and the “nonself” cells would not be destroyed. There is no doubt that 
vitamin C is required also in humans for the synthesis of Cl-esterase, be¬ 
cause this component of complement contains protein molecules that are 
similar to the molecules of collagen that are known to require vitamin C for 
their synthesis. 

After the foreign cells or malignant cells have been identified and marked 
for destruction they are attacked and destroyed by the phagocytic (cell¬ 
eating) cells that patrol the body. These phagocytic cells are white cells, 
leucocytes, in the blood and other body fluids. Leucocytes are found in large 
numbers in the pus formed in suppurating abscesses or sores, where they 
have been fighting an infection. 

Leucocytes that are made in the lymph glands are lymphocytes. They are 
conveyed in the lymph (a suspension of the cells in a clear yellowish fluid 
resembling blood plasma) through the lymphatic vessels to the bloodstream. 
The lymphocytes seem to be the most important of the phagocytic cells in 
the battles against cancer and other diseases. A malignant tumor is often 
observed to be infiltrated with lymphocytes, and a high degree of lympho¬ 
cyte infiltration is now accepted as a reliable indicator of a favorable out¬ 
come of the disease. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that guinea pigs 
maintained on very low intakes of vitamin C tolerate skin grafts from other 
guinea pigs, and that this tolerance is related to their abnormally low lym¬ 
phocyte ascorbate levels (Kalden and Guthy, 1972). When the guinea pigs 
are given large amounts of vitamin C the skin grafts are promptly rejected, 
showing that the immune systems are again functioning. 

These observations and the well-known fact that leukocytes are phago- 
cytically effective only if they contain a rather large amount of ascorbate 
led Dr. Ewan Cameron and me to suggest in 1974 that a high intake of 
vitamin C would permit the lymphocyte part of the defense mechanisms 
against cancer to function at high efficiency. This prediction has now been 
confirmed. Working in the National Cancer Institute, Yonemoto and his 
coworkers (Yonemoto, Chretien, and Fehniger, 1976; Yonemoto, 1979) 
studied five healthy young men and women, eighteen to thirty years old, 






THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 


103 


who initially were receiving the ordinary low intake of vitamin C. They 
took samples of blood, separated the lymphocytes, and measured their rate 
of blastogenesis (production of new lymphocyte cells by budding) when 
stimulated by an antigenic foreign substance, phytohemagglutinin. Then 
they gave each subject 5 g of vitamin C on each of three successive days. 
The rate of formation of new lymphocytes, as measured by the same test of 
the separated cells, had nearly doubled (an increase of 83 percent) in a few 
days, and it remained high for another week. A dose of 10 g per day for 
three days caused this rate to triple, and a dose of 18 g per day caused it to 
reach four times the original value. This study leaves little doubt that a 
high intake of vitamin C by cancer patients increases the effectiveness of the 
body’s protective mechanism involving lymphocytes and leads to a more 
favorable prognosis for the patient suffering from cancer or an infectious 
disease. More extensive studies of this sort are needed to determine the 
intake of vitamin C, both orally and intravenously, that leads to the maxi¬ 
mum rate of blastogenesis of lymphocytes. The indication from the work 
of Yonemoto and his coworkers is that the optimum oral intake may be 
greater than 18 g per day. 

Many investigators have reported that an increase in the intake of vita¬ 
min C by either normal subjects or patients with certain diseases leads to 
increased motility of leukocytes and their more rapid movement to the site 
of an infection (Anderson, 1981, 1982; Panush et al., 1982). There is fur¬ 
ther evidence that when they arrive, vitamin C increases their capacity for 
phagocytosis. This is the process in which leucocytes surround and destroy 
bacterial cells or malignant cells that have been identified as foreign and 
marked for destruction; the individual leucocyte surrounds and engulfs the 
foreign cell. Vitamin C is required for this process. It was discovered long 
ago that leucocytes are not phagocytically effective if they do not contain 
enough ascorbate (Cottingham and Mills, 1943). A recent study (Hume 
and Weyers, 1973) has shown that persons on an ordinary Scottish diet and 
in good health had a little more ascorbate in their leucocytes than the 
amount needed for phagocytic activity but the amount dropped to half this 
value on the first day after they had contracted colds, and it stayed low for 
several days, rendering them susceptible to secondary bacterial infections. 
An intake of 250 milligrams (mg) of ascorbic acid per day was not enough 
to keep the amount of ascorbate in the leucocytes up to the level required 
for effective phagocytosis, but 1 g per day plus 6 g per day beginning at the 
onset of the cold was found to be enough to keep this important protective 
mechanism operating. 

I conclude from this study that the prophylactic intake of ascorbic acid, 
the dose taken regularly to preserve good health and provide protection 
against disease, almost certainly should be more than 250 mg per day for 



104 


CHAPTER 12 


most people. Other considerations led me to suggest the range 250 mg to 
4000 mg, or even 10,000 mg, for recommended daily intake for most people 
(Pauling, 1974c). Such an intake should decrease the chance of contracting 
the common cold or influenza and, if a viral infection is contracted, should 
prevent a secondary bacterial infection from developing. 

Irwin Stone (1972) has described vitamin C in relation to bacterial dis¬ 
eases in the following words: 

1. It is bactericidal or bacteriostatic and will kill or prevent the growth of 
the pathogenic organisms.* 

2. It detoxicates and renders harmless the bacterial toxins and poisons. 

3. It controls and maintains phagocytosis. 

4. It is harmless and nontoxic and can be administered in the large doses 
needed to accomplish the above effects without danger to the patient. 

Another, more recently recognized, agent in the immune system is the 
interferons. These are proteins with antiviral activity, which are produced 
by cells infected by a virus and possibly also by malignant cells. Spreading 
to neighboring cells, the interferons change them in such a way as to enable 
them to resist infection. There is some evidence that interferons help in the 
effort by the human body to control a developing cold or other infection or 
cancer. Different kinds of interferon are synthesized by different animal 
species. Human beings make about twenty different kinds of interferon 
molecules, with somewhat different activities, in different cells in the body. 
Interferon has attracted lively interest because very few drugs have any 
effectiveness against viral infections and cancer. 

Since interferons are proteins, animal interferons act as antigens in hu¬ 
man beings and cannot be injected without sensitizing the person in such a 
way that further injections would cause serious allergic reactions. Human 
interferons, made from human leucocytes in cell culture, are now avail¬ 
able, but at a rather high price. Studies have indicated that injections of 
these substances have some value in treating cancer and infectious diseases 
(Borden, 1984). 

The suggestion that an increased intake of vitamin C would lead to the 
production of larger amounts of the interferons (Pauling, 1970) has been 
verified. Until more evidence becomes available about the value of injec- 


Evidence for this statement will be considered in Chapter 14. 





THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 


105 


tions of human interferon, we may be wise to follow the advice of Cameron: 
“Take more vitamin C and make your own interferon!” 

The prostaglandins are small molecules (lipids, related to fats) that play 
a potent, central role in the functioning of the human body. Acting as 
hormones, they are involved in regulation of the heart beat, the flow of 
blood, the damage done to cells by drugs, and the responses of the immune 
system. Their isolation and characterization have occurred mainly since 
1960, with many discoveries made since 1970. The formula of prosta¬ 
glandin PGE1 is C 2 oH 34 0 5 , and the other prostaglandins have the same or 
closely similar formulas. 


ml ; 



“Take, i^ter^eroi^, At4D call me 

IVvi TA£- !v/\OGtsJ\tsl<C=t," 
















106 


CHAPTER 12 


Whenever any tissue is disturbed or damaged it releases prostaglandins 
(Vane, 1971). The prostaglandins, especially PGE2 and PGF2-alpha, are 
involved with other substances in producing inflammation of the tissues— 
redness, swelling, pain, tenderness, and heat—resulting from increased 
flow of blood and the movement of leucocytes and other cells and substances 
to the region in response to the hormones. As we shall see in the compari¬ 
son of drugs and vitamins in Chapter 26, the function of the prostaglandins 
in inflammation is controlled to some extent by aspirin. In 1978 Horrobin 
reported that vitamin C inhibits the synthesis of PGE2 and PGF2-alpha, 
and in this way the vitamin also exerts a considerable anti-inflammatory 
action (Horrobin, 1978). He reported, however, that whereas aspirin in¬ 
hibits the synthesis of PGE1, vitamin C increases the amount synthesized 
(Horrobin, Oka, and Manku, 1979). The prostaglandin PGE1 is involved 
in the formation of lymphocytes and plays a major part in the regulation of 
immune responses. Accordingly the effect of vitamin C in stimulating the 
production of PGE1 is an additional way in which the intake of the opti¬ 
mum amount of vitamin C strengthens the immune system and contributes 
to the maintenance of better health. 



13 


The Common Cold 


Most people catch several colds each year, usually in the fall, winter, and 
spring. When you catch a cold, after you have been exposed to cold viruses 
being spread by some other person, you may sneeze, feel a chill and 
scratchiness of the throat, develop a runny nose or stopped-up nose, and 
show other signs of the viral infection. Later, as the cold develops, you may 
feel rather miserable for two or three days. At this time it is usually wise to 
stay at home and rest in bed—for your own well-being and to spare your 
family and your colleagues the risk of exposure to your cold. After a week 
or ten days you have usually recovered. 

Having a cold two or three times a year is not pleasant. What is worse, 
the cold may be attended by serious complications—bronchitis, sinus infec¬ 
tion, infection of the middle ear, infection of the mastoid bone (mastoiditis), 
meningitis, bronchopneumonia or lobar pneumonia, or exacerbation of 
some other disease, such as arthritis or kidney disease or heart disease. 

The common cold (acute coryza) is an inflammation of the upper respi¬ 
ratory tract caused by infection with a virus.* This infection alters the 


*A discussion of the many viruses that can cause the common cold is given in the book The 
Common Cold , by Sir Christopher Andrewes, 1965. 





108 


CHAPTER 13 


physiology of the mucous membrane of the nose, the perinasal sinuses, and 
the throat. The common cold occurs more often than all other diseases 
combined. This infection does not occur, however, in small isolated commu¬ 
nities; exposure to the virus, carried by persons from the outside, is needed. 
Thus, the Norwegian island of Spitsbergen used to be isolated during seven 
months of the year. The 507 residents of the principal town of the island, 
Longyear, were nearly free of colds through the cold winter, with only four 
colds recorded in three months. Then within two weeks after the arrival of 
the first ship some 200 of the residents had become ill with colds (Paul and 
Freese, 1933). 

Development of a cold after exposure to the virus is determined to some 
extent by the state of health of the person and by environmental factors. 
Fatigue, chilling of the body, wearing of wet clothing and wet shoes, and 
the presence of irritating substances in the air are traditionally cited as 
preludes to a cold. Experimental studies indicate, however, that these fac¬ 
tors are not so important as is generally believed (Andrewes, 1965; Debre 
and Celers, 1970, page 539). 

The period of incubation, between exposure and the manifestation of 
symptoms, is usually two or three days. The first symptoms are the familiar 
ones cited in the first paragraph of this chapter. Headache, general malaise 
(an indefinite feeling of uneasiness or discomfort), and chills (a sensation of 
coldness attended with convulsive shaking of the body, pinched face, pale 
skin, and blue lips) often attend the progress of the cold. A slight increase 
in temperature, usually to not over 101 °F (38.3°C), may occur. The mu¬ 
cous membranes of the nose and pharynx are swollen. One nostril or both 
nostrils may be blocked by the thickened secretions. The skin around the 
nostrils may become sore, and cold sores (caused by the virus Herpes 
simplex) may develop on the lips. 

The customary treatment for the common cold includes resting in bed, 
drinking fruit juice or water, ingesting a simple and nutritious diet, pre¬ 
venting irritants such as tobacco smoke from entering the respiratory tract, 
and alleviating the symptoms to some extent by the use of aspirin, 
phenacetin, antihistamines, and other drugs (see Chapter 26). After some 
days the tissues of the nose and throat, weakened by the virus infection, are 
often invaded by bacteria. This secondary infection may cause the nasal 
secretions to become purulent (to contain pus). Also, the secondary infec¬ 
tion may spread to the sinuses, the middle ears, the tonsils, the pharynx, the 
larynx, the trachea, the bronchi, and the lungs. As mentioned above, mas¬ 
toiditis, pneumonia, meningitis, and other serious infections may follow. 
Control of the common cold thus would lead to a decrease in the incidence 
of more serious diseases. 

Not everyone is susceptible to infection with the common cold. Most 
investigators have noted that an appreciable proportion of the population, 6 




THE COMMON COLD 


109 


to 10 percent, never have colds. This fact provides justification for hope that 
a significant decrease in the number of colds can be achieved through in¬ 
crease in the resistance of individuals to viral infection. It is likely that the 
ability of 6 to 10 percent of the population to avoid colds is the result of 
their natural powers of resistance. Like other physiological properties, the 
resistance of individuals to viral infection probably can be represented by a 
distribution curve that has approximately the normal bell shape. The 6 to 
10 percent of the population that are resistant to colds presumably corre¬ 
spond to the tail end of the curve, those people with the largest natural 
powers of resisting viral infections. If in some way the natural resistance of 
the whole population could be shifted upward, a larger percentage of the 
population would lie in the range corresponding to complete resistance to 
the infection and would never have colds. This argument indicates strongly 
that a study of the factors involved in the natural resistance to viral infec¬ 
tion, such as nutritional factors, could lead to a significant decrease in the 
susceptibility of the population as a whole to the common cold. Consider¬ 
ing, along with this possibility, that the common cold disappears in iso¬ 
lated communities like Spitsbergen, I am moved to declare again my belief 
that the nuisance and menace of the common cold might be stamped out 
entirely. 

I have made a rough estimate of the significance of the common cold, 
measured in dollars. Let us assume that the average loss of time because of 
serious illness with the common cold is seven days per person per year. The 
person suffering from a cold or series of colds during the year might stay 
away from work, or might have a decreased effectiveness, or might be 
sufficiently ill and miserable to feel that the seven days are wasted. In any 
event, a measure of the damage done by the common cold might be roughly 
taken as the person’s loss of productivity and income for the seven days 
during the year when he or she is most seriously ill. The personal income of 
the people of the United States is about $3,000 billion per year (1985). The 
income per week is this quantity divided by fifty-two. We may accordingly 
be justified in saying that the damage done by the common cold to the 
people of the United States each year can be described roughly as corre¬ 
sponding to a monetary loss of $60 billion per year.* 

This corresponds to a loss in income or its equivalent in well-being of 
about $250 per year per person. It is easy to understand why the people of 
the United States spend hundreds of millions of dollars per year on cold 
medicines, despite their limited effectiveness. 


*A smaller estimate, $5 billion per year, was given by Fabricant and Conklin in their book 
The Dangerous Cold , 1965. The increase is the result of population growth and monetary 
inflation. 




110 


CHAPTER 13 


It has been known for more than twenty years that most people can keep 
from having colds, or, if a cold develops, can suppress most of its disagree¬ 
able manifestations, by the proper use of vitamin C. There is no need for 
you to be made miserable by the common cold. 

In the medical literature, nonetheless, it continues to be said that no 
clearly effective method of treatment of the common cold has been devel¬ 
oped. The various drugs that are prescribed or recommended have some 
value in making the patient more comfortable, by giving relief from some of 
the more distressing symptoms, but they have little effect on the duration of 
the cold. The fact that doctors have not had a good way of preventing and 
treating the common cold has been the subject of many jokes. The doctor 
says to the patient, “You have a cold. I don’t know how to treat it, but if it 
develops into pneumonia, come to see me because I can cure pneumonia.” 
There is another joke that appeared after the first edition of my book 
Vitamin C and the Common Cold was published in 1970. The doctor says 
to the patient, “You are suffering from an overdose of vitamin C, so I shall 
give you an injection of cold viruses to counteract it.” 

A great many people have reported to me that their lives were changed 
by reading my book. Whereas during previous years they had suffered from 
many colds, their increased intake of vitamin C had been effective in pro¬ 
viding complete protection against this disease. Other people, however, re¬ 
ported that following my recommendations did not keep them from devel¬ 
oping colds that were just about as serious as those that they had caught 
earlier. The continued study of this problem has led me to conclude that 
human beings, with their biochemical individuality, differ quite a bit from 
one another in the amount of vitamin C required to provide protection 
against the common cold. For some people the achievement of really good 
health and protection against cold viruses requires the intake of a far larger 
amount of vitamin C than was recommended in my book. I now believe 
that every person can protect himself or herself against the common cold, 
or, if a cold begins to develop, can make its symptoms far less serious than 
they would be otherwise, by taking the amount of vitamin C that is appro¬ 
priate to him or her. 

If you have established your optimum nutritional intake of vitamin C, 
you will find yourself going through the common-cold season without a 
cold. This statement may, in fact, be put the other way around. If you go 
through the season cold-free, you have probably found your optimum nu¬ 
tritional intake of vitamin C. 

Your heightened resistance may nonetheless be overridden. When you 
feel the first symptoms of a cold coming on, you should increase your intake 
of vitamin G at once to the therapeutic level. In my own experience, this 
means taking 1 gram (g) or more of vitamin C per hour throughout the 




THE COMMON COLD 


777 


waking hours of the day. Cold symptoms are usually suppressed at once, 
and they remain so if the therapeutic dose is maintained for the duration of 
what would otherwise have been the cold. The one discomfort in this regi¬ 
men may be a looseness of the bowels in the first few days. 

My simple prescription remains, of course, heresy to orthodox nutrition¬ 
ists and most practitioners of medicine. I was on a televison show, with 
David Frost, some years ago with the nutrition authority Dr. Fredrick J. 
Stare, Mademoiselle's “Big Name in nutrition/’ as my fellow guest. Stare 
and I made somewhat different statements about vitamin C and its value, 
and the hour-long program came nearly to its end. Finally, Stare said, “I 
know that Dr. Pauling’s method of preventing the common cold is no good, 
because I tried it, and it didn’t work.” I started to ask a question about how 
he had tried it, but Frost said, “Gentlemen, I am sorry that our time is up, 
and I thank you for having been on the program.” Then, as we were 
walking away, Stare turned to me and said “Of course, I didn’t use the 
astronomical amount that you recommend.” 

This story has some bearing on the question of why physicians on the 
whole have not been recommending the use of vitamin C to their patients to 
help prevent the common cold and other diseases. Although physicians, as 
part of their training, are taught that the dosage of a drug that is prescribed 
for the patient must be very carefully determined and controlled, they seem 
to have difficulty in remembering that the same principle applies to the 
vitamins. Stare probably could have prevented his cold from developing if 
he had taken the “astronomical amount” that I recommend. 

I believe that every cold or other illness that a person suffers from dam¬ 
ages his or her body in a permanent way to some extent, and shortens his or 
her life expectancy. Using vitamin C to prevent colds may slow down the 
aging process. This is part of the contribution that results from following 
the regimen that I urge in this book for the prolongation of life and espe¬ 
cially of the period of well-being, during which life is really enjoyed. 

The answer to the apparent contradiction between the opinions ex¬ 
pressed by authorities in nutrition and my own experience is a simple one. 
Vitamin C has only rather small value in providing protection against the 
common cold when it is taken in small amounts, but it has great value when 
it is taken in large amounts. Most of the studies referred to in the editorial 
article in the August 1967 issue of Nutrition Reviews, mentioned in Chap¬ 
ter 3, involved giving small amounts of ascorbic acid to the subjects, usually 
200 milligrams (mg) per day. But even these studies indicate that such 
small amounts have some protective value, not very great, against the com¬ 
mon cold. The amount of protection increases with increase in the amount 
of ingested vitamin C and becomes nearly complete with 10 g to 40 g per 
day taken at the immediate onset of the cold. 



7 72 


CHAPTER 13 


The study of vitamin C in relation to the common cold began only a few 
years after the vitamin was identified as ascorbic acid. Dr. Roger Korbsch 
of St. Elisabeth Hospital, Oberhausen, Germany, was one of the first to 
publish an account of such a study, in 1938. The fact that ascorbic acid has 
been reported to be effective against several diseases, including gastritis and 
stomach ulcers, suggested that he try it in treating acute rhinitis and colds. 
In 1936 he found that oral doses of up to 1 g per day were of value against 
rhinorrhea, acute rhinitis, and secondary rhinitis and accompanying mani¬ 
festations of illness, such as headache. He then found that the injection of 
250 or 500 mg of ascorbic acid on the first day of a common cold almost 
always led to the immediate disappearance of all the signs and symptoms of 
the cold, with a similar injection sometimes needed on the second day. He 
stated that ascorbic acid is far superior to other cold medicines, such as 
aminopyrine, and is without danger, in that there is no evidence that there 
are serious side effects, even with large doses. 

A trial was then made in Germany (Ertel, 1941) in which 357 million 
daily doses of vitamin C were distributed among 3.7 million pregnant 
women, nursing mothers, suckling infants, and schoolchildren. Ertel re¬ 
ported that the recipients of the vitamin C enjoyed better health, in several 
different respects, than the corresponding control populations. The only 
quantitative information given by him is that with one group of schoolchil¬ 
dren for which good statistical data were collected the amount of illness 
with respiratory infections was 20 percent less than the year before. 

In 1942 Glazebrook and Thomson reported the results of a study carried 
out in an institution where there were about 1500 students, whose ages 
ranged from fifteen to twenty years. The food was poorly prepared, being 
kept hot for two hours or more before serving, and the total intake of 
ascorbic acid was determined to be only about 5 to 15 mg per student per 
day. Some of the students (335) were given additional ascorbic acid, 200 mg 
per day, for a period of six months, and the others (1100) were kept as 
controls. The incidence of colds and tonsillitis was 14 percent less among 
the students given ascorbic acid than among the controls. The number of 
serious cases of colds or tonsillitis requiring admission to sick quarters was 
25 percent less for the students receiving ascorbic acid than for the controls. 
This difference has high statistical significance (only 1 percent probability 
in a uniform population). The average number of days of hospitalization 
per student because of infection (common cold, tonsillitis, acute rheuma¬ 
tism, pneumonia) was 2.5 days for the students receiving ascorbic acid and 
5.0 days for the controls. These were 17 cases of pneumonia and 16 cases of 
acute rheumatism among the 1100 controls, and no case of either disease 
among the 335 students receiving ascorbic acid. The probability of such a 
great difference in two samples of a uniform population is so small (less 
than 0.3 percent) as to indicate very strongly that vitamin C has value in 



THE COMMON COLD 


113 


providing protection against these serious infectious diseases, as well as 
against the common cold and tonsillitis. 

A study made famous by detractors of my prescription of vitamin C is 
that of Cowan, Diehl and Baker, which I cited in Chapter 3. The main 
result of the study is that the students who received the placebo lost an 
average of 1.6 days from school because of colds, and those who received 
vitamin C in only a small dose, 200 mg per day, lost only an average of 1.1 
days, 31 percent less. The probability that this difference would occur in a 
uniform population is only 0.1 percent, so that it is highly likely that this 
decrease in the amount of illness was caused by the ascorbic acid. 

In such a test, the best experiments are those in which the subjects are 
divided into two groups, in a random way, with the substance being tested 
(ascorbic acid) administered to the subjects in one group, and a placebo (an 
inactive material resembling the preparation to be tested: for example, a 
capsule containing citric acid might be used as a placebo for ascorbic acid) 
administered to those of the other group. In a blind experiment the subjects 
do not know whether or not they are receiving the placebo. Sometimes a 
double-blind study is made, in which the investigators evaluating the effects 
of the preparation and the placebo do not know which of the subjects 
received the preparation and which received the placebo until the study is 
completed, this information being kept by some other person. 

The results of the first carefully controlled, double-blind study with a 
larger daily amount, 1000 mg, of ascorbic acid were reported in 1961 by 
Dr. G. Ritzel, a physician with the medical service of the school district of 
the city of Basel, Switzerland. He carried out the study at a ski resort with 
279 boys during two periods of five to seven days. The conditions were such 
that the incidence of colds during these short periods was large enough 
(approximately 20 percent) to permit results with statistical significance to 
be obtained. The subjects were of the same age (fifteen to seventeen) and 
had similar nutrition during the period of study. In accordance with the 
double-blind protocol, neither the participants nor the physicians had any 
knowledge about the distribution of the 1000-mg ascorbic-acid tablets and 
the placebo tablets. The tablets were distributed every morning and were 
taken by the subjects under observation in such a way that the possibility of 
interchange of tablets was eliminated. The subjects were examined daily 
for symptoms of colds and other infections. The records were largely on the 
basis of subjective symptoms, partially supported by objective observations 
(measurement of body temperature, inspection of the respiratory organs, 
auscultation of the lungs, and so on). Persons who showed cold symptoms 
on the first day were excluded from the investigation. 

After the completion of the investigation a completely independent group 
of professional people carried out the statistical evaluation of the observa¬ 
tions with the identity of the recipients of the ascorbic acid and the placebo 




114 


CHAPTER 13 


tablets concealed by identification numbers. The group receiving ascorbic 
acid showed only 39 percent as many days of illness per person as the 
group receiving the placebo; the number of individual symptoms per person 
was only 36 percent as great for the ascorbic-acid group as for the placebo 
group. The statistical evaluation showed that these differences are statisti¬ 
cally significant at better than the 99 percent level of confidence. We see 
that in Ritzel’s study the vitamin-C subjects had only about one-third as 
much illness as the placebo subjects. 

In another ski-camp study, with forty-six students as subjects, Bessel- 
Lorck (1959) found that those students who received 1 g of vitamin C 
per day had only about half as much illness as those who received no 
vitamin C. 

After the publication of my Vitamin C and the Common Cold\ several 
excellent double-blind studies were carried out. The first one, in Toronto, 
Canada (Anderson, Reid, and Beaton, 1972) involved 407 subjects receiv¬ 
ing ascorbic acid (1 g per day plus 3 g per day for three days at the onset of 
any illness) and 411 subjects receiving a closely matching placebo. The 
duration of the study was four months. The number of days confined to 
house per subject was 30 percent less for the ascorbic-acid group than for 
the placebo group, and the number of days off work per subject was 33 
percent less. The authors mention that these differences have high statisti¬ 
cal significance (99.9 percent level of confidence). 

Another study, under quite different conditions, involved 112 sol¬ 
diers undergoing operational training in northern Canada (Sabiston and 
Radomski, 1974). Half of the subjects received 1 g of ascorbic acid per day 
during the four weeks of the study, and the other half received a placebo. 
The average number of days of illness was 68 percent less for the ascorbic- 
acid subjects than for the placebo subjects. 

The average amount of protection against the common cold found in 
these four studies in which 1 g or 2 g was given per day is 48 percent; that 
is, on the average, the subjects who received vitamin C had only about one- 
half as much illness as those who received the inactive tablet. 

Since identical twins have, in principle, identical immune systems, they 
commend themselves for studies of this kind. Two unfortunately flawed 
studies comparing one twin on placebo and the other on vitamin C have 
been reported. Carr and his colleagues conducted a hundred-day double¬ 
blind study of ninety-five pairs of identical twins in Australia, fourteen to 
sixty-four years old, average twenty-five years, in which one of each pair 
took a 1000-mg tablet of vitamin C each day and the other took a well- 
matched placebo, with all subjects also taking a vitamin tablet containing 
70 mg of vitamin C. The results of this study were published in three 
separate articles (Carr, Einstein, et al., 1981a, 1981b; Martin, Carr, et al., 




THE COMMON COLD 


115 


1982.) Of the ninety-five pairs of twins, however, fifty-one pairs were 
living together. For these pairs there was little difference in the amount of 
illness between the twin with the high intake of C and the twin with the 
low intake. I think that the probable explanation is that the twins living 
together were not careful about taking their own tablets. Moreover, close 
exposure to the other’s cold might well override whatever protection was 
afforded to the twin taking vitamin C. For the forty-four pairs of twins 
living apart the average number of days of illness was 6.32 for the high- 
intake twins and 12.08 for the low-intake twins, corresponding to 48 per¬ 
cent protection by the extra 1000 mg of vitamin C per day. 

In the other twin study, by Miller et al. (1977, 1978) forty-four pairs of 
identical twins were given 500, 750, and 1000 mg of vitamin C per day, 
depending on age, or a starch placebo. There was little difference in the 
amounts of illness of the vitamin-C twins and the placebo twins. All of 
these pairs of twins lived at home, and the same effects of mixing their 
tablets and exchanging their infections may have occurred. 

Many other physicians have reported their observations that vitamin C 
seems to have value in helping to control the common cold, as well as other 
diseases. From a study of 2600 factory workers in Leipzig, Scheunert 
(1949) reported that an intake of either 100 mg or 300 mg of vitamin C per 
day decreased the incidence of respiratory diseases and other diseases by 
about 75 percent. Bartley, Krebs, and O’Brien (1953) found that the mean 
length of colds in subjects deprived of ascorbic acid was twice as great as for 
subjects not deprived. Fletcher and Fletcher (1951) stated that supplements 
of 50 mg to 100 mg of ascorbic acid per day increased the resistance of 
children to infection. Some value of small amounts of ascorbic acid was 
reported also by Barnes (1961), Macon (1956), and Banks (1965, 1968). 
Marckwell (1947) stated that there was a 50 percent chance of stopping a 
cold if enough ascorbic acid was taken: 0.75 g at once, followed by 0.5 g 
every three or four hours, continuing on later days if needed. 

In the July-August 1967 issue of the magazine Fact there appeared an 
article entitled “Why Organized Medicine Sneezes at the Common Cold” 
by Dr. Douglas Gildersleeve, apparently a pseudonym for a physician who 
feared the consequences of writing heresy in a popular magazine. The 
author reported that he could suppress the symptoms of the common cold 
by making use of twenty or twenty-five times as much ascorbic acid as the 
200 mg per day used by investigators whose reports he had read. In studies 
carried out on more than four hundred colds in twenty-five individuals, 
mostly his own patients, he had found the treatment with ascorbic acid in 
large amounts to be effective in 95 percent of the patients. The most fre¬ 
quent cold symptom, excessive nasal discharge, disappeared entirely on use 
of ascorbic acid, and other symptoms—sneezing, coughing, sore throat, 





116 


CHAPTER 13 


hoarseness, and headache—were barely noticeable, if they were present at 
all. He reported that not one of the subjects ever experienced any secondary 
bacterial complications. 

In this article Gildersleeve reported that in 1964 he wrote a paper in 
which he described his observations. He submitted the paper to eleven 
different professional journals, every one of which rejected it. One editor 
said to him that it would be harmful to the journal to publish a useful 
treatment for the common cold. He stated that medical journals depend for 
their existence on the support of their advertisers, and that more than 
twenty-five percent of the advertisements in the journals relate to patented 
drugs for the alleviation of cold symptoms or for the treatment of complica¬ 
tions of colds. 

Another editor said that he had rejected the paper because it was not 
correct. When Gildersleeve questioned him about this statement, he said, 
“Twenty-five years ago I was a member of a team of researchers that 
investigated vitamin C. We determined then that the drug was of no use in 
treating the common cold.” He was not impressed when Gildersleeve told 
him that the amount of ascorbic acid that had been used in the early work 
was only one-twentieth of the minimum amount necessary to achieve sig¬ 
nificant results. 

Explaining “Why Organized Medicine Sneezes at the Common Cold,” 
Gildersleeve concluded: “. . . having worked as a researcher in the field, it is 
my contention that an effective treatment for the common cold, a cure, is 
available, that [it] is being ignored because of the monetary losses that 
would be inflicted on pharmaceutical manufacturers, professional journals, 
and doctors themselves.” 

Some other studies have addressed the therapeutic value of vitamin C in 
treating, as distinguished from preventing, the common cold. They confirm 
the experience reported by the pseudonymous Dr. Gildersleeve. In 1938 
Ruskin reported his observations on more than one thousand patients to 
whom he had given an injection, sometimes followed by a second one, of 
450 mg of calcium ascorbate as soon as possible after the onset of a cold. He 
found that 42 percent of the patients were completely relieved and another 
48 percent were markedly improved. He concluded that “calcium ascorbate 
would appear to be practically an abortive in the treatment of the common 
cold.” Several other somewhat similar reports are mentioned by Irwin 
Stone in his book The Healing Factor: Vitamin C against Disease (1972). 
Stone himself recommended taking 1.5 to 2 g of ascorbic acid by mouth at 
the first sign of a cold, with the dose repeated at twenty-minute to half- 
hour intervals until the symptoms have disappeared, which occurs usually 
by the third dose. 

The physician Edme Regnier of Salem, Massachusetts, reported in 1968 
that he had discovered the value of the administration of large doses of 



THE COMMON COLD 


777 


ascorbic acid in the prevention and treatment of the common cold. For 
many years, beginning at the age of seven, he had suffered from repeated 
bouts of inflammation of the middle ear. He had tried a number of ways of 
controlling the infections, and after twenty years he tried the bioflavonoids 
(from citrus fruits) and ascorbic acid. He felt that this treatment had been 
of some benefit but not very great. He decided to try increasing the amount. 
After several trials he found that the serious and disagreeable manifesta¬ 
tions of the common cold and the accompanying inflammation of the middle 
ear could be averted by the use of large amounts of ascorbic acid and that 
ascorbic acid alone was just as effective as the same amount of ascorbic acid 
plus bioflavonoids. He then initiated a study of twenty-one subjects with 
use of ascorbic acid alone, ascorbic acid plus bioflavonoids, bioflavonoids 
alone, or a placebo. This study extended over a period of five years. At first 
the subjects were kept ignorant of the preparations that they received, but 
later on (during the last year) it became impossible to continue the blind 
study, because a patient whose cold was developing recognized that he was 
not receiving the vitamin C that might have prevented it. 

The method of treatment recommended by Regnier is the administration 
of 600 mg of ascorbic acid at the first signs of a cold (scratchiness of the 
throat, nasal secretion, sneezing, a chill), followed by an additional 600 mg 
every three hours or 200 mg of ascorbic acid every hour. At bedtime the 
amount ingested is increased to 750 mg. This intake, amounting to about 
4 g of ascorbic acid per day, is to be continued for three or four days, 
reduced to 400 mg every three hours for several days, and then to 200 mg 
every three hours. Regnier reported that of thirty-four colds treated with 
ascorbic acid plus bioflavonoids, thirty-one were averted, and of fifty colds 
treated with ascorbic acid alone, as described above, forty-five were averted. 
He had no success in treating colds with bioflavonoids alone, or with a 
placebo. 

He made the important observation that a cold that has been apparently 
aborted by the use of a large intake of ascorbic acid may return, even after a 
period of a week or more, if the ingestion of ascorbic acid is suddenly dis¬ 
continued. 

Even nearly 3 g per day for three days (2.66 g the first and second days; 
1.33 g the third day) may not be effective if the treatment is delayed until 
after the cold has begun, as reported by Cowan and Diehl (1950). A similar 
lack of effectiveness of 3 g per day, starting after the cold had developed, 
was also reported by a group of seventy-eight British physicians (Abbott et 
al., 1968). 

In a study carried out by the British Common Cold Research Unit in 
Great Britain (Tyrrell et al., 1977) with 1524 volunteers employed in 
industrial plants in several parts of England, each subject was given a vial 
containing ten effervescent tablets. Some of the vials contained 1000 mg of 




118 


CHAPTER 13 


vitamin C per tablet, and others contained a placebo. The instructions were 
to take the tablets for 2.5 days, beginning when the first symptoms of a cold 
developed. The fraction developing a first cold was nearly the same, 31.1 
percent for the vitamin-C group and 33.2 percent for the placebo group. No 
difference would be expected, since the two groups were on the same regi¬ 
men until the first cold developed. 

There was no difference in the duration of the colds. The lack of effect of 
taking 10 g of vitamin C during the first 2.5 days indicates that high doses 
of vitamin C should be taken until the cold is controlled. This finding 
corroborates Regnier’s opinion on the likely return of aborted colds. If the 
cold is not completely suppressed, the rebound effect from the stopping of 
vitamin C intake may help in permitting it to run its full course. 

One significant observation was made in the study by the Common Cold 
Research Unit. Of the 101 male vitamin-C subjects who experienced a first 
cold during the four months of the trial, 23 developed a second cold later 
on, whereas of the 98 similar male placebo subjects, nearly twice as many, 
43, developed the second cold. This twofold difference has high statistical 
significance. The 10 g of vitamin C taken for the first cold may have had a 
strengthening effect on the immune system lasting a month or two. The 
difference in incidence of the second cold was not observed for the women 
in the study, possibly because vitamin-C depletion is not so serious for 
British women as for the men. 

In a second Toronto study (Anderson et al., 1974), in which there were 
2349 volunteers divided into eight groups, one group of 275 took 4 g of 
vitamin C on the first day of a cold and the second took 8 g on the first day, 
with no regular intake for either group. There was no clear benefit for the 
first group, but the authors point out that the 8-g therapeutic dose was 
associated with less illness than the 4-g therapeutic dose. The protective 
effect, measured by the decrease in number of days when individual symp¬ 
toms were recorded, was about 5 percent for the single 4-g dose and 20 
percent for the single 8-g dose. 

The best study of the therapeutic effect of vitamin C was carried out by 
Asfora (1977), who gave 30 g of vitamin C or a placebo to 133 subjects 
(medical students, physicians, or clinic patients in Pernambuco) who had 
reported a developing cold. The vitamin C was given as effervescent 1000- 
mg tablets, with instructions that six should be taken each day (two at a 
time, three times a day) for five days; the placebo consisted of similar 
effervescent tablets. Some patients began on the first day of the cold, others 
on the second, and others on the third, as shown in the table on page 119. 

The number of subjects for whom the treatment may be said to have 
failed completely, in that they developed secondary bacterial infections and 
were ill for an average of 15 days, was 13 percent for the first-day vitamin- 




THE COMMON COLD 


119 


Results of a controlled trial of the therapeutic value of 30 g of vitamin C (6 g per day for 
5 days) beginning on the first, second, or third day of a cold. 


Group 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

Number of subjects: 

45 

30 

17 

41 

male/female 

25/20 

17/43 

11/6 

25/16 

Day of beginning vitamin C 

1 

2 

3 

placebo 

Fraction with bacterial 





complications 

13% 

20% 

41% 

39% 

Average days of illness: 

3.6 

5.4 

9.0 

>5 a 

with complications 

15.2 

16.0 

14.6 

>5 a 

without complications 

1.82 

2.71 

5.10 

>5 a 

a Not recorded 


C subjects, 20 percent for the second-day subjects, and 41 percent for the 
third-day subjects (also 39 percent for the placebo group). For the remain¬ 
ing subjects in each group, whose colds were without complications, the 
average number of days of illness was 1.82, 2.71, and 5.10 for the first-, 
second-, and third-day subjects. We see that 6 g of vitamin C per day, 
starting on the first or second day of the cold, stopped it for most of the 
subjects in this investigation. 

We have now reviewed about thirty reported studies of the value of 
vitamin C taken in daily doses in preventing a cold from starting to develop 
or in reducing the severity of a cold. Some of the investigators have reported 
that both the incidence and the severity of the colds are decreased by the 
vitamin C. Thus Ritzel in his study of schoolboys who received 1 g of 
vitamin C per day reported a decrease in incidence (number of colds per 
subject) by 15 percent and also a decrease by 19 percent in the severity of 
individual colds (the number of days of illness per cold). Others have re¬ 
ported only a small decrease in incidence. Anderson has pointed out that 
with a small number of symptoms observable early in a cold, it is hard to 
decide whether the subject has a cold or not. 

In the table on page 120 I have listed the results of sixteen trials, com¬ 
prising all of the trials known to me that meet certain specifications. One is 
that ascorbic acid be given regularly over a period of time to subjects who 
were not ill at the start of the trial, with the subjects selected at random 
from a larger population. The study by Masek et al. (1972) is not included 
because the vitamin-C subjects were the workers in one mine and the 
placebo subjects were those in another, where the conditions affecting the 
health of the workers might have been either better or worse. In all but one 
of the studies a placebo, a tablet or capsule closely resembling the vitamin- 







120 


CHAPTER 13 


C tablet or capsule, was given to the control subjects. The one exception 
was the carefully conducted and thorough study by Glazebrook and Thom¬ 
son (1942), in which ascorbic acid was added to the food (cocoa or milk) of 
one or more of the seven divisions of boys that were served in seven differ¬ 
ent places in the dining hall. 

The amount of illness per subject found in these sixteen controlled trials 
varies from 1 percent to 68 percent, and there is no clear indication that an 
intake of 1000 or 2000 mg per day gives greater protection than 70 to 200 
mg per day. The studies giving the smallest and largest protective effects 
had soldiers as subjects. In the Pitt and Costrini study the marine recruits 
were in barracks in South Carolina. There was no protective effect against 
colds, but there was a significant protective effect against pneumonia. The 
Sabiston and Radomski study was carried out under more severe condi¬ 
tions, with soldiers living in tents in northern Canada, and the number of 


Summary of results of controlled studies of amount of illness per subject in vitamin C 
subjects relative to placebo subjects. 


Study 

Amount of decrease in 
illness per person, 
percent 

a Glazebrook & Thomson (1942) 

50 

a Cowan, Diehl, Baker (1942) 

31 

a Dahlberg, Engel, Rydin (1944) 

14 

a Franz, Sands, Heyl (1954) 

36 

a Anderson et al. (1975) 

25 

Ritzel (1961) 

63 

Anderson, Reid, Beaton (1972) 

32 

Charleston, Clegg (1972) 

58 

Elliott (1973) 

44 

Anderson, Suranyi, Beaton (1974) 

9 

Coulehan et al. (1974) 

30 

Sabiston & Radomski (1974) 

68 

Karlowski et al. (1975) 

21 

Clegg & Macdonald (1975) 

8 

Pitt & Costrini (1979) 

0 

Carr et al. (1981) 

48 

Average 

34 


*70 to 200 mg per day, average 31%; others, larger intakes, average 40%. 






THE COMMON COLD 


121 


colds per subject was three times as great as for the South Carolina study. 
A possible explanation is that the amount of vitamin C in the rations of the 
marine recruits in South Carolina was much greater than that in the ra¬ 
tions of the Canadian soldiers, providing greater protection for the marine 
recruits. It may be pertinent that in the 1975 study of Canadian subjects by 
Anderson, Beaton, Corey, and Spero there was a 25 percent protection, 
even though the intake of supplementary vitamin C was only one 500-mg 
tablet per week, equal to 70 mg per day. The average intake of vitamin C 
in the food in Canada is known to be less than that in the United States. 

A principal reason for the failure of most of the controlled trials to show 
a large prophylactic or therapeutic effect is that the amounts of vitamin C 
taken are too small. It is as if the physicians and nutritionists reasoned, 
fallaciously, that since a tiny dose of vitamin C will cure scurvy, why 
should it take an astronomical dose to cure the common cold. Even so, the 
average of the sixteen values of the decrease in the amount of illness per 
person is 34 percent. For the five studies in which only 70 mg to 200 mg of 
ascorbic acid per day was given the average is 31 percent, and for the eleven 
in which 1 g per day or more was given it is 40 percent. We may conclude 
that even a small added intake of vitamin C, 100 mg or 200 mg per day, has 
considerable value, and that a larger intake probably has somewhat more 
value.* 

The studies I have reviewed here fall short of the standards I have in 
mind not only because too little vitamin C was administered but also be¬ 
cause the vitamin was not taken over a long enough period of time and 
biochemical individuality—different needs for different persons—was not 
considered. The factor of biochemical individuality is clearly shown in the 
illustration entitled “Vitamin C and schizophrenia” in Chapter 10. The 
fraction of a standard amount, 1.76 g, of vitamin C taken by mouth that is 
excreted in the urine during the next six hours varies from about 3 percent 
to about 30 percent. People representing these extremes might well respond 
differently to vitamin C taken to control the common cold. 

Dr. Robert F. Cathcart, about whose work I shall have more to say in 
the next chapter, has had extensive experience in administering vitamin C 


*In addition to the studies cited in this chapter, a number of others are discussed in my 1976 
book Vitamin C, the Common Cold, and the Flu. Some of these are the following: Anderson, 
Reid, and Beaton, 1972; Anderson, Suranye, and Beaton, 1974; Anderson, Beaton, Corey, 
and Spero, 1975; Charleston and Clegg, 1972; Masek, Neradilova, and Hejda, 1972; Elliott, 
1973; Coulehan et al., 1974; Wilson, Loh, and Foster, 1973; Karlowski et al., 1975; Franz, 
Sands, and Heyl, 1956; Clegg and Macdonald, 1975; Carr et al., 1981, 1982; Miller et al., 
1977, 1978. The results are summarized in the following chapter. 




722 


CHAPTER 13 


to patients with colds. His observations on many thousands of patients have 
led him to conclude that the doses of vitamin C needed to control a viral 
disease depend on the nature of the disease and on the nature of the patient. 
In his 1981 report he suggests that you cannot cure a “100-gram cold” by 
taking a few grams of vitamin C. 

The proper intake of vitamin C needed to control a viral infection, 
Cathcart found, is an intake just below the amount that causes a loose, 
watery bowel movement—increase in the intake of vitamin C to a suffi¬ 
ciently large amount does have a laxative effect, at first. This bowel-toler¬ 
ance intake is said by him to be between 4 and 15 g per twenty-four hours 
for people in “ordinary good health,” and to have much larger values for 
the same persons, up to more than 200 g per twenty-four hours, when they 
are suffering from a viral disease. A similar observation with cancer pa¬ 
tients was also made by Dr. Ewan Cameron. 

We can now see how difficult it would be to carry out a proper trial of 
vitamin C and the common cold. The dose should be determined for each 
subject by the bowel-tolerance limit. It might be possible to formulate a 
suitable placebo with a bowel-tolerance limit, but it is clear that it would 
not be easy to carry out a controlled trial with the high intakes that are 
needed for 100 percent effectiveness. 

I have received hundreds of letters from people who say that they have 
for years had freedom from colds after they began taking 500 mg, 1 g, 3 g, 
6 g, or more vitamin C per day. We know that the 6 to 1C percent of people 
who never have colds must have enough vitamin C in their food. It is not 
unreasonable to believe that another 6 to 10 percent are close enough to this 
resistance that a supplement of 500 mg per day would protect them; an¬ 
other group might require 1000 mg per day, and others still more. 

I believe that every person can protect himself or herself from the com¬ 
mon cold. Catching a cold and letting it run its course is a sign that you are 
not taking enough vitamin C. 

I am convinced by the evidence now available that vitamin C is to be 
preferred to the analgesics, antihistamines, and other dangerous drugs that 
are recommended for the treatment of the common cold by the purveyors of 
cold medicines. Every day, even every hour, radio and television commer¬ 
cials extol various cold remedies. I hope that, as the results of further stud¬ 
ies become available, extensive educational efforts about vitamin C and the 
common cold will be instituted on radio and television, including warnings 
against the use of dangerous drugs, like those about the hazards of smoking 
that are now sponsored by the United States Public Health Service, the 
American Cancer Society, the Heart Association, and other agencies. 




14 


Influenza and Other 
Infectious Diseases 


Though people often diagnose themselves as having “the flu,” influenza is 
not the same disease as the common cold. Some of the signs and symptoms, 
such as increased nasal secretion, are similar, but influenza is a highly 
contagious, potentially life-threatening disease. Like the common cold, it is 
caused by a virus. The influenza viruses belong, however, to a different 
family from the cold viruses, and the two diseases manifest themselves in 
some significantly different ways. 

The incubation time for influenza (time from exposure to onset of symp¬ 
toms) is short, about two days. The onset usually is sudden. It is marked by 
chills, fever, headache, lassitude and general malaise, loss of appetite, mus¬ 
cular aches and pains, and sometimes nausea, occasionally with vomiting. 
Respiratory symptoms, such as sneezing and nasal discharge, may be pres¬ 
ent but are usually less pronounced than with the common cold. Coughing, 
without production of sputum, may occur, and hoarseness sometimes devel¬ 
ops. The fever usually lasts for two to four days. In mild cases the tempera¬ 
ture reaches 101 °F to 103°F (38.3°C to 39.4°C) and in severe cases as 
much as 105°F (40.6°C). 

Treatment consists of rest in bed, continuing for twenty-four to forty- 
eight hours after the temperature has become normal. Antibiotics may be 
used to control bacterial infections. The diet should be light, with a large 




124 


CHAPTER 14 


intake (3000 to 3500 milliliters (ml) per day, about 7 pints) of water and 
fruit juices. Except during a pandemic, when an especially virulent strain 
infects most of the population in a country or several countries, almost all of 
the patients recover completely. 

Influenza is an old disease. Hippocrates in his book Epidemics described 
a disease raging at Perinthos in Crete about 400 B.C. in such a way as to 
permit its identification as influenza. An influenza epidemic was reported 
in 1557-1558, and a pandemic spread throughout Europe in 1580-1581. 
Other epidemics or pandemics broke out in 1658, 1676, 1732-1733, 1837, 
1889-1890, 1918-1919, 1933, and 1957, and a mild one in 1977-1978. 

The most serious influenza pandemic was that of 1918-1919. It swept 
over the whole world in three successive waves, May to July 1918, Septem¬ 
ber to December 1918, and March to May 1919. It is thought to have 
arisen in Spain, and it was popularly called the Spanish flu (Collier, 1974). 
It broke out almost simultaneously in all the European nations and prob¬ 
ably was rapidly spread because of the movements of troops and because of 
wartime conditions. The first wave did not reach some parts of the world, 
including South America, Australia, and many islands in the Atlantic and 
Pacific Oceans. The second wave, which caused most of the deaths, covered 
the whole world except the islands of St. Helena and Mauritius. Between 
80 and 90 percent of the people in most countries contracted the disease, 
and about twenty million died. The disease was clearly not the same as 
ordinary influenza, because in 1918-1919 most of the deaths occurred 
among young people, whereas in the preceding and following years most of 
the deaths from influenza were among the old. 

From 1892 to 1918 it was thought that influenza was caused by a bacte¬ 
rium, called Pfeiffer’s bacillus, that had been isolated from sputum or blood 
of influenza patients. Then in 1918 the French investigator Debre observed 
a similarity in the immune response of patients with influenza to those with 
measles, a viral disease, and concluded that influenza was probably also 
caused by a virus. Proof of this suggestion was immediately reported 
by Selter (1918) in Germany, Nicolle and Lebailly (1918) in Tunis, and 
Dujarric de la Riviere (1918) in France. The proof was obtained by forcing 
infected sputum and blood through a filter with pores so fine that no bacte¬ 
ria could pass through them. It was found that the filtered liquid put in the 
nasal passage of monkeys and of human volunteers caused them to develop 
the disease, which was accordingly ascribed to a “filterable” virus, the par¬ 
ticles of which are much smaller than bacteria. 

Isolation of strains of influenza virus, permitting thorough studies of 
their properties to be made, was achieved in 1933 by the British investiga¬ 
tors Wilson Smith, Christopher Andrewes, and Patrick Laidlaw. An ac¬ 
count of their procedure was published by Andrewes in 1965. During the 



INFLUENZA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


125 


influenza epidemic of 1933 Andrewes and Smith, both of the British Na¬ 
tional Institute for Medical Research, were working on influenza when 
Andrewes became ill with the disease. Smith had him gargle with salt 
water and used the solution in an attempt to infect rabbits, guinea pigs, 
mice, hedgehogs, hamsters, and monkeys, but without success. Laidlaw, in 
the same institute, had been able to infect ferrets with dog distemper; he 
found that the Andrewes’s garglings introduced into the noses of ferrets 
caused them to become ill with the flu. Later a way was found to infect 
mice with influenza. 

In fact, there had for a long time been evidence that some strains of 
influenza virus infect certain animals, as well as human beings. Observers 
had noted that in the 1732 epidemic horses seemed to be suffering from the 
same disease as people. The virus that caused the 1918-1919 pandemic has 
been shown to be antigenically identical with porcine influenza virus 
(swine-flu virus). The virus was not studied during the pandemic itself; the 
methods for doing so were not developed until fifteen years later. In 1935, 
however, Andrewes showed that persons twenty years old or older had a 
high concentration of antibodies against swine-flu virus in their blood, 
whereas children younger than twelve had none. The clear conclusion is 
that swine-flu virus was infecting children at some time between 1915 and 
1923, presumably 1918-1919. 

Thorough studies have led to the classification of influenza viruses into 
several types, each with many strains. The types are A (with subtypes AO, 
Al, and A2), B, and C. All nonhuman-flu viruses are of type A. A person 
who has recovered from an infection with one type of the virus is immune 
to it for some time but not to the others. 

Some protection against influenza is provided by the injection of a vac¬ 
cine. The vaccine is prepared by growing the virus on embryonated (fertile) 
eggs, removing the allantoic fluid, which contains the crop of virus parti¬ 
cles, and inactivating them by treatment with formaldehyde. The inacti¬ 
vated virus is no longer infective; that is, it is no longer able to stimulate the 
cells of a human being or other host to produce additional virus particles. It 
is, however, able to act as an antigen, causing the host to produce molecules 
of its specific antibody. This antibody can combine with active virus parti¬ 
cles and neutralize them, thus protecting the immunized person against the 
disease. 

Vaccines are usually made with strains of viruses that are prevalent in 
the country at the time. Immunity from the vaccination lasts for about one 
year, after which booster doses extending the protection for another year 
may be given. The protection provided by vaccination is estimated to be 70 
to 80 percent. Its failure may usually be ascribed to infection by a strain of 
virus differing from the strains used in making the vaccine; new strains 



126 


CHAPTER 14 


seem to be continually arising. The partial protection provided by vaccina¬ 
tion is considered to be especially important for old people and people with 
chronic diseases. 

There are some possible side effects of the vaccination. Persons with a 
history of sensitivity to eggs should not be given the vaccine. Some persons 
suffer from local or systemic reactions to the vaccine, but immediate reac¬ 
tions followed by death are very rare. Because of the possible side effects, 
physicians usually advise their patients to be vaccinated only when there is 
a special reason. The imminence of an epidemic may constitute such a 
reason, especially for persons who, because of age or illness, are deficient in 
their natural protective mechanisms and for persons who are occupation- 
ally exposed, such as those in hospitals and clinics. 

The importance of influenza is made clear by a 1973 report by Schmeck, 
based on unpublished data from the National Center for Health Statistics. 
In the ranking of diseases according to their impact on health in 1971, 
influenza and pneumonia (which often is a sequel in influenza) came first 
in days of disability in bed in 1971 (206,241,000), with upper respiratory 
infections second (164,840,000) and heart disease third (93,137,000). In 
deaths, influenza and pneumonia rank fourth (56,000), behind heart dis¬ 
ease (741,000), cancer (333,000), and cerebrovascular disease (208,000). 

The best protection against the flu is one’s natural defense mechanisms. 
These defense mechanisms seem to have protected about one-sixth of the 
people during the 1918-1919 pandemic, presumably for the most part 
those people whose defense mechanisms were operating most effectively. 
There is much evidence, discussed in connection with the common cold, 
that a good intake of vitamin C improves the functioning of the natural 
defense mechanisms to such an extent that a much larger fraction of the 
population would resist the infection. The proper use of vitamin C, to¬ 
gether with vaccination when its use is indicated, should be effective in 
preventing an influenza pandemic or serious epidemic. 

In 1976 there was fear that another swine-flu epidemic like the one in 
1918-1919 would occur. The United States federal government appropri¬ 
ated SI65 million to subsidize the preparation of vaccines, and many mil¬ 
lion people were vaccinated. The serious epidemic did not occur. A suffi¬ 
cient number of the vaccinated persons suffered serious side effects from the 
vaccine to compel termination of the program. The worst of these side 
effects was the Guillain-Barre syndrome, a neuritis characterized by mus¬ 
cular weakness and sensory disturbances of the extremities. 

The measures to be taken for the prevention and treatment of influenza 
through use of vitamin C are essentially the same as for the common cold. 
For most people the regular intake of 1 gram (g) or more per hour should 
be begun. Also, a high intake of vitamin C should not be used as an excuse 



INFLUENZA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


727 


for continuing to work until exhaustion sets in. A person who may be 
contracting a cold or influenza should go to bed, rest for a few days, and 
take plenty of fluids along with vitamin C, to have a much greater chance 
of avoiding serious illness. If you have a fever for more than a couple of 
days, or a very high fever, be sure to call your physician. 

A good intake of vitamin C should prevent a secondary bacterial infec¬ 
tion from beginning. If it does begin, your physician can control it by 
a suitable regimen with antibiotics. Some physicians might inject large 
amounts of sodium ascorbate. 

Persons at special risk, such as those with heart, lung, kidney, and cer¬ 
tain metabolic diseases, including diabetes, may be advised to be vaccinated 
against influenza, as may also doctors, nurses, and others exposed to the 
virus to more than the usual extent. They should also take vitamin C; it 
will protect against the side effects of the vaccination, as well as against the 
disease. 

If an attack of influenza begins and is not stopped by vitamin C, you 
should continue to take the vitamin in large amounts. It should make the 
attack a light one, of short duration. 

Vitamin C has value in preventing and treating not only the common 
cold and influenza but also other viral diseases and various bacterial infec¬ 
tions. Its main mechanism of action is through strengthening the immune 
system, as was discussed in Chapter 12. It may also have a direct antiviral 
effect, in some way inactivating the virus. There are very few drugs that are 
effective against viral infections, so that the value of the indicated antiviral 
action of vitamin C is especially great. Most bacterial infections can be 
treated successfully with the appropriate antibiotics or other drugs, but 
vitamin C also has value as an adjunct to this treatment. 

In 1935 Dr. Claus W. Jungeblut, working in the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons of Columbia University, was the first person to report that 
vitamin C, in concentrations that can be reached in the human body by a 
high intake, inactivates poliomyelitis virus and destroys its power of 
causing paralysis. He and other investigators showed that the vitamin inac¬ 
tivates herpes virus, vaccinia virus, hepatitis virus, and others (references to 
the early work are given by Stone, 1972). Jungeblut, who died in 1976, 
lived long enough to see greatly increased interest and activity in the field in 
which he pioneered. 

The antiviral effect of vitamin C has also been studied by Murata and 
coworkers. Using viruses that infect bacteria as their model, they showed 
that these viruses are neutralized by a free-radical mechanism. 

Dr. Fred R. Klenner, a physician in Reidsville, North Carolina, was 
stimulated by Jungeblut’s report to use vitamin C in the treatment of 
patients with poliomyelitis, hepatitis, viral pneumonia, and other diseases 




128 


CHAPTER 14 


(Klenner, 1948 to 1974). His suggested dose, by intravenous infusion, for 
viral hepatitis is 400 to 600 mg per kilogram body weight; that is, 28 to 
42 g for a 150-pound person, repeated every eight to twelve hours, and he 
has administered up to twice this amount for various viral diseases 
(Klenner, 1971, 1974). 

In addition to the antiviral action of vitamin C, many investigators have 
reported that ascorbate inactivates bacteria. One of the earliest studies was 
that of Boissevin and Spillane (1937), who showed that an ascorbate con¬ 
centration of 1 milligram (mg) per deciliter, which is easily reached in the 
blood, prevents the growth of cultures of the tuberculosis bacterium. Effec¬ 
tiveness of ascorbate in inactivating many other bacteria and their toxins 
has also been reported, including the toxins of diphtheria, tetanus, staphy¬ 
lococcus, and dysentery and the bacteria that cause typhoid fever, tetanus, 
and staphylococcus infections (references are given by Stone, 1972). The 
mechanism of the inactivation seems to be similar to that for viruses: attack 
by free radicals formed by ascorbate and molecular oxygen, catalyzed by 
copper ions (Ericsson and Lundbeck, 1955; Miller, 1969). 

Klenner (1971), McCormick (1952), and others have reported a consid¬ 
erable degree of success in treating various bacterial infections in humans 
with large doses of vitamin C. This success may be attributed to some 
extent to the direct inactivation of the bacteria, for which evidence is pre¬ 
sented in Chapter 13, but I think that for the most part it results from the 
action of the vitamin in increasing the power of the natural protective 
mechanisms of the body (Cameron and Pauling, 1973, 1974). 

Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver caused by infections or toxic 
agents. It usually causes jaundice, a yellowness of the skin and the whites of 
the eyes resulting from an excess of bile pigments in the blood. Toxic 
substances such as carbon tetrachloride and various drugs, as well as heavy 
metals, may cause toxic hepatitis. Vitamin C is of some value in preventing 
toxic hepatitis because it has rather general detoxifying capability by 
hydroxylating or glycosylating toxic organic compounds and by combining 
with heavy metals. 

Infectious hepatitis may be caused by viruses or bacteria, usually by 
viruses introduced by fecally contaminated food or water. The usual treat¬ 
ment is bed rest for three weeks or more. Serum hepatitis (hepatitis B, 
inoculation hepatitis) is caused by a different virus, hepatitis-B virus, and is 
usually transmitted to the patient by blood transfusions or use of unsterile 
hypodermic needles or dentists’ drills. The incubation time is one to five 
months. Serum hepatitis occurs mostly in older people. It is more serious 
than infectious hepatitis, with mortality as high as 20 percent in some 
studies. 

Dr. Fukumi Morishige in Japan became interested in vitamin C while 
he was a medical student: his thesis was on the value of the vitamin in 



INFLUENZA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


129 


accelerating the healing of wounds. When he became a thoracic surgeon 
and the head of a hospital in Fukuoka, Japan, he gave moderately large 
doses of vitamin C to some surgical patients who had received blood trans¬ 
fusions. He noticed that these patients did not develop serum hepatitis, 
whereas similar patients who did not receive the supplementary vitamin 
had a 7 percent incidence of the infection. In 1978 he and Murata reported 
their observations on 1537 Surgical patients who had received blood trans¬ 
fusions in Torikai Hospital in Fukuoka between 1967 and 1976. Of the 
170 patients who received little or no vitamin C, 11 developed hepatitis, an 
incidence of 7 percent, whereas of the 1367 patients who received from 2 to 
6 g of vitamin C per day only 3 cases (all non-B) occurred, an incidence of 
only 0.2 percent. These numbers indicate that 93 patients were saved from 
the suffering and danger of hepatitis by the vitamin C (Morishige and 
Murata, 1978). 

A high intake of vitamin C protects the liver in several ways. It detoxifies 
poisonous substances that might cause toxic hepatitis. By this effect, it also 
helps to prevent damage to the liver from cigarette smoking and over- 
indulgence in alcoholic drinks. By making the immune system more effec¬ 
tive, it helps to prevent and control viral and bacterial infections of the liver. 

The physician who has had the greatest amount of experience with vita¬ 
min C and viral diseases is Dr. Robert Fulton Cathcart III, of San Mateo, 
California. 

Cathcart was for several years an orthopedic surgeon. In his practice he 
implanted in many patients a hip-joint prosthesis, a metal ball attached to 
a spike that fits inside the upper end of the femur and replaces the round 
part of this upper leg bone. This prosthesis had been developed by Austin 
Moore, an English investigator. Cathcart was troubled by the failure of the 
implant in many of the patients because of erosion of the hip socket into 
which the ball fits. He decided to find out why the prosthesis was not more 
successful. He examined many human hip bones and noticed that the ball 
at the top of the femur is not spherical but spheroidal, and he designed a 
new prosthesis conforming more closely to the shape of the femur. Many 
thousands of the Cathcart prostheses have now been implanted. 

In 1971, shortly after my book Vitamin C and the Common Cold was 
published, Cathcart wrote me to tell how he had read the book and by 
following its recommendations had succeeded in controlling the serious res¬ 
piratory infections and infections of the inner ear that had plagued him 
since childhood. He reported that a single dose of 8 g of vitamin C taken at 
the first sign of a cold usually stopped it, although often additional doses 
were needed. 

He was so much impressed by the effectiveness of vitamin C that he gave 
up his practice as an orthopedic surgeon and became a general practitioner, 
specializing in the treatment of infectious diseases (Pauling, 1978). By 1981 



130 


CHAPTER 14 


he was able to report on his observations on 9000 patients treated with 
large doses of vitamin C (Cathcart, 1981). 

Cathcart makes it his practice to establish for each of his patients their 
bowel-tolerance intake of vitamin C—the amount of vitamin C taken by 
mouth that is a little less than the amount that has a troublesome laxative 
effect. He found that vitamin C is most effective as an adjunct to appropri¬ 
ate conventional therapy, when needed, if it is ingested at the bowel-toler¬ 
ance intake. This intake is different for different people and different for 
the same person at different times. Cathcart observed that the bowel-toler¬ 
ance intake is usually very large for seriously ill patients and becomes 
smaller as the patient’s health improves. He was astonished that for some 
severely ill patients the bowel-tolerance limit was more than 200 g per day. 
Within a few days, as the disease was controlled, the limit would fall 
toward the normal values, 4 to 15 g per day. 

Having thus established a standard for administering vitamin C to his 
patients in a manner responsive to their biochemical individuality, Cathcart 
has accumulated a wealth of experience with this orthomolecular treatment 
of many different kinds of infection. He indicates that vitamin C has little 
effect on acute symptoms until doses of 80 to 90 percent of bowel tolerance 
are reached. He also has stated that suppression of symptoms in some 
instances may not be total but usually is very significant, and often the 
amelioration is complete and rapid. 

It is known that many stressful conditions cause destruction of vitamin C 
and consequently low concentrations of the vitamin in the blood and other 
tissues, unless it is replaced by a high intake of the vitamin. Among these 
conditions are infectious diseases, cancer, heart disease, surgery, injury, cig¬ 
arette smoking, and mental and emotional stress. The low level of vitamin 
C is called hypoascorbemia by Irwin Stone and induced scurvy or anascor- 
bemia by Cathcart. Unless rectified, it leads to exacerbation of the trouble 
affecting the person. There is the possibility that the mechanism of the ob¬ 
served increased morbidity and mortality of men and women following the 
death of a spouse is the destruction of vitamin C by the stressful situation. 
This may be explained by extra demand for ascorbic acid in the adrenal 
glands for manufacture of the stress hormone, adrenalin, as shown in 
Chapter 8. 

The possible consequences of induced anascorbemia have been described 
by Cathcart (1981) in the following words: 

The following problems should be expected with increased incidence 
with severe depletion of ascorbate; disorders of the immune system 
such as secondary infections, rheumatoid arthritis and other collagen 
diseases, allergic reactions to drugs, foods and other substances, 



INFLUENZA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


131 


chronic infections such as herpes, or sequelae of acute infections, and 
scarlet fever; disorders of the blood coagulation mechanisms such as 
hemorrhage, heart attacks, strokes, hemorrhoids, and other vascular 
thromboses; failure to cope properly with stresses due to suppression 
of the adrenal functions such as phlebitis, other inflammatory 
disorders, asthma, and other allergies; problems of disordered collagen 
formation such as impaired ability to heal, excessive scarring, bed 
sores, varicose veins, hernias, stretch marks, wrinkles, perhaps even 
wear of cartilage or degeneration of spinal discs; impaired function of 
the nervous system such as malaise, decreased pain tolerance, 
tendency to muscle spasms, even psychiatric disorders and senility; 
and cancer from the suppressed immune system and carcinogens not 
detoxified; etc. Note that I am not saying that ascorbate depletion is 
the only cause of these disorders, but I am pointing out that disorders 
of these systems would certainly predispose to these diseases and that 
these systems are known to be dependent upon ascorbate for their 
proper function. 

Not only is there the theoretical probability that these types of 
complications associated with infections or stresses could result from 
ascorbate depletion, but there was a conspicuous decrease in the 
expected occurrence of complications in the thousands of patients 
treated with oral tolerance doses or intravenous doses of ascorbate. 

This impression of marked decrease in these problems is shared by 
physicians experienced with the use of ascorbate such as Klenner 
(1949, 1971) and Kalokerinos (1974). 

Infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever) is an acute infection that af¬ 
fects mainly young people and is sometimes epidemic in schools and col¬ 
leges. It is characterized by swelling lymph nodes throughout the body and 
the appearance of abnormal lymphocytes in the blood. The patients, after 
an incubation period of five to fifteen days, have vague symptoms of head¬ 
ache, fatigue, fever, chills, and general malaise. Secondary throat infections 
and liver damage by clogging with lymphocytes sometimes occur, as well as 
problems with the spleen, nervous system, heart, and other organs. The 
disease sometimes runs its course in one to three weeks but often is trouble¬ 
some for several months. 

Cathcart has reported success in treating mononucleosis with large oral 
doses of vitamin C (see table on page 132). Here are his comments: 

Acute mononucleosis is a good example because there is such an 
obvious difference between the course of the disease, with and without 
ascorbate. Also, it is possible to obtain laboratory diagnosis to verify 



132 


CHAPTER 14 


that it is mononucleosis being treated. Many cases do not require 
maintenance doses for more than 2 to 3 weeks. The duration of need 
can be sensed by the patient. I had ski patrol patients back skiing on 
the slopes in a week. They were instructed to carry their boda bags 
full of ascorbic acid solution as they skied. The ascorbate kept the 
disease symptoms almost completely suppressed even if the basic 
infection had not completely resolved. The lymph nodes and spleen 
returned to normal rapidly and the profound malaise was relieved in a 
few days. It is emphasized that tolerance doses must be maintained 
until the patient senses he is completely well, or the symptoms will 
recur. 

During recent years a new disease has been recognized, acquired im¬ 
mune deficiency syndrome, usually called AIDS. It seems to be a viral 


Usual bowel-tolerance doses (Cathcart) 


Condition 

Grams per 

24 hours 

Number of doses 
per 24 hours 

Normal 

4- 15 

4 

Mild cold 

30- 60 

6-10 

Severe cold 

60-100 

8-15 

Influenza 

100-150 

8-20 

ECHO, coxsackievirus 

100-150 

8-20 

Mononucleosis 

150-200 + 

12-25 

Viral pneumonia 

100-200 + 

12-25 

Hay fever, asthma 

15- 50 

4- 8 

Environmental and food allergy 

0.5- 50 

4- 8 

Burn, injury, surgery 

25-150 

6-20 

Anxiety, exercise, and other 
mild stresses 

15- 25 

4- 6 

Cancer 

15-100 

4-15 

Ankylosing spondylitis 

15-100 

4-15 

Reiter’s syndrome 

15- 60 

4-10 

Acute anterior uveitis 

30-100 

4-15 

Rheumatoid arthritis 

15-100 

4-15 

Bacterial infections 

30-200 + 

10-25 

Infectious hepatitis 

30-100 

6-15 

Candida infections 

15-200 + 

6-25 






INFLUENZA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


133 


disease, mainly transmitted by fecal matter during sexual contact but some¬ 
times by blood transfusions. The patients are mainly promiscuous homo¬ 
sexual men and women, but there are some others, including a few children 
and infants. The patients develop secondary infections and a form of can¬ 
cer, Kaposi’s sarcoma, and the disease often results in death. 

The success of vitamin C in controlling other viral diseases suggests that 
it be tried with AIDS. Dr. Ewan Cameron, Dr. Robert F. Cathcart, and I 
separately during the last three years made this proposal to appropriate 
medical groups, but with no response. 

One study has been published. Cathcart (1984) examined ninety AIDS 
patients who had sought medical care from other physicians and who also 
took high doses of ascorbate on their own initiative, and he also treated 
twelve AIDS patients with high doses (50 to 200 g per day) of oral and 
intravenous ascorbate. From his limited observations he has concluded that 
vitamin C suppresses the symptoms of the disease and can reduce the inci¬ 
dence of secondary infections. It is evident that additional work along this 
line is needed. 

Chemotaxis of phagocytes is an important part of the immune mecha¬ 
nism (Chapter 12). Chemokinesis is increased movement of the cells, either 
directed or random, in response to a chemical stimulus, and chemotaxis is 
increased movement in the right direction, toward the place where they are 
needed, such as the focus of an infection. Neutrophils are the leukocytes 
that are most chemotactically responsive—they arrive first at an inflamma¬ 
tory focus, followed by other phagocytic white blood cells. 

There are many different causes of abnormal chemotaxis of phagocytes 
(Gallin, 1981). Many responsible genetic abnormalities are so serious that 
staphylococcus and other infections and skin problems appear in the first 
days of life, and most of these infants do not live very long. In several 
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and cancer, substances are released 
by the diseased tissues into the blood that interfere with the mobility of 
phagocytes. 

Many investigators have reported that an increased intake of vitamin C 
improves the chemotactive response of phagocytes. One of many examples 
is Anderson (1981), who reported that 1 g of vitamin C per day gave 
improved neutrophil mobility in children with chronic granulomatous dis¬ 
ease. Similar improvement has been reported in patients with asthma and 
tuberculosis. Patrone and Dallegri (1979) concluded that “Vitamin C rep¬ 
resents the specific therapy for primary defects of phagocytic function in 
persons with recurrent infections.” 

The question of phagocytic function invites a digression here from infec¬ 
tions to genetic disease. Patients with the recessive genetic disease called 



134 


CHAPTER 14 


Chediak-Higashi disease suffer frequent and severe pyogenic (pus¬ 
forming) infections that result from abnormal chemotactic responsiveness of 
neutrophils and other phagocytic cells. These cells are able to move by 
means of the contraction of actin-myosin fibrils (similar to those in muscle) 
located in the front edge of the cell. Good locomotion of the cell is permit¬ 
ted by its structure, its stabilization by rods, called microtubules, that ex¬ 
tend from the central region to the periphery. The genetic abnormality in 
Chediak-Higashi disease involves an abnormality in the protein tubulin 
that by aggregation forms the microtubules. 

Ten years ago it was discovered that vitamin C enhances neutrophil 
chemotaxis (Goetzl et al., 1974). Several investigators have reported that 
increased intake of vitamin C by Chediak-Higashi patients protects them 
against infections, although it does not correct the abnormality in the 
tubulin molecules (Boxer et al., 1976, 1979; Gallin et al., 1979). This clear 
example of the value of vitamin C in controlling infectious diseases in these 
patients emphasizes its importance for the immune system. 

Kartagener’s disease is a recessive genetic disorder with low incidence 
(one in thirty thousand to forty thousand births) and an astonishing collec¬ 
tion of manifestations. It is characterized by chronic bronchitis and infec¬ 
tions of the sinuses and middle ears and a tendency to have chronic head¬ 
ache. Male patients are sterile and have immobile spermatozoa; many 
patients show situs inversus, with the heart on the right side and some or all 
of the other internal organs in the right-left reflected positions. 

These facts raise the question of how the large-scale chirality of the 
human body is determined. Why do most people have the heart on the left 
side? What has gone wrong with the patients with Kartagener’s disease 
who have situs inversus ? 

In the discussion of right-handed and left-handed amino acids in Chap¬ 
ter 9 it was pointed out that the proteins in the human body are all built of 
L-amino acids. One of the principal ways of folding the polypeptide chains 
(linear sequences of amino-acid residues) in proteins is the alpha helix. 
The alpha helix is required by the handedness of the L-amino-acid residues 
to be a right-handed helix, like an ordinary screw. The diameter of an 
amino acid is only about one hundred-millionth of that of a human being, 
but a segment of alpha helix may be one hundred times as long, thus carry¬ 
ing the message of handedness to structures as large as one-millionth of the 
diameter of the body. 

Another way of transferring chirality to larger structures was discov¬ 
ered in 1953, when I pointed out that a globular protein molecule, built 
of perhaps ten thousand atoms, could have two mutually complementary 
sticky patches on its surface such as to cause it to combine with similar 
molecules to produce a large helix in the form of a tube (Pauling, 1953). 




INFLUENZA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


135 


Such a structure, in units such as the microtubules, can carry handedness 
throughout a cell. 

The spermatozoon normally swims by using its tail as a propellor, with a 
corkscrew motion. The corkscrew (helix) might be either right-handed or 
left-handed. Its handedness in a normal spermatozoon is determined by 
little protuberances, called dynein arms, which stick out from the tail to 
either the right or the left. These dynein arms are missing from the sperma¬ 
tozoa of patients with Kartagener’s disease; the tails then do not know 
which way to twist, the spermatozoa do not swim, and the patients are 
sterile (Afzelius, 1976). 

In the same way the cilia in the bronchi are unable to wave back and 
forth to keep the bronchi clear, and the patients are accordingly especially 
susceptible to bronchitis and associated infections. The tendency to have 
chronic headaches may result from a defect of the cilia of the epithelial 
membrane lining the ventricles of the brain and the canal of the spinal cord. 

The nature of the structures that determine the chirality of the or¬ 
gans, placing the heart on the left side, is not known, but it is likely that 
they resemble the dynein arms of the sperm tails. Their abnormality for 
Kartagener patients might leave the positioning of the heart and other 
organs to chance, so that half of them would show situs inversus. 

These patients have abnormal neutrophil chemotaxis that is related to a 
microtubule abnormality. There is the possibility that their resistance to 
bacterial infection might benefit from an increased intake of vitamin C, as 
do the patients with Chediak-Higashi disease, but this has not yet been 
demonstrated. 

I have been astonished, as have other people, that in the last quarter of 
the twentieth century a single substance would be recognized to be helpful 
no matter what disease a person is suffering from. The reason that vitamin 
C is such a substance is that by its involvement in many biochemical reac¬ 
tions in the human body it makes the body’s natural defenses more power¬ 
ful, and it is these natural defenses that provide most of our resistance to 
disease. Our bodies can fight disease effectively only when we have in our 
organs and body fluids enough vitamin C to enable our natural protective 
mechanisms to operate effectively. The amount required is, of course, much 
larger than the amount that has been recommended by the authorities in 
medicine and nutrition in the past. 



15 


Wounds and Their Healing 


A wound is an injury to the body caused by physical means, with disrup¬ 
tion of the normal continuity of body structure. Accidents and surgical 
operations cause wounds. Broken bones are wounds. Wounds cause about 
150 million visits to physicians per year in the United States. About 75 
million people per year suffer injuries, and about 20 million surgical oper¬ 
ations are carried out. These numbers show that any factor that can in¬ 
crease the rate of healing of wounds and decrease the length of stay in 
hospitals can be very valuable. 

It was observed long ago that when a sailor developed scurvy, old scars 
from wounds that had been incurred twenty years earlier would break 
open. Since the healing of wounds requires the generation and laying down 
of collagen at the site, it would seem wise to call upon vitamin C in its role 
in the synthesis of collagen (Chapter 9). Murad and his coworkers, who 
demonstrated the eightfold increase in collagen production in tissue cultures 
supplied with vitamin C, concluded their paper with this observation: “The 
clinical implications of this study are appreciable. The importance of ascor¬ 
bate in wound healing has been recognized for years. Ascorbate is concen¬ 
trated in wounded tissues and rapidly utilized during wound healing. Ten¬ 
sile strength of wounds and incidence of wound dehiscence are related to 
ascorbate levels. Because humans are dependent on dietary sources for as- 





WOUNDS AND THEIR HEALING 


137 


corbate, deficiency is common in the elderly as well as sick and debilitated 
persons, who most commonly undergo surgical treatment. Such patients 
may need supplemental ascorbate for optimal wound healing.” 

This is a fine statement, but I shall criticize the last sentence, which 
reflects the astonishing and often irrational conservatism of the medical 
establishment in its attitude toward vitamins. Why say “may need supple¬ 
mental ascorbate,” and why only “sick persons” (elderly, sick, debilitated 
persons)? The evidence shows clearly that every person needs supplemen¬ 
tary ascorbate for optimum wound healing. 

An experimental wound in a subject who for seven months had been on a 
diet containing no vitamin C failed to heal and then healed normally when 
the subject was given 1 gram (g) per day of the vitamin for ten days (Lund 
and Crandon, 1941). Several investigators have reported that surgical 
wounds do not heal in patients whose blood plasma concentration of ascor¬ 
bate is less than 2 milligrams (mg) per liter, corresponding to an intake of 
less than 20 mg per day (references are given in the reviews by Schwartz, 
1970). One patient with bilateral hernia and plasma concentration only 0.9 
mg per liter was given 100 mg of ascorbic acid per day after the herniorrha¬ 
phy on one side; after the second operation he was given 1100 mg per day. 
The skin and fascia wounds on the first side healed poorly, whereas those 
on the second side healed well, with breaking strength three to six times 
that for the first side (Bartlett, Jones, and Ryan, 1942). 

Bourne in 1946 showed that the scar tissue in guinea pigs was much 
stronger with a high intake of vitamin C (see illustration on page 138), and 
Collins et al. in 1967 reported that gingival wounds healed in eight days for 
guinea pigs with a daily intake of 20 mg of vitamin C, twelve days for those 
with a daily intake of 2 mg, and seventeen days for those receiving no 
supplementary vitamin. Ringsdorf and Cheraskin (1983) reported a 40 
percent decrease in the time of healing standard gingival wounds in human 
volunteers who received a supplement of 1 g of vitamin C per day. These 
authors conclude from their review of the published evidence and from 
their own work that daily doses of 500 to 3000 mg of vitamin C signifi¬ 
cantly accelerate healing for persons recovering from surgery, decubital ul¬ 
cers, and leg ulcers caused by hemolytic anemia. 

I estimate that the length of stay in the hospital could be decreased by an 
average of two days by the proper use of supplementary vitamin C, not 
only through its strengthening of the immune system but also through its 
acceleration of the process of healing of surgical wounds, broken bones, 
burns, and other injuries. If we take $500 per day as the average cost of 
hospitalization, the saving in the cost of health care for the forty million 
patients with short-term stays in hospitals achieved by the administration 
of between 1 and 20 g of vitamin C per day would be $20 billion per year, 



138 


CHAPTER 15 



Ascorbic acid, milligrams per day 

Vitamin C and scar tissue A 1946 study showed that scar tissue in guinea pigs was much 
stronger with a high intake of vitamin C. The points on the graph show the strength of scar 
tissue in guinea pigs that had been given no vitamin C, 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 2 mg per 
day. The scars had been formed during a seven-day period after the cuts, one-quarter inch 
long, had been made. The scar tissue is four times as strong for an intake of 2 mg per day as 
for 0.25 mg per day (Bourne, 1946). Similar results for humans have been reported by 
Wolfer, Farmer, Carroll, and Manshardt (1947). 


and in addition millions of patients would be spared unnecessary suffering. 

It is deplorable that this way of decreasing suffering and saving money is 
being ignored by organized medicine and by many individual physicians 
and surgeons. 

It is not only by failing to act that many physicians and surgeons do 
harm to their patients. Often the patient who arrives in the hospital is 
prevented from receiving the supplementary vitamin C and other vitamins 
and minerals that he or she has been taking, just when they are needed 
the most. 

The value of vitamin C in promoting wound healing was recognized in 
the 1930s, when studies were made with guinea pigs, and it was recognized 
that the requirement of vitamin C for the synthesis of collagen might be the 
major mechanism of this action. I remember that in 1941 Dr. Thomas 
Addis, professor of medicine in Stanford Medical School, prescribed sup¬ 
plementary vitamins and minerals for all his patients. Thirty years later I 
asked the physicians and surgeons in medical schools and hospitals that I 
was visiting to tell me what their practice was about prescribing vitamin C 
for their patients. One surgeon told me that he had all of his patients take 
500 mg of vitamin C per day, but usually I received no response, and I 
formed the opinion that vitamin C was prescribed less in 1971 than in 
1941. I think that during the last few years more physicians and surgeons 
have begun the routine prescribing of vitamin C, but I have not been able to 
obtain statistical information about this matter. From the reports made to 




WOUNDS AND THEIR HEALING 


139 


me by patients, however, it is clear that many physicians and surgeons now 
recognize the value of supplementary vitamin C. 

If you are injured or have to have a surgical operation, be sure to insist 
on being given the optimum amount of vitamin C. 

There have been many observations that vitamin C concentrates at the 
site of an injury and is destroyed. If supplementary amounts of the vitamin 
are not given to the patient, the concentrations in the plasma, serum, whole 
blood, and white cells drop to low levels. Crandon et al. (1961) in their 
study of 287 surgical patients found that the vitamin C concentration in the 
leucocytes and platelets (buffy coat) and in the plasma decreased after 
surgery by about 20 percent. Similar results have been reported by other 
investigators (Coon, 1962; Irvin and Chattopadhyay, 1978; McGinn and 
Hamilton, 1976). Mukherjee, Som, and Chatterjee (1982) found a large 
decrease in ascorbate concentration in the plasma and blood, over 50 per¬ 
cent, after trauma or surgery for 40 patients and some increase in the 
concentration of the oxidation product dehydroascorbic acid. Sayed, Roy, 
and Acharya (1975) studied 1434 patients and found a decrease in leuko¬ 
cyte concentration following surgery of 19 percent for the patients whose 
surgical wounds were not infected and by 30 percent for those whose 
wounds were infected. 

It was observed long ago that peptic ulcers are associated with a defi¬ 
ciency of vitamin C (Ingalls and Warren, 1937; Portnoy and Wilkinson, 
1938). The gastric juice in the stomach is acidic and corrosive. It contains 
enzymes such as pepsin to attack the proteins in the food and in this way to 
continue the process of digestion that was started in the mouth by chewing 
and by the action of the enzymes in the saliva. Since the walls of the 
stomach contain proteins, there is the possibility that the gastric juice might 
attack them. Sometimes the protective structures break down in some spot 
and the gastric juice begins its attack, causing an ulcer in the stomach (a 
gastric ulcer) or in the adjacent intestine (a duodenal ulcer). The formation 
of these ulcers can be initiated by aspirin, cortisone, cincophen, and other 
drugs, which sometimes cause gastric hemorrhage. 

Many later reports of vitamin C and ulcers have been published, show¬ 
ing that an increased intake of the vitamin has both prophylactic and thera¬ 
peutic value. A discussion of the evidence with references to the literature 
has been presented by Irwin Stone (1972). 

A pressure sore (bed sore, decubitus ulcer) is an ulcer overlying a bony 
prominence that has been under pressure from a bed, wheelchair, or other 
object. These ulcers plague paraplegics and debilitated persons. They are 
hard to handle, and surgical treatment is often needed. 

In 1972 Burr and Rajan reported their observations on ninety-one 
paraplegics and forty-one control subjects (patients without pressure sores), 
with the controls and the patients with pressure sores each divided into four 



140 


CHAPTER 15 


subgroups (male and female, smokers and nonsmokers). In each of the eight 
subgroups the concentration of vitamin C in the leukocytes was highest for 
the controls and lowest for the patients with pressure sores. Also in each of 
the six categories the concentration was much lower for the smokers than 
for the nonsmokers. 

A double-blind controlled trial with twenty surgical patients with pres¬ 
sure sores was reported in 1974 by Taylor et al. Ten of the subjects, se¬ 
lected at random, were given 1 g of vitamin C each day, and the other ten 
were given a placebo. After one month there was an average reduction in 
pressure-sore area by 84 percent for the vitamin-C patients, with six com¬ 
pletely healed, and by 43 percent for the placebo patients, with three com¬ 
pletely healed. The investigators point out that their results have high sta¬ 
tistical significance in showing the acceleration of healing of pressure sores 
by 1 g per day of vitamin C. A larger intake should be even more effective. 

More than thirty years ago it was reported that vitamin C and other 
vitamins in large doses have much value in the treatment of burns (Brown, 
Farmer, and Franks, 1948; Klasson, 1951; Yandell, 1951). It is, of course, 
reasonable that vitamin C should help in this healing process because of its 
being required for the synthesis of collagen, which is a principal component 
of scar tissue and of skin. The investigators usually administered about 2 g 
of vitamin C per day, orally or by intravenous infusion, and in addition 
applied dressings of a 5 percent or 10 percent aqueous solution of the 
vitamin. Other vitamins were also administered in daily amounts 20,000 
International Units (IU) of vitamin A, 20 to 50 mg of B t , 20 mg of B 2 , 150 
to 250 mg of niacin, 2000 IU of vitamin D, and 1 mg of vitamin K. 

Excellent results in the treatment of burns with vitamin E, both orally 
and topically, have also been reported (Shute and Taub, 1969). Vitamin E 
also has value in converting keloids (hard irregular excrescences on the 
skin, often the result of burns) into skin of normal texture. 

Supplementary vitamin C has value in preventing and healing gastric 
ulcers and in the healing of wounds and burns. Intakes as small as 1 g per 
day have been found to have a significant effect. The optimum intake, of 
several grams per day, can be expected to be even more effective. 

Much suffering and loss of life can be prevented by the proper use of 
vitamin C. I remember that fifty years ago I asked one of my graduate 
students about the condition of his father, who had undergone abdominal 
surgery some time before. He said that his father was declining in health 
(and in fact died not long afterward), because the surgical incision would 
not heal. There is little doubt that he was deficient in vitamin C. I regret 
that I did not know enough about vitamin C at that time to enable me to 
suggest that he be given vitamin C and other vitamins. Now, fifty years 
later, there is no excuse for a surgical patient not to be given good amounts 
of supplementary vitamin C. 



16 


Muscular Activity 


The function of the muscles in the human body is to do work, powered by 
the energy released by the oxidation of foods, especially the carbohydrates 
and fats. In doing work a muscle contracts, decreasing its length and in¬ 
creasing its width in such a way as to keep its volume constant. Good health 
requires good muscular activity. It should be no surprise to the reader who 
has come this far to learn that vitamin C has a part in maintaining the 
integrity and function of muscle tissue. 

Muscle tissue contains 20 to 30 percent protein. The contractile material 
is the protein actomyosin, which is itself composed of two fibrous proteins, 
actin and myosin. The molecular mechanism of muscular contraction is 
now known, largely through the work of the British biologist H. E. 
Huxley. A muscle consists of myosin molecules that are aggregated into 
filaments with the head ends of the molecules pointing in two opposite 
directions. The actin molecules are attached to a plate, from which they 
extend on both sides. In an extended muscle the ends of the actin filaments 
just reach the ends of the myosin filaments. The end of a myosin molecule 
is attracted to the complementary regions on the surfaces of the actin mole¬ 
cules by specific interatomic forces, and as a result the myosin filaments, in 
the course of contraction of the muscle, creep along down the channels 
between the actin filaments, with successive myosin molecules shifting from 
one actin molecule to the next. 




142 


CHAPTER 16 


In its contraction the muscle has done work. Energy must be supplied to 
break the bonds between the heads of the myosin molecules and the comple¬ 
mentary regions of the actin molecules. This energy is supplied by the 
oxidation of foods, especially fats. The oxidation takes place inside the 
mitochondria, which are small structures inside the muscle cells and par¬ 
ticipating in their metabolism. The energy of the oxidation is used to 
produce the high-energy molecules adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and phosphate ion. The high-energy ATP 
molecules then diffuse into the contracted muscle and use their energy to 
change the structure of the actin and myosin complementary regions in 
such a way that they no longer attract one another, permitting the muscle to 
relax into its extended state. These regions then revert to their active struc¬ 
tures and the muscle is ready to contract again, when instructed by a 
nervous impulse. 

One of the substances involved in muscular activity is carnitine. It is one 
of many orthomolecular substances in the human body—substances nor¬ 
mally present and required for life. Its molecules are small, containing only 
twenty-five atoms, its formula being (CH 3 ) 3 N + CH 2 CH(OH)CH 2 COO. 
It was discovered in 1905 by two Russian scientists, Gulewitsch and 
Krimberg, who were studying muscle. They found that the substance is 
present to the extent of about 1 percent in the juice from red meat, with a 
smaller amount in that from white meat, and named it from carnis, the 
Latin word for “flesh” or “meat.” It was then discovered that carnitine is 
required to move molecules of fat into the mitochondria, where they are 
oxidized to provide the energy of muscular activity. A molecule of carnitine 
in the cytoplasm outside the mitochondrion combines with a molecule of fat 
and a molecule of coenzyme A to make a complex that can penetrate the 
mitochondrion wall. Inside the mitochondrion, the complex liberates the 
carnitine, which can move outside to repeat its action of serving as a shuttle 
to carry more molecules of the fuel into the mitochondrion. 

The rate at which the fat is made available as fuel for the muscle is 
determined by the amount of carnitine in the muscle. This makes carnitine 
an important substance. 

We obtain some carnitine from various foods, especially red meat. This 
may explain why red meat has the reputation of increasing muscular 
strength and why beef extract, made from the soluble constituents of beef 
meat, was for a century a popular drink (beef tea). 

We are also able to synthesize carnitine from lysine, one of the amino 
acids that are present in the polypeptide chains of the many proteins in our 
bodies and that we obtain in good amount by digesting the proteins in our 
food. Studies on animals have shown that most of the carnitine has been 
synthesized by the animal from lysine, with only about one-fifth coming 





MUSCULAR ACTIVITY 


143 


from the food (Cederblad and Linstedt, 1976; Leibovitz, 1984). Similar 
studies have not been carried out for human beings, but there is the possi¬ 
bility that many people would achieve greater muscular strength by an in¬ 
crease in their carnitine levels. 

A gene mutation resulting in loss of the ability to convert lysine into 
carnitine has been reported by Engel and Angelini (1973). The patients are 
extremely fatigued and have extraordinary muscular weakness. For some 
patients the disease is controlled by a high intake, several grams a day, of 
L-carnitine (for references see Leibovitz, 1984). 

In his 1984 book about carnitine Brian Leibovitz discusses the results of 
his own studies and those of other investigators of the value of supplemen¬ 
tary carnitine in improving strength, health, and athletic performance and 
in leading to decreased obesity. His recommended dietary intake of L- 
carnitine is 500 milligrams (mg) per day. He also points out that there is 
some evidence that the mirror-image form, D-carnitine, which does not 
occur in nature, has been observed to have some toxic reactions. Only the L 
form is effective in increasing muscular power. Accordingly only half of a 
dose of the D,L mixture would be effective, and the other half might be 
harmful. I have found in the December 1984 issue of Prevention magazine 
three advertisements for D,L-carnitine and none for L-carnitine, but 
Leibovitz lists six companies that sell the pure L isomer. 

The optimum intake of vitamin C and of other vitamins and minerals 
might increase the amount of L-carnitine synthesized from lysine to obviate 
the need for any supplementary carnitine. The conversion of lysine to car¬ 
nitine takes place through five successive biochemical reactions, each cata¬ 
lyzed by a specific enzyme. The second and fifth of these reactions involve 
hydroxylation, for which vitamin C is needed. Accordingly the amount of 
carnitine that is made in the human body depends on the intake of vitamin 
C. This explains the fact that sailors who were developing scurvy showed 
lassitude and muscular weakness as the first signs of their disease, and why 
Ewan Cameron’s debilitated cancer patients in Vale of Leven Hospital said 
“But Doctor, I now feel so strong” a few days after they began their intake 
of 10 grams of vitamin C per day. 

The other nutrients involved in the conversion of lysine to carnitine are 
the amino acid methionine, vitamin B6, and iron. 

There are muscle fibers everywhere in the body. Leukocytes swim 
through the contraction of their actin-myosin fibrils. The heart beats 
through muscular contraction. The role of vitamin C in benefitting the 
heart is the subject of the next chapter. 

Much backache, low-back pain, is caused by muscular weakness and by 
deterioration of the collagenous substances in the joints. Nearly every per¬ 
son suffers occasionally from back pain, sometimes caused by too heavy a 



144 


CHAPTER 16 


load on the back muscles, and about 50 percent of people more than sixty 
years old have chronic back trouble. Surgery is needed in case of a ruptured 
intervertebral disk or certain other conditions. 

The preceding discussion of vitamin C in relation to both collagen and 
muscle suggests that a high intake of this vitamin might often provide 
significant control of back problems. In 1964 Dr. James Greenwood, Jr., 
clinical professor of neurosurgery in Baylor University College of Medi¬ 
cine, reported his observations on the effect of an increased intake of ascor¬ 
bic acid in preserving the integrity of intervertebral discs and preventing 
back trouble. He recommended the use of 500 mg per day with an increase 
to 1000 mg per day if there was any discomfort or if work or strenuous 
exercise was anticipated. He said that evidence from most patients indi¬ 
cated that muscular soreness experienced with exercise had been greatly 
reduced by these doses of ascorbic acid, but it increased again when the 
vitamin was not taken. He concluded, from observation of more than five 
hundred cases, that “it can be stated with reasonable assurance that a 
significant percentage of patients with early disk lesions were able to avoid 
surgery by the use of large doses of vitamin C. Many of these patients after 
a few months or years stopped their vitamin C and symptoms occurred. 
When they were placed back on the vitamin the symptoms disappeared. 
Some, of course, eventually came to surgery” (Greenwood, 1964). Green¬ 
wood has informed me when he visited me at my home in California that 
he has continued to find vitamin C helpful in controlling problems with the 
lower back. Larger intakes than the 500 or 1000 mg per day that he first 
recommended have even greater value. 



17 


The Heart 


Heart disease (rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease, hypertensive 
heart disease, ischemic heart disease, acute myocardial infarction, and other 
forms) is the principal cause of death in the United States, responsible for 
about 48 percent of all deaths, with related diseases (stroke, hypertension, 
atherosclerosis, and other diseases of arteries, arterioles, and capillaries) 
responsible for another 10 percent. In 1986 about 1,400,000 people in the 
United States will die of these diseases. I believe that the death rate from 
these diseases at every age could be decreased greatly, probably cut in half, 
by the proper use of vitamin C and other nutrients. 

There is no doubt that heart disease is related to the diet. In the 1976 
congressional hearings on the relation between diet and disease the nation’s 
top health officer, Dr. Theodore Cooper (Assistant Secretary for Health in 
the Department of Health, Education and Welfare) stated that “While 
scientists do not yet agree on the specific causal relationships, evidence is 
mounting and there appears to be general agreement that the kinds and 
amount of food and beverages we consume and the style of living common 
in our generally affluent, sedentary society may be the major factors asso¬ 
ciated with the cause of cancer, cardiovascular disease, and other chronic 
illnesses.” 

About thirty years ago it was recognized that there is a correlation be¬ 
tween the incidence of heart disease and the amount of cholesterol in the 




146 


CHAPTER 17 


blood. Cholesterol is a lipid, soluble in fats and oils, with chemical formula 
C 27 H 46 0. It is manufactured in all cells of animals, especially the liver, but 
is not found in plants. Human beings synthesize about 3000 to 4000 milli¬ 
grams (mg) per day and receive a somewhat smaller amount in their food, 
mainly from eggs and animal fat. Cholesterol is found in all the tissues of 
the human body, especially the brain and spinal cord. People with a high 
percentage of cholesterol in the blood have an increased incidence of cardio¬ 
vascular disease. 

High blood cholesterol was found to cause fatty deposits in blood vessels 
throughout the body, narrowing these vessels and reducing the flow of 
blood through them. The decreased blood flow can lead to heart disease and 
diseases of the circulatory system. It was recommended by the medical 
authorities that people decrease their intake of eggs and animal fat. For 
twenty years there was no change in the mortality from cardiovascular 
diseases in the United States. Since 1970 there has been some decrease, but 
it is not known whether it is the result of a change in diet or some other 
cause, perhaps the larger increase in the intake of supplementary vitamin C 
and other vitamins since 1970. 

Later studies have shown that there are several correlations between 
cardiovascular disease and constituents of the blood. Most of the cholesterol 
in the blood is not free; instead, it is attached to the molecules of certain 
serum proteins that have an affinity for fatlike substances, forming lipopro¬ 
tein molecules. Some of these molecules have a low density: they are called 
beta-lipoprotein, or low-density lipoprotein, and those with higher density 
are called alpha-lipoprotein, or high-density lipoprotein. The two kinds of 
lipoproteins can be separated by spinning a sample of blood in an ultra¬ 
centrifuge, and their amounts can be measured. For many years most of the 
emphasis has been on the cholesterol in the low-density lipoprotein or on 
the total cholesterol, which is more easily measured, and the high-density 
lipoprotein was usually ignored. It has now been found that the incidence 
of cardiovascular disease tends to increase with increase in the amounts of 
total blood cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and 
triglycerides, and to decrease with the amount of high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol. These correlations can be understood from the func¬ 
tions of LDL and HDL. LDL carries cholesterol through the bloodstream, 
where it may attach itself to cells and form atherosclerotic plaques, whereas 
HDL picks it up and carries it to the gall bladder, where it is converted 
into bile acids that are then eliminated into the intestines through the bile 
duct. 

The amounts of cholesterol in the blood and tissues are determined by 
the rate at which it is synthesized in the liver (from acetate and other 
precursors), the rate at which it is obtained from food, the rate at which it is 



THE HEART 


147 


converted into bile acids and excreted into the intestines, and the rate at 
which the bile acids are reabsorbed in the lower bowel and then recon¬ 
verted into cholesterol. A steady state is set up between the rate of destruc¬ 
tion (conversion to bile acids) and the other three rates. All of these rates 
are affected by the genotype of the person, the nature of the diet, and other 
factors. 

We see that it should be possible to change the steady-state level in the 
blood by varying any one of these four rates. An interesting and important 
study of this sort, with use of a drug, cholestyramine resin, was completed 
by the National Heart Institute in 1984. Cholestyramine resin is an artifi¬ 
cial macromolecular substance (consisting of very large molecules) that is 
insoluble in water and when taken by mouth is retained in the feces and 
then eliminated. It has the property of combining with bile acids and thus 
preventing their reabsorption into the blood and reconversion into choles¬ 
terol. In this way its ingestion leads to some decrease in the amount of 
cholesterol in the body. 

The study, which took ten years, cost $150 million. I think that it was 
worth-while for the National Heart Institute to spend this amount, because 
the study gave a definite result, the amount of benefit that we might expect 
from stopping the reabsorption of the bile acids in the lower bowel. In 
comparison with the cost of medical treatment of patients with heart dis¬ 
ease, more than $100 billion per year, the cost of the investigation was 
trivial. 

Each of the 1900 cholestyramine patients, chosen by lot from the 3800 
men in the study, was supposed to take a spoonful (4 grams [g]) of the 
resin granules six times per day. The 1900 controls in the double-blind 
study were supposed to take the same amount, 24 g per day, of another 
resin that does not combine with the bile acids. Compliance in each group 
was about two-thirds, an average of 16 g of resin each day. 1 am not 
astonished by the low compliance; it is a nuisance to have to take a spoonful 
of granules six times a day, for years, especially when there are occasional 
side effects of constipation, diarrhea, and nausea. 

In its principal finding, this study showed that the cholestyramine sub¬ 
jects had an average lowering of total blood cholesterol by 8.5 percent more 
than the controls, and their death rate from heart disease was 25 percent 
less. The investigation of the effect of cholestyramine resin provides what 
seems to be a reliable value of the effect of reducing blood cholesterol. In 
this study it was found that the percentage decrease in the death rate from 
heart disease was three times the percentage decrease in the cholesterol 
level. 

In December 1984 a panel of experts convened by the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH) issued a report that included the recommendation that 



148 


CHAPTER 17 


adults thirty years old or older with total cholesterol levels 240 mg per 
deciliter or more, younger adults with levels above 220 mg per deciliter, 
and children with levels above 185 mg per deciliter take steps to reduce 
the level, through changing the diet or by cholesterol-lowering drugs. The 
drugs may have serious side effects, and changing the diet has limited value. 

The 1984 panel of the National Institutes of Health recommended de¬ 
creasing the amount of eggs and animal fat in the diet to a cholesterol 
intake of 250 to 300 mg per day. Also, in the 1977 report “Dietary Goals 
for the United States” prepared by the staff of the Select Committee on 
Nutrition and Human Needs, U.S. Senate (Senator George McGovern, 
chairman), one of the six dietary goals is “Reduce cholesterol consumption 
to about 300 mg per day.” But it has been known since 1970 from the 
multimillion-dollar Framingham study of diet in relation to heart disease 
that restricting the intake of cholesterol does not reduce the cholesterol level 
in the blood. In this study the men and women had average cholesterol 
intakes of 702 and 492 mg per day, respectively. (One egg provides about 
200 mg.) The average serum concentrations for men and women with 
higher than average intakes were found to be 237 and 245 mg per deciliter, 
respectively, and those for men and women with lower than average intakes 
were nearly the same, 237 and 241 mg per deciliter. Thus there was no 
effect of decreased intake of cholesterol on the concentration in the blood. 
The explanation of this rather surprising result is that human beings, of 
course, synthesize cholesterol in their own cells, in the amount of around 
3000 or 4000 mg per day, and there is a feedback mechanism that decreases 
the rate of synthesis of the substance when the intake is increased. It is 
regrettable that Senator McGovern’s committee and the NIH panel should 
be giving unreliable information and advice to the American people such as 
to tend to deprive them of a reasonable amount of such good foods as eggs, 
meat, and butter. 

The fat-in-food-cholesterol-in-the-bloodstream idea is dying hard, as 
noted in Chapter 6. During the last decade it has become increasingly 
evident that the great hope of thirty years ago that heart disease could be 
controlled by limiting the intake of saturated fat (as in meat and butter) 
and cholesterol (in meat and eggs) and increasing that of unsaturated fat, 
especially polyunsaturated fat (margarine, certain vegetable oils) had 
failed. A thoughtful study of the evidence was published in the New En¬ 
gland Journal of Medicine in 1977 by Dr. George V. Mann of Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine. In his opening paragraph he writes that 
“Foundations, scientists, and the media, both lay and scientific, have pro¬ 
moted low fat, low cholesterol, polyunsaturated diets, and yet the epidemic 
continues unabated, cholesteremia in the population is unchanged, and cli¬ 
nicians are unconvinced of efficacy. . . . And yet the oil and spread industry 
advertises its products with claims and promises that make these foods seem 





THE HEART 


149 


like drugs. The vibrant certainty of scientists claiming to be authorities on 
these matters is disturbing.” He mentions that in the 1950’s the diet-heart 
enthusiasts exerted pressure on physicians, who “were overwhelmed by this 
assault, arising from both their waiting rooms and their professional jour¬ 
nals. A low fat, low cholesterol diet became as automatic in their treatment 
advice as a polite goodbye.” 

In his 1976 article “Is It True What They Say About Cholesterol?”, Dr. 
Mark D. Altschule discussed the hypothesis that the ingestion of foods, 
such as eggs, that contain cholesterol increases the risk of heart disease. He 
said that “Today an awesome collection of powerful agencies, public and 
private, put forward statements that assert or imply its truth.” He then 
discussed eight clinical trials, carried out in the United States, England, 
and Scandinavia and published between 1965 and 1972. Most of these 
studies failed to show that a change in the amount of cholesterol in the diet 
had any significant effect on the incidence of heart disease. 

These results and other similar results have caused Mann and others to 
reach the conclusion that the emphasis on the intake of fats and cholesterol 
during the last thirty years has been misguided and fruitless. The way is 
now clearing for the recognition of the decisive work of John Yudkin and of 
those who have followed up on his demonstration (Chapter 6) that it is the 
increase in the consumption of the sugar sucrose that has brought on the 
pandemic of heart and circulatory disease in the prosperous industrial 
countries of the world. 

Along with the reduction of sucrose in the diet there is another measure 
everyone can take to reduce the risk of heart disease from elevated choles¬ 
terol levels in the blood: that is the intake of supplemental vitamin C. An 
increased intake of vitamin C decreases total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, 
and triglycerides, and increases HDL cholesterol; in all these ways it helps 
protect against heart disease. 

Total cholesterol is regulated by vitamin C in several ways. Ginter 
(1973) in Czechoslovakia showed that a high intake of the vitamin in¬ 
creases the rate of removal of cholesterol from the blood by its conversion 
into bile acids, which are excreted with the bile into the intestines (many 
additional references are given by Turley, West, and Horton, 1976). This 
conversion involves hydroxylation reactions, for which ascorbate is in gen¬ 
eral required. A good dose of vitamin C taken before breakfast can act as a 
laxative and speed up the elimination of the waste material in the bowel, 
thus decreasing the reabsorption of the bile acids and their reconversion to 
cholesterol. A high-fiber diet probably also has value because of a similar 
effect. 

The discovery that a high HDL level helps prevent cardiovascular dis¬ 
ease was made long ago (Barr, Russ, and Eder, 1951) and has been veri¬ 
fied in many recent studies, such as the Tromso Heart Study in Norway 



150 


CHAPTER 17 


(Miller et al., 1977) and a study in Hawaii (Rhoads, Gullrandsen, and 
Kagan, 1976). In several recent studies it has been verified that an in¬ 
creased intake of vitamin C increases the HDL level (Bates, Mandal, and 
Cole, 1977; Harte et al., 1984; Glover, Koh, and Trout, 1984). 

In an early study by I. A. Myasnikova in 1947 she reported that serum 
cholesterol concentrations in humans with high cholesterol could be low¬ 
ered by the increased intake of vitamin C. Ginter found in one study with 
patients with average initial plasma cholesterol level of 263 mg per deciliter 
that intake of 1 g of vitamin C per day resulted in three months in an 
average decrease in this level by 10 percent and a decrease in triglycerides 
by 40 percent (Ginter, 1977). In a study of patients with an average initial 
cholesterol level of 312 mg per deciliter who were given 3 g of vitamin C for 
three weeks the decrease in the cholesterol level was 18 percent and that in 
triglycerides was 12 percent (Fidanza, Audisio, and Mastrovacovo, 1982). 

Little change, however, is observed for men and women with low or 
normal cholesterol values, 132 to 176 mg per deciliter, by taking 1 or 3 g of 
the vitamin per day for four to twelve weeks (Johnson and Obenshein, 
1981; Kahn and Seedarnee, 1981; Elliott, 1982). The explanation of this 
difference has been discussed by Ginter through a study of 280 men and 
women divided into fourteen groups on the basis of the initial cholesterol 
level (Ginter, 1982). When 300 to 1000 mg of vitamin C was given to the 
subjects, their average cholesterol levels changed by amounts ranging from 
+ 5 percent to —19 percent, as shown in the illustration on page 151. The 
heavy line in the figure corresponds to the linear regression line given by 
Ginter. His conclusion, which agrees with the results of other investigators, 
is that vitamin C has little effect on the cholesterol level in the normal 
range, below about 200 mg per deciliter, but has a large effect in decreasing 
high levels by 10 to 20 percent. 

If we accept the 1984 statement by the National Institutes of Health 
Panel that for each 1 percent decrease in the cholesterol level there would 
result a 2 percent decrease in cardiovascular mortality or the chole¬ 
styramine result of 8.5 percent decrease in cholesterol associated with a 25 
percent decrease in cardiovascular mortality, we may conclude that an in¬ 
creased intake of vitamin C might lead to a 20 to 60 percent decrease in the 
mortality rate for the people at risk. 

There is evidence from epidemiological studies of the health of popula¬ 
tions to support this conclusion. These studies have shown quite clearly 
that a diet including fresh fruits and vegetables is beneficial to the health. 
The effort has been made to analyze the diets in relation to their effect on 
health in order to determine what nutrients in the ingested foods are most 
important in decreasing the death rates. Of all of the twenty-five factors 
considered in the San Mateo County study conducted by Chope and 



Decrease in cholesterol, percent 


THE HEART 


151 



Initial serum concentration of cholesterol, milligrams per deciliter 


Vitamin C and cholesterol The fourteen dots show the average percentage change in 
total cholesterol concentration in the blood serum for fourteen groups of twenty subjects each 
with different average initial values. (Redrawn from Figure 9 of Ginter, 1982). 


Breslow, the intake of vitamin C was found to be the most important in 
decreasing the death rate. The people in the study who had been receiving 
50 mg or more per day had an age-corrected death rate only 40 percent of 
that of the people who had been receiving less than 50 mg per day. Most of 
the deaths, as with the population as a whole, were from cardiovascular 
disease. 

An epidemiological study by Knox of a very large population in England 
gave similar results (1973). He found, as had been known before, that a 
high intake of calcium is associated with protection against ischemic heart 
disease and cerebrovascular disease and also that a still greater protective 
effect—greater than that for any other factor—is associated with an in¬ 
creased intake of vitamin C. In an attempt to obtain evidence about the 
mortality rate among users of vitamin supplements a prospective six-year 
study was made of 479 elderly California respondents to a 1972 question¬ 
naire carried in Prevention magazine (Enstrom and Pauling, 1982). The 
subjects had an average daily intake of about 1 g of vitamin C, as well as 
larger than usual intakes of vitamin E and vitamin A, and they followed 
other good health practices. Relative to the expected 1977 rate for U.S. 





152 


CHAPTER 17 


whites, their standardized mortality rate for cardiovascular diseases (which 
caused 58 percent of all deaths), was 75 percent for males, 46 percent for 
females, 62 percent for both sexes. The values for all causes of death were 
78, 54, and 68 percent of the expected national rate for that year. These 
observations indicate that these health-conscious elderly Californians have 
a life-style, including taking supplementary vitamins, that is correlated 
with a 38 percent decrease in cardiovascular mortality and a 21 percent 
decrease in mortality from other causes. 

These epidemiological studies and other similar ones strongly support 
the conclusion that a significant amount of protection against cardiovascu¬ 
lar disease can be achieved by increasing the intake of vitamin C above the 
60 mg Recommended Daily Allowance of the U.S. Food and Nutrition 
Board. 

Much evidence has been reported recently about the value of eating fish, 
either lean fish or fat fish, in decreasing the incidence of coronary heart 
disease. In one study (Kromhout et al., 1985) it was found that subjects 
who ate no fish had an age-standardized death rate from coronary heart 
disease 2.5 times as great as that for subjects who ate 1 ounce (28.3 grams) 
or more per day. Part of the effect can be attributed to the fish oils 
(Phillipson et al., 1985; Lee et al., 1985). 

Hundreds of millions of dollars have been spent by the National Insti¬ 
tutes of Health, the American Heart Association, and other agencies in 
support of studies of cardiovascular disease in relation to LDL and HDL 
cholesterol, triglycerides, saturated fats, and unsaturated fats. Very little 
attention has been paid to vitamin C and other vitamins. I think that these 
agencies have been betting on the wrong horse. 

It is fortunate that vitamin C is not a drug—it is an orthomolecular 
substance, normally present in the human body and required for life, and it 
has extremely low toxicity. You do not need to have a physician’s prescrip¬ 
tion or the approval of the medical establishment to use it in the best way to 
improve your health and to prevent heart disease. Your knowledge may 
even be greater and your judgment better than theirs. 




18 


Cardiovascular Disease 


For the control of the atherosclerotic pathology that underlies the cardio¬ 
vascular diseases in their several manifestations there is another vitamin 
that has demonstrated its efficacy, administered alone and with vitamin C. 
This is vitamin E (tocopherol), one of the fat-soluble vitamins. It was 
discovered in 1922 by Herbert M. Evans, professor of biochemistry in the 
University of California, and his coworker Katherine Scott Bishop. They 
showed that it is necessary for full health in rats, but the question of 
whether or not it is needed for humans was not settled until recently. Only 
in 1968 did the U.S. Food and Nutrition Board finally decide that it is 
essential to human nutrition and set the recommended daily allowance for 
an adult at 30 international units (IU). 

By 1980, however, the Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) had been 
reduced by the board to 10 IU. The board has described the basis of its 
decision in the following words: 

Inasmuch as there is no clinical or biochemical evidence that vitamin 
E status is inadequate in normal individuals ingesting balanced diets 
in the United States, the vitamin E activity in average diets is 
considered satisfactory. . . . The values [of the RDA] in the table 
should be considered as average adequate intakes in the United States, 
but the adequacy of these intakes will vary if the PUFA 




154 


CHAPTER 18 


(polyunsaturated fatty acid) content of the diet deviates significantly 
from that which is customary. . . . Evidence that normal persons 
benefit from supplements above the recommended allowance is largely 
subjective. 

The Food and Nutrition Board has accordingly rejected all of the evi¬ 
dence that will be presented here—or perhaps it considers that people who 
may die of cardiovascular disease or have other problems that are helped by 
vitamin E are not “normal persons.” Since more than half of all people in 
the United States die of cardiovascular disease, this attitude seems to me to 
be irrational. As late as 1980 the board had not learned about the difference 
between the minimum intake and the optimum intake of an essential 
nutrient. 

During the last sixty years a keen controversy has persisted over the 
possible value of vitamin E in far larger amounts than 10 IU per day for 
controlling or curing many serious diseases, including coronary heart dis¬ 
ease and peripheral vascular disease. The controversy centers around the 
Canadian physician Dr. R. James Shute and his two sons, Dr. Evan V. 
Shute and Dr. Wilfrid E. Shute, who had begun using vitamin E in the 
treatment of disease in 1933. Their claims of success were contradicted by 
many other physicians, especially in the years around 1948, and for thirty- 
seven years since then the stand taken by nearly all medical authorities has 
been that vitamin E in amounts greater than the RDA of 10 IU has no 
value in improving health or in preventing or controlling disease. It is my 
opinion that the authorities are wrong about vitamin E, as they were about 
vitamin C. 

When vitamin E was isolated from wheat germ oil in 1936, it was found 
to be a mixture of several similar substances, which are called alpha- 
tocopherol, beta-tocopherol, gamma-tocopherol, delta-tocopherol, and so 
on. Each of these can occur as the D form or the L form. They all have 
biological activity and antioxidant power but in different amounts. Vitamin 
E capsules often contain pure DL-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, for which 1 
milligram (mg) equals 1 IU. They may, however, contain a mixture of 
tocopherols or their esters, in relative amounts such as to give the biological 
effect corresponding to the number of IU stated on the label. The various 
biological and antioxidant effects do not change in quite the same way from 
one tocopherol to another, so that the number of IU is only a rough mea¬ 
sure of the activity of vitamin E. Wilfrid Shute recommended that alpha- 
tocopherol (or alpha-tocopheryl acetate) be used in controlling heart dis¬ 
ease, but the other tocopherols taken in the same dosage (measured in IU) 
probably have essentially the same value. The relative vitamin-E activities 




CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 


155 


of the several tocopherols have been determined by animal studies, espe¬ 
cially the effectiveness in permitting normal reproduction in the rat. 

Pure vitamin E is an oil, practically insoluble in water but soluble in oils 
and fats. It is found in many foods (butter, vegetable oils, margarine, eggs, 
fruits, and vegetables). In 1956 it was discovered that patients in a state 
hospital who for several years had lived on a diet containing only 3 IU of 
vitamin E showed an increased fragility of their red blood cells, caused by 
oxidation of the unsaturated fatty acids in the cell membrane. Vitamin E 
acts as an antioxidant and prevents or reverses the oxidation, being itself 
oxidized in the process. Vitamin C, which is also an antioxidant, can re¬ 
store the vitamin E to its original state. 

A diet high in unsaturated fatty acids, especially the polyunsaturated 
ones, can destroy the body’s supply of vitamin E and cause muscular le¬ 
sions, brain lesions, and degeneration of blood vessels. Care must be taken 
not to include a large amount of polyunsaturated oil in the diet without a 
corresponding increase in the intake of vitamin E. 

In 1950 the Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry of the American Medi¬ 
cal Association published a report on vitamin E, including the following 
statements: 

More than three years ago stories appeared concerning a remarkable 
new treatment for patients with circulatory disease. The treatment 
was said to have been discovered by some investigators in London, 
Canada. It was alleged that large doses of vitamin E, or alpha 
tocopherol, could effect remarkable recoveries in patients with a wide 
variety of cardiovascular disorders who had not been benefitted by 
more orthodox therapy. . . . The first announcement of the possible 
effectiveness of alpha tocopheryl acetate in coronary heart disease 
appeared as a letter, signed by A. Vogelsang and E. V. Shute, in 
Nature (1946, 157:772). Subsequently a series of articles appeared in 
the Medical Record ( Surgery, Gynecology, and Obstetrics, 1948, 86:1) 
that varicose ulcers, thrombophlebitis, early gangrene of the 
extremities, thromboangiitis obliterans, and cerebral thrombosis 
respond to vitamin E therapy. The disease most recently reported by 
Vogelsang of the Shute Institute to respond to vitamin E therapy is 
diabetes ( Medical Record, 1948, 161:363; Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology, 1944, 8:883). . . . The lay press already has devoted 
considerable space to the claimed virtues of vitamin E. . . . It is 
regrettable that the hopes of sufferers from heart disease and other 
cardiovascular conditions, as well as those of countless diabetic 
persons, should be falsely raised by unbridled enthusiasm. 



156 


CHAPTER 18 


This attitude of unhealthy skepticism has persisted for thirty-five years. 
In 1977 the leading U.S. authority on old-fashioned nutrition, Dr. Jean 
Mayer, president of Tufts University, stated that “Because of the variety of 
the deficiency signs in various animals, enormous doses of vitamin E have 
been tried in a great many human diseases, from habitual abortion to heart 
disease and muscular dystrophy. The experiments were not a success. So 
doctors went back to the position that we need vitamin E, but only in 
moderate amounts,” (Mayer, 1977.) Mayer also describes the use of large 
amounts of vitamin C to control the common cold as a “fad,” started by me, 
and suggests that no one should ever take more than the RDA, quoting 
several of the fallacious arguments discussed in Chapter 27. 

Harmful side effects from very large doses of vitamin E have not been 
reported. In this respect it differs from the various drugs, such as aspirin (to 
mention one of the less dangerous), that are widely used in treating the 
diseases for which the Shutes claim that vitamin E is valuable. The fact 
that vitamin E is safe and the fact that the Shutes claim that it has value in 
treating coronary heart disease and several other diseases should have 
caused the skeptical medical authorities to carry out a thorough investiga¬ 
tion by means of a number of large double-blind trials, in which patients in 
one group, selected at random, receive the vitamin, and those in another 
group receive a placebo. But in fact these thorough investigations have not 
been carried out, thirty-nine years after the original claims were made. 

It has been argued that it was the duty of the Shutes to carry out these 
double-blind studies themselves, but the basic principles of medical ethics 
have made it impossible for them to do so. They themselves were convinced 
of the great value of vitamin E in 1946. A physician has the moral duty to 
give to each patient the treatment that he or she believes to have the greatest 
chance of healing the patient. Hence it was the duty of the Shutes to 
continue to use vitamin E for all their patients with the diseases that they 
had found vitamin E to control. To have kept this beneficial treatment from 
half of their patients would have been immoral. 

It would not be immoral, however, for a skeptic, a physician who be¬ 
lieves that vitamin E has no value, to carry out a double-blind study of this 
sort. It is not the Shutes but rather the other members of the medical 
profession who have failed in their duty, by not having made extensive 
studies of vitamin E, when there was strongly suggestive evidence that this 
nontoxic, safe, natural substance has some value, probably even great value, 
in controlling diseases that each year cause about 200 million patient-days 
of bed disability and 1 million deaths in the United States. 

In addition to many papers published in medical journals since 1946, the 
Shutes have described their methods and results in two books, Vitamin E 
for Ailing and Healthy Hearts , by Wilfrid E. Shute and Harold J. Taub 



CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 


157 


(1969) and The Heart and Vitamin E } by Evan Shute and his staff (1956, 
1969). The diseases discussed in separate chapters of these books include 
coronary and ischemic heart disease and the accompanying angina, rheu¬ 
matic fever, acute and chronic rheumatic heart disease, high blood pres¬ 
sure, congenital heart disease, peripheral vascular disease, arteriosclerosis, 
Buerger's disease, varicose veins, thrombophlebitis, arterial thrombi, indo¬ 
lent ulcer, diabetes, kidney disease, and burns. They believe that vitamin E 
in doses of between 50 IU and 2500 IU per day has value in treating all of 
these diseases. The vitamin E is given by mouth. An ointment (3 percent 
vitamin E in petroleum jelly) is also used for burns and ulcers and some 
forms of pain. 

Wilfrid Shute states that in the twenty-two years before 1969 he had 
treated thirty thousand cardiovascular patients. The records of hundreds of 
them have been published. For the most part, the only “control cases" have 
been provided by the record of the patient himself before he began vitamin 
E. For example, one patient, an elderly physician with diabetes, had severe 
ulceration and impairment of the circulation in one leg, so serious as to 
indicate that amputation was necessary. The leg was amputated. Ulcer¬ 
ation and impairment of the circulation developed in the other leg. He then 
learned of the Shutes. Vitamin E was administered. After some months the 
other leg was healed, and amputation was avoided. 

Another patient, age fifty-eight in 1951, had a coronary occlusion with 
posterior infarction. After two weeks in the hospital he was sent home but 
was not able to work. After six months he was seen by Wilfrid Shute, who 
placed him on 800 IU of vitamin E per day. Within ten weeks he was free 
of symptoms and had returned to work. Seventeen years later he had an 
attack of auricular fibrillation, which was soon controlled with oxygen. He 
was in good condition in 1968, at age seventy-six. 

There are scores of such case histories in the books. They do not consti¬ 
tute proof, but there is no doubt that Wilfrid Shute and Evan Shute were 
convinced that vitamin E is the most important substance in the world. I 
confess to having the same feeling about vitamin C. 

Some years ago I was prompted by an article in Consumer Reports to 
check the published studies of vitamin E and heart disease. Consumer Re¬ 
ports is a publication that purports “to provide consumers with information 
and counsel on consumer goods and services, to give information on all 
matters relating to the expenditure of the family income, and to initiate and 
to cooperate with individual and group efforts seeking to create and main¬ 
tain decent living standards." It has millions of readers. For many products 
its advice may be good, but for the vitamins it is completely unreliable. It 
makes no tests of vitamins but relies upon some anonymous authority 
whose judgment seems to me to be untrustworthy. 



158 


CHAPTER 18 


In its January 1973 issue, Consumer Reports had an article entitled 
“Vitamin E: What’s Behind All Those Claims for It?” The writer of the 
article gave a long list of diseases for which therapeutic claims for vitamin 
E have been made (those mentioned by Wilfrid and Evan Shute, as listed 
above, and also acne, aging, and others) and concluded with the statement, 
“We have been unable to unearth valid scientific evidence that vitamin E 
helps any of the long list of ailments catalogued on page 62.” He then wrote 
that the only therapeutic use of vitamin E established by a well-controlled 
clinical trial is the treatment of hemolytic anemia in certain premature 
babies and that some doctors prescribe it as a precautionary measure in a 
few relatively rare diseases involving fat absorption. 

The article concluded, “Otherwise, the use of vitamin E as a dietary 
supplement or as a medication for common ailments is at best a waste of 
money. But far more serious, it could lead to postponing proper medical 
treatment in favor of worthless self-medication. And the cost of that may be 
incalculable.” 

The conclusions are said to be based on published reports of various 
trials of vitamin E by physicians, to which reference is made in the article. I 
made a careful examination of every one of these published reports, and I 
found that they do not justify the conclusion reached by Consumer Reports. 
My conclusion is that their medical authority, the writer of the article, 
lacked the ability to evaluate the evidence properly. 

Consumer Reports had listed several studies of vitamin E and coronary 
heart disease that had been carried out around 1949. All were said to have 
given negative results, refuting the claims made by the Shutes. I decided 
that the studies were all unreliable because they used too small an amount 
of the vitamin or used it for too short a time or for some other reason. For 
example, the study that is described as “perhaps the most sophisticated” 
was carried out by Donegan, Messer, Orgain, and Ruffin, of Duke Univer¬ 
sity School of Medicine {American Journal of the Medical Sciences 217 
[1949] :294). It involved twenty-one patients with cardiovascular disease, 
who were followed for five to twenty months. During alternate months 
each patient received vitamin E (150 to 600 IU per day) or a placebo. The 
patients were seen once a month. There was little difference in their condi¬ 
tion after a month of vitamin E than after a month of placebo. 

It is known, however, that two or three months of vitamin E intake is 
needed for it to become effective. It is stored in the fat, and depletion of the 
body store occurs only slowly. Hence, the patients would not have changed 
very much in their store of vitamin E during the alternate months. This 
study, like the others, does not provide any refutation of the claims made by 
the Shutes. 

Dr. Alton Ochsner, the great heart surgeon who died in 1981, published 
several papers on his success in treating blood clots (thromboembolism and 




CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 


159 


thrombophlebitis) with vitamin E (Ochsner, DeBakey, and DeCamp, 
JAMA 144 [ 1950] :831; Ochsner, New England Journal oj Medicine 271 
[1964]:4). Ochsner stated: “In all [surgery] patients in whom venous 
thrombosis [a blood clot in a vein] might develop, for a number of years we 
have routinely prescribed alpha tocopherol (vitamin E) 100 international 
units, three times a day, until the patient is fully ambulatory. . . . Alpha 
tocopherol is a potent inhibitor of thrombin [blood clotting factor] that does 
not produce a hemorrhagic tendency [as anticoagulant drugs tend to do] 
and therefore is a safe prophylactic against venous thrombosis.” 

Another piece of testimony was overlooked by Consumer Reports. This is 
the work of Dr. Knut Haeger of the Department of Surgery of Malmo 
Hospital, Sweden, who described his observations of 227 patients with 
peripheral occlusive arterial disease (1968). Of these patients 104 (average 
age 60.0 years) received 300 to 600 IU of vitamin E per day, with no other 
treatment, and 123 (average age 59.4) received either vasodilators, antipro¬ 
thrombin, or multivitamins. 

There were no significant differences among the groups of patients given 
the last three different treatments. After two to seven years of observation, 
several differences were observed between the vitamin E patients and the 
other patients. Nine of the vitamin E patients died during the study, and 19 
of the other group (8.7 percent versus 15.4 percent). One of the 95 surviv¬ 
ing vitamin E patients had to have a leg amputated, and 11 of the 104 
surviving patients of the other group (1.05 percent versus 10.58 percent; 
statistically significant at the 99-percent level of confidence.) The patients 
with peripheral or occlusive arterial disease after walking some distance 
suffer from sharp pains in the calves of the legs, because of an insufficient 
supply of oxygen to the muscles. Of the vitamin E patients, 75 percent in¬ 
creased their walking distance by 50 percent, as compared with 20 percent 
of the other patients; 38 percent of the vitamin E patients more than dou¬ 
bled their walking distance, as compared with only 4 percent of the other 
patients. The subjective feeling of improvement was much greater for the 
vitamin E patients than for the others. 

A number of other studies have given similar results. Boyd and Marks 
(1963) reported on 1476 patients with general atherosclerosis who had 
been treated with vitamin E for ten years. They found that the ten-year 
survival rate for these patients was higher than that found in any similar 
studies of patients who had not received vitamin E. 

My conclusion from the evidence summarized above and other reports in 
the medical literature, developed by able physicians other than the Shutes, 
is that there is no doubt that vitamin E has great value in controlling 
peripheral vascular disease, which often occurs together with heart disease 
and with diabetes, and also in preventing and treating blood clots 
(thromboembolism and thrombophlebitis). In addition, I believe that there 



160 


CHAPTER 18 


are sound arguments that support the claims made by the Shutes about the 
value of vitamin E for preventing and controlling coronary heart disease 
and other diseases. 

Haeger pointed out that the sharp pains in the calves of the legs that are 
experienced by patients with peripheral occlusive arterial disease after they 
have walked some distance are analogous to the sharp heart pains (angina) 
of patients with coronary heart disease. In each instance the pain results 
from a deficiency of oxygen—the working muscle has used up the oxygen 
faster than it can be brought to the muscle of the leg or heart through the 
clogged arteries. There is no doubt that the muscle pain is relieved by 
vitamin E (as are also the muscle cramps that some people experience). It 
is, accordingly, reasonable that the angina of the patient with heart disease 
would also be relieved by vitamin E, as described by Wilfrid Shute and 
Evan Shute in their books. 

It was recognized more than fifty years ago that a low intake of vitamin 
E leads to muscular dystrophy, a disorder of the skeletal muscles character¬ 
ized by weakness similar to that caused by a deficiency of vitamin C (the 
studies of vitamin E and muscular dystrophy have been discussed by 
Pappenheimer, 1948). The difficulty in walking experienced by patients 
with peripheral occlusive arterial disease may result in part from a low 
vitamin-E concentration in the muscles and in part from a decreased rate of 
delivery of oxygen to them. The damage to the muscles when vitamin E is 
in short supply may be the result of oxidation of the unsaturated lipids, 
which are protected by the fat-soluble antioxidant vitamin E when it is 
present in sufficient concentrations. 

Several kinds of hereditary muscular dystrophies are known. For the 
most part their nature is not thoroughly understood, and there is no specific 
therapy recommended for them. Myasthenia gravis is treated by inhibitors 
of cholinesterase, corticosteroids, and surgical removal of the thymus gland. 
The medical authorities do not mention the possible value of vitamins in 
controlling muscular dystrophies. The evidence about the involvement of 
vitamin E and vitamin C as well as B 6 and other vitamins in the function¬ 
ing of muscles suggests that the optimum intakes of these nutrients should 
be of value to the patients. So far as I know, no careful study of an in¬ 
creased vitamin intake for patients with hereditary muscular dystrophy has 
been reported. 

Vitamin E, the fat-soluble antioxidant vitamin, and vitamin C, the 
water-soluble antioxidant vitamin, collaborate in protecting the blood ves¬ 
sels and other tissues against damage by oxidation. They slow down the 
process of deterioration of the body with the passage of time and help to 
prevent cardiovascular disease. They have value as an adjunct to appropri¬ 
ate conventional therapy in the treatment of cardiovascular disease and 
other diseases. 



CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 


161 


In this book I have restricted my discussion almost exclusively to vita¬ 
mins and other orthomolecular substances, with only occasional mention of 
drugs. I make an exception in this chapter to discuss a nonorthomolecular 
procedure —EDTA (ethylene diaminetetra-acetic acid) chelation prophy¬ 
laxis—for atherosclerosis and the consequent diseases of the heart and pe¬ 
ripheral circulatory system. One reason is that this prophylactic treatment 
seems to me to have a quite rational scientific basis, and the evidence of its 
value seems to me to be strong. The other reason is that most people would 
neither learn the truth about it nor receive good advice from their physi¬ 
cians. Most physicians have heard about EDTA treatment, but advise 
against it on the basis of some false ideas, as discussed below. 

EDTA is used widely in analytical chemistry and chemical industrial 
processes, such as dyeing and the manufacture of soaps and detergents, 
where even very small concentrations of heavy metal ions in the water 
interfere with the reactions. It acts by combining strongly with these ions 
and thus sequestering them. This process is called chelation. 

EDTA is used in medicine, with approval by the Food and Drug Ad¬ 
ministration, for treatment of persons poisoned with cadmium, chromium, 
cobalt, copper, lead, manganese, nickel, radium, selenium, tungsten, ura¬ 
nium, vanadium, or zinc. It is usually administered by slow intravenous 
infusion of a solution containing 3 grams (g) of the calcium disodium salt. 
The poisonous metal ions combine more strongly with EDTA than with 
calcium ion and replace it in the complex and are then eliminated in the 
urine. 

EDTA also has value in helping to control cardiovascular disease, in¬ 
cluding atherosclerosis, occlusive arterial disease, and heart disease result¬ 
ing from a decreased supply of oxygen to the heart muscles. For this pur¬ 
pose a solution of 3 g of sodium EDTA in 500 milliliters (ml) of Ringers 
solution, normal saline solution, or dextrose solution, often with some 
added sodium ascorbate, is administered by intravenous infusion over a 
period of three hours. The usual course of prophylactic treatment consists 
of twenty such infusions, usually two per week for ten weeks. There is 
evidence that such a treatment helps to eliminate atheromatous plaques. 

In the development of atherosclerosis the first step consists of laying 
down a mass of loosely aggregated connective tissue (collagen fibrils and 
mucopolysaccharides, often with some fibroblast cells) on the inner wall of 
the artery. The process may be initiated by a small lesion in the wall. 
Cholesterol and other lipids then begin to accumulate in the plaque, with a 
small amount of calcium. Later, as the plaque grows, it incorporates more 
calcium and becomes harder. By diminishing the size of the lumen of the 
artery it leads to decrease in the flow of blood to the tissues, to increase in 
blood pressure, and to damage to the heart and other organs because of the 
restricted supply of oxygen. 



162 


CHAPTER 18 


The main way in which EDTA operates to improve the cardiovascular 
system may be by removing calcium ions from the plaques. The cholesterol 
could then more easily be removed by the high-density lipoprotein. Other 
ways in which EDTA chelation might be beneficial have been discussed by 
Dr. Bruce W. Halstead in his 1979 book The Scientific Basis of EDTA 
Chelation Therapy. 

Halstead discusses the toxicity of EDTA at length. When the amount 
and the rate of administration are controlled in the recommended manner, 
the substance shows few side effects. Decrease in calcium concentration is 
corrected by administration of calcium compounds. 

Halstead says that during the thirty years before 1979 more than 
150,000 patients in the United States received more than two million treat¬ 
ments by EDTA chelation therapy, mainly for cardiovascular disease, and 
that when it is properly administered it can be used with safety. Both he 
and Walker (1980) recommend that it be administered only by a physician 
thoroughly trained in EDTA chelation therapy. 

Chelation therapy is far safer and much cheaper than having a by-pass 
operation. There seems to be a reasonable chance that this treatment would 
obviate the need for the operation. 

When I testified in 1984 at the hearing of an orthomolecular physician, 
the assistant attorney general of the State of California, who was the pros¬ 
ecutor, asked me if I knew that EDTA chelation therapy for controlling 
cardiovascular problems had not been approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration. My answer was “Yes, I know that. I also know that the 
same EDTA therapy is approved by the FDA for heavy-metal detoxifica¬ 
tion, and that the reason it does not have FDA approval for cardiovascular 
problems is that no one has tried to get it. Many years ago Abbott Labora¬ 
tories, which owned the U.S. patent rights, dropped its application for 
FDA approval for treating arteriosclerotic disease, for financial reasons— 
the patent would expire too soon. No one else could afford to apply.” 

Despite the facts that this therapy for cardiovascular disease lacks FDA 
approval because pharmaceutical companies are not interested in obtaining 
it and that there is no legal bar to its use by physicians for this purpose, 
there has been a good bit of harassment by the government of physicians 
who use this therapy (Halstead, 1979; Walker, 1980). This harassment has 
the support of some medical societies, and, like the similar harassment 
of orthomolecular physicians, it seems to be based largely on ignorance 
and bias. 



19 


Cancer 


Cancer, including neoplasms of the lymphatic and hematopoietic (blood- 
cell-forming) systems, is the cause of 22 percent of all deaths in the United 
States. Each year about 600,000 people develop cancer, and most of them, 
more than 420,000, die of the disease. The amount of suffering associated 
with cancer is much greater than that for most other diseases. It is for this 
reason that the federal government has emphasized research on cancer and 
has allocated several hundred million dollars per year for cancer research, 
reaching $1 billion this year. 

Despite the great amount of money and effort expended in the study of 
cancer, progress during the last twenty-five years has been slow. A signifi¬ 
cant increase in survival time after diagnosis was achieved about thirty 
years ago, largely through improvements in the techniques of surgery and 
anesthesia. During the last twenty-five years some improvement in treat¬ 
ment of certain kinds of cancer has been achieved, mainly through the use 
of high-energy radiation and chemotherapy, but for most kinds of cancer 
there has been essentially no decrease in either incidence or length of time 
of survival after diagnosis, and it has become evident that some new ideas 
are needed, if greater control over this scourge is to be achieved. 

One new idea is that large doses of vitamin C may be used both to 
prevent cancer and to treat it. The most important work along this line has 
been carried out by Dr. Ewan Cameron, formerly chief surgeon in Vale of 





164 


CHAPTER 19 


Leven Hospital, Loch Lomondside, Scotland, and now medical director of 
the Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine. I have had the good 
fortune of having been associated with Dr. Cameron in his clinical research 
in this area during the last fourteen years. Accounts of our work are given 
in the book Cancer and Vitamin C (1979) and the published papers cited in 
the references section and are summarized later in this chapter. Another 
surgeon who has made important contributions in this field is Dr. Fukumi 
Morishige, of Fukuoka, Japan. 

Irwin Stone in his 1972 book The Healing Factor: Vitamin C Against 
Disease discussed the early reports that doses of vitamin C of 1 to 4 grams 
(g) per day, sometimes given together with an increased intake of vitamin 
A, seemed to have value in controlling cancer in some patients. This work 
was done largely by German physicians in the period between 1940 and 
1956. Despite the indication that these doses of vitamin C were of value in 
the treatment of cancer, the early studies did not lead to a thorough exami¬ 
nation of the possible virtues of vitamin C in that connection. Some favor¬ 
able results were also reported in studies with animals, but the early work 
in this field too was not followed up. 

In 1951 it was reported that patients with cancer have usually a very 
small concentration of vitamin C in the blood plasma and in the leucocytes 
of the blood, often only about half the value for other people. This observa¬ 
tion has been verified many times during the last thirty years. In 1979 
Cameron, Pauling, and Brian Leibovitz listed thirteen studies, all showing 
large decreases in both plasma and leucocyte concentrations. The level of 
ascorbic acid in the leucocytes of cancer patients is usually so low that the 
leucocytes are not able to carry out their important function of phagocyto¬ 
sis, of engulfing and digesting bacteria and other foreign cells, including 
malignant cells, in the body. A reasonable explanation of the low level of 
vitamin C in the blood of cancer patients is that their bodies are using up 
the vitamin in an effort to control the disease. The low level suggests that 
they should be given a large amount of the vitamin in order to keep their 
bodily defenses as effective as possible. 

Only one of the early reports on vitamin C and cancer dealt with the use 
of large doses of vitamin C over as long a period as eighteen months. In 
1954 Dr. Edward Greer, of Robinson, Illinois, published a report about a 
remarkable patient who apparently controlled his cancer (chronic myeloid 
leukemia) over a period of two years by the oral intake of very large 
amounts of vitamin C. This patient, an elderly executive of an oil company, 
had a number of concurrent illnesses. He developed chronic heart disease in 
September 1951 and was described in May 1952 as having alcoholic cirrho¬ 
sis of the liver and polycythemia (an increased number of circulating red 
blood cells). In August 1952 the diagnosis of chronic myeloid leukemia was 
established and verified by an independent hematologist. In September 



CANCER 


165 


1952, after extraction of some of his teeth, he was advised to take some 
vitamin C to promote healing of his gums. He immediately began to take 
very large amounts, from 24.5 g to 42 g per day (seven 500-milligram (mg) 
tablets taken seven to twelve times a day). He said that he set this regime 
for himself because he felt so much better when he took these very large 
doses. The patient repeatedly remarked about his feeling of well-being, and 
he continued in active employment. On two occasions Greer insisted that 
the vitamin C be stopped. Both times when the patient did so his spleen and 
liver became enlarged, soft, and tender, his temperature rose to 101 degrees, 
and he complained of general malaise and fatigue, typical leukemic symp¬ 
toms. His signs and symptoms rapidly improved when he resumed the 
intake of vitamin C. He died of acute cardiac decompensation in March 
1954, at age seventy-three. His spleen was then firm, and the leukemia, 
polycythmia, cirrhosis, and myocarditis had shown no progression during 
the eighteen months since he began his intake of large doses of vitamin C. 
Greer concluded that “the intake of the huge dose of ascorbic acid appeared 
to be essential for the welfare of the patient.” 

In 1968 Cheraskin and his associates described a synergistic effect of 
supplemental ascorbate on the radiation response in patients with 
squamous-cell carcinomas of the uterine cervix. Twenty-seven patients 
were given 750 mg of ascorbic acid per day, beginning one week before the 
radiation treatment and continuing until three weeks after its termination; 
in addition they received a vitamin-mineral supplement and general nutri¬ 
tional advice (decrease in intake of sucrose). The controls were twenty- 
seven similar patients who did not receive the vitamins or nutritional 
advice. Radiation therapy was equally vigorous for the two groups. The 
response to the radiation was significantly higher for the nutritionally 
treated patients (average score 97.5) than for the controls (average score 
63.3). Thus there is some evidence that cancer patients undergoing radio¬ 
therapy have an increased requirement for ascorbic acid and that satisfying 
this increased requirement protects against some of the harmful effects of 
irradiation as well as potentiating the therapeutic response. 

The late Dr. William McCormick of Toronto appears to have been the 
first to recognize that the generalized connective-tissue changes that attend 
scurvy are identical with the local connective-tissue changes observed in the 
immediate vicinity of invading neoplastic cells (McCormick, 1959). He 
surmised that the nutrient (vitamin C) known to be capable of preventing 
such generalized changes in scurvy might have similar effects in cancer. 
The evidence that cancer patients are almost invariably depleted of ascor¬ 
bate lent support to his view. 

There are some other interesting associations between scurvy and cancer. 
The historical literature contains many allusions to the increased frequency 
of “cancers and tumors” in scurvy victims. A typical autopsy report of 



166 


CHAPTER 19 


James Lind (Lind, 1753) contains phrases such as “all parts were so mixed 
up and blended together to form one mass or lump that individual organs 
could not be identified,” surely an eighteenth-century morbid anatomist’s 
graphic description of neoplastic infiltration. Conversely, in advanced hu¬ 
man cancer, the premortal features of anemia, cachexia, extreme lassitude, 
hemorrhages, ulceration, susceptibility to infections, and abnormally low 
tissue, plasma, and leucocyte ascorbate levels, with terminal adrenal fail¬ 
ure, are virtually identical with the premortal features of advanced human 
scurvy. 

Epidemiological evidence indicates that cancer incidence in large popula¬ 
tion groups is inversely related to average daily ascorbate intake. Of the 
several different published investigations, all giving essentially the same 
result, I mention the work of the Norwegian investigator Bjelke who in 
1973 and 1974 published accounts of the exhaustive studies that he had 
made of gastrointestinal cancers by means of a dietary survey by mail and a 
case-controlled study. His work, which involved more than thirty thousand 
people in the United States and Norway, included a determination of the 
consumption of various foods, as well as smoking habits and other factors. 
He found a negative correlation between the consumption of fruits, berries, 
vegetables, and vitamin C and the incidence of gastric cancer, whereas 
starchy foods, coffee, and salted fish were positively correlated. The two 
most important factors were, he concluded, the total intake of vegetables 
and the intake of vitamin C. The greater the intake of vegetables and of 
vitamin C, the smaller is the incidence of cancer. 

In 1973 I went to the National Cancer Institute to show a dozen top 
specialists there the case histories of the first forty patients with advanced 
cancer in Vale of Leven Hospital, Loch Lomondside, Scotland, who had 
been treated with 10 g of vitamin C per day by Dr. Ewan Cameron; my 
objective was to ask these specialists to carry out a controlled trial of vita¬ 
min C. They were not impressed by the evidence or the possibility that 
some control over cancer could be achieved by using large doses of this 
vitamin as an adjunct to appropriate conventional therapy. My wife, who 
had accompanied me, said afterwards that she had never before seen a 
group of medical researchers with less interest in new ideas. They told me 
that the National Cancer Institute would not do anything with vitamin C 
until studies had been made with animals. 

Those specialists did suggest, however, that I apply to the National Can¬ 
cer Institute for a grant to provide support for our Institute in California to 
carry out such a study. I at once applied to the institute for a grant to 
support studies of vitamin C in relation to cancer in mice and guinea pigs. 
It was approved as scientifically sound by the institute’s consultants, but it 
was turned down. My next seven applications met the same fate. Finally 
the National Cancer Institute made a grant to us that provided partial 



CANCER 


167 


support for a careful study of vitamin C in relation to spontaneous breast 
cancer in mice that we conducted in our institute in Palo Alto from 1981 to 
1984. This study is by far the most carefully carried out and reliable ani¬ 
mal study of vitamin C and cancer that has ever been made (Pauling et al., 
1985). 

The mice used in this investigation, strain RIII, begin to develop palpa¬ 
ble breast tumors at about age forty weeks. Formation of the tumors in¬ 
volves a virus that is transmitted from mother to daughter in the maternal 
milk. The rate at which the first tumor develops after the end of the lag 
period is constant—that is, after that age the tumorless mice have the same 
chance each week of demonstrating the first tumor. 

In our study we had seven groups of mice, fifty in each group, eating 
carefully prepared food containing percentages of 0.076, 1.86, 2.9, 4.2, 8.0, 
8.1, or 8.3 of added ascorbic acid. They began these diets at age 9 weeks 
and continued it to age 114 weeks. Mice burdened with tumors were killed 
to prevent suffering. We found that the lag period increased steadily with 
increasing intake of vitamin C, from age 38 weeks for 0.076 percent C to 
age 52 weeks for 8.3 percent C. Also, the rate of appearance of the first 
tumor among each group of mice decreased steadily in percentage, from 2.7 
per week for 0.075 percent C to 0.7 per week for 8.3 percent C. The 
biostatistical evaluation of the results shows that the confidence level of the 
conclusion that increased amounts of vitamin C in their food leads to de¬ 
creased incidence of spontaneous breast cancer in this strain of mice is 
extremely high. The chance that the observations are the results of a statis¬ 
tical fluctuation is only about one in a million. 

The overall result is that the age at which the tumor appears increases 
greatly with increased intake of vitamin C. This age for half the mice to 
develop a tumor (the median age) increases from 66 weeks for the smallest 
amount of the vitamin to 120 weeks for the largest amount. Development of 
the cancer is delayed in the RIII mouse strain from middle age to extreme 
old age. 

Similar results with skin cancer in mice caused by irradiation with long- 
wavelength ultraviolet light (similar to sunlight) were obtained in an ear¬ 
lier study in our institute (supported by contributions by many people, 
not by the National Cancer Institute) (Pauling, Willoughby, et al., 1980). 
Other animal studies made by various investigators, usually with much 
smaller groups, have given less reliable results. 

It has been recognized for many years that patients with cancer have a 
decreased level of vitamin C in the blood and also that these patients, 
especially children with cancer, have a high tendency to develop infections. 
Infection is a major cause of morbidity and of mortality in children with 
cancer, partially because the anticancer therapy damages the immune 
mechanism. 



168 


CHAPTER 19 


The low level of vitamin C in the blood should, of course, be rectified for 
all cancer patients by a high intake of the vitamin. This high intake should 
function to provide some protection against infectious diseases and should 
be a valuable adjunct to conventional therapy in the treatment of the infec¬ 
tious diseases as well as of the cancer itself. These facts about vitamin C, 
infection, and cancer seem never to have been learned or to have been 
forgotten by many physicians. An example is a recent article on infections 
in children with cancer (Hughes, W. T., 1984, “Infections in children with 
cancer: Part I: Most common causes and how to treat them,” in Primary 
Care & Cancer , October, pp. 66-72). This article mentions eleven factors 
as indicators of increased susceptibility of infectious disease in a child with 
malignancy. One of these factors is malnutrition. There is some discussion 
of the effect of the anticancer therapy and the type and extent of the malig¬ 
nancy on the natural defense mechanisms of the body, but there is no 
discussion of vitamin C and other nutrients in strengthening the defense 
mechanisms and essentially no discussion or recommendations about nutri¬ 
tion. There is no mention in the article of the fact that cancer patients have 
a decreased level of ascorbate in the blood, which should be rectified. 

Ascorbate in the human body has rather wide powers to destroy toxic 
substances. It collaborates with enzymes in the liver to react with these 
substances, often by hydroxylating them, converting them into other sub¬ 
stances that are not toxic, for elimination then in the urine. We do not yet 
have information about the extent to which the optimum intake of vitamin 
C can provide protection against the carcinogenic substances in our foods, 
drinks, and environment that get into our bodies, but some examples show 
that this effect may be large. 

Nitrites and nitrates in foods such as bacon and other preserved meats 
react in the stomach with amino compounds in the stomach contents to 
form nitrosamines, which are carcinogenic and which cause cancer of the 
stomach. A good intake of vitamin C destroys the nitrites and nitrates and 
prevents stomach cancer. A vigorous effort is being made now to reduce the 
amounts of nitrites and nitrates in foods, as a way of controlling cancer. 
Increased intake of vitamin C can also help to achieve this end. 

It has also been reported that the cancers that often appear in the blad¬ 
ders of cigar smokers and other users of tobacco regress if the patient 
ingests a sufficient amount of ascorbic acid, 1 g per day or more. Schlegel, 
Pipkin, Nishimura, and Schultz (1980) found the ascorbic-acid level of the 
urine to be about half as great for smokers as for nonsmokers and to be low 
for patients with bladder tumors. They also found with mice that implanta¬ 
tion in the bladder of a pellet containing 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid (a de¬ 
rivative of the amino acid tryptophan) caused bladder tumors to develop if 
the mice were receiving a normal diet but not if they had extra ascorbic acid 
in their drinking water. The authors suggest that the ascorbic acid prevents 



CANCER 


169 


the oxidation of 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid to a carcinogenic oxidation 
product. They state, “There seems to be reason to consider the beneficial 
effects of an adequate ascorbic acid level in the urine (corresponding to a 
rate of intake of 1.5 g per day) as a possible preventive measure in regard to 
bladder tumor formation and recurrence.” They also call attention to inves¬ 
tigations indicating that ascorbic acid may have a beneficial effect on the 
aging process of atherosclerosis, the hardening and thickening of the walls 
of the arteries (Willis and Fishman, 1955; Sokoloff and others, 1966). 

It was reported by Dr. Robert Bruce, director of the Toronto branch of 
the Ludwig Cancer Research Institute, in 1977 that there are mutagenic 
and presumably carcinogenic substances in the intestinal contents of human 
beings. Later he and his associates reported that a good intake of vitamin C 
greatly reduces the amount of these substances (Bruce 1979). In this way, 
and also be reducing the residence time of the waste material in the body, as 
was discussed in Chapter 10, a proper intake of vitamin C helps to protect 
the lower bowel against cancer. 

Colonic polyposis is a genetic disease characterized by the formation of 
large numbers of polyps in the colon and rectum. These polyps are benign 
tumors, but their presence has long been recognized as a premalignant 
condition. According to Willis (1973), “Victims of familial polyposis are 
almost certain to die of carcinoma of the colon or rectum at an early age.” 
There is, however, now hope for them. Studies by DeCosse et al. (1975), 
Lai et al. (1977), and Watne et al. (1977) with sixteen persons with famil¬ 
ial polyposis gave the result that the regular intake of 3 grams of vitamin C 
per day caused the polyps to disappear in half of the patients. There is a 
real possibility that a larger intake, of 10 or 20 g per day, would control the 
disease in others. 

Before we met each other and began our collaboration, Ewan Cameron 
had carried out operations on hundreds of patients with cancer in his sur¬ 
gery in Scotland. Like many other people, he thought that this disease, 
which causes so much suffering, needed a fresh approach. He gathered a 
large amount of information about cancer and formulated a new theory on 
its causation, which he published in a book, Hyaluronidase and Cancer , in 
1966. In this book he suggested that a significant amount of control over 
cancer might be achieved by strengthening the natural defense mechanisms 
of the human body. In particular, he mentioned that malignant tumors are 
known to produce an enzyme, hyaluronidase, that attacks the intercellular 
cement of surrounding tissues, weakening this cement to such an extent as 
to permit invasion of the tissues by the neoplasm. He suggested that some 
way might be found to strengthen the intercellular cement and in this way 
to build up the natural defense mechanisms of the body to such an extent as 
to resist attack by the malignant cells. For several years he tried giving 
various hormones and other substances to patients with advanced cancer in 



170 


CHAPTER 19 


the hope of achieving this result, but he did not succeed in finding any 
substance or mixture of substances that was effective. 

I read his book and was much impressed by his argument. I had been 
working on vitamin C in relation to the common cold and other diseases, 
and in 1971 I had the idea that the known property of ascorbic acid of 
increasing the rate of synthesis of collagen would permit large doses of 
vitamin C to strengthen the intercellular cement by the increased synthesis 
of collagen fibrils, which are an important part of this intercellular cement. 
I mentioned this idea in an address that I gave at the dedication of the Ben 
May Laboratory for Cancer Research in Pritzker Medical School, Univer¬ 
sity of Chicago. By then, Cameron had independently reached the tentative 
conclusion that ascorbate might be involved in the synthesis of the naturally 
occurring hyaluronidase inhibitor and had already begun cautiously to pre¬ 
scribe ascorbate to dying cancer patients under his care. In November 1971 
he read an account of my address in the New York Times. We immediately 
corresponded, and this marked the beginning of a long and productive 
association. 

Whereas Cameron had been disappointed in his trials of various hor¬ 
mones, he immediately thought that the treatment with vitamin C was of 
considerable benefit to the patients, and during the next ten years he gave 
the vitamin in large doses to several hundred patients with advanced can¬ 
cer, almost all of them being patients for whom the conventional methods of 
treatment had been tried and found to be of no further benefit. He and his 
coworkers published several papers on their observations. In one paper 
they reported that the vitamin C seemed to control pain quite effectively, 
so that patients who had been receiving large doses of morphine or 
diamorphine could stop taking the narcotic drug (Cameron and Baird, 
1973). He also published a detailed report on the first fifty patients with 
advanced cancer to be treated with large doses of vitamin C (Cameron and 
Campbell, 1974), and a paper on one patient who seemed to recover com¬ 
pletely from cancer when treated with vitamin C, in whom, however, the 
cancer returned when the intake of vitamin C was stopped, and who again 
recovered completely when the treatment with vitamin C was resumed. 
This patient continues to take vitamin C, 12.5 g per day, and after twelve 
years seems to be in excellent health (Cameron, Campbell, and Jack, 
1975). 

The first observation made by Cameron was that most of the ascorbate- 
treated patients entered upon a period of increased well-being and general 
clinical improvement. The benefits enjoyed by a majority of these patients 
included, in addition to increased well-being, relief from pain, a decrease in 
malignant ascites (cells shed from the tumors, potentially initiators of new 
tumors and so the agents of metastasis) and malignant pleural effusions, 
relief from hematuria, some reversal of malignant hepatomegaly and malig- 



CANCER 


777 


nant jaundice, and decrease in the red-cell sedimentation rate and in the 
serum seromucoid level, all accepted indicators of lessening malignant ac¬ 
tivity. It was thus possible to conclude that both the increase in well-being 
and the apparent increase in survival time resulted from a significant attack 
by the ascorbate, either directly or by way of the natural protective mecha¬ 
nisms of the body, on the malignancy itself. 

By 1973 it seemed to Cameron and me that a controlled trial should be 
carried out, in which half of the patients, selected by tossing a coin or by 
some more sophisticated randomizing process, received 10 g of vitamin C 
each day and the others received a placebo. By that time, however, 
Cameron had become so convinced of the value of vitamin C to patients 
with advanced cancer that he was unwilling for ethical reasons to withhold 
it from any patient to whom he had the power to give it; accordingly he 
could not carry out such a trial with his patients. I then went to the Na¬ 
tional Cancer Institute to suggest that it carry out such a trial, as mentioned 
earlier in this chapter. 

Even though we could not carry out a double-blind randomized clinical 
trial, we could carry out a controlled trial. The Vale of Leven Hospital is a 
large one, with 440 beds, and it registers about 500 new cancer patients 
each year. Although Cameron was the senior consultant surgeon in admin¬ 
istrative charge of the 100 surgical beds, he was in direct medical charge of 
only some of these cancer patients. At first none of the other physicians or 
surgeons gave large doses of vitamin C to their patients, and even in later 
years many of the Vale of Leven cancer patients have not received this 
treatment. Thus there have been other cancer patients closely similar to the 
ascorbate-treated patients, receiving the same treatment, except for the as¬ 
corbate, from the same medical and surgical staff, in the same hospital. 
These patients could serve as the controls. 

In 1976 we reported the survival times of one hundred terminal cancer 
patients given supplemental ascorbate and those of a control group of one 
thousand patients of similar initial status who had been treated by the same 
clinicians in the same hospital and who had been managed identically ex¬ 
cept for the supplemental ascorbate. The one thousand controls thus pro¬ 
vided ten control patients for each ascorbate-treated patient, matched as to 
sex, age, primary tumor type, and clinical status of “untreatability.” We 
employed an outside doctor, who had no knowledge of the survival times of 
the ascorbate-treated patients, to examine the case histories of each of the 
control patients and to record for each of them the survival time—the time 
in days between the date of abandonment of all conventional forms of 
treatment and the date of death. 

The results were surprising, even to us (see illustration on page 172) 
(Cameron and Pauling, 1978). On 10 August 1976 all of the one thousand 
control patients had died, whereas eighteen of the one hundred ascorbate- 



772 


CHAPTER 19 


treated patients were still living. On that date the average time of survival 
after the date of “untreatability” was 4.2 times as great for the ascorbate- 
treated patients as for their matched controls. The one hundred ascorbate- 
treated patients have lived on the average more than three hundred days 
longer than their matched controls, and in addition it is our strong clinical 
impression that they have lived happier lives during this terminal period. 
Moreover, a few of them continue to survive, still taking their daily doses of 
sodium ascorbate, and some of them might well be considered to have been 
“cured” of their malignant disease, in that they are free of overt manifesta¬ 
tions of cancer and are leading normal lives. 

We considered this to be a remarkable achievement, bearing in mind that 
if the mortality of cancer could be decreased by 5 percent the lives of twenty 
thousand American cancer patients would be saved each year. 

Because of the importance of the problem of cancer, we made a second 
examination of the case histories of the Vale of Leven patients in 1978, 



Vale of Leven study Upon being judged untreatable, one hundred patients under the care 
of Ewan Cameron at the Vale of Leven Hospital in Scotland were treated with vitamin C, 
usually 10 g per day. Their survival times are here compared to a control group of one 
thousand patients matched by age, sex, and site of cancer to the experimental group. At all 
the times plotted, the vitamin-C-treated patients were surviving in a much larger percentage 
than the controls, with no controls surviving past day 500. 





CANCER 


173 


again with one hundred ascorbate-treated patients and one thousand 
matched controls (Cameron and Pauling, 1978). Ten of the original one 
hundred ascorbate-treated patients, mainly with rare forms of cancer for 
whom it had been difficult to find sets of exactly matched controls, were 
replaced by new ones, and the one thousand matched controls were inde¬ 
pendently selected, without regard as to whether or not they had been 
selected before (about half of them were in the earlier set). Some of the 
results of this study are given in the illustrations on pages 174 and 175. 
The one hundred ascorbate-treated patients and their matched controls 
(same type of primary tumor, same sex, and same age to within five years) 
were divided into nine groups, based on the type of primary tumor; for 
example, 17 ascorbate-treated patients and 170 controls with cancer of the 
colon. (The ninth group included patients with types of cancer other than 
those shown in the illustrations not cited.) Survival times were measured 
from the date when the patient was determined to be “unbeatable”; that is, 
when the conventional therapies were deemed to be no longer effective—at 
this date or a few days later ascorbate treatment was begun. In 1978 the 
mean survival times for the nine groups were between 114 and 435 days 
greater for the vitamin-C groups than for the corresponding control groups, 
an average of 255 days for all groups, and were continuing to increase 
because 8 percent of the vitamin-C patients were still alive, and none of the 
controls were. 

A similar study was carried out in the Fukuoka Torikai Hospital in 
Japan during the five years beginning 1 January 1973 (Morishige and 
Murata, 1979), with results, shown in the illustration on page 176, similar 
to those obtained in Vale of Leven Hospital. 

More recently, two controlled trials have been carried out in the Mayo 
Clinic. This Mayo work has been publicized as refuting the Vale of Leven 
and Fukuoka Torikai studies. The record shows, however, that the Mayo 
Clinic doctors did not follow the protocols of those studies. That work has, 
therefore, only small relevance to the question of how great the value of 
vitamin C is for cancer patients. 

The first Mayo Clinic study (Creagen et al., 1979), showed only a small 
protective effect of vitamin C. Cameron and I attributed this reported result 
to the fact that most of the Mayo Clinic patients had already received heavy 
doses of cytotoxic drugs, which damage the immune system and interfere 
with the action of vitamin C, and the fact that the controls were also taking 
vitamin C in much larger amounts than were the controls in Scotland or 
Japan. Only 4 percent of the Vale of Leven patients had received prior 
chemotherapy. 

In our studies the vitamin-C patients took large amounts of the vitamin, 
without stopping, for the rest of their lives or until the present time, some 
for as much as fourteen years. In the second Mayo Clinic Study (Moertel et 



174 


CHAPTER 19 



Vale of Leven survival times For cancers with eight different primary sites in the Vale 
of Leven study (summarized in Figure 19.1) the survival times of the vitamin-C-treated 
patients are compared to those of their matched controls. Survival is measured from the day 


al., 1985), the vitamin-C patients received the vitamin for only a short time 
(median 2.5 months). None of the vitamin-C patients died while taking the 
vitamin (amount somewhat less than 10 g per day). They were, however, 
studied for another two years, during which their survival record was no 
better than that of the controls, or even somewhat worse. The Moertel 
paper and a spokesman for the National Cancer Institute, who commented 
on it (Wittes, 1985) both suppressed the fact that the vitamin-C patients 
were not receiving vitamin C when they died and had not received any for a 
long time (median 10.5 months). They announced vigorously that this 
study showed finally and definitely that vitamin C has no value against 
advanced cancer and recommended that no more studies of vitamin C be 
made. 







































CANCER 


775 



Surv ival time after diagnosis of “untreatability, , ‘ in days 

the patient was judged unbeatable. In conventional cancer statistics, survival for five years 
(1826 days) is recorded as “cure.” 


Their results provided no basis whatever for this conclusion, because in 
fact their patients died only after being deprived of the vitamin C. To the 
extent that their study showed anything, it is that cancer patients should 
not stop taking their large doses of vitamin C. Yet the study was heralded 
upon publication as one that reflected adversely on the Cameron-Pauling 
work. 

When this Mayo Clinic paper appeared, 17 January 1985, Cameron 
and I were angry that Moertel and his Mayo Clinic associates, the spokes¬ 
man for the National Cancer Institute, and also the editor of the New 
England Journal of Medicine had managed to prevent us from obtaining 
any information about their results until a few hours before their publica¬ 
tion. Six weeks earlier Moertel refused to tell me anything about the work, 



















































176 


CHAPTER 19 



Fukuoka Torikai Hospital study Matched experimental and control subjects received 
large amounts of vitamin C (5 grams or more per day, averaging 29 grams per day) and 
small amounts (4 g per day or less) respectively, upon being judged unbeatable. Patients in 
the control group had all died by day 200, when 25 percent of the high-intake group were 
still alive. The six still alive on 10 August 1978, indicated by the long extension past 400 
days, had survived an average of 866 days after being judged untreatable. (Adapted from 
Morishige and Murata, 1979.) 


except that their paper was going to be published. In a letter to me he 
promised that he would arrange for me to have a copy of the paper several 
days before publication, but he broke that promise. 

The misrepresentation by Moertel and his associates and by the Na¬ 
tional Cancer Institute spokesman has done great harm. Cancer patients 
have informed us that they are stopping their vitamin C because of the 
“negative results” reported by the Mayo Clinic. 

It is not often that unethical behavior of scientists is reported. Fraud 
committed by young physicians doing medical research has been turned 
up several times in the last few years. Improper representation of the re¬ 
sults of clinical studies, as in the second Mayo Clinic report, is especially to 
be condemned because of its effect in increasing the amount of human 
suffering. 

The Mayo Clinic paper stimulated a vigorous response from the public 
addressed to Cameron and me. The first two letters reached me five days 
after the publication of the paper. The following excerpts are quoted with 
permission of the writers. 

One letter was written to Moertel, the principal Mayo Clinic investiga¬ 
tor, by a man in Utah, who sent a copy to me. It was written the day after 
publication, and the entire letter reads as follows: 

Dear Dr. Moertel: 

In March 1983 my right lung was removed due to cancer. The 

X-ray showed no spread and no follow-up treatment was given. 







CANCER 


777 


On May 8, 1984 a cat-scan showed metastasis to the brain, two 
small tumors on front of brain, right side and left side, 3 cm. Also one 
large tumor at the back, 6 cm. 

The prognosis was terminal with about a year to live. The 
treatment was radiation at LDS Hospital, Salt Lake City which 
would shrink and control the tumors for a while, but not eradicate 
them. 

I immediately went on a nutritional program which included 
Vitamin C. I went to my bowel tolerance level of 36 grams a day. 

On July 9th another cat-scan was done at LDS Hospital and the 
tumors were completely gone. I just finished a follow-up cat-scan and 
chest X-ray which showed no sign of cancer. 

I feel strongly that the Vitamin C (and other nutrients) together 
with the radiation removed the tumors. I am still on 36 grams daily 
and plan to be indefinitely and feel the Vitamin C has played an 
important part of my miraculous cure. 

In the book “Cancer and Vitamin C” by Ewan Cameron and Linus 
Pauling, they do not suggest the use of vitamin C alone to cure cancer 
but only to augment traditional treatments. 

My records are open for verification. I realize you do not like case 
histories, but X-rays and doctors reports plus real results are pretty 
good proof. 

I do not know how much Vitamin C you gave in your blind studies, 
but each person’s requirements are different. Therefore, any amount 
short of bowel tolerance levels, which could not be done in a blind 
study such as yours, is useless. 

It is my hope that if you are truly interested in the cancer patient 
you will reconsider your position. 

The second letter was written to me by an eighty-one-year-old man in 
San Francisco. Here are some excerpts from his letter: 

This letter is essentially about the use of your basic theories 
concerning cancer and vitamin C. As I wrote before, I had surgery for 
colorectal cancer on 4 September, 1980. It had metastasized to the 
liver where a tumor about 35 mm in diameter was found. It was not 
operable under the circumstances. I started reading on the subject and 
taking injections of 5-FU at the same time. I knew you had written on 
vitamin C and the common cold but was unaware of your work with 
Dr. Cameron on cancer in Scotland. 

In the literature, I quickly found that metastasized cancer to the 
liver was tantamount to a death sentence, survival rates ranging from 
a few weeks to 18 months. In most studies, untreated metastases had a 




178 


CHAPTER 19 


survival period averaging 6.1 months. I also quickly became convinced 
that the fluorinated pyrimidine 5-FU was nothing more than a 
placebo. I decided to quit taking it. The oncologist I was seeing did not 
object and ordered a liver scan. This showed that the tumor had 
grown from 35 mm to 52 millimeters in diameter while I was taking 
the injections. 

By nature, I am a sanguine man and since fifteen, I have known 
that life would be the death of me yet. Gathering all my material 
together and using your thinking on the subject as a guide, I worked 
out a regime based on vitamin C, vitamin E and other dietary 
supplements. 

The second liver scan, after I ingested 10-12 grams of vitamin C 
daily for three months, showed no change in the size or texture of the 
liver lesion. It was there, all right, but it had not grown. I continued 
my self-treatment, looked for a medical doctor who could help me. I 
found myself faced with an ocean of ignorance on the part of the 
medical fraternity as to the immensely complex process by which the 
human body absorbs and uses the materials upon which it exists. And 
profound indifference as to what I was doing. I know 12 doctors 
personally, most of them I consider friends. Five of them tell me that 
they had one course in nutrition for a single semester in medical 
school. The other seven had no course at all. None asked me anything 
about what I was doing. 

I continued the liver scans, one each three months. The lesion 
remained the same until the ultrasound scan of 15 October, 1984. To 
my surprise, this scan showed a decrease amounting to 32% in the 
cubic content of the tumor. Because of the nature of the finding, the 
series was run twice. Once by the technician and then by the doctor in 
charge of the laboratory to make sure of an accurate finding. The 
tumor had also begun to be infiltrated with calcium. 

During all of this time, I have been reasonably healthy with no sign 
of cancer, working at one thing or another and sailing our boat on the 
Bay. I have a chest x-ray each year because the normal path of the 
decrease is from the liver to the lungs. My lungs are clear. 

In your writing, you suggest that the intake of ascorbic acid be 
moved up until one becomes uncomfortable and then to back down a 
bit. In your letter to me, you proposed 25 grams of C daily. I have 
been taking 36 grams daily for more than two years now. In divided 
portions, I have no difficulty with this. 

I have planned on writing you for more than a year, but pure sloth 
has caused me to put it off. The present spur to my intent is the article 
read at breakfast two days ago about the Mayo Clinic procedure. I 
think that this is a shabby business indeed. Mayo is the last place I 



CANCER 


179 


would want to see used for a study of vitamin C under any conditions. 
They are flawed because of the manner in which they did their first 
so-called study. What is needed should be obvious to a blind man. 

That is, nothing short of a series of massive tests, using thousands of 
patients with scores of different kinds of cancer. And these grouped in 
various stages of this degenerative disease. It would have to be a 
national effort as no clinic, hospital or teaching university could 
possibly carry it out on the necessary scale. 

I am sure that you are absolutely right in saying that vitamin C, 
while not a cure for cancer, is a vital and potent adjunct in the 
management and control of the disease. And it is a fact that any form 
of chemotherapy will damage the body’s own immune system. In my 
case, I must have achieved a dandy immune system or my cancer 
would long ago have reached one of the lymph glands. 

That the tumor on my liver has become non-invasive is obvious. 
That it will stay that way is not obvious. Knowing that it is there puts 
me in the position of living under the sword of Damocles. I am 
reasonably certain that I shall die of cancer. . . if I do not die of old age 
first. I was 81 years of age on January 16, 1985. 


These letters are representative of scores of letters that Cameron and I 
have received. Such evidence may be dismissed as anecdotal when com¬ 
pared to the statistical evidence from large-scale trials—with inadequate 
intakes of vitamin C. The anecdotes nonetheless should challenge conscien¬ 
tious investigators to run large-scale trials with intakes of vitamin C as 
prescribed by Cameron. 

In Chapter 26 I have more to say about the behavior of Moertel and his 
colleagues in illustration of the difference between vitamins and drugs. 

Based upon the results of our studies, Cameron and I have recommended 
that a high intake of vitamin C be taken by every cancer patient, as an 
adjunct to appropriate conventional therapy and beginning as early in the 
course of the disease as possible. 

How many people could be helped in this way? The quantitative infor¬ 
mation that we have is based mainly on the observation of patients with 
advanced cancer in Scotland who received 10 g of vitamin C per day. As the 
result of observations on several hundred patients, Cameron reached the 
following conclusions about the effects of administering this amount of 
vitamin C to patients with advanced cancer: 


• Category I. No response of tumors, but usually 
improvement in wellbeing 


about 20% 




Rather small response 


about 25% 


Category II. 




180 


CHAPTER 19 


• Category III. Retardation of growth of tumors 

• Category IV. No change in tumor (standstill) 

• Category V. Tumor regression 

• Category VI. Complete regression 


about 25% 


about 20% 


about 9% 


about 1% 


Better results are obtained with intakes greater than 10 g per day. 

In our book Cancer and Vitamin C, Cameron and I stated our conclusion 
that “This simple and safe treatment, the ingestion of large amounts of 
vitamin C, is of definite value in the treatment of patients with advanced 
cancer. Although the evidence is as yet not so strong, we believe that vita¬ 
min C has even greater value for the treatment of cancer patients with the 
disease in earlier stages and also for the prevention of cancer.” 

The last sentences in that book are the following: 

With the possible exception of during intense chemotherapy, 
we strongly advocate the use of supplemental ascorbate in the 
management of all cancer patients from as early in the illness as 
possible. We believe that this simple measure would improve the 
overall results of cancer treatment quite dramatically, not only by 
making the patients more resistant to their illness but also by 
protecting them against some of the serious and occasionally fatal 
complications of the cancer treatment itself. We are quite convinced 
that in the not too distant future supplemental ascorbate will have an 
established place in all cancer-treatment regimes. 

We have now had the opportunity to observe patients who have taken 
10 g or more per day of vitamin C during intense chemotherapy. It seems 
clear that there is benefit from the vitamin C, which controls to a consider¬ 
able extent the disagreeable side effects of the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic 
agents, such as nausea and loss of hair, and that benefit seems to add its 
value to that of the chemotherapeutic agent. We now recommend a high 
intake of vitamin C, in some cases up to the bowel-tolerance limit (Chapter 
14), beginning as early as possible. 

There are many advantages to using vitamin C as an adjunct to appro¬ 
priate conventional therapy in the treatment of cancer patients. Vitamin C 
is inexpensive. It has no serious side effects, but instead improves the appe¬ 
tite, controls the feeling of misery that plagues cancer patients, improves the 
general health, and gives the patient a greater capacity to enjoy life. For 
every patient there is the chance that through its use, together with the 
appropriate conventional therapy and good intakes of other nutrients, the 
disease can be kept under control for many years. 



20 


The Brain 


Of all of the organs in the human body, the brain is the most sensitive to its 
molecular composition. The proper functioning of the brain is known to 
require the presence of many different kinds of molecules in the right 
concentrations. This is the physical, the molecular environment of the 
mind. The physiology of the brain tends always to maintain that environ¬ 
ment constant. In persons suffering from scurvy the concentration of vita¬ 
min C in the brain is kept high even when there is almost complete deple¬ 
tion in the blood and other tissues. So sensitive is the brain that if a person 
is deprived of oxygen for a few minutes, the brain dies (as is shown by a flat 
electroencephalic curve), while the other organs survive. 

In considering the health of the rest of the body, we have encountered the 
biochemical individuality that sets each person singularly apart from every 
other (Chapter 10). Can it be argued that they do not differ in the amounts 
of critical substances supplied to the brain? We must ask then what part 
the molecular environment of each mind plays in establishing the singular¬ 
ity of each individual’s personality. 

This simple question leads us to the possibility that the brain may suffer 
a localized cerebral avitaminosis or other localized cerebral deficiency dis¬ 
ease. There is the possibility that some human beings have a sort of cere¬ 
bral scurvy, without any of the other manifestations, or a sort of cerebral 





182 


CHAPTER 20 


pellagra, or cerebral pernicious anemia. It was pointed out by Zuckerkandl 
and Pauling (1962) that every vitamin, every essential amino acid, and 
every other essential nutrilite represents a molecular disease, which our 
distant ancestors learned to control, when it began to afflict them, by select¬ 
ing a therapeutic diet, and which has continued to be kept under control in 
this way. The localized deficiency diseases mentioned above may be com¬ 
pound molecular diseases, involving not only the original lesion, the loss of 
the ability to synthesize the vital substance, but also another lesion, one that 
causes a decreased rate of transfer across a membrane, such as the blood- 
brain barrier, to the affected organ, or an increased rate of destruction of 
the vital substance in the organ, or some other perturbing reaction. These 
deficiencies in the supply of synthesis of crucial molecules may manifest 
themselves in symptoms diagnosed as psychosis of one kind or another to be 
treated by attempts to modify the patient’s behavior or personality. 

In the ninth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1881) insanity is 
defined as a chronic disease of the brain inducing chronic disordered mental 
symptoms. The author of the article, J. Batty Tuke, M.D., lecturer on 
insanity, School of Medicine, Edinburgh, then stated that this definition 

possesses the great practical advantage of keeping before the student 
the primary fact that insanity is the result of disease of the brain, that 
it is not a mere immaterial disorder of the intellect. In the earliest 
epochs of medicine the corporeal character of insanity was generally 
admitted, and it was not until the superstitious ignorance of the 
Middle Ages had obliterated the scientific—though by no means 
always accurate—deductions of the early writers that any theory of its 
purely psychical character arose. At the present day it is unnecessary 
to combat such a theory, as it is universally accepted that the brain is 
the organ through which mental phenomena are manifested, and 
therefore it is impossible to conceive of the existence of an insane mind 
in a healthy brain. 

By 1929, when the fourteenth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica 
was published, the situation had changed, largely because of the develop¬ 
ment of psychoanalysis by Sigmund Freud. The earlier definition of insan¬ 
ity was deleted and was replaced by discussions from two points of view: 
that of the materialistic school, who held that structural changes in the 
brain are involved, and that of the psychogenic school, who held that insan¬ 
ity is the result of abnormalities of the ego and that the structural changes 
in the brain observed in certain forms of insanity are caused by a perverted 
mentality. 



THE BRAIN 


183 


Even now, half a century later, when we have extensive knowledge of the 
action of psychotropic drugs, brain tumors, brain injuries, slow viruses, 
protein starvation, and other factors affecting the function of the brain, 
there are still practitioners of psychoanalysis who ignore the brain and 
attempt only to treat the ego. 

When the use of vitamin B 3 was introduced (by drinking milk, 1920 on, 
or eating bread made from flour fortified with the vitamin, 1940), it cured 
thousands of pellagra patients of their psychoses, as well as of the physical 
manifestations of their disease. For this purpose only small doses are re¬ 
quired; the Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) of the National Re¬ 
search Council is 17 milligrams (mg) per day (for a 70-kilogram [kg], 
154-pound, male). In 1939 Cleckley, Sydenstricker, and Geeslin reported 
the successful treatment of nineteen patients, and in 1941 Sydenstricker 
and Cleckley reported similarly successful treatment of twenty-nine pa¬ 
tients, with severe psychiatric symptoms by use of moderately large doses of 
nicotinic acid (0.3 to 1.5 grams [g] per day). None of these patients had 
physical symptoms of pellagra or any other avitaminosis. More recently 
many other investigators have reported on the use of nicotinic acid and 
nicotinamide for the treatment of mental disease. Outstanding among them 
are Dr. Abram Hoffer and Dr. Humphry Osmond, who since 1952 have 
advocated and used nicotinic acid in large doses, in addition to the conven¬ 
tional therapy, for the treatment of schizophrenia. Their work, which ig¬ 
nited my interest in vitamins, will be discussed more fully later in this 
chapter. 

A deficiency of vitamin B 12 , cobalamin, whatever its cause (pernicious 
anemia, a genetic lack of the factor in gastric juice that is needed to trans¬ 
port the vitamin into the blood; or infestation with the fish tapeworm Di- 
phyllobothrium, whose high requirement for the vitamin results in depriva¬ 
tion for the host; or excessive bacterial flora with a high requirement for the 
vitamin) leads to mental illness, often more pronounced than the physical 
consequences. The mental illness associated with pernicious anemia often 
appears years before the anemia develops. All of these manifestations of 
severe B 12 deficiency are, of course, controlled by the administration of the 
vitamin in adequate amounts. 

There is also epidemiological evidence that even only moderate defi¬ 
ciency of B 12 may lead to mental illness. Edwin, Holten, Norum, Schrumpf, 
and Skaug (1965) determined the amount of B 12 in the serum of every 
patient over thirty years old admitted to a mental hospital in Norway 
during a period of one year. Of the 396 patients, 5.8 percent (23) had a 
pathologically low concentration, less than 101 picograms per milliliter 
(ml), and the concentration in 9.6 percent (38) was subnormal (101 to 150 




184 


CHAPTER 20 


picograms per milliliter). The normal concentration is 150 to 1300 pro¬ 
grams per milliliter. The incidence of pathologically low and subnormal 
levels of B 12 in the serums of these patients, 15.4 percent, is about thirty 
times that in the general population, about 0.5 percent (estimated from the 
reported frequency of pernicious anemia in the area, 9.3 per 100,000 per¬ 
sons per year). Other investigators have also reported a higher incidence of 
low B 12 concentrations in the serums of mental patients than in the popula¬ 
tion as a whole and have suggested that B 12 deficiency, whatever its origin, 
may lead to mental illness. 

These observations indicate that an increased intake of vitamin B 12 , as 
well as of other vitamins, should be a part of the treatment of every men¬ 
tally ill person. The vitamin can be effectively taken by mouth, except by 
those persons with pernicious anemia, for whom injections are needed. 

An interesting investigation of the relation between intelligence, as indi¬ 
cated by the results of standard mental ability tests, and the concentration 
of ascorbic acid in the blood plasma has been reported by Kubala and Katz 
(1960). The subjects were 351 students in four schools (kindergarten to 
college) in three cities. They were initially divided into the higher-ascorbic- 
acid group (with more than 1.10 mg of ascorbic acid per 100 milliliters of 
blood plasma) and the lower-ascorbic-acid group (less than 1.10 mg per 
100 milliliters) on the basis of analysis of blood samples. By matching pairs 
on a socioeconomic basis (family income, education of father and mother), 
seventy-two subjects in each group were selected. It was found that the 
average measured intelligence quotient (IQ) of the higher-ascorbic-acid 
group was greater than that of the lower-ascorbic-acid group in each of the 
four schools; for all seventy-two pairs of subjects the average IQ values 
were 113.22 and 108.71, respectively, with an average difference of 4.51. 
The probability that a difference this great would be found in a similar test 
on a uniform population is less than 5 percent; hence the observed differ¬ 
ence in average IQ of the two groups is statistically significant. 

The subjects in both groups were then given supplementary orange juice 
during a period of six months, and the tests were repeated. The average 
measured IQ for those in the initially higher-ascorbic-acid group has in¬ 
creased very little (by only 0.02), whereas that for the lower group had 
increased by 3.54 IQ units. This difference in increase is also statistically 
significant, with a probability that it is just a statistical fluctuation of less 
than 5 percent in a uniform population. 

The study was continued through a second school year with thirty-two 
pairs (sixty-four subjects), with similar results. The relation between the 
average measured IQ and the average blood-plasma ascorbic-acid concen¬ 
tration for these sixty-four subjects tested four times during a period of 
months is shown in the illustration on page 185. These results indicate that 



THE BRAIN 


185 


the IQ is raised by 3.6 units when the blood-plasma ascorbic-acid concen¬ 
tration is increased by 50 percent (from 1.03 to 1.55 mg per 100 milliliters). 
This increase would for many people result from increasing the intake of 
ascorbic acid for an adult by 50 mg per day (from 100 to 150 mg per day). 

Kubala and Katz conclude that some of the variance in intelligence-test 
performance is determined by the “temporary nutritional state of the indi¬ 
vidual, at least with regards to citrus or other products providing ascorbic 
acid.” They suggest that “alertness” or “sharpness” is diminished by a de¬ 
creased intake of ascorbic acid. 

There is no indication in the illustration cited that maximum mental 
ability has been reached at the value 1.55 mg of ascorbic acid per 100 
milliliters of blood plasma. This concentration corresponds for a 70-kg 
adult to the daily ingestion of about 180 mg of ascorbic acid. I conclude that 
for maximum mental performance the daily allowance of ascorbic acid 
should be at least three times the 60 mg recommended by the U.S. Food 
and Nutrition Board and at least nine times the 20 mg recommended by the 
corresponding British authority. Still larger intakes might have an addi¬ 
tional effect. 

People differ from one another in their ability to fit into the world, to get 
along with other people, and to make their own living by contributing to 
the work needed to keep the world going. For many people inability is 
inborn, and shows up in childhood as mental retardation, slowness to learn, 
an impairment of the ability to think clearly. The problem of mental retar¬ 
dation is a very serious one. About fifteen million people in the United 



Mean blood-plasma ascorbic-acid concentration 
in mg per 100 milliliters of plasma 


Vitamin C and IQ Relation between mean intelligence quotient and mean concentration 
of vitamin C in the blood plasma is shown for sixty-four school children. Four tests were 
made of each child over a period of eighteen months. The plasma vitamin-C concentration 
was changed by giving all the subjects extra orange juice during certain months. (Redrawn 
from Figure 1 of Kubala and Katz, 1960). 





186 


CHAPTER 20 


States are mentally deficient, including about two million classed as se¬ 
verely deficient. The cost of taking care of the more severely retarded ones I 
estimate at more than $50 billion per year. Mental retardation is a cause of 
suffering not only to the retarded person but also to his or her family. 

Many causes of mental retardation are now known, and for a few it is 
known how to prevent or modify the genetic damage. An example is 
phenylketonuria (PKU), which results from the inability to make the en¬ 
zyme that catalyzes the conversion of the amino acid phenylalanine into 
another amino acid, tyrosine. Both of these amino acids are present in the 
proteins in our food. A child with PKU has an excess of phenylalanine and 
a deficiency of tyrosine in the blood. This condition interferes with the 
proper development and functioning of the brain, leading to mental retar¬ 
dation. If the PKU infant shortly after birth is given a special diet low in 
phenylalanine and is kept on the diet for several years, the severe mental 
retardation does not occur. 

Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21, mongolism) is the result of a genetic ab¬ 
normality in which the cells of the person contain three, rather than two, of 
one of the smaller chromosomes, number 21. Persons suffering from this 
disease thus tend to produce 50 percent more than usual of many different 
kinds of enzymes, programmed by the hundreds of genes on this chromo¬ 
some. As a result, such persons show many abnormalities. They are small 
in stature; have an abnormally large size and unusual shape of the head; 
abnormalities in shapes of the hands and feet; a large, protruding tongue; 
and the slanted eyes under epicanthal folds that caused the disease origi¬ 
nally to be called mongolism. About one-third suffer from congenital heart 
disease, and they have an increased incidence of acute leukemia; these prob¬ 
lems often result in early death. Those who survive to adulthood show ac¬ 
celerated aging and usually die between forty and sixty. 

People with Down’s syndrome are placid and affectionate, and the in¬ 
fants rarely cry. They are severely retarded mentally, with IQ usually 
about 50. The incidence in births to young mothers is about one in two 
thousand, rising to about one in twenty-two for mothers more than forty 
years old. Persons with Down’s syndrome constitute the largest group of 
institutionalized mental retardates. 

An important medical and scientific problem is that of finding a way of 
treating these genetic abnormalities, starting in infancy, that would prevent 
much of the mental retardation and also the physical abnormalities, such as 
small stature and unusual appearance. I believe that we can now see that 
this goal can in part be reached by nutritional and other orthomolecular 
measures. Even a partial decrease in the severity of mental retardation can 
be very important. Increase in IQ from 50 to 70 (low normal) means the 



THE BRAIN 


187 


difference between a life of dependency on others and a life of independence 
and self-sufficiency. 

Dr. Ruth F. Harrell, of Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia, 
and her collaborators Ruth Capp, Donald Davis, Julius Peerless, and 
Leonard Ravitz have reported the results of their double-blind study of the 
effect of administering a mixture of nineteen vitamins and minerals to 
sixteen mentally retarded children between five and fifteen years old (six 
boys and ten girls) (Harrell et al., 1981). Their initial IQ values, averages 
of measurements by three or more psychologists, varied from 17 to 70, with 
mean a value of 47.7. The subjects were assigned randomly to two groups. 
During the first four months of the double-blind study the six subjects in 
group 1 were given six vitamin-mineral tablets each day, and the ten sub¬ 
jects in group 2 were given six placebo tablets; then for four additional 
months every subject received the vitamin-mineral tablets. 

Harrell had been inspired by having read the suggestion by Professor 
Roger J. Williams of the University of Texas, who in 1933 had discovered 
pantothenic acid, that an increased intake of important nutrients might 
help control some genetic diseases (Williams, 1956). She had then carried 
out a trial experiment with a severely retarded seven-year-old boy who was 
in diapers, could not speak, and had an estimated IQ of 25 to 30. A bio¬ 
chemist, Dr. Mary B. Allen, devised the formulation of vitamins and min¬ 
erals given in the table on page 188. On this treatment the boy soon began 
to talk and in a few weeks began to read and write and to act like a normal 
child. Two years later he was getting along well in school subjects and had 
an estimated IQ of 90. Allen had also administered another orthomolecular 
substance, thyroid, to her patients, and fourteen of the sixteen in the 
Harrell study also received thyroid, in amounts of 30 to 120 mg per day. 

The main results are shown in the illustration on page 189. The group 
that received the supplement for eight months showed a steady increase in 
average IQ, from 46 to 61. The other group showed no change during the 
first four months, when the placebo was given, and then an increase from 
49 to 59 during the next four months, when the vitamin-mineral supple¬ 
ment was given. 

From these results we may conclude that there is a reasonable chance 
that a child with severe mental retardation could by vitamin-mineral 
supplementation beginning early in life achieve an increase in IQ of 20 
points or more. The largest individual increases reported by Harrell et al. 
were 24 points (42 to 66) in eight months and twenty-one points (50 to 71) 
in four months, enough gain to put those persons in a position to become 
self-sufficient. The improved nutritional status resulting from taking the 
vitamin-mineral supplement, with about thirty times the RDA for vitamin 



188 


CHAPTER 20 


Daily doses of supplementary vitamins and minerals (six tablets). 


Vitamin A palmitate 

15,300 

IU a 

Vitamin D (cholecalciferol) 

300 

IU 

Thiamin mononitrate 

300 

mg 

Riboflavin 

200 

mg 

Niacinamide 

750 

mg 

Calcium pantothenate 

490 

mg 

Pyridoxine hydrochloride 

350 

mg 

Cobalamin 

1000 

mg 

Folic acid 

400 

mg 

Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) 

1500 

mg 

Vitamin E (d-a-tocopheryl succinate) 

600 

IU 

Magnesium (oxide) 

300 

mg 

Calcium (carbonate) 

400 

mg 

Zinc (oxide) 

30 

mg 

Manganese (gluconate) 

3 

mg 

Copper (gluconate) 

1.75 

mg 

Iron (ferrous fumarate) 

7.5 

mg 

Calcium phosphate (CaHP0 4 ) 

37.5 

mg 

Iodide (KI) 

0.15 

mg 


The daily dose was 6 tablets. The tablets also contained microcrystalline cellulose, povidone, stearic 
acid, sodium silicoaluminate, hydroxypropylmethylcellulose, propylene glycol, silica gel, polyethylene 
glycol, titanium dioxide, oleic acid, and tribasic sodium phosphate as excipients. The placebo tablets 
contained lactose, microcrystalline cellulose, stearic acid, povidone, propylene glycol, 
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose, titanium dioxide, and oleic acid. 

*Capsules with similar composition (2 capsules, GTC#2, equal 1 tablet) are available from Bronson 
Pharmaceuticals, La Canada, California 91011. 


C and good amounts of other nutrients, would benefit anyone taking it, and 
it is my recommendation that this improved nutritional regimen be fol¬ 
lowed by every retarded child. The cost of 180 tablets, one month’s supply, 
is less than $10, and is accordingly small compared with the other expenses 
involved in caring for a mentally retarded person. 

Three of the subjects in the study by Harrell et al. suffered from Down’s 
syndrome. Their initial IQ values were 42, 59, and 65, and the increases 
with intake of the vitamin-mineral supplement and thyroid (for the first 
two) were 24 and 11 (in eight months) and about 10 (in four months), 
respectively. 

There is no accepted conventional treatment for Down’s syndrome. The 
physician who has made the greatest effort to ameliorate that condition is 
Dr. Henry Turkel, of Detroit, Michigan. He has reported on his work in a 
paper communicated to the Select Committee on Nutrition and Human 
Needs of the United States Senate, Senator George McGovern, Chairman 
(Turkel, 1977), and in a book, New Hope for the Mentally Retarded — 
Stymied by the FDA (Turkel, 1972). In 1940 he had begun treating 
Down’s syndrome patients with tablets that he had developed. The tablets 





THE BRAIN 


189 



Vitamin C and mental retardation Retarded people who received vitamin-mineral 
supplements over an eight-month period showed an average increase in IQ of 15 points 
(from 46 to 61). A control group that received no supplements for the first four months 
showed no change in IQ. When the controls were given vitamin-mineral supplements for 
four months, they showed an average increase in IQ of 10 points (from 49 to 59) 
approaching the experimental groups. (Adapted from Harrell et al., 1981.) 


contain mainly orthomolecular substances—ten vitamins, nine minerals, 
one amino acid (glutamic acid), choline, inositol, para-aminobenzoic acid, 
thyroid, unsaturated fatty acids, and digestive enzymes. These substances 
should improve the health of the patients. In addition his preparation con¬ 
tains several drugs, given in smaller dosages than those usually prescribed. 
One of the drugs is pentylenetetrazole, which stimulates the central nervous 
system. Another is aminophylline, a heart stimulant. I do not know enough 
about drugs to permit me to comment on their value for these patients, but 
there is the possibility that their action as stimulants is beneficial. 

I know Dr. Turkel, and I can testify as to his sincerity and conviction. 
The results that he reports are striking. Many of the children show a 
reduction of the developmental anomalies, especially of the bones. Their 
appearance changes in the direction of normality. Their mental ability and 
behavior improve to such an extent that they are able to hold jobs and 
support themselves. Rapid growth (increase in height) occurs during the 
period when the tablets are being taken, and the growth stops during the 
periods when they are not taken. 

My conclusion is that there is little danger that this treatment or treat¬ 
ment with the supplementary nutrients would do harm, and there is evi¬ 
dence that the patients would receive significant benefit. There are about 





190 


CHAPTER 20 


300,000 people with Down’s syndrome in the United States. I think that 
all—especially the younger ones—should try nutritional supplementation 
to see to what extent it benefits them. 

Turkel treats Down’s syndrome patients in Michigan, but he is not 
allowed by the Food and Drug Administration to ship his tablets across 
state lines. In 1959 he filed a new-drug application with the FDA (neces¬ 
sary because his tablets contain some drugs). The application was turned 
down, and his later efforts were also unsuccessful. The director of the 
National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness, referring to 
Turkel’s treatment of Down’s syndrome patients, wrote that “On theoreti¬ 
cal grounds, and based on known effects of these drugs, which consist of 
vitamins, minerals, and other medications, our advisors have stated that, 
although they are not harmful, they doubt that the drugs would be of 
specific value in treating mongolism.” (Turkel, 1972, p. 123.) The FDA in 
rejecting the new-drug application stated that “The known facts concerning 
mongolism preclude any reasonable hope that your products would be of 
benefit in this condition, which is caused by a defect in the basic cell struc¬ 
ture. This finding, considered together with the long history of inability of 
medical science to find a treatment or cure for mongolism, suggests that this 
condition is beyond hope of successful treatment by the kind of preparations 
that you wish to recommend for this purpose.” (Turkel, 1972, p. 119.) 

I think that this attitude of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and 
the FDA is the result of ignorance, bias, misunderstanding of the nature of 
vitamins and other orthomolecular substances, and lack of hope or vision— 
they seem to have the conviction that nothing new can be discovered. 

Autism is a genetic disease that manifests itself in the first one or two 
years of life in about one child in three thousand (80 percent are boys). The 
autistic child remains alone, not developing social relationships with his 
parents or other people. He has language problems, refusing to speak or 
using language in an odd way. He adheres to rituals, resists change, and 
has an unusually strong attachment to objects. His IQ is usually low, and 
he may develop seizures. Those with higher IQ benefit somewhat from 
psychotherapy and special education. 

There is no accepted conventional therapy for autism. Several investiga¬ 
tors, however, have reported that vitamin supplementation has value. The 
most significant work has been done by Dr. Bernard Rimland, a psycholo¬ 
gist who is director of the Institute for Child Behavior Research, San 
Diego, California (Rimland, 1973; Rimland, Callaway, and Dreyfus, 
1977). Through their parents, Rimland arranged for 190 autistic children 
to be studied for twenty-four weeks. The parents of each child were re¬ 
quired to obtain the cooperation of the child’s physician or another local 
doctor to provide on-site medical supervision and to complete monthly 



THE BRAIN 


191 


reports on the child’s status under the vitamin treatment. Many parents 
found such strong resistance from the physicians that they were required to 
withdraw; this reduced the number of children in the reported study from 
an original 300 to 190. 

After the tablets were gradually introduced over five weeks, the children 
took ten per day for twelve weeks. There was then a no-treatment period of 
two weeks, followed by doses of ten tablets per day for two weeks. The 
daily intake of nutrients provided by the ten tablets was 1000 mg of vitamin 
C, 1000 mg of niacinamide, 150 mg of pyridoxine, 5 mg of thiamine, 5 mg 
of riboflavin, 50 mg of pantothenic acid, 0.1 mg of folic acid, 0.01 mg of 
vitamin B 12 , 30 mg of para-aminobenzoic acid, 0.015 mg of biotin, 60 mg of 
choline, 60 mg of inositol, and 10 mg of iron. The cost of the vitamins was 
about $10 per month. 

The parents and physicians made regular reports, which were analyzed 
for the amount of improvement when the vitamins were taken and for 
deterioration during the no-treatment interval. The conclusion was that 86 
of the 190 children (45 percent) showed great improvement, very good 
improvement, or significant improvement; 78 (41 percent) showed some 
smaller amount of improvement; 20 (11 percent) showed no change; and 6 
(3 percent) deteriorated. Thus about three-quarters of the children were 
benefited by the nutritional supplement, and only 3 percent were made 
worse. 

There were indications that vitamin B 6 was especially important, and a 
double-blind study of fifteen children was then carried out (Rimland et al., 
1977). During the study the children continued to take the same vitamins, 
minerals, and drugs as before the study began. Each child during one 
period received either vitamin B 6 (75 to 800 mg per day, different for 
different children) or a placebo, and then during a second period the pla¬ 
cebo or the B 12 . Ten of the fifteen children were judged to have benefited 
from the B 6 (average score +24), one showed no change, and four deterio¬ 
rated (average score —16). The investigators concluded that vitamin B 6 
seems to be a safe agent with potential value in the management of autistic 
children. My opinion, based on these Rimland studies and others, is that 
orthomolecular treatment with vitamins and minerals should be tried for 
every autistic child as having the possibility of leading to significant im¬ 
provement without the danger of leading to harmful side effects that act as 
a deterrant to the trial of a drug. 

Epilepsy is a recurrent disorder of the brain that involves brief attacks of 
altered consciousness, usually a convulsive seizure with loss of conscious¬ 
ness and with jerking of the extremities. Convulsive seizures can be caused 
by drugs and by lack of oxygen, but the cause of most epileptic seizures is 
not known. About 2 percent of the American people are affected. Conven- 




192 


CHAPTER 20 


tional treatment is the use of anticonvulsant drugs (diphenylhydantoin, 
phenobarbital, several others). This treatment usually is effective, but the 
side effects of the drugs can be troublesome. 

In her study of nutritional supplements and mental retardation Harrell 
noticed that three of the children who were seizure-prone had no seizures 
during the four or eight months during which they received the vitamin- 
mineral supplement. She studied seven more seizure-prone children by giv¬ 
ing them the supplement for one month, during which they had no seizures. 
Her application to the National Institutes of Mental Health for a grant to 
support a more extensive study was turned down. 

The nutritional treatment should be tried with children subject to sei¬ 
zures. It provides general healthful benefit, and for many it might control 
the problem of the seizure-prone children as well as the drugs do, without 
the disagreeable side effects. 

Affective disorders are a form of mental illness involving a feeling or 
emotion or disturbance evidenced in inappropriate response and reaction to 
the objective circumstances at the time. Schizophrenic disorders are forms 
of affective disorders that tend to be chronic and that involve various psy¬ 
chotic symptoms, such as delusions, hallucinations, and deteriorated func¬ 
tioning over long periods of time. Nearly everyone has periods of sadness, 
depression, and grief following a death or disappointment, and periods of 
elation following success and achievement. It is only when the periods last 
too long, the mood is too extreme, and the person does not respond to 
reassurance and other efforts to help that he or she can be described as 
psychotic and suffering from an affective disorder. Schizophrenia and other 
affective disorders are the major mental illnesses. It is estimated that about 
12 percent of men and 18 percent of women suffer from some form of 
clinically significant affective disorder during their lifetimes, and about 2 
percent have one or more schizophrenic episodes. 

Affective disorders—depressions, elations, schizophrenic episodes—have 
a variety of causes, such as drugs (steroidal contraceptives, other steroids, 
L-dopa, reserpine, cocaine, sedatives, amphetamines, and others) or disease 
(influenza, hepatitis, mononucleosis, encephalitis, tuberculosis, syphilis, 
multiple sclerosis, cancer, and others). Other causes include vitamin defi¬ 
ciencies (B l5 B 3 , B 6 , B 12 ) or allergic responses to foods, chemicals, and other 
environmental factors (Hoffer and Osmond, 1960; Hawkins and Pauling, 
1963; Cheraskin and Ringsdorf, 1974; Philpott, 1974; Pfeiffer, 1975; 
Dickey, 1976; Lesser, 1977). The best way to control these psychoses is by 
finding and eliminating the causes. Improved nutrition is also often helpful. 

Manic depression is usually treated with compounds of lithium. This 
element is present in the earth’s crust in only a small amount, 0.01 percent, 
far smaller than sodium, 2.8 percent, or potassium, 2.6 percent. The lith- 



THE BRAIN 


193 


ium ion may influence the central nervous system by interfering with 
the motion of sodium ions and potassium ions. Lithium is not known to 
be required for life and probably should not be called an orthomolecular 
substance. 

During the last two decades large numbers of young people have devel¬ 
oped psychoses because of the use of mood-changing drugs—uppers, 
downers, cocaine and harder drugs, probably also marijuana. Many of 
them have recovered to the point where they could lead normal lives by the 
regular intake of vitamins and minerals in the optimum amounts. 

The first double-blind study in the field of psychiatry was that carried 
out by Osmond and Hoflfer in the Saskatchewan Hospital and University 
Hospital, Saskatoon, which I cited in Chapter 3. Osmond and Dr. John H. 
Smythies had formulated the hypothesis that schizophrenia might be caused 
by the production in the body of a substance with psychological properties 
similar to those of mescaline and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), perhaps 
by methylation reactions similar to that involved in the conversion of nor¬ 
adrenaline to adrenaline. It is known that a methylating agent, the amino 
acid methionine, when taken in large amount by a schizophrenic person 
exacerbates his or her illness. Osmond and Hoflfer had the idea that a 
substance that picks up methyl groups might prevent these methylation 
reactions from producing the harmful substances. They knew that niacin, 
vitamin B 3 (nicotinic acid or nicotinamide), is such a demethylating agent, 
and they also knew that it is remarkably free of toxicity, so that large 
amounts can be taken. In early 1952 they administered niacin to half a 
dozen schizophrenic patients, with good results. One patient was a seven- 
teen-year-old boy who was excited, overactive, silly, deluded, and some¬ 
times hallucinating. He responded to some extent to electroconvulsive 
therapy and insulin-coma treatment, which, however, had to be stopped 
because he developed facial palsy. Toward the end of May he was lying 
naked in bed, incontinent and hallucinating. There was nothing else 
Osmond and Hoflfer could do for him (the tranquilizers used today had not 
yet been discovered), so on May 28 they began giving him 5 g of niacin and 
5 g of vitamin C per day. He was better the next day, almost normal ten 
days later, went home in July, and was still well ten years later. 

Osmond and Hoflfer then set up their double-blind experiment with 
thirty schizophrenic patients, some of whom, selected at random, were 
given a placebo, others nicotinic acid, and others nicotinamide, in the 
amount of 3 g per day for thirty-three days. During the next two years 
the placebo group was well during only 48 percent of the time, whereas 
the other two groups were well 92 percent of the time (Osmond and Hoflfer, 
1962). After 1952 they continued to give niacin to some of the hospitalized 
patients, some of whom continued to take it after their discharge. The 




194 


CHAPTER 20 


record of the niacin patients was uniformly better than that of the others. 
For example, the number of the niacin patients still well after five years 
was 67 percent, about twice that of the others, 35 percent. 

I have talked with many orthomolecular psychiatrists. The average 
amounts of niacin administered is about 8 g per day, with an equal amount 
of vitamin C and usually also good amounts of other nutrients. There seems 
to be agreement with Osmond’s estimate that about 20 percent of patients 
hospitalized for the first time with acute schizophrenia and given ortho¬ 
molecular treatment have another attack requiring hospitalization, whereas 
with only conventional treatment their number is about 60 percent. There 
is little doubt that this vitamin supplementation, as an adjunct to appropri¬ 
ate conventional treatment, has great value. 

The orthomolecular treatment of schizophrenia has not yet been gener¬ 
ally accepted, although it is used in a few psychiatric hospitals. In 1973 a 
committee of the American Psychiatric Association published a report, 
Megavitamin and Orthomolecular Therapy in Psychiatry 3 in which argu¬ 
ments were presented to support the conclusion that megavitamin and 
orthomolecular therapy has no value in the treatment of schizophrenia or 
other mental diseases. I pointed out that this report contained many incor¬ 
rect statements and logical errors (Pauling, 1974). This bias against vita¬ 
mins and lack of respect for the facts are not found in the 1976 report of 
megavitamin therapy of the Joint University Megavitamin Therapy Re¬ 
view Committee to the minister of Social Services and Community Health 
of the Province of Alberta, Canada. The report presents a balanced account 
of the evidence and a number of recommendations about further investiga¬ 
tions (McCoy, Youge, and Karr, 1976). The 1979 report on nutrition and 
health of the Council on Scientific Affairs of the American Medical Associ¬ 
ation, on the other hand, ignores the question of the value of vitamin sup¬ 
plements except to say that the public is being misled by extravagant 
claims. 

Much information about nutrition in relation to mental disease is given 
in the thirty-one articles by thirty-seven authors in the 1973 book 
Orthomolecular Psychiatry: Treatment of Schizophrenia . One chapter de¬ 
scribes the results of giving a mixture of three vitamins (C, B 3 , and B 6 ) by 
mouth to acute schizophrenic patients and control subjects and then mea¬ 
suring the amounts excreted in the urine. Low excretion of a vitamin is 
thought to indicate a special need for that vitamin. Nearly all of the schizo¬ 
phrenic patients (94 percent) were low excretors of one or more of the 
vitamins, far more than the 62 percent of the controls. The authors con¬ 
cluded that deficiency in any one of these three vitamins could increase the 
probability of an attack of schizophrenia. Other authors emphasized that 
there are many kinds of schizophrenia, and that different patients may be 



THE BRAIN 


195 


benefited by improving their nutritional status in many different ways, 
with optimum intakes of niacin, ascorbic acid, thiamine, pyridoxine, other 
vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients. 

In 1970 I was walking along Main Street in the small town of Cambria, 
on the coast of California, when a passing car stopped and the driver got 
out and ran back to me. She said, “Dr. Pauling, I owe my life to you. I am 
twenty-six years old. Two years ago I was contemplating suicide. I had 
suffered miserably from schizophrenia for six years. Then I learned about 
vitamins when someone told me about your paper on orthomolecular psy¬ 
chiatry. The vitamins have saved my life.” 

There are now many orthomolecular psychiatrists. Many interesting pa¬ 
pers are published in the Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry. I believe 
that improved nutrition should be a part of the treatment of every person 
with mental problems, and I am glad that progress is being made in this 
direction. 







21 


The Allergies 


Many people suffer from asthma, hay fever, allergic rhinitis, allergic bron¬ 
chitis, or some other hypersensitivity reaction, to such substances as house 
dust, pollen, other environmental factors, or certain foods or drugs. That 
they can be helped to some extent to control their problems by the proper 
intake of vitamin C and other nutrients was pointed out long ago by several 
investigators (Korbsch, 1938; Holmes and Alexander, 1942; Holmes, 1943: 
Leake, 1955; other references are given by Stone, 1972). The established 
role of vitamin C in strengthening the immune system suggests that it 
should have value in managing hypersensitivity reactions, which are essen¬ 
tially immune reactions. Many recent studies affirm this proposition and 
show that the vitamin has such value at daily doses of 500 milligrams (mg) 
or somewhat more. A careful study of the effect of still larger doses has yet 
to be made. 

An important molecular actor in hypersensitivity reactions is histamine. 
This is a small molecule, containing only seventeen atoms, its formula 
being C 5 H 9 N 3 . It is closely related to histidine, one of the essential amino 
acids. Histamine is stored in granules of the cells in many tissues, especially 
of the skin, lungs, and stomach, and it is released from these granules when 
an antigen (such as the antigenic molecular groups of pollen grains that 
cause hay fever) combines with its specific antibody. Its release may also be 
triggered by the stimulus of certain drugs or by disruption of the tissues. 




THE ALLERGIES 


197 


When histamine is released, it combines with specific proteins and starts 
the reactions that are characteristic of hypersensitivity. In the skin the 
capillaries are dilated, and their walls become permeable to fluid, produc¬ 
ing a wheal (a flat burning or itching eminence, such as is caused by a 
mosquito bite) and redness. The arterioles are dilated, permitting a larger 
flow of blood to the affected region. Dilation of the blood vessels in the 
brain may cause headache. Contraction of smooth muscles in response to 
histamine may cause restriction of the bronchi and difficulty in breathing. 
The heart may be affected, with stronger contractions and more rapid beat. 
Itching is caused by the effect of histamine on nerve endings. 

Many drugs, called antihistamines, are known that are often effective in 
counteracting the histamine released in a hypersensitivity reaction. They 
have much value, but, as with most drugs, they must be used with caution 
because of the possible harmful side effects, such as drowsiness, dizziness, 
headache, nausea, lack of appetite, dryness of the mouth, and nervousness. 
They exert their antihistaminic function by competing with histamine for 
the specific sites on the protein molecules through which histamine exerts 
its effects. 

The many reports, beginning nearly fifty years ago, about the value of 
vitamin C as an adjunct to other treatments in the control of hypersensitiv¬ 
ity reactions caused researchers to study the interaction of this vitamin and 
histamine. In 1975 Chatterjee and his associates showed that when guinea 
pigs are put on a diet containing no vitamin C, the blood level of histamine 
started to rise on the third day and reached a high level by the fourteenth 
day, when they were beginning to show signs of scurvy. They suggested 
that one of the functions of vitamin C is to regulate the amount of histamine 
in the body by converting it into another substance, hydantoin-5-acetic acid, 
which then decomposes into normal metabolic products (Subramanian, 
1978). The conversion involves a hydroxylation reaction, for which vitamin 
C is required. It is evidently the destruction of vitamin C in this process 
that results in its deficiency for other vital functions and brings on incipient 
scurvy. 

Dr. C. Alan B. Clemetson has carried out an important study of the 
relation between vitamin C and histamine in the blood of four hundred 
men and women in New York. The concentration of vitamin C in the blood 
ranged from the dangerously low value of 0.00 to 0.19 mg per deciliter (for 
fourteen) to a high of 2.5 (for two), with a median of 0.8, which corre¬ 
sponds to the intake of about 100 mg of the vitamin per day. The histamine 
concentration varied over more than a threefold range, with a striking 
dependence on the level of vitamin C, as shown in the illustration on page 
198. The slope of the curve shows that for values of ascorbate concentration 
from 1.0 to 2.5 mg per deciliter there is no change in the histamine concen- 



198 


CHAPTER 21 



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 2.5 

Vitamin C concentration in blood plasma, milligrams per deciliter 

Vitamin C and histamine in blood In a study of four hundred people, Alan B. 

Clemetson demonstrated the effectiveness of vitamin C in lowering the histamine 
concentration in the blood. Histamine is shown by the scale at the left, vitamin C by the 
scale on the bottom. The points indicate the average concentration of histamine, 
corresponding to increasing concentration of ascorbate in the blood plasma, in milligrams 
per deciliter, for the ranges 0.00 to 0.19, 0.20 to 0.39, 0.40 to 0.59, and so on. The point 
plotted at the far right shows the average concentration of histamine for concentrations of 
ascorbate from 1.2 to 2.5 milligrams per deciliter. (Adapted from Clemetson, 1980.) 


tration. Most people who ingest 250 mg of vitamin C per day or more have 
plasma concentrations in this range, and I consider this to be the normal 
range (Pauling, 1974c). The results with histamine support this conclusion, 
in that the homeostatic (feedback) mechanisms that operate to keep the 
histamine concentration constant, at its optimum value, are achieving this 
goal in this range. 

For smaller values of the ascorbate level, however, the histamine level 
rises rapidly. Chatterjee et al. (1975b) have suggested that the vasodilating 
action of histamine may be responsible for some of the manifestations of 
scurvy. Remarking that scurvy may be partly due to histamine intoxication, 
Clemetson has observed that it may be more than a coincidence that inflam¬ 
mation, such as that produced by histamine, seems to resemble localized 
scurvy. 






THE ALLERGIES 


199 


Additional evidence has been provided by Nandi et al. (1976), who re¬ 
ported that in rats and guinea pigs stress induced by vaccine treatment, 
fasting, and exposure to heat or cold increased the production of histamine 
(measured in gastric mucosa and urinary excretion). Treatment with vita¬ 
min C decreased the urinary excretion significantly. 

These observations provide strong support for the conclusion that an 
increased intake of vitamin C has value in helping to control hypersensitiv¬ 
ity problems. 

Clemetson (1980) also compared histamine and vitamin C levels in 223 
pregnant women and a number of nonpregnant women. He found that the 
pregnant women had lower levels of vitamin C and higher levels of hista¬ 
mine than the others. One woman developed partial separation of the pla¬ 
centa (<abruptio placentae) and vaginal bleeding in the thirty-fifth week of 
pregnancy. Her plasma ascorbate level was very low, 0.19 to 0.27 mg per 
deciliter, and her blood histamine level was high, 35 to 38 ng per milliliter. 
She was given 1000 mg of vitamin C per day, the bleeding stopped, and she 
was delivered of a healthy child at forty weeks. Two other abruptio 
placentae patients had plasma ascorbate levels of 0.38 and 0.25 and hista¬ 
mine levels of 44 and 55, respectively. Clemetson states that ascorbate and 
histamine levels should be obtained for pregnant women, and supplemen¬ 
tation with vitamin C should be given when it is needed. 

Anaphylactic shock is a sudden, acute reaction to an antigen, mainly 
through histamine release in a hypersensitized person. The person develops 
hives (urticaria) and has difficulty in breathing and may lose so much 
liquid from the blood by seeping through the walls of the blood vessels as to 
nearly stop the circulation of the blood. Among the antigens that cause 
anaphylaxis are foreign proteins, such as those in horse serum (giving rise 
to serum sickness); any one of many drugs (penicillin in penicillin-sensitive 
persons); and substances introduced by snake bites (rattlesnakes, cotton- 
mouths, cottonheads, coral snakes), Gila monster bites, spider bites (espe¬ 
cially by the black widow spider and violin spider, sometimes by other spi¬ 
ders, nearly all of which are venomous), and bee stings. A single bee sting 
may cause death. About four times as many deaths in the United States are 
caused by bee stings as by snake bites. Persons known to be at risk should 
carry a kit containing epinephrine and an antihistamine. 

Human beings, monkeys, and guinea pigs, which do not synthesize vita¬ 
min C, are more susceptible to anaphylactic shock than other animals. It 
was discovered nearly fifty years ago that a high intake of vitamin C pro¬ 
tects guinea pigs against anaphylaxis (Raffel and Madison, 1938; many 
other studies have been made). Fred R. Klenner has reported on the effec¬ 
tive treatment of snake bite by the intravenous infusion of sodium ascorbate 
(1971). It would be wise for persons who might be exposed to agents that 
could cause anaphylaxis to ingest regular high doses of vitamin C. 




200 


CHAPTER 21 


Asthma (bronchial asthma) is a disease characterized by difficulty in 
breathing because of the spasmodic contraction of the bronchi, recurring at 
intervals and accompanied by a wheezing sound, a sense of constriction in 
the chest, a cough, and expectoration. An attack is often subsequent to ex¬ 
posure to an allergen, but sometimes it results from psychosocial stress 
(emotional upset) or other stresses, such as exercise, viral respiratory dis¬ 
ease, or inhalation of cold air, gasoline fumes, fresh paint, or cigarette 
smoke, or from change in the barometric pressure. About half of the per¬ 
sons with this disease have it in a severe and troublesome form. It can 
usually be controlled by drugs, which, of course, have disagreeable and 
harmful side effects. 

Reports of the value of vitamin C for the control of asthma began around 
1940. There is now good evidence that vitamin C has such value as an 
adjunct to conventional therapy. Some of the older studies gave negative 
results, perhaps because of the use of too small an amount of the vitamin 
for too short a time. Most of the recent studies have shown that the vitamin 
has a significant effect. For example, a reduced airflow caused by inhala¬ 
tion of histamine aerosol (Zuskin, Lewis, and Bouhuys, 1973), flax dust 
(Valic and Zuskin, 1973), or textile dust (Zuskin, Valic, and Bouhuys, 
1976) was partially controlled for several hours by 500 mg of vitamin C. 
Ogilvy, DuBois, and their collaborators at Yale University then carried out 
several studies with methacholine, a drug that induces constriction of the 
bronchi and decreased airflow in both healthy persons and asthmatics. Six 
healthy young men given methacholine either by aerosol inhalation or by 
mouth showed bronchoconstriction that decreased the airflow by about 40 
percent, whereas the amount of decrease was only 9 percent when they 
ingested 100 mg of vitamin C one hour before the administration of the 
drug (Ogilvy et al., 1978, 1981). Similar results were obtained with asth¬ 
matic patients (Mohrenin, DuBois, and Douglas, 1982). 

In a recent double-blind study of forty-one asthmatic Nigerian patients 
(Anah, Jarike, and Baig, 1980) twenty-two were given 1 gram (g) of vita¬ 
min C per day, and nineteen were given a placebo, for fourteen weeks 
during the rainy season, when the asthma is exacerbated by respiratory 
infections. The vitamin-C subjects had less than one-quarter as many asth¬ 
matic attacks during this period as the placebo subjects, and the attacks 
were less serious. All of the thirteen vitamin-C patients who had no attacks 
during the fourteen weeks had at least one attack during the eight weeks 
after the vitamin was stopped. 

Anderson et al. (1980) reported on their study of ten white asthmatic 
children in Pretoria, South Africa. These children, who initially had bron¬ 
chial asthma and showed exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, were given 
1 g of vitamin C per day and were assessed clinically and immunologically 



THE ALLERGIES 


201 


for six months. They showed increased neutrophil chemotaxis, improved 
lung function, and greater transformation of lymphocytes under antigenic 
stimulation, and they all were free of severe asthmatic attacks during the 
six months. 

These investigations support the conclusion that an increased intake of 
vitamin C has value for asthmatic patients. 

Hay fever (pollinosis) is an acute inflammation of the mucous membrane 
of the nostrils that is usually caused by windborne tree, grass, or weed 
pollens. Itching, sneezing, production of a watery nasal secretion, and flow 
of tears occur during the pollen season. Antihistamines and other drugs are 
used to control the problem. The sufferers often try to avoid the guilty 
pollen and sometimes move to a different part of the country—where they 
may have the bad luck to find another kind of pollen that is as bad as the 
original culprit. 

One of the early reports about the value of vitamin C in controlling hay 
fever was that of Holmes and Alexander (1942), who reported that 200 mg 
per day was often effective. The matter was made confusing, however, by 
other investigators, who reported that they observed no benefit. This situa¬ 
tion has not changed very much. For example, Kordowsky, Rosenthal, and 
Norman (1979) studied the effect of vitamin C on ragweed-induced bron- 
chospasm in six ragweed-sensitive asthmatic adults and reported that 500 
mg had no protective effect. This amount is probably too small, and a long 
period of administration may be needed. In 1949 Brown and Ruskin stud¬ 
ied sixty hay fever patients and reported that about 50 percent of those 
taking 1 g of vitamin C per day and about 75 percent of those taking 2.25 g 
per day showed improvement. For forty-seven years I have observed one 
subject who suffered greatly for decades from hay fever caused by ragweed 
and olive pollen and has for the last twelve years found much relief by 
taking 3 g of vitamin C per day. 

I suggest that persons suffering from hay fever should take about this 
amount regularly and should increase their intake to the bowel-tolerance 
level (Chapter 14) during the pollen season. 

Sometimes the immune reaction turns upon its own body; antibodies 
form against antigens in the cells of the patient. Among these auto-immune 
diseases are systemic lupus erythematosis, myasthenia gravis, glomerulone¬ 
phritis, and pemphigus. Little information is available about the possible 
value of high doses of vitamin C in helping to control these diseases. 




Arthritis and Rheumatism 


Arthritis is inflammation of a joint. More than one hundred different kinds 
of arthritis have been characterized, with many different causes. Gout, for 
example, is caused by the formation of crystals of sodium hydrogen urate in 
the joint. Infectious agents such as gonococcal bacteria or the viruses of 
mumps or hepatitis may also cause inflammation of the joints, as can other 
diseases, drugs, allergens, and cancer. 

Rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis are readily distinguished. In 
rheumatoid arthritis the swollen joints in the fingers are soft and tender; in 
osteoarthritis, they are hard and usually not tender. The joints near the end 
of the fingers are usually involved in osteoarthritis, but not those closer to 
the wrist, whereas in rheumatoid arthritis it is the wrist and parts of the 
hand other than the ends of the fingers that are affected. 

Rheumatism (fibromyositis) comprises a group of illnesses involving 
pain, tenderness, and stiffness. It may affect not only joints (rheumatoid 
arthritis) but also muscles and adjacent structures. 

Many drugs that are highly effective for the control of arthritis have been 
developed during recent years. Aspirin is often used to control the pain and 
inflammation of rheumatoid arthritis; the average daily dose is 4.5 grams 
(g), 14 tablets. Enteric-coated tablets may be taken by patients with stom¬ 
ach or duodenal ulcers to avoid the exacerbation of the ulcers by the aspi- 




ARTHRITIS AND RHEUMATISM 


203 


rin. The problem of serious dysfunction of a joint can sometimes be handled 
by surgery. Total hip replacement is often successful. 

Nutritional factors are important in both causing and controlling some 
kinds of arthritis. An attack of gout may occur from overeating, especially 
eating too much meat, and from drinking too much alcohol and not enough 
water. Eating a large amount of meat, especially certain organ meats, in¬ 
creases the level of uric acid in the blood, and increasing the amount of 
alcohol and decreasing the amount of water in the body fluids make it 
easier for the crystals of sodium hydrogen urate to deposit in the joints. To 
prevent an attack of gout the intake of meat should be kept low and a large 
amount of water should be drunk, at least three quarts per day. Also, the 
urine should be kept alkaline, because sodium hydrogen urate is more 
soluble in alkaline urine than in acidic urine. Alkaline urine can be 
achieved by taking sodium bicarbonate, trisodium citrate, or sodium ascor¬ 
bate. I recommend the last. 

As with other diseases, the question of the value of supplementary vita¬ 
mins for the control of arthritis has been confused by misleading state¬ 
ments. Not long ago I read a brief report by a professor in a leading med¬ 
ical school about his trial of the value of unconventional treatments for 
arthritis. He stated that vitamin supplements were found to have no value. 
I wrote to him, asking how many patients he had studied, and how much 
vitamin supplement he had given them. His answer was that he had given 
an ordinary multivitamin tablet every day to a half-dozen patients, who 
seemed not to improve. The patients described later in this chapter took 
between one hundred and five hundred times the amounts in these tablets; 
it is these optimum intakes that have value in helping to control arthritis. 

The pioneer in vitamin therapy for rheumatism and arthritis was a 
young physician in New England, Dr. William Kaufman. To secure objec¬ 
tive assessment of the state and progress of his patients he built a set of 
goniometers (angle-measuring devices) with which he could measure the 
angles through which different joints of the human body could move. By 
measuring one thousand people in ordinary good health he obtained a 
standard curve showing the average joint mobility index as a function of 
age—it falls off slowly with increasing age. He also measured the joint 
mobility for patients with joint dysfunction and found that the index fell 
far below the standard curve. In addition, he verified that the patients had 
much larger values of the rate of sedimentation of the red corpuscles of the 
blood than did the healthy controls. Thus he had two objective ways of 
assessing the state of health of the patients. 

In 1937 vitamin B 3 , niacin or niacinamide, was identified. Kaufman de¬ 
cided to find out whether it could help his patients. Upon administering it 
to his arthritic patients, he found that most of them responded rapidly by 




204 


CHAPTER 22 


feeling better and by an increase in the joint mobility index to nearly the 
normal curve and a decrease in the red-cell sedimentation rate. Stopping 
the niacinimide caused a return to the abnormal state within a day or two. 

Kaufman published an account of his study of 150 arthritic patients 
in 1943 in The Common Form of Niacin Amide Deficiency Disease, 
Aniacinamidosis, and in 1949 he published his study of 450 patients in The 
Common Form of Joint Dysfunction: Its Incidence and Treatment. In 1955 
in a report to the American Geriatric Society he stated that most of the 
patients improved greatly on a regimen of 1 to 5 g of niacinamide per day 
in divided doses (six to sixteen per day), continuing for as long as nine 
years. He observed no untoward reactions from niacinamide in several 
thousand patient-years of continuous use. His recommended intake for 
treatment of restricted mobility of joints and other manifestations of defi¬ 
ciency of vitamin B 3 (aniacinamidosis) is 4 to 5 g per day. 

Even before the work of Abram Hoffer and Humphry Osmond on acute 
schizophrenia, Kaufman had written that many of his patients showed 
striking improvement in mental health as well as physical health on this 
niacinamide regimen. I have had the opportunity to check the effectiveness 
of niacinamide, together with vitamin C, in controlling arthritis in a few 
patients, with results that support the conclusions stated by Kaufman. So 
far as I know, no group of researchers in the field of arthritis has attempted 
to repeat Kaufman’s work. This lack of interest may be the result in part, 
again, of the general bias of the medical profession against vitamins and in 
part of the fact that no one can make money from niacinamide, which is 
just as cheap as vitamin C. 

Another vitamin that brings relief to the sufferers from rheumatism is 
vitamin B 6 , pyridoxine. Vitamin B 6 shrinks the synovial membranes that 
line the bearing surfaces of the joints. It thus helps to control pain and to 
restore mobility in the elbows, shoulders, knees, and other joints, as was 
observed by Dr. John M. Ellis, a physician in Mt. Pleasant, Texas. 

In his 1983 book Free of Pain Ellis has reported that the vitamin is 
effective at high intakes. There is now little doubt that the optimum intake 
of vitamin B 6 is somewhere in the region of 50 to 100 milligrams (mg) per 
day, and probably more for some people. There is an upper limit, however, 
to the intake of this vitamin. A daily intake of 2000 mg or more of vitamin 
B 6 continued for months or years leads to a temporary peripheral neuropa¬ 
thy, a feeling of numbness in the toes. The optimum intake of this vitamin 
is accordingly less than one thousand times the Recommended Daily 
Allowance but somewhat greater than the RDA. 

Because of its shrinking effect on the synovial membranes, vitamin B 6 
has found another use; in the relief of a nerve disorder called carpal tunnel 
syndrome. This is a painful and crippling disease of the hands and wrists 



arthritis and rheumatism 


205 


that results from compression of a principal nerve to the hand as it passes 
through a tunnel lined with synovial membrane between the tendons and 
ligaments in the wrist. It occurs about three times as frequently in women 
as in men and has a higher incidence during pregnancy and at the time of 
the menopause than at other times. Until recently the principal treatment 
was surgery. 

In 1962 Ellis began giving vitamin B 6 in large doses to pregnant women 
to control the edema and some other problems from which they tend to 
suffer. He noticed that the large doses, 50 to 1000 mg per day (twenty-five 
to five hundred times the RDA) also controlled the tingling in the fingers, 
cramps, weakness of grip, and lack of feeling in the hands. Around 1970 he 
noticed that these large doses of vitamin B 6 provided good control of the 
carpal tunnel syndrome (Ellis, 1966; Ellis and Presley, 1973), usually such 
that surgery was not needed. 

An interesting aspect of Ellis’ work is the discovery that the abnormality 
in the metabolism of the amino acid tryptophan that is caused by the 
steroidal birth-control pills is prevented by the daily intake of about 50 mg 
of vitamin B 6 . 

Many of the vitamins serve as coenzymes in various enzyme systems in 
the human body. Vitamin B 6 , for example, is known to serve in this way for 
more than one hundred different enzymes. In the past it has been said that 
the intake of the RDAs of vitamins provided enough for the enzyme sys¬ 
tems to function at nearly their maximum effectiveness, but it has now been 
learned that this statement is not true. 

Karl Folkers is a distinguished organic chemist and biochemist who is 
now a professor at the University of Texas in Austin, and who earlier was 
for twenty years director of research for Merck and Company. He decided 
to study the enzymes for which vitamin B 6 is a coenzyme and selected 
the easily available glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase of erythrocytes 
(EGOT), which is in the red cells of the blood. By 1975 he and his collabo¬ 
rators had shown that in their Texan subjects on an ordinary diet the 
EGOT enzymatic activity was far less than the maximum value that could 
be achieved by a high intake of vitamin B 6 . This observation supported the 
conclusion already reached by Ellis that many people suffer from a defi¬ 
ciency of this vitamin. 

Ellis and Folkers then collaborated in a double-blind study in which the 
effectiveness of vitamin B 6 was compared with that of a placebo in patients 
with the carpal tunnel syndrome. The result, with high statistical signifi¬ 
cance (P = 0.0078), was that the B 6 patients improved and placebo pa¬ 
tients did not (Ellis, Folkers, et al., 1982). The authors conclude that “Clin¬ 
ical improvement of the syndrome with pvridoxine therapy may frequently 
obviate hand surgery.” The mechanism of control of the disease is the 




206 


CHAPTER 22 


action of the vitamin in reducing the swelling of the synovial membrane 
that lines the tunnel. 

It is not surprising that B 6 has been found also to be helpful in control¬ 
ling arthritis. Its action as an antihistaminic agent and regulator of the rate 
of synthesis of prostaglandins (Chapter 28) make it to some extent a substi¬ 
tute for aspirin in controlling pain and inflammation. 

The best known example of the effectiveness of vitamin C in controlling 
an arthritic disorder is the experience of Norman Cousins, the former edi¬ 
tor of the Saturday Review, who was suffering intensely from an ailment 
diagnosed as ankylosing spondylitis, a progressive form of arthritis charac¬ 
terized by inflammation and then the fusing together of adjacent bones, 
especially of the spine. As described by him in his book, Anatomy of an 
Illness as Perceived by the Patient, Cousins decided to try the effect of 
vitamin C and persuaded his physician to give him intravenous infusions of 
35 g of sodium ascorbate per day. This treatment, together with the psycho¬ 
somatic aid of his determination to remain cheerful and to enjoy himself, 
achieved partially by leaving the hospital and receiving the treatment in a 
hotel room, led to his recovery. He now holds a special professorship in the 
University of California Medical School in Los Angeles. 

There is evidence that arthritis, rheumatism, and related diseases often 
are the result of nutritional deficiencies. Sufferers from these diseases 
would be wise to try to improve their nutritional status by regulating their 
diet and taking supplementary vitamins and minerals, perhaps approxi¬ 
mating the intake described in the table on page 61, possibly with addi¬ 
tional niacinamide, vitamin C, and vitamin B 6 . The need to take a large 
number of tablets can be avoided by using a mixture of pure vitamins 
available from Bronson Pharmaceuticals, La Canada, California; one tea¬ 
spoonful provides 1000 mg of niacinamide, 100 mg of vitamin C, and 60 
mg of vitamin B 6 . There is also the possibility that an increased intake of 
some other vitamin, such as pantothenic acid, would be helpful. These 
nutritional measures should serve as an adjunct to appropriate conventional 
treatment, if there is such a treatment, but sometimes, as with carpal tunnel 
syndrome, the need for the conventional treatment (surgery) disappears. 



23 


The Eye, the Ear, and the Mouth 


From the larger concerns about health and illness that have engaged our 
attention in the last chapters let us turn now to consider what the optimum 
use of vitamins may do for certain afflictions that bring pain and disability 
even though they do not threaten life. Some of the observations and recom¬ 
mendations I shall make are as solidly based on reliable and repeated 
observations as are most of the things I have had to say in the earlier 
chapters. Some are based, however, on only a small amount of evidence. If I 
were recommending drugs I should have to be far more cautious in men¬ 
tioning some of their reported uses. Fortunately, however, the vitamins are 
astonishingly low in toxicity, and few people need to limit their intake. The 
optimum intake of vitamins improves the general health and strengthens 
the body’s natural protective mechanisms. Vitamin D, however, should not 
be taken in excess, and too much vitamin A may cause headache. 

The eye is an important organ and a delicate one. It is sensitive to the en¬ 
vironment, including the molecules provided to it by the blood. Toxic sub¬ 
stances can cause cataracts. Too high partial pressure of oxygen given to 
premature infants can cause restriction and obliteration of the arteries to 
the retina (retrolental fibroplasia) resulting in blindness. Chronic use of 
topical corticosteroids leads to glaucoma, cataracts, and other eye problems 
in some persons. 





208 


CHAPTER 23 


The value of a proper intake of vitamins to achieve good health of the 
eyes is well known. In some countries in southern and eastern Asia and in 
Brazil, blindness is often caused by vitamin-A deficiency. Xerophthalmia 
(abnormal dryness of the eyeball) resulting from lack of vitamin A is the 
principal cause of blindness in young children. Blindness from retinitis 
pigmentosa caused by the Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome can be prevented by 
massive doses of vitamins E and A. 

The importance of vitamin C for good eye health is suggested by the fact 
that the concentration of this vitamin in the aqueous humor is very high, 
twenty-five times that in the blood plasma. 

There is much evidence linking a low intake of vitamin C to cataract 
formation. Cataracts are opacities in the lens of the eye caused by the ag¬ 
gregation of protein molecules into particles large enough to scatter light. 
Early cataracts are caused by exposure of the pregnant mother or the child 
to toxic substances, by malnutrition, and by certain diseases, such as rubella 
and galactosemia. Senile cataracts may be caused by sunlight, high-energy 
radiation (X rays, neutrons), infections, diabetes, and poor nutrition. 

Many investigators, beginning as long ago as 1935 with Monjukowa and 
Fradkin, have reported that there is very little vitamin C in the aqueous 
humor of cataractous eyes and that patients with cataracts often have a low 
level of vitamin C in the blood plasma (Lee, Lam, and Lai, 1977; Varma, 
Kumar, and Richards, 1979; Varma, Srivistava, and Richards, 1982; 
Varma et al. 1984). Monjukowa and Fradkin reported that the low concen¬ 
tration of vitamin C in the lens preceded the formation of the cataract and 
concluded that low vitamin C is the cause, not the consequence, of cataract 
formation. They suggested that in old age there is a decreased permeability 
of the eye to vitamin C and suggested that it might be overcome by a high 
intake of the vitamin. Varma et al. (1984) concluded from their studies that 
vitamins C and E are important for the prevention of senile cataracts. 

There are also reports that the regular intake of high doses of vitamin B 2 , 
200 to 600 milligrams (mg) per day, slows down the development of cata¬ 
racts. It is possible that the regimen described in Chapter 5, faithfully 
followed, would lead to a significant control over the development of senile 
cataracts. 

A number of physicians have reported favorable experience with vitamin 
C for control of glaucoma. This painful affliction, so often terminating in 
blindness, is evidenced by increased intraocular pressure, causing swelling 
of the eyeball. The normal pressure is less than 20 millimeters of mercury 
(mm Hg). Mild glaucoma involves pressures 22 to 30 mm Hg, more severe 
30 to 45 mm Hg, and very severe as much as 70 mm Hg. It sometimes has 
a hereditary cause, or it may result from an eye infection or other injury or 
from emotional stress. It can often be controlled by drugs. 



THE EYE, THE EAR, AND THE MOUTH 


209 


Cheraskin, Ringsdorf, and Sisley (1983) in their discussion of glaucoma 
mention that Lane (1980) studied sixty subjects aged twenty-six to seventy- 
four and found an average intraocular pressure of 22.33 mm Hg when 
their average vitamin C intake was 75 mg per day, decreasing to 15.15 mm 
Hg when vitamin C intake was increased to 1200 mg per day. Other 
investigators have reported similar results. Most striking are the observa¬ 
tions of Bietti (1967) and Virno et al. (1967), who gave doses of vitamin C 
of 30 to 40 grams (g) per day (0.5 g per kilogram body weight) to patients 
for as long as seven months. The intraocular pressure, initially 30 to 70 mm 
Hg, usually decreased to about half the value. High doses of vitamin C for 
some patients might control the glaucoma and for others decrease the 
amount of drugs needed for control. 

The value of vitamin C in the healing of burns has been mentioned in 
Chapter 14. This vitamin also has been reported to have much value in the 
treatment of burns of the cornea of the eye. Many thousands of these burns 
are caused by industrial accidents in which the eye is exposed to an alkali 
solution or some other chemical. In 1978 the U.S. Consumer Protection 
Safety Commission reported 22,429 cases of chemical burns of the eye 
sustained in the home. 

If such an accident occurs, the eye should be immediately irrigated with 
water, continuing for as long as two hours. Treatment by an ophthalmol¬ 
ogist may be needed to save the sight. Ulceration of the cornea and perfora¬ 
tion of the eyeball may result from the burns. 

The injury may interfere with the transport of vitamin C into the eye, 
causing its concentration in the aqueous humor to drop to one-third of its 
normal value. It was reported long ago that vitamin C taken orally and 
applied topically as sodium ascorbate solution has much value in the treat¬ 
ment of these burns (Boyd and Campbell, 1950; Krueger, 1960; Stellamor- 
Peskir, 1981). 

A thorough study of the nature of the action of vitamin C has been 
carried out over the last decade by Professor Roswell R. Pfister and his col¬ 
leagues at the University of Alabama in Birmingham. In addition to con¬ 
ventional treatment, oral ascorbate and topical application of 10 percent 
sodium ascorbate solution may prevent ulceration. 

Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva, the mucous membrane 
covering the inner surface of the eyelid and extending over the forward 
point of the eyeball. It may be caused by viral infections, allergies, intense 
light, or other sources of irritation. Pinkeye is a highly contagious variety of 
conjunctivitis. Iriditis and uveitis are inflammations of parts of the iris. All 
of these conditions may be benefitted by eyedrops of a freshly made isotonic 
solution (3.1 percent) of sodium ascorbate, as an adjunct to appropriate 
conventional treatment. 




210 


CHAPTER 23 


Acute otitis media, a bacterial or viral infection of the middle ear, causes 
much suffering for many people. It is usually the result of an upper respi¬ 
ratory infection. A good way to prevent this problem is to stop or con¬ 
trol the respiratory infection, which can be done by the proper intake of 
vitamin C. 

A correspondent has written to me that he has had success with infection 
of the middle ear by introducing some drops of a solution of sodium ascor¬ 
bate into the ear. Although no thorough study of this treatment has been 
made, it seems to me to be sensible and worth trying. 

The health of the mouth—the teeth, the gums, and the mucous mem¬ 
branes—depends upon the intake of vitamin C. A very low intake is disas¬ 
trous. A moderate intake, such as is provided by an ordinary balanced diet, 
leads to moderately good health. For really good health of the mouth the 
optimum intake, provided by supplementary vitamin C in amounts of sev¬ 
eral grams per day, is required. 

The effects of such a low intake as to lead to scurvy were described by 
Jacques De Vitry, bishop of Acre, speaking of the scurvy that afflicted 
Crusaders in the Holy Lands: . . their teeth and gums were soon tainted 
with a kind of gangrene and the sick could no longer eat.” (Quoted by 
Fullmer, Martin, and Burns, 1961.) 

A low intake of vitamin C affects the teeth directly. The cells that 
produce teeth deteriorate, and production of new dentin ceases and the den¬ 
tin becomes porous. Good supplies of vitamin C, calcium, and fluoride are 
essential for healthy teeth. 

Vitamin-C deficiency leads to capillary fragility. When the capillaries in 
the gums break down and bleed, the flow of blood to the gum tissues is 
interrupted and the tissues break down. The gums become swollen, violet 
colored, and soft, and are easily damaged. Infection and gangrene then fol¬ 
low, with danger of losing the teeth. The inflammation of the gums is called 
gingivitis, which becomes pyorrhea (periodontal disease) as it worsens. 

The conclusion reached by Fullmer, Martin, and Burns (1961) and 
other investigators is that vitamin C is required for the formation and 
maintenance of normal dentin, bone, gums, and other connective tissues of 
the periodontium. 

The usual treatment of periodontal disease is removal of plaque and 
sometimes selective grinding of teeth, changes in fillings and prostheses, 
and surgical excision of some gum tissue. This treatment is painful and 
expensive. The need for it can often be averted by increasing the intake of 
vitamin C. 

For the foregoing statement there has been no extensive controlled clini¬ 
cal demonstration; so far as I know, no such trial has been carried out. It is 
instead supported by some individual cases, which, combined with our 



THE EYE, THE EAR, AND THE MOUTH 


211 


knowledge about the properties of vitamin C, commend the use of the 
vitamin for this purpose. I shall quote one case, that of Joshua M. Rabach, 
as told in his book on vitamin C (1972): 

I was introduced to vitamin C in 1966 by a dentist—not my regular 
dentist, but a new man whom I had consulted in desperation. The cause 
of my desperation was $900, the fee a periodontist wanted to get my 
gums in “better” shape. . . . The periodontist’s prognosis was really 
grim. Bad enough that the fee would be $900; worse, he couldn’t 
promise that his work would keep me from losing my teeth 
prematurely. ... I saw the second dentist—now “my” dentist—a week 
later. After poking in my mouth and asking many questions, he 
agreed that my gums were receding and the problem shouldn’t be 
ignored. He did not agree that periodontal work was necessary “for 
the time being.” He prescribed a course of treatment as follows: I was 
to have my teeth cleaned then and every three months thereafter; I 
was to brush my teeth and massage my gums as instructed; morning 
and evening I was to take one of the white tablets he gave me. 

Six months passed before I learned that the white tablets were 
vitamin C (500 mg) and that, in certain kinds of gum disease, my 
dentist employs vitamin C therapy before other, more radical, kinds of 
treatment. . . . That was six years ago. I still have all my teeth, and my 
gums are healthy.” 

For Rabach 1000 mg of vitamin C per day was enough to prevent 
periodontal disease, but for some other people much more may be needed. 

There is no doubt, as pointed out by Cheraskin and Ringsdorf in their 
book Predictive Medicine (1973), that your general health is affected to 
some extent by the health of your mouth and that the health of your mouth 
serves as an indicator of your general health. If you have trouble with your 
gums or teeth, increase your regular daily supplement of vitamin C and 
other vitamins to see if the problem cannot be solved in this simple way. 
Also, keep in touch with your dentist—and be sure that he or she knows 
about the value of proper nutrition. 




24 


Aging: Its Moderation and Delay 


Aging is the process of growing old and approaching normal death. It is 
accompanied by a gradual deterioration in the biochemical and physiologi¬ 
cal functions, such as the activity of enzymes, beginning at about age thirty- 
five years and continuing at an increasing rate thereafter. 

The death rate increases with age, in consequence of the aging process. 
Death may be caused at any age by illness, accident, suicide, or murder. 
Accidents cause about 4.5 percent of all deaths in the United States, suicide 
about 1.4 percent, homicide about 1.0 percent, and illness about 93 percent. 
The mortality (death rate) from illness is a measure of the change in health 
caused by aging. 

A valuable contribution to the study of aging was made in 1825 by an 
English scholar, Benjamin Gompertz, in a paper titled, “On the Nature of 
the Function Expressive of the Law of Human Mortality,” published in 
the Philosophical Proceedings of the Royal Society of London . He studied 
the death records from four areas and noticed that the probability of death 
increases from year to year after age thirty or thirty-five by a constant 
factor. This means that the death rate after this age increases exponentially 
with increase in age. A useful way of checking the Gompertz relationship is 
to plot the logarithm of the mortality as a function of age; the Gompertz 
function is then a straight line. 




AGING: ITS MODERATION AND DELAY 


213 


In the illustration below I have plotted the logarithm of the number of 
deaths per one thousand persons per year in the United States as a function 
of the age. We see that a straight line fits the points from age thirty-five to 
age eighty-five. The slope of the line is such that we can say that for the 
average American the chance of death increases by 8.8 percent with each 
birthday after the thirty-fifth. His or her chance of dying during the year 
doubles with every increase of 8.2 years in age. 

Over the range from thirty-five to seventy-five years of age the death rate 
for women remains close to one half that for men. From birth to age five 
the ratio for girls to boys is about 80 percent, but then it drops rapidly to 
about 30 percent from age seventeen to twenty-five, rising to 50 percent at 
thirty-five. After age seventy-five it increases to about 65 percent. 

The values in infancy are attributed to genetic defects and childhood 
diseases. The best health is seen to come at age ten. The high death rate 
from ages seventeen to thirty can be attributed mainly to automobile acci¬ 
dents. These accidents cause about forty thousand deaths per year, at the 
average age of twenty-two. The hump in the curve is higher for young men 



Age-specific death rates Gompertz diagram shows the logarithm of the annual death rate 
(per thousand living at each age) for white males and white females in the United States, 
1979. 





214 


CHAPTER 24 


than for young women, who have a smaller chance of being killed at this 
age in an automobile accident. 

The human female in the United States starts life with somewhat better 
health than the male, and by age thirty-five she is twice as healthy, as 
shown by the difference in the death rates. (Part of this difference is the 
result of more cigarette smoking by men than by women.) From then on, 
however, she ages at the same rate, as shown by the parallelism of the 
Gompertz lines. 

People who smoke cigarettes have poor health. This poor health is made 
evident not only by the greater incidence of minor and major ailments but 
also by a striking increase in the death rate from all causes. Cigarette 
smokers lead miserable lives. They are the captives of their drug addiction. 

Scores of careful studies have been made in which the death rate of a 
population of cigarette smokers is compared with that of a similar popula¬ 
tion of nonsmokers. The smokers die faster than the nonsmokers, at every 
age and with every larger number of cigarettes smoked, and they die at a 
greater rate from every disease. Their natural protective mechanisms are 
damaged to such an extent as to make them vulnerable to every assault. 
Even the nonsmoking wives or husbands of cigarette smokers are damaged 
to such an extent by living in a smoky atmosphere as to have decreased life 
expectancy. 

One-pack-a-day smokers have twice the chance of nonsmokers of dying 
at age fifty to sixty (somewhat smaller at higher ages), and two-pack-a-day 
smokers have three times the chance. Average smokers die about eight years 
younger than nonsmokers. Cigar smokers are not damaged so much, per¬ 
haps because they do not inhale the smoke. They die a year or two earlier 
than nonsmokers, however, often of cancer of the mouth or throat. 

Twenty-five years ago I calculated that life expectancy is decreased by 
fifteen minutes for each cigarette smoked. Since smoking a cigarette takes 
about five minutes, I concluded that it is not worth while to smoke unless 
the smoker is more than four times as happy when smoking as when not 
smoking (Pauling, 1960). 

Lung cancer is an unpleasant disease. A smoker living in the city has 
three hundred times greater chance of dying of lung cancer than a non- 
smoker living in the country. There used to be a striking difference between 
the death rate of men from lung cancer and that of women, but now many 
more women are smoking, and they are catching up with the men, as 
shown in the top illustration on page 215. 

The major cause of the decreased life expectancy as a result of smoking 
cigarettes is not cancer; it is heart disease. The bottom illustration on page 
215 shows the logarithm of the death rate for coronary heart disease plotted 
against age, as found from a statistical study of 187,783 men by Hammond 



AGING: ITS MODERATION AND DELAY 


215 



Cigarettes and lung cancer Mortality from lung cancer increased sharply about twenty- 
five years after cigarette smoking became popular, first among men and then among women. 
(From Cameron and Pauling, 1979.) 



Age in years 

Cigarettes and heart disease Gompertz lines show the logarithm of the age-specific death 
rate (deaths per year per thousand persons) from coronary heart disease from a study of 
187,783 men for one-pack-a-day cigarette smokers, 0.3-pack-a-day cigarette smokers, and 
nonsmokers. 


Deaths per 100,(MX) per year 








216 


CHAPTER 24 


and Horn (1958). The slopes of the lines correspond to a doubling time of 
seven years. The curve for one-pack-a-day smokers is shifted to lower ages 
by seven years; that is, a one-pack-a-day smoker dies of coronary heart 
disease seven years earlier than a nonsmoker. 

It was discovered many years ago that the level of vitamin C is lower in 
the blood of smokers than of nonsmokers (Strauss and Scheer, 1939), and 
scores of investigators have verified this observation. At one recent interna¬ 
tional conference on vitamin C four of the twenty papers presented were on 
this subject, with discussion of populations in Brazil, Canada, Switzerland, 
and the United States (Hoefel, 1977; Pelletier, 1977; Ritzel and Brup- 
pacher, 1977; Sprince, Parker, and Smith, 1977). 

The investigators agree that the vitamin-C level in the plasma in smokers 
is usually only half or two-thirds that of nonsmokers. McCormick in 1952 
estimated that each cigarette smoked can destroy 25 milligrams (mg) of 
vitamin C, and Irwin Stone (1972) wrote that smokers suffer from a 
chronic subacute stage of scurvy. 

A part of the poor health of cigarette smokers can be attributed to their 
deficiency in vitamin C. This deficiency can be rectified by the regular 
intake of a few grams of the vitamin each day. In this way some, but not all, 
of the harmful effects of smoking can be prevented. The smoker taking 
supplementary vitamin C will not catch up with the nonsmoker taking 
vitamin C until he or she stops smoking. 

During the last few decades many people have stopped smoking, but 
others have not been able to escape from the addiction. For them there is 
the possibility of stopping in two stages. First, replace the cigarettes by 
chewing gum that contains nicotine (a prescription is needed), and after 
some time stop the gum. 

With respect to alcohol, people may be divided into three classes: non¬ 
drinkers, moderate drinkers (one to four drinks per day), and heavy drink¬ 
ers (more than four drinks per day). Many epidemiological studies have 
agreed that moderate drinkers on the average have slightly better health 
than nondrinkers, living about two years longer (Jones, 1956; Chope and 
Breslow, 1955). This effect of a moderate intake of alcohol may be the re¬ 
sult of its acting as a tranquilizer. For this purpose it is less harmful than 
the tranquilizing drugs. 

A high intake of alcohol can lead to great misery: interference with the 
ability of the person to get along with his or her spouse and children and 
with friends and business associates, destruction of the marriage, loss of the 
job, injury to himself or herself and others by drunk driving, arrest for 
drunkenness, and deterioration in physical and mental health. The effects 
of alcoholism are often compounded by the effects of cigarette smoking— 
heavy drinkers tend also to be heavy smokers. 



AGING: ITS MODERATION AND DELAY 


277 


The problem of alcoholism is hard to control. For many sufferers psy¬ 
chosocial support such as is provided by Alcoholics Anonymous has been 
helpful. The drug disulfiram has been effective for some alcoholics. It 
blocks the further oxidation of acetaldehyde, which is an oxidation product 
of alcohol. If a patient drinks alcohol after taking disulfiram he or she 
flushes, has a throbbing headache, and becomes nauseated and generally 
miserable. Such an experience may help him or her to give up drinking. 

Roger J. Williams, the discoverer of pantothenic acid, has written about 
the value of vitamins in controlling alcoholism (Williams, 1937). Many 
investigators have found that the B vitamins and vitamin C have value. 
Abram Hoffer (1962) reported the control of acute alcoholism and delirium 
tremens by giving 9 grams (g) of niacin and 9 g of vitamin C per day. 
Niacin and vitamin C in relation to alcoholism are discussed by several 
authors, especially Hawkins, in the book Orthomolecular Psychiatry. Haw¬ 
kins mentions one study in which 507 alcoholic patients on megavitamin 
treatment had been carefully followed for five years. All were long-time 
treatment failures before beginning to take the vitamins. Four hundred of 
the 507 had then remained sober for two years or more. 

Sprince, Parker, and Smith (1977) have pointed out that heavy smoking 
and heavy drinking introduce into the body not only nicotine and ethanol 
but also other toxic substances, including acetaldehyde, N-nitroso com¬ 
pounds, polynuclear hydrocarbons, cadmium, and carbon monoxide. They 
also stimulate the release of catecholamines and corticosteroids, which are 
associated with adverse cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous-system ef¬ 
fects. They discuss the evidence that large doses of vitamin C have value 
in decreasing the toxic effects of acetaldehyde and some of the other 
substances. 

In sum, cigarette smoking and excessive drinking are important factors 
leading to unhappiness, poor health, and early death. 

Unavoidably, aging is accompanied by the slowing down of the physio¬ 
logical and biochemical processes that go on in the body, by decreasing 
strength, and by increasing incidence of illness and probability of death. 
The molecules of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) that control the synthesis of 
enzymes and other proteins undergo changes (somatic mutations) that lead 
to decreased production of these important substances or to changes in the 
molecules that decrease their activity. These changes in enzymes through¬ 
out the body are compounded by poor nutrition resulting from poor appe¬ 
tite, failure to take supplementary vitamins, and decreased activity of the 
digestive enzymes. The increase in the number of cells containing chromo¬ 
somal abnormality contributes to these effects. 

One theory of aging is that many molecular changes that build up in the 
human body with the passage of time are caused by free radicals, atoms or 




218 


CHAPTER 24 


molecules that are especially reactive because they contain an unpaired 
electron (Denham, 1981). They can cause changes in the structure and 
function of important molecules, such as enzymes, and these changes can 
produce somatic mutations, mutations in the cells of the body as distin¬ 
guished from mutations in the egg or sperm that may result in the birth of 
defective infants or in stillbirths or prevent the development of the fetus. 

One characteristic of aging is the decrease in the elasticity of the skin and 
the production of wrinkles, especially in the areas exposed to sunlight—the 
hands, face, and neck. Bjorksten (1951) developed a theory of aging that 
explains these changes in the skin. In the process of the tanning of leather, 
molecules are introduced into the animal hide that form chemical bonds 
with the skin molecules and cross-link them into large aggregates, making 
the skin insoluble and tough. Bjorksten pointed out that in the course of 
increasing age the molecules in the human skin become cross-linked, and 
the skin becomes leathery. 

This process can be slowed down by restricting the exposure of the skin 
to strong sunlight and by protecting it against the ultraviolet rays in the 
sunlight by using a lotion or salve that contains a substance that absorbs 
ultraviolet light. In the same way the chance of developing skin cancer is 
decreased. 

A common accompanimeiit of old age is the formation of yellow deposits 
of cholesterol in the skin below the eyes. It has been observed that after 
such a deposit has been removed another does not appear if the blood level 
of cholesterol is decreased by the regular intake of high-dose vitamin C and 
by cutting down the intake of sucrose. 

Ultraviolet light, X rays, cosmic rays, natural radioactivity, radioactive 
fallout from nuclear explosions, and mutagenic and carcinogenic chemicals 
produce their effects in part by forming free radicals, which then attack 
other molecules by changing them or cross-linking them. Part of the aging 
process may be the production of insoluble cross-linked sludge in cells 
throughout the body. The oxidation-reduction power of vitamin C and vit¬ 
amin E provides protection against cancer and against aging by causing 
these molecules to combine with, reduce, and so destroy free radicals. 

I do not recommend that drugs be taken in the effort to control aging. In 
a large (and, to me, rather confusing) popular book on aging and life 
extension by Pearson and Shaw (1982), the authors list thirty-one sub¬ 
stances in their personal experimental life-extension formula. The list in¬ 
cludes vitamins and other orthomolecular substances but also a number of 
drugs, including several that they describe as antioxidants: dilauryl thio- 
propionate, thiodipropionic acid, butylated hydroxytoluene, and hydroge¬ 
nated ergot alkaloids (dihydroergocornine methanesulfonate, dihydroergo- 
cristine methanesulfonate, dihydroergocryptine methanesulfonate). I do not 
recommend taking these substances. 



AGING: ITS MODERATION AND DELAY 


219 


It is generally agreed that physical activity is important for the preserva¬ 
tion of good health. Cheraskin and Ringsdorf in their book Predictive Med¬ 
icine conclude that “the addition of physical activity discourages disease; the 
absence of exercise invites disease.” 

One early study is that of Hammond (1964), who reported on more than 
a million men and women who were enrolled in the study and then fol¬ 
lowed for two years. The death rates for 461,440 men between forty-five 
and ninety years of age are shown in the illustration below. It is seen that 
the men who did not exercise had death rates much larger than those of the 
men who did. The ratios correspond to between ten and twenty years 
difference in life expectancy. Other investigators have reported about a five- 
year difference between people who have little or no exercise and those who 
exercise moderately, with no advantage to strenuous exercise. People who 
exercise probably also follow other good health practices. Regular exercise 
benefits the heart and lungs, improves the blood vessels, increases muscular 
strength, tightens the ligaments, and helps to control the body weight. 

The word aerobic, which means pertaining to the presence or use of the 
oxygen of the air, has been used in recent years to describe exercising 



Age in years 

Exercise and mortality Annual death rates (deaths per year per thousand persons) differ 
significantly for men who exercise and men who do not. The ratios correspond to between 
ten and twenty years difference in life expectancy. (From Hammond, 1964.) 




220 


CHAPTER 24 


vigorously enough to require more rapid breathing and an increased rate of 
the heartbeat. Aerobic exercise can be carried out by walking rapidly, jog¬ 
ging, bicycling, or swimming. There is no doubt that it is beneficial when it 
is practiced regularly and not excessively. 

Every insult to the body, every illness, every stress increases the physio¬ 
logical age of a person and decreases his or her life expectancy. The 
amounts by which life expectancy is decreased by episodes of illness have 
been reported by Dr. Hardin Jones of the Donner Laboratory of Medical 
Physics of the University of California in Berkeley. He pointed out that 
there is evidence that aging results from episodes that damage the bodily 
functions. Among these damaging episodes are illnesses; each illness leaves 
the body with decreased ability to function in the optimum way. One dis¬ 
ease experience tends to lead to another and to decrease life expectancy. 
This effect has been described by saying that each person is born with a 
certain amount of vitality, that some vitality is used up by each episode of 
illness or other cause of stress, and that death comes when the quota of 
vitality has been exhausted. 

Jones concludes that the way to avoid disease is by not having earlier 
diseases: “. . . we may be able to achieve an even greater preservation of 
physiologic health by the elimination of our more trivial diseases; the suc¬ 
cessful removal of such ‘benign’ diseases as the common cold, chicken pox, 
measles, etc., may be more effective in lessening the disease tendency of 
later life than anything else we may attempt to do.” 

By controlling the common cold, the flu, and other ailments through the 
intake of supplementary vitamin C and other health practices, we not only 
avoid the discomfort of these diseases but also slow down the rate at which 
our bodies deteriorate and at which our stores of vitality are used up. Old 
people and sick people often move rapidly toward death because they do not 
eat enough food. Their malnutrition is often the result of poverty, but it 
may also come about because the food does not taste good or smell good to 
them. The deterioration in the senses of taste and olfaction may itself be the 
result of malnutrition, but it is often exacerbated by the toxic products of 
illnesses, especially cancer, by the changes accompanying the aging process, 
and by poor health habits, such as constipation. 

Good nutrition can decrease the number of these episodes and prevent 
the onslaught on the physiological age by improving the general health, 
strengthening the body’s natural protective mechanisms, and helping to 
control illness. To all these ends, the optimum intake of supplementary 
vitamins contributes heavily. It is possible, as Lewis Thomas has said, for 
us all to die healthy! 

Even if the aging person is not healthy, the last days can be made more 
comfortable by good nutrition. Dr. Ewan Cameron has reported that pa- 



AGING: ITS MODERATION AND DELAY 


221 


tients with advanced cancer who began taking 10 grams of vitamin C per 
day quickly responded by having better appetite and eating more, probably 
in part because the food smelled better and tasted better. The resulting 
improved nutrition may be part of the explanation of the effect of the 
vitamin on the health of the patients. 

At the present time the average age at death in the United States is about 
seventy-five years. The slope of the Gompertz curve begins to decrease 
beyond age eighty-five; that is, the death rate does not increase quite so 
rapidly with increasing age as in earlier years. This effect is probably the 
result of the selection of the survivors as generally healthier people than 
those who have died. At age 100 the annual death rate is 0.30, and this rate 
increases by about 0.012 for each succeeding year. A calculation on this 
basis indicates that in the U.S. population there should be one person who 
has survived to age 125. 

My estimate, made on the basis of the results of epidemiological studies 
and other observations, is that through the optimum use of vitamin supple¬ 
ments and other health measures, the length of the period of well-being and 
the length of life could be increased by twenty-five to thirty-five years. For 
the subpopulation following this regimen the life expectancy would be 100 
to 110 years, and in the course of time the maximum age, reached by a few, 
might be 150 years. 










-4 



































IV 


VITAMINS AND DRUGS 




















25 


Organized Medicine and the Vitamins 


Fifteen years ago I was writing Vitamin C and the Common Cold . I was 
pleased with myself. I had made many discoveries in chemistry and other 
fields of science and had even made some contributions to medicine, al¬ 
though it was not clear that these contributions would have much effect in 
decreasing the amount of suffering caused by disease. Now, I thought, I 
have learned about something that can decrease somewhat the amount of 
suffering for tens of millions or even hundreds of millions of people, some¬ 
thing that had been noticed by other scientists and by some physicians but 
for some reason had been ignored. 

I thought that all that I needed to do was to present the facts in a simple, 
straightforward, and logical way in order that physicians and people gener¬ 
ally would accept them. I was right, in this expectation, about the people 
but wrong about the physicians, or perhaps not about the physicians as 
individuals but about organized medicine. 

A modest number of all U.S. physicians, perhaps 1 percent, are now 
practicing orthomolecular medicine and calling themselves orthomolecular 
physicians. They make use of conventional prophylactic and therapeutic 
measures and in addition supplement these measures by the proper recom¬ 
mendations about the optimum intake of vitamins and other nutrients, 
together with the use of other orthomolecular substances. The American 




226 


CHAPTER 25 


Orthomolecular Medical Association, of which I have been honorary presi¬ 
dent since its formation ten years ago, today has five hundred members. 

It is not easy to be an orthomolecular physician. This field has not yet 
been recognized as a medical specialty. Orthomolecular medicine for some 
reason seems to be considered a threat to conventional medicine. Ortho¬ 
molecular physicians are harassed by the medical establishment. One of my 
friends, in fact the present president of the Orthomolecular Medical Associ¬ 
ation, had his California medical license revoked in 1984 and has had to 
move to another state in order to continue his practice of medicine. I testi¬ 
fied at his hearing, where I was asked some rather silly questions by the 
assistant attorney general of the State of California. None of his patients 
presented charges against him; instead, the charges were brought by an¬ 
other physician, who may have felt that orthomolecular medicine consti¬ 
tuted unfair competition, in that the patients are benefitted too much and at 
too low a cost (vitamins are much cheaper than drugs). My understanding 
is that the principal charge against my friend is that “He did not try hard 
enough to get his cancer patient who had decided against chemotherapy to 
change her mind.” This sort of excuse seems to me to be about as flagrant 
as the one used thirty-three years ago by the U.S. Department of State for 
not giving me my passport to permit me to attend a two-day international 
symposium in London arranged by the Royal Society of London to discuss 
my discoveries about the structure of proteins. I was to have been the first 
speaker. The State Department said that my “anti-Communist statements 
had not been strong enough.” 

In Chapter 13 1 mentioned that whereas many people believe that vita¬ 
min C helps prevent colds, most physicians deny that this vitamin has much 
value. My experiences after the publication of Vitamin C and the Common 
Cold (1970) substantiated this idea and have stimulated me to attempt to 
explain the fact. 

Many physicians have written me that they find vitamin C to be effective 
in controlling the common cold and other infections of the respiratory tract 
and use it in treating themselves, members of their families, and patients. 
Some hundreds of nonphysicians also have written me about their success¬ 
ful use of vitamin C, usually over a period of years. I have received only 
three or four letters from physicians who are convinced that vitamin C has 
no such effectiveness. It is likely, however, that this small number is mis¬ 
leading: skeptics do not write to me. 

Cortez F. Enloe, Jr., M.D., editor of Nutrition Today, in an editorial 
(1971) on my book, mentioned that he had not found one physician among 
his friends or among those attending a meeting of a state medical society 
who “would admit to having even read the book.” I surmise that most 
physicians have read neither this book nor any of the articles describing the 



ORGANIZED MEDICINE AND THE VITAMINS 


227 


controlled studies that have been made of vitamin C in relation to the 
common cold. I estimate that one American physician in a thousand has 
read the 1942 article by Cowan, Diehl, and Baker, and that one in ten 
thousand has read the 1961 article by Ritzel. The opinions of all but a 
handful are secondhand. 

Almost all physicians rely upon the statements made by authorities. This 
situation is inevitable. The practicing physician is too busy to make a 
thorough study of the complex and often voluminous original literature 
on every medical topic. For example, a physician in Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, wrote a letter to the local newspaper, saying that it had been 
shown that vitamin C has no value at all in protecting against the common 
cold and other respiratory diseases. I wrote to him, asking him on which 
published accounts of investigations he had based his statement. He replied 
that he was a gynecologist and knew little about the infectious diseases; he 
had based his statement in the newspaper on information given to 
him by his old professor, Dr. F. J. Stare, by telephone. This physician had 
relied upon an authority who, like many members of the medical establish¬ 
ment, has ignored the mounting evidence in favor of the treatment of the 
common cold with vitamin C. 

Some of the medical investigators themselves have failed to analyze their 
own observations in a sound way and to act in accordance with these 
results. Cowan, Diehl, and Baker (1942) provide an example. In their 
careful study these three physicians observed a decreased incidence of colds 
for the ascorbic-acid group (relative to the placebo group) by 15 percent 
and a decreased severity by 19 percent (Chapter 12). These decreases are 
statistically significant, according to the rules generally accepted by statisti¬ 
cians, and they should not be ignored. Nevertheless, Cowan, Diehl, and 
Baker did ignore the results. In the summary of their paper, which is the 
only part that would be read by most readers of the Journal of the American 
Medical Association } they omitted mention of these facts. Their summary 
consists of a single sentence: “This controlled study yields no indication that 
either large doses of vitamin C or large doses of vitamins A, B,, B 2 , C, D, 
and nicotinic acid have any important effect on the number or severity of 
infections of the upper respiratory tract when administered to young adults 
who presumably are already on a reasonably adequate diet.” 

In my opinion this statement is incorrect. The vitamin-C subjects had 
only 69 percent as much illness with the common cold (as measured by days 
of illness per subject, the product of the number of colds per subject and the 
days of illness per cold) as the placebo subjects. This surely is an important 
effect, the result of a 15 percent decrease in incidence and a 19 percent 
decrease in severity. The only explanation of the action of Cowan, Diehl, 
and Baker in writing the summary in this way is that they did not consider 



228 


CHAPTER 25 


the observed effect important; but surely most people would consider it 
important to be able to cut their amount of illness with the common cold by 
nearly one-third. In a letter to the New York Times in 1970, Diehl indi¬ 
cated that he still thought that he and his collaborators had not obtained 
positive results. In a reply to that letter I pointed out that Dr. Diehl and I 
agreed about the facts but disagreed about the word important 3 and that 
Cowan, Diehl, and Baker had made an error of judgment in omitting from 
their summary mention of the fact that they had observed a statistically 
significant protective effect of ascorbic acid against the common cold. 

Glazebrook and Thomson (1942) also misconstrued their own observa¬ 
tions in the summary of their paper. It is mentioned in Chapter 13 that in 
their main study, with 435 subjects, they found the incidence of colds and 
tonsillitis in the ascorbic-acid group to be 13 percent less than for the 
controls. The incidence of colds alone was 17 percent less in this main study 
and 12 percent less in a second study, with 150 subjects, in which they also 
observed a 15 percent smaller incidence of colds and tonsillitis. These facts, 
presented in the body of the paper, are not repeated in the summary. 
Instead, the statement is made, contrary to the facts, that “the incidences of 
common cold and tonsillitis were the same in the two groups.” Similar 
failure to present in the summaries of their papers a correct account of the 
results of their work can be found also in the reports of other investigators. 

The actions of these investigators in understating their observations in 
the summaries of their papers may have been the result of a sort of conser¬ 
vatism and restraint, the feeling that one should not claim that a therapeu¬ 
tic or preventive effect has been observed unless it is a large and obvious 
one. It is my opinion that feelings of this sort, admirable though they may 
be, do not justify an incorrect description of one’s observations. The authors 
of a scientific or medical article should always strive for accuracy. It is just 
as wrong to understate one’s findings as to overstate them. There is no 
doubt that the original investigators themselves have been partly responsi¬ 
ble for the failure of the medical establishment to recognize the significance 
of the observations. 

The attitude of the medical authorities is illustrated by the statement in 
the unsigned editorial in Nutrition Reviews (1967), quoted in Chapter 6, 
that there is no conclusive evidence that ascorbic acid has any protective or 
therapeutic effect on the course of the common cold in healthy people. The 
study of the evidence made by the anonymous author was clearly a careless 
and superficial one, in that, as is mentioned in Chapter 13, he erroneously 
reported that Ritzel (1961) had observed only a 39 percent reduction in the 
number of days of illness and a 36 percent reduction in the incidence of 
symptoms, the correct values being nearly twice as great (61 percent and 65 
percent, respectively). There is no indication in the editorial that its author 




ORGANIZED MEDICINE AND THE VITAMINS 


229 


made any attempt to analyze the evidence in the published papers to find 
out whether the statement could be made that the evidence shows with 
statistical significance that ascorbic acid either has or has not a protective or 
therapeutic effect (of a given assumed magnitude). It seems not unlikely 
that the author was misled by the incorrect summary statements of some 
investigators, as mentioned above, and by the prevailing medical opinion, 
and that this bias led to the superficiality of his editorial. 

Even after the appearance of Vitamin C and the Common Cold (7 De¬ 
cember 1970), when the evidence was clearly brought to the attention of the 
medical authorities, they continued to deny the existence of the evidence. 
This denial was sometimes accompanied by statements that contradicted or 
misconstrued the facts. 

Among the authorities who denied this evidence was Dr. Charles C. 
Edwards, the chief of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). On 
18 December 1970 Commissioner Edwards telephoned me and asked me to 
come to Washington for a conference about this matter with the Food and 
Drug Administration. I agreed and suggested that some questions be clari¬ 
fied by correspondence before the meeting. On the very next day, as re¬ 
ported in a United Press International dispatch under the byline of Craig 
A. Palmer, printed in many newspapers, he summoned reporters to tell 
them that the run on drugstores for vitamin C since publication of my book 
was “ridiculous” and stated that “There is no scientific evidence and [there] 
never have been any meaningful studies indicating that vitamin C is capa¬ 
ble of preventing or curing colds.” I wrote several letters to Commissioner 
Edwards, asking him to explain how he could reconcile this statement with 
the existence of the evidence summarized in my book, especially the results 
obtained by Ritzel. In his replies, which included material by Allan L. 
Forbes, M.D., deputy director of the Division of Nutrition of the FDA, he 
made several critical comments about the work of Ritzel and of other inves¬ 
tigators quoted in my book. He concluded, however, that Ritzel “does 
present what seem to be meaningful data.” With “clarification” carried as 
far as it could go by correspondence, I wrote Commissioner Edwards in 
June 1971 that I would come to Washington for the conference immedi¬ 
ately or at a date convenient to him. He then withdrew his invitation, and 
the conference has never taken place. 

Despite the repeated findings that an increased intake of vitamin C does 
provide some protection against respiratory illnesses and other diseases, the 
federal medical agencies continue to deny that it has any value. In August 
1975 the National Institutes of Health issued a pamphlet (566-AMDD- 
975-B) containing many incorrect statements: “The body uses only the 
amount of ascorbic acid it needs and excretes the rest in the urine!” “Other 
questions about the safety of high doses of ascorbic acid include its possible 



230 


CHAPTER 25 


effect on fertility and the fetus, interference with the treatment of patients 
whose urine must be kept alkaline. . . “Recent reports further demon¬ 
strate that high doses of vitamin C destroy substantial amounts of the 
vitamin B 12 in food.” It is stated in the pamphlet that it is reasonable to 
assume that 45 milligrams (mg) per day is sufficient to prevent disease and 
maintain health. The only mention of the evidence is the assertion that the 
studies are unconvincing. 

The authors of the authoritative reference books and textbooks have 
failed to assess properly the evidence about vitamin C. For example, in the 
sixth edition of the textbook Human Nutrition and Dietetics by Davidson, 
Passmore, Brock, and Truswell (1975), the authors write: “The claim by 
Pauling (1970) that the consumption of 1 or 2 g per day promotes optimum 
health and protects against the common cold rests on slender evidence.” In 
support of this statement they cite the conclusions of Cowan et al. and of 
Glazebrook and Thomson but say nothing about their data. They make no 
mention of the work by Ritzel, even though they knew about Ritzel’s study. 
One of the authors, Passmore, wrote a review of Vitamin C and the Com¬ 
mon Cold, in which I discussed that work (Passmore 1971). Why these 
authorities in the field of nutrition should misinterpret and ignore the evi¬ 
dence is not clear. 

The Medical Letter, a nonprofit publication on drugs and therapeutics 
for physicians put out by Drug and Therapeutic Information Inc., pub¬ 
lished an unsigned, unfavorable review of Vitamin C and the Common 
Cold on 25 December 1970. The anonymous author said that I had relied 
on uncontrolled studies and went on to say, “A controlled trial of the effec¬ 
tiveness of vitamin C against upper respiratory infections must be con¬ 
ducted over a long period and include many hundreds of persons to give 
meaningful results. No such trial has been performed.” I wrote a letter 
pointing out the falsity of this statement and showing the writer of the 
article how the Cowan, Diehl, and Baker study, for one, surely met all of 
his specifications. I concluded by asking the Medical Letter to publish my 
letter. 

This was not done; instead, on 28 May 1971 the Medical Letter pub¬ 
lished a second article with the title “Vitamin C—Were the Trials Well 
Controlled and Are Large Doses Safe?” This article argued that the 
Cowan, Diehl, and Baker study had to be rejected because it was not 
double-blind (although Cowan himself said in a letter to me that it could be 
so described) and the allocation of subjects to the ascorbic-acid group and 
the placebo group was not randomized (although the investigators describe 
their method of randomization in their paper). The study by Ritzel was 
attacked on the trivial ground that Ritzel had not given the ages and sex of 
the subjects. In fact, his paper indicated that the subjects were all school- 



ORGANIZED MEDICINE AND THE VITAMINS 


231 


boys (in a letter to me Ritzel verified that they were all boys and said that 
they were fifteen to seventeen years old). The article also raised the ques¬ 
tion, without offering any evidence, of the possible formation of kidney 
stones. 

The weakness of the arguments advanced by the Medical Letter and 
some other critics caused a Canadian physician, Dr. Abram Hoffer, to 
make the following comment (1971): “[These critics] use two sets of logic. 
Before they are prepared to look at Dr. Pauling’s hypothesis, they demand 
proof of the most rigorous kind. But when arguing against his views, they 
refer to evidence of the flimsiest sort for the toxicity of ascorbic acid.” 

Popular writers are, of course, misled by such authoritative mis¬ 
statements. In a thoroughly unreliable article in Reader's Digest (Ross, 
1971) there is the sentence “But some of these patients [who had taken 
4000 to 10,000 mg of vitamin C a day] have developed kidney stones.” My 
request to Reader's Digest and the author of the article to give me the 
references to the medical literature about these patients was unsuccessful. 
The Medical Letter did not mention any patients in whom ascorbic acid 
had caused kidney stones to form but mentioned only such a possibility. 

For many years the stand of the American Medical Association, as ex¬ 
pressed especially by Dr. Philip L. White, its principal spokesman on 
nutrition and health, was that vitamin C has no value in preventing or 
treating the common cold or other diseases (White, 1975). On 10 March 
1975 the AM A issued a statement to the press with the heading “Vitamin 
C will not prevent or cure the common cold.” The basis for this quite 
negative statement was said to be two papers published on that day in the 
Journal of the American Medical Association (Karlowski et al., 1975; 
Dykes and Meier, 1975). Karlowski and his associates had made a study of 
ascorbic acid in relation to the common cold, with employees of the Na¬ 
tional Institutes of Health as the subjects. The paper by Dykes and Meier 
was a review of some other studies. The results observed by Ritzel (1961), 
Sabiston, and Radomski (1974), and some other investigators were not, 
however, presented. Despite their incomplete coverage of the evidence, 
Dykes and Meier concluded that the studies seemed to show that vitamin C 
decreases the amount of illness accompanying the common cold, although in 
their opinion its protective effect might not be large enough to be clinically 
important. Thus their review of the evidence did not provide any basis for 
the AMA statement that vitamin C will not prevent or cure the com¬ 
mon cold. 

In order to present to the readers of the Journal of the American Medical 
Association {JAMA) an account of all of the evidence, I at once prepared a 
thorough but brief analysis of thirteen controlled trials and submitted it to 
the editor on 19 March. He returned it to me twice, with suggestions for 



232 


CHAPTER 25 


minor revisions, which I made. Finally on 24 September, six months after I 
had submitted the article to him, he wrote me that it was not wholly 
convincing and that he had decided to reject the article and not publish it in 
JAMA . It was later published in Medical Tribune (Pauling, 1976b). 

It is my opinion that it is quite improper for the editor of JAMA (or of 
any other journal) to follow the policy of publishing only those papers that 
support only one side of a scientific or medical question and also to inter¬ 
fere with the proper discussion of the question by holding a paper that had 
been submitted to him for half a year, during which period, according to 
accepted custom, the paper could not be submitted to another journal. 

This is not the only example of this sort of action by the editor of JAMA. 
The paper by Herbert and Jacobs, which makes the claim that vitamin C 
taken with a meal destroys the vitamin B 12 in the food and may cause a 
serious disease similar to pernicious anemia, was published in JAMA 
(Chapter 9). When Newmark and his coworkers found that the claim could 
not be substantiated, and that in fact vitamin C does not destroy the vitamin 
B 12 in the food, they sent their paper to the editor of JAMA, which seems 
clearly to be the place where the correction should be published. He held it 
for half a year, and then refused to publish it, thus delaying its publication 
in another journal and preventing many of the readers of the original 
article by Herbert and Jacobs from learning that their results were incor¬ 
rect. These actions suggest that the AMA works to protect American phy¬ 
sicians from information that runs counter to its own prejudices. The 
evidence indicates that the AMA is prejudiced against vitamin C. 

The editor of JAMA and his advisers have a hard task to handle. Medi¬ 
cine is an extremely complicated subject. It is to a large extent based on the 
sciences—physics, physical chemistry, organic chemistry, biochemistry, mo¬ 
lecular biology, bacteriology, virology, genetics, pharmacology, and oth¬ 
ers—but it has not yet become a science. No one can know thoroughly more 
than a small part of medicine. Moreover, many physicians are limited 
in their scientific knowledge and have not had experience in the field 
of scientific discovery. They do not know how to greet and how to assess 
new ideas. 

The literature of science and medicine has now become so extensive that 
an editor may form his or her opinions on the basis of only a small part of 
the existing evidence. The editor of JAMA may have been too busy to look 
thoroughly into the vitamin-C question. The distinguished editor of an¬ 
other medical journal, Modern Medicine, Dr. Irvine H. Page, was on 
unsure ground when he wrote an editorial entitled “Are Truth and Plain 
Dealing Going Out of Style?” for his 15 January 1976 issue. Page had this 
to say: “When even responsible investigators use shady tactics to promote 
their ‘discoveries/ it is no wonder that the public loses confidence in the 



ORGANIZED MEDICINE AND THE VITAMINS 


233 


scientific establishment.” He went on to say: “To me, the most tragic exam¬ 
ple of self-deception was that in which Dr. Linus Pauling—twice a Nobel 
prize winner—proposed and exploited the use of huge doses of vitamin C 
for the common cold.” 

After an exchange of correspondence with me, Page retracted his state¬ 
ments about me in the 1 July 1976 issue of Modern Medicine. There he 
wrote: 

I withdraw this statement and regret the unjustified use of the 
pejorative words that because of a misunderstanding I improperly 
claimed that Dr. Pauling demanded that his critics prove him wrong. 

Dr. Pauling in fact presented in his 1970 book Vitamin C and the 
Common Cold and in his articles a reasonable summary of the 
published reports of the several controlled studies that had been made, 
together with his own discussion and conclusions. He has not 
demanded that his critics prove him wrong, although he has urged 
them to examine the evidence. . . . The high opinion that this 
magazine has of Dr. Pauling is indicated by our action in giving him 
the Modern Medicine Award for Distinguished Achievement in 1963 
for his discovery that sickle cell anemia is a molecular disease. 

Page also said that physicians should provide reliable information about 
such major public-health topics as nutrition (including the use of vitamin 
C), drugs, immunizations, and life-styles and by their own deportment 
should earn and keep the respect and confidence of those they hope to bene¬ 
fit by preventive medicine. In addition, Modern Medicine published in the 
1 July 1976 issue a paper by me on the argument for vitamin C in main¬ 
taining health and preventing disease. 

Modern Medicine seems to be developing a more open-minded attitude 
toward the recent progress in nutrition and preventive medicine, following 
the lead of another medical magazine, Medical Tribune> which over the 
years has continually been free from bias of this sort. I hope that in the 
course of time some improvement will become discernible in the publica¬ 
tions of the American Medical Association. 

Physicians must be conservative in the practice of medicine, but the med¬ 
ical profession needs to be open to new ideas, if medicine is to progress. A 
new idea, that large amounts of vitamins might help in controlling disease, 
was discussed about fifty years ago but was not properly developed. Claus 
W. Jungeblut, the physician who first showed that ascorbic acid can inacti¬ 
vate viruses and provide some protection against viral diseases (Chapter 13) 
became discouraged by the poor reception given his idea and went into 
another field of medicine. 



234 


CHAPTER 25 


The most recent and the most outrageous action by organized medicine 
against the new science of nutrition and the well-being of the American 
people has been perpetrated by the Mayo Clinic. This action, the publica¬ 
tion of a fraudulent paper in the 17 January 1985 issue of the New En¬ 
gland Journal of Medicine, has been mentioned in Chapter 19. The princi¬ 
pal author of the paper, Dr. Charles G. Moertel, and his five collaborators, 
deliberately misrepresented their investigation of the value of high doses of 
vitamin C for patients with metastatic cancer of the colon or rectum as a 
repetition of and check on the work by Dr. Ewan Cameron and his collabo¬ 
rators (of whom I was one). They concluded that high doses of vitamin C 
have no value for patients with advanced cancer. In fact (although they 
suppressed this information), they supplied vitamin C to the patients in a 
way completely different from that followed by Cameron. Cameron’s pa¬ 
tients received high doses of vitamin C from the beginning of their treat¬ 
ment until the end of their lives or the present time, as much as twelve or 
thirteen years, whereas the Mayo Clinic patients received a smaller amount 
for a short time. Cameron and I had warned that suddenly stopping the 
high doses of vitamin C could be dangerous. This warning was ignored by 
the Mayo Clinic doctors. 

The National Cancer Institute was also a victim of the Mayo Clinic 
fraud. Its officers were misled into thinking that the Mayo Clinic had 
repeated Cameron’s work. By making a public statement to this effect, they 
loaned their authority to this bogus effort and compounded its error. 

The Mayo Clinic doctors have refused to discuss this matter with me. I 
conclude that they are not scientists, devoted to the search for the truth. I 
surmise that they are so ashamed of themselves that they would prefer that 
the matter be forgotten. The Mayo Clinic used to have a great reputation. 
This episode indicates to me that it is no longer deserved. I shall refer to the 
Mayo Clinic again in the next chapter, comparing vitamins and drugs. 

In 1985 the American Medical Association, the American Cancer Soci¬ 
ety, and the editors of the leading medical journals have not yet recognized 
that vitamin supplements in the optimum amounts have value. There are 
indications, however, that a change in their attitude may come during the 
next few years. Individual physicians in large numbers have changed from 
being antagonistic to high intakes of vitamins to being willing to consider 
the idea that they have value. I am impressed by the number of them 
who write or telephone me or one of my associates, especially Dr. Ewan 
Cameron, for additional information. Also, many people have written me 
about the response of their physician when he (or, rarely, she) learned that 
the patient had been taking 5 or 10 grams (g) of vitamin C per day. A 
decade ago the patients often refrained from telling the physician about this 
intake. When the physician learned about it, he would say, “You’ve been 




ORGANIZED MEDICINE AND THE VITAMINS 


235 


listening to Linus Pauling—that quack!” or sometimes would make a 
stronger, more vulgar statement. During the last three or four years, pa¬ 
tients have been reporting to me that the physician has said, “It may not be 
the vitamin C, but keep on taking it!” or, if the patient had not divulged 
his or her intake, “I don’t know what you have been doing, but keep on 
doing it.” 



1 5WTED OUT IN (?UAMTUiVl 
/AkCUANlCS, fcUT SOIV\£AM02E ALON6 Ttft 
Wa h I Took A turn." 











































236 


CHAPTER 25 


A dozen years ago I was persona non grata in medical schools. During 
the last few years I have spoken many times about vitamins in medical 
schools and at medical meetings—ten times in 1984. On 14 November 1984, 
for example, I spoke on the value of nutritional science in medicine to a 
large audience in Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, at the invitation 
of the Division of Gastroenterology and the Jefferson Nutrition Program. 
After my lecture one of the professors of medicine said to me, “Up to two 
hours ago I believed that vitamins in amounts greater than the RDAs had 
no value. I have now changed my mind, because of the facts that you 
presented.” 

Also during 1984 I gave twenty-five talks to health groups or other 
groups of laymen or on television or radio programs. There is no doubt that 
the public has great interest in improving health by the optimum intake of 
vitamin C and other nutrients. In November I appeared on the Toronto 
evening television program called Speaking Out. The viewers could tele¬ 
phone the station and vote on a question about vitamins. The station re¬ 
ceived 25,229 telephone calls during the program. I was told that this was 
the largest popular response of any program in the history of the station. 

This great popular interest in improved nutrition is now having an influ¬ 
ence on the medical establishment. I believe that the time has come not only 
for orthomolecular medicine to be recognized as a field of specialization but 
also for all physicians and surgeons to incorporate improvements of nutri¬ 
tion into their procedures for helping their patients. 



26 


Vitamins and Drugs Compared 


If you have a serious problem with your health you should see your physi¬ 
cian. He or she probably will prescribe a drug for you. Often the drug is 
effective in controlling the disease. Also, the drug may have harmful side 
effects. Sometimes a second drug is prescribed to control the side effects of 
the first drug. 

The reason that most drugs are available only through a doctor’s pre¬ 
scription is that they are dangerous. They are still dangerous even though a 
doctor prescribes them. 

In case of serious illness the drug may be essential. Before taking it, you 
should understand why it should be taken and what the likely consequences 
will be, and you should combine your own judgment with that of the 
doctor. 

In the book Matters of Life and Death, cited in Chapter 1, Dr. Eugene 
D. Robin says: 

The doctor’s opinion is not infallible and you need not be passive. It is 
your future that is being decided. Remember that you, the patient, 
have the highest stake in the decision—the most to gain and the most 
to lose. You, the patient, if you are capable of making the decision, are 
the one to decide what constitutes a happy and productive life. Don’t 
let your doctor, however well intentioned, usurp this right. 





238 


CHAPTER 26 


This advice may be especially important with respect to vitamins and to 
nutrition in general. Even the specialists in nutrition tend to be unreliable 
because education in nutrition has not changed very much during the last 
thirty years and there is a bias against the new knowledge about the value 
of megavitamins. 

Also, you should not consider that the over-the-counter nonprescription 
drugs, even aspirin, are safe. Your health is apt to be better if you do not 
take any of them. Be leery of the statements made on television commer¬ 
cials. For example, hemorrhoids are probably more effectively controlled by 
taking vitamin C in large enough amounts to keep the stools soft and liquid 
and by applying vitamin E topically than by using Preparation H. 

Drugs are dangerous; vitamins are safe. The vitamins are foods —essen¬ 
tial foods, required by human beings for life and good health. They are 
safe, even when taken in large amounts. Side effects occur only infrequently 
and are rarely serious (Chapter 27). Also, vitamins are inexpensive, com¬ 
pared with most drugs. 

In this chapter I shall use vitamin C as my main example, comparing it, 
for example, with the over-the-counter drugs that are sold as remedies for 
the common cold. 

The drugs that are used in tremendous amounts for treating the common 
cold are very different from vitamin C in that they are harmful and danger¬ 
ous and are themselves responsible for much illness and many deaths. They 
do not control the viral infection but only the symptoms, to some extent, 
whereas vitamin C controls the infection itself, as well as the symptoms. 

Aspirin is an example of a drug that is said to have low toxicity and 
few side effects. This drug, which is the chemical substance acetylsalicylic 
acid, is present in most cold medicines. The fatal dose for an adult is 20 
grams (g) to 30 g. The ordinary aspirin tablet contains 324 milligrams 
(mg) (5 grains); hence sixty to ninety tablets can kill an adult, and a 
smaller amount can kill a child. Aspirin is the most common single poison 
used by suicides (it is second only to the group of substances used in sleep¬ 
ing pills). About 15 percent of accidental poisoning deaths of young chil¬ 
dren are caused by aspirin. Many lives would be saved if the medicine chest 
contained vitamin C in place of aspirin and the other cold medicines. 

Some people show a severe sensitivity to aspirin, such that a decrease in 
circulation of the blood and difficulty in breathing follow the ingestion of 
0.3 g to 1 g (one to three tablets). 

The symptoms of mild aspirin poisoning are burning pain in the mouth, 
throat, and abdomen, difficulty in breathing, lethargy, vomiting, ringing in 
the ears, and dizziness. More severe poisoning leads to delirium, fever, 
sweating, incoordination, coma, convulsions, cyanosis (blueness of the skin), 
failure of kidney function, respiratory failure, and death. 



VITAMINS AND DRUGS COMPARED 


239 


Aspirin, like other salicylates, has the property that in concentrated solu¬ 
tion it can attack and dissolve tissues. An aspirin tablet in the stomach may 
attack the stomach wall and cause the development of a bleeding ulcer. 

The U. S. Centers for Disease Control have reported that if children and 
teenagers suffering from influenza or chicken pox are given aspirin they 
have fifteen to twenty-five times greater chance of developing Reye’s syn¬ 
drome, an acute encephalopathy and fatty degeneration of the viscera, 
causing death in about 40 percent of the patients. In 1982 the Department 
of Health and Human Services announced that it would require labels on 
aspirin warning against its use for childhood diseases, but it withdrew the 
proposal after the drug industry lobbied heavily against it. In 1985, how¬ 
ever, the firms voluntarily agreed to use those warnings. Then in October 
1985 the Subcommittee on Health of the House of Representatives Energy 
and Commerce Committee stated that the voluntary agreement was not 
effective and voted to require explicit messages on all aspirin bottles warn¬ 
ing of the association between the drug and the often fatal Reyes syndrome 
in children and teenagers. 

Aspirin had been in use as a nonprescription drug, sold casually over the 
counter, for more than a century before the physiological basis of its pain¬ 
killing and fever-reducing action was discovered in 1971. Then it was 
found that aspirin acts upon a central hormonal control system in the body. 
If it were now coming on to the market from a pharmaceutical laboratory, 
it would be surely placed under the constraint of prescription. The story of 
how its potency came to be understood is a roundabout one. 

In 1930 Kurzrok and Lieb in the Department of Obstetrics and Gyne¬ 
cology of Columbia University in New York reported that women receiving 
artificial insemination sometimes showed violent contraction or relaxation 
of the uterus. In 1933 Goldblatt in England reported that human semen 
contains a substance that reduces blood pressure and stimulates smooth 
muscle. At about the same time the Swedish investigator U. S. von Euler 
isolated a similar factor from the prostate glands of humans, monkeys, 
sheep, and goats (von Euler, 1937). He gave the name prostaglandin to the 
factor. Since then many prostaglandins have been found. They are called 
PGE1, PGE2, PGE3, PGA1, PGB1, and so on. Intensive study of these 
substances has since been carried out by many researchers; about thirty-five 
thousand scientific and medical papers on the prostaglandins had been 
published by 1980. 

The prostaglandins are hormones, serving as messengers to control the 
biochemical and physiological activity in the body. They are rather simple 
compounds, the formula of PGE1, for example, being C 2 oH 34 O s . The mole¬ 
cule consists of a five-member ring of atoms with two chains attached, one 
being a fatty acid and the other a hydrocarbon chain with an attached 




240 


CHAPTER 26 


hydroxyl group. They are fat-soluble lipids. They are found in many tis¬ 
sues in addition to the male reproductive organs and have many functions. 

There was evidence that prostaglandins are involved in the processes that 
cause inflammation, fever, and pain. In 1971 John R. Vane, a British 
pharmacologist working in the University of London, made the important 
discovery that the action of aspirin as an anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, 
and analgesic agent depends upon its power to inhibit the synthesis of the 
prostaglandins PGE2 and PGE2-alpha. Aspirin thus reduces the redness, 
pain, and swelling associated with inflammation of tissues. It is one of the 
few drugs for which we know the mechanism of its action in the human 
body. 

Such is the nature of this ‘‘harmless” household remedy, prescribed by 
the physician on the telephone in lieu of a house call. Vitamin C has been 
found to act in a way similar to aspirin in inhibiting the synthesis of some 
prostaglandins (Pugh, Sharma, and Wilson, 1975; Sharma, 1982). This 
may be the mechanism of the effectiveness of large doses of vitamin C in 
controlling inflammation, fever, and pain. It differs from aspirin, however, 
in that it increases the rate of synthesis of PGE1 (Horrobin, Oka, and 
Manku, 1979). Horrobin, Manku et al. (1979) have pointed out that this 
prostaglandin is involved in lymphocyte function and other aspects of the 
immune system, in rheumatoid arthritis, in various auto-immune diseases, 
in multiple sclerosis, and in cancer. Further studies of the relations between 
vitamin C and the several prostaglandins may throw additional light on the 
complex problem of the remarkable properties of this vitamin. At the 
present time it is worth while to keep in mind that an increased intake of 
vitamin C may act in such a way as to obviate the need to take aspirin or 
any similar drug. Its power to control pain in cancer patients was reported 
by Cameron and Baird in 1973 and has been reported also for headache, 
arthritis, toothache, and earache. As distinguished from aspirin, vitamin C 
is a substance naturally and necessarily present in the tissues of the body. 

Several other substances closely related to aspirin have analgesic proper¬ 
ties (the ability to decrease the sensitivity to pain) and antipyretic proper¬ 
ties (the ability to lower increased body temperature) and are present in 
some of the popular cold medicines. One of these is salicylamide (the amide 
of salicylic acid). It has about the same toxicity as aspirin: 20 g to 30 g is 
the lethal dose for an adult. 

The closely related analgesic substances acetanilide (N-phenylace- 
tamide), phenacetin (acetophenetidin), and acetaminophen (p-hydroxyace- 
tanilide) are used alone or in combination with other drugs in a number of 
cold medicines, in amounts of 150 to 200 mg per tablet. These substances 
damage the liver and kidneys. A single dose of 0.5 g to 5 g may cause fall of 
blood pressure, failure of kidney function, and death by respiratory failure. 



VITAMINS AND DRUGS COMPARED 


241 


Many of the cold medicines available without prescription contain not 
only aspirin or some other analgesic but also an antihistamine and an 
antitussive (to control severe coughing). For example, one preparation, rec¬ 
ommended on the box for “Fast temporary relief of cold symptoms and 
accompanying coughs, sinus congestion, headache, the symptoms of hay 
fever,” contains in each tablet 12 mg of the antihistamine methapyrilene 
hydrochloride and 5 mg of the antitussive dextromethorphan hydrobro¬ 
mide, as well as some phenacetin, salicylamide, and other substances. In the 
Handbook of Poisoning (Dreisbach, 1969) it is reported that the death of a 
small child was caused by an estimated 100 mg of methapyrilene (114 mg 
of the hydrochloride). At least twenty deaths of children have resulted from 
accidental poisoning by antihistamines. The estimated fatal dose for these 
reported poisonings lies in the range of 10 mg to 50 mg per kilogram body- 
weight for phenindamine, methapyrilene, diphenhydramine, and pyrila- 
mine and is probably about the same for many other antihistamines. These 
substances are more toxic than aspirin; one or two grams might cause the 
death of an adult. 

These medicines often cause side effects, such as drowsiness and dizzi¬ 
ness, even when taken in the recommended amounts. On the package there 
is usually a warning about the possibility of poisoning, for example, “Keep 
this and all medicines out of children’s reach. In case of accidental overdose, 
contact a physician immediately.” 

Moreover, there is often a more extensive warning, such as the following: 

CAUTION: Children under 12 should use only as directed by a 
physician. If symptoms persist or are unusually severe, see a 
physician. Do not exceed recommended dosage. Not for frequent or 
prolonged use. If excessive dryness of the mouth occurs, decrease 
dosage. Discontinue use if rapid pulse, dizziness, skin rash, or 
blurring of vision occurs. Do not drive or operate machinery as this 
preparation may cause drowsiness in some persons. Individuals with 
high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes, thyroid disease, glaucoma 
or excessive pressure within the eye, and elderly persons (where 
undiagnosed glaucoma or excessive pressure within the eye may be 
present) should use only as directed by physician. Persons with 
undiagnosed glaucoma may experience eye pain; if this occurs 
discontinue use and see physician immediately. 

The substance dextromethorphan hydrobromide, mentioned above as an 
antitussive, controls severe coughing by exerting a depressant effect on the 
brain. Also, the related substance codeine (as codeine phosphate) in 
amounts of 15 mg to 60 mg every three or four hours is often prescribed by 




242 


CHAPTER 26 


physicians for severe coughing. In most states of the United States codeine 
is not present in the medicines sold without prescription, but many of these 
medicines contain some other antitussive, such as dextromethorphan. The 
minimum fatal doses of these substances range from 100 mg to 1 g for an 
adult; much less for infants and more for narcotic addicts. 

Some nonprescription cold medicines also contain belladonna alkaloids 
(atropine sulfate, hyoscyamine sulfate, scopolamine hydrobromide) in 
amounts as great as 0.2 mg per capsule. These drugs serve to dilate the 
bronchi and prevent spasms. They are intensely poisonous; the fatal dose in 
children may be as low as 10 mg. Side effects that may occur from ordinary 
doses are abnormal dryness of the mouth, blurred vision, slow beating of 
the heart, and retention of the urine. 

Phenylpropanolamine hydrochloride (25 mg per tablet in some cold 
medicines) and phenylephrine hydrochloride (5 mg per tablet) serve to 
decrease nasal congestion and dilate the bronchi. These and related drugs, 
such as epinephrine and amphetamine, are also used in nose drops. It is 
estimated that 1 to 10 percent of users of such nose drops have reactions 
from overdosage, such as chronic nasal congestion or personality changes 
with a psychic craving to continue the use of the drug. Fatalities are rare. 
The estimated fatal dose for children ranges from 10 mg for epinephrine to 
200 mg for phenylpropanolamine. 

The prescriptions of physicians for treating colds and other respiratory 
ailments contain these drugs and other drugs that are equally toxic or more 
toxic and have a similar incidence of side reactions. 

Instead of the warning “KEEP THIS MEDICINE OUT OF REACH 
OF CHILDREN” carried by cold medicines, I think that they should say 
“KEEP THIS MEDICINE OUT OF REACH OF EVERYBODY! 
USE VITAMIN C INSTEAD!” 

The people of the United States spend about $2 billion per year on cold 
medicines. These medicines do not prevent the colds. They may decrease 
somewhat the misery of the cold, but they also do harm, because of their 
toxicity and their side effects. 

The natural, essential food, vitamin C, taken in the right amounts at the 
right time, would prevent most of these colds from developing and would in 
most cases greatly decrease the intensity of the symptoms in those that do 
develop. Vitamin C is nontoxic, whereas all the cold drugs are toxic, and 
some of them cause severe side reactions in many people. In every respect, 
vitamin C is to be preferred to the dangerous and only partially effective 
analgesics, antipyretics, antihistamines, antitussives, bronchodilators, anti- 
spasmodics, and central-nervous-system depressants that constitute most 
medicines sold for relief of the common cold. 

The drugs used to control other diseases may have even more serious side 
effects. I have mentioned in Chapter 24 that Dr. William Kaufman has 



VITAMINS AND DRUGS COMPARED 


243 


reported success in treating patients with rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthri¬ 
tis, and milder joint dysfunction by administering large amounts (about 5 g 
per day) of niacinamide, sometimes with other vitamins. The conventional 
treatment now, however, is with aspirin or stronger drugs. Here are the 
warnings about one of these drugs, which I call Drug X, instead of its 
correct name, because it is not much different from the others: 

Contraindications'. Drug X should not be used in patients who have 
previously exhibited hypersensitivity to it or in individuals with the 
syndrome comprised of bronchospasm, nasal polyps and angioedema 
precipitated by aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 

Warnings : Peptic ulceration, perforation, and gastrointestinal 
bleeding—sometimes severe, and in some instances, fatal—have been 
reported with patients receiving Drug X. If Drug X must be given to 
patients with a history of upper gastrointestinal tract disease the 
patient should be under close supervision (see Adverse Reactions). 

Precautions'. As with other anti-inflammatory agents, long-term 
administration to animals results in renal papillary necrosis and 
related pathology in rats, mice, and dogs. 

Acute renal failure and hyperkalemia as well as reversible 
elevations of BUN and serum creatinine have been reported with 
Drug X. In addition to reversible changes in renal function, 
interstitial nephritis, glomerulitis, papillary necrosis, and the 
nephrotic syndrome have been reported with Drug X. 

Although other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs do not 
have the same direct effect on platelets that aspirin does, all drugs 
inhibiting prostaglandin biosyntheses do interfere with platelet 
function to some degree. 

Because of reports of adverse eye findings with nonsteroidal anti¬ 
inflammatory agents, it is recommended that patients who develop 
visual complaints during treatment with Drug X have ophthalmic 
evaluation. 

As with other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, borderline 
elevations of one or more liver tests may occur in up to 15% of 
patients. A patient with symptoms and/or signs suggesting liver 
dysfunction or in whom abnormal liver tests have occurred should 
be evaluated for evidence of the development of more severe hepatic 
reaction while on therapy with Drug X. 

Severe hepatic reactions, including jaundice and cases of fatal 
hepatitis, have been reported with Drug X. Although such reactions 
are rare, if abnormal liver tests persist or worsen, if clinical signs 
and symptoms consistent with liver disease develop, or if systemic 




244 


CHAPTER 26 


manifestations occur (e.g., eosinophilia, rash, etc.), Drug X should be 
discontinued (see also Adverse Reactions ). 

Although at the recommended dose of 20 mg/day of Drug X, 
increased fecal blood loss due to gastrointestinal irritation did not 
occur, in about 4% of the patients treated with Drug X alone or 
concomitantly with aspirin, reductions in hemoglobin and hematocrit 
values were observed. 

Peripheral edema has been observed in approximately 2% of the 
patients treated with Drug X. Therefore Drug X should be used 
with caution in patients with heart failure, hypertension, or other 
conditions predisposing to fluid retention. 

A combination of dermatological and/or allergic signs and 
symptoms suggestive of serum sickness have occasionally occurred in 
conjunction with the use of Drug X. These include arthralgias, 
pruritus, fever, fatigue, and rash including vesiculobullous reactions 
and exfoliative dermatitis. 

Adverse Reactions, with incidence 20% less than 1%: stomatitis, 
anorexia, gastric distress, nausea, constipation, abdominal pain, 
indigestion, pruritus, rash, dizziness, drowsiness, vertigo, headache, 
malaise, tinnitus, jaundice, hepatitis, vomiting, hematemesis, melena, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, bone marrow depression, aplastic anemia, 
colic, fever, swollen eyes, blurred vision, bronchospasm, uerticaria, 
angioedema. 

The warning has here been printed in readable book type, not the small 
print of the flyer in the box. 

Drug X is recommended for rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis and 
is said to have been administered to millions of patients in eighty different 
countries. How many of these patients suffered from the side effects? How 
many read the foregoing contraindications before beginning to take the 
drug? And how many knew that the easy, harmless, and cheap vitamin 
niacinamide might have controlled their arthritis? 

Kaufman’s work and the observations of many persons show that a gram 
or more of niacinamide per day has value in controlling arthritis, and Dr. 
Ellis has reported good results with vitamin B 6 . Even if I had very severe 
arthritis, I doubt that I would take Drug X. Instead, I would try niacin¬ 
amide, 5 g or more per day, if necessary, and I would increase my intake of 
vitamin B 6 . 

Warnings similar to those quoted above for Drug X are made also for 
the drugs used in the effort to control diseases other than joint dysfunction. 
Patients often are helped by these drugs, but sometimes a drug is adminis- 




VITAMINS AND DRUGS COMPARED 


245 


tered by the physician even when the physician has doubts about its prob¬ 
able value. 

For example, in Europe chemotherapy is administered to only a small 
percentage of patients with advanced cancer, those with the kinds of cancer 
that have been found to respond to this treatment, but in the United States 
most of advanced-cancer patients receive chemotherapy, with its disagree¬ 
able side effects. In our book Cancer and Vitamin C y Cameron and I 
mention that Dr. Charles G. Moertel of the Mayo Clinic, the well-known 
cancer authority, had made a valuable comment on the important question 
of whether or not an adult patient with a solid malignant tumor that had 
not been controlled by other treatments should, as the last resort, receive 
chemotherapy. In a summary of current opinion on the use of chemother¬ 
apy in the treatment of gastrointestinal cancer published in the New En¬ 
gland Journal of Medicine in 1978, Moertel pointed out that twenty-five 
years ago the fluorinated pyrimidines 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and 5-fluoro- 
2'-deoxyuridine were found to be capable of producing a transient decrease 
of tumor size in patients with metastatic cancer of intestinal origin. An 
intravenous treatment in amount that produces toxic reactions is the most 
effective, but the effect is not great: 

Even when administered in most ideal regimens, the fluorinated 
pyrimidines, in a large experience, will produce objective response in 
only about 15 to 20 percent of treated patients. In this context, 
objective response is usually defined as a reduction of more than 50 
percent in the product of longest perpendicular diameters of a 
measurable tumor mass. These responses are usually only partial and 
very transient, persisting for a median time of only about five months. 
This minor gain for a small minority of patients is probably more 
than counterbalanced by the deleterious influence of toxicity for other 
patients and by the cost and inconvenience experienced by all patients. 
There is no solid evidence that treatment with fluorinated pyrimidines 
contributes to the overall survival of patients with gastrointestinal 
cancer regardless of the stage of the disease at which they are applied. 

Moertel also discussed the clinical trials of 5-FU and other chemothera¬ 
peutic agents singly and in various combinations in relation to colorectal 
cancer, gastric carcinoma, squamous-cell carcinoma of the esophagus, and 
others, with essentially the same conclusion, except that adriamycin seems 
to have significant value for the treatment of primary liver cancer. He then 
states that “In 1978 it must be concluded that there is no chemotherapy 
approach to gastrointestinal carcinoma valuable enough to justify applica¬ 
tion as standard clinical treatment.” 



246 


CHAPTER 26 


We would interpret this conclusion as sound reason for not subjecting 
these patients to the misery, trouble, and expense of chemotherapy. Moertel 
continues, however, as follows: 

By no means, however, should this conclusion imply that these efforts 
should be abandoned. Patients with advanced gastrointestinal cancer 
and their families have a compelling need for a basis of hope. If such 
hope is not offered, they will quickly seek it from the hands of quacks 
and charlatans. Enough progress has been made in chemotherapy of 
gastrointestinal cancer so that realistic hope can be generated by entry 
of those patients into well designed clinical research studies. ... If we 
can channel our efforts and resources into constructive research 
programs of sound scientific design, we shall offer the most hopeful 
treatment for the patient with gastrointestinal cancer today and lay a 
sound foundation for chemotherapy approaches of substantive value 
for the patient of tomorrow. 

In diametric contrast with this prescription and the practice at the Mayo 
Clinic and other U.S. medical centers, it has been the rather general prac¬ 
tice in most hospitals in Britain, for more than a decade, not to subject 
patients with advanced gastrointestinal cancer and similar cancers to the 
misery of chemotherapy, experience having shown that this treatment has 
little value. Instead, these “hopeless” patients were given only palliative 
treatment, including morphine and heroin as needed to control pain. 
Cameron improved upon these procedures at the Vale of Leven Hospital by 
administering vitamin C. As discussed in Chapter 19, he thereby eased the 
suffering and increased the number of “good days” in the last days of the 
lives of terminal-cancer patients. 

It was the same Moertel who misrepresented Cameron’s work in 
Moertel’s poorly designed experiments with patients at the Mayo Clinic. 
Compare Cameron’s procedure with the Moertel strategy of subjecting 
such patients to the misery of chemotherapy for the sake of their families 
and their physicians’ morale! If Moertel had followed the Vale of Leven 
procedure, he would have seen that there is now a real reason for these 
patients and their families to have hope. These “unbeatable” patients can 
be given supplemental ascorbate as their only form of treatment and can 
derive some benefit, and just occasionally the degree of benefit obtained 
might be quite remarkable. 

The average increase in survival time of patients with advanced gastroin¬ 
testinal cancer treated with 10 g of ascorbate per day is greater than that 
reported by Moertel for those treated with chemotherapy, and the ascor¬ 
bate-treated patients have the advantages of feeling well under the treat- 






VITAMINS AND DRUGS COMPARED 


241 


ment and of not having the financial burden of chemotherapy. Moreover, 
little effort has been made as yet to determine the most effective dosages of 
vitamin C and the possible supplementary value of vitamin A, the B vita¬ 
mins, minerals, and a diet high in fruits, vegetables, and their juices. This 
nutritional treatment of cancer, with emphasis on vitamin C, is probably 
far more effective at earlier stages of cancer than in the terminal stage, and 
if it is instituted at the first sign of cancer and in the most effective amounts 
it may well decrease the cancer mortality by much more than our earlier 
estimate of 10 percent. 

The message of this chapter is that you should be wary of drugs—over- 
the-counter drugs and drugs prescribed by a physician. You should, of 
course, also be wary of the claims made for vitamins and other nutrients, 
even though for the most part they are not so dangerous as drugs. Find out 
what the facts are and make the best decisions that you can, using the best 
advice that you can obtain. 

The older books about nutrition and health are, of course, unreliable, 
because it is only during the last two decades that we have gathered reliable 
information about the optimum intakes of vitamins. Some of the recent 
books are also unreliable. For example, Nathan Pritikin in his book The 
Pritikin Promise : 28 Days to a Longer , Healthier Life discusses his pro¬ 
gram of exercise and rigorously restricted diet, which, without doubt, im¬ 
proves the health of persons who follow it. He states, however, that 

When a varied diet, as recommended in the Pritikin Program, is 
eaten, you will get all the vitamins your body can use and then some. 
Many persons, however, believe that taking extra vitamins, especially 
B, C, and E, in the form of supplements will provide additional 
health benefits. This, however, is simply not the case. . . . Vitamin 
supplements not only are uncalled for, but are potentially hazardous 
to your health. . . . There are many salesmen in this country and many 
gullible people who are victimized financially by vitamin “pushers.” 
Americans excrete the most expensive urine in the world because it is 
loaded with so many vitamins. 

I think that Pritikin received poor advice from his medical and nutri¬ 
tional advisers. His clients no doubt benefit from his regimen, so long as 
they follow it. They would benefit more with supplementary nutrients, and 
the diet could be made less restrictive, giving better client compliance. 

A modern authority on nutrition, Dr. Brian Leibovitz, agrees with me. 
In his sensible discussion of dieting and diets (1984) he states “One may not 
be in danger of vitamin deficiency on the Pritikin plan, but neither will 
one be able to achieve a state of optimum health.” 



248 


CHAPTER 26 


In another popular book, Life Extension: A Practical Scientific Approach 
(1981), the authors, Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw, recommend a high 
intake of vitamins, often far more than I recommend. In addition, however, 
they discuss many drugs as beneficial to health and conducive to life exten¬ 
sion. One of these drugs, a mixture of hydrogenated ergot alkaloids, which 
blocks the functioning of the adrenal glands, is mentioned about 150 times 
under one of its trademarked names. Leibovitz (1984), after mentioning the 
high doses of vitamins, comments that “Of greater concern, however, is the 
inclusion of hormones, drugs, and other potentially dangerous substances 
in the Pearson-Shaw formula. While the list of compounds with potential 
toxicity is too extensive to discuss in detail, it should be noted that some of 
the substances recommended have known toxicities. Vasopressin, also 
called antidiuretic hormone, is one such compound.” 

In sum, try to keep your intake of drugs low and your intake of vitamins 
and other nutrients at the optimum level. 



27 


The Low Toxicity of Vitamins 


Physicians, these days, are armed with increasingly potent drugs, which 
they must prescribe and administer with great care, keeping their patients 
under alert surveillance. In extension of this chary attitude, I think, they 
are cautious about vitamins. It is easy to develop an exaggerated and un¬ 
justified fear of the toxicity of vitamins. During recent years it has become 
the practice of writers on medical matters and on health to warn their 
readers that large doses of vitamins may have serious side effects. For 
example, in The Book of Health, a Complete Guide to Making Health Last 
a Lifetime (1981), edited by Dr. Ernst L. Wynder, president of the Ameri¬ 
can Health Foundation, it is said that “So-called megavitamin treatment— 
taking massive doses of a particular vitamin—should be avoided. Vitamins 
are essential nutrients, but high dosages become drugs and should only be 
taken to treat a specific condition. Large doses of the fat-soluble vitamins A 
and D have well-recognized ill effects, and this must be true of others, too. 
Large doses of vitamin C are mainly excreted in the urine. In the absence of 
certainty that ‘mega vitamins* are safe, they are better avoided.” 

The authors of this book on health are depriving their readers of the 
benefit of the optimum intakes of these important nutrients, the vitamins, 
by creating in them the fear that any intake greater than the usually Rec¬ 
ommended Daily Allowances (RDA) may cause serious harm. 




250 


CHAPTER 27 


I believe that the main reason for this poor advice is that the authors are 
ignorant. They make the false statement that large doses of vitamin C are 
mainly excreted in the urine. They give no indication that they know that 
the RDAs of the vitamins are the intakes that probably would prevent most 
people in “ordinary good health” from dying of scurvy, beriberi, pellagra, 
or other deficiency disease but are not the intakes that put people in the best 
of health. They seem not to know that there is a great span between the 
RDAs and the toxic amounts of those that exhibit any toxicity and that for 
several vitamins there is no known upper limit to the amount that can be 
taken. These authorities on health should show greater concern about the 
health of the American people. 

The Reader's Digest Family Health Guide and Medical Encyclopedia 
(1976) in its section on vitamins states that “A well-balanced, varied diet 
contains all the vitamins normally needed for health. Vitamins in excess of 
what the body needs do not increase health or well-being and may actually 
produce disease. A poor diet cannot be corrected simply by taking vitamins 
in concentrated form.” 

The first sentence, which seems to express the belief of nearly all nutri¬ 
tionists and physicians, may be true or false, depending on what is meant 
by “normally needed for health.” If we mean needed for the average health 
of “healthy” people in the United States, who presumably eat a well-bal¬ 
anced, varied diet, then the statement is no more than a truism, a self- 
evident, obvious truth; but if by “health” we mean that state of health that 
can be achieved by the optimum intakes of vitamins, as discussed in this 
book, the statement is false. 

Moreover, the second sentence is clearly false. There is overwhelming 
evidence, only a small part of which I am able to include in this book, that 
supplementary vitamins (beyond what the body “needs” by the criterion of 
the preceding sentence) improve health and well-being in many ways. The 
last words, “may actually produce disease,” refer to possible side effects in 
such a way as to deter the reader from improving his or her health by 
increasing intake of these important nutrients. 

The last sentence is seriously misleading, because of the omission of the 
adverb completely . A true statement is, “A poor diet cannot be completely 
corrected simply by taking vitamins in concentrated form, but taking the 
vitamins can do a lot of good.” 

The writers of the Reader’s Digest book on health should have known 
enough by 1976 to make better statements about the value of supplemen¬ 
tary vitamins. I am reminded of an experience I had in 1984 on a radio 
medical program (on station KQED) in San Francisco. There was another 
guest on the program, a retired professor of nutrition from the University of 
California in Berkeley. I made a statement about the value of a high intake 






THE LOW TOXICITY OF VITAMINS 


251 


of vitamin C (such as my own 18,000 milligrams [mg] per day) and men¬ 
tioned some evidence to support it, giving the references to papers published 
in medical and scientific journals. The retired professor of nutrition said 
simply, u No one needs more than 60 mg of vitamin C per day,” without 
giving any evidence to support his flat statement. I then presented some 
more evidence for my large intake, and he responded by saying, “Sixty mg 
of vitamin C per day is adequate for any person.” After I had presented 
some more evidence, this retired professor said, “For fifty years I and other 
leading authorities in nutrition have been saying that 60 mg of vitamin C 
per day is all that any person needs!” There was just time enough left on 
the live radio program for me to say “Yes—that’s just the trouble: you are 
fifty years behind the times.” 

We are surrounded by toxic substances. In our buildings and in the 
countryside we may be exposed to asbestos or other siliceous materials that 
cause dyspnea (difficulty in breathing) and pneumoconiosis (fibrous hard¬ 
ening of the lungs). In the neighborhood of a farm we may be exposed to 
one or more of the fifty organic phosphate insecticides or twenty 
chlorobenzene-derivative insecticides or thirty pesticides of other kinds. At 
home we may be exposed to several household chemicals and to drugs. 

It is drugs, especially the analgesics and antipyretics, such as aspirin, 
that are responsible for most of the five thousand deaths by poisoning that 
occur each year in the United States. Of that mournful total about twenty- 
five hundred are children. About four hundred of these children die each 
year of poisoning by aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) or some other salicylate. 
Aspirin and similar drugs are sold openly, without a prescription. They are 
considered to be exceptionally safe substances. The fatal dose is 0.4 to 0.5 
grams per kilogram body weight; that is, 5 to 10 g for a child, 20 to 30 g for 
an adult. 

Nobody dies of poisoning by an overdose of vitamins. 

I have credited the physician with caution for the patient, even though 
the caution is entirely misplaced. Several people have suggested another 
possible explanation to me. It is that the drug manufacturers and the people 
involved in the so-called health industry do not want the American people 
to learn that they can improve their health and cut down on their medical 
expenses simply by taking vitamins in the optimum amounts. 

The bias against vitamins may be illustrated by an episode that occurred 
a few years ago. A small child swallowed all the vitamin-A tablets that he 
found in a bottle. He became nauseated and complained of a headache. His 
mother took him to an East coast medical-school hospital, where he was 
treated and then sent home. The professors of medicine then wrote an 
article about this case of vitamin poisoning. The article was published in 
the New England Journal of Medicine, the same journal that had rejected a 



252 


CHAPTER 27 


paper by Ewan Cameron and me on observations of cancer patients who 
received large intakes of vitamin C. The New York Times and many other 
newspapers published stories about this child and about how dangerous the 
vitamins are. 

Some child in the United States dies of aspirin poisoning every day. 
These poisonings are ignored by the medical-school doctors, the medical 
journals, and the New York Times. 

There are seven thousand entries in the index of the Handbook of Poi¬ 
soning by Dr. Robert H. Dreisbach, professor of pharmacology at Stanford 
University School of Medicine. Five of these seven thousand are about 
vitamins. These five entries refer to vitamins A, D, K, K t (a form of K), 
and the B vitamins. 

You do not need to worry about vitamin K. It is the vitamin that prevents 
hemorrhage by promoting coagulation of the blood. It is not often put into 
vitamin tablets. Adults and children usually receive a proper amount, 
which is normally supplied by “intestinal bacteria.” The physician may 
prescribe vitamin K to newborn infants, to women in labor, or to people 
with an overdose of an anticoagulant. The toxicity of vitamin K is a prob¬ 
lem of interest to the physician who administers it to a patient. 

Vitamin D is the fat-soluble vitamin that prevents rickets. It is required, 
together with calcium and phosphorus, for normal bone growth. The RDA 
is 400 International Units (IU) per day. It is probably wise not to exceed 
this intake very much. Dreisbach gives 158,000 IU as the toxic dose, with 
many manifestations of toxicity: weakness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, ane¬ 
mia, decreased renal function, acidosis, proteinuria, elevated blood pres¬ 
sure, calcium deposition, and others. Kutsky {Handbook of Vitamins and 
Hormones, 1973) states that 4000 IU per day leads to anorexia, nausea, 
thirst, diarrhea, muscular weakness, joint pains, and other problems. 

Vitamin A is usually mentioned as a prime example in any discussion of 
the toxicity of vitamins. Thus in her 1984 New York Times article “Vita¬ 
min Therapy: The Toxic Side Effects of Massive Doses,” the writer about 
foods, Jane E. Brody, stated that “Vitamin A has been the cause of the 
largest number of vitamin poisoning cases.” She did not mention that the 
patients did not die (as do many of those poisoned by aspirin and other 
drugs), but she did give two case histories, presumably the worst that she 
could find. 

A 3-year-old girl was hospitalized with confusion, dehydration, 
hyperirritability, headache, pains in the abdomen and legs, and 
vomiting, the result of daily ingestion of 200,000 I.U. of vitamin A a 
day for three months (2,500 is the amount recommended for a child 
her age, theoretically to prevent respiratory infections). 





THE LOW TOXICITY OF VITAMINS 


253 


A 16-year-old boy who took 50,000 I.U. daily for two and a half 

years to counter acne developed a stiff neck, dry skin, cracked lips, 

swelling of the optic nerves, and increased pressure in the skull.” 

These reports indicate that the long-continued daily intake of doses of 
vitamin A ten to eighty times the RDA may cause moderately severe effects. 
Dreisbach in his book on poisons says that twenty to one hundred times the 
RDA may in time cause painful nodular periosteal swelling, osteoporo¬ 
sis, itching, skin eruptions and ulcerations, anorexia, increased intracranial 
pressure, irritability, drowsiness, alopecia, liver enlargement (occasionally), 
diplopia, and papilledema. 

The RDA for vitamin A is 5000 IU (for an adult). A single dose of 
5,000,000 IU, one thousand times the RDA, causes nausea and headache. 
It is reasonable to recommend that single doses approaching this size not 
be taken. 

On repeated regular intake of this fat-soluble vitamin the amount stored 
in the body increases, and ultimately its activity may reach such a level as to 
cause manifestations such as headache from increased intracranial pressure 
and others mentioned above. Repeated intakes of 100,000 or 150,000 IU 
per day for a year or more have caused these problems in some people but 
not in others. My recommendation is that in general 50,000 IU per day be 
considered the upper limit for regular intake. Any person taking large 
amounts of vitamin A should be on the watch for signs of toxicity. 

As for the B vitamins, Bj has no known fatal dose and no known dose 
with serious toxicity. The RDA for an adult male is 1.4 mg. The regular 
daily intake of 50 or 100 mg is tolerated by most people and may be 
beneficial. 

B 2 has no known fatal dose and no known dose with serious toxicity. The 
RDA for an adult is about 1.6 mg. Regular daily intakes of 50 or 100 mg 
per day are tolerated by most people and may be beneficial. 

B 3 , niacin (nicotinic acid, nicotinamide, niacinamide), has no known fa¬ 
tal dose. Intakes of nicotinic acid of 100 mg or more (different for differ¬ 
ent people) cause flushing, itching, vasodilation, increased cerebral blood 
flow, and decreased blood pressure. This flushing reaction usually stops 
after four days with daily intake of 400 mg or more. Large doses of nicotin¬ 
amide cause nausea in some people. The RDA is about 18 mg for an adult. 
The low toxicity of niacin (either nicotinic acid or nicotinamide) is shown 
by the fact that daily amounts from 5000 to 30,000 mg have been taken 
for years by schizophrenic patients without toxic effects (Hawkins and 
Pauling, 1973). 

Vitamin B 6 , pyridoxine, has no known fatal dose. When this vitamin 
is taken regularly in very large daily doses, it causes a significant neurologi- 



254 


CHAPTER 27 


cal damage in some people. Vitamin B 6 is the only water-soluble vitamin 
that has significant toxicity. 

There are several substances (pyridoxol, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, 
pyridoxal phosphate, and pyridoxamine phosphate) with B 6 activity (pro¬ 
tection against convulsions, irritability, skin lesions, decreased production 
of lymphocytes). Pyridoxine is the name used for all the forms of B 6 . Con¬ 
verted in the body to pyridoxal phosphate, vitamin B 6 serves as the coen¬ 
zyme for many enzyme systems. A good intake of this vitamin is needed in 
order that the many essential biochemical reactions in the human body 
proceed at the rate that leads to the best health. 

Until 1983 it was thought that none of the water-soluble vitamins had 
significant toxicity even at very high intakes. Then a report was made that 
seven persons who had been taking 2000 to 5000 mg per day (one thousand 
to three thousand times the RDA) of vitamin B 6 for between four months 
and two years had developed a loss of feeling in the toes and a tendency to 
stumble (Schaumberg et al., 1983). This peripheral neuropathy disap¬ 
peared when the high intake of the vitamin was stopped, and the patients 
showed no damage to the central nervous system. 

We may conclude that there is an upper limit, one thousand times the 
RDA, to the daily intake of vitamin B 6 . The authors of the report were far 
more cautious, however; they recommended that no one take more than the 
RDA of this vitamin, 1.8 to 2.2 mg per day. To follow this recommendation 
would deprive many people of a means for improving their health by taking 
50 or 100 mg or more every day, as I have recommended in Chapter 5. 
Many orthomolecular psychiatrists recommend 200 mg per day to their 
patients, with some patients taking 400 to 600 mg per day (Pauling, 1983). 
Hawkins reported that “In more than 5,000 patients we have not observed 
a single side effect from pyridoxine administration of 200 mg of vitamin B 6 
daily.” (Hawkins and Pauling, 1973.) 

Single doses of 50,000 mg of vitamin B 6 are given without serious side 
effects. These large doses are given as the antidote to patients suffering 
from poisoning with an overdose of the antituberculosis drug isoniazid 
(Sievers and Harrier, 1984). 

No fatal doses are known for folacin (folic acid), pantothenic acid, vita¬ 
min B 12 , and biotin. These four water-soluble vitamins are described as 
lacking in toxicity, even at very high intakes. The values of the RDA for 
adult males are 400 micrograms {fig) for folacin, 7 mg for pantothenic acid, 
3 fig for vitamin B 12 , and 200 fig for biotin. 

There is an odd situation involving folacin. In 1960 the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) ordered that no vitamin tablet or one-day 
supply of vitamins contain more than 250 fig of folacin, later increased to 
400 fig. These cautious orders were not issued because of evidence that 



THE LOW TOXICITY OF VITAMINS 


255 


folacin is toxic in larger doses. Folacin is not toxic. Indeed, the FDA limit 
of 400 jug is less than the amount considered necessary for good health. 
Professor Roger J. Williams, who discovered pantothenic acid and carried 
out some of the early work on folacin, has written that “More than the 
specified amount (about 2000 micrograms, instead of 400 micrograms) 
would be recommended if it were not for the conflicting FDA regulations.” 
(Williams, 1975.) 

Why, then, does the FDA prevent all of us from obtaining the proper 
amount of this important vitamin? The action was taken by the FDA to 
make it easier for physicians to diagnose a disease, pernicious anemia. This 
disease results from the failure to transport vitamin B 12 from the stomach 
into the bloodstream. The resulting deficiency of vitamin B I2 is character¬ 
ized by anemia and by neurological damage leading to psychosis. Both 
vitamin B 12 and folacin are required for the production of red blood cells in 
the bone marrow, and a deficiency in B 12 is in part compensated for by 
increasing the intake of folacin. Accordingly a high intake of folacin may 
prevent the anemia from developing, but it does not control the neurological 
damage resulting from B 12 deficiency and may possibly exacerbate it by 
helping to use up the limited supply of B 12 by increasing the red-cell 
production. 

In 1960 spokesmen for the medical profession argued that physicians 
relied on the development of anemia to recognize the disease and that if 
folacin prevented the anemia they would not know that a patient begin¬ 
ning to show signs of psychosis was in fact suffering from pernicious ane¬ 
mia. The FDA then announced its order limiting the amount of folacin in 
vitamin preparations. This action was, therefore, not to protect the pub¬ 
lic against folacin toxicity but to help physicians to recognize perni¬ 
cious anemia in a few patients who might be receiving larger amounts 
of folacin. 

Now, a quarter of a century later, physicians know more about perni¬ 
cious anemia, vitamin B 12 , and folacin. It is easy to test any patient with 
neurological problems for B 12 deficiency. There is no longer any need for 
the FDA regulation that limits the amount of folacin in vitamin prepara¬ 
tion. This regulation should be revoked. 

There is no known fatal dose of vitamin C. As much as 200 grams (g) 
has been taken by mouth over a period of a few hours without harmful 
effects. Between 100 and 150 g of sodium ascorbate has been given by 
intravenous infusion without harm. 

There is little evidence of long-term toxicity. I know a man who has 
taken over 400 kilograms (kg) of this vitamin during the last nine years. He 
is a chemist, working in California. When he developed metastatic cancer, 
he found that he could control his pain by taking 130 g of vitamin C per 



256 


CHAPTER 27 


day, and he has taken this amount, over a quarter of a pound per day, for 
nine years. Except that he has not succeeded in ridding himself completely 
of his cancer, his health is reasonably good, with no indication of harmful 
side effects of the vitamin. 

There has been extensive discussion of possible side effects of high in¬ 
takes of vitamin C. This subject is treated in the following chapter. 

There is no known fatal intake of the several closely related substances, 
called tocopherols, that have vitamin-E activity. Different mixtures of these 
tocopherols are available, with their activity, determined by a standard test, 
expressed as international units. For example, 1 mg of D-alpha-tocopherol 
equals 1.49 IU and 1 mg of D,L-alpha-tocopheryl acetate (a mixture of D 
and L) equals 1 IU. 

Vitamin E is valuable in many ways, including the treatment of cardiac 
and muscular disorders. It acts both as a general antioxidant, in collabora¬ 
tion with vitamin C, and in some specific ways involving interactions with 
proteins and lipids not yet well understood. 

The RDA of vitamin E is 10 IU per day. Many people have taken much 
larger amounts over long periods of time. Dr. Evan V. Shute and Dr. 
Wilfrid E. Shute in Canada reported on thousands of persons who received 
between 50 and 3200 IU of vitamin E per day for long periods with no 
signs of significant toxicity (Shute and Taub, 1969; Shute, 1978). Vitamin 
E as the fat-soluble antioxidant is a valuable companion to vitamin C, the 
main water-soluble antioxidant. 



28 


The Side Effects of Vitamins 


During recent years, as more and more people have recognized the value of 
an increased intake of vitamin C, there has developed a lively interest in the 
question of possible side effects of this vitamin taken over long periods of 
time. This concern in the public mind has been amplified by physicians 
who carry over to vitamins the caution about side effects that they quite 
properly attach to drugs. In publication and in consultation with their 
patients, they have spread misinformation and false alarm. 

The problem is complicated by the biochemical individuality (Chapter 
10) that gives rise to the heterogeneity of the American population. The 
fact (Chapter 26) that one man has taken 130 grams (g) of vitamin C per 
day for nine years without developing any signs of harmful side effects does 
not mean that every person would do well with this intake. More pertinent 
is the report by Dr. Fred R. Klenner that hundreds of persons he observed 
ingested 10 g of vitamin C per day for years and remained in good health 
with no problems that could be attributed to their high intake of the 
vitamin. 

In a review of toxic effects of vitamin C, Dr. L. A. Barness of the 
University of South Florida College of Medicine listed fourteen (Barness, 
1977). I shall discuss all of them. He said that many toxic effects are 
insignificant or rare or troublesome but of little consequence. Among these 




258 


CHAPTER 28 


are sterility caused by vitamin C, of which there is a single doubtful case. 
About reports of fatigue the author is skeptical; many people report an 
increase in vigor with increased intake of the vitamin. Reports of hypergly¬ 
cemia following intake of vitamin C may be unreliable because of interfer¬ 
ence with the test for sugar in the urine, as discussed below. It seems 
unlikely that the allergic reactions occasionally attributed to vitamin C are 
caused by the ascorbic acid or sodium ascorbate, because these crystalline 
substances are subjected to so many processes of purification in their syn¬ 
thesis from glucose that allergens are not expected to remain; I do not know 
of any careful study that showed vitamin C itself to be allergenic. 

Some of the side effects of large doses of vitamin C have been subjected to 
careful study and analysis during the last ten or twelve years, and much of 
the misunderstanding about their significance has been corrected (Pauling, 
1976). Many popular writers about nutrition, however, have only incom¬ 
plete knowledge and continue to write scare stories about the dangers of 
megavitamins and to recommend that no one take more than the Recom¬ 
mended Daily Allowance (RDA) without first asking the advice of a physi¬ 
cian (who may also be ignorant about vitamins). An example is the 1984 
New York Times article by Jane E. Brody (mentioned in Chapter 27), 
which is outstanding for the large number of false or misleading statements 
in it. When I called the attention of the publisher of the Times to these 
errors, a correction was published but of only one error (May 7, 1984). 
Nearly all of the “dangers” mentioned in the article are discussed in this 
chapter or the preceding chapter. 

One effect of vitamin C in large doses has been reported by many people. 
This is its effect as a laxative, its action in causing looseness of the bowels. 
For some people a single dose of 3 g taken on an empty stomach exerts too 
strong a laxative action, whereas the same amount taken at the end of a 
meal does not. One physician who treats patients with infectious diseases 
by having them take as much ascorbic acid as they can without discomfort 
has reported that most of them take between 15 and 30 g per day (Cathcart, 
1975). Virno et al. (1967) and Bietti (1967) have written that glaucoma 
patients taking 30 to 40 g of ascorbic acid per day suffer from “diarrhea” 
for three or four days but not thereafter. 

Constipation can usually be controlled by adjusting the intake of vitamin 
C (Hoffer, 1971). To be in the best of health it is wise to evacuate the 
contents of the lower bowel regularly every day. To carry the waste matter 
around for a longer time than necessary might do harm. On the other hand, 
moderately irritant laxatives, such as milk of magnesia, cascara sagrada, or 
sodium sulfate, might themselves cause some harm. Physicians often advise 
patients suffering from constipation to eat a good diet, including plenty of 
fruit and vegetables. This is good orthomolecular treatment, but the use 




THE SIDE EFFECTS OF VITAMINS 


259 


of vitamin C, in addition to that in the fruit and vegetables, is also good 
orthomolecular treatment. 

One well-known medical treatise says that no real harm is done if the 
bowel does not move for three or four days and that the bowel itself must be 
given a chance to function. I think that this opinion is wrong, for several 
reasons. We know from the work of Dr. Robert Bruce, director of the 
Toronto branch of the Ludwig Cancer Research Institute, that there are 
presumptive carcinogens in human fecal material. Continued exposure of 
the lower bowel to these substances increases the probability of developing 
cancer of the rectum and colon. There is also an increase in the amount of 
bile acids reabsorbed from the fecal material into the blood- stream, which 
takes them to the liver for reconversion to cholesterol, thus raising the 
cholesterol level and increasing the chance of developing heart disease. 
Other toxic substances that the body should get rid of as fast as possible are 
also reabsorbed. Sometimes they can be detected on a person’s breath. This 
should give special incentive to people interested in the opposite sex for 
taking care of their waste material expeditiously. 

This goal can be achieved through the laxative action of a natural sub¬ 
stance, vitamin C. You can take a good amount, 3, 5, 8, or 10 g, of vitamin 
C when you rise in the morning. It should be the amount, which you 
determine for yourself by trial, that causes a loose bowel movement imme¬ 
diately after breakfast. This should put you right for the day. 

From my observations I make the rough estimate that this procedure 
speeds up the elimination of the waste materials by about twenty-four 
hours, or even more for those people who pay attention to the medical 
authority quoted above. 

A large intake of vitamin C has also been reported to increase the pro¬ 
duction of intestinal gas (methane) in many people. To minimize these 
effects, to the extent that they are undesirable, one might try various kinds 
of vitamin C and various ways of taking it (after meals, for example, as 
mentioned earlier). Some people say that they can handle the salt sodium 
ascorbate better than ascorbic acid, and for some a mixture of the two may 
be best; people in the latter group may obtain both sodium ascorbate and 
ascorbic acid or a fiftyrfifty mixture from Bronson Pharmaceuticals and 
other suppliers. Some undesirable effects might be attributable to the filler 
or binder or the coloring or flavoring additives in tablets, making it desir¬ 
able to change the brand or to use the pure substances. For some people the 
time-release tablets may solve the problem. 

It should not surprise us that our intestinal tracts cause some temporary 
trouble for us when we ingest 5 or 10 g of ascorbic acid per day, even 
though this quantity is indicated to be the optimum by the fact that animals 
manufacture this amount for themselves. The animals make it inside their 




260 


CHAPTER 28 


bodies, in the liver or kidney. It does not pass into the stomach and intes¬ 
tines, except for the smaller amount obtained from their food. After we lost 
the ability to synthesize this nutrient and began eating foods that provided 
us with only a small amount, 1 or 2 g per day, our digestive systems were 
not under any evolutionary pressure to adapt to the reception of larger 
amounts. We may have adapted to some extent to get along with smaller 
amounts, but there are indications, discussed elsewhere in this book, that 
our optimum intake is not less than the amount synthesized by other ani¬ 
mals for their own benefit. 

Some people have asked me if ascorbic acid, by acting as an acid, might 
not cause stomach ulcers. In fact, the gastric juice in the stomach contains a 
strong acid, and ascorbic acid, which is a weak acid, does not increase its 
acidity. Aspirin tablets and potassium chloride tablets can corrode the wall 
of the stomach and cause ulcers. Vitamin C keeps them from forming and 
helps to heal them (for references and additional discussion see Stone, 
1972). 

In the review of my book Vitamin C and the Common Cold in the 
Medical Letter , referred to in the last chapter, it was alleged that vitamin C 
might have the adverse effect of causing kidney stones to form. The author 
of this unsigned review wrote, “When 4 to 12 grams of vitamin C are taken 
daily for acidification of the urine, however, as in the management of some 
chronic urinary tract infections, precipitation of urate and cystine stones in 
the urinary tract can occur. Very large doses of vitamin C, therefore, should 
be avoided in patients with a tendency to gout, to formation of urate stones, 
or to cystinuria.” 

This statement is wrong. The editors might quite properly have written 
that very large doses of ascorbic acid should be avoided in these patients, 
but there is no reason for the patients to refrain from taking vitamin C in 
large doses, because it can be taken as sodium ascorbate, which does not 
acidify the urine. The statement made in the Medical Letter shows that the 
editors of the publication simply did not understand what they were writ¬ 
ing about. 

Vitamin C is in fact the ascorbate ion. This ion carries a negative electric 
charge, and we are accordingly not able to take vitamin C without taking 
an equivalent amount of some atom that carries a positive electric charge. 
In ascorbic acid this atom is a hydrogen ion, H+; in sodium ascorbate it is 
the sodium ion, Na + ; and in calcium ascorbate it is half of a calcium ion, 
1/2 Ca ++ . All of these substances contain vitamin C, the ascorbate ion, and 
each of them also contains something else. The effects of the “something 
else,” the hydrogen ion, sodium ion, or calcium ion, should not be confused 
with the effects of the ascorbate ion, as was done by the editors of the 
Medical Letter and continues to be done by writers whose understanding is 
incomplete. 




THE SIDE EFFECTS OF VITAMINS 


261 


It is well known that there are two classes of kidney stones, and that a 
tendency to form them should be controlled in two quite different ways. 
The stones of one class, comprising nearly one half of all urinary calculi, 
are composed of calcium phosphate, magnesium ammonium phosphate, 
calcium carbonate, or mixtures of these substances. They tend to form in 
alkaline urine, and persons with a tendency to form them are advised to 
keep their urine acidic. A good way, probably the best way, to acidify the 
urine is to take 1 g or more of ascorbic acid each day. Ascorbic acid is used 
by many physicians for this purpose and for preventing infections of the 
urinary tract, especially infection by organisms that hydrolyze urea to form 
ammonia and in this way alkalize the urine and promote the formation of 
kidney stones of this class. 

The kidney stones of the other class, which tend to form in acidic urine, 
are composed of calcium oxalate, uric acid, or cystine. Persons with a tend¬ 
ency to form these stones are advised to keep their urine alkaline. This can 
be achieved by their taking vitamin C as sodium ascorbate or by taking 
ascorbic acid with just enough sodium hydrogen carbonate (ordinary bak¬ 
ing soda) or other alkalizer to neutralize it. 

Not a single case has been reported in the medical literature of a person 
who formed kidney stones because of a large intake of vitamin C. There is 
the possibility, however, that some people might have an increased tend¬ 
ency to form calcium oxalate kidney stones while taking a large amount of 
vitamin C. It is known that ascorbic acid can be oxidized to oxalic acid in 
the body. Lamden and Chrystowski (1954) studied fifty-one healthy male 
subjects with an ordinary intake of vitamin C (only that in their food) and 
found the average amount of oxalic acid excreted in the urine to be 38 
milligrams (in a range of 16 to 64 mg). The average increased by only 3 mg 
for 2 g per day additional ascorbic acid and by only 12 mg per day for 4 g. 
Additional intake of 8 g per day increased the excretion of oxalic acid by 45 
mg, and of 9 g by 68 mg (average—as much as 150 mg was excreted by one 
subject). It seems likely that most people would not have trouble with 
oxalic acid while taking large doses of vitamin C, but a few might have to 
be careful, just as they have to refrain from eating spinach and rhubarb, 
which have a high oxalate content. A few people have a rare genetic disease 
that leads to the increased production of oxalic acid in their own cells 
(largely from the amino acid glycine), and one young man is known who 
converts about 15 percent of ingested ascorbic acid into oxalic acid, fifty 
times more than is converted by other people (Briggs, Garcia-Webb, and 
Davies, 1973). This man, and others who have the same genetic defect, 
must limit their intake of vitamin C. 

During recent years I have received many letters from people who were 
troubled by a report that large doses of vitamin C taken with food destroyed 
the vitamin B 12 in the food, leading to a deficiency resembling pernicious 



262 


CHAPTER 28 


anemia. I replied that the report was not reliable, because the conditions 
under which the food had been investigated in the laboratory were not 
closely similar to those for food that is swallowed and kept in the stomach. 
It has now been shown that the original report, by Herbert and Jacob 
(1974), was wrong, because of their use of an unreliable method of analy¬ 
sis, and that in fact vitamin C does not destroy the vitamin B in food to any 
significant extent. 

Herbert and Jacob studied a meal with modest vitamin B 12 content and a 
meal with high B 12 content, the latter containing 90 g of grilled beef liver, 
which is known to be rich in B 12 . Some of the meals had 100 mg, 250 mg, 
or 500 mg of ascorbic acid added. The meals were homogenized in a 
blender, held for thirty minutes at body temperature (37°C), and then 
analyzed for vitamin B 12 by a radioactive-isotope method. The investigators 
reported that 500 mg of ascorbic acid added to the meal destroyed 95 
percent of the vitamin B 12 in the modest-B 12 meal and nearly 50 percent in 
the high-B 12 meal. They concluded that “High doses of vitamin C, 
popularly used as a home remedy against the common cold, destroy sub¬ 
stantial amounts of vitamin B 12 when ingested with foods. . . . Daily inges¬ 
tion of 500 mg or more of ascorbic acid without regular evaluation of 
vitamin B 12 status is probably unwise.” This statement has been repeated in 
many articles on nutrition and health in newspapers and magazines during 
recent years. 

It is known that pure hydroxycobalamin and pure cyanocobalamin 
(forms of vitamin B 12 ) are attacked and destroyed (cyanocobalamin less 
rapidly) by ascorbic acid in the presence of oxygen and copper ions, but the 
amount of destruction reported by Herbert and Jacob was surprisingly 
high. Moreover, there was evidence in the account of their results given by 
Herbert and Jacob that something was wrong in their work. The amount 
of vitamin B 12 reported by them from their analysis of the meals (without 
added ascorbic acid) was only about one-eighth of that known to be present 
in the foods comprising the meals. It is known that some of the vitamin B 12 
in foods is tightly bound to proteins and other constituents of the foods. 
Biochemists developed some special procedures to release the bound vita¬ 
min. If these procedures are not used, only the amount of loosely bound B 12 
is determined in the analysis. Investigators in two different laboratories 
then repeated the work, using reliable analytical methods (Newmark, 
Scheiner, Marcus, and Prabhudesai, 1976). They found amounts of B 12 in 
the two meals equal, to within 5 percent, to the amounts calculated from 
the food tables. Their amounts were six to eight times those reported by 
Herbert and Jacob, and, moreover, they found that addition of 100 mg, 250 
mg, or 500 mg of ascorbic acid led to no change in the amount of B 12 in 
the meal. 




THE SIDE EFFECTS OF VITAMINS 


263 


The allegation that vitamin B 12 is destroyed in meals consumed with 
vitamin C has also been contradicted by two other studies (Marcus, 
Prabhudesai, and Wassef, 1980; Ekvall and Bozian, 1979). We may con¬ 
clude that the hazard ascribed to the intake with meals of moderately large 
amounts of vitamin C, 500 mg or more, by Herbert and Jacob does not 
exist. They were led to draw an incorrect conclusion by having used a poor 
method of chemical analysis for vitamin B 12 . Writers who write articles on 
vitamins and physicians who give advice about health should now stop 
quoting destruction of vitamin B, 2 as a reason for not taking the optimum 
amounts of vitamin C. 

One of the reasons proposed by the Medical Letter for not taking an 
increased amount of vitamin C is that the presence of that vitamin in the 
urine might cause the ordinary tests for glucose in the urine, a sign of 
diabetes, to give a false positive result. This fact is hardly an argument 
against taking the valuable substance vitamin C. It is instead an argument 
for developing reliable tests for glucose in the urine. 

Brandt, Guyer, and Banks (1974) have shown how the test for glucose in 
the urine can be modified to prevent interference by ascorbic acid. An even 
simpler way is to refrain from taking vitamin C on the day when the urine 
sample is obtained. 

Another common test that is interfered with by ascorbic acid is that for 
blood in the stool, an indication of internal bleeding (Jaffe et al., 1975). Dr. 
Russell M. Jaffe of the National Institutes of Health, who discovered this 
effect, is now developing a more reliable test. 

When a person ingests an ordinary quantity of vitamin C each day, the 
concentration of ascorbate in his or her blood remains constant at about 15 
mg per liter. Spero and Anderson (1973) studied twenty-nine subjects who 
were put on an intake of 1, 2, or 4 g per day. Their blood levels rose at first 
to over 20 mg per liter but after some days decreased. A similar effect was 
also noticed by Harris, Robinson, and Pauling (1973), and was attributed 
by them to increased metabolic utilization of the vitamin C in response to 
the increase in intake. 

This phenomenon is well known in bacteria. The ordinary intestinal 
bacterium E. coli usually uses the simple sugar glucose as its source of 
carbon. It can also live on the disaccharide lactose (milk sugar). When a 
culture of E. coli is transferred from glucose to lactose, it grows very slowly 
for a while and then rapidly. In order to live on lactose the organism must 
contain an enzyme that splits lactose into two halves. E. coli is able to 
manufacture this enzyme, betagalactosidase, because it has the correspond¬ 
ing gene in its genetic material, but when it is living on glucose, each cell in 
the culture contains only a dozen molecules of this enzyme. When it is 
transferred to a medium containing lactose, each cell synthesizes several 



264 


CHAPTER 28 


thousand molecules of the enzyme, permitting it to use the lactose more 
effectively. 

This process is called induced enzyme formation. It was discovered in 
1900, and was carefully investigated by the French biologist Jacques 
Monod, who received a Nobel Prize in medicine, shared with Francois 
Jacob and Andrew Lwoff, in 1965. Monod and his associates demonstra¬ 
ted that the rate of manufacture of the enzyme under the control of its spe¬ 
cific gene is itself controlled by another gene, called a regulatory gene. 



X v&vrgR imaljdise^se: to 

Tbfc " 































THE SIDE EFFECTS OF VITAMINS 


265 


When there is little or no lactose in the medium, the regulatory gene stops 
the synthesis of the enzyme. This decreases the unnecessary burden on the 
bacterium of manufacturing a useless enzyme. When lactose is present the 
regulatory gene starts the process of synthesizing the enzyme, in order that 
the lactose can be used as food. 

The evidence indicates that human beings have similar regulatory genes 
that control the synthesis of the enzymes involved in the conversion of 
ascorbic acid into other substances. These other substances, oxidation prod¬ 
ucts, are valuable; it is known, for example, that they are more effective in 
the control of cancer in animals than is ascorbic acid (Omura et al., 1974 
and 1975). But ascorbic acid itself is also an important substance, directly 
involved in the synthesis of collagen and in other reactions in the human 
body. It would be catastrophic if the enzymes were to operate so efficiently 
as to convert all of the ascorbic acid and dehydroascorbic acid into oxidation 
products that do not have the same biochemical properties as the vitamin. 
For this reason the regulatory genes stop or slow down the manufacture of 
the enzymes when the intake of vitamin C is small. When the intake is 
large the enzymes are produced in larger amounts, permitting more of the 
ascorbic acid to be converted into the other useful substances. 

When a person has been receiving a large amount of vitamin C for a few 
days or longer, the amount of these enzymes is so large that if he or she 
reverts to a small amount most of the ascorbic acid in the blood is rapidly 
converted into other substances, and the concentration of ascorbic acid and 
dehydroascorbic acid in the blood becomes abnormally low. The person’s 
resistance to disease may be decreased. This is the discontinuation effect 
(also called the rebound effect). 

The discontinuation effect lasts for a week or two. By that time the 
amount of the enzymes has decreased to the normal value for a low intake, 
and the concentration of ascorbic acid in the blood has risen to its normal 
value. It is accordingly wise for people who have been taking a large 
amount of vitamin C and who decide to revert to a small intake to decrease 
the intake gradually, over a week or two, rather than suddenly. 

The discontinuation effect may not be very important for most people. 
Anderson, Suranyi, and Beaton (1974) checked the amount of winter ill¬ 
ness (mainly colds) in their subjects during the month just after they had 
stopped taking their tablets of ascorbic acid or placebo. During this month 
the subjects who had been receiving 1 or 2 g of vitamin C each day and 
those who had been receiving the placebo had nearly the same number of 
episodes of illness per person, 0.304 and 0.309, respectively. The mean 
values of number of days indoors per person, 0.384 and 0.409, and number 
of days off work, 0.221 and 0.268, were a little smaller for the first group 
than for the second, rather than the reverse, which would be expected if the 



266 


CHAPTER 28 


effect were important. Also, there was no greater amount of illness during 
the first half than the second half of the month. 

Some people might suffer from an abnormality involving these regula¬ 
tory genes. The presence of an excess of the enzymes that catalyze the 
oxidation of vitamin C might be responsible for the abnormality in metabo¬ 
lizing the vitamin that is observed for some schizophrenic subjects. 

Dr. Ewan Cameron and I, however, pointed out in our book Cancer and 
Vitamin C (1979) that the discontinuation effect might be dangerous for 
cancer patients and recommended that the intake not be stopped for these 
patients, even for a single day. This question is discussed further in Chap¬ 
ter 19. 

It has been known for more than thirty years that pregnant women need 
more vitamin C than other women. Part of the reason for this extra need is 
that the developing fetus needs a good supply of this vitamin, and there is a 
mechanism in the placenta for pumping vitamin C from the blood of the 
mother into that of the fetus. In one early study by Javert and Stander 
(1943) the ascorbate concentration in the blood of the umbilical cord was 
found to be 14.3 mg per liter, four times that of the blood of the mother. 
Depletion of the maternal blood for the benefit of the infant continues even 
after parturition, as ascorbate is secreted in the mother’s milk. Cow’s milk 
is much less rich in vitamin C than human milk; the calf does not need 
extra vitamin C, because it manufactures its own in the cells of its liver. 

In normal pregnancy women with the usual low intake of vitamin C 
have been reported to show a steady decrease in blood plasma concentration 
from 11 mg per liter (average for 246 women) to 5 mg per liter at four 
months and then to 3.5 mg at full term (Javert and Stander, 1943). These 
low values correspond to poor health not only for the mother but also for 
the infant. A low value of the concentration of vitamin C in the blood has 
been shown to be correlated with incidence of hemorrhagic disease of the 
newborn. Javert and Stander concluded that for good health an intake of 
200 mg per day is needed by the pregnant woman, and it is likely that for 
most pregnant women the optimum intake is still greater, 1 g or more per 
day. Other nutritional needs must, of course, also be satisfied. Brewer 
(1966) has emphasized that a good intake of protein and other nutrients is 
essential to prevent puerperal eclampsia and that the diuretics and diet 
restrictions that are used to control the increase in weight during pregnancy 
are harmful. 

A good intake of vitamin C has great value in controlling threatened, 
spontaneous, and habitual abortion. In their study of seventy-nine women 
with threatened, previous spontaneous, or habitual abortion Javert and 
Stander had 91 percent success with thirty-three patients who received 
vitamin C, together with bioflavonoids and vitamin K (only three abor¬ 
tions), whereas all of the forty-six patients who did not receive the vitamin 




THE SIDE EFFECTS OF VITAMINS 


267 


aborted. In his analysis of the management of habitual abortion Greenblatt 
(1955) concluded that vitamin C with bioflavonoids and vitamin K is the 
best treatment, the next best being progesterone, vitamin E, and thyroid 
extract. 

During the last seven years various authorities in the field of nutrition 
who write newspaper columns have repeatedly stated that high intake of 
vitamin C can cause abortions. The basis for this statement seems to be a 
brief paper by two physicians in the Soviet Union, Samborskaya and 
Ferdman (1966). They reported that twenty women in the age range of 
twenty to forty years whose menstruation was delayed by ten to fifteen days 
were given 6 g of ascorbic acid by mouth on each of three successive days, 
and that sixteen of them then menstruated. I wrote to Samborskaya and 
Ferdman, asking if any test of pregnancy had been carried out. In reply 
they sent me only another copy of their paper. 

Abram Hoffer (1971) has stated that he has used megadoses of ascorbic 
acid, 3 to 30 g per day, with more than a thousand patients since 1953 and 
has not seen one case of kidney-stone formation, miscarriage, excessive de¬ 
hydration, or any other serious toxicity. 

It seems unlikely that ascorbic acid causes abortions, although it may 
help to control difficulties with menstruation. Lahann (1970) has reviewed 
the literature, especially that in German and Austrian journals. He con¬ 
cluded that noticeable improvement in menstruation had been observed 
through the oral intake of 200 to 1000 mg of ascorbic acid per day. More¬ 
over, the utilization of ascorbic acid increases sharply in the course of the 
menstrual cycle, especially at the time of ovulation, and measurement of 
this utilization can be used for determining the end of ovulation and accord¬ 
ingly for determining the time of optimum conception in relation to the 
problem of overcoming sterility (Paeschke and Vasterling, 1968). 

The prophylactic value of vitamin supplements, even in the small 
amounts recommended by the Food and Nutrition Board, is indicated by a 
report from England of a study of vitamin supplements as a way of pre¬ 
venting the development of neural tube defects, such as spina bifida, in the 
developing embryo (Smithells, Sheppard, and Schorah, 1976). Neural tube 
defects occur in the North American white population with an incidence of 
about two per thousand live births. The incidence is much higher for a 
second child of parents whose preceding child has such a defect. The study 
in England was made with women who had given birth to a child with 
neural tube defect, by involving 448 such mothers, of whom about half 
received a multiple vitamin and iron preparation and the other half re¬ 
ceived a placebo. There was nearly complete prevention of neural tube 
defects, in that the incidence was only 0.6 percent for the infants of mothers 
who received the supplement, as compared with 5.0 percent for the infants 
of unsupplemented mothers. 





. 





















V 


HOW TO LIVE LONGER 
AND FEEL BETTER 



























































29 


A Happy Life and a Better World 


From understanding developed during the last twenty years by the new 
science of nutrition, this book has shown how you can live longer and feel 
better. For this reward you need not follow a burdensome and disagreeable 
regimen. On the contrary, the regimen you are to follow is the sensible and 
pleasant one specified in the second chapter of this book, on which con¬ 
temporaries of yours are already leading longer and healthier lives. You 
will multiply the benefits of that regimen by making a habit of the most 
important recommendation from the new science of nutrition; that is, 

TAKE THE OPTIMUM SUPPLEMENTARY AMOUNT OF 
EACH OF THE ESSENTIAL VITAMINS EVERY DAY. 


No matter what your present age is, you can achieve significant benefit 
by starting the regimen now. Older people can benefit greatly, because they 
have special need for optimum nutrition. Steadfast adherence is essential. It 
is fortunate that the regimen imposes few restrictions on the diet, so that 
for the most part you can add to the quality of your life by eating foods that 
you enjoy. What is more, you can, and it is even recommended that you do, 
enjoy the moderate intake of alcoholic beverages. 






272 


CHAPTER 29 


In fact, as to eating and drinking there is in this book only one real don't ; 
that is sugar. Like the cigarette, the sugar sucrose is a novelty of industrial 
civilization. Together, they have brought pandemics of cancer and cardio¬ 
vascular disease to the otherwise fortunate populations of the developed 
countries. Sugar in breakfast foods (as much, sometimes, as the cereal) is 
especially harmful to infants and children, and the problem of a good bev¬ 
erage, free of sugar or of the chemical sweeteners that are substituted for it, 
remains to be solved. The cigarette hazard can be eliminated by quitting 
the smoking habit. Sucrose cannot be avoided, but a large decrease in the 
intake of this sugar is essential. 

This book has explained the necessity for the supplementary vitamins in 
human nutrition. It was a significant evolutionary advantage of the early 
vertebrates that they could leave to the plants they ate the task of synthesiz¬ 
ing the vitamins and even some of the amino acids. As the new understand¬ 
ing of life at its molecular level has shown, the latest genetic deletion of this 
kind deprived the primates of the capacity to manufacture their own vita¬ 
min C. Thanks in part to the adaptive advantage conferred by that deletion, 
the primate line gave rise to humans. The new science of nutrition now 
instructs us to take advantage of the rational faculty that is the supreme 
adaptive advantage of the human species to circumvent whatever disadvan¬ 
tage we suffer from those genetic deletions. We can and we must do so by 
supplementary intakes of the vitamins, especially vitamin C. 

In this book we have seen, further, that by keeping in the best of health, 
in particular by maintaining optimum intake of the vitamins, we can resist 
the entire long list of illnesses that afflict mankind. The list begins with the 
afflictions laid upon us by deficiencies of the vitamins, deficiencies so easily 
cured by restoring the functions in the biochemistry of the body; the vita¬ 
mins help us to fend off infection and fortify our tissues against the self¬ 
assault of cancer and the auto-immune diseases. With the best understood 
vitamin, vitamin C, as our example, we have been able to envision a new 
kind of medicine, the orthomolecular medicine that uses substances natural 
to the body both to protect it from, and to cure, illness. Already, ortho¬ 
molecular medicine has shown how vitamin C can prevent and cure and 
may yet eliminate from human experience the illness most familiar and 
most baffling to the old medicine, the common cold. 

At the end, I have given space in this book to the arguments against its 
thesis that come from many physicians and from old-fashioned nutrition¬ 
ists. I have had to do so because I have not always been able to answer them 
in the publications and other forums where they have made their criticisms. 
It is more likely that you have heard from them than from me. In these 
pages you have heard both sides. 




A HAPPY LIFE AND A BETTER WORLD 


273 


So you see that I shall have a second reason to rejoice in knowing that 
you are living longer and feeling better. 

During the last twenty years we have been experiencing a revolution in 
our lives, a revolution that permits us to have greater freedom to be produc¬ 
tive, to exercise our creativity, and to enjoy life. 

Animals in the wild devote most of their time and energy to obtaining 
enough food to keep alive. Primitive men, women, and children also had to 
devote most of their time and energy to hunting and to food gather¬ 
ing, searching for fruits, berries, nuts, seeds, and succulent plants. Then, 
around ten thousand years ago, there occurred a revolution, when agricul¬ 
ture was discovered and animals were domesticated. Obtaining enough food 
to stay alive did not require all of the time and energy of everyone. Some 
people were able to think about new ways of doing things, about new tools 
made from stone or metals, about the motion of the heavenly bodies, about 
language, even about the meaning of life. Civilization was beginning to 
develop. 

Another step came with the industrial revolution, when machines pow¬ 
ered by waterfalls and the combustion of coal and other fuels liberated hu¬ 
man beings still more from the drudgery of routine work. 

The revolution that has been occurring during the last two decades in¬ 
volves liberation from the great effort that has been required to obtain the 
proper foods, those that confer the best of health and the best opportunity to 
lead a good and long life, as free as possible from the suffering caused by 
illness. This revolution is occurring through the discovery of vitamins and 
other essential nutrients and the recognition that the optimum intakes, the 
intakes that provide the best of health, are often far larger than the usually 
recommended intakes, so large that they can be obtained only as nutritional 
supplements, not in any diet involving ordinary foods. 

The physicians and the old-fashioned professors of nutrition have for 
fifty years been urging that everyone adopt a diet that is described as 
healthful. For two or three decades we were all urged to eat a well-bal¬ 
anced diet, with servings of the four categories of food: meat or fish or fowl; 
cereals; fruits and red or yellow vegetables; and dairy products. This di¬ 
etary regimen was urged on us whether or not we liked all these foods. 
Recently much of the enjoyment of life has been taken away from many of 
us by additional strong recommendations by these authorities. We are told 
that we should not eat a succulent steak, because of the animal fat. We are 
told that we should not eat eggs, because of the cholesterol they contain; 
instead, we are urged to eat a sort of factory product, a preparation, prob¬ 
ably not very appealing to the taste, that is made by treating eggs with some 
chemical solvent to remove some of the cholesterol. We are told not to eat 





274 


CHAPTER 29 


butter. Going to a fine restaurant then is not a pleasure, but a source of 
worry and a cause of a feeling of guilt. 

Why are these recommendations being made to us? A part of the reason 
is that good health depends on a good supply of vitamins. In the past, to 
obtain even a passable supply of vitamins, leading to even ordinary poor 
health, required a moderately large intake of fruits and vegetables. In every 
culture in countries other than the tropical ones some special foods, such as 
sauerkraut and pickles, had to be eaten in order for us to survive the winter. 
Even with the best selection of foods the health of most people has in the 
past not been very good. 

The revolution that is taking place now liberates us from this obsession 
to restrict our diet, to refrain from eating those foods that we like. The only 
limitations that I suggest are that you not eat large amounts of food and 
that you limit your intake of the sugar sucrose. This nutritional freedom 
has become possible because of the availability of vitamin and mineral 
supplements. 

Moreover, it is now possible to take these important nutrients in the 
optimum amounts, far larger than can be obtained in foods, and in this way 
to achieve a sort of superhealth, far beyond what was possible in earlier 
times. We can be grateful to the organic chemists and biochemists of the 
past 140 years who laboriously solved the riddles of the nature of the 
compounds of carbon and the way that they interact with one another in 
the human body. Because of their efforts, we are now able to get greater 
enjoyment of life. 

Finally, I cannot refrain from mentioning that the greatest threat to your 
health and that of your children, grandchildren, and others is the possibility 
of nuclear war. The real possibility that the American people, and everyone 
else, would be killed in a nuclear war between the United States and the 
Soviet Union might seem to make it a waste of effort for me to suggest ways 
for you to live longer and be happier. I believe, however, that the catastro¬ 
phe can be averted, and that it is worthwhile to work to improve the quality 
of life. You can contribute to improving not only the quality of your own 
life but also that of your fellow human beings by working for sanity in 
international relations. The criterion of success is a decrease in the military 
budgets of the great nations. 

Do not let either the medical authorities or the politicians mislead you. 
Find out what the facts are, and make your own decisions about how to live 
a happy life and how to work for a better world. 




Bibliography 


ABBOTT, P.; SEVENTY-SEVEN OTHERS (1968). Ineffectiveness of Vitamin C 
in Treating Coryza. The Practitioner 200:442-445. 

ABRAHAM, S.; LOWENSTEIN, F. W.; JOHNSON, C. L. (1976). Dietary Intake 
and Biochemical Findings (preliminary). First Health and Nutri¬ 
tion Examination Survey, United States, 1971-1972. Department of 
Health, Education, and Welfare Publication No. (HRA) 76-1219-1. 
ADAMS, J. M. (1976). Viruses and Colds: The Modern Plague. American 
Elsevier, New York. 

AFZELIUS, B. A. (1976). A Human Syndrome Caused by Immotile Cilia. 
Science 193:317-319. 

ALTSCHUL, R. (1964). Niacin in Vascular Disorders and Hyperlipemia. 
Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill. 

ALTSCHULE, M. D. (1976). Is It True What They Say about Cholesterol? 
Executive Health 12:no. 11. 

AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION (1973). Megavitamin and Ortho¬ 
molecular Therapy in Psychiatry. Task Force Report 7. American 
Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C. 

ANAH, C. O.; JARIKE, L. N.; BAIG, H. A. (1980). High Dose Ascorbic Acid 
in Nigerian Asthmatics. Tropical and Geographical Medicine 32: 
132-137. 








276 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ANDERSON, R. (l981a). Ascorbate-Mediated Stimulation of Neutrophil 
Motility and Lymphocyte Transformation by Inhibition of the 
Peroxidase-H 2 0 2 -Halide System in Vitro and in Vivo. American Jour¬ 
nal of Clinical Nutrition 34:1906-1911. 

ANDERSON, R. (l98lb). Assessment of Oral Ascorbate in Three Children 
with Chronic Granulomatous Disease and Defective Neutrophil Mo¬ 
tility over a Two-Year Period. Clinical and Experimental Immunol¬ 
ogy 43:180-188. 

ANDERSON, R. (1982). Effects of Ascorbate on Normal and Abnormal Leu¬ 
kocyte Functions, in Vitamin C: New Clinical Applications in Immu¬ 
nology, Lipid Metabolism, and Cancer , ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, 
Bern, pp. 23-34. 

ANDERSON, R.; HAY, I.; VAN WYK, H.; OOSTHUIZEN, R.; THERON, A. 
(1980). The Effect of Ascorbate on Cellular Humoral Immunity in 
Asthmatic Children. South African Medical Journal 58:974-977. 

ANDERSON, T. W.; BEATON, G. H.; COREY, P. N.; SPERO, L. (1975). Win¬ 
ter Illness and Vitamin C: The Effect of Relatively Low Doses. Cana¬ 
dian Medical Association Journal 112:823-826. 

ANDERSON, T. W.; REID, D. B. W.; BEATON, G. H. (1972). Vitamin C and 
the Common Cold: A Double Blind Trial. Canadian Medical Associa¬ 
tion Journal 107:503-508. 

ANDERSON, T. W.; SURANYI, G.; BEATON, G. H. (1974). The Effect on 
Winter Illness of Large Doses of Vitamin C. Canadian Medical Asso¬ 
ciation Journal 11:31-36. 

ANDREWES, C. (1965). The Common Cold. W. W. Norton, New York. 

ANONYMOUS (l91l). Scurvy. The Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed., vol. 
XXIV, p. 517. University of Cambridge, England. 

ASFORA, J. (1977). Vitamin C in High Doses in the Treatment of the 
Common Cold, in Re-evaluation of Vitamin C, eds. A. Hanck and 
G. Ritzel. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 219-234. 

ATKINS, G. L.; BELLER, G. A.; PAINE, L. S.; THORUP, O. A., JR. 
(1985). High-Tech Cardiology—Issues and Costs. The Pharos 48, no. 
3:31-37. 


BANKS, H. S. (1965). Common Cold: Controlled Trials. The Lancet 2:790. 
BANKS, H. S. (1968). Controlled Trials in the Early Antibiotic Treatment of 
Colds. The Medical Officer 119:7-10. 

BARNES, F. E., JR. (l96l). Vitamin Supplements and the Incidence of Colds 
in High School Basketball Players. North Carolina Medical Journal 
22:22-26. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


277 


BARNESS, L. A. (1977). Some Toxic Effects of Vitamin C, in Re-evaluation 
of Vitamin C s eds. A. Hanck and G. Ritzel. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 
23-29. 

BARR, D. P.; RUSS, E. M.; EDER, H. A. (l95l). Protein-Lipid Relationships 
in Human Plasma. II. In Atherosclerosis and Related Conditions. 
American Journal of Medicine 11:480-493. 

BARTLEY, W.; KREBS, H. A.; O’BRIEN, J. R. P. (1953). Medical Research 
Council Special Report Series No. 280. Her Majesty’s Stationery Of¬ 
fice, London. 

BATES, C. J.; MANDAL, A. R.; COLE, T. J. (l977). HDL-Cholesterol and 
Vitamin-C Status. The Lancet 3:611. 

BELFIELD, W. O.; STONE, I. (l975). Megascorbic Prophylaxis and Mega- 
scorbic Therapy: A New Orthomolecular Modality in Veterinary 
Medicine. Journal of the International Academy of Preventive Medi¬ 
cine 2:10-26. 

BELFIELD, W. O.; ZUCKER, M. (l983>. The Very Healthy Cat Book . 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 

BELFIELD, VV. O.; ZUCKER, M. (l98l). How to Have a Healthier Dog: The 
Benefits of Vitamins and Minerals for Your Dog's Life Cycles. 
Doubleday, New York. 

BELLOC, N. B.; BRESLOW, L. (1972). The Relation of Physical Health Sta¬ 
tus and Health Practices. Preventive Medicine 1:409-421. 

BELLOC, N. B.; BRESLOW, L. (1973). Relationship of Health Practices and 
Mortality. Preventive Medicine 2:67-81. 

BESSEL-LORCK, C. (1959). Erkaltungsprophylaxe bei Jugendlichen im 
Skilager. Medizinische Welt 44:2126-2127. 

BIETTI, G. B. (1967). Further Contributions on the Value of Osmotic Sub¬ 
stances as Means to Reduce Intra-Ocular Pressure. Ophthalmological 
Society of Australia 26:61-71. 

BJELKE, E. (1973). Epidemiologic Studies of Cancer of the Stomach, Colon, 
and Rectum. Dissertation, University of Minnesota. 

BJELKE, E. (1974). Epidemiologic Studies of Cancer of the Stomach, Colon, 
and Rectum with Special Emphasis on the Role of Diet. Scandinavian 
Journal of Gastroenterology 9 (Suppl. 31): 1-235. 

BJORKSTEN, J. (l95l). Crosslinkages in Protein Chemistry. Advances in 
Protein Chemistry 6:343-381. 

BOISSEVAIN, C. H.; SPILLANE, J. H. (1937). Effect of Synthetic Ascorbic 
Acid on the Growth of Tuberculosis Bacillus. American Review of 
Tuberculosis 35:661-662. 

BORDEN, E. C. (l984). Progress toward Therapeutic Application of Inter¬ 
ferons. Cancer 54:2770-2776. 





278 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


BOURNE, G. H. (1949). Vitamin C and Immunity. British Journal of Nutri¬ 
tion 2:346-356. 

BOURNE, G. H. (i946). The Effect of Vitamin C on the Healing of 
Wounds. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 4:204-211. 

BOXER, L. A.; WATANABE, A. M.; RISTER, M.; BESCH, H. R., JR.; ALLEN, 
J.; BACHNER, R. L. (1976). Correction of Leukocyte Function in 
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome by Ascorbate. New England Journal of 
Medicine 295:1041-1045. 

BOXER, L. A.; VANDERBILT, B.; BONSIB, S.; JERSILD, R.; YANG, H. H.; 
BACHNER, R. L. (1979). Enhancement of Chemotactic Response and 
Microtubule Assembly in Human Leukocytes by Ascorbic Acid. Jour¬ 
nal of Cellular Physiology 100:119-126. 

BOYD, A. M.; MARKS, J. (1963). Treatment of Intermittent Claudication: A 
Reappraisal of the Value of Alpha-tocopherol. Angiology 14:198-208. 

BOYD, T. A. S.; CAMPBELL, F. W. (1950). Influence of Ascorbic Acid on 
the Healing of Corneal Ulcers in Man. British Medical Journal 
2:1145-1148. 

BRAEDEN, O. J. (1973). The Common Cold: A New Approach. Interna¬ 
tional Research Communications System 7:12. 

BRANDT, R.; GUYER, K. E.; BANKS, W. L., JR. (1974). A Simple Method to 
Prevent Vitamin C Interference with Urinary Glucose Determina¬ 
tions. Clinica Chimica Acta 51:103-104. 

BREWER, T. H. (1966). Metabolic Toxemia of Late Pregnancy: A Disease of 
Malnutrition. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill. 

BRODY, JANE E. (l984). Vitamin Therapy: The Toxic Side Effects of Mas¬ 
sive Doses. New York Times, New York, 14 March; correction 7 
May. 

BROWN, E. A.; RUSKIN, S. (1949). The Use of Cevitamic Acid in the Symp¬ 
tomatic and Coseasonal Treatment of Pollinosis. Annals of Allergy 
7:65-70. 

BROWN, W. A.; FARMER, A. W.; FRANKS, W. R. (l948). Local Application 
of Aluminum Foil and Other Substances in Burn Therapy. American 
Journal of Surgery 76:594-604. 

BRUCE, R.; EYSSEN, G. M.; CIAMPI, A.; DION, P. W.; BOYD, N. (l98l). 
Strategies for Dietary Intervention Studies in Colon Cancer. Cancer 
47:1121-1125. 

BRUCE, W. R.; VARGHESE, A. J.; WANG, S.; DION, P. (1979). Naturally Oc¬ 
curring Carcinogens-Mutagens and Modulators of Carcinogenesis, 
eds. E. C. Miller et al. Japan Sci. Soc. Press, Tokyo/University Park 
Press, Baltimore, pp. 177-184. 

BURR, R. G.; RAJAN, K. T. (1972). Leukocyte Ascorbic Acid and Pressure 
Sores in Paraplegia. British Journal of Nutrition 28:275-281. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


279 


BUZZARD, I. M.; MC ROBERTS, M. R.; DRISCOLL, D. L.; BOWERING, J. 
(1982). Effect of Dietary Eggs and Ascorbic Acid on Plasma Lipid and 
Lipoprotein Cholesterol Levels in Healthy Young Men. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 36:94-105. 

CAMERON, E. (1966). Hyaluronidase and Cancer . Pergamon Press, New 
York. 

CAMERON, E. (l 975). Vitamin C. British Journal of Hospital Medicine 
13:511-514. 

CAMERON, E. (1976). Biological Function of Ascorbic Acid and the Patho¬ 
genesis of Scurvy. Medical Hypotheses 2:154-163. 

CAMERON, E.; BAIRD, G. (1973). Ascorbic Acid and Dependence on Opi¬ 
ates in Patients with Advanced Disseminated Cancer. IRCS Letter to 
the Editor, August. 

CAMERON, E.; CAMPBELL, A. (l974). The Orthomolecular Treatment of 
Cancer. II. Clinical Trial of High-dose Ascorbic Supplements in Ad¬ 
vanced Human Cancer. Chemical-Biological Interactions 9:285-315. 

CAMERON, E.; CAMPBELL, A.; JACK, T. (1975). The Orthomolecular 
Treatment of Cancer. III. Reticulum Cell Sarcoma: Double Complete 
Regression Induced by High-dose Ascorbic Acid Therapy. Chemical- 
Biological Interactions 11:387-393. 

CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L. (1973). Ascorbic Acid and the Glycos- 
aminoglycans: an Orthomolecular Approach to Cancer and Other 
Diseases. Oncology 27:181-192. 

CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L. (1974). The Orthomolecular Treatment of 
Cancer. I. The Role of Ascorbic Acid in Host Resistance. Chemical- 
Biological Interactions 9:273-283. 

CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L. (1976). Supplemental Ascorbate in the Sup¬ 
portive Treatment of Cancer: Prolongation of Survival Times in 
Terminal Human Cancer. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA 73:3685-3689. 

CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L. (1978). Supplemental Ascorbate in the Sup¬ 
portive Treatment of Cancer: Reevaluation of Prolongation of Sur¬ 
vival Times in Terminal Human Cancer. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 75:4538-4542. 

CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L. (1978). Experimental Studies Designed to 
Evaluate the Management of Patients with Incurable Cancer. Pro¬ 
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 75:6252. 

CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L. (1979). Ascorbate and Cancer. Proceedings of 
the American Philosophical Society 123:117-123. 

CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L. (1979). Cancer and Vitamin C. Linus Pauling 
Institute of Science and Medicine, Palo Alto, Cal. 




280 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CAMERON, E.; PAULING, L.; LEIBOVITZ, B. (1979). Ascorbic Acid and 
Cancer: A Review. Cancer Research 39:663-681. 

CAMERON, E.; ROTMAN, D. (1972). Ascorbic Acid, Cell Proliferation, and 
Cancer. The Lancet 1:542. 

CARDINALE, G. J.; UDENFRIEND, S. (1974). Prolyl Hydroxylase. Advances 
in Enzymology 41:245-300. 

CARR, A. B.; EINSTEIN, R.; LAI, L. Y.; MARTIN, N. G.; STARMER, G. A. 
(1981). Vitamin C and the Common Cold, Using Identical Twins as 
Controls. Medical Journal of Australia 2:411-412. 

CARR, A. B.; EINSTEIN, R.; LAI, L. Y.; MARTIN, N. G.; STARMER, G. A. 
(l981). Vitamin C and the Common Cold: A Second MZ Cotwin 
Control Study. Acta Geneticae Medicae et Gemellologiae 30:249-255. 

CATHCART, R. F. (1975). Clinical Trial of Vitamin C. Medical Tribune 3 
June 25. 

CATHCART, R. F. (l98l). Vitamin C, Titrating to Bowel Tolerance, 
Anascorbemia, and Acute Induced Scurvy. Medical Hypotheses 7: 
1359-1376. 

CATHCART, R. F. (1984). Vitamin C in the Treatment of Acquired Im¬ 
mune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Medical Hypotheses 14:423-433. 

CEDERBLAD, G.; LINSTEDT, S. (1976). Metabolism of Labeled Carnitine in 
the Rat. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 175:173-182. 

CHARLESTON, S. S.; CLEGG, K. M. (1972). Ascorbic Acid and the Common 
Cold. The Lancet 1:1401. 

CHATTERJEE, I. B.; DAS GUPTA, S.; MAJUMDER, A. K.; NANDI, B. K.; 
SUBRAMANIAN, N. (1975). Effect of Ascorbic Acid on Histamine Me¬ 
tabolism in Scorbutic Guinea Pigs. Journal of Physiology 251: 
271-279. 

CHATTERJEE, I. B.; MAJUMDER, A. K.; NANDI, B. K.; SUBRAMANIAN, N. 
(1975). Synthesis and Some Major Functions of Vitamin C in Ani¬ 
mals. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 258:24-47. 

CHERASKIN, E.; RINGSDORF, W. M., JR.; HUTCHINS, K.; SETYAADMADJA, 
A. T. S. H.; WIDEMAN, G. L. (1968). Effect of Diet upon Radiation 
Response in Cervical Carcinoma of the Uterus: A Preliminary Report. 
Acta Cytologica 12:433-438. 

CHERASKIN, E.; RINGSDORF, W. M., JR. (l97l). New Hope for Incurable 
Disease. Arco, New York. 

CHERASKIN, E.; RINGSDORF, W. M., JR. (1973). Predictive Medicine, A 
Study in Strategy. Pacific Press, Mountain View, Cal. 

CHERASKIN, E.; RINGSDORF, W. M., JR. (1974). Psychodietetics: Food as 
the Key to Emotional Health. Stein and Day, New York. 

CHERASKIN, E.; RINGSDORF, W. M., JR.; SISLEY, E. L. (1983). The Vitamin 
C Connection. Harper and Row, New York. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


281 


CHERKIN, A. (1967). Parnassus Revisited. Science 155:266-268. 

CHOPE, H. D.; BRESLOW, L. (1955). Nutritional Status of the Aging. 
American Journal of Public Health 46:61-67. 

CLEAVE, T. L. (l 975). The Saccharine Disease. Keats Publishing, New 
Canaan, Conn. 

CLECKLEY, H. M.; SYDENSTRICKER, V. P.; GEESLIN, L. E. (1939). Nico¬ 
tinic Acid in the Treatment of Atypical Psychotic States. Journal of the 
American Medical Association 112:2107-2110. 

CLEGG, K. M.; MACDONALD, J. M. (1975). L-Ascorbic Acid and D- 
Isoascorbic Acid in a Common Cold Survey. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition 28:973-976. 

CLEMETSON, C. A. B. (1980). Histamine and Ascorbic Acid in Human 
Blood. Journal of Nutrition 110:662-668. 

COHEN, A. M. (i960). Effect of Change in Environment on the Prevalence 
of Diabetes among Yemenite and Kurdish Communities. Israel Medi¬ 
cal Journal 19:137-142. 

COHEN, A. M.; BAVLY, S.; POZNANSKI, R. (l96l). Change of Diet of Yem¬ 
enite Jews in Relation to Diabetes and Ischaemic Heart-Disease. The 
Lancet 2:1399-1401. 

COLLIER, R. (1974). The Plague of the Spanish Lady. Atheneum, New 
York. 

COLLINS, C. K.; LEWIS, A. E.; RINGSDORF, W. M., JR.; CHERASKIN, E. 
(1967). Effect of Ascorbic Acid on Oral Healing in Guinea Pigs. 
Internationale Zeitschrift fur Vitaminforschung 37:492-495. 

COMMITTEE ON ANIMAL NUTRITION (1972). Nutrient Requirements of 
Laboratory Animals: Cat, Guinea Pig, Hamster , Monkey, Mouse, Rat. 
National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C. 

Consumer Reports (l97l). Vitamin C, Linus Pauling, and the Common 
Cold. February issue. 

Consumer Reports (1973). Vitamin E: What’s Behind All Those Claims 
for It? January issue. 

COOKE, W. L.; MILLIGAN, R. S. (1977). Recurrent Hemoperitoneum Re¬ 
versed by Ascorbic Acid. Journal of the American Medical Association. 
237:1358-1359. 

COON, W. W. (1962). Ascorbic Acid Metabolism in Postoperative Patients. 
Surgery, Gynecology, and Obstetrics 114:522-534. 

CORONARY DRUG PROJECT RESEARCH GROUP (1975). Clofibrate and Ni¬ 
acin in Coronary Heart Disease. Journal of the American Medical 
Association 231:360-381. 

COTTINGHAM, E.; MILLS, C. A. (1943). Influence of Temperature and Vi¬ 
tamin Deficiency upon Phagocytic Functions. Journal of Immunology 
47:493-502. 





282 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


COULEHAN, J. L.; REISINGER, K. S.; ROGERS, K. D.; BRADLEY, D. W. 
(1974). Vitamin C Prophylaxis in a Boarding School. The New En¬ 
gland Journal of Medicine 290:6-10. 

COUSINS, N. (1979). Anatomy of an Illness as Perceived by the Patient: 
Reflections on Healing and Regeneration . W. W. Norton, New York. 

COWAN, D. W.; DIEHL, H. S. (1950). Antihistamine Agents and Ascorbic 
Acid in the Early Treatment of the Common Cold. Journal of the 
American Medical Association 143:421-424. 

COWAN, D. W.; DIEHL, H. S.; BAKER, A. B. (1942). Vitamins for the Pre¬ 
vention of Colds. Journal of the American Medical Association 120: 
1268-1271. 

CRANDON, J. H.; LENNIHAN, R., JR.; MIKAL, S.; REIF, A. E. (l96l). As¬ 
corbic Acid Economy in Surgical Patients. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences 92:246-267. 

CREAGAN, E. T.; MOERTEL, C. G.; O’FALLON, J. R.; SCHUTT, A. J.; 
O’CONNELL, M. J.; RUBIN, J.; FRYTAK, S. (1979). Failure of High- 
Dose Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid) Therapy to Benefit Patients with 
Advanced Cancer: A Controlled Trial. New England Journal of Med¬ 
icine 301:687-690. 

DAVIDSON, S.; PASSMORE, R.; BROCK, J. F.; TRUSWELL, A. S. (1975). Hu¬ 
man Nutrition and Dietetics. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh, 
London, and New York. 

DEBRE, R. (1918). L’anergie dans la grippe. Comptes rendus Soc. Biol. 
(Paris) 81:913-914. 

DEBRE, R.; CELERS, J. (1970). Clinical Virology. W. B. Saunders, 
Philadelphia. 

DECOSSE, J. J.; ADAMS, M. B.; KUZMA, J. F.; LO GERFO, P.; CONDON, 
R. E. (1975). Effect of Ascorbic on Rectal Polyps of Patients with Fa¬ 
milial Polyposis. Surgery 78:608-612. 

DEMOLE, V. (1934). On the Physiological Action of Ascorbic Acid and 
Some Related Compounds. Biochemical Journal 28:770-773. 

DEUCHER, W. G. (1940). Observations on the Metabolism of Vitamin C in 
Cancer Patients (in German). Strahlentherapie 67:143-151. 

DICE, J. F.; DANIEL, C. W. (1973). The Hypoglycemic Effect of Ascorbic 
Acid in a Juvenile-onset Diabetic. International Research Communi¬ 
cations System 1:41. 

DICKEY, L. D. (1976). Clinical Ecology. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, 

Ill. 

DOLL, R. (1977). Origins of Human Cancer: Book A } Incidence of Cancer in 
Humans 3 eds. H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson, and J. A. Winsten. Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring, N. Y., pp. 1-12. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


283 


DONEGAN, C. K.; MESSER, A. L.; ORGAIN, E. S.; RUFFIN, J. M. (1949). 
Negative Results of Tocopherol Therapy in Cardiovascular Disease. 
American Journal of the Medical Sciences 217:294-299. 

DREISBACH, R. H. (l969). Handbook of Poisoning: Diagnosis and Treat¬ 
ment, 6th edition. Lange Medical Publications, Los Altos, Cal. 

DUJARRIC DE LA RIVIERE, R. (1918). La grippe est-elle une maladie a 
virus filtrant? Comptes rendus Acad. Sci. (Paris) 167:606. 

DUVAL, M. K. (1977). The Provider, the Government, and the Consumer, 
in Doing Better and Feeling Worse: Health in the United States, ed. 
J. H. Knowles. W. W. Norton, New York, pp. 185-192. 

DYKES, M. H. M.; MEIER, P. (l 975). Ascorbic Acid and the Common Cold. 
Journal of the American Medical Association 231:1073-1079. 

EATON, S. B.; KONNER, M. (1985). Paleolithic Nutrition: A Consideration 
of Its Nature and Current Implications. New England Journal of 
Medicine 312:283-289. 

ECKHOLM, E. P. (1977). The Picture of Health: Environmental Sources of 
Disease. W. W. Norton, New York. 

EDWIN, E.; HOLTEN, K.; NORUM, K. R.; SCHRUMPF, A.; SKAUG, O. E. 
( 1 965). Vitamin B I2 Hypovitaminosis in Mental Diseases. Acta Med- 
ica Scandinavica 177:689-699. 

EKVALL, S.; BOZIAN, R. (l979). Effect of Supplemental Ascorbic Acid on 
Serum Vitamin B 12 and Serum Ascorbate Levels in Myelomeningocele 
Patients. Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology 
38:452. 

ELLIOTT, B. (1973). Ascorbic Acid: Efficacy in the Prevention of Symptoms 
of Respiratory Infection on a Polaris Submarine. International Re¬ 
search Communications System, May. 

ELLIOTT, H. C. (l982). Effects of Vitamin C Loading on Serum Constitu¬ 
ents in Man. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and 
Medicine 169:363-367. 

ELLIS, J. M. (l966). The Doctor Who Looked at Hands. Vantage Press, 
New York. 

ELLIS, J. M. (1983) . Free of Pain: A Proven and Inexpensive Treatment for 
Specific Types of Rheumatism. Southwest Publishing, Brownsville 
and Dallas, Tex. 

ELLIS, J. M.; PRESLEY, J. (1973). Vitamin B 6 , the Doctor's Report. Harper 
and Row, New York. 

ELLIS, J. M.; FOLKERS, K.; LEVY, M.; SHIZUKOISHI, S.; LEWANDOWSKI, 
J.; NISHII, S.; SHUBERT, H. A.; ULRICK, R. (1982). Response of Vita¬ 
min B 6 Deficiency and the Carpal Tunnel Syndrome to Pyridoxine. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 79:7494-7498. 




284 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ENGEL, A.; ANGELINI, G. (l973). Carnitine Deficiency of Human Skeletal 
Muscle with Associated Lipid Storage Myopathy: A New Syndrome. 
Science 179:899-902. 

ENLOE, C. F., JR. (l97l). The Virtue of Theory. Nutrition Today January- 
February, p. 21. 

ENSTROM, J. E.; PAULING, L. (1982). Mortality Among Health-Conscious 
Elderly Californians. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
USA 79:6023-6027. 

EPSTEIN, S. S. (1978). The Politics of Cancer. Sierra Club Books, San 
Francisco. 

ERICSSON, Y.; LUNDBEGK, H. (1955). Antimicrobial Effect in vitro of the 
Ascorbic Acid Oxidation. I. Effect on Bacteria, Fungi and Viruses in 
Pure Culture, II. Influence of Various Chemical and Physical Factors. 
Acta Pathologica et Microbiologica Scandinavica 37:493-527. 

ERTEL, H. (1 94 1). Der Verlauf der Vitamin C-Prophylaxen in Fruhjahr. 
Die Ernahrung 6:269-273. 

EULER, U. S. VON (1937). On the Specific Vasodilating and Plain Muscle 
Stimulating Substances from Accessory Genital Glands in Man and 
Certain Animals (Prostaglandin and Vesiglandin). fournal of Physiol¬ 
ogy 88:213-234. 

EVERSON, T. C.; COLE, W. H. (1966). Spontaneous Repression of Cancer. 
W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia. 

FABRICANT, N. D.; CONKLIN, G. (l965>. The Dangerous Cold. Macmillan, 
New York. 

FEIGEN, G. A.; SMITH, B. H.; DIX, C. E.; FLYNN, C. J.; PETERSON, N. S.; 
ROSENBERG, L. T.; PAVLOVIC, S.; LEIBOVITZ, B. (1982). Enhance¬ 
ment of Antibody Production and Protection Against Systemic Ana¬ 
phylaxis by Large Doses of Vitamin C. Research Communications in 
Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology 38:313-333. 

FIDANZA, A.; AUDISIO, M.; MASTROIACOVO, P. (1982). Vitamin C and 
Cholesterol, in Vitamin C: New Clinical Applications in Immunology , 
Lipid Metabolism, and Cancer , ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 
153-171. 

FLETCHER, J. M.; FLETCHER, I. C. (l95l). Vitamin C and the Common 
Cold. British Medical fournal 1:887. 

FOLKERS, K.; ELLIS, J.; WATANABE, T.; SAJI, S.; KAJI, M. (1978). 
Biochemical Evidence for a Deficiency of Vitamin B 6 in the Carpal 
Tunnel Syndrome Based on a Crossover Clinical Study. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences USA 75:3418-3422. 

FRANZ, W. L.; SANDS, G. W.; HEYL, H. L. (1956). Blood Ascorbic Acid 
Level in Bioflavonoid and Ascorbic Acid Therapy of Common Cold. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


285 


Journal of the American Medical Association 162:1224-1226. 

FRIEDMAN, G. J.; SHERRY, S.; RALLI, E. P. (mo). Mechanism of Excre¬ 
tion of Vitamin C by Human Kidney at Low and Normal Plasma 
Levels of Ascorbic Acid. Journal of Clinical Investigations 19:685-689. 

FULLMER, H. M.; MARTIN, G. R.; BURNS, J. J. (l96l). Role of Ascorbic 
Acid in the Formation and Maintenance of Dental Structures. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences 92:286-294. 

FUNK, C. (1912). The Etiology of the Deficiency Diseases: Beri-Beri 
Polyneuritis in Birds, Epidemic Dropsy, Scurvy, Experimental Scurvy 
in Animals, Infantile Scurvy, Ship Beri-Beri, Pellagra. J. St. Med. 
20:341-368. 

GALLIN, J. I. (l 981 ). Abnormal Phagocyte Chemotaxis: Pathophysiology, 
Clinical Manifestations, and Management of Patients. Reviews of 
Infectious Diseases 3:1196-1220. 

GALLIN, J. I.; ELIN, R. J.; HUBERT, R. T.; FAUCI, A. S.; KALINER, M. A.; 
WOLFF, S. M. (1979). Efficacy of Ascorbic Acid in Chediak-Higashi 
Syndrome: Studies in Humans and Mice. Blood 53:226-234. 

GEORGE, N. (1 95 1). Vitamin E and Diabetic Ulceration. Summary (Shute 
Foundation, London, Canada) 3:74-75. 

GERSON, M. (1958). A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases, 2d edition. 
Totality Books, Del Mar, Cal. 

GILDERSLEEVE, D. (l967). Why Organized Medicine Sneezes at the Com¬ 
mon Cold. Fact, July-August, pp. 21-23. 

GINTER, E. (1970). The Role of Ascorbic Acid in Cholesterol Metabolism. 
The Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Czechoslovakia. 

GINTER, E. (1973). Cholesterol: Vitamin C Controls Its Transformation 
into Bile Acids. Science 179:702. 

GINTER, E. (1977). Vitamin C and Cholesterol, in Re-evaluation of Vita¬ 
min C, eds. A. Hanck and G. Ritzel. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 53-66. 

GINTER, E. (l975). The Role of Vitamin C in Cholesterol Catabolism and 
Atherogenesis. The Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Czecho¬ 
slovakia. 

GINTER, E. ( 1 978). Marginal Vitamin C Deficiency, Lipid Metabolism, 
and Atherosclerosis. Lipid Research 16:167-220. 

GINTER, E. (1982). Vitamin C in the Control of Hypercholesteremia in 
Man, in Vitamin C: New Clinical Applications in Immunology, Lipid 
Metabolism, and Cancer, ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 
137-152. 

GLAZEBROOK, A. J.; THOMSON, S. (1942). The Administration of Vitamin 
C in a Large Institution and Its Effect on General Health and Resist¬ 
ance to Infection. Journal of Hygiene 42:1-19. 





286 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


GLOVER, E.; KOH, E. T.; TROUT, D. L. (1984). Effect of Ascorbic Acid on 
Plasma Lipid and Lipoprotein Cholesterol in Normotensive and Hy¬ 
pertensive Subjects. Federation Proceedings 43:1057. 

GOLDBLATT, M. W. (i933). A Depressor Substance in Seminal Fluid. 
Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry 52:1056-1057. 

GOETZL, E. J.; WASSERMAN, S. I.; GIGLI, I.; AUSTEN, K. F. (1974). En¬ 
hancement of Random Migration and Chemotactic Response of Hu¬ 
man Leukocytes by Ascorbic Acid. Journal of Clinical Investigation 
53:813-818. 

GOMPERTZ, B. (1820). A Sketch of the Analysis and Notation Applicable 
to the Value of Life Contingencies. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society 110:214-294. 

GOMPERTZ, B. (1825). On the Nature of the Function Expressive of the 
Law of Human Mortality and on a New Mode of Determining the 
Value of Life Contingencies. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society 115:513-585. 

GOMPERTZ, B. (l862). A Supplement to Two Papers Published in the 
Transactions of the Royal Society, “On the Science Connected with 
Human Mortality”; The One Published in 1820, and the Other in 
1825. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 52:511-559. 

GREENBLATT, R. B. (1955). Bioflavonoids and the Capillary: Management 
of Habitual Abortion. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
61:713-720. 

GREENWOOD, J. (1964). Optimum Vitamin C Intake as a Factor in the 
Preservation of Disc Integrity. Medical Annals of the District of Co¬ 
lumbia 33:274-276. 

GULEWITSCH, V. S.; KRIMBERG, R. (1905). On the Nature of Substances 
Extracted from Muscle: A Communication about Carnitine. Zeit- 
schrift fur Physiologische Chemie 45:326-330. 


HAEGER, K. (1968). The Treatment of Peripheral Occlusive Arterial Dis¬ 
ease with Alpha-tocopherol as Compared with Vasodilator Agents and 
Antiprothrombin [Dicumarol]. Vascular Diseases 5:199-213. 
HALSTEAD, B. W., JR. (1979). The Scientific Basis of EDTA Therapy. 
Golden Quill, Colton, Cal. 

HAMMOND, E. C. (1964). Some Preliminary Findings on Physical Com¬ 
plaints from a Prospective Study of 1,064,004 Men and Women. 
American Journal of Public Health 54:11-22. 

HAMMOND, E. C.; HORN, D. (1958). Smoking and Death Rates: Report on 
44 Months of Follow-Up on 187,783 Men. I. Total Mortality. II. 
Death Rates by Cause. Journal of the American Medical Association 
166:1159-1172; 1294-1308. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


287 


HARMAN, D. (l98l). The Aging Process. Proceedings of the National Acad¬ 
emy of Sciences USA 78:7124-7128. 

HARRELL, R. F.; CAPP, R. H.; DAVIS, D. R.; PEERLESS, J.; RAVITZ, L. R. 
(1981). Can Nutritional Supplements Help Mentally Retarded Chil¬ 
dren? An Exploratory Study. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA 78:574-578. 

HARRIS, A.; ROBINSON, A. B.; PAULING, L. (1973). Blood Plasma L-Ascor- 
bic Acid Concentration for Oral L-Ascorbic Acid Dosage up to 12 
Grams per Day. International Research Communications System , 
page 19, December. 

HARRIS, L. J.; RAY, S. N. (1935). Diagnosis of Vitamin C-Subnutrition by 
Urinalysis with Note on Antiscorbutic Value of Human Milk. The 
Lancet 1:71-77. 

HARTZ, S. C.; MC GANDY, R. B.; JACOB, R. A.; RUSSELL, R. M.; JACQUES, 
P. (1984). Relationship of Serum Ascorbic Acid and HDL Cholesterol 
in Elderly Non-Users of Nutrient Supplement. Federation Proceed¬ 
ings 43:393. 

HAWKINS, D.; PAULING, L. (1973). Orthomolecular Psychiatry. W. H. 
Freeman and Company, San Francisco. 

HERBERT, V.; JACOB, E. (1974). Destruction of Vitamin B I2 by Ascorbic 
Acid, fournal of the American Medical Association 230:241-242. 

HERJANIC, M.; MOSS-HERJANIC, B. L. (1967). Ascorbic Acid Test in Psy¬ 
chiatric Patients, fournal of Schizophrenia 1:257-260. 

HINDSON, T. C. ( 1 968) . Ascorbic Acid for Prickly Heat. The Lancet 
1:1347-1348. 

HINES, K.; DANES, B. H. (1976). Microtubular Defect in Chediak-Higashi 
Syndrome. The Lancet, 145-146, 17 July. 

HOEFEL, O. S. (1977). Plasma Vitamin C Levels in Smokers, in Re-evalua- 
tion of Vitamin C, ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 127-138. 

HOFFER, A. (1962). Niacin Therapy in Psychiatry. Charles C Thomas, 
Springfield, Ill. 

HOFFER, A. (1 97 1). Ascorbic Acid and Toxicity. New England fournal of 
Medicine 285:635-636. 

HOFFER, A.; OSMOND, H. (i960). The Chemical Basis of Clinical Psychia¬ 
try. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill. 

HOFFER, A.; OSMOND, H. (l966). How to Live With Schizophrenia. Uni¬ 
versity Books, New Hyde Park, New York. 

HOFFER, A.; WALKER, M. (1978). Orthomolecular Nutrition: New Lifestyle 
for Super Good Health. Keats Publishing, New Canaan, Conn. 

HOLMES, H. N. (1943). Food Allergies and Vitamin C. Annals of Allergy 
1:235-241. 

HOLMES, H. N. (1946). The Use of Vitamin C in Traumatic Shock. Ohio 
State Medical fournal 42:1261-1264. 





288 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


HOLMES, H. N.; ALEXANDER, W. (1942). Hay Fever and Vitamin C. 
Science 96:497-499. 

HOPKINS, F. G. (1912). Feeding Experiments Illustrating the Importance 
of Accessory Factors in Normal Dietaries. Journal of Physiology 
(London) 44:425-460. 

HORROBIN, D. F.; MANKU, M. S.J OKA, M.; MORGAN, R. O.; CUNNANE, S. 
C.; ALLY, A. I.; GHAYUR, T.; SCHWEITZER, M.; KARMALI, R. A. 
(1979). The Nutritional Regulation of T Lymphocyte Function. Med¬ 
ical Hypotheses 5:969-985. 

HORROBIN, D. F.; OKA, M.; MANKU, M. S. (1979). The Regulation of 
Prostaglandin El Formation: A Candidate for One of the Fundamen¬ 
tal Mechanisms Involved in the Actions of Vitamin C. Medical Hy¬ 
potheses 5:849-858. 

HUGHES, W. T. (1984). Infections in Children with Cancer. Primary Care 
and Cancer , October, 66-72. 

HUME, R.; WEYERS, E. (l973). Changes in Leucocyte Ascorbic Acid during 
the Common Cold. Scottish Medical Journal 18:3-7. 

INGALLS, T. H.; WARREN, H. A. (l937). Asymptotic Scurvy. Its Relation to 
Wound Healing and Its Incidence in Patients with Peptic Ulcer. New 
England Journal of Medicine 217:443-446. 

IRVIN, T. T.; CHATTOPADHYAY, D. K. (1978). Ascorbic Acid Requirements 
in Postoperative Patients. Surgery, Gynecology, and Obstetrics 
147:49-56. 

ISSACS, A.; LINDEMANN, J. (1957). Virus Interference. I. The Interferon. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B147:258-267. 

JAFFE, R. M.; KASTEN, B.; YOUNG, D. S.; MAC LOWRY, J. D. (1975). 
False-Negative Stool Occult Blood Tests Caused by Ingestion of 
Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C). Annals of Internal Medicine 83:824-826. 

JAVERT, C. T.; STANDER, H. J. (1943). Plasma Vitamin C and Prothrom¬ 
bin Concentration in Pregnancy and in Threatened, Spontaneous, and 
Habitual Abortion. Surgery, Gynecology, and Obstetrics 76:115-122. 

JOHNSON, G. E.; OBENSHAIN, S. S. (l98l). Nonresponsiveness of Serum 
High-Density Lipoprotein-Cholesterol to High Dose Ascorbic Acid 
Administration in Normal Men. American Journal of Clinical Nutri¬ 
tion 34:2088-2091. 

JOHNSON, G. T. (1975). What You Should Know about Health Care Before 
You Call a Doctor . McGraw-Hill, New York. 

JONES, H. (1955). A Special Consideration of the Aging Process, Disease, 
and Life Expectancy. University of California Radiation Laboratory, 
No. 3105. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


289 


JONES, H. B. (1956). Demographic Consideration of the Cancer Problem. 

Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences 18:298-333. 
JUNGEBLUT, C. W. (l935). Inactivation of Poliomyelitis Virus by Crystal¬ 
line Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid). Journal of Experimental Medicine 
62:517-521. 


KALOKERINOS, A. (l98l). Every Second Child. Keats Publishing, New 
Canaan, Conn. 

KARLOWSKI, T. R.; CHALMERS, T. C.; FRENKEL, L. D.; KAPIKIAN, A. Z.; 
LEWIS, T. L.; LYNCH, J. M. (1975). Ascorbic Acid for the Common 
Cold: A Prophylactic and Therapeutic Trial. Journal of the American 
Medical Association 23:1038-1042. 

KAUFMAN, W. (1943). The Common Form of Niacin Amide Deficiency Dis¬ 
ease y Aniacinamidosis. By author, Bridgeport, Conn. 

KAUFMAN, W. (l949). The Common Form of Joint Dysfunction: Its Inci¬ 
dence and Treatment. E. L. Hildreth, Brattleboro, Vermont. 

KAUFMAN, W. (l955). The Use of Vitamin Therapy to Reverse Certain 
Concomitants of Aging. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 
3:927-936. 

KAUFMAN, W. (1983). Niacinamide, A Most Neglected Vitamin. Interna¬ 
tional Academy of Preventive Medicine 8:5-25. 

KEYS, A. (1956). The Diet and the Development of Coronary Heart Dis¬ 
ease. Journal of Chronic Diseases 4:364-380. 

KHAN, A. R.; SEEDARNEE, F. A. (l98l). Effect of Ascorbic Acid on Plasma 
Lipids and Lipoproteins in Healthy Young Women. Atherosclerosis 
39:89-95. 

KIMOTO, E.; TANAKA, H.; GYOTOKU, J.; MORISHIGE, F.; PAULING, L. 
(1983). Enhancement of Antitumor Activity of Ascorbate against 
Ehrlich Ascites Tumor Cells by the Copper-Glycylglycylhistidine 
Complex. Cancer Research 43:824-828. 

KLASSON, D. H. (l95l). Ascorbic Acid in the Treatment of Burns. New 
York State Journal of Medicine 51:2388-2392. 

KLENNER, F. R. (1948). Virus Pneumonia and Its Treatment with Vitamin 
C. Journal of Southern Medicine and Surgery 110:60-63. 

KLENNER, F. R. (l949). The Treatment of Poliomyelitis and Other Virus 
Diseases with Vitamin C. Journal of Southern Medicine and Surgery 
113:101-107. 

KLENNER, F. R. (l95l). Massive Doses of Vitamin C and the Viral Dis¬ 
eases. Southern Medicine and Surgery 113:101-107. 

KLENNER, F. R. (with BARTZ, F. H.) (1969). The Key to Good Health: Vita¬ 
min C . Graphic Arts Research Foundation, Chicago, Ill. 





290 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


KLENNER, F. R. (l97l). Observations on the Dose and Administration of 
Ascorbic Acid When Employed beyond the Range of a Vitamin in 
Human Pathology. Journal of Applied Nutrition 23:61-88. 

KLENNER, F. R. (1974). Significance of High Daily Intake of Ascorbic Acid 
in Preventive Medicine. Journal oj the International Academy oj 
Preventive Medicine 1:45-69. 

KNOX, E. G. (1973). Ischaemic Heart Disease Mortality and Dietary Intake 
of Calcium. The Lancet 1:1465. 

KODICEK, E. H.; YOUNG, F. G. (1969). Captain Cook and Scurvy. Notes 
and Records oj the Royal Society 24:43-60. 

KOGAN, B. A. (l970). Health. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York. 

KORBSCH, R. (1938). Cevitamic Acid Therapy of Allergic Inflammatory 
Conditions. Medizinische Klinik 34:1500-1505. 

KORDANSKY, D. W.; ROSENTHAL, R. R.; NORMAN, P. S. (1979). The Effect 
of Vitamin C on Antigen-Induced Bronchospasm. Journal oj Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 63:61-64. 

KROMHOUT, D.; BOSSCHIETER, E. B.; COULANDER, C. DE L. (1985). The 
Inverse Relation between Fish Consumption and 20-Year Mortality 
from Coronary Heart Disease. New England Journal oj Medicine 
312: 1205-1209. 

KRUEGER, R. (i960). Experimental and Clinical Observations on the 
Treatment of Alkali Corneal Burns with Ascorbic Acid. Berichte der 
Versammlung der deutschen ophthalmologischen Gesellschajt 62: 
255-258. 

KRUMDIECK, C.; BUTTERWORTH, C. E. (1974). Ascorbate-Cholesterol- 
Lecithin Interactions: Factors of Potential Importance in the Patho¬ 
genesis of Atherosclerosis. American Journal oj Clinical Nutrition 
27:866-876. 

KUBALA, A. L.; KATZ, M. M. (i960). Nutritional Factors in Psychological 
Test Behavior. Journal oj Genetic Psychology 96:343-352. 

KUBLER, W.; GEHLER, J. (1970). Zur Kinetik der enteralen Ascorbinsaure- 
resorption zur Berechnung nicht dosisproportionaler Resorptionsvor- 
gange. Internationale Zeitschrijt Jur Vitaminjorschung 40:442-453. 

KURZROK, R.; LIEB, C. C. (1930). Biochemical Studies of Human Semen. 
II. The Action of Human Semen on the Human Uterus. Proceedings 
oj the Society oj Experimental Biology and Medicine 28:268-272. 

KUTSKY, R. J. (1973). Handbook oj Vitamins and Hormones. Van Nos¬ 
trand Reinhold, New York. 

LAHANN, H. (1970). Vitamin C\ Forschung und Praxis. Merck, Darmstadt. 

LAI, H.-Y. L.; SHIELDS, E. K.; WATNE, A. L. (1977). Effect of Ascorbic 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


291 


Acid on Rectal Polyps and Rectal Steroids. Federation Proceedings 
(Abs.) 35:1061. 

LANE, B. C. (1980) . Evaluation of Intraocular Pressure with Daily Sus¬ 
tained Closework Stimulus to Accommodation to Lowered Tissue 
Chromium and Dietary Deficiency of Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C). 
Ph.D. dissertation, New York University. 

LAMDEN, M. P.; CHRYSTOWSKI, G. A. (1954). Urinary Oxalate Excretion 
by Man Following Ascorbic Acid Ingestion. Proceedings of the Society 
for Experimental Biology and Medicine 85:190-192. 

LEAKE, C. D. (1955). Drug Allergies. Postgraduate Medicine 17:132-139. 

LEE, P.-F.; LAM, K.-W.; LAI, M.-M. (1977). Aqueous Humor Ascorbate 
Concentration and Open-Angle Glaucoma. Archives of Ophthalmol - 
ogy 95:308-310. 

LEE, T. H.; HOOVER, R. L.; WILLIAMS, J. D.; SPERLING, R. I.; ET AL. 
(1985). Effects of Dietary Enrichment with Eicosapentaenoic and 
Decosahexaenoic Acids on In Vitro Neutrophil and Monocyte Leuko- 
triene Generation and Neutrophile Function. New England Journal of 
Medicine 312:1217-1224. 

LEIBOVITZ, B. (1984) . Carnitine: The Vitamin B r Phenomenon. Dell, 
New York. 

LESSER, M. (1977). Mental Health: It’s Not Just in Our Heads, in Diet 
Related to Killer Diseases. V. Nutrition and Mental Health. Hearing 
before the Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs of 
the United States Senate. Government Printing Office, Washington, 
D.C., pp. 13-27, 94-96. 

LIEB, C. W. (1926). The Effect of an Exclusive, Long-Continued Meat 
Diet, Based on the History, Experiences, and Clinical Survey of 
Vilhjalmur Stefansson, Arctic Explorer. Journal of the American 
Medical Association 87:25-26. 

LIBBY, A. F.; STONE, I. (1977). The Hypoascorbemia-Kwashiorkor Ap¬ 
proach to Drug Addiction Therapy: A Pilot Study. Journal of Ortho¬ 
molecular Psychiatry 6:300-308. 

LIGHT, N. D.; BAILEY, A. J. (l980). Molecular Structure and Stabiliza¬ 
tion of the Collagen Fibre, in Biology of Collagen 3 eds. A. Viidik and 
J. Vuust. Academic Press, New York. pp. 15-38. 

LIND, J. A. (1753). A Treatise of the Scurvy. Sands, Murray, and Cochrane, 
Edinburgh; reprinted (1953) Edinburgh University Press. 

LUND, C. C.; GANDON, J. H. (l94l). Human Experimental Scurvy and 
the Relation of Vitamin C Deficiency to Postoperative Pneumonia 
and to Wound Healing. Journal of the American Medical Association 
116:663-668. 




292 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


LUNIN, N. ( 1881 ). Uber die Bedeutung der anorganischen Salze fur die 
Ernahrung des Tieres. Zeitschrift fur physiologische Chemie 5:31-39. 

MACON, W. L. (1956). Citrus Bioflavonoids in the Treatment of the Com¬ 
mon Cold. Industrial Medicine and Surgery 25:525-527. 

MANN, G. V. (1977). Diet-Heart: End of an Era. New England Journal of 
Medicine 297:644-650. 

MARCKWELL, N. W. (1947). Vitamin C in the Prevention of Colds. Medical 
Journal of Australia 2:777-778. 

MARCUS, M.; PRABHUDESAI, M.; WASSEF, S. (1980). Stability of Vitamin 
B 12 in the Presence of Ascorbic Acid in Food and Serum: Restoration 
by Cyanide of Apparent Loss. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 
33:137-143. 

MARTIN, N. G.; CARR, A. B.; OAKESHOTT, J. G.; CLARK, P. (1982). Co- 
Twin Control Studies: Vitamin C and the Common Cold. Progress in 
Clinical and Biological Research 103A:365-373. 

MASEK, J.; NERADILOVA, M.; HEJDA, S. (1972). Vitamin C and Respira¬ 
tory Infections. Review of Czechoslovak Medicine 18:228-235. 

MATSUO, E.; SKINSNES, O. K.; CHANG, P. H. C. (1975). Acid Mucopolysac¬ 
charide Metabolism in Leprosy. III. Hyaluronic Acid Mycobacterial 
Growth Enhancement, and Growth Suppression by Saccharic Acid 
and Vitamin C as Inhibitors of Betaglucuronidase. International 
Journal of Leprosy 43:1-13. 

MAYER, J. (1977). A Diet for Living. Pocket Books, New York. 

MCCANN, J.; AMES, B. N. (1977). The Salmonella/ Typhimurium Micro- 
some Mutagenicity Test: Predictive Value for Animal Carcinogen¬ 
icity, in Origins of Human Cancer: Book C, Human Risk Assessment, 
eds. H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson, and J. A. Winsten. Cold Spring 
Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring, N. Y., pp. 1431-1450. 

MC CORMICK, W. J. (1952). Ascorbic Acid as a Chemotherapeutic Agent. 
Archives of Pediatrics 69:151-155. 

MCCORMICK, W. J. (1959). Cancer, a Collagen Disease, Secondary to a 
Nutritional Deficiency. Archives of Pediatrics 76:166-171. 

MCCOY, E. E.; YONGE, K.; KARR, G. W. (1976). Megavitamin Therapy: 
Final Report of the Joint University Megavitamin Therapy Review 
Committee. Ministry of Social Services and Community Health, 
Alberta, Canada. 

MCGINN, F. P.; HAMILTON, J. C. (1976). Ascorbic Acid Levels in Stored 
Blood and in Patients Undergoing Surgery after Blood Transfusion. 
British Journal of Surgery 63:505-507. 

MC PHERSON, K.; FOX, M. S. (1977). Treatment of Breast Cancer, in Costs, 
Risks , and Benefits of Surgery , eds. J. P. Bunker, B. A. Barnes, and 
F. Mosteller. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 308-322. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


293 


MC WHIRTER, R. (1948). The Value of Simple Mastectomy and Radiother¬ 
apy in the Treatment of Cancer of the Breast. British Journal of Radi¬ 
ology 21:252. 

MILLER, J. Z.; NANCE, W. E.; NORTON, J. A.; WOLEN, R. L.; GRIF¬ 
FITH, R. S.; ROSE, R. J. (1977). Therapeutic Effect of Vitamin C, a 
Co-Twin Control Study. Journal of the American Medical Association 
237:248-251. 

MILLER, J. Z.; NANCE, W. E.; KANG, K. (1978). A Co-Twin Control Study 
of the Effects of Vitamin C. Progress in Clinical and Biological Re¬ 
search 24:151-156. 

MILLER, N. E.; FORDE, O. H.; THELLE, D. S.; MJOS, O.D. (1977). The 
Tromso Heart Study: High-Density Lipoprotein and Coronary Heart 
Disease, a Prospective Case-Control Study. The Lancet 1:965. 

MILLER, T. E. (l969). Killing and Lysis of Gram-Negative Bacteria 
through the Synergistic Effect of Hydrogen Peroxide, Ascorbic Acid, 
and Lysozyme. Journal of Bacteriology 98:949-955. 

MOERTEL, C. G. (l978). Current Concepts in Cancer Chemotherapy of 
Gastrointestinal Cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 299: 
1049-1052. 

MOERTEL, C. G.; FLEMING, T. R.; CREAGAN, E. T.; RUBIN, J.; 
O’CONNELL, M. J.; AMES, M. M. (1985). High-Dose Vitamin C versus 
Placebo in the Treatment of Patients with Advanced Cancer Who 
Had No Prior Chemotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine 
312:137-141. 

MOHSENIN, V.; DUBOIS, A. B.; DOUGLAS, J. S. (1982). Ascorbic Acid Ex¬ 
erts its Effect on Asthmatics through Prostaglandin Metabolism. 
American Thoracic Society 125, abstract. 

MONJUKOWA, N. K.; FRADKIN, M. J. (l935). New Experimental Observa¬ 
tions on the Pathogenesis of Cataracts. Archiven der Ophthalmologie 
133:328-338. 

MORISHIGE, F.; MURATA, A. (l978). Vitamin C for Prophylaxis of Viral 
Hepatitis B in Transfused Patients. Journal of the International Acad¬ 
emy of Preventive Medicine 5:54-58. 

MORISHIGE, F.; MURATA, A. (1979). Prolongation of Survival Times in 
Terminal Human Cancer by Administration of Supplemental Ascor¬ 
bate. Journal of the International Academy of Preventive Medicine. 
5:47-52. 

MUKHERJEE, D.; SOM, S.; CHATTERJEE, I. B. (1982). Ascorbic Acid Me¬ 
tabolism in Trauma. Indian Journal of Medical Research 75:748-751. 

MURAD, s.; GROVE, D.; LINDBERG, K. A.; REYNOLDS, G.; SIVARAJAH, A.; 
PINNELL, S. R. ( 1981 ). Regulation of Collagen Synthesis by Ascorbic 
Acid. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 78: 
2879-2882. 




294 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


MURAD, S.; SIVARAJAH, A.; PINNELL, S. E. (l98l). Regulation of Prolyl 
and Lysyl Hydroxylase Activities in Cultured Human Skin Fibro¬ 
blasts by Ascorbic Acid. Biochemical and Biophysical Research 
Communications 101:868-875. 

MURAD, S.; TAJIMA, S.; JOHNSON, G. R.; SIVARAJAH, A.; PINNELL, S. R. 
(1983). Collagen Synthesis in Cultured Human Skin Fibroblasts: Ef¬ 
fect of Vitamin C and Its Analogs. Journal of Investigative Dermatol¬ 
ogy 81:158-612. 

MURATA, A. (1975). Virucidal Activity of Vitamin C: Vitamin C for Pre¬ 
vention and Treatment of Viral Diseases. Proceedings of the First 
Intersectional Congress of Microbiological Societies 3 Science Council 
of Japan 3:432-442. 

MURATA, A.; KITAGAWA, K. (1973). Mechanism of Inactivation of Bacte¬ 
riophage J1 by Ascorbic Acid. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry 
35:1145-1151. 

MURATA, A.; KITAGAWA, K.; SARUNO, R. (l97l). Inactivation of Bacte¬ 
riophages by Ascorbic Acid. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry 35: 
294-296. 

MYASNIKOVA, I. A. (1947). Effect of Ascorbic Acid, Nicotinic Acid, and 
Thiamine on Cholesterolemia. Voenno-Morskoi Med. Akad. Lenin¬ 
grad 8:140 (in Russian). 

MYLLYLA, R.; MAJAMAA, K.; GUNZLER, V.; HANUSKA-ABEL, H. M.; 

KIVIRIKKO, K. I. (1984). Ascorbate Is Consumed Stoichiometrically in 
the Uncoupled Reactions Catalyzed by Prolyl-4-Hydroxylase and 
Lysyl Hydroxylase. Journal of Biological Chemistry 259:5403-5405. 

NANDI, B. K.; SUBRAMANIAN, N.; MAJUMDER, A. K.; CHATTERJEE, I. B. 
(l976). Effect of Ascorbic Acid on Detoxification of Histamine under 
Stress Conditions. Biochemical Pharmacology 23:643-647. 

New York Times (1985). Aspirin: Firms Agree to Use Warnings. 
January 12. 

NEWMARK, H. L.; SCHEINER, J.; MARCUS, M.; PRABHUDESAI, M. 
(1976). Stability of Vitamin B 12 in the Presence of Ascorbic Acid. The 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 29:645-649. 

NICOLE, C.; LEBAILLY, C. (1918). Quelque notions expermentales sur le 
virus de la grippe. Comptes rendus Acad. Sci. (Paris) 167:607-610. 

OCHSNER, A. (1964). Thromboembolism. New England Journal of Medi¬ 
cine 271:211. 

OCHSNER, A.; DEBAKEY, M. E.; DECAMP, P. T. (1950). Venous Thrombo¬ 
sis. Journal of the American Medical Association 144:831-834. 

OGILVY, C. S.; DOUGLAS, J. D.; TABATABAI, M.; DUBOIS, A. B. (1978). 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


295 


Ascorbic Acid Reverses Bronchoconstriction Caused by Methacholine 
Aerosol in Man; Indomethacin Prevents This Reversal. The Physiolo¬ 
gist 21:86. 

OGILVY, C. S.; DUBOIS, A. B.; DOUGLAS, J. S. (l98l). Effects of Ascorbic 
Acid and Indomethacin on the Airways of Healthy Male Subjects 
with and without Induced Bronchoconstriction. Journal of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology 67:363-369. 

OMURA, H.; FUKUMOTO, Y.; TOMITA, Y.; SHINOHARA, K. (1975). Action 
of 5-Methyl-3,4-Dihydroxytetrone on Deoxyribonucleic Acid. Journal 
oj the Faculty of Agriculture, Kyushu University 19:139-148. 

OMURA, H.; TOMITA, Y.; NAKAMURA, Y.; MURAKAMI, H. (1974). 
Antitumoric Potentiality of Some Ascorbate Derivatives. Journal oj the 
Faculty oj Agriculture , Kyushu University 18:181-189. 

OSMOND, H.; HOFFER, A. (1962). Massive Niacin Treatment in Schizo¬ 
phrenia: Review of a Nine-Year Study. The Lancet 1:316-322. 

PAESCHKE, K. D.; VASTERLING, H. W. (1968). Photometrischer Ascorbin- 
saure-Test zur Bestimmung der Ovulation, verglichen mit anderen 
Methoden der Ovulationsterminbestimmung. Zentralblatt fur Gyna- 
kologie 90:817-820. 

PANUSH, R. S.; DELAFUENTE, J. C.; KATZ, P.; JOHNSON, J. (1982). 
Modulation of Certain Immunologic Responses by Vitamin C. III. 
Potentiation of In Vitro and In Vivo Lymphocyte Responses, in Vita¬ 
min C: New Clinical Applications in Immunology, Lipid Metabolism, 
and Cancer , ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 35-47. 

PAPPENHEIMER, A. M. (1948). On Certain Aspects oj Vitamin C Defi¬ 
ciency. Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill. 

PASSMORE, R. ( 1971 ). That Man. . . . Pauling! Nutrition Today, January- 
February, pp. 17-18. 

PASSWATER, R. A. (1975). Super nutrition. The Dial Press, New York. 

PASSWATER, R. A. (l 977). Super nutrition for Healthy Hearts. Dial Press, 
New York. 

PATRONE, F.; DALLEGRI, F. (1979). Vitamin C and the Phagocytic System. 
Acta Vitaminologica et Enzymologica 1:5-10. 

PAUL, J. H.; FREESE, H. L. (l933). An Epidemiological and Bacteriological 
Study of the “Common Cold” in an Isolated Arctic Community 
(Spitsbergen). American Journal of Hygiene 17:517-535. 

PAULING, L. (1953). Protein Interactions: Aggregation of Globular Pro¬ 
teins. Faraday Society Discussion , pp. 170-176. 

PAULING, L. (1958). The Relation between Longevity and Obesity in Hu¬ 
man Beings. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
44:619-622. 




296 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


PAULING, L. (i960). Observations on Aging and Death. Engineering and 
Science Magazine, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, Cal., 
May issue. 

PAULING, L. (1 96 1). A Molecular Theory of General Anesthesia. Science 
134:15-21. 

PAULING, L. (1968a). Orthomolecular Psychiatry. Science 160:265-271. 
PAULING, L. (1968b). Orthomolecular Somatic and Psychiatric Medicine. 

Journal of Vital Substances and Diseases of Civilization 14:1-3. 
PAULING, L. (1970a). Vitamin C and the Common Cold. W. H. Freeman, 
San Francisco. 

PAULING, L. (l970b). Evolution and the Need for Ascorbic Acid. Proceed¬ 
ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 67:1643-1648. 
PAULING, L. (l97la). Vitamin C and the Common Cold, revised edition. 
Bantam Books, New York. 

PAULING, L. (197 1 b). That Man. . . . Pauling! Nutrition Today, March- 
April, pp. 21-24. 

PAULING, L. (1971c). Vitamin C and the Common Cold. Journal of the 
American Medical Association 216:332. 

PAULING, L. (1 97 1 d). Vitamin C and Colds. New York Times, January 17. 
PAULING, L. ( 1 972). Preventive Nutrition. Medicine on the Midway 
27:15-17. 

PAULING, L., ET AL. (l973a). Results of a Loading Test of Ascorbic Acid, 
Niacinamide, and Pyridoxine in Schizophrenic Subjects and Con¬ 
trols, in Orthomolecular Psychiatry: Treatment of Schizophrenia, eds. 
D. Hawkins and L. Pauling. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco. 
PAULING, L. (1973b). Vitamin C and the Common Cold, abridged edition. 
Bantam Books, New York. 

PAULING, L. (1974a). Early Evidence About Vitamin C and the Common 
Cold. Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry 3:139-151. 

PAULING, L. (1974b). On the Orthomolecular Environment of the Mind: 
Orthomolecular Theory. American Journal of Psychiatry 131: 
1251-1257. 

PAULING, L. (l974c). Are Recommended Daily Allowances for Vitamin C 
Adequate? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 
71:4442-4446. 

PAULING, L. (1976a). On Fighting Swine Flu. New York Times, June 5. 
PAULING, L. (1976b). Ascorbic Acid and the Common Cold: Evaluation of 
Its Efficacy and Toxicity. Medical Tribune, March 24. 

PAULING, L. (l976c). The Case for Vitamin C in Maintaining Health and 
Preventing Disease. Modern Medicine, July, pp. 68-72. 

PAULING, L. (l976d). Vitamin C, the Common Cold, and the Flu. W. H. 
Freeman, San Francisco. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


297 


PAULING, L. (1978). Robert Fulton Cathcart, III, M.D., an Ortho¬ 
molecular Physician. Newsletter 1 , no. 4, fall issue. The Linus Paul¬ 
ing Institute of Science and Medicine, Palo Alto, Cal. 

PAULING, L. (1984). Sensory Neuropathy from Pyridoxine Abuse. New 
England Journal of Medicine 310:197. 

PAULING, L.; WILLOUGHBY, R.; REYNOLDS, R.; BLAISDELL, B. E.; 
LAWSON, S. (1982). Incidence of Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Hair¬ 
less Mice Irradiated with Ultraviolet Light in Relation to Intake of 
Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) and of D,L-a-Tocopheryl Acetate (Vitamin 
E), in Vitamin C: New Clinical Applications in Immunology, Lipid 
Metabolism, and Cancer , ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 
53-82. 

PAULING, L.; NIXON, J. C.; STITT, F.; MARCUSON, R.; DUNHAM, W. B.; 
BARTH, R.; BENSCH, K.; HERMAN, Z. S.; BLAISDELL, E.; TSAO, C.; 
PRENDER, M.; ANDREWS, V.; WILLOUGHBY, R.; ZUCKERKANDL, E. 
(1985) . Effect of Ascorbic Acid on the Incidence of Spontaneous Mam¬ 
mary Tumors in RIII Mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 82:5185-5189. 

PEAR, R. (1985) . Lower Nutrient Levels Proposed in Draft Report on 
American Diet. New York Times, 23 September: 1, 17. 

PEARSON, D.; SHAW, S. (l982). Life Extension: A Practical Scientific Ap¬ 
proach. Warner Books, New York. 

PELLETIER, O. (l977). Vitamin C and Tobacco, in Re-evaluation of Vita¬ 
min C, ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 139-148. 

PETROUTSOS, G.; POULIQUEU, Y. (1984). Effect of Ascorbic Acid on Ulcer¬ 
ation in Alkali-Burned Corneas. Ophthalmic Research 16:185-189. 

PFEIFFER, C. C. (1975). Mental and Elemental Nutrients: A Physician's 
Guide to Nutrition and Health Care. Keats Publishing, New Canaan, 
Conn. 

PFISTER, R. R.; KOSKI, J. (1982). Alkali Burns of the Eye: Pathophysiology 
and Treatment. Southern Medical Journal 75:417-422. 

PHILLIPSON, B. E.; ROTHROCK, B. W.; CONNOR, W. E.; HARRIS, W. S.; 
ILLINGWORTH, D. R. (1985). Reduction of Plasma Lipids, Lipopro¬ 
teins, and Apoproteins by Dietary Fish Oils in Patients with Hyper¬ 
triglyceridemia. New England Journal of Medicine 312:1210-1216. 

PHILPOTT, W. H. (1974). Maladaptive Reactions to Frequently Used Foods 
and Commonly Met Chemicals as Precipitating Factors in Many 
Chronic Physical and Chronic Emotional Illnesses, in New Dynamics 
of Preventive Medicine, ed. L. R. Pomeroy. Intercontinental Medical 
Book Corp., New York, pp. 171-198. 

PINNELL, S. R. (1982). Regulation of Collagen Synthesis. Journal of Inves¬ 
tigative Dermatology 79:73s-76s. 




298 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


PITT, H. A.; COSTRINI, A. M. (1979). Vitamin C Prophylaxis in Marine 
Recruits. Journal of the American Medical Association 241:908-911. 

POHL, F.; KORNBLUTH, G. M. (1953). The Space Merchants. Ballantine 
Books, New York. 

PORTMAN, O. W.; ALEXANDER, M.; MARUFFO, C. A.; (1967). Nutritional 
Control of Arterial Lipid Composition in Squirrel Monkeys. Journal 
of Nutrition 91:35-44. 

PORTNOY, B.; WILKINSON, J. F. (1938). Vitamin C Deficiency in Peptic 
Ulceration and Haematemesis. British Medical Journal 1:554-560. 

PRIESTMAN, T. J. (l 977). Cancer Chemotherapy—An Introduction. Mont¬ 
edison Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Barnet, England. 

PRINZ, W.; BORTZ, R.; BRAGIN, B.; HERSCH, M. (1977). The Effect of 
Ascorbic Acid Supplementation on Some Parameters of the Human 
Immunological Defence System. International Journal of Vitamin and 
Nutrition Research 47:248-256. 

PRITIKIN, N. (1983). The Pritikin Promise: 28 Days to a Longer , Healthier 
Life. Simon and Schuster, New York. 

PUGH, D. M.; SHARMA, S. C.; WILSON, C. W. M. (1975). Inhibitory Effect of 
L-Ascorbic Acid on the Yield of Prostaglandin F from the Guinea-Pig 
Uterine Homogenates. British Journal of Pharmacolocy 53:469P. 

RABACH, J. M. (1972). Vitamin C for a Cold. Dell Publishing, New York. 

RAFFEL, S.; MADISON, R. R. (1938). The Influence of Ascorbic Acid on 
Anaphylaxis in Guinea Pigs. Journal of Infectious Diseases 63:71-76. 

RAMACHANDRAN, G. N.; REDDI, A. H. (1976). Biochemistry of Collagen. 
Plenum Press, New York. 

RAPAPORT, S. A. (1978). Strike Back at Cancer: What To Do and Where 
To Go for the Best Medical Care. Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, N. J. 

RAUSCH, P. G.; PRYZWANSKY, K. B.; SPITZNAGEL, J. K. (1978). Immuno- 
cytochemical Identification of Azurophilic and Specific Granule 
Markers in the Giant Granules of Chediak-Higashi Neutrophiles. 
New England Journal of Medicine 298:693-698. 

Reader's Digest Family Health Guide and Medical Encyclopedia (1976). 
The Reader’s Digest Association, Pleasantville, N. Y. 

REGNIER, E. (1968). The Administration of Large Doses of Ascorbic Acid 
in the Prevention and Treatment of the Common Cold, Parts I and II. 
Review of Allergy 22:835-846, 948-956. 

RHOADS, G. C.; GULBRANDSEN, C. L.; KAGAN, A. (l976). Serum Lipopro¬ 
teins and Coronary Heart Disease in a Population Study of Hawaiian 
Japanese Men. New England Journal of Medicine 294:297. 

RICH, A.; CRICK, F. H. C. (l96l). The Molecular Structure of Collagen. 
Journal of Molecular Biology 3:483-506. 







BIBLIOGRAPHY 


299 


RIMLAND, B. (1973). High-Dosage Levels of Certain Vitamins in the 
Treatment of Children with Severe Mental Disorders, in Ortho¬ 
molecular Psychiatry: Treatment of Schizophrenia , eds. D. Hawkins 
and L. Pauling, W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, pp. 513-539. 

RIMLAND, B. (1979). Nutritional Medicine vs. Toxic Medicine. Let's Live } 
March, 127-128. 

RIMLAND, B.; CALLAWAY, E.; DREYFUS, P. (1977). The Effect of High 
Doses of Vitamin B 6 on Autistic Children—A Double Blind Crossover 
Study, in Diet Related to Killer Diseases V. Nutrition and Mental 
Health . Hearing before the Select Committee on Nutrition and Hu¬ 
man Needs of the United States Senate. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C., pp. 276-279. 

RINEHART, J. F.; GREENBERG, L. D. (1956). Vitamin B 6 Deficiency in the 
Rhesus Monkey with Particular Reference to the Occurrence of Ath¬ 
erosclerosis, Dental Caries, and Hepatic Cirrhosis. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition 4:318-327. 

RINGSDORF, W. M., JR.; CHERASKIN, E. (1982). Vitamin C and Human 
Wound Healing. Oral Surgery 53:231-236. # 

RITZEL, G. ( 1961 ). Kritische Beurteilung des Vitamins C als Prophylacti- 
cum und Therapeuticum der Erkaltungskrankheiten. Helvetica Med- 
ica Acta 28:63-68. 

RITZEL, G.; BRUPPACHER, R. (1977). Vitamin C and Tobacco, in Re-eval¬ 
uation of Vitamin C , ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 171-184. 

ROBIN, E. D. (1984). Matters of Life and Death: Risks vs. Benefits of Medi¬ 
cal Care. W. H. Freeman, New York. 

ROSS, W. S. (l 97 1). Vitamin C: Does It Really Help? Reader's Digest 
98:129-132. 

RUSKIN, S. L. (l938). Calcium Cevitamate (Calcium Ascorbate) in the 
Treatment of Acute Rhinitis. Annals of Otology , Rhinology, and 
Larynology 47:502-511. 

SABISTON, B. H.; RADOMSKI, N. W. (l974). Health Problems and Vitamin 
C in Canadian Northern Military Operations. Defence and Civil In¬ 
stitute of Environmental Medicine Report No. 74-R-1012. 

SALOMON, L. L.; STUBBS, S. W. (l96l). Some Aspects of the Metabolism of 
Ascorbic Acid in Rats. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 
92:128-140. 

SAMBORSKAYA, E. P.; FERDMAN, T. D. (l966>. The Problem of the Mecha¬ 
nism of Artificial Abortion by Use of Ascorbic Acid. Bjulletin Ekspe- 
rimentalnoi Biologii i Meditsinii 62:96-98. 

SAYED, S. M.; ROY, P. B.; ACHARYA, P. T. (1975). Leukocyte Ascorbic Acid 
and Wound Infection. Journal of the Indian Medical Association 64: 
120-123. 





300 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


SGHAUMBERG, H.; CAPLAN, J.; WINDEBANK, A. (1983). Sensory Neuro¬ 
pathy from Pyridoxine Use: A New Megavitamin Syndrome. New 
England Journal of Medicine 309:445-448. 

SGHEUNERT, A. (1949). Der Tagesbedarf des Erwachsenen an Vitamin G. 
Internationale Zeitschrijt fur Vitaminforschung 20:371-386. 

SCHLEGEL, J. U. (l975). Proposed Uses of Ascorbic Acid in Prevention of 
Bladder Carcinoma. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 258: 
432-438. 

SCHLEGEL, J. U.; PIPKIN, G. E.; BANOWSKY, L. (l967>. Urine Composition 
in the Etiology of Bladder Tumor Formation. Journal of Urology 97: 
479-481. 

SCHLEGEL, J. U.; PIPKIN, G. E.; NISHIMURA, R.; DUKE, G. A. (1969). 
Studies in the Etiology and Prevention of Bladder Carcinoma. Journal 
of Urology 101:317-324. 

SCHLEGEL, J. U.; PIPKIN, G. E.; NISHIMURA, R.; SCHULTZ, G. N. 
(1970). The Role of Ascorbic Acid in the Prevention of Bladder 
Tumor Formation. Journal of Urology 103:155-159. 

SCHMECK, H. M., JR. (1973). Research Funds and Disease Effects Held 
Out of Step. New York Times, February 10. 

SCHORAH, C. J. ( 1981 ). Vitamin C Status in Population Groups, in Vita¬ 
min C (Ascorbic Acid), eds. J. N. Counsell and D. H. Hornig. Ap¬ 
plied Science Publishers, London. 

SCHRAUZER, G. N.; RHEAD, W. J. (1973). Ascorbic Acid Abuse: Effects of 
Long Term Ingestion of Excessive Amounts of Blood Levels and 
Urinary Excretion. International Journal of Vitamin and Nutrition 
Research 43:201-211. 

SCHWARTZ, P. L. (l970). Ascorbic Acid in Wound Healing—A Review. 
Journal of the American Dietetic Association 56:497-503. 

SCHWARZ, R. I.; MANDELL, R. B.; BISSELL, M. J. (l98l). Ascorbate Induc¬ 
tion of Collagen Synthesis as a Means for Elucidating a Mechanism 
for Quantitative Control of Tissue-Specific Function. Molecular and 
Cellular Biology 1:843-853. 

SCHWERDT, P. R.; SCHWERDT, C. E. (1975). Effect of Ascorbic Acid on 
Rhinovirus Replication in WI-38 Cells. Proceedings of the Society for 
Experimental Biology and Medicine 148:1237-1243. 

SELTER, M. ( 1918). Zur Aetiologie der Influenza. Deutsche medizinische 
Wochenschrift 44:932-933. 

SHARMA, S. C. (1982). Interactions of Ascorbic Acid with Prostaglandin, in 
Vitamin C: New Clinical Applications in Immunology, Lipid Metabo¬ 
lism, and Cancer, ed. A. Hanck. Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 239-256. 

SHUTE, E. V. (1969). The Heart and Vitamin E. The Shute Foundation for 
Medical Research, London, Canada. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


301 


SHUTE, VV. E.; TAUB, H. J. (1969). Vitamin E for Ailing and Healthy 
Hearts. Pyramid House, New York. 

SHUTE, VV. E. (1978). Vitamin E Book. Keats Publishing, New Canaan, 
Conn. 

SIEVERS, M. L.; HERRIER, R. N. (1984). Sensory Neuropathy from Pyri- 
doxine Abuse. New England Journal of Medicine 310:198. 

SMITH, VV.; ANDREYVES, C. H.; LAIDLOW, P. (1933). A Virus Obtained 
From Influenza Patients. The Lancet 225:66-68. 

SMITHELLS, R. VV.; SHEPPARD, S.; SCHORAH, C. J. (1976). Vitamin Defi¬ 
ciencies and Neural Tube Defects. Archives of Disease in Childhood 
51:944-950. 

SOKOLOFF, B.; HORI, M.; SAELHOF, C. C.; WRZOLEK, T.; IMAI, T. (l966>. 
Aging, Atherosclerosis, and Ascorbic Acid Metabolism. Journal of the 
American Geriatric Society 14:1239-1260. 

SPERO, L. M.; ANDERSON, T. VV. (l973>. Ascorbic Acid and Common Colds. 
British Medical Journal 4:354-359. 

SPITTLE, C. R. (1 97 1). Atherosclerosis and Vitamin C. The Lancet 2: 
1280-1281. 

SPRINCE, H.; PARKER, C. M.; SMITH, G. G. (1977). L-Ascorbic Acid in 
Alcoholism and Smoking Protection against Acetaldehyde Toxicity as 
an Experimental Model, in Re-evaluation of Vitamin C y ed. A. 
Hanck, Hans Huber, Bern, pp. 185-218. 

STARE, F. J. (1969). Eating for Good Health. Cornerstone Library, New 
York. 

STEFANSSON, V. (1918). Observations on Three Cases of Scurvy. Journal of 
the American Medical Association 71:1715-1718. 

STEFANSSON, V. (l964). Discovery. McGraw-Hill, New York. 

STELLAMOR-PESKIR, H. (l96l). On the Therapy of Alkali Burns of the 
Eye. Klinische und Mikrobiologische Augenheilkunde 139:838-841. 

STONE, I. (1965). Studies of a Mammalian Enzyme System for Producing 
Evolutionary Evidence on Man. American Journal of Physical Anthro¬ 
pology 23:83-86. 

STONE, I. (1967). The Genetic Disease Hypoascorbemia. Acta Geneticae 
Medicae et Gemellologiae 16:52-60. 

STONE, I. ( 1 972). The Healing Factor: Vitamin C against Disease. Grosset 
and Dunlap, New York. 

STRAUSS, L. H.; SCHEER, P. (l939). Uber die Einwirkungen des Nikotins 
auf den Vitamin C-Haushalt. Zeitschrift fur Vitaminforschung 
9:39-48. 

SUBRAMANIAN, N. (1978). Histamine Degredative Potential of Ascorbic 
Acid: Considerations and Evaluations. Agents and Actions 8:484-487. 

SYDENSTRICKER, V. P.; CLECKLEY, H. M. (l94l). The Effect of Nicotinic 




302 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Acid in Stupor, Lethargy, and Various Other Psychiatric Disorders. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 98:83-92. 

SZENT-GYORGYI, A. (1937). Studies on Biological Oxidation and Some of Its 
Catalysts. Szeged, Hungary. 

TAJIMA, S.; PINNELL, S. R. (1982). Regulation of Collagen Synthesis by 
Ascorbic Acid: Ascorbic Acid Increases Type I Procollagen mRNA. 
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 106:632-637. 

TAYLOR, T. V.; RIMMER, S.; DAY, B.; BUTCHER, J.; DYMOCK, I. W. 
(1974). Ascorbic Acid Supplementation in the Treatment of Pressure- 
Sores. The Lancet> September 7, pp. 544-546. 

TORREY, J. C.; MONTU, E. (l93l). The Influence of an Exclusive Meat 
Diet on the Flora of the Human Colon. Journal of Infectious Diseases 
49:141-176. 

TSAO, G. S. (l984a). Equilibrium Constant for Calcium Ion and Ascorbate 
Ion. Experimentia 40:168-170. 

TSAO, C. S. (1984b). Ascorbic Acid Administration and Urinary Oxalate. 
Annals of Internal Medicine 101:405. 

TSAO, C. S.; MIYASHITA, K. (1984). Effects of High Intake of Ascorbic Acid 
on Plasma Levels of Amino Acids. IRCS Medical Sciences 12: 
1052-1053. 

TSAO, C. S.; SALIMI, S. L. (l984a). Effect of Large Intake of Ascorbic Acid 
on Urinary and Plasma Oxalic Acid Levels. International Journal of 
Nutrition and Vitamin Research 54:245-249. 

TSAO, C. S.; SALIMI, S. L. (l984b). Evidence of Rebound Effect with Ascor¬ 
bic Acid. Medical Hypotheses 13:303-310. 

TSAO, C. S.; SALIMI, S. L.; PAULING, L. (1982). Lack of Effect of Ascorbic 
Acid on Calcium Excretion. IRCS Medical Science 10:738. 

TUKE, J. BATTY (l88l). Insanity. The Encyclopedia Britannica , 9th ed., 
vol. XIII, 95-113. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York. 

TURKEL, H. (1972). New Hope for the Mentally Retarded—Stymied by the 
FDA. Vantage Press, New York. 

TURKEL, H. (1977). Medical Amelioration of Down’s Syndrome Incorpo¬ 
rating the Orthomolecular Approach, in Diet Related to Killer Dis¬ 
eases V. Nutrition and Mental Health , Hearing before the Select 
Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs of the United States 
Senate. U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., pp. 
291-304. 

TURLEY, S. D.; WEST, C. E.; HORTON, B. J. (1976). The Role of Ascorbic 
Acid in the Regulation of Cholesterol Metabolism and in the Patho¬ 
genesis of Atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 24:1-18. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


303 


TYRRELL, D. A. J.; CRAIG, J. W.; MEADE, T. W.; WHITE, T. (1977). A 
Trial of Ascorbic Acid in the Treatment of the Common Cold. British 
Journal of Preventive and Social Medicine 31:189-191. 

VALIC, F.; ZUSKIN, E. (l973). Pharmacological Prevention of Acute Ven¬ 
tilatory Capacity Reduction in Flax Dust Exposure. British Journal of 
Industrial Medicine 30:381-384. 

VALLANCE, S. (1977). Relationships between Ascorbic Acid and Serum 
Proteins of the Immune System. British Medical Journal 2:437-438. 

VANE, J. R. (l971 ). Inhibition of Prostaglandin Synthesis as a Mechanism 
of Action for Aspirin-like Drugs. Nature (New Biol.) 231:232-235. 

VARMA, S. D.; KUMAR, S.; RICHARDS, R. D. (1979). Light-Induced Dam¬ 
age to Ocular Lens Cation Pump: Prevention by Vitamin C. Proceed¬ 
ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 76:3504-3506. 

VARMA, S. D.; CHAND, D.; SHARMA, Y. R.; KUCK, J. F., JR.; RICHARDS, 
R. D. (1984). Oxidative Stress on Lens and Cataract Formation. Cur¬ 
rent Eye Research 3:35-57. 

VARMA, S. D.; SRIVASTAVA, V. K.; RICHARDS, R. D. (1982). Photoperoxida- 
tion in Lens and Cataract Formation: Preventive Role of Superoxide 
Dismutase, Catalase, and Vitamin C. Ophthalmological Research 
14:167-175. 

VIRNO, M.; BUCCI, M. G.; PECORI-GIRALDI, J.; MISSIROLI, A. (1967). Oral 
Treatment of Glaucoma with Vitamin C. The Eye, Ear, Nose, and 
Throat Monthly 46:1502-1508. 

VOGELSANG, A. (l948a). Effect of Alpha Tocopherol in Diabetes Mellitus. 
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology 8:883-884. 

VOGELSANG, A. (l948b). Cumulative Effect of Alpha Tocopherol on the 
Insulin Requirements in Diabetes Mellitus. Medical Record 161: 
363-365. 

VOGELSANG, A.; SHUTE, E. V. (l946). Vitamin E and Coronary Heart Dis¬ 
ease. Nature 157:772-773. 

WALKER, M. (1980). Chelation Therapy: How to Prevent or Reverse Hard¬ 
ening of the Arteries. M. Evans, New York. 

WATNE, A. L.; LAI, H.-Y.; CARRIER, J.; COPPULA, W. (1977). The Diagno¬ 
sis and Surgical Treatment of Patients with Gardner’s Syndrome. 
Surgery 82:327-333. 

WAUGH, W. A.; KING, C. G. (l932). Isolation and Identification of Vitamin 
C. Journal of Biological Chemistry 97:325-331. 

WEINHOUSE, S. (1977). Problems in the Assessment of Human Risk of 
Carcinogenesis from Chemicals, in Origins of Human Cancer: Book C, 




304 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Human Risk Assessment } eds. H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson, and J. A. 
Winsten. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring, N. Y. 

WHELAN, E.; STARE, F. J. (1975). Panic in the Pantry. Atheneum, New 
York. 

WHITE, P. L. (1975). Editorial: Megavitamin This and Megavitamin That. 
Journal of the American Medical Association 233:538-539. 

WILLIAMS, R. J. (l95l). Nutrition and Alcoholism. University of Oklahoma 
Press, Norman, Okla. 

WILLIAMS, R. J. (l956). Biochemical Individuality, the Basis for the Gen - 
etotrophic Concept. University of Texas Press, Austin, Tex. 

WILLIAMS, R. J. (1959). Alcoholism, the Nutritional Approach. University 
of Texas Press, Austin, Tex. 

WILLIAMS, R. J. (1967). You Are Extraordinary. Random House, New 
York. 

WILLIAMS, R. J. (l 97 1). Nutrition against Disease. Pitman, New York. 

WILLIAMS, R. J. (1973). Biochemical Individuality. University of Texas 
Press, Austin, Tex. 

WILLIAMS, R. J. (1975). Physician's Handbook of Nutritional Science. 
Charles C Thomas, Springfield, Ill. 

WILLIAMS, R. J.; DEASON, G. (1967). Individuality in Vitamin C Needs. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 57:1638-1641. 

WILLIAMS, R. J.; KALITA, D. K. EDS. (l977>. A Physician's Handbook on 
Orthomolecular Medicine. Pergamon Press, New York. 

WILLIS, G. C.; FISHMAN, S. (1955). Ascorbic Acid Content of Human Arte¬ 
rial Tissue. Canadian Medical Association Journal 72:500-503. 

WILLIS, R. A. (1973). The Spread of Tumours in the Human Body, 3d ed. 
Butterworth, London. 

WILSON, C. W.; LOH, H. S. (1973). Vitamin C and Colds. The Lancet 
1:1058-1059. 

WILSON, G. W.; LOH, H. S.; FOSTER, F. G. (l976b). Common Cold Symp¬ 
tomatology and Vitamin C. European Journal of Clinical Pharma¬ 
cology 6:196-202. 

WINITZ, M.; GRAFF, J.; SEEDMAN, D. A. (1964). Effect of Dietary Carbo¬ 
hydrate on Serum Cholesterol Levels. Archives of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics 108:576-579. 

WINITZ, M.; SEEDMAN, D. A.; GRAFF, J. (l970). Studies in Metabolic Nu¬ 
trition Employing Chemically Defined Diets. I. Extended Feeding of 
Normal Human Adult Males. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 
23:525-545. 

WINITZ, M.; ADAMS, R. F.; SEEDMAN, D. A.; DAVIS, P. N.; JAYKO, L. G.; 
HAMILTON, J. A. (1970). Studies in Metabolic Nutrition Employing 







BIBLIOGRAPHY 


305 


Chemically Defined Diets. II. Effects on Gut Microflora Populations. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 23:546-559. 

WITTES, R. E. (1985) . Vitamin C and Cancer. New England Journal of 
Medicine 312:178-179. 

WOOLLEY, D. W. (l962). The Biochemical Bases of Psychoses. Wiley, New 
York. 

WYNDER, E. L. (ED.) (l 981 ). The Book of Health. Franklin Watts, New 
York. 

YANDELL, H. R. (l95t). The Treatment of Extensive Burns. American 
Surgeon 17:351-360. 

YEW, M. S. (1973). “Recommended Daily Allowances” for Vitamin C. Pro¬ 
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 70:969-972. 

YONEMOTO, R. H.; CHRETIEN, P. B.; FEHNIGER, T. F. (1976). Enhanced 
Lymphocyte Blastogenesis by Oral Ascorbic Acid. Proceedings of the 
American Association for Cancer Research 17:288. 

YONEMOTO, R. H. (l979). Vitamin C and the Immunological Response 
in Normal Controls and in Cancer Patients (in Portuguese). Medico 
Dialogo 5:23-30. 

YUDKIN, J. (1972). Sweet and Dangerous. Peter H. Wyden, New York. 

YUDKIN, J.; EDELMAN, I.; HOUGH, L. (EDS.) (l97l). Sugar: Chemical } 
Biological , and Nutritional Aspects of Sucrose. Daniel Davey, Hart¬ 
ford, Conn. 

ZAMENHOF, S.; EICHHORN, H. H. (1967). Study of Microbial Evolution 
Through Loss of Biosynthetic Functions: Establishment of “Defective” 
Mutants. Nature 216:456-458. 

ZUCKERKANDL, E.; PAULING, L. (1962). Molecular Disease, Evolution, 
and Genic Heterogeneity, in Horizons in Biochemistry , eds. M. Kasha 
and B. Pullman. Academic Press, New York, pp. 189-225. 

ZUSKIN, E.; LEWIS, A. J.; BOUHUYS, A. (1973). Inhibition of Histamine- 
Produced Airway Constriction by Ascorbic Acid. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 51:218-223. 

ZUSKIN, E.; VALIC, F.; BOUHUYS, A. (1976). Byssinosis and Airway Re¬ 
sponses Due to Exposure to Textile Dust. Lung 154:17-21. 



























. 

■ 

■ 

























About the Author 


Linus Pauling first came to the notice of many of his countrymen outside of 
science when he framed the issue on which public opinion compelled, at 
last, the suspension by the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United 
Kingdom of the testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere. From the 
time the atomic bomb tests began in earnest on Frenchman’s Flats near Las 
Vegas, Nevada, in 1951, the Atomic Energy Commission regularly issued 
reassuring press releases. High energy radiation had caused no abnormal 
number of defects in the offspring of parents exposed at Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki, they said. Generations of fruit flies raised in radioactive contain¬ 
ers showed “more vigor, hardiness, resistance to disease, better reproductive 
capacity.” 

It was Linus Pauling, speaking with the authority of a Nobel laureate 
(in chemistry, 1954), who exposed the fraud of this governmental public 
relations campaign. He translated the physics of nuclear explosions into 
words and numbers people could understand. Thus, it was known that the 
neutron flux in an explosion transmutes atmospheric nitrogen into radio¬ 
active carbon-14. The Atomic Energy Commission called upon another 
Nobel Prize-winner, Willard Libby, to show this effect would have negligi¬ 
ble consequences. The large molecules of the living cell are constructed 
around carbon, however, and C-14 readily substitutes for the nonradio- 




308 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


active isotope C-12. From Libby's own figures Pauling calculated that the 
output of C-14 from the then-scheduled weapons tests would cause 55,000 
children to be born with gross physical and mental defects, result in more 
than 500,000 miscarriages, stillbirths, and newborn deaths, and cause as 
much leukemia and bone cancer as that caused by all the fission products 
from the explosions combined. 

The public controversy, sustained by Pauling’s robust contributions, 
eventually induced the superpowers to suspend the testing of atomic bombs 
in the atmosphere; they signed the treaty in 1963, and it went into effect on 
the very day of the bestowal of the Nobel Peace Prize for 1962 on Linus 
Pauling. 

Throughout his campaign against the weapon tests in the polarized 
American political climate of the 1950s, Pauling had had to endure the 
impugning of his citizenship and even the official affront of the lifting of his 
passport for a time by the Department of State. As late as 1963, his Nobel 
Peace Prize was headlined in Life magazine as a “Weird Insult from 
Norway.” 

Controversy was not, however, a novel experience for Pauling. In the 
first of his seminal contributions to science in the 1920s, he had brought 
quantum physics and his powerful visual imagination into chemistry. The 
chemical formula, laid flat in two dimensions of the page, then began to 
find operational expression in the architectural configuration of molecules 
and crystals in three-dimensional space. Pauling showed how to reconstruct 
these configurations from measurement of the distances and angles of the 
chemical bonds holding atoms together. Workaday chemists, content with 
their science in its pre-Pauling cookbook stage, attempted to repel the in¬ 
trusion of physics into their field. They not only resisted his conceptual 
argument and challenged his data, but called his integrity into question. 
Two generations of chemists, raised since then on textbooks, including 
Pauling’s own, that incorporate the revolution he brought to the founda¬ 
tions of chemistry, would have difficulty recognizing the ground of that 
forgotten controversy. 

The Pauling method in controversy has always been to establish the data 
and, in serene good humor, to state plainly what the data mean. He almost 
invariably turns out to be right on the data and rarely wrong on the larger 
meaning. In 1964 he was provoked, however, to bring suit against a par¬ 
ticularly offensive newspaper. The jury, badly instructed on the law of 
libel, found that the newspaper could not injure the reputation of so emi¬ 
nent a man. 

For the past dozen years, Pauling’s contributions to better understanding 
of nutrition and the enhancement of people’s health—which he has set out 
in this book—have embroiled him in controversy with organized medicine 






ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


309 


and associated old-fashioned nutritionists. The physicians, with only a few 
distinguished exceptions, denounce this nonphysician’s intrusion into the 
practice of medicine. They tend to pitch their argument on ad hominem 
grounds: Pauling is not a doctor, they say, but a superannuated scientist out 
of his depth. This controversy has been a somewhat lonely one for Pauling. 
People who acknowledge his stature in science deplore his travel so far out 
of the “mainstream.” There are nonetheless many also who hold, with the 
late Rene Dubos, that the mainstream converges with Pauling twenty years 
later. 

Linus Carl Pauling was born in Portland, Oregon, on February 28, 
1901, the son of Herman William Pauling, a pharmacist, and Lucy Isa¬ 
belle (Darling). He graduated from Oregon Agriculture College (now 
Oregon State University) with a B.S. in chemical engineering in 1922 and 
went to California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, where Arthur A. 
Noyes, Richard C. Tolman, and Roscoe G. Dickinson helped to shape his 
career. Joined by his bride Ava Helen Miller after a year, he pursued his 
studies in chemistry, physics, and mathematics, leading to a Ph.D. in 1925. 
Distinguished already by his appointment as a National Research Fellow, 
Pauling was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for study in Europe. He 
spent most of his year and a half at Arnold Sommerfeld’s Institute for 
Theoretical Physics in Munich, but he also spent a month at Niels Bohr’s 
Institute in Copenhagen and a few months in Zurich, where he studied 
with Erwin Schrodinger. He returned to California in 1927 and began his 
long career as a teacher and researcher at Caltech. 

Pauling was one of the first American chemists to master the technology 
of X-ray diffraction. This is the tool with which the distances and angles of 
the atomic bonds in the three-dimensional structure of crystals and mole¬ 
cules are determined; it is the tool that primarily brought on the revolution 
in the life sciences that we call today molecular biology. Much of Pauling’s 
early research was on the X-ray diffraction of inorganic crystals, for exam¬ 
ple, topaz, the micas, the silicates, and the sulfides. His development of the 
coordination theory for complex substances helped to create the field of 
crystal chemistry. This theory guides the selection, from many possible 
crystal structures, of the chemically reasonable arrangement. It helped to 
bring X-ray diffraction into analysis of the structure of organic molecules. 
At Caltech Pauling also trained many of America’s future X-ray crystal- 
lographers, among them, Nobel Prize-winner W. N. Lipscomb. In 1930, as 
a result of a meeting with Hermann Mark in Germany, Pauling became 
interested in electron diffraction and he used this powerful tool along with 
X-ray diffraction in his determinations of the structure of the large mole¬ 
cules of life. 

As X-ray analysis and electron diffraction gave him experimental tools 





310 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


for exploring the structure of molecules, so his study of quantum mechanics 
provided him with a theoretical tool. With this battery of tools he helped to 
bring about the reconstruction of the foundations of the science of chemis¬ 
try. Of the new chemistry, that sees the bonds between and among the 
atoms of a molecule as established by the action of electrons, Pauling was 
the principal organizer, generalizer, and system-builder. His great work, 
The Nature of the Chemical Bond, is a landmark in the history of science. 

Pauling’s interest in biological molecules was stimulated, as he recalls in 
this book, by the arrival of T. H. Morgan at Caltech in the late 1920s. By 
the middle 1930s Pauling was studying the hemoglobin molecule, attracted 
by its striking color and the vital function served by its property of combin¬ 
ing reversibly with the oxygen molecule. Interest in hemoglobin led natu¬ 
rally to a more general interest in proteins. With Alfred Mirsky he pub¬ 
lished a paper on the general theory of protein structure, which suggested 
that the polypeptide chain of each protein is coiled and folded into a specific 
configuration which accounts for that molecule’s function in the body; the 
molecule loses this function, is “denatured,” when that configuration is lost 
by breakage of the chemical bonds that coil and fold the molecule. 

On one of Pauling’s visits to the Rockefeller Institute in New York, he 
met Karl Landsteiner, the discoverer of blood types, who introduced him to 
the field of immunology. Pauling’s first paper on the structure of antibodies 
appeared in 1940. During World War II the thrust of his work shifted 
somewhat toward practical problems, for example, finding an artificial 
substitute for blood serum. For his work in the service of the wartime 
Office of Scientific Research and Development, he was awarded the Presi¬ 
dential Medal for Merit. 

At the end of the war, as a result of an encounter with Dr. William B. 
Castle, a coworker on a committee of the Bush Report, Science, the Endless 
Frontier, Pauling became interested in sickle-cell anemia, which, he specu¬ 
lated, might be a molecular disease caused by an abnormal hemoglobin 
molecule. Working with Harvey Itano and others, Pauling showed in 1949 
that the abnormal hemoglobin was caused by just a single amino-acid 
anomaly in one of the polypeptide chains. 

While a guest professor at Oxford University in 1948, Pauling returned 
to a problem that had occupied him in the late 1930s, the coiling of the 
polypeptide chain in proteins. By folding a paper on which he had drawn a 
polypeptide chain, he discovered the alpha helix. Pauling and Robert B. 
Corey published a description of the helical structure of proteins in 1950, 
and this structure was soon verified experimentally. 

With the recognition that deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is the genetic 
molecule, Pauling became interested in its three-dimensional structure. In 
1953 he and Corey proposed that it was made up of three chains, twisted 





ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


311 


around each other in ropelike strands. Shortly thereafter, Watson and 
Crick proposed the double helix structure, which turned out to be cor¬ 
rect. Watson and Crick had the advantage of X-ray photographs of DNA 
taken by Rosalind Franklin, an advantage denied Pauling because the U.S. 
State Department had lifted his passport (which it reissued when he re¬ 
ceived the 1954 Nobel Prize in chemistry). 

With the increased public visibility bestowed on him by his Nobel Prize, 
Pauling began to devote more of his attention to humanitarian issues con¬ 
nected with science. In 1958, Pauling and his wife presented a petition 
signed by over eleven thousand scientists from around the world to Dag 
Hammarskjold, secretary-general of the United Nations, calling for an end 
to nuclear-weapons testing. He had to defend that petition before a con¬ 
gressional subcommittee in 1960, and he even risked going to jail for refus¬ 
ing to turn over the correspondence with those who helped to circulate his 
petition. Meanwhile he had published his book No More War! 

Through the middle sixties Pauling was- at the Center for the Study of 
Democratic Institutions in Santa Barbara, California. He had left Caltech 
largely because of institutional hostility there to his peace efforts; at Santa 
Barbara he hoped to be able to work in both areas, science and peace. 
There he turned to work on the structure of the atomic nucleus, from which 
he proposed his close-packed spheron theory that sees the protons and neu¬ 
trons in the nucleus arranged in clusters. The theory provides a simple 
explanation of nuclear properties, including asymmetric fission. 

Pauling left Santa Barbara in 1967 to become research professor of 
chemistry at the University of California in San Diego. There he worked 
on the molecular basis of memory and published, in 1968, his paper on 
orthomolecular psychiatry. This interest in orthomolecular medicine con¬ 
tinued throughout the period of his professorship at Stanford University in 
the late 1960s and early 1970s and led to his founding, in 1973, of the 
Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine. 

Throughout this latter phase of his career, Pauling’s interest has cen¬ 
tered on nutrition and the role of the micronutrients, especially vitamin C 
(ascorbic acid), in the physiology of the organism. From this work came 
a book for the lay reader, Vitamin C and the Common Cold\ published 
in 1970, which received the Phi Beta Kappa Award as the best book 
on science of that year. Soon after, Pauling became interested in the use of 
ascorbic acid in the treatment of cancer, largely through his contact with 
the Scottish physician, Dr. Ewan Cameron. Their collaboration resulted in 
his 1979 book, Cancer and Vitamin C , with Dr. Cameron as coauthor. 

Now in his eighties, Pauling continues to travel all over the world, lec¬ 
turing both on his classic work in chemistry, biology, medicine, and peace, 
and on his present amplification of his earlier ideas. He also continues to 





312 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


write on these topics. In 1983, for example, the twenty-fifth anniversary 
revised edition of No More War! was published. In all this he has remained 
faithful to his structural vision, whether he is using it to understand the 
world of matter or to help improve the world of man. 


Dr. Robert J. Paradowski 
Rochester Institute of Technology 






Name Index 


Abbott, P.,117,277 
Abraham, S., 80, 277 
Acharya, P. T., 139 
Adams, John M., 20, 277 
Addis, Thomas, 138 
Alexander, W., 196, 201, 289 
Allen, Mary B., 11,187 
Altschule, Mark D., 149, 277 
Anah, C. O., 200, 277 
Anderson, R., 103, 200, 263, 265 
Anderson, T. W., 114, 118, 119, 121, 
121n., 133 

Andrewes, Christopher, 108, 124-25 

Anson, George, 48 

Asfora, J., 118 

Atkins, G. L., 98 

Audisio, M., 150, 286 


Baig, H. A., 200, 277 

Baird, G., 170, 240, 281 

Baker, A. B., 21, 22, 113, 227, 230, 284 

Banks, H. S., 115,278 

Banks, W. L., Jr., 263 

Banting, F. G., 17 

Barnes, F. E., Jr., 115, 278 

Barness, L. A., 257, 279 

Barr, D. P, 149, 279 

Bartley, W., 115,279 


Bates, C. J., 150, 279 
Beadle, G. W., 56 
Beaton, G. H., 114, 121n.,265 
Belfield, W. O., 78, 79, 279 
Beller, George A., 98-99 
Bessel-Lorck, C., 114, 279 
Best, C. H., 17 
Bietti, G. B., 209, 258, 279 
Bishop, Katherine Scott, 153 
Bjelke, E., 166, 279 
Bjorksten, J., 218 
Boissevin, C. H., 128, 279 
Bouhuys, A., 200, 307 
Bourne, G. H., 76, 137, 280 
Boyd, A. M., 159, 280 
Boyd, T. A. S., 209, 280 
Bozian, R., 263, 285 
Braenden, O. J., 15, 280 
Brandt, R., 263, 280 
Breslow, Lester, 84, 151,216 
Brewer, T. H., 266, 280 
Brock, J. F., 280, 284 
Brody, Jane E., 252, 258,280 
Brown, E. A., 201,280 
Brown, W. A., 140, 280 
Bruce, Robert, 169, 259, 280 
Bruppacher, R., 216, 301 
Buchman, E. R., 54 
Burr, R. G., 139, 280 





314 


NAME INDEX 


Callaway, E., 190, 300 
Cameron, Ewan, 67, 100, 102, 105, 122, 128, 
133,143, 164, 166, 169-80, 172, 215, 220, 
234, 240, 245, 246, 252, 266 
Campbell, A., 170,209, 281 
Capp, Ruth, 187, 288 
Carr, A. B., 114, 121n.,282 
Carroll, Lewis, 74 
Cartier, Jacques, 48 

Cathcart, Robert F., 121-22, 129-33, 258, 282 

Cederblad, G., 143, 282 

Celers, J., 108, 284 

Chain, E. B., 17 

Charleston, S. S., 121n., 282 

Chatterjee, I. B., 77, 139, 197, 198, 282, 296 

Chattopadhyay, D. K., 139, 290 

Cheraskin, E., 50, 97, 137, 165, 209, 211, 218 

Chevreul, Michael Eugene, 28 

Chope, H. D., 39, 84, 150, 216, 283 

Chrystowski, G. A., 261, 293 

Cleckley, H. M., 183, 283, 303 

Clegg, K. M., 121n., 282, 283 

Clemetson, C. A. B., 197-98, 199, 283 

Cohen, A. M., 41, 283 

Cole,T. J., 150 

Collier, R., 124, 283 

Collins, C. K, 137, 283 

Collip, J. B., 17 

Cook, James, 49, 50 

Coon,W. W., 139, 283 

Cooper, Theodore, 144 

Cortes, Hernando, 48 

Costrini, A. M., 103, 120, 121,299 

Cottingham, E., 103, 283 

Coulehan, J. L., 121n., 284 

Cousins, Norman, 206, 284 

Cowan, D. W., 21,22, 113, 139, 227 

Crandon, J. H., 139, 284 

Dallegri, F., 133, 297 
Daniel, C. W, 94, 284 
Davidson, S., 230, 284 
Davis, Donald R., 187, 288 
DeBakey, M. E., 159,296 
Debre, R., 108, 124, 284 
DeCamp, P.T, 159, 296 
DeCosse, J. J.,87, 169,284 
Dice, J. F., 94, 284 

Diehl, H. S., 21, 22, 113, 227-228, 280, 284 

Donegan, C. K., 158 

Douglas, J. D., 200, 296 

Dreisbach, Robert H., 241, 252, 253, 284 

Dreyfus, R, 190, 300 

DuBois, A. B., 200, 295, 296 

Dubos, Rene, 22 

Dujarric de la Riviere, R., 124, 285 
Dykes, M.H.M., 231, 284 

Eaton, S. Boyd, 62-63, 285 
Edelman, I., 39, 307 


Eder, H. A., 149,279 
Edwards, Charles D., 229 
Edwin E., 183, 285 
Eichhorn, H. H., 57, 307 
Eijkman, Christiaan, 51 
Einstein, R., 114, 282 
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 35 
Ekvall, S., 263, 285 
Ellis, John M., 204-205, 285 
Elliott, B., 121n., 285 
Elliott, H. C., 150, 285 
Elvehjem, C. A., 54 
Enloe, Cortez F., Jr., 226, 286 
Enstrom, J. E., 151, 286 
Ericsson, Y., 128, 286 
Ertel, H., 112,285 
Evans, Herbert M., 153 

Farmer, A. W., 138, 140 
Feigen, George A., 102, 286 
Fordman, T. D., 267, 301 
Fidanza, A., 150, 286 
Fishman, S., 169, 306 
Fleming, Alexander, 17 
Fletcher, I. C., 115, 286 
Fletcher, J. M., 115, 286 
Florey, W. H., 17 
Folkers, Karl, 205, 285 
Forbes, Allan L., 229 
Foster, F. G., 121n., 306 
Fradkin, M. J., 208 
Franks, W. R., 140, 280 
Franz, W. L., 121n., 286 
Freese, H. L, 108, 297 
Freud, Sigmund, 182 
Friedman, G. J., 87, 286 
Frost, David, 111 
Fullmer, H. M., 210, 287 
Funk, Casimir, 52, 287 

Gama, Vasco da, 48 

Garcia-Webb, Briggs, 261 

Geeslin, L. E., 183, 283 

Gehler, J., 85 

Gehrig, Lou, 98 

Gildersleeve, D., 115-16, 287 

Ginter, E., 149, 150, 287 

Glazebrook, A. J., 112, 228, 230, 287 

Glover, E., 150, 287 

Goldberger, J., 54 

Goldblatt, M. W., 239, 287 

Gompertz, Benjamin, 212-13, 221,288 

Greenberg, L. D., 77, 301 

Greenblatt, R. B., 267, 288 

Greenwood, James, 144, 288 

Greer, Edward, 164-65 

Grijns, Gerrit, 52 

Gulewitsch, V. S., 142, 288 

Gullrandsen, C. L., 150, 300 

Guyer, K. E., 263, 280 





NAME INDEX 


315 


Haeger, Knut, 159, 160, 288 
Halstead, Bruce YV., Jr., 162, 288 
Hamilton, J. C., 139 

Hammond, E. C., 214, 216, 218, 219, 288 

Harrell, Ruth F., 187, 189, 288 

Harris, A., 85, 263, 289 

Harris, L. J., 88, 289 

Hawkins, D., 217, 254, 289 

Hawkins, John, 48, 50, 88, 96 

Haworth, W. M., 53 

Herbert, V., 232, 262, 263, 289 

Herjanic, M.,79, 88,289 

Heyl, H. L., 121 n., 286 

Hippocrates, 124 

Hodgkin, Dorothy, 54 

Hoefel, O. S.,216, 289 

Hoffer, Abram, 19, 96, 183, 193-94, 204, 217, 
231,258,267,289, 297 
Holmes, H. N., 196,201,289 
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 18 
Holten, K., 183, 285 
Hopkins, Gowland F., 52, 53 
Horrobin, D. F., 106, 240, 290 
Horton, B. J., 149, 304 
Hough, L., 39, 307 
Hughes, W.T., 168, 290 
Hume, R., 103,290 
Huxley, H. E., 141 

Ingalls, T. H., 139, 290 
Irvin, T.T., 139,290 

Jack, T., 170 

Jacob, E., 232, 262, 263, 289 

Jacob, Francois, 264 

Jaffe, Russell M., 263 

Jarike, L. N., 200 

Johnson, G. E., 150, 290 

Johnson, G. T., 20, 290 

Jones, H. B., 137,216, 290 

Jones, Hardin, 220 

Joule, James Prescott, 33 

Jungenblut, Claus W., 60, 127, 233, 291 

Kagan, A., 150, 300 
Kalokerinos, A., 131,291 
Karlowski, T. R., 121n., 231,291 
Karr, G. W., 194,294 
Katz, M. M., 184, 185, 292 
Kaufman, W., 203-204, 242, 291 
Keys, Ancel, 39, 291 
King, C. G., 53, 305 
Klasson, D. H., 140, 291 
Klenner, Fred B., 79, 127-28, 131, 199, 
257,291 

Knox, E. G., 151,292 
Kodicek, E. H., 49, 292 
Kogan, Benjamin A., 20, 292 
Koh, E., 150, 287 
Konner, Melvin, 62-63 


Korbsch, Roger, 112, 196, 292 
Kordowsky, D. W., 201, 292 
Krebs, H. A., 115, 279 
Krimberg, R., 142, 288 
Kubala, A. L., 184, 292 
Kulber, W., 85, 292 
Kumar, S., 208, 304 
Kurzrok, R., 239, 292 
Kutsky, R. J., 252, 292 

Lahann, H., 267, 292 
Lai, H.-Y. L., 169,292 
Lai, M.-M., 208, 293 
Laidlaw, Patrick, 124-25 
Lamden, M. P.,261,293 
Landsteiner, Karl, 26 
Lane, B. C., 209, 292 
Leake, C. D., 196, 293 
Lebailly, C., 124, 296 
Lee, P. F., 208, 293 

Leibovitz, Brian, 11, 12, 37, 143, 164, 247, 282 

Lewis, A. E., 200, 283 

Lieb, C. C., 239, 293 

Lieb, C. W., 34, 293 

Lind, James A., 50, 166, 293 

Lindstedt, S., 143, 282 

Loh, H. S., 121n., 304 

Lundbeck, H., 128, 286 

Lunin, N., 52, 293 

LwofF, Andrew, 264 

McCollum, E. V., 52 

McCormick, William J., 128, 165, 216, 294 

McCoy, E. E., 194, 294 

McGinn, F. P, 139, 294 

McGovern, George, 148, 188 

McLeod, J. J. R., 17 

Macon, W. L., 115, 293 

Madison, R. R., 199, 300 

Mandal, A. R., 150 

Manku, M. S., 240, 290 

Mann, George V., 148, 293 

Marckwell, N. W., 115,293 

Marcus, M., 262, 263, 293, 296 

Martin, H. M., 210, 287 

Martin, N. G., 114, 294 

Masek, J., 119, 121n., 294 

Mayer, Jean, 156, 294 

Mayer, Julius Robert, 33 

Mastrovacovo, P., 150, 286 

Meier, P., 231,284 

Mendel, G., 19 

Miller, J. Z., 115, 121 n., 294, 295 
Miller, T. E., 128, 150, 295 
Mills, C. A., 103,283 

Moertel, Charles G., 173, 174, 176, 179, 234, 
245-46, 295 
Mohrenin, V., 200, 295 
Monjukowa, N. K., 208, 295 
Monod, Jacques, 264 





316 


NAME INDEX 


Montu, E., 35, 303 

Moore, Austin, 129 

Morgan, Thomas Hunt, 19 

Morishige, Fukumi, 128-29, 164, 173, 176, 295 

Moss-Herjanic, B. L., 79, 88, 289 

Mukherjee, D., 139, 295 

Murad, S., 73, 136,295 

Murata, A., 127, 129, 173, 176, 295, 296 

Myasnikova, I. A., 150, 296 

Myllyla, R., 73, 296 

Nandi, B. K., 198, 282, 296 
Neradilova, M., 121n., 294 
Newmark, H. L., 262, 296 
Nicolle, C., 124,296 
Nishimura, R., 168, 302 
Norman, P. S., 201,292 
Norum, K. R., 183, 185 

Obenshein, S. S., 150, 290 

O’Brien, J. R. R, 115,279 

Ochsner, Alton, 158-59, 296 

Ogilvy, C. S., 200, 296 

Oka, M., 106, 240, 290 

Omura, H., 265, 297 

Osmond, Humphry, 19, 96, 183, 193-94, 

204,297 

Page, Irvine H., 232-33 
Palmer, Craig A., 229 
Panush, R. S., 103, 297 
Pappenheimer, A. M., 160, 297 
Parker, C. M, 217, 303 
Passmore, R., 230, 284, 297 
Patrone, F., 133, 297 
Paul, J. H., 108,297 

Pauling, Linus C., 58, 85, 86, 88, 93, 96, 102, 
105, 110, 111, 114, 121n., 128,129, 133, 
134,151,164, 166-67, 169-80, 182, 194, 
214, 215, 225-26, 229-32, 233-36, 245, 
250-52,254, 258, 260, 263, 297-99 
Pearson, D., 218, 299 
Peerless, Julius, 187, 288 
Pelletier, O., 216, 299 
Pence, Gregory, 99 
Perry, T., 49 
Pfeiffer, C. C., 124, 299 
Pfister, Roswell R., 209, 299 
Pipkin, G. E., 168,302 
Pitt, H. A., 120, 121n., 299 
Pliny the Elder, 28 
Portman, O. W., 77, 299 
Portnoy, B., 139, 299 
Prabhudesai, M., 262, 263, 293, 296 
Prinz, W., 101,300 
Pritikin, Nathan, 37, 247, 300 
Pugh, D. M., 240, 300 

Rabach, Joshua M., 211,300 
Radomski,N. W., 114, 120,231,301 


Raffel, S., 199, 300 
Rajan, K. T., 139,280 
Ravitz, Leonard R., 187, 288 
Ray, S. N., 88, 289 
Regnier, Edme, 15, 116-18, 300 
Rhoads, G. C., 150, 300 
Richards, R. D., 208, 305 
Rimland, Bernard, 93, 190-91,300 
Rinehart, J.F., 77, 301 
Ringsdorf, W. M., Jr., 50, 97, 137, 209, 211, 
218, 282, 301 

Ritzel, G., 113-14, 119, 216, 227, 228, 229, 
230-31,301 

Robin, Eugene D., 5, 237, 301 

Robinson, A. B., 85, 263, 289 

Rosenthal, R. R., 201,292 

Ross, W.S., 231, 301 

Roy, P.B., 139, 301 

Ruskin, S. L., 116, 201,280, 301 

Russ, E. M., 149 

Sabiston, B. H., 114, 120, 231, 301 
Salomon, L. L., 77, 301 
Samborskaya, E. P., 267, 301 
Sands, G. W., 121n.,286 
Sayed,S. M., 139, 301 
Schaumberg, H., 254, 301 
Scheele, K. W., 28 
Scheer, P.,216, 303 
Scheiner, J., 262, 296 
Sheunert, A., 115, 301 
Schlegel, J. U., 168, 301,302 
Schmeck, H. M., Jr., 126, 302 
Schorah, C. J., 267, 302 
Schrumpf, A., 183, 285 
Schultz, G. N., 168, 302 
Scott Bishop, Katherine. See Bishop, 
Katherine Scott 
Selter,M., 124, 302 
Semmelweiss, Philipp, 18 
Sharma, S. C., 240, 300 
Shaw, S., 218, 299 
Sheppard, S., 267, 303 
Sherry, S., 87, 286 

Shute, Evan V., 140, 154-57, 158, 159, 160, 
256 

Shute, James R., 154-56, 158, 159, 160 
Shute, Wilfrid E., 154-56, 157, 158, 159, 160, 
256,302 

Sisley, E. L., 50, 208 

Skaug, O. E, 183,285 

Smith, G. G., 216, 217, 303 

Smith, Wilson, 124-25 

Smithells, R. W, 267, 303 

Smythies, John H., 193 

Sokoloff, B., 169, 303 

Spero, L. M., 121, 121n., 263, 303 

Spillane,J. H., 128, 279 

Sprince, H., 216, 217, 303 

Stare, Fredrick J., 21,22, 87, 111, 227, 303 





NAME INDEX 


317 


Stefansson, Vilhjalmur, 34, 35, 303 
Stone, Irwin, 20, 58, 76, 104, 116, 127, 130, 
139, 164, 196,216, 260, 303 
Strauss, L. H.,216, 303 
Stubbs, S. W., 77, 301 
Subramanian, N., 197, 282, 296, 303 
Sydenstricker, V. P., 183, 283 
Szent-Gyorgi, Albert, 6-7, 18, 53 

Tatum, E. L., 56 

Taub, Harold J., 140, 156, 256, 302 

Taylor, T. V., 140, 304 

Thomas, Lewis, 101,220 

Thomson, S., 112, 120, 228, 230, 287 

Torry.J. C.,35, 304 

Trout, D. L., 150, 287 

Truswell, A. S., 230, 284 

Tuke, Batty J., 182, 304 

Turkel, Henry, 188-89, 190, 304 

Turley, S. D., 149, 304 

Tyrrell, D. A. J., 117, 304 

Valic, F., 200, 304 
Vallance, S., 101,304 
Vane, John R., 106, 239, 305 
Varma, S. D., 208 

Vasco da Gama. See Gama, Vasco da 
Virno, M., 209, 258, 305 
Vitry, bishop Jacques de, 210 
Vogelsang, A., 155, 305 


Walker, M., 162, 304 
Warren, H. A., 139, 290 
Wassef, S., 263, 293 
Waterman, R. R., 54 
Watne, A. L., 169,292, 305 
Waugh, W. A., 53, 304 
West, C. E., 149, 304 
Weyers, E., 103, 290 
Whelan, E., 87, 304 
White, Paul Dudfey, 35, 304 
White, Philip, 231 
Wilkinson, J. F., 139, 299 
Williams, Robert, 54 
Williams, Roger J., 11, 12, 54, 82-83, 
187,255 

Willis, G. C., 169, 304 
Willoughby, R., 167,299 
Wilson, C. W., 121n.,240, 306 
Winitz, Milton, 42-43, 306 
Wittes, R. E., 174, 306 
Wynder, Ernst L., 21, 249, 306 

Yandell, H. R., 140, 307 
Yew, M. S., 77, 307 
Yonemoto, R. H., 103, 307 
Young, F. G., 49, 292 

Yudkin, John, 39-41,43, 44, 149, 194, 307 

Zamenhof, S., 57, 307 
Zuckerkandl, E., 58, 182, 299, 307 
Zuskin, E., 200, 304 







Subject Index 


Abortion, spontaneous, 266 
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), 
132-3 

Aged, vitamins for, 271 

Alcohol, intake of, 9, 16, 31, 38, 39, 271 

Allergies, 196-201, 198 (chart) 

American Cancer Society, 122, 234 
American Medical Association, 155-6, 234 
American Orthomolecular Medical Association, 
225-6 

Amino acids, 26-28, 93, 134, 143, 182 
Amytrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig’s 
disease), 98 

Anatomy of an Illness (Cousins), 206 
Anemia, 47, 182-4, 255 
Angina pectoris, 41, 160 
Ankylosing spondylitis (Norman Cousins’s 
disease), 206 
Anorexia nervosa, 38 
Antibiotics, 123, 127 
Antibodies, 101 
Antihistamines, 197 
Arthritis, 130 
drugs for, 242-3 
vitamins for, 8, 204-5, 244 
Ascorbic acid. See Vitamin C 
Aspirin, 106, 238-9 
and ulcers, 260 
toxicity of, 243, 251 


Asthma, 200-201 
Atherosclerosis, 169 
Autism, 190-1, 217 
Auto-immune diseases, 101, 132-3 

Back pain, 143-4 

Bacterial diseases, 104 

Bed sores, 139-40 

Beriberi, 47, 51-52, 54, 93, 250 

Bioflavonoids, 117 

Biotin, 20 

Birth control pills, 205 
Blood, red cells of, 27 
Blood types, 26 
Bones, 25 

The Book of Health (Wynder), 21, 249 

Breath, bad, 259 

Bronchitis, 135 

Bulimia, 38 

Burns 

vitamin C for, 140 
vitamin E for, 157 

Calcium, and heart diseases, 151 
Cancer 

bladder, 168 
children with, 167-8 
essential fatty acids and, 29 
incidence of, 166 




SUBJECT INDEX 


319 


metastasis of, 171, 177, 178 
smoking and, 214-6, 215 
survival time for, 171-2, 172, 175 
vitamin C for, 12, 102-3, 163-80, 240, 246-7 
Cancer and Vitamin C (Pauling ar\d Cameron), 
164, 180, 245,266 
Carbohydrates, 19-30, 73-74 
See also Fructose; Glucose; Starch 
Cardiovascular diseases. See Heart diseases 
Carnitine (Leibovitz), 12 
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 15, 204-5, 206-7 
Cataracts, 208 

Chediak-Higashi Disease, 134, 135 
Chelation therapy 

and coronary by-pass surgery, 162 
harassment of practitioners of, 162 
and heavy-metal detoxification, 161 
Chemotherapy, vitamin C and, 180, 245-6 
Childbed fever, 17-18 
Children 

and antihistamines, 241 
cancer in, 168-9 
and drug toxicity, 168-9 
Chirality, defined, 73 
Cholesterol, 28, 145, 161,273 
in eggs, 148 

and heart diseases, 35, 39-43 
popular misconceptions about, 148 
and sucrose, 42-44, 43 
and vitamin C, 44, 149-50 
Choline, 65 

Cigarettes. See Smoking 
Citrus fruits, 11, 14, 50, 66, 184 
Cocaine, 193 
Codeine, 241 
Coenzymes, 95 
Colds, 12, 15 
causes of, 108 

conventional treatment of, 108-9, 122, 240-2 
defined, 107-8 

vitamin C for, 15-16, 20-22, 96, 110-22, 120 
(chart), 220, 226-35, 240-2 
Collagen, 25, 67-68, 69-73, 130-1, 136, 

161, 170 

The Common Cold (Andrewes), 107 
Common Cold Research Unit, 118 
Common colds. See Colds 
The Common Form of Joint Dysfunction 
(Kaufman), 204 
Conjunctivitis, 209 

Consumer Reports (periodical), 157-8, 159 

Death rates 
exercise and, 219 
male and female, 213 
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 27, 217 
Depression, 19 
Diabetes, 94, 157, 158, 208 
Diet, suggested, 9, 33 (table) 

Dieting, 14, 36-38 


Discover (Stefansson), 35 
Doctors. See Physicians 
Down’s Syndrome. See Mongolism 
Drugs, toxicity of, 240-2, 243-4, 248 

Ear infections, 210 
Eating for Good Health (Stare), 87 
Eggs, 14,28, 52,54, 148, 273 
Enzymes, 11,65-66, 67, 75, 205, 263-4 
Epilepsy, 191 

Essential fatty acids (EFA), 10, 25, 28-29 
Ethylene diaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA), 

161,162 

Exercise, 14, 16, 219 
Eyes 

burns of, 209 

orthomolecular treatment for, 207-9 

Fact (periodical), 115 
Fat, 31, 142, 148 
defined,28 
in early societies, 37 
energy value of, 33-35 
public concern about, 35, 37, 39-42 
The Fat of the Land (Stefansson), 35 
Federation of American Societies for 
Experimental Biology, 60, 76 
Folacin (folic acid), 20, 54, 255 
Fiber, in diet, 149 
Fish, 28, 31,34 
Flu. See Influenza 
Food 

carcinogens in, 168 
categories of, 273 
energy from, 32-34 
and primates, 62 
and primitive man, 62 
substitutes for, 23-24 
Ford Foundation, 19 
Free of Pain (Ellis), 204 
Free-radicals, 127, 128, 217, 218 
Fructose, 29-30, 42, 74 
Fruit, 11, 14,23,31,50, 66, 184 

Gelatin, 69 
Glaucoma, 208-9 
Glucose, 29-30, 41,74 
Gout, 30, 203 

Handbook of Poisoning (Dreisbach), 241, 
252,253 

Handbook of Vitamins and Hormones 
(Kutsky), 252 
Hay fever, 201 

The Healing Factor: Vitamin C Against Disease 
(Stone), 116, 164 
Health, nutrition and, 7 
Health (Kogan), 20 

Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 
1971-1972, 84n. 




320 


SUBJECT INDEX 


Health care, costs of, 98 
The Heart and Vitamin E (Shute), 157 
Heart Association, 122 
Heart diseases, 39-43 
in Africa, 41-42 
by-pass surgery and, 162 
chelation therapy for, 161-2 
cost of care for, 98 
smoking and, 214-16, 215 
among Yemenite Jews, 41 
Hemoglobin, 25-26, 67 
Hepatitis, 127, 128-9 
Herpes simplex (cold sores), 108, 127 
High blood pressure, and vitamin E, 157 
Hives, 199 

Hospitalization, dangers of, 5 
Human Nutrition and Dietetics (Davidson 
et a/.), 230 

Hyaluronidase and Cancer (Cameron), 169 

Immune system, 18, 100-106 
Influenza, 22-23 
defined, 123 
history of, 124-5 
porcine, 125 
vaccines for, 125-6 
vitamin C for, 94, 126-7 
Insanity. See Mental illness 
Insulin, 17 

Intelligence quotient (IQ), vitamin C and, 184, 
185,186-7 
Interferons, 104-5 

Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry 
(periodical), 195 

Journal of the American Medical Association 
(periodical), 231-2 

Kartagener’s Disease, 134-5 

Keratin, 25, 26 

Kidney stones, 30, 231, 260-1 

Lecithin, 30 

Leucocytes and lymphocytes, 102 
Leukemia, 164-5 
Life expectancy. See Longevity 
Life Extension (Pearson and Shaw), 218, 248 
Linus Pauling Institute of Science and 
Medicine, 164 
Lipids, 74, 105 
Lipoproteins, 146 
Lithium, 192-3 
Liver, cancer of, 245 

Longevity, 3-4, 20, 36, 111, 159, 211-221 
Ludwig Cancer Research Institute, 169 
Lysine, 75 

Macrobiotic diet, 38 
Mademoiselle (periodical), 21, 111 


Marasmus. See Starvation 
Marijuana, 193 

Matters of Life and Death (Robin), 5, 237-8 

Mayo Clinic, 173-6, 234 

Meat 

consumption of, 14, 28, 31, 34-35, 273 
and early man, 62-63 
for muscular strength, 142 
vitamins and, 9 
Medical care, risks of, 5 
Medical Letter (periodical), 230, 260 
Medical Tribune (periodical), 232 
Megavitamin and Orthomolecular Therapy in 
Psychiatry (American Psychiatric 
Association), 194 

Megavitamins. See Vitamins, megadoses of 
Menstruation, 267 
Mental illness 
causes of, 182-3 
in schizophrenics, 19 
vitamin B 3 for, 96, 183-4 
vitamin C for, 88, 89, 96, 193 
vitamin B ]2 for, 183-4 

Mental retardation, 19, 185-90, 188-9 (tables) 

Methionine, 193 

Milk, 14, 52, 54, 66 

Mineral supplements, 9, 12 

Modern Medicine (periodical), 232-3 

Molds, survival capability of, 55 

Molecular biology, 23 

Mongolism (Down’s syndrome), 186-90 

Mononucleosis, 131-2 

Muscles, 141-3 

Muscular dystrophy, vitamin E and, 160 
Myasthenia gravis, 160 

National Cancer Institute, 103, 166-7, 171, 234 
National Heart Institute, 147 
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), 
19 

National Institute of Neurological Diseases and 
Blindness, 190 

National Institutes of Health (NIH), 39-40, 
147-8,190, 229 

New England Journal of Medicine (periodical), 
148, 176, 234, 245, 251-2 
New Hope for the Mentally Retarded—Stymied 
by the FDA (Turkel), 188-9 
New York Times (periodical), 170, 252, 258 
Niacinamide, 243, 244 
See also Vitamin B 3 

Nitrogen balance. See Amino acids, balance of 
Nobel Prize winners, 52, 54 
Notes and Records of the Royal Society of 
London (Kodicek and Young), 49 
Nutrition Reviews (periodical), 21, 111 
Nutrition Today (periodical), 226 
Nutritionists, old school of, 18 
Nuts, 31 





SUBJECT INDEX 


321 


Obesity, 36-38 
Orange juice, 11,84 

Orthomolecular Psychiatry: Treatment of 
Schizophrenia, 194, 217 
Orthomolecular treatment, 4, 19, 225-6, 236, 
272 

for affective disorders, 192-3 
for autism, 190 
defined, 93 
for epilepsy, 191 
health care costs and, 98 
for mental retardation, 186-90, 188-9 
(tables) 

See also Vitamins 

Panic in the Pantry (Stare), 87 
Pantothenic acid, 54, 58, 65, 187, 217 
Pellagra, 52, 54, 282, 283, 250 
Penicillin, 17 

Pernicious anemia. See Anemia 
Physicians, and preventive medicine, 5 
Polyps, in colon and rectum, 169 
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), 153-4, 
155 

Phenylketonuria (PKU), 186 
Pneumonia, 126 
Poliomyelitis, 127 

Predictive Medicine (Cheraskin and 
Ringsdorf), 211,218 
Pregnancy, 266 
vitamin B 6 and, 205 
vitamin C and, 199 

Prevention (periodical), 13, 97, 143, 151 
The Pritikin Promise (Pritikin), 37-38, 247 
Prostaglandins, 105-6, 239-40 
Proteins, 33-34, 73-74 
chirality of, 74 
deficiency of, 38 
overconsumption of, 27 
varieties of, 25 
Puerperal fever, 18 

Reader's Digest Family Health Guide and 
Medical Encyclopedia, 250 
Reye’s syndrome, and aspirin, 239 
Rheumatism, vitamin B 6 for, 204 
Rice, unpolished and beriberi, 51, 54 
Rickets, 47, 52 
Rockefeller Foundation, 53 
Rose hips, 13 
Rubella, 208 

Schizophrenia. See Mental illness 
The Scientific Basis of EDTA Chelation 
Therapy (Halstead), 162 
Scurvy, 35, 47-51,52, 67, 93, 130 
and cancer, 165 
cerebral, 181-2 
citrus fruits for, 50 


smoking and, 216 
symptoms of, 66 
teeth, effect on, 210 
vitamins and, 7, 47-50, 150 
Shock, anaphylactic, 199 
Sickle cell anemia, Pauling’s work on, 233 
Skin, 25, 218 
Sleep, 14 

Smoking, 9, 23, 268-9, 214-6, 272 
Sodium ascorbate, 12, 15, 256 
See also Vitamin C 
Starch, 29, 33 
Starvation, 27, 93 
Sucrose, 31, 149 
Sugar 

and cholesterol, 42 
consumption of, 9, 13 
energy value of, 33 
hazards of, 272 
and heart diseases, 39-43 
Sugar (edited by Yudkin, Edelman, and 
Hough), 39 

Sunlight, and vitamin D, 47 
Surgery, vitamin C following, 137, 138 
Sweet and Dangerous (Yudkin), 39 
Sweeteners, artificial, 44 
Swine flu. See Influenza, porcine 

Teeth, 24, 210 

Thyroid medication, 187, 188, 189 
Tonsillitis, 112-14, 228 
A Treatise on Scurvy (Lind), 48-49 
Tryptophan, 57-58 

Ulcers, 112, 113 

U.S. Consumer Protection Agency, 209 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 
12, 13, 161, 190, 229,255 
U.S. Food and Nutrition Board, 4, 10, 18, 27, 
60,76, 78, 185,267 

U.S. Health Resources Administration, 80 
U.S. National Academy of Sciences, 4, 11, 18 
U.S. Public Health Service, 122 
Urea, 27, 85-86, 261 

Varicose veins, vitamin E for, 157 
Vegetables, 14, 23,31,62-63 
Vegetarians, 28, 31 
Viruses and Colds (Adams), 20 
Vitamin A, 58, 151,252-3 
Vitamin B 

content in plant foods, 61 (table) 
history of, 52-54 
side effects of, 253-4 
Vitamin B, (thiamine) 
and beriberi, 47, 56 
history of, 54 

Vitamin B 2 (riboflavin), 58 





322 


SUBJECT INDEX 


Vitamin B 3 (niacin), 58, 217 
as coenzyme, 65-66 
history of, 54, 203-4 
for joint dysfunction, 242-3 
mental illness and, 19, 96, 193 
for pellagra, 183 
RDA for, 183 
side effects of, 253 
and vitamin C, 84-85 

Vitamin B 6 (pyridoxine), 20, 143 
for autism, 191 

for carpal tunnel syndrome, 204-5, 206-7 
as coenzyme, 66 
for muscular dystrophy, 160 
toxicity of, 254 

Vitamin B 12 (cobalamin), 12, 58, 182-4, 261-3 
for anemia, 47, 255 
enzymes and, 65 
and folacin, 255 
and vitamin C, 230, 261-3 

Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) 
adrenalin and, 60, 75-76, 130 
allergic reaction to, 14-15 
animal need for, 76, 77-78 
animal studies with, 82, 101-2, 166-7 
as antioxidant, 160 
bowel tolerance level of, 130, 258-9 
and cancer pain, 170, 240. See also Cancer 
and carcinogens, 168 
chirality of, 73-74 
and cholesterol, 44 
and collagen, 69-73, 75, 136 
costs of, 13 
defined, 66 
depletion of, 130-1 
and depression, 19 
destroyed by cooking, 79 
discontinuation effect of, 12, 118, 265-6 
dosage, 3, 11, 78-80, 83-89, 97, 121, 
255,259 

vs. drugs, 122, 240-2 
function in body of, 87 
history of, 18, 53-54, 112 
and human evolution, 59 
and immune system, 11 
and incidence of disease, 83-84 
by injection, 85, 88 
laxative effect of, 258-9 
and longevity, 20, 83-84, 111, 151 
molecular structure of, 68 (illus.) 
and opponents of Pauling theory, 20-21, 156, 
173-6,226-36 


in plants, 61 (table) 
in primates, 58 
RDA for, 76, 87,97, 156 
side effects of, 180, 231, 260 
toxicity of, 19, 22, 78-79, 93, 152, 255-5, 
257-62,267 

twins studies with, 114-15 
urinary excretion of, 86-87, 88 
and vitamin B 12 , 58, 182-4m, 230, 261-3 
See also specific disease 

Vitamin C and the Common Cold (Pauling), 13, 
20, 110, 114, 225,229, 230, 233,260 
The Vitamin C Connection (Cheraskin, 
Ringsdorf, and Sisley), 50, 97 
Vitamin D, 47, 206, 252 
Vitamin E, 74, 151 
for angina, 160 
animal studies with, 155 
as antioxidant, 155, 160, 256 
and burns, 140 
for diabetes, 157, 158 
and heart diseases, 153-160 
history of, 153 
and longevity, 159 
RDA for, 153 
the Shutes’ work on, 154 
tocopherals of, 154 
toxicity of, 156, 256 
and vitamin C, 256 
Vitamins 

for the aging, 4, 274 

and alcohol intake, 39 

animal studies with, 4 

dosages, 8-9, 11 (table) 

vs. drugs, 99, 122, 240-2 

history of, 18, 47-54 

and human evolution, 57-59, 81 

individual needs for, 81-85 

megadoses of, 8-9, 11, 18, 194, 217, 233, 

249, 258 

nomenclature of, 157-9, 247, 258 
opponents of taking, 157-8, 247, 258 
RDA’s for, 4, 10, 12, 60, 76-78, 80, 153, 258 
side effects of, 207, 252-4, 257-67 
toxicity of, 238, 251-6 

Water, intake of, 9, 30 
What You Should Know about Health Care 
before You Call a Doctor (Johnson), 20 
Wheat germ oil, 154 

Williams Fortified Insurance Formula, 12 
World Health Organization (WHO), 7 








$7.95 U.S. 


HOW TO LIVE LONGER AND FEEL BETTER 


LINUS PAULING 

Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine 


Linus Pauling’s latest book, HOW TO LIVE LONGER AND FEEL 
BETTER, draws on this two-time Nobel laureate’s scientific knowledge, 
common sense, and clear thinking to present an easy-to-follow, inexpen¬ 
sive regimen for adding years of feeling good to your life. 

HOW TO LIVE LONGER AND FEEL BETTER shows how vitamins 
work, and how to make them work for you. For example, in addition to 
its many other functions, vitamin C is responsible for producing and 
maintaining the body’s supply of collagen—the “glue” that virtually holds 
the human body together. Without collagen our skeletal and muscular 
systems disintegrate. With even a depleted supply of this vital substance, 
skin loses its elasticity and makes us look much older than we actually are. 

Dr. Pauling explains what each of us can do in the face of doctors who 
may be good at treating some illnesses, but who are frequently useless in 
helping us to prevent them. And, armed with conclusive experimental 
and clinical evidence in support of his ideas, he reveals the facts behind 
the Mayo Glinic’s distortion of his successful orthomolecular treatments 
of terminally ill cancer patients. 

Of immense immediate and practical benefit to people of all ages, HOW 
TO LIVE LONGER AND FEEL BETTER also exposes readers to the 
fascinating sensibility of one of the world’s most renowned working 
scientists—one whose celebrated achievements in the laboratory and in 
the cause of world peace stem from a compassionate concern for every 
human individual’s daily and lifelong well-being. 

LINUS PAULING has been the recipient of over 40 honorary degrees 
from colleges and universities in the United States and abroad and was 
awarded the 1954 Nobel Prize for chemistry and the 1962 Nobel Prize 
for peace. He is the author of several books, including Vitamin C , the 
Common Cold, and the Flu and Chemistry (both published by W. H. Freeman 
and Company). 

“Dr. Pauling’s new book gives sound advice on good nutrition and 
health maintenance. I recommend it to all who would like to live longer 
and feel better.” 


1 34018 <5 ' "f mmer 
3 6021486 


Cover photo by Joe McNally / Whet 



is 


W. H. Freeman and Company 

41 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010 
20 Beaumont Street, Oxford, 0X1 2NQ England 


ISBN 0-7167-1775-1 






