THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


TRANSLATED 

By  VARIOU  S$  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 


AND  EDITED  BY 

9 

Ft  MAX  MULLER 


xxn 


SACKED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST  SERIES 


IN  50  VOLUMES 


Vols. 

i,  15.  THE  UPANI5ADS  : in  2 vols.  : F.  Max  Mailer. 

2)  14.  the  SACRED  LAWS  OF  THE  ARYAS  : in  2 vols. : Georg  BOhler. 
3,  16,  27,  28,  39,  40.  THE  SACRED  BOOKS  OF  CHINA  : in  6 vols.  s 
James  Legge. 

4i  23,  31.  THE  ZEND-AVESTA  : in  3 vols.  : James  Darmesteter  & 
L.H.  Mills. 

5,  18,  24,  37,  47.  PAHLAVI  TEXTS  : in  5 vols.  : E.W.  West. 

6,  9.  THE  QUR’AN  : in  a vols.  : E.H.  Palmer.  • 

7.  THE  INSTITUTES  OF  VI$NU  : Julius  Jolly. 

8.  THE  BHAGAVADGlTA  with  the  Sanatfujatiya  and  the  AnugitS: 

Kashinath  Trimbak  Telang. 

10.  THE  DHAMMAPADA  : F.  Max  Mailer;  SUTTA-NIPATA  : V. 

Fausboll. 

11.  BUDDHIST  SUTTAS  : T.W.  Rhys  Davids. 

12,  26,  41,  43,  44.  THE  5 A T A PA  TH  A - B R AH  M A N A : in  5 vols.  : Julius 

Eggeling. 

13,  17,  20.  VINAYA  TEXTS  : in  3 vols.  : T.W.  Rhys  Davids  & Hermann 

Oldenberg.  , 

19.  THE  FO-SHO-HING-TSAN-KING  : Samuel  Beal, 
ai.  THE  SADDHARMA-PUtfPARlKA  or  The  Lotus  of  the  True  Law} 
H.  Kern.  ' , 

22,  45.  JAINA  StJTRAS  : in  2 vols.  : Hernftnn  Jacobi.  m 
25.  MANU  : Georg  Bahler.  4* 

29,  30.  THE  GRIHYA-§t)TRAS  : in  2 vols.  : Hermann  jpldenberg  & 
F.  Max  Mailer. 

32,  46.  VEDIC  HYMNS  : in  2 vols.  : F.  Max  Mailer  & H.  Oldenberg. 

33,  THE  MINOR  LAW-BOOKS  : Julius  Jolly. 

34,  38.  THE  VEDANTA-SCTRAS  : in  a vols.  : with  SaikarSclrya’s 

Commentary  : G.  Thibaut.  » 

35,  36.  THE  QUESTIONS  OF  KING  MILINDA  : in  a vols.  : T.W. 

^.hys  Davids.  * 

42.  HYMNS  OF  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA  s M.  Bloomfield.# 

.,48.  THE  VEDANTA-SOTRAS  with  RimSnuja’s  Sribhi»ya  s G.  Thibaut. 
49.  BUDDHIST  MAHAYANA  TEXTS  s E.B.  Co^sll,  F.  Mu  Mflller 
& J.  Takakusu.  * * 

30.  INDEX  t M.  Winterniti. 


JAIN  A SUTRAS 


TRANSLATED  FROM  PRAKRIT 
BY 

HERMANN  JACOBI 


■% 


Part  I 

* 

THE  A/TArANGA  SUTRA 
THE  KALPA  SUTRA 


motIla’l  banarsidass 

DELHI  ::  VARANASI  ::  PATNA 


© MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS 

Bungalow  Road,  Jawahar  Nagar,  Delhi-6 
Nepali  Khapra,  Varanasi  U.  P. 
Bankipur,  Patna  (Bihar) 


UNESCO  COLLECTION  OF  REPRESENTATIVE  WORKS— INDIAN  SERIES 

This  book  has  been  accepted  in  the  Indian  Translation  Series 
of  the  UNESCO  collection  of  Representative  Works,  jointly 
sponsored  by  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and 
Cultural  Organization  ( UNESCO) , and  the  Government  of  India. 


First  published  by  the  Oxford  University  Press,  1884 
Reprinted  by  Motilal  Banarsidass , 19644 


PRINTED  IN  INDIA  BY  SHANTILAL  JAIN,  8HRI  •JAINENDRA  PRESS, 
BUNGALOW  ROAD,  DELHI-6  AND  FURUSHED  BY  SUNDARLAL  JAIN, 
MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS,  By#$Af*OW  ROAD,  JAW  AM  ARN  AGAR , DELHI-6 


Rashtrapati  Bhavan, 
New  Delhi-4 
June  io,  1962 


I am  very  glad  to  know  that  the  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  published  years  ago  by 
the  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford,  which  have 
been  out-of-print  for  a number  of  years, 
will  now  be  available  to  all  students  of 
religion  and  philosophy.  The  enterprise 
of  the  publishers  is  • commendable  and  I 
hope  the  books  will  be  widely  read. 


S.  - Radhakrishnan 


PREFATORY  NOTE  TO  THE  NEW  EDITION 


Since  1948  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific 
and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO),  upon  the  recom- 
mendation of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Nations, 
lias  been  concerned  with  facilitating  the  translation  of  the 
works  most  representative  of  the  culture  of  certain  of  its 
Member  States,  and,  in  particular,  those  of  Asia. 

One  of  the  major  difficulties  confronting  this  programme 
is  the  lack  of  translators  having  both  the  qualifications  and 
the  time  to  undertake  translations  of  the  many  outstanding 
books  meriting  publication.  To  help  overcome  this  difficulty 
in  part,  UNESCO’s  advisers  in  this  field  (a  panel  of  experts 
convened  every  other  year  by  the  International  Council  for 
Philosophy  and  Humanistii  Studies),  have  recommended  that 
many  worthwhile  translations  published  during  the  19th  century, 
and  now  impossible  to  find  except  in  a limited  number  of 
libraries,  should  be  brought  back  into  print  in  low-priced 
editions,  for  the  use  .of  students  and  of  the  general  public.  The 
experts  also  pointed  out*  that  in  certain  cases,  even  though 
there  might  be^Sn  existence  more  recent  and  more  accurate 
translations  endowed  with  a more  modern  apparatus  of  scholar- 
ship, a number  of  pioneer  works  of  the  greatest  value  and 
interest  to  students  of  Eastern  religions  also  merited  republi- 
cation. 

• 

. This  point  of  view  was  warmly  endorsed  by  the  Indian 
National  Academy  of  Letters  (Sahitya  Akademi),  and  tjjp 
Ihdian  National  Commission  for  Unesco. 

* • 

It  is  in  the  spirit  of  these  recommendations  that  this 
work  from  the  faxqpus  series  “Sacred  Books  of  the  East”  is 
now  oilbe  agaid  being  made  available  to  the  general  public 
as  part  of  the  UNESCO  Collection  of  Representative  Works. 


PUBLISHER’S  NOTE 


First,  the  man  distinguished  between  eternal  and  perish- 
able. Later  he  discovered  within  himself  the  germ  of  the 
Eternal.  This  discovery  was  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the 
human  mind  and  the  East  was  the  first  to  discover  it . 

To  watch  in  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  the  dawi>*j)f 
this  religious  consciousness  of  man,  must  always  remain  one 
of  the  most  inspiring  and  hallowing  sights  in  the  whole  history 
of  the  world.  In  order  to  have  a solid  foundation  for  a com- 
parative study  of  the  Religions  of  the  East,  we  must  have  before 
all  things,  complete  and  thoroughly  faithful  translation  of  their 
Sacred  Books  in  which  some  of  the  ancient  sayings  were  pre- 
served because  they  were  so  true  and  so  striking  that  they 
could  not  be  forgotten.  They  contained  eternal  truths,  ex- 
pressed for  the  first  time  in  human  language. 

With  profoundest  reverence  for  Dr.  S.  Radhakrishnan, 
President  of  India,  who  inspired  us  for  the  task;  our  deep 
sense  of  gratitude  for  Dr.  C.  D.  Deshmukh  & Dr.  D.  S. 
Kothari,  for  encouraging  assistance;  esteemed  appreciation  of 
UNESCO  for  the  warm  endorsement  of  the  cause;  and  finally 
with  indebtedness  to  Dr.  H.  Rau,  Director,  Max  Muller 
Bhawan,  New  Delhi,  in  procuring  us  the  texts  of  the  Series 
for  reprint,  we  humbly  conclude. 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction 


TACK 

ix 


AatArANga  sCtra. 


FIRST  BOOK. 

Lecture  1. 

Knowledge  of  the  Weapon  . 

. . . i 

2. 

Conquest  of  the  World 

- 15 

• 

H 

3. 

Hot  and  Cold 

. 28 

M 

4. 

Righteousness 

* 36 

tt 

5. 

Essence  of  the  World  . 

. 42 

M 

6. 

Cleaning  .... 

• 53 

ft 

7. 

Liberation  .... 

. . . 62 

ft 

8. 

The  Pillow  of  Righteousness 

. 79 

SECOND  BOOK. 
• First  Part. 


Lecture  1. 

Begging  of  Fo<td 

88 

» 

2. 

Begging  for  a Couch 

. . . 120 

a 

3. 

Walking  .... 

136 

tt 

4. 

Modes  of  Speech 

• 149 

tt 

5. 

Begging  of  Clothes  . 

• *57 

it 

6 f 

Begging  for  a Bowl  . 

166 

tt 

7. 

Regulation  of  Possession  t 

Second  Part. 

. 17* 

Lecture  8. 

...... 

. . . 178 

9. 

...... 

*79 

if 

10. 

180 

tt 

11. 

...  *83 

9 

a 

12. 

. ‘•tSg 

ft 

*13.  • 

. . . * , • . 

. i6« 

ft 

14. 

. . . • • • 

. 18S 

Third  Part. 


PACK 


Lecture  15.  The  Clauses 189 

Fourth^  Part. 

Lecture  16.  The  Liberation  . * .an 


KALPA  SCTRA. 


Lives  or  ifix  Ginas  ... 

217-285 

Life  of  Mahavfra  .... 

217-270 

Lecture  1.  

217 

» 2. . 

218 

>i  3*  • ♦ ... 

. ' 229 

» 4.  

238 

„ 5. 

. 251 

Life  of  Pdrjva 

27I“275 

vLife  of  Arish/anemi  ...... 

276-279 

Epochs  of  the  intermediate  Tirthakaras 

. 280 

JLafe  of  J?ishabha 

281-285 

List  of  the  Sthaviras 

286-295 

Rules  for  Yatis  ....... 

296-3IT 

Index . 

. 3*3-3*° 

Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the 

Translations  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East 

321-324 

INTRODUCTION. 


The  origin  and  development  of  the  (Faina  sect  is  a 
subject  on  which  some  scholars  still  think  it  safe  to  speak 
with  a sceptical  caution,  .though  this  seems  little  warranted 
by  the  present  state  of  the  whole  question ; for  a large  and 
ancient  literature  has  been  made  accessible,  and  furnishes 
ample  materials  for  the  early  history  of  the  sect  to  all  who 
are  willing  to  collect  them.  Nor  is  the  nature  of  these 
materials  such  as  to  make  us  distrust  them.  We  know 
that  the  sacred  books,  of  the  (Fainas  are  old,  avowedly 
older  than  the  Sanskrit  literature  which  we  are  accus- 
tomed to  call  classical.  Regarding  their  antiquity,  many 
of  those  books  can.  vie  with  the  oldest  books  of  the 
northern  Buddhists.  As  the  latter  works  have  success- 
fully been  used  as  materials  for  the  history  of  Buddha 
and  Buddhism,  we  can  find  no  reason  why  we  should 
distrust  the  sacred  books  of  the  (Fainas  as  an  authentic 
source  of  their  history.  If  they  were  full  of  contradictory 
statements,  or  the  dates  contained  in  them  would  lead  to 
contradictor^  conclusions,  we  should  be  justified  in  viewing 
all  theories  based  on  such  materials  with  suspicion.  But 
the  character  of  the  (Faina  literature  differs  little  in  this 
.respect  also  from  the  Buddhistical,  at  least  from  that  of 
the  northern  Buddhists.  How  is  it  then  that  so  many 
writers  are  inclined  to  accord  a different  age  and  origin 
to  the  (Faina  sect  from  what  can  be  deduced  from  their 
own  literature?  The  obvious  reason  is  the  similarity,  mil 
or  appar^pt,  which  European  scholars  have  discovered 
between  (jainism  and  Buddhism.  Two  sects  which  have 
so  much  in  common  could  not,  it  was  thought,  have  been 
Independent  from  each  other,  but  one  sect  must  needs 


X 


(7  AIN  A sOTRAS. 


have  grown  out  of,  or  branched  off  from  the  other.  This 
4 priori  opinion  has  prejudiced  the  discernment  of  many 
critics,  and  still  does  so.  In  the  following  pages  I shall  tty 
to  destroy  this  prejudice,  and  to  vindicate  that  authority 
and  credit  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Cainas  to  which  they 
are  entitled.  We  begin  our  discussion  with  an  inquiry 
about  Mah&vira,  the  founder  or,  at  least,  the  last  prophet 
of  the  £aina  church.  It  will  be  seen  that  enough  is 
known  of  him  to  invalidate  the  suspicion  that  he  is  a 
sort  of  mystical  person,  invented  or  set  up  by  a younger 
sect  some  centuries  after  the  pretended  age  of  their 
assumed  founder. 

The  Cainas,  both  5vet4mbaras  and  Digambaras,  state 
that  MaMvira  was  the  son  of  king  Siddhirtha  of  Ku«</a- 
pura  Or  Kuwtfagr&ma.  They  would  have  us  believe  that 
KuWagrima  was  a large  town,  and  Siddhirtha  a powerful 
monarch.  But  they  have  misrepresented  the  matter  in 
overrating  the  real  state  of  things,  just  as  the  Buddhists 
did  with  regard  to  Kapilavastu  and  .Suddhodana.  For 
Kuw/agrima  is  called  in  the  Aiiringa  Stitra  a samnivesa, 
a term  which  the  commentator  interprets  as  denoting  a 
halting-place  of  caravans  or  processions.  It  must  therefore 
have  been  an  insignificant  place,  of  which  tradition  has 
only  recorded  that  it  lay  in  Videha  (A&tringa  Sfitra  II, 
15,  § I7)-  Yet  by  combining  occasional  hints  in  the  Baud-, 
dha  and  Caina  scriptures  we  can,  with  sufficient  accuracy, 
point  out  where  the  birthplace  of  Mahivlra  was  situated ; 
for  in  the  Mahftvagga  of  the  Buddhists1  we  read  that 
Buddha,  while  sojourning  at  Korigg&ma,  was  visited  by 
the  courtezan  ^.mbapili  and  the  Li££^avis  of  the  neigh- 
bouring capital  Vesftli.  From  Koffggima  he  went  to  where 
the  A^itikas2  (lived).  There  he  lodged  in  the  J^Ltika  Brick- 
hall  V in  the  neighbourhood  of  . which  place  the  couttezan 

* 1 See  Oldenberg’s  edition,  pp.  131,  333 ; the  tnuulation,  p.  104  teq.,  of  the 
second  part,  Sacred  Books  «of  the  East,  vol.  xvii.  c ( 

1 The  passages  in  which  the  ifatikas  occur  seem  to  have  been  misunderstood 
by  the  commentator  and  the  modem  translators.  Rhys  Davids  in  his  transla- 
tion of  the  Mah&parinibb&na-Sutta  (Sacred  Books  of  the^East,  vol.  xi)  says  in 
.note,  p.  34 : * As  tint  N&dika  is  (twice)  spoken  of  in  the  plural  number ; but  then* 


INTRODUCTION. 


xi 


Ambap&li  possessed  a park,  Ambap&livana,  which  she 
bequeathed  on  Buddha  and  the  community.  From  there 
he  went  to  Ves&li,  where  he  converted  the  general-in-chief 
(of  the  Li^Mavis),  a lay-disciple  of  the  Nirgranthas  (or 
Gaina  monks).  Now  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  Korig- 
g&ma  of  the  Buddhists  is  identical  with  the  Ku/w/agg&ma 
of  the  Gainas.  Apart  from  the  similarity  of  the  names, 
the  mentioning  of  the  vVcltikas,  apparently  identical  with  the 
Giiktrika  Kshatriyas  to  whose  clan  Mah&vira  belonged,  and 
of  Siha,  the  Gains.,  point  to  the  same  direction.  Kwida- 
grUma,  therefore,  was  probably  one  of  the  suburbs  of  Valr&li, 
the  capital  of  Videha.  This  conjecture  is  borne  out  by  the 
name  Ve&lie,  i.  e.  Vaifalika  given  to  Mahdvira  in  the  S&tra- 
kr/tanga  1, 31.  The  commentator  explains  the  passage  in 
question  in  two  different  ways,  and  at  another  place  a third 
explanation  is  given.  This  inconsistency  of  opinion  proves 
that  there  was  no  distinct  tradition  as  to  the  real  meaning  of 
VaLrilika,  and  so  we  are  justified  in  entirely  ignoring  the  arti- 
ficial explanations  of  the  later  Gainas.  Vaix&lika  apparently 
means  a native  0fVai5d.lt:  and  Maji&vira  could  rightly 
be  called  that  when  Ku^agrdma  was  a suburb  of  Valrdli, 
just  as  a native,  of  Turnham  Green  may  be  called  a 
Londoner.  If  then  Ku«<a?ag&ma  was  scarcely  more  than 
an  outlying  village  ofVaixdli,  it  is  evident  that  the  sovereign 
of  that  village  could  at  best  have  been  only  a petty  chief. 
Indeed,  though  the  Gainas  fondly  imagine  Siddhdrtha  to 
have  been  a powerful  monarch  and  depict  his  royal  state 
in  glowing,  but  typical  colours,  yet  their  statements,  if 
stripped  of  all  rhetorical  ornaments,  bring  out  the  fact 


thirdly,  in  the  last  danse,  in  the  singular.  Buddhaghosa  explains  this  by  saying 
that  there  were  two  villages  of  the  same  name  on  the  shore  of  the  same  piece  of 
water/  'The  plural  $itik&  denotes,  in  my  opinion,  the  Kshatriyas,  the  singular 
is'the  adjective  specifying  Gi&gak&vasatha,  which  occurs  in  the  first-  mention  of 
the  place  in  the  Mahiparinibbina-Sutta  and  in  the  Mahivagga  VI,  30,  a, 
9 and  must  b!  supplied  in  the  former  book  wherever  N&dika  is  used  n the  singular: 
I think  the  fcym  Nfidika  is  wrong,  and  /Cfetika,  the  ipelling  of  U ? Mahivagga, 
is  correct.  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  is  also  mistaken  in  saying  in  the  index  to  his  trans- 
lation : * N&dika,  near  Patna/  It  is  apparent  from  the  narrative  in  the  Mahi- 
raggt  that  the  place  ip  question,  as  well  as  Koligg&ma,  was  near  VesfUh 
1 See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XVI,  p.  a6a. 


GAIN  A SUTRAS. 


• • 

XU 

that  SiddhArtha  was  but  a baron ; for  he  is  frequently 
called  merely  Kshatriya  — his  wife  TriralA  is,  so  far 
as  I remember,  never  styled  Devi,  queen,  but  always 
KshatriyAni.  Whenever  the  G«Atrrka  Kshatriyas  are  men- 
tioned, they  are  never  spoken  of  as  SiddhArtha’s  SAmantas 
or  dependents,  but  are  treated  as  his  equals.  From  all  this 
it  appears  that  SiddhArtha  was  no  king,  nor  even  the  head 
of  his  clan,  but  in  all  probability  only  exercised  the  degree  of 
authority  which  in  the  East  usually  falls  to  the  share  of  land- 
owners,  especially  of  those  belonging  to  the  recognised 
aristocracy  of  the  country.  Still  he  may  have  enjoyed  a 
greater  influence  than  many  of  his  fellowrchiefs ; for  he  is 
recorded  to  have  been  highly  connected  by  marriage.  His 
wife  TriralA  was  sister  to  ATe/aka,  king  of  ValrAli1.  She  is 
called  Vaideht  or  VidehadattA*,  because  she  belonged  to  the 
reigning  line  of  Videha. 

Buddhist  works  do  not  mention,  for  aught  I know, 
JTeftka,  king  of  ValrAli ; but  they  tell  us  that  the  government 
of  Vesali  was  vested  in  a senate  composed  of  the  nobility 
and  presided  over  by  a king,  who  shared  the  power  with  a 
viceroy  and  a general-in-chief8.  In  Gaina  books  we  still 
have  traces  of  this  curious  government  of  the  Li^Mavis ; 
for  in  the  NirayAvall  S&trA4  it  is  related  that  king  ATe/aka 
whom  KCinika,  al.  A^Atajatru,  king  of  ATampA,  prepared  to 
attack  with  a strong  army,  called  together  the  eighteen 
confederate  kings  of  KArt  and  Korala,  the  TL\kkha.v\s  and 
Mallakis,  and  asked  them  whether  they  would, satisfy  KAni- 
ka’s  demands  or  go  to  war  with  him.  Again,  on  the  death  of 
MahAvira  the  eighteen  confederate  kings,  mentioned  above, 
instituted  a festival  to  be  held  in  memory  of  that  event8, 
but  no  separate  mention  is  made  of  ATe/aka,  their  pretended 
sovereign.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  Kef, aka  was  simply 
one  of  these  confederate  kings  and  of  equal  power  with 
them.  In  addition  to  this,  his  power  was  checked  by  the 

1 Sec  Kalpa  Sutra,  my  edition,  p.  1 13.  Keraka  is  called  file  maternal  oncle  of 
Mahavira. 

* See  Kalpa  Sutra,  lives  of  the  Ginas,  (iio;  JLi&rihga  Sfltra  II,  15,  } ig. 

* Tumour  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  As.  Soc.  of  Bengal,  yil,  p.  99a. 

4 Ed.  Warren,  p.  2J. 

* See  Kalpa  Sdtra,  Lives  of  the  Ginas. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xiii 

constitution  of  Ves&li.  So  we  are  enabled  to  understand 
why  the  Buddhists  took  no  notice  of  him,  as  his  influence 
was  not  very  great,  and,  besides,  was  used  in  the  interest  of 
their  rivals.  But  the  Gainas  cherished  the  memory  of  the 
maternal  uncle  and  patron  of  their  prophet,  to  whose 
influence  we  must  attribute  the  fact,  that  Valril!  used  to 
be  a stronghold  of  Gainism,  while  being  looked  upon  by 
the  Buddhists  as  a seminary  of  heresies  and  dissent. 

We  have  traced  the  connection  of  Mah&vtra’s  family  not 
out  of  mere  curiosity,  which  indiscriminately  collects  all 
historical  facts  however  insignificant  in,  themselves,  but  for 
the  reason  that  the  knowledge  of  this  connection  enables 
us  to  understand  how  Mahdvtra  came  to  obtain  his  success. 
By  birth  he  as  well  as  Buddha  was  a member  of  a feudal 
aristocracy  similar  to  that  of  the  Yidavas  in  the  legends 
about  K«sh«a,  or  that  of  the  Rajpoots  of  the  present  day. 
In  feudal  societies  family  ties  are  very  strong  and  long 
remembered  \ Now  we  know  for  certain  that  Buddha  at 
least  addressed  himself  chiefly  to  the  members  of  the  aris- 
tocracy, that  the  Gainas  originally  preferred  the  Kshatriyas 
to  the  Brihmans2.  It  *is  evident  that  both  Mah&vira  and 
Buddha  have  made  use  of  the  interest  and  support  of  their 
families  to  propagate  their  order.  Their  prevalence  over 
other  rivals  was  certainly  due  in  some  degree  to  their  con- 
nection with  the  chief  families  of  the  country. 

Through  his  mother  Mah&vira  was  related  to  the  ruling 
dynasty  in*Magadha;  for  ATe/aka’s  daughter  J5Tellan48 
was  married  to  Sewiya  Bimbhisdra4  or  Bimbis&ra,  king  of 
Magadha,  and  residing  in  Rdfagriha.  He  is  praised  by 
, the  Gainas  and  Buddhists,  as  the  friend  and  patron  of  both 


# 1 Tie  Gainas  are  very  particular  in  stating  the  names  and  gotras  ofMahAvtra’s 
relations,  of  whom  they  have  recorded  little  else.  Kalpa  SGtra,  lives  of  the  Ginas, 
§ 109.  * 

* See  Kalpa  SGtra,  Lives  of  the  Ginas,  §§  27  and  18. 

9 See  Niimydvaft  SGtra,  ed.  Warren,  p.  22.  She  is  commonly  called  by  the 
Buddhists  Vaidebl ; in  r Thibetan  life  of  Buddha  her  name  is  fttbhadrG,  which 
reminds  us  of  the  name  of  £e*aka’s  wife  SubhadriL  See  Sduefher  in  Mdmoires 
» de  l'Acaddmie  IjnpdAle  de  St.  Pdtersbourg,  tome  iv,  p.^53. 

4 He  is  usually  called  only  Seaiya  or  £re*ika ; the  full  name  is  given  in  the 
Das&srutaakandha,  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  XVI,  <p.  469. 


xiv 


GAIN  A StjTRAS. 


Mah&vira  and  Buddha.  But  Kdnika  or,  as  the  Buddhists 
call  him,  A^Atajatru1,  his  son  by  Kt llan&,  the  Videhan 
lady,  showed  no  favour  to  the  Buddhists  in  the  earlier  part 
of  his  reign ; only  eight  years  before  Buddha’s  death  he 
became  his  patron.  We  should  go  wrong  in  believing  him 
to  have  sincerely  been  converted.  For  a man  who  avowedly 
murdered  his  father2,  and  waged  war  against  his  grand- 
father3, is  not  likely  to  have  cared  much  about  theology. 
His  real  motive  in  changing  his  religious  policy  we  may 
easily  guess.  He  planned  to  add  Videha  to  his  dominions, 
just  as  his  father  had  added  Ahga  to  his  kingdom  of  Maga- 
dha  ; he  therefore  built  the  fort  at  P4&ligr4ma 4,  in  order 
not  to  repel  but  subdue  the  Va^fians  or  Vrigis,  a tribe  of 
Videha,  and  at  last  fixed  a quarrel  on  the  king  of  VauAli, 
his  grandfather.  As  the  latter  was  the  maternal  uncle  of 
Mahdvira,  A^tasatru,  by  attacking  this  patron  of  the 
£ainas,  lost  in  some  degree  their  sympathy.  Now  he 
resolved  on  siding  with  their  rivals,  the  Buddhists,  whom 
he  formerly  had  persecuted  as  friends  of  his  father’s,  whom, 
as  has  been  said  above,  he  finally  put  to  death.  We  know 
that  A^&taratru  succeeded  in  conquering  Vaiiali,  and  that 
he  laid  the  foundation  of  the  ^empire  of  the  Nandas  and 
Mauryas.  With  the  extension  of  the  limits  of  the  empire 
of  Magadha  a new  field  was  opened  to  both  religions,  over 
which  they  spread  with  great  rapidity.  It  was  probably 
this  auspicious  political  conjuncture  to  which  Jainism  and 
Buddhism  chiefly  owed  their  success,  while  many  similar 
sects  attained  only  a local  and  temporal  importance. 

The  following  table  gives  the  names  of  the  relations  of 
Mahivlra,  or,  as  we  should  call  him  when  not  speaking  of 


1 That  the  same  person  is  intended  by  both  names  is  evident  from  the  fact* 
that  according  to  Buddhist  and  Gaina  writers  he  is  the  father  of  Ud&yin  or 
U<Sayibhaddaka,  the  founder  of  P&aliputra  in  the  records  of  the  G§inas  and 
Brthmans.  , 9 

a The  story  is  told  with  the  same  details  by  the  Buddhists ; see  Kern,  Dcr 
Buddhismus  und  seine  Geschichte  in  Indeed,  I,  p.  249  (p.  X95  of  the  original), 
and  the  Gainas  in  the  Niray&valt  Sdtra.  * 

• See  above.  * • 

4 Mah&parinibb&na-Sutta  X»  26,  *nd  MahAvagga  VI,  28,  7 seq. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


him  as  a prophet  of  the  £7ainas,  VardhamAna  or  GiiSi- 
tr/putra1: — 


i i 

Sup&rrva  Siddhartha 


Trisali  or 
Videhadattd 


JTe/aka 

king  ofVauilf 


Subhadrfc 


ellan£ 


Nandivardhana  Vardham&na  Sudarsan&  Bimbis&ra  2TelIan£ 
married  to  king  of  Magadha 

Yasoda  I 


AnoggS.  m.  to 
Gam&li 

Seshavatf. 


Kftnika  or  Ag&tasatru 

Udayin,  founder  of 
Ta/aliputra. 


I do  not  intend  to  write  a full  life  of  MahAvlra,  but  to 
collect  only  such  details  which  show  him  at  once  a distinct 
historical  person,  and  as  different  from  Buddha  in  the  most 
important  particulars.  VardhamAna  was,  like  his  father, 
a KAryapa.  He  seems  to  have  lived  in  the  house  of  his 
parents  till  they  died,  and  his  elder  brother,  Nandivardhana, 
succeeded  to  what  principality  they  had.  Then,  at  the  age 
of  twenty-eight,  he,  with  the  consent  of  those  in  power, 
entered  the  spiritual  career,  which  in  India,  just  as  the 
church  in  Roman  Catholic  countries,  seems  to  have  offered 
a field  for  the  ambition  of  younger  sons.  For  twelve  years 
he  led  a life  of  austerities,  visiting  even  the  wild  tribes  of 
the  country  called  R SJASl.  After  the  first  year  he  went 
about  naked2.  From  the  end  of  these  twelve  years  of  pre- 
paratory self-mortification  dates  Vardham Ana’s  Kevaliship. 
Since  that  \ime  he  was  recognised  as  omniscient,  as  a 
prophet  of  the  Fainas,  or  a Tirthakara*  and  had  the  titles 
Gita,  MahAvira,  &c.,  which  were  also  given  to  .S&kyamuni. 
. The  last  thirty  years  of  his  life  he  passed  in  teaching  his 
religious  system  and  organising  his  order  of  ascetics,  which, 
as  we  have  seen  above,  was  patronised  or  at  least  counte- 
nanced chiefly  by  those  princes  with  whom  he  was  related 
through  his  mother,  viz.  Afe/aka,  5re«ika,  and  Kflnika,  tHfe 


1 Nitaputta  in  Pali  and  Prftkrit.  T!he  Buddhist*  call  him  NigaaAka  N&tapntta, 
i.  e.  (M&triputra  the  Nirgrantha  or  Gaina  monk. 

’ ’ This  periodaof  his  life  is  the  subject  of  a sort  of  ballad  incorporated  in  the 

Attrfifiga  Sfitra  ft  8). 


xvi 


<7 AINA  SUTRAS. 


kings  of  Videha,  Magadha,  and  Anga.  In  the  towns  which 
lay  in  these  parts  he  spent  almost  all  the  rainy  seasons, 
during  bis  spiritual  career1,  though  he  extended  his  travels 
as  far  west  and  north  as  Sr&vastl  and  the  foot  of  the  Hima- 
laya. The  names  of  his  chief  disciples,  the  eleven  Ga»a- 
dharas  or  apostles  of  the  Cainas,  as  detailed  in  the  Kalpa 
Stitra  (List  of  Sthaviras,  § i),  are  given  without  any  varia- 
tion by  both  divisions  of  the  church,  the  .Svet&mbaras 
and  Digambaras.  Of  the  details  of  Mah&vira’s  life,  men- 
tioned in  the  canonical  books,  his  rivalry  with,  and  victory 
over  Go.rS.la,  the  son  of  Makkhali,  and  lastly,  the  place  of 
his  death,  the  small  town  PSpi,  deserve  to  be  noticed.  Nor 
are  we  by  any  means  forced  to  rely  on  the  tradition  of  the 
Gainas  only,  since  for  some  particulars  we  have  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Buddhists  also,  in  whose  writings  Mahivira  is 
mentioned  under  his  well-known  name  Nataputta,  as  the 
head  of  the  Niga#f/*as  or  Caina  monks  and  a rival  of 
Buddha.  They  only  misstated  his  Gotra  as  that  of  Agni- 
vakySyana ; in  this  particular  they  confounded  him  with 
his  chief  apostle  Sudharman,  the  only  one  of  all  the  apostles 
who  survived  him  and  took  the  lead  in  the  church  after  his 
teacher’s  death.  Mahivira  being  a contemporary  of  Buddha, 
they  both  had  the  same  contemporaries,  viz.  Bimbisara  and 
his  sons,  Abhayakum&ra  and  A^itaratru,  the  Li££/;avis 
and  Mallas",  Go-rlla  Makkhaliputra,  whom  we  accordingly 
meet  with  in  the  sacred  books  of  either  sect.  From  the 
Buddhist  Pi/akas  it  appears,  as  we  have  seen  above,  that 
Mahctvira’s  followers  were  very  numerous  in  vau-&li,  a fact 
that  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  what  the  Chinas  relate 
about  his  birth  in  the  vicinity  of  that  town,  and  which  at 
the  same  time  well  agrees  with  his  connection  with  the 
chief  magistrate  of  the  place.  In  addition  to  this,  some' 
tenets  of  the  NiganfAas,  e.  g.  the  Kiriyav&da  and  the.belief 
that  water  is  inhabited  by  souls,  are  mentioned  in  the 
sacred  books  of  the  Buddhists,  in  perfect  accordance  with 

1 See  Kalpa  Sfltra,  Lives  of  the  Ginas,  4 m;  iTampa,  3;  Vais  alt,  1 W;  Mithili,  6 ; 
Rigagriba,  14 ; Bhadriki,  a ; Alabhiki,  1 ;“PamtabhOmi,  1 ; A&vastl,  1 ; P&pft,  1. 
All  these  towns,  with  the  exception  of  Paaitabhhmi,  jSrftvasti,  and  perhaps 
Alabhiht,  lay  within  the  limits  of  the  three  kingdoms  mdatio&ed  in  the  text.  ' 


INTRODUCTION. 


xvii 


the  Gaina  creed.  Lastly,  the  Buddhists  are  correct  in 
assuming  the  town  P4p4  as  the  scene  of  NAtaputta’s 
death. 

Comparing  this  outline  of  Mahdvira's  life  with  that  of 
Buddha's,  we  can  detect  little  or  nothing  Jn  the  former 
which  can  be  suspected  as  having  been  formed  after  the 
latter  by  tradition.  The  general  resemblance  between  the 
lives  of  both  is  due  to  their  being  lives  of  ascetics,  which 
from  the  nature  of  the  things  must  present  some  uniformity, 
which  certainly  will  appear  greater  to  the  mind  of  a European 
historian  of  our  times  than  to  that  of  an  ancient  Hindu. 
Some  names  of  Mah&vira’s  relations  are  similar  to  those  of 
Buddha’s : the  former's  wife  was  Yajodi,  the  latter's  Yaro- 
dhar& ; the  formers  elder  brother  was  Nandivardhana,  the 
latter’s  step-brother  Nanda;  Buddha’s  name  as  a prince 
was  Siddh&rtha,  which  was  the  name  of  Mah&vira’s  father. 
But  if  the  similarity  of  these  names  proves  anything,  it 
proves  no  more  than  that  names  of  this  description  were 
much  used  then  among  the  Kshatriyas,  as  surely  they  were 
at  all  times l.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  two  Ksha- 
triyas should  have  founded  sects  in  opposition,  or  at  least  in 
disregard  to  the  authorfty  of  the  Brahmans.  For,  as  I shall 
try  to  prove  in  the  sequel,  the  Kshatriyas  were  the  most 
likely  of  all  to  become  what  the  Brahmans  would  call 
c untrue  ascetics.’ 

We  shall  now  put  .side  by  side  the  principal  events  of 
Buddha’s  and  Mah&vira’s  lives,  in  order  to  demonstrate 
their  difference.  Buddha  was  bora  in  Kapilavastu,  MahA- 
v!ra  in  a village  near  VaisAli ; Buddha’s  mother  died  after 
his  birth,  MahAvlra’s  parents  lived  to  see  him  a grown-up 
•man ; Buddha  turned  ascetic  during  the  lifetime  and 
against  the  will  of  his  father,  MahAvlra  did  so  after  the 
cjeath'  of  his  parents  and  with  the  consent  of  those  in 
power;  Buddha  led  a life  of  austerities  for  six  years, 
MahAviaa  for  twelve ; Buddha  thought  these  years  wasted 
time,  and.thaf  all  his  penances  were  useless  for  attaining 
his  end,  MahAvira  was  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  his 


C«] 


1 See  Petersburg  Dictionary,  ss.w. 

b 


xviii 


ffAINA  S0TRAS. 


penances1,  and  persevered  in  some  of  them  even  after 
becoming  a Ttrthakara.  Amongst  Buddha’s  opponents 
Gorila  Makkhaliputra  is  by  no  means  so  prominent  as 
amongst  Mah&vira’s,  nor  among  the  former  do  we  meet 
GamAli,  who  caused  the  first  schism  in  the  Gaina  church. 
All  the  disciples  of  Buddha  bear  other  names  than  those 
of  Mah&vlra.  To  finish  this  enumeration  of  differences, 
Buddha  died  in  Kusinagara,  whereas  Mah&vira  died  in 
P&pi,  avowedly  before  the  former. 

I have  dwelt  so  long  on  the  subject  of  Mahivira’s  life  in 
order  to  make  the  reader  acquainted  with  facts  which  must 
decide  the  question  whether  the  origin  of  (Jainism  was 
independent  of  Buddhism  or  not.  Though  most  scholars 
do  not  go  the  length  of  denying  that  Mah&vtra  and  Buddha 
were  different  persons,  yet  some  will  not  admit  that  this 
decides  the  question  at  issue.  Professor  Weber,  in  his 
learned  treatise  on  the  literature  of  the  Gainas2,  says  that 
he  still  regards  ‘the  Gainas  merely  as  one  of  the  oldest 
sects  of  Buddhism.  According  to  my  opinion,’  he  writes, 
‘this  is  not  precluded  by  the  tradition  about  the  origin  of 
its  founder  having  partly  made  use  of  another  person  than 
Buddha  .Slkyamuni;  nay,  even  ot  one  whose  name  is  fre- 
quently mentioned  in  Buddhist  legends  as  one  of  Buddha’s 
contemporary  opponents.  This  rather  suggests  to  me  that 
the  Gainas  intentionally  disowned.  Buddha,  being  driven  to 
this  extremity  by  the  animosity  of  sect.  The  number  and 
importance  of  coincidences  in  the  tradition  of  either  sect 
regarding  their  founders  is,  on  the  whole,  overwhelming.’ 

Professor  Weber’s  last  argument,  the  very  one  on  which 
he  seems  to  base  his  theory,  has,  according  to  my  opinion, 
been  fully  refuted  by  our  preceding  inquiry.  This  theory,  in' 
itself,  would  require  the  strongest  proof  before  we  could  admit 
it  as  even  probable.  Generally,  heterodox  sects  claim  to  be 
the  most  authentic  and  correct  interpreters  of  the  words  and 


1 These  twelve  years  of  penance  were  indeed  always*  thought  essential  for 
obtaining  perfection*  and  every  ascetic  who  endeavours  to  quit  this  life  with 
the  best  claims  to  enter  one  of  the  highest  heavens,  or  even  Nirvioa,  has  to 
undergo  a similar  course  of  preparatory  penance*  which  lasts  twelve  years. 

* Indische  Studien*  XVI,  aio.  * 


INTRODUCTION. 


xix 


tenets  of  their  founders.  If  a sect  begins  to  recognise 
another  authority  than  that  of  the  original  founder  of  the 
main  church,  it  either  adopts  another  faith  already  in  exist- 
ence, or  starts  a new  one.  In  the  first  case  the  previous 
existence  of  the  £aina  faith  in  some  form  or  other  has  to  be 
admitted ; in  the  second  we  must  suppose  that  the  malcontent 
Buddhists  searched  in  their  scriptures  for  an  opponent  of 
Buddha,  on  whom  they  might  foist  their  heretical  theories, 
a course  in  which  they  were  not  followed  by  any  other  of  the 
many  sects  of  Buddhism.  Now,  granted  for  argument’s 
sake,  that  they  really  did  what  they  are  charged  with,  they 
must  have  proceeded  with  the  utmost  dexterity,  making  use  of, 
and  slightly  altering  all  occasional  hints  about  the  Niga*/<ias 
and  NAtaputta  which  they  were  able  to  hunt  up  in  their 
ancient  scriptures,  inventing  new  facts,  and  fabricating  docu- 
ments of  their  own,  which  to  all,  not  in  the  secret,  would 
seem  just  as  trustworthy  as  those  of  their  opponents.  Indeed 
the  Buddhistical  and  &aina  traditions  about  Mah&vlra,  the 
circumstances  in,  and  the  people  with  whom  he  lived,  so 
very  well  tally  with,  complete  and  correct  each  other  that 
the  most  natural  and  plausible  way  to  account  for  this  fact, 
which  our  preceding  inquiry  has  established,  seems  to  be 
that  both  traditions  are,  in  the  main,  independent  of  each 
other,  and  record  what,  at  the  time  of  their  attaining  a fixed 
form,  was  regarded  as  historical  truth. 

We  shall  now  considenthe  resemblance  between  Buddhism 
and  Gainism  wjiich  has  struck  so  many  writers  on  this  topic 
and  greatly  influenced  their  opinion  regarding  their  mutual 
relation.  Professor  Lassen1  adduces  four  points  of  coind- 
.dence  which,  according  to  his  opinion,  prove  that  the 
Cainas  have  branched  off  from  the  Bauddhas.  We  shall 
discuss  , them  one  after  the  other. 

9 oth  sects  give  the  same  titles  or  epithets  to  their  prophets  : 
Gina,  Arhat,  Mahivtra,  Saivag$a,  Sugata,  Tath&gata, 
Siddha,  Bmddha,  Sambuddha>  Parinivrfta,  Mukta,  &c.  All 
these  words  occdt  more  or  less  frequently  in  the  writings  of 
both  sects ; but  there  is  this  difference,  that  with  the  exception 

* - r-T"'-- 

1 Indxsehe  AHvtlraa.«fcai»d^  IV,  p.  763  seq. 

b 2 


XX 


GAIN  A SUTRAS. 


of  Gina,  and  perhaps  Gramawa,  the  preference  is  given  to 
some  set  of  titles  by  one  sect,  and  to  another  set  by  the 
rival  sect;  e.g.  Buddha,  TathAgata,  Sugata,  and  Sam- 
buddha  are  common  titles  of  GAkyamuni,  and  are  only 
occasionally  used  as  epithets  of  MahAvira.  The  case  is 
exactly  reverse  with  regard  toVira  and  MahAvira,  the  usual 
titles  of  VardhamAna.  More  marked  still  is  the  difference 
with  regard  to  Tirthakara,  meaning  prophet  with  the  Gainas, 
but  founder  of  an  heretical  sect  with  the  Bauddhas.  What 
then  may  be  safely  inferred  from  the  peculiar  choice  which 
either  sect  made  from  these  epithets  and  titles?  That  the 
Gainas  borrowed  them  from  the  older  Buddhists  ? I think 
not.  For  if  these  words  had  once  been  fixed  As  titles,  or 
gained  some  special  meaning  beyond  the  one  warranted 
by  etymology,  they  could  only  have  been  adopted  or 
rejected.  But  it  was  not  possible  that  a word  which  had 
acquired  some  special  meaning  should  have  been  adopted, 
but  used  in  the  original  sense  by  those  who  borrowed  it 
from  the  Buddhists.  The  most  natural  construction  we  can 
put  on  the  facts  is,  that  there  was  and  is  at  all  times  a 
number  of  honorific  adjectives  and  substantives  applicable 
to  persons  of  exalted  virtue.  These  words  were  used  as 
epithets  in  their  original  meaning  by  all  sects;  but  some 
were  selected  as  titles  for  their  prophets,  a choice  in  which 
they  were  directed  either  by  the  fitness  of  the  word  itself,  or 
by  the  fact  that  such  or  such  a word  was  already  appro- 
priated by  heterodox  sects  as  a title  fqr  their  highest 
authority.  Thus  the  etymological  meaning  of  Tirthakara 
is  founder  of  a religion,  prophet,  and  accordingly  this  title 
was  adopted  by  the  Gainas  and  other  sects,  whereas  the 
Buddhists  did  not  adopt  it  in  this  sense,  but  in  that  of*  an 
heterodox  or  heretical  teacher,  showing  thereby  their  enmity 
towards  those  who  used  Tirthakara  as  an  honorific  title. 
Again,  Buddha  is  commonly  used  in  about  the  same 
sense  its  mukta,  that  is  a liberated  soul,  afad  in  this 
meaning  It  is  stili  employed  in  Gaina  writings,  whilst  with 
the  Buddhists  the  word  has  become  a title  of  their  prophet. 
The  only  conclusion  which  might  be,  forced  from  th,ese 
facts  is,  that  the  Buddhists  at  the  time  when  they  formed 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXI 


their  terminology  were  opponents  of  the  £ainas,  but  not 
vice  versi. 

Lassen,  as  a second  argument  in  favour  of  the  priority  of 
Buddhism,  adduces  the  fact  that  both  sects  worship  mortal 
men,  their  prophets,  like  gods,  and  erect  statues  of  them  in 
their  temples.  As  Buddhism  and  jainism  excepted  none 
of  the  many  sects,  the  founders  of  which  pretended,  like 
Buddha  or  Mah&vira,  to  omniscience  and  absolute  perfection, 
have  continued  long  enough  to  come  within  the  reach  of  our 
knowledge — and  all  or  many  of  them  may,  for  aught  we 
know,  have  given  the  same  divine  honours  to  their  saints, 
as  the  Buddhists  and  Gainas  did  to  their  own  prophets — it 
cannot  be  alleged  that  the  practice  of  the  Buddhists  rather 
than  of  any  other  sect  was  imitated  by  the  Gainas,  or  vice 
vers&.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  nothing  in  the  notion  of 
Buddha  that  could  have  favoured  the  erecting  of  statues 
and  temples  for  his  followers  to  worship  them,  but  rather 
much  that  is  inconsistent  with  this  kind  of  adoration, 
while  the  Gainas  commit  no  inconsistency  in  worshipping 
MaMvira  in  his  apotheosis.  But  I believe  that  this  worship 
had  nothing  to  do  with  original  Buddhism  or  (Jainism,  that 
it  did  not  originate  with  iSie  monks,  but  with  the  lay  com- 
munity, when  the  people  in  general  felt  the  want  of  a higher, 
cult  than  that  of  their  rude  deities  and  demons,  and  when 
the  religious  development  of  India  found  in  the  Bhakti  the 
supreme  means  of  salvation.  Therefore  instead  of  seeing  in 
the  Buddhists  the  originals,  and  in  the  Gainas  the  imitators, 
with  regard  to*the  erection  of  temples  and  worship  of  sta- 
tues, we  assume  that  both  sects  were,  independently  from 
each  other,  brought  to  adopt  this  practice  by  the  perpetual 
and  irresistible  influence  of  the  religious  development  of 
the  people  in  India. 

The  third  point  of  resemblance  between  both  sects,  the 
stress  which  is  laid  on  the  ahiwsl  or  not  killing -of  living 
Jbeings,  wjjl  be  treated  more  fully  in  the  sequel.  For  this  „ 
reason  I quickly  pass  over  to  Professor  Lassen’s  fourth 
argument,  viz.  that  the  Buddhists  and  (rainas  measure  the 
history  of  the  World  by  those  enormous  periods  of  time 
which  bewilder  art<I  awe  even  the  most  imaginative  fancy. 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


xxii 

It  is  true  that  regarding  this  the  Gainas  outdo  the  Bud- 
dhists, but  they  have  the  idea  of  such  , periods  in  common 
not  only  with  the  latter  but  also  with  the  Br&hmans.  The 
main  features  of  the  chronological  system  of  the  Gainas 
equally  differ  from  those  of  the  Buddhists  as  from  those 
of  the  Br&hmans.  For  it  is  impossible  to  derive  the  Ut- 
sarpiwt  and  Avasarpiwt  eras,  with  their  six  Aras,  from  the 
Buddhistical  four  great  and  eighty  smaller  Kalpas,  which  are 
as  it  were  the  acts  and  scenes  in  the  drama  of  the  suc- 
cessive creations  and  dissolutions  of  the  universe,, nor  from 
the  Yugas  and  Kalpas  of  the  Br&hmans.  I am  of  opinion 
that  the  Buddhists  have  improved  on -the  Brahmanic 
system  of  the  Yugas,  while  the  Gainas  invented  their 
Utsarpiffi  and  Avasarpi«t  eras  after  the  model  of  the  day 
and  night  of  Brahm&. 

We  have  postponed  the  discussion  of  Professor  Lassen’s 
third  argument,  the  ahiwrsA,  because  it  will  be  better 
treated  together  with  the  other  moral  precepts  of  both 
sects.  Professor  Weber1  has  pointed  out  the  near  relation 
existing  between  the  five  great  vows  of  the  Gainas  and  the 
five  cardinal  sins  and  virtues  of  the  Buddhists ; and  Pro- 
fessor Windisch 2 * has  compared  the  Gaina  vows  (mahavrata) 
with  the  ten  obligations  of  the  Buddhists  (dasasil). 

The  Ten  Precepts  for  the  Buddhist  ascetics  are  the 
following8 : 

i.  I take  the  vow  not  to  destroy  life. 

а.  I take  the  vow  not  to  steal. 

3.  I take  the  vow  to  abstain  from  impurity. 

4.  I take  the  vow  not  to  lie. 

5.  I take  the  vow  to  abstain  from  intoxicating  drinks 
which  hinder  progress  and  virtue. 

б.  I take  the  vow  not  to  eat  at  forbidden  times. 

7.  I take  the  vow  to  abstain  from  dancing,  singing, 
music,  and  stage  plays. 

■-  8.  I take  the  vow  not  to  use  garlands,  scents,  ttnguents, 
or  ornaments. 


1 Fragment  der  Bhagavatt,  II,  pp.  175, 18}. 

* Zetachrift  der  Dentscben  Morgen  Undiechen  GeselUchaft,  XXVIII,  p.  tii. 

note.  * Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism,  p.  160. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXill 


9.  I take  the  vow  not  to  use  a high  or  broad  bed. 

10.  I take  the  vow  not  to  receive  gold  or  silver. 

The  Buddhists  have  also  Eight  Precepts  (a//^angasila), 
of  which  the  first  five  (pa»£asila)  are  binding  on  every 
Buddhist,  while  the  rest  are  only  recommended  tp  pious 
laymen1: 

1.  One  should  not  destroy  life. 

3.  One  should  not  take  that  which  is  not  given. 

3.  One  should  not  tell  lies. 

4.  One  should  not  become  a drinker  of  intoxicating 
drinks. 

5.  One  should  refrain  from  unlawful  sexual  intercourse — 
an  ignoble  .thing. 

6.  One  should  not  eat  unseasonable  food  at  nights. 

7.  One  should  not  wear  garlands  or  use  perfumes. 

8.  One  should  sleep  on  a mat  spread  on  the  ground. 

The  five  Buddhist  vows  nearly  agree  with  those  of  the 

Gaina  ascetics,  viz. : 

1.  Not  to  destroy  life  (ahims4). 

3.  Not  to  lie  (sftnn'ta). 

3.  Not  to  take  that  which  is  not  given  (asteya). 

4.  To  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  (brahmai-arya). 

5.  To  renounce  all  interest  jn  worldly  things,  especially 
to  call  nothing  one’s  own  (aparigraha). 

The  fifth  precept  of  the  Gainas  is  much  more  compre- 
hensive than  the  corresponding  one  of  the  Buddhists,  but 
the  other  precepts  are  tfie  same,  in  a different  order,  as  Nos. 
1-4  of  the  Buddhists.  The  agreement  is  indeed  so  striking 
that  it  would  seem  hard  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  one  sect 
borrowed  their  precepts  from  the  other.  Yet  the  question 
whether  the  Buddhists  or  the  Gainas  were  the  borrowers, 
would  still  remain  an  open  one.  It  can  be  shown,  how- 
ever, that  neither  the  Buddhists  nor  the  Gainas  have  in  this 
regard  any  claim  to  originality,  but  that  both  have  only 
.adopted  $he  five  vows  of  the  Brahmanic  ascetics  (sawmyft- 
sin).  the  ^tter  must  keep  the  following  five  vows* : 

1 Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism,  p.  139.  * 

. * Baudh&yana  II,  10 ,18 ; see  Bidder's  translation.  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
vol.  xiv,  p.  ajj. 


XXIV 


GAINA  SfiTRAS. 


x . Abstention  from  injuring  living  beings . 

a:  Truthfulness. 

3.  Abstention  from  appropriating  the  property  of  others. 

4.  Continence. 

5.  Liberality. 

And  five  minor  vows : 

6.  Abstention  from  anger. 

7.  Obedience  towards  the  Guru. 

8.  Avoidance  of  rashness. 

9.  Cleanliness. 

10.  Purity  in  eating. 

The  first  four  great  vows  of  the  Sa/«ny&sin  agree  with 
those  of  the  Gaina  Bhikshu,  and  are  enumerated  in  the 
same  order.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  the  Gainas  have 
borrowed  their  own  vows  from  the  Br&hmans,  not  from  the 
Buddhists,  because  the  latter  have  changed  the  order  of 
the  vows,  making  truthfulness  either  the  third  or  fourth 
cardinal  virtue  instead  of  giving  it  the  second  place.  Be- 
sides it  is  highly  improbable  that  they  should  have  imitated 
the  Buddhists,  when  they  had  in  the  Brahmanic  ascetics 
much  older  and  more  respected  models. 

It  is  worth  remarking  that  the  fifth  great  vow  or  precept 
is  peculiar  to  each  of  the  th^ee  religious  systems,  probably 
because  the  Brahmanic  fifth  vow,  viz.  liberality,  could  not 
be  enjoined  on  mendicants  such  as  the  monks  of  the 
Buddhists  and  Gainas  were.  The  Gainas  previous  to 
Mah&vtra’s  time  had  only  four  great  vows,  since  the  fourth 
was  included  in  the  fifth.  But  Mah&v!r&  brought  the 
number  of  the  vows  again  up  to  five,  a number  which  seems 
to  have  been  regarded  as  solemn,  since  the  Buddhists  have 
adopted  it  likewise  in  their  moral  code. 

Our  foregoing  inquiry  suggests  where  we  have  to  look 
for  the  originals  of  the  monastic  orders  of  the  Gainas  and 
Buddhists.  The  Brahmanic  ascetic  was  their  model,  from 
which  they  borrowed  many  important  practices  and  insti-^ 
tutions  of  ascetic?  life.  This  observation  is<  nottan  entirely 
new  one.  Professor  Max  Muller  has  already,  in  his  Hib- 
bert  Lectures  (p.  351),  started  a similar  opinion  5 likewise 
Professor  Buhler,  in  his  translation  of  the  feaudh&yana  Sfttrk 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV 


(passim);  and  Professor  Kern,  in  his  History  of  Buddhism 
in  India.  In  order  to  show  to  what  extent  the  life  of  Gama 
monks  is  but  an  imitation  of  the  life  of  the  Brahmanic 
ascetics,  I shall  now  compare  the  rules  given  to  the  latter 
in  Gautama's  and  Baudh&yana’s  law-books1  with  the  rules 
for  Gaina  monks.  In  most  cases  the  Buddhists  conform  to 
the  same  rules ; this  will  also  be  briefly  noticed. 

11.  ‘An  ascetic  shall  not  possess  (any)  store2.'  The 
Gama  and  Buddhist  monks  are  also  forbidden  to  have  any- 
thing which  they  could  call  their  own.  See  the  fifth  vow 
of  the  Gainas  (aparigraha).  Even  those  things  which  the 
Gaina  monk  always  carries  about  himself,  as  clothes, 
alms-bowl,  broom,  &c.,  are  not  regarded  as  his  property, 
but  as  things  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  religious  duties 
(dharmopakara^a). 

12.  ‘(He  must  be)  chaste.'  This  is  the  fourth  great 
vow  of  the  Gainas  and  in  Baudh&yana,  the  fifth  of  the 
Buddhists. 

13.  ‘He  must  not  change  his  residence  during  the  rainy 
season3.’  Biihler  remarks  in  a note : ‘This  rule  shows  that 
the  Vasso  of  the  Bauddhas  and  Gainas  is  also  derived  from 
a Brahmanic  source.’  # 

14.  ‘He  shall  enter  a village  only  in  order  to  beg.’  The 
Gainas  are  not  so  strict  in  this  respect,  as  they  allow  a 
monk  to  sleep  in  a village  or  town.  However  he  must  not 
stay  too  long4.  Mah&vira  did  not  stay  longer  than  one 
night  in  a village  or  five  nights  in  a town5. 

15.  ‘ He  shall  beg  late  (after  people  have  finished  their 
meals),  without  returning  twice6.'  The  £aina  monks  collect 
food  in  the  morning  or  at  noon,  probably  to  avoid  meeting 

. with  their  rivals.  They  generally  but  once  in  a day  go  out 
begging ; but  one  who  has  fasted  for  more  than  one  day 
may  go  a begging  twice  a day7. 

1 See  Biihler’s  translation,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  pp.  191, 192. 
The  numbers  in  the  text  refer  to  the  paragraphs  in  Gautama's  third  book.  The 
similar  passages  df  Baudh&yana  are  referred  to  in  the  notes. 

9 Compare  Baudh&yana  II,  6,  8 Baudh&yana  II,  6,  a,  ao. 

* iU&r&figa  Sdtra  II,  a,  a,  § 6. 

» 8 Kalpa  Stitr^,  Livts  of  the  Ginas,  $ 119. 

8 Baudh&yana  II,  6, 12,  2a.  T Kalpa  Siltra,  Rules  for  Yatis,  § ao. 


xxvi 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


1 6.  ' Abandoning  all  desires  (for  sweet  food).’  The  same 
is  prescribed  in  the  fourth  clause  of  the  fifth  great  vow  of 
the  Gainas1 *,  and  is,  besides,  the  apparent  motive  in  many 
rules  for  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  alms. 

17.  ‘He  shall  restrain  his  speech,  his  eyes,  (and)  his 
actions.’  This  nearly  agrees  with  the  three  Guptis  of  the 
Gainas,  or  the  restraining  of  the  mind,  speech,  and  body9. 

18.  * He  shall  wear  a cloth  to  cover  his  nakedness3.’  The 
Gaina  rules  about  dress  are  not  so  simple ; for  they  allow 
a Gaina  to  go  naked  or  to  wear  one,  two,  or  three  garments, 
but  a young,  strong  monk  should  as  a rule  wear  but  one 
robe4 *.  MahAvira  went  about  naked®,  and  so  did  the 
Ginakalpikas,  or  those  who  tried  to  imitate  him  as  much 
as  possible.  But  they  also  were  allowed  to  cover  their 
nakedness6. 

19.  ‘Some  (declare  that  he  shall  wear)  an  old  rag  after 
having  washed  it.’  Baudh&yana7  says  : ‘ He  shall  wear  a 
dress  dyed  yellowish-red.’  This  rule  agrees  more  with  the 
practice  of  the  Buddhists  than  that  of  the  Gainas.  The  latter 
are  forbidden  to  wash  or  dye  their  clothes,  but  they  must 
wear  them  in  the  same  condition  in  which  they  are  given6. 
However,  the  Gainas  have  only  carried  into  the  extreme 
the  original  intention  of  the  Brahmanic  rule,  viz.  that  the 
dress  of  ascetics  should  be  as  simple  and  mean  as  possible. 
For  they  seem  to  take  a sort  of  pride  in  outdoing  their 
Brahmanic  rivals  as  regards  rigorous  conduct,  mistaking 
nastiness  and  filthiness  for  the  highest  pitch  of  ascetic 
virtue8,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  Buddhists  studied  to 
bring  their  conduct  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of 
humanity. 

so.  ‘ He  shall  not  take  parts  of  plants  and  trees  except 
such  as  have  become  detached  (spontaneously).’  The 
Gainas  have  the  same  precept,  but  they  go  still  farther 


1 AMi&u ga  Stare  II,  15,  v,  $ 15.  ' 

' Kalpa  Stare,  lives  of  this  Ginas,  { 1 18.  *’  * 

* Baudh&yana,  1.  c.  $ 16.  . * AMrtaiga  Stare  II,  5,  1,  § 1, 

* Kalpa  Stare,  Lives  of  the  Ginas,  § 117.  * AMr&nga  Stare  I,  7,  7,  1. 

T L.c.  { si.  • A*ta&figa  Stare  II,  5,  a,  i,  aid  I,  5,  a. 

* Compare  Aifrtaiga  Stare  71,  a,  a,  1. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxvii 


in  allowing  a Gaina  to  eat  only  such  vegetables,  fruits,  &c. 
as  have  no  trace  of  life  left *. 

21.  ‘ Out  of  season  he  shall  not  dwell  a second  night  ■ 
in  (the  same)  village.’  We  have  seen  above  that  Mah&vtra 
carried  out  this  precept  whatever  may  have  been  the  prac- 
tice of  the  monks  in  general. 

22.  * He  may  either  shave  or  wear  a lock  on  the  crown  of 
the  head.'  The  (Gainas  have  improved  on  this  rule  as  they 
make  baldness  binding  for  all  monks.  According  to  Bau- 
dhiyana*  a Br&hman  on  becoming  an  ascetic  had  to  cause 
‘the  hair  of  his  head,  his  beard,  the  hair  on  his  body,  and 
his  nails  to  be  cut.’  The  same  practice,  at  least  as  regards 
the  cutting  of  the  hair,  was  observed  by  the  frainas  on  the 
same  occasion.  Hence  the  phrase:  ‘becoming  bald  (or 
tearing  out  one’s  hair)  to  leave  the  house  and  enter  the 
state  of  houselessness®.’ 

23.  * He  shall  avoid  the  destruction  of  seeds.'  The  reader 
will  observe,  in  many  passages  of  the  second  book  of  the 
A&tr&dga  Stttra,  how  careful  Gaina  monks  should  be  of 
avoiding  to  injure  eggs,  living  beings,  seeds,  sprouts,  &c. 
It  seems  therefore  that  the  Gainas  have  only  generalised 
the  above  rule  in  applying  it  to  all  small  beings  of  the 
animal  and  vegetable  world. 

24.  ‘(He  shall  be)  indifferent  towards  (all)  creatures, 
whether  they  do  him  an  injury  or  a kindness.’ 

25.  * He  shall  not  undertake  (anything  for  his  temporal 
or  spiritual  welfare).’ 

The  last  two  rules  could  just  as  well  be  taken  from  a 
sacred  book  of  the  Gainas,  for  they  are  in  full  accordance 
with  the  drift  of  their  religion.  Mah&vtra  strictly  carried 
‘them  out.  ‘ More  than  four  months  many  sorts  of  living 
beings  gathered  on  his  body,  crawled  about  it,  and  caused 
there  pain1 * * 4.’  ‘ Always  well  guarded,  he  bore  the  pains-(caused 
by)  grass,  cold,  fire,  dies,  and  gnats ; manifold  pains5.’  ' He 
’ with  eqfianimity  bore,  underwent,  and.  suffered  all  pleasant 

1 AJiiinga  Sfttra  II,  1,  j,  6,  and  8th  Lesson, 

. * Bandhiyana  II,  itf,  17, 10. 

* Mtumfe  bhanttfi  agirfio  aaag&riyam  pawaie. 

* iifaiAfa  Sdtra  I,  8, 1,  t.  • Attrthga  Staa  1,^  j,  I. 


xxviii 


GAIN  A SUTRAS. 


or  unpleasant  occurrences,  arising  from  divine  powers,  men, 
or  animals1 * *.’  It  is  frequently  said  of  the  ascetic  in  the  last 
stage  of  his  spiritual  career  that ‘he  does  desire  neither  life 
nor  death  V 

There  are  some  more  precepts  in  Baudh&yana  which  bear 
a close  resemblance  to  such  of  the  Gainas.  ‘ With  the  three 
means  of  punishment,  (viz.)  words,  thoughts,  and  acts,  he 
shall  not  injure  created  beings V This  is  only  an  amplifi- 
cation of  the  first  great  vow  (see  above).  ‘ Means  of  punish- 
ment’is  what  the  Fainas  call  weapon  (.rastra4 *). 

* He  shall  carry  a cloth  for  straining  water  for  the  sake  of 
purification.’  * He  shall  perform  the  necessary  purifications 
with  water  which  has  been  taken  out  (of  a well  or'a  tank) 
and  has  been  strained6.’  These  rules  are  strictly  observed 
by  the  Gaina  monks.  They  also  carry  a cloth  for  straining 
water.  The  commentator  Govinda  explains  pavitra, ‘a cloth 
for  straining  water,’  by  ‘ a bunch  of  Ku-ra  grass  for  removing 
insects  from  the  road6.’  If  Govinda  be  right,  and  had  the 
authority  of  a really  old  tradition,  which  I do  not  doubt, 
we  have  here  the  Brahmanic  counterpart  of  the  broom 
(r^oharawa  or  p&dapro^Mana)  with  which  the  Gaina  monks 
sweep  the  road  and  the  place  where  they  walk  or  sit  down, 
for  removing  insects. 

The  outfit  of  a Brahmanic  ascetic  consists  in  ‘ sticks,  a 
rope,  a cloth  for  straining  water,  a water  vessel,  and  an  alms- 
bowl7.’  Thai  Gaina  monks  also  carry  sticks,  at  least  now- 
a-days,  though  I remember  no  passage  in  the  Pi/akas 
expressly  allowing  the  use  of  a stick.  They  have  also 
a rope  belonging  to  the  alms-bowl8,  an  alms-bowl,  and  a 
water  vessel9.  Of  the  cloth  for  straining  water,  and  the 
broom,  we  have  already  spoken.  The  filter  for  the  mouth  • 
(mukhavastrika)  remains  as  the  only  article  exclusively  used 

1 Kalpa  Sdtra,  Lives  of  the  Ginas,  § 117,  towards  the  end. 

3 E.  g.  Kaipa  Sfitra,  Rules  for  Yatis,  § 51. 

8 Baudh&yana  II,  6,  xi,  23.  4 JU&rimga  Stitra,  p.  1,  note  2. 

* Baudh&yanall,  6, 11,  24,  25.  1 

• See  Professor  Biihier’s  translation,  p.  u6o,  note. 

T Baudh&yana  II,  10, 17,  n.  1 A*&r&figa  SGtra,  p.  67,  note  3. 

• Though  a monk  is  allowed  to  carry  a water  vessel  besides  his  alms-bowl, 

still  it  is  thought  more  meritorious  to  have  but  one  bowl. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXIX 


by  the  Gainas.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  Gainas  were 
outfitted  very  much  like  their  Brahmanic  models,  the 
Samny&sins  or  Bhikshus. 

‘Let  him  eat  food,  given  without  asking,  regarding  which 
nothing  has  been  settled  beforehand,  and  which  has  reached 
him  accidentally,  so  much  only  as  is  sufficient  to  sustain 
life1.’  The  reader  will  find  on  perusing  the  Gaina  ‘rules 
for  begging2 * that  only  that  food  is  considered  ‘pure  and 
acceptable  which  has  been  obtained  under  exactly  the 
same  circumstances  as  have  been  laid  down  in  the  above 
rule  of  Baudh&yana  for  Brahmanic  ascetics.  The  Bud- 
dhists are  not  so  strict  in  this  regard,  as  they  accept  invita- 
tions for  dinner,  of  course,,  prepared  especially  for  them. 

From  the  comparison  which  we  have  just  instituted 
between  the  rules  for  the  Brahmanic  ascetic  and  those  for 
the  Gaina  monk,  it  will  be  apparent  that  the  latter  is  but  a 
copy  of  the  former.  But  now  the  question  may  be  raised 
whether  the  Nirgrantha  is  a direct  copy  of  the  Sawnyjtsin, 
or  an  indirect  one.  For  it  might  be  assumed  that  the  Nir- 
grantha copied  the  Buddhist  Bhikkhu,  who  himself  was  but 
a copy  of  the  Sawmy&sin.  As  I have  hinted  above,  this 
suggestion  is  not  a probable  one,  for  there  being  a model 
of  higher  antiquity  and  authority,  the  Gainas  would  proba- 
bly have  conformed  rather  to  it  than  to  the  less  respected 
and  second-hand  model  of  their  rivals,  the  Buddhists.  But 
besides  this  primS.  f^cie  argument  against  the  assumption 
in  question^the  adoption  of  certain  Brahmanic  rules,  noticed 
above,  by  the  Ginas,  which  were  not  followed  by  the  Buddhists, 
proves  that  the  latter  were  not  the  model  of  the  former. 

There  remains  another  possibility,  but  a still  more  im- 
probable one,  viz.  that  the  Brahmanic  ascetic  copied  the 
Buddhist  Bhikkhu  or  Gaina  monk.  I say  still  more  im- 
. probable,  because,  firstly,  the  Sa#my&sin  makes  part  of  the 
system  of  the  four  stages,  or  Ajramas,  which  if  not  so  old 
as  Brahmanism  itself,  is  at  least  much  older  than  both 
Buddhism  ahd  Gainism ; secondly,  the  Brahmanic  ascetics 
were  scattered  all  over  India,  while  the  Buddhists  were 

" I - - 

1 Baudifcyana  II,  10,  x8, 13.  3 AHr&nga  SCttra  II,  u 


XXX 


GAIN  A SUTRAS. 


confined,  at  least  in  the  first  two  centuries  of  their  church, 
to  a small  part  of  the  country,  and  therefore  could  not 
•have  been  imitated  by  all  the  Sa»my4sins;  thirdly,  Gau- 
tama, the  lawgiver,  was  certainly  older  than  the  rise  of 
Buddhism.  For  Professor  Biihler  thinks  that  the  lower 
limit  for  the  composition  of  the  Apastamba  Shtra  must 
be  placed*  in  the  fourth  or  fifth  century  B.C.1 * *  Baudh&yana 
is  older  than  Apastamba ; according  to  Biihler8,  the  dis- 
tance in  years  between  them  must  be  measured  rather  by 
centuries  than  by  decades.  Again,  Gautama  is  older  than 
Baudhiyana*.  Gautama,  therefore,  and  perhaps  BaudhA- 
yana,  must  have  lived  before  the  rise  of  Buddhism,  and  as 
the  former  teaches  already  the  complete  system  of  Brah- 
mantc  ascetism,  he  cannot  have  borrowed  it  from  the 
Buddhists.  But  if  Biihler  should  be  wrong  in  his  estima- 
tion of  the  time  when  those  codes  of  sacred  laws  were 
composed,  and  if  they  should  turn  out  to  be  younger  than 
the  rise  6f  Buddhism,  they  certainly  cannot  be  so  by  many 
centuries.  Even  in  that  case,  which  is  not  a probable  one, 
those  lawgivers  are  not  likely  to  have  largely  borrowed 
from  the  Buddhists  whom  the  Br&hmans  at  that  time  must 
have  despised  as  false  pretenders  of  a recent  origin.  They 
would  certainly  not  have  regarded  laws  as  sacred  which  were 
evidently  appropriated  from  heretics.  On  the  other  hand 
the  Buddhists  had  no  reason  not  to  borrow  from  the  Brah- 
mans, because  they  greatly  respected  the  latter  for  the 
sake  of  their  intellectual  and  moral  superiority.  Hence 
the  Cainas  and  Buddhists  use  the  word  Brihma«a  as  an 
honorific  title,  applying  it  even  to  persons  who  did  not 
belong  to  the  caste  of  Brahmans. 

It  may  be  remarked  that  the  monastical  order  of  the 
Gainas  and  Buddhists  though  copied  from  the  Br&hmans 
were  chiefly  and  originally  intended  for  Kshatriyas.  Buddha 
addressed  himself  in  the  first  line  to  noble  and  rich  men, 
as  has  been  pointed  out  by  Professor  Oldenberg.4.  For 


1 Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aqrai,  part  i>,  introduction,  p.  xliii. 

1 L.  c.  p.  xxii.  * * L.  c.  p.  xlix. 

* Bnddha,  Kin  Leben.  &c.,  p.  157  seq.  1 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXI 


Buddha,  in  his  first  sermon  at  Benares,  speaks  of  his  reli- 
gion as  that  yass'  atth&ya  kulaputtd  sammad  eva 
ag&rasmfr  anag&riya m pabba^anti:  for  the  sake  of 
which  sons  of  noble  families  leave  the  house  and  enter  the 
state  of  houselessness1.  That  the  Cainas  too  gave  the 
Kshatriyas  the  preference  over  the  Brahmans  is  proved  by 
that  curious  legend  about  the  transfer  of  the  embryo  of 
Mah&vira  from  the  womb  of  the  Br4hma«!  Dev&nandA  tor 
that  of  the  Kshatriy3t#i  TrualA,  it  being  alleged  that  a 
Br&hmaai  or  another  woman  of  low  family  was  not  worthy 
to  give  birth  to  a Tlrthakara  2. 

On  the  other  hand  it  is  probable  that  Brahmanic  ascetics 
did  not  regard  fellow-ascetics  of  other  castes  as  quite  their 
equals,  though  they  were  just  as  orthodox  as  themselves. 
For  in  later  times  the  opinion  prevailed  that  only  Br&h- 
mans  were  entitled  to  enter  the  fourth  A^rama,  and  as  a 


1 Mah&vagga  I,  6,  ia. 

3 This  legend  is  rejected  as  absurd  by  the  Digambaras,  but  the  <SVet&mbaras 
staunchly  uphold  its  truth.  As  it  is  found  in  the  A&lr&rtga,  the  Kalpa  Sfttra, 
and  many  other  books,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  it  is  very  old.  However,  it 
is  not  at  aU  clear  for  what  reason-  so  absurd  a legend  could  have  been  invented 
and  have  gained  currency.  Yet  I may  be  allowed  to  offer  my  opinion  on  this 
dark  point.  I assume  that  Siddh&rtha  hfcd  two  wives,  the  Br&hmani  Dev£nand&, 
the  real  mother  of  Mah&vtra,  and  the  Kshatriy&nl  Trisalff;  for  the  name  of 
the  alleged  husband  of  the  former,  viz.  Rtshabhadatta,  cannot  be  very  old,  be- 
cause its  Pr&krit  form  would  in  that  case  probably  be  Usabhadinna  instead  of 
Usabhadatta.  Besides,  the  ngme  is  such  as  could  be  given  to  a Gaina  only, 
not  to  a Br&hman.  I therefore  make  no  doubt  that  Rishabhadatta  has  been 
invented  by  the  tikdnas  in  order  to  provide  Dev£nand&  with  another  husband. 
Now  Siddhirtha  was  connected  with  persons  of  high  .rank  and  great  influence 
through  his  marriage  with  Trisald.  It  was,  therefore,  probably  thought  more 
profitable  to  give  out  that  Mah&vira  was  the  son,  and  not  merely  the  step-son 
of  Trualfi,  for  this  reason,  that  he  should  be  entitled  to  the  patronage  of  her 
delations.  This  story  could  all  the  more  easily  have  gained  credence  as 
Mah&vira's  parents  were  dead  many  years  when  he  came  forward  as  a prophet 
But  as  the  real  state  of  things  could  not  totally  have  been  erased  from  the 
memory  of  the  people,  the  story  of  the  transfer  of  the  embryos  was  invented. 
The  latter  idea  was  not  an  original  conception  of  the  Gainas,  but  it  is  evidently 
» borrowed  from  the  Pur&nic  story  of  the  transfer  of  the  embryo  of  Krishna 
from  the  won£>  of  Revakt  to  that  of  Rohinl.  The  worship  of  Krishna  seems  to 
have  been  popular  during  the  first  centuries  of  the  development  of  the  Gaina 
creed ; for  the  Gainas  have  reproduced  the  whole  history  of  Krishna,  with 
small  alterations,  in  relating  the  life  of  the  twenty-second  Tlrthakara,  Arishftt- 
hemi,  who  was  a famous  Y&dava. 


xxxii 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


proof  for  this  theory  a verse  of  Manu,  VI,  97,  as  Professor 
Buhler  informs  me,  was  quoted.  But  not  all  commentators 
drew  the  same  inference  from  that  verse.  Leaving  aside 
this  controverted  point,  it  certainly  became,  in  later  times, 
the  custom  that  a Brahman,  as  a rule,  passed  through  four, 
a nobleman  through  three,  a citizen  through  two,  a .Stodra 
through  one  of  the  four  Arramas1. 

From  all  this  it  becomes  probable  that  the  non-Brahma- 
nic  ascetics  even  in  early  times  were  regarded  as  an  order 
separate  and  distinguished  from  the  Brahmanic  ascetics. 
We  can  understand  that  this  position  of  non-Brahmanic 
ascetics  led  to  the  formation  of  sects  inclining  to  dissent. 
That  the  untrue  ascetics  had  such  an  origin,  may  be  col- 
lected from  a remark  of  Vasish/Aa.  It  is  known  that  the 
performance  of  religious  ceremonies  was  discontinued  by 
the  ascetics,  but  some  went  beyond  this  and  discontinued 
the  recitation  of  the  Veda.  Against  transgressors  of  this 
kind  Vasish/Aa2  has  the  following  quotation : * Let  him  dis- 
continue the  performance  of  all  religious  ceremonies,  but 
let  him  never  discontinue  the  recitation  of  the  Veda.  By 
neglecting  the  Veda  he  becomes  a .Sfidra ; therefore  he 
shall  not  neglect  it.’  An  inhibition  pronounced  so  em- 
phatically presupposes  the  real  occurrence  of  the  practices 
forbidden.  If  therefore  some  ascetics  already  had  ceased 
to  recite  the  Veda,  we  may  conclude  that  others  began  to 
disregard  it  as  revelation  and  the  highest  authority.  That 
those  who  were  regarded  as  a sort  of  inferior  ascetics,  the 
non-Brahmanic  ascetics,  were  most  likely  to  make  this  step, 
is  easy  to  imagine.  We  see  thus  that  the  germs  of  dissent- 
ing sects  like  those  of  the  Buddhists  and  the  Cainas  were 
contained  in  the  institute  of  the  fourth  Arrama,  and  that 
the  latter  was  the  model  of  the  heretical  sects ; therefore 
Buddhism  and  (Jainism  must  be  regarded  as  religions  de- 
veloped out  of  Brahmanism  not  by  a sudden  reformation, 
but  prepared  by  a religious  movement  going  on  for  a long 
time.  - 

o 

1 Max  Muller,  The  Hibbert  Lectures,’ p.  343. 

* Chapter  x,  4,  Buhler’s  translation. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxiii 


We  have  seen  that  neither  the  Gaina  legends  about  their 
last  prophet,  nor  the  ascetic  life  ordained  for  Gaina  monks, 
nor  any  other  religious  practices  adhered  to  by  the  faithful, 
warrant  our  assuming  that  the  Gaina  sect  has  developed, 
in  one  way  or  other,  out  of  the  BuddhistiCal  church.  It 
remains  for  me  to  show  that  the  difference  of  both  creeds 
as  regards  the  principal  tenets  is  such  as  not  to  admit  a 
common  origin.  . Whatever  Buddha  may  have  taught  and 
thought  about  the  state  of  Nirvdwa,  whether  he  went  the 
length  to  identify  it  with  absolute  non-existence,  or  imagined 
it  to  be  a sort  of  existence  different  from  all  we  know  or 
can  conceive,  it  is  beyond  doubt,  and  a striking  feature  of 
Buddha’s  * philosophy,  that  he  combated  the  Brahmanic 
theory  of  the  Atman,  as  being  the  absolute  and  permanent 
soul,  according  to  the  pantheist  as  well  as  the  monadic 
point  of  view.  But  the  Gainas  fully  concur  in  the  Brahmanic 
theory  of  the  Atman,  with  only  this  difference,  that  they  as- 
cribe to  the  Atmans  a limited  space,  while  the  Brahmans  of 
the  S&rikhya,  Nyiya,  and  VaLreshika  schools  contend  that  the 
Atmans  are  co-extensive  with  the  universe.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Buddhistical  theory  of  the  five  Skandhas  with  their 
numerous  subdivisions  have  no  counterpart  in  the  psycho- 
logy of  the  Gainas.  A characteristic  dogma  of  the  Gainas 
which  pervades  their  whole  philosophical  system  and  code 
of  morals,  is  the  hylozoistic  theory  that  not  only  animals 
and  plants,  but  also  the  smallest  particles  of  the  elements, 
earth,  fire,  wa£er,  and  wind,  are  endowed  with  souls  (£iva). 
No  such  dogma,  on  the  other  hand,  is  .contained  in  the 
philosophy  of  the  Buddhists.  To  Indian  philosophers  the 
various  degrees  of  knowledge  up  to  omniscience  are 
matters  of  great  moment.  The  Gainas  have  a theory  of 
their  own  on  this  head,  and  a terminology  which  differs 
from  that  of  the  Brahmanic  philosophers  and  of  the  Bud- 
dhists. Right  knowledge,  they  say,  is  fivefold:  (i)  mati, 
right  perception ; (2)  rru  ta,  clear  knowledge  based  on  mati; 
(3)  avadhif  a sSrt  of  supernatural  knowledge ; (4)  manaA- 
paryiya,  clear  knowledge  of*  the  thoughts  of.  others;  (5) 
kevala,  the  highest  degree  of  knowledge,  consisting  in 
omniscience.  This  psychological  theory  is  a fundamental 

l»l  c 


xxxiv 


<7 AINA  SUTRAS. 


one  of  the  Gainas,  as  it  is  always  before  the  mind  of  the 
authors  of  the  sacred  books  when  describing  the  spiritual 
career  of  the  saints.  But  we  search  in  vain  for  something 
analogous  in  the  Buddhist  scriptures.  We  could  multiply 
the  instances  of  difference  between  the  fundamental  tenets 
of  both  sects,  but  we  abstain  from  it,  fearing  to  tire  the 
reader’s  patience  with  an  enumeration^  all  such  cases. 
Such  tenets  as  the  Gainas  share  with  the  Buddhists,  both 
sects  have  in  common  with  the  Brahmanic  philosophers,  e.  g. 
the  belief  in  the  regeneration  of  souls,  the  theory  of  the 
Karman,  or  merit  and  demerit  resulting  from  former  actions, 
which  must  take  effect  in  this  or  another  birth,  the  belief 
that  by  perfect  knowledge  and  good  conduct  man  can  avoid 
the  necessity  of  being  born  again  and  again,  &c.  Even  the 
theory  that  from  time  immemorial  prophets  (Buddhas  or 
Ttlthakaras)  have  proclaimed  the  same  dogmas  and  re- 
newed the  sinking  faith,  has  its  Brahmanic  counterpart  in 
the  Avat4ras  of  Vish«u.  Besides,  such  a theory  is  a 
necessary  consequence  both  of  the  Buddhistical  and  Gaina 
creed.  For  what  Buddha  or  Mah4vira  had  revealed  was, 
of  course,  regarded  by  the  followers  of  either  as  truth  and 
the  only  truth;  this  truth  must  have  existed  from  the 
beginning  of  time,  like  the  Veda  of  the  Br&hmans ; but 
could  the  truth  have  remained  unknown  during  the  infinite 
space  of  time  elapsed  before  the  appearance  of  the  prophet  ? 
No,  would  answer  the  pious  believer  in  Buddhism  or 
Gainism,  that  was  impossible ; but  the  truf  faith  was  re- 
vealed in  different  periods  by  numberless  prophets,  and  so 
it  will  be  in  the  time  to  come.  The  theory  of  former 
prophets  seems,  therefore,  to  be  a natural  consequence  of 
both  religions  ; besides,  it  was  not  wholly  unfounded  on* 
facts,  at  least  as  regards  the  Gainas.  For  the  Nirgranthas 
are  never  spoken  of  in  the  Buddhist  writings^  as  a newly 
risen  sect,  nor  N4taputta  as  their  founder.  Accordingly  the 
Nirgranthas  were  probably  an  old  sect  at  the  time  of 
Buddha,  and  l^itaputta  only  the  reformer  of  the  Gaina 
church,  which  may  have  been  founded  by  the  twenty-third 
Ttrthakara,  PArrva.  But  what  seems  astonishing  is  the 
fact  that  the  Gainas  and  Bauddhas  have  hit  on  nearly  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXV 


same  number  of  prophets  believed  to  have  risen  since  the 
creation  of  the  present  order  of  things,  the  former  worship- 
ping twenty-four  Tfrthakaras,  the  latter  twenty-five  Bud- 
dhas. I do  not  deny  that  in  developing  this  theory  one  sect 
was  influenced  by  the  other ; but  I firmly  believe  that  it 
cannot  be  made  out  which  of  the  two  sects  first  invented, 
or  borrowed  from  the  Brihmans,  this  theory.  For  if  the 
twenty-five  Buddhas  were  worshipped  by  the  Buddhists 
of  the  first  centuries  after  the  Nirv&wa,  the  belief  in 
twenty-four  Tlrthakaras  is  equally  old,  as  it  is  common 
to  the  Digambaras  and  5vet4mbaras,  who  separated  pro- 
bably in  the  second  century  after  the  Nirv&#a.  However 
the  decision  of  the  question  whether  the  Buddhists  or 
the  £ainas  originally  invented  the  theory  of  the  succes- 
sion of  prophets,  matters  little;  it  cannot  influence  the 
result  to  which  the  previous  discussion  has  led  us,  viz.  (i) 
that  Jainism  had  an  origin  independent  from  Buddhism, 
that  it  had  a development  of  its  own,  and  did  not  largely 
borrow  from  the  rival  sect;  (a)  that  both  Jainism  and 
Buddhism  owed  to  the  Br&hmans,  especially  the  Sawnyi- 
sins,  the  groundwork  »f  their  philosophy,  ethics,  and 
cosmogony.  # 

Our  discussion  has  as  yet  been  conducted  on  the  supposi- 
tion that  the  tradition  of  the  <7ainas  as  contained  in  their 
sacred  books  may  on  the  whole  be  credited.  But  the  intrin- 
sic value  of  this  tradition  has  been  called  into  question  by  a 
scholar  of  wide  views  and  cautious  judgment,  Mr.  Barth,  in 
the  Revue  de  l’Histoire  des  Religions,  vol.  iii,  p.90,  admits 
that  an  historical  personage  is  hidden  under  Nitaputta,  but 
.he  doubts  that  valid  inferences  may  be  drawn  from  the 
sacred  books  of  the  £ainas  which,  avowedly,  have  been 
reduced  to  writing  in  the  fifth  century  A.  D.,  or  nearly  a 
thousand  years  after  the  foundation  of  the  sect.  For,  in 
his  opinion, ' the  self-conscient  and  continuous  existence  of 
the  sect  ^Ince  that  remote  epoch,  i.  e.  the  direct  tradition  of 
peculiar  doctrines  and  records,  has  not  yet  been  demon- 
strated. During  many  centuries,’  he  says,  ‘theffainas  had 
not  become  distinct  from  the  numerous  groups  of  ascetics 
who  could  not  boast  of  more  than  an  obscure  floating 

c 2 


xxxvi 


<7AINA  SUTRAS. 


existence/  The  tradition  of  the  Gainas  appears  to  Mr.  Barth 
to  have  been  formed  of  vague  recollections  in  imitation  of 
the  Buddhist  tradition. 

Mr.  Barth  seems  to  base  his  theory  on  the  assumption 
that  the  Gainas  must  have  been  careless  in  handing  down 
their  sacred  lore,  since  they  formed,  for  many  centuries,  but 
a small  and  unimportant  sect.  I cannot  see  the  force  of 
this  argument  of  Mr.  Barth’s.  Is  it  more  likely  that  a sect 
of  which  the  not  very  numerous  followers  are  scattered  over 
a large  country,  or  a church  which  has  to  satisfy  the  reli- 
gious wants  of  a great  multitude,  will  better  preserve  its 
original  tenets  and  traditions?  It  is  impossible  to  decide 
this  question  on  k priori  grounds.  The  Jews*  and  the 
Paflsis  may  be  adduced  as  instances  in  favour  of  the  former 
view,  the  Roman  Catholic  church  as  one  in  favour  of  the 
latter.  But  we  are  not  obliged  to  rely  on  such  generalities 
in  order  to  decide  the  question  at  issue  with  regard  to  the 
Gainas,  for  they  were  so  far  from  having  only  dim  notions 
of  their  own  doctrines  that  they  pronounced  as  founders 
of  schisms  those  who  differed  from  the  great  bulk  of  the 
faithful  in  comparatively  unimportant  details  of  belief.  This 
fact  is  proved  by  the  tradition  about  the  seven  sects  of  the 
•Svet&mbaras  made  known  by  Dr.  Leumann1.  The  Digam- 
baras  also,  who  | separated  from  the  .SVet&mbaras  probably 
in  the  second  or  third  century  after  the  Nirv&wa,  differ  from 
their  rivals  but  little  with  regard  to  philosophical  tenets ; yet 
they  were  nevertheless  stigmatised  by  the  latter  as  heretics 
on  account  of  their  rules  of  conduct.  All  these  facts  show 
that  the  Gainas,  even  previous  to  the  redaction  of  their 
sacred  books,  had  not  a confused  and  undefined  creed,  which, 
would  have  been  liable  to  become  altered  and  defiled  by 
doctrines  adopted  from  widely  different  religions,  but  one 
in  which  even  the  minutest  details  of  belief  were  fixed. 

What  has  been  said  about  the  religious  doctrines  of  the 
Gainas  can  also  be  proved  of  their  historical  traditions. 
For  the  detailed  lists  of  teachers  handed  dSwn  in  the 
several  GaMAas*,  and  those  "incorporated  in  their  sacred 


> See  IndUche  Studien,  XVT.  * See  Dr.  Klatt,  Tnd.  Ant.  XI. 


INTRODUCTION. 


. X XXVII 


books,  show  that  the  Gainas  did  possess  an  interest  in  the  his- 
tory of  their  church.  I do  not  deny  that  a list  of  teachers  may 
be  invented,  or  an  incomplete  one  filled  up  or  made  pakka. 
a.s  the  Hindus  would  say ; the  necessity  of  proving  itself  to 
be  legitimately  descended  from  a recognised  authority  may 
induce  a sect  to  invent  the  names  of  a line  of  teachers. 
But  what  could  have  caused  the  Gainas  to  fabricate 
such  a detailed  list  of  teachers,  Ga«as,  and  SAkhAs  'as 
that  in  the  Kalpa  Stitra?  Of  most  of  the  details  the 
Gainas  of  later  times  knew  nothing  beyond  what  they' 
found  in  the  Kalpa  Stitra  itself, — and  that  is  unfortunately 
very  little, — nor  did  they  pretend  to  anything  more.  For 
all  practical  purposes  the  short  list  of  Sthaviras,  as  it  stands 
in  the  Kalpa  Shtra,  would  have  been  sufficient ; the  pre- 
servation of  the  detailed  list,  containing  so  many  bare 
names,  proves  that  they  must  have  had  an  interest  for  the 
members  of  the  early  church,  though  the  more  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  times  and  events  chronicled  in  that  list 
was  lost  after  some  centuries. 

However,  it  is  not  enough  to  have  proved  that  the  Gainas. 
even  before  the  redaction  of  their  sacred  books,  possessed 
the  qualities  necessary  for  continuing  their  creed  and  tradi- 
tion, and  preserving  them  from  corruptions  caused  by  large 
borrowings  from  other  religious  systems ; we  must  also 
show  that  they  did  do  what  they  were  qualified,  to  do. 
This  leads  us  to  a discussion  of  the  age  of  the  extant 
Gaina  literature.  For  if  we  succeed  in  proving  that  the 
Gaina  literafure  or  at  least  some  of  its  oldest  works  were 
composed  many  centuries  before  they  were  reduced  to 
writing,  we  shall  have  reduced,  if  not  closed,  the  gap  sepa- 
rating the  prophet  of  the  Gainas  from  their  oldest  records. 

The  redaction  of  the  Gaina  canon  or  the  Siddhanta  took 
place,  according  to  the  unanimous  tradition,  on  the  council 
of  Valabhi,  under  the  presidency  of  Devarddhi.  The  date  of 
this  evept,  980  (or  993)  A.V.,  corresponding  to  454  (or  467) 
A.  D.1,  is  itcorporated  in»the  Kalpa  Sfttra  ($  148).  Devard- 
dhi Ga»in,  says  the  tradition,  perceiving  die  SiddhAnta  in 

1 It  is  possible*  but  not  probable*  that  the  date  of  the  redaction  fell  sixty  yea » 
later,  5x4  (527)  a.d.  ; see  Kalpa  Sdtra,  introduction,  p.  15. 


xxxviii 


fJAINA  SUTRAS. 


danger  of  becoming  extinct,  caused  it  to  be  written  in 
books.  Before  that  time  teachers  made  no  use  of  written 
books  when  teaching  the  Siddh&nta  to  novices,  but  after 
that  time  they  did  use  books.  The  latter  part  of  this 
statement  is  evidently  true.  For  in  olden  times  books 
were  not  used,  it  being  the  custom  of  the  Br&hmans  to 
rely  rather  on  the  memory  than  on  the  MSS.,  and  in  this 
they  were,  almost  without  doubt,  followed  by  the  Gainas 
and  Buddhists.  But  now-a-days  Yatis  use  MSS.  when 
teaching  the  sacred  lore  to  their  novices.  There  is  no 
reason  why  we  should  not  credit  the  tradition  that  this 
change  in  the  method  of  instruction  was  brought  about  by 
Devarddhi  Gawin ; for  the  event  was  of  too  great,  import- 
ance not  to  be  remembered.  To  provide  every  teacher  or 
at  least  every  Up&rraya  with  copies  of  the  sacred  books, 
Devarddhi  Gawin  must  have  issued  a large  edition  of  the 
Siddh&nta.  This  is  probably  the  meaning  of  the  traditional 
record  that  Devarddhi  caused  the  Siddh&nta  to  be  written 
in  books,  for  it  is  hardly  credible  that  the  Gaina  monks 
should  never  before  have  attempted  to  write  clown  what 
they  had  to  commit  to  memory ; the  Br&hmans  also  have 
MSS.  of  their  sacred  books,  though  they  do  not  use  them 
in  handing  down  the  Veda.  « These  MSS.  were  intended 
for  private  use,  to  aid  the  memory  of  the  teacher.  I make 
no  doubt  that  the  same  practice  was  observed  by  the  Gaina 
monks,  the  more  so  as  they  were  not,  like  the  Br&hmans, 
influenced  by  any  theory  of  their  own  not  to  trust  to  MSS., 
but  were  induced  merely  by  the  force  of  tfie  prevalent 
custom  to  hand  down  their  sacred  lore  by  word  of  niouth. 
I do  not  maintain  that  the  sacred  books  of  the  Gainas  were 
originally  written  in  books,  for  the  same  argument  which- 
has  been  brought  forward  to  prove  that  the  Buddhist 
monks  could  have  had  no  MSS.,  as  they  are  never  men- 
tioned in  their  sacred  books,  in  which ' every  movable  thing, 
down  to  the  smallest  and  least  important  domestic  utensils, 
is  in  some  way  or  other  referred  to*,’  the  sanfe  argument,  I 
say,  holds  good  with  regard  ta  the  Gainas  as  long  as  the 


1 Sacred  Book*  of  the  Bait,  voL  alii,  introduction,  p.  xxxiii. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxix 


monks  led  a wandering  life;  but  when  the  monks  were 
settled  in  Uplrrayas  exclusively  belonging  to  themselves, 
they  may  have  kept  there  their  MSS.  as  they  do  now- 
a-days. 

Devarddhi’s  position  relative  to  the  sacred  literature  of 
the  £ainas  appears  therefore  to  us  in  a different  light  from 
what  it  is  generally  believed  to  have  been.  He  probably 
arranged  the  already  existing  MSS.  in  a canon,  taking 
down  from  the  mouth  of  learned  theologians  only  such 
works  of  which  MSS.  were  not  available.  Of  this  canon  a 
great  many  copies  were  taken,  in  order  to  furnish  every 
seminary  with  books  which  had  become  necessary  by  the 
newly  introduced  change  in  the  method  of  religious  instruc- 
tion. Devarddhi’s  edition  of  the  Siddhinta  is  therefore 
only  a redaction  of  the  sacred  books  which  existed  before 
his  time  in  nearly  the  same  form.  Any  single  passage  in  a 
sacred  text  may  have  been  introduced  .by  the  editor,  but 
the  bulk  of  the  Siddhdnta  is  certainly  not  of  his  making. 
The  text  of  the  sacred  books!  before  the  last  redaction  of 
the  Siddhinta,  did  not  exist  in  such  a vague  form  as  it 
would  have  been  liable  to  if  it  were  preserved  only  by  the 
memory  of  the  monks,  but  it  was  checked  by  MSS. 

On  this  premise  we  now  proceed  to  inquire  into  the  date 
of  the  composition  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  £ainas.  Their 
own  dogmatical  theory  that  all  sacred  books  were  revealed 
by  the  first  Tfrthakara,  shall  only  be  noticed  to  be  dis- 
missed. We  must  try  to  discover  better  grounds  for  fixing 
the  age  wheif  the  chief  works  of  the  Siddhinta  were 
composed. 

As  single  passages  may  have  crept  into  the  text  at  any 
time,  we  can  draw  no  valid  inferences  from  them,  even  if 
they  be  sanctioned  by  Devarddhi's  receiving  them  into  his 
revised  text  I attach  therefore  no  great  weight  to  the  lists 
of  barbarous  or  un- Aryan  tribes1,  nor  to  the  meition  of 
all  sevenk schisms,  the  last  of  which  occurred  5^4. A. v„* 
Nothing  is^nore  common,  than  that  such  details  should  be 

1 Among  the  latter  Arava  may  denote  the  Arabs,  as  Weber  thinks,  or,  as  X 
prefer  to  think,  the  Tamils,  whose  language  is  called  Aravamubythe  Dravidiana. 

* See  Weber,  In&ische  Studien,  XVI,  p.  <37. 


xl 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


added  as  a gloss,  or  be  incorporated  even  in  the  text,  by 
those  who  transmitted  it  either  in  writing  or  in  instructing 
their  .pupils.  But  an  argument  of  more  weight  is  the  fact 
that  in  the  Siddh&nta  we  find  no  traces  of  Greek  astro- 
nomy. In  fact  the  Gaina  astronomy  is  a system  of  incre- 
dible absurdity,  which  would  have  been  impossible,  if  its 
author  had  had  the  least  knowledge  of  the  Greek  science. 
As  the  latter  appears  to  have  been  introduced  in  India  about 
the  third  or  fourth  century  A.  D.,  it  follows  that  the  sacred 
books  of  the  (7ainas  were  composed  before  that  time. 

Another  argument  which  offers  itself  for  fixing  the  period  of 
the  composition  of  the  sacred  books,  is  the  language  in  which 
they  are  written.  But,  unfortunately,  it  is  not  at  all  clear 
whether  the  sacred  books  have  been  handed  down  in  that  lan- 
guage in  whiph  they  were  composed,  or  in  that  in  which  they 
were  pronounced, and  transcribed  in  later  generations,  accord- 
ing to  the  then  current  idiom,  till  Devarddhi’s  edition  put  an 
end  to  the  modernising  of  the  language  of  the  sacred  books. 
I am  inclined  to  believe  the  latter  view  to  be  correct, and  look 
upon  the  absence  of  a self-consistent  orthography  of  the 
fraina  Pr&krit  as  the  effect  of  the  gradual  change  of  the 
vernacular  language  in  which  thb  sacred  books  were  re- 
cited. In  all  MSS.  of  ffaioa  texts,  the  same  word  is  not 
always  spelt  in  the  same  way.  The  differences  of  spelling 
refer  chiefly  to  the  retention,  omission,  or  attenuation  of 
single  consonants  between  vowels,  and  the  retention  of  the 
vowels  e,o,  before  two  consonants,  or  their  change  in  i,  u.  It  is 
hardly  possible  that  the  different  spellings  of  h word  should 
all  correctly  represent  the  pronunciation  of  that  word  at  any 
given  time,  e.g.  bhfita,  bhtiya;  udaga,  udaya,  uaya; 
lobha,  loha1,  &c. ; but  probably  we  must  regard  these 
methods  of  spelling  as  historical  spellings,  that  p to  say,  that 
all  different  spellings  presented  in  the  MSS.  which  formed  the 
materials  for  Devarddhi's  edition  of  the  Siddh&nta,  were 
looked  upon  as  authentical  and  were  preserved  iij,  all  later 
copies  of  the  sacred,  texts.  If  this,  assumption  incorrect,  we 

— . 7 ~ “ 

1 Ido  net  contend  that  no  double  forma  of  any  word  were  current  at  any 
time,  for  there  must  have  been  a good  many  double  formg,  but  I doubt  that 
nearly  every  word  should  have  existed  in  two  or  three  forms. 


INTRODUCTION, 


xli 


must  regard  the  most  archaic  spellings  as  representing  the 
pronunciation  at  or  shortly  after  the  epoch  of  the  composi- 
tion of  the  sacred  books,  and  the  most  modern  one  as  repre- 
senting the  pronunciation  at  or  shortly  before  the  redaction 
of  the  Siddhdnta1.  Now  on  comparing  thcGaina  Prakrit 
especially  in  the  oldest  form  attainable  with  the  Pili  on  one 
side,  and  the  Pr&krit  of  H&la,  Setubandha,  &c.  on  the  other, 
it  will  kppear  to  approach  more  the  Pslli  than  the  later 
Pr&krit.  We  may  therefore  conclude  that  chronologically 
also  the  sacred  books  of  the  Gainas  stand  nearer  those  of 
the  Southern  Buddhists  than  the  works  of  later  Pr&krit 
writers. 

But  we  can  fix  the  date  of  the  Gaina  literature  between 
still  narrower  limits  by  means  of  the  metres  employed 
in  the  sacred  books.  I am  of  opinion  that  the  first  book 
of  the  A^&r&nga  SQtra  and  that  of  the  Sfitraknt&nga 
SOtra  may  be  reckoned  among  the  most  ancient  parts  of 
the  Siddh&nta ; the  style  of  both  works  appears  to  me  to 
prove  the  correctness  of  this  assumption.  Now  a whole 
lesson  of  the  Sutrakrzt&riga  Sfttra  is  written  in  the  Vait&liya 
metre.  The  same  metre  is  used  in  the  Dhammapadam  and 
other  sacred  books  of  th#e  Southern  Buddhists.  But  the  P&li 
verses  represent  an  older  stage  in  the  development  of  the 
Vait41!ya  than  those  in  the  Sfitrakrrt&nga,  as  I shall  prove 
in  a paper  on  the  post-Vedic  metres  soon  to  be  published  in 
the  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society.  Compared 
with  the  common  Vait&liya  verses  of  Sanskrit  literature,  a 
small  number  of  which  occur  already  in  the  Lalita  Vistara, 
the  Vait&lly&  of  the  Sfttrakrrt&nga  must  be  considered  to 
represent  an  earlier  form  of  the  metre.  Again,  ancient  Pftli 
works  seem  to  contain  no  verses  in  the  Ar yk  metre ; at  least 
there  is  none  in  the  Dhammapadam,  nor  have  I found  one 
in  other  works.  But  both  the  A^&r&nga  and  Stitrakro't&Aga 


1 It  might  be  objected  that  archaic  spellings  are  dne  to  the  influence  of  the 
knowledge’of  Sanskrit ; but  the  Gainas  must  always  have  been  so  well  acquainted 
with  PiAkrit*that  they  needed  hot  any  help  from  -the  Sanskrit  to  understand 
their  sacred  books.  On  the  contrary,  in  their  Sanskrit  MSS.  we  frequently 
meet  with  words  spelt  like  Piikrit  words.  Besides,  some  spellings  cannot  be 
explained  as  San$kritidsms,  e.g.  dftraga  for  dfiraya,  the  Sanskrit  prototype 
being  d&raka. 


xlti 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


contain  each  a whole  lecture  in  AryA  verses  of  a form  which 
is  decidedly  older  than,  and  probably  the  parent  of  the 
common  AryA.  The  latter  is  found  in  the  younger  parts 
of  the  SiddhAnta,  in  the  Brahmanical  literature,  both  in 
PrAkrit  and  in  Sanskrit,  and  in  the  works  of  the  Northern 
Buddhists,  e.  g.  the  Lalita  Vistara,  &c.  The  form  of  the 
Trish/ubh  metre  in  ancient  Gaina  works  is  younger  than 
that  in  the  PAli  literature  and  older  than  that  in  the 
Lalita  Vistara.  Finally  the  great  variety  of  artificial 
metres  in  which  the  greater  number  of  the  GAthAs  in  the 
Lalita  Vistara,  &c.,  is  composed  and  which  are  wanting 
in  the  Gaina  SiddhAnta,  seems  to  prove  that  the  literary 
taste  of  the  Gainas  was  fixed  before  the  composition  of 
the  latter  works.  From  all  these  facts  we  must  conclude 
that  the  chronological  position  of  the  oldest  parts  of  the 
Gaina  literature  is  intermediate  between  the  PAli  literature 
and  the  composition  of  the  Lalita  Vistara.  Now  the  PAli 
Pifakas  were  written  in  books  in  the  time  of  Varta  GAmawi, 
who  began  to  reign  88  b.C.  But  they  were  in  existence  already 
some  centuries  before  that  time.  Professor  Max  Muller 
sums  up  his  discussion  on  that  point  by  saying : ‘ We  must 
be  satisfied  therefore,  so  far  as  I fan  see,  at  present  with 
fixing  the  date,  and  the  latest‘date,  of  a Buddhist  canon  at 
the  time  of  the  Second  Council,  377  B.C.1’  Additions  and 
alterations  may  have  been  made  in  the  sacred  texts  after 
that  time ; but  as  our  argument  is  not  based  on  a single 
passage,  or  even  a part  of  the  Dhammapada,  but  on  the 
metrical  laws  of  a variety  of  metres  in  this  an  cl  other.  PAli 
books,  the  admission  of  alterations  and  additions  in  these 
books  will  not  materially  influence  our  conclusion,  viz.  that 
the  whole  of  the  Gaina  SiddhAnta  was  composed  after  the- 
fourth  century  B.  C. 

We  have  seen  that  the  oldest  works  in  the  Gaina  canon 
are  older  than  the  GAthAs  in  the  Lalita  Vistara.  As  this 
work  is  said  to  have  been  translated  into  Chinese  f>5  A.  D., 
we  must  place  the  origin  of  the  extant  Gjflna  literature 
before  the  beginning  of  our  era.  If  we  may  judge  about 


1 Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vot  x,  p.  xxxii. 


INTRODUCTION.  xKU 

the  distance  in  thfte  of  the  questionable  date  from  either 
limit  by  the  greater  or  less  resemblance  of  the  oldest 
Gaina  works  in  verse  with  such  of  the  Southern  and  North- 
ern Buddhists  as  regards  metrical  dr  stylistic  peculiarities, 
we  Should  place  the  beginning  of  the  Gaina  literature 
nearer  the  time  of  the  P&li  literature,  rather  than  that  of 
the  Northern  Buddhists.  This  result  agrees  pretty  well 
with  a tradition  of  the  .SVet&mbaras.  For  they  say1  that 
after  the  twelve  years’  famine,  while  Bhadrab&hu  was  the 
head  of  the  church,  the  Ahgas  were  brought  together  by 
the  Sangha  of  P&laliputra.  Now  Bhadrab&hu’s  death  is 
placed  170  A.  v.  by  the  .SVet&mbaras,.  and  16s  A.V.  by  the 
Digambaras ; he  lived'  therefore,  according  to  the  former, 
under  ATandragupta,  who  is  said  to  have  ascended  the 
throne  155  A.v.  Professor  Max  Muller  assigns  to  ATandra- 
gupta  the  dates  315-291  B.C.;  Westergaard  prefers  320B.C. 
as  a more  likely  date  for  ATandragupta,  ahd  so  does  Kern  2. 
However  this  difference  matters  little : the  date  of  the  collec- 
tion or,  perhaps  more  correctly;  the  composition  of  the  Gaina 
canon  would  fall  somewhere  about  the  end  of  the  fourth  or 
the  beginning  of  the  third  century  B.C.  It  is  worth  noticing, 
that  according  to  the  abdve-cited  tradition,  the  Sangha  of 
Piteliputra  collected  the  eleven  Ahgas  without  the  assist- 
ance of  Bhadrab&hu.  As  the  latter  is  claimed  by  the 
Digambaras  for  one  of  their  teachers,  and  as  the  -SVet&mbaras, 
though  doing  the  same, still  continue  the  list  of  Sthaviras  from 
Sambhhtavj^aya,  Bhadrab&hu’s  fellow  Sthavira,  not  from 
Bhadrab&hu  Himself,  it  seems  to  follow  that  the  Angas, 
brought  together  by  the  Sangha  of  P&felifmtra,  formed  the 
canon  of  the  Gvet&mbaras  only,  not  that  of  the  whole  Gaina 
church.  In  that  case  we  should  not  go  wrong  in  placing  the 
date  of  the  canon  somewhat  later,  under  the  patriarchate  of 
Sth&labhadra,  i.  e.  in  the  first  part  of  the  third  century  B.  C. 

If  the  result  of  our  preceding  inquiry  deserves  credit — 
and  I see/10  counter  arguments  entitling  us  to  mistrust  our 
conclusion-«-the^origin  of  the  extant  Gaina  literature  cannot 
be  placed  earlier  than  about  300  B.C.,  or  two  centuries  after 

1 Paruishfe  Parvan  IX,  55  seqq. 

* Geschiedenis  van  het  Buddhiaae  in  Indie,  it,  p,  M note. 


xliv 


ffAINA  SUTRAS. 


the  origin  of  the  sect.  But  we  are  not  from  this  fact 
obliged  to  assume  that  the  Cainas  in  the  time  intermediate 
between  their  last  prophet  and  the  composition  of  their 
canon  had  to  rely  on  nothing  more  solid  than  a religious 
and  legendary  tradition,  never  brought  into  a fixed  form. 
In  that  case,  Mr.  Barth’s  objections  to  the  trustworthiness 
of  the  Gaina  tradition  would,  it  is  true,  not  be  without 
ground.  However,  we  are  told  by  the  SvetAmbaras,  as  well 
as  the  Digambaras,  that  besides  the  Angas,  there  existed 
other  and  probably  older  works,  called  Pflrvas,  of  which 
there  were  originally  fourteen.  The  knowledge  of  these 
Pflrvas  was  gradually  lost,  till  at  last  it  became  totally 
extinct.  The  tradition  of  the  .SVetAmbaras  aboijt  the  four- 
teen Pflrvas  is  this : the  fourteen  Pflrvas  had  been  in- 
corporated in  the  twelfth  Anga,  the  Drcsh/ivAda,  which 
was  lost  before  1000  A.V.  Rut  a detailed  table  of  con- 
tents of  it,  and  consequently  of  the  Pflrvas,  has  survived 
in  the  fourth  Anga,  the  SamavAyAnga,  and  in. the  Nandi 
Sfltra1.  Whether  the  Pflrvas,  contained  in  the  Drfsh/i- 
vAda,  were  the  original  ones,  or,  as  I am  inclined  to  believe, 
only  abstracts  of  them,  we  cannot  decide;  at  all  events 
there  has  been  a more  detailed  tradition  about  what  they 
contained.  « 

Now  we  should  as*  a rule  be  careful  in  crediting  any 
tradition  about  some  lost  book  or  books  of  great  antiquity, 
because  such  a tradition  is  frequently  invented  by  an 
author  to  furnish  his  doctrines  with  an  authority  from 
which  they  ^iay  be  derived.  But  in  our  cast,  there  are  no 
grounds  for  suspecting  the  correctness  of  so  general  and 
old  a tradition  as  that  about  the  Pflrvas.  For  the  Angas  do 
not  derive  their  authority  from  the  Pflrvas,  but  are  believed 
to  be  coeval  with  the  creation  of  the  world.  As  a fraud, 
the  tradition  about  the  Pflrvas  would  therefore  be  unin-  - 
telligible ; but  accepted  as  truth,  it  well  falls  in  with  our 
views  about  the  development  of  the  Gaina  Jiterature. 
The  name  itself  testifies  to  the  fact  that  the  pflrvas  were 
superseded  by  a new  canog,  for  pflrva  means  former, 


1 See  Weber,  IndUche  Studien,  XVI,  p.  341  siqq. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlv 


earlier1;  and  it  is  assuredly  not  by  accident  that  the  know- 
ledge of  the  PArvas  is  said  to  have  commenced  to  fade  away 
at  the  same  time  when  the  Ahgas  were  collected  by  the 
SaAgha  of  PA/aliputra.  For  after  BhadrabAhu,  only  ten 
out  of  the  fourteen  PArvas  were  known. 

This  then  is  the  most  natural  interpretation  we  can  place 
on  the  tradition  about  the  fourteen  PArvas,  that  they  were 
the  oldest  sacred  books,  which  however  were  superseded  by 
a new  canon.  But  as  regards  the  cause  of  the  abolition  of 
the  old  canon  and  the  composition  of  a new  one,  we  are 
left  to  conjecture,  and  only  as  such  I shall  give  my  opinion. 
We  know  that  the  DrtshrivAda,  which  included  the  fourteen 
PArvas,  dealt  chiefly  with  the  drish/is  or  philosophical 
opinions  of  the  £ainas  and  other  sects.  It  may  be  thence 
inferred  that  the  PArvas  related  controversies  held  between 
MahAvlra  and  rival  teachers.  The  title  pravAd  a,  which  is 
added  to  the  name  of  each  PArva,  seems  to  affirm  this  view. 
Besides,  if  MahAvlra  was  not  the  founder  of  a new  sect,  but 
as  I have  tried  to  prove,  the  reformer  of  an  old  one,  it  is 
very  likely  that  he  should  vigorously  have  combated  the 
opinions  of  his  opponents,  and  defended  those  he  had 
accepted  or* improved.  The  founder  of  a religion  has  to 
establish  his  own  system,  he*is  not  so  much  in  danger  to 
become  a mere  controversialist  as  a reformer.  Now  if  the 
discourses  of  Mahavira,  remembered  and  handed  down  by 
his  disciples,  were  chiefly  controversies,  they  must  have  lost 
their  interest#when  the  opponents  of  MahAvira  had  died  and 
the  sects  headed  by  them  had  become  extinct.  Could  such 
contentions  about  philosophical  questions  which  were  no 
more  of  any  practical  importance,  and  bickerings  of  divines 
all  but  forgotten,  though  these  things  were  of  paramount 
interest  to  the  contemporary  world,  serve  as  a canon  for- 
later  generations  who  lived  in  thoroughly  changed  circum- 
stances ? The  want  of  a canon  suiting  the  condition  of  the 
» - 

1 The  GaicSts  explain  the  meaning  of  the  word  pftrva  in  the  following  way. 
The  Ttrthakara  himself  taught  the  P&gras  to  his  disciples,  the  Ganadharas.  The 
Gaaadharas  then  composed  the  Ahgas.  There  is  evidently  some  truth  in  this 
tradition,  a*  it  does  not  agree  with  the  dogma  of  the  Ahgas,  being  taught  already 
by  the  first  Ttrlhakara.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XVI,  p.  353. 


Xlvi  OAINA  SUTRAS. 

community  must  have  made  itself  felt,  and  it  led,  in  my 
opinion,  to  the  composition  of  a new  canon  and  the  neglect 
of  the  old  one. 

Professor  A.  Weber1  assigns  as  the  probable  cause  of 
the  Drzsh/iv&da  being  lost,  that  the  development  of  the 
.Svet&mbara  sect  had  arrived  at  a point  where  the  diversity 
of  its  tenets  from  those  embodied  in  that  book  became  too 
visible  to  be  passed  over.  Therefore  the  Drish/ivAda,  which 
contained  the  POrvas,  fell  into  neglect.  I cannot  concur  in 
Professor  Weber’s  opinion,  seeing  that  the  Digamb'aras  also 
have  lost  the  Pflrvas,  and  the  Angas  to  boot.  It  is  not 
probable  that  the  development  of  Jainism  during  the 
two  first  centuries  after  the  NirvAwa  should  have  gone  on 
at  so  fapid  a pace  that  its  two  principal  sects  should  have 
been  brought  to  the  necessity  of  discarding  their  old  canon. 
For,  as  stated  above,  after  the  splitting  of  the  church  in 
these -two  sects  the  philosophical  system  of  the  Uainas 
remained  stationary,  since  it  is  nearly  the  same  with  both 
sects.  As  regards  ethics,  both  sects,  it  is  true,  differ  more. 
But  as  the  extant  canon  of  the  .SvetAmbaras  is  not  falling 
into  neglect,  though  many  practices  enjoined  in  it  have  long 
since  been  abandoned,  it  is  not  more  probable  that  they 
should  have  been  more  sensible  on  the  same  score  at  the 
time  when  the  PArvas  formed  their  canon.  Besides,  some 
of  the  POrvas  are  said  to  have  continued  to  be  extant  long 
after  the  time  which  we  have  assigned  for  the  formation  of 
the  new  canon.  At  last  they  disappeared,  not  by  an 
intentional  peglect,  I presume,  but  because  the  new  canon 
set  into  clearer  light  the  (Jaina  doctrines,  and  put  them 
forward  more  systematically  than*  had  been  done  in  the 
controversial  literature  of  the  Ptirvas. 

Our  discussion,  which  we  here  close,  has,  I hope,  proved 
that  the  development  of  the  Caina  church  has  not  been,  at 
any  time,  violently  interrupted  by  some  very  extraordinary 
events;  that  we  can  follow  this  development  from  its  true 
beginning  through  Its  different  stages,  and!  that  (Jainism 
is  as  much  independent  Trom  other  sects,  especially  from 


1 ImUsche  Studien,  XVI,  p.  348. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlvii 


Buddhism,  as  can  be  expected  from  any  sect.  We  must 
leave  to  future  researches  to  work  out  the  details,  but  I 
hope  to  have  removed  the  doubts,  entertained  by  some 
scholars,  about  the  independence  of  the  (Jaina  religion  and 
the  value  of  its  sacred  books  as  trustworthy  documents  for 
the  elucidation  of  its  early  history. 


It  remains  for  me  to  add  a few  remarks  about  the  two 
works  which  have  been  translated  in  this  book. 

The  AMr&nga  Sutra,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  the 
SAmdyika1,  is  the  first  of  the  eleven  Angas.  It  treats  of 
the  kkkta.t  or  conduct,  which  falls  under  the  last  of  the  four 
heads,  or  anuyogas,  into  which  the  sacred  lore  is  divided, 
viz.  Dharmakathct,  Gawita,  Dravya,  and  A'arawakararra. 
The  Ak&r&nga  Sfitra  contains  two  books,  or  Srutaskandhas, 
very  different  from  each  other  in  style  and  in  the  manner  in 
which  the  subject  is  treated.  The  subdivisions  of  the 
second  book  being  called  Affllfls,  or  appendices,  it  follows 
that  only  the  first  book  is  really  old.  That  it  was  consi- 
dered so  even  in  later  times,  is  apparent  from  a remark  of 
.Sil&nka,  who  wrote  the  commentary,  which  is  the  oldest  one 
extant*.  For  speaking  of  the  mangala  or  auspicious  sen- 
tence which,  according  to  a current  theory,  must  occur  at 
the  beginning,  in  the  middle,  and  at  the  end  of  each  work, 
£il&nka  points  out  as(such  the  first  sentence  of  the  first 
lesson  of  the  first  lecture,  the  first  sentence  of  the  fifth 

m 

lesson  of  the  fifth  lecture,  and  the  latter  half  of  the  i6th 
verse  in  the  fourth  lesson  of  the  eighth  lecture  of  the  first 
book.  It  is  evident  that  he  regarded  the  Ai&r&nga  Stitra 
as  ending  with  the  last-named  passage,  which  is  the  last  but 
one  of  the  first  book. 

The  first  book,  then,  is  the  oldest  part  of  the  A£&rddga 
Sfitra ; it  is  probably  the  old  A£4r£nga  Sfitra  itself  to  which 
other  treatises  have  been  added.  For  it  is  complete  in 

1 » * r 

1 See  Professor  Weber’s  remarks  09  the.  possible  bearing  of  this  name  in  the 
treatise  I had  so  often  occasion  to  quote,  p.  343  seqq. 

* It  was  not,  itpiwever,  the  first  commentary,  for  AUhlta  mentions  one  by 
Gandhahastin. 


xlviii 


<7  AINA  SUTRAS. 


itself ; it  describes  in  rather  enigmatical  language  the  pro- 
gress of  the  faithful  towards  the  highest  perfection.  The 
last  lecture,  a sort  of  popular  ballad  on  the  glorious  suffer- 
ing of  the  prophet,  was  perhaps  added  in  later  times,  but 
as  it  stands  now  it  serves  well  to  illustrate  and  to  set  a high 
example  of  the  true  ascetic’s  life.  But  the  greater  part  of 
the  book  is  in  prose  of  the  most  bewildering  kind.  Fre- 
quently we  meet  with  fragments  only  of  sentences,  or  with 
sentences  which  it  is  impossible  to  construe.  This  reminds 
us  of  the  style  of  the  Brahmanical  Sfitras;  but  there  is 
this  difference,  that  in  the  last-named  works  the  single 
aphorisms  are  the  necessary  links  in  the  logical  concatena- 
tion of  ideas,  while  in  our  book  the  single  sentences  or  parts 
of  sentences  do  not  seem  to  be  connected  with  one  another 
in  order  to  carry  on  the  illustration  of  an  idea.  They  do 
not  read  like  a logical  discussion,  but  like  a sermon  made 
up  by  quotations  from  some  then  well-known  sacred  books. 
In  fact  the  fragments  of  verses  and  whole  verses  which  are 
liberally  interspersed  in  the  prose  text  go  far  to  prove  the 
correctness  of  my  conjecture  ; for  many  of  these  ‘disjecta 
membra’  are  very  similar  to  verses  or  PAdas  of  verses 
occurring  in  the  Sfitrakn'tAriga,  UttarAdhyayana,  and 
Daravaik&lika  Sfitras.  They  must  therefore  be  taken  as 
allusions  to  standard  authorities.  The  same  must  be 
assumed  of  at  least  some  prose  sentences,  especially  those 
which  are  incomplete  in  themselves.  Other  passages  again 
seem  to  be  added  to  those  quotations  in  order  to  explain 
or  to  complete  them.  I shall  give  a few  specimens.  I,  4, 
1,  3 we  read,  aho  ya  rAo  g atamAwe  dhlre;  this  is  a 
PAda  of  a Trish/ubh,  and  accordingly  a quotation.  The 
words  which  follow,  sayA  Agayapanna«e,  explain  the 
meaning  of  that  quotation,  aho  ya  rAo  = sayA,  ^ata- 
mine  dhlre  = AgayapannAwe.  The  text  continues 
pamatte  .bahiyA  pAsa.  This  is  probably  a PAda  of  a 
.Sloka ; the  rest  of  the  sentence,  appamatie  sayA 
parakkame^A,  is  the  moral  “application  of  the  pre- 
ceding one.  We  should  therefore  translate.:  ‘Day  and 
night  exerting  himself  and  steadfast/  i.  e.  always  having 
ready  wisdom.  ‘ Look,  the  careless  stand  outside,’  (there- 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlix 


fore)  being  careful  he  should  always  exert  himself.  The 
commentator  however  does  not  separate  the  quotations 
from  the  glosses,  but  takes  all  these  passages  as  parts  of 
one  sentence,  which  he  interprets  in  the  way  that  it.  has 
been  rendered  in  the  text  of  my  translation,  p.  37. 

In  this  as  in  many  other  cases  I have  preferred  to  give  in 
my  translation  the  meaning  which  SilAnka  has  given  in  his 
commentary.  For  it  is  sometimes  extremely  difficult  to 
separate  the  quotations  from  the  remaining  text.  I have 
never  dared  to  do  so  when  they  could  not  be  proved  to  be 
parts  of  verses.  I had  therefore  to  leave  unnoticed  all  such 
passages  which,  as  the  one  quoted  above,  might  be  taken  as 
a Pida  of  a.  Sloka ; for  in  every  prose  work  such  passages 
occur,  though  they  never  were  meant  for  verse.  They  may, 
therefore,  only  accidentally  resemble  parts  of  a 51oka  in 
our  book  too,  though  the  great  number  of  such  passages 
is  rather  suspicious.  The  greatest  difficulty  however  we 
should  incur  if  we  were  to  point  out  the  prose  quota- 
tions, though  there  are  certainly  such,  e.g.  I,  3,  1, 1,  suttl 
amu«i,  mu«i«o  satataw  £*&garanti.  Such  phrases 
differ  in  style  from  the  rest  of.  the  prose  part ; but  it  would 
be  impossible  to  draw  thfc  line  between  them  and  the  work 
of  the  real  author.  From  what>  has  been  said,  it  will  appear 
how  difficult  it  is  to  do  justice  to  such  a work  as  the  first 
book  of  the  A&LrAnga  in  the  first  attempt  to  translate  it 
In  most  cases  I have  contented  myself  with  rendering  the 
text  according  to  the  interpretation  of  the  commentator.  It 
must  be  left  \o  future  labours  to  come  nearer  the  meaning 
of  the  author  than  it  has  been  preserved  by  the  tradition  of 
the  scholiasts. 

. Formerly  the  first  book  contained  nine  lectures  instead  of 
eight,  one  lecture,  the  MaMparinnd,  being  now  lost.  It  was, 
accbrding  to  some  authorities,  Samaviy&nga,  Nandi,  Ava- 
ryaka  Niryukti,  and  VidhiprabhA1,  the  ninth  lecture;  but 
according;  to  the  Niryukti  of  the  A&tr&nga  SOtra,  which 
contains  a systematic  exposition  of  the.  subjects  treated  in 
the  single  lectures  and  lessons  of  the  A&tr&figa  itself,  and 


1 See  Weber,  Xndische  Studien,  XVI,  p.  351  teq. 

C«3  d 


1 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


to  5il£nka  and  the  other  commentators,  it  was  the  eighth 
lecture.  It  contained  seven  lessons,  and  treated  of  some 
details  of  ascetic  life1.  The  fact  that  the  same  subjects 
were  treated  in  the  second  book  probably  occasioned  the 
loss  of  the  Mah&parinni,  ‘because  it  was  superfluous  V 

The  second  book  consists  of  four  parts  (iifflli)  or  appen- 
dices. There  were  originally  five  AT(114s,  but  the  fifth,  the 
Nisftiiyjy’g’Aawa,  is  now  reckoned  as  a separate  work.  The 
first  and  second  parts  lay  down  rules  for  conduct.  Their 
style  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  first  book,  being 
rather  cumbrous,  and  not  at  all  aphoristical.  The  greatest 
difficulty  in  translating  these  parts  is  caused  by  the  numer- 
ous technical  terms,  some  of  which  remain  obscure,  notwith- 
standing  the  explanation  of  the  commentary;  others  again 
are  Simply  transcribed  into  Sanskrit  by  the  scholiast,  and 
seem  to  require  no  definition  to  be  understood  by  the 
modern  Gainas,  But  it  is  different  with  us,  who  are  fre- 
quently reduced  to  guessing  at  the  meaning  of  techni- 
calities which  a Yati  could  explain  at  once.  It  is  therefore 
to  be  hoped  that  some  scholars  in  India,  who  can  avail 
themselves  of  the  instruction  of  a Yati,  will  turn  their 
attention  to  this  subject,  and  get  an  authentic  explanation 
of  the  many  technical  term^  the  meaning  of  which  cannot 
be  ascertained  by  a European  scholar  by  the  means  of 
Gaina  works  only. 

The  third  and  fourth  Aftil&s  have,  according  to  the  Pari- 
xish/a  Parvan  IX,  been  revealed  to  the  eldest  sister  of  Sthfl- 
labhadra  by  Slmandhara,  a Gina  living  in  Fftrvavideha,  a 
mythical  continent.  This  tradition  is  very  remarkable,  as 
it  assigns  what  we  should  call  the  composition  of  the  two 
last  parts  of  the  A£&r£nga  Sfttra  to  the  same  time  when 
the  Kalpa  Sfttra,  which  treats  of  a similar  subject,  was 
composed! 

The  third  part  is  of  great  interest,  as  it  contains  the 
materials  from  which  the  Life  of  Mah&vlra  in  the  Kalpa 
Sfttra  has  been  wc>rked  9ut.  Ii\  fact  most  the  prose 
paragraphs  occur  with  but  small  alterations  in  the  Kalpa 

1 See  Calcutta  edition,  I,  p.  435  seq.,  vv.  351-25$. 

* S&sayattaaewa,  Weber,  1.  c. 


INTRODUCTION. 


li 


Sfitra.  The  latter  work  adds  little  that  is  material  from  an 
historical  point  of  view,  but  a great  deal  of  descriptions 
which  have  become  typical  and  are  to  be  found  in  other 
Caina  works  adapted  to  similar  circumstances.  The  kkk- 
ringa  S-fttra  contains,  besides  the  above-mentioned  para* 
graphs,  some  verses  which  are  wanting  in  the  Kalpa  Sfttra. 
On  comparing  these  verses  with  those  in  the  eighth  lecture 
of  the  first  book,  we  become  aware  of  the  great  difference 
which,  subsists  between  both  portions  of  the  A^&r&hga 
Sfitra,  for  in  both,  kindred  subjects  are  treated  in  Arya 
verses,  yet  the  difference  in  style  and  in  the  treatment  of 
the  metre  is  such  as  can  only  be  explained  by  the  assump- 
tion of  a ctfnsiderablevdistance  of  time. 

The  latter  part  of  the  third  which  treats  of  the  five 

great  vows,  with  their  twenty-five  clauses,  calls  for  no  fur- 
ther remark ; nor  is  anything  more  to  be  said  about  the 
twelve  verses  which  make  up  the  fourth  ATfilci,  but  that  they 
are  probably  old,  and  have  been  added  here  for  want  of  a 
better  place. 

The  translation  of  the  A^&r&nga  Sfitra  is  based  on  my 
edition  of  the  text  in  tjie  P&li  Text  Society1,  and  the 
commentaries  printed  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  Ak&- 
r&nga  Sfitra.  They  are  : 

i.  7ik&  of  .Sil&nka,  also  called  Tattvdditya,  said  to  have 
been  finished  in  the  5aka  year  798  or  876  A.D.,  with  the 
help  of  V&hari  S&dhu.  , 

a.  Dipikd  o£  Ginahawsa  Sfiri,  a teacher  of  the  Br/hat 
Kharatara  Gzkk/idi.  The  Dipiki  is  almost  verbally  copied 
from  the  7ik&,  which  it  pretends  to  reduce  to  a smaller 
compass.  But  the  reduction  consists  almost  entirely  in  the 
onlission  of  .Sll&nka’s  comments  on  the  Niryukti  verses, 
which  form  his  introduction  to  every  lecture  and  lesson, 

3.  P&r.rvaAandra’s  B&ldvabodha  or  Gu^erati  Gloss.  In 
some  parts  of  the  second  book,  which  are  not  explained 
in  the  oldfcr  commentaries,  this  gloss  was  the  only  help 
I had.  It  generally  closefy  follows  the  explanation  of  the 
older  commentaries,  more  especially  that  of  the  Dipfld, 

About  the  K|dpa  Sfitra  I have  spoken  at  some  length  in 

1 The  Ay&rtega  Sutta  of  the  fvetimbara  Jains,  London,  iS8a, 

d 2 


Ill 


GAIN  A SUTRAS. 


the  Introduction  to  my  edition  of  that  work1,  to  which  I 
refer  the  reader  for  further  particulars.  Since  that  time 
Professor  Weber  has  taken  up  the  subject  in  his  treatise 
on  tile  Sacred  Books  of  the  Gainas  and  corrected  some 
mistakes  of  mine.  He  ascertained  that  the  whole  Kalpa 
Sfttra  is  incorporated  as  the  eighth  lecture  in  the  Dari- 
rrutaskandha,  the  fourth  Khz  da  Stitra.  Professor  Weber 
concurs  in  my  opinion  that  the  ‘ Rules  for  Yatis 5 * * * 9 may  be 
the  work  of  Bhadrab&hu2,  and  that  the  ‘List  of  Sthaviras’ 
probably  has  been  added  by  Devarddhi,  the  editor  of  the 
Siddh&nta.  I do  not  think,  however,  that  Devarddhi  was 
the  author  of  the  Life  of  MaMvira  also,  as  Professor  Weber 
suggests.  For  if  it  were  the  work  of  so  well  known  a man, 
tradition  would  certainly  not  have  allowed  such  a fact  to 
become  forgotten.  It  was  a different  thing  with  the  List 
of  Stiiaviras,  which  consists  of  four  or  five  distinct  treatises 
only  put  together  and  added  to  the  Lives  of  the  Ginas  by  the 
editor  of  the  work.  We  cannot  argue  from  the  style  of  the 
Lives  of  the  Ginas  that  that  part  must  be  younger  than 
the  Rules  for  Yatis ; for  the  same  difference  of  style  occa- 
sioned by  the  diversity  of  the  matter  exists  between  the 
third  Kb\k  of  the  A^Sringa  Sfitra  and  the  two  preceding 
ones.  Nor  can  the  meagreness  of  the  contents  be  adduced 
as  an  argument  against  the  antiquity  of  the  Lives  of  the 
Ginas,  since  they  were  probably  not  intended  for  bio- 
graphical treatises,  hut  served  a liturgical  purpose;  for 
when  the  images  of  the  Tlrthakaras  are  worshipped  in 
the  temples  they  are  addressed  with  hymns, *one  of  which 
sums  up  the  Kalyi«akas  or  auspicious  * moments3.  It  is 


1 The  Kalpa  Sfitra  of  Bhadrab&hu,  Leipzig,  1879.  Abhandlungen  fur  die 

Kunde  des  Morgenlandes,  VII,  1 . 

9 That  the  * Rules  for  Yatis  ’ must  have  been  composed  at  least  six  genera- 
tions after  MaMvira  is  evident  from  §§  3-8,  but  probably  the  work  is  still 

younger.  For  in  § 6 the  Sthaviras*  who  come  immediately  after  the  disciples  of 

the  Ganadharatf,  are  spoken  of  in  some  contrast  to  the  * Sramanas  Nirgranthas 

of  (he  present  time.'  Yet  the  work  cannot  be  comparatively  young,  because  it 

appears  from  §§  28-30  thht  the  Ginakalpa  Had  not  yet  fallen  \ato  disuse,  as 

it  Ipd  done  in  later  times.  , 

9 The  rites  are  described  and  (he  hymns  given  in  a modern  work  called 
KatummmtittAhahkar&n&m  pilgft,  a MS.  of  which  belongs  to  the  Deocan 
College* 


INTRODUCTION. 


liii 


with  these  Kaly&«akas  that  the  Lives  of  the  Ginas  are 
chiefly  concerned,  and  this  fact  seems  to  prove  that  the 
custom  of  mentioning  the  Kaly&wakas  in  the  worship  of 
the  Tirthakaras  is  a very  old  one ; for  otherwise  it  would 
be  impossible  to  conceive  what  could  have  induced  an 
'author  to  treat  so  largely  of  so  barren  a subject  as  has  been 
done  in  the  Kalpa  Sfttra.  But  whatever  may  be  the  age  of 
the  several  parts  of  the  Kalpa  Sfltra,  it  is  certain  that  this 
work  has  been  held  in  high  esteem  by  the  Gainas  for  more 
.than  a thousand  years.  It  therefore  deserves  a place  in 
this  collection  of  translations  from  the  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East.  I could  only  have  wished  to  make  my  transla- 
tion more  worthy  of  the  place  where  it  is  to  make  its 
appearance ; but  if  I have  somewhat  fallen  short  in  my 
performance,  I hope  it  will  be  accepted  as  an  excuse  that 
I had  to  translate  into  a language  which  is  not  my  own, 
works  of  a literature  which,  notwithstanding  all  that  has 
been  done  for  it,  still  is  all  but  virgin  soil  to  us. 

HERMANN  JACOBI. 

Munster,  Westphalia,  , 

June,  1884. 


A/fARANGA  SUTRA. 


A/tarAnga  sOtra 

FIRST  BOOK1. 

FIRST  LECTURE2 *, 

CALLED 

KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  .WEAPON. 

First  Lesson8. 

O long-lived  (Gambftsv&min 4 * *) ! I (Sudharman) 
have  heard  the  following  discourse  from  the  vene- 
rable (Mahivlra) : (i) 

Here  many  do  not  remember  whether  they  have 
descended  in  an  eastern  direction  (when  they  were 
born  in  this  world),  or  in  a southern,  or  in  a western, 
or  in  a northern  direction,  or  in  the  direction  from 
above,  or  in  the  direction  from  below,  or  in  a direc- 
tion intermediate  (between  the  cardinal  points),  or  in 
a direction  intermediate  between  these  (and  the 


1 Suyakkhamdha,  rrutaskandha. 

* kgghzyzn*,  adhyayana.  The  first  lecture  is  called  sattha- 
pari#«&  (rastra-pari^iS),  ‘knowledge  of  the  weapon/  Weapons 
are  divided  into  material  weapon  and  weapon  consisting  in  a state 
(bh&va).  The  latter  is  explained  to  be  non-control  (asawyama) 
or  the  wrong  use  of  mind,  speech,  and  body.  Knowledge  (par\ff*4) 
is  twofold  : comprehension  and  renunciation.  The  subject  of  the 
first  lecture  is,  therefore,  the  comprehension  and  renunciation  of 
everything  that  hurts  other  beings. 

8 Uddesayvk,  uddesaka. 

4 GkmbftsvSmin  was  the  disdple  of  Sudharman,  one  of  the 

eleven  chief  disciples  (ga/iadhara)  of  MahSvtra. 

[22]  * B 


a 


AxarAnga  sOtra. 


cardinal  points).  (2)  Similarly,  some  do  not  know 
whether  their  soul  is  born  again  and  again  or  not ; 
nor  what  they  were  formerly,  nor  what  they  will  be- 
come after  having  died  and  left  this  world.  (3)  Now 
this  is  what  one  should  know,  either  by  one’s  own 
knowledge  or  through  the  instruction  of  the  highest 
(i.  e.  a Tlrthakara),  or  having  heard  it  from  others : 
that  he  descended  in  an  eastern  direction,  or  in  any 
other  direction  (particularised  above).  Similarly,  some 
know  that  their  soul  is  born  again  and  again,  that  it 
arrives  in  this  or  that  direction,  whatever  direction 
that  may  be.  (4)  He  believes  in  soul 1,  believes  in 
the  world 2,  believes  in  reward 3,  believes  in  action 
(acknowledged  to  be  our  own  doing  in  such  judgments 
as  these) : * I did  it;'  ‘I  shall  cause  another  to  do  it 
‘I  shall  allow  another  to  do  it4.’  In  the  world,  these 
are  all  the  causes  of  sin e,  which  must  be  compre- 
hended and  renounced.  (5)  A man  that  does  not 
comprehend  and  renounce  the  causes  of  sin,  descends 
in  a cardinal  or  intermediate  direction,  wanders  to  all 
cardinal  or  intermediate  directions,  is  born  again  and 
again  in  manifold  births,  experiences  all  painful 
feelings.  (6)  About  this  the  Revered  One  has  taught 


1 Le.  in  a permanent  soul,  different  from  the  body.  This  is 
said  against  the  AUrv&kas. 

* I.  e.  the  plurality  of  souls,  not  in  one  all-soul,  as  the  Veddntins. 

* Kamma  (karma)  is  that  which  darkens  our  intellect,  &c.  Its 
result  is  the  suffering  condition  of  men,  its  cause  is  action 
(kiriyl,  kriyi). 

4 The  different  tenses  employed  in  these  sentences  imply,  ac- 
cording to  the  commentators,  the  acknowledgment  6f  the  reality 
of  time,  as  past,  pre%ent,  future.  * 1 

* Kamma-sam&rambha.  Kamma  has  been  explained  above. 

Sam&rambha,  a special  action  (kriyS),  is  the  engaging  in  something 
hlamabie  (s4vady4nush/A£na).  4 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  2. 


3 


the  truth  (comprehension  and  renunciation).  For 
the  sake  of  the  splendour,  honour,  and  glory  of  this 
life,  for  the  sake  of  birth,  death,  and  final  liberation, 
for  the  removal  of  pain,  all  these  causes  of  sin  are  at 
work,  which  are  to  be  comprehended  and  renounced 
in  this  world.  He  who,  in  the  world,  comprehends 
and  renounces  these  causes  of  sin,  is  called  a reward- 
knowing sage  (mum).  Thus  I say1.  (7) 

Second  Lesson  2. 

The  (living)  world  is  afflicted,  miserable,  diffi- 
cult to  instruct,  and  without  discrimination.  In 
this  world  full  of  pain,  suffering  by  their  different 
acts,  see  the  benighted  ones  cause  great  pain.  (1) 
See!  there  are  beings  individually  embodied  (in 
earth ; not  one  all-soul).  See  ! there  are  men  who 

1 These  words  (tti  bemi)  stand  at  the  end  of  every  lesson.  The 
commentators  supply  them  also  for  the  beginning  of  each  lesson. 

2 After  the  chief  tenets  of  Jainism  with  regard  to  soul  and  actions 
have  briefly  been  stated  in  the  first  lesson,  the  six  remaining 
lessons  of  the  first  lecture  treat  of  the  actions  which  injure  the  six 
classes  of  lives  or  souls.  The  Gainas  seem  to  have  arrived  at  their 
concept  of  soul,  not  through  the  search  after  the  Self,  the  self- 
existing  unchangeable  principle  in  the  ever-changing  world  of  phe- 
nomena, but  through  the  perception  of  life.  For  the  most  general 
Gaina  term  for  soul  is  life  (^iva),  which  is  identical  with  self  (&y3, 
Stman).  There  are  numberless  lives  or  souls,  not  only  embodied 
in  animals,  men,  gods,  hell-beings  (tasa,  trasa),  and  plants  (vanassaf, 
vanaspati),  but  also  in  the  four  elements — earth,  water,  fire,  wind. 
Earth,  Ac.,  regarded  as  the  abode  of  lives  is  called  earth-body,  Ac. 
These  bodies  are  only  perceptible  when  an  infinite  number  of  them 
is  united  in  one  place.  The  earth- lives,  Ac.,  possess  only  one  organ, 
that  of  feeling;  they  have  undeveloped  (avyakta)intellect  and  feelings 
(vedan&),  bfit  no  lynbs,  &c.  The  doctrines  about  these  elementary 
lives  are  laidtlown  in  fihadrab&hu's  Niryukti  of  our  Sfltra,  and  are 
commented  upon  in  *Stl&nka's  great  commentary  of  it.  They  are 
very  abstruse,  and  deal  in  the  most  minute  distinctions,  which  baffle 
our  comprehension. 

B 2 


4 


AxAranga  s6tra. 


control  themselves,  (whilst  others  only)  pretend 
to  be  houseless  (i.  e.  monks,  such  as  the  Bauddhas, 
whose  conduct  differs  not  from  that  of  house- 
holders), because  one  destroys  this  (earth-body)  by 
bad  and  injurious  doings,  and  many  other  beings, 
besides,  which  he  hurts  by  means  of  earth,  through 
his  doing  acts  relating  to  earth.  (2)  About  this  the 
Revered  One  has  taught  the  truth : for  the  sake  of  the 
splendour,  honour,  and  glory  of  this  life,  for  the  sake 
of  birth,  death,  and  final  liberation,  for  the  removal 
of  pain,  man  acts  sinfully  towards  earth,  or  causes 
others  to  act  so,  or  allows  others  to  act  so.  This 
deprives  him  of  happiness  and  perfect  wisdom. 
About  this  he  is  informed  when  he  has  understood 
or  heard,  either  from  the  Revered  One  or  from  the 
monks,  the  faith  to  be  coveted.  (3)  There  are  some 
who,  of  a truth,  know  this  (i.  e.  injuring)  to  be  the 
bondage,  the  delusion,  the  death,  the  hell.  For  this1 
a man  is  longing  when  he  destroys  this  (earth-body) 
by  bad,  injurious  doings,  and  many  other  beings, 
besides,  which  he  hurts  by  means  of  earth,  through 
his  doing  acts  relating  to  earth.  Thus  I say.  (4) 

As  somebody  may  cut  ojr  strike  a blind  man 
(who  cannot  see  the  wound),  as  somebody  may  cut 
or  strike  the  foot,  the  ankle,  the  knee,  the  thigh,  the 
hip,  the  navel,'  the  belly,  the  flank,  the  back,  the 
bosom,  the  heart,  the  breast,  the  fleck,  the  arm, 
the  finger,  the  nail,  the  eye,  the  brow,  the  forehead, 
the  head,  as  some  kill  (openly),  as  some  extirpate 


1 Ikk’  atthaw.  The  commentators  think  this  to  be«a  reference  to 
the  sentence,  For  the  sake  of  the  splendour,  &2.  Ifewould  be  more 
natural  to  connect  it/ with  the  foregoing  sentence ; the  meaning  is, 
For  bondage;  &c.,  men  commit  violence,  though’  they  believe  it  to  be 
for  the  happiness  of  this  life.  * 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  3.  5 

(secretly),  (thus  the  earth-bodies  are  cut,  struck,  and 
killed  though  their  feeling  is  not  manifest).  (5) 

He  who  injures  these  (earth-bodies)  does  not 
comprehend  and  renounce  the  sinful  acts ; he  who 
does  not  injure  these,  comprehends  and  renounces 
the  sinful  acts.  Knowing  them,  a wise  man  should 
not  act  sinfully  towards  earth,  nor  cause  others  to 
act  so,  nor  allow  others  to  act  so.  He  who  knows 
these  causes  of  sin  relating  to  earth,  is  called  a 
reward-knowing  sage.  Thus  I say.  (6) 

Third  Lesson  h 

(Thus  I say):  He  who  acts  rightly,  who  does 
pious  work,  who  practises  no  deceit,  is  called 
houseless.  (1)  One  should,  conquering  the  world, 
persevere  in  that  (vigour  of)  faith  which  one  had 
on  the  entrance  in  the  order;  the  heroes  (of 
faith),  humbly  bent,  (should  retain  their  belief  in) 
the  illustrious  road  (to  final  liberation)  and  in  the 
world  (of  water-bodies) ; having  rightly  compre- 
hended them  through  the  instruction  (of  Mah&vira), 
(they  should  retain)  that  which  causes  no  danger 
(i.  e.  self-control).  Thus  I say.  (2)  A man  should 
not  (himself)  deny  the  world  of  (water-bodies),  nor 
should  he  deny  the  self.  He  who  denies  the  world 
(of  water-bodies),  denies  the  self;  and  he  who  denies 
the  self,  denies  the  world  of  (water-bodies).  (3) 

See!  there  are  men  who  control  themselves; 

1 The  water-lives  which  are  treated  of  in  this  lesson  are,  as  is  the . 
case  with  ajl  elementary  lives,  divided  into  three  das  es:  the  sen- 
tient, the  senseless,  and  the  mixed.  Only  that  water  which  is  the 
abode  of  senseless  water-lives  may  be  used.  Therefore  water  is  . 
to  be  strataecl  before  use,  because  the  senseless  lives  only  are 
believed^o  remain  in  water  after  that  process. 


6 


AaArAnga  sOtra. 


others  pretend  only  to  be  houseless;  for  one  de- 
stroys this  (water-body)  by  bad,  injurious  doings, 
and  many  other  beings,  besides,  which  he  hurts  by 
means  of  water,  through  his  doing  acts  relating  to 
water.  (4)  About  this  the  Revered  One  has  taught 
the  truth : for  the  sake  of  the  splendour,  honour, 
and  glory  of  this  life,  for  the  sake  of  birth,  death, 
and  final  liberation,  for  the  removal  of  pain,  man 
acts  sinfully  towards  water,  or  causes  others  to  act 
so,  or  allows  others  to  act  so.  (5)  This  deprives 
him  of  happiness  and  perfect  wisdom.  About  this 
he  is  informed  when  he  has  understood  and  heard 
from  the  Revered  One,  or  from  the  monks,  the  faith 
to  be  coveted.  There  are  some  who,  of  a truth, 
know  this  (i.  e.  injuring)  to  be  the  bondage,  the 
delusion,  the  death,  the  hell.  For  this  a man  is 
longing  when  he  destroys  this  (water-body)  by  bad 
and  injurious  doings,  and  many  other  beings,  besides, 
which  he  hurts  by  means  of  w^ater,  through  his  doing 
acts  relating  to  water.  Thus  I say.  (6) 

There  are  beings  living  in  water,  many  lives ; of 
a truth,  to  the  monks  water  has  been  declared  to  be 
living  matter.  See ! considering  the  injuries  (done 
to  water-bodies),  those  acts  (w'hich  are  injuries,  but 
must  be  done  before  the  use  of  water,  e.g.  straining) 
have  been  distinctly  declared.  Moreover  he  (who 
uses  water  which  is  not  strained)  takes  away  what 
has  not  belen  given  (i.e.  the  bodies  of  water-lives). 
(A  Bauddha  will  object) : ‘ We  have  permission,  we 
have  permission  to  drink  it,  or  (to  take  it)  for  toilet 
purposes.’  Thus  they  destroy  by  various  injuries 
(the  water-bodies).  But  in  dais  their*  doctrine  is  of 
no  authority.  t 

He  who  injures  these  (water-bodies)  does  not 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  4. 


7 


comprehend  and  renounce  the  sinful  acts;  he  who 
does  not  injure  these,  comprehends  and  renounces 
the  sinful  acts.  (7)  Knowing  them,  a wise  man 
should  not  act  sinfully  towards  water,  nor  cause 
others  to  act  so,  nor  allow  others  to  act  so.  He 
who  knows  these  causes  of  sin  relating  to  water,  is 
called  a reward-knowing  sage.  Thus  I say.  (8) 

Fourth  Lesson. 

(Thus  I say) : A man  should  not,  of  his  own 
accord,  deny  the  world  (of  fire-bodies),  nor  should 
he  deny  the  self.  He  who  denies  the  world  (of 
fire-bodies),  denies  the  self ; and  he  who  denies  the 
self,  denies  the  world  (of  fire-bodies),  (i)  He  who 
knows  that  (viz.  fire)  through  which  injury  is  done 
to  the  long-living  bodies  (i.e.  plants) 1,  knows  also 
that  which  does  no  injury  (i.e.  control) ; and  he  who 
knows  that  which  does  no  injury,  knows  also  that 
through  which  no  injury  is  done  to  the  long-living 
bodies.  (2)  This  has  been*  seen  by  the  heroes  (of 
faith)  who  conquered  ignorance;  for  they  control 
themselves,  always  exert  themselves,  always  mind 
their  duty.  He  who  is  unmindful  of  duty,  and 
desiring  of  the  qualities  (i.e.  of  the  pleasure  and 
profit  which  may  be  derived  from  - the  elements) 
is  called  the  torment 2 (of  living  beings).  Knowing 
this,  a wise  man  (resolves):  * Now  (I  shall  do)  no 
more  what  I used  to  do  wantonly  before.’  (3)  See  t 
there  are  men  who  control  themselves ; others 
pretend  only  to  be  houseless ; for  one  destroys  this 

(fire-body}  by  bad  and  injurious  doings,  and  many 

• • • 

1 The  fire-bodies  live  ncft  longer  than  three  days. 

* Dawj/a. 


8 


AjtAranga  sOtra. 


other  beings,  besides,  which  he  hurts  by  means  of  fire, 
through  his  doing  acts  relating  to  fire.  About  this 
the  Revered  One  has  taught  the  truth : for  the  sake 
of  the  splendour,  honour,  and  glory  of  this  life,  for 
the  sake  of  birth,  death,  and  final  liberation,  for  the 
removal  of  pain,  man  acts  sinfully  towards  fire, 
or  causes  others  to  act  so,  or  allows  others  to 
act  so.  (4)  This  deprives  him  of  happiness  and 
perfect  wisdom.  About  this  he  is  informed  when 
he  has  understood,  or  heard  from  the  Revered  One 
or  from  the  monks,  the  faith  to  be  coveted.  There 
are  some  who,  of  a truth,  know  this  (i.e.  injuring) 
to  be  the  bondage,  the  delusion,  the  death,  the  hell. 
For  this  a man  is  longing,  when  he  destroys  this 
(fire-body)  by  bad  and  injurious  doings,  and  many 
other  beings,  besides,  which  he  hurts  by  means  of 
fire,  through  his  doing  acts  relating  to  fire.  Thus 
I say.  (5) 

There  are  beings  living  fa  the  earth,  living  in 
grass,  living  on  leaves, 'living  in  wood,  living  in 
cowdung,  living  in  dust-heaps,  jumping  beings  which 
coming  near  (fire)  fall  into  it.  Some,  certainly, 
touched  by  fire,  shrivel  up ; those  which  shrivel  up 
there,  lose  their  sense  there ; . those  which  lose  their 
sense  there,  die' there.  (6) 

He  who  injures  these  (fire-bodies)  does  not  com- 
prehend and  renounce  the  sinful  acts ; he  who  does 
not  injure  these,  comprehends  and  renounces  the 
sinful  acts.  Knowing  them,  a wise  man  should  not 
act  sinfully  towards  fire,  nor  cause  others  to  act  so, 
nor  allow  others  to  act  so.  r He  wbo  ljnows  the 
causes  of  sin  relating  toi  fire,  is  called  a reward- 
knowing sage.  Thus  I say.  (7) 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  t,  LESSON  5. 


9 


Fifth  Lesson1. 

* I shall  not  do  (acts  relating  to  plants)  after  having 
entered  the  order,  having  recognised  (the  truth  about 
these  acts),  and  having  conceived  that  which  is  free 
from  danger  (i.e.  control).’ 

He  who  does  no  acts  (relating  to  plants),  has 
ceased  from  works ; he  who  has  ceased  from 
them  is  called  ‘houseless/  (1)  Quality  is  the  whirl- 
pool (&va//a  = sa*#s&ra),  and  the  whirlpool  is 
quality.  Looking  up,  down,  aside,  eastward,  he  sees 
colours,  hearing  he  hears  sounds;  (2)  longing  up- 
wards, down,  aside,  eastward,  he  becomes  attached 
to  colours  and  sounds.  That  is  called  the  world ; 
not  guarded  against  it,  not  obeying  the  law  (of  the 
Tirthakaras),  relishing  the  qualities,  conducting  him- 
self wrongly,  he  will  wantonly  live  in  a house  (i,e. 
belong  to  the  world).  ^3) 

See ! there  are  men  who  control  themselves ; others 
pretend  only  to  be  houseless,  for  one  destroys  this  (body 
of  a plant)  by  bad  and  injurious  doings,  and  many  other 

1 The  discussion  of  the  * wind-bodies/  which  should  follow  that 
of  the  fire-bodies,  is  postponed  for  two  lessons  in  which  the  vege- 
table and  animal  world  is  treated  of.  The  reason  for  this  inter- 
ruption of  the  line  of  exposition  is,  as  the  commentators  state, 
that  the  nature  of  wind,  because  of  its  invisibleness,  is  open  to 
doubts,  whilst  plants  and  animals  are  admitted  by  all  to  be  living 
beings,  and  are,  therefore,  the  best  support  of  the  hylozoistical 
theory.  That  wind  was  not  readily  admitted  by  the  ancient 
Indians  to  be  a peculiar  substance  may  still  be  recognised  in  the 
philosophical  Sfitras  of  the  Brahmans.  For  there  it  was  thought 
necessary  tfi  discuss,  at  length  the  proofs  for  the  existence  of  a 
peculiar  substance,  wind.  It  should  be  remarked  that  tfind  was 
never  identified  with  air,  and  that  the  Crainas  ha4  not  yet  separated 
air  from  space/ 


10  AxarAnga  s6tra. 

beings,  besides,  which  he  hurts  by  means  of  plants, 
through  his  doing  acts  relating  to  plants.  (4)  About 
this  the  Revered  One  has  taught  the  truth : for  the 
sake  of  the  splendour,  honour,  and  glory  of  this  life, 
for  the  sake  of  birth,  death,  and  final  liberation,  for 
the  removal  of  pain,  man  acts  sinfully  towards 
plants,  or  causes  others  to  act  so,  or  allows  others 
to  act  so.  This  deprives  him  of  happiness  and 
perfect  wisdom.  About  this  he  is  informed  when 
he  has  understood,  or  heard  from  the  Revered 
One  car  from  the  monks,  the  faith  to  be  coveted. 
There  are  some  who,  of  a truth,  know  this  (i.e. 
injuring)  to  be  the  bondage,  the  delusion,  the  death, 
the  hell.  For  this  a man  is  longing  when  he  destroys 
this  (body  of  a plant)  by  bad  and  injurious  doings, 
and  many  other  beings,  besides,  which  he  hurts  by 
means  of  plants,  through  his  doing  acts  relating  to 
plants.  Thus  I say.  (5) 

As  the  nature  of  this  (i.e.  mgn)  is  to  be  born  and 
to  grow  old,  so  is  the  nature  of  that  (i.e.  plants)  to  be 
born  and  to  grow  old ; as  this  has  reason,  so  that 
has  reason1;  as  this  falls  sick  when  cut,  so  that 
falls  sick  when  cut ; as  this  needs  food,  so  that  needs 
food ; as  this  will  decay,  so  tha£  will  decay ; as  this 
is  not  eternal,  so  that  is  not  eternal ; as  this  takes 

1 

increment,  so  that  takes  increment ; as  this  is  chang- 
ing, so  that  is  changing.  (6)  He  who  injures  these 
(plants)  does  not  comprehend  and  renounce  the  sinful 

1 The  plants  know  the  seasons,  for  they  sprout  at  the  proper 
time,  the  Aroka  buds  and  blooms  when  touched  by  the  foot  of  a 
well-attired  girl,  and  the  Vakula  whep  watered  jwith^wine ; the 
seed  grows  always  upwards : all  this  would  not  happen  if  the 
plants  had  no  knowledge  of  the  circumstances  about  them.  Such 
is  the  reasoning  of  the  commentators.  % 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  6. 


II 


acts ; he  who  does  not  injure  these,  comprehends 
and  renounces  the  sinful  acts.  Knowing  them,  a wise 
man  should  not  act  sinfully  towards  plants,  nor  cause 
others  to  act  so,  nor  allow  others  to  act  so.  He  who 
knows  these  causes  of  sin  relating  to  plants,  is  called 
a reward-knowing  sage.  Thus  I say.  (7) 


Sixth  Lesson. 

Thus  I say : There  are  beings  called  the  animate, 
viz.  those  who  are  produced  1.  from  eggs  (birds, 
&c.),  2.  from  a fetus  (as  elephants,  &c.),  3.  from  a 
fetus  with  an  enveloping  membrane  (as  cows, 
buffaloes,  &c.),  4.  from  fluids  (as  worms,  &c.), 
5.  from  sweat  (as  bugs,  lice,  &c.),  6.  by  coagulation 
(as  locusts,  ants,  &c.),  7.  from  sprouts  (as  butterflies, 
wagtails,  &c.),  8.  by  regeneration  (men,  gods,  hell- 
beings).  This  is  called  the  Saws&ra  (1)  for  the 
slow,  for  the  ignorant  Having  well  considered  it, 
having  well  looked  at  it,,  I say  thus : all  beings, 
those  with  two,  three,  four  senses,  plants,  those  with 
five  senses,  and  the  rest  of  creation,  (experience) 
individually  pleasure  or  displeasure,  pain,  great 
terror,  and  unhappiness.  Beings  are  filled  with 
alarm  from  all  directions  and  in  all  directions.  See ! 
there  the  benighted  ones  cause  great  pain.  See  •* 
there  are  beings  individually  embodied.  (2) 

See!  there  are  men  who  control  themselves; 
others  pretend  only  to  tye  houseless,  for  one  destroys 
this  (body  of  an  animal)  by  bad  and  injurious  doings, 
and  many  other  beings,  besides,  which  he  hurts  by 
means  oi»  anfmals,  through  his  doing  acts  relating 
to  animals.  (3)  About  this  the  Revered  One  has 
taught  the  Jtruth:  for  the  sake  of  the  splendour r 


12 


aitarAnga  sOtra. 


honour,  and  glory  of  this  life,  for  the  sake  of  birth, 
death,  and  final  liberation,  for  the  removal  of  pain, 
man  acts  sinfully  towards  animals,  causes  others 
to  act  so,  or  allows  others  to  act  so.  This  de- 
prives him  of  happiness  and  perfect  wisdom.  About 
this  he  is  informed,  when  he  has  understood,  or 
heard  from  the  Revered  One  or  from  the  monks, 
the  faith  to  be  coveted.  There  are  some  who,  of 
a truth,  know  this  (i.e.  injuring)  to  be  the  bondage, 
the  delusion,  the  death,  the  hell.  For  this  a man 
is  longing,  when  he  injures  this  (body  of  an  animal) 
by  bad  and  injurious  doings,  and  many  other  beings, 
besides,  which  he  hurts  by  means  of  animals,  through 
acts  relating  to  animals.  Thus  I say.  (4) 

Some  slay  (animals)  for  sacrificial  purposes,  some 
kill  (animals)  for  the  sake  of  their  skin,  some  kill 
(them)  for  the  sake  of  their  flesh,  some  kill  them 
for  the  sake  of  their  blood;  thus  for  the  sake  of 
their  heart,  their*  bile,  the  feathers  of  their  tail, 
their  tail,  their  big  or  small  horns,  their  teeth,  their 
tusks,  their  nails,  their  sinews,  their  bones1;  with 
a purpose  or  without  a purpose.  Some  kill  animals 
because  they  have  been  wounded  by  them,  or  are 
wounded,  or  will  be  wounded.  (5) 

He  who  injures  these  (animals)  does  not  com- 
prehend and  renounce  the  sinful  acts ; he  who  does 
not  injure  these,  comprehends  and  renounces  the 
sinful  acts.  Knowing  them,  a wise  man  should  not 
act  sinfully  towards  animals,  nor  cause  others  to  act 

so,  nor  allow  others  to  act  so.  He  who  knows 

— — L ; — - — ■ »■»■— — .—■■■ — 

1 The  word  after  bones  (a //Me)  fs  a.i/Aimi'rngit,  for  which 
toiffaloes,  boars,  &c.  are  killed,  as,  the  commentator  states.  I do 
not  know  the  meaning  of  this  word  which  is  rendered  asthi- 
mifig£.  ♦ 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  7. 


13 


these  causes  of  sin  relating  to  animals,  is  called  a 
reward-knowing  sage.  Thus  I say.  (6) 

Seventh  Lesson. 

He  who  is  averse  from  (all  actions  relating  to) 
wind,  knows  affliction.  Knowing  what  is  bad,  he 
who  knows  it  with  regard  to  himself,  knows  it  with 
regard  to  (the  world)  outside ; and  he  who  knows 
it  with  regard  to  (the  world)  outside,  knows  it  with 
regard  to  himself : this  reciprocity  (between  himself 
and)  others  (one  should  mind).  Those  who  are 
appeased,  who  are  free  from  passion,  do  not  desire 
to  live.  (1) 

See ! there  are  men  who  control  themselves ; 
others  pretend  only  to  be  houseless,  for  one  destroys 
this  (wind-body)  by  bad  and  injurious  doings,  and 
many  other  beings,  besides,  which  he  hurts  by  means 
of  wind,  through  his  doing  acts  relating  to  wind.  (2) 
About  this1  the  Revered  One  has  taught  the  truth  : 
for  the  sake  of  the  splendour,  honour,  and  glory 
of  this  life,  for  the  sake  of  birth,  death,  and  final 
liberation,  for-  the  removal  of  pain,  man  acts  sinfully 
towards  wind,  or  , causes  others  to  act  so,,  or 
allows  others  to  act  so.  This  deprives  him  of 
happiness  and  perfect  wisdom.  About  this  he  is 
informed  when  he  has  understood,  or  heard  from 
the  Revered  One  or  from  the  monks,  the  faith  to 
be  coveted.  There  are  some  who,  of  a truth,  know 
this  to  be  the  bondage,  the  delusion,  the  death,  the 
hell.  For  this  a man  is  longing  when  he  destroys 
this  (wisd-body)  by  bad  and  injurious  acts,  and  many 
other  beings',  beside^,  which  he  hurts  by  means  of 
wind,  through  his  doing  acts  relating  to  wind.  Thus 
I say.  (3)  .. 


14  atArAnga  sOtra. 

There  are  jumping  beings  which,  coming  near 
wind,  fall  into  it  Some,  certainly,  touched  by  wind, 
shrivel  up ; those  which  shrivel  up  there,  lose  their 
sense  there ; those  which  lose  their  sense  there,  die 
there.  (4) 

He  who  injures  these  (wind-bodies)  does  not  com- 
prehend and  renounce  the  sinful  acts ; he  who  does 
not  injure  these,  comprehends  and  renounces  the 
sinful  acts.  Knowing  them,  a wise  man  should  not 
act  sinfully  towards  wind,  nor  cause  others  to  act  so, 
nor  allow  others  to  act  so.  He  who  knows  these 
causes  of  sin  relating  to  wind,  is  called  a reward- 
knowing sage.  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Be  aware  that  about  this  (wind-body)  too  those 
are  involved  in  sin  who  delight  not  in  the  right 
conduct,  and,  though  doing  acts,  talk  about  religious 
discipline,  who  conducting  themselves  according  to 
their  own  will,  pursuing  sensual  pleasures,  and  en- 
gaging  in  acts,  are  addicted  to  worldliness.  He 
who  has  the  true  knowledge  about  all  things,  will 
commit  no  sinful  act,  nor  cause  others  to  do  so, 
&c.  (6)  Knowing  them,  a wise  man  should  not 
act  sinfully  towards  the  aggregate  of  six  (kinds  of) 
lives,  nor  cause  others  to  act  so,  nor  allow  others  to 
act  so.  He  who  knows  these  causes  of  sin  relating 
to  the  aggregate  of  the  six  (kinds  of)  lives,  is  called 
a reward-knowing  sage.  Thus  I say.  (7) 


End  of  the  First  Lecture,  called  Knowledge  of  the 

Weapon. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  I. 


15 


SECOND  LECTURE, 

■ CALLED 

CONQUEST  OF  THE  WORLD. 

First  Lesson. 

Quality  is  the  seat  of  the  root,  and  the  seat  of 
the  root  is  quality  \ He  who  longs  for  the  qualities, 
is  overcome  by  great  pain,  and  he  is  careless8. 
(For  he  thinks)  I have  to  provide  for  a mother, 
for  a father,  for  a sister,  for  a wife,  for  sons,  for 
daughters,  for  a daughter-in-law,  for  my  friends,  for 
near  and  remote  relations,  for  my  acquaintances8, 
for  different  kinds  of  property;  profit,  meals,  and 
clothes.  Longing  for  these  objects,  people  are 
careless,  suffer  day  and  night,  work  in  the  right 
and  the  wrong  time,  desire  wealth  and  treasures, 
commit  injuries  and  violent  acts,  direct  the  mind, 
again  and  again,  upon  these  injurious  doings  (de*- 
scribed  in  the  preceding  lecture),  (i)  (Doing  so), 
the  life  of  some  mdrtals  (which  by  destiny  would 
have  been  long)  is  shortened.  For  when  with  the 
deterioration  of  the  perceptions  of  the  ear,  eye, 
organs  of  smelling,  tasting,  touching,  a man  becomes 
aware  of  the  decline  of  life,  they1 * *  4 after  a time 


1 1.  e.  in  the  qualities  of  the  external  things  lies  the  primaiy  cause 
of  the  Sams&ra,  viz.  sin;  the  qualities  produce  sin,  and  sinfulness 
makes  us  apt  to  $njoy  the  qualities.  , 

* L e.  gives  way  to  love,  hate,  &c. 

* Samthuya.  The  commenftitors  explain  this  word  acquaint- 
ance or  one  who  is  recommended  to  me. 

4 Le.  these  Ming  perceptions. 


i6 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


produce  dotage.  Or  his  kinsmen  with  whom  he 
lives  together  will,  after  a time,  first  grumble  at 
him,  and  he  will  afterwards  grumble  at  them. 
They  cannot  help  thee  or  protect  thee,  nor  canst 
thou  help  them  or  protect  them.  (2)  He  is  not 
fit  for  hilarity,  playing,  pleasure,  show.  There- 
fore, ah!  proceeding  to  pilgrimage,  and  thinking 
that  the  present  moment  is  favourable  (for  such 
intentions J),  he  should  be  steadfast  and  not,  even 
for  an  hour,  carelessly  conduct  himself.  His  youth, 
his  age,  his  life  fade  away. 

A man  who  carelessly  conducts  himself,  who 
killing,  cutting,  striking,  destroying,  chasing  away, 
frightening  (living  beings)  resolves  to  do  what  has 
not  been  done  (by  any  one) — him  his  relations  with 
whom  he  lived  together,  will  first  cherish,  and  he 
will  afterwards  cherish  them.  But  they  cannot  help 
thee  or  protect  thee,  nor  canst  thou  help  them  or 
protect  them.  (3) 

Or  he  heaps  up  treasures  for  the  benefit  of  some 
spendthrifts,  by  pinching  himself.  Then,  after  a 
time,  he  falls  in  sickness ; those  with  whom  he 
lives  together  will  first  leave  him,  and  he  will  after- 
wards leave,  them.  They  cannot  help  thee  or  protect 
thee,  nor  canst  thou  help  them  or  protect  them.  (4) 

Knowing  pain  and  pleasure  in  all  their  variety 8, 
and  seeing  his  life  not  yet  decline,  a wise  man  should 
know  that  to  be  the  proper  moment  (for  entering 
a religious  life) ; while  the  perceptions  of  his  ear, 
eye,  organs  of  smelling,  tasting,  touching  are  not 


1 I.e.  his  present  life;  for  the  birth  in  ttryakshetra  and  in  a 
noble  family  is  difficult  to  obtain  in  this  Saws&ra. 

* Patteya*&,  singly,  with  regard  to  the  living  beings. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  2. 


17 


yet  deteriorated,  while  all  these  perceptions  are  not 
yet  deteriorated,  man  should  prosecute 1 * * the  real  end 
of  his  soul  *.  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Second  Lesson. 

A wise  man  should  remove  any  aversion  (to  con- 
trol*); he  will  be  liberated  in  the  proper  time. 
Some,  following  wrong  instruction,  turn  away  (from 
control).  They  are  dull,  wrapped  in  delusion. 
While  they  imitate  the  life  of  monks,  (saying), ‘We 
shall  be  free  from  attachment,’  they  enjoy  the  plea- 
sures that  offer  themselves4 * *.  Through  wrong  in- 
struction the  (would-be)  sages  trouble  themselves 
(for  pleasures);  thus  they  sink  deeper  and  deeper 
in  delusion,  (and  cannot  get)  to  this,  nor  to  the 
opposite  shore  *.  Those  who  are  freed  (from  attach- 
ment to  the  world  and  its  pleasures),  reach  the 
opposite  shore*.  Subduing  desire  by  desirelessness, 
he  does  not  enjoy  the'  pleasures  that  offer  them- 
selves. Desireless,  giving'  up  the  world,  and 
ceasing  to  act,  he  knows,  and  sees,  and  has  no 
wishes  because  of  his  discernment7;  he  is  called 
houseless.  (1)  ' 


1 Samanuvfise^&si  (tti  bemi)  is  taken  by  the  commentators 
for  the  second  person,  which  always  occurs  before  tti  bemi,  bat 
nowhere  else.  I think  si  belongs  to  tti  bemi,  and  stands  for  se= 
asau. 

* Viz.  control. 

* Arati  is  usually  dislike,  iu/fei  exercise;  but,  according  to  the 
commentators,  these  words  here  mean  samyam&rati  and  nivar- 
tayati.  •* 

4 E.  g.  the  Baddhi’sts,  Ac.,  SilkyfidayaA. 

* I.  e.  they  are  neither  householders  nor  houseless  monks. 

* 1 e.  moksha,  final  liberation. 

T Vis.  between  good  and  bad,  or  of  the  results  of  desire. 

[as]  C 


aatarA^ga  s6tra. 


18 


(But  on  the  contrary)  he  suffers  day  and  night, 
works  in  the  right  and  the  wrong  time,  desires  wealth 
and  treasures,  commits  injuries  and  violent  acts, 
again  and  again  directs  his  mind  upon  these  in- 
jurious doings1;  for  his  own  sake,  to  support  or 
to  be  supported  by  his  relations,  friends,  the  an- 
cestors, gods,  the  king,  thieves,  guests,  paupers, 
tSramatfas.  (2) 

Thus  violence  is  done  by  these  various  acts, 
deliberately,  out  of  fear,  because  they  think  ‘it  is 
for  the  expiation  of  sins  or  for  some  other  hope. 
Knowing  this,  a wise  man  should  neither  himself 
commit  violence  by,  such  acts,  nor  order  others  to 
commit  violence  by  such  acts,  nor  consent  to  the 
violence  done  by  somebody  else. 

This  road  (to  happiness)  has  been  declared  by 
the  noble  ones,  that  a clever  man  should  not  be 
defiled  (by  sin).  Thus  I say.  (3) 

< 

Third  Lesson. 

‘ Frequently  (I  have  been  born)  in  a high  family, 
frequently  in  a low  one ; I am  not  mean,  nor  noble, 
nor  do  I desire  (social  preferment).’  Thus  reflect- 
ing, who  would  brag  about  his  family  or  about  his 
glory,  or  for  what  should  he  long  ? (1) 

Therefore  a wise  man  should  neither  be  glad  nor 
angry  (about  his  lot):  thou  shouldst  know  and  con- 
sider the  happiness  of  living  creatures.  Carefully 
conducting  himself,  he  should  mind  this : blindness, 
deafness,  dumbness,  one-eyedness4  hunchbacked - 

1 See  I,  a,  1,  § 1. 

* The  sacrificial  rites  of  the  Br&hmanas  are  meant. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  3. 


19 


ness1 * *,  blackness,  variety  of  colour  (he  will  always 
experience) ; because  of  his  carelessness  he  is  bom 
in  many  births,  he  experiences  various  feelings.  (2) 
Not  enlightened  (about  the  cause  of  these  ills)  he 
is  afflicted  (by  them),  always  turns  round  (in  the 
whirl  of)  birth  and  death.  Life  is  dear  to  many 
who  own  fields  and  houses.  Having  acquired  dyed 
and  coloured  (clothes),  jewels,  earrings,  gold,  and 
women,  they  become  attached  to  these  things. 
And  a fool  who  longs  for  life,  and  worldly-minded  *, 
laments  that  (for  these  worldly  goods)  penance, 
self-restraint,  and  control  do  not  avail,  will  igno- 
rantly come  to  grief.  (3) 

Those  who  are  of  a steady  conduct  do  not  desire 
this  (wealth).  Knowing  birth  and  death,  one  should 
firmly  walk  the  path  (i.e.  right  conduct),  (and  not 
wait  for  old  age  to  commence  a religious  life), 

For  there  is  nothing  inaccessible  for  death.  All 
beings  are  fond  of  life®,  like  pleasure,  hate  pain, 
shun  destruction,  like  life,  long  to  live.  To  all  life 
is  dear4 5.  (4) 

Having  acquired  it  (i.e.  wealth),  employing  bipeds 
and  quadrupeds,  gathering  riches  in  the  three  ways  *, 


1 Hereafter  varfabhatta#*  explained  by  vinirgataprfthivi 
,va<fabha-laksha»am. 

* Sawpu»naw=sampfirnam,  lit.  complete,  i.e.  the  complete 
end  of  human  existence  is  enjoyment  of  the  world. 

* Another  reading  mentioned  by  the  commentator  is  piyfiyavS, 
fond  of  themselves. 

4 The  original  of  this  paragraph  reads  partly  metrical ; after  the 

verse  marked*  in  my  edition  there  follow  three  'final  p&das  of  a 
rioka.  •»  * 

5 According  to  the  commentators,  the  three  modes  of  activity 
(yoga),  action,  order,  consent,  or  the  three  organs  of  activity 
(kara»a),  mind,  speech,  body,  are  meant. 


20 


ajcAranga  sOtra. 


whatever  his  portion  will  be,  small  or  great,  he  will 
desire  to  enjoy  it.  Then  at  one  time,  his  manifold 
savings  are  a large  treasure.  Then  at  another  time, 
his  heirs  divide  it,  or  those  who  are  without  a living 
steal  it,  or  the  king  takes  it  away,  or  it  is  ruined  in 
some  way  or  other,  or  it  is  consumed  by  the  con- 
flagration of  the  house.  Thus  a fool  doing  cruel 
deeds  which  benefit  another,  will  ignorantly  come 
thereby  to  grief.  (5) 

This  certainly  has  been  declared  by  the  sage1. 
They  do  not  cross  the  flood 2 * * * * *,  nor  can  they  cross 
it ; they  do  not  go  to  the  next  shore,  nor  can  they 
go  to  it ; they  do  not  go  to  the  opposite  shore,  nor 
can  they  go  to  it. 

And  though  hearing  the  doctrine,  he  does  not 
stand  in  the  right  place ; but  the  clever  one  who 
adopts  the  true  (faith),  stands  in  the  right  place  (i.  e. 
control) 8. 

He  who  sees  by  himself,  needs  no  instruction.  But 
the  miserable,  afflicted  fool  who  delights  in  pleasures, 
and  whose  miseries  do  not  cease,  is  turned  round  in 
the  whirl  of  pains.  Thus  I say.  (6) 

1 I.  e.  the  Tlrthakara. 

* Le.  the  Samira,  represented  under  the  idea  of  a lake  or  slough, 

in  the  mud  of  which  the  worldly  are  sinking  without  being  able  to 

reach  the  shore. 

* ky&mggzm  4a  Adaya  tatnmi  th&nt  na  4i//Aai  1 avitaham  pappa 
kheyanne  tammi  th&mxnvax  4i//4ai  11  These  words  form  a regular 
xk>ka,  which  has  not  been  noticed  by  any  commentator.  •STl&nka 
seems  to  have  read  vitaham  pappa  akheyanne,  but  I consider 
the  reading  of  our  MSS.  better,  for  if  we  adopt  it,  th£n&  retains  the 

same  meaning  (viz.  -control)  in  both  parts  of  the  couplet,  while  if 

we  adopt  •SUAnka’s  reading,  /iina  must  in  the  on!  place  denote 

the  contrary  of  what  it  means  in  the  other;,  idiniya,  doctrine,  lib  to 
be  adopted. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  4.  21 


Fourth  Lesson. 

't'hen,  after  a time,  he  falls  in  sickness:  those 
with  whom  he  lives  together,  first  grumble  at  him, 
and  he  afterwards  grumbles  at  them.  But  they 
cannot  help  thee  or  protect  thee,  nor  can&c  thou 
help  them  or  protect  them,  (i) 

Knowing  pleasure  and  pain  separately1 *,  they 
trouble  themselves  about  the  enjoyment  (of  the 
external  objects).  For  some  men  in  this  world  have 
(such  a character  that)  they  will  desire  to  enjoy  their 
portion,  whether  it  be  large  or  small,  in  the  three 
ways*.  Then,  at  one  time,  it  will  be  sufficiently 
large,  with  many  resources.  Then,  at  another  time, 
his  heirs  divide  it,  or  those  who  have  no  living 
steal  it,  or  the  king  takes  it  away,  or  it  is  ruined 
in  some  way  or  other,  or  it  is  consumed  by  the 
conflagration  of  the  'house.  Thus  a fool,  doing 
cruel  acts,  comes  ignorantly  to  grief.  (2) 

Wisely . reject  hope  and  desire 3,  and  extracting 
that  thorn  (i.e.  pleasure)  thou  (shouldst  act  rightly). 
People  who  are  enveloped  by  delusion  do  not 
understand  this : he  who  (gathers  wealth)  will, 
perhaps,  not  have  the  benefit  of  it.* 

The  world  is  greatly  troubled  by  women.  They 
(viz.  men)  forsooth  say,  * These  are  the  vessels  (of 
happiness).’  But  this  leads  them  to  pain,  to  delusion, 

1 The  meaning  seems  to  be:  If  people  do  not  know  that 
pleasure  and  pain  are  the  result  of  their  own  works,  Ac. 

* The  commentators  giver  no  explanation.of  what  is  meant  by 

‘ the  three  ways,’  yet  cf.  3,  § 5.  , 

* The  words  fisawi  kz  Him  dim  tz  vigir»<fa  dhire  form  atrish/ubh 
pdda. 


22 


Axaranga  sOtra. 


to  death,  to  hell,  to  birth  as  hell-beings  or  brute 
beasts.  The  fool  never  knows  the  law.  (3) 

Thus  spake  the  hero 1 : ‘Be  careful  against  this 
great  delusion;  the  clever  one  should  have  done 
with  carelessness  by  considering  death  in  tranquillity, 
and  that,  the  nature  of  which  is  decay  (viz.  the 
body) ; these  (pleasures),  look ! will  not  satisfy  (thee). 
Therefore  have  done  with  them ! Sage,  look ! this 
is  the  great  danger,  it  should  overcome  none  whom- 
soever. He  is  called  a hero  who  is  not  vexed  by 
(the  hardships  caused)  by  control.  He  should  not 
be  angry  because  the  (householder)  gives  him  little. 
If  turned  off,  he  should  go.  Thou  shouldst  conform 
to  the  conduct  of  the  sages.'  Thus  I say.  (4) 


Fifth  Lesson. 

That  for  this  (viz.  pleasure)  the  wants  of  the 
world  should  be  supplied  by  bad  injurious  doings : 
for  one's  own  sons,  daughters,  daughters-in-law, 
kinsmen,  nurses,  kings,  male  and  female  slaves, 
male  and  female  servants,  for  the  sake  of  hospitality, 
of  supper  and  breakfast,  the  accumulation  of  wealth 
is  effected.  (1) 

(This  is)  here  for  the  enjoyment  of  some  men. 
(But  a wise  man)  exerting  himself,  houseless,  noble, 
of  noble  intellect,  of  noble  perception  recognises  the 
proper  moment  (for  all  actions).  He  should  not 
accept,  nor  cause  others  to  accept,  or  permit  them 


* The  MSS.  have  ud&hu  dhjre.  The  last  word  is  a frequent 
mistake  for  vire,  which  is  adopted  by  the  commentators  They 
explain  udfihu  by  ud-4ha— uktavin 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  5.  23 

to  accept  anything  unclean1.  Free  from  uncleanli- 
ness he  should  wander  about.  (2) 

Being  not  seen  in  buying  and  selling,  he  should 
not  buy,  nor  cause  others  to  buy,  nor  consent  to  the 
buying  of  others.  This  mendicant  who  knows  the 
time,  the  strength  (of  himself),  the  measure  (of  all 
things), the  practice2,  the  occasion  (for  begging,  &c.), 
the  conduct,  the  religious  precepts3,  the  true  con- 
dition (of  the  donor  or  hearer),  who  disowns  all 
things  not  requisite  for.  religious  purposes4,  who 
is  under  no  obligations,  he  proceeds  securely  (on 
the  road  to  final  liberation)  after  having  cut  off  both 
(love  and  hate).  Clothes,  alms-bowls,  blankets, 
brooms,  property 5,  straw  mats,  with  regard  to  these 
things  he  should  know  (what  is  unclean).  When 
he  receives  food  he  should  know  the  quantity 
required.  This  has  been  declared  by  the  Revered 
One : he  should  not  rejoice  in  the  receipt  of  a gift, 
nor  be  sorry  when  he, gets  nothing.  Having  got 
much,  one  should  not  storq' it  away;  one  should 
abstain  from  things  not  requisite  for  religious 
purposes.  With  a mind  different  (from  that  of 
common  people)  a seer  abandons  (these  things). 
This  is  the  road  taught  by  the  noble  ones,  well 
acquainted  with  which  one  should  not  he  defiled  (by 
sin).  Thus  I say.  (3) 


1 Amagandha,  unclean,  is  also  a Buddhist  term;  see  Rhys 
Davids'  Buddhism,  pp.  131, 18  r. 

1 Kheda=abhyisa,  or  the  pain  of  worldly  existence. 

* Samaya, 

4 Pariggaiia ; k might  aly>  be  translated,  who  disowns  attach- 
ment. 

* Oggaha=savagraha  property  e,g.  the  ground  or  space  which 
the  householder  allows  the  mendicant  who  stays  in  his  house. 


*4 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


Pleasures  are  difficult  to  reject,  life  is  difficult  to 
prolong.  That  man,  certainly,  who  loves  pleasures, 
is  afflicted  (by  their  loss),  is  sorry  in  his  heart,  leaves 
his  usual  ways,  is  troubled,  suffers  pain.  The  far- 
sighted one  who  knows  the  world,  knows  its  inferior 
part  (hell),  its  upper  part  (heaven),  its  side-long  part 
(the  state  of  brute  beasts).  He  who  knows  the 
relation  (of  human  affairs,  viz.)  that  he  who  desires 
for  the  world  is  always  turned  round  (in  the  sa*»- 
sAra),  is  called  among  mortals  a hero,  who  liberates 
those  who  are  fettered.  (4) 

As  the  interior  (of  the  body  is  loathsome),  so  is 
the  exterior ; as  the  exterior,  so  is  the  interior.  In 
the  interior  of  the  body  he  perceives  the  foul  interior 
humours,  he  observes  their  several  courses  (or 
eruptions).  A well-informed  man  knowing  (and 
renouncing  the  body  and  pleasures),  should  not  eat 
(his  saliva1 * * * * *);  he  should  not  oppose  himself  to  the 
(current  of  knowledge).  Certainly,  that  man  who 
engages  in  worldly  affairs,  who  practises  many  tricks, 
who  is  bewildered  by  his  own  doings,  acts  again  and 
again  on  that  desire  which  increases  his  unrighteous- 
ness*. Hence  the  above  has  been  said  for  the 
increase  of  this  (life) 8.  (A  man  addicted  to  pleasures) 
acts  as  if  immortal,  and  puts  great  faith  (in  pleasure); 
but  when  he  perceives  that  this  body  sustains  pains, 
he  cries  in  his  ignorance.  Therefore  keep  in  your 
mind  what  I say.  (5) 


1 I.e.  what  he  has  thrown  away,  vomited,  as  it  were;  pleasures. 

* Veraiw  vzddhei  appawo,  apparently  the  clos^of  a rloka; 

see  1, 3,  a,  3.  , , • « 

* The  commentators  supply  rartrasya,  the  body.  For  sinful  acts 

injure  the  bodies  of  living  beings ; therefore  they  are  increased  by 

our  abstaining  from  sin. 


Book  i,  lecture  2,  lesson  6. 


25 


A heretic1  professes  to  cure  (the  love  of  pleasure), 
while  he  kills,  cuts,  strikes,  destroys,  chases  away, 
resolves  to  do  what  has  not  been  done  before.  To 
whom  he  applies  the  cure — enough  of  that  fool’s 
affection®;  or  he  who  has  (the  cure)  applied,  is  a 
fool.  This  does  not  apply  to  the  houseless.  Thus 
I say.  (6) 


Sixth  Lesson. 

He  who  perfectly  understands  (what  has  been 
said  in  the  preceding  lesson)  and  follows  the  (faith) 
to  be  coveted,  should  therefore  do  no  sinful  act, 
nor  cause  others  to  do  one.  Perchance  he  meditates 
a sin  (by  an  act  against  only)  one  (of  the  six 
aggregates  of  lives);  but  he  will  be  guilty  (of  sin 
against)  every  one  of  the  six.  Desiring  happi- 
ness and  bewailing  much,  he  comes  ignorantly  to 
grief  through  his  ojvn  misfortune.  (1)  Through, 
his  own  carelessness  every  one  produces  that  phase 
of  life  in  which  the  vital  spirits  are  pained. 
Observing  (the  pain  of  mundane  existence,  one 
should)  not  (act)  with  violence.  This  is  called  the 
true  knowledge  (and  renunciation).  He  who  ceasing 
from  acts  relinquishes  the  idea  of  property,  relin- 
quishes property  itself.  That  sage  has  seen  the 
path  (to  final  liberation)  for  whom  there  exists  no 
property.  Knowing  this,  a wise  man,  who  knows 
the  world  and  has  cast  off  the  idea  of  the  world, 


1 Paw^ite=panrfita»jinint,  who  believes  or  pretends  to  be  a 
learned  majL  • . . 

* Ala m balassa  samgen a,  a p&da  of  iloka ; followed  by  the 
words  in  note  2,  p.  24,  it  forms  the  hemistich  of  verSe  3 in  the 
Second  Lesson  of  the  next  Chapter. 


26 


Ar  A rang a s<jtra. 


should  prudently  conquer1  the  obstructions  to 
righteousness.  Thus  I say.  (2) 

The  hero  does  not  tolerate  discontent, 

The  hero  does  not  tolerate  lust 
Because  the  hero  is  not  careless, 

The  hero  is  not  attached  (to  the  objects  of  the 
senses). 

Being  indifferent  against  sounds  (and  the  other) 
perceptions,  detest  the  comfort  of  this  life. 

A sage  adopting  a life  of  wisdom,  should  treat 
his  gross  body  roughly. 

The  heroes  who  have  right  intuition,  use  mean 
and  rough  food 2. 

Such  a man  is  said  to  have  crossed  the  flood  (of 
life),  to  be  a sage,  to  have  passed  over  (the  sa m- 
sara),  to  be  liberated,  to  have  ceased  (from  all 
activity).  Thus  I say.  (3) 

A sage  is  called  unfit  who  does  not  follow  the 
law  and  fails  in  his  office.  (But  on  the  contrary) 
he.  is  praised  as  a hero,  he,  overcomes  the  connection 
with  the  world,  he  is  called  the  guide  (or  the  right 
way).  What  has  been  declared  to  be  here  the  un- 
happiness of  mortals,  of  that  unhappiness  the  clever 
ones  propound  the  knowledge.  (4) 

Thus  understanding  (and  renouncing)  acts,  a man 
who  recognises  the  truth,  delights  in  nothing  else ; 
and  he  who  delights  only  in  the  truth,  recognises 
nothing  else.  As  (the  law)  has  been  revealed  for 
the  full  one,  so  for  the  empty  one ; as  for  the  empty 


1 See1  p.  17,  note  r.  • 

* These  words  apparently  form  a rldka,  thougl!  the'third  p&da 
is  too  short  hy  one  syllable ; but  this  fault  can  easily  be  corrected 
by  inserting  ^:  pamtam  ltiham  ka.  sevanti.  The  commentators 
treat  die  passage  as  prose. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  6. 


27 


one,  so  for  the  full  one 1.  But  he  (to  whom  the 
faith  is  preached)  will  perhaps  disrespectfully  beat 
(the  preacher).  Yet  know,  there  is  no  good  in  this 
(indiscriminate  preaching).  (But  ascertain  before) 
what  sort  of  man  he  is,  and  whom  he  worships.  He 
is  called  a hero  who  liberates  the  bound,  above, 
below,  and  in  the  sideward  directions.  He  always 
conforms  to  all  knowledge  (and  renunciation) ; the 
hero  is  not  polluted  by  the  sin  of  killing.  He  is 
a wise  man  who  perfectly  knows  the  non-killing2, 
who  searches  after  the  liberation  of  the  bound. 
The  clever  one  is  neither  bound  nor  liberated ; he 
should  do  or  leave  undone  (what  the  hero  does 
or  does  not  do) ; he  should  not  do  what  (the  hero) 
leaves  undone : 

Knowing  (and  renouncing)  murder  of  any  kind 
and  worldly  ideas  in  all  respects 3. 

He  who  sees  himself,  needs  no  instruction.  But 
the  miserable  and  afflicted  fool  who  delights  in 
pleasures  and  whose  miseries  do  not  cease,  is  turned 
round  in  the  whirl  of  pains 4.  Thus  I say.  (5) 


End  of  the  Second  Lecture,  called  Conquest  of  the 

World. 


1 The  full  and  the  empty  designate  those  who  adopt  the  true 
faith,  and  those  who  do  not. 

* A»uggh&ya«a.  According  to  the  commentator,  the  destruc- 
tion of  karman. 

* This  is  again  a stray  half  doka.  The  text  abounds  in  minor 
fragments  of  verses,  trish/ubhs,  or  dokas. 

4 See  the  <md  oT  the  Third*  Lesson. 


28 


Aaaranga  sGtra. 


THIRD  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

HOT  AND  COLD. 

First  Lesson. 

The  unwise  sleep,  the  sages  always  wake.  Know, 
that  in  this  world  the  (cause  of)  misery1  brings  forth 
evil  consequences!  Knowing  the  course  of  the 
world8,  one  should  cease  from  violent  acts.  He 
who  correctly  possesses 8 these  (sensual  perceptions), 
viz.  sounds,  and  colours,  and  smells,  and  tastes,  and 
touches  (i),  who  self-possessed,  wise,  just,  chaste, 
with  right  comprehension  understands  the  world,  he 
is  to  be  called  a sage,  one  who  knows  the  law,  and 
righteous.  He  knows  the  connection  of  the  whirl 
(of  births)  and  the  current  (of  sensation  with  love 
and  hate).  Not  minding  heat  and  cold,  equanimous 
against  pleasure  and  pain,  the  Nirgrantha  does  not 
feel  the  austerity  of  penance.  Waking  and  free 
from  hostility,  a wise  man,  thou  liberatest  (thyself 
and  others)  from  the  miseries,  (2) 

But  a man  always  benighted,  subject  to  old  age 
and  death,  does  not  know  thfe  law.  Seeing  living 
beings  suffering,  earnestly  enter  a religious  life4. 
Considering  this,  O prudent  one,  look ! 

Knowing  the  misery  that  results  from  action, 

The  deluded  and  careless  one  returns  tp  life ; 

■'  s 1 •> 

1 I.e.  ignorance  and  delusion.. 

* Regarding  the  evil-doer.  * And  renounces. 

* Again  a naif  rloka,  unnoticed  as  such  by  the  commentators. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  2. 


29 


Disregarding  sounds  and  colours,  upright, 
Avoiding  M&ra  one  is  liberated  from  death  K 
Carefully  abstaining  from  pleasures  and  ceasing 
from  bad  works  he  is  a hero,  guarding  himself,  who 
is  grounded  in  knowledge 8.  (3)  He  who  knows  the 
violence  done  for  the  sake  of  special  objects,  knows 
what  is  free  from  violence8;  he  who  knows  what 
is  free  from  violence,  knows  the  violence  done  for 
special  objects.  For  him  who  is  without  karman, 
there  is  no  appellation4.  The  condition  of  living 
beings  arises  from  karman. 

Examining  karman  and  the  root  of  karman,  viz. 
killing examining  (it)  and  adopting  its  contrary #,  he 
is  not  seen  by  both  ends 7.  Knowing  this,  a wise  man 
who  knows  the  world  and  has  cast  off  the  idea  of 
the  world,  should  prudently  conquer  the  obstructions 
to  righteousness 8.  Thus  I say.  (4) 


Second  Wesson. 

Look,  Sir,  at  birth  and  old  age  here, 

Examine  and  know  the  happiness  of  the  living, 
Thence  the  most  learned,  knowing  (what  is  called) 
the  highest  good, 

He  who  has  right  intuition,  commits- no  sin.  (i) 


1 A trish/ubh  unnoticed  by  the  commentators. 

1 Kheyanna=kheda^na  nipuna.  I think  the  Sanskrit  would 
rather  be  kshetra^na. 

* Le.  control 

4 As  man,  god,  hell-being,  young,  old,  Ac. 

• See  p.  38,  nete  4.  , 

* Literally,  the  left  side  (savyam);  control  is  intended. 

8 L e.  he  is  not  touched  by  loke  and  hate,  which  cause  death. 

• See  I,  a,  6 (s). 


akArAnga  sOtra. 


Undo  the  bond  with  mortals  here ; 

He  who  lives  by  sins,  is  subject  to  both  *, 

Desirous  of  pleasures  they  heap  up  karman, 

Influenced  by  it  they  are  born  again.  (2) 

Killing  (animals)  he  thinks  good  sport,  and  derives 
mirth  from  it : 

Away  with  that  fool’s  company,  he  increases  his 
own  unrighteousness.  (3) 

Thence  the  most  learned,  knowing  (what  is  called) 
the  highest  good, 

Aware  of  the  punishment,  commits  no  sin ; 

Wisely  avoid  the  top  and  the  root1  2! 

Cutting  them  off,  he  knows  himself  free  from 
karman.  (4) 

That  man  will  be  liberated  from  death ; he  is 
a sage  who  sees  the  danger 3,  knowing  the  highest 
good  in  this  world,  leading  a circumspect  life,  calm, 
guarded,  endowed  (with  knowledge,  &c.),  always 
restrained,  longing  for  death,  he  should  lead  a 
religious  life.  Manifold,  indeed,  appear  sinful 
actions ; therefore  prove  constant  to  truth ! Delight- 
ing in  it4,  a wise  man  destroys  all  karman.  (1) 

Many,  indeed,  are  the  plans  of  this  man  (of  the 
world) ; he  will  satisfy  his  desires ; he  (thereby 
causes)  the  slaughter  of  others,  the  pain  of  others, 
the  punishment  of  others,  the  slaughter,  the  blame, 

1 Literally,  sees  both,  i.e.  experiences  bodily  and  mental  (agonies), 
those  of  this  world  and  of  the  next. 

* The  root  means  delusion,  the  top  the  rest  of  the  sins. 

* Arising  from  worldliness.  The  same  words  occur  in  2, 6,  § a ; 
but  bhae  (bhaya)  stands  here  instead  of  pahe,  rctod.  Bhae 
occurs  also  in  the  former  place  in  §ome  MSS. 

4 Ettho  ’varae  is  usually  ‘ceasing  from  it,  i.e.  activity.’  But 
here  the  commentators  explain  it  as  translated  above. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  3. 


3* 


the  punishment  of  a whole  province.  Doing  such 
things,  some  have  exerted  themselves  (2) 

Therefore  the  second  (i.e.  the  wrong  creed)  is 
not  adhered  to.  The  knowing  one  seeing  the  vanity 
(of  the  world)  [knowing  the  rise  and  fall  of  the 
souls 2],  the  Brahman  follows  the  unrivalled  (control 
of  the  (7ainas).  He  should  not  kill,  nor  cause  others 
to  kill,  nor  consent  to  the  killing  of  others.  * Avoid 
gaiety,  not  delighting  in  creatures  (i.e.  women), 
having  the  highest  intuition,’  keeping  off  from  sinful 
acts.  (3) 

And  the  hero  should  conquer  wrath  and  pride, 

Look  at  the  great  hell  (as  the  place)  for  greed. 

Therefore  the  hero  abstaining  from  killing. 

Should  destroy  sorrow,  going  the  road  of  easiness  *. 

Here  now  the  hero,  knowing  the  bondage, 

Knowing  sorrow,  should  restrain  himself. 

Having  risen  to  birth  among  men, 

He  should  not  take  the  life  of  living  beings. 

» 

Third  Lesson. 

‘ Knowing  the  connection  of  the  world,  (careless- 
ness is  not  for  his  benefit 4).'  ‘ Look  at  the  exterior 

1 Samu/Miy  & is  commonly  used  in  the  sense  of  right  effort,  and 
thus  explained  by  the  commentators  in  this  place,  though  we  should 
expect  the  contrary. 

* The  words  in  brackets  []  are  a gloss  upon  the  preceding 
sentence.  If  we  leave  them  out,  the  rest  forms  half  a rioka. 

8 Laghubhuya,  i.  e.  nirvdwa. 

4 This  is  a very  difficult  passage.  Connection  (sandhi)  is  ex- 
plained in,  different  ways,  as  karmavivara,  samyagzWi  anSvSpti,  and 
the  state  of, the  soul,  which  Jias  only  temponyrily  abd  not  thoroughly 
come  to  rest.  To  complete  the  sentence  the  commentators  add 
pram&do  na  jreyase.  As  the  words  of  the  text  form  the  pftda  of  a 
rioka,  it  is  probable  that  something  like  pamdo  neva  se^ase 


32 


AxAranga  sOtra. 


(world  from  analogy  with  thy  own)  self ; [then]  thou 
wilt  neither  kill  nor  destroy  (living  beings);’  viz. 
out  of  reciprocal  regard  [well  examining]  he  does 
no  sinful  act  What  is  the  characteristic  of  a sage  ? 
‘ Recognising  the  equality  (of  all  living  beings),  he 
appeases  hisself.’  (i) 

Knowing  the  highest  good,  one  should  never  be 
careless ; 

Guarding  one’s  self,  always  prudent,  one  should 
pass  life  on  the  right  road. 

‘One  should  acquire  disregard  of  sensual  enjoy- 
ment, being  with  a great  one  (i.e.  a god)  or  the 
small  bnes  (men).’  When  one  knows  whence  men 
come  and  where  they  go,  and  when  both  ends  are 
out  of  sight1,  one  is  not  cut,  nor  slit,  nor  burnt, 
nor  struck  * (2)  by  any  one  in  the  whole  world 8. 

Some  do  not  remember  what  preceded  the  pre- 
sent: ‘what  has  been  his  past?  what  will  be  his 
future?’  Some  men  here  say:  ‘what  has  been  his 
past,  that  will  be  his  future  V 

There  Is  no  past  thing,  nor  is  there  a future  one ; 

So  opine  the  Tath&gatas. 

He  whose  karman  has  ceased  and  conduct  is  right, 

concluded  the  hemistich.  The  meaning  is,  • Make  good  use  of 
any  opening  to  get  out  of  worldly  troubles.’ 

1 See  z,  lesson  4. 

1 The  reading  of  the  N&g&rguniyas,  according  to  the  com- 
mentary, was,  ‘Knowing  well  and  essentially  the  five  (perceptions) 
in  the  object  and  the  three  degrees  (i.  e.  good,  middle,  bad),  in  the 
twofold  (i.e.  what  is  to  be  avoided  and  to  be  adopted),  one  is  not 
marred,  by  either  (love  and  hate).’  These  words  form  a xloka. 

* The  commentary  connects  these  words  with  the  preceding 
sentence,  saying  that  the  accusative  stands  for  die  instrumental, 
by  any  one.  * 

4 The  words  of  the  original  read  like  a trish/nbh  in  disorder;  die 
same  is  the  case  with  a different  reading  quoted  by  the  commentator. 


33 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  4. 

who  recognises  the  truth  (stated  above)  and  destroys 
sinfulness  (thinks) : 

What  is  discontent  and  what  is  pleasure  ? not  sub- 
ject to  either,  one  should  live ; 

Giving  up  all  gaiety,  circumspect  and  restrained, 
one  should  lead  a religious  life.  (3) 

Man!  Thou  art  thy  own  friend;  why  wishest 
thou  for  a friend  beyond  thyself  ? Whom  he  knows 
as  a dweller  on  high1,  him  he  should  know  as  a 
dweller  far  (from  sin) ; and  whom  he  knows  as 
a dweller  far  (from  sin),  him  he  should  know  as  a 
dweller  or.  high.  Man!  restraining  thyself  (from 
the  outward  world)  ‘ thou  wilt  get  free  from  pain.’ 
Man,  understand  well  the  truth  ! exerting  himself  in 
the  rule  of  truth  a wise  man  overcomes  Mira.  (4) 

‘ The  gifted  man 2 * following  the  law,  sees  well  his 
true  interest.’  In  a twofold  way8,  for  the  sake  of 
life’s  splendour,  honour  and  glory  (some  men  exert 
themselves),  wherein  they  go  astray.  The  gifted 2, 
touched  by  calamity,  are  not  confounded.  ‘Mind 
this ! the  worthy  one,  in  this  world,  gets  out  of  the 
creation4 *.’  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Fourth  Lesson. 

That  man  (i.e.  the  liberated)  conquers  wrath, 
pride,  deceit,  and  greed.  This  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  Seer  who  does  not  injure  living  beings  and  has 
put  an  end  (to  acts  and  to  samsira).  Preventing 

1 There  is  apparently  a pan  in  the  text:  uAKLlaiyaw  is  explained 
by  ui$ilayit£ram = remover  (of  sins),  but  as  contrasted  with  dflrS- 
laiya  it  has  the,  meaning  we  have  adopted  above. 

8 With  knowledge,  &c. 

* For  the  sake  of  love  and  hate,  or  worldly  and  heavenly  bliss. 

4 If  loySloya  is  omitted,  the  last  words  form  the  half  of  a xloka. 

[aaj  D 


34 


Axaranga  sOtra. 


propensity  to  sin  destroys  former  actions.  He  who 
knows  one  thing,  knows  all  things;  and  he  who 
knows  all  things,  knows  one  thing1.  He  who  is 
careless  in  all  respects,  is  in  danger 2 ; he  who  is  not 
careless  in  all  respects,  is  free  from  danger,  (i) 

He  who  conquers  one  (passion),  conquers  many ; 
and  he  who  conquers  many,  conquers  one.  ‘ Know- 
ing the  misery  of  the  world  ’ rejecting  the  connection 
with  the  world,  * the  heroes  go  on  the  great  journey,’ 
they  rise  gradually ; ‘ they  do  not  desire  life.’  (2) 

He  who  avoids  one  (passion),  avoids  (them  all) 
severally ; and  he  who  avoids  them  severally,  avoids 
one.  Faithful  according  to  the  commandment  (of 
the  Tirthakaras),  wise,  and  understanding  the  world 
according  to  the  commandment — such  a man  is 
without  danger2  from  anywhere.  There  are  de- 
grees in  injurious  acts,  but  there  are  no  degrees  in 
control.  (3) 

He  who  knows3  wrath,  knows  pride ; he  who  knows 
pride,  knows  deceit;  he  who  knows  deceit,  knows 
greed;  he  \yho  knows '■greed,  knows  love;  he  who 
knows  love,  knows  hate ; he  who  knows  hate,  knows 
delusion ; he  who  knows  delusion,  knows  conception ; 
he  who  knows  conception,  knows  birth;  he  who 
knows  birth,  knows  death ; he  who  knows  death, 
knows  hell ; he  who  knows  hell,  knows  animal  exist- 
ence; he- who  knows  animal  existence,  knows  pain.  . 

Therefore,  a wise  man  should  avoid  wrath,  pride, 
deceit,  greed,  love,  hate,  delusion,  conception,  birth, 
death,  hell,  animal  existence,  and  pain. 


1 Because  true  knowledge  of  one  thing  is  inseparable  from  true 
knowledge  of  all  things.  * t 

* I.  e.  he  heaps  up  karman.  > 

* And  accordingly  avoids  wrath. 


BQOK  I,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  4.  35 

This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Seer,  who  does  not 
injure  living  beings  and  has  put  an  end  (to  acts 
and  to  sawsira).  Preventing  the  propensity  to  sin 
destroys  former  actions.  Is  there  any  worldly 
weakness  in  the  Seer  ? There  exists  none,  there 
is  none.  Thus  I say.  (4) 


End  of  the  Third  Lecture,  called  Hot  and  Cold. 


36 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


FOURTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

First  Lesson. 

The  Arhats  and  Bhagavats  of  the  past,  present, 
and  future,  all  say  thus,  speak  thus,  declare  thus, 
explain  thus : all  breathing,  existing,  living,  sentient 
creatures1  should  not  be  slain,  nor  treated  with 
violence,  nor  abused,  nor  tormented,  nor  driven 
away,  (i) 

This  is  the  pure,  unchangeable,  eternal  law,  which 
the  clever  ones,  who  understand  the  world,  have 
declared : among  the  zealous  and  the  not  zealous, 
among  the  faithful  and  the  not  faithful,  among  the 
not  cruel  and  the  cruel,  ambng  those  who  have 
worldly  weakness  and  those  who  have  not,  among 
those  who  like  social  bonds  and  those  who  do  not : 
* that  is  the  truth,  that  is  so,  that  is  proclaimed  in 
this  (creed).’  (2) 

Having  adopted  (the  law),  one  should  not  hide  it, 
nor  forsake  it. ' Correctly  understanding  the  law, 
one  should  arrive  at  indifference  for  the  impressions 
of  the  senses2 *,  and  ‘not  act  on  the  motives  of  the 
world.’  ‘He  who  is  not  of  this  mind8,  how  should 
he  come  to  the  other4?’ 


1 P4*4  bhfiyfi  satta.  In  the  sequel  we  trarftlate  these 

words,  all  sorts  of  lining  beings.  * * 

* Literally,  what  one  sees.  • 

* Who  acts  not  on  worldly  motives. 


4 Sinfulness. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  4,  LESSON  2. 


37 


What  has  been  said  here,  has  been  seen  (by  the 
omniscient  ones),  heard  (by  the  believers),  acknow- 
ledged (by  the  faithful),  and  thoroughly  understood 
by  them.  Those  who  acquiesce  and  indulge  (in 
worldly  pleasures),  are  born  again  and  again.  * Day 
and  night  exerting  thyself,  steadfast,'  always  having 
ready  wisdom,  perceive  that  the  careless  (stand) 
outside  (of  salvation);  if  careful,  thou  wilt  always 
conquer.  Thus  I say.  (3) 

. Second  Lesson. 

There  are  as  many  isravas1  as  there  are  parisra- 
vas,  and  there  are  as  many  parisravas  as  there  are 
Ssravas.  There  are  as  many  anflsravas  as  there  are 
aparisravas,  and  there  are  as  many  aparisravas  as 
there  are  anfisravas.  He  who  well  understands 
these  words  and  regards  the  world  according  to  the 
instruction  (and  understands),  that  which  has  been 
distinctly  declared,  that  ‘wise  man  proclaims  (the 
truth)  here  to  men,’  who  still  belong  to  the  sawsflra, 
who  are  awakened,  and  have  reached  discrimina- 
tion. (1) 

‘Those  also  who  are  afflicted  and  careless’  (will 
be  instructed).  I say  this  as  a truth.  There  is 
nothing  secure  from  the  mouth  of*  death.  Those 
who  are  led  by  their  desires,  who  are  the  tabernacle 
of  fraud,  ‘who  seized  by  Time  dwell  in  the  heap 
(of  karman),’  are  born  again  and  again.  [Many  who 
are  again  and  again  (immersed)  in  delusion,  (will 

1 Asrava  jp  that  by  means#of  which  karman  takes  effect  upon  the 
soul,  parisrava  that  (nir^ara,  &c.)  by  which  the  influence  of  karman 
is  counteracted.  Anasrava  is  that  by  which  flsrava  is  avoided 
(religious  vows),  and  aparisrava  that  by  which  karman  is  acquired. 


38 


AjcAranga  sGtra. 


often  renew)  their  acquaintance  with  the  places  of 
pain;  they  experience  the  pains  inherent  in  re- 
generation. He  who  often  does  cruel  acts,  often 
undergoes  (punishment  in  hell,  &c.)  He  who 
seldom  does  cruel  acts,  seldom  undergoes  (punish- 
ment).]1 (2) 

Some  say  thus,  also  the  wise  ones ; the  wise  ones 
say  thus,  also  some  others 2.  Many  and  several  in 
this  world,  Brihma«as  or  6rama#as,  raise  this  dis- 
cussion : We  have  seen,  heard,  acknowledged, 
thoroughly  understood,  in  the  upper,  nether,  and 
sidelong  directions,  and  in  all  ways  examined  it: 
all  sorts  of  living  beings  may  be  slain,  or  treated 
with  violence,  or  abused,  or  tormented,  or  driven 
away.  Know  about  this:  there  is  no  wrong  in 
it  (3) 

That  is  a doctrine  of  the  unworthy.  But  those 
who  are  teachers,  have  said:  You  have  wrongly 
seen,  wrongly  heard,  wrongly  acknowledged,  wrongly 
understood,  in  the  upper,  nether,  and  sidelong 
directions,  in  all  ways  wrongly  examined  it,  when 
you  say  thus,  speak  thus,  declare  thus,  explain 
thus:  All  sorts  of  living  beings  mav  be  slain,  or 
treated  with  violence,  or  abused,  or  tormented,  or 
driven  away.  Know  about  this : there  is  no  wrong 
in  It.  That  is  a"  doctrine  of  the  unworthy.  (4)  But 
we  say  thus,  speak  thus,  declare  thus,  explain  thus : 


1 The  passage  in  brackets  is  introduced  by  the  words  p&M&n- 

taram  v&,  ‘various  reading.'  It  occurs  in  all  MSS.  I have^ consulted, 

sad  is  commented  upon  by  the  commentaries  as  •belonging  to  the 
* 

* By  some  is  meant  the  highest  class  of  sages.  The  meaning 
is  that  all  professors,  high  or  low,  say  the'  same,  agree  in  the 
doctrine  of  ahisisl 


39 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  4,  LESSON  3. 


All  sorts  of  living  beings  should  not  be  slain,  nor 
treated  with  vfolence,  nor  abused,  nor  tormented; 
nor  driven  away.  Know  about  this,  there  is  no 
wrong  jn  it.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  teachers.  (5) 

First  the  persuasion  of  every  one  should  be 
ascertained,  and  then  we  will  ask  them  severally : Ye 
professors ! is  pain  pleasant  to  you,  or  unpleasant  ? 
If  they  give  the  right  answer,  reply : For  all  sorts 
of  living  beings  pain  is  unpleasant,  disagreeable, 
and  greatly  feared.  Thus  I say.  (6) 

t 

Third  Lesson. 

‘ Reflect  and  observe  that  whether  you  go  to  this 
world  or  to  that  beyond,  in  the  whole  world  those 
who  are  discerning  beings,  who  abstain  from  cruelty^, 
relinquish  karman.  They  are  flesh-subduing,  called 
duty-knowing,  upright  men,  aware  that  pain  results 
from  actions.’  Thus*  say  those  who  have  right 
intuition.  (1)  • 

All  the  professors,  conversant  with  pain,  preach 
renunciation.  Thus  thoroughly  knowing  karman, 
observing  the  commandment,  wise,  unattached  (to 
the  world),  recognising  thy  Self  as  one*  subdue  the 
body,  chastise  thyself,  weaken  thyself : ‘just  as  fire 
consumes  old  wood !’  Thus  with  a composed  mind, 
unattached,  ‘unhesitatingly  avoid  wrath!’  Con- 
sidering the  shortness  of  life  ‘know  pain,  or  what 
will  come1 * 3;’  one  shall  feel  the  several  feelings;  and 
perceive  the  world  suffering  under  them.  (2) 

1 Nikkhittadam^l,  literally,  thc^e  who  have  laid  down  the  rod. 

* I.  e.  as  separate  and  different  from  the  world. 

3 According  to  the  commentators  the  present  and  future  pains. 


40 


AaArAnga  sOtra. 


Those  who  are  free  from  sinful  acts  are  called 
anid&na1.  Hence  a very  wise  man  should  not  be 
inflamed  (by  wrath).  Thus  I say.  (3) 

Fourth  Lesson. 

One  should  mortify  (one’s  flesh)  in  a low,  high, 
and  highest  degree,  quitting  one’s  former  connec- 
tions, and  entering  tranquillity.  Therefore  a hero  is 
careful,  a person  of  pith  2 * 4,  guarded,  endowed  (with 
knowledge,  &c.),  and  always  restrained.  Difficult  to 
go  is  the  road  of  the  heroes,  who  go  whence  there 
is  no  return  (final  liberation).  Subdue  blood  and 
flesh.  (1) 

That  man  is  called  a worthy  one,  a hero,  one  to 
be  followed,  who  living  in  chastity  [guarding  his 
eyes]  shakes  off  the  aggregate s. 

He  who  desires  the  current  of  karman,  is  a fool 
who  has  not  cut  off  the  fetters  of,  nor  conquered 
the  connection  with,  (the  world.)  For  such  as  dwell 
in  darkness,  and  are  without  knowledge,  there  is  no 
success  in  faith.  Thus  I say.  (2) 

‘Whence  should  he  have  it  *,  who  does  not  get  it 


1 If  we  read  niwp<$  pavakammehiw  aniyini  vivahiya,  we  have 
a hemistich  of  a rloka. 

* S&rae.  The  commentators  translate  it  with  svfirata  — su  + a 
(a  ^ivanamary&dSyi) + rata  (samyam&nush/Aine),  for  ever  delighting 
in  the  exercise  of  control.  I think  the  Sanskrit  prototype  of  s&rae 
is  slraka. 

''These  words  seem  to  have  formed  a rloka,  which  could 
easily  be  restored  if  we  read : purise  davie  vire  fy&mggt  viyihie  » 
vasitta  bambhaierawsi  ge  dhunii  samyssayaw  11  •The»aggregate  is 
either  that  of  the  constituent  parts  of  the  body,  i.  e.  the  body  itself, 
or  that  of  karman,  i.  e.  the  sum  ofkarman. 

4 Success  in  faith. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  4,  LESSON  4. 


41 


early,  late,  or  in  the  middle  of  life  ? ' But  the  dis- 
cerning one  is  awakened,  and  ceases  to  act  See 
that  it  is  good  to  be  so!  Cutting  off  that ‘whence 
bondage,  cruel  death,  and  dreadful  pain,’  ‘ and  the 
(desire  for)  external  (objects)  flow,  he  who  among 
mortals  knows  freedom  from  acts,’  ‘ seeing  that  acts 
will  bear  fruit,  the  knower  of  the  sacred  lore,  parts 
from  (karman).’  (3) 

There  are  those  who  have  established  themselves 
in  the  truth,  who  (were,  are,  or  will  be)  heroes, 
endowed  (with  knowledge),  always  exerting  them- 
selves, full  of  equanimity  *,  valuing  the  world  (as  it 
deserves)  in  the  east,  west,  south,  north.  We  shall 
tell  the  knowledge  of  them  who  (were,  &c.)  heroes, 
endowed  (with  knowledge),  always  exerting  them- 
selves, full  of  equanimity,  valuing  the  world  (as  it 
deserves). 

Is  there  any  worldly  weakness  in  the  Seer?  There 
exists  none,  there  is  none.  Thus  I say.  (4) 


End  of  the  Fourth  Lecture,  called  Righteousness. 


1 Samgha</adamsi«o : nirantaradamna^  jubhirubhasya. 


42 


Axaranga  sOtra. 


FIFTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

ESSENCE  OF  THE  WORLD. 

First  Lesson. 

Many  entertain  cruel  thoughts  against  the  world 
with  a motive  or  without  one ; they  entertain  cruel 
thoughts  against  these  (six  classes  of  living  beings). 
To  him1  pleasures  are  dear.  Therefore  he  is  near 
death.  Because  he  is  near  death,  he  is  far  (from 
liberation).  But  he  who  is  neither  near  (death)  nor 
far  (from  liberation),  considers  the  life  of  a slow  and 
ignorant  fool  as  similar  to  a dewdrop  trembling  on 
the  sharp  point  of  the  blade  of  Kura  grass  which  falls 
down  when  shaken  by  the  wind.  A fool,  doing 
cruel  acts,  comes  thereby  ignorantly  to  grief. 
‘ Through  delusion  he  ‘ is  born,  dies,  &c.’  Being 
conversant  with  the  deliberation  about  this  delu- 
sion, one  is  conversant  with  the  sawsAra ; being 
not  conversant  with  that  deliberation,  one  is  not 
conversant  with  the  sa/wsAra.  He  who  is  clever, 
should  not  seek  after  sexual  intercourse.  But 
having  done  so,  (it  would  be)  a second  folly  of  the 
weak-minded  not  to  own  it.  Repenting  and  ex- 
cluding (from  the  mind)  the  begotten  pleasures,  one 
should  instruct  others  to  follow  the  commandment. 
Thus  I say.  (i) 

See!  many  who  desire  colours,  are  led  around 

' * The  change  of  number  here*  and  in  the  analogous  passages  at 
the  beginning  of  the  second  and  third  lessons  is  one  of  the  gram- 
matical irregularities  in  which  our  text  abounds. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  2.  43 

(in  the  sawsira),  they  (experience)  here  again  and 
again  feelings  (i.  e.  punishment)1.  Many  live  by 
injurious  deeds  against  the  world,  they  live  by 
injurious  deeds  against  these  (living  beings)2.  Also 
the  fool,  suffering  (for  his  passions),  delights  in  bad 
acts  here,  mistaking  that  for  salvation  which  is  none. 
Many  (heretics)  lead  the  life  of  a hermit  (in  order 
to  avoid  worldly  sorrows  and  pains).  (2) 

Such  a man  has  much  wrath,  much  pride,  much 
conceit,  much  greed ; he  delights  in  many  (works), 
acts  frequently  like  a stage-player  or  a rogue,  forms 
many  plans,  gives  way  to  his  impulses,  is  influenced 
by  his  acts  though  he  pretends  to  be  awakened: 
(thinking)  that  nobody  will  see  him.  Through  the 
influence  of  ignorance  and  carelessness  the  fool 
never  knows  the  law.  Men!  unhappy  creatures, 
world-wise  are  those  who,  not  freeing  themselves 
from  ignorance,  talk  about  final  liberation:  they 
turn  round  and  round  in  the  whirlpool  (of  births). 
Thus  I say.  (3) 


Second  Lesson. 

Many  do  not  live  by  injurious  deeds  against  the 
world,  they  do  not  live  by  injurious  deeds  against 

1 This  interpretation  of  the  scholiast  can  scarcely  be  correct 
Probably  the  same  ideas  which  are  introduced  in  the  last  paragraph 
with  the  words,  Being  conversant  with,  &c.,  are  to  be  repeated 
here.  For  this  passage  is  similar  to  the  commencement  of  that 
in  $ 1,  or  identical  if  we  adopt  the  pH/Mntaram. 

* This  passage  is  perfectly  analogous  to  that  in  the  be'pnning  of 
the  lesson.  *But  the  scholiast  explains  the  locatives  which  we  have, 
according  to*  his  explanation  in  the  forma-  place,  translated 
against  the  world,  against  these,  here  and  in  the  similar 
passages  which  occur  in  this  lecture,  by,  in  the  world,  amongst 
these,  viz.  householders. 


44 


AA'ARANGA  SljTRA. 


these  (living  beings).  Ceasing  from  them,  making 
an  end  of  them,  he  perceives : this  is  a favourable 
opportunity1 *;  he  who  searches  for®  the  right  moment 
for  this  body  (should  never  be  careless).  This  is  the 
road  taught  by  the  noble  ones,  (i) 

When  he  has  become  zealous  for  the  law,  he 
should  never  be  careless,  knowing  pain  and  pleasure 
in  their  various  forms.  Men  act  here  on  their  own 
motives ; it  has  been  declared  that  they  suffer  for 
their  own  sins.  Neither  killing  nor  lying,  he  should 
(patiently)  bear  (all  unpleasant)  feelings  when  affected 
by  them.  That  man  is  called  a true  monk.  (2) 

Those  who  are  not  given  to  sinful  acts  are 
(nevertheless)  attacked  by  calamities ; but  then  the 
steadfast  will  bear  them.  (He  has  to  bear)  them 
afterwards  as  (he  has  done)  before  (his  conversion). 
(The  body)  is  of  a fragile,  decaying  nature,  (it  is) 
unstable,  transient,  uneternal,  increasing  and  de- 
creasing, df  a changeable  nature.  Perceive  this  as  its 
true  character. , For  hiih  who  well  understands  this, 
who  delights  in  the  unique  refuge 3,  for  the  liberated 
and  inactive  there  is  no  passage  (from  birth  to  birth). 
Thus  I say.  (3) 

Many  are  attached  to  something  in  the  world — 
be  it  little  or  much,  small  or  great,  sentient  or  non- 
sentient — they  are  attached  to  it  (here)  amongst  these 
(householders).  Thus  some  incur  great  danger. 
For  him  who  contemplates  the  course  of  the  world 
and  does  not  acknowledge  these  attachments  (there 


1 For  adopting  the  right  conduct.  t «.  , 

* Annesi=anveshin.  I think  that  anneal  may  be  an  aorist  of 

gn&,  knew.  • 

* Ayata»a,'i.e.  the  triad:  right  knowledge,  right  intuition,  right 
conduct. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  5 LESSON  3.  45 

— — ( — 
is  no  such  danger).  Knowing  that  that  which  is  well 
understood  is  well  practised,  man ! with  thy  eyes  on 
the  highest  gojpd,  be  victorious  (in  control).  Among 
such  men  only  is  real  Brahmanhood.  Thus  I say.  (4) 

I have  heard  this,  and  it  is  in  my  innermost  heart ; 
and  the  freedom  from  bonds  is  in  your  innermost 
heart  He  who  has  ceased  (to  have  worldly  attach- 
ments), the  houseless,  suffers  with  patience  a long 
time. 

The  careless  stand  outside,  the  careful  lead  a reli- 
gious life. 

Maintain  rightly  this  state  of  a sage.  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Third  Lesson. 

Many  are  not  attached  to  something  in  this  world, 
they  are  not  attached  to  it  among  these  (house- 
holders). He  is  a wise  man  who  has  heard  and 
understood  the  word  of  the  learned  ones.  Without 
partiality  the  law  has  been  declared  by  the  noble 
ones.  As  I have  destroyed  here1  the  connection 
with  the  world,  so  is  the  connection  elsewhere  diffi- 
cult to  destroy.  Therefore  I say : One  should/not 
abandon  firmness,  (r)  Some  who  early  exert  them- 
selves,, do  not  afterwards  slide  back ; some  who  early 
exert  themselves,  afterwards  slide  back ; those  who 
•do  not  early  exert  themselves,  (can  of  course)  not 
slide  back.  That  man  also  is  of  this  description®, 
who  knowing  the  world  (as  worthless  neverthe- 
less) follows  its  ways.  ‘ Knowing  this,  it  ha$  been 
declared  by  the -sage.’  Here  the  follower  of  the  com- 

* ‘ Here  ’ aW  ‘"elsewhere  ’*  mean,  in  the  Church  of  Mahavira. 
and  in  that  of  the  Tirthikas.  « 

* Belongs  to  the  last  category,  to  which  belong  the  Sakyas,  &c. 


4 6 a*ArAnga  sOtra. 

mandment,  the  wise,  the  passionless,  he  who  exerts 
himself  before  morning  and  after  evening1,  always 
contemplating  virtue2 * * * * *  and  hearing  (the  merit  of  it) 
will  become  free  from  love  and  delusion.  ‘ Fight 
with  this  (your  body)!  why  should  you  fight  with 
anything  else  ?’  Difficult  to  attain  is  this  (human 
body)  which  is  worth  the  fight.  For  the  clever  ones 
have  praised  the  discernment  of  wisdom;  the  fool 
who  falls  from  it,  is  liable  to  birth,  &c.  (2)  In  this 
(religion  of  the  Cainas  the  cause  of  the  fool’s  fall) 
has  been  declared  (to  depend)  on  colour8  and  killing. 
But  a sage  who  walks  the  beaten  track  (to  libe- 
ration), regards  the  world  in  a different  way. 
‘ Knowing  thus  (the  nature  of)  acts  in  all  regards, 
he  does  not  kill/  he  controls  himself,  he  is  not 
overbearing.  (3) 

Comprehending  that  pleasure  (and  pain)  are  indi- 
vidual, advising  kindness,  he  will  not  engage  in 
any  work  in  the  whole  world : keeping  before  him 
the  one  (great  aim,  liberation),  and  not  turning 
aside,  ‘living  humbly,  unattached  to  any  creature/ 
The  rich  (in  control)  who  with  a mind  endowed 
with  all  penetration  (recognises)  that  a bad  deed 
should  not  be  done,  will  not  go  after  it  What  you 
acknowledge  as  righteousness,  that  you  acknowledge 
as  sagedom  (mauna);  what  you  acknowledge  as  sage- 
dom,  that  you  acknowledge  as  righteousness.  It  is 


1 Puvvfivararftyam,  the  first  and  the  last  wake  (yfima)  of  the 

night ; the  intermediate  time  is  allowed  for  sleep. 

1 Sf la  is  either  slusyama,  control  with  its  18,000  subdivisions,  or 

it  consists  of  (r)  the  five  great  vows,  (a)  the  three  gpptis,  (3)  the 

restraint  of  the  senses,  (4)  the  avoidance  of  sin  (kash£ya). 

* Colour  stands  for  all  perceptions  of  the  senses.  Of  course, 

the  attachment,  to  sensual  pleasures  is  meant. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  4.  47 

inconsistent  with  weak,  sinning,  sensual,  ill-conducted 
house-inhabiting  men.  (4)  ‘A  sage,  acquiring  sage- 
dom,  should  subdue  his  body.’  ‘ The  heroes  who 
look  at  everything  with  indifference,  use  mean  and 
rough  (food,  &c.)’  Such  a man  is  said  to  have 
crossed  the  flood  (of  life),  to  be  a sage,  to  have 
passed  over  (the  saws&ra),  to  be  liberated,  to  have 
ceased  (from  acts).  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Fourth  Lesson. 

For  a monk  who  has  not  yet  reached  discrimina- 
tion1, it  is  bad  going  and  difficult  proceeding  when  he 
wanders  (alone)  from  village  to  village.  Some  men 
(when  going  wrong)  will  become  angry  when  ex- 
horted with  speech.  And  a man  with  wary  pride 
is  embarrassed  with  great  delusion2 * * * * *.  (1)  There  are 
many  obstacles  which  are  very  difficult  to  overcome 
for  the  igporant  and  the  blinded.  Let  that  not  be 
your  case ! That  is  the  doctrine  of*the  clever  one 
(Mahavlra).  Adopting  the  (d^&rya’s)  views,  imi- 
tating his  indifference  (for  the  outer  world),  making 
him  the  guide  and  adviser  (in  all  one’s  matters), 
sharing  his  abode,  living  carefully,  acting  according 
to  his  mind,  examining  one’s  way8,  not  coming  too 
near  (the  fiiftrya),  minding  living  beings,  one  should 
go  (on  one’s  business).  (2) 

1 Avyakta,  either  with  regard  to  rruta,  sacred  knowledge,  or  to 

his  age. 

* The  result  will  be  that  he  thinks  himself  above  the  admonition 

of  the  spiritual  head  (ii&rya)  of  the  chapter  (ga££Aa),  and  leaves 

the  chapter,'  living  as  a gaAManirgata. 

* The  mbnk  must  closely  inspect  everything  with  which  he 

comes  in  contact  in  order  to  avoid  killing  animals;  this  holds  good 

with  regard  to  walking,  sitting,  sleeping,  eating,  drinking,  Ac. 


48 


AtfARANGA  s£>TRA. 


(A  monk  should  according  to  the  &£&rya’s  or- 
der) go  and  return,  contract  or  stretch  (his  limbs), 
thoroughly  clean  (what  ought  to  be  cleaned).  Some- 
times, though  a monk  be  endowed  with  virtue  and 
walks  in  righteousness,  living  beings,  coming  in  con- 
tact with  his  body,  will  be  killed.  (If  this  happens 
through  mere  carelessness)  then  he  will  get  his 
punishment  in  this  life ; but  if  it  was  done  contrary 
to  the  rules1,  he  should  repent  of  it  and  do  penance 
for  it2.  Thus  he  who  knows  the  sacred  lore3,  recom- 
mends penance  combined  with  carefulness.  (3) 

(When  a monk)  with  fully  developed  intuition  and 
knowledge,  calm,  guarded,  endowed  (with  know- 
ledge), always  restrained,  perceives  (a  woman  tempt- 
ing him),  he  should  consider  within  himself : what 
will  this  person  do  ? The  greatest  temptation  in 
this  world  are  women.  This  has  been  declared 
by  the  sage.  (4) 

When  strongly  vexed  by  the  influence  of  the 
senses,  he  should  eat  bad  food,  mortify  himself, 
stand  upright,  wander  from  village  to  village,  take 
no  food  at  all,  withdraw  his  mind  from  women. 
First  troubles,  then  pleasures ; first  pleasures,  then 
troubles4:  thus  they  are  the  cause  of  quarrels.  Con- 
sidering this  and  well  understanding  it,  one  should 
teach  oneself  not  to  cultivate  (sensuality).  Thus  I 
say.  He  should  not  speak  of  women,  nor  look  at 
them,  nor  converse  with  them,  nor  claim  them  as  his 
own,  nor  do  their  work.  Careful  in  his  speech  and 


1 Au//tkamma«=4ku//ikarman. 

* Vi vega=viveka,  explained  as  pr&yaj/Sittam*  s,  Vedavid. 

4 In  order  to  attain  pleasure,  one  has  to  work  for  the  means ; 

after  the  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  one  has  to  undergo  punish- 
ment in  hell,  &c. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  5. 


49 


guarding  his  mind,  he  should  always  avoid  sin.  He 
should  maintain  this  sagedom.  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Fifth  Lesson. 

Thus  I say : a lake  is  full  of  water,  it  is  in  an  even 
plain,  it  is  free  from  dust,  it  harbours  (many  fish)  *. 
Look!  he  (the  teacher)  stands  in  the  stream  (of  know- 
ledge) and  is  guarded  in  all  directions.  Look ! there 
are  great  Seers  in  the  world,  wise,  awakened,  free  from 
acts.  Perceive  the  truth  : from  a desire  of  (a  pious) 
end  they  chose  a religious  life.  Thus  I say.  (1) 

He  whose  mind  is  always  wavering,  does  not 
reach  abstract  contemplation2.  Some,  bound  (by 
worldly  ties),  are  followers  (i.  e.  understand  the 
truth) ; some  who  are  not  bound,  are  followers. 
How  should  he  not  despond  who  amongst  followers 
is  a non-follower  ? ‘ But  that  is  truth  beyond  doubt, 

what  has  been  declared  by  the  6rinas.’  (2) 

Whatever 3 a faithful,  well-disposed  man,  on  enter- 
ing the  order,  thought  to  be  true,  that  may  afterwards 
appear  to  him  true ; what  he  thought  to  be  true, 
that  may  afterwards  appear  to  him  untrue ; what  he 
thought  to  be  untrue,  that  may  afterwards  appear  to 
him  true ; what  he  thought  to  be  unthie,  that  may 
afterwards  appear  to  him  true.  What  he  thinks  to 
be  true,  that  may,  on  consideration,  appear  to  him 
true,  whether  it  be  true  or  untrue.  What  he  thinks 
to  be  untrue,  that  may,  on  consideration,  appear  to 
him  untrue,  whether  it  be  true  or  untrue.  But.  he 

o . . 

* Like  unto  8 is  a teacher  who  is  full  of  wisdom,  who  lives  in 
a quiet  country,  is  free  from  passion,  «and  protects  living  beings. 

1 Sam&dhi,  the  means  of  a religious  death. 

1 Any  article  of  the  Gaina  faith. 

C«]  E 


50 


AtArAAga  sOtra. 


who  reflects  should  say  unto  him  who  does  not 
reflect : Consider  it  to  be  true.  Thus  the  connection 
(i.  e.  the  continuity  of  sins)  is  broken.  (3) 

Regard  this  as  th^  course  of  the  zealous  one,  who 
stands  (in  obedience  \o  the  spiritual  guide).  In  this 
point  do  not  show  yourself  a fool1 ! 

As  it  would  be  unto  thee,  so  it  is  with  him  whom 
thou  intendest  to  kill.  As  it  would  be  unto  thee,  so 
it  is  with  him  whom  thou  intendest  to  tyrannise  over. 
As  it  would  be  unto  thee,  so  it  is  with  him  whom 
thou  intendest  to  torment.  In  the  same  way  (it  is 
with  him)  whom  thou  intendest  to  punish,  and  to  drive 
away.  The  righteous  man  who  lives  up  to  these  sen- 
timents, does  therefore  neither  kill  nor  cause  others 
to  kill  (living  beings).  He  should  not  intentionally 
cause  the  same  punishment  for  himself2 * * * * *.  (4) 

The  Self  is  the  knower  (or  experiencer),  and  the 
knower  is  the  Self.  That  through  which  one  knows, 
is  the  Self.  With  regard  to  this  (to  know)  it  (the 
Self)  is  established8.  Such  is* he  who  maintains  the 
right  doctrine  of'  Self.  This  subject  has  truly  been 
explained.  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Sixth  Lesson. 

Some  not  instructed  (in  the  true  law)  make  (only 
a show)  of  good  conduct ; some,  though  instructed, 


1 Fool,  bila ; the  scholiast  explains  bala  as  5&kya  or  Parrvastha, 

an  outsider,  or  a follower  of  Pirrva  (?). 

8 For  the  same  pain  he  has  caused  to  others  in  this  life,  he  will 

suffer  in  the  life  hereafter.  _ * 

* This  means  that ‘knowledge  is  a1  modification  ({fari«£raa)  of 

the  Se|f,  and  therefore  one  with  it,  but  not  as  a quality  or  action 

of  the  Self  different  from  it. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  6. 

have  no  good  conduct.  Let  that  not  be  your  case ! 
That  is  the  doctrine  of  the  clever  one.  Adopting 
the  (fii&rya’s)  views,  imitating  his  indifference  (for 
the  outer  world),  making  him  the  guide  and  adviser 
(in  all  ones  matters),  sharing  his  abode,  conquering 
(sinfulness),  one  sees  the  truth ; unconquered  one 
should  be  one’s  own  master,  having  no  reliance  on 
anything  (in  the  world).  He  who  is  great  and  with- 
draws his  mind  from  the  outer  world,  should  learn 
the  teaching  (of  the  Tirthakaras)  through  the  teach- 
ing (of  the  Ai&rya) ; by  his  own  innate  knowledge, 
or  through’  the  instruction  of  the  highest1,  or 
having  heard  it  from  others.  A wise  man  should 
not  break  the  commandment.  Examining  all  (wrong) 
doctrines  from  all  sides  and  in  all  respects,  one 
should  clearly  understand  (and  reject)  them.  ' Know- 
ing the  delight  of  this  world2,  circumspect  and  re- 
strained, one  should  lead  the  life  of  an  ascetic.’ 
Desiring  liberation 3,  a,  hero  should,  through  the 
sacred  lore,  ever  be  victorious.  Thus  I say.  (i) 

The  current  (of  sin) 4 is  said  to  come  from  above, 
from  below,  and  from  the  sides;  these  have  been 
declared  to  be  the  currents  through  which,  look, 
there  is  sinfulness. 

‘Examining  the  whirlpool*,  a man, .versed  in  the 
sacred  lore,  should  keep  off  from  it.’  Leaving  the 
world 1 to  avert  the  current  (of  sin),  such  a great 

1 L e.  the  Tirthakaras.  * I.  e.  self-control 

* The  original  has  ni/Miya=nishMita. 

* It  is  called  the  door  of  dsrava.  The  three  directions  men- 
tioned in  the  ttjrt,  are  the  three;  divisions  of  the  .universe.  Objects 
of  desire  in  each  induce  men  to  sin.  The  original  is  a rloka, 
noticed  as  such  by  the  scholiast.  * 

* Of  worldly  desires  and  their  objects. 

E 2 


52 


AxarAnga  s^tra. 


man,  free  from  acts,  knows  and  sees  the  truth  ; 
examining  (pleasures)  he  does  not  desire  them.  (2) 
Knowing  whence  we  come  and  whither  we  go,  he 
leaves  the  road  to.  birth  and  death,  rejoicing  in 
the  glorious  (liberation).  * All  sounds  recoil  thence, 
where  speculation  has  no  room,’  nor  does  the  mind 
penetrate  there1.  The  saint2  knows  well  that  which 
is  without  support*.  (3) 

(The  liberated)  is  not  long  nor  small  nor  round 
nor  triangular  nor  quadrangular  nor  circular;  he  is 
not  black  nor  blue  nor  red  nor  green  nor  white; 
neither  of  good  nor  bad  smell ; not  bitter  nor  pun- 
gent nor  astringent  nor  sweet;  neither  rough  nor 
soft ; neither  heavy  nor  light ; neither  cold  nor  hot ; 
neither  harsh  nor  smooth  ; he  is  without  body,  with- 
out resurrection,  without  contact  (of  matter),  he  is  not 
feminine  nor  masculine  nor  neuter ; he  perceives,  he 
knows,  but  there  is  no  analogy  (whereby  to  know 
the  nature  of  .the  liberated  soul) ; its  essence  is  with- 
out form  ; there  is  no  condition  of  the  unconditioned. 
There  is  no  sound,  no  colour,  no  smell,  no  taste,  no 
touch — nothing  of  that  kind.  Thus  I say.  (4) 

End  of  the  Fifth  Lecture,  called  Essence  of  the 
. World. 

1 It  is  impossible  to  express  the  nature  of  liberation  in  words, 
since  it  cannot  be  reached  even  by  the  mind. 

* Oe=o^a,  he  who  is  free  from  love  and  hate. 

' I.e.  liberation,  or  the  state  of  the  liberated.  Support,  pati /- 
M4*a,  is  the  body  or  karman. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  6,  LESSON  I. 


'W 


SIXTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

THE  CLEANING1. 

First  Lesson. 

He  who  is  awakened  amongst  men,  preaches; 
the  man  to  whom  all  these  classes  of  lives  are 
well  known,  preaches  the  unparalleled  wisdom.  He 
praises  the  road  to  liberation  for  those  who  well 
exert  themselves,  who  have  forsworn  cruelty,  are 
zealous  and  endowed  with  knowledge.  Thus  some 
great  heroes  are  victorious ; but,  look,  some  others 
who  are  wanting  in  control  do  not  understand  (the 
welfare  of)  their  souls.  Thus  I say.  (i) 

As  in  a lake  a greedy  leaf-covered  tortoise  cannot 
rise  up ; as  the  trees  do  not  leave  their  place  (though 
shaken  by  storms,  &c.):  thus  men,  born  in  various 
families,  cry  bitterly  because  they  are  attached  to 
the  objects  of  the  senses2 ; on  account  of  their 
sinfulness  they  do  not  reach  liberation3.  (2) 

Now  look  at  those  who  are  born  in  these  families 
to  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  acts4  s 

Boils  and  leprosy,  consumption,  falling  sickness, 
blindness  and  stiffness,  lameness  and  humpbacked- 
ness, 1 


1 Dhuta,  literally,  shaken.  Compare  the  dhutangas  of  the 
Buddhists,,  Childers’  P&li  Diet.  s.  v. 

* Literally,  the  colours.  • . 

3 This  paragraph  reads  like  prose  mixed  with  parts  of  verses. 
But  it  is  not  possible  to  restore  one  complete  verse. 

4 ‘To  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  acts’  is,  according  to  the  com- 
mentary, the  meaning  of  &yatt£e=&tmatviya. 


54 


Axaranga  sOtra. 


Dropsy  and  dumbness,  look ! apoplexy  (?)  and  eye- 
disease,  trembling  and  crippledness,  elephantiasis 
and  diabetes,  2 

These  are  the  sixteen  diseases  enumerated  in  due 
order;  besides  them  many  illnesses  and  wounds 
occur.  3 

Contemplating  their  (i.  e.  the  creatures’)  death, 
knowing  their  births  in  higher  and  lower  regions, 
contemplating  the  fruit  (of  their  acts),  hear  about 
this  according  to  truth.  4 

There  are  said  to  be  blind  beings  dwelling  in 
darkness ; once  or  frequently  meeting  this  lot,  they 
experience  pleasant  and  unpleasant  feelings.  This 
has  been  declared  by  the  awakened  ones.  (3)  There 
are  beings  endowed  with  voice,  with  taste,  water- 
beings  dwelling  in  water,  beings  living  in  the  air: 
‘beings  torment  beings.  See  the  great  danger  in 
this  world1 many  pains  (are  the  lot)  of  the  creatures. 
Men  who  are  given  to  theii*  lusts,  come  to  destruc- 
tion through  their  weak;  frail  body.  * The  fool  works 
hard,  thinking’  that  the  unhappy  one  suffers  many 
pains.  ‘Knowing  that  these  diseases  are  many, 
should  the  afflicted  search  after  (remedies)?’  See! 
they  are  of  no  avail,  have  done  with  them ! Sage ! 
see  this  great  danger!  Do  not  hurt  anybody! 
Contemplate.  Be  attentive!  I shall  proclaim  the 
doctrine  of  renunciation2.  (4) 

To  reap  the  fruit  of  their  acts  they  are  born  in 
these  various  families,  they  increase,  are  bom,  grow 
up,  become  awakened,  and  leave  the  world  in  due 
order  as  great  sages.  The  lamenting  parents  say  to 
them  who  proceed  on  the  glorious  road : * Do  not 

1 The  result  of  former  acts.  1 DhAtav&da. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  6,  LESSON  2.  55 

leave  us!’  (5)  Consulting  their  own  pleasure,  in- 
dulging their  passions, ' making  a noise1,  the  parents 
cry No  man  who  leaves  his  parents  is  (fit  to  become) 
a flood-crossing  sage ! (The  ascetic)  does  not  take 
refuge  there  (in  his  family) ; for  what  could  attract 
him  there  ? 

He  should  always  maintain  this  knowledge ! Thus 
I say.  (6) 


Second  Lesson. 

Though  some  know  the  misery  of  the  world,  have 
relinquished  their  former  connections,  have  given  up 
. ease’  live  in  chastity,  and,  whether  monk  or  layman, 
thoroughly  understand  th’e  law,  they  are  not  able 
(to  persevere  in  a religious  life).  The  ill-disposed, 
giving  up  the  robe,  alms-bowl,  blanket,  and  broom, 
do  not  bear  the  continuous  hardships  that  are  diffi- 
cult to  bear.  He  who  prefers  pleasures  will,  now 
or  after  an  hour2 * * *,  be  deprived  (of  the  body8,  not 
to  recover  it)  for  an  infinite  space  of  time.  And 
thus  they  do  not  cross  (the  saws&ra),  for  the  sake  of 
these  pleasures  which  entail  evil  consequences  and 
are  associated  with  others  of  their  kind.  (1) 

But  some  who  embrace  the  law, .will  practise  it, 
being  careful  about  its  outward  signs;  not  giving 
way  to  worldliness,  but  being  firm.  Knowing  (and 
renouncing)  all  lust,  a devout  man  becomes  a great 
sage  when  he  breaks  all  bonds,  thinking  : Nothing 

1 The  commentator  explains  this  passage : < We  do  your  will, 

we  depend  dh  you  (?),’  so  shSuting  they  cry,  ftc. 

* I.e.  after  a short  time.  • 

* The  body  with  five  organs,  in  winch  alone  liberation  can  be 

realised. 


56  axarAnga  sOtra. 

belongs  to  me.  A man  who,  thinking,  I am  l1 * *, 
exerts  himself  for  this  (creed),  ceases  (to  act),  is 
houseless,  walks  about  bald-headed.  The  naked, 
fasting  (monk),  who  combats  the  flesh,  will  be 
abused,  or  struck,  or  hurt8 ; he  will  be  upbraided 
with  his  former  trade,  or  reviled  with  untrue  re- 
proaches. Accounting  (for  this  treatment)  by  his 
former  sins,  knowing  pleasant  and  unpleasant  occur- 
rences, he  should  patiently  wander  about.  Quitting 
all  worldliness8  one  should  bear  all  (disagreeable) 
feelings,  being  possessed  of  the  right  view4 * * *.  (2) 
Those  are  called  naked,  who  in  this  world,  never 
returning  (to  a worldly  state),  (follow)  my  religion 
according  to  the  commandment.  This  highest  doc- 
trine has  here  been  declared  for  men.  Delighted 
with  this,  destroying  that  (i.e.  the  effect ‘of  works),  he 
will  successively 8 give  up  sinfulness®,  after  having 
come  to  a knowledge  of  it.  Here  (in  our  reli- 
gion) some  live  as  single  njendicants.  Therefore  a 
wise  man  should  lead  the  life  of  an  ascetic  by 
collecting  pure  alms  or  any  alms  in  all  sorts  of 
families.  * If  (the  food)  be  of  good  or  bad  smell, 
or  if  dreadful  beasts  inflict  pain  on  (other)  beings’ — 


1 I have  nothing  to  do  with  anybody  else. 

8 Lfisie.  The  commentator  translates  it  by  lu»£ita,  to  tear  out 
the  hair.  This  would  be  a rather  difficult  operation  on  the  bald 
head  of  a (?aina  monk.  Lftsiya  is,  of  course,  the  Sanskrit  10  sh  it  a, 
hurt 

* Visottiyaiw.  Sanskrit  vijTotasiki(P)=ranki. 

4 Samiyadamsane.  The  commentator  explains  it  bysamita- 

darrana.  I think  it  corresponds  to  samyagdarrana. , 

* Pariyie*a»i=pary&ya.  The  commentator  interprets  it  by 

xr&manya. 

* Add«i^am=&dfiniya.  it  means  usually  faith;  but  I have 
here  translated  it  according  to  the  commentary. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  6,  LESSON  3. 


57 


all  that  happens  to  you,  you  will  firmly  bear  it. 
Thus  I say.  (3) 

Third  Lesson. 

A sage  who  is  well  instructed  in  the  law  and  leads 
a life  of  abstinence,  is  always  a destroyer  of  the 
effects  of  works1.  To  a mendicant  who  is  little 
clothed2  and  firm  in  control,  it  will  not  occur  (to 
think):  My  clothes  are  torn,  I shall  beg  for  (new) 
clothes  ; I shall  beg  for  thread ; I shall  beg  for 
a needle;  I shall  mend  (my  clothes);  I shall  darn 
them ; I "Shall  repair  them ; I shall  put  them  on  ; 
I shall  wrap  myself  in  them.  (1) 

The  unclothed  one,  who  “excels  in  this  (absti- 
nence), will  often  be  molested  by  (sharp  blades  of) 
grass,  by  cold,  heat,  gnats,  and  mosquitoes.  The 
unclothed  one,  who  effects  scarcity  (of  his  wants 
or  of  his  karman),  bears  these  and  various  other 
hardships.  He  is  fif  for  penance,  as  has  been 
declared  by  the  Revered  One.  U nderstanding  this 
in  all  respects  and  with  his  whole  mind,  he  should 
perfectly  know  righteousness.  The  great  heroes 
(i. e.  the  Tlrthakaras)  who  for  a long  time3  walked 


1 Ad&nam  explained  as  implements  which  are  not  requisite  for 
the  law. 

* A -tel  a,  literally,  unclothed.  But  it  has  that  meaning  only  when 

it  is  applied  to  a ^inakalpika.  A ^inakalpika  is  a monk  who 
wears  no  clothes  and  uses  the  hollow  of  the  hand  for  an  alms-bowl. 
The  only  implements  he  has  are  the  broom  (ra^oharanam)  and 
the  piece  of  cloth  which  the  monk  places  before  the  mouth  while 
speaking,  in  order  to  prevent  insects  from  getting  into  his  mouth 
(mukhava£trik&).  * * 

* Afirardta,  literally,  long  nigjrt.  Compare  dirgharltra,  which 
the  Bauddhas  and  Gainas  employ  in  the  sense  we  have  given  to 
Jiraritam  in  the  text 


58 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


in  the  former  years1,  the  worthy  ones  ,bore  the 
troubles  (mentioned  above) ; endowed  with  perfect 
knowledge  they  had  lean  arms  and  very  little  flesh 
and  blood.  He  who  discontinues  (to  sin)  and  is 
enlightened,  is  said  to  have  crossed  (the  saws&ra),  to. 
be  liberated,  and  to  have  ceased  (to  act).  Thus  I 
say.  (2) 

But  can  discontent  lay  hold  of  a mendicant,  who 
has  ceased  to  act  and  leads  a religious  life,  for  a 
long  time  controlling  himself?  He  advances  in  his 
spiritual  career  and  exerts  himself.  As  an  island 
which  is  never  covered  with  water,  so  is  the  law 
taught  by  the  noble  ones  (a  safe  refuge  for  those  in 
danger).  They  are  free  from  desires,  free  from 
murder,  beloved,  wise,  learned.  For  their  benefit 
has  been  the  exertion  of  the  Revered  One ; as  birds 
(feed)  their  young  ones,  so  are  the  disciples  regularly 
to  be  instructed  day  and  night.  Thus  I say.  (3) 

Fourth  Lesson. 

The  disciples  are  thus  regularly  instructed,  day 
and  night,  by  the  knowledge-endowed  great  heroes, 
receiving  knowledge  from  them.  Some,  being  se- 
duced from  the  calmness  of  the  mind,  adopt  rough 
manners.  Some,  living  in  chastity,  dispute  the 
authority  (of  the  teacher),  others  hear  and  under- 
stand his  words ; they  intend  to  lead  a godly  life, 
but  having  left  the  world2,  they  are  not  qualified  (for 
a religious  life).  Others,  being  incensed  by  lusts, 


1 Puvv&im  v&s&iVn,  the  former  yiare  are  those  long  periods  by 
. which  the  length  of  the  early  Tirthakaras’  life  is  measured.  Walked 
means  walked  in  righteousness. 

• Or  obedience  to  their  teacher  ? 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  6,  LESSON  4.  59 

greedy,  sensual,  ‘ do  not  care  for  abstract  meditation 
and  religious  instruction : these  men  speak  harshly 
unto  the  teacher.’  It  is  a second  folly  of  the  slow- 
minded  to  call  virtuous,  calm,  religiously  living  men 
worthless. 

Some,  turning  from  (control),  assign  its  difficulty 
as  their  reason  (for  doing  so)1;  others,  falling  from 
the  pure  knowledge  and  defiling  the  creed,  though 
not  without  devotion,  for  the  love  of  life  change 
(their  vows).  ‘ When  they  feel  the  hardships  (of  a 
religious  life)  they  slide  back,  for  their  love  of  life.’ 
Their  leaving  the  world  is  a bad  leaving,  (t) 

Those  who  deserve  to  be  called  fools,  are  bom 
again  and  again.  Standing  low  (in  lemming  or  con- 
trol) they  will  exalt  themselves  (and  say)  in  their 
pride : I am  learned.  They  speak  harshly  unto  the 
passionless ; they  upbraid  them  with  their  former 
trades,  or  revile  them  with  untrue  reproaches*.  The 
wise,  therefore,  should  *know  the  law.  Thou  lovest 
unrighteousness,  because  thou  art  young,  and  lovest 
acts,  and  sayest : ‘Kill  beings thou  killest  them  or 
consentest  to  their  being  killed  by  others.  (Such  a 
man)  thinks  contemptuously : A very  severe  religion 
has  been  proclaimed.  Sinking  in  opposition  to  the 
law,  he  is  called  murderer.  Thus  I Say.  (2) 

. Some  think : What  have  I to  do  with  this  or 
that . man  ? Thus  they  leave  father  and  mother, 
kith  and  kin,  like  heroes  exerting  themselves,  free 
from  murder.  Look!  the  pious  and  calm  become 


> They  dcP  not  upbraid  their  teachers,  and  hence  are  not  guilty 
of  the  second* folly.  * 

* Compare  second  lesson,  § 3.  JPaliya,  which  we  have  here  as  in 
the  passage' above  translated  ‘former  trade,’  is  here  explained  by 
anush/Mna,  exertion. 


6o 


ArArASga  'sOtra. 


desponding;  the  rising,  cast  down.  Those  troubled 
with  sensuality,  the  cowardly  men  become  perverters 
of  the  faith  \ Therefore  the  reputation  of  some  be- 
comes bad.  He  is  an  apostate  ascetic ! He  is  an 
apostate  ascetic!  (3) 

Look ! Some,  though  living  with  religious,  pious, 
calm,  and  worthy  (monks),  are  not  religious,  nor 
pious,  nor  calm,  nor  worthy.  Knowing  them,  the 
learned,  the  wise,  the  steadfast  hero  will  always  be 
victorious  through  the  right  faith.  Thus  I say.  (4) 

Fifth  Lesson. 

Staying  in  or  between  houses,  in  or  between  vil- 
lages, in  or  between  towns,  in  or  between  counties, 
a monk  is  attacked  by  murderers,  or  is  subject  to 
the  hardships  (of  a mendicant’s  life).  A hero  should 
bear  these  hardships.  (1) 

A saint1 2,  with  right  intuition,  who  cherishes 
compassion  for  the  world,  in  the  east,  west,  south, 
and  north,  should  preach,  spread,  and  praise  (the 
faith),  knowing  the  sacred  lore3.  He  should  pro- 
claim it  among  those  who  exert  themselves,  and 
those  who  do  not4,  among  those  who  are  willing  to 
hear  (the  word).  (2) 

Not  neglecting  tranquillity,  indifference,  patience, 
liberation,  purity,  uprightness,  gentleness,  and  free- 
dom from  worldly  cares fi,  one  should,  with  due  con- 
sideration, preach  the  law  of  the  mendicants  to  all 
sorts  of  creatures.  (3) 

1 Or  breakers  of  vows.  2 Oy  a,  see  nqte  a,  p.  52. 

* Veyavf=:vedavid. 

4 This  is  equivalent  either  to*  believers  and  heretics,  or  to  clerical 
and  lay  men. 

• L&ghaviya,  lightness,  explained,  freedom  from  bonds. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  6,  LESSON  5. 


6l 


With  due  consideration  preaching  the  law  of  the 
mendicants,  one  should  do  no  injury  to  one’s  self, 
nor  to  anybody  else,  nor  to  any  of  the  four  kinds  of 
living  beings.  But  a great  sage,  neither  injuring 
nor  injured,  becomes  a shelter  for  all  sorts  of  afflicted 
creatures,  even  as  an  island,  which  is  never  covered 
with  water.  (4) 

Thus  a man  who  exerts  himself,  and  is  of  a 
steady  mind,  without  attachment,  unmoved  (by 
.passion)  but  restless  (in  wandering  about),  having  no 
worldly  desires,  should  lead  the  life  of  an  ascetic. 

Having  cohtemplated  the  beautiful  law,  the  dis- 
cerning one  is  liberated. 

Therefore  look  at  worldliness,  ye  men,  fettered  in 
fetters ! 

Those  whom  lust  conquers,  sink;  therefore  do 
not  shrink  from  the  hard  (control)!  He  who  knows 
(and  renounces)  perfectly  and  thoroughly  these  inju- 
rious acts,  from  whom  the,  injurers  do  not  shrink  *, 
‘who  has  shaken  off  wrath,  pride,’  delusion,  and 
greed,  ‘he  is  called  a removed  one.’  Thus  I 
say.  (5) 

On  the  decay  of  the  body  (he  does  not  despond, 
but  deserves)  his  appellation,  ‘the  leader  of  the 
battle/  The  sage  who  has  reached  the  other  side, 
UHafflicted  and  unmoved  like  a beam,  being  in  the 
power  of  death,  desires  death  as  the  dissolution  , of 
the  body.  Thus  I say.  (6) 

End  of  the  Sixth  Lecture,  called  the  Cleaning. 


1 One  expects,  who  does  not  shrink  from  the  injurers. 


62 


axarAnga  s6tra. 


SEVENTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

LIBERATION. 

First  Lesson. 

I say:  To  friendly  or  hostile  (heretics)  one  should 
not  give  food,  drink,  dainties  and  spices,  clothes, 
alms-bowls,  and  brooms ; nor  exhort  these  persons 
to  give  (such  things),  nor  do  them  service,' always 
showing  the  highest  respect  Thus  I say1,  (i) 

(A  heretic  may  say):  Know  this  for  certain: 
having  or  not  having  received  food,  &c.  (down  to) 
brooms,  having  or  not  having  eaten  (come  to  our 
house),  even  turning  from  your  way  or  passing  (other 
houses ; we  shall  supply  your  wants).  Confessing  an 
individual  creed,  coming  and  going,  he  may  give,  or 
exhort  to  give,  or  do  service  (but  one  should  not 
accept  anything  from  him),  showing  not  the  slightest 
respect  Thus  I say.  (2) 

Some  here  are  not  well  instructed  as  regards  the 
subject  of  conduct;  for  desirous  of  acts,  they  say: 
‘ Kill  creatures they  themselves  kill  or  consent  to 
the  killing  of  others ; or  they  take  what  has  not 
been  given ; or  they  pronounce  opinions,  e.  g.  the 
world  exists,  , the  world  does  not  exist  the  world  is 


1 This  and  the  following  paragraph  are  extremely  difficult  to 
translate.  I have  translated  the  words  according  to  the  scholiast, 
and  supplied  what  he  supplies;  but  his  interpretation  can  scarcely 
be  reconciled  with  the  text. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  I. 


63 


unchangeable,  the  world  is  ever  changing;  the 
world  has  a beginning,  the  world  has  no  beginning ; 
the  world  has  an  end,  the  world  has  no  end;  (or 
with  regard  to  the  self  and  actions) : this  is  well 
done,  this  is  badly  done;  this  is  merit,  this  is 
demerit ; he  is  a good  man,  he  is  not  a good  man ; 
there  is  beatitude,  there  is  no  beatitude ; there  is  a 
hell,  there  is  no  hell.  When  they  thus  differ  (in  their 
opinions)  and  profess  their  individual  persuasion, 
know  (that  this  is  all)  without  reason  \ Thus  they 
are  not  well  taught,  not  well  instructed  in  the  reli- 
gion such  as  it  has  been  declared  by  the  Revered 
One,  who  knows  and  sees  with  quick  discernment. 
(One  should  either  instruct  the  opponent  in  the  true 
faith)  or  observe  abstinence  as  regards  speech. 
Thus  I say.  (3) 

Everywhere1 2 * * * * *  sins  are  admitted ; but  to  avoid  them 
is  called  my  distinction.  For  ye  who  live  in  a 
village  or  in  the  forest,  qr  not  in  a village  and  not 
in  the  forest,  know  the  law  as  it  has  been  declared. 

' By  the  Brahman,  the  wise  (MahfLvira),  three 8 vows 
have  been  enjoined.’  Noble  and  tranquil  men  who 
are  enlightened  and  exert  themselves  in  these  (pre- 
cepts), are  called  free  from  sinful  acts.  (4) 

Knowing  (and  renouncing)  severally  and  singly 


1 The  Gainas  do  not  espouse  one  of  the  alternative  solutions 

of  the  metaphysical  and  ethical  questions ; but  they  are  enabled  by 

the  sy&dvida  to  believe  in  the  co-existence  of  contrary  qualities  in 

one  and  the  same  thing. 

1 In  all  other  religious  sects. 

* G& ma  = y&ma.  These  arte,  ( 1)  to  kill  no  Jiving  being,  (a)  to 

speak  no  untruth,  (3)  to  abstain  from  forbidden  things  (theft  and 

sexual  pleasures).  Or  the  three  ages  of  man  are  intended  by 
£&ma,  which  we  have  rendered  vows. 


64 


AjcarAnga  sCtra. 


the  actions  against  living  beings,  in  the  regions 
above,  below,  and  on  the  surface,  everywhere  and 
in  all  ways — a wise  man  neither  gives  pain  to  these 
bodies,  nor  orders  others  to  do  so,  nor  assents  to 
their  doing  so.  Nay,  we  abhor  those  who  give  pain 
to  these  bodies.  Knowing  this,  a wise  man  should 
not  cause*  this  or  any  other  pain  (to  any  creatures). 
Thus  I say.  (5) 


Second  Lesson. 

* 

A mendicant  may  exert  himself,  or  stand  or  sit 
or  lie  in  a burying-place  or  in  an  empty  house  or 
in  a mountain  cave  or  in  a potter’s  workshop.  A 
householder  may  approach  a mendicant  who  stays 
in  any  of  these  places,  and  say  unto  him : O long- 
lived  5Vama«a ! I shall  give  you  what  I have  bought 
or  stolen  or  taken,  though  it  was  not  to  be  taken, 
nor  given,  but  was  taken  by  force,  viz.  food,  drink, 
dainties  and  spices,  clothes,  an  alms-bowl,  a plaid,  a 
broom — by  acting  sinfully  against  all  sorts  of  living 
beings;  or  I shall  prepare  you  snug  lodgings;  eat  (the 
offered  food),  dwell  (in  the  prepared  house1).  (1) 

0 long-lived  6rama«a ! A mendicant  should  thus 
refuse  a householder  of  good  sense  and  ripe  age: 
O long-lived  householder ! I do  not  approve  of  thy 
words,  I do  not  accept  thy  words,  that,  for  my  sake, 
thou  givest  unto  me  what  thou  hast  bought  or  stolen 
or  taken,  though  it  was  not  to  be  taken,  nor  given, 
but  was  taken  by  force,  viz.  food,  drink,  dainties  and 
spices,  clothes,  an  alms-bowl,  a plaid,  a broom — by 

1 Later  on  in  the  commentary  (beginning  of  the  sixth  lesson)  this 
is  called  udgamotp&danaishand. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  2t 


65 


acting  sinfully  against  all  sorts  of  living  beings ; or 
that  thou  preparest  pleasant  lodgings  for  me.  O long- 
lived  householder!  I have  given  up  this,  because 
it  is  not  to  be  done.  (2)  A mendicant  may  exert 
himself,  &c.  (first  sentence  of  § 1).  A householder, 
without  betraying  his  intention,  may  approach  him 
who  stays  in  some  one  of  the  above-mentioned 
places,  and  give  unto  him  what  has  been  taken, 
&c.  (all  as  above,  down  to)  or  prepare  pleasant 
lodgings,  and  accommodate  the  mendicant  with 
food  (and  „lodging).  A mendicant  should  know  it 
by  his  own  innate  intelligence,  or  through  the 
instruction  of  the  highest  (i.  e.  the  Tirthakaras),  or 
having  heard  it  from  others : This  householder,  for- 
sooth, for  my  sake  injures  all  sorts  of  living  beings, 
to  give  me  food,  &c.,  clothes,  &c.,  or  to  prepare 
pleasant  lodgings.  A mendicant  should  well  observe 
and  understand  this,  that  he  may  order  (the  house- 
holder) not  to  show  such  obsequiousness.  Thus 
I say.  (3) 

Those  who  having,  with  or  without  the  mendi- 
cant’s knowledge,  brought  together  fetters  \ become 
angry  (on  the  monk’s  refusal)  and  will  strike  him, 
saying:  Beat,  kill,  cut,  burn,  roast,  tear,  rob,  despatch, 
torture  him ! But  the  hero,  come  to  such  a lot, 
. will  bravely  bear  it,  or  tell  him  the  code  of  conduct, 
considering  that  he  is  of  a different  habit ; or  by 
guarding  his  speech  he  should  in  due  order  examine 
the  subject,  guarding  himself. 

This  has  been  declared  by  the  awakened  ones: 
The  faithful  should  not  give  to  dissenters  food.  &c., 
clothes,  &c.,  nor  should  they  exhort  them  (to  give), 


[«] 


1 The  ahove-detailed  benefaction*. 
F. 


66 


AxArAnga  sOtra. 


nor  do  them  service,  always  showing  the  highest 
respect.  Thus  I say.  (4) 

Know  the  law  declared  by  the  wise  Brihma»a : 
one  should  give  to  one  of  the  same  faith  food, 
&c.,  clothes,  &c.,  and  one  should  exhort  him  (to 
give)  or  do  him  service,  always  showing  the  highest 
respect.  Thus  I say.  (5) 

Third  Lesson. 

Some  are  awakened  as  middle-aged  men  and 
exert  themselves  well,  having,  as  clever  men,  heard 
and  received  the  word  of  the  learned l.  The  noble 
ones  have  impartially  preached  the  law.  Those 
who  are  awakened,  should  not  wish  for  pleasure, 
nor  do  harm,  nor  desire  (any  forbidden  things).  A 
person  who  is  without  desires  and  does  no  harm 
unto  any  living  beings  in  the  whole  world,  is  called 
by  me  ‘ unfettered.’  (1)  <• 

One  free  from  passion?  understands  perfectly  the 
bright  one  *,  knowing  birth  in  the  upper  and  nether 
regions. 

‘Bodies  increase  through  nourishment,  they  are 
frail  in  hardships.'  See  some  whose  organs  are 
failing  (give  way  to  weakness). 

A person  who  has  no  desires,  cherishes  pity.  He 
who  understands  the  doctrine  of  sin,  is  a mendicant 
who  knows  the  time,  the  strength,  the  measure,  the 
occasion,  the  conduct,  the  religious  precept ; he  dis- 
owns all  things  not  requisite  for  religious  purposes, 

- ■ — .L * 

1 The  scholiast  says  that  there  are  three  classes  of  the  awakened; 
the  Svayambnddha,  the  Pratyekakuddha,  and  the  Buddhabodhita. 
The  last  only  is  treated  of  in  the  text. 

* Le.  self-control. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  4.  67 

in  time  exerts  himself,  is  under  no  obligations;  he 
proceeds  securely  (on  the  road  to  final  liberation) 
after  having  cut  off  both  (love  and  hate)1 *.  (2) 

A householder  approaching  a mendicant  whose 
limbs  tremble  for  cold,  may  say : 

O long-lived  6rama«a!  are  you  not  subject  to 
the  influences  of  your  senses  ? 

0 long-lived  householder!  I am  not  subject  to 
the  influences  of  my  senses.  But  I cannot  sustain 
the  feeling  of  cold.  Yet  it  does  not  become  me 
to  kindle  or  light  a fire z,  that  I may  warm  or  heat 
myself;  nor  (to  procure  that  comfort)  through  the 
order  of  others. 

Perhaps  after  the  mendicant  has  spoken  thus,  the 
other  kindles  or  lights  a fire  that  he  may  warm  or 
heat  himself.  But  the  mendicant  should  well  ob- 
serve and  understand  this,  that  he  may  order  him  to 
show  no  such  obsequiousness.  Thus  I say.  (3) 

■ft 

Fourth  Lesson. 

A mendicant  who  is  fitted  out  with  three  robes3,  and 
a bowl  as  fourth  (article),  will  not  think : I shall  beg 

1 The  latter  part  of  this  paragraph  is  nearly  identical  with 
lecture  2,  lesson  5,  § 3,  to  which  we  refer  the  reader  for  the  ex- 
planation of  the  dark  phrases. 

* The  original  has  fire-body,  which  the  faithful  are  enjoined  nht 
to  injure;  see  lecture  2,  lesson  4. 

.*  The  three  robes  allowed  to  a (raina  monk  are  two  linen  under 
garments  (kshaumikakalpa)  and  one  woollen  upper  garment  (aurm- 
kakalpa).  Besides  these  (kalpatraya),  the  monk  posr  esses,  2.  an 
alms-bowl  (pitra)  with  six  things  belonging  to  it,  3.  a >.  room  (ra^-o- 
hara/*a),  4.  a veil  for  the  mouth  (mukhavastrikft).  The  alms- 
bowl  and  the  articles  belonging  <0  it  are  specialised  in  the  fol- 
lowing gfithfi:  pattern  patt&bamdho  pfiyaAftavanaxa  £a  pfiyakesariyftl 
pa&lii  rayatt&Mun  h.  goMAao  p&yanjggogo  n 


68 


axarAnga  sOtra. 


for  a fourth  rote.  He  should  beg  for  (clothes)  which 
he  wants,  and  which  are  permitted  by  the  religious 
code 1 ; he  should  wear  the  clothes  in  the  same  state 
in  which  they  are  given  him;  he  should  neither 
wash  nor  dye  them,  nor  should  he  wear  washed 
or  dyed  clothes,  nor  (should  he)  hide  (his  garments 
when  passing)  through  other  villages,  being  care- 
less of  dress.  This  is  the  whole  duty2 *  of  one 
who  wears  clothes.  But  know  further,  that,  after 
winter  is  gone  and  the  hot  season  has  come,  one 
should  leave  off  the  used-up  (garment  of  the  three), 
being  clad  with  an  upper  and  under  garment,  or 
with  the  undermost  garment,  or  with  one  gown,  or 
with  no  clothes — aspiring  to  freedom  from  bonds  s. 
Penance  suits  him.  Knowing  what  the  Revered 
One  has  declared,  one  should  thoroughly  and  in  all 
respects  conform  to  it.  (i) 

When  it  occurs  to  a blessed 4 mendicant  that  he 
suffers  pain,  and  cannot  bean  the  influence  of  cold, 
he  should  not  try  to  obviate  these  trials,  but  stand 
fast  in  his  own  self  which  is  endowed  with  all  know- 
ledge®. ‘For  it  is  better  for  an  ascetic  that  he 
should  take  poison.’  Even  thus  he  will  in  due 
time  put  an  end  to  existence.  This  (way  to 
escape  trials)  has  been  adopted  by  many  who  were 

1 Things,  &c. : this  is  the  meaning  of  the  technical  term 
ahesaxif^a  yathaishaxfya,  allowed  objects  of  begging. 

* Literally,  outfit.  Cf.  II,  g,  a,  § i. 

* I.  e.  freedom  from  worldly  cares  and  interest. 

4 Vasumaxr : rich  (in  control). 

s But  he  should  not,  in  order  to  escape  these  trials,  commit  such 
suicide  as  is  only  permitted  to  ascetics  who  have « reached  the 
highest  degree  of  perfection,  when  they  are  ripe  for  Nirvtoa. 
Suicide  only  puts  off  the  last  struggle  for  Nirvixa ; but  it  is 
otter  than  breaking  the  vow. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  5.  69 

free  from  delusion ; it  is  good,  wholesome,  proper, 
beatifying,  meritorious.  Thus  I say.  (2) 

Fifth  Lesson. 

A mendicant  who  is  fitted  out  with  two  robes, 
and  a bowl  as  third  (article),  will  not  think : I shall 
beg  for  a third  robe.  He  should  beg  for  robes 
which  are  allowed  to  be  begged  for ; he  should  wear 
the  clothes,  &c.  &C.1  This  is  the  whole  outfit  of 
one  who  wears  clothes.  But  know  further,  that 
after  the  winter  is  gone  and  the  hot  season  has  come, 
one  should  leave  off  the  used-up  garments ; having 
left  off  the  used-up  garments,  (one  should)  be  dad 
with  the  undermost  garment,  with  a gown 2 *,  or  with 
no  clothes  at  all — aspiring  to  freedom  from  bonds. 
Penance  suits  him.  Knowing  what  the  Revered 
One  has  declared,  one  should  thoroughly  and  in  all 
respects  conform  to  it.  (i) 

When  the  thought,  occurs  to  a mendicant  that 
through  illness  he  is  too  vyeak,  and. not  able  to  beg 
from  house  to  house — and  on  his  thus  complaining 
a householder  brings  food,  &c.,  obtained  (without 
injuring  life8),  and  gives  it  him — then  he  should, 
after  deliberation,  say4 * * *:  O long-lived  householder!  it 
does  not  become  me  to  eat  or  drink  this 8 food,  &c., 
or  (accept)  anything  else  of  the  same  kind.  (2) 

1 See  lesson  4,  § 1. 

* The  MSS.  are  at  variance  with  each  other  in  adapting  the 

words  of  the  former  lesson  to  the  present  case.  As  the  com- 

mentaries are  no  check,  and  do  not  explain  our  passage,  I have 

selected  what  seemed  to  me  to  be  the  most  likely  reading. 

* Abhihatfo=abhy&hrtta  :*  it  is  a typical  Attribute  of  objection-, 
aide  things.  The  commentator  explains  it  here  by  ^ivopainardani- 

vn'tta. 

* The-  original  has  only  ftloegg&,  he  should  examine  whether 


70 


AxArAnga  sOtra. 


A mendicant  who  has  resolved,  that  he  will,  when 
sick,  accept  the  assistance  of  fellow-ascetics 1 in  good 
health,  when  they  offer  (assistance)  without  being 
asked,  and  that  vice  versa  he,  when  in  health,  will 
give  assistance  to  sick  fellow-ascetics,  offering  it 
without  being  asked — (he  should  not  deviate  from 
his  resolution  though  he  die  for  want  of  help).  (3) 

Taking  the  vow  to  beg  (food,  &c.)  for  another 
(who  is  sick),  and  to  eat  (when  sick)  what  is  brought 
by  another  ; taking  the  vow  to  beg,  &c.,  and  not 
to  eat  what  is  brought ; taking  the  vow  not  to  beg, 
&cM  but  to  eat  what  is  brought;  taking  the  vow 
neither  to  beg,  &c.,  nor  to  eat  what  is  brought — 
(one  should  adhere  to  that  vow).  Practising  thus 
the  law  as  it  has  been  declared,  one  becomes  tran- 
quil, averted  from  sin,  guarded  against  the  allure- 
ments of  the  senses.  Even  thus  (though  sick)  he 
will  in  due  time  put  an  end  to  existence2.  This 
(method)  has  been  adopted  by  many  who  were 
free  from  delusion ; it  is  good,  wholesome,  proper, 
beatifying,  meritorious.  Thus  I say.  (4) 

the  food  &c.  is  acceptable  or  not  This  is  called  the  grahawai- 
shanfL 

1 Sihammiya=sftdbarmika,  one  who  follows  the  same  rule 
in  cases  where  different  rules  are  left  to  the  option  of  the  mendi- 
cants. Theword  abhikamkha=abhikdnkshya  is  not  translated, 
the  commentator  makes  it  out  to  mean,  wishing  for  freedom  from 
sinful  acts. 

* As  in  the  preceding  lesson  a man  who  cannot  conquer  his  sen- 
suality, is  permitted  to  commit  suicide  (by  hanging  himself,  &c.),  in 
order  to  put  an  end  to  his  trials  and  temptations,  so  in  this  lesson 
a man  whose  sickness  prevents  him  from  persevering  in  a life  of 
austerities,  is  permitted  to  commit  suicide  by  rejecting  food  and 
drink.  This  is  called  bhaktap&napratyikhy&namukti.  It 
seems  therefore  to  have  been  regarded  as  leading  to  final  liberation 
(mukti).  « 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  6. 


7* 


Sixth  Lesson. 

A mendicant  who  is  fitted  out  with  one  robe,  and 
a bowl  as  second  (article),  will  not  think : I shall  beg 
for  a second  robe.  He  should  beg  for  such  a robe 
only  as  is  allowed  to  be  begged  for,  and  he  should 
wear  it  in  the  same  state  as  he  receives  it  This 
is,  &c.  (see  lesson  4,  § 1). 

But  when  the  hot  season  has  come,  one  should 
leave  off  the  used-up  clothes;  one  should  be  clad 
with  one  *or  no  garment — aspiring  to  freedom  from 
bonds.  Knowing  what  the  Revered  One,  &c.  (see 
lesson  5,  § 1). 

When  the  thought  occurs  to  a mendicant : ‘ I am 
myself  alone ; I have  nobody  belonging  to  me,  nor 
do  I belong  to  anybody,’  then  he  should  thoroughly 
know  himself  as  standing  alone — aspiring  to  freedom 
from  bonds.  Penance  suits  him.  Knowing  what  the 
Revered  One  has  declared,  one  should  thoroughly 
and  in  all  respects  conform  to  it.  (1) 

A male  or  female  mendicant  eating  food  &c. 
should  not  shift  (the  morsel)  from  the  left  jaw  to 
the  right  jaw,  nor  from  the  right  jaw  to  the  left  jaw, 
to  get  a fuller  taste  of  it,  not  caring  for  the  taste 
(of  it) — aspiring  to  freedom  from  "bonds.  Penance 
suits  him.  Knowing  what  the  Revered  One  has 
declared,  one  should  thoroughly  and  in  all  respects 
conform  to  it.  (2) 

If  this  thought  occurs  to  a monk : ‘I  am  sick 
and  not;  able,  at  this  time,  to  regularly  mortify  the 
flesh,’  that  monk  should  regularly  reduce  his  food ; 
regularly  reducing  his  /ood,  and  diminishing  his 
sins,  ‘ he  should  take  proper  care  of  his  body,  being 


72  AxArAnga  s6tra. 

immovable  like  a beam;  exerting  himself  he  dis- 
solves his  body1.’  (3) 

Entering  a village,  or  a scot-free  town,  or  a town 
with  an  earth-wall,  or  a town  with  a small  wall,  or 
an  isolated  town,  or  a large  town,  or  a sea-town, 
or  a mine,  or  a hermitage,  or  the  halting-places  of 
processions,  or  caravans,  or  a capital2 3 — a monk 
should  beg  for  straw ; having  begged  for  straw  he 
should  retire  with  it  to  a secluded  spot.  After 
having  repeatedly  examined  and  cleaned  the  ground, 
where  there  are  no  eggs,  nor  living  beings,  nor 
seeds,  nor  sprouts,  nor  dew,  nor  water,'  nor  ants, 
nor  mildew,  nor  waterdrops,  nor  mud,  nor  cobwebs — 
he  should  spread  the  straw  on  it.  Then  he  should 
there  and  then  effect  (the  religious  death  called) 
itvara®.  (4) 


1 There  is  no  finite  verb  in  this  sentence,  nor  any  word 
which  could  supply  its  place.  The  old  train  a authors  were  so 
accustomed  to  surround  their  meaning  with  exclusions  ^nd  excep- 
tions, and  to  fortify  it  with  a maze  of  parentheses,  that  they  some- 

times apparently  forgot  to  express  the  verb,  especially  when  they 
made  use  of  fragments  of  old  verses,  as  in  the  present  qase. 

3 This  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  gamas  or  identical  passages 
which  form  a rather  questionable  ornament  of  the  Sfitra  style.  The 
gamas  are  usually  abbreviated,  e.  g.  villages,  &c.,  all  down  to 
capital,  or  eggs,  #c.,  all  down  to  cobwebs,  which  we  shall 
presently  meet  with. 

* Itvara  or  ingitamarana  consists  in  starving  oneself,  while 
keeping  within  a limited  space.  A religious  death  is  usually 
permitted  only  to  those  who  have  during  twelve  years  undergone 
preparatory  penance,  consisting  chiefly  in  protracted  periods  of 
fasting.  The  scholiast  says  that  in  our  case  the  itvara  is  not 
enjoined  for  sick  persons  who  can  no  longer  sustain  ^austerities; 
but  they  should  act  as  if  they  were  to  .commit  the  itvara  suicide, 
hoping  that  in  five  or  six  days  the  sickness  would  leave  them,  in 
which  case  they  are  to  return  to  their  former  life.  But  if  they  should 
not  get  better  but  die,  it  is  all  for  the  best 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  J,  LESSON  *J.  73 

This  is  the  truth : speaking  truth,  free  from  pas- 
sion, crossing  (the  sawsdra),  abating  irresoluteness, 
knowing  all  truth  and  not  being  known,  leaving  this 
frail  body,  overcoming  all  sorts  of  pains  and  troubles 
through  trust  in  this  (religion),  he  accomplishes  this 
fearful  (religious  death).  Even  thus  he  will  in  due 
time  put  an  end  to  existence.  This  has  been  adopted 
by  many  who  were  free  from  delusion ; it  is  good, 
wholesome,  proper,  beatifying,  meritorious.  Thus 
I say.  (5) 

• Seventh  Lesson. 

To  a naked1  monk  the  thought  occurs : I can  bear 
the  pricking  of  grass,  the  influence  of  cold  and  heat, 
the  stinging  of  flies  and  mosquitos ; these  and  other 
various  painful  feelings  I can  sustain,  but  I cannot 
leave  off  the  covering  of  the  privities.  Then  he 
may  cover  his  privities  with  a piece  of  cloth 2. 

A naked  monk  who  .perseveres  in  this  conduct, 
sustains  repeatedly  these  and  other  various  painful 
feelings : the  grass  pricks  him,  heat  and  cold  attack 
him,  flies  and  mosquitos  sting  him.  A naked  monk 
(should  be)  aspiring  to  freedom  from  bonds.  Pen- 
ance suits  him.  Knowing  what  the  Revered  One  has 
declared,  one  should  thoroughly  and . in  all  respects 
conform  to  it.  (i) 

A monk  who  has  come  to  any  of  the  following 
resolutions, — having  collected  food,  &c.,  I shall  give 
of  it  to  other  monks,  and  I shall  eat  (what  they 
have)  brought;  (or)  having  collected  food,  &c,  I 
shall  give  .of  it  to  other  monks,  but  1 shall  not  eat. 

* ft — — * 

1 AJela. ' , 

* This  is  the  ka/ibandhana  or  £olapa//aka;-.it  should  be 
four  fingers  broad  and  one  hasta  long. 


74  AxArAAga  sCtra. 

(what  they  have)  brought;  (or)  having  collected 

food,  &c.,  I shall  not  give  of  it  to  other  monks,  but 

I shall  eat  (what  they  have)  brought;  (or)  having 

collected  food,  &c.,  1 shall  pot  give  of  it  to  other 

monks,  nor  eat  (what  they  have)  brought ; (2)  (or) 

I shall  assist  a fellow-ascetic  with  the  remnants  of 

my  dinner,  which  is  acceptable1  and  remained  in 

the  same  state  in  which  it  was  received 2,  and  I shall 

accept  the  assistance  of  fellow-ascetics  as  regards 

the  remnants  of  their  dinner,  which  is  acceptable 

and  remained  in  the  same  state  in  which  it  was 

*• 

received ; — (that  monk  should  keep  these  vows  even 
if  he  should  run  the  risk  of  his  life)  (3) — aspiring  to 
freedom  from  bonds.  Penance  suits  him.  Knowing 
what  the  Revered  One  has  declared,  one  should 
thoroughly  conform  to  it.  (4) 

(The  last  two  paragraphs  of  the  last  lesson  are 
to  be  reproduced  here.) 

Thus  I say.  (5)  « 

«> 

Eighth  Lesson.  • 

The  wise  ones  who  attain  in  due  order3  to  one  of 
the  unerring  states  (in  which  suicide  is  prescribed), 
those  who  are  rich  in  control  and  endowed  with 
knowledge,  knowing  the  incomparable  (religious 
death,  should  continue  their  contemplation).  (1) 

1 Ahesanigga : it  had  those  qualities  which  are  required  of  a 
ding  the  mendicant  may  accept, 

* Ahfipariggahiyassabdparign'htta. 

* The  preceding  lessons  treated  of  suicide  conceded  to  sick 
persons  as  a means  of  entering  Nirvawa.  The  eighth  lesson,  which 
is  written  in  rlokas,.  describes  the  different  kinds  of  religious  deaths 
which  form  the  end  of  a twelve-years'  mortification  of  the  flesh 
(saedekhaafl);  But  $e  ascetic*  must  ask  and  get  the  permission  of 
his  Guru,  before  he  commits  suicide. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  8.  75 

Knowing  the  twofold  (obstacles,  i.  e.  bodily  and 
mental),  the  wise  ones,  having  thoroughly  learned 
the  law,  perceiving  in  due  order  (that  the  time  for 
their  death  has  come),  get  rid  of  karman.  (2) 

Subduing  the  passions  and  living  on  little  food  \ 
he  should  endure  (hardships).  If  a mendicant  falls  , 
sick,  let  him  again  take  food.  (3) 

He  should  not  long  for  life,  nor  wish  for  death ; 
he  should  yearn  after  neither,  life  or  death.  (4) 

He  who  is  indifferent  and  wishes  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  karman,  should  continue  his  contemplation. 
Becoming  Unattached  internally  and  externally,  he 
should  strive  after  absolute  purity.  (5) 

Whatever  means  one  knows  for  calming  one’s  own 
life  *,  that  a wise  man  should  learn  (i.  e.  practise)  in 
order  to  gain  time  (for  continuing  penance).  (6) 

In  a village  or  in  a forest,  examining  the  ground 
and  recognising  it  as  free  from  living  beings,  the 
sage  should  spread  the  straw1 *  3.  (7) 

Without  food  he  should  lie  down  and  bear  the 
pains  which  attack  him.  he  should  not  for  too 
long  time  give  way  to  worldly  feelings  which  over- 
come him.  (8) 

When  crawling  animals  or  such  as  live  on  high 
or  below,  feed  on  his  flesh  and  blood,  he  should 
neither  kill  them  nor  rub  (the  wound).  (9) 

Though  these  animals  destroy  the  body,  he  should 
not  stir  from  his  position. 


1 Compare  lecture  7,  lesson  6,  § 3. 

* I.  e.  for  preserving  the  life,  when  too  severe  penance  brings  on 
sickness  and  the  probability  of  instant  death.* 

* Here  commences  the  description  of  the  bhaktapraty&khyi- 
namarawa,  suicide  by  rejecting  food.  * 


76 


AjcAranga  sOtra. 


After  the  irravas  have  ceased,  he  shoald  bear 
(pains)  as  if  he  rejoiced  in  them,  (io) 

When  the  bonds  fall  off,  then  he  has  accomplished 
his  life. 

(We  shall  now  describe)  a more  exalted  (method1) 
for  a well-controlled  and  instructed  monk,  (n) 

This  other  law  has  been  proclaimed  by  Gnktri- 
putra : 

He  should  give  up  all  motions  except  his  own  in 
the  thrice-threefold  way 2.  (12) 

He  should  not  lie  on  sprouts  of  grass,  but  in- 
specting the  bare  ground  he  should  lie  on  it. 

Without  any  comfort  and  food,  he  should  there 
bear  pain.  (13) 

When  the  sage  becomes  weak  in  his  limbs,  he 
should  strive  after  calmness s. 

For  he  is  blameless,  who  is  well  fixed  and  im- 
movable (in  his  intention  to  die).  (14) 

He  should  move  to  and  fro  (on  his  ground), 
contract  and  stretch  (his  limbs)  for  the  benefit  of 
the  whole  body ; or  (he  should  remain  quiet  as  if 
he  were)  lifeless.  (15) 

He  should  walk  about,  when  tired  of  (lying),  or 
stand  with  passive  limbs ; when  tired  of  standing,  he 
should  sit  down.  (16) 

Intent  on  such  an  uncommon  death,  he  should 
regulate  the  motions  of  his  organs. 


1 Viz.  the  ingitamarana,  which  differs  from  the  preceding  one 
by  the  restriction  of  the  motions  of  the  candidate  for  suicide  to  a 
limited  space.  ..  .. 

* I.  e.  of  body,  speech,  and  mind;  doing,  or  causing,  or  allowing 

to  be  done.  ( * 

* He  shouldnot  give  way  to  melancholy  thoughts^. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  8. 


77 


Having  attained  a place  swarming  with  insects, 
he  should  search  for  a clean  spot,  (i  7) 

He  should  not  remain  there  whence  sin  would 
rise. 

He  should  raise  himself  above  (sinfulness),  and 
bear  all  pains.  (18) 

And  this  is  a still  more  difficult  method  \ when 
one  lives  according  to  it:  not  to  stir  from  one’s 
place,  while  checking  all  motions  of  the  body.  (19) 

This  is  the  highest  law,  exalted  above  the  pre- 
ceding method: 

Having  examined  a spot  of  bare  ground  he  should 
remain  there ; stay  O Br&hma»a ! (20) 

Having  attained  a place  free  from  living  beings, 
he  should  there  fix  himself. 

He  should  thoroughly  mortify  his  flesh,  thinking: 
There  are  no  obstacles  in  my  body.  (2 1)  • 

Knowing  as  long  as  he  lives  the  dangers  and 
troubles,  the  wise  and ‘restrained  (ascetic)  should 
bear  them  as  being  instrumental  to  the  dissolution 
of  the  body.  (22) 

He  should  not  be  attached  to  the  transitory 
pleasures,  nor  to  the  greater  ones ; he  should  not 
nourish  desire  and  greed,  looking  only  for  eternal 
praise.  (23) 

He  should  be  enlightened  with  eternal  objects1 2, 
and  not  trust  in  the  delusive  power  of  the  gods; 

1 It  is  called  p&ovagama**ay  translated  by  the  commentators 
p&dapopagamana,  remaining  motionless  like  a felled  tree.  This 
etymology,  which  is  generally  adopted  by  the  Gainas,  is  evidently 
wrong;  for  the  Sanskrit  prototype  is  the  Brabmanical  pr&yopa* 
gamana. 

* This  is  the  scholiast's  interpretation  of  i\imawte^ft  niman- 
trayet. 


78 


axArAnga  sOtra. 


a Brihma«a  should  know  of  this  and  cast  off  all 
inferiority1.  (24) 

Not  devoted  to  any  of  the  external  objects  he 
reaches  the  end  of  his  life ; thinking  that  patience 
is  the  highest  good,  he  (should  choose)  one  of 
(the  described  three)  good  methods  of  entering 
Nirviwa.  (25)  Thus  I say. 

End  of  the  Seventh  Lecture,  called  Liberation. 

1 Nftmam  karma  v&. 


79 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  8,  LESSON  I. 


EIGHTH  LECTURE, 

(called) 

THE  PILLOW  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

First  Lesson. 

A&  I have*  heard  it,  I shall  tell  how  the  Venerable 
Ascetic,  exerting  himself  and  meditating,  after  having 
entered  the  order  in  that  winter,  wandered  about1 * * * * * *, 

‘I  shall  not  cover  myself  with  that  robe*/ only 
in  that  winter  (he  used  it).  He  had  crossed  (the  sa*»- 
sira)  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  This  (refusing  of  dress) 
is  in  accordance  with  his  doctrine,  (l) 

More  than  four  months  many  sorts  of  living  beings 
gathered  on  his  body,  crawled  about  it,  and  caused 
pain  there.  (2) 

For  a year  and  a month  he  did  not  leave  off  his 
robe.  Since  that  time  the  Venerable  One,  giving  up 
his  robe,  was  a naked,  world-relinquishing,  houseless 
(sage)8.  (3) 

Then  he  meditated  (walking)  with*  his  eye  fixed 
on  a square  space  before  him  of  the  length  of  a 

1 The  commentators  call  this  passage  a rloka,  though  only  die 

beginning  of  it  looks  like  a p&da,  the  rest  shoving  no  metrical 

lav.  The  beginning  of  the  last  passage  looks  also  like  the  first 

pfida  of  a rioka;  but  the  rest  requires  some  violent  alterations  to 

answer  the  metrical  lavs  of  a rioka.  • 

* The  divine  robe  given  him  by  India. 

* The  commentator  says  that  this  happened  at  the  Suvai»abA- 

lukfi  river. 


8o 


AxArAnga  sOtra. 


man1.  Many  people  assembled,  shocked  at  the  sight ; 
they  struck  him  and  cried.  (4) 

Knowing  (and  renouncing)  the  female  sex  in 
mixed  gathering  places2,  he  meditated,  finding  his 
way  himself : I do  not  lead  a worldly  life.  (5) 

Giving  up  the  company®  of  all  householders 
whomsoever,  he  meditated.  Asked,  he  gave  no 
answer;  he  went,  and  did  not  transgress  the  right 
path.  (6) 

For  some  it  is  not  easy  (to  do  what  he  did),  not 
to  answer  those  who  salute;  he  was  beaten  with 
sticks,  and  struck  by  sinful  people.  (7) 

Disregarding  slights  difficult  to  bear,  the  Sage 
wandered  about,  (not  attracted)  by  story-tellers, 
pantomimes,  songs,  fights  at  quarter-staff,  and 
boxing-matches.  (8) 

At  that  time  the  son  of  Gnktri  saw  without 
sorrow  (or  pleasure)  people  in  mutual  conversation. 
G^&trfputra  obtained  oblivion  of  these  exquisite 
sorrows.  (9) 

For  more  than  a couple  of  years  he  led  a reli- 
gious life  without  using  cold  water;  he  realised 
singleness,  guarded  his  body,  had  got  intuition,  and 
was  calm.  (10) 

Thoroughly  knowing  the  earth-bodies  and  water- 
bodies  and  fire-bodies  and  wind-bodies,  the  lichens, 
seeds,  and  sprouts,  (n) 

He  comprehended  that  they  are,  if  narrowly 


1 Tiriyabhittim  is  left  out  in  the  translation.  I cannot  make  out 
the  exact- meaning  of  it,  perhaps:  ‘so  that  he  was  a wall  for  the 
animals.' 

* SayaitehuB  in  the  original. 

* Literally,  the  mixed  state. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  8,  LESSON  1. 


81 


inspected,  imbued  with  life,  and  avoided  to  injure 
them;  he,  the  great  Hero.  (12) 

The  immovable  (beings)  are  changed  to  mova- 
ble ones,  and  the  movable  beings  to  immovable 
ones;  beings  which  are  born  in  all  states  become 
individually  sinners1  by  their  actions.  (13) 

The  Venerable  One  understands  thus : he  who  is 
under  the  conditions  (of  existence) 2,  that  fool  suffers 
pain.  Thoroughly  knowing  (karman),  the  Venerable 
One  avoids  sin.  (14) 

The  sage,  perceiving  the  double  (karman)®,  pro- 
claims the ‘incomparable  activity4,  he,  the  knowing 
one ; knowing  the  current  of  worldliness,  the  current 
of  sinfulness,  and  the  impulse,  (15) 

Practising  the  sinless  abstinence  from  killing,  he  did 
no  acts,  neither  himself  nor  with  the  assistance  of  others ; 
he  to  whom  women  were  known  as  the  causes  of  all 
sinful  acts,  he  saw  (the  true  state  of  the  world).  (16) 
He  did  not  use  what  had  expressly  been  pre- 
pared for  him6 ; he  well  saw  (that  bondage  comes) 
through  action.  Whatever  is  sinful,  the  Venerable 
One  left  that  undone  : he  consumed  clean  food.  (1 7) 
He  did  not  use  another’s  robe,  nor  does  he  eat 
out  of  another’s  vessel.  Disregarding  contempt,,  he 
went  with  indifference  to  places  where  food  was  pre- 
pared. (18) 

Knowing  measure  in  eating  and  drinking,  he  was 
not  desirous  of  delicious  food,  nor  had  he  a longing 
for  it.  A sage  should  not  rub  his  eyes  nor  scratch 
his  body.  (19) 

1 Or  sinful?  bSM.  . * Upadhi. 

* Present  and  future.  4 I.  e.  religious  life. 

* Ah&kacfam:  yathd  yena  prakdrena  pr(sh/va  aprfsH/va  va 
krrtam  yath&krttam  &dh&kannidin&. 

0*3  « 


82 


AjtAranga  sOtra. 


Looking  a little  sideward,  looking  a little  behind, 
answering  little  when  spoken  to,  he  should  walk 
attentively  looking  on  his  path.  (20) 

When  the  cold  season  has  half-way  advanced,  the 
houseless,  leaving  off  his  robe  and  stretching  out 
his  arms,  should  wander  about,  not  leaning  against  a 
trunk.  (21) 

This  is  the  rule  which  has  often  been  followed  by 
the  wise  Brihmawa,  the  Venerable  One,  who  is  free 
from  attachment : thus  proceed  (the  monks). 

Tbjus  I say.  (22) 

Second  Lesson. 

Whatever  different  seats  and  couches  have  been 
told,  whatever  have  been  used  by  the  great  Hero, 
these  resting-places  are  thus  detailed1,  (x) 

He  sometimes  lodged  in  workshops,  assembling- 
places,  wells,  or  shops ; sometimes  in  manufactories 
or  under  a shed  of  straw.  (2) 

He  sometimes  lodged  in  travellers’  halls,  garden- 
houses,  or  towns;  sometimes  on  a burying-ground, 
in  relinquished  houses,  or  at  the  foot  of  a tree.  (3) 
In  these  places  was  the  wise  .5rama»a  for  thirteen 
long  years ; he  meditated  day  and  night,  exerting 
himself,  undisturbed,  strenuously.  (4) 

TheVenerable  One,  exerting  himself,  did  not  seek 

1 5?14nka  remarks : * This  verse  has  not  been  explained  by  the 
author  of  the  old  /ikS.  Why?  Either  because  it  offers  no  difficulty, 
or  because  it  was  wanting.  Yet  it  is  found  in  the  MSS.  of  the  text 
alone.  We  do  not  exactly  know  the  reason.'  Whjph  old  dki  is 
meant  by  Sil&nka  we  cannot  tell  \yith  certainty.  It  scarcely  can 
be  the  A'firm,  for  in  the  Bombay  MS.  of  it  the  text  of  the  verse  in 
question  is  given,  but  no  explanation  beyond  the  words:  es& 
putMi,  this  is  (given  as  an  answer  to)  a question. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  8,  LESSON  2. 


«5 


sleep  for  the  sake  of  pleasure ; he  waked  up  himself, 
and  slept  only  a little,  free  from  desires.  (5) 

Waking  up  again,  the  Venerable  One  lay  down, 
exerting  himself ; going  outside  for  once  in  a night, 
he  walked  about  for  an  hour.  (6) 

In  his  resting-places  he  sustained  fearful  and  mani- 
fold calamities ; crawling  or  flying  animals  attack 
him.  (7) 

Bad  people,  the  guard  of  the  village,  or  lance- 
bearers  attack  him ; or  there  were  domestic  tempta- 
tions, single  women  or  men ; (8) 

Fearful  and  manifold  (calamities)  of  this  and  the 
next  world;  pleasant  and  unpleasant  smells,  and 
manifold  sounds : (9) 

Always  well  controlled,  he  bore  the  different  sorts 
of  feelings ; overcoming  carelessness  and  pleasure,  the 
Br&hmatta  wandered  about,  speaking  but  little.  (10) 
In  the  resting-places  there  once,  in  a night,  the 
single  wanderers  asked’him  (who  he  was,  and  why 
he  was  there) ; as  he  did  n6t  answer,  they  treated 
him  badly;  but  he  persevered  in  his  meditations, 
free  from  resentment.  (11) 

(Sometimes  to  avoid  greater  troubles  when  asked), 
‘Who  is  there  within?’  he  answered,  ‘ It  is-  I,  a 
mendicant.’  But  this  is  the  best  law;  silently  to 
meditate,  even  if  badly  treated.  (12) 

When  a cold  wind  blows,  in  which  some  feel  pain, 
then  some  houseless  monks  in  the  cold  rain  seek 
a place  sheltered  from  the  wind.  (13) 

(Some  heretical  monks  say),  ‘We  shall  put  on 
more  cloth*es;  kindling  .wood  or  (well)  covered,  we 
shall  be  able  (to  bear)  the  very  painful  influence  of 
.the  cold.’  (14) 

But  the  V enerable  One  desired  nothing  of  the  kind ; 


84 


AaArAnga  sOtra. 


strong  in  control,  he  suffered,  despising  all  shelter. 
Going  outside  once  of  a night,  the  Venerable  One 
was  able  (to  endure  all  hardships)  in  calmness.  (15) 
This  is  the  rule  which  has  often  been  followed  by 
the  wise  Brihma«a,  the  Venerable  One,  who  is  free 
from  attachment : thus  proceed  (the  monks). 

Thus  I say.  (16) 

Third  Lesson. 

Always  well  guarded,  he  bore  the  pains  (caused  by) 
grass,  cold,  fire,  flies,  and  gnats ; manifold  pains.  (1) 
Ho  travelled  in  the  pathless  country  of  the 
L&jJIas,  in  Vagg'abhfimi  and  Subbhabhumi1;  he  used 
there  miserable  beds  and  miserable  seats.  (2) 

In  \Adk&  (happened)  to  him  many  dangers.  Many 
natives  attacked  him.  Even  in  the  faithful  part  of 
the  rough  country2  the  dogs  bit  him,  ran  at  him.  (3) 
Few  people  kept  off  the  attacking,  biting  dogs. 
Striking  the  monk,  they  cried  ‘ Khukkhh,'  and  made 
the  dogs  bite  him.  (4) 

Such  were  the  inhabitants.  Many  other  men- 
dicants, eating  rough  food  in  Vaggabhftmi,  and 
carrying  about  a strong  pole  or  a stalk  (to  keep  off 
the  dogs),  lived  there.  (5) 

Even  thus  armed  they  were  bitten  by  the  dogs,  torn 
by  the  dogs.  It  is  difficult  to  travel  in  LAnfAa.  (6)  . 

> V^frabhfimi  and  •S'ubhratMmi  (or  •SVabhrabhtlmi)  are,  accord- 
ing to  the  commentaries,  the  two  divisions  of  Lidfa.  I think  that 
lAdhi.  may  be  identical  with  the  classical  'R.&dha.  or  western  Bengal 
and  the  L&la  of  the  Buddhists,  the  native  country  of  Vjgaya,  the 
legendary  conqueror  of  Ceylon.  Subbbabhfimi  is*  probably  the 
country  of  the  Suhtflas,  who  are  alsfl  identified  with  the  RA44as. 

* The  commentator  seems  tp  understand  the  words  lukkhadesie 
bhatU  in  the  sense: ‘There  the  living  also  was  rough;  for  they 
used  clothes  of  grass  instead  of  cotton. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  8,  LESSON  4.  85 

Ceasing  to  use  the  stick  (i.  e.  cruelty)  against 
living  beings,  abandoning  the  care  of  the  body,  the 
houseless  (Mah&vtra),  the  Venerable  One,  endures 
the  thorns  of  the  villages  (i.e.  the  abusive  language 
of  the  peasants),  (being)  perfectly  enlightened.  (7) 
As  an  elephant  at  the  head  of  the  battle,  so  was 
MahSvira  there  victorious.  Sometimes  he  did  not 
reach  a village  there  in  \Adhz.  (8) 

When  he  who  is  free  from  desires  approached  the 
village,  the  inhabitants  met  him  on  the  outside,  and 
attacked  him,  saying,  * Get  away  from  here.’  (9) 

He  was  struck  with  a stick,  the  fist,  a lance,  hit 
with  a fruit,  a clod,  a potsherd.  Beating  him  again 
and  again,  many  cried.  (10) 

When  he  once  (sat)  without  moving  his  body,  they 
cut  his  flesh1,  tore  his  hair  under  pains,  or  covered 
him  with  dust,  (ti) 

Throwing  him  up,  they  let  him  fall,  or  disturbed 
him  in  his  religious  pastures ; abandoning  the  care 
of  his  body,  the  Venerable  Qne  humbled  himself  and 
bore  pain,  free  from  desire.  (12) 

As  a hero  at  the  head  of  the  battle  is  sur- 
rounded on  all  sides8,  so  was  there  MaheLvtra. 
Bearing  all  hardships,  the  Venerable  One,  undis- 
turbed, proceeded  (on  the  road  to  Nirv£#a).  (13) 
This  is  the  rule  which  has  often  been  followed,  &c. 

Fourth  Lesson. 

The  Venerable  One  was  able  to  abstain  from 
indulgence  of  the  flesh8,  though  never  attacked  by 

* Or  his  mustaches.  * * Or  is  on  his  guard. 


* Omodariya. 


86  axArAnga  sOtra. 

diseases.  Whether  wounded  or  not  wounded,  he 
desired  not  medical  treatment,  (i) 

Purgatives  and  emetics,  anointing  of  the  body 
and  bathing,  shampooing  and  cleansing  of  the  teeth 
do  not  behove  him,  after  he  learned  (that  the  body 
is  something  unclean).  (2) 

Being  averse  from  the  impressions  of  the  senses1, 
the  Br&hma#a  wandered  about,  speaking  but  little. 
Sometimes  in  the  cold  season  the  Venerable  One  was 
meditating  in  the  shade.  (3) 

In  summer  he  exposes  himself  to  the  heat,  he  sits 
squatting  in  the  sun ; he  lives  on  rough  (food) : rice, 
pounded  jujube,  and  beans.  (4) 

Using  these  three,  the  Venerable  One  sustained 
himself  eight  months.  Sometimes  the  Venerable 
One  did  not  drink  for  half  a month  or'  even  for  a 
month.  (5) 

Or  he  did  not  drink  for  more  than  two  months, 
or  even  six  months,  day  and  night,  without  desire 
(for  drink).  Sometimes  he  ate  stale  food.  (6) 
Sometimes  he  ate  only  the  sixth  meal,  or  the 
eighth,  the  tenth,  the  twelfth ; without  desires, 
persevering  in  meditation.  (7) 

Having  wisdom,  Mahavira  committed  no  sin  him- 
self, nor  did  he  induce  others  to  do  so,  nor  did  he 
consent  to  the  sins  of  pthers.  (8) 

Having  entered  a village  or  a town,  he  begged  for 
food  which  had  been  prepared  for  somebody  else. 
Having  got  clean*  food,  he  used  it,  restraining  the 
impulses.  (9) 

When  there  were  hungry  crows,  or  thirsty  beings 
stood  in  his  way,  where  he  begged,  or  when  he  saw 
them  flying  repeatedly  down,  (10) 


1 G&madhamma. 


* I.  e.  free  from  faults. 


BOOK  I,  LECTURE  8,  LESSON  4.  8 J 

When  a Br£hma«a  or  .5rama#a,  a beggar  or  guest, 
a K&ncfala.1,  a cat,  or  a dog  stood  in  his  way,  (11) 
Without  ceasing  in  his  reflections,  and  avoiding 
to  overlook  them2,  the  Venerable  One  slowly  wan- 
dered about,  and,  killing  no  creatures,  he  begged  for 
his  food.  (12) 

Moist  or  dry  or  cold  food,  old  beans,  old  pap;  or 
bad  grain,  whether  he  did  or  did  not  get  such  food, 
he  was  rich  (in  control).  (13) 

And  Mahivira  meditated  (persevering)  in  some 
posture,  without  the  smallest  motion ; he  meditated 
in  mental  concentration  on  (the  things)  above,  below, 
beside,  free  from  desires.  (14) 

He  meditated  free  from  sin  and  desire,  not  attached 
to  sounds  or  colours ; though  still  an  erring  mortal 
(^/zadmastha),  he  wandered  about,  and  never  acted 
carelessly.  (15) 

Himself  understanding  the  truth  and  restraining 
the  impulses  for  the  purification  of  the  soul,  finally 
liberated,  and  free  from*  delusion,  the  Venerable  One 
was  well  guarded  during  his  "whole  life.  (16) 

This  is  the  rule  which  has  been  followed.  &c. 

End  of  the  Ninth  Lecture,  called  the  Pillow  of 
Righteousness. 

End  of  the  First  Book. 


1 Svap&ka. 

* Tassa  jippattiyam  pariharawto,  avoiding  the  non-percep- 
tion of  it,  i.  e.  the  interruption  of  his  reflections. 


SECOND  BOOK 


FIRST  PART1. 

FIRST  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

BEGGING  OF  FOOD2. 

First  Lesson. 

When  a male  or  a female  mendicant,  having 
entered  the  abode  of  a householder  with  the  inten- 
tion of  collecting  alms,  recognises3  food,  drink,  dainties, 
and  spices  as  affected  by,  or  mixed  up  with,  living 
beings,  mildew,  seeds  or  sprouts,  or  wet  with  water, 
or  covered  with  dust — either  in  the  hand  or  the  pot 
of  another4 — they  should  not,  even  if  they  can  get  it, 
accept  of  such  food,  thinking  that  it  is  impure  and 
unacceptable5,  (i) 

But  if  perchance  they  accept  of  such  food,  under 
pressing  circumstances®,  they  should  go  to  a secluded 
spot,  a garden,  or  a monk’s  hall — where  there  are  no 

1 KMi.  , 2 Fi«(/aisha»S. 

* This  is  the  typical  beginning  of  most  precepts  or  sfttras  in  this 
khd& : se  bhikkhh  vi  bhikkhuni  v&  g&h&vaikulam  pi«</avityapa<fiy&e 
attupavi/Me  sam£«e  se  ggzm  puna  g&neggi.  In  the  sequel  I have 
shortened  this  rather  lengthy  preamble. 

* By  the  other  is  meant  the  householder  or  the  giver  (d£tn). 

5 This  is  the  typical  conclusion  of  all  prohibitions : aphdsuyaw 
zntsajtiggzm  ti  mannam&»e  l&bhe  samte  no  pa^ggihfgi'i  In  the 
translation  the  plural  is  used  throughout,  in  order  to  avoid  the 
necessity  of  always  repeating  ‘he  or  she.' 

* As  e.  g.  total  want  of  another  opportunity  to  get  suitable  food 
during  famine  and  sickness. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  I.  89 


eggs,  nor  living  beings,  nor  sprouts,  nor  dew,  nor 
water,  nor  ants,  nor  mildew,  nor  drops  (of  water),  nor 
mud,  nor  cobwebs — and  rejecting  (that  which  is 
affected  by),  and  cleaning  that  which  is  mixed  up 
(with  living  beings,  &c.),  they  should  circumspectly  eat 
or  drink  it  But  with  what  they  cannot  eat  or  drink, 
they  should  resort  to  a secluded  spot,  and  leave  it 
there  on  a heap  of  ashes  or  bones,  or  rusty  things, 
or  chaff,  or  cowdung,  or  on  any  such-like  place  which 
they  have  repeatedly  examined  and  cleaned.  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  as  alms  whatever  herbs  they  recognise,  on 
examining  them,  as  still  whole,  containing  their 
source  of  life,  not  split  longwise  or  broadwise,  and 
still  alive,  fresh  beans,  living  and  not  broken;  for 
such  food  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  (3) 

But  when  they  recognise  after  examination  that 
those  herbs  are  no  more  whole,  do  not  contain  their 
source  of  life,  are  split,  longwise  or  broadwise,  and 
no  more  alive,  fresh  beans,  lifeless  and  broken,  then 
they  may  accept  them,  if  they  get  them;  for  they 
are  pure  and  acceptable.  (4) 

A monk  or  nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  as  alms  whatever  flattened  grains,  grains  con- 
taining much  chaff,  or  half-roasted  spikes  of  wheat, 
&c.,  or  flour  of  wheat,  &c.,  or  rice  or  flour  of  rice, 
they  recognise  as  only  once  worked1;  for  such  food 
is  impure  and  unacceptable.  (5) 

But  when  they  recognise  these  things  as  more  than 
once  worked,  as  twice,  thrice  worked,  then  they  may 
accept  th«m,  if  they  get  them ; for  they  are  pure  and 
acceptable.  (6)  * 

1 Founded  or  cooked  or  roasted,  &c.,  -because  after  only  one 
operation  sperms  of  life  might  still  be  left. 


90 


AsArAnga  s6tra. 


A monk  or  a nun  desiring  to  enter  the  abode  of  a 
householder  for  collecting  alms,  should  not  enter  or 
leave  it  together  with  a heretic  or  a householder; 
or  a monk  who  avoids  all  forbidden  food,  &c.,  to- 
gether with  one  who  does  not.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  entering  or  leaving  the  out-of- 
door  places  for  religious  practices  or  for  study1 
should  not  do  so  together  with  a heretic  or  a house- 
holder; or  a monk  who  avoids  all  forbidden  food, 
together  with  one  who  does  not.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun  wandering  from  village  to 
village  should  not  do  so  together  with  A heretic  or 
a householder ; or  a monk  who  avoids  all  forbidden 
food,  together  with  one  who  does  not.  (9) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should 
not  give,  immediately  or  mediately,  food,  &c.,  to  a 
heretic  or  a householder ; or  a monk  who  avoids  all 
forbidden  food,  to  one  who  does  not.  (10) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  from  a householder  whom  they  know 
to  give  out  of  respect  for  a Nirgrantha,  in  behalf  of 
a fellow-ascetic,  food,  &c.,  which  he  has  bought  or 
stolen  or  taken,  though  it  was  not  to  be  taken  nor 
given,  but  was  taken  by  force,  by  acting  sinfully 
towards  all  sorts  of  living  beings ; for  such-like  food, 
&c.,  prepared  by  another  man2  or  by  the  giver  himself, 
brought  out  of  the  house  or  not  brought  out  of  the 
house,  belonging  to  the  giver  or  not  belonging  to 
him,  partaken  or  tasted  of,  or  not  partaken  or  tasted 
of,  is  impure  and  unacceptable. 

1 These  are  the  vi£&rabh&mi  an<^vih£rabhftmi.  , 

* Purisa*0taraksu&*  * I have  rendered  this  word  according  to 
iht  interpretation  of  the  commentators ; but  in  a similar  passage, 
8,  3,  §§  a and  3,  they  uhderstand  the  word  to  mean  appropriated 
by  another  person* 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  I.  91 

In  this  precept  substitute  for ‘on  behalf  of  one 
fellow-ascetic,’  (2)  on  behalf  of  many  fellow-ascetics, 
(3)  on  behalf  of  one  female  fellow-ascetic,  (4)  on  be- 
half of  many  female  fellow-ascetics;  so  that  there 
will  be  four  analogous  precepts.  (11) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  of  food, 
&c.,  which  they  know  has  been  prepared  by  the 
householder  for  the  sake  of  many  6rama»as  and 
Br&hma#as,  guests,  paupers,  and  beggars,  after  he 
HRs  counted  them,  acting  sinfully  towards  all  sorts  of 
living  beings ; for  such  food,  whether  it  be  tasted  of 
or  not,  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  (12) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  of  food,  &c., 
procured  in  the  way  described  in  § 1 1 for  the  sake  of 
the  persons  mentioned  in  § 12,  if  the  said  food,  &c., 
has  been  prepared  by  the  giver  himself,  has  been 
brought  out  of  the  house,  does  not  belong  to  the 
giver,  has  not  been  partaken  or  tasted  of ; for  such 
food,  &c.,  is  impure  aryl  unacceptable;  but  if  the 
food,  &c.,  has  been  preparedly  another  person,  has 
been  brought  out  of  the  house,  belongs  to'  the  giver, 
has  been  partaken  or  tasted  of,  one  may  accept  it ; 
for  it  is  pure  and  acceptable.  (13) 

A monk  or  a nun  wishing  to  enter  the  abode  of  a 
householder  with  the  intention  of  qollecting  alms, 
should  not,  for  the  sake  of  food  or  drink,  enter  or  leave 
such  always  liberal,  always  open  houses,  where  they 
always  give  a morsel,  always  the  best  morsel,  always 
a part  of  the  meal,  always  nearly  the  half  of  it. 

This  certainly  is  the  whole  duty  of  a monk  or  a 
nun  in  which  one  should,  instructed  in  all  its  mean- 
ings and  endowed  with  IdUss,  always*  exert  oneself. 
Thus  I say.  (14)  • 


92 


AxArAnga  sOtra. 


Second  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  in  the  following  case : when,  on  the 
eighth  or  paushadha  day,  on  the  beginning  of  a 
fortnight,  of  a month,  of  two,  three,  four,  five,  or  six  ■ 
months,  or  on  the  days  of  the  seasons,  of  the  junction 
of  the  seasons,  of  the  intervals  of  the  seasons,  many 
6rama»as  and  Br&hma»as,  guests,  paupers,  and 
beggars  are  entertained  with  food,  &c.,  out  of  one 
or  two  or  three  or  four  vessels,  pots,  baskets,  or 
heaps  of  food ; such-like  food  which  has  been  pre- 
pared by  the  giver,  &c.,  (all  down  to)  not  tasted  of, 
is  impure  and  unacceptable.  But  if  it  is  prepared  by 
another  person,  &c.  (see  first  lesson,  § 13),  one  may 
accept  it ; for  it  is  pure  and  acceptable.  (1) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  may  accept 
food,  &c.,  from  unblamed,  uncensured  families,  to  wit, 
noble  families,  distinguished  families,  royal  families, 
families  belonging  to  the.  line  of  Ikshv&ku,  of  Hari, 
cowherds’  families,  Vairya  families,  barbers'  families, 
carpenters’  families,  /akurs’  families,  weavers’ families; 
for  such  food,  &c.,  is  pure  and  acceptable.  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  in  the  following  case : when  in 
assemblies,  or  during  offerings  to  the  manes,  or  on  a 
festival  of  Indra  or  Skanda  or  Rudra  or  Mukunda 
or  demons  or  Yakshas  or  the  snakes,  or  on  a festival 
in  honour  of  a tomb,  or  a shrine,  or  a tret,  or  a hill, 
or  a cave,  or  a -Urell,  or  a tank,  or  a pond,  or  a river,  - 
or  a lake,  or  the  sea,  or  a mine — when  on  such-like 
various  festivals  many  .Srama^as  and  Brdhma«as, 


BOOK  II.  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  2.  93 

guests,  paupers,  and  beggars  are  entertained  with 
food,  &c.  (all  as  in  i , down  to)  acceptable.  (3) 

But  when  he  perceives  that  all  have  received  their 
due  share,  and  are  enjoying  their  meal,  he  should 
address1  the  householder’s  wife  or  sister  or  daughter- 
in-law  or  nurse  or  male  or  female  servant  or  slave 
and  say : 4 O long-lived  one ! (or,  O sister !)  will  you 
give  me  something  to  eat  ?’  After  these  words  of 
the  mendicant,  the  other  may  bring  forth  food,  &c., 
and  give  it  him.  Such  food,  &c.,  whether  he  beg  for 
it  or  the  other  give  it,  he  may  accept ; for  it  is  pure 
and  acceptable.  (4) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  knows  that  at  a distance 
of  more  than  half  a yo/ana  a festive  entertainment2 * 
is  going  on,  they  should  not  resolve  to  go  there  for 
the  sake  of  the  festive  entertainment.  (5) 

When  a monk  hears  that  the  entertainment  is  given 
in  an  eastern  or  western  or  southern  or  northern 
place,  he  should  go  respectively  to  the  west  or  east 
or  north  or  south,  being  quite  indifferent  (about  the 
feast) ; wherever  there  is  a festive  entertainment,  in 
a village  or  scot-free  town,  &c.  (see  I,  7,  6,  § 4),  he 
should  not  go  there  for  the  sake  of  the  festive 
entertainment. 

The  Kevalin  assigns  as  the  reason  for  this  precept, 
that  if  the  monk  eats  food,  &c.,  which  has  been  given 
him  on  such  an  occasion,  he  will  incur  the  sin  of  one 

1 Puvvfim  eva  iloe^a,  he  should  first  look  at  him  or  her 

(and  then  say).  * 

1 Samkhs^i,  somewhere  explained  odanap&ka,  cooking  of 

rice ; in  the  commentary  the  following  etymology  is  given : sam- 
khamfyante  virSdhyante  pr£«ino  yatra  sfi  samkhadl  But  the  Guzerati 
commentator  explains  it : £ih&ffl*gha«&  gw  nimitti  fihfira  kelvivfi 
bha«&. 


94 


AjcArAnga  sOtra. 


who  uses  what1  has  been  prepared  for  him,  or  is 
mixed  up  with  living  beings,  or  has  been  bought  or 
stolen  or  taken,  though  it  was  not  to  be  taken,  nor 
was  it  given,  but  taken  by  force.  (6) 

A layman2  might,  for  the  sake  of  a mendicant, 
make  small  doors  large,  or  large  ones  small;  put 
beds8  from  a level  position  into  a sloping  one,  or  from 
a sloping  position  into  a level  one ; place  the  beds8 
out  of  the  draught  or  in  the  draught ; cutting  and 
clipping  the  grass  outside  or  within  the  up&yraya, 
spread  a couch  for  him,  (thinking  that)  this  mendicant 
is  without  means  for  a bed3 *.  Therefore  should  a 
well-controlled  Nirgrantha  not  resolve  to  go  to  any 
festival  which  is  preceded  or  followed  by  a feast. 

This  certainly  is  the  whole  duty,  &c.  (see  end  of 
lesson  i). 

Thus  I say.  (7) 


Third  Lesson. 

When  he  has  eaten  br  drunk  at  a festive  enter- 
tainment, he  might  vomit  (what  he  has  eaten),  or  not 
well  digest  it ; or  some  other  bad  disease  or  sickness 
might  befall  him.  (1) 

The  Kevalin  says  this  is  the  reason  : 

A mendicant;  having  drunk  various  liquors,  to- 
gether with  the  householder  or  his  wife,  monks  or 
nuns,  might  not  find  the  (promised)  resting-place 
on  leaving  the  scene  of  entertainment  and  looking 


1 This  stands  for  4hi  kammiya  and  uddesiya,  pure  and  impure 
food  prepared  for  a mendicant 

* Asajw^-ae,  the  uncontrolled  one;  it  denotes  a layman  or  a 
householder. 

3 Se^a=sfayy&,  bed;  but  the  scholiast  explains  it  by  vasati, 

dwelling,  lodging. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  3. 


95 


out  for  it ; or  in  the  resting-place  he  may  get  into 
mixed  company;  in  the  absence  of  his  mind  or  in 
his.  drunkenness  he  may  lust  after  a woman  or  a 
eunuch ; approaching  the  mendicant  (they  will  say) : 

‘ O long-lived  .Sramawa ! (let  us  meet)  in  the  garden, 
or  in  the  sleeping- place,  in  the  night  or  in  the  twi- 
light.’ Luring  him  thus  by  his  sensuality  (she  says) : 

‘ Let  us  proceed  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  love.’ 
He  might  go  to  her,  though  he  knows  that  it  should 
not  be  done. 

These  are  the  causes  to  sin,  they  multiply  con- 
tinuously. 'Therefore  should  a well-controlled  Nir- 
grantha  not  resolve  to  go  to  any  festival  which  is 
preceded  or  followed  by  a feast.  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun,  hearing  or  being  told  of  some 
festivity,  might  hasten  there,  rejoicing  inwardly: 
‘There  will  be  an  entertainment,  sure  enough!’  It 
is  impossible  to  get  there  from  other  families  alms 
which  are  acceptable  ajid  given  out  of  respect  for 
the  cloth1,  and  to  eat  the  meal.  As  this  would  lead 
to  sin,  they  should  not  do  it2.  But  they  should  enter 
there,  and  getting  from  other  families  their  alms, 
should  eat  their  meal.  (3) 

A monk  or  a nun,  knowing  that  in  a village  or  a 
scot-free  town,  &c.  (see  I,  7,  6,  § 4),  aji  entertainment 
will  be  given,  should  not  resolve  to  go  to  that  village, 
&c.}  for  the  sake  of  the  entertainment.  The  Kevalin 
assigns  as  the  reason  herefore  : When  a man  goes  to 

1 Esiyara  vesiyaw.  The  latter  word  is  explained  by  ra^-o- 
haranSdiveshgd  labdham,  what  one  gets  for  the  sake  of  one’s 
apparel,  the  broom,  &c.  , , 

a M£i//Mnam  sawphase,  no  evaw  kare^gi,  i.  e.  m&tristhSnawi 
samsprfret,  na  evam  kuryit:  m&trfsth&na  is  somewhere  ex- 
plained karmopadanasth&na. 


y6 


A^Aranga  sOtra. 


a much-frequented  and  vulgar  entertainment  some- 
body’s foot  treads  on  his  foot,  somebody’s  hand 
moves  his  hand,  somebody’s  bowl  clashes  against  his 
bowl,  somebody’s  head  comes  in  collision  with  his 
head,  somebody’s  body  pushes  his  body,  or  some- 
body beats  him  with  a stick  or  a bone  or  a fist  or  a 
clod,  or  sprinkles  him  with  cold  water,  or  covers  him 
with  dust ; or  he  eats  unacceptable  food,  or  he  re- 
ceives what  should  be  given  to  others.  Therefore 
should  a well-controlled  Nirgrantha  not  resolve  to 
go  to  a much-frequented  and  vulgar  entertainment 
to  partake  of  it.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  such  food,  &c.,  about  the  acceptability  or  un- 
acceptability of  which  his  (or  her)  mind  has  some 
doubts  or  misgivings ; for  such  food,  &c.  (5) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  wishes  to  enter  the  abode 
of  a householder,  they  should  do  so  with  the  complete 
outfit1.  (6)  ^ 

A monk  or  a nun  entering  or  leaving  the  out-of- 
door  places  for  religious  practices  or  study,  should 
do  so  with  the  complete  outfit.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  wandering  from  village  to  village 
should  do  so  with  the  complete  outfit2.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not,  with  the  complete 
outfit,  enter  or  leave  the  abode  of  a householder  to 
collect  alms,  or  the  out-of-door  places  for  religious 
practices  and  study,  or  wander  from  village  to  village 
on  perceiving  that  a strong  and  widely-spread  rain 
pours  down,  or  a strong  and  widely-spread  mist  is 


‘ See  I,  7,  4,  note  1. 

1 These  Shtm  arte  perfectIy#analogous  with  §§  7,  8 of  the  first 
lesson. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  4. 


97 


coming  on,  or  a high  wind  raises  much  dust,  or 
many  flying  insects  are  scattered  about  and  fall 
down.  (9) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  in  the  houses  of  Kshatriyas,  kings, 
messengers,  and  relations  of  kings,  whether  they  are 
inside  or  outside,  or  invite  them  ; for  such  food,  &c., 
is  impure  and  unacceptable.  Thus  I say.  (io) 

Fourth  Lesson. 

A monk ' or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
resolve  to  go  to  a festival,  preceded  or  followed  by 
an  entertainment,  to  partake  of  it,  when  they  know 
that  there  will  be  served  up  chiefly  meat  or  fish  or 
roasted  slices  of  meat  or  fish ; nor  to  a wedding 
breakfast  in  the  husband’s  house  or  in  that  of  the 
bride’s  father ; nor  to  a funeral  dinner  or  to  a family 
dinner  where  something  is  served  up, — if  on  their 
way  there,  there  are  many  living  beings,  many  seeds, 
many  sprouts,  much  dew,  much  water,  much  mildew, 
many  drops  (of  water),  much  dust,  and  many  cob- 
webs ; or  if  there  have  arrived  or  will  arrive  many 
5*rama«as  and  Brihma»as,  guests,  paupers,  and  beg- 
gars, and  if  it  will  be  a crowded  assembly,  so  that  a 
wise  man  may  not  enter  or  leave  it,  or  learn  there 
the  sacred  texts,  to  question  about  them,  to  repeat 
them,  to  consider  them,  to  think  about  the  substance 
of  the  law.  (i) 

A monk  or  a nun  may  go  to  such  an  entertain- 
ment (as  described  in  the  preceding  Stitra),  provided 
that  on  their  way  there}  there  are  few  living  beings, 
few  seeds,  &c. ; that  no  6rama«as  and  Br&hmawas, 
&c.,  have  arrived  or  will  arrive  y that  it  is  not  a 
£aaj  H 


98 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


crowded  assembly,  so  that  a wise  man  may  enter 
or  leave,  &C.1  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun  desirous  to  enter  the  abode 
of  a householder,  should  not  do  so,  when  they 
see  that  the  milch  cows  are  being  milked,  or  the 
food,  &c.,  is  being  cooked,  and  that  it  is  not  yet  dis- 
tributed. Perceiving  this,  they  should  step  apart  and 
stay  where  no  people  pass  or  see  them.  But  when 
they  conceive  that  the  milch  cows  are  milked,  the 
dinner  prepared  and  distributed,  then  they  may  cir- 
cumspectly enter  or  leave  the  householder’s  abode 
for  the  sake  of  alms.  (3) 

Some  of  the  mendicants  say  to  those  who  follow 
the  same  rules  of  conduct,  live  (in  the  same  place), 
or  wander  from  village  to  village : ‘ This  is  indeed 
a small  village,  it  is  too  populous,  nor  is  it  large ; 
reverend  gentlemen  go  to  the  outlying  villages  to 
beg  alms2/ 

Some  mendicant  may  hate  there  kinsmen  or  rela- 
tions, e.  g.  a householder  or  his  wife,  or  daughters, 
or  daughters-in-law,  or  nurses,  or  male  and  female 
slaves  or  servants.  Such  families  with  which  he  is 
connected  by  kindred  or  through  marriage,  he  intends 
to  visit  before  (the  time  of  begging) : ' I shall  get  there 
(he  thinks)  food  or  dainties  or  milk  or  thick  sour  milk 
or  fresh  butter  or  ghee  or  sugar  or  oil  or  honey  or. 
meat  or  liquor,  a sesamum  dish8,  or  raw  sugar,  or 
a meal  of  parched  wheat4,  or  a meal  of  curds  and 
sugar  with  spices 5 ; after  having  eaten  and  drunk, 
and  having  cleaned  and  rubbed  the  alms-bowl,  I shall, 
- — — 

1 This  precept  applies,  according  to  the  commentator,  only  to 
sick  monks,  or  such  as  can  ge^  nothing  elsewhere. 

* The  just  arrived  monks  should  do  as  they  are  bidden. 

* Samkuli.  * Phya.  * Sikhariat. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  5. 


99 


together  with  other  mendicants,  enter  or  leave  the 
abode  of  a householder  to  collect  alms.’  As  this 
would  be  sinful,  he  should  not  do  so.  (4) 

But,  at  the  proper  time,  entering  there  with  the 
other  mendicants,  he  may  there  in  these  or  other 
families  accept  alms  which  are  acceptable  and  given 
out  of  respect  for  his  cloth,  and  eat  his  meal. 

This  certainly  is  the  whole  duty,  &c.  (see  end  of 
lesson  1). 

Thus  I say.  (5) 


Fifth  Lesson. 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  entering  the  abode 
of  a householder  sees  that  the  first  portion  of  the 
meal  is  being  thrown  away1  or  thrown  down,  or 
taken  away,  or  distributed,  or  eaten,  or  put  off,  or 
has  already  been  eaten  or  removed;  that  already 
other  6rama»as  and  Bi&hma#as,  guests,  paupers, 
and  beggars  go  there  in  great  haste;  (they  might 
think),  ‘ Hallo ! I too  shall  go  there  in  haste.'  As 
this  would  be  sinful,  they  should  not  do  so.  (1) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  comes 
upon  walls  or  gates,  or  bolts  or  holes  to  fit  them, 
they  should,  in  case  there  be  a byway,  avoid  those 
(obstacles),  and  not  go  on  straight. 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : Walk- 
ing there,  he  might  stumble  or  fall  down ; when 
he  stumbles  or  falls  down,  his  body  might  become 
contaminated  with  feces,  urine,  phlegmatic  humour, 
mucus,  saliva,  bile,  matter,  semen,  or  blood.  And  if 
his  body  has  become  soiled,  he  should  not  wipe  or 


1 In  honour  of  the  gods. 
H 2 


100 


(jtarXnGA  StJTRA. 


rub  or  scratch  or  clean1 * * *  or  warm  or  dry  it  on  the 
bare  ground  or  wet  earth  [or  dusty  earth8]  on  a 
rock  or  a piece  of  clay  containing  life,  or  timber 
inhabited  by  worms,  or  anything  containing  eggs, 
living  beings,  &c.  (down  to)  cobwebs;  but  he 
should  first  beg  for  some  straw  or  leaves,  wood 
or  a potsherd,  which  must  be  free  from  dust,  resort 
with  it  to  a secluded  spot,  and  on  a heap  of  ashes  or 
bones,  &c.  (see  II,  i,  i,  § 2),  which  he  has  repeatedly 
examined  and  cleaned,  he  should  circumspectly  wipe 
or  rub,  warm  or  dry  (his  body).  (2) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  per- 
ceives a vicious  cow  coming  towards  them,  or  a 
vicious  buffalo  coming  towards  them,  or  a vicious 
man,  horse,  elephant,  lion,  tiger,  wolf,  panther,  bear, 
hyena,  rarabha,  shakal,  cat,  dog,  boar,  fox,  leopard 
coming  towards  them,  they  should,  in  case  there  be 
a byway,  circumspectly  avoid  them,  and  not  walk 
on  straight.  (3) 

When  a monk  or  3.  nun  on  a begging-tour  comes 
on  their  way  upon  a pit,  pillar,  thorns,  or  unsafe, 
marshy  or  uneven  ground;  or  mud,  they  should, 
in  case  there  be  a byway,  avoid  these  (obstacles), 
and  not  walk  on  straight. 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  per- 
ceives that  the  entrance  of  a householder’s  abode 
is  secured  by  a branch  of  a thorn  bush,  they  should 
not,  without  having  previously  got  the  (owner’s) 
permission,  and  having  examined  and  swept  (the 
entrance),  make  it  passable  or  enter  and  leave  (the 

1 This  stands  for  uwaUgg-a  vft'uwa Ueggi  vi  (udvaled  vi  udvar- 

ted  vi),  for  which  words,  denoting  some  rather  indistinct  varieties 

of  rubbing,  I know  no  adequate  English  words. 

8 The  words  in  brackets  are  foe  translation  of  varia  lectio. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  5.  IOI 

house).  But  they  may  circumspectly  do  so,  after 
having  got  the  (owner’s)  permission,  and  having 
examined  and  swept  it.  (4) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  knows 
that  a 6rama«a  or  a Br£hma#a,  a guest,  pauper  or 
beggar  has  already  entered  (the  house),  they  should 
not  stand  in  their  sight  or  opposite  the  door  \ 

The  Kevalin1  2 * * * * * says : This  is  the  reason : Another, 
on  seeing  him,  might  procure  and  give  him  food,  &c. 
Therefore  it  has  been  declared  to  the  mendicants : 
This  is  the  statement,  this  is  the  reason,  this  is  the 
order,  that  he  should  not  stand  in  the  other  mendi- 
cants’ sight  or  opposite  the  door. 

Knowing  this,  he  should  go  apart  and  stay  where 
no  people  pass  or  see  him.  Another  man  may  bring 
and  give  him  food,  &c.,  while  he  stays  where  no 
people  pass  or  see  him,  and  say  unto  him  : * O long- 
lived  .Srama#a ! this  food,  &c.,  has  been  given  for  the 
sake  of  all  of  you ; eat  \t  or  divide  it  among  you.’ 
Having  silently  accepted  the  gift,  he  might  think : 
‘Well,  this  is  just  (enough)  for  me !’  As  this  would 
be  sinful,  he  should  not  do  so. 

Knowing  this,  he  should  join  the  other  beggars, 
and  after  consideration  say  unto  them8:  ‘ O lorjg-lived 
•Sramawas ! this  food,  &c.,  is  given  for  the  sake  of  all 
of  you ; eat  it  or  divide  it  among  you.’  After  these 
words  another  might  answer  him:  ‘O  long-lived 

1 This  might  also  be  translated : at  an  opposite  door. 

* The  following  passage  is  not  explained  in  the  commentaries, 

and  is  wanting  in  the  oldest  MS.,  though  supplied  on  the  margin. 

It  may  therefore  be  concluded  that  the  whole  passage,  the  greater 

part  of  which  is  typical,  is  a lat$r  addition.  ( 

• Aloe*yl  The  scholiast  explains  it  here  by  darrayet,  he 

should  show  the  food,  &c.  Professor  Oidenberg  has  identified  this 

word  with  the  Pili  SroAeti. 


102 


AkAranga  sCtra. 


•SramaKa!  distribute  it  yourself.’  Dividing  the  food, 
&c.,  he  should  not  (select)  for  himself  too  great  a 
portion,  or  the  vegetables,  or  the  conspicuous  things, 
or  the  savoury  things,  or  the  delicious  things,  or 
the  nice  things,  or  the  big  things;  but  he  should 
impartially  divide  it,  not  being  eager  or  desirous  or 
greedy  or  covetous  (of  anything).  When  he  thus 
makes  the  division,  another  might  say:  ‘O  long-lived 
.Sramatta ! do  not  divide  (the  food) ; but  let  us, 
all  together,  eat  and  drink.’  When  he  thus  eats, 
he  should  not  select  for  himself  too  great  a portion, 
&c. ; but  should  eat  and  drink  alike  with  all,  not 
being  desirous,  &C.1  (5) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  per- 
ceives that  a iSramawa  or  BrAhmawa,  a beggar  or 
guest  has  already  entered  the  house,  they  should  not 
overtake  them  and  address  (the  householder)  first. 
Knowing  this,  they  should  go  apart  and  stay  where 
no  people  pass  or  see  theiji.  But  when  they  per- 
ceive that  the  other  has  been  sent  away  or  received 
alms,  and  has  returned,  they  may  circumspectly  enter 
the  house  and  address  the  householder. 

This  certainly  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (6) 

4 

Sixth  Lesson. 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  per- 
ceives that  many  hungry  animals  have  met  and 
come  together  in  search  of  food,  e.g.  those  of  the 

chicken-kind  or  those  of  the  pig-kind,  or  that  crows 

. _ 

1 The  scholiast  says  that  the  way  to  procure  food,  &c..  as 
described  in  this  paragraph,  should  only  be  resorted  to  under 
pressing  circumstances. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  6.  103 

have  met  and  come  together,  where  an  offering  is 
thrown  on  the  ground,  they  should,  in  case  there  be 
a byway,  avoid  them  and  not  go  on  straight.  (1) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
stand  leaning  against  the  door-post  of  the  house- 
holder’s abode,  or  his  sink  or  spitting-pot,  nor  - in 
sight  of,  or  opposite  to  his  bathroom  or  privy ; nor 
should  they  contemplate  a loophole  or  a mended  spot 
or  a fissure  (of  the  house)  or  the  bathing-house, 
showing  in  that  direction  with  an  arm  or  pointing 
with  a finger,  bowing  up  and  down.  (2) 

Nor  should  they  beg,  pointing  with  a finger  at 
the  householder,  or  moving  him  with  a ringer,  or 
threatening  him  with  a finger,  or  scratching  him 
with  a finger,  or  praising  him,  or  using  coarse 
language.  (3) 

If  he  sees  somebody  eating,  e.g.  the  householder 
or  his  wife,  &c.,  he  should  after  consideration  say : 
‘ O long-lived  one ! (or,  O sister !)  will  you  give  me 
some  of  that  food  ?’  After  these  words  the  other 
might  wash  or  wipe  his  hand  or  pot  or  spoon 
or  plate  with  cold  or  hot  water  *.  He  should  after 
consideration  say : ‘ O long-lived  one  ! (or,  O sister!) 
do  not  wash  or  wipe  your  hand  or  pot  or  spoon  or 
plate ! If  you  want  to  give  me  something,  give  it  as  it 
is !’  After  these  words  the  other  nlight  give  him  a 
share,  having  washed  or  wiped  his  hand,  &c.,  with 
cold  or  hot  water.  But  he  should  not  accept  any- 
thing out  of  such  a hand,  &c.,  which  has  been  before 
treated  thus ; for  it  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  (4) 
It  is  a\so  to  be  known  that  food,  &c.  is  impure 

1 Siodagavigtu/a,  usinodagavigadh.  YigsWa,  Sanskrit  vika/a, 
is  explained  apk&ya.  It  is  cher$lore  cold  or  hot  water  which  $ 
to  be  considered  as  containing  life. 


104 


AjcarAnga  sOtra. 


and  unacceptable,  which  is  given  with  a wet  hand, 
though  the  hand  be  not  purposely  wetted.  (5) 

The  same  rule  holds  good  with  regard  to  a 
moistened  hand,  &c.,  and  a dusty  hand,  &c.,  and 
a hand  which  is  soiled  with  clay,  dew,  orpiment, 
vermilion,  realgar,  collyrium,  white  chalk,  alum, 
rice-flour,  kukkusa,  ground  drugs.  (6) 

It  is  also  to  be  known  that  he  may  accept  such 
food,  &c.,  which  is  given  with  a soiled  hand,  &c.,  to 
one  similarly  soiled  (i.  e.  with  what  one  is  to  receive), 
or  to  one  unsoiled,  with  hand  similarly  soiled ; for 
such  food,  &c.,  is  pure  and  acceptable.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  flattened  grains,  grains  containing  much  chaff, 
&c.  (see  II,  1,  i,§  5),  which  a layman,  for  the  sake  of 
the  mendicant,  has  ground1,  grinds,  or  will  grind,  has 
winnowed,  winnows,  or  will  winnow  on  a rock  or 
a piece  of  clay  containing  life,  &c.  (see  II,  1,  5,  § 2, 
all  down  to)  cobwebs;  for  such  large,  parched 
grains,  &c.,  are  impure  and  unacceptable.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  fossil  salt  or  sea  salt  which  a householder, 
for  the  sake  of  the  mendicant,  has  ground  or 
pounded,  grinds  or  pounds,  will  grind  or  pound  on 
a rock  or  a piece  of  clay  containing  life,  &c. ; for 
such-like  fossil  ‘ salt  or  sea  salt  is  impure  and 
unacceptable.  (9) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 

1 The  subject  asam^ae,  the  uncontrolled  one,  i.e.  layman, 
stands  in  the  singular,  but  the  verb  in  the  pluraL#  The  same 
irregularity  occurs  in  the  next  paragraph.  The  commentator 
accounts  for  it  simply  by  saying:  ekavaian&dhik&re  pi  £/&&nda- 
satv&t  tadvyatyayena  bahuva£ana#>  drash/avyam,  pfirvatra  v&  gi t&v 
. ekava&nam. 


BOOK.  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  7.  IO5 

accept  food,  &c,,  which  is  prepared  over  the  fire ; 
for  such  food  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  The 
KevaKn  says : This  is  the  reason : A layman  will 
kill  the  fire-bodies,  by  wetting  or  moistening,  wiping 
or  rubbing,  throwing  up  or  turning  down  the  food, 
&c.,  for  the  sake  of  the  mendicant.  Hence  it  has 
been  declared  to  the  mendicants:  This  is  the  state- 
ment, this  is  the  reason,  this  is  the  order,  that  they 
should  not  accept  food,  &c.,  which  has  been  pre- 
pared over  the  fire,  &c. 

This  certainly  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (10) 


Seventh  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun  oft  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  which  has  been  placed  on  a post  or 
pillar  or  beam  or  scaffold  or  loft1  or  platform  or  roof 
Or  some  such-like  elevated  place;  for  such  food 
fetched  from  above  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  The 
Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : The  layman 
might  fetch  and  erect  a stool  or  a bench  or  a ladder 
or  a handmill,  get  upon  it,  and  getting  upon  it  fall 
or  tumble  down.  Thus  he  might  hurt  his  foot  or 
arm  or  breast  or  belly  or  head  or  some  other  part  of 
his  body ; or  he  might  kill  or  frighten  or  bruise  or 
smash  or  crush  or  afflict  or  pain  or  dislocate  all  sorts 


1 Mala.  The  word  is  not  explained  in  the  T'lka  and  Dipikd ; 
the  Guzerati  translation  says  that  the  word  is  lokapratita,  com- 
monly understood.  It  is  probably  the  Marathi  mil  or  mili ; the 
former  word  denotes  a loft,  flqpred  with  bamboos ; the  second,  the 
room  formed  by  overlaying  with  slight  sticks  the  cross-beams  of 
a house,  a loft,  an  erection  or  stand  in  a cornfield,  scaffolding  (of  a 
building).  Molesworth,  Mardthi  and  English  Dictionary,  s.  v. 


io 6 AjtArAnga  sOtra. 

of  living  beings.'  Therefore  he  should  not  accept 
such>like  food,  &c.,  fetched  from  above,  (i) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  which  a layman,  for  the  sake  of  the 
mendicant,  has  taken  from  a granary  or  vault  by 
contorting  himself  up  and  down  and  horizontally; 
thinking  that  such-like  food  is  brought  from  under- 
ground1. (2) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  which  is  kept  in  earthenware. 
The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : The  layman 
might,  for  the  sake  of  the  mendicant,*  break  the 
earthen  vessel  containing  the  food,  &c.,  and  thereby 
injure  the  earth-body;  in  the  same  way  he  might 
injure  the  fire-body,  the  wind-body,  plants  and  ani- 
mals; by  putting  it  again  (in  earthenware),  he 
commits  the  pa/Mviakamma  sin.  Hence  it  has  been 
said  to  the  mendicant,  &c.,  that  he  should  not  accept 
food,  &c.,  which  is  put  in  earthenware.  (3) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  placed  on  the  earth-body,  the  wind- 
body,  the  fire-body,  for  such  food  is  impure  and 
unacceptable.  The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the 
reason : A layman  might,  for  the  sake  of  the  men- 
dicant, stir  or  brighten  the  fire,  and  taking  the  food, 
&c.,  down  from  it,  might  give  it  to  the  mendicant. 
Hence  it  has  been  said,  &c.,  that  he  should  accept 
no  such  food.  (4) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  sees 
that  a layman  might,  for  the  sake  of  the  mendicant. 

— ■§ 

1 The  original  has  bho  tn&lohsu/aw«ti  na£$L  Bho  miloha^a  is 
explained  adhom&l&hrftam,  Malohat/a,  which  I translate 
< fetched  from  above/  i,s  the  technical  term  for  things  affected  by 
the  dosha  under  question. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  7.  I©7 

cool  too  hot  food,  &c.,  by  blowing*  or  fanning  with 
a winnowing  basket  or  fan  or  a palm  leaf  of  a 
branch  or  a part  of  a branch  or  a bird’s  tail  or  a 
peacock’s  tail  or  a cloth  or  a corner  of  a cloth  or  the 
hand  or  the  mouth,  they  should,  after  consideration, 
say  (to  the  householder  or  his  wife):  ‘O  long-lived 
one ! (or,  O sister !)  do  not  blow  or  fan  the  hot  food, 
&c.,  with  a winnowing  basket,  &c. ; but  if  you  want 
to  give  it  me,  give  it  as  it  is.’  After  these  words 
the  other  might  give  it  after  having  blown  or  fanned 
it  with  a winnowing  basket,  &c. ; such-like  food  they 
should  not  accept,  because  it  is  impure  and  unac- 
ceptable. (5) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  which  is  placed  on  vegetable  or 
animal  matter1;  for  such  food  is  impure  and  unac- 
ceptable. (6) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  water  which  has,  been  used  for  watering  flour 
or  sesamum  or  rice,  or  any  other  such-like  water 
which  has  been  recently  used  for  washing,  which  has 
not  acquired  a new  taste,  nor  altered  its  taste  or  nature, 
nor  has  been  strained ; for  such-like  water  is  impure 
and  unacceptable.  But  if  it  has  long  ago  been  used 
for  washing,  has  acquired  a new  taste,  has  altered 
its  taste  or  nature,  and  has  been  strained,  it  may  be 
accepted,  for  it  is  pure  and  acceptable.  (7) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  finds 
water  used  for  washing  sesamum,  chaff  or  barley,  or 
rainwater 2 or  sour  gruel  or  pure  water,  they  should, 
after  consideration,  say  (to  the  householder  or  his 
wife):  ‘O  long-lived  orie ! (or,  O sister!)  will  you  give 

1 Va»assaik£yapati//Aiya  and  tasak&yapati/ZAiya. 

* Ay&napfb&mlam  avsuytnam. 


108  Ajtaranga  sOtra. 

me  some  of  this  water  ?’  Then  the  other  may 
answer  him : ' O long-lived  .Srama«a  1 take  it  your- 
self by  drawing  it  with, or  pouring  it  in,  your  bowl!’ 
Such-like  water,  whether  taken  by  himself  or  given 
by  the  other,  he  may  accept.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  such  water  as  has  been  taken  from  the  bare 
ground,  &c.  (see  II,  i,  5,  § 2,  all  down  to)  cobwebs, 
or  water  which  the  layman  fetches  in  a wet  or  moist 
or  dirty  vessel,  mixing  it  with  cold  water. 

This  certainly  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (9) 

Eighth  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  juice  of  mangos,  inspissated  juice  of  mangos, 
juice  of  wood-apples,  citrons,  grapes,  wild  dates, 
pomegranates,  cocoa-nuts,  bamboos,  jujubes,  myro- 
balans,  tamarinds,  or  any  such-like  liquor  containing 
particles  of  the  shell  or. skin  or  seeds,  which  liquor 
the  layman,  for  the  sake  of  the  mendicant,  pressed, 
strained,  Or  filtered  through  a basket1,  cloth,  or 
a cow’s  tail;  for  such  liquor  is  impure  and  unac- 
ceptable. (1) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour 
smells,  in  travellers’  houses  or  garden  houses  or 
householders’  houses  or  raa/As,  the  scent  of  food  or 
drink  or  sweet  scents,  they  should  not  smell  them, 
being  indifferent  against  smell,  and  not  eager  or 
desirous  or  greedy  or  covetous  of  the  pleasant 
smell.  (2)  r 

* «■ 

1 uOavva,  Sanskrit  ££abdaka  (sic).  The  Hindi  has  khmdi, 
basket. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  8. 


109 


A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  raw  things  which  are  not  yet  modified  by 
instruments 1 *,  as  bulbous  roots,  growing  in  water  or 
dry  ground,  mustard  stalks ; for  they  are  impure 
and  unacceptable.  The  same  holds  good  with  regard 
to  long  pepper,  ground  long  pepper,  common  pepper, 
ground  common  pepper,  ginger  or  ground  ginger.  (3) 
A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  such  raw  fruits  which  are  not  yet  modified 
by  instruments,  as  those  of  Mango,  Amri/aka,  Gkvg- 
ghi r&*,  Surabhi 3,  Sallaki 4 *;  for  they,  &c.  (4) 

The  same  holds  good  with  regard  to  raw  shoots 
which,  &c.,  as  those  of  Ajvattha,  Nyagrodha, 
Pila/»khu6,  Niytira6,  Sallaki.  (5) 

The  same  holds  good  with  regard  to  raw  berries 
which,  &c.,  as  those  of  Kapittha7,  pomegranate, 
or  Pippala.  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  raw,  powdered  fruits  which  are  not  well 
ground  and  still  contain  small  seeds,  as  those  of 
Umbara,  Pilamkhu,  Nyagrodha,  and  Asvattha;  for 
&c.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  unripe  wild  rice 8,  dregs,  honey,  liquor,  ghee, 
or  sediments  of  liquor,  if  these  things  be  old  or  if 
living  beings  are  engendered  or  grow  or  thrive  in 


1 I.  e.  when  they  have  undergone  no  operation  which  takes  the 

life  out  of  them. 

* Name  of  a shrub.  * Explained  by  ratagru. 

4 Boswdlia  Thurifera.  * Explained  by  pippart. 

* Cedrela  Toona.  * 

7 The  wood-apple  tree,  Feronia  Elephantum. 

* Ama</&ga,  explained  in  the  commentary  &mapa*«am,  unripe 

or  half  ripe,  aramkatandulfyak&di. 


no 


ajtArA&ga  sOtra. 


them,  or  are  not  taken  out,  "or  killed  or  destroyed  in 
them.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  any  such-like  raw  plants 1 as  Ikshumeru,  Ah- 
kakarelu,  K&reru,  SawghA/ika,  Pftti&lu.  (9) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  any  such-like  (vegetables)  as  Nymphaea  or 
stalk  of  Nymphaea  or  the  bulb  of  Nelumbium  or 
the  upper'part  or  the  filament  of  Lotus  or  any  part 
of  the  plant.  (10) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  such-like  raw  substances  as  seeds  or  sprouts, 
growing  on  the  top  or  the  root  or  the  stem  or  the 
knots  (of  a plant),  likewise  the  pulp  or  blossoms  of  the 
plantain,  cocoa-nut,  wild  date,  and  palmyra  trees.  (1 1) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  any  such-like  raw  unmodified  substances  as 
sugar-cane,  which  is  full  of  holes,  or  withering  or 
peeling  off  or  corroded  by  wplves ; or  the  points  of 
reeds  or  the  pulp  of  plantains.  (12) 

The  same  holds  good  with  regard  to  garlic  or  its 
leaves  or  stalk  or  bulb  or  integument.  (13)  Likewise 
with  regard  to  cooked  fruits  of  Atthiya 2,  Tinduka  ®, 
Vilva  *,  6rlpar«i6.  (14) 

A monk  or  a #nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  such  raw,  unmodified  substances  as  com, 
clumps  of  corn,  cakes  of  corn,  sesamum,  ground 
sesamum,  or  cakes  of  sesamum. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (15) 



1 Of  these  plants  only  Kareni,  a kipd  of  grass,  and  Sa*»gh£/ika 
Trapa  Bispinosa  are  specialised  in  bur  dictionaries. 

* A certain  tree.  » 8 Diospyros  Glutinosa. 

3 Aegle  Marmelos.  _ ' 5 Pistia  Stratiotes. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  9. 


Ill 


Ninth  Lesson. 

In  the  east  or  west  or  south  or  north,  there  are 
some  faithful  householders,  &c.,  (all  down  to)  ser- 
vants who  will  speak  thus:  ‘It  is  not  meet  that 
these  illustrious,  pious,  virtuous,  eloquent,  restrained, 
controlled,  chaste  ascetics,  who  have  ceased  from 
sensual  intercourse,  should  eat  or  drink  food,  &c., 
which  is  idhikarmika1;  let  us  give  to  the  ascetics 
all  food,  &c.,  that  is  ready  for  our  use,  and  let  us, 
afterwards,  prepare  food  for  our  own  use.’  Having 
heard  such  talk,  the  mendicant  should  not  accept 
such-like  food,  &c.,  for  it  is  impure  and  unac- 
ceptable. (1) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  or  in  their 
residence  or  on  a pilgrimage  from  village  to  village, 
who  know  that  in  a village  or  scot-free  town,  &c., 
dwell  a mendicant’s  nearer  or,  remoter  relations — viz. 
a householder  or  his  wife,  &c. — should  not  enter  or 
leave  such  houses  for  the  sake  of  food  or  drink. 
The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : Seeing  him, 
the  other  might,  for  his  sake,  procure,  or  prepare 
food,  &c.  Hence  it  has  been  said,  to  the  mendi- 
cant, &c.,  that  he  should  not  enter  or  leave  such 
houses  for  the  sake  of  food  or  drink. 

Knowing  this,  he  should  go  apart  and  stay  where 
no  people  pass  or  see  him.  In  due  time  he  may 
enter  other  houses,  and  having  begged  for  alms 
which  are*  acceptable  and  given  out  of  respect  for 

1 For  the  meaning  of  this  frequently  used  term,  see  note  g on 
p.  81,  and  note  1 on  p.  94. 


1 12 


AjtArAnga  s(Stra. 


his  cloth,  he  may  eat  his  dinner.  If  the  other  has,  on 
the  mendicant’s  timely  entrance,  procured  or  prepared 
food,  &c.,  which  is  AdhAkarmika,  he  might  silently 
examine  it,  and  think : ‘ Why  should  I abstain  from 
what  has  been  brought.’  As  this  would  be  sinfulr 
he  should  not  do  so.  But  after  consideration  he 
should  say:  ‘O  long-lived  one!  (or,  O sister!)  as  it  is 
not  meet  that  I should  eat  or  drink  food,  &c.,  which  is 
AdhAkarmika,  do  not  procure  or  prepare  it.’  If  after 
these  words  the  other  brings  and  gives  him  AdhA- 
karmika  food  which  he  has  prepared,  he  should  not 
accept  such-like  food,  &c.,  for  it  is  impure  and 
unacceptable.  (2) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  sees 
that  meat  or  fish  is  being  roasted,  or  oil  cakes, 
for  the  sake  of  a guest,  are  being  prepared,  they 
should  not,  quickly  approaching,  address  the  house- 
holder ; likewise  if  the  food  is  prepared  for  the  sake 
of  a sick  person.  (3)  » 

A monk  or  a nun  ,on  a begging-tour  might,  of 
the  received  quantity  of  food,  eat  only  the  sweet- 
smelling parts  and  reject  the  bad-smelling  ones.  As 
this  would  be  sinful,  they  should  not  do  so ; but  they 
should  consume  everything,  whether  it  be  sweet 
smelling  or  bad  smelling,  and  reject  nothing.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  might,  of 
the  received  quantity  of  drink,  imbibe  only  the  well- 
flavoured  part,  and  reject  the  astringent  part  As 
this  would  be  sinful,  they  should  not  do  so ; but 
they  should  consume  everything,  whether  it  be  well 
flavoured  or  astringent  and  reject  nothing.  (5) 

A monk  or  A nun,  having  received  a more  than 
sufficient  quantity  of  food,  might  reject  (the  super- 
fluous part)  without  haying  considered  or'  consulted 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  IQ.  II3 

fellow-ascetics  living  in  the  neighbourhood,  who 
follow  the  same  rules  of  conduct,  are  agreeable  and 
not  to  be  shunned ; as  this  would  be  sinful,  they  should 
not  do  so.  Knowing  this,  they  should  go  there  and 
after  consideration  say : ‘ O long-lived  £rama#as ! 
this  food,  &c.,  is  too  much  for  me,  eat  it  or  drink  it!’ 
After  these  words  the  other  might  say:  ‘O  long- 
lived  tSramatta!  we  shall  eat  or  drink  as  much  of 
this  food  or  drink  as  we  require  ; or,  we  require  the 
whole,  we  shall  eat  or  drink  the  whole.’  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  food,  &c.,  which  for  the  sake  of  another  has 
been  put  before  the  door,  if  the  householder  has 
not  permitted  him  to  do  so,  or  he  gives  it  him ; 
for  such  food,  &c.  But  on  the  contrary  he  may 
accept  it. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (7) 


Tenth  Lesson. 

A single  mendicant,  having  collected  alms  for 
many,  might,  without  consulting  his  fellow-ascetics, 
give  them  to  those  whom  he  list;  as  this  would  be 
sinful,  he  should  not  do  so.  Taking  the  food,  he 
should  go  there  (where  his  teacher  &c.  is)  and  speak 
thus:  ‘O  long-lived  -Sramawa ! there  are  near  or 
remote  (spiritual)  relations  of  mine : a teacher,  a 
sub-teacher,  a religious  guide,  a Sthavira,  a head  of 
a Gana,  a Gawadhara,  a founder  of  a Ga«a;  forsooth, 
I shall  give  it  them.’  The  other  may  answer  him : 

‘ Well  now, ’indeed,  O long-lived  one ! give  such  a 
portion!’  As  much  as  the  other  commands,  thus 
much  he  should  give ; if  the  other  commands  the 
whole,  he  should  give  tho  whole.  (1) 

M 1 


114 


AxArAnga  sCtra. 


A single  mendicant,  having  collected  agreeable 
food,  might  cover  it  with  distasteful  food,  think- 
ing : * The  teacher  or  sub-teacher,  &c.,  seeing  what 
I have  received,  might  take  it  himself;  indeed,  I 
shall  not  give  anything  to  anybody ! ’ As  this  would 
be  sinful,  he  should  not  do  so. 

Knowing  this,  he  should  go  there  (where  the 
other  mendicants  are),  should  put  the  vessel  in  his 
out-stretched  hand,  show  it  (with  the  words) : ‘ Ah, 
this!  ah,  this !’  and  hide  nothing.  (2)  ' 

A single  mendicant,  having  received  some  food, 
might  eat  what  is  good,  and  bring  what  is  dis- 
coloured and  tasteless ; as  this  would  be  sinful,  he 
should  not  do  so.  (3) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
accept  any  part  of  the  sugar-cane1,  whether  small 
or  large,  pea-pods,  seed-pods,  of  which  articles  a 
small  part  only  can  be  eaten,  and  the  greater  part 
must  be  rejected;  for  su/;h  things  are  impure  and 
unacceptable.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should 
not  accept  meat  or  fish  containing  many  bones,  so 
that  only  a part  of  it  can  be  eaten  and  the  greater 
part  must  be  rejected ; for  such  meat  or  fish,  &c.,  is 
impure  and  unacceptable.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  may  be 
invited  to  meat  or  fish  containing  many  bones,  (by 
the  householder  who  addresses  him  thus):  ‘O  long- 
lived  tSlramaaa!  will  you  accept  meat  with  many 
bones  ?’  Hearing  such  a communication,  he  should 

1 — — - — ■ — m — ■ ■ 

1 They  are  defiled  in  the  original : a«taru££Auya»»,  a piece 
between  two  knots;  nkkhugzmdiy&m,  a piece  containing  a knot; 
uHAufoyagam  (?),  u£AAtrmeraga>»,  top  of  a stalk;  u£AAusl- 
lagaw,  long  leaf ; u£££a<?£lagam,  fragment  of  a leaf. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  IO. 


rl5 


say,  after  consideration : ‘ O long-lived  one  1 (or,  O 
sister !)  it  is  not  meet  for  me  to  accept  meat  with 
many  bones ; if  you  want  to  give  me  a portion  of 
whatever  size,  give  it  me  ; but  not  the  bones  1’  If 
after  these  words  the  other  (i.e.  the  householder) 
should  fetch  meat  containing  many  bones,  put  it  in  a 
bowl  and  return  with  it,  (the  mendicant)  should  not 
accept  such  a bowl,  whether  out  of  the  other’s  hand 
or  a vessel1;  for  it  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  But 
if  he  has  inadvertently  accepted  it,  he  should  not 
say : ‘ No,  away,  take  it ! ’ Knowing  this,  he  should  go 
apart,  and  in  a garden  or  an  up&rraya,  where  there 
are  few  eggs,  &c.,  (all  down  to)  cobwebs,  eat  the 
meat  or  fish,  and  taking  the  bones,  he  should  resort 
to  a secluded  spot  and  leave  them  on  a heap  of 
ashes,  &c.  (see  II,  i,  i,  § 2).  (6) 

If  a householder  should  fetch  fossil  salt  or  sea 
salt,  put  it  in  a bowl  and  return  with  it,  a monk  or 
a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not  accept  it  out 
of  the  other’s  hand  or  vessel,;  for,  &c. 

But  if  he  has  inadvertently  accepted  it,  he  should 
return  with  it  to  the  householder,  if  he  is  not  yet 
too  far  away,  and  say,  after  consideration2:  ‘Did 
you  give  me  this  with  your  full  knowledge*  or  with- 
out it  ?’  He  might  answer  : ‘I  did  give  it  without 
my  full  knowledge ; but  indeed,  O long-lived  one ! 
I now  give  it  you ; consume  it  or  divide  it  (with 
others) !’ 

Then  being  permitted  by,  and  having  received  it 
from,  the  householder,  he  should  circumspectly  eat 
it  or  drink  it,  and  what  he  cannot  eat  or  drink  he 

Jt  . 

1 Parahatthamsi  v&  par&piyainsi  v&.  This  is  a typical  phrase, 
and  seems  rather  out  of  place  her£.  . » 

* Aloe^fi,  he  should  show,  would  perhaps  be  bettor. 


Ajearanga  sOtra. 


116 

should  share  with  his  fellow-ascetics  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, who  follow  the  same  rules  of  conduct,  are 
agreeable,  and  not  to  be  shunned  ; but  if  there  are 
no  fellow-ascetics,  the  same  should  be  done  as  in 
case  one  has  received  too  much  food. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &e. 

Thus  I say.  (7) 

Eleventh  Lesson. 

Some  mendicants  say  unto  (others)  who  follow  the 
same  rules  of  conduct,  or  live  in  the  same  place,  or 
wander  from  village  to  village,  if  they  have  received 
agreeable  food  and  another  mendicant  falls  sick 1 : 
‘Take  itl  give  it  him  ! if  the  sick  mendicant  will  not 
eat  it,  thou  mayst  eat  it.’  But  he  (who  is  ordered  to 
bring  the  food)  thinking,  ‘I  shall  eat  it  myself/  covers 
it  and  shows  it  (saying) : ‘ This  is  the  lump  of  food, 
it  is  rough  to  the  taste 2,  it  is  pungent,  it  is  bitter,  it 
is  astringent,  it  is  sour,  it  is  sweet ; there  is  certainly 
nothing  in  it  fit  for  a sick  person.’  As  this  would  be 
sinful,  he  should  not  do  so.  But  he  should  show 
him  which  parts  are  not  fit  for  a sick  person  (saying): 
‘This  particle  is  pungent,  this  one  bitter, .this  one 
astringent,  this  one  sour,  this  one  sweet.’  (1) 

Some  mendicants  say  unto  (others)  who  follow  the 
same  rules  of  conduct,  or  live  in  the  same  place,  or 
wander  from  village  to  village,  if  they  have  received 
agreeable  food  and  another  mendicant  falls  sick : 
‘ Take  it ! give  it  him  ! if  the  mendicant  will  not  eat 
it,  bring  it  to  us!’  ‘If  nothing  prevents  me,  I shall 

m— 

1 This  is  the  way  in  which  the  commentator  construes  the  sen- 
tence. There  is  some  confusion  in  the  text,  which  cannot  easily 
be  removed.  , • 

* Loe,  Sanskrit  rfiksha? 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  II.  H7 

bring  it.’  (Then  he  might  act  as  stated  in  § 1,  which 
would  be  sinful.)  (2) 

For  the  avoidance  of  these  occasions  to  sin  there 
are  seven  rules  for  begging  food  and  as  many  for 
begging  drink,  to  be  known  by  the  mendicants. 

Now,  this  is  the  first  rule  for  begging  food. 
Neither  hand  nor  vessel  are  wet 1 : with  such  a hand 
or  vessel  he  may  accept  as  pure,  food,  &c.,  for  which 
he  himself  begs  or  which  the  other  gives  him.  That 
is  the  first  rule  for  begging  food.  (3) 

Now  follows  the  second  rule  for  begging  food. 
The  hand  and  the  vessel  are  wet.  The  rest  as  in 
the  preceding  rule.  That  is  the  second  rule  for 
begging  food.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  third  rule  for  begging  food.  In 
the  east,  &c.,  there  are  several  faithful  householders, 
&c.,  (all  down  to)  servants  : they  have  put  (food) 
in  some  of  their  various  vessels,  as  a pan,  a pot,  a 
winnowing  basket,  a basket,  a precious  vessel.  Now 
(the  mendicant)  should  again  know  : is  the  hand  not 
wet  and  the  vessel  wet ; or  the  hand  wet  and  the 
vessel  not  wet  ? If  he  collect  alms  with  an  alms-bowl 
or  with  his  hand  2,  he  should  say,  after  considera- 
tion : ‘ O long-lived  one ! (or,  O sister !)  with  your  not- 
wet  hand,  or  with  your  wet  vessel,  put  (alms)  in  this 
my  bowl,  or  hand,  and  give  it  me !’  Such-like  food, 
for  which  he  himself  begs  or  which  the  other  gives 
him,  he  may  accept ; for  it  is  pure  and  acceptable. 
That  is  the  third  rule  for  begging  food.  (5) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  rule  for  begging  food.  A 


1 Samsailha ; it  would  perhaps  be  more  correct  to  translate  this 
word,  soiled  with  the  food  in  question. 

* These  are  the  pa^iggahadhSfrl  and  tlje  p&»ipa</iggahiya, 
lib  one  who  uses  his  hand  instead  of  an  alms-bowl. 


Axaranga  sOtra. 


118 


monk  or  a nun  may  accept  flattened  grains,  &c.  (cf. 
II,  i,  i,  § 5),  for  which  they  beg  themselves  or  which 
the  other  gives  them,  if  it  be  such  as  to  require  little 
cleaning  or  taking  out  (of  chafl);  for  it  is  pure,  &c. 
That  is  the  fourth  rule  for  begging  food.  (6) 

Now  follows  the  fifth  rule  for  begging  food.  A 
monk  or  a nun  may  accept  food  which  is  offered  on 
a plate  or  a copper  cup  or  any  vessel,  if  the  moisture 
on  the  hands  of  the  giver  is  almost  dried  up;  for,  &c. 
That  is  the  fifth  rule  for  begging  food.  (7) 

Now  follows  the  sixth  rule  for  begging  food.  A 
monk  or  a nun  may  accept  food  which* had  been 
taken  up  from  the  ground,  either  taken  up  for  one’s 
own  sake  or  accepted  for  the  sake  of  somebody  else, 
whether  it  be  placed  in  a vessel  or  in  the  hand ; for, 
&c.  That  is  the  sixth  rule  for  begging  food.  (8) 
Now  follows  the  seventh  rule  for  begging  food. 
A monk  or  a nun  may  accept  food  of  which  only  a 
part  may  be  used,  and  which  is  not  wanted  by  bipeds, 
quadrupeds,  iramawas,  Brihmawas,  guests,  paupers, 
and  beggars,  whether  they  beg  for  it  themselves,  or 
the  householder  gives  it  them.  That  is  the  seventh 
rule  for  begging  food.  (9) 

These  are  the  seven  rules  for  begging  food ; now 
follow  the  seven  rules  for  begging  drink.  They  are, 
however,  the  same  as  those  about  food,  only  the 
fourth  gives  this  precept:  A monk  or  a nun  may 
accept  as  drink  water  which  has  been  used  for 
watering  flour  or  sesamum,  &c.  (II,  1,  7,  § 7),  if  it  be 
such  as  to  require  little  cleaning  and  taking  out  (of 
impure)  articles ; for,  &c.  (10)  • 

One  who  has  adopted  one*  of  these  seven  rules 
for  begging  food  or  drink, should  not  say:  ‘These 
reverend  persons  have  chosen  a wrong  rule,  I alone 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  I,  LESSON  II. 


119 


have  rightly  chosen.’  (But  he  should  say) : ' These 
reverend  persons,  who  follow  these  rules,  and  I who 
follow  that  rule,  we  all  exert  ourselves  according  to 
the  commandment  of  the  (Pina,  and  we  respect  each 
other  accordingly.’ 

This  certainly  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (11) 

End  of  the  First  Lecture,  called  Begging  of 
Food. 


120 


axarAnga  sOtra. 


SECOND  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

BEGGING  FOR  A COUCH1. 

First  Lesson. 

If  a monk  or  a nun  want  to  ask  for  a lodging, 
and  havingj  entered  a village  or  scot-free  town,  &c., 
conceive  that  lodging  to  contain  eggs,  living  beings, 
&c.,  they  should  not  use  it  for  religious  postures, 
night’s-rest,  or  study z.  (i) 

But  if  the  lodging  contains  only  few  eggs  or  few 
living  beings,  &c.,  they  may,  after  having  inspected- 
and  cleaned  it,  circumspectly  use  it  for  religious 
postures,  &c.  Now,  if  they  conceive  that  the  house- 
holder, for  the  sake  of  a ^Jirgrantha  and  on  behalf 
of  a fellow-ascetic  (male  or  female,  one  or  many), 
gives  a lodging  which  he  has  bought  or  stolen  or 
taken,  though  it  was  not  to  be  taken  nor  given,  but 
was  taken  by  force,  by  acting  sinfully  towards  all  sorts 
of  living  beings,  they  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  such  a lodging  which  has  been  appro- 
priated by  the  giver  himself,  &c.  (see  II,  i,  i,  § 1 1). 

The  same  holds  good  if  there  be  instead  of  a fel- 
low-ascetic many  6rama«as  and  Br&hmarcas,  guests, 
paupers,  and  beggars.  But  if  the  lodging  has  been 

1 Seggl 

5 Tahappagare  uvassae  no  thrw&m  vi  stggam  va  nisthiyam  v4 
ieieggL  Thirty  ==  sthana  is  explained  kayotsarga ; seggi = 
•rayya,  samsiaraka ; nisihiy4==pirithik4,  svadhySya;  M^4=>Kn- 
tayet.  The  last  word*  is  elsewhere  translated  dadydt. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  I.  121 

appropriated  by  another  man  than  the  giver,  &cM 
they  may,  after  having  inspected  and  cleaned  it, 
circumspectly  use  it  for  religious  postures,  &c.  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun,  knowing  that  the  layman  has, 
for  the  sake  of  the  mendicant,  matted  the  lodging, 
whitewashed  it,  strewn  it  (with  grass,  &c.),  smeared 
it  (with  cowdung),  levelled,  smoothed,  or  perfumed  it 
(or  the  floor  of  it),  should  not  use  that  lodging,  which 
has  been  prepared  by  the  giver  himself,  &c.,  for 
religious  postures.  But  if  it  has  been  prepared  by 
another  person,  &c.,  they  may  circumspectly  use  it 
for  religious  postures.  (3) 

A monk  or  a nun,  knowing  that  a layman  will,  for 
the  sake  of  a mendicant,  make  small  doors  large,  &c. 
(all  as  in  II,  1,  2,  § 7,  down  to)  spread  his  couch  or 
place  it  outside,  should  not  use  such  a lodging  which 
has  been  appropriated  by  the  giver  himself,  &c.,  for 
religious  postures,  &c.  But  if  it  has  been  appropriated 
by  another  person,  &c.^  they  may  circumspectly  use  it 
for  religious  postures,  &c.  (4) 

Again,  a monk  or  a nun,  knowing  thaf  the  layman, 
for  the  sake  of  the  mendicant,  removes  from  one 
place  to  another,  or  places  outside,  bulbs  or  roots  or 
leaves  or  flowers  or  fruits  or  seeds  or  grass-blades  of 
water  plants,  should  not  use  such  a lodging,  which  is 
appropriated  by  the  giver  himself,  for  religious  pos- 
tures, &c.  But  if  it  has  been  prepared  by  another 
person,  &c.,  they  may  circumspectly  use  it  for  religious 
postures,  &c.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun,  knowing  that  the  layman,  for 
the  sake  ^ of  the  mendicant,  removes  from  one  place 
to  another,  or  places  outside,  a chair  or  a board  or  a 
ladder  or  a mortar,  should  not  use  such  a lodging- 
place,  &c.  (all  as  at  the  end  of  the  last  paragraph).  (6) 


122 


AxAranga  sCtra. 


A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious  pos- 
tures, &c.,  a lodging-place  above  ground,  as  a pillar 
or  a raised  platform  or  a scaffold  or  a second  story 
or  a flat  roof,  likewise  no  underground  place  (ex- 
cept under  urgent  circumstances).  If  by  chance 
they  are  thus  lodged,  they  should  there  not  wash  or 
clean  their  hands  or  feet  or  eyes  or  teeth  or  mouth 
with  hot  or  cold  water ; nor  should  they  put  forth 
there  any  other  secretion,  as  excrements,  urine, 
saliva,  mucus,  bilious  humour,  ichor,  blood,  or  any 
other  part  of  the  bodily  humours. 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : Making 
secretions  he  might  stumble  or  fall;  stumbling  or 
falling  he  might  hurt  his  hand,  &c.  (II,  i,  7,  § 1), 
or  any  other  limb  of  his  body,  or  kill,  &c.,  all  sorts 
of  living  beings.  Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  men- 
dicant, &c.,  that  he  should  use  no  above-ground 
lodging-place  for  religious  postures,  &c.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  should  not 
use,  for  religious  postures,  a lodging-place  used  by 
the  householder,  in  which  there  are  women,  children, 
cattle,  food,  and  drink.  This  is  the  reason : A mendi- 
cant living  together  with  a householders  family  may 
have  an  attack  of  gout,  dysentery,  or  vomiting ; or 
some  other  pain,  illness,  or  disease  may  befall  him ; 
the  layman  might,  out  of  compassion,  smear  or 
anoint  the  mendicant’s  body  with  oil  or  ghee  or 
butter  or  grease,  rub  or  shampoo  it  with  perfumes, 
drugs,  lodhra,  dye,  powder,  padmaka,  then  brush 
or  rub  it  clean;  clean,  wash,  or  sprinkle  it  with  hot 
or  cold  water,  kindle  or  light  a fire  by  rubbing  wood 
on  wood;  and  having  done  so,  he  might  dry  or  warm 
(the  mendicant’s  body).  , 

Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c., 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  I. 


123 


that  he  should  not  use  for  religious  postures,  &c.,  a 
lodging-place  which  is  used  by  the  householder.  (8) 
This  is  (another)  reason:  While  a mendicant  lives 
in  a lodging  used  by  the  householder,  the  house- 
holder or  his  wife,  &c.,  might  bully,  scold  \ attack 
or  beat  each  other.  Then  the  mendicant  might 
direct  his  mind  to  approval  or  dislike:  ‘Let  them 
bully  each  other !’  or,  * Let  them  not  bully  each 
other!’  &c.  &c. 

Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c., 
that  he  should  not  use,  for  religious  postures,  &c.,  a 
lodging-place  used  by  the  householder.  (9) 

This  is  (another)  reason : While  the  mendicant 
lives  together  with  householders,  the  householder 
might,  for  his  own  sake,  kindle  or  light  or  extinguish 
a fire-body.  Then  the  mendicant  might  direct  his 
mind  to  approval  or  dislike:  ‘ Let  them  kindle  or  light 
or  extinguish  a fire-body;’  or,  ‘ Let  them  not  do  so.’ 

Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c. 
(see  above).  (10)  , 

This  is  (another)  reason:  While  the  mendicant 
lives  together  with  householders,  he  might  see  the 
householder’s  earrings  or  girdle  or  jewels  or  pearls 
or  gold  and  silver1 2  or  bracelets  (those  round  the 
wrist  and  those  round  the  upper  arm)  or  necklaces 
(those  consisting  of  three  strings,  or  those  reaching 
halfway  down  the  body,  or  those  consisting  of  eighty 

1 Vahamti.  The  Guzerati  translation  renders  it  nirbhain££e, 
which  is  derived  from  Sanskrit  nirbharts. 

* Hirawne  suva««e.  The  commentators  explain  these  two 
words,  which *are  synonyms  in  the  later  language,  as  ‘raw  and 
wrought  gold,  or  coined  gold.’  I translate  ‘gold  and  silver,’ 
because  the  distinction  of  the  commentators  seems  rather  far- 
fetched, and  because  silver  would  Be  missed  in  enumerations  like 
the  present  one. 


124 


AjtAranga  sOtra. 


strings  or  forty  strings  or  one  string  or  strings  of 
pearls,  golden  beads  Or  jewels)  or  a decked  or  orna- 
mented girl  or  maiden.  Thus  the  mendicant  might 
direct  his  mind  to  approval  or  dislike  : ‘ Let  her  be 
thus;’  or,  ‘Let  her  not  be  thus.’  So  he  might  say,  so 
he  might  think.  Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the 
mendicant,  &c.  (see  above),  (i  i) 

This  is  (another)  reason : While  a mendicant  lives 
together  with  householders,  the  householder’s  wives, 
daughters,  daughters-in-law,  nurses,  slave-girls  or 
servant-girls  might  say:  ‘These  reverend  iSramattas, 
&c.,  have  ceased  from  sexual  intercourse;  it  behoves 
them  not  to  indulge  in  sexual  intercourse : whatever 
woman  indulges  with  them  in  sexual  intercourse,  will 
have  a strong,  powerful,  illustrious,  glorious,  victorious 
son  of  heavenly  beauty.’  Hearing  and  perceiving 
such  talk,  one  of.  them  might  induce  the  mendicant 
ascetic  to  indulge  in  sexual  intercourse. 

Hence  it  has  been  said, to  the  mendicant,  &c., 
that  he  should  not  use  for  religious  postures,  &c.,  a 
lodging  used  by  the  householder. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (12) 

Second  Lesson. 

Some  householders  are  of  clean  habits  and  the 
mendicants,  because  they  never  bathe,  are  covered 
with  uncleanliness;  they  smell  after  it,  they  smell 
badly,  they  are  disagreeable,  they  are  loathsome. 
Hence  the  householders, with  regard  to  the  mendicant, 
put  off  some  work  which  otherwise  they  w’ould  have 
done  before,  and  do  some  work  which  otherwise 
they  would  have  put  ofL 

Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c., 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  2. 


125 


that  he  should  not  use,  for  religious  postures,  &c.,  a 
lodging  used  by  the  householder.  (1) 

This  is  the  reason:  While  a mendicant  lives 
together  with  householders,  the  householder  might, 
for  his  own  sake,  have  prepared  something  to  eat. 
Then,  afterwards,  he  might,  for  the  sake  of  the 
mendicant,  prepare  or  dress  food,  &c.,  and  the  men- 
dicant might  desire  to  eat  or  drink  or  swallow  it. 

Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c. 
(see  above).  (2) 

This  is  the  reason : While  the  mendicant  lives 
together  with  a householder,  there  may  be  ready 
wood  cleft  for  the  use  of  the  householder.  Then, 
afterwards,  (the  householder)  might,  for  the  sake  of 
the  mendicant,  cleave  or  buy  or  steal  wood,  kindle 
or  light,  by  rubbing  wood  on  wood,  the  fire-body, 
and  the  mendicant  might  desire  to  dry  or  warm 
himself  at,  or  enjoy,  the  fire. 

Hence  it  has  been  §aid  to  the  mendicant,  &c. 
(see  above).  (3) 

When  in  the  night  or  twilight  a mendicant,  to 
ease  nature,  leaves  the  door  open,  a thief,  watching 
for  an  occasion,  might  enter.  It  is  not  meet  for 
the  mendicant  to  say : This  thief  enters  or  does  not 
enter,  he  hides  himself  or  does  not  hide  himself,  he 
creeps  in  or  does  not  creep  in,  he  speaks  or  does  not 
speak;  he  has  taken  it,  another  has  taken  it,  it  is 
taken  from  that  man this  is  the  thief,  this  Is  the 
accomplice,  this  is  the  murderer,  he  has  done  so1. 
The  householder  will  suspect  the  ascetic,  the  men- 


1 For  if  he  gives  warning  of  the  thief,  the’  wamer  or  the  thief 
might  be  slain ; but  if  he  gives  no  warning,  no  life  will  be  lost, 
though  the  mendicant’s  integrity  may  be  doubted. 


126 


AjCARANGA  SUTRA. 


dicant,  who  is  not  a thief,  to  be  the  thief.  Hence  it 
has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use,  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  sheds  of  grass  or  straw  which  contain 
eggs,  living  beings,  &c.  But  they  may  do  so  if  they 
contain  few  eggs,  few  living  beings,  &c.  (5) 

A . mendicant  should  not  stay  in  halting-places, 
garden  houses,  family  houses,  monasteries,  where 
many  fellow-ascetics  are  frequently  arriving. 

1.  If  the  reverend  persons  continue  to  live  in  those 
places  after  staying  there  for  a month 1 in  the  hot  or 
cold  seasons  or  for  the  rainy  season  (heishould  say) : 

‘ O long-lived  one ! you  sin  by  overstaying  the  fixed 
time.’  (6) 

2.  If  the  reverend  persons  repeatedly  live  in 
halting-places,  &c„  after  staying  there  for  tlje  proper 
time,  without  passing  two  or  three  intermediate 
months  somewhere  else,  (he  should  say) : * O long- 
lived  one ! you  sin  by  repeating  your  retreat  in  the 
same  place.’  (7) 

3.  Here,  in  <the  east,  west,  north,  or  south,  there 
are,  forsooth,  some  faithful  householders,  house- 
holders’ wives,  &c.,  who  are  not  well  acquainted  with 
the  rules  of  monastic  life  (with  regard  to  the  fitness 
of  lodging-places) ; nevertheless  they  believe  in,  per- 
ceive, are  convinced  of,  (the  merit  of)  giving  lodging 
to  mendicants.  They  (accordingly)  give  lodging- 
places  for  the  sake  of  many  6rama»as  and  Br&h- 
ma«as,  guests,  paupers,  and  beggars,  in  workshops, 
chapels,  temples,  assembly  halls,  wells,  houses  or 
halls  for  shopkeeping  or  for  keeping  pr  building 
carriages,  distilleries,  houses  where  Darbha-grass, 

1 Or  any  fixed  period,  which  the  mendicant  has  vowed  not  to 
exceed  staying  in  one  place, 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  2.  127 

bark,  trees,  wood  or  charcoal  are  being  worked, 
houses  on  burial-places,  rooms  for  retirement  near 
the  place  of  sacrifice1,  empty  houses,  hill-houses; 
caves,  stone -houses,  or  palaces.  He  should  say  to 
those  reverend  persons  who  live  in  such -like  places 
as  workshops,  &c.,  together  with  other  guests : ‘ O 
long-lived  one ! you  sin  by  living  in  a place  frequented 
by  other  sectarians.’  (8) 

4.  Here,  in  the  east,  &c.  They  accordingly  give, 
&c.  (all  as  in  § 8 down  to)  palaces.  If  the  mendi- 
cants come  there  while  the  other  religious  men  do 
not  come'  there,  they  sin  by  living  in  a place  not 
frequented  by  other  mendicants.  (9) 

5.  In  the  east,  west,  north,  or  south  there  are 
faithful  householders,  viz.  a householder  or  his  wife, 
&c.,  who  will  speak  thus  : * It  is  not  meet  that  these 
illustrious,  pious,  virtuous,  eloquent,  controlled,  chaste 
ascetics,  who  have  ceased  from  sexual  intercourse, 
should  dwell  in  a lodging  which  is  idh&karmika8: 
let  us  give  to  the  mendicants  the  lodgings  which  are 
ready  for  our  use,  viz.  workshops,  &c.,  and  let  us, 
afterwards,  prepare  lodgings  for  our  own  use,  viz. 
workshops,  &c.’  Hearing  and  perceiving  such  talk, 
if  the  reverend  persons  frequent  such-like  lodgings, 
viz.  workshops,  &c.,  and  live  in  them  which  are 
ceded  by  other  people  (they  should  be  warned) : ‘O 
long-lived  one ! that  (lodging  is  infected  by  the  sin 
called)  varfakriyi.’  (10) 

6.  Here,  in  the  east,  &c.  (see  § 8 all  down  to) 
they  give  lodging-places  for  the  sake  of  many  .Sra- 
ma»as  apd  Brihma»as,  guests,  paupers,  and  beggars, 
after  having  well  counted  them,,  in  workshops,  &c. 


1 •S’&ntigriha. 


V) 


*’See  note  5 on  p.  81. 


128 


Ajcaranga  sOtra. 


If  the  reverend  persons  frequent  such-like  lodgings, 
viz.  workshops,  &c.,  and  live  in  them  which  are  ceded 
by*other  people  (they  should  be  warned) : ‘ O long- 
lft*ed  one!  that  (lodging  is  infected  by  the  sin  called) 
mah^varjrakriyd.’  (ix) 

7.  Here,  in  the  east,  &c.  They  accordingly  give, 
for  the  sake  of  many  sorts  of  .SYamawas1,  after  having 
well  counted  them,  lodging-places,  viz.  workshops, 
&c.  If  the  reverend  persons  frequent  such-like  lodg- 
ings, viz.  workshops,  &c.,  and  live  in  them  which 
are  ceded  by  other  people  (they  should  be  warned) : 
‘ O lopg-lived  one  ! that  (lodging  is  infected  by  the 
sin  catted)  s&vadyakriyi.’  (12) 

8.  Mere,  in  the  east,  &c.  They  accordingly  pre- 
pare, for  the  sake  of  one  sort  of  ^ramawas,  lodgings, 
viz.  workshops,  &c.,  for  which  purpose  great  injury  is 
done  to  the  earth,  water,  fire,  wind-bodies,  plants,  and 
animals,  great  injury,  great  cruelty,  great  and  mani- 
fold sinful  acts ; by  wasting  cold  water  or  strewing 
(the  ground),  smearing  it  with  cowdung,  shutting  the 
doors  and  securing  the  bed,  lighting  a fire.  If  the 
reverend  persons  frequent  such-like  lodgings,  viz. 
workshops,  &c.,  and  lead  in  such  ceded  lodgings  an 
ambiguous  * life  (they  should  be  warned)  : * O long- 
lived  one ! that  (lodging  is  infected  by  the  sin  called) 
mah&s&vadyakriyi.’  (13) 

9.  But  if  the  lodgings,  viz.  workshops,  &c.,  are 


1 .There  are  five  sorts  of  *Srama«as  enumerated  in  the  following 
hemistich,  which  occurs  not  only  in  Silanka’s  commentary,  but 
also  in  that  of  the  SthSnanga  Sfitra,^as  Dr.  Leumann  informs  me: 
Niggaawtha,  Sakka,  Tavasa,  Gerua,  A^iva  pa?;^aha  sania^i.  Nir- 
granthas,  S£kyas,  Tdpasas,  Gairikas,  A^ivakas. 

* Dupakkhaw  te  kamma  sevawti,  lit.  use  twofold  work ; the 
meaning  is,  according  to  the  comfoentary,  that  they  act  like  house* 
holders,  though  they  make  a show  of  monastic  life. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  3. 


129 


prepared  by  the  householders  for  their  own  sake 
under  the  same  circumstances  as  detailed  in  the 
preceding  paragraph,  and  the  reverend  persons  fre- 
quent such-like  lodgings,  they  lead,  in  those  lodgings, 
an  unambiguous  life.  ‘ O long-lived  one ! that  (lodge  s 
ing  is  infected  by  the  very  small  sin  called)  alpasA- 
vadyakriyA.’ 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (14) 

Third  Lesson. 

* It1  is  difficult  to  obtain  pure,  acceptable  alms ; it 
is  indeed  not  free  from  such  preparations  as  strewing 
the  ground  (with  Darbha-grass),  smearing  it  (with 
cowdung),  shutting  the  doors  and  securing  the  beds. 
And  he  (the  mendicant)  delights  in  pilgrimage, 
religious  exercises,  study,  begging  for  a bed,  a couch, 
or  other  alms.’ 

Some  mendicants  explain  thus  (the  requisites  of 
a lodging) ; they  are  called  upright,  searching  after 
liberation,  practising  no  deceit. 

Some  householders  (who,  having  learned  the 
requisites  of  a lodging- place,  fit  one  out  accord- 
ingly, try  to  deceive  the  mendicants,  saying): 4 This 
lodging,  which  we  offer  you,  has  b§en  assigned  to 
you,  it  has  been  originally  prepared  for  our  sake,  or 
for  the  sake  of  some  relations,  it  has  been  used,  it 
has  been  relinquished.’ 

Explaining2 *  thus,  he  truly  explains.  (The  teacher 
says) : Well,  he  is  (an  explainer  of  the  truth),  (i) 


1 The  commentators  say  that  this  passage  .contains  the  mendi- 

cant's answer  to  an  invitation  to  live  in  this  or  that  village.  By 
the  second  it  is  meant  the  lodging. ^ , 

* The  commentator  supposes  here  the  householder  to  further 

0*]  K 


130 


AzarAnga  s<jtra. 


If  a mendicant,  at  night  or  at  the  twilight,  leaves 
or  enters  a small  lodging,  one  with  a small  door,  a 
low  or  crammed  lodging,  (he  should  put  forward) 
first  his  hand,  then  his  foot,  and  thus  circumspectly 
leave  or  enter  it. 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : There 
might  be  a badly  bound,  badly  placed,  badly  fastened, 
loose  umbrella,  pot,  stick,  staff,  robe,  hide,  leather 
boots  or  piece  of  leather  belonging  to  .Sramawas  or 
Br&hmawas;  and  the  mendicant,  when  leaving  or 
entering  (the  lodging)  at  night  or  twilight,  might 
stumble  or  fall ; stumbling  or  falling  hfe  might  hurt 
his  hand  or  foot,  &c.  (see  IV,  i,  7,  § 1),  kill,  &c.,  all 
sorts  of  living  beings. 

Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c., 
that  one  (should  put  forward)  first  the  hand,  then 
the  foot,  and  thus  circumspectly  leave  or  enter  such 
a lodging.  (2) 

He  (the  mendicant)  should,  at  halting-places,  &c., 
ask  for  a lodging-place,  after  having  inquired  who  is 
the  landlord  or  who  is  the  tenant.  He  should  ask 
permission  to  use  the  lodging-place  in  this  way  : * By 
your  favour,  O long-lived  one ! we  shall  dwell  here 
for  a while  (for  the  time  and  in  the  place)  which  you 
will  concede.’  (If  the  landlord  should  object  and  say 
that  he  owns  the  lodging  for  a limited  time  only,  or 
if  he  asks  for  the  number  of  monks  for  which  the 
lodging  is  required,  he  should  answer)1: ' As  long  as 
this  lodging  belongs  to  you,  (or)  for  the  sake  of  as 


inquire  after  the  requisites  of,  an<^  the  objections  to,  the  lodging- 
place.  The  mendicant  should  explain  them. 

1 The  passage  in  parentheses  contains  what  the  commentator 
supplies. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  3. 

many  fellow-ascetics  (as  shall  stand  in  need  of  it), 
we  shall  occupy  the  lodging;  afterwards  we  shall 
take  to  wandering.’  (3)* 

A monk  or  a nun  may  know  the  name  and 
gotra  of  him  in  whose  lodging  he  lives ; in  that  case 
they  should  not  accept  food,  &c.,  in  that  house 
whether  invited  or  not  invited ; for  it  is  impure  and 
unacceptable.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  a lodging-place  which  is  used  by  the 
householder,  which  contains  fire  or  water;  for  it  is 
not  fit  for  a*wise  man  to  enter  or  leave  it,  &c.  (cf.  II, 

1.  4 JO-  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  a lodging  for  which  they  have  to  pass 
through  the  householder’s  abode,  or  to  which  there 
is  no  road;  for  it  is  not  fit,  &c.  (see  last  para- 
graph). (6) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  a lodging  where  the  householder  or  his 
wife,  &c.,  might  bully  or  scold,  &c.,  each  other  (see 
II,  2,  1,  § 9)  ; for  it  is  not  fit,  &c.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  a lodging  where  the  householder  or  his 
wife,  &c.,  rub  or  anoint  each  other’s  body  with 
oil  or  ghee  or  butter  or  grease ; for  it  is  not 
. fit,  &c.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,a  lodging  where  the  householder  or  his 
.wife,  &c.,  rub  or  shampoo  each  other’s  body  with 
perfumes,  ground  drugs,  powder,  lodhra,  &c.  (see  1 1, 

2,  1,  § 8);  for  it  is  not  fit,  &c.  (9)  . 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  a lodging  where  the  householder  or  his 

K 2 


132 


Ajtaranga  sOtra. 


wife,  &c.,  clean,  wash,  or  sprinkle  each  other’s  body 
with  cold  or  hot  water ; for  it  is  not  fit,  &c.  (io) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures;  &c.,  a lodging  where  the  householder  or 
his  wife,  &c.,  go  about  naked  or  hide  themselves,  or 
talk  about  sexual  pleasures,  or  discuss  a secret  plan ; 
for  it  is  not  fit,  &c.  (i  i) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  use  for  religious 
postures,  &c.,  a lodging  which  is  a much-frequented 
playground1 ; for  it  is  not  fit,  &c.  (12) 

1.  If  a monk  or  a nun  wish  to  beg  for  a couch,  they 
should  not  accept  one  which  they  recognise  full  of 
eggs,  living  beings,  &c.  (13) 

2.  If  the  couch  is  free  from  eggs,  living  beings,  but 
is  heavy,  they  should  not  accept  such  a couch.  (14) 

3.  If  the  couch  is  free  from  eggs,  liying  beings, 
light,  but  not  movable,  they  should  not  accept  such 
a couch.  (15) 

4.  If  the  couch  is  free  from  eggs,  living  beings, 
&c.,  light,  movable,  but  not  well  tied,  they  should  not 
accept  such  a couch2.  * (16) 

5.  If  the  couch  is  free  from  eggs,  living  beings, 
light,  movable,  and  well  tied,  they  may  accept  such 
a couch.  (17) 

For  the  avoidance  of  these  occasions  to  sin  there 
are  four  rules'  according  to  which  the  mendicant 
should  beg  for  a couch. 

1 Ainnasamlekkham.  I am  not  certain  whether  I have  found 
the  correct  meaning. 

* In  the  first  case,  there  would  be  samyamavir&dhani,  or 
obstruction  to  control ; in  the  second,  fitmavirfidljand,  injury  to 
him  who  lifts  the  couch ; in  the  third,  tatparity&ga;  in  the  fourth, 
bandhanfidipalim’antha,  friction  of  the  ropes.  The  word  which 
I have  translated  movable  i%  patfihiriya  pratihfiruka.  The 
translation  is  conjectural. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  3. 


133 


Now  this  is  the  first  rule  for  begging  for  a couch. 
If  a monk  or  a nun  beg  for  a couch,  specifying 
(its  quality),  viz.  one  of  Ikka/a-reed,  a hard  one,  one  of 
Cantuka-grass,  of  Para-grass1,  of  peacock  feathers, 
of  hay,  of  Kusa-grass,  of  brush-hair,  of  Pataka,  of 
Pippala,  of  straw,  they  should,  after  consideration, 
say : * O long-lived  one ! (or,  O sister !)  please  give 
me  this  here !’  If  the  householder  prepares  one  of 
the  above-specified  couches,  or  if  the  mendicant  asks 
himself,  and  the  householder  gives  it,  then  he  may 
accept  it  as  pure  and  acceptable. 

This  is  the  first  rule.  (18) 

Now  follows  the  second  rule. 

If  a monk  or  a nun  beg  for  a couch  (of  the  above- 
detailed  description)  after  having  well  inspected  it, 
they  should,  after  consideration,  say  : ‘ O long-lived 
one!  &c.’  (all  as  in  the  first  rule). 

This  is  the  second  rule2.  (19) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  beg  for  a couch  of  the  above- 
detailed  description,  viz.  onet  of  Ikka/a-grass,  &c., 
from  him  in  whose  house  he  lives,  they  may  use  it 
if  they  get  it ; if  not,  they  should  remain  in  a squat- 
ting or  sitting  posture  (for  the  whole  night). 

This  is  the  third  rule.  (20) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  rule. 

If  a monk  or  a nun  beg  for  a couch  such  as  it 
is  spread,  either  on  the  ground  or  on  a wooden 
plank,  they  may  use  it  if  they  get  it ; if  not,'  they 


1 The  commentator  says  that  from  this  grass  artificial  flowers  are 
produced.  . 

* According  to  the  commentary  the  first  and  second  rules  may 
not  be  adopted  by  a ga^Aa-nirgnta,  or  a monk  who  is  attached 
to  no  order  of  monks. 


*34 


AJTARANGA  sOTRA. 


should  remain  in  a squatting  or  sitting  posture  (for 
the  whole  night). 

This  is  the  fourth  rule.  (21) 

A monk  who  has  adopted  one  of  these  four  rules, 
should  not  say,  &c.  (all  as  in  II,  1,  11,  § 12,  down 
to)  we  respect  each  other  accordingly.  (22) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  wish  to  give  back  a couch, 
they  should  not  do  so,  if  the  couch  contains  eggs, 
living  beings,  &c.  But  if  it  contains  few  living 
beings,  &c.,  they  may  restrainedly  do  so,  after  having 
well  inspected,  swept,  and  dried  it1.  (23^ 

A monk  or  a nun  on  a begging-tour  or  in  a 
residence  or  on  a pilgrimage  from  village  to  village 
should  first  inspect  the  place  for  easing  nature.  The 
Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : If  a monk  or  a 
nun,  in  the  night  or  the  twilight,  ease  nature  in 
a place  which  they  have  not  previously  inspected, 
they  might  stumble  or  fall,  stumbling  or  falling  they 
might  hurt  the  hand  or  foot,  &c.,  kill,  &c.,  all  sorts  of 
living  beings.  (24)  , 

A monk  or  a nun  might  wish  to  inspect  the 
ground  for  their  couch  away  from2  that  occupied  by 
a teacher  or  sub-teacher,  &c.  (see  II,  1,  10,  § 1),  or 
by  a young  one  or  an  old  one  or  a novice  or  a 
sick  man  or  a .guest,  either  at  the  end  or  in  the 
middle,  either  on  even  or  uneven  ground,  or  at  a 
place  where  there  is  a draught  or  where  there  is  no 
draught.  They  should  then  well  inspect  and  sweep 


1 One  past  preterite  participle  vi«i//Au«iya  is  left  out  in  the 
translation,  as  I do  not  know  its  meaning. 

2 Nannattha  with  instr.,  here  explained  muktvfL  Though  I 
suspect  the  correctness  of  this  translation,  I have  nothing  better 
to  offer. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  2,  LESSON  3. 


*35 


(the  floor),  and  circumspectly  spread  a perfectly  pure 
bed  or  couch.  (25) 

Having  spread  a perfectly  pure  bed  or  couch, 
a monk  or  a nun  might  wish  to  ascend  it.  When 
doing  so,  they  should  first  wipe  their  body  from 
head  to  heels  ; then  they  may  circumspectly  ascend 
the  perfectly  pure  bed  or  couch,  and  circumspectly 
sleep  in  it.  (26) 

A monk  or  a nun  sleeping  in  a perfectly  pure  bed  or 
couch  (should  have  placed  it  at  such  a distance  from 
the  next  one’s)  that  they  do  not  touch  their  neigh- 
bour’s hand,’ foot,  or  body  with  their  own  hand,  foot, 
or  body ; and  not  touching  it,  should  circumspectly 
sleep  in  their  perfectly  pure  bed  or  couch.  (27) 

Before  inhaling  or  breathing  forth,  or  coughing  or 
sneezing  or  yawning  or  vomiting  or  eructating,  a 
monk  or  a nun  should  cover  their  face  or  the  place 
where  it  lies ; then  they  may  circumspectly  inhale  or 
breathe  forth,  &c.  (28) , 

Whether  his  lodging1  be  even  or  uneven ; full  of, 
or  free  from,  draughts ; full  of,  or  free  from,  dust ; 
full  of,  or  free  from,  flies  and  gnats  ; full  of,  or  free 
from,  dangers  and  troubles — in  any  such*like  lodging 
one  should  contentedly  stay,  nor  take  offence  at  any- 
thing. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say*  (29) 

End  of  the  Second  Lecture,  called  Begging 
for  a Couch. 


Se^S,  here  explained  by  vasati. 


*3* 


AjcArASGA  SUTRA. 


THIRD  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

WALKING1. 

First  Lesson. 

When  the  rainy  season  has  come  and  it  is  raining, 
many  living  beings  are  originated  and  many  seeds 
just  spring  up,  the  roads  between  (different  places) 
contain  many  living  beings,  seeds,  &c.  (see  II,  i,  i, 
§ 2),  the  footpaths  are  not  used,  the  roads  are  not 
recognisable.  Knowing  this  (state  of  things)  one 
should  not  wander  from  village  to  village,  but 
remain  during  the  rainy  season  in  one  place2.  (1) 
When  a monk  or  a nun  knows  that  in  a village 
or  scot-free  town,  &c.  (see  I,  7,  6,  § 3),  there  is  no 
large  place  for  religious  practices  nor  for  study ; 
that  there  cannot  easily  be  obtained  a stool,  bench, 
bed,  or  couch,  nor  pure,  acceptable  alms ; that  there 
have  come  or  will  come  many  .Sramawas  and  Brdh- 
ma«as,  guests,  paupers,  and  beggars ; that  the  means 
of  existence  are  extremely  small ; that  it  is  not  fit 
for  a wise  man  to  enter  or  leave  it,  &c.  (see  II,  1, 4, 
§ 1) ; in  such  a village,  scot-free  town,  &c.,  they  should 
no  remain  during  the  cold  season.  (2) 

When  a monk  or  a nun  knows  that  in  a village 
or  scot-free  town,  &c.,  there  is  a large  ‘place  for 
religious  practices  or  for  study ; that  there  can  easily 

**I.  e.  keep  the  partisan. 


Iriyfi. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  I. 


137 


be  obtained  a stool,  bench,  bed,  or  couch,  or  pure, 
acceptable  alms ; that  there  have  not  come  nor  will 
come  £rama«as  and  Br&hma»as,  guests,  paupers, 
and  beggars;  that  the  means  of  existence  are  not 
small,  &cM  they  may  remain  in  such  a village,  &p., 
during  the  rainy  season.  (3) 

Now  they  should  know  this : After  the  four  months 
of  the  rainy  season  are  over,  and  five  or  ten  days  of 
the  winter  have  passed,  they  should  not  wander  from 
village  to  village,  if  the  road  contains  many  living 
beings,  &c.,  and  if  many  i’ramawas  and  Br&hma«as, 
&c.,  do  not  yet  travel1.  (4) 

But  if  after  the  same  time  the  road  contains  few 
living  beings,  and  many  •Sramawas  and  Brlhmawas, 
&c.,  travel,  they  may  circumspectly  wander  from  vil- 
lage to  village.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun  wandering  from  village  to  village 
should  look  forward  for  four  cubits,  and  seeing 
animals  they  should  mo\*e  on  by  walking  on  his  toes 
or  heels  or  the  sides  of  his  feet.  If  there  be  some 
bypath,  they  should  choose  it,  and  not  go  straight 
on ; then  they  may  circumspectly  wander  from  village 
to  village.  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun  wandering  from  village  to  village, 
on  whose  way  there  are  living  beings,  seeds,  grass, 
water,  or  mud,  should  not  go  straight  -if  there  be  an 
unobstructed  byway ; then  they  may  circumspectly 
wander  from  village  to  village.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage,  whose  road 
(lies  through)  places  belonging  to  borderers,  robbers, 

Mle^iias,  non-Aryan  people2,  half-civilised  people, 

« 

1 He  should  in  that  case  stay  in  the  same  place  for  the  whole 
month  M&rgadrsha,  where  he  was  during  th^  rainy  season* 

* According  to  the  commentary  mle£££a  (milakkhu)  means 


aaarAnga  sCtra, 


138 

unconverted  people,  people  who  rise  or  eat  at  an 
improper  time,  should,  if  there  be  some  other  place 
for  walking  about  or  friendly  districts,  not  choose 
the  former  road  for  their  voyage.  (8) 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : The 
ignorant  populace  might  bully,  beat,  &c.,  the  mendi- 
cant, in  the  opinion  that  he  is  a thief  or  a spy,  or 
that  he  comes  from  yonder  (hostile  village) ; or  they 
might  take  away,  cut  off,  steal  or  rob  his  robe,  alms- 
bowl,  mantle,  or  broom.  Hence  it  has  been  said 
to  the  mendicant,  &c.,  that  one  whose  road  (lies 
through)  places  belonging,  &c.  (all  as  in  the  last 
paragraph);  then  he  may  circumspectly  wander 
from  village  to  village.  (9) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage,  whose  road 
(lies  through)  a country  where  there  is  no  king  or 
many  kings  or  an  unanointed  king  or  two  govern- 
ments or  no  government  or  a weak  government, 
should,  if  there  be  some  other  place  for  walking  about 
or  friendly  districts,  nojt  choose  the  former  road  for 
their  voyage.  The  Kevalin  says  : This  is  the  reason  : 
The  ignorant  populace  might  bully  or  beat,  &c.,  the 
mendicant,  &c.  (all  as  in  § 9).  (10) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage,  whose  road 
lies  through  a forest1  which  they  are  not  certain  of 
crossing  in  one  or  two  or  three  or  four  or  five  days, 
should,  if  there  be  some  other  place  for  walking 
about  or  friendly  districts,  not  choose  the  former 
road  for  their  voyage,  (n) 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason ; During 


the  Varvara,  £arvstra,  Pulindra,  Jfcc.;  the  non-Aryans  are  those 
who  live  not  in  the  36  £ countries. 

1 Viha«R,  forest,  as  explained  in  the  third  lesson.  But  the 
commentator  here  explains  it,  a journey  of  some  days. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  I.  1 39 

the  rain  (he  might  injure)  living  beings,  mildew, 
seeds,  grass,  water,  mud.  Hence  it  has  been  said 
to  the  mendicant  that  one  whose  road  lies  through 
such  a forest,  &c.  (all  as  in  the  last  paragraph) ; 
then  he  may  circumspectly  wander  from  village  to 
village.  (12) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage,  on  whose 
way  there  is  some  watercourse  which  must  be  crossed 
by  a boat,  should  not  ascend  such  a boat  which  plies 
up  or  down  or  across  (the  river),  neither  for  one 
y o^ana’s  or  half  a yo^ana’s  distance,  neither  for  a 
shorter  nor  a longer  voyage,  if  they  know  that  the 
householder1  will  buy  or  purloin  the  boat,  or  doing 
the  work  necessary  to  put  the  boat  in  order,  pull  it 
ashore  out  of  the  water,  or  push  it  from  the  shore 
into  the  water,  or  bale  it,  if  it  is  filled  (with  water), 
or  cause  a sinking  boat  to  float.  (13) 

A monk  or  a nun,  knowing  that  a boat  will  cross 
the  river,  should,  after  having  received  the  owner’s 
permission,  step  apart,  examinp  their  outfit,  put  aside 
their  provender,  wipe  their  body  from  head  to  heels, 
reject  the  householder’s  food,  and  putting  one  foot 
in  the  water  and  the  other  in  the  air2,  they  should 
circumspectly  enter  the  boat.  (14) 

A monk  or  a nun  in  entering  the  boat  should  not 
choose  for  that  purpose  the  stem  or  the  prow  or  the 
middle  of  the  boat ; nor  should  they  look  at  it  hold- 
ing up  their  arms,  pointing  at  it  with  their  finger, 
bowing  up  and  down.  ( 1 5) 

If,  on  board,  the  boatman  should  say  to  the  monk, 
‘ O long-lived  6Vama#a ! pull  the  boat  forward  or  back- 


1 By  householder  is  here  intended  the  hogt  of  the  mendicant. 

1 Thale=sthale.  The  commentator  explains  it  by  &k&je. 


140 


AjcAranga  sOtra. 


ward,  or  push  it,  or  draw  it  with  the  rope  towards 
you,  or,  let  us  do  it  together,’  he  should  not  comply 
with  his  request,  but  look  on  silently.  (16) 

If,  on  board,  the  other  should  say  to  him,*  O long- 
lived  .Sramawa!  you  cannot  pull  the  boat  forward 
or  backward,  or  push  it,  or  draw  it  with  a rope 
towards  you ; give  us  the  rope,  we  will  ourselves  pull 
the  boat  forward  or  backward,  &c.,’  he  should  not 
comply  with  his  request,  but  look  on  silently,  (i  7) 

If,  on  board,  the  other  should  say  to  him,  ‘ O long- 
lived  .Sramawa ! if  you  can,  pull  the  boat  by  the  oar, 
the  rudder,  the  pole,  and  other  nautical  instruments1,’ 
he  should  not  comply  with  his  request,  but  look  on 
silently.  (18) 

If,  on  board,  the  other  should  say  to  him,  ‘O  long- 
lived  .Srama^a ! please,  lade  out  the  water  with  your 
hand,  or  pitcher2,  or  vessel,  or  alms-bowl,  or  bucket,’ 
he  should  not  comply  with  his  request,  but  look  on 
silently.  (19) 

If,  on  board,  the  other  should  say  to  him,  ‘ O long- 
lived  6rama«a ! please,  stop  the  boat’s  leak  with  your 
hand,  foot,  arm,  thigh,  belly,  head,  body,  the  bucket, 
or  a cloth,  or  with  mud,  Ku^a-grass,  or  lotus  leaves,’ 
he  should  not  comply  with  his  request,  but  look  on 
silently.  (20) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  see  that  water  enters  through 
a leak  in  the  boat,  and  the  boat  becomes  dirty  all 
over,  they  should  not  approach  the  boatman  and  say: 
‘ O long-lived  householder ! water  enters  through  a 
leak  into  the  boat,  and  it  becomes  dirty  all  over.’ 

1 Rudder  is  a guess  for  pitMa,  nautical  instruments  for  valaya 
and  avallaya. 

* P&e«a  = p&tre»a,  The  Guzerati  commentator  takes  it  for 
p&dena,  foot. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  2.  I4I 

One  should  not  think  so  or  speak  so;  but  undis- 
turbed, the  mind  not  directed  outwardly,  one  should 
collect  one’s  self  for  contemplation ; then  one  may 
circumspectly  complete  one’s  journey  by  the  boat 
on  the  water. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (21) 

Second  Lesson. 

If,  on  board,  the  boatman  should  say  to  the  mendi- 
cant, ‘ O long-lived  .Sramawa ! please,  take  this  um- 
brella, pot,’&c.  (see  II,  2,  3,  § 2),  hold  these  various 
dangerous  instruments1,  let  this  boy  or  girl  drink,' 
he  should  not  comply  with  his  request,  but  look  on 
silently.  (1) 

If,  on  board,  the  boatman  should  say  to  another  of 
the  crew,  ‘ O long-lived  one ! this  .Sramawa  is  only  a 
heavy  load  for  the  boat,  take  hold  of  him  with  your 
arms  and  throw  him  into  the  water!’  hearing  and 
perceiving  such  talk,  he  should,  if  he  wears  clothes, 
quickly  take  them  off  or  fasten  them  or  put  them  in 
a bundle  on  his  head.  (2) 

Now  he  may  think : These  ruffians,  accustomed 
to  violent  acts,  might  take  hold  of  me  and  throw  me 
from  the  boat  into  the  water.  He,  should  first  say 
to  them : ‘ O long-lived  householders ! don’t  take  hold 
of  me  with  your  arms  and  throw  me  into  the  water ! 
I myself  shall  leap  from  the  boat  into  the  water!’ 
If  after  these  words  the  other,  by  force  and  violence, 
takes  hold  of  him  with  his  arms  and  throws  him  into 
the  water*,  he  should  be  neither  glad  nor  sorry, 
neither  in  high  nor  loV  spirits,  nor  should  he  offer 


* Sattha^&yassfastra^&tsf.  About  jastra,  sfce  I,  i,  a. 


142 


AjArAnga  sCtra. 


violent  resistance  to  those  ruffians ; but  undisturbed, 
his  mind  not  directed  to  outward  things,  &c.  (see  11,3, 
i,  § 21),  he  may  circumspectly  swim  in  the  water.  (3) 
A monk  or  a nun,  swimming  in  the  water,  should 
not  touch  (another  person’s  or  their  own  ?)  hand,  foot, 
or  body  with  their  own  hand,  foot,  or  body;  but 
without  touching  it  they  should  circumspectly  swim 
in  the  water.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun,  swimming  in  the  water,  should 
not  dive  tip  or  down,  lest  water  should  enter  into 
their  ears,  eyes,  nose,  or  mouth ; but  they  should  cir- 
cumspectly swim  in  the  water.  (5) 

If  a monk  or  a nun,  swimming  in  the  water,  should 
be  overcome  by  weakness,  they  should  throw  off 
their  implements  (clothes,  &c.),  either  all  or  a part 
of  them,  and  not  be  attached  to  them.  Now  they 
should  know  this : If  they  are  able  to  get  out  of  the 
water  and  reach  the  bank,  they  should  circumspectly 
remain  on  the  bank  with  a wet  or  moist  body.  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  wipe  or  rub  or  brush 
or  stroke1  or  dry  or  warm  or  heat  (in  the  sun)  their 
body.  But  when  they  perceive  that  the  water  on 
their  body  has  dried  up,  and  the  moisture  is  gone, 
they  may  wipe  or  rub,  &c.,  their  body  in  that  state ; 
then  they  may  circumspectly  wander  from  village 
to  village.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage  should  not 
wander  from  village  to  village,  conversing  with 
householders ; they  may  circumspectly  wander  from 
village  to  village.  (8) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage  come 


1 The  original  has  six  words  for  different  kinds  of  robbing,  which 
it  would  be  impossible  to  render  adequately  in  any  other  language. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  2.  1 43 

across  a shallow  water1,  they  should  first  wipe  their 
body  from  head  to  heels,  then,  putting  one  foot  in 
the  water  and  the  other  in  the  air,  they  should  wade 
through  the  shallow  water  in  a straight  line2.  (9) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage  come 
across  a shallow  water,  they  should  wade  through  it 
in  a straight  line,  without  being  touched  by  or 
touching  (another  person’s  or  their  own  ?)  hand,  foot, 
or  body  with  their  own  hand,  foot,  or  body.  (10) 

A monk  or  a nun,  wading  through  shallow  water 
in  a straight  line,  should  not  plunge  in  deeper  water 
for  the  sake  of  pleasure  or  the  heat ; but  they  should 
circumspectly  wade  through  the  shallow  water  in  a 
straight  line.  Now  they  should  know  this : If  one 
is  able  to  get  out  of  the  water  and  reach  the  bank, 
one  should  circumspectly  remain  on  the  bank  with 
a wet  or  moist  body,  (n) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  wipe  or  rub,  &c. 
(all  as  in  § 7).  (12) 

A monk  or  a nun  oh  the  pilgrimage,*  with  their 
feet  soiled  with  mud,  should-1  not,  in  order  that  the 
grass  might  take  off  the  mud  from  the  feet,  walk  out 
of  the  way  and  destroy  the  grass  by  cutting,  trampling, 
and  tearing  it.  As  this  would  be  sinful,  they  should 
not  do  so.  But  they  should  first  inspect  a path  con- 
taining little  grass;  then  they  may  circumspectly 
wander  from  village  to  village.  (13) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage  come 
upon  walls  or  ditches  or  ramparts  or  gates  or  bolts 

1 CramghSsaOTt&rime  udae,  literally,  a water  which  is  to  be 
crossed  by  Wading  through  it  up  to  the  knees ; or  perhaps  water 
to  be  crossed  on  foot.  * • 

* AhSriyam=yatM  rign  bhavati.  It  might  also  mean,  in  the 
right  way.  Another  explanation  is  yath&t&tyam. 


144 


AjtAranga  sCtra. 


or  holes  to  fit  them,  or  moats  or  caves,  they  should, 
in  case  there  be  a byway,  choose  it,  and  not  go 
on  straight.  (14) 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : Walking 
there,  the  mendicant  might  stumble  or  fall  down ; when 
he  stumbles  or  falls  down,  he  might  get  hold  of  trees, 
shrubs,  plants,  creepers,  grass,  copsewood,  or  sprouts 
to  extricate  himself.  He  should  ask  travellers  who 
meet  him,  to  lend  a hand ; then  he  may  circumspectly 
lean  upon  it  and  extricate  himself ; so  he  may  cir- 
cumspectly wander  from  village  to  village.  (15) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  perceive  in  their  way  (trans- 
ports of)  corn,  waggons,  cars,  a friendly  or  hostile 
army1,  some  encamped  troops,  they  should,  in  case 
there  be  a byway,  circumspectly  choose  it,  and  not 
walk  on  straight.  One  trooper  might  say  to  an- 
other : * O long-lived  one ! this  .Sramawa  is  a spy  upon 
the  army;  take  hold  of  him  with  your  arms,  and 
drag  him  hither!’  The  other  might  take  hold  of 
the  mendicant  with  his  arms  and  drag  him  on.  He 
should  neither  be  glad  nor  sorry  for  it,  &c.  (see  § 3) ; 
then  he  may  circumspectly  wander  from  village  to 
village.  (16) 

If  on  his  road  travellers  meet  him  and  say,  * O 
long-lived  .Sramajsa!  how  large  is  this  village  or 
scot-free  town,  &c.  ? how  many  horses,  elephants, 
beggars,  men  dwell  in  it  ? is  there  much  food, 
water,  population,  com  ? is  there  little  food,  water, 
population,  com?'  he  should  not  answer  such 
questions  if  asked,  nor  ask  them  himself. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (17) 


1 Sva^akrSai  v&  parafeikr£»i  vjL 


My  translation  is  merely  a guess 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  3. 


145 


Third  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage,  in  whose 
way  there  are  walls  or  ditches  or  ramparts  or 
gates,  &c.  (see  II,  3,  2,  § 14),  hill  houses,  palaces, 
underground  houses,  houses  in  trees,  mountain  caves, 
a sacred  tree  or  pillar,  workshops,  &c.  (see  II,  2,  2, 
$ 8),  should  not  look  "at  them  holding  up  their  arms, 
pointing  at  them  with  their  fingers,  bowing  up  and 
down.  Then  they  may  circumspectly  wander  from 
village  to  village.  (1) 

A monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage,  on  whose 
way  there  are  marshes,  pasture-grounds,  moats,  forti- 
fied places,  thickets,  strongholds  in  thickets,  woods, 
mountains,  strongholds  on  mountains,  caves1,  tanks, 
lakes,  rivers,  ponds,  lotus  ponds,  long  winding  ponds, 
water-sheets,  rows  of  water-sheets,  should  not  look  at 
them  holding  up  their  arms,  &c.  (see  § 1).  (2) 

The  Kevalin  says:  This  is  the  reason:  The  deer, 
cattle,  birds,  snakes,  animals  living  in  water,  on  land, 
in  the  air  might  be  disturbed  or  frightened,  and 
strive  to  get  to  a fold  or  (other  place  of)  refuge, 
(thinking)  : ‘ The  *Srama»a  will  harm  me !’ 

Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c., 
that  he  should  not  look  at  the  objects  (mentioned 
in  § 2)  holding  up  his  arms,  &c.*  (3) 

1 The  word  aga</a  has  been  left  out  in  the  translation. 

1 The  passage  closes : * then  he  may  circumspectly  wander  from 
village  to  village  together  with  the  master  and  teacher  (Syariovag- 
ghiy a).'  Bub  as  the  master  and  teacher  have  not  been  mentioned 
before,  and  will  be  mentioned  in  the  next  Sfitra,  it  is  almost  certain 
that  the  words  in  question  have  been  brought  over  from  the  next 
Sfttra,  or  . that  they  ought  to  be  supplied  U>  all  Sfttras  from  the 
beginning  of  the  third  leBson. 

[aa]  L 


axarAnga  sOtra. 


146 

A monk  or  a nun,  wandering  from  village  to  village 
together  with  the  master  or  teacher,  should  not  touch 
the  master’s  or  teacher's  hand  with  their  own,  &c.; 
but  without  touching  or  being  touched  they  should 
circumspectly  wander  from  village  to  village  together 
with  the  master  or  teacher.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun,  wandering  from  village  to 
village  together  with  the  master  or  teacher,  might 
be  met  on  the  road  by  travellers  and  asked:  ‘O  long- 
lived  .5rama«a!  who  are  you  ? whence  do  you  come, 
and  where  do  you  go  ?’  The  master  or  teacher 
may  answer  and  explain ; but  whilst  die  master  or 
teacher  answers  and  explains,  one  should  not  mix  in 
their  conversation.  Thus  they  may  wander  from  vil- 
lage to  village  with  a superior  priest1.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun,  wandering  from  village  to 
village  with  a superior  priest,  should  not  touch  the 
superior’s  hand  with  their  own,  &c.  (see  § 4).  (6). 

A monk  or  a nun,  wandering  from  village  to 
village  with  superior^  priests,  might  be  met  on  the 
road  by  travellers,  and  be  asked : ‘ O long-lived  Sra.- 
ma»a ! who  are  you  ? ’ He  who  has  the  highest 
rank  of  them  all,  should  answer  and  explain;  but 
whilst  the  superior  answers  and  explains,  one  should 
not  mix  in  their  conversation,  &c.  (see  § 5).  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun,  wandering  from  village  to 
village,  might  be  met  on  the  road  by  travellers,  and 
be  asked:  ‘O  long-lived  3rama»a ! did  you  see 
somebody  on  the  road?  viz.  a man,  cow,  buffalo, 
cattle,  bird,  snake,  or  aquatic  animal — tell  us,  show 

1 AMriti«iy£e,  Com.  yatlf&ratn&dhikam.  R&tiniya  is 
opposed  to  seha  (disciple) ; it  is  elsewhere  explained  by^yeshMa ; 
see  Kalpa  Sfttra,  Sim.  59.  I am  not  sure  if  the  phrase  ought  not 
to  he  translated,  with  due  respect  for  his  superior. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  3,  LESSON  3. 


*47 


us!’  The  mendicant  should  not  tell  it,  nor  show  it, 
he  should  not  comply  with  their  request,  but  look 
on  silently,  or,  though  knowing  it,  he  should  say 
that  he  did  not  know.  Then  he  may  circumspectly 
wander  from  village  to  village.  (8) 

He  should  act  in  the  same  manner,  if  asked  about 
bulbs  of  water-plants,  roots,  bark,  leaves,  flowers, 
fruits,  seeds,  water  in  the  neighbourhood,  or  a 
kindled  fire;  (9) 

Likewise,  if  asked  about  (transports  of)  com, 
waggons,  cars,  &c.  (see  II,  3,  2,  § 16).  (10) 

Likewise,  if  asked  : * O long-lived  .SramaJta  1 how 
large  is  this  village  or  scot-free  town,  &c.  ?’  (1 1) 
Likewise,  if  asked:  ‘O  long-lived  ^ramaffal  How 
far  is  it  to  that  village  or  scot-free  town,  &c.?’  (12) 
If  a monk  or  a nun,  wandering  from  village  to  vil- 
lage, sees  a vicious  cow  coming  towards  them,  &c. 
(see  II,  1,  s,  § 3),  they  should  not,  from  fear  of  them, 
leave  the  road,  or  go  ineo  another  road,  nor  enter  a 
thicket,  wood,  or  stronghold,  nor  climb  a tree,  nor 
take  a plunge  in  a large  and  extended  water-sheet, 
nor  desire  a fold  or  any  other  place  of  refuge,  or  an 
army  or  a caravan ; but  undisturbed,  the  mind  not 
directed  to  outward  things,  they  should  collect  them- 
selves for  contemplation ; thus  they  may  circum- 
spectly wander  from  village  to  village.  (13) 

If  the  road  of  a monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage 
lies  through  a forest,  in  which,  as  they  know,  there 
stroll  bands  of  many  thieves  desirous  of  their  pro- 
perty, they  should  not,  for  fear  of  them,  leave  the 
road,  &c.  (a'll  as  in  § 13).  (14) 

If  these  thieves  say,  ‘O  long-lived  .Sramawa ! bring, 
us  your  clothes,  &c.,  give  them,  put  them  down!’ 
the  mendicant  should  not  give  or  put  them  down. 


148 


AxArAnGA  SfjTRA. 


Nor  should  he  reclaim  (his  things)  by  imploring 
(the  thieves),  or  by  folding  his  hands,  or  by  moving 
their  compassion,  but  by  religious  exhortation  or 
by  remaining  silent.  (15) 

If  the  thieves,  resolving  to  do  it  themselves,  bully 
him,  &c.,  tear  off  his  clothes,  &c.,  he  should  not  lodge 
an  information  in  the  village  or  at  the  king’s  palace ; 
nor  should  he  go  to  a layman,  and  say,  ‘O  long- 
lived  householder!  these  thieves,  resolving  to  do 
(the  robbing)  themselves,  have  bullied  me,  &c.,  they 
have  torn  off  my  clothes/  &c.  He  should  neither 
think  so,  nor  speak  so ; but  undisturbed,  &c.  (see 
$ IS)- 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (16) 


End  of  the  Third  Lecture,  called  Walking. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  4,  LESSON  I. 


149 


FOURTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

MODES  OF  SPEECH1. 

First  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun,  hearing  and  perceiving  these 
uses  of  speech,  should  know  that  the  following  ones 
are  not  to  be  employed  and  have  not  hitherto  been 
employed  (by  persons  of  exemplary  conduct);  those 
who  speak  in  wrath  or  in  pride,  for  deception  or  for 
gain,  who  speak,  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  hard 
words.  They  should  avoid  all  this,  which  is  blam- 
able.  Employing  their  judgment,  they  should  know 
something  for  certain  and  something  for  uncer- 
tain2: (1)  (N.  N.)  having  received  food  or  not 

having  received  food,  having  eaten  it  or  not  having 
eaten'  it,  has  come  or  has  not  come,  comes  or  does 
not  come,  will  come  or  will  not  come.  (2) 

Well  considering  (what  one  is  to  say),  speaking 
with  precision,  one  should  employ  language  in 
moderation  and  restraint : the  singular,  dual,  plural ; 
feminine,  masculine,  neuter  gender.;  praise,  blame, 


1 BhSsa^&ya. 

* The  commentator  understands  this  passage  and  the  following 
paragraph  in  a different  way:  a man  of  ripe  judgment  should 
utter  no  such  positive  assertions,  e.  g.  it  is  certain  (that  it  will  rain), 
or  it  is  not  certain,  &c.  He  seems  to  have  been  of  opinion  that  the 
prohibition  itf  the  last  sentence,  sawam  etam  sivaggam  vagg^ggA, 
extends  also  to  the  following  ‘sentence.  Bub  this  is  not  probable^ 
as  eta*  generally  refers  to  what  precedes,  and  imaw  to  what 
follows.  * . 


150 


AxArAiSiga  sGtra. 


praise  mixed  with  blame,  blame  mixed  with  praise ; 
past,  present,  or  future  (tenses),  the  first  and  second, 
or  third  (person)1.  If  one  thinks  it  necessary  to- 
speak  in  the  singular,  he  should  speak  in  the  sin- 
gular; if  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  speak  in  the 
plural,  he  should  speak  in  the  plural,  &c.  Consider- 
ing well : this  is  a woman,  this  is  a man,  this  is  a 
eunuch,  this  is  to  be  called  thus,  this  is  to  be  called 
otherwise,  speaking  with  precision,  he  should  em- 
ploy language  in  moderation  and  restraint.  (3) 

For  the  avoidance  of  these  occasions  to  sin,  a mendi- 
cant should  know  that  there  are  four  kinds  of  speech: 
the  first  is  truth ; the  second  is  untruth  ; the  third  is 
truth  mixed  with  untruth ; what  is  neither  truth,  nor 
untruth,  nor  truth  mixed  with  untruth,  that  is  the 
fourth  kind  of  speech : neither  truth  nor  untruth 2 * * * * *. 
Thus  I say. 

All  past,  present,  and  future  Arhats  hrve  taught 
and  declared,  teach  and  declare,  will  teach  and  de- 
clare these  four  kinds  of  speech ; and  they  have 
explained  all  those  things  which  are  devoid  of  intel- 
lect, which  possess  colour,  smell,  taste,  touch,  which 
are  subject  to  decay  and  increase,  which  possess 
various  qualities.  (4) 

A monk  (of  a nun  should  know  that)  before  (the 
utterance)  speech  is  speech  in  (antecedent)  non- 
existence8; that  while  uttered,  it  is  (real)  speech;. 

1 Pai£akkhavaya«aw,  parokkhavayanaw. 

* The  first,  second,  and  third  cases  refer  to  assertions,  the  fourth 

(asatyammhfi)  to  injunctions. 

* Literally,  non-speech.  The  commentary  has  the'  terms  used 

in  the  translation,  which  are  taken  frofti  the  Vaiseshika  philosophy. 

Bat  ft  is  well  known  that  many  Gainas  have  adopted  and  written  on 

the  Vaireshika  philosophy,  and  that  the  Gainas  themselves  maintain 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  4,  LESSON  I.  1 5 1 

that  the  moment  after  it  has  been  uttered,  the  spoken 
speech  is  speech  in  (subsequent)  non-existence.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun,  well  considering,  should  not 
use  speech  whether  truth  or  untruth,  or  truth  mixed 
with  untruth,  if  it  be  sinful,  blamable,  rough, 
stinging,  coarse,  hard,  leading  to  sins,  to  discord  and 
factions,  to  grief  and  outrage,  to  destruction  of  living 
beings.  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun,  considering  well,  should  use 
true  and  accurate  speech,  or  speech  which  is  neither 
truth  nor  untruth  (i.e.  injunctions) ; for  such  speech 
is  not  sinful,  blamable,  rough,  stinging,  &c.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun,  if  addressing  a man  who,  if 
addressed,  does  not  answer,  should  not  say:  ‘You 
loon!  you  lout1!  you  .SYtdra ! you  low-born  wretch! 
you  slave!  you  dog!  you  thief!  you  robber!  you 
cheat!  you  liar!  &c.;  you  are  such  and  such!  your 
parents  * are  such  and  such !’  Considering  well,  they 
should  not  use  such  sinful,  blamable,  &c.,  speech.  (8) 

But  in  that  case  they  should  say : * N.  JM.I  O long- 
lived  one!  O long-lived  ones !•  O layman!  O pupil! 
O faithful  one ! O lover  of  faith ! ’ Considering 
well,  they  should  use  such  sinless,  blameless,  &c., 
speech.  (9) 

A monk  or  a nun,  if  addressing  a woman  who,  if 
addressed,  does  not  answer,  should ‘not  say:  ‘You 
hussy ! you  wench ! &c.’  (repeat  the  above  list  of 

that  one  of  their  own  creed,  A’liuluya-Rohagutta,  is  the  author  of 
the  Vaueshika  Da  wan  am ; see  Kalpa  Sfltra,  p.  1 19. 

1 The  original  has  hole,  gole,  which  are  said  by  the  com- 
mentator to  have  been  used,  in  another  country,  as'  abusive  words. 
My  conjectural  translation  is  based  on  the  meaning  of  the  Sanskrit 
words  ho^i,  goli.  * 

* It  is  well  known  that  the  Hindus  include  the  parents  of  tbs 
abused  party  in  their  maledictions.  * • 


AjtarAnga  sOtra. 


»S2 

abusive  words  adapted  to  females).  Considering 
well,  they  should  not  use  such  sinful,  blamable,  &c., 
speech,  (io) 

A monk  oi*  a nun,  if  addressing  a woman  who, 
if  addressed,  does  not  answer,  should  say : ‘ O long- 
lived  one ! O sister ! madam ! my  lady ! O lay-sister ! 
O pupil!  O faithful  one!  O lover  of  faith!’  Con- 
sidering well,  they  should  use  such  sinless,  blame- 
less, &c.,  speech,  (u) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  say:  ‘The  god1  of 
the  sky!  the  god  of  the  thunderstorm!  the  god  of 
lightning!  the  god  who  begins  to  rain!  the  god 
who  ceases  to  rain ! may  rain  fall  or  may  it  not  fall ! 
may  the  crops  grow  or  may  they  not  grow ! may  the 
night  wane  ot  may  it  not  wane ! may  the  sun  rise  or 
may  it  not  rise ! may  the  king  conquer  or  may  he  not 
conquer!’  They  should  not  use  such  speech.  (12) 

But  knowing  the  nature  of  things,  he  should  say : 
‘ The  air ; the  follower  of  Guhya ; a cloud  has 
gathered  or  come  down;  the  cloud  has  rained.’ 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (13) 

Second  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  any  sort  (of  diseases), 
should  not  talk  of  them  in  this  way : ‘ He  has  got 
boils,  or  leprosy,  &g.  (see  I,  6,  1,  § 3);  his  hand  is 
cut,  or  his  foot,  nose,  ear,  lip  is  cut.’  For  as  all 
such  people,  spoken  to  in  such  language,  become 

1 This  prohibition  to  use  the  word  god  in  such  phrases  as  the 
god  (deva)  rains,  is  a curious  instance  of  the  rationalism  of  the 
early  Gainas.  As  they  were  allowed  to  speak  nothing  but  the 
truth,  they  were  enjoined  not  to  say,  * the  god  rains,'  but ' the  air 
(awtalikkham)  rains.’  • 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  4,  LESSON  2.  153 

angry,  hence,  considering  well,  they  should  not  speak 
to  them  in  such  language,  (i) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  any  sort  (of  good  quali- 
ties), should  speak  thus:  ‘He  is  strong,  powerful, 
vigorous,  famous,  well-formed,  well-proportioned, 
handsome.’  For  as  all  such  people,  spoken  to  in 
such  language,  do  not  become  angry,  they  should,  con- 
sidering well,  speak  to  them  in  such  language.  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  any  sort  of  such  things 
as  walls  or  ditches,  &c.  (see  II,  3,  2,  § 14),  should 
not  speak  of  them  in  this  way:  ‘ This  is  well-executed, 
finely  executed,  beautiful,  excellent,  (so  done)  or  to 
be  done;’  they  should  not  use  such  sinful,  &c., 
language.  (3) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  walls,  &c.,  should  speak 
about  them  in  this  way : * This  has  b£en  executed 
with  great  effort,  with  sin,  with  much  labour ; it  is 
very  magnificent,  it  is  very  beautiful,  it  is  very  fine, 
it  is  very  handsome;’  considering  well,  they  should 
use  such  sinless,  &c.,  language.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  food,  &c.,  prepared, 
should  not  speak  about  it  in  this  way : * This  is  well 
executed,  finely  executed,  beautiful,  excellent,  (so 
done)  or  to  be  done ;'  considering  well,  they  should 
not  use  such  sinful,  &c.,  language.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  food,  &c.,  prepared, 
should  speak  about  it  in  this  way : ‘ This  has  been 
executed  with  great  effort,  with  sin,  with  much 
labour;  it  is  very  good,  it  is  excellent,  it  is  well 
seasoned,  it  is  most  delicious,  it  is  most  agreeable 
considering  well,  they  should  use  such  sinless,  &c„ 
language*  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  a man,  a cow,  a buffalo, 
deer,  cattle,  a bird,  a snake,  an,  aquatic  animal  of 


»54 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


increased  bulk,  should  not  speak  about  them  in  this 
way : 4 He  (or  it)  is  fat,  round,  fit  to  be  killed  or 
cooked considering  well,  they  should  not  use  such 
sinful,  &c.,  language.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  a man,  a cow,  &c.,  of  in- 
creased bulk,  should  speak  about  them  in  this  way : 
‘He  is  of  increased  bulk,  his  body  is  well  grown, 
well  compacted,  his  flesh  and  blood  are  abundant, 
his  limbs  are  fully  developed;’  considering  well, 
they  should  use  such  sinless,  &c.,  language.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  any  sort  of  cows  (or 
oxen),  should  not  speak  about  them  in-  this  way: 

4 These  cows  should  be  milked  or  tamed  or  covered, 
should  draw  a waggon  or  car ;’  considering  well,  they 
should  not  use  such  sinful,  &c.,  language.  (9) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  any  sort  of  cows  (or 
oxen),  should  speak  about  them  in  this  way : 4 It  is 
a young  cow,  a milch  cow,  she  gives  much  milk,  it 
is  a short  or  a large  one,  a beast  of  burden;’  con- 
sidering well,  they  should  use  such  sinless,  &c., 
language.  (10) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  big  trees  in  parks,  on 
hills,  or  in  woods,  should  speak  about  them  in  this 
way : 4 These  (trees)  are  fit  for  palaces,  gates,  houses, 
benches,  bolts,  boats,  buckets,  stools,  trays,  ploughs, 
mattocks (?),  machines,  poles,  the  nave  of  a wheel(?), 
ga nclt1,  seats,  beds,  cars,  sheds ; ’ considering  well,  they 
should  not  use  such  sinful,  &c.,  language.  (1 1) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  big  trees  in  parks,  on 
hills,  or  in  woods,  should  speak  about  them  in  this 
way : 4 These  trees  are  noble,  high  and  rotund,  big ; 


1 The  Guzerati  commentator  explains  ga  nd\  by  a kind  of  utensil. 
The  Sanskrit  commentaries  give  ho  explanation. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  4,  LESSON  2.  155 

they  have  many  branches,  extended  branches,  they 
are  very  magnificent,'  &c  (see  § 4);  considering  well, 
they  should  use  such  sinless,  &c.,  language.  (12) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  many  wild  fruits,  should 
not  speak  about  them  in  this  way : * They  are  ripe, 
they  should  be  cooked  or  eaten,  they  are  just  in 
season,  or  soft,  or  they  have  just  split consider- 
ing well,  they  should  not  use  such  sinful,  &c.,  lan- 
guage. (13) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  many  wild  fruits,  should 
speak  about  them  in  this  way : ‘ They  are  very  plen- 
tiful, they  contain  many  seeds,  they  are  fully  grown, 
they  have  developed  their  proper  shape ; ’ consider- 
ing well,  they  should  use  such  sinless,  &c.,  lan- 
guage. (14) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  many  vegetables,  should 
not  speak  about  them  in  this  way : ' They  are  ripe, 
they  are  dark  coloured,  shining,  fit  to  be  fried  or 
roasted  or  eaten considering  well,  they  should  not 
use  such  sinful,  &c.,  language.  (15) 

A monk  or  a nun,  seeing  mdny  vegetables,  should 
speak  about  them  in  this  way : ‘ They  are  grown 
up,  they  are  fully  grown,  they  are  strong,  they  are 
excellent,  they  are  run  to  seed,  they  have  spread 
their  seed,  they  are  full  of  sap;’  considering  well, 
they  should  use  such  sinless,  &c.,  language.  (16) 

A monk  or  a nun,  hearing  any  sort  of  sounds, 
should  not  speak  about  them  in  this  way:  ‘This  is  a 
good  sound,  this  is  a bad  sound;’  considering  well, 
they  should  not  use  such  sinless,  &c.,  language ; but 
they  shoul4  call  them  good,  if  they  are  good ; bad,  if 
they  are  bad ; considering  well,  they  .should  use  such 
sinless,  &c.,  language.  (17) 

In  the  same  manner  they*  should  speak  about  the 


AxArAnga  s6tra. 


156 

(five)  colours,  as  black,  &c.;  the  (two)  smells,  as 
pleasant  or  unpleasant;  the  (five)  tastes,  as  sharp 
&c.;  the  (five)  kinds  of  touch,  as  hard,  &c.  (18) 

A monk  or  a nun,  putting  aside  wrath,  pride, 
deceit,  and  greed,  considering  well,  speaking  with, 
precision,  what  one  has  heard,  not  too  quick,  with 
discrimination,  should  employ  language  in  modera- 
tion and  restraint. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (19) 

End  of  the  Fourth  Lecture,  called  Modes  of 
Speech. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  I. 


15  7 


FIFTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

BEGGING  OF  CLOTHES1. 

First  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting  to  get  clothes,  may  beg  for 
cloth  made  of  wool,  silk,  hemp,  palm-leaves,  cotton, 
or  Arkathla;  or  such-like  clothes.  If  he  be  a youthful, 
young,  strong,  healthy,  well-set  monk,  he  may  wear 
one  robe,  not  two ; if  a nun,  she  should  possess  four 
raiments,  one  two  cubits  broad,  two  three  cubits 
broad,  one  four  cubits  broad2.  If  one  does  not 
receive  such  pieces  of  cloth,  one  should  afterwards 
sew  together  one  with  the  other.  (1) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  resolve  to  go  further 
than  half  a yo^ana  to  get  clothes.  As  regards  the 
acceptance  of  clothes,  those  precepts  which  have 
been  given  in  the  (First  Lesson  of  the  First  Lecture, 
called)  Begging  of  Food8,  concerning  one  fellow- 
ascetic,  should  be  repeated  here;  also  concerning 
many  fellow-ascetics,  one  female  fellow-ascetic,  many 
female  fellow-ascetics,  many  iSrama#as  and  Brih- 
ma«as ; also  about  (clothes)  appropriated  by  another 
person 4.  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  clothes  which 
the  layman,  for  the  mendicant’s  sake,  has  bought, 


* Vatthesawl  » . 

* The  first  to  wear  in  the  cloister,  the  second  and  third  for  out- 
of-door,  the  fourth  for  assemblies, 

* See  II,  1, 1,  § 11.  * 4 See  II,  1, 1,  $ 13. 


AjtAranga  sOtra. 


*58 


washed,  dyed,  brushed,  rubbed,  cleaned,  perfumed, 
if  these  clothes  be  appropriated  by  the  giver  him- 
self. But  if  they  be  appropriated  by  another  person, 
they  may  accept  them;  for  they  are  pure  and  accept- 
able. .(3) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  any  very  ex- 
pensive clothes  of  the  following  description  : clothes, 
made  of  fur,  fine  ones,  beautiful  ones ; clothes  made 
of  goats’  hair,  of  blue  cotton,  of  common  cotton,  of 
Bengal  cotton,  of  Pa//a,  of  Malaya  fibres,  of  bark 
fibres,  of  muslin,  of  silk;  (clothes  provincially  called) 
Desaraga,  Amila,  Gag^ala,  Phdliya,  Kiyaha ; blankets 
or  mantles.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  any  of  the 
following  plaids  of  fur  and  other  materials : plaids 
made  of  Udra,  Pesa  fur  *,  embroidered  with  Pera  fur, 
made  of  the  fur  of  black  or  blue  or  yellow  deer, 
golden  plaids,  plaids  glittering  like  gold,  interwoven 
with  gold,  set  with  gold,  embroidered  with  gold, 
plaids  made  of  tigers’  fur,  highly  ornamented  plaids, 
plaids  covered  with  ornaments.  (5) 

For  the  avoidance  of  these  occasions  to  sin  there 
are  four  rules  for  begging  clothes  to  be  known  by 
the  mendicants. 

Now,  this  is  tl>e  first  rule  : 

A monk  or  a nun  may  beg  for  clothes  specifying 
(their  quality),  viz.  wool,  silk,  hemp,  palm-leaves, 
cotton,  Arkatfila.  If  they  beg  for  them,  or  the  house- 
holder gives  them,  they  may  accept  them ; for  they 
are  pure  and  acceptable. 

This  is  the  first  rule.  (6) 

Now  follows  the  second  rute  : 

1 According  to  the  commentary  udra  and  per  a are  animals 
in  Sindh. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  I. 


159 


A monk  or  a nun  may  ask  for  clothes  which  they 
have  well  inspected,  from  the  householder  or  his  wife, 
&c.  After  consideration,  they  should  say : * G long- 
lived  one!  (or,  O sister!)  please  give  me  one  of 
these  clothes  1’  If  they  beg  for  them,  or  the  house- 
holder gives  them,  they  may  accept  them ; for  they 
are  pure  and  acceptable. 

This  is  the  second  rule.  (7) 

Now  follows  the  third  rule  : 

A monk  or  a nun  may  beg  for  an  under,  or  upper 
garment.  If  they  beg  for  it,  &c.  (see  § 7). 

This  is  the  third  rule.  (8) 

Now  follows  the  fourth,  rule : 

A monk  or -a  nun  may  beg  for  a left-off  robe, 
which  no  other  .Sramawa  or  Br&hma*a,  guest,  pauper 
or  beggar  wants.  If  they  beg,  &c.  (see  § 7). 

This  is  the  fourth  rule. 

A monk  or  a nun  who  have  adopted  one  of  these 
four  rules  should  not  gay,  &c.  (all  as  in  II,  1,  11, 
§ 12,  down  to)  we  respect  each  other  accordingly.  (9) 

A householder  may  perhaps  say  to  a mendicant 
begging  in  the  prescribed  way : * O long-lived  .Sra- 
ma»a ! return  after  a month,  ten  nights,  five  nights, 
to-morrow,  to-morrow  night;  then  we  shall  give  you 
some  clothes.’  Hearing  and  perceiving  such  talk, 
he  should,  after  consideration,  say:  ‘O  long-lived 
one ! (or,  O sister !)  it  is  not  meet  for  me  to  accept 
such  a promise.  If  you  want  to  give  me  (something), 
give  it  me  now ! ' 

After  these  words  the  householder  may  answer : 
'O  long-lived  .Sramawa ! follow  me!  then  we  shall 
give  you  some  clothes!’  The  mendicant  should  give 
die  same  answer  as  above. 

After  his  words  the  householder  may  say  (to  one 


160  AjtArAnga  sOtra. 

of  his  people):  ‘O  long-lived  one!  (or,  O sister!) 
fetch  that  robe ! we  shall  give  it  the  5rama»a,  and 
afterwards  prepare  one  for  our  own  use,  killing  all 
sorts  of  living  beings.’ 

Hearing  and  perceiving  such  talk,  he  should  not 
accept  such  clothes;  for  they  are  impure  and  un- 
acceptable. (io) 

The  householder1  may  say  (to  one  of  his  people): 
‘O  long-lived  one!  (or,  O sister!)  fetch  that  robe, 
wipe  or  rub  it  with  perfume,  &c.  (see  II,  2, 1,  $ 8) ; 
we  shall  give  it  to  the  6rama«a.’ 

Hearing  and  perceiving  such  talk,  the  mendicant 
should,  after  consideration,  say:  ‘O  long-lived  one! 
(or,  O sister !)  do  not  wipe  or  rub  it  with  perfume, 
&c.  If  you  want  to  give  it  me,  give  it,  such  as 
it  is!’ 

After  these  words  the  householder  might  never- 
theless offer  the  clothes  after  having  wiped  or 
rubbed  them,  &c. ; but  the  mendicant  should  not 
accept  them,  for  they  are  impure  and  unaccept- 
able. (11) 

The  householder  may  say  (to  another  of  his 
people):  ‘O  long-lived  one!  (or,  O sister!)  bring 
that  robe,  clean  or  wash  it  with  cold  or  hot  water !’ 

The  mendicant  should  return  the  same  answer  as 
above  (in  § 11)  and  not  accept  such  clothes.  (12) 

The  householder  may  say  (to  another  of  his 

1 Here  and  in  die  following  paragraph  the  original  adds  nettfi, 
which  may  be  - nttvS,  bringing  (the  clothes);  but  the  following 
words  seem  to  militate  against  this  rendering.  For  the  house- 
holder’s order  to  fetch  (dhara)  the  clothes  would  be  superfluous,  if 
be  had  already  brought  (nettd)  them.  Unless  dhara  has  here  some 
other  meaning  than  the  commoq  one,  perhaps  ‘ take  it,’  nettfr  can- 
not be  translated  ‘ having  brought  them.* 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  I.  l6l 

people):  ‘O  long-lived  one!  (or,  O sister!)  bring 
that  cloth,  empty  it  of  the  bulbs,  &c.  (see  II,  2,  1, 
§ 5);  we  shall  give  it  to  the  .Srama»a.’  Hearing  and 
perceiving  such  talk,  the  mendicant  should  say,  after 
consideration : * O long-lived  one  ! (or,  O sister !)  do 
not  empty  that  cloth  of  the  bulbs,  &c. ; it  is  not  meet 
for  me  to  accept  such  clothes.’  After  these  words 
the'  householder  might  nevertheless  take  away  the 
bulbs,  &c.,  and  offer  him  the  cloth ; but  he  should  not 
accept  it;  for  it  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  (13) 

If  a householder  brings  a robe  and  gives  it  to 
the  mendicant,  he  should,  after  consideration,  say: 
‘O  long-lived  one!  (or,  O sister!)  I shall,  in  your 
presence,  closely  inspect  the  inside  of  the  robe.’ 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason  : There 
might  be  hidden  in  the  robe  an  earring  or  girdle  or 
gold  and  silver,  &c.  (see  II,  2,  1,  § 11),  or  living 
beings  or  seeds  or  grass.  Hence  it  has  been  said  to 
the  mendicant,  &c.,  thatt  he  should  closely  inspect 
the  inside  of  the  robe.  (14) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  clothes 
which  are  full  of  eggs  or  living  beings,  &c.;  for  they 
are  impure,  &c.  A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept 
clothes  which  are  free  from  eggs  or  living  beings, 
&c.,  but  which  are  not  fit  nor  strong  nor  lasting 
nor  to  be  worn1 — which  though  pleasant  are  not 
fit  (for  a mendicant);  for  they  are  impure  and 
unacceptable.  (15) 

1 If  they  contain  stains  of  mustard  or  A%ana,  &c.  The  com- 
mentator quotes  two  rlokas  which,  as  I understand  them,  assign  to 
the  different  parts  of  the  cloth  different  significations  as  omina. 
They  run  thus : ATattfiri  deviy£*bh£g&  do  ya  ya  m&iusfi  l 

asur&iia  ya  do  bhfigfi  xaagght  vatthassa  rakkhaso  a devesu  uttamo 
lobho  m&rusesu  ya  magg^imo  I asyresu  ya.  galanwaw  maraoam 
g&n a rakkhase  a 
[as] 


M 


162 


AjcArAnga  sCtra. 


A monk  or  a nun  may  accept  clothes  which  are 
fit,  strong,  lasting,  to  be  worn,  pleasant  and  fit  for  a' 
mendicant;  for  they  ate  pure  and  acceptable.  (16) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  wash  his  clothes, 
rub  or  wipe  them  with  ground  drugs,  &c.,  because 
they  are  not  new. 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  clean  or  wash  his 
clothes  in  plentiful  water,  because  they  are  not 
new.  (17) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  make  his  clothes 
undergo  the  processes  (prohibited  in  § 17),  because 
they  have  a bad  smell.  (18) 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting  to  air  o t dry  (in  the 
sun)  their^  clothes,  should  not  do  so  on  the  bare 
ground  or  wet  earth  or  rock  or  piece  of  clay  con- 
taining life,  &c.  (see  II,  1,  5,  § 2).  (19)1 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting  to  air  or  dry  (in  the 
sun)  their  clothes,  should  not  hang  them  for  that  pur- 
pose on  a post  of  a house,  on  the  upper  timber  of  a 
door-frame,  on  a mortar,  on  a bathing-tub,  or  on  any 
such-like  above-ground  place,  which  is  not  well  fixed 
or  set,  but  shaky  and  movable.  (20) 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting  to  air  or  dry  (in  the 
sun)  their  clothes,  should  not  lay  them  for  that  pur- 
pose on  a dyke,  wall,  rock,  stone,  or  any  such-like 
above-ground  place,  &c.  (21) 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting  to  air  or  dry  (in  the 
sun)  their  clothes,  should  not  do  it  on  a pillar,  a raised 
platform,  a scaffold,  a second  story,  a flat  roof,  or 
any  such-like  above-ground  place,  &c.  (22) 


1 If  the  garment  falls  on  the  ground,  it  wojuld  c6me  in  contact 
with  dust,  Ac.,  then  -it  would  contain  living  beings  and  be  no  more 
pure. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  2.  1 63 

Knowing  this,  he  should  resort  to  a secluded  spot, 
and  circumspectly  air  or  dry  his  clothes  there  on  a 
heap  of  ashes  or  bones,  &c.  (see  II,  1,  1,  § 1),  which 
he  has  repeatedly  inspected  and  cleaned. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (23) 

Second  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun  should  beg  for  acceptable 
clothes,  and  wear  them  in  that  state  in  which  they  get 
them ; they  should  not  wash  or  dye  them,  nor  should 
they  wear  washed  or  dyed  clothes,  nor  (should  they) 
hide  (their  clothes)  when  passing  through  other  vil- 
lages, being  careless  of  dress.  This  is  the  whole 
duty  for  a mendicant  who  wears  clothes1. 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting,  for  the  sake  of  alms, 
to  enter  the  abode  of  a householder,  should  do  so 
outfitted  with  all  their  clothes ; in  the  same  manner 
they  should  go  to  the  out-of-door  place  for  religious 
practices  or  study,  or  should  wander  from  village 
to  village. 

Now  they  should  know  this : A monk  or  a nun 
dressed  in  all  their  clothes  should  not  enter  or 
leave,  for  the  sake  of  alms,  the  abode  of  a house- 
holder, &c.  &c.,  on  perceiving  that  a strong  and  widely 
spread  rain  pours  down,  &c.  (see  II,  1,  3,  § 9).  (1) 

If  a single  mendicant  borrows  for  a short  time  a 
robe8  (from  another  mendicant)  and  returns  after 
staying  abroad  for  one,  two,  three,  four,  or  five  days. 

Sec  I,  7,  4,  § 1. 

* Padih&rtyam,  which  is  translated  prStih&ruka.  There 
are  various  readings  as  patih&riya,  p&rfth&riya;  but  the 
meaning  of  the  word  remains  uncertain,  and  my  translation  is 
but  conjectural.  * * 


M 2 


1 64  AtArA$ga  sCtra. 

he  (the  owner)  should  not  take  such  a robe  for 
himself,  nor  should  he  give  it  to  somebody  else, 
nor  should  he  give  it  on  promise  (for  another  robe 
after  a few  days),  nor  should  he  exchange  that  robe 
for  another  cpie.  He  should  not  go  to  another 
mendicant  and  say:  ‘O  long-lived  .SVamafta!  do 
you  want  to  wear  or  use  this  robe  ?’  He  (the 
owner  'of  the  robe)  should  not  rend  the  still  strong 
robe,  and  cast  it  away ; but  give  it  him  (who  had 
borrowed  it)  in  its  worn  state;  he  should  not  use 
it  himself.  (2) 

The  same  rule  holds  good  when  many ‘mendicants 
borrow  for  a short  time  clothes,  and  return  after  stay- 
ing abroad  for  one,  &c.,  days.  All  should  be  put  in 
the  plural.  (3) 

‘Well,  I shall  borrow  a robe  and  return  after  stay- 
ing abroad  for  one,  two,  three,  four,  or  five  days; 
perhaps  it  will  thus  become  my  own.’  As  this  would 
be  sinful,  he  should  not  do  sp.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  make  coloured 
clothes  colourless,  or  colour  colourless  clothes ; nor 
should  they  give  them  to  somebody  else  thinking 
that  they  will  get  other  clothes;  nor  should  they 
give  it  on  promise  (for  other  clothes) ; nor  should 
they  exchange  them  for  other  clothes ; nor  should 
they  go  to  somebody  else  and  say : ‘ O long-lived 
•Siramatta ! do  you  want  to  wear  or  use  these  clothes  ?' 
They  should  not  rend  the  still  strong  clothes,  and 
cast  them  away,  that  another  mendicant  might  think 
' them  bad  ones.  (5) 

, If  he  sees  in  his  way  thieves,  he  should  not  from 
fear  of  them,  and  to  save  his*clothes,  leave  the  road 
or  go  into  another  road,  &c.  (see  II,  3,  3,  $ 13),  but 
undisturbed,  his  mind  not  directed  to  outward  things, 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  5,  LESSON  2.  I65 

he  should  collect  himself  for  contemplation;  then 
he  may  circumspectly  wander  from  village  to 
village.  (6) 

If  the  road  of  a monk  or  a nun  on  the  pilgrimage 
lies  through  a forest  in  which,  as  they  know,  there 
stroll  bands  of  many  thieves  desirous  of  their  clothes, 
they  should  not  from  fear  of  them,  and  to  save  their 
clothes,  leave  the  road  or  go  into  another  road,  &c. 
(all  as  in  §6).  (7) 

If  these  thieves  say:  ‘O  long-lived  6rama*a! 
bring  us  your  robe,  give  it,  deliver  it!’  he  should 
not  give  or  deliver  it  He  should  act  in  such  cases 
(as  prescribed  in  II,  3,  3,  §§  15  and  16). 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (8) 


End  of  the  Fifth  Lecture,  called  Begging  of 
Clothes. 


166 


AxArAnga  s6tra. 


SIXTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

BEGGING  FOR  A BOWL1. 

First  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting  to  get  a bowl,  may 
beg  for  one  made  of  bottle-gourd  or  wood  or  clay, 
or  such-like  bowls.  If  he  be  a youthful,  young,  &c. 
(see  II,  5,  i,  § i)  monk,  he  may  carry  with  him  one 
bowl,  not  two 2. 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  resolve  to  go  farther 
than  half  a Yo^ana  to  get  a bowl. 

As  regards  the  acceptance  of  a bowl,  Those  four 
precepts  which  have  been  given  in  (the  First  Lesson 
of  the  First  Lecture,  called)3  Pegging  of  Food,  con- 
cerning one  fellow-ascetic,  &c.,  should  be  repeated 
here,  the  fifth  is  that  concerning  many  >Srama#as 
and  BrAhma«as. 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  a bowl 
which  the  layman  has,  for  the  mendicant’s  sake, 
bought,  &c.  (see . the  Lecture  called  Begging  of 
Clothes4),  (i) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  any  very 
expensive  bowls  of  the  following  description : bowls 
made  of  iron,  tin,  lead,  silver,  gold,  brass,  a mixture  of 


1 Plesa  n&.  • 

* This  applies,  according  to  the  commentator,  to  Ginakalpikas, 

&c.  Ordinary  monks  may  have  a drinking  vessel  besides  the  alms- 
bowL 

* See  II,  i,  i,  $n. 


* II,  5,  $ 3* 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  6,  LESSON  I. 


I67 


gold,  silver,  and  copper,  pearl,  glass,  mother  of  pearl, 
horn,  ivory,  cloth,  stone,  or  leather;  for  such  very 
expensive  bowls  are  impure  and  unacceptable.  (2) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  accept  bowls  which 
contain  a band  of  the  same  precious  materials 
specialised  in  $ 2 ; for  &c.  (3) 

For  the  avoidance  of  these  occasions  to  sin  there 
are  four  rules  for  begging  a bowl  to  be  known  by 
the  mendicants. 

Now  this  is  the  first  rule  : 

A monk  or  a nun  may  beg  for  a bowl  specifying 
its  quality,  viz.  bottle-gourd  or  wood  or  clay.  If  they 
beg  for  such  a bowl,  or  the  householder  gives  it, 
they  may  accept  it,  for  it  is  pure  and  acceptable. 
This  is  the  first  rule.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  second  rule  : 

A monk  or  a niin  may  ask  for  a bowl,  which  they 
have  well  inspected,  from  the  householder  or  his  wife, 
&c.  After  consideration,  they  should  say : ‘ O long- 
lived  one ! (or,  O sister !)  phase  give  me  one  of 
these  bowls,  viz.  one  made  of  bottle-gourds  or  wood 
or  clay.’  If  they  beg  for  such  a bowl,  or  the  house- 
holder gives  it,  they  may  accept  it ; for  &c. 

This  is  the  second  rule.  (5) 

Now  follows  the  third  rule : 

A monk  or  a nun  may  beg  for  a bowl  which  has 
been  used  by  the  former  owner  or  by  many  people. 
If  they  beg  for  it,  &c.  (see  § 5). 

This  is  the  third  rule.  (6) 

Now  follpws  the  fourth  rule ; 

A monk  or  a nun  may  beg  for, a left-off  bowl 
which  no  other  £rama«a  or  Br&hma#a,  gues  , pauper, 
or  beggar  wants.  If  they  beg  for  it,  &c.  (see  § 5). 
This  is  the  fourth  rule. 


i68 


AtArAnga  sOtra. 


A monk  or  a nun  having  adopted  one  of  these 
four  rules  should  not  say,  &c.  (see  II,  i,  n,  § 12,  all 
down  to)  we  respect  each  other  accordingly.  (7) 

A householder  may  perhaps  say  to  a mendicant 
begging  in  the  prescribed  Way : ‘ O long-lived  .Sra- 
mana ! return  after  a month,’  &c.  (all  as  in  the 
Lecture  called  Begging  of  Clothes1).  (8) 

The  householder  may  say  (to  one  of  his  people) : 
‘ O long-lived  one ! (or,  O sister !)  fetch  that  bowl, 
rub  it  with  oil,  ghee,  fresh  butter  or  marrow,  we  shall 
give  it,’  &c.  (see  II,  5, 1,  § 1 1) ; or  ‘ wash,  wipe,  or  rub 
it  with  perfumes,’  &c. ; or  ‘ wash  it  with  cold  or  hot 
water ; ’ or  ‘empty  it  of  the  bulbs,’  &c.  (see  II,  5,  1, 
§§  1 1 and  1 2).  (9) 

. The  householder  may  say  (to  the  mendicant) : 
* O long-lived  »Srama»a ! stay  a while  till  they  have 
cooked  or  prepared  our  food,  &c.,  then  we  shall  give 
you,  O long-lived  one ! your  alms-bowl  filled  with 
food  or  drink ; it  is  not  goo$,  not  meet  that  a mendi- 
cant should  get  an  empty  alms-bowl.’  After  con- 
sideration, the  mendicant  should  answer : ‘ O long- 
lived  one ! (or,  O sister !)  it  is  indeed  not  meet  for 
me  to  eat  or  drink  food  &c.  which  is  &dh4karmika ; 
do  not  cook  or  prepare  it;  if  you  want  to  give  me 
anything,  give  it  as  it  is.'  After  these  words  the 
householder  might  offer  him  the  alms-bowl  filled 
with  food  or  drink  which  had  been  cooked  or  pre- 
pared: he  should  not  accept  such  an  alms-bowl, 
for  it  is  impure  and  unacceptable.  (10) 

Perhaps  the  householder  will  bring  and  give  the 
mendicant  an  alms-bowl ; the  mendicant  should  then, 
after  consideration,  say : 4 G long-lived  one ! (or,  O 


* 1 n»*5>  »>  f *«• 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  6,  LESSON  2.  1 69 

sister !)  I shall  in  your  presence  closely  inspect  the 
interior  of  the  bowl.’ 

The  Kevalin  says : This  is  the  reason : In  the 
alms-bowl  there  might  be  living  beings  or  seeds  or 
grass.  Hence  it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant, 
&c.,  that  he  should  closely  inspect  the  interior  of 
the  alms-bowl.  (11) 

All  that  has  been  said  in  the  Lecture  called 
Begging  of  Clothes  (II,  5,  i,  § 1 5 down  to  the  end)  is 
mutatis  mutandis  to  be  repeated  here,  (In  § 15, 
add  before  perfumes)  with  oil,  ghee,  butter  or 
marrow.  * 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (12) 

Second  Lesson. 

A monk  or  a nun,  entering  the  abode  of  a house- 
holder for  the  sake  of  alms,  should  after  examining 
their  alms-bowl,  taking  out  any  living  beings,  and 
wiping  off  the  dust,  circumspectly  enter  or  leave  the 
householder’s  abode. 

The  Kevalin  says:  This  is  the  reason:  Living 
beings,  seeds  or  dust  might  fall  into  his  bowl.  Hence 
it  has  been  said  to  the  mendicant,  &c.,  that  he  should 
after  examining  his  alms-bowl,  taking  out  any  living 
beings,  circumspectly  enter  or  leave  the  householder’s 
abode,  (i) 

On  such  an  occasion  the  householder  might  per- 
haps, going  in  the  house,  fill  the  alms-bowl  with 
cold  water  and,  returning,  offer  it  him ; (the  mendi- 
cant) should  not  accept  such  an  alms-bowl1  either  in 

1 Though  the  alms-bowl  is  expressly  mentioned,  it  must  stand 
here  for  water,  as  the  commentators  interpret  the  passage. 


170 


AxArAnga  sOtra. 


the  householder’s  hand  or  his  vessel ; for  it  is  impure 
and  unacceptable.  (2) 

Perhaps  he  has,  inadvertently,  accepted  it ; then 
he  should  empty  it  again  in  (the  householder’s) 
water-pot;  or  (on  his  objecting  to  it)  he  should 
put  down  the  bowl  and  the  water  somewhere,  or 
empty  it  in  some  wet  place.  (3) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  wipe  or  rub  a wet 
-or  moist  alms-bowl.  But  when  they  perceive  that 
on  their  alms-bowl  the  water  has  dried  up  and  the 
moisture  is  gone,  then  they  may  circumspectly  wipe 
or  rub  it.  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  wanting  to  enter  die  abode  of 
a householder,  should  enter  or  leave  it,  for  the  sake 
of  alms,  with  their  bowl ; also  on  going  to  the  out-of- 
door  place  for  religious  practices  or  study;  or  on 
wandering  from  village  to  village. 

If  a strong  and  widely  spread  rain  pours  down, 
they  should  take  the  same  care  of  their  alms-bowl 
as  is  prescribed  for  clothes  (in  the  preceding  Lecture, 
Lesson  2,  § x). 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (5) 


End  of  the  Sixth  Lecture,  called  Begging  for 
a Bowl. 


book  ii,  Lecture  7,  lesson  i. 


171 


SEVENTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

REGULATION  OF  POSSESSION1 * * * * * *. 

First  Lesson. 

* I shall  become  a 6rama«a  who  owns  no  house, 
no  property,  no  sons,  no  cattle,  who  eats  what  others 
give  him ; I shall  commit  no  sinful  action ; Master,  I 
renounce  to  accept  anything  that  has  not  been  given.’ 
Having  taken  such  vows,  (a  mendicant)  should  not, 
on  entering  a village  or  scot-free  town,  &c.,  take  him- 
self, or  induce  others  to  take,  or  allow  others  to  take, 
what  has  not  been  given.  A mendicant  should  not 
take  or  appropriate  any  property,  viz.  an  umbrella 8 
or  vessel  or  stick,  &c.  (see  II*,  2,  3,  § 2),  of  those 
monks  together  with  whom  he  stays,  without  getting 
their  permission,  and  without  having  inspected  and 
wiped  (the  object  in  question) ; but  having  got  their 
permission,  and  having  inspected  and  wiped  (the  ob- 
ject in  question),  he  may  take  or  appropriate  it8.  (1) 
He  may  beg  for  a domicile  in  a traveller’s  hall,  &c. 


1 Oggahapadiml. 

* The  commentator  (.Stl&hka)  states  that  the  monks  in  Kun- 

kawadexa,  &c.,  are  allowed  to  carry  umbrellas,  because  of  the  heavy 

rains  in  that  country. 

* Oginhe^a  v&  paggi»he$£&  vL  The  commentators  explain 

these  words  'to  take  for  once’  (sakrit)  and  ‘ to  take  repeatedly ’ 

(anekaxas).  Later  on  the  Guzerati  commentator  explains  oggin* 

heggi  by  mfige,  * he  should  ask.' 


17a 


AxArA&ga  sOtra. 


(see  II,  i,  8,  § 2),  having  reflected  (on  its  fitness  for 
a stay) ; he  should  ask  permission  to  take  possession 
of  it  from  him  who  is  the  landlord  or  the  steward  of 
that  place : ' Indeed,  O long-lived  one  1 for  the  time, 
and  in  the  space  which  you  concede  us,  we  shall  dwell 
here.  We  shall  take  possession  of  the  place  for  as 
long  a time  as  the  place  belongs  to  you ; and  of  as 
much  of  it  as  belongs  to  you ; for  as  many  fellow- 
ascetics  (as  shall  stand  in  need  of  it) ; afterwards  we 
shall  take  to  wandering1/  (2) 

Having  got  possession  of  some  place,  a mendicant 
should  invite  to  that  food,  &c.,  which  he  himself 
has  collected,  any  fellow-ascetics  arriving  there  who 
fallow  the  same  rules  and  are  zealous  brethren ; but 
he  should  not  invite  them  to  anything  of  which 
he  has  taken  possession  for  the  sake  of  somebody 
else.  (3) 

Having  got  possession  of  some  place  (in  a tra- 
veller’s hall,  &c.),  a mendicant  should  offer  a foot- 
stool or  bench  or  bed  or  couch,  which  he  himself  has 
begged,  to  any  fellow-ascetics  arriving  there  who 
follow  other  rules  than  he,  yet  are  zealous  brethren ; 
but  he  should  not  offer  them  anything  of  which 
he  has  taken  possession  for  the  sake  of  somebody 
else.  (4) 

Having  got  possession  of  some  place  in  a tra- 
veller’s hall,  &c.,  a mendicant  might  ask  from  a 
householder  or  his  sons  the  loan  of  a needle  or 
a Pippalaka*  or  an  ear-picker  or  a nail-parer,  he 
should  not  give  or  lend  it  to  somebody  else ; but 

1 Compare  the  corresponding  pfecept  in  II,  s,  3,  f 3. 

* The  Guzerati  commentator  only  says  drat  pippalaka  is  some 
utensil.  The  older  commentators  do  not  explain  this  passage. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  2.  1 73 

having  done  that  for  which  he  wanted  one  of  the 
above  articles,  he  should  go  with  that  article  there 
(where  the  householder,  &c.,  is),  and  stretching  out 
his  hands  or  laying  the  article  on  the  ground,  he 
should,  after  consideration,  say : ‘ Here  it  is ! here  it 
is !’  But  he  should  not  with  his  own  hand  put  it  in 
the  hand  of  the  householder.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  take  possession 
of  anything1  on  the  bare  ground,  on  wet  ground, 
where  there  are  eggs,  &c.;  nor  on  pillars  or  such 
an  above-ground  place  (II,  2, 1,  $ 7) ; nor  on  a wall, 
&c. ; nor  on  *the  trunk  of  a tree,  &c. ; nor  where  the 
householder  or  fire  or  water,  or  women  or  children 
or  cattle  are,  and  where  it  is  not  fit  for  a wise 
man  to  enter  or  to  leave,  &c.,  nor  to  meditate  on 
the  law;  nor  where  they  have  to  pass  through  the 
householder’s  abode  or  to  which  there  is  no  road, 
and  where  it  is  not  fit,  &c.;  nor  where  the  house- 
holder or  his  wife,  &c.,  bplly  or  scold  each  other,  &c. 
(see  II,  2, 1,  $ 9,  and  3,  § 7) ; nor  where  they  rub  or 
anoint  each  other’s  body  with  'oil  or  ghee  or  butter 
or  grease;  nor  where  they  take  a b&tli,  &c. ; nor 
where  they  go  about  naked,  &c.  (all  as  in  II,  2,  3, 
§§  7-12)- 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (6-12) 

Second  Lesson. 

He  may  beg  for  a domicile  in  a traveller’s  hall, 
&c.  (see  II,  1,  8,  § 2),  having  reflected  (on  its  fit- 
ness); he  should  ask  permission  to.  take  possession 


1 OggaHa. 


174  AtArA&ga  sOtra. 

of  it  from  the  landlord  or  the  steward  of  that  place : 

* Indeed,  O long-lived  one ! for  the  time  and  in 
the  space  you  concede  us,  we  shall  dwell  here1,'  &c. 
(see  i,  § 2).  Now  what  further  after  the  place  is  taken 
possession  of?  He  should  not  remove  from  without 
to  within,  or  vice  versa,  any  umbrella  or  stick,  &c. 
(see  II,  2,  3,  § 2)  belonging  to  3rama»as  or  Br&h- 
ma#as  (previously  settled  there) ; nor  should  he 
wake  up  a sleeping  person,  nor  offend  or  molest  the 
(inmates).  (1) 

A monk  or  a nun  might  wish  to  go  to  a mango 
park;  they  should  then  ask  the  landlord’s  or  steward’s 
permission’ *(in  the  manner  described  above).  Now 
what  further  after  the  place  is  taken  possession  of? 
Then  they  might  desire  to  eat  a mango.  If  the  monk 
or  the  nun  perceive  that  the  mango  is  covered  with 
eggs,  living  beings,  &c.  (see  II,  1, 1,  § 2),  they  should 
not  take  it ; for  it  is  impure,  &c.  (2) 

If  the  monk  or  the  nun  perceive  that  the  mango 
is  free  from  eggs,,  living  beings,  &c.,  but  not  nibbled 
at  by  animals,  nor  injured,  they  should  not  take  it ; for 
it  is  impure,  &c.  But  if  they  perceive  that  the  mango 
is  free  from  eggs,  living  beings,  &c.,  and  is  nibbled 
at  by  animals  and  injured,  then  they  may  take  it ; for 
it  is  pure,  &c. a (3) 

The  monk  might  wish  to  eat  or  suck  one  half  of 
a mango  or  a mango’s  peel  or  rind  or  sap  or  . smaller 
particles.  If  the  monk  or  the  nun  perceive  that 
the  above-enumerated  things  are  covered  with  eggs, 
or  living  beings,  they  should  not  take  them ; for  they 
are  impure,  &c.  But  they  may  take  them,  if  they  are 

1 § 2 of  the  preceding  Lesson  is  repeated  word  for  word. 

See  II,  j,  1,  §§  3,  4.  # 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  % LESSON  2.  1 75 

free  from  eggs,  &c.,  and  nibbled  at  by  animals  or 
injured1..  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  might  wish  to  go  to  a sugar- 
cane plantation.  They  should  ask  permission  in  the 
manner  described  above.  The  monk  or  the  nun 
might  wish  to  chew  or  suck  sugar-cane.  In  that  case 
the  same  rules  as  for  eating  mango  apply  also ; like- 
wise if  they  wish  to  chew  or  to  suck  the  sugar-cane’s 
pulp,  fibres,  sap,  or  smaller  particles.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun  might  wish  to  go  to  a garlic 
field.  They  should  ask  permission  in  the  manner 
described  above.  The  monk  or  the  nun  might  wish 
to  chew  or  suck  garlic.  In  that  case  the  same  rules 
as  for  eating  mangoes  apply  also ; likewise  if  they 
wish  to  chew  or  suck  the  bulb  or  peel  or  stalk  or 
seed  of  garlic2.  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun,  having  got  possession  of  a place 
in  a traveller’s  hall,  &c.,  should  avoid  all  occasions 
to  sin  (proceeding  from  any  preparations  made  by) 
the  householders  or  thfcir  sons,  and  should  occupy 
that  place  according  to  the  following  rules.  (7) 

Now  this  is  the  first  rule : 

He  may  beg  for  a domicile  in  a traveller’s  hall, 
&c.,  having  reflected  (on  its  fitness  for  a stay),  &c. 
(§  2 of  the  preceding  Lesson  is  to  be  repeated  here). 

This  is  the  first  rule.  (8) 

Now  follows  the  second  rule : 

A monk  resolves : ‘ I shall  ask  for  possession  of  a 
dwelling-place,  &c.,  for  the  sake  of  other  mendicants, 


1 In  the  text  § 3 is  repeated  with  the  necessaiy  alterations. 

2 5tMka,  In  his  commentary,  remarks  that  the  meaning  of  the 
Sfttras  about  eating  mangoes,  sugar-cane,  and  garlic  should  be 
learned  from  the  Sixteenth  Lesson  of  the  Nishttha  Sfttra. 


176 


AxArA&ga  sCtra. 


and  having  taken  possession  of  it  for  their  sake, 
I shall  use  it.’ 

This  is  the  second  rule.  (9) 

Now  follows  the  third  rule : 

A monk  resolves  : ‘ I shall  ask  for  possession  of  a 
dwelling-place,  &c.,  for  the  sake  of  other  mendicants, 
and  having  taken  possession  of  it  for  their  sake,  I 
shall  not  use  it.’ 

This  is  the  third  rule.  (10) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  rule  : 

A monl^  resolves  : ‘ I shall  not  ask  for  possession 
of  a dwelling-place,  &c.,  for  the  sake  of  other  mendi- 
cants; but  if  the  dwelling-place,  &c.,  has  already 
been  ceded  to  them,  I shall  use  it.’ 

This  is  the  fourth  rule.  (11) 

Now  follows  the  fifth  rule : 

A monk  resolves : * I shall  ask  for  possession  of  a 
dwelling-place  for  my  own  sake,  not  for  two,  three, 
four,  or  five  persons.’  t 

This  is  the  fifth  rule.  (12) 

Now  follows  the  sixth  rule  : 

If  a monk  or  a nun,  occupying  a dwelling-place  in 
which  there  is  Ikkaafa  reed,&c.  (see  II,  2, 3,  § 18),  get 
this  thing,  then  they  may  use  it;  otherwise  they 
should  remain  in  a squatting  or  sitting  posture. 
This  is  the  sixth  rule.  (13) 

Now  follows  the  seventh  rule : 

A monk  or  a nun  may  beg  for  a dwelling-place 
paved  with  clay  or  wood.  If  they  get  it,  then 
they  may  use  it ; otherwise  they  should  remain  in  a 
squatting  or  sitting  posture. 

This  is  the  seventh  rule.  > 

One  who  has  adopted  one  of  these  seven  rules, 
should  not  say,  &c.  (all  as  in  II,  1, 1 1,  § 12).  (14) 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  7,  LESSON  2.  ..  %JJ 

‘ f K ■ 

. I have  heard  the  following  explanation  by  the 
venerable  (Mah&vlra) : The  Sthaviras;  the  venerable 
ones,  have  declared  that  dominion 1 * * is  fivefold : 

The  lord  of  the  gods’  dominion ; 

The  king’s  dominion ; 

The  houseowner’s*  dominion ; 

The  householder’s8  dominion ; 

The  religious  man’s 4 * * * dominion. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (15) 


End  of  the  Seventh  Lecture,  called  Regulation 
of  Possession. 


1 Oggaha,  avagraha. 

* G&hSvaf,  grihapati.  In  another  part  of  the  commentary  it  ia 
explained  gr&mamahattaradi,  his  dominion  is  gr&map&/a- 
k&dikam. 

8 S£g&riya,  s£g£rika.  It  is  explained  $ayy£tara,  host.  His 
dominion  is  shampas£l£di. 

4 Sdharamiya,  sddharmika.  His  dominion  is  vasatyidi,  his 

domicile  which  extends  for  a Yo^ana  and  a quarter.  When  he 

takes  possession  (parigraha)  of  it,  he  must  ask  permission  of  the 

possessors. 


178 


AaArAnga  s6tra. 


SECOND  PART. 


THE  SEVEN  LECTURES1. 

Eighth  Lecture2 *. 

When  a monk  or  a nun  wishes  to  perform  religious 
postures  *,  they  should  enter  a village  or  a scot-free 
town,  &c. ; having  entered  it,  they  should  not  accept  a 
place,  even  if  it  is  offered,  which  is  infected  by  eggs 
Or  living  beings,  &c. ; for  such  a place  is  impure  and 
unacceptable.  In  this  way  all  that  hg.s  been  said 
about  couches  (in  the  Second  Lecture)*  should  be 
repeated  here  as  far  ar  ‘water-plants’  (II,  2,  1, 

I 5 )•  (1) 

Avoiding  these  occasions  to  sin,  a mendicant  may 
choose  one  of  these  four  rules  for  the  performance 
of  religious  postures. 

This  is  the  first  rule : 

I shall  choose  something  inanimate4,  and  lean 
against  it;  changing  the  position  of  the  body,  and 
moving  about  a little,  I shall  stand  there. 

This  is  the  first  rule.  (2) 

Now  follows  the  second  rule : 

1 shall  choose  something  inanimate,  and  lean 


1 Sattikao.  * * 

* 7M*asattiklcayam,  sth&nasaptaikakam. 

1 Thb-nun  ML ttte.  * * As  a wall,  Ac. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  9. 


I79 


against  it ; changing  the  position  of  the  body,  but 
not  moving  about  a little,  I shall  stand  there. 

This  is  the  second  rule.  (3) 

Now  follows  the  third  rule : 

1 shall  choose  something  inanimate,  and  lean 
against  it;  not  changing  the  position  of  the  body, 
nor  moving  about  a little,  I shall  stand  there. 

This  is  the  third  rule.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  rule : 

I shall  choose  something  inanimate,  but  I shall 
not  lean  against  it ; not  changing  the  position  of  the 
body,  nor  moving  about  a little,  I shall  ntand  there. 
Abandoning  the  care  of  the  body,  abandoning  the 
. care  of  the  hair  of  the  head,  beard,  and  the  other 
parts  of  the  body,  of  the  nails,  perfectly  motionless, 
I shall  stand  there. 

This  is  the  fourth  rule.  (5) 

One  who  has  adopted  one  of  these  four  rules,  &c. 
(see  II,  1, 11,  § 12). 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  ' 


Ninth  Lecture1. 

When  a monk  or  a nun  wishes  to  go  to  a pure 
place  for  study,  they2  should  not  accept  one  which  is 
infected  by  eggs  or  living  beings,  &c. ; for  it  is  im- 
pure and  unacceptable.  But  if  that  place  for  study 
to  which  they  wish  to  go,  is  free  from  eggs  or  living 
beings,  &c.,  they  may  accept  it ; for  it  is  pure  and 
acceptable. 


* Nisihiyasattikkayaw ; nish5thikl=svadhyayabh£imiA. 

* The  original  has  the  first  person  fetissaini. 

N 2 


ATARANGA  sOTRA. 


l80 


In  this  -way  all  that  has  been  said  in  the  corre- 
sponding passage  about  couches1  should  be  repeated 
here  as  far  as  ‘water-plants.’  (1) 

If  parties  of  two,  three,  four,  or  five  (mendicants) 
resolve  to  go  to  the  place  for  study,  they  should  not 
embrace  or  hug,  bite  with  their  teeth  or  scratch  with 
their  nails  each  other’s  body. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (2) 

Tenth  Lecture2. 

A monk  or  a nun  being  pressed  by  nature 
should,  in  case  they  have  not  their  own  broom, 
beg  for  that  of  a fellow-ascetic.  A monk  or  a nun, 
seeing  that  the  ground  is  infected  by  eggs  or  living 
beings,  &c.,  should  not  ease  nature  on  such  an  unfit 
ground.  But  if  the  ground  is  free  from  eggs  or 
living  beings,  &c.,  then  they  may  ease  nature  on 
such  a ground.  (1)  c 

A monk  or  a nun, .knowing  that  the  householder 
with  regard  to  such  a place  for  the  sake  of  one 
or  many;  male  or  female  fellow-ascetics,  for  the 
sake  of  many  .Sramawas  or  Br&hma«as  whom  he  has 
well  counted,  kills  living  beings  and  commits  various 
sins,  should  not  ease  nature  on  such  a place  or  any 
other  of  the  same  sort,  whether  that  place  be  appro- 
priated by  another  person  or  not3,  &c.  (see  II,  1,  1, 
§ 13).  (2  and  3). 


1 Se$$£-gatne*a. 

* Ui£irap&sava*asattikkao,  discharging  of  feces*  and  urine. 

* Purisai»tar&ka</a,  here  translated  svikrfta.  The  text  pro- 
ceeds £&va  bahiyi  niha <hm  vd,  which  I do  not  know  how  to  apply 
to  the  object  in  q^stion.  .As  $ 3 differs  from  § a only  in  giving 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  IO. 


1 8 1 


Now  he  should  know  this : If  that  place  has  not 
been  appropriated  by  another  person,  &c.,  he  may 
ease  nature  on  such  a place  (after  having  well 
inspected  and  cleaned  it).  (4) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  on  a 
ground  which  for  their  sake  has  been  prepared  or 
caused  to  be  prepared  (by  the  householder),  or  has 
been  occupied  by  main  force,  or  strewn  with  grass, 
or  levelled,  or  smeared  (with  cowdung),  or  smoothed, 
or  perfumed.  (5) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  on  a 
ground  where  the  householders  or  their  sons  remove 
from  outside  to  inside,  or  vice  versa,  bulbs,  roots, 
&c.  (see  II,  2,  1,  $ 5).  (6) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  on  a 
pillar  or  bench  or  scaffold  or  loft  or  tower  or 
roof.  (7) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  on  the 
bare  ground  or  on  wet  ‘ground  of  on  dusty  ground 
or  on  a rock  or  clay  containing  life,  or  on  timber 
inhabited  by  worms  or  on  anything  containing  life, 
as  eggs,  living  beings,  &c.  (8) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in  a 
place  where  the  householders  or  their  sons  have, 
do,  or  will  put1  by  bulbs,  roots,  &c.  ‘(9) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in  a 
place  where  the  householders  or  their  sons  have 
sown,  sow,  or  will  sow  rice,  beans,  sesamum,  pulse, 
or  barley.  (10) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  na  ure  in  a 
place  where  there  are  hjsaps  of  refuse,  furrows,  mud, 

the  negative  attributes  (apurisawtaraksufem),  I have  contracted  both 
paragraphs  in  the  translation.  * 

1 Paris&famu  vft,  explained  parikshepM&dik&A  kriy&A  kuryuA. 


182 


AjtArAnga  s^tra. 


stakes,  sprigs,  Boles,  caves,  walls,  even  or  uneven 
places1 * * * *,  (n) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in  fire- 
places, layers  (or  nests)  of  buffaloes,  cattle,  cocks, 
monkeys,  quails,  ducks®,  partridges,  doves,  or  franco- 
line partridges.  (12) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in  a 
place  where  suicide  is  committed,  or  where  (those 
who  desire  to  end  their  life)  expose  their  body  to 
vultures,  or  precipitate  themselves  from  rocks  or 
trees 8,  or  eat  poison,  or  enter  fire.  (13)  • 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in 
gardens,  parks,  woods,  forests,  temples,  or  wells.  (14) 
A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in 
towers,  pathways,  doors,  or  town  gates.  (15) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  where 
three  or  four  roads  meet,  nor  in  courtyards  or 
squares.  (16) 

A monk  or  a nun  should'  not  ease  nature  where 
charcoal  or  potash  is  produced,  or  the  dead  are  burnt, 
or  on  the  sarcophagues  or  shrines  of  the  dead.  (17) 
A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  at 
sacred  places  near  rivers,  marshes  or  ponds,  or  in  a 
conduit  (18) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in 
fresh  clay  pits,  fresh  pasture  grounds  for  cattle,  in 
meadows  or  quarries.  (19) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in  a 
field  of  shrubs,  vegetables,  or  roots.  (20) 


1 The  translation  of  some  of  the  words  in  the  text  is  merely 

conjectural.  * 

* Va/feya.  I think  this  is  the  modern  ba//ak,  duck. 

* The  commentator  says . Where  they  fall  like  a tree,  having 

starved  themselves  to  death,  or  where  they  fall  from  tries. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  II. 


I»3 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  ease  nature  in 
woods  of  A Jana1,  .Sana2 *,  Dh&taki 8,  Ketaki4 * *,  Mango, 
Ajoka,  Punndga,  or  other  such-like  places  which  con- 
tain leaves,  flowers,  fruits,  seeds,  or  sprouts.  (21) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  take  their  own  chamber- 
pot or  that  of  somebody  else,  and  going  apart  with  it, 
they  should  ease  nature  in  a secluded  place  where  no 
people  pass  or  see  them,  and  which  is  free  from  eggs 
or  living  beings,  &c. ; then  taking  (the^hamber-pot), 
they  should  go  to  a secluded  spot,  and  leave  the  excre- 
ments there  on  a heap  of  ashes,  &c.  (see  II,  1, 1,  § 2). 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (22) 


Eleventh  Lecture®. 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  resolve  to  go 
where  they  will  hear  sounds  of  a MWdanga,  Nandt- 
mrfdanga,  or  Gvfcallart®,  »or  any  such-like  various 
sounds  of  drums.  (1) 

If  a monk  or  a nun  hear  any  sounds,  viz.  of  the 
Vi»&,  Vipamit,  Vadvlsaka,  T u«aka,  Pawaka,  Tumba- 
vtwiki,  or  Dhamku/za,  they  should  not  resolve  to  go 
where  they  will  hear  any  such-like  various  sounds  of 
stringed  instruments.  (2) 

The  same  precepts  apply  to  sounds  of  kettle- 
drums, viz.  of  the  T£la,  Lattiyd,  GohiyAT,  or  Kiri- 
kiriyH ; (3) 


1 Terminalia  Tomentosa.  * Crotolaria  Juncea. 

* Grislea  Tomentosa.  4 Pandanus  Odoratissimus. 

* Saddasattikk  ayam.  Lecture  on  Sounds.  ( 

* These  are  different  kinds  of  drums. 

7 LattiyS  and  gohiyS  would  be  #in  Sanskrit  lattikft  and  go- 

dhikft ; both  words  are  names  of  lizards. 


184 


AjtArAnga.  sOtra. 


Also  to  sounds  of  wind  instruments,  viz.  the 
conch,  flute,  KharamukhI,  or  Piripiriyi.  (4) 

A1  monk  or  a nun  should  not,  for  the  sake  of 
hearing  sounds,  go  to  walls  or  ditches,  &c.  (see  II, 
3,  3,  ff  1 and  2);  (5) 

Nor  to  marshes,  pasture  grounds,  thickets,  woods, 
strongholds  in  woods,  mountains,  strongholds  in 
mountains ; (6) 

Nor  to  villages,  towns,  markets,  or  a capital,  her- 
mitages, cities,  halting-places  for  caravans ; (7) 

Nor  to  gardens,  parks,  woods,  forests,  temples, 
assembly  halls,  wells ; (8) 

Nor  to  towers,  pathways,  doors,  or  town  gates ; (9) 
Nor  where  three  or  four  roads  meet,  nor  to 
courtyards  or  squares;  (10) 

Nor  to  stables  (or  nests)  of  buffaloes,  cattle, 
horses,  elephants,  &c.  (see  10,  $ 12);  (11) 

Nor  to  places  where  buffaloes,  bulls,  horses,  &c., 
fight;  (12) 

Nor  to  places  where  herds  of  cattle,  horses,  or 
elephants  are  kept;  (13) 

Nor  to  places  where  story-tellers  or  acrobats  per- 
form, or  where  continuously  story-telling,  drama- 
tical plays,  singing,  music,  performance  on  the  Vi«A, 
beating  of  time, .playing  on  the  Tftrya,  clever  playing 
on  the  Pa/aha  is  going  on ; (14) 

Nor  to  places  where  quarrels,  affrays,  riots,  con- 
flicts between  two  kingdoms,  anarchical  or  revolu- 
tionary disturbances  occur ; (15) 


1 The  beginning,  'If  a monk  or  a nun  hear  particular  sounds 
somewhere,  viz.,’  and.  the  end, 'they  should  not  resolve  to  go  to  such- 
like  or  other  places  for  the  sake  of  hearing  sounds,’  are  in  the  text 
repeated  in  all,  §§  5-7:6.  In  .the  translation  the  text  has  been 
somewhat  abridged. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  12. 


185 


Nor  to  places  where  a young  well-attended  girl, 
well-attired  and  well-ornamented,  is  paraded,  or  where 
somebody  is  led  to  death.  (16) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not,  for  the  sake  of 
hearing  sounds,  go  to  places  where  there  are  many 
great  temptations  \ viz.  where  many  cars,  chariots, 
Mlei&6as,  or  foreigners  meet.  (17) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not,  for  the  sake  of 
hearing  sounds,  go  to  great  festivals  where  women 
or  men,  old,  young,  or  middle-aged  ones  are  well- 
dressed  and  ornamented,  sing,  make  music,  dance, 
laugh,  play,  sport,  or  give,  distribute,  portion  or 
parcel  out  plenty  of  food,  drink,  dainties,  and 
spices.  (18) 

A monk  or  a nun  should  not  like  or  love,  desire 
for,  or  be  enraptured  with,  sounds  of  this  or  the  other 
world,  heard  or  unheard  ones,  seen  or  unseen  ones. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (19)  • 

Twelfth  Lecture. 

If  a monk  or  a nun  see  various  colours  (or  forms), 
viz.  in  wreaths,  dressed  images,  dolls,  clothes*,  wood- 
work, plastering,  paintings,  jewelry,  ivory-work, 
strings,  leaf-cutting,  they  should  not  for  the  sake  of 
pleasing  the  eye  resolve  to  go  where  they  will  See 
various  colours  (or  forms).  All  that  has  been  said 

‘ Mahisava,  mah&srava.  The  word  has  probably  here  the 
original  meaning,  conflux;  or  mah&sava  is  a mistake  for  maho- 
sava,  which’would  be  identical  with  mahussava,  great  festivals, 
fat  the  next  paragraph.  • . 

1 I have  translated  th9  last  four  words,  gamthim&m,  veMim&m, 
pflrimfcri,  samgMtimdm,  according  to  the  commentary.  Later  on 
I shall  translate  them  garlands,  ribbons,  scarfs,  and  sashes. 


AxArA&ga  sOtra. 


i 86 

in  the  last  chapter  with  regard  to  sounds  should  be 
repeated  here  with  regard  to  colours  (or  forms) ; only 
the  passages  on  music  are  to  be  omitted,  (i) 

Thirteenth  Lecture. 

One  should  neither  be  pleased  with  nor  prohibit 
the  action  of  another  which  relates  to  one’s  self,  and 
produces  karman. 

One  should  neither  be  pleased  with  nor  prohibit  it 1 ; 

If  another  (i.  e.  a householder)  wipes  [or  rubs] 
the  mendicant’s  feet;  (i) 

If  he  kneads  or  strokes  them  ; (2) 

If  he  touches  or  paints  them ; (3) 

If  he  smears  or  anoints  them  with  oil,  ghee,  or 
marrow;  (4) 

If  he  rubs  or  shampoos  them  with  Lodhra,  ground 
drugs,  powder,  or  dye ; (5) 

If  he  sprinkles  or  washes  them  with  hot  or  cold 
water;  (6) 

If  he  rubs  or  anoints 'them  with  any  sort  of  oint- 
ment; (7) 

If  he  perfumes  or  fumigates  them  with  any  sort 
of  incense;  (8) 

If  he  extracts  or  removes  a splinter  or  thorn  from 
them;  (9) 

If  he  extracts  or  removes  pus  or  blood  from 
them.  (10) 

If  he  wipes  or  rubs  the  mendicant’s  body,  &c.* 
(see  §§  2-8  down  to)  if  he  perfumes  or  fumigates 
it  with  any  sort  of  incense.  (1 1 ) , 

If  he  wipes  or  i^ibs  a wound  in  (the  mendicant’s) 


1 In  the  text  these  word;  are  repeated  after  each  Sfttra  in  §§  1-10. 
* The  text  gives  the  whole  in  extenso. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 3.  1 87 

body  (&c.\  down  to)  if  he  sprinkles  or  washes  it 
with  hot  or  cold  water;  (12) 

If  he  cuts  or  incises  it  with  any  sharp  instrument ; 
if  after  having  done  so,  he  extracts  or  removes  pus 
or  blood  from  it.  (1 3) 

If  he  wipes  or  rubs  a boil,  a’  scess,  ulcer,  or  fistula 
(&c.\  down  to)  if  he  cuts  or  incises  it  with  any 
sharp  instrument ; if  after  having  done  so,  he  ex- 
tracts or  removes  pus  or  blood  from  it;  (14) 

If  he  removes,  or  wipes  off,  the  sweat  and  un- 
cleanliness on  his  body ; (15) 

If  he  removes,  or  wipes  off,  the  dirt  of  his  eyes, 
ears,  teeth,  or  nails.  (16) 

If  he  cuts  or  di  esses  the  long  hair  of  his  head  or 
his  brows  or  his  armpits ; (17) 

If  he  removes,  or  wipes  off,  the  nit  or  lice  from 
his  head.  (18) 

One  should  neither  be  pleased  with  nor  prohibit 
it,  if  the  other,  sitting  in  the  Ahka  or  Paryanka 
posture,  wipes  or  rubs  (the  mendicant’s)  feet;  in 
this  way  the  §§  1-18  should  be  repeated  here.  (19) 
One  should  neither  be  pleased  with  nor  prohibit 
it,  if  the  other,  sitting  in  the  Anka  or  Paryanka 
posture,  fastens  or  ties  a necklace  of  many  or  less 
strings,  a necklace  hanging  down  over  the  breast,  a 
collar,  a diadem,  a garland,  a golden  string ; (20) 

If  the  other  leading  him  to,  or  treating  him  in,  a 
garden  or  a park,  wipes  or  rubs  (the  mendicant’s) 
feet,  &c.  (all  as  above) ; similarly  with  actions  done 
reciprocally.  (21) 

One  should  neither  1?e  pleased  with  nor  prohibit 
it,  if  the  other  tries  to  cure  him  by  * ure  charms ; 


1 The  text  gives  the  whole  in  extenso  in  § ti. 


i88 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


If  the  other  tries  to  cure  him  by  impure  charms ; 

If  he  tries  to  cure  him,  digging  up  and  cutting, 
for  the  sake  of  a sick  monk,  living  bulbs,  roots,  rind, 
or  sprouts.  (22) 

For  sensation  is  the  result  of  former  actions ; all 
sorts  of  living  beings  experience  sensation. 

This  is  the  whole  duty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (23) 

Fourteenth  Lecture. 

« 

One  should  not  be  pleased  with  nor  prohibit  a 
reciprocal  action,  which  relates  to  one’s  self,  and 
produces  karman. 

A mendicant  should  not  be  pleased  with  nor  pro- 
hibit it,  if  (he  and  the  other)  wipe  or  rub  each  other's 
feet,  &c. 

In  this  way  the  whole  Thirteenth  Lecture  should 
be  repeated  here.  • 

This  is  the  whole  dyty,  &c. 

Thus  I say.  (1) 


End  of  the  Second  Part,  called  the  Seven 
Lectures. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5. 


189 


THIRD  PART. 


FIFTEENTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

THE  CLAUSES  1 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  lived  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mahfivlra,  the  five  (most  important  moments 
of  whose  life  happened)  when  the  moon  was  in  con- 
junction with  the  asterism  Uttaraphalgunl2;  to  wit: 
In  Uttaraphalgunl  he  descended  (from  heaven),  and 
having  descended  (thence),  he  entered  the  womb  (of 
Dev&nandi);  in  Uttaraphalgunl  he  was  removed 
from  the  womb  (of  Devfinandfi)  to  the  womb  (of 
Trual^.);  in  Uttaraphalgunl  he  was  born  ; in  Utta- 
raphalgunl tearing  out  his  hair,  he  left  the  house, 
and  entered  the  state  of  houselessness;  in  Uttara- 
phalgunl he  obtained  the  highest  knowledge  and 
intuition,  called  Kevala,  which  is  infinite,  supreme, 
unobstructed,  unimpeded,  complete,  and  perfect. 
But  in  Sviti  the  Venerable  One  obtained  final  libe- 
ration3. (1) 

When  in  this  Avasarpi»l  era,  the  Sushama-sushamfi 
period,  the  Sushamfi  period,  the  Sushamadu^sham^ 
period,  and  much  time  of  the  Du^shamasushami 
period  had  elapsed,  seventy-five  years  nine  and  a half 

1 Bh&va»i.  The  bh&vanis  are  subdivisions  of  the  five  great 

vows.  * * 

* Hatthottarfi  in  the  original  9 Kalpa  Sfitra,  §1. 


190  AaArAnga  sOtra. 

months  of  it  being  left ; in  the  fourth  month  of  sum- 
mer, in  the  eighth  fortnight,  in  the  light  fortnight 
of  Ash&d%a(  on  its  sixth  day,  while  the  moon  was 
in  conjunction  with  Uttaraphalguni,  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  MahAvlra  descended  from  the  great  VimAna1, 
the  all-victorious  and  all-prosperous  Pushpottara, 
which  is  like  the  lotus  amongst  the  best  (and  highest 
flowers),  and  like  the  Svastika  and  Vardham&naka 
amongst  the  celestial  regions,  where  he  had  lived 
for  twenty  SAgaropamas  till  the  termination  of  his 
allotted  length  of  life,  (divine)  nature  and  existence 
(among  gods).  Here,  forsooth,  in  the  continent  of 
Gambudvlpa,  in  Bharatavarsha,  in  the  southern 
part  of  it,  in  the  southern  brahmanical  part  of  the 
place  KuWapura,  he  took  the  form  of  an  embryo 
in  the  womb  of  DevAnandA,  of  the  G&landharA- 
ya*a  gotra,  wife  of  the  BrAhmawa  .tffshabhadatta,  of 
the  gotra  of  Koa&la,  taking  the  form  of  a lion2.  (2) 
The  knowledge  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  MahA- 
vlra  (with  reference  to  this  transaction)  was  three- 
fold: he  knew  that  he  was  to  descend;  he  knew 
that  he  had  descended ; he  knew  not  when  he  was 
descending.  For  that  time  has  been  declared  to  be 
infinitesimally  small.  (3) 

Then  in  the  third  month  of  the  rainy  season,  the 
fifth  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  Arvina,  on  its 
thirteenth  day,  while  the  moon  was  in  conjunction 
with  Uttaraphalguni,  after  the  lapse  of  eighty-two 
days,  on  the  eighty-third  day  current,  the  com- 
passionate god  (Indra),  reflecting  on  what  was  $ie 
established  custom  (with  regard  to  the  birth  of 
Tlrthakaras),  removed  the  embryo  from  the  southern 


* Viminas  are  palaces  of  the  gods.  2 Cf.  Kalpa-Sfitra,  § 2. 


BOOK  n,  LECTURE  1 5. 


I9T 

brahmanical  part  of  the  place  Ku^apura  to  the 
northern  Kshatriya  part  of  the  same  place,  rejecting 
the  unclean  matter,  and  retaining  the  clean  matter, 
lodged  the  fetus  in  the  womb  of  Trijali  of  the 
Visish/^a  gotra,  wife  of  the  Kshatriya  Siddh&rtha, 
of  the  K&ryapa  gotra,  of  the  clan  of  the  Gnktrts, 
and  lodged  the  fetus  of  the  Kshatriyi«i  Trirali  in 
the  womb  of  Devinandd  of  the  G&landhar&ya»a 
gotra,  wife  of  the  Brihma«a  T&'shabhadatta,  of  the 
gotra  of  Kod&la,  in  the  southern  brahmanical  part  of 
the  place,  Kuwdapuri.  (4)  The  knowledge  of  the 
Venerable^  Ascetic  Mah&vlra  (with  regard  to  this 
transaction)  was  threefold : he  knew  that  he  was  to 
be  removed;  he  knew  that  he  was  removed;  he 
also  knew  when  he  was  being  removed.  (5) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age,  once  upon  a time,  after 
the  lapse  of  nine  complete  months  and  seven  and 
a half  days,  in  the  first  month  of  summer,  in  the 
second  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  Aaitra,  on 
its  thirteenth  day,  while  the  moon  was  in  conjunction 
with  Uttaraphalguni,  the  Kshatriy£«l  Triralct,  per- 
fectly healthy  herself,  gave  birth  to  a perfectly 
healthy  (boy),  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahdvlra.  (6) 
In  that  night  in  which  the  Kshatriy£»i  TriraU, 
perfectly  healthy  herself,  gave  birth  to  a perfectly 
healthy  (boy),  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vlra, 
there  was  one  great  divine,  godly  lustre  (originated) 
by  descending  and  ascending  gods  and  goddesses 
(of  the  four  orders  of)  Bhavanapatis,  Vyantaras, 
ISgyotishkas,  and  Viminav&sins ; and  in  the  conflux  of 
gods  the  bustle  of  gods  amounted  to  confusion1.  (7) 
In  that  night,  &c.,  the  gods  and  goddesses  rained 


1 Cf.  Kalpa  Sfttra,  § 97. 


AxArAnga  sOtra. 


192 

down  one  great  shower  of  nectar,  sandal  powder, 
flowers,  gold,  and  pearls1.  (8) 

In  that  night  the  gods  and  goddesses  (of  the 
above-mentioned  four  orders)  performed  the  cus- 
tomary ceremonies  of  auspiciousness  and  honour, 
and  his  anointment  as  a Tirthakara.  (9) 

Upwards  from  the  time  when  the  Venerable 
Mahivlra  was  placed  in  the  womb  of  the  Kshatri- 
y 4»t  Trlrald,  that  family’s  (treasure)  of  gold,  silver, 
riches,  corn,  jewels,  pearls,  shells,  precious  stones, 
and  corals  increased*.  (10)  When  the  parents 
of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira  had  be- 
come aware  of  this,  after  the  lapse  of  the  tenth 
4ayi  and  the  performance  of  the  purification, 
they  prepared  much  food,  drink,  sweetmeats,  and 
spices;  and  having  invited  a host  of  friends,  near 
and  remote  relatives,  they  distributed,  portioned 
out,  bestowed  (the  above-mentioned  materials)  to 
>Srama»as,  Br£hma«as,  paupers,  beggars®,  eunuchs, 
&c.,  and  distributed  gifts  to.  those  who  wanted  to 
make  presents  ; then  they  gave  a dinner  to  the  host 
of  friends,  near  and  remote  relatives,  and  after 
dinner  they  announced  the  name  (of  the  child)  to 
their  guests : (1 1)  ‘ Since  the  prince  was  placed  in 
the  womb  of  the  Kshatriyiw!  Tribal  A,  this  family’s 
(treasure)  of  gold*  silver,  riches,  corn,  jewels,  pearls, 
shells,  precious  stones,  and  corals  increased ; there- 
fore the  prince  shall  be  called  V ardham&na  (i.e.  the 
Increasing).’  (12) 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira  was  attended 
by  five  nurses : a wet-nurse,  a nurse  to  clean  him, 


1 Cf.  Kalpa,  Sfitra,  § *98.  ^ Cf.  Kalpa  Sfltra,  § 90. 

* The  next  Word,  bhivvtundaga,  has  been  left  out  in  the  translation. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5. 


193 


one  to  dress  him,  one  to  play  with  him,  one  to  carry 
him ; being  transferred  from  the  lap  of  one  nurse  to 
that  of  another,  he  grew  up  on  that  beautiful  ground, 
paved  with  mosaic  of  precious  stones,  like  a A'am- 
paka1  tree  growing  in  the  glen  of  a mountain.  (13) 

Then  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vtra,  after  his 
intellect  had  developed  and  the  childhood  had  passed 
away,  lived  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  allowed,  noble, 
fivefold  joys  and  pleasures : (consisting  in)  sound, 
touch,  taste,  colour,  and  smell2 *.  (14) 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivira  belonged  to  the 
Kaxyapa  gotra.  His  three  names  have  thus  been 
recorded  by  tradition : by  his  parents  he  was  called 
Vardhamina,  because  he  is  devoid  of  love  and  hate ; 
(he  is  called)  »Srama»a  (i.e.  Ascetic),  because  he  sus- 
tains dreadful  dangers  and  fears,  the  noble  naked- 
ness, and  the  miseries  of  the  world ; the  name 
Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vlra  has  been  given  to  him 
by  the  gods®. 

TheVenerable  Ascetic  Mahivira’s  father  belonged 
to  the  Klryapa  gotra ; he  had  three  names : Sid- 
dh&rtha,  .Sreydwsa,  and  (rasawsa4.  His  mother 
belonged  to  the  V4sish/&a  gotra,  and  had  three 
names : Tmald,  Videhadatti,  and  Priyakiriwi.  His 
paternal  uncle  Sup&nrva  belonged  to  the.  K&syapa 
gotra.  His  eldest  brother,  Nandi vardhana,  and  his 
eldest  sister,  Sudarrani,  belonged  both  to  the  K4- 
ryapa  gotra.  His  wife  Ya$od4  belonged  to  the 
Kaumfinya  gotra.  His  daughter,  who  belonged  to 
the  Kclsyapa  gotra,  had  two  names : hnoggi.  and 

1 Michelia  Champaka.  # * Cf.  Kalpa  Sfltra,  $ 10. 

* Cf.  Kalpa  Sfttra,  § to8. 

4 The  spaced  words  are  Ptikrit,  the  Sanskrit  form  of  which  can- 
not be  made  oat  with  certainty. 

[as] 


O 


194 


AjtAranga  sOtra. 


Priyadarsani.  His  granddaughter,  who  belonged  to 
the  Kaurika  gotra,  had  two  names : •S'eshavat!  and 
Yarovatl1.  (15) 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivtra’s  .parents  were 
worshippers  of  P&rsva  and  followers  of  the  .Srama- 
»as.  During  many  years  they  were  followers  of  the 
■SVamawas,  and  for  the  sake  of  protecting  the  six  classes 
of  lives  they  observed,  blamed,  repented,  confessed, 
and  did  penance  according  to  their  sins.  On  a bed 
of  Kma-grass  they  rejected  all  food,  and  their  bodies 
dried  up  by  the  last  mortification  of  the  flesh,  which 
is  to  end  in  death.  Thus  they  died  in  the  proper 
month,  and,  leaving  their  bodies,  were  born  as  gods 
in  Adbhuta  Kalpa.  Thence  descending  after  the 
termination  of  their  allotted  length  of  life,  they  will, 
in  Mah&videha,  with  their  departing  breath,  reach 
absolute  perfection,  wisdom,  liberation,  final  Nir- 
vA#a,  and  the  end  of  all  misery.  (16) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vira,  a G&*xtri  Kshatriya,  GVt&trzputra,  a Vi- 
deha,  son  of  Videhadatti,  a native  of  Videha,  a 
prince  of  Videha,  lived  thirty  years  amongst  the 
householders  under  the  name  of  ‘Videha*.’ 

After  his  parents  had  gone  to  the  worlds  of  the 
gods  and  lie  had  fulfilled  his  promise,  he  gave  up 
his  gold  and  silver,  his  troops  and  chariots,  and 
distributed,  portioned  out,  and  gave  away  his  valuable 
treasures  (consisting  of)  riches,  corn,  gold,  pearls, 
&c.,  and  distributed  among  those  who  wanted  to 
make  presents  to  others.  Thus  he  gave  away  during 
a whole  year.  In  the  first  month  of  winter,- in  the 
first  fortnight,  in  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  M&rgariras, 


* Cf.  Kalpa  Sfitva,  $ 109. 


* Cf.  Kalpa  Sfttra,  § 1 10. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5. 


*95 

on  its  tenth  day,  while  the  moon  was  in  conjunction 
with  Uttaraphalguni,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  retire 
from  the  world.  (17) 

A year  before  the  best  of  £inas  will  retire  from 
the  world,  they  continue  to  give  away  their  property, 
from  the  rising  of  the  sun.  i. 

One  krore  and  eight  lacks  of  gold  is  his  gift  at  the 
rising  of  the  sun,  as  if  it  were  his  morning  meal.  ii. 

Three  hundred  and  eighty-eight  krores  and  eighty 
lacks  were  given  in  one  year.  iii. 

The  Ku#dfaladharas  ofVawrama»a,  the  Lauk&n- 
tika  and  Maharddhika  gods  in  the  fifteen  Karma- 
bhrimis1  wake  the  Ttrthakara.  iv. 

In  Brahma  Kalpa  and  in  the  line  of  Krrsh*as,  the 
Lauk&ntika  Vim&nas  are  eightfold  and  infinite  in 
number,  v. 

These  orders  of  gods  wake  the  best  of  <7inas,  the 
Venerable  Vlra : ‘Arhat!  propagate  the  religion  which 
is  a blessing  to  all  creatures  in  the  world !’  vi. 

When  the  gods  and  goddesses  (of  the  four  orders 
of)  Bhavanapatis,  Vyantaras,  Gyotishkas,  and  Vi- 
mdnav&sins  had  become  aware  of  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mah&vira’s  intention  to  retire  from  the  world, 
they  assumed  their  proper  form,  dress,  and  ensigns, 
ascended  with  their  proper  pomp,  and  splendour, 
together  with  their  whole  retinue,  their  own  vehicles 
and  chariots,  and  rejecting  all  gross  matter,  retained 
only  the  subtile  matter.  Then  they  rose  arid  with 
that  excellent,  quick,  swift,  rapid,  divine  motion  of 
the  gods  they  came  down  again  crossing  numberless 
continents  and  oceans  till  they  arrived  in  Gambri- 

1 Those  parts  of  the  world  which  are  inhabited  by  men  who 
practise  religious  duties,  are  called  KaruabhinL.  In  Gtnbb- 
dvfpa  they  are  Bharata,  Air&vata,  and  Videba. 

O 2 


196 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


dvtpa  at  the  northern  Kshatriya  part  of  the  place 
Kuxu&pura ; in  the  north-eastern  quarter  of  it  they 
suddenly  halted.  (18) 

•Sakra,  the  leader  and  king  of  the  gods,  quietly  and 
slowly  stopped  his  vehicle  and  chariot,  quietly  and 
slowly  descended  from  it  and  went  apart.  There 
he  underwent  a great  transformation,  and  produced 
by  magic  a great,  beautiful,  lovely,  fine-shaped  divine 
pavilion  \ which  was  ornamented  with  many  designs 
in  precious  stones,  gold,  and  pearls.  In  the  middle 
part  of  that  divine  pavilion  he  produced  one  great 
throne  of  the  same  description,  with  a footstool.  (19) 

Then  he  went  where  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahi- 
vira  was,  and  thrice  circumambulating  him  from  left 
to  light,  he  praised  and  worshipped  him.  Leading 
him  to  the  divine  pavilion,  he  softly  placed  him  with 
the  face  towards  the  east  on  the  throne,  anointed  him 
with  hundredfold  and  thousandfold  refined  oil,  with 
perfumes  and  decoctions,  bathed  him  with  pure  water, 
and  rubbed  him  with  beautifying  cool  sandal1  2,  laid 
on  a piece  of  cloth  worth  a lack.  He  clad  him  in 
a pair  of  robes  so  light  that  the  smallest  breath 
would  carry  them  away;  they  were  manufactured 
in  a famous  city,  praised  by  clever  artists,  soft  as 
the  fume  of  horses,  interwoven  with  gold  by  skilful 
masters,  and  ornamented  with  designs  of  flamingos. 
Then  (the  god)  decked  him  with  necklaces  of  many 
and  fewer  strings,  with  one  hanging  down  over  his 
breast  and  one  consisting  of  one  row  of  pearls, 
with  a garland,  a golden  string,  a turban,  a diadem, 
wreaths  of  precious  stones,  and  decorategi  him  with 

1 DevaMamdaya  m the  original.  My  translation  is  but  a guess. 

* Goxirsha  and  red  sandal. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5. 


197 


garlands,  ribbons,  scarves,  and  sashes  like  the 
KalpavWksha.  (20) 

The  god  then,  for  a second  time,  underwent  a 
great  transformation,  and  produced  by  magic  the 
great  palankin,  called  Aandraprabhd 1,  which  a thou- 
sand men  carry.  (This  palankin)  was  adorned  with 
pictures  of  wolves,  bulls,  horses,  men,  dolphins,  birds, 
monkeys,  elephants,  antelopes,  rarabhas*,  yacks, 
tigers,  lions,  creeping  plants,  and  a train  of  couples 
of  Vidyddharas ; it  had  a halo  of  thousands  of  rays; 
it  was  decorated  with  thousands  of  brilliant  glittering 
rupees ; its  lustre  was  mild  and  bright ; the  eyes 
could  not  bear  its  light;  it  shone  with  heaps  and 
masses  of  pearls;  it  was  hung  with  strings  and 
ribbons,  and  with  golden  excellent  necklaces,  ex- 
tremely beautiful ; it  was  embellished  with  designs 
of  lotuses  and  many  other  plants ; its  cupola  was 
adorned  with  many  precious  stones  of  five  colours, 
with  bells  and  flags;*  it  was  conspicuous,  lovely, 
beautiful,  splendid,  magnificent  (21) 

This  palankin  was  brought  for  the  best  of  Ginas, 
who  is  free  from  old  age  and  death ; it  was  hung 
with  wreaths  and  garlands  of  divine  flowers,  gibwn 
in  water  or  on  dry  ground,  vii. 

In  the  middle  of  the  palankin  (was)  a costly  throne 
covered  with  a divine  cloth,  precious  stones  and  silver, 
with  a footstool,  for  the  best  of  Ginas,  viii. 

He  wore  on  his  head  a chaplet  and  a diadem, 
his  body  was  shining,  and  he  was  adorned  with  many 
ornaments ; he  had  put  on  a robe  of  muslin  worth 
a lack.-  &. 


1 I.  e.  shining  like  the  moop. 

* A fabulous  animal  with  eight  legs. 


AzArAnga  sOtra. 


i 98 

After  a fast  of  three  days,  with  a glorious  reso- 
lution he  ascended  the  supreme-  palankin,  purifying 
alt  by  his  light,  x. 

He  sat  on  his  throne;  and  .Sakra  and  i&na,  on 
both  sides,  fanned  him  with  chowries,  the  handles  of 
which  were  inlaid  with  jewels  and  precious  stones,  xi. 

In  front  it  was  uplifted  by  men,  covered  with 
joyful  horripilation ; behind  the  gods  carried  it : the 
Suras  and  Asuras,  the  Gartufas  and  die  chiefs  of 
N&gas,  xii. 

The  Suras  carried  it  on  the  eastern  side,  and  the 
Asuras  on  the  southern  one ; on  the  western  side 
the  Garuaias  carried  it,  and  the  N&gas  on  the 
northern  side.  xiii. 

As  a grove  in  blossom,  or  a lotus-covered  lake 
in  autumn  looks  beautiful  with  a mass  of  flowers, 
so  did  (then)  the  firmament  with  hosts  of  gods.  xiv. 

As  a grove  of  Siddh&rtha  \ of  Karaikfira 8 or  of 
ATampaka8  looks  beautiful  with  a mass  of  flowers, 
so  did  (then)  the  firmament  with  hosts  of  gods.  xv. 

In  the  skies  and  on  earth  the  sound  of  musical 
instruments  produced  by  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
excellent  drums,  kettle-drums,  cymbals,  and  conches 
was  extremely  pleasant,  xvi. 

Then  the  gods  ordered  many  hundreds  of  actors 
to  perform  a very  rich  concert  of  four  kinds  of 
instruments : stringed  instruments  and  drums,  cym- 
bals and  wind-instruments,  xvii. 

At  that  period,  in  that  age,  in  the  first  month  of 
winter,  in  the  first  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight) 
of  M&rgariras,  on  its  tenth  day,  called  Suvfata  \ in 

— — , . — 

1 White  mustard;  8 Cassia  Fistula. 

* Michelia  Champa^a. 

4 Correct  snvvatenam  in  the  printed  text. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5. 


*99 


the  Muhtirta  called  Vi^aya,  while  the  moon  was  in 
conjunction  with. the  asterism  Uttaraphalguni,  when 
the  shadow  had  turned  towards  the  east,  and  the 
first  Paurusht1  was  over,  after  fasting  three  days 
without  taking  water,  having  put  on  one  garment, 
tile  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahfivira,  in  his  palankin 
jVandraprabhi,  which  only  a thousand  men  can  carry, 
with  a train  of  gods,  men,  and  Asuras  left  the 
northern  Kshatriya  part  of  the  place  Kumfapura 
by  the  high  way  for  the  park  Gnktri  Shawafa.  There, 
just  at  the  beginning  of  night,  he  caused  the  palankin 
AandraprabhS  to  stop  quietly  on  a slightly  raised 
untouched  ground,  quietly  descended  from  it,  sat 
quietly  down  on  a throne  with  the  face  towards  the 
east,  and  took  off  all  his  ornaments  and  finery.  (22) 
The  god  VaLrramawa,  prostrating  himself*,  caught 
up  the  finery  and  ornaments  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mahcivira  in  a cloth  of  flamingo-pattern.  Mahfivtra 
then  plucked  out  with  hi§  right  and  left  (hands)  on 
the  right  and  left  (sides  of  his  head)  his  hair  in  five 
handfuls.  But  6akra,  the  leader  and  king  of  the 
gods,  falling  down  before  the  feet  of  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mahcivira,  caught  up  the  hair  in  a cup  of 
diamond,  and  requesting  his  permission,  brought 
them  to  the  Milk  Ocean.  After  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mah&vira  had  plucked  out  his  hair  in  five 
handfuls  (as  described  above),  he  paid  obeisance  to 
all  liberated  spirits,  and  vowing  to  do  no  sinful  act, 
he  adopted  the  holy  conduct.  At  that  moment  the 


1 Wake,  Y&ma,  or  time  of  three  hours. 

* (ramtuv&yaparfe,.  according  to  the  Guzerati  B&lbodh  this 
means  making  obeisance  to  the  Lord  of  the  world  by  touching  his 
feet  Another  MS.  has ; Then  Sakra  the  chief  and  king  of  die  gods. 


200 


AtArAAga  sAtra. 


whole  assembly  of  men  and  gods  stood  motionless, 
like  the  figures  on  a picture. 

At  the  command  of  5akra,  the  clamour  of  men 
and  gods,  and  the  sound  of  musical  instruments 
suddenly  ceased,  when  MahAvira  chose  the  holy 
conduct,  xviii. 

Day  and  night  following  that  conduct  which  is  a 
blessing  to  9.U  animated  and  living  beings,  the  zealous 
gods  listen  to  him  with  joyful  horripilation,  xix. 

When  the  Venerable  Ascetic  MahAvira  had 
adopted  the  holy-  conduct  which  produced  that 
state  of  soul  in  which  the  reward  of  former  actions 
is  temporarily  counteracted,  he  reached  the  know- 
ledge called  Mana^paryAya1,  by  which  he  knew 
the  thoughts  of  all  sentient  beings,  with  five  organs, 
which  are  not  defective,  and  possess  a developed 
intellect,  (living)  in  the  two  and  a half  continents 
and  the  two  oceans.  Then  he  formed  the  following 
resolution : I shall  for  twelve  years  neglect  my  body 
and  abandon  the  care  of  it;  I shall  with  equani- 
mity bear,  undergo,  and  suffer  all  calamities  arising 
from  divine  powers,  men  or  animals®.  (23) 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  MahAvira  having  formed 
this  resolution,  and  neglecting  his  body,  arrived  in 
the  village  KummAra  when  only  one  MuhArta  of 
the  day  remained.  Neglecting  his  body,  the  Vene- 
rable Ascetic  MahAvlra  meditated  on  his  Self,  in 
blameless  lodgings,  in  blameless  wandering,  in  re- 
straint, kindness,  avoidance  of  sinful  influence  (sam- 
vara),  chaste  life,  in  patience,  freedom  from  passion, 
contentment ; control,  circumspecttiessu  practising 
religious  postures  and  actsj  walking  the  path  of 


1 Or  Mana^paryaya. 


* Cf,  Kalpa  Sfitra,  § 1x7. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5. 


201 


Nirv&wa  and  liberation,  which  is  the  fruit  of  good 
conduct.  Living  thus  he  with  equanimity  bore, 
endured,  sustained,  and  suffered  all  calamities  aris- 
ing  from'' divine  powers,  men,  and  animals,  with 
undisturbed  and  unafflicted  mind,  careful  of  body, 
speech,  and  mind.  (24) 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vlra  passed  twelve 
years  in  this  way  of  life;  during  the  thirteenth 
year  in  the  second  month  of  summer,  in  the  fourth 
fortnight,  the  light  (fortnight)  of  Vair&kha,  on  its 
tenth  day,  called  Suvrata,  in  the  Muhfirta  called 
Vi/ray  a,  while  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  with 
the  asterism  U ttaraphalguni,  when  the  shadow  had 
turned  towards  the  east,  and  the  first  wake  was 
over,  outside  of  the  town  Grzmbhikagrdma l,  on  the 
northern  bank  of  the  river  jfagTjp&likS. 2 *,  in  the  field  of 
the  householder  S&m&ga,  in  a north-eastern  direc- 
tion from  an  old  temple8,  not  far  from  a S&l  tree, 
in  a squatting  position  with  joined  heels  exposing 
himself  to  the  heat  of  the  sun,  with  the  knees  high 
and  the  head  low,  in  deep  rfieditation,  in  the  midst 
of  abstract  meditation,  he  reached  Nirvi»a4 * *,  the  com- 
plete and  full,  the  unobstructed,  unimpeded,  infinite, 
and  supreme,  best  knowledge  and  intuition,  called 
Kevala.  (25)  When  the  Venerable  One  had  become 
an  Arhat  and  6ina,  he  was  a Kevalin,  omniscient  and 
comprehending  all  objects,  he, knew  all  conditions 
of  the  world,  of  gods,  men,  and  demons;  whence 


1 Gambhiyagima  in  Prikrit  1 U^fupftliyft  in  Pr&krit 

* Or,  a temple  called  V^aySvartta. 

4 NivWUe*  or  new&ne;  it  may  also  be  an  adjective,  belonging  to 

nirvtoa.  This  is  of  course  hot  the  final  niM»a,  which  is  reached 

at  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  but  that  state  which  the  orthodox 

philosophers  call  ^fvanmukti.  * 


202 


AjtArAnga  sOtra. 


they  come,  where  they  go,  whether  they  are  born 
as  men  or  animals  (/fyavana),  or  become  gods  or  hell- 
beings  (upapAda) ; their  food,  drink,  doings,  desires, 
open  and  secret  deeds,  their  conversation  an8  gossip, 
and  the  thoughts  of  their  minds ; he  saw  and  knew  all 
conditions  in  the  whole  world  of  all  living  beings.  (26) 

On  the  day  when  the  Venerable  Ascetic  MahA- 
vlra  reached  the  Kevala,  the  gods  (of  the  four 
orders  of)  Bhavanapatis,  Vyantaras,  Gyotishkas,  and 
VimAnavAsins  descended  from,  and  ascended  to 
heaven,  &c.  (as  on  the  moment  of  his  birth,  see 
above,  $ 7).  (27) 

Then  when  the  Venerable  Ascetic  MahAvlra  had 
reached  the  highest  knowledge  and  intuition,  he 
reflected  on  himself  and  the  world : first  he  taught 
the  law  to  the  gods,  afterwards  to  men.  (28) 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahavlra  endowed  with 
the  highest  knowledge  and  intuition  taught  the  five 
great  vows,  with  their  clauses,  the  six  classes  of  lives 
to  the  6’rama«as  and  Nirgranthas,  to  Gautama,  &c. 

The  six  classes  of  lives  are  earth-body,  &c.  (down 
to)  animals.  (29) 

i.  The  first  great  vow,  Sir,  runs  thus: 

I renounce  all  'killing  of  living  beings,  whether 
subtile  or  gross,  whether  movable  or  immovable. 
Nor  shall  I myself  kill  living  beings  (nor  cause 
others  to  do  it,  nor  consent  to  it).  As  long  as  I 
live,  I confess  and  blame,  repent  and  exempt  my- 
self of  these  sins,  in  the  thrice  threefold  way1,  in 

mind,  speech,  and  body. 

« * 

1 I.e.  acting,  commanding,  consenting,  either  in  the  past  or  the 
present  or  the  future.  ' 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5,  !,  4.  203 

There  are  five  clauses. 

The  first  clause  runs  thus : 

A Nirgrantha  is  careful  in  his  walk,  not  careless1. 
The  Kevalin  "assigns  as  the  reason,  that  a Nirgrantha, 
careless  in  his  walk,  might  (with  his  feet)  hurt  or 
displace  or  injure  or  kill  living  beings.  Hence  a 
Nirgrantha  is  careful  in  his  walk,  not  careless  in  his 
walk. 

This  is  the  first  clause.  (1) 

Now  follows  the  second  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  searches  into  his  mind  (i.e.  thoughts 
and  intentions).  If  his  mind  is  sinful,  blamable,  in- 
tent on  works,  acting  on  impulses2,  produces  cutting 
and  splitting  (or  division  and  dissension),  quarrels, 
faults,  and  pains,  injures  living  beings,  or  kills  crea- 
tures, he  should  not  employ  such  a mind  in  action ; 
but  if,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  not  sinful,  &c.,  then  he 
may  put  it  in  action. 

This  is  the  second  clause.  (2) 

Now  follows  the  third  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  searches  into  his  speech;  if  his 
speech  is  sinful,  blamable,  &c.  (all  down  to)  kills 
creatures,  he  should  not  utter  that  speech.  But  if, 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  not  sinful,  &c.,  then  he  may 
utter  it. 

This  is  the  third  clause.  (3) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  is  careful  in  laying  down  his  uten- 
sils of  begging,  he  is  not  careless  in  it.  The  Kevalin 
says;  A Nirgrantha  who  is  careless  in  laying. down 
his  utensils  of  begging,  might  hurt  or  displace  or 

— ' 3‘‘- 

1 This  could  also  be  translated : he  who  is  careful  in  his  walk  is 
a Nirgrantha,  not  he  who  is  careless. 

* Afthayakare  explained  by  karm&sravakgii 


204 


AxArAnga  sOtra. 


injure  or  kill  all  sorts  of  living  beings.  Hence  a 
Nirgrantha  is  careful  in  laying  down  his  utensils 
of  begging,  he  is  not  careless  in  it. 

This*is*the  fourth  clause.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  fifth  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  eats  and  drinks  after  inspecting  his 
food  and  drink ; he  does  not  eat  and  drink  without 
inspecting  his  food  and  drink.  The  Kevalin  says : 
If  a Nirgrantha  would  eat  and  drink  without  inspect- 
ing his  food  and  drink,  he  might  hurt  and  displace 
or  injure  or  kill  all  sorts  of  living  beings.  Hence 
a Nirgrantha  eats  and  drinks  after,  inspecting  his 
food  and  drink,  not  without  doing  so. 

This  is  the  fifth  clause.  (5) 

In  this  way  the  great  vow  is  correctly  practised, 
followed,  executed,  explained,  established,  effected 
according  to  the  precept. 

This  is,  Sir,  the  first  great  vow : Abstinence  from 
killing  any  living  beings,  i. 

ii.  The  second  great  vow  runs  thus : 

I renounce  all  vices  of  lying  speech  (arising)  from 
anger  or  greed  or  fear  or  mirth.  I shall  neither 
myself  speak  lies,  nor  cause  others  to  speak  lies,  nor 
consent  to  the  speaking  of  lies  by  others.  I confess 
and  blame,  repent  and  exempt  myself  of  these  sins  in 
the  thrice  threefold  way,  in  mind,  speech,  and  body. 

There  are  five  clauses. 

The  first  clause  runs  thus  : 

A Nirgrantha  speaks  after  deliberation,  not  with- 
out deliberation.  The  Kevalin  says : Without  deli- 
beration a Nirgrantha  might  utter  a falsehood  in  his 
speech.  A Nirgrantha  speaks  after  deliberation,  not 
without  deliberation. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5,  iii,  I. 


205 


This  is  the  first  clause,  (i) 

Now  follows  the  second  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  comprehends  (and  renounces)  anger, 
he  is  not  angry.  The  Kevalin  says  : A Nirgrantha 
who  is  moved  by  anger,  and  is  angry,  might  utter 
a falsehood  in  his  speech.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  second  clause.  (2) 

Now  follows  the  third  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  comprehends  (and  renounces)  greed, 
he  is  not  greedy.  The  Kevalin  says : A Nirgrantha 
who  is  moved  by  greed,  and  is  greedy,  might  utter 
a falsehood  in  his  speech.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  third  clause.  (3) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  clause  : 

. A Nirgrantha  comprehends  (and  renounces)  fear, 
he  is  not  afraid.  The  Kevalin  says : A Nirgrantha 
who  is  moved  by  fear,  and  is  afraid,  might  utter 
a falsehood  in  his  speech.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  fourth  clause.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  fifth  clause  : 

A Nirgrantha  comprehends  (and  renounces)  mirth, 
he  is  not  mirthful.  The  Kevalin  says : A Nirgran- 
tha who  is  moved  by  mirth,  and  is  mirthful,  might 
utter  a falsehood  in  his  speech.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  fifth  clause.  (5) 

' In  this  way  the  great  vow  is  correctly  practised, 
followed,  &c. 

This  is,  Sir,  the  second  great  vow.  ii. 

iii.  The  third  great  vow  runs  thus : 

I renounce  all  taking  of  anything  not  given»  either 
in  a village  or  a town  or  a wood,  ejtfier  of  little  or 
much,  of  small  or  great,  of  living  or  lifeless  things. 
I shall  neither  take  myself  what  *is  not  given,  nor 


206 


axArAnga  sAtra. 


cause  others  to  take  it,  nor  consent  to  their  taking 
it.  As  long  as  I live,  I confess  and  blame,  &c.  (all 
down  to)  body. 

There  are  five  clauses.  • 

The  first  clause  runs  thus : 

A Nirgrantha  begs  after  deliberation,  for  a limited 
ground,  Aot  without  deliberation.  The  Kevalin 
says : If  a Nirgrantha  begs  without  deliberation  for 
a limited  ground,  he  might  take  what  is  not  given. 
A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  ^he  first  clause,  (i) 

Now  follows  the  second  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  consumes  his  food  and  drink  with 
permission  (of  his  superior),  not  without  his  per- 
mission. The  Kevalin  says : If  a Nirgrantha  con- 
sumes his  food  and  drink  without  the  superior’s 
permission,  he  might  eat  what  is  not  given. 
A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  second  clause.  (2) 

Now  follows  the  third  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  who  has  taken  possession  of  some 
ground,  should  always  take  possession  of  a limited 
part  of  it  and  for  a fixed  time.  The  Kevalin  says  : 
If  a Nirgrantha  who  has  taken  possession  of  some 
ground,  should  take  possession  of  an  unlimited  part 
of  it  and  for  an  unfixed  time,  he  might  take  what  is 
not  given.'  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  third  clause.  (3) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  who  has  taken  possession  of  some 
ground,  should  constantly  have  his  gr^nt  renewed. 
The  Kevalin  says : If  a Nirgrantha  has  not  con- 
stantly his  grant  renewed,  he  might  take  possession 
of  what  is  not  given.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 5,  IV,  3. 


207 


This  is  the  fourth  clause.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  fifth  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  begs  for  a limited  ground  for  his 
co-religionists  after  deliberation,  not  without  deliber- 
ation. The  Kevalin  says : If  a Nirgrantha  should 
beg  without  deliberation,  he  might  take  possession 
of  what  is  not  given.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  fifth  clause.  (5) 

In  this  Way  the  great  vow,  &c. 

This  is,  Sir,  the  third  great  vow.  iii. 

iv.  The.fourth  great  vow  runs  thus : 

I renounce  all  sexual  pleasures,  either  with  gods 
or  men  or  animals.  I shall  not  give  way  to  sensu- 
ality, &c.  (all  as  in  the  foregoing  paragraph  down 
to)  exempt  myself. 

There  are  five  clauses. 

The  first  clause  runs  thus : 

A Nirgrantha  does  not  continually  discuss  topics 
relating  to  women.  The  Kevalin  says : If  a Nir- 
grantha discusses  such  topics,  he  might  fall  from  the 
law  declared  by  the  Kevalin,  because  of  the  destruc- 
tion or  disturbance  of  his  peace.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  first  clause.  (1) 

Now  follows  the  second  clause  : 

A Nirgrantha  does  not  regard  and  contemplate  the 
lovely  forms  of  women.  The  Kevalin  says : If  a Nir- 
grantha regards  and  contemplates  the  lovely  forms 
of  women,  he  might,  &c.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  second  clause.  (2) 

Now  follows  the  third  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  does  not  recall  to  his  mind  the 
pleasures  and  amusements  he  formerly  had  with 
women.  The  Kevalin  says : If  a Nirgrantha  recalls 


208 


Axaranga  s6tra. 


to  his  mind  the  pleasures  and  amusements  he  formerly 
had  with  women,  he  might,  &c.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 
This  is  the  third  clause.  (3) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  clause : • 

A Nirgrantha  does  not  eat  and  drink  too  much,  nor 
does  he  drink  liquors  or  eat  highly-seasoned  dishes. 
The  Kevalin  says : If  a Nirgrantha  did  eat  and 
drink  too  much,  or  did  drink  liquors  and  eat  highly- 
seasoned  dishes,  he  might,  &c.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 
This  is  the  fourth  clause.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  fifth  clause : 

A Nirgrantha  does  not  occupy  a bed  or  couch 
affected1  by  women,  animals,  or  eunuchs.  The 
Kevalin  says : If  a Nirgrantha  did  occupy  a bed  or 
couch  affected  by  women,  animals,  or  eunuchs,  he 
might,  &c.  A Nirgrantha,  &c. 

This  is  the  fifth  clause.  (5) 

In  this  way  the  great  vow,  &c. 

This  is,  Sir,  the  fourth  great  vow.  iv. 

v.  The  fifth  great  Vow  runs  thus : 

I renounce  all  attachments2,  whether  little  or  much, 
small  or  great,  living  or  lifeless ; neither  shall  I my- 
self form  such  attachments,  nor  cause  others  to  do 
so,  nor  consent  to  their  doing  so,  &c.  (all  down  to) 
exempt  myself. 

There  are  five  clauses. 

The  first  clause  runs  thus : 

If  a creature  with  ears  hears  agreeable  and  dis- 
agreeable sounds,  it  should  not  be  attached  to,  nor 
delighted  with,  nor. desiring  of,  nor  infatuated  by, 


1 This  may  mean  belonging  to,  or  close  by. 

2 This  means  the  pleasure  in  external  objects. 


BOOK  IT,  LECTURE  1 5,  V,  5. 


209 


nor  covetous  of,  nor  disturbed  by  the  agreeable 
or  disagreeable  sounds.  The  Kevalin  says:  If 
a Nirgrantha  is  thus  affected  by  the  pleasant  or 
unpleasant"  sounds,  he  might  fall,  &c.  (see  above, 
IV,  1). 

If  it  is  impossible  not  to  hear  sounds,  which 
reach  the  ear,  the  mendicant  should  avoid  love  or 
hate,  originated  by  them. 

A creature  with  ears  hears  agreeable  and  dis- 
agreeable sounds. 

This  is  the  first  clause.  (1) 

Now  follows  the  second  clause : 

If  a creature  with  eyes  sees  agreeable  and  dis- 
agreeable forms  (or  colours),  it  should  not  be  attached, 
•&c.,  to  them. 

The  Kevalin  says,  &c.  (the  rest  as  in  the  last 
clause.  Substitute  only  see  and  forms  for  hear 
and  sounds). 

This  is  the  second  clause.  (2) 

Now  follows  the  third  clause :- 

If  a creature  with  an  organ  of  smell  smells 
agreeable  or  disagreeable  smells,  it  should  not  be 
attached  to  them.  (The  rest  as  above.  Substitute 
smell  and  nose.) 

This  is  the  third  clause.  (3) 

Now  follows  the  fourth  clause : 

If  a creature  with  a tongue  tastes  agreeable  or 
disagreeable  tastes,  it  should  not  be  attached,  &c., 
to  them.  (The  rest  as  above.  Substitute  taste 
and  tongue.) 

This  is  the  fourth  clause.  (4) 

Now  follows  the  fifth  clause : 

If  a creature  with  an  organ  of  feeling  feels  agree- 
able or  disagreeable  touches,  it*  should  not  be 
0»3  v 


210 


AjcArA&ga  sOtra. 


attached  to  them.  (The  rest  as  above.  Substitute 
feel  and  touch.) 

This  is  the  fifth  clause.  (5) 

In  this  way  the  great  vow,  &c.  (see  above),  v. 

He  who  is  well  provided  with  these  great  vows 
and  their  twenty-five  clauses  is  really  Houseless,  if 
he,  according  to  the  sacred  lore,  the  precepts,  and 
the  way  correctly  practises,  follows,  executes,  ex- 
plains, establishes,  and,  according  to  the  precept, 
effects  them. 

End  of  the  Fifteenth  Lecture,  called 
the  Clauses. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 6. 


2 1 1 


FOURTH  PART. 


SIXTEENTH  LECTURE, 

CALLED 

THE  LIBERATION. 

The  creatures  attain  only  a temporary  residence 
(in  one  of  the  four  states  of  being) ; hearing  this 
supreme  truth  (i.e.  the  doctrine  of  the  Tlrthakara’s) 
one  should  meditate  upon  it.  The  wise  man  should 
free  himself  from  the  family  bonds ; fearless  should 
he  give  up  acts  and  attachments,  (i) 

A mendicant,  living  thus  \ self-controlled  towards 
the  eternal  (world  of  living  beings),  the  ipatchless 
sage,  who  collects  his  alms,  is  insulted  with  words 
by  the  people  assailing  him,  like  an  elephant  in 
battle  with  arrows.  (2) 

Despised  by  such-like  people,  the  wise  man,  with 
undisturbed  mind,  sustains  their  words  and  blows, 
as  a rock  is  not  shaken  by  the  wind.  (3) 

Disregarding  (all  calamities)  he  lives  together  with 
clever  (monks,  insensible)  to  pain  and  pleasure,  not 
hurting  the  movable  and  immovable  (beings),  not 
killing,  bearing  all : so  is  described  the  great  sage, 
a good  5rama»a.  (4) 

As  the  lustre  of  a burning  flame  increases,  so 
increase  the  austerity,  wisdom,  and  glory  of  a stead- 
fast sage  who,  with  vanquished  desires,;  meditates 

1 Tt*hfigaya,i.  e.  tath%a$a. 

P 2 


212 


ArarAnga  sOtra, 


on  the  supreme  place  of  virtue  \ though  suffering 
pain*.  (5) 

The  great  vows  which  are  called  the  place  of 
peace,  the  great  teachers,  and  the  producers  of  dis-; 
interestedness  have,  in  all  quarters  of  the  earth, 
been  proclaimed  by  the  infinite  Gina,  the  knowing 
one®,  as  light,  illumining  the  three  worlds,  (repels) 
darkness.  (6) 

The  unbound  one,  living  amongst  the  bound  (i.e. 
householders),  should  lead  the  life  of  a mendicant ; 
unattached  to  women,  he  should  speak  with  reverence. 
Not  desiring  this  or  the  next  world,  the  learned  one 
is  not  measured  by  the  qualities  of  love.  (7) 

The  dirt  (of  sins)  formerly  committed  by  a thus 
liberated  mendicant  who  walks  in  wisdom  (and 
restraint),  who  is  constant,  and  bears  pain,  vanishes 
as  the  dirt  covering  silver  (is  removed)  by  fire.  (8) 

He  *lives,  forsootn,  in  accordance  with  wisdom 
(and  restraint),  and  wallfs  free  from  desire,  and 
with  conquered  sensuality.  As  a snake  casts  off 
its  old  skin,  so  is  the  Br&hma«a  freed  from  the  bed 
of  pain.  (9) 

As  they  call  the  great  ocean  a boundless  flood 
of  water,  difficult  to  traverse  with  the  arms  (alone), 
so  should  the  learned  one  know  (and  renounce)  it 
(the  sa*Ks&ra) : that  sage  is  called  ‘ Maker  of  the 
end.’  (10) 

Here  amongst  men  bondage  and  deliverance  have 

* Dhammapadam. 

* Vidfiaate,  which  I take  to  be  the  genitive  of  the  present  parti- 
ciple corresponding  to  vidunvataA,  The  commentators  divide  the 
word  into  vidil  nates vidv&n  nataAj  which  gives  no  sense. 

* N4ti«4  in  the  original.  I would  prefer  to  translate  it  gfatri,  the 
name  of  the  clan  to  which  N&taputta  belonged. 


BOOK  II,  LECTURE  1 6. 


213 


been  declared ; he  who,  according  to  that  doctrine 
(of  the  church),  knows  bondage  and  deliverance: 
that  sage  is  called  ‘Maker  of  the  end.’  (n) 

He  for  Whom  there  is  no  bondage  whatever  in 
this  world,  and  besides  in  the  two  (other  continents, 
or  heaven  and  hell),  is  indeed  a (monk  needing)  no 
support  and  no  standing  place;  he  has  quitted  the 
path  of  births.  (12) 


End  of  the  Sixteenth  Lecture,  called 
the  Liberation. 


End  of  the  Second  Book. 
End  of  the  Aidringa  Stitra. 


THE  KALPA  S/&TRA 

OF 


bhadrabAhu. 


KALPA  SCTTRA 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


LIFE  OF  MAHAviRA. 

Obeisance  to  the  Arhats! 

Obeisance  to  the  Liberated  Ones! 

Obeisance  to  the  Religious  Guides! 

Obeisance  to  the  Religious  Instructors! 

Obeisance  to  all  Saints  in  the  World ! 

This  fivefold  obeisarfce,  destroying  all  sins,  is  of 
all  benedictions  the  principal  benediction. 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  lived  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mah&vira,  the  five  (most  important  moments 
of  whose  life  happened)  when  the  moon  was  in  con- 
junction with  the  asterism  Uttaraphalguni ; to  wit, 
in  Uttaraphalguni  he  descended  (ffom  heaven),  and 
having  descended  (thence),  he  entered  the  womb  (of 
DevinandA) ; in  U ttaraphalgunl  he  was  removed  from 
the  womb  (of  Devinandi)  to  the  womb  (of  Trirali)  ; 
in  Uttaraphalguni  he  was  bom ; in  Uttaraphalguni, 
tearing  out  his  hair,  he  left  the  house  and  entered 
the  state  of  houselessness;  in  Uttaraphalguni  he 
obtained  the  highest  knowledge  and  intuition,  called 
Kevala,  which  is  infinite,  supreme,  unobstructed, 


2l8 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


unimpeded,  complete,  and  perfect.  But  in  SvAti  the 
Venerable  One  obtained  final  liberation,  (i)1 
End  of  the  First  Lecture*. 


In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
MahAvlra,  having  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  fourth 
month  of  summer,  in  the  eighth  fortnight,  the  light 
(fortnight)  of  AshAdJ&a,  descended  from  the  great 
VimAna,  the  all-victorious  and  all-prosperous  Push- 
pottara,  which  is  like  the  lotus  amongst  the  best 
things,  where  he  had  lived  for  twenty  SAgaropamas 
till  the  termination  of  his  allotted  length  of  life,  of 
his  (divine  nature,  and  of  his  existence  (among  gods); 
here  in  the  continent  of  GambAdvlpa,  in  Bharatavar- 
sha, — when  of  this  Avasarpiwi  era  the  Sushamasu- 
shamA,  the  SushamA,  and  SushamaduAshamA  periods, 
and  the  greater  part  of  the  Du^shamasushamA  period 
(containing  a Kot/Akoafi  * of  SAgaropamas,  less  forty- 
two  thousand  years)  had  elapsed,  and  only  seventy- 
two  years,  eight  and  A half  months  were  left,  after 
twenty-one  Tlrthakaras  of  the  race  of  IkshvAku 
and  of  the  KAryapa  gotra,  and  two  of  the  race  of 
Hari  and  of  the  Gautama  gotra,  on  the  whole  twenty- 
three  Tlrthakaras  had  appeared, — the  Venerable 
Ascetic  MahAvlra,  the  last  of  the  Tlrthakaras,  took 
the  form  of  an  embryo  in  the  womb  of  DevAnandA, 
of  the  (7AlandharAya«a  gotra,  the  wife  of  the  BrAh- 
ma«a  i&'shabhadatta,  of  the  gotra  of  Koa&la,  in  the 

1 Cf.  JUiringa  Sfttra  H,  15,  § 1. 

* VAianft.  These  vAian&s  are  the  parts  into  which  the  Kalpa 
Sfttra  is  generally  divided  by  some  cctamentators.  I have  adopted 
the  distribution  of  Samayasundara. 

* A ko/i  of  kods  or  100,000,000,000,000. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


219 


brahmanical  part  of  the  town  Ku#a&gr4ma  in  the 
middle  of  the  night,  when  the  moon  was  in  con- 
junction with  the  asterism  Uttaraphalguni,  after  his 
allotted  length  of  life,  of  his  (divine)  nature,  and  of 
his  existence  (amongst  gods)  had  come  to  their 
termination.  (2)1  ' 

The  knowledge  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&- 
vtra  (about  this)  was  threefold;  he  knew  that  he 
was  to  descend,  he  knew  that  he  had  descended,  he 
knew  not  when  he  was  descending*. 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vira  took  the  form  of  an  embryo  in  the  womb 
of  the  Br£hma»l  Dev£nand4  of  the  6£landhar&ya«a 
gotra,  the  Brihma»i  Devinandi  was  on  her  couch, 
taking  fits  of  sleep,  in  a,  state  between  sleeping  and 
waking,  and  having  seen  the  following  fourteen  illus- 
trious, beautiful,  lucky,  blest,  auspicious,  fortunate 
great  dreams,  she  woke  up.  (3)  To  wit : 

An  elephant,  a bull,  $ lion,  the  anointing  (of  the 
goddess  .Sri),  a garland,  the  moon,  the  sun,  a flag, 
a vase,  a lotus  lake,  the  ocean,  a celestial  abode,  a 
heap  of  jewels,  and  a flame.  (4) 

When  the  Brihmawl  DevdnandA,  having  seen 
these  dreams,  woke  up,  she — glad,  pleased,  and 
joyful  in  her  mind,  delighted,  extremely  enraptured, 
with  a heart  widening  under  the  influence  of  happi- 
ness, with  the  hair  of  her  body  all  erect  in  their 
pores  like  the  flowers  of  the  Kadamba  touched  by 
rain-drops — firmly  fixed  the  dreams  (in  her  mind), 
and  rose  from  her  couch.  Neither  hasty  nor  trem- 
bling, with  a quick  and  even a gait,  like  that  of  the* 

1 Cf.  A&r&nga  Sfttra  II,  15,  § a.  * 

* Cf.  Ai&r&nga  Sfitra  II,  xg,  $ 3. 

* Add  in  the  text  asambhamtite  alter  avilaaibiySe. 


220 


KALrA  SIJTRA. 


royal  swan,  she  went  to  the  Brihma*a  /ftshabha- 
datta,  and  gave  him  the  greeting  of  victory.  Then 
she  comfortably  sat  down  in  an  excellent  chair 
of  state ; calm  and  composed,  joining  thte  palms  of 
her  hands  so  as  to  bring  the  ten  nails  together, 
she  laid  the  folded  hands  on  her  head,  and  spoke 
thus:  (5) 

‘ O beloved  of  the  gods,  I was  just  now  on  my 
couch  taking  fits  of  sleep,  in  a state  between  sleep- 
ing and  waking,  when  I saw  the  following  fourteen 
illustrious,  &c.,  great  dreams;  to  wit,  an  elephant, 
&c.  (6) 

‘ O beloved  of  the  gods,  what,  to  be  sure,  will  be 
the  happy  result  portended  by  these  fourteen  illus- 
trious, &c.,  great  dreams  ?’  (7) 

When  the  Brihma«a  jfffshabhadatta  had  heard 
and  perceived  this  news  from  the  Brihma»l  Devi- 
nandi,  he,  glad,  pleased,  and  joyful  (see  § 5,  down  to) 
rain-drops,  firmly  fixed  the  dreams  (in  his  mind),  and 
entered  upon  considering  them.  He  grasped  the 
meaning  of  those  dreams  with  his  own  innate  intellect 
and  intuition,  which  were  preceded  by  reflection, 
and  thus  spoke  to  the  Br«Lhma«l  Dev&nandi : (8) 

‘ O beloved  of  the  gods,  you  have  seen  illustrious 
dreams;  O beloved  of  the  gods,  you  have  seen 
beautiful,  lucky,  blest,  auspicious,  fortunate  dreams, 
which  will  bring  health,  joy,  long  life,  bliss,  and 
fortune!  We  shall  have  success,  O beloved  of  the 
gods,  we  shall  have  pleasure;  we  shall  have  happiness, 
O beloved  of  the  gods,  we  shall  have  a son ! Indeed, 
O beloved  of  the  gods,  after  the  lapse  of  nine  com- 
plete months  and, seven  and  a.  half  days  you  will  give 
birth  to  a lovely  and  handsome  boy  with  tender 
hands  and  feet,  with  a body  containing  the  entire 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


221 


and  complete  five  organs  of  sense,  with  the  lucky 
signs,  marks,  and  good  qualities ; a boy  on  whose 
body  all  limbs  will  be  well  formed,  and  of  full 
volume,  weight,  and  length,  of  a lovely  figure  like 
that  of  the  moon!  (9)  And  this  boy,  after  having 
passed  his  childhood  \ and,  with  just  ripened  intel- 
lect, having  reached  the  state  of  youth,  will  repeat, 
fully  understand,  and  well  retain  (in  his  mind)  the 
four  Vedas : the  /?fg-ve da,  Ya^ur-veda,  S&ma-veda, 
Atharva-veda — to  which  the  Itih&sa1 2 *  is  added  as 
a fifth,  and  the  Nigghaw/u 8 as  a sixth  (Veda) — to- 
gether with  their  Angas  and  Upingas,  and  the 
Rahasya 4 ; he  will  know  the  six  Angas,  he  will  be 
versed  in  the  philosophy  of  the  sixty  categories5 * *, 
and  well  grounded  in  arithmetic,  in  phonetics, 
ceremonial,  grammar,  metre,  etymology,  and  as- 
tronomy8, and  in  many  other  brahmanical  [and 
monastic]  sciences  besides.  (10)  Therefore,  O 
beloved  of  the  gods,  you  have  seen  illustrious 
dreams,  &c.  (see  § 9).’ 

In  this  way  he  repeatedly*  expressed  his  extreme 
satisfaction.  (ii) 

When  the  BrAhmawl  Dev4nand&  had  heard  and 
perceived  this  news  from  the  Brihma«a  ^shabha- 
datta,  she — glad,  pleased,  and  joyful,  &c.  (see  § 5) — 


1 That  is,  having  reached  his  eighth  year. 

* Purina.  * Dictionary. 

4 According  to  the  commentators,  works  which  treat  of  the 

aidamparya  of  the  Vedas. 

8 The  Sinkhya  philosophy  of  Kapila,  according  to  the  com- 
mentary ; bift  see  Max  Mailer,  What  can  India  teach  us  ? p.  363. 

8 These  are  the  six  Angas  which  in  the  same  order  occur  in  the 

well-known  versus  memorialis.  Indeed,  that  verse  is  nearly  iden- 

tical with  the  passage  in  our  text.  , 


222 


KALPA  S6TRA. 


joining  the  palms  of  her  hands,  &c.  (see  $ 5,  down 
to)  and  spoke  thus:  (12) 

1 That  is  so,  O beloved  of  the  gods ; that  is  exactly 
so,  O beloved  of  the  gods ; that  is  true,  O beloved  of 
the  gods ; that  is  beyond  doubt,  O beloved  of  the 
gods ; that  is  what  I desire,  O beloved  of  the  gods ; 
that  is  what  I accept,  O beloved  of  the  gods ; that  is 
what  I desire  and  accept,  O beloved  of  the  gods ; that 
matter  is  really  such  as  you  have  pronounced  it.’ 

Thus  saying,  she  accepted  the  true  meaning 
of  the  dreams,  and  enjoyed  together  with  ifo'sha- 
bhadatta  the  noble  permitted  pleasures  of  human 
nature.  (13) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age,  6akra, — the  chief  and 
king  of  the  gods,  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  the 
destroyer  of  towns,  the  performer  of  a hundred  sacri- 
fices, the  thousand-eyed  one,  Maghavan,  the  punisher 
of  the  Daitya  Pika,  the  lord  of  the  southern  half  of 
the  earth x,  the  lord  of  the  thirty-two  thousand  celestial 
abodes,  the  bestrider  of  the  elephant  Airavata,  the  chief 
of  the  Suras,  who  wears  spotless  clothes  and  robes*, 
and  puts  on  garlands  and  the  diadem,  whose  cheeks 
were  stroked  by  fine,  bright,  and  trembling  earrings 
of  fresh  gold  [the  most  prosperous,  the  most  brilliant, 
the  most  mighty,  the  most  glorious,  the  most  power- 
ful, apd  the  most  happy  one],  with  a splendid  body, 
ornamented  with  a long  down-reaching  garland, — this 
•Sakra  was  in  the  Saudharma  Kalpa,  in  the  celestial 
abode  Saudharma  Avata#*saka,  in  the  council-hall 
Sudharman,  on  his  throne  -Sakra ; he  who  exercises 
and  maintains  the  supreme  command,  government, 

1 L e.  of  tint  part  of  it  which  lies  to  the  south  of  mount  Meru. 

* According  to  the  commentators,  wearing  clothes  resembling 
the  duadess  dty.  • 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


223 


management,  guidance,  direction,  and  sovereign 
power  and  generalship  over  the  thirty-two  thousand 
gods  of  the  celestial  abodes,  the  eighty-four  thou- 
sand gods,  of  a rank  equal  with  that  of  himself,  the 
thirty-two  chief  gods,  the  four  guardians  of  the  world, 
the  eight  principal  queens  with  their  trains,  the  three 
courts,  the  seven  armies,  and  the  seven  commanders 
of  these  armies.  He  was  then  enjoying  the  permitted 
pleasures  of  divine  nature  under  the  great  din  of 
uninterrupted  story-telling,  dramatical  plays*  ping- 
ing, and  music,  as  beating  of  time,  performance  on 
the  Vi#A,  the  Tftrya,  the  great  drum,  and  the  PaAi- 
palaha.  (14) 

And  he  viewed  this  whole  continent  £ambAdvipa 
with  his  extensive  (knowledge  called)  Avadhi.  There 
he  saw  in  the  continent  Gambfldvlpa,  in  Bhirata- 
varsha,  in  the  southern  half  of  Bharata,  in  the  brah- 
manical  part  of  the  town  Ku#o!agr&ma,  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  MahAvtra  taking  the  form  of  an  embryo  in  the 
womb  of  the  BrAhma#iT>evAnandA  of  the  G&landha- 
rAyawa  gotra,  wife  of  the  BrAhma«a  /ftshabhadatta 
of  the  gotra  of  Kor&la ; and — glad,  pleased,  and  joyful 
in  his  mind,  delighted,  extremely  enraptured,  with 
a heart  widening  under  the  influence  of  happiness, 
with  the  hair  of  his  body  bristling  and  erect  in  their 
pores  like  the  fragrant  flowers  of  Ntpa  when  touched 
by  rain-drops,  with  his  eyes  and  mouth  open  like  full- 
blown lotuses,  with  his  excellent,  various1,  trembling 
bracelets,  with  diadem  and  earrings,  his  breast  lighted 
up  by  necklaces,  wearing  long  and  swinging  orna- 
ments with  a pearl  pendant— the  chief  of  the  gods  rose 

1 Ka<&ga,  tikfiya,  keflra.  * Ka/aka  is  the*  well-known  kankana, 
tru/Ska  is  explained  by  b&hurakahM,  keyftra  by  ahgadk.  The  last 
two  are  bracelets  worn  on  the  upper  arm.  • 


224 


KALPA  'SOTRA. 


with  confusion,  hasty  and  trembling  from  his  thnme, 
descended  from  the  footstool,  took  off  his  shoes 
which  were  by  a clever  artist  set  with  Vaidftrya  and 
excellent  Rish/a  and  A«^ana  \ and  ornamented  with 
glittering  jewels  and  precious  stones,  threw  his  seam- 
less robe  over  his  left  shoulder,  and,  arranging  the 
fingers  of  his  hands  in  the  shape  of  a bud,  he  ad- 
vanced seven  or  eight  steps  towards  the  Tirthakara. 
Bending  his  left  knee  and  reposing  on  the  right  one, 
he  three  times  placed  his  head  on  the  ground  and 
lifted  it  a little ; then  he  raised  his  bracelet-encum- 
bered arms,  and  joining  the  palms  of  his  hands  so  as 
to  bring  the  ten  nails  together,  laid  the  hands  on  his 
head  and  spoke  thus  : (15) 

‘ Reverence  to  the  Arhats  and  Bhagavats ; to  the 
Adikaras,  the  Tirthakaras,  the  perfectly-enlightened 
ones ; to  the  highest  of  men,  the  lions  among  men,  the 
flowers  among  mankind1 2 * * * *,  the  Gandhahastins  among 
men ; to  the  highest-  in  the  world,  the  guides  of  the 
world,  the  benefactors  of  the  world,  the  lights  of 
the  world,  the  enlightehers  of  the  world ; to  the  givers 
of  safety,  to  the  givers  of  sight,  to  the7  givers  of  the 
road,  to  the  givers  of  shelter,  to  the  givers  of  life,  to 
the  givers  of  knowledge8;  to  the  givers  of  the  law, 
the  preachers  of  the  law,  the  lords  of  the  law,  the 
leaders  of  the  law,  the  universal  emperors  of  the  best 
law ; to  the  light,  the  help,  the  shelter,  the  refuge,' 
the  resting-place,  the  possessors  of  unchecked  know- 


1 Names  of  precious  stones. 

* The  text  has  literally,  the  best  lotus  among  men. 

* These  words  are  variously  and  always  somewhat  fancifully  in- 

terpreted. One  explanation  is  ascribed  to  the  Aupanishadikas, 

whom  I do  not  remember  to  have  found  noticed  anywhere  else  in 

(Taina  books.  <■ 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


235 


ledge  and  intuition  who  have  got  rid  of  unrighteous- 
ness ; to  the  conquerors  and  the  granters  of  conquest, 
the  saved  atid  the  saviours,  the  enlightened  and  the 
enlighteners,  the  liberated  and  the  liberators,  to 
the  all-knowing  ones,  the  all-seeing  ones,  to  those 
who  have  reached  the  happy,  stable,  unstained, 
infinite,  unperishable,  undecaying  place,  called  the 
path  of  perfection,  whence  there  is  no  return ; reve- 
rence to  the  Ginas  who  have  conquered  fear. 

‘ Reverence  to  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivtra, 
the  Adikara,  the  last  of  the  Tirthakaras  who  was  pre- 
dicted by  the  former  Tirthakaras,  &C.1  I here  adore 
the  Revered  One  yonder,  may  the  Revered  One 
yonder  see  me  here !’  With  these  words  he  adored, 
he  worshipped  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivira,  and 
sat  down  on  his  excellent  throne  facing  the  east 
Then  the  following  internal,  reflectional,  desirable 
idea  occurred  to  the  mind  of  .Sakra,  the  chief  of 
kings  and  gods:  (16)  • 

‘ It  never  has  happened,  nor  does  it  happen,  nor 
will  it  happen,  that  Arhats,  Aakravartins,  Bala- 
devas,  or  Vasudevas,  in  the  past,  present,  or  future, 
should  be  bom  in  low  families,  mean  families,  de- 
graded families,  poor  families,  indigent  families, 
beggars’  families,  or  brahmanical  • families.  (17) 
For  indeed  Arhats,  Aakravartins,  Baladevas,  and 
Vasudevas,  in  the  past,  present,  and  future,  are 
bom  in  high  families,  noble  families,  royal  fami- 
lies, noblemen's  families,  in  families  belonging  to 
the  race  of  IkshvAkil,.or  of  Hari,  or  in  other  such- 
like families  of  pure  descent  on  both  sides,  (18) 


1 According  to  the  commentary  all  the  epithets  from  'the  enlight- 
ened one  ’ down  to  ' who  has  reached  * are  intended  by  this  ' Ac.’ 

[«1  Q 


226 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


Now  this  is  something  which  moves  the  wonder 
of  the  world : it  happens  in  the  lapse  of  numberless 
Avasarpiwls  and  Utsarpiwis,  because  the  imperish- 
able, indescribable,  and  undestroyable  ‘Karman  re- 
lating to  name  and  gotra  must  take  effect,  that 
Arhats,  &c.,  in  the  past,  present,  and  future,  descend 
in  (i.  e.  take  the  form  of  an  embryo  in  the  womb  of  a 
woman  belonging  to)  low  families,  &c. ; but  they 
are  never  brought  forth  by  birth  from  such  a 
womb.  (19)  This  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah£vtra,  now, 
in  the  continent  C'ambudvlpa,  in  Bharatavarsha,  in 
the  brahmanical  part  of  the  town  Kuw^agrdma,  has 
taken  the  form  of  an  embryo  in  the  womb  of  the 
Br4hma»i  Devdnandi  of  the  G&landhar&ya»a  gotra, 
wife  of  the  Br&hma«a  /frshabhadatta  of  the?  gotra  of 
Ko<&la.  (20)  Hence  it  is  the  established  custom 
of  all  past,  present,  and  future  .Sakras,  chiefs  and 
kings  of  the  gods,  to  cause  the  Arhats  and  Bhaga- 
vats  to  be  removed  from,  such-like  low,  mean,  &c., 
families,  to  such-like  high,  noble,  &c.,  families.  (21) 
It  is,  therefore,  better  that  I should  cause  the 
Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira,  the  last  of  the  Tlr- 
thakaras  who  was  predicted  by  the  former  Tirtha- 
karas,  to  be  removed  from  the  brahmanical  part 
of  the  town  Kurcakgr&ma,  from  the  womb  of  the 
Br&hmaat  Dev&nandi  of  the  G&landhar&yawa  gotra, 
wife  of  the  Brdhma«a  AVshabhadatta  of  the  gotra  of 
Kot&la,  to  the  Kshatriya  part  of  the  town  Kunda- 
gr&ma,  and  to  be  placed  as  an  embryo  in  the  womb 
of  the  Kshatriy&rt  Tmali  of  the  Visish/^a  gotra, 
wife  of  the  Kshatriya  Siddhirtha  of  the  K&ryapa 
gotra,  belonging  to  the  clan  of  the  Gn&tri  Ksha- 
triyas  ; and  to  cause  the  embryo  of  the  Kshatriyi/d 
Trua  & of  the  V&sishMa  gotra  to  be  placed  in  the 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


227 


womb  of  the  Br&hmawt  Dev4nand4  of  the  G&landha- 
r4ya«a  gotra.’ 

Thus  he  reflected  and  called  Harmegamesi1,  the 
divine  commander  of  the  foot  troops ; having  called 
him,  he  spoke  thus : (22) 

* Well,  now,  beloved  of  the  gods,  it  never  has  hap- 
pened, &c.  (§§  17-20  are  verbally  repeated).  (23-25) 

‘ Therefore,  go  now  and  remove  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mahdvlra  from  the  brahmanical  part,  &c., 
and  place  the  embryo  of  the  Kshatriy4«i  Trisal4,  &c. 
(see  § 21).  Having  done  this,  return  quickly  to 
report  on  the  execution  of  my  orders.’  (26) 
.When  Hariwegamesi,  the  divine  commander  of 
the  foot  troops,  was  thus  spoken  to  by  6akra,  the 
chief  and  king  of  the  gods,  he — glad,  pleased,  and 
joyful,  &c.  (see  $ 15) — laid  his  folded  hands  on  his 
head  and  modestly  accepted  the  words  of  command, 
saying,  ‘Just  as  your  Majesty  commands.1  After 
this  he  left  the  presence  of  .Sakra,  the  chief  and 
king  of  the  gods,  and  descended  towards  the  north- 
eastern quarter ; then  he  transformed  himself  through 
his  magical  power  of  transformation,  and  stretched 
himself  out  for  numerous  Yo^anas  like  a staff,  (during 
which  he  seized)  jewels,  Va^ra,  Vaiafarya,  Lohi- 
tiksha,  Mas4ragalla,  Hawsagarbha,  Pulaka,  Sau- 
gandhika,  Gyotisara,  A«fana,  A%anapulaka,  64 ta- 
rftpa,  Subhaga,  Spha/ika,  and  Rish/a;  (of  these 
precious  materials)  he  rejected  the  gross  particles, 
and  retained  the  subtle  particles.  (27)  Then 

1 This  name  is  rendered  Hariwaigatnaishin  in  Sanskrit.  He  is 
represented  in  pictures  as  a*  man  with  the  iiead  of  an  antelope 
(harm).  This  is  apparently  the  effect  of  a wrong  etymology, 
interesting  as  the  fact  itself  is.  • 

Q 2 . 


228 


KALPA  sCtRA. 


for  a second  time  he  transformed  himself  through 
his  magical  power  of  transformation,  and  pro* 
duced  the  definitive  form  (which  gods  adopt  on 
entering  the  world  of  men);  having  done  so,  he 
passed  with  that  excellent,  hasty,  trembling,  active, 
impetuous,  victorious,  exalted,  and  quick  divine  mo- 
tion of  the  gods  right  through  numberless  continent! 
and  oceans,  and  arrived  in  GambCidvipa,  in  Bha- 
ratavarsha,  in  the  brahmanical  part  of  the  town 
Kuwdagrlma,  at  the  house  of  the  Brlhmawa  ifosha- 
bhadatta,  where  the  Brlhma»t  Devlnandl  dwelt. 
Having  arrived  there,  he  made  his  bow  in  die  sight 
of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahlvira,  and  cast  the 
Brlhma»i  Devlnandl,  together  with  her  retinue, 
into  a deep  sleep ; then  he  took  off  all  unclean  par- 
ticles, and  brought  forth  the  clean  particles,  and 
saying,  ‘May  the  Venerable  One  permit  me,’  he 
took  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahlvira  in  the  folded 
palms  of  his  hands  without  hurting  him.  Thus  he 
went  to  the  Kshatriya  part  of  the  town  Kuttdhgrlma, 
to  the  house  of  the  Kshatriya  Sidtjhlrtha,  where 
the  Kshatriyiwt  Trifall  dwelt;  he  cast  her  and  her 
attendants  into  a deep  sleep,  took  off  all  unclean 
particles,  and  brought  forth  the  clean  partides,  and 
placed  the  embryo  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahl- 
vira  in  the  womb  of  the  Kshatriylwt  Trifall,  and 
die  embryo  of  the  Kshatriyl«i  Trifall  he  placed  in 
the  womb  of  the  Brlhma#i  Devlnandl  of  the  (71- 
landharlya»a  gotra.  Having  done  so,  he  returned 
in  that  direction  in  which  he  had  come1.  (28) 
With  that  excellent,  &c.  (see  j 28),  divine  motion 


1 The  contents  of  $$  14-28  are  contained  in  A^SHlnga  Sfttra  II, 
>5.84* 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS.  229 

of  the  gods,  he  flew  upwards  right  through  number- 
less continents  and  oceans,  taking  thousands  of 
Yq^anas  in  each  motion,  and  arrived  in  the  Sau- 
dharma  Kalpa,  in  the  divine  abode  called  Saudharma 
Avatawsaka,  where  .Sakra,  the  chief  and  king  of  the 
gods,  sat  on  the  throne  called  .Sakra,  and  reported 
to  .Sakra,  the  chief  and  king  of  the  gods,  on  the  exe- 
cution of  his  orders. 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  knowledge  of  the 
Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivtra  was  threefold;  he 
knew  that  he  was  to  be  removed;  he  knew  that 
he  was  removed ; he  knew  not  when  he  was  being 
removed1.  (29) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age,  on  the  thirteenth  day 
of  the  third  month  of  the  rainy  season,  in  the  fifth 
fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  Arvina,  after  the 
lapse  of  eighty-two  days,  on  the  eighty-third  day 
current  (since  his  conception),  the  embryo  of  the 
Venerable  Ascetic  Mahdvlra  was,*on  the  command 
of  .Sakra,  safely  removed  by  Harmegamesi  from  the 
womb  of  the  Brihma«i  Dev4nand4  to  that  of  the 
Kshatriyi#!*  Trisald a,  in  the  middle  of  the  night, 
when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  witluthe  asterism 
Uttaraphalguni.  (30) 

End  of  the  Second  Lecture. 

In  that  night  in  which  the  embryo  of  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mahivtra  was  removed  from  the  womb  of 
the  Brahma#!  Dev4nand4  of  the  64landhar4ya#a 
gotra  to  that  of  the  Kshatriydwi  Triraia  of  the 

e 

1 In  some  MSS.  the  last*  part  of  this  paragraph  is  placed  at  the 
end  of  the  next  one. 

1 The  text  repeats  the  .corresponding  passage  of  § si. 


KALPA  S^TRA. 


*30 

V&sishMa  gotra,  the  former  was  on  her  couch  taking 
fits  of  sleep  in  a state  between  sleeping  and 
waking;  and  seeing  that  these  fourteen  illustrious 
beautiful,  lucky,  blest,  auspicious,  fortunate,  great 
dreams  were  taken  from  her  by  the  Kshatriyffwl 
Trwali,  she  awoke.  (31) 

In  that  night  in  which  the  embryo  of  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mahivira  was  removed  from  the  womb  of 
the  Brihma nl  Devanandd  of  the  G&landhar£ya«a 
gotra  to  that  of  the  Kshatriy&«i  .Trisali  of  the 
V&sish/>&a  gotra,  the  latter  was  in  her  dwelling-place, 
of  which  the  interior  was  ornamented  with  pictures, 
and  the  outside  whitewashed,  furbished  and  cleansed, 
.the  brilliant  surface  of  the  ceiling  was  painted,  the 
darkness  was  dispelled  by  jewels  and  precious  stones, 
the  floor  was  perfectly  level  and  adorned  with  auspi- 
cious figures;  which,  moreover,  was  furnished  with 
offerings  of  heaps  of  delicious,  fragrant,  strewn 
flowers  of  all  five  colours,  ,was  highly  delightful 
through  curling,  scented  fumes  of  black  aloe,  the 
finest  Kundurukka  and  Turushka1,  and  burning 
frankincense ; was  exquisitely  scented  with  fine  per- 
fumes, and  turned  as  it  were  into  a smelling-bottle ; 
on  a couch  with  a mattress  of  a man’s  length,  with 
pillows  at  head  and  foot,  raised  on  both  sides  and 
hollow  in  the  middle,  soft  as  if  one  walked  on  the 
sand  of  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  covered  with  the 
cloth  of  a robe  of  ornamented  linen,  containing  a 
well-worked  towel,  and  hung  with  red  mosquito 
curtains,  delightful,  soft  to  the  toach  like  fur,  wad- 
ding, Pfira2,  butter,  or  cotton,  with  all  the  comforts  of 


1 Different  kinds  of  the  resin  of  Boswellia. 

1 Name  of  a.tree. 


LIVES  OP  THE  GINAS. 


231 


a bed,  such  as  fragrant,  excellent  flowers  and  sandal* 
powder— (in  such  a room  and  on  such  a bed  Trirali 
was)  taking  fits  of  sleep  between  sleeping  and 
waking,  and  having  seen  the  following  fourteen, 
&c.  (see  § 3),  dreams,  viz.  an  elephant,  &c.  (see  § 4), 
she  awoke.  (32) 

1.  Then  TriralcL  saw  in  her  first  dream  a fine,  enor- 
mous elephant,  possessing  all  lucky  marks,  with 
strong  thighs  and  four  mighty  tusks;  who  was 
whiter  than  an  empty  great  cloud,  or  a heap  of 
pearls,  or  the  ocean  of  milk,  or  the  moon-beams,  or 
spray  of  water,  or  the  silver  mountain  (Vait&nSiya); 
whose  temples  were  perfumed  with  fragrant  musk- 
fluid,  which  attracted  the  bees ; equalling  in  dimension 
the  best  elephant  of  the  king  of  the  gods  (Air&vata) ; 
uttering  a fine  deep  sound  like  the  thunder  of  a big 
and  large  rain-cloud.  (33) 

2.  Then  she  saw  a tame,  lucky  bull,  of  a whiter  hue 
than  that  of  the  mass  of  petals  of  the  white  lotus,  illu- 
mining all  around  by  the  diffusion  of  a glory  of  light; 
(a  bull)  whose  lovely,  resplen'dent,  beautiful  hump 
was  delightful  through  the  collection  of  its  charms, 
whose  glossy  skin  (was  covered  with)  thin,  fine,  soft 
hairs;  whose  body  was  firm,  well  made,  muscular,  com- 
pact, lovely,  well  proportioned,  and  beautiful ; whose 
horns  were  large,  round,  excellently  beautiful,  greased 
at  their  tops,  and  pointed ; whose  teeth  were  all 
equal,  shining,  and  pure.  He  foreboded  innumerable 
good  qualities.  (34) 

3.  Then  she  saw  a handsome,  handsomely  shaped, 
playful  lion,  jumping  from  the  sky  towards  hrr  face; 
a delightful  and  beautiful  lion  whiter  than  a neap  of 
pearls,  &c.  (see  $ 33),  who  had  strong  and  lovely 
fore-arms,  and  a mouth  adorned  with  round,  large, 


23*  ..  KALPA  sCTRA. 

and  well-set  teeth;  whose  lovely  lips,  splendent 
through  their  proportions,  and  soft  like  a noble 
lotus,'  looked  as  if  they  were  artificially  ornamented ; 
whose  palate1  was  soft  and  tender  like  the  petals  of 
the  red  lotus,  and  the  top  of  whose  tongue  was  pro- 
truding ; whose  eyes  were  like  pure  lightning,  and 
revolved  like  red-hot  excellent  gold  just  poured  out 
from  the  crucible;  (a  lion)  with  broad  and  large 
thighs,  and  with  full  and  excellent  shoulders,  who 
was  adorned  with  a mane  of  soft,  white,  thin,  long 
hair  of  the  finest  quality ; whose  erect,  well-shaped, 
and  well-grown  tail  was  flapping ; the  tops  of  whose 
nails  were  deeply  set  and  sharp ; whose  beautiful 
tongue  came  out  of  his  mouth  like  a shoot  of 
beauty.  (35) 

4.  Then  she,  with  the  face  of  the  full  moon,  saw  the 
goddess  of  famous  beauty,  .Sri,  on  the  top  of  Mount 
Himavat,  reposing  on  a lotus  in  the  lotus  lake, 
anointed  with  the  water  from  the  strong  and  large 
trunks  of  the  guardian  elephants.  She  sat  on  a lofty 
throne.  Her  firmly  placed  feet  resembled  golden 
tortoises,  and  her  dyed,  fleshy,  conVex,  thin,  red, 
smooth  nails  were  set  in  swelling  muscles2 *.  Her 
hands  and  feet  were  like  the  leaves  of  the  lotus,  and 
her  fingers  and  toes  soft  and  excellent;  her  round 
and  well-formed  'legs  were  adorned  'with  the  Kuru- 
vindivarta 8,  and  her  knees  with  dimples.  -H  er  fleshy 
thighs  resembled  the  proboscis  of  an  excellent  ele- 
phant, and  her  lovely  broad  hips  were  encircled  by 
a golden  zone.  Her  large  and  beautiful  belly  was 

1 Another  reading  noticed  in  the  commentary  has  tala,  upper* 
side  of  die  tongue,  instead  of  tilu,  palate. 

2 Literally  elevated  and  fat. 

1 An  ornament  according  to  the  commentary. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


*33 


adorned  by  a circular  navel,  and  contained  a lovely 
row  of  hairs  (black  as)  collyrium,  bees,  or  clouds, 
straight,  even,  continuous,  thin,  admirable,  handsome, 
soft,  and  downy.  Her  waist,  which  contained  the 
three  folds,  could  be  encompassed  with  ohe  hand. 
On  all  parts  of  her  body  shone  ornaments  and  trin- 
kets, composed  of  many  jewels  and  precious  stones, 
yellow  and  red  gold.  The  pure  cup-like  pair  of  her 
breasts  sparkled,  encircled  by  a garland  of  Kunda 
flowers,  in  which  glittered  a string  of  pearls.  She 
wore  strings  of  pearls  made  by  diligent  and  clever 
artists,  shining  with  wonderful  strings,  a necklace  of 
jewels  with  a string  of  Dln&ris1,  and  a trembling 
pair  of  earrings,  touching  her  shoulders,  diffused  a 
brilliancy;  but  the  united  beauties  and  charms  of 
these  ornaments  were  only  subservient  to  the  loveli- 
ness of  her  face2.  Her  lovely  eyes  were  large  and 
pure  like  the  water  lily.  She  sprinkled  about  the 
sap  from  two  lotus  flowers  which*  she  held  in  her 
splendid  .hands,  and  gracefully  fanned  herself.  Her 
glossy,  black,  thick,  smooth  hair  hung  down  in 
a braid.  (36) 

5.  Then  she  saw,  coming  down  from  the  firma- 
ment, a garland  charmingly  interwoven  with  fresh 
Mandira  flowers.  It  spread  the,  delicious  smell  of 
Aampaka3,  Aroka4,  N&ga5 *  Punniga*,  Priyangu7, 

1 This  word,  corresponding  to  the  Greek  tqvdptov,-  proves  the 
late  composition  of  this  part  of  the  Kalpa  Siltra. 

2 I cannot  accurately  construe  this  passage ; my  translation  is 

therefore  rather  free,  but,  I believe,  comes  near  the  meaning  of  the 

original. 

* Michelia  Champaka.  * 4 Jonesia  Asoka. 

* Mesua  Roxburghii.  * Rottlera  Tinctoria. 

T Panicum  Italicum.  . 


234 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


•Sirisha1 II,  Mudgara2,  Mallikd8,  G& ti4,  Yftthika5,  An- 
kolla6,  Kora«/akapatra 7,  Damanaka 8,  Navami- 
liki®,  Bakula10,  Tilajca n,  Vdsantika18,  Nuphar, 
Nymphaea,  P&/alals,  Kunda14,  Atimukta16,  and 
Mango ; and  perfumed  the  ten  divisions  of  the  uni- 
verse with  its  incomparably  delightful  fragrance. 
It  was  white  through  wreaths  of  fragrant  flowers  of 
all  seasons,  and  brilliant  through  splendid,  beautiful 
embellishments  of  many  colours.  Towards  it  came 
humming  swarms  of  different  kinds  of  bees16,  and 
filled  with  their  sweet  noise  the  whole  neighbour- 
hood. (37) 

6.  And  the  moon : white  as  cow-milk,  foam,  spray  of 
water,  or  a silver  cup,  glorious,  delighting  heart  and 
eyes,  full,  dispelling  the  compact  darkness  of  the  thick- 
est wilderness,  whose  crescent  shines  at  the  end  of  the 
two  halves  of  the  month,  opening  the  blossoms  of 
the  groups  of  Nymphaeas,  adorning  the  night,  resem- 
bling the  surface  of  a well-polished  mirror.  She 
was  of  a white  hue,  like  a flamingo,  the  stars’  head- 
ornament,  the  quiver  of  Cupid’s  arrows^  raising  the 
waters  of  the  ocean,  burning  as  it  were  disconsolate 


I Acacia  Sirisa.  2 A species  of  jasmine. 

* Jasminum  Zambac.  4 Jasminum  Grandiflorum. 

6 Jasminum  Auriculatum.  * Alangium  Hexapetalum. 

T Not  specialised  in  our  dictionaries.  6 Artemisia  Indica. 

* The  many-flowered  Nykanthes  or  Jasminum  Zambac. 

Mimusops  Elengi. 

II  Gerodendum  Phlomoides  or  Symplocos  Racemosa. 

12  Gaertnera  Racemosa.  15  Bignonia  Suaveolens. 

14  Fragrant  Oleander. 

16  Diospyros  Glutinos  or  Dalbergia  Ougeinense.  • 

u Sha/pada,  madhukari,  bhramara.  tThe  sha/pada  are  literally 
six-footed  bees,  as  SteVenson  correctly  translated,  but  he  strangely 
reckons  them  among  the  preternatural  animals,  like  the  four-tusked 
elephants,  dear  to  the  imagination  of  the  Gains! 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


235 


people  when  absent  from  their  sweethearts,  the 
large,  glorious,  wandering  headmark  of  the  celestial 
sphere — beloved  in  heart  and  soul  by  Rohinl1.  Such 
was  the  gldrious,  beautiful,  resplendent  full  moon 
which  the  queen  saw.  (38) 

7.  Then  she  saw  the  large  sun,  the  dispeller  of 
the  mass  of  darkness,  him  of  radiant  form,  red  like 
the  Asoka,  the  open  Kiwsuka,  the  bill  of  a parrot, 
or  the  Guw^irdha2,  the  adorner  of  the  lotus  groups, 
the  marker  of  the  starry  host,  the  lamp  of  the  firma- 
ment, throttling  as  it  were  the  mass  of  cold,  the 
illustrious  leader  of  the  troop  of  planets,  the 
destroyer  of  night,  who  only  at  his  rising  and  setting 
may  be  well  viewed,  but  (at  all  other  times)  is  diffi- 
cult to  be  regarded,  who  disperses  evil-doers  that 
stroll  about  at  night,  who  stops  the  influence  of  cold, 
who  always  circles  round  Mount  Meru,  whose  thou- 
sand rays  obscure  the  lustre  of  other  lights®.  (39) 

8.  Then  she  saw  an  extremely  beautiful  and  very 
large  flag,  a sight  for  all  people,  of  a form  attractive 
to  the  beholders.  It  was  fastened  to  a golden  staff 
with  a tuft  o‘f  many  soft  and  waving  peacock’s 
feathers  of  blue,  red,  yellow,  and  white  colours,  and 
seemed  as  if  it  would  pierce  the  brilliant,  celestial 
sphere,  with  the  brilliant  lion  on  its  top,  who  was 
white  like  crystal,  pearlmother,  Anka-stone,  Kunda- 
flowers,  spray  of  water,  or  a silver  cup.  (40) 


1 The  commentators  understand  this  passage  (Rohinimanahiya- 
yavallabham)  differently  by  explaining  hiyaya  by  hitada,  the  lover 
of  Rohint  who,, did  her  mind  good. 

1 According  to  Stevenson : the  red  side  of  the  retti  seed. 

• Or  if  we  adopt  a various  reading,  mentioned  in -the  com- 
mentary, payarfiya,  we  must  translate : whose  luminous  gkuy  was 
set  forth  by  his  thousand  rays.  * 


KALPA  sOtRA. 


9.  Then  she  saw  a full  vase  of  costly  metal1, 
splendent  with  fine  gold,  filled  with  pure  water, 
excellent,  of  brilliant  beauty,  and  shining  with  a 
bouquet  of  water  lilies.  It  united  many*excellencies 
and  all-auspicious  marks,  and  stood  on  a lotus- 
shaped  foot),  shining  with  excellent  jewels*.  It 
delighted  the  eyes,  glittered  and  illumined  all  about; 
it  was  the  abode  of  happy  Fortune,  free  from  all 
faults,  fine,  splendid,  exquisitely  beautiful,  entwined 
with  a wreath  of  fragrant  flowers  of  all  seasons.  (41) 

10.  Then  she  saw  a lake,  called  Lotus  Lake, 
adorned  with  water  lilies.  Its  yellow  water  was 
perfumed  by  lotuses  opening  in  the  rays  of  the  morn- 
ing sun ; it  abounded  with  swarms  of  aquatic  animals, 
and  fed  fishes.  It  was  large,  and  seemed  to  bum 
through  the  wide-spreading,  glorious  beauty  of  all 
kinds  of  lotu  ses 3.  Its  shape  and  beauty  were  pleasing. 
The  lotuses  in  it  were  licked  by  whole  swarms  of  gay 
bees  and  mad  dVones.  Pairs  of  swans,  cranes,  Afakra- 
v&kas,  ducks,  Indian  cranes,  and  many  other  lusty 
birds  resorted  to  its  waters,  and  on  the  leaves  of  its 
lotuses  sparkled  water-drops  like  peirls*.  It  was  a 
sight,  pleasing  to  the  heart  and  the  eye.  (42) 

11.  Then  she  whose  face  was  splendid  like  the 

1 The  original  h%s  rayaya,  silver,  but  as  the  commentary  re- 
marks, this  would  be  in  conflict  with  the  epithet  which  we  have  put 
next,  but  which,  in  the  original,  is  separated  from  it  by  many  lines. 
Unless  the  author  has  blundered,  which  from  his  vague  style  seems 
far  from  impossible,  the  word  must  here  have  a more  indefinite 
meaning  than  it  usually  has. 

1 This  passage  may  also  be  translated : standing  on  a lotus  filled 
with  pollen,  of  excellent  workmanship.  , 

* Specialised  in  the  text  as  kamula,  kuvalaya,  utpala,  t&marasa, 
and  puaArika.  * * 

4 According  to  the  commentary ; the  textus  receptus  is,  many 
water-drops.  • 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS.  237 

moon  in  autumn,  saw  the  milk-ocean,  equalling  in 
beauty,  the  breast  of  Lakshmt,  which  is  white  like 
the  mass  of  moon-beams.  Its  waters  increased  in 
all  four  directions,  and  raged  with  ever-changing 
and  moving,  excessively  high  waves.  It  presented 
a splendid  and  pleasant  spectacle  as  it  rushed  to 
and  from  the  shore  with  its  wind-raised,  changeable, 
and  moving  billows,  its  tossing  waves,  and  its  rolling, 
splendid,  transparent  breakers.  From  it  issued 
camphor-white  foam  under  the  lashing  (tails)  of 
great  porpoises,  fishes,  whales,  and  other  monsters 
of  the  deep1.  Its  agitated  waters  were  in  great 
uproar,  occasioned  by  the  vortex  Gang&varta,  which 
the  vehemence  and  force  of  the  great  rivers  pro- 
duced ; they  rose,  rushed  onwards  and  backwards, 
and  eddied.  (43) 

12.  Then  she  saw  a celestial  abode  excelling 
among  the  best  of  its  kind,  like  the  lotus  (among 
flowers).  It  shone  like#  the  morning  sun’s  disk,  and 
was  of  a dazzling  beauty.  Its  thousand  and  eight 
excellent  columns  (inlaid  wifh)  the  best  gold  and 
heaps  of  jewels  diffused  a brilliant  light  like  a hea- 
venly lamp,  and  the  pearls  fastened  to  its  curtains 
glittered.  It  was  hung  with  brilliant  divine  garlands, 
and  decorated  with  pictures  of  wolves,  bulls,  horses, 
men,  dolphins,  birds,  snakes,  Kinnaras,  deer,  .5a- 
rabhas,  Yaks,  Sawsaktas 2,  elephants,  shrubs,  and 
plants.  There  the  Gandharvas  performed  their 
concerts,  and  the  din  of  the  drums  of  the  gods, 


* The  original  has  timingik-niruddha-tilitilika. 

1 Samsakta,  which  I do  not  find  mentioned  elsewhere,  is  ex- 
plained, ‘a  kind  of  beast  of  prey;’  I think  that  samakta  maybe 
an  adjective  specifying  the  following  word,  and  mean  ’fighting’ 
elephants.  4 


238 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


imitating  the  sound  of  big  and  large  rain-clouds, 
penetrated  the  whole  inhabited  world.  It  was  highly 
delightful  through  curling,  scented  fumes  of  black 
aloe,  the  finest  Kundurukka  and  Turushka,  burning 
frankincense  and  other  perfumes.  It  (shed)  conti- 
nuous light,  was  white,  of  excellent  lustre,  delighting 
the  best  of  gods,  and  affording  joy  and  pleasure.  (44) 

13.  Then  she  saw  an  enormous  heap  of  jewels 
containing  Pulaka,  Va^a,  Indranila,  Sasyaka,  Kar- 
ketana,  Lohit&ksha,  Marakata,  Prabila,  Saugandhika, 
Spha/ika,  Ha/wsagarbha,  A»/ana,  and  Aandrak&nta. 
Its  base  was  on  the  level  of  the  earth,  and  it  illu- 
mined with  its  jewels  even  the  sphere  of  the  sky. 
It  was  high  and  resembled  Mount  Meru.  (45) 

14.  And  a fire.  She  saw  a fire  in  vehement 
motion,  fed  with  much-shining  and  honey-coloured 
ghee,  smokeless,  crackling,  and  extremely  beautiful 
with  its  burning  flames.  The  mass  of  its  flames, 
which  rose  one*  above  the  other,  seemed  to  inter- 
penetrate each  other,  and  the  blaze  of  its  flames 
appeared  to  bake  the  firmament  in  some  places.  (46) 

After  having  seen  these  fine,  beautiful,  lovely, 
handsome  dreams,  the  lotus-eyed  queen  awoke  on 
her  bed  while  the  hair  of  her  body  bristled  for  joy. 

Every  mother  of  a Tirthakara  sees  these  fourteen 
dreams  in  that  night  in  which  the  famous  Arhat 
enters  her  womb.  (46  b) 

End  of  the  Third  Lecture. 

When  the  Kshatriy&«l  Trwal4,  having  seen  these 
fourteen  illustrious,  great  dreams,  awoke,  she  was 
glad,  pleased,  and  joyful,  &c  (see  § 5,  down  to)  rose 
from  her  couch,  and  descended  from  the  footstool. 
Neither  hasty  nor  trembling,  with  a quick  and  even 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


239 


gait  like  that  of  the  royal  swan,  she  went  to  the  couch 
of  the  Kshatriya  Siddh&rtha.  There  she  awakened 
the  Kshatriya  Siddh&rtha,  addressing  him  with  kind, 
pleasing,  amiable,  tender,  illustrious,  beautiful,  lucky, 
blest,  auspicious,  fortunate,  heart-going,  heart-easing, 
well-measured,  sweet,  and  soft  words.  (47) 

Then  the  Kshatriyi#!  Trirali,  with  the  permission 
of  king  Siddh&rtha,  sat  down  on  a chair  of  state 
inlaid  with  various  jewels  and  precious  stones  in  the 
form  of  arabesques ; calm  and  composed,  sitting  on 
an  excellent,  comfortable  chair,  she  addressed  him 
with  kind,  pleasing,  &c.  (see  last  paragraph),  words, 
and  spoke  thus  : (48) 

1 0 beloved  of  the  gods,  I was  just  now  on  my 
couch  (as  described  in  § 32),  &e.  (see  § 5),  and  awoke 
after  having  seen  the  fourteen  dreams;  to  wit,  an 
elephant,  &c.  What,  to  be  sure,  O my  lord,  will  be 
the  happy  result  portended  by  these  fourteen  illus- 
trious, great  dreams  ?’  (49)  • 

When  the  Kshatriya  Siddh&rtha  had  heard  and 
perceived  this  news  from  the  Kshatriydw!  Trirala, 
he  glad,  pleased,  and  joyful,  &c.  (see  § 5,  down  to) 
firmly  fixed  the  dreams  in  his  mind,  and  entered 
upon  considering  them;  he  grasped  the  meaning  of 
those  dreams  with  his  own  innate  intelligence  and 
intuition  which  were  preceded  *by  reflection,  and 
addressing  the  Kshatriyiwl  Trisal4  with  kind, 
pleasing,  &c.,  words,  spoke  thus : (50) 

‘ O beloved  of  the  gods,  you  have  seen  illus- 
trious dreams,  &c.  (see  § 9,  down  to)  you  will 
give  birth  to  a lovely,  handsome  boy,  who  will  be 
the  ensign  of  our  family,  the  lamp  of  our  family, 
the  crown1  of  our  'family,  the*  frontal  ornament 


1 Vsu&nsaya  (avatamsaka)  is  here  rendered  by  rekhan. 


240 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


of  oUr  family,  the  maker  of  our  family’s  glory, 
the  sun  of  our  family,  the  stay  of  our  family,  the 
maker  of  our  family’s  joy  and  fame,  the  tree  of  our 
family,  the  exalter  of  our  family ; (a  boy)  with  tender 
hands  and  feet,  &c.  (see  § 9,  down  to  the  end).  (51) 
And  this  boy,  after  having  passed  childhood,  and, 
with  just  ripened  intellect,  having  reached  the  state 
of  youth,  will  become  a brave,  gallant,  and  valorous 
king,  the  lord  of  the  realm,  with  a large  and  exten- 
sive army  and  train  of  waggons.  (52)  Therefore,  O 
beloved  of  the  gods,  you  have  seen  illustrious,  &c., 
dreams,  &c.  (see  § 9).’ 

In  this  way  he  repeatedly  expressed  his  extreme 
satisfaction. 

When  the  Kshatriy£«i  Trisali  had  heard  and 
peroeived  this  news  from  king  SiddhArtha,  she 
glad,  pleased,  and  joyful,  &c.  (see  § 12,  down  to) 
and  spoke  thus : (53) 

‘That  is  so,  O beloved  of  the  gods,  &c.  (see  § 13, 
down  to)  as  you  have  pronounced  it.’ 

Thus  saying  she  accepted  the  true  meaning  of 
the  dreams,  and  with  the  permission  of  king  Sid- 
dh&rtha  she  rose  from  her  chair  of  state,  inlaid  with 
various  jewels  and  precious  stones  in  the  form  of 
arabesques.  She  then  returned  to  her  own  bed, 
neither  hasty  nor  trembling,  with  a quick  and 
even  gait  like  that  of  the  royal  swan,  and  spoke 
thus : (54) 

‘ These  my  excellent  and  pre-eminent  dreams  shall 
not  be  counteracted  by  other  bad  dreams.’ 

Accordingly  she  remained  awake  to  «save  her 
dreams  by  means  of  (hearing)  good,  auspicious, 
pious,  agreeable  stories  about  gods  and  religious 
men.  (55) 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


241 


At  the  time  of  daybreak  the  Kshatriya  Siddhirtha 
called *his  family  servants  and  spoke  thus:  (56) 

‘ Now,  ^eloved  of  the  gods,  quickly  make  ready, 
or  have  made  ready,  the  exterior  hall  of  audience ; 
see  that  it  be  sprinkled  with  scented  water,  cleaned, 
swept,  and  newly  smeared,  furnished  with  offerings 
of  fragrant,  excellent  flowers  of  all  five  colours, 
made  highly  delightful  through  curling  scented 
fumes,  &c.  (see  § 32,  down  to)  and  turned,  as  it 
were,  into  a smelling  box ; also  erect  my  throne, 
and  having  done  this  quickly  return,  and  report  on 
the  execution  of  my  orders.’  (57) 

When  the  family  servants  were  thus  spoken  to 
by  king  Siddhirtha,  they — glad,  pleased,  and  joyful, 
&c.  (see  §12,  down  to)  on  their  heads,  and  modestly 
accepted  the  words  of  command,  saying,  ‘Yes, 
master!’  Then  they  left  the  presence  of  the  Ksha- 
triya Siddhirtha,  and  went  to  the*  exterior  hall  of 
audience,  made  it  ready,  and  erected  the  throne  (as 
described  in  the  last  paragraph).  Having  done  this, 
they  returned.to  the  Kshatriya  Siddhirtha ; joining 
the  palms  of  their  hands  so  as  to  bring  the  ten  nails 
together,  laid  the  folded  hands  on  their  heads,  and 
reported  on  the  execution  of  their  orders.  (58) 

Early  at  the  wane  of  the  night, *when  the  bright 
morning  disclosed  the  soft  flowers  of  the  full-blown 
lotuses  and  Nymphaeas,  rose  the  sun : he  was  red  like 
the  Atoka,  the  open  Kiwmika,  the  bill  of  a parrot 
or  the  Guw^irdha ; of  an  intense  redness  like  that 
of  the  Bandhufivaka1,  the  feet  and  eyes  of  the  turtle 
dove,  the  scarlet  eyes  of  the  Indian  cuckoo,  a mass 
of  China  roses,  or  vermljion.  He,  the  thousand-rayed 
maker  of  the  day,  shining  in  his  radiance,  awakened 

1 Pentapetes  Phoenicea. 

{«]  R 


KALPA  sflTRA. 


842 

the  groups  of  lotuses.  When  in  due  time  the  god 
of  the  day  had  risen  and  by  the  blows  of  his  hands 
(or  rays)  the  darkness  was  driven  away,  while  the 
inhabited  world  was,  as  it  were,  dipped  in  saffron  by 
the  morning  sun,  the  Kshatriya  Siddh&rtha  rose 
from  his  bed,  (59)  descended  from  the  footstool, 
went  to  the  hall  for  gymnastic  exercises,  and  entered 
it.  There  he  applied  himself  to  many  wholesome 
exercises,  jumped,  wrestled,  fenced,  and  fought  till 
he  got  thoroughly  tired : then  he  was  anointed  with 
hundredfold  and  thousandfold  refined  different  kinds 
of  oil,  which  nourished,  beautified,  invigorated,  exhi- 
larated, strengthened,  and  increased  all  senses  and 
limbs.  On  an  oiled  hide  he  was  shampooed  by 
clever  men  with  soft  and  tender  palms  of  the  hands 
and  soles  of  the . feet,  who  were  well  acquainted 
with  the  best  qualities  of  the  practices  of  anointing, 
kneading,  and  stretching ; well  trained,  skilful,  excel- 
lent, expert,  intelligent,  and  never  tiring.  When  by 
this  fourfold  agreeable  treatment  of  die  body  the 
king’s  bones,  flesh,  skin,  and  hair  had  been  bene- 
fited, and  his  fatigues  banished,  he  left  the  hall  for 
gymnastic  exercises,  (60)  and  entered  the  bathing- 
house.  The  pleasant  bathing-room  was  very  agree- 
able, and  contained  many  windows1,  ornamented 
With  pearls;  its  floor  was  decorated  with  mosaic 
of  various  jewels  and  precious  stones.  On  the  bath- 
ing-stool,  inlaid  with  various  jewels  and  precious 
stones  in  the  form  of  arabesques,  he  comfortably 
sat  down  and  bathed  himself  with  water  scented 
with  flowers  and  perfumes,  with  tepid  Water  and 
pure  water,  according  to  an  excellent  method  of 

1 Gila,  windows  farmed  by  flat  stones  which  are  perforated  so 
at  to  produce  a network  of  more  or  less  intricate  design. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


«43 


bathing,  combined  with  healthy  exercises.  When 
this  healthy  excellent  bathing  under  many  hundred- 
fold pleasures  was  over,  he  dried  his  body  with 
a long-haired,  soft,  scented,  and  coloured  towel,  put 
on  a new  and  costly  excellent  robe,  rubbed  himself 
with  fresh  and  fragrant  Gortrsha1  and  sandal,  and 
ornamented  himself  with  fine  wreaths  and  sandal-oint- 
ment He  put  on  (ornaments)  of  jewels  and  pearls, 
hung  round  his  neck  fitting  necklaces  of  eighteen, 
nine,  and  three  strings  of  pearls,  and  one  with  a 
pearl  pendant,  and  adorned  himself  with  a zone.  He 
put  on  a collar,  rings,  and  charming  ornaments  of 
the  hair,  and  encumbered  his  arms  with  excellent 
bracelets : he  was  of  excessive  beauty.  His  face  was 
lighted  up  by  earrings,  and  his  head  by  a diadem ; 
his  breast  was  adorned  and  decked  with  necklaces, 
and  his  fingers  were,  as  it  were,  gilded  by  his  rings. 
His  upper  garment  of  fine  cloth  contained  swinging 
pearl  pendants.  He  put»on,  as  an  emblem  of  his 
undefeated  knighthood,  glittering,  well-made,  strong, 
excellent,  beautiful  armlets,  made  by  clever  artists 
of  spotless  and  costly  jewels,  gold,  and  precious 
stones  of  many  kinds.  In  short,  the  king  was  like 
the  tree  granting  all  desires,  decorated  and  orna- 
mented; an.  umbrella,  hung  "with  wreaths  and  gar- 
lands of  Kori«/a  flowers,  was  held  above  him.  He 
was  fanned  with  white  excellent  chowries,  while  his 
appearance  was  greeted  with  auspicious  shouts  of 
victory.  Surrounded  by  many  chieftains,  satraps, 
kings,  princes,  knights,  sheriffs,  heads  of  families, 
ministers,  chfef  ministers,  astrologers,  counsellors, 
servants,  dancing  masters,  citizens,  ‘traders,  mer- 
chants, foremen  of  guilds,  generals,  leaders  of  cara- 
. . ■ ■ ■ ■■■  - * 

1 Gortrsha  is  a superior  kind  of  sandal. , 


244 


KALPA  stiTRA. 


vans,  messengers,  and  frontier-guards,  he — the  lord 
and  chief  of  men,  a bull  and  a lion  among  men*  shining 
with  excellent  lustre  and  glory,  lovely  to  behold  like 
the  moon  emerging  from  a great  white  cloud  in  the 
midst  of  the  flock  of  the  planets  and  of  brilliant 
stars  and  asterisms  — left  the  bathing-house,  (61) 
entered  the  exterior  hall  of  audience  and  sat  down 
on  his  throne  with  the  face  towards  the  east.  (62) 

On  the  north-eastern  side  he  ordered  eight  state 
chairs,  covered  with  cloth  and  auspiciously  deco- 
rated with  white  mustard,  to  be  set  down.  Not 
too  far  from  and  not  too  near  to  himself,  towards 
the  interior  of  the  palace,  he  had  a curtain  drawn. 
It  was  adorned  with  different  jewels  and  precious 
stones,  extremely  worth  seeing,  very  costly,  and 
manufactured  in  a famous  town ; its  soft  cloth  was 
ail  over  covered  with  hundreds  of  patterns  and  deco- 
rated with  pictures  of  wolves,  bulls,  horses,  men, 
dolphins,  birds,  snakes,  Kinnaras,  deer,  6arabhas, 
Yaks,  Sawsaktas,  elephants,  shrubs,  and  plants  Be- 
hind it  he  ordered  to  be  placed,  for  the  Kshatri- 
ykni  Trirala,  an  excellent  chair  of  state,  decorated 
with  arabesques  of  different  jewels  and  precious 
stones,  outfitted  with  a coverlet  and  a soft  pillow, 
covered  with  a<  white  cloth,  very  soft  and  agreeable 
to  the  touch.  Then  he  called  the  family  servants 
and  spoke  thus  : (63) 

‘ Quickly,  O beloved  of  the  gods,  call  the  inter- 
preters of  dreams  who  well  know  the  science  of 
prognostics  with  its  eight  branches,  and  are  well 
versed  in  many  sciences  besides !’ 

When  the  family  servants  were  thus  spoken  to 
by  king  Siddh&rtha,  they — glad,  pleased,  and  joyful, 
&c. — laid  the  folded  hands  on  their  heads  and 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


245 


modestly  accepted  the  words  of  command,  saying, 
‘Yes,  master!’  (64) 

Then  they  left  the  presence  of  the  Kshatriya 
Siddh&rtha?  went  right  through  the  town  Ku#/fapura 
to  the  houses  of  the  interpreters  of  dreams,  and 
called  the  interpreters  of  dreams.  (65) 

Then  the  interpreters  of  dreams,  being  called  by 
the  Kshatriya  Siddh4rtha’s  family  servants,  glad, 
pleased,  and  joyful,  &c.,  bathed,  made  the  offering 
(to  the  house-gods) !,  performed  auspicious  rites  and 
expiatory 2 acts,  put  on  excellent,  lucky,  pure  court- 
dress,  adorned  their  persons  with  small  but  costly 
ornaments,  and  put,  for  the  sake  of  auspiciousness, 
white  mustard  and  DCtrvi  grass  on  their  heads. 
Thus  they  issued  from  their  own  houses  and  went 
right  through  the  Kshatriya  part  of  the  town  Ku Ja- 
pura to  the  front  gate  of  king  Siddhirtha’s  excellent 
palace,  a jewel  of  its  kind.  (66) 

There  they  assembled  and  went*  to  the  exterior 
hall  of  audience  in  the  presence  of  the  Kshatriya 
Sidcfhirtha.  Joining  the  paints  of  their  hands  so  as 
to  bring  the  t£n  nails  together,  they  laid  the  folded 
hands  on  their  heads  and  gave  him  the  greeting  of 
victory.  (67) 

The  king  Siddhirtha  saluted  and  honoured  the 
interpreters  of  dreams,  made  them  ‘presents,  and  re- 
ceived them  with  respect.  They  sat  down,  one 
after  the  other,  on  the  chairs  of  state  which  had 
been  placed  there  before.  (68)  Then  the  Kshatriya 
Siddhirtha  placed  his  wife  TriralA.  behind  the  cur- 
tain, and  taking  flowers  and  fruits  in  his  hands. 

1 Balikarman.  * • 

* PAyaAMitta  = pr£yar£itta.  The  commentators  explain  it  by 
pddaMupta,  touching  their  feet  in  order  to  .avoid  the  wicked  eye. 


246  KALPA  S0TRA. 

addressed  with  utmost  courtesy  the  interpreters  of 
dreams:  (69) 

‘ O beloved  of  the  gods,  the  KshatriyA«t  TriralA 
was  just  on  her  couch,  &c.  (see  § 32,  down  to  the 
end).  (70  and  71)  What  to  be  sure,  O beloved  of 
the  gods,  will  be  the  result  portended  by  these  four- 
teen illustrious  great  dreams  ?’  (72) 

When  the  interpreters  of  dreams  had  heard  and 
perceived  this  news  from  the  Kshatriya  Siddhirtha, 
they — glad,  pleased,  and  joyful,  &c. — fixed  the  dreams 
in  their  minds,  entered  upon  considering  them,  and 
conversed  together.  (73) 

Having  found,  grasped,  discussed,  decided  upon, 
and  clearly  understood  the  meaning  of  these  dreams, 
they  recited  before  king  Siddh&rtha  the  dream-books 
and  spoke  thus : 

‘O  beloved  of  the  gods,  in  our  dream-books  are 
enumerated  forty-two  (common)  dreams  and  thirty 
great  dreams.  'Now,  O beloved  of  the  gods,  the 
mothers  of  universal  monarchs  or  of  Arhats  wake 
up  after  seeing  these  fourteen  great  dreams  out 
of  the  thirty  great  dreams,  when  the  embryo  of 
a universal  monarch  or  an  Arhat  enters  their 
womb ; (74)  viz.  an  elephant,  a bull,  &c.  (75)  The 
mothers  of  VAsudevas  wake  up  after  seeing  any 
seven  great  dreams  out  of  these  fourteen  great 
dreams,  when  the  embryo  of  a V Asudeva  enters  their 
womb.  (76)  The  mothers  of  Baladevas  wake  up  after 
seeing  any  four  great  dreams  out  of  these  four- 
teen great  dreams,  when  the  embryo  of  a Baladeva 
enters  their  womb.  (77)  The  mother  o£  MA«dalikas 
wake  up  after  seeing  a single  great  dream  out  of 
these  fourteen  great  dreams,  when  the  embryo  of  a; 
MWalika  enters,  their  womb.  (78)  Now,  O beloved 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


247 


of  the  gods,  the  Kshatriyfiwi  Trwali  has  seen  these 
fourteen  great  dreams,  &c.  (see  § 51,  down  to  the 
end).  (79)  And  this  boy,  &c.  (see  § 52,  down  to)  the 
lord  of  a realm  with  a large  and  extensive  army  and 
train  of  waggons,  a universal  emperor  or  a Gina., 
the  lord  of  the  three  worlds,  the  universal  emperor 
of  the  law.  (80).  Therefore,  O beloved  of  the 
gods,  the  Kshatriy&»i  Trirald  has  seen  illustrious 
dreams,’  &c.  (see  § 9).  (81) 

When  king  Siddh&rtha  had  heard  and  perceived, 
this  news  from  the  interpreter  of  dreams,  he — glad, 
pleased,  and  joyful,  &c. — spoke  to  them  thus : (82) 

‘ That  is  so,  O beloved  of  the  gods,  &c.  (see  §11, 
down  to)  as  you  have  pronounced  it.’ 

Thus  saying  he  accepted  the  true  meaning  of  the 
dreams,  and  honoured  the  interpreters  of  dreams 
with  praise  and  plenty  of  food,  flowers,  perfumes, 
garlands,  and  ornaments.  He  made  them  a present 
in  keeping  with  their  station  in  life 1 and  dismissed 
them.  (83)  • 

•After  this  the  Kshatriya  Stfddh&rtha  rose  from  his 
throne,  went*  to  the  Kshatriy&#t  Trual&  behind  the 
curtain,  and  addressed  her  thus : (84) 

‘ Now,  O beloved  of  the  gods,  you  have  seen 
these  fourteen  great  dreams,  &c.  (see  §§  79,  80,  down 
to)  emperor  of  the  law.’  (85,  86)  • 

When  the  Kshatriyiwt  TriraUt  had  heard  and 
perceived  this  news,  she — glad,  pleased,  and  joyful, 
&c. — accepted  the  true  meaning  of  the  dreams.  (87) 
With  the  permission  of  king  Siddhirtha  she  rose 
from  her  chair  of  state  which  was  decorated  with 
arabesques  of  various  jewels  and  precious  stones, 


1 Or  a life  annuity. 


248 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


and  returned  to  her  own  apartments,  neither  hasty 
nor  trembling,  with  a quick  and  even  gait  like  that 
of  the  royal  swan.  (88) 

From  that  moment  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vira  was  brought  into  the  family  of  the  Gnitris, 
many  demons1  in  Vaisrama«a’s  service,  belonging 
to  the  animal  world,  brought,  on  .Sakra’s  command, 
to  the  palace  of  king  Siddh&rtha,  old  and  ancient 
treasures,  of  which  the  owners,  deponers,  and  fami- 
lies to  whom  they  originally  belonged  were  dead, 
and  extinct,  and  which  were  hidden  in  villages,  or 
mines,  or  scot-free  towns,  or  towns  with  earth  walls, 
or  towns  with  low  walls,  or  isolated  towns,  or  towns 
accessible  by  land  and  water,  or  towns  accessible 
either  by  land  or  by  water  only,  or  in  natural. strong- 
holds, or  in  halting-places  for  processions  or  for 
caravans,  in  triangular  places,  or  in  places  where 
three  or  four  roads  meet,  or  in  courtyards,  or 
squares,  or  high  roads,  or  on  the  site  of  villages  or 
towns,  or  in  drains  of  villages  or  towns,  or  in  bazaars, 
or  temples,  or  assembling  halls,  or  wells,  or  parks?  or 
gardens,  or  woods,  or  groves,  or  burying-places,  or 
empty  houses,  or  mountain  caves,  or  hermits’  cells, 
or  secret  places  between  walls,  or  in  houses  on  an 
elevation,  or  houses  for  audience,  or  palaces.  (89) 

In  the  night  .in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vira  was  brought  into  the  family  of  the 
Gniitris  their  silver  increased,  their  gold  increased ; 
their  riches,  corn,  majesty,  and  kingdom  increased ; 
their  army,  train,  treasure,  storehouse,  town,  seraglio, 
subjects,  and  glory  increased;  their  real  valuable 
property,  as  riches,  gold,  precious  stones,  jewels, 

1 <?a»ibhaya=  GWmbhaka ; what  they  are  is  not  said  in  the 
commentaries. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


249 


pearls,  conches,  stones,  corals,  rubies,  &c.,  (he  inten- 
sity of  their  popularity  and  liberality  highly  in- 
creased* At  that  time  the  following  personal, 
reflectional,.  desirable  idea  occurred  to  parents  of 
the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira : (90) 

‘ From  the  moment  that  this  our  boy  has  been 
begotten,  our  silver  increased,  our  gold  increased, 
&c.  (see  § 90,  down  to)  the  intensity  of  our  liberality 
and  popularity  highly  increased.  Therefore  when 
this  our  boy  will  be  born,  we  shall  give  him  the  fit 
name,  attributive  and  conformable  to  his  quality — 
Vardham&na.Y  (91) 

Now  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira,  out  of 
compassion  for  his  mother,  did  not  move  nor  stir 
nor  quiver,  but  remained  quiet,  stiff,  and  motionless. 
Then  the  following,  &c.  (see  § 90,  down  to)  idea 
occurred  to  the  mind  of  the  Kshatriy&«l  Tmal&: 
‘ The  fruit  of  my  womb  has  been  taken  from  me, 
it  has  died,  it  is  fallen,  it  is  lost.  Formerly  it 
moved,  now  it  does  not  *move.’  Thus  with  anxious 
thoughts  and  ideas,  plunged  in  a sea  of  sorrow  and 
misery,  reposing  her  head  on  her  hand,  overcome 
by  painful  reflections,  ^nd  casting  her  eyes  on  the 
ground  she  meditated.  And  in  the  palace  of  king 
Siddh&rtha  the  music  of  drums  and  stringed  instru- 
ments, the  clapping  of  hands,  the*  dramatical  per- 
formances, and  the  amusements  of  the  people  ceased, 
and  mournful  dejection  reigned  there.  (92) 

Then  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira,  knowing 
that  such  an  internal,  &c.  (see  § 90,  down  to)  idea 
had  occurred  to  the  mind  of  his  mother,  he  quivered 
a little.  (93) 

__ • 4 

1 I.e.  ‘the  increasing  one’  not  as  we  should  expect,  and  Steven- 
son translated,  the  Increaser.  * 


250  KALFA  sOTRA. 

Feeling  her  child  quivering,  trembling,  moving, 
and  stirring,  the  Kshatriyiwi  T risald — glad,  pleased, 
and  joyful,  &c. — spoke  thus : * No,  forsooth, 'the  fruit 
of  my  womb  has  not  been  taken  from  me,  it  has  not 
died,  it  is  not  fallen,  it  is  not  lost.  Formerly  it  did 
not  move,  but  now  it  does  move/  Thus  she  was 
glad,  pleased,  and  joyful,  &c. 

Then  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vlra,  while  in 
her  womb,  formed  the  following  resolution : * It  will 
not  behove  me,  during  the  life  of  my  parents,  to 
tear  out  my  hair,  and  leaving  the  house  to  enter  the 
state  of  houselessness/  (94) 

Batiung,  making  offerings  to  the  house-gods,  perform- 
ing auspicious  rites  and  expiatory  acts,  and  adorning 
herself  with  all  ornaments,  the  KshatriyAwiTriral&kept 
sickness,  sorrow,  fainting,  fear,  and  fatigue  by  food 
and  clothing,  perfumes  and  garlands,  which  were  not 
too  cold  nor  too  hot,  not  too  bitter  nor  too  pungent, 
not  too  astringent  nor  .too  sour  nor  too  sweet,  not  too 
smooth  nor  too  rough,  not’  too  wet  nor  too  dry,  but 
all  just  suiting  the  season.  In  the  proper  place  and 
time  she  ate  only  such  food  which  was  good,  suffi- 
cient, and  healthy  for  the  nourishment  of  her  child. 
She  took  her  walks  in  places  which  were  empty  and 
agreeable  as  well  as  delightful  to  the  mind;  her 
desires  were  laudable,  fulfilled,  honoured,  not  disre- 
garded, but  complied  with  and  executed ; she  most 
comfortably  dozed,  reposed,  remained,  sat,  and  laid 
on  unobjectionable  and  soft  beds  and  seats,  and 
thusjfiost  comfortably  carried  her  unborn  child.  (95) 
In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable-  Ascetic 
Mahftvlra 1 — after  the  lapse  of  nine  months  and 

1 The  whole  passage  is  in  some  disorder;  for  the  subject  is  she 
(Tiiiali)  and  the  object  is  ‘boy,’  yet  ‘die  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahft- 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


251 


seven  and  a half  days,  in  the  first  month  of  summer, 
in  the  second  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of 
Afaitra,  on  its  fourteenth  day,  [while  all  planets  were 
in  their  exaltations,  the  moon  in  her  principal  con- 
junction, and  the  sky  in  all  its  directions  clear, 
bright,  and  pure  ; while  a favourable  and  agreeable 
low  wind  swept  the  earth;  at  the  time  when  the 
fields  were  green  and  all  people  glad  and  amusing 
themselves]1  in  the  middle  of  the  night  while  the 
moon  was  in  conjunction  with  the  asterism  Uttara- 
phalgunl — (Trwalft),  perfectly  healthy  herself,  gave 
birth  to  a perfectly  healthy  boy.  (96)* 

End  of  the  Fourth  Lecture. 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vira  was  born,  there  was  a divine  lustre  ori- 
ginated by  many  descending  and  ascending  gods 
and  goddesses,  and  in  the  universe,  resplendent  with 
one  light,  the  conflux  of  gods*  occasioned  great 
confusion  and  noise.  (97) 3 
Tin  that  night  in  which 'the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mahdvira  was  born,  many  demons  in  Vaisramawa’s 


vira’  is  also  put  in  the  nominative.  It  seems  that  the  author  or 
the  copyists  added  the  three  words  Samane  Bhagavaxn  Mahlvfre 
because  they  usually  followed  the  beginning : tenant  k&lemun  tenant 
samaenant.  The  same  disorder  occurs  in  all  corresponding  passages 
which  we  shall  meet  with  later  on. 

1 The  passage  in  brackets  seems  to  be  a later  addition;  for  it 
is  wanting  in  my  oldest  MS.,  and  the  commentator  says  that  it  was 
not  seen  in  many  books.  The  occurrence  of  the  astrological  term 
exaltation  (wbiasstyayui)  in  this  passage  proves  it  to  be  inserted 
. after  300  a<d.  For  about  that  time  Greek  astrology  had  been  intro*, 
duced  in  India,  as  I have  shown  in  my  dissertation : De  Astrologiae 
Indicae  ‘Horn’  appelbtae brigmibus,  Bonn,  187a. 

. * Cf.  AiMhga  SQtra  II,  15,  § 6. 

*:  Cf.  JL&r&hga  Sfttra  II,  tg,  § 7.  • 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


252 

service  belonging  to  the  animal  world,  rained  down 
on  the  palace  of  king  SiddMrtha  one  great  shower 
of  silver,  gold,  diamonds,  clothes,  ornaments,  leaves, 
flowers,  fruits,  seeds,  garlands,  perfumes,  sandal, 
powder,  and  riches.  (98) 1 

After  the  Bhavanapati,  Vyantara,  Gyotishka,  and 
Vaim&nika  gods  had  celebrated  the  feast  of  the 
inauguration  of  the  Ttrthakara’s  birthday,  the  Ksha- 
triya  Siddh&rtha  called,  at  the  break  of  the  morning, 
together  the  town  policemen  and  addressed  them 
thus  : (99) 

‘ O beloved  of  the  gods,  quickly  set  free  all 
prisoners  in  the  town  of  Ku#dapura,  increase 
measures  and  weights,  give  order  that  the  whole 
town  of  KuWapura  with  its  suburbs  be  sprinkled 
with  water,  swept,  and  smeared  (with  cowdung,  &c.) 
that  in  triangular  places,  in  places  where  three  or 
four  roads  meet,  in  courtyards,  in  squares,  ahd  in 
thoroughfares,  the  middle  of  the  road  and  the  path 
along  the  shops  be  sprinkled,  cleaned,  and  swept ; 
that  platforms  be  erected  one  above  the  other ; that 
the  town  be  decorated  with  variously  coloured  flags 
and  banners,  and  adorned  with  painted  pavilions 2 ; 
that  the  walls  bear  impressions  in  Gostrsha,  fresh 
red  sandal,  and  Dardara 3 of  the  hand  with  out- 
stretched fingers;’ that  luck-foreboding  vases  be  put 
on  the  floor,  and  pots  of  the  same  kind  be  disposed 
round  every  door  and  arch ; that  big,  round,  and 
long  garlands,  wreaths,  and  festoons  be  hung  low 

1 Cf.  Al&r&nga  Sfitra  II,  15,  § 8. 

3 According  to  the-  commentary  this  may  also  be  translated : 
smeared  (with  cowdung)  and  whitewashed. 

8 Dardara  is  sandal* brought  from  Dardara.  All  who  have  tra- 
velled in  India  will  have  noticed  on  walls  the  impressions  of  the 
hand  mentioned  in  the  text. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


253 


and  high ; that  the  town  be  furnished  with  offerings, 
&c.  (see  § 32,  down  to)  smelling  box ; that  players, 
dancers,  rope-dancers,  wrestlers,  boxers,  jesters, 
story-tellers,  ballad-singers,  actors1 *,  messengers®, 
pole-dancers,  fruit-mongers,  bag-pipers,  lute-players, 
and  many  T41&6aras 3 be  present.  Erect  arid  order 
to  erect  thousands  of  pillars  and  poles,  and  report 
on  the  execution  of  my  orders.’  (100) 

When  the  family  servants  were  thus  spoken  to  by 
king  Siddhirtha,  they — glad,  pleased,  and  joyful,  &c. 
(see  § 58) — accepted  the  words  of  command,  saying, 

‘ Yes,  masfer !’ 

Then  they  set  free  all  prisoners,  &c.  (see  § 100, 
down  to)  pillars  and  poles.  Having  done  this,  they 
returned  to  king  Siddh&rtha,  and  laying  their  hands 
on  their  heads,  reported  on  the  execution  of  his 
orders.  (101) 

The  king  Siddhirtha  then  wept  to  the  hall  for 
gymnastic  exercises,  &c.  (see  §§  60  and  614).  (After 
having  bathed)  the  king  accompanied  by  his  whole 
seraglio4,  and  adorned  with*  flowers,  scented  robes, 
garlands,  and  ornaments,  held  during  ten  days  the 
festival  in  celebration  of  the  birth  of  a heir  to  his 
kingdom ; (it  was  held)  under  the  continuous  din 
and  sound  of  trumpets,  with  great  state  and  splen- 
dour, with  a great  train  of  soldiers,  vehicles,  and 
guests,  under  the  sound,  din,  and  noise  of  Conches, 

1 Lasakd  bbinda 

* Arakshak&s  taliri,  & khyiyakd  vd.  The  translation  is  conjectural. 

* T&l&fraras  are  those  who  bv  clapping  the  hands  beat  the  time 
during  a performance  of  music. 

4 The  text  has  down  tp  'with  his  whole  seraglio.’  But  as  no 
such  words  occur  in  the  passage  in  question,  they  seem  to  pbint  tp 
the  description  in  § 115,  which  contains  the  latter  part  of  thhi 
passage. 


254 


KALPA  S0TRA. 


cymbals,  drums,  castanets,  horns,  small  drums,  kettle 
drums,  Mura^as,  Mrfdangas,  and  Dundubhis  \ which 
were  accompanied  at  the  same  time  by  trumpets  *. 
The  customs,  taxes,  and  confiscations  were  released, 
buying  and*  selling  prohibited,  no  policemen  were 
allowed  to  enter  houses,  great  and  small  fines  were 
remitted,  and  debts  cancelled.  Numberless  excel- 
lent actors  performed 8 and  many  T4l4>£aras  were 
present,  drums  sounded  harmoniously,  fresh  gar- 
lands and  wreaths  were  seen  everywhere,  and  the 
whole  population  in  the  town  and  in  the  country 
rejoiced  and  was  in  full  glee.  (102) 

When  the  ten  days  of  this  festival  were  over,  the 
king  Siddfcirtha  gave  and  ordered  to  be  given 
hundreds  and  thousands  and  hundred-thousands  of 
offerings  to  the  gods,  gifts,  and  portions  (of  goods); 
he  received  and  ordered  to  be  received  hundreds, 
thousands,  and  hundred-thousands  of  presents.  (103)1 * *  4 
The  parents  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivlra 
celebrated  the  birth  of  their  heir  on  the  first  day,  qn 
the  third  day  they  showed  him  the  sun  and  the 
moon,  on  the  sixth  day  they  observed  the  religious 
vigil ; after  the  eleventh  day,  when  the  impure  ope- 
rations and  ceremonies  connected  with  the  birth,  of 
a child  had  been  performed,  and  the  twelfth  day  had 
come,  they  prepared  plenty  of  food,  drink,  spices, 
and  sweetmeats,  invited  their  friends,  relations,  kins- 
men, agnates,  cognates,  and  followers,  together  with 
the  6#4tr*ka  Kshatriyas.  Then  they  bathed,  made 


1 Murzas,  Mn'dangas,  Dundubhis  are  different  kinds  bf  drums. 

* Samaga^amaga-turiya. 

* This  is  Jhe  translation  of  a varia  lectio.  The*  adopted  text 
has : while  courtezans  and  excellent  actors  performed. 

* Cf.  AiirShga  Sfltra  II,  15,  § r 1. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


*55 


offerings  (to  the  house-gods),  and  performed  auspi- 
cious rites  and  expiatory  acts,  put  on  excellent, 
lucky,  pure  court-dress,  and  adorned  their  persons 
with  small  but  costly  ornaments.  At  dinner-time 
they  sat  down  on  excellent,  comfortable  chairs  in  the 
dining-hall,  and  together  with  their  friends,  relations, 
kinsmen,  agnates,  cognates  and  followers,  and  with 
the  GMXrika  Kshatriyas  they  partook,  ate,  tasted, 
and  interchanged  (bits)  of  a large  collation  of  food, 
drink,  spices,  and  sweetmeats.  (104) 

After  dinner  they  went  (to  the  meeting  hall1)  after 
having  cleansed  their  mouths  and  washed;  when 
perfectly  clean,  they  regaled  and  honoured  their 
friends,  &c.  (see  § 104,  down  to)  Gnitrika  Kshatriyas 
with  many  flowers,  clothes,  perfumes,  garlands,  and 
ornaments.  Then  they  spoke  thus  to  their  friends, 
&c.:  (105) 

‘ Formerly,  O beloved  of  the  goc^s,  when  we  had 
begotfen  this  our  boy,  jthe  following  personal,  re- 
flectipnal,  desirable  idea  occurred  to  our  mind: 
“ From  the  njoment  that  this  our  boy  has  been 
begotten,  our  silver  increased,  our  gold  increased, 
&c.  (see  $ 91,  down  to)  Vardham&rta.  Now  our 
wishes  have  been  fulfilled,  therefore  shall  the  name 
of  our  boy  be  Vardham&na.’”  (106,  J07)* 

The  Venerable  Ascetic,  Mahivlra  belonged  to  the 
Klryapa  gotra.  His  three  names  have  thus  been 
recorded : by  his  parents  he  was  called  Vardhamina; 
because  he  is  devoid  of  love  and  hate,  he  is  called 
•SVama#a  (i.  e.  Ascetic) ; because  he  stands  fast  in 
midst  of  dangers  and  fears,  patiently  bears  hard* 
ships  and  calamities,  adheres  to  the  chosen  rules  of 

1 This  is  an  addition  of  the  commentator. 

* Cf.  Aitiihga  Sfitra  IT,  15,  § xa.  * 


256 


KALPA  S6TRA. 


penance,  is  wise,  indifferent  to  pleasure  and  pain, 
rich  in  control,  and  gifted  with  fortitude,  the  name 
Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira  has  been  given  him  by 
the  gods.  (108) 1 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vlra’s  father  belonged 
to  the  Klryapa  gotra ; he  had  three  names  : Siddh&r- 
tha,  iSVeyiwsa,  and  CPasawsa,  &c.  (see  A£&ringa 
SQtra  II,  15,  § 15,  down  to)  .Seshavati  and  Yaro- 
vatl.  (109) 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivira — clever,  with 
the  aspirations  of  a clever  man,  of  great  beauty,  con- 
trolling (his  senses),  lucky,  and  modest;  a Gn&tri 
Kshatriya,  the  son  of  a Gn&tri  Kshatriya ; the 
moon  of  the  clan  of  the  Gnktris',  a Videha,  the 
son  of  Videhadatti,  a native  of  Videha,  a prince  of 
Videha — had  lived  thirty  years  in  Videha  when  his 
parents  went  to  the  world  of  the  gods  (i.  e.  died), 
and  he  with  the,  permission  of  his  elder  brother  and 
the  authorities  of  the  kingdom 2 fulfilled  his  promise. 
At  that  moment  the  Laukantika  gods,  following  the 
established  custom,  praised  and  hyipned  him  with 
these  kind,  pleasing,  &c.  (see  § 47,  down  to)  sweet, 
and  soft  words : (no) 

* Victory,  victory  to  thee,  gladdener  of  the  world ! 
Victory,  victory  .to  thee,  lucky  one ! Luck  to  thee, 
bull  of  the  best  Kshatriyas ! Awake,  reverend  lord 
of  the  world!  Establish  the  religion  of  the  law 
which  benefits  all  living  beings  in  the  whole  uni- 
verse! It  will  bring  supreme  benefit  to  all  living 
beings  in  all  the  World!’ 

Thus  they  raised  the  shout  of  victor^,  (in) 

r ' 

1 See  AAirSnga  Sfltra  II,  15,  § 15. 

4 Guru-mahattara  is,  the  original  of  the  last  words,  which  I have 
translated  according  to  the  explanation  of  the  commentary. 


LIVES  OP  THE  GINAS. 


*57 


Before  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivlra  had 
adopted  the  life  of  a householder  (i.e.  before  his 
marriage)  he  possessed  supreme,  unlimited1 * *,  unim- 
peded knowledge  and  intuition.  The  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mahivlra  perceived  with  this  his  supreme 
unlimited  knowledge  and  intuition  that  the  time 
for  his  Renunciation*  had  come.  He  left  his  silver, 
he  left  his  gold,  he  left  his  riches,  com,  majesty, 
and  kingdom ; his  army,  grain,  treasure,  storehouse, 
town,  seraglio,  and  subjects ; he  quitted  and  rejected 
his  real,  valuable  property,  such  as  riches,  gold,  pre- 
cious stones,"  jewels,  pearls,  conches,  stones,  corals, 
rubies,  &c. ; he  distributed  presents  through  proper 
persons,  he  distributed  presents  among  indigent 
persons,  (i  12)* 

In  that  period,  in  that  age,  in  the  first  month  of 
winter,  in  the  first  fortnight,  in  the  dark  (fortnight) 
of  M&rgasiras,  on  its  tenth  day,  when  the  shadow 
had  turned  towards  the  east  and  the  (first)  Paurushi4 
was  full  and  over,  on  the  day  called  Suvrata,  in  the 
MuliCirta  called  Vi^aya,  in  the  palankin  Aandra- 
prabhcL,  (Mahkvtra)  was  followed  on  his  way®  by 
a train  of  gods,  men,  and  Asuras,  (and  surrounded) 
by  a swarm  of  shell-blowers,  proclaimers,  pattivallas, 


1 Abhogika.  It  is  inferior  to  the  Avadhi  knowledge.  In  a quo- 
tation it  is  said  that  (the  knowledge)  of  the  Nairayikas,  Devas,  and 
Tirthakaras  does  not  reach  the  Avadhi ; it  is  total  with  them,  but 
with  others  only  partial. 

* N ishkramana = pravra^y 

* Cf.  A&ir&nga  Sfitra  II,  15,  §17. 

* Yima  or4ime  of  three  hours. 

* Samanugammam&na-magge.  The  commentator  divides  sama- 
wugammamSwam  agge,  and  ‘explains  the  passage  thus : him  who 
was  followed  by,  Ac.,  and  surrounded  by,  Ac.  (agre  parivrrtam)  they 
praised  and  hymned,  and  the  authorities  spoke  thus  to  hurt. 

[aa]  S 


258  XALPA  S^TRA. 

courtiers,  men  carrying  others  on  the  back,  heralds, 
and  bell  bearers.  They  praised  and  hymned  him, 
with  these  kind,  pleasing,  &c.  (see  § 47,  down  to) 
sweet  and  soft  words:  (1 1 3) 

( Victory,  victory  to  thee,  gladdener  of  the  world ! 
Victory  to  thee,  lucky  one  1 Luck  to  thee ! with  undis- 
turbed knowledge,  intuition,  and  good  conduct  con- 
quer the  unconquered  Senses ; defend  the  conquered 
Law  of  the  6rama«as ; Majesty,  conquering  all  ob- 
stacles, live  in  Perfection ; put  down  with  thy  devo- 
tion Love  and  Hate,  the  (dangerous)  wrestlers; 
vigorously  gird  thy  loins  with  constancy  and  over- 
come the  eight  Karmans,  our  foes,  with  supreme, 
pure  meditation ; heedful  raise  the  banner  of  content, 
O Hero ! in  the  arena  of  the  three  worlds  gain  the 
supreme,  b^st  knowledge,  called  Kevala,  which  is  free 
from  obscurity ; obtain  the  pre-eminent  highest  rank 
(i.  e.  final  liberation)  on  that  straight  road  which  the 
best  (rinas  have  taught ; beat  the  army  of  obstacles ! 
Victory,  victory  to  thee,  bull  of  the  best  Kshatriyas ! 
Many  days,  many  fortnights,  many  months,  m£ny 
seasons,  many  half-years,  many  years  be  not  afraid 
of  hardships  and  calamities,  patiently  bear  dangers 
and  fears ; be  free  from  obstacles  in  the  practice  of 
the  law !’ 

Thus  they  raised  the  shout  of  victory.  (1 14) 

Then  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira — gazed  on 
by  a Circle  of  thousands  of  eyes1,  praised  by  a circle 
of  thousands  of  mouths,  extolled  by  a circle  of  thou- 
sands of  hearts,  being  the  object  of  many  thousands 
of  wishes,  desired  because  of  his  splendour,  beauty, 
and  virtues,  pointed  out  by  a circle  of  thousands  of 


1 laterally,'' by  thousands  of  circles  of  eyes,  Ac.  Ac. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


*59 


forefingers,  answering  with  (a  salam)  of  his  right 
hand  a circle  of  thousands  of  joined  hands  of  thou- 
sands of  men  and  women,  passing  along  a row  of 
thousands  of  palaces,  greeted  by  sweet  and  delightful 
music,  as  beating  of  time,  performance  on  the  Vt»4, 
Tfirya,  and  the  great  drum,  in  which  joined  shouts 
of  victory,  and  the  low  and  pleasing  murmur  of 
the  people;  accompanied  by  all  his  pomp,  all  his 
splendour,  all  his  army,  all  his  train,  by  all  his 
retinue,  by  all  hss  magnificence,  by  all  his  grandeur, 
by  all  his  ornaments,  by  all  the  tumult,  by  all  the 
throng,  by  all*  subjects,  by  all  actors,  by  all  time- 
beaters,  by  the  whole  seraglio ; adorned  with  flowers, 
scented  robes,  garlands,  and  ornaments,  &c.  (see 
$ 102,  down  to)  which  were  accompanied  at  the 
same  time  by  trumpets — went  right  through  Ku ruh.- 
pura  to  a park  called  the  Sha«davana  of  the  GnSxrh 
and  proceeded  to  the  excellent  treg  A-soka.  (115) 
There  under  the  excellent  tree  Asoka  he  caused 
his  p|lankin  to  stop,  descended  from  his  palankin, 
took  off  his  ornaments,  garlands,  and  finery  with 
his  own  hands,  and  with  his  own  hands  plucked 
out  his  hair  in  five  handfuls.  When  the  moon 
was  in  conjunction  with  the  asterism  Uttaraphal- 
guni,  he,  after  fasting  two  and  a half  days1  without 
drinking  water,  put  on  a divine  robe,  and  quite 
alone,  nobody  else  being  present,  he  tore  out  his 
hair  and  leaving  the  house,  entered  the  state  of 
houselessness.  (n6)* 

The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahftvira  for  a ye;  r and  , 

1 L e,  taking  only  one  meal  in  three  days.  "He  fasted  therefore 
two  continuous  days  and  the  first  part  ofjhe  third. 

* Cf.  AA&rftnga  Sfitra  II,  15,  § 22.  * 


260 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


a month  wore  clothes;  after  that  time  he  walked 
about  naked,  and  accepted  the  alms  in  the  hollow 
of  his  hand.  For  more  than  twelve  years  the 
Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivlra  neglected  his  body 
and  abandoned  the  care  of  it;  he  with  equanimity 
bore,  underwent,  and  suffered  all  pleasant  or  un- 
pleasant occurrences  arising  from  divine  powers, 
men,  or  animals.  (117)1 

Henceforth  the  Venerable  Ascetic  MahfLvlra  was 
houseless,  circumspect2  in  his  walking,  circumspect 
in  his  speaking,  circumspect  in  his  begging,  circum- 
spect in  his  accepting  (anything),  in  the  carrying  of  his 
outfit  and  drinking  vessel ; circumspect  in  evacuating 
excrements,  urine,  saliva,  mucus,  and  uncleanliness  of 
the  body ; circumspect  in  his  thoughts,  circumspect 
in  his  words,  circumspect  in  his  acts 3 ; guarding  his 
thoughts,  guarding  his  words,  guarding  his  acts, 
guarding  his  senses,  guarding  his  chastity ; without 
wrath,  without  pride,  without  deceit,  without  greed ; 
calm,  tranquil,  composed,  liberated,  free  from  temp- 
tations4, without  egofsm,  without  property;  he*' had 
cut  off  all  earthly  ties,  and  was  not  stained  by  any 
worldliness : as  water  does  not  adhere  to  a copper 
vessel,  or  collyrium  to  mother  of  pearl  (so  sins 
found  no  place  in  him) ; his  course  was  unobstructed 
like  that  of.  Life ; like  the  firmament  he  wanted  no 
support ; like  the  wind  he  knew  no  obstacles ; his 
heart  was  pure  like  the  water  (of  rivers  or  tanks) 
in  autumn ; nothing  could  soil  him  like  the  leaf  of 

1 Cf.  JUMnga  Stitra  II,  ig,  § 23.  , 

* Circumspect  is  samita,  guarding  gupta;  the  former  relates  to 
execution  of  good  acts,  the  latter  to  the  abstinence  from  bad  ones. 

* This  is  the  triad  man  as  mind,  v&4  speech,  k&ya  body. 

4 Asrava.  • 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


26l 


a lotus ; his  senses  were  well  protected  like  those 
of  a to/toise ; he  was  single  and  alone  like  the  horn 
of  a rhinoceros;  he  was  free  like  a bird;  he  was 
always  waking  like  the  fabulous  bird  Bhiruwrfa  \ 
valorous  like  an  elephant,  strong  like  a bull,  difficult 
to  attack  like  a lion,  steady  and  firm  like  Mount 
Mandara,  deep  like  the  ocean,  mild  like  the  moon, 
refulgent  like  the  sun,  pure  like  excellent  gold*; 
like  the  earth  he  patiently  bore  everything;  like 
a well-kindled  fire  he  shone  in  his  splendour. 

These  words  have  been  summarised  in  two 
verses : * 

A vessel,  mother  of  pearl,  life,  firmament,  wind, 
water  in  autumn,  leaf  of  lotus,  a tortoise,  a bird, 
a rhinoceros,  and  Bh&ruwttia ; I 

An  elephant,  a bull,  a lion,  the  king  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  the  ocean  unshaken — the  moon,  the  sun, 
gold,  the  earth,  well-kindled  fire.  II 

There  were  no  obstacles  anywKere  for  the  Vene- 
rable One.  The  obstacles  have  been  declared  to 
be  of  four  kinds,  viz.  with  regard  to  matter, 
space,  time, '*  affects.  With  regard  to  matter:  in 


* Each  of  these  birds  has  one  body,  two  necks,  and  three  legs. 

* The  last  three  similes  cannot  be  translated  accurately,  as  they 
contain  puns  which  must  be  lost  in  the  translation.  The  moon  is 
somalese,  of  soft  light,  but  Mahivtra  has  pure  thoughts  (leryfi, 
manaso  bahirvik&ra) ; the  sun  is  dittateo  of  splendent  light, 
Mah&vira  of  splendent  vigour;  gold  is  ^Syarftva,  a synonym  of 
kanaga  gold,  Mah&vira  always  retains  his  own  nature.  It  is. 
worthy  of  remark  that  only  two  regular  puns  (for  the  second  is 
but  a common  metaphor)  occur  in  a passage  in  which  a later 
writer  would  have  strained  his  genius  to  the  utmost  to  turn  every 
simile  into  a pun.  The  difference  of  style  is  best  seen  on  comparing 
this  passage  with  e.  g.  the  description  of  the  nun  Sarasaati  and  of 
autumn  in  the  KSlakfMdrya  Kathdnaka ; see  my  edition,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgeni.  Gesellschaft,  XXXIV,  pp.  a6o,  363. 


262 


KALPA  sflTRA. 


things  animate,  inanimate,  and  of  a mixed  state; 
with  regard  to  space:  in  a village  or  a town  or 
in  a wood  or  in  af  field  or  a threshing-floor  or  a 
house1  or  a court-yard;  with  regard  to  time:  in 
a Samaya2  or  an  Avalikd  or  in  the  time  of  a respir- 
ation or  in  a Stoka  or  in  a Ksha»a  or  in  a Lava 
or  in  a Muhfirta  or  in  a day  or  in  a fortnight  or  in 
a month  or  in  a season  or  in  a half  year  or  in  a year 
or  in  a long  space  of  time ; with  regard  to  affects : 
in  wrath  or  in  pride  or  in  deceit  or  in  greed  or  in 
fear  or  in  mirth  or  in  love  or  in  hate  or  in  quarrelling 
or  in  calumny  or  in  tale-bearing  or  in  scandal  or  in 
pleasure  or  pain  or  in  deceitful  falsehood,  &c.  (all 
down  to)*  or  in  the  evil  of  wrong  belief.  There  was 
nothing  of  this  kind  in  the  Venerable  One.  (118) 

The  Venerable  One  lived,  except  in  the  rainy 
season,  all  th‘e  eight  months  of  summer  and  winter, 
in  villages  only  a single  night,  in  towns  only  five 
nights ; he  was  * indifferent  alike  to  the  smell  of 
ordure  and  of  sandal,  to  straw  and  jewels,  dirt  and 
gold,  pleasur£/f&nd  pain,  attached  neither  to  “this 
world  nor  to  that  beyond,  desiring  nfcither  life  nor 
death,  arrived  at  the  other  shore  of  the  sams&ra, 
and  he  exerted  himself  for  the  suppression  of  the 

defilement  of  Karman.  (119) 

• 

1 Ghare  vfi,  omitted  in  my  edition. 

* Different  names  of  divisions  of  time ; a Stoka  contains  seven 
respirations,  a Kshana  many  (bahutara)  respirations  (according  to 
another  commentary  a Kshawa  contains  six  NMkis,  it  is  the  sixth 
part  of  a Gha/i),  a Lava  contains  seven  Stokas,  and  a Muhflrta 
seventy  Lavas.  This  system  of  dividing  time  differs  fjrom  all  other 
known;  compare  Colebrooke,  Mise. Essays,  II’,  pp.  540, 54 1 . Wilson, 
Vishnu  Ptu6»a,I*,p.  4ft  note  a. — Expufage  pakkhe  vfl  in  my  edition. 

* The  same  passage  occurs  in  the  Aupapfttika  Sfitra  (ed.  Leu- 
mann,  $ 87),  but  without  ah  indication  tint  it  is  not  complete.. 


LIVES  OP  THE  GINAS.  26$ 

With  supreme  knowledge,  with  supreme  intuition, 
with  supreme  conduct,  in  blameless  lodgings,  in 
blameless  wandering,  with  supreme  valour,  with 
supreme  Uprightness,  with  supreme  mildness;  with 
supreme  dexterity,  with  supreme  patience,  with  'su- 
preme freedom  from  passions,  with  supreme  control, 
with  supreme  contentment,  with  supreme  under- 
standing, on  the  supreme  path  to  final  liberation, 
which  is  the  fruit  of  veracity,  control,  penance,  and 
good  conduct,  the  Venerable  One  meditated  on  him- 
self for  twelve  years. 

During  the  thirteenth  year,  in  the  second  month 
of  summer,  in  the  fourth  fortnight,  the  light  (fort- 
night) ofVau&kha,  on  its  tenth  day,  when  the  shadow 
had  turned  towards  the  east  and  the  first  wake  was 
over,  on  the  day  called  Suvrata,  in  the  MuhUrta 
called  Vifaya,  outside  of  the  town  £Wmbhikagrima 
on  the  bank  of  the  river  Rgupilika,  not  far  from  an 
old  temple,  in  the  field  of  the  houleholder  S4m&ga*, 
under  a Sal  tree,  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction 
with  the  asterism  U ttaraphalgunl,  (the  Venerable  One) 
in  a squatting  position  with  joined  heels,  exposing 
himself  to  the  heat  of  the  sun,  after  fasting  two 
and  a half  days  without  drinking  water,  bong 
engaged  in  deep  meditation,  reached  the  highest 
knowledge  and  intuition,  called*  Kevala,  which  is 
infinite,  supreme,  unobstructed,  unimpeded,  complete, 
and  full.  (120)* 

When  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vlra  had 
become  a Gina,  and  Arhat,  he  was  a Kevalin, 
omniscient  and  comprehending  all  objects;  he 
knew  and  saw  all  conditions  of  the  world,  of  gods, 

1 Or  SSmftka.  * Cf.  JU&r&Rga  Sfttra  II,  15,  ( ag. 


264 


KALPA  SOTKA. 


men,  and  demons  : whence  they  come,  whither  they 
go,  whether  they  are  bom  as  men  or  animals 
(yfcyavana)  or  become  gods  or  hell-beings  (upap&da), 
the  ideas,  the  thoughts  of  their  minds,  the  food, 
doings,  desires,  the  open  and  secret  deeds  of  all 
the  living  beings  in  the  whole  world;  he  the 
Arhat,  for  whom  there  is  no  secret,  knew  and  saw 
all  conditions  of  all  living  beings  in  the  world, 
what  they  thought,  spoke,  or  did  at  any  mo- 
ment. (121)* 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vtra  stayed  the  first  rainy  season  in  Asthika- 
grdma1 2 * 4 *,  three  rainy  seasons  in  ATampd  and  Prr’sh/i- 
£amp&,  twelve  in  Vaisdlt  and  V drti^agrdma,  fourteen  in 
RA^agWha  and  the  suburb8  of  Ndlandi,  six  in  Mithili, 
two  in  Bhadrikd,  one  in  Alabhiki,  one  in  Pawita- 
bhftmi*  one  in  .Sri vast!,  one  in  the  town  of  P4p4* 
in  king  Hastip4la’s  office  of  the  writers : that  was 
his  very  last  rairiy  season.  (122) 

In  the  fourth  month  of  that  rainy  season,  in  the 
seventh  fortnight,  in  -the  dark  (fortnight)  of  K4rt- 
tika,  on  its  fifteenth  day,  in  the  last*  night,  in  the 
town  of  P4p4,  in  king  Hastip4la’s  office  of  the 
writers,  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahivlra  died,  went 
off,  quitted  the  world,  cut  asunder  the  ties  of  birth, 
old  age,  and  dedth;  became  a Siddha,  a Buddha, 

1 Cf.  Aiaranga  Sfltra  II,  15,  § 26. 

* According  to  the  commentary  it  was  formerly  called  Vardha- 
tn&na,  but  it  has  since  been  called  Asthikagr&ma,  because  a Yaksha 
•StUapfat  had  there  collected  an  enormous  heap  of  bones  of  the 
people  whom  he  had  killed.  On  that  heap  of  bones  tlje  inhabitants 
had  built  a temple. 

. * Bfthirikft? 

4 A place  in  Va^rabhflmi  according  to  the  commentaries. 

* MhggAimA  Pipi,  thp  middle  town  P&pl 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


265 


a Mukta,  a maker  of  the  end  (to  all  misery),  finally 
liberated,  freed  from  all  pains.  (123) 

This  occurred  in  the  year  called  A’andra,  the 
second  (of  the  lustrum)1;  in  the  month  called 
Prttivardhana ; in  the  fortnight  Nandi vardhana ; 
on  the  day  Suvratigni2 *,  surnamed  U pajama;  in 
the  night  called  Dev&nandi,  surnamed  N imti ; in 
the  Lava  called  Ariya ; in  the  respiration  called 
Mukta*;  in  the  Stoka  called  Siddha;  in  the  Kara/ta 
called  Niga  ; in  the  Muhtirta  called  Sarvfirtha- 
siddha ; while  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  with  the 
asterism  Sviti  he  died,  &c.  (see  above,  all  down 
to)  freed  from  all  pains.  (124) 

That  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahi- 
vlra  died,  &C.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all  pains, 
was  lighted  up  by  many  descending  and  ascending 
gods.  (125) 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vlra  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all 
pains,  a great  confusion  and  noise  was  originated 
by  many  descending  and  ascending  gods.  (126) 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vira  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all 
pains,  his  oldest  disciple,  the  monk  Indrabhdti  of 
the  Gautama  gotra,  cut  asunder  the  tie  of  friend- 
ship which  he  had  for  his  master4,  and  obtained  the 


1 The  yuga  or  lustrum  contains  five  years ; the  third  and  fifth 
yean  are  leap  yean,  called  abhivardhita,  the  rest  are  common  yean 
of  354  days  and  are  called  iandra.  The  day  has  1262  bh&gas. 

* Some  2£SS.  and  the  commentary  have  aggivesa.  * 

' Or  Supta, 

4 Indrabhfiti  was  on  a 'mission  to  convert  somebody  when 
Mahivtra  died.  Being  aware  that  love  had  no  place  in  one  who  is 
free  from  passion,  he  suppressed  his  friendship  for  his  teacher  and 


266 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


highest  knowledge  and  intuition,  called  Kevala,  which 
is  infinite,  supreme,  &c.,  complete,  and  full.  (127) 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
MahAvtra  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all 
pains,  the  eighteen  confederate  kings  of  KcLrf  and 
Ko.ra.la,  the  nine  Mallakis  and  nine  Li^Mavis1,  on 
the  day  of  new  moon,  instituted  an  illumination9 
on  the  Poshadha,  which  was  a fasting  day ; for  they 
said : * Since  the  light  of  intelligence  is  gone,  let  us 
make  an  illumination  of  material  matter!’  (128) 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mahivlra  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all 
pains,  the  great  Graha®  called  Kshudr&tma,  re- 
sembling a heap  of  ashes,  which  remains  for  two 
thousand  years  in  one  asterism,  entered  the  natal 

became  a Kevalin;  he  died  twelve  years  after,  having  lived  fifty  years 
as  a monk,  and  altogether  ninety-two  years. 

1 They  were  tributary  to  Afefoka,  king  of  VaUatt  and  maternal 
unde  of  MaMvtra.  'instead  of  Ukkhvn,  which  form  is  used  by  the 
Buddhists,  the  Gainas  have  Le&Aaki  as  the  Sanskrit  form  of  the 
Prfikrit  LeAAAat,  which  may  be  either.  • 

* Pfirfibhoyam  or  vSribhoyaxn.  The  meaning;  of  this  word  is  not 
clear,  and  the  commentator  also  did  not  know  anything  certain 
about  it  He  therefore  tries  three  different  etymological  explana- 
tions, which  are  all  equally  fanciful  I have  adopted  one  which 
makes  v&r&bhoya  to  stand  for  Sanskrit  dv&r&bhoga,  which  is 
explained  pr&dlpa,  lamp ; for  this  best  suits  the  meaning  of  the 
whole  passage.  The  Gainas  celebrate  the  Nirvftoa  of  Mahivlra 
with  an  illumination  on  the  night  of  new  moon  in  the  month 
Kirttlka. 

* It  is  not  clear  what  is  intended  by  this  Graha,  the  thirtieth  in 
the  list  of  Grahas.  Stevenson  supposes  it  to  have  been  a comet 
appearing  at  that  time.  There  was  a comet  at  the  time  of  the  battle 
of  Salamis,  as  Pliny  tells  us,  Hist  Nat.  II,  25,  which  would  answer 
pretty  well  as  regards  chronology.  But  it  had  the  form  of  a horn 
and  not  that  of  a heap  of  ashes,  fre  must  therefore  dismiss  the 
idea  of  identifying  it  with  the  Graha  in  question,  and  confess  that 
we  are  at  a loss  to  clerfr  up  the  mystery  of  tins  Grahfc 


LIVES  OF  THE  0INAS. 


267 

asterism  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&Vlra.  (129) 
From  the  moment  in  which  the  great  Graha,  &c., 
entered  the  natal  asterism  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
MahAvlra,  There  will  not  be  paid  much  respect  and 
honour  to  the  .5rama*as,  the  Nirgrantha  monks 
and  nuns.  (130)  But  when  the  great  Graha,  &c., 
leaves  that  natal  asterism,  there  will  be  paid  much 
respect  and  honour  to  the  Sramawas,  the  Nirgrantha 
monks  and  nuns.  (1 31) 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vtra  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all 
pains,  the  animalcule  called  Anuddhart  was  origi- 
nated: which  when  at  rest  and  not  moving,  is  not 
easily  seen  by  Nirgrantha  monks  and  nuns  who 
have  not  yet  reached  the  state  of  perfection,  but 
which  when  moving  and  not  at  rest,  is  easily  seen 
by  Nirgrantha  monks  and  nuns  who  have  not  yet 
reached  the  state  of  perfection.  (132)  On  seeing 
this  (animalcule)  many(Nirgrantha  monks  and  nuns 
must  refuse  to  accept  the  offered  alms. 

‘ Master,  why  has  this  been ’said  ?’  ‘After  this  time 
the  observance  of  control  will  be  difficult’  (133) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mah&vlra  had  an  excellent  community1  of 
fourteen  thousand  6rama»as  with  Indrabh&ti  at 
their  head;  (134)  thirty-six  thousand  nuns  with 
ATandand  at  their  head;  (135)  one  hundred  ,and 
fifty-nine  thousand  lay  votaries  with  tSahkhasataka 
at  their  head;  (136)  three  hundred  and  eighteen 

1 The  original  has:  ukkosiyi  samasasampayft;  ukkosiya'is 
translated  utkrt sh/a ; in  the  sequel  I abridge  the  similar  passages 
which  are  all  constructed  on*  the  same  model  as  f 134.  It  is  tobe 
noticed  that  these  numbers  though  exaggerated  are  nevertheless 
rather  moderate.  Compare  the  note  to  the  List  of  the  Sthaviras,  f t. 


268 


KALPA  sfiTRA. 


thousand  female  lay  votaries  with  Sulasd  and  Revatt 
at  their  head ; (137)  three  hundred  sages  who  knew 
the  fourteen  Pftrvas,  who  though  no  £7inas  came 
very  near  them,  who  knew  the  combination  of  all 
letters,  and  like  Gina  preached  according  to  the 
truth;  (138)  thirteen  hundred  sages  who  were 
possessed  of  the  Avadhi-knowledge  and  superior 
qualities ; ( x 39)  seven  hundred  Kevalins  who  pos- 
sessed the  combined1  best  knowledge  and  intui- 
tion; (140)  seven  hundred  who  could  transform 
themselves,  and,  though  no  gods,  had  obtained 
the  powers  (Wddhi)  of  gods;  (141)  five  hundred 
sages  of  mighty  intellect2 * * * * *  who  know  the  mental 
conditions  of  all  developed  beings  possessed  of 
intellect  and  five  senses  in  the  two  and  a half  conti- 
nents and  two  oceans ; (142)  four  hundred  professors 
who  were'never  vanquished  in  the  disputes  occurring 
in  the  assemblies  of  gods,  men,  and  Asuras ; (143) 
seven  hundred  male  and  fourteen  hundred  female 
disciples  who  reached  perfection,  &c.  (all  down  to) 
freed  from  all  pains;  (144)  eight  hundred  sages  in 
their  last  birth  who  were  happy  as 'regards  their 
station,  happy  as  regards  their  existence8,  lucky  as 
regards  their  future.  (145) 


1 Sambhinna.  According  to  the  commentary  this  word  has  been 

explained  in  two  opposite  ways.  Siddhasena  Div&kara  makes  it  out 

to  denote  that  knowledge  and  intuition  functionate  at  the  same 
time,  while  Ginabhadragam  in  the  SiddhSntahrfdaya  says  that  in 
our  case  knowledge  and  intuition  do  functionate  alternately. 

* 1 This  is  that  knowledge  which  is  called  mana£pjuy£ya  or  the 

knowledge  which  divines  the  thoughts  of  all  people. 

* Station  (gati)  is  explained  devagati,  state  of  the  gods,  ex- 

istence (sthiti),  devasthiti,  dev&yfirfipa,  existence  of  the  gods, 

having  the  length  $ftye*of  the  gods. 


LIVES  OF  THE  ffISAS. 


26  9 


The  Venerable  Ascetic  Mahdvlra  instituted  two 
epochst  in  his  capacity  of  a Maker  of  an  end : the 
epoch  relating  to  generations,  and  the  epoch  relat- 
ing to  psychical  condition ; in  the  third  generation 
ended  the  former  epoch,  and  in  the  fourth  year  of 
his  Kevaliship  the  latter.  (146)1 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vtra  lived  thirty  years  as  a householder,  more 
than  full  twelve  years  in  a state  inferior  to  perfec- 
tion, something  less  than  thirty  years  as  a Kevalin, 
forty-two  years  as  a monk,  and  seventy-two  years 
on  the  whole.  When  his  Karman  which  produces 
Vedaniya  (or  what  one  has  to  experience  in  this 
world),  Ayus  (length  of  life),  name,  and  family,  had 
been  exhausted,  when  in  this  Avasarpi#!  era  the 
greater  part  of  the  D u^shamasushamS.  period  had 
elapsed  and  only  three  years  and  eight  and  a half 
months  were  left,  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction 
with  the  asterism  Svitik  at  the  time  of  early  morning, 
in  the  town  of  P4pi,  and  in  king  HastipcLla’s  office 
of  the  writers,  (Mahivira)  si'ngle  and  alone,  sitting 
in  the  Samparyanka  posture,  reciting  the  fifty-five 
lectures  which  detail  the  results  of  Karman,  and  the 
thirty-six®  unasked  questions,  when  he  just  explained 
the  chief  lecture  (that  of  Marudeva)  he  died,  &c. 
(see  § 124,  all  down  to)  freed  from  all  pains.  (147) 


1 The  meaning  of  this  rather  dark  passage  is  according  to  the 
commentary  that  after  three  generations  of  disciples  (Vira,  Sudhar- 
man,  GambfisvSmin)  nobody  reached  Nirv&wa ; and  after  the  fourth 
year  of  Mah&vira’s  Kevaliship  nobody  entered  the  path  which  ends 
in  tinal  liberation,  so  that  all  persons  who  before  that  moment  Hhd 
not  advanced  in  the  way  to  final  liberation,  will  not  reach  that  state 
though  they  may  obtain  the  Kevalam  by  their  austerities  and 
exemplary  conduct 

* This  is  the  Uttaridhyayana  Sfitra.  • 


KALPA  sdTRA. 


270 

Since  the  time  that  the  Venerable  Ascetic  MaM- 
vlra  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all  pains, 
nine  centuries  have  elapsed,  and  of  the  tenth  century 
this  is  the  eightieth  year.  Another  redaction  has 
ninety-third  year  (instead  of  eightieth)1 * *.  (148) 

End  of  the  Fifth  Lecture. 

End  of  the  Life  of  Mah&vtra. 


1 To  what  facts  the  two  dates  in  this  paragraph  relate,  is  not 
certain.  The  commentators  confess  that  there  was  no  fixed  tradi- 
tion, and  bring  forward  the  following  four  facts,  which  are  applied 
at  will  to  either  date  : 

1.  The  council  of  Valabhi  under  the  presidency  of  Devarddhi, 
who  caused  the  SkkMnta  to  be  written  in  books. 

2.  The  council  of  Mathuri  under  the  presidency  of  Skandila, 
who  seems  to  have  revised  the  Siddh&nta. 

3.  The  public  reading  of  the  Kalpa  Sfitra  before  king  Dhruva- 
sena  of  Anandapura,  to  console  him4  on  the  death  of  his  son. 
Anandapura  is  identified  with  Af  ah&sth&na  by  Ginaprabhamuni,  and 
with  Badanagara  by  Samayasundara.  Some  scholars  have  assumed, 
but  not  proved,  that  this  Dhruvasena  is  identical  with  one  of  the 
Valabhi  kings  of  the  same  name. 

4.  The  removal  of  the  Pa^usan  by  KAlak&fc&rya  from  the  fifth 
to  the  fourth  Bh&drapada. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


271 


LIFE  OF  PARSVA. 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  lived  the  Arhat  PArrva, 
the  people’s  favourite1,  the  five  most  important 
moments  of  whose  life  happened  when  the  moon 
was  in  conjunction  with  the  asterism  Vir&khS. : in 
Vix&kM  he  descended  (from  heaven),  and  having 
descended  thence,  entered  the  womb  (of  his  mother); 
in  Vii&khi  he  was  born ; in  Vir&khi,  tearing  out  his 
hair,  he  left  the  house  and  entered  the  state  of 
houselessness ; in  Virikhi  he  obtained  the  highest 
knowledge  and  intuition,  called  Kevala,  which  is 
infinite,  supreme,  unobstructed,  unimpeded,  complete, 
and  full ; in  Vir&khi  he  obtained  final  liberation.  (149) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age,  in  the  first  month  of 
summer,  in  the  first  fortnight,  the  dai*k  (fortnight)  of 
Aaitra,  on  its  fourth  day,  the  Arhat  P&rrva,  the 
people’s  favourite,  descended  from  the  Pri#ata 
Kalpa8,  where  Ije  had  lived  for  twenty  S&garopamas, . 
here  on  the  continent  Gambhdvipa,  in  Bharatavarsha, 
in  the  town  of  Benares ; and  in  the  middle  of  the 
night  when  the , moon  was  in  conjunction  with  the 
asterism  Vir&kM,  after  the  termination  of  h'is  allotted 
length  of  life,  divine  nature,  and  existence  (among 
the  gods),  he  took  the  form  of  an  embryo  in  the 
womb  of  the  queen  V&m*L,  wife  of  Arvasena,  king 
(of  Benares).  (150) 

The  knowledge  of  the  Arhat  Pirrva,  the  people’s  ^ 
» * * 

1 Puris&d&nfya,  explained:  jwho  is  to  be  chosen  among  men 
because  of  his  preferable  karman. 

* This  is  the  tenth  world  of  the  gods. 


KALPA  stiTRA. 


272 

favourite,  (about  this)  was  threefold,  &c.  (repeat 
§§  3-95  after  making  the  necessary  substitutions, 
and  omitting  what  exclusively  applies  to  Mahd- 
vlra,  all  down  to)  comfortably  carried  her  unborn 
child.  (151) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Afhat  PAwva,  the 
people’s  favourite 1 — after  the  lapse  of  nine  months 
and  seven  and  a half  days,  in  the  second  month  of 
winter,  in  the  third  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of 
Paushya,  on  its  tenth  day,  in  the  middle  of  the  night 
when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  with  the  asterism 
Vis&kh£ — (V4mi),  perfectly  healthy  herself,  gave 
birth  to  a perfectly  healthy  boy.  (152) 

In  that  night  in  which  the  Arhat  Pirrva,  the 
people’s  favourite,  was  born,  &c.  (repeat  §§  97-107 
with  the  necessary  alterations,  all  down  to)  therefore 
shall  the  name  of  our  boy  be  Parsva 2.  (153,  154) 

The  Arhat  P4r^va,  the  people’s  favourite,  clever, 
with  the  aspirations  of  a clever  man,  of  great 
beauty,  controlling  his  senses,  lucky,  and  modest, 
lived  thirty  years  as  a householder.  Then*  the 
Laukintika  gods,  following  the  established  custom, 
addressed  him  with  these  kind,  pleasing,  &c.,  sweet, 
and  soft  words:  (155) 

* Victory,  victory  to  thee,  gladdener  of  the  world ! ’ 
(see  Jin,  down  to)  Thus  they  raised  the  shout  of 
victory.  (156)  Before  the  Arhat  Pirrva,  the  people’s 
favourite,  had  adopted  the  life  of  a householder,  &c. 
(see  § 1 1 2,  down  to)  indigent  persons. 

< 1 As  regards  the  construction  of  this  passage  compare  $ 96, 
note  1.  . *' 

* This  name  was  given  him  because  before  his  birth  his  mother, 
lying  on  her  couch,  saw  in  the  dark  a black  serpent  crawling  about 
This  is  die  account  given  by  the  commentator,  who  forgets  to  tell 
ns  how  it  comes  to  bear  on  the  name  Pfirrva. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


273 


In  the  second  month  of  winter,  in  the  third 
fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  Paushya,  on  its 
eleventh  day,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  riding  in 
his  palankin  called  Visild,  followed  on  his  way 
by  a train  of  gods,  men,  and  Asuras,  &c.  (Pdrsva) 
went  right  through  the  town  of  Benares  to  the  park 
called  Asramapada,  and  proceeded  to  the  excellent 
tree  Aroka.  There,  &c.  (see  § 116,  down  to)  five 
handfuls. 

When  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  with  the 
asterism  Vuikhd,  he,  after  fasting  three  and  a half 
days  without  drinking  water,  put  on  a divine  robe, 
and  together  with  three  hundred  men  he  tore  out 
his  hair,  and  leaving  the  house  entered  the  state  of 
houselessness.  (157) 

The  Arhat  Pdrrva,  the  people’s  favourite,  for 
eighty-three  days  neglected  his  body,  &c.  (see  $117, 
down  to)  animals.  (158) 

Thereafter  the  Arhat  firrva,  the  people  s favourite, 
was  houseless,  circumspect,  &c.  (see  §§  1 18-120,  down 
to)  meditated  upon  himself  for  eighty-three  days. 

During  the  eighty-fourth  day — it  was  in  the  first 
month  of  summer,  in  the  first  fortnight,  the  dark 
(fortnight) -of  ATaitra,  on  its  fourth  day,  in  the  early 
part  of  the  day,  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction 
with  the  asterism  VhikhH — Pirrva,  under  a Dhitaki 
tree,  after  fasting  two  and  a half  days  without 
drinking  water,  being  engaged  in  deep  meditation, 
reached  the  infinite,  &c.  (see  § 120,  down  to)  highest 
knowledge  and,  intuition  called  Kevala,  &c.  (see 
§ 121,  down  to)  moment.  (159) 

The  Arhat  P&wva„  the  people’s  favourite,  had 
eight  Ga»as  and  eight  Ga#adharas  (enumerated  in 
a »Sloka) : • 

t>»]  t 


*74  . KALPA  SOTRA. 

.Subha  and  Aryaghosha,  VasishMa1  and  Brahma* 
£4rin,  Saumya  and  iridhara,  Vtrabhadra  and 
Yams.  (160) 

The  Arhat  Pdrsva,  the  people’s  favourite,  had  an 
excellent  community  of  sixteen  thousand  5rama«as 
with  Aryadatta2  at  their  head;  (161)  thirty-eight 
thousand  nuns  with  Pushpa^hld  at  their  head ; (162) 
one  hundred  and  sixty-four  thousand  lay  votaries 
with  Suvrata  at  their  head;  (163)  three  hundred 
and  twenty-seven  thousand  female  lay  votaries  with 
Sunandi  at  their  head;  (164)  three  hundred  and  fifty 
sages  who  knew  the  fourteen  Ptirvas,  &c.  (see  § 138) ; 
(165)  fourteen  hundred  sages  who  were  possessed 
of  the  Avadhi  knowledge ; one  thousand  Kevalins ; 
eleven  hundred  sages  who  could  transform  them- 
selves,  six  hundred  sages  of  correct  knowledge,  one 
thousand  male  and  two  thousand  female  disciples 
who  had  reached  perfection,  seven  hundred  and  fifty 
sages  of  vast  intellect,  six  hundred  professors,  and 
twelve  hundred  sages  in  their  last  birth.  (166) 

The  Arhat  Pirora,  the  people’s  favourite,  Insti- 
tuted two  epochs  in  his  capacity  of  a Maker  of  an 
end:  the  epoch  relating  to  generations  and  the 
epoch  relating  to  psychical  condition;  the  former 
ended  in  the  fourth  generation,  the  latter  in  the 
third  year  of  his;  Kevaliship.  (167) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Arhat  P&rsva,  the 
people's  favourite,  lived  thirty  years  as  a house- 
holder, eighty-three  days  in  a state  inferior  to  per- 
fection, something  less  than  seventy  years  as  a 
Kevalin,  full  seventy  years  as  a .Sramspta,  and  a 
hundred  years  on  the  whole. 

■ ..II.J....... ......  — — , 4 

* C.  has  Vis/Aia,  i.  e.  Vuish/a.  8 Ariyadinna  in  the  original. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


275 

When  his  fourfold  Karman1  was  exhausted  and  in 
this  Avasarpi»i  era  the  greater  part  of  the  DuAsha- 
masushami  period  had  elapsed,  in  the  first  month  of 
the  rainy  season,  in  the  second  fortnight,  the  light 
(fortnight)  of  6V4va«a,  on  its  eighth  day,  in  the  early 
part  of  the  day  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction 
with  the  asterism  ViiikM,  (Pirrva),  after  fasting  a 
month  without  drinking  water,  on  the  summit  of 
mount  Sammeta,  in  the  company  of  eighty-three 
persons,  stretching  out  his  hands,  died,  &c.  (all  down 
to)  freed  from  all  pains.  (168) 

Since  the  time  that  the  Arhat  Pirrva,  the  people’s 
favourite,  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all 
pains,  twelve  centuries  have  elapsed,  and  of  the 
thirteenth  century  this  is  the  thirtieth  year.  (169) 


End  of  the  Life  of  Pirrva. 


1 See  § 147.. 


KALPA  S0TRA. 


*76 


LIFE  OF  ARISH7ANEMI. 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  lived  the  Arhat 
Arish/anemi,  the  five  most  important  moments  of 
whose  life  happened  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  asterism  Kx tr&.  In  KxXxt  he  descended 
from  heaven,  &c.  (see  § 149,  down  to)  obtained  final 
liberation.  (170) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age,  in  the  fotirth  month  of 
the  rainy  season,  in  the  seventh  fortnight,  the  dark 
(fortnight)  of  KUrttika,  on  its  twelfth  day,  the  Arhat 
Arish/anemi  descended  from  the  great  Vimina, 
called  Apariyfita,  where  he  had  lived  for  thirty-six 
Sigaropamas,  here  on  the  continent  £ambtidvipa,  in 
Bharatavarsha,  in  the  town  of  6auripura\  and  in  the 
middle  of  the  night  when  tfye  moon  was  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  asterism  A'itri,  he  took  the  form  of 

t 

an  embryo  in  the  womb  of  the  queen  Siv&,  wife 
of  the  king  Samudravi^aya,  &c.  (the*  seeing  of  the 
dreams,  the  accumulation  of  riches,  &c.,  should  be 
repeated  here).  (171) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Arhat  Arish^a- 
nemi — after  the  lapse  of  nine  months  and  seven  and. 
a half  days,  in  the  first  month  of  the  rainy  season,  in 
the  second  fortnight,  the  light  (fortnight)  of  6r4va»a, 
on  its  fifth  day,  &c. — (61  vi),  perfectly  healthy  herself, 
gave  birth  to  a perfectly  healthy  boy.  (Repeat  the 
account  of  the  birth,  substituting  the  name  Samudra- 

1 The  PrSkrit  form  is  Soriyapura,  which  would  correspond  to 
Sanskrit  6'aurikapura.  • It  is,  of  course,  Krishna's  town. 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS.  2 77 

, — - * ■ - 

vi/aya,  all  down  to)  therefore  shall  the  name  of  our 
boy  be  Arish/anemi  \ 

The  Arhat  Arish/anemi,  clever,  &c.  (see  §§  T55- 
157,  all  down  to)  indigent  persons.  (172)  In  the  first 
month  of  the  rainy  season,  in  the  second  fortnight, 
the  light  (fortnight)  of  •Sr4va»a,  on  its  sixth  day 
riding  in  his  palankin  called  U ttarakurA,  ‘and  fol- 
lowed on  his  way  by  a train  of  gods,  men,  and 
Asuras,  &c.  (Arish/anemi)  went  right  through  the 
town  of  DvArAvati  to  the  park  called  Revatika,  and 
proceeded  to  the  excellent  Asoka  tree.  There,  &c. 
(see  £ 1 16,  down  to)  five  handfuls.  When  the  moon 
was  in  conjunction  with  the  asterism  ATitrA,  after « 
fasting  two  and  a half  days  without  drinking  water, 
he  put  on  a divine  robe,  and  together  with  a thou- 
sand persons  he  tore  out  his  hair,  and  leaving  the 
house  entered  the  state  of  houselessness.  (173) 

The  Arhat  Arish/anemi  for  fifty-four  days  neg- 
lected his  body,  &c.  (see  §§  1 1 7-1*20).  During  the 
fifty-fifth  day — it  was  in  the  third  month  of  the  rainy 
sealon,  in  the  fifth  fortnight;  the  dark  fortnight  of 
Arvina,  on  itS  fifteenth  day,  in  the  last  part  of  die 
day,  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  with  the 
asterism  AfitrA — (Arish/anemi)  under  a Ve/asa*  tree 
on  the  summit  of  mount  GirnAr3,  after  fasting 
three  and  a half  days  without  drinking  water,  8cc.t 
obtained  infinite,  &c.,  highest  knowledge  and  in- 
tuition called  Kevala,  &c.  (see  § 121,  down  to) 
moment.  (174) 

» His  mother  saw  in  a dream  a nemi,  the  outer  rim  of  a wheel,  • 
which  consisted  of  rish/a  stones  flying  up  to  the  sky.  Hence  the 
name  Arish/anemi.  • . 

* Vafc  in  some  MSS.;  it  is  the  Banyan  tree. 

* Ugginta  in  the  original.  , 


KALPA  S^TRA. 


*78 

The  Arhat  Arish/anemi  had  eighteen  Gawas  and 
eighteen  Ga«adharas.  (175) 

The  Arhat  Arish/anemi  had  an  excellent  commu- 
nity of  eighteen  thousand  5rama»as  witK  Varadatta 
at  their  head ; (176)  forty  thousand  nuns  with  Arya 
Yakshitti  at  their  head ; (1 77)  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
nine  thousand  lay  votaries  with  Nanda  at  their  head; 
(17S)  three  hundred  and  thirty-six  thousand1  female 
lay  votaries  with  Mah&suvratA  at  their  head;  (179) 
four  hundred  sages  who  knew  the  fourteen  PClryas, 
&€.;  (180)  fifteen  hundred  sages  who  were  possessed 
of  the  Avadhi  knowledge;  fifteen  hundred  Kevalins; 
fifteen  hundred  sages  who  could  transform  them- 
selves ; one  thousand  sages  of  vast  intellect ; eight 
hundred  professors;  sixteen  hundred  sages  in  their 
last  birth ; fifteen  hundred  male  and  three  thousand 
female  disciples  who  had  reached  perfection. 

The  Arhat  Arish/anemi  instituted,  &c.  (see  § 146, 
down  to)  the  former  ended  in  the  eighth  generation, 
the  latter  in  the  twelfth  year  of  his  Kevaliship.  (181) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Arhat  Arish/anemi 
lived  three  centuries  as  a prince,  fifty-four  days,  in 
a state  inferior  to  perfection,  something  less  than 
seven  centuries  as  a Kevalin,  Full  seven  centuries  as 
a St amawa,  a thousand  years  on  the  whole.  When 
his  fourfold  Karman  was  exhausted  and  in  this  Ava- 
sarpi«i  era  a great  part  of  the  Du^shamasushamd 
period  had  elapsed,  in  the  fourth  month  of  summer, 
in  the  eighth  fortnight,  the  light  (fortnight)  of 
Ash&dAsL,  on  its  eighth  day,  in  the  middle  of  the 
night  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  *with  the 
asterism  Kitxi,  (Arish/anemi),  after  fasting  a month 


1 Read  Mattisam  in  the  printed  text 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


279 


without  drinking  water,  on  the  summit  of  mount 
Girn4r,  in  the  company  of  five. hundred  and  thirty- 
six  monks,  in  a squatting  position,  died,  &c.  (all 
down  to)  freed  from  all  piains.  (182) 

Since  the  time  that  the  Arhat  Arish/anemi  died, 
&c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all  pains,  eighty-four 
thousand  years  have  elapsed,  of  the  eighty-fifth 
millennium  nine  centuries  have  elapsed,  of  the  tenth 
century  this  is  the  eightieth  year.  (183) 


End  of  the  Life  of  Arish/anemi. 


KALPA  sOTRA. 


280 


EPOCHS  OF  THE  INTERMEDIATE 
TtRTHAKARAS. 

Since  the  time  that  the  Arhat  Nami  died,  &c. 
(all  down  to)  freed  from  all  pains,  584,979  years 
have  elapsed,  this  is  the  eightieth  year1.  (184) 
Since  the  death  of  Munisuvrata  this  is  the  year 
1,184,980.  Since  Malli2  this  is  the  year  6,584,980. 
Ara  died  10,000,000 years  before  Malli;  Kunthu  a 
quarter  of  a Palyopama  before  Malli;  S&nti  three- 
quarters  of  a Palyopama;  Dharma  three  S&garo- 
pamas  before  Malli;  Ananta  seven  S&garopamas 
before  Malli;  Vimala  sixteen  S&garopamas  before 
Malli;  Vfisuptif ya  forty  Sigaropamas  before  Malli; 
.Srey&wsa  a hundred  S&garopamas  before  Malli. 
•S'! tala  died  a kjrore  of  Sagaropamas,  less  42,003 
years  and  eight  and  a half  months,  before  the  death 
ofVira.  Suvidhi.  sumamed  Pushpadanta,  died 
ten  krores  of  Sigaropamas  before  51{ala ; Aandra- 
prabha  a hundred  krores  of  Slgaropamas  before 
51tala ; Sup&rsva  a thousand  krores  of  S&garo- 
pamas  before  51tala ; Padmaprabha  ten  thousand 
krores  of  S&garopamas  before  51  tala;  Sumati  one 
hundred  thousand  krores  of  Sigaropamas  before 
51tala;  Abhinandana  one  million  krores  of  Sigaro- 
pamas  before  51tala ; Sambhava  two  million  krores 
of  S&garopamas  before  51tala;  A/ita  five  million 

krores  of  Sigaropamas  before  51tala.  (185-203) 

— * . 

1 The  numbers  aid  given  in  the  same  way  as  in  $ 183.  I have 
abridged  these  tedious  ‘accounts.  All  Tirthakaras  except  Mahlvtra 
have  the  title  Arhat,  which.  1 have  dropped  in  die  sequel 

* Read  Malli  (for  Mai#  in  the  printed  edition  of  the  text 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


281 


’LIFE  OF  tf/SHABHA. 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  lived  the  Arhat 
/?fshabha,  the  Kosalian  \ four  important  moments 
of  whose  life  happened  when  the  moon  was  in  con- 
junction with  the  asterism  Uttardsh4dS44;  the  fifth, 
when  in  conjunction  with  Abhifit : (.204)  in  U ttari- 
shkdhS.  he  descended  from  heaven,  &c.  (all  down  to) 
in  Abhifit  he  obtained  final  liberation.  (205) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age,  in  the  fourth  month 
of  summer,  in  the  seventh  fortnight,  the  dark  (fort- 
night) of  Ash&a^a  on  its  fourth  day,  the  Arhat 
AVshabha,  the  Ko-ta  ian,  descended  from  the  great 
Vimdna  called  SarvSrthasiddha,  where  he  had  Kved 
for  thirty-three  S&garopamas,  here  on  the  continent 
Gambftdvipa,  in  Bhar^tavarsha,  in  Ikshvikubhdmi, 
and  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  &c.,  he  took  the  form 
of  an  embryo  in  the  womb*  of  Marudevi,  wife  of 
the  patriarch^  Nibhi.  (206) 

The  knowledge  of  the  Arhat  Afshabha  about 
this,  &c.  (all  as  in  the  case  of  Mahdvlra,  but  note 
the  following  differences : the  first  dream  is  a bull 
1 coming  forward  with  his  face,’  the  other  (mothers 
of  Tirthakaras  see  first)  an  elephant.  She  (Maru- 
devi) relates  them  to  N&bhi,  the  patriarch;  there 


1 Kosaliya= Kauralika.  He  is  thus  called  because  he  was  bom 
in  Korall  or  Ayodhyfi.  0 * 

* Kulakara;  these  Kulakaras  were  the  first  kings  and  founders  of 
families  -at  the  time  when* the  rest  of  mankind  were  ‘ Yugalins.’ 
The  first  Kulakara  was  Vimalav&hana;  the  seventh  and  last  of  the 
line  N&bhi.  -» 


282 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


are  no  interpreters  of  dreams ; NAbhi,  the  patriarch, 
himself  interprets  them).  (207) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Arhat  i&shabha, 
the  Ko&lian, — in  the  first  month  of  summer,  in  the 
first  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  Aaitra,  on  its 
eighth  day,  &c., — (Marudevi),  perfectly  healthy  her- 
self, gave  birth  to  a perfectly  healthy  boy.  (208) 

(The  circumstances  connected  with  the  birth  of 
/?tshabha  are  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  that  of 
Mah&vira,  only  that  the  contents  of  §§  100  and  10 1 
do  not  apply  to  the  present  case.)  (209) 

The  Arhat  ^fshabha,  the  Kosalian,  belonged  to 
the  K&yyapa  gotra,  and  he  had  five  names : jfftsha- 
bha,  First  King,  First  Mendicant,  First  (Sana,  and 
First  Tirthakara.  (210) 

The  Arhat  /frshabha,  the  Kosalian,  clever,  with 
the  aspirations  of  a clever  man,  of  great  beauty, 
controlling  (his  senses),  lucky,  and  modest,  lived  two 
millions  of  former  years1  as*a  prince,  and  six  mil- 
lions three  hundred  thousand  former  years  as  a kipg. 
During  his  reign  he  taught,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
people,  the  seventy-two  sciences,  of  which  writing  is 
the  first,  arithmetic  the  most  important,  and  the 
knowledge  of  omens  the  last,  the  sixty-four  accom- 
plishments of  woipen,  the  hundred  arts,  and  the 
three  occupations  of  men2.  At  last  he  anointed  his 

1 See  Ai&r&nga  Sfitra  I,  6, 3,  $ 2,  note  1. 

2 The  arts,  as  those  of  the  potter,  blacksmith,  painter,  weaver, 
and  barber,  each  of  which  five  principal  arts  is  subdivided  into 
twenty  branches,  are  inventions  and  must  be  taught ; while  the  occu- 
pations, agriculture,  trade,  Ac.  have  everywhere  developed,  as  it 
were,  of  themselves.  The  accomplishments  of  women  are  dancing, 
singing,  Ac.  The  commentator  adds  to  these  a detailed  list  of 
those  questionable  accomplishments  which  V&tsy&yana  has  so 
curiously  described,  and  refers  the  reader  to  the  Gayamangala  for 
further  details.  The  latter  work,  a still  extant  commentary  on  the 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS.  283 

hundred  sons  as  kings,  and  gave  each  a kingdom. 
Then  the  Lauk&ntika  god,  following  the  established 
custom,  &c.  (see  §§  no-112,;  down  to)  indigent  per- 
sons. In  the  first  month  of  summer,  in  the  first 
fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  A’aitra,  oh  Its  eighth 
day,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  day,  riding  in  his  palan- 
kin  called  Sudarsani,  followed  on  his  way  by  a train 
of  gods,  men,  and  Asuras,  &c.  (iftshahha)  went  right 
through  the  town  Vinltd  to  the  park  called  Siddh&r- 
tha  Vans,  and  proceeded  to  the  excellent  tree  Aroka. 
There,  &c.  (see  $ 116,  down  to)  four  handfuls. 
When  the  m6on  was  in  conjunction  with  the  asterism 
Ashda^fl,  he,  after  fasting  two  and  a half  days 
without  drinking  water,  put  on  a divine  robe,  and 
together  with  four  thousand  of  high,  noble,  royal 
persons,  and  Kshatriyas,  he  tore  out  his  hair,  and 
leaving  the  house  entered  the  state  of  houseless- 
ness. (211) 

The  Arhat  ^‘shabha,  the  Koralian,  for  one  thou- 
sand^ years  neglected  his  body,  &c.  (see  §§  1 17-120, 
down  to)  meditated  upon  himself  for  one  thousand 
years.  Thereupon — it  was  in  the  fourth  month  of 
winter,  the  seventh  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of 
Ph&lguna,  on  its  eleventh  day,  in  the  early  part  of 
the  day,  when  the  moon  was  in  conjunction  with  the 
asterism  Ashia54i,  outside  of  the  town  Purimatila, 
in' the  park  called  .Saka&mukha,  under  the  excellent 
tree  Nyagrodha — (/foshabha)  after  fasting  three  and 
a halfdays  without  drinking  water,  being  engaged  in 
deep  meditation,  reached  the  infinite,  &c.  (see  § 120, 
down  to)  ‘highest  knowledge  and  intuition  called 
Kevala,  &c.  (see  § 1 21,  down  to)  moment.  (212) 

K&ma  Sfitra,  must  therefore  be  older  than  130?,  the  date  of  0iaapra- 
bham  uni’s  commentary  on  the  Kalpa  Sfttra. 


284 


KALPA  sCTRA. 


The  Arhat  /fo’shabha,  the  Kojalian,  had  eighty- 
four  Ga#as  and  eighty-four  Ga^adharas.  (213) 

The  Arhat  i&’shabha,  the  Ko.ra.lian,  had  an  excel- 
lent community  of  eighty-four  thousand  >Srama»as 
with  Atfshabhasena  at  their  head;  (214)  three  hun- 
dred thousand  nuns  with  Brahmisundarl  at  their 
head;  (215)  three  hundred  and  five  thousand  lay 
votaries  with  Srey&msa.  at  their  head;  (216)  five 
hundred  and  fifty-four  thousand  female  lay  votaries 
with  Subhadrd  at  their  head ; (217)  four  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  fifty  sages  who  knew  the  fourteen 
Pfirvas,  &c.;  (218)  nine  thousand  sages  who  were 
possessed  of  the  Avadhi  knowledge;  (219)  twenty 
thousand  Kevalins;  (220)  twenty  thousand  six  hun- 
dred sages  who  could  transform  themselves;  (221) 
twelve  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty  sages  of  vast 
intellect,  &c.;  (222)  twelve  thousand  six  hundred 
and  fifty  professors ; (223)  twenty  thousand  male 
and  forty  thousand  female  disciples  who  had  reached 
perfection ; (224)  twenty-two  thousand  nine  hundred 
sages  in  their  last  birth,  &c.  (225) 

.The  Arhat  A&habha,  the  Kosalian, 'instituted,  &c. 
(see  § 146,  down  to)  the  former  ended  after  number- 
less generations,  the  latter  from  the  next  Muhfirta 
after  his  Kevaliship.  (226) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Arhat  iftshabha, 
the  Koralian,  lived  two  millions  of  former  years 
as  a prince,  six  millions  three  hundred  thousand 
former  years  as  a king,  together  eight  millions 
three  hundred  thousand  former  years  as  a house- 
holder; a thousand  (former)  years  in  a state 
inferior  to  perfection,  nin^-and-ninety  thousand 
former  years  as  a Kevalin,  together  a hundred 
thousand  former  years  as  a *SVama#a,  and  eight 


LIVES  OF  THE  GINAS. 


28$ 


millions  four  hundred  thousand  years  on  the  whole. 
When  his  fourfold  Karman  was  exhausted,  and  in 
this  Avasarpiwi  era  the  Sushamadu^shaml  period 
had  nearly’  elapsed,  only  three  years  and  eight  and  a 
half  months  being  left,  in  the  third  month  of  wipter, 
in  the  fifth  fortnight,  the  dark  (fortnight)  of  M&gha, 
on  its  thirteenth  day,  in  the  early  part  of  the  day 
when  the  moon  was  m conjunction  with  the  asterism 
Abhgit,  (i&shabha),  after  fasting  six  ‘and  a half 
days  without  drinking  water,  on  the  summit  of 
mount  Ash&pada,  in  the  company  of  ten  thousand 
monks  in  the  Samparyanka  position,  died,  &c.  (all 
down  to)  freed  from  all  pains.  (227) 

Since  the  time  that  the  Arhat  ^fshabha,  the 
Koralian,  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all 
pains,  three  years  and  eight  and  a half  months 
elapsed;  thereupon  one  ko/i  of  ko/is  of  Sigaropatnas, 
less  forty-two  thousand  and  three  years  and  eight 
and  a half  months,  elapsed.  At  th*at  time  the  Vener- 
able Ascetic  Mahclvira  died  ; after  his  NirvcLwa  nine 
centuries  elapsed,  of  the  tefith  century  this  is  the 
eightieth  yeir. 


End  of  the  Life  of  J&shabha. 


End  of  the  Lives  of  the  Irinas. 


286 


KALPA  S^TRA. 


LIST  OF  THE  STHAVIRAS. 

< 

At  that  period,  at  that  age  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
MahAvira  had  nine  Ga»as  and  eleven  Ganadharas. 

' Why,  now,  has  it  been  said,  that  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  MahAvira  had  nine  Gawas,  but  eleven 
Gawadharas  ?’ 

* The  oldest  monk  of  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Ma- 
hAvira was  IndrabhAti  of  the  Gautama  'gotra,  who 
instructed  five  hundred  *Srama#as ; the  middle-aged 
monk  was  AgnibhAti  of  the  Gautama  gotra,  who  in- 
structed five  hundred  5rama»as  ; the  youngest  was 
VAyubhAti  of  the  Gautama  gotra,  who  instructed 
five  hundred  .Sramattas.  The  Sthavira  Arya-Vyakta 
of  the  BhAradvAgu  gotra  instructed  five  hundred  5ra- 
mawas ; the  Sthayira  Arya-Sudharman  of  the  Agni- 
vef/Ayana  gotra  instructed  five  hundred  3rama»as ; 
the  Sthavira  Maawfikaputra 1 of  the  VAsishMa  gQtra 
instructed  two  hundred  and  fifty  .Sr^maaas;  the 
Sthavira  Mauryaputra  of  the  KA^yapa  gotra  in- 
structed two  hundred'  and  fifty  6rama»as ; the 
Sthavira  Akampita  of  the  Gautama  gotra  and  Stha- 
vira A-felabhrAtra  of  the  HAritAyana  gotra,  both 
Sthaviras  instructed  together  three  hundred  5ra- 
manas  each ; the  Sthaviras  MetArya  and  PrabhAsa, 
both  of  the  Kaumfi»ya  gotra,  instructed  together 

1 Some  spell  this  name  Mamff/aputra;  he  and  Mauryaputra  were 
softs  of  the  same  mother,  Vi^ayadevt,  but  different  fathers ; the 
former  of  Dhanadeva,  the  other  of  Maurya.  I do  not  know  any  legend ' 
which  connects  this  Maurya  with  a kiftg  of  the  Maurya  dynasty, 
which  besides  would  be  impossible  from  a chronological  point  of 
view.  r 


LIST  OF  THE  STHAVIRAS,  287 

three  hundred  6rama»as  each  \ Therefore,  Sir,  has 
it  been  said  that  the  Venerable  Ascetic  MahAvira 
had  nine  Ga»as,  but  eleven  Ga»adharas.’  (1) 

All  these  eleven  Gawadharas  of  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  MahAvira,  who  knew  the  twelve  Angas,  the 
fourteen  Pftrvas,  and  the  whole  SiddhAnta  of  the 
Ga«ins,  died,  &c.  (all  down  to)  freed  from  all  pains 
in  R^fagWha  after  fasting,  a month  without  drink- 
ing water.  The  Sthaviras  Indrabh&ti  and  Arya 
Sudharman  both  died  after  the  NirvAwa  of  MahA- 
vlra.  The  Nirgrantha  .Sramawas  of  the  present  time 
are  all  (spiritual)  descendants  of  the  monk  Arya 
Sudharman,  the  rest  of  the  Ganadharas  left  no 
descendants.  (2) 

. The  Venerable  Ascetic  MahAvira  was  of  the  KA- 
jyapa  gotra.  His  disciple  was 2: 

1.  Arya  S.udharman  of  the  AgniveryAyana gotra ; 

2.  Arya  CrambAnAnian  of  the  Kiryapa  gotra; 

3.  Arya  Prabhava  of  the  Kitykyana  gotra ; 

4.  Arya  .Sayyambha,  father  of  Manaka,  was  of 
* the  Vatsa  gotra ; 

5.  Arya  Va^obhadra  of  the  TungikAyana  go- 

tta- (3) 

In  the  short  redaction  the  list  of  Sthaviras  after 
Arya  Y arobhadra  is  the  following : 

6.  Arya  Sambhtitavi^aya  of  die  MA/Aara  gotra 

and  Arya  BhadrabAhu  of  the  Pri^lna  gotra; 

7.  Arya  Sthftlabhadra  of  the  Gautama  gotra ; 

8.  i.  Arya  MahAgiri  of  the  AilApatya  gotra  and 

* The  sum  total  of  &ama«as  is  therefore  4711, while  inf  134.it 
is  stated  to  have  been  14,600. 

' * I only  give  the  facts.  The  names  of  those  Sthaviras  who  con- 
tinue the  line  tie  spaced.  The  names  are  given  in  their  Sanskrit 
form  which  in  many  cases  is  well  known,  hi  others  can  easily  be 
made  out  In  doubtful  cases  I have  put  thelPrfikrit  form  in  backets. 


288 


KALPA  S<!)TRA. 


ii.  Arya  Suhastin  of  the  Visish/Aagotra; 

9.  Susthita  and  Supratibuddha,  surnamed  Ko- 
/ika  and  Kfrkandaka,  of  the  Vy&ghrlpatya 
gotra;  . 

10.  Arya  Indradatta  (Indadinna)  of  the  Kahrika 

gotra ; 

1 1.  Arya  Datta  (Dinna)  of  the  Gautama  gotra ; 

12.  Arya  Siwhagiri  G&tismara  of  the  Kaurika 

gotra; 

13.  Arya  Va^ra  of  the  Gautama  gotra; 

14.  Arya  V a/rasena  of  the  Utkrfshfa  gotra1 * *. 

He  had  four  disciples  : Arya  N&gila,  Arya  Pad- 

mila,  Arya  £ayanta,  and  Arya  T&pasa,  each  of 
whom  founded  a .S&khi  called  after  his  name,  viz. 
the  Aryanfrgilfr  .S&khi,  the  Aryapadmilfr  .S&khfr,  the 
Arya^ayantl  .S£kh4,  and  the  Aryatfipast  .S^khl  (4) 
In  the  detailed  redaction  the  list  of  Sthaviras  after 
Arya  Yarobhadra.  is  the  following : 

6.  i.  Arya  Bhadrab&hu  of  the  Prfriina  gotra,  who 
had  four  disciples  of  the  Klyyapa  gotjra : 
a.  Godisa,  founder  of  the  Gpd&sa  Ga«a4, 
which  was  divided  into  four  S'S.khis : 

«.  The  Timraliptiki  •SSkh^t, 
ft.  The  Ko/ivarshlyi  .S&khd, 
y.  The  ,Pu«^ravardhaniyi  ■S'dkhi,  and 


1 He  is  left  out  in  some  MSS. 

* It  is  not  quite  dear  what  is  meant  by  Gsuta,  Kula,  and  <S%khl 
Gana  designates  the  school  which  is  derived  from  one  teacher; 
Kula  the  succession  of  teachers  in  one  line ; «S$khS  the  lines  which 
bnmch  off  from  each  teacher.  These  terms  seem  to  be  disused  in 
modem  times,  for  the  four  principal  divisions  called  after  N&gendra, 
Sandra,  Nivrrtti,  and  Vidyddhara  are  generally  called  Kulas,  but  also 
occasionally  S&khfa.  “They  go  back  to  Va gn  according  to  some, 

to  Va^rasena  according  to  others.  The  modem  Gikkfa  appears 

equivalent  with  theanciint Gaaa. 


LIST  OF  THE  STHAVIRAS. 


289 


8.  The  D&stkharbatf  ldl  »S&khd. 

b.  Agnidatta, 

c.  Ganadatta, 

d.  Sdmadatta. 

ii.  Arya  Sambhutavi^-aya  of  the  MaAfcara 
gotra,  who  had  twelve  disciples : 

7.  a.  Nandanabhadra, 

b.  Upananda, 

c.  Tishyabhadra1, 

d.  Y ai’obhadra, 

e.  Sumanobhadra 2, 

f.  Ma^ibhadra, 

g.  Pu»yabhadra  ®, 

h.  SthAlabhadra  of  the  Gautama  gptra, 

i.  Rig umati, 

k.  Gambti, 

l.  Dlrghabhadra,  and 

m.  PcL«<2ubhadra ; 

and  seven  female  disciples : 

a.  Yakshd, 

b.  Y akshadatti  (YakshadinnS.), 

c.  Bh<ii4, 

d.  Bhdtadatti  (Bhtitadinni), 

e.  Seni  (also  E nt), 

f.  Vent, 

* 

g.  Re«&. 

8.  i.  Arya  Mah&giri  of  the  Aildpatya  gotra,  who 

had  eight  disciples : 

a.  Uttara, 

b.  Balissaha,  who  both  together  founded  the 
» Uttarabalissaha  Ga«a,  which  was  di- 
vided intq  four  Vakhas : 

1 Tisabhadda,  translated  Tridarabhadra. 

1 Or  Sumanabhadra.  * Or  Pfirmbhadra, 

[as] 


U 


290 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


a.  KamambikA, 

j8.  SautaptikA  (Pr.  SoittiyA), 

y.  Kau/umbini  (or  Ku?fc/adharl), 

8.  AandanAgari. 

c.  Dhanarddhi  (Pr.  DhanaddAa), 

d.  61rarddhi  (Pr.  SiriddAa), 

e.  KWmya, 

f.  NAga, 

g.  NAgaputra, 

h.  A^aluka  Rohagupta  of  the  Kaurika  gotra, 

founder  of  the  TrairAsika  .SAkhA. 
ii.  Arya  Suhastin1  of  the  VAsishMa  gotra,  who 
had  twelve  disciples : 

9.  a.  Arya  Roha#a  of  the  Klryapa  gotra, 
founder  of  the  Uddeha  Ga/za,  which 
was  divided  into  four  .SAkhAs : 
o.  UdumbarikA  (Pr.  UdumbaripgiyA), 
ft  MAsapArikA, 
y.  MatipatrikA,  , 

8.  PAraapatrikA  (Pr.  PunnapattiyA,  Panna°. 
Sunna',  or  Suvanna0); 
and  into  six  Kulas: 
a.  NAgabhAta, 
ft.  SomabhAta, 

y.  Ullaga&Ma.  (or  Ardraka^&t  ?), 

S'.  Hastilipta  (Pr.  Hatthili^ga), 

NAndika  (Pr.  Nand^ga), 

ParihAsaka. 


1 Suhastin  is  said  to  have  converted  Samprati,  grandson  and  suc- 
cessor of  Axoka.  The  correctness  of  this  statement  is  open  to 
doubt;  but  at  any  rate  Suhastin  must  have  been  one  of  the  most 
important  patriarchs,'  for  under  and  immediately  after  him  the  spread 
of  Gainism  must  have  been  uncommonly  vigorous,  as  is  proved  by 
the  great  number  of  Kulas  and  <S3kh&s  at  that  time. 


LIST  OF  THE  STHAVIRAS.  291 

b.  Bhadrayasas  of  the  Bhiradv&^a  gotra,  who 

founded  the  Uafav&tfka  Gawa,  which 
was  divided  into  four  .S&kh&s  : 
a.  Kamptyikl  (Pr.  Kawpijgiyd), 

0.  Bhadrtyiki  (Pr.  Bhaddi^iyA), 
y.  KikandikS, 

8.  MekhaliyikS.  (Pr.  MehaliggiyS.) ; 
and  into  three  Kulas : 

a.  Bhadrayaska  (Pr.  Bhadda^asiya), 

0'.  Bhadraguptika, 

y'.  Yasobhadra  (Pr.  Gasabhadda). 

c.  Megha. 

d.  K&marddhi  (Pr.  of  the  KuwaSala 

gotra,  who  founded  the  Vesavi/ika 
Ga»a,  which  was  divided  into  four 
•S&kh&s : 

a.  .SrivastikS., 

0.  Ri^yapilik^.  (Pr.  Rag^ap&liyA), 
y.  Antarawfik*  (Pr.  Antari^iy^), 

8.  Kshemaliptikd  (Pr.  Khemaligg-iy&) 
and  into  four  Kulas : 
a.  Ga«ika, 

0'.  Maighika, 
y'.  K&marddhika, 

S'.  Indrapuraka. 

e.  .Srlgupta  of  the  H&rita  gotra,  founder  of 

the  AT&ra«a  Ga»a,  which  was  divided 
into  four  .S&kh&s : 
a.  H&ritamdlikdrl, 

0.  SawkeLrikS, 
y.  Gavedhuki, 

8.  Vatfran&garl ; 
and  into  seven  Kulas : 

a.  V&tsaliya  (Pr.  V *kkfa\igga), 

V 2 


292  KALPA  SCTRA. 

/S'.  Pritidharmika, 

y'.  H'&ridraka  (Pr.  H&li^ga),  . 

S'.  Pushyamitrika  (Pr.  Pftsamittigga'I, 
e'.  M&lyaka  (Pr.  Mdli^ga), 

C'.  Aryaie/aka, 

y'.  Kmhwasakha  (Pr.  Kanhasaha). 

f.  7?fshigupta  Kdkatidaka  of  the  V£sish/<6a 

gotra,  founder  of  the  Minava  Ga«a, 
which  was  divided  into  four  .SSkhis : 
a.  K&syapiyi  (Pr.  Kisaviggiyi), 

/3.  Gautamiyi  (Pr.  Goyame^giyi), 
y.  VAsish^iyd  (Pr.  Vasi/^iyi), 

S.  Saur&shfriki ; 
and  into  three  Kulas : 
o'.  ifoshiguptika, 

/S'.  /frshidattika, 
y'.  Abhiyasasa. 

g.  and  h.  Susthita  and  Supratibuddha, 

surnamed  Kai^ika  and  Kakandaka,  of 
the  Vy&ghrcLpatya  gotra,  founders  of 
the  Kaii^ika  Ga«a,  which  was  divided 
into  four  .S&khas : 
a.  U££an&garl, 

/3.  Vidyddhari, 
y.  Vagri, 

S.  Madhyamikd  (Pr.  Majg&milla) ; 
and  into  four  Kulas : 

a'.  Brahmaliptaka  (Pr.  Bawbhalijgu), 

/S'.  V&tsaliya  (Pr.  V zkkhzVigga.,  cf.  e.  o'.), 
y'.  V4»iya  (Pr.  V4mgga), 

S'.  Prasnavihanaka.  « 

Both  Sthaviras  had  together  five  disciples : 
io.  a.  Arya  Indradatta  (Pr.  Indadinna)  of  the 
K&syapa  gotra, 


LIST  'OF  THE  STHAVIRAS. 


293 


b.  Priyagantha,  founder  of  the  Madhyaml 

Si khi, 

c.  Vidyddharagopala  of  the  K&ryapa  gotra, 

• founder  of  the  Vidy&dhari  .S4kh4, 

d. ‘  ifoshidatta, 

e.  Arhaddatta  (Pr.  Arihadatta). 

1 1.  Arya  Datta  (Pr.  Dinna)  of  the  Gautama  gotra, 

who  had  two  disciples : 

12.  i.  Arya  >S&ntisenika  of  the  MiMara  gotra, 

founder  of  the  U^ian&garl  •S’aJkM.  who 
had  four  disciples: 

a.  Arya  Senika,  founder  of  the  Aryaseuik& 

.Sakha, 

b.  Arya  T apasa,  founder  of  the  Aryatipasi 

d>4kh4, 

c.  Arya  Kubera,  founder  of  the  Aryakuber4 

. 6akh&,  and 

d.  Arya  ifo'shipilita,  founder  of  the  Arya ri~ 

shipdlitd  .Sakhd.  * 

ii.  Arya  Siwhagiri  GeLtismara  of  the  Gau- 
tama gotra,  who  hdd  four  disciples : 

13.  a.  Dhanagiri, 

b.  Arya  Samita  of  the  Gautama  gotra,  founder 

of  the  Brahmadvipika  6ilkh4, 

c.  Arya  Va^ra  of  the  Gautama  gotra, 

founder  of  the  Aryava^ri  *S4kh4, 

d.  Arhaddatta  (Pr.  Arihadinna). 

14.  i.  Arya  Vafrasena,  founder  of  the  Aryanlgili 

a Sikhi, 

ii.  Arya  Padma,  founder  of  the  Aryapadmah 
• Sikhi, 

iii.  Arya  Rath/i  of  the  Vatsa  gotra,  founder 

of  the  Arya^ayanti  iSdkhd. 

15.  Arya  Pushyagiri  of  the  Kaurika  gotra. 


294 


KALPA  S0TRA. 


16.  Arya  Phalgumitra  of  the  Gautama  gotra. 

17.  Arya  Dhanagiri  of  the  VfisishAfa  gotra. 

18.  Arya  .Sivabhftti  of  the  Kautsa  gotra. 

19.  Arya  Bhadra  of  the  Kisyapa  gottfa. 

20.  Arya  Nakshatra  of  the  K&ryapa  gotra. 

21.  Arya  Raksha  of  the  Klryapa  gotra. 

22.  Arya  N&ga  of  the  Gautama  gotra. 

23.  Arya  ^ehila1  of  the  V&sishMa  gotra. 

24.  Arya  Vish«u  of  the  M&Mara  gotra. 

25.  Arya  K alaka  of  the  Gautama  gotra. 

26.  Arya  Sampalita  and  Bhadra,  both  of  the 

Gautama  gotra. 

27.  Arya  VWddha  of  the  Gautama  gotra. 

28.  Arya  Sanghap&lita  of  the  Gautama  gotra. 

29.  Arya  Hastin  of  the  K&ryapa  gotra. 

30.  Arya  Dharma  of  the  Suvrata  gotra. 

31.  Arya  Siwha  of  the  Klryapa  gotra. 

32.  Arya  Dharma  of  the  Klryapa  gotra. 

33.  Arya  S&ndWydi*.  t 

' A various  reading  has  Gtilh ila  = <?yesh/>4a.  • 

* This  list  in  prose  from  1 7 down  to  33  is  wanting  in  some  MSS. 
I think  that  .S$»<filya  is  the  same  as  Skandila,  who  was  president  of 
the  council  of  Mathura,  which  seems  to  have  been  the  rival  of  that 
in  Valabhi;  see  notes  to  my  edition  of  the  Kalpa  Sfitra,  p.  117. 

It  deserves  to  be  noticed  that  the  gotra  of  .SaH^ilya  is  not  given, 
while  that  of  the  remairyng  Sthaviras  is  specialised.  This  seems  to 
prove  that  his  name  is  a later  addition  to  the  list. 

After  the  prose  list  all  MSS.  have  eight  gathis,  in  which  the 
names  16-32,  given  above,  are  repeated.  Instead  of  translating 
these  verses,  which  contain  little  more  than  a string  of  names,  I only 
note  down  the  differences  from  the  above  list.  After  18  is  added 
Durgaya  Krfshwa,  a Kau/ika ; Nakshatra  is  shortened,  metri  causa, 
to  Nakkha ; the  gotra  of  Sanghap&lita  is  Kfbyapa  instead  of  Gau- 
tama; after  30  are  inserted  Hasta  of  the  K&ryapa  gotra  and 
Dharma.  • * 

After  these  g&th&s  follow  five  more,  whicn  are  wanting  in  some 
MSS.,  and  are  not  commented  upon.  The  last  (14th)  g&thft  is 


LIST  OF  THE  STHAVIRAS. 


295 


Bowing  down  my  head,  I pay  my  reverence  to 
the  Sthavira  Cambti  of  the  Gautama  gotra,  who 
possessed  steady  virtue,  good  conduct,  and  know- 
ledge. ix.  * 

I prostrate  myself  before  the  Sthavira  Nandi ta 
of  Kaiyapa  gotra,  who  is  possessed  of  great 
clemency  and  of  knowledge,  intuition,  and  good 
conduct,  x. 

Then  I adore  the  Kshamfisramawa  Dedgamn  of 
the  K&yyapa  gotra,  who,  steady  in  his  conduct,  pos- 
sesses the  highest  righteousness  and  virtue,  xi. 

Then  I prostrate  myself  before  the  Ksham&rra- 
ma»a  Sthiragupta  of  the  V&tsya  gotra,  the  preserver 
of  the  sacred  lore,  the  wise  one,  the  ocean  of  wisdom, 
him  of  great  virtue,  xii. 

Then  I adore  the  Sthavira  prince,  Dharma,  the 
virtuous  Gawin,  who  stands  well  in  knowledge,  in- 
tuition, good  conduct,  and  penance,  and  is  rich  in 
virtues 1.  xiii.  t 

I revere  the  Kshamfisrama/ra  Devarddhi  of  the 
Klryapa  gotra,  who  wears,  as  *it  were,  the  jewel  of 
the  right  understanding  of  the  Sdtras,  and  pos- 
sesses the  virtues  of  patience,  self-restraint,  and 
clemency,  xiv. 

End  of  the  List  of  the  Sfhaviras. 

found  in  all  MSS.  It  brings  the  list  down  to  the  president  of  the 
council  of  Valabhf.  (The  translation  of  the  gathas  ix-xiv  is  given 
in  full  in  the  text.) 

1 The  Sthaviras  named  in  verses  ix— xiii  are  probably  not  to  be 
regarded  as  following  each  other  in  a continuous  line,  but  rather  aS 
famous  Sthaviras  praised  here  for  some  reason  or  other  ('  %drtham). 
At  least  the  first,  ffambft,  seefhs  to  be  the  sstme  with  Jambft,  the 
second  of, the  list,  who  was  also  a Kaiyapa. 


296 


KALPA  S0TRA. 


RULES  FOR  YATIS1. 

x.  In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable 
Ascetic  Mah&vira  commenced  the  Pajgnxsan  when  a 
month  and  twenty  nights  of  the  rainy  season  had 
elapsed. 

‘ Why  has  it  been  said  that  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mah&vira  commenced  the  Pa^usan  when  a month 
and  twenty  nights  of  the  rainy  season  had 
elapsed  ?’  (1) 

* Because  at  that  time  the  lay  people  have  usually 
matted  their  houses,  whitewashed  tfrem,  strewn 
them  (with  straw),  smeared  them  (with  cowdung), 
levelled,  smoothed,  or  perfumed  them  (or  the  floor 
of  them),  have  dug  gutters  and  drains,  have  fur- 
nished their  houses,  have  rendered  them  comfort- 
able, and  have  cleaned  them.  Hencfe  it  has  been 
said  that  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira  com- 
menced the  Pa^usan  when  a month  and  twenty 
nights  of  the  rainy  season  had  elapsed/  (2) 

As  the  Venerable  Ascetic  Mah&vira  commenced 
the  Pag^usan  when  a month  and  twenty  nights  of 
the  rainy  season  had  elapsed,  so  the  Gawadharas 
commenced  the  Paggusan  when  a month  and  twenty 
nights  of  the  rainy  season  had  elapsed.  (3)  As  the 
Gawadharas  have  done,  so  the  disciples  of  the 
Gawadharas  have  done.  (4)  # As  they  have  done, 


• 1 S4m£Mrt. 


RULES  FOR  YATIS. 


297 


so  the  Sthaviras  have  done.  (5)  As  they  have  done, 
so  do  the  Nirgrantha  •Srama#as  of  the  present 
time.  {6) 

As  they  do,  so  our  masters,  teachers,  &c.  do.  (7) 
As  they  do,  so  do  we  commence  the  Paggusan  after 
a month  and  twenty  nights  of  the  rainy  season  have 
elapsed.  It  is  allowed  , to  commence  the  Pa^gusan 
earlier,  but  not  after  that  time.  (8) 

2.  Monks  or  nuns  during  the  Paggusan  are  allowed 
to  regard  their  residence  as  extending  a Yo^ana  and 
a Kroxa  all  around,  and  to  live  there  for  a moderate 
time.  (9)  . 

3.  During  the  Paggusan  monks  or  nuns  are  allowed 
to  go  and  return,  for  the  sake  of  collecting  alms,  not 
farther  than  a Yo^ana  and  a Krosa  (from  their 
lodgings).  (10)  If  there  is  (in  their  way)  an  always 
flowing  river  which  always  contains  water,  they  are 
not  allowed  to  travel  for  a Yo^ana  and  a Krom.  (1 1) 
But  if  the  river  is  like  the  Er4va*tl  near  Ku«4l4,  such 
that  it  can  be  crossed  by  putting  one  foot  in  the 
water  and  keeping  the  oth’er  in  the  air,  there  it  is 
allowed  to  'travel  for  a Yo^ana  and  a Krora.  (12) 
But  where  that  is  impossible,  it  is  not  allowed  to 
travel  for  a Yo^ana  and  a Krosa.  (13) 

4.  During  the  Partisan  the  A^irya  will  say, 

‘ Give,  Sir !’  Then  he  is  allowed  to  give  (food  to 
a sick  brother),  but  not  to  accept  himself.  (14)  If 
the  A/£ctrya  says,  Accept,  Sir!’  then  he  is  allowed 
to  accept  (food),  but  not  to  give.  (15)  If  the  A/£4rya 
says,  ‘ Give,  Sir ! accept,  Sir!’  then  the  patient  is 
allowed»to  give  and  to  accept  (food).  (16)  * 

5.  Monks  or  nuns  who  are  hale  and  healthy,  and 
of  a strong  body,  are  not  allowed  during  the  Partisan 
frequently  to  take  the  following  nine  drinks : milk; 


298 


KALPA  stiTRA. 


thick  sour  milk,  fresh  butter,  clarified  butter,  oil, 
sugar,  honey,  liquor,  and  meat.  (1 7) 

6.  During  the  Pa^usan  a collector  of  alms  might 
ask  (the  A&irya),  ‘ Sir,  is  (anything  of  the  just-men- 
tioned articles)  required  for  the  sick  man  ?’  he  (the 
A&irya)  says,  ‘Yes,  it  is.’  Then  (the  sick  man) 
should  be  asked,  ‘ How  much  do  you  require  ?’  The 
Ai&rya  says,  * So  much  is  required  for  the  sick  man  : 
you  must  take  so  much  as  he  told  you.’  And  he 
(the  collector  of  alms)  should  beg,  and  begging  he 
should  accept  (the  required  food).  Having  obtained 
the  quantity  ordered,  he  should  say,  ‘ No  more ! ’ 
Perchance  (the  giver  of  food)  might  ask,  * Why  do 
you  say  so,  Sir  ?’  (Then  he  should  answer),  ‘ Thus 
much  is  required  for  the  sick  man.’  Perchance,  after 
that  answer  the  other  may  say,  ‘ Take  it,  Sir ! You 
may  after  (the  sick  man  has  got  his  shared  eat  it  or 
drink  it.’  Thus  he  is  allowed  to  accept  it,  but  he  is 
not  allowed  to  accept  it  by  pretending  that  it  is  for 
the  sick  man.  (18) 

7.  In  householders’  families  which  are  converted, 
devoted,  staunch  adherers  (to  the  law),  and  honour, 
praise,  and  permit  (the  visits  of  monks),  Sthaviras, 
during  the  Pa^gusan,  are  not  allowed  to  ask,  ‘ Sir, 
have  you  got  such  or  such  a thing  ?’  if  they  do  not 
see  it. 

‘ Why,  Sir,  has  this  been  said  ?'  ‘ Because  a devout 
householder  might  buy  it  or  steal  it.’  (19) 

8.  During  the  Paggusan  a monk  eats  only  one 
meal  a day,  and  should  at  one  fixed1  time  frequent 
the  abodes  of  householders  for  the  sake  of  collecting 

1 I.e.  after  the  sfitra  and  artha  paurushis  or  the  religious 
instruction  in  the  morning.  • 


RULES  FOR  YATIS. 


299 


alms,  except  when  he  does  services  for  the  Ai&rya, 
the  teacher,  an  ascetic,  or  a sick  man,  likewise  if  he 
or  she  be  a novice  who  has  not  yet  the  marks  of  ripe 
age1 *.  (20)  To  a monk  who  during  the  Paggusan 
eats  only  one  meal  on  every  second  day,  the  follow- 
ing special  rule  applies.  Having  gone  out  in  the 
morning,  he  should  eat  and  drink®  his  pure  dinner, 
then  he  should  clean  and  rub  his  alms-bowl.  If  his 
dinner  was  sufficient,  he  should  rest  content  with  it 
for  that  day ; if  not,  he  is  allowed  for  a second  time 
to  frequent  the  abodes  of  householders  for  the 
sake  of  collecting  alms.  (21)  A monk  who  during 
the  Pa^gusan  eats  on  every  third  day,  is  allowed 
twice  to  frequent  the  abodes  of  householders  for  the 
sake  of  collecting  alms.  (22)  A monk  who  during 
the  Pagfusan  eats  one  meal  on  every  fourth  day,  is 
allowed  three  times  to  frequent  the  abodes  , of  house- 
holders for  the  sake  of  collecting  alms.  (23)  A 
monk  who  keeps  still  more  protracted  fasts,  is  allowed 
at  all  (four)  times  to  frequent  the  abodes  of  house- 
holders for  tfye  sake  of  collecting  alms.  (.24) 

9.  A monk  who  during  the  Pajgusan  eats  one 
meal  every  day,  is  allowed  to  accept  all  (permitted) 
drinks.  A monk  who  during  the  Paggusan  eats 
one  meal  on  every  second  day,  is ‘allowed  to  accept 
three  kinds  of  drinks  : water  used  for  watering  flour, 
sesamum,  or  rice3.  A monk  who  eats  one  -meal 

1 I.  e.  on  whose  belly,  armpits,  lips,  &c.  hair  has  not  yet  grown. 
The  last  part  is  also  explained : except  an  A^arya,  teacher,  ascetic, 
sick  monk,  fnd  novice. 

* PiAt&  is  the  reading  of  tfie  commentaries. 

• Cf.  Aj&r&nga  Sfitra  II,  1,  7,  § 7.  The  definitions  given  in  our 
commentary  are  the  following : the  first  is  water  mixed  with  flour, 
■or  water  used  for  washing  the  hands  after  kneading  flour;  the 


3oo 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


on  every  third  day,  is  allowed  to  accept  three  kinds 
of  drinks : water  used  for  washing  sesamum,  chaff, 
or  barley1.  A monk  who  during  the  Partisan  eats 
one  meal  on  every  fourth  day,  is  allowed  to  accept 
three  kinds  of  water : rain-water,  or  sour  gruel,  or 
pure  (i.  e.  hot)  water.  A monk  who  during  the 
Pagfusan  keeps  still  more  protracted  fasts,  is  allowed 
to  accept  only  one  kind  of  drink : hot  pure  water. 
It  must  contain  no  boiled  rice®.  A monk  who  ab- 
stains from  food  altogether,  is  allowed  to  accept  only 
one  kind  of  drink : pure  hot  water.  It  must  contain 
no  boiled  rice ; it  must  be  filtered,  not  unfiltered  ; it 
must  be  a limited  quantity,  not  an  unlimited  one ; 
it  must  be  sufficient,  not  insufficient.  (25) 

10.  A monk  who  during  the  Paggusan  restricts 
himself  to  a certain  number  of  donations3,  is  allowed 
to  accept  (e.  g.)  five  donations  of  food,  And  five  of 
drink ; or  four  of  food,  and  five  of  drink ; or  five  of 
food,  and  four  of  drink.  He  may  accept  one  dona- 
tion of  salt  for  seasoning  his  meat4.  He  should 


second,  water  with  which  squeezed  leaves,  &c.  are  sprinkled; 
the  third,  water  used  for  washing  threshed  and  winnowed  rice 
(tam/ula). 

1 A^ar&hga  Sdtra  II,  1,  7,  § 8.  The  first  is  water  used  for  washing 
sesamum,  or,  in  MahdrSsh/ra,  husked  sesamum ; the  second,  water 
used  for  washing  rice,  &c.  (vrihyadi) ; the  third,  water  used  for 
washing  barley. 

* The  commentator  says  that  the  body  of  monks  who  fast 
longer  than  four  days  is  usually  inhabited  by  a deity ; this  seems  to 
denote,  in  our  language,  mental  derangement  as  a consequence  of 
staging  oneself. 

* Datti.  The  commentator  does  not  explain  this  woftl.  It  seems 
to  denote  the'  quantity  of  food  or  drink  which  is  given  by  one 
man. 

4 The  one  donation  of  salt  is  meant  to  make  up  the  five  donations 
to  which  the  monk  confines  himself.  But  he  should  not  reckon  * 


RULES  FOR  YATIS. 


301 


rest  content  for  that  day  with  the  dinner  he  has 
brought  together,  and  is  not  allowed  a second  time 
to  frequent  the  abodes  of  householders  for  the  sake 
of  collecting  alms.  (26)  During  the  Paggusan  monks 
or  nuns  who  restrict  their  visits  to  certain  houses 
may  go  to  a place  where  rice  is  cooked1,  if  it  is  the 
seventh  house  from  that  where  they  are  lodged. 
According  to  some,  the  lodging  is  included  in  the, 
seven  housed  which  such  a mendicant  must  pass 
before  he  may  participate  in  the  festive  entertain- 
ment ; but  according  to  others,  it  is  not  included  in 
those  seven  houses.  (27) 

1 1 . During  the  Paggusan  a monk  who  collects  alms 
in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  is  not  allowed  to  frequent 
the  abodes  of  householders,  &c.,  if  rain2,  even  in  the 
form  of  a fine  spray,  falls  down.  (28)  During  the 
PaggTisan.a  monk  who  collects  alms  in  the  hollow  of 
his  hand,  is  not  allowed  to  stay  anywhere  except  in  a 
house  after  having  accepted  alms,  for  it  might  begin 
to  rain.  But  he  should  eat  a part,  and  put  back  the 
rest  (if  it  then  begins  to  fain),  covering  his  hand 
with  the  other  hand,  and  laying  it  on  his  bosom  or 
hiding  it  under  his  armpit8 ; then  he  should  go  to 
well-covered  (places),  to  a cave  or  the  foot  of  a tree, 
where  no  water  or  drops  of  water  or  spray  of  water 
falls  in  his  hand.  (29) 

12.  During  the  Pa^gnsan  a monk  who  collects 


the  donations  of  food  above  the  fixed  number  as  donations  of  drink 
if  the  latter  have  not  yet  reached  the  fixed  number. 

1 Samkhtufi,  the  word  which,  in  the  AHrdnga  Sfitra  II,  1,  2^  &c., 
we  have  translated  * festive  entertainment* 

2 Rain  is  here  and  in  the  sequel  called  rain-body,  i.  e.  rain-drops 
considered  as  containing  life,  apkfiya.  * 

8 To  render  kaksha. 


302 


KALPA  S6TRA. 


alms  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  is  not  allowed  to 
collect  alms  if  rain,  even  in  the  form  of  a fine  spray, 
falls  down.  (30) 

13.  During  the  Paj^usan  a monk  who  uses  an 
alms-bowl  is  not  allowed  to  frequent  the  abodes  of 
householders  for  the  sake  of  collecting  alms  if  it 
rains  fast,  but  he  is  allowed  to  do  so  if  it  rains  but 
little ; but  they  must  wear  then  an  under  and  upper 
garment.  (31)  During  the  Pagsnisan,  a monk  who  has 
entered  the  abode  of  a householder  while  there  are 
single  showers  of  rain,  is  allowed  (when  the  rain 
ceases  for  a moment)  to  stand  under  a grove,  or  in 
his  residence,  or  in  the  assembling-hall  of  the  village1, 
or  at  the  foot  of  a tree.  (32)  If  before  his  arrival  a 
dish  of  rice  was  being  cooked,  and  after  it  a dish  of 
pulse  was  begun  to  be  cooked,  he  is  allowed  to 
accept  of  the  dish  of  rice,  but  not  of  the  dish  of 
pulse.  (33)  But  if  before  his  arrival  a dish  of  pulse 
was  being  cooked,  and  after  it  a dish  of  rice  was 
begun  to  be  cooked,  he  is  allowed  to  accept  of  the 
dish  of  pulse,  but  not  of  the  dish  of  rice.  (34)  If 
both  dishes  were  begun  to  be  cooked  before  his 
arrival,  he  is  allowed  to  accept  of  both.  If  both 
dishes  were  begun  to  be  cooked  after  his  arrival,  he 
is  not  allowed  to  accept  of  either.  He  is  allowed  to 
accept  of  what  was  prepared  before  his  arrival ; he 
is  not  allowed  to  accept  of  what  was  prepared  after 
his  arrival.  (35)  During  the  Pa/gusan,  &c.  (see 
§ 32,  down  to)  tree;  he  is  not  allowed  to  pass 
there  his  time  with  the  food  he  had  collected  be- 
fore. But  he  should  first  eat  and  drink  his  pure 
(food  and  drink),  then  rub  and  clean  his  alms-bowl, 


1 Vika/agrtha. 


RULES  FOR  YATIS. 


303 


and,  putting  his  things  together,  he  should,  while 
the  sun  has  not  yet  set,  go  to  the4  place  where  he 
is  lodged ; but  he  is  not  allowed  to  pass  the  night 
in  the  fo'rmer  place.  (36)  During  the-  Paggnsan, 
&c.  (see  § 32,  down  to)  tree.  (37)  It  is  not  allowed 
that  there  at  the  same  place  should  stand  together 
one  monk  and  one  nun,  nor  one  monk  and  two  nuns, 
nor  two  monks  and  one  nun,  nor  two  monks  and  two 
nuns.  But  if  there  is  a fifth  person,  a male  or  female 
novice,  or  if  that  place  can  be  seen  (by  those  who 
pass)  or  doors  open  on  it,  then  they  are  allowed  to 
stand  there  together.  (38)  During  the  Pa.gg'usan, 
&c.  (see  § 32,  down  to)  tree.  It  is  not  allowed  that 
there  at  the  same  place  should  stand  together  a 
• monk  and  a lay  woman,  &c.  (through  the  four  cases 
as  in  § 28).  But  if  there  is  a fifth  person,  a Sthavira 
or  a Sthaviri,  or  if  that  place  can  be  seen  (by  those 
who  pass)  or  doors  open  on  it,  then  they  are  allowed 
to  stand  there  together.  The  same  rule  applies  to 
a nun  and  a layman.  (39) 

14.  During  the  Paggoisan  monks  or  nuns  are  not 
allowed  to  accept  food,  drink,  dainties,  and  spices  for 
one  who  has  not  asked  them,  and  whom  they  have 
not  promised  to  do  so.  (40) 

‘ Why  has  this  been  said,  Sir  ?’  * Because  one 
who  collects  alms  for  another  without  being  asked 
for  it,  might  eat  them  or  not,  just  as  he  lists.’  (41)  . 

15.  During  the  Pajgusan  monks  or  nuns  are  not 
allowed  to  take  their  meals  as  long  as  their  body  is 
wet  or  moist  (42) 

‘ Hovff  has  this  been  said,  Sir  ?’  * Seven  places 
which  retain  the  moisture  have. been  declared:  the 
hands,  the  lines  in  the  hand,  the  nails,  the  top  of 
the  nails,  the  brows,  the  under  lip,  the  upper  lip.’ 


3©4 


KALPA  S6TRA. 


But  when  they  perceive  that  the  water  on  their  body 
has  dried  up  and  the  moisture  is  gone,  then  they  are 
allowed  to  take  their  meals.  (43) 

16.  There  are  these  eight  classes  of  small  things 
which  a mendicant  ought  diligently  to  perceive, 
observe,  and  inspect,  viz.  living  beings,  mildew, 
seeds,  sprouts,  flowers,  eggs,  layers,  and  moisture. 

What  is  “understood  by  the  small  living  beings? 
The  small  living  beings  are  declared  to  be  of  five 
kinds : black,  blue,  red,  yellow,  and  white  ones. 
There  is  an  animalcule  called  Anuddhari,  which 
when  at  rest  and  not  moving  is  not  easily  seen  by 
monks  and  nuns  who  have  not  yet  reached  perfection, 
which  when  not  at  rest  but  moving  is  easily  seen  by 
monks  and  nuns  who  have  not  yet  reached  perfec- 
tion. Monks  and  nuns  who  have  not  yet  reached 
perfection  must  diligently  perceive,  observe,  and 
inspect  this.  Those  are  the  small  living  beings.  (44) 
What  is  understood  by  small  mildew  ? Small 
mildew  has  been  declared  to  be  of  five  kinds : black, 
blue,  &c.  There  is  a kind  of  small  mildew  which 
has  the  same  colour  as  the  substance  on  which  it 
grows.  Monks,  nuns,  &c.  (see  § 44,  down  to)  inspect 
this.  That  is  small  mildew. 

What  is  understood  by  small  seeds  ? Small  seeds 
are  declared  to  be  of  five  kinds : black,  blue,  &c. 
There  is  a kind  of  small  seeds  of  the  same  colour 
as  grain1.  Monks  and  nuns,  &c.  (see  § 44,  down  to) 
inspect  this.  Those  are  the  small  seeds. 

What  is  understood  by  small  sprouts  ? Small 
sprouts  are  declared  to  be  of  five  kinds*,  black, 
blue,  &c.  There  „is  a kind  .of  small  sprouts  of 


" 1 Ka«ikl. 


RULES  FOR  YATIS. 


305 


the  same  colour  as  earth.  Monks  and  nuns,  &c. 
(see  § 44,  down  to)  inspect  them.  Those  are  the 
small  sprouts. 

What  is*  understodd  by  small  flowers  ? Small 
flowers  are  declared  to  be  of  five  kinds : black, 
blue,  &c.  There  is  a kind  of  small  flowers  of 
the  same  colour  as  the  tree  (on  which  they  grow). 
Monks  and  nuns,  &c.  (see  § 44,  down  to)  inspect 
them.  Those  are  the  small  flowers. 

What  is  understood  by  small  eggs  ? Small  eggs 
are  declared  to  be  of  five  kinds:  eggs  of  biting 
insects l * *,  of  spiders,  of  ants, . of  lizards  (or  wasps)  *, 
and  of  chameleons8!  Monks  and  nuns,  &c.  (see 
§ 44,  down  to)  inspect  them.  Those  are  the  small 
eggs- 

What  is  understood  by  small  caves  or  lairs? 
Small  caves  or  lairs  are  declared  to  be  of  five 
kinds : lairs  of  animals  of  the  asinine  kind,  chasms, 
holes,  cavities  widening  below  like  the  stem  of  a 
palm  tree,  and  wasps’  nests.  Monks  and  nuns,  &c. 
(see  § 44,  down  to)  inspect  them.  Those  are  the 
small  caves  6r  lairs. 

What  is  understood  by  small  moisture?  Small 
moisture  is  declared  to  be  of  five  kinds : dew,  hoar- 
frost4 * * *, fog,  hailstones,  and  damps.  Monks  and  nuns, 


1 Uddawja,  mosquitoes,  gadflies,  bugs. 

* Halikfl,  explained  by  grthakokila,  which  I take  to  mean  the 

same  as  grrhagolikfl,  a kind  of  lizard ; and  vrihmant,  a kind  of 
wasps,  ditto,  of  lizards. 

* Hallohaliyfl,  which  is  declared  by  the  commentator  to  be 
synonymous  with  ahilcuA,  sanuft,  and  kakki»</i.  Of  these  words 
only  sanutf  is  known ; for  it  seems  to  be  the  same  with  Sanskrit 

. sara/a  or  sara/u,  ‘ chameleon,  lizard,’  and  Mar&thi  sara/a,  * hedge- 

lizard.’ 

* HimaA  stvSnodakaA. 

[aa] 


X 


306 


KALPA  SCTRA. 


&c.  (see  § 44,  down  to)  inspect  this.  That  is  small 
moisture.  (45) 

17.  During  the  Paggusan1  a monk  might  wish  to 
frequent  the  abodes  of  householders  for 'the  sake  of 
collecting  alms.  He  is  not  allowed  to  go  without 
asking  leave  of  the  teacher,  or  sub-teacher,  or  reli- 
gious guide,  or  Sthavira,  or  head  of  the  Ga«a,  or 
Ga»adhara,  or  founder  of  the  Ga«a,  or  whom  else 
he  regards  as  his  superior;  he  is  allowed  to  go 
after  having  ask£d  leave  of  one  of  these  persons 
(in  this  way) : ‘ I want  with  your  permission  to  fre- 
quent the  abodes  of  householders  for  .the  sake  of 
collecting  alms/  If  he  (the  superior)  grants  per- 
mission, one  is  allowed  to  go;  if  not,  bnfe  is  not 
allowed  to  go. 

‘Why  has  this  been  said,  Sir?’  ‘The  teacher 
knows  how  to  make  good  what  has  J>een  done 
wrong/  (46)  The  same  rule  applies  concerning 
the  visits  to  temples  and  leaving  the  house  for 
easing  nature2,  or  any  other  business,  also'  the 
wandering  from  village  to  village.  (47) 

18.  During  the  Paggusan  a monk  might  wish  to 
take  some  medicine;  he  is  not  allowed  to  take  it 
without  asking  leave  of  the  teacher,  &c.  (see  § 47, 
down  to)  founder  of  the  Ga»a;  but  he  is  allowed 
to  take  it  after  having  asked  leave  of  one  of  these 
persons  (in  this  way) : ‘ I want,  Sir,  with  your  per- 
mission to  take  some  medicine/  viz.  so  much  or  so 
often.  If  he,  &c.  (see  § 46,  down  to)  wrong.  (48) 

1 The  whole  of  the  seventeenth  rule  holds  good  not  quly  for  the 
raby  season,  but  ako  for  the  rest  of  the  year  (n'tubaddhakila). 

* VMrabMmi  and  v\ttrabh<lnri,  whioh  in  the  A&r&hga  Sfitra 
I have,  according  to  die  explanation  of  the  commentary,  translated 
f places  for  study  and  religipus  practices.’ 


RULES  FOR  YATIS. 


307 


The  same  rule  applies  if  a monk  wants  to  undergo 
som£  medical  cure.  (49)  Also  if  he  wants  to  do 
some  exalted  penance.  (50)  Also  if  he  intends, 
after  the  last  mortification  of  the  flesh  which  is  to 
end  in  death,  to  wait  for  his  last  hour  without 
desiring  it,  in  total  abstinence  from  food  and  drink 
or  in  remaining  motionless ; also  if  he  wants  to  go 
out  or  to  enter,  to  eat  food,  &c.,  to  ease  nature,  to 
learn  his  daily  lesson,  to  keep  religious  vigils — he 
is  not  allowed  to  do  it  without  asking  leave.  (51) 

19.  If  during  the  Pa.ggusan  a monk  wants  to  dry 
or  warm  (iA  the  sun)  his  robe,  alms-bowl,  blanket, 
broom,  or  any  other  utensil, .he  is  not  allowed  with- 
out asking  one  or  many  persons  to  frequent  the 
abodes  of  householders  for  the  sake  of  collecting 
alms,  to  eat  food,  &c.,  to  visit  temples  or  leave  the 
house  for  easing  nature,  to  learn  his  daily  lesson, 
to  lie  down  with  outstretched  limits  or  stand  in  some 
posture.  If  there  is  somebody  near,  one  or  many 
persons,  then  he  should  say * Sir,  please  mind  this 
(robe,  &c.)  while  I frequent  the  abodes  of  house- 
holders, &c.  ( see  above,  down  to)  posture.’  If  that 
person  promises  to  do  it,  then  he  (the  monk)  is 
allowed  to  go ; if  he  does  not  promise  it,  then  he 
is  not  allowed  to  go.  (52) 

20.  During  the  Paj^usan  monks  or  nuns  are  not 
allowed  to  be  without  their  proper  bed  or  bench1. 
This  is  the  reason : A mendicant  whose  bed  and 
bench  are  not  reserved  for  his  own  use,  are  low 
and  rickety,  not  sufficiently  fastened,  without  a 
fixed  place,  and  never  exposed  to  the  run,  and 

1 The  commentator  translates  pi/ia,  * stool,’  and  phalaka,  ‘bench 
they  are  of  course  not  the  property  of  the  mendicant,  but  only 
’ temporally  reserved  for  his  use.  * 


308 


KALPA  SCTRA. 


who  is  not  circumspect  in  what  he  does,  nor  accus- 
tomed to  inspect  and  clean  the  things  of  ljis^use, 
will  find  it  difficult  to  exercise  control;  (53)  but  on 
the  contrary,  control  will  be  easy  to  him.  *(54) 

21.  During  the  Pagfusan  monks  or  nuns  must 
always  inspect  three  spots  where  to  ease  nature; 
not  so  in  the  summer  and  winter,  as  in  the  rainy 
season.  ‘Why  has  this  been  said,  Sir?’  ‘For  in 
the  rainy  season  living  beings,  grass,  seeds,  mildew, 
and  sprouts  frequently  come  forth.’  (55) 

22.  During  the  Pagfusan  monks  or  nuns  must  have 
three  pots,  one  for  ordure,  one  for  urine,  and  a 
spitting-box.  (56)  Monks  and  nuns,  who  wear  after 
the  Pa^gfusan  their  hair  as  short  as  that  of  a cow, 
are  not  allowed  to  do  so  during  the  Pagg-usan  after 
that  night  (of  the  fifth  Bhldrapada) ; but  a monk 
should  shave  his  head  or  pluck  out  * his  hair1. 
Shaving  with  a razor  every  month,  cutting  with 
scissors  every  half1  month,  packing  out  every  six 
months.  (57)  This  is  the  conduct  chiefly  of  Stha- 
viras  during  the  rainy  season2. 


1 After  these  words  the  text  has  pakkhiyd  &rova»&,  which  is 
explained  in  two  ways : 1.  every  half-month  the  tied  strings  on  the 
bed  should  be  untied  and  inspected ; the  same  should  be  done  with 
wicker-work  (? davaraka , cf.  Hindi  daura,  ‘ basket’);  a.  every  half- 
month prfiyar/htta  should  be  made.  The  commentator  Samaya- 
sundara  says  that  these  words  are  not  connected  with  the  preceding 
and  following  ones ; their  import  (paramartha)  should  be  learned 
from  a well-instructed  brother  (gitirtha).  I think  that  pakkhiyft  is 
not  connected  with  paksha,  * half-month,’  but  with  kerapaksha, 
‘braid  of  hair,  tresses;’  the  two  words,  or  rather  the  compound, 
would  in  that  case  denote  arrangement  of  (or  in)  tresses  or  braids, 
and  relate  to  nuns  who  do  not,  as  far  as  I know,  shave  their  head. 
A precept  for  nuns  is  just  what  would  fie  expected  at  this  place, 
after  one  for  monks  (&rya)  has  been  given. 

* The  last  words  are  variously  interpreted  by  the  commentators.. 


RULES  FOR  YATIS.  >309 

23.  During" the  Paggusan  monks  or  nuns  should 
not  use  harsh  .words  after  the  commencement  of 
the  Ptlgg'usan ; if  they  do,  they  should  be  warned : 

‘ Reverend  brother  (or  sister),  you  speak  unman- 
nerly.’ One  who  (nevertheless)  uses  harsh  words 
after  the  commencement  of  the  Paggusan,  should  be 
excluded  from  the  community.  (58) 

24.  If,  during  the  Pa^oisan,  among  monks  or 
nuns  occurs  a quarrel  or  dispute  or  dissension,  the 
young  monk  should  ask  forgiveness  of  the  superior, 
and  the  superior  of  the  young  monk.  They  should 
forgive  and  ask  forgiveness,  appease  and  be  ap- 
peased, and  converse  without  restraint1.  For  him 
who  is  appeased,  there  will  be  success  (in  control) ; 
for  him  who  is  not  appeased,  there  will  be  no  suc- 
cess; therefore  one  should  appease  one’s  self.  ‘Why 
has  this  been  said,  Sir?’  ‘Peace  is  the  essence  of 
monachism.’  (59) 

25.  During  the  Pqgfusan  monks  or  nuns  should 
have  three  lodging-places ; (two)  for  occasional  use, 


Therakappa  is*  said  to  mean  ‘old  monks,’  for  young  and  strong 
ones  must  pluck  out  their  hair  every  four  months.  It  usually 
denotes  the  conduct  of  ordinary  monks,  in  opposition  to  the  Gvu- 
kappa ; if  taken  in  this  sense,  the  whole  passage  is  made  out  to 
mean  that  even  one  who,  because  of  sickness  of  his  scalp,  is  dis- 
pensed from  tearing  out  his  hair,  must  do  it  in  the  rainy  season,  for 
then  the  precept  is  binding  both  for  (rinakalpikas  and  Sthavira- 
kalpikas.  According  to  the  interpretation  I have  followed  the 
words  samva^Aarie  vS  therakappe  are  a sort  of  colophon  to 
the  rules  17-22,  and  indicate  that  these  rules  apply  to  Sthavirakal- 
pikas,  but  not  exclusively  (v&),  as  some  apply  to  (rinakalpikas  also. 
The  phrase  sawva^Mariya  therakappa  occurs  also  at  the  beginning 
of  § 63,  and  has  there  a similar  meaning. 

1 According  to  the  commentary,  they  should  ask  each  other  the 
meaning  of  the  Sfttras. 


3io 


KALPA  SOTRA. 


which  must  be  inspected ; one  for  constant  use,  which 
must  be  $\yept l.  (60) 

26.  During  the  Paggnsan  monks  or  nuns  should  give 
notice  of  the  direction  or  intermediate  4‘recti°n  >n 
which  they  intend  to  go  forth  for  the  sake  of  begging 
alms.  ' Why  has  this  been  said,  Sir  ?’  * During  the 
Partisan  the  reverend  monks  frequently  undertake 
austerities ; an  ascetic  becoming  weak  and  exhausted 
might  swoon  or  fall  down.  (In  case  of  such  an 
accident  the  remaining)  reverend  monks  will  under- 
take their  search  in  that  direction  or  intermediate 
direction  (which  the  ascetic  had  named  them).  (61) 

27,  During  the  Pa^usan  monks  or  nuns  are  not 
allowed  to  travel  farther  than  four  or  five  Yo^anas2, 
and  then  to  return.  They  are  allowed  to  stay  in 
some  intermediate  place,  but  not  to  pass  there  (at 
the  end  of  their  journey)  the  night.  (62) 

Of  those  Nirgrantha  monks  who  follow,  &c.  (see 
A&tr&nga  Sfitra  II,  15,  v end,  down  to)  ...  . these 
(rules  regulating)  the  conduct  of  Sthaviras  in  the 
rainy  season,  some  will  reach  perfection,  &c.  (see 
§ 124,  down  to)  be  freed  from  all  pains  in  that  same 
life,  some  in  the  next  life,  some  in  the  third  birth ; 


1 I deviate  from  the  interpretation  of  the  commentators,  who  give 
veuvviyS  (or  veu/Yiya  v.  L),  which  I have  rendered  * for  occasional 
use,’  the  sense  of  ‘ repeatedly.’  But  as  they  give  siiggiyz  the 
meaning  ‘ used/  and  as  the  practice  justifies  my  translation,  I am 
rather  confident  about  the  correctness  of  my  conjecture.  The 
practice,  as  related  by  the  commentator,  is  this  : The  Upirraya 
where  the  monks  live  must  be  swept  in  the  morning,  when  the 
monks  go  out  begging,  at  noon,  and  in  the  afternoon  at  the  end  of 
the  third  prahara;  the  other  two  Up&rayas  must  be  dailyjnspected, 
lest  somebody  else  occupy  them,  and  be  swept  every  third  day. 

* And  this  only  in  c%se  of  need,  to«  fetch  medicine,  &c.  In 
ordinary  cases  the  third  rule  applies. 


RULES  FOR  YATIS. 


none  will  have  to  undergo  more  than  seven  or  eight 
births.  (63) 

In  that  period,  in  that  age  the  Venerable  Ascetic 
Mahlvlra,  in.  the  town  of  R&fagnha,  in  the  ATaitya! 
Guwanlaka,  surrounded  by  many  monks  and  nuns, 
by  many  men  and  women  of  the  laity,  by  many  gods 
and  goddesses^  said  thus,  spoke  thus,  declared  thus, 
explained  thus ; he  proclaimed  again  and  again  the 
Lecture  called  Paryusha»4kalpa  with  its  application, 
with  its  argumentation,  with  its  information,  with  its 
text,  with  its  meaning,  with  both  text  and  -meaning, 
with  the  examination  of  the  meaning; 

Thus  I say.  (64) 

End  of  the  Rules  for  Yatis. 


End  of  thg  Kalpa  S&tra. 


INDEX 


Abhfcit, name  of  an  asterism,  p.  281. 

Abhinandana,  name  of  the  fourth 
Tirthakara,  280. 

Abhiya/asa,  name  of  a Kula,  292. 

Accomplishments,  the  sixty-four,  of 
women,  282. 

Adbhuta  Kalpa,  194. 

Adhikarma,  81  n 2, 127. 

Adikara ~ Tirthakara,  224. 

Affects,  enumei$ted,  262. 

A^ita,  name  of  the  second  Tirtha- 
kara, 280. 

Agnibhfiti,  name  of  a Gawadhara, 
286. 

Agnidatta,  289. 

Agnive/yS)  ana,  name  of  a gotra, 
286,  287. 

AhSkamma,  &hakammiya«Sdhakar- 
ma,  °ika,  94  n 1, 111  n 1. 

Ah&nlti»iya,  146. 

Ahiwsa,  doctrine  of,  38. 

Ailipatya,  name  of  a gotra^  287, 
289. 

AJalabhr&trc,  name  of  a Gawadhara, 
286. 

Akampita,  namegf  a Gawadhara,  286. 

A/fela,  a naked  monk,  57  n 2. 

Alabhika,  name  of  a town,  264. 

Alms-bowls,  what  they  should  be 
made  of,  166. 

Amagandha,  23  n 1. 

Ananta,  name  of  the  fourteenth  Tir- 
thakara, 280. 

An&srava,  37. 

AAga,  title  of  works,  221. 

Anidina,  40. 

Animals,  eight  kinds  of,  11. 

Anka,  a certain  posture,  187. 

Ano£g&,  daughter  of  Mahtvlra,  193. 

Antaratf^ikl  (AntarfogiyS),  name  of 

Anuddharl'  name  of  small  insects, 
167* 

Apai%ita,  name  of  a Vimftwa,  376. 

Ara,  name  of  the  eighteenth  Ttrtha- 
kara,  280. 


Arati,  17. 

Arhaddatta,  293  (bis). 

Arhat,  title  of  Ginas,  36,  325,  &c. 
Arishfanemi,  name  of  the  twenty- 
second  Tirthakara,  276. 
Arithmetics,  221. 

Ar£ya,  name  of  a Lava,  265. 

Arts,  hundred,  282. 

Aryadatta,  274. 

Arya^ayanti,  name  of  a Sikh!,  288, 
t 393* 

Aryaghosha,  274. 

Aryaiefaka,  name  of  a Kula,  292. 
Aryakubcri,  name  of  a SakhI,  293. 
Aryanlgill,  name  of  a SIkha,  288, 
t 393* 

Aryapadma,  name  of  a SikhI,  293. 
Aryapadmila,  name  of  a SIkha, 
288. 

Aryar/shipalita,  name  of  a SikhI, 
t 2f3* 

Aryatlpasi,  name  of  a SakhI,  288, 
. 393. 

Aryav^grl,  name  of  a Sakha,  293. 
Ascetic,  compared  to  a warrior, 
258. 

— different  kinds  of,  128  n i. 

— untrue,  17. 

Asha^a,  name  of  an  asterism,  278. 
AshfU&a,  name  of  a month,  281. 
Aframapada,  name  of  a park,  283. 
Asravji,  37,  76. 

Asthikagrama,  name  of  a town,  264. 
Astronomy,  221. 

Asura,  198. 

Ajvasena,  king  of  Benares,  271. 
Ajvina,  name  of  a month,  191. 
Atharva-veda,  221. 

Avadhi  knowledge,  223. 

Avalikt,  a division  of  time,  263. 
Avasarpifli  era,  189, 218, 

Ayatana,  44. 

Ayus,  369,, 

* 

Bftla,  25  n 2. 

\Baladeva,  225, 


314 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


Balissaha,  289. 

Bathing-room,  described,  242. 
Bauddha,  4.  * 

Bhadra,  name  of  a Sthavira,  294 
, (bis). 

Bhadrabahu,  name  of  a Sthavira, 
287,  2 88. 

Bh&drapada,  name  of  a month,  308. 

- Bhadrayaias,  291. 

Bhadrayajaska,  name  of  a Kula,  291. 
/ Bhadrika,  name  of  a nun,  264. 
Bhadriyika,  name  of  a 5akh&,  291. 
Bhagavai,  title  of  Ginas,  36. 
Bh&radv^a,  name  of  a gotra,  286, 
291* 

Bharatavarsha,  1 90,  218,  &c. 
Bharu/w/a,  a fabulous  bird,  261. 
Bhavanapati,  one  of  the  four  orders 
of  gods,  19 1,  &c. 

BhfitA,  289. 

Bhfitadattl  (Minna),  289. 

Birds,  young,  likened  to  disciples, 
58. 

Birth,  18. 

Bodies,  3 n 2. 

Brahmadvfpikl,  name  of  a *Sakha, 

m* 

Brahma  Kalpa,  195. 

Brahmaiarin,  name  of  a monk,  274. 
Brahmaliptikt,  name  of  a £akh&, 
292.  * 

Brahma /*as  and  Srama»as,  38,  &c. 

/ Brahmasundari,  name  of  a nun, 
284. 

Buddha,  epithet  of  Mahavira,  264. 
Buddhabodhita,  66  n 1. 

Categories,  sixty,  221. 

Ceremonial,  221. 

Clothes,  what  they  should  be  made 
of,  157, 

— how  many  to  be  worn,  1 57.* 

— should  not  be  dyed,  163. 

Dao/a,  7. 

DJstkarbarikt,  name  of  a Sikha, 
289. 

Datta  (Dinna),  name  of  a Sthavira, 
288,293. 

De/igamn,  name  of  a Sthavira,  295. 
Devinaivii,  190,  ai8,  &c. 

— name  of  a night,  265. 

Devarddhi,  name  of  a Sthavira,  295. 
Dharamapada,  212  n 1.  * 

Dhanagiri,  name  of  a Sthavira,  293, 

294. 


Dhanarddhi,  290. 

Dharma,  name  of  different  Stha- 
viras,  *94  (bis),  *95. 

— name  of  the  fifteenth  Ttrtha- 

kara,  280. 

DlnlrS,  denar,  233.  • 

Dtrghabhadra,  289. 

Diseases,  various  kinds  of,  18,  19. 

— enumerated,  53. 

Dream-book,  346. 

Dreams,  interpreters  of,  244,  &c. 

— various  kinds  of,  246. 

— those  of  Tri/ali  described,  230, 

&c. 

DushamasushamU  period,  189,  218, 
&c. 


Earth-bodies,  how  they  are  in- 
jured, 4. 

E»3, 289.  f 

Er&vatt,  name  of  a river,  297. 

Fire-bodies,  7. 

Flood  = Sa»*sara,  20. 

Flowers,  various  kinds  enumerated, 
a33* 

GiJikbZy  chapter  of  mpnks,  Mirgata, 
47  n 2,  113  n 2. 

Gama,  identical  passages,  72  n 2. 
Ga«a,  1 1 3, 273,286,  306. 

— founder  of  a,  113. 

Gaaadatta,  289. 

Gawadhara,  1 n 4, 113,  273,  286. c 
Gandharvas,  237. 

GahgSvarta,  name  < of  a whirlpool, 
237* 

Ga*ika,  name  of  a Kula,  291. 
GanWas,  gods,  189. 

Gautama,  name  of  a gotra,  286, 289, 
293,  294. 

— the  Nirgrantha,  302. . 

Gautamlyi,  name  of  a Si khl,  292, 
Gavedhuka,  name  of  a £akh&,  291. 
Girnar,  a mountain,  277,  379. 
Godasa,  name  of  a Sthavira,  288. 

— name  of  a Ga»a,  288. 

Graha,  266,  267. 

Grammar,  221. 

Guhya,  152, 

Gymnastic  exercises,  hall, for,  242. 

£&landhar&ya#a,  name  of  a gotra, 
190,*  2 1 8. 

Gambfi,  name  of  a Sthavira,  395. 

— name  of  another  monk,  289. 


INDEX, 


315 


GambOdvipa,  190,  318,  &c. 
GambMman-Gambfl,  387. 

Gambfisv&min  « GambQ,  1. 

Gaszunsa,  name  of  Mahlvira,  193, 
356, 

Gayanta,  name  „ of  a Sthavira, 
388, 

Gehila  (Gei*£ila),  name  of  a Stha- 
vira, 394. 

Gina,  title,  aoi,  203. 

Ginakalpika,  57  n 2,  308  n a* 

Giva,  identical  with  &tman,  3 n 2, 

Onkri  or  G^trika,  clan  of  Kshatri- 
yas,  191,  226,  &c. 

Gflatr/putra,  name  of  Mahlvira,  76, 
80. 

Gflltrishandh,  name  of  a park,  199. 

GrimbhikagrSma,  201, 263. 

Gyotishka,  one  of  the  four  orders  of 
gods,  191,  195*  252. 

Haridraka,  name  of  a Kula,  292. 

Harbegamesi,  327,  329. 

HSrita,  name  of  a gotra,  391* 

Hlritamiiaglrt,  name  of  a iSIkhl, 

api. 

HSritayana,  name  of  a gotra,  286. 

Harivanwa,  93. 

Hastilipta  (Hatthiligga),  name  of  a 
Kula,  290. 

Hastin,  name  of  a Sthavira,  394. 

Heretic,  25.  , 

IkshvSku,  93,  218. 

Indra,  92. 

Indrabhffti,  name  df  a Ganadhara, 
286.  ■ 

— name  of  another  man,  365, 
Indradatta(Dinna),name  of  a Stha- 
vira, 288, 292. 

Indrapuraka,  name  of  a Kula,  291. 

Ihgitaraarana,  a religious  death,  72 
n 3. 

liina,  different  from  Indra,  198. 

Island,  never  covered  with  water, 
likened  to  an  ascetic,  58,  61. 

Itihisa,  221, 

It  vara,  a religious  death,  72  n 3. 


Kamarddhi,  291, 

Kamarddhika,  name  of  a Kula,  291. 
Karaaa,  19  ns,  265,' 

Karmabhflmi,  195  n 1. 

Karman,  2. 

Klrttika,  name  of  a month,  276, 
Kiri,  kings  of,  266. . 

KsUyapa,  name  of  a gotra,  193,  at 8, 
226,  286, 294. 

Kasyapiyi,  name  of  a 58kh8, 292. 
Ka/ibandhana,  73  n 2. 

K&ty&yana,  name  of  a gotra,  287. 
Kaumfriya,  name  of  a gotra,  193, 
28  6. 

Kaujtrabika,  name  of  a $&kh&,  290. 
Kausika,  name  of  a gotra.  290.  293. 
Kaurika,  288,  292. 

Kautsa,  name  of  a gotra,  294. 
Kau/umbini,  name  of  a S&khil,  290. 
Kevala,  2,  &c. 

Kheyanna,  29. 

Kinnaras,  237. 

Ko&la,  name  of  a gotra,  190,  219, 

&c. 

KoJinya,  290. 

Kojala,  kings  of,  266. 

Kosalian,  native  of  AyodhyH,  281. 
KorivarshiyE,  name  of  a Sakha,  288. 
Krishna,  the  line  of,  a celestial 
region,  195. 

Krishnasekha,  name  of  a Kula,  292, 
KriyS,  203. 

Kroja,  297. 

Kshamlrramana,  a title,  295. 

Kshana,  a divisioh  of  time,  262. 
K$hemaliptik&,  name  of  a Sakha,  291, 
Kshudiitman,  name  of  a graha,  265. 
Kubera,  293. 

Kula,  288,  &c. 

Kulakara,  381  n 2. 

Kunlla,  name  of  a town,  297. 
KuWadhari.  See  Kau/umbini. 
Kuiw/agrlma,  Mah&vira'sbirth-place, 
219,  &c. 

KuWala,  name  o£  a gotra,  291. 
Ktuw/apura,  Mahavira’s  birth-place, 
190;  °purti9i. 

Kunthu,  name  of  the  seventeenth 
Tlrthakara,  280. 


Jewels,  different  kinds  of,  338, 
— sixteen  kinds  of,  227. 


Kaitra,  name  of  a month,  273, 3*8,2, 
ATakravartin,  335* 

Xampl,  name  a town,  a6a. 
Xampiyikl,  name  of  a *Slkhl,  291. 

/ Xandanl,  name  of  a nun,  267. 
Xandanftiprt,  name  of  a SftkMt,  390. 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


316 


JSTandra,  name  of  a year,  265. 
JCandraprabha,  name  of  the  eighth 
Ttrtbakari,  a 80. 

tfandraprabha,  name  of  a palankin, 
197,  2'57. 

JT&rajia,  name  of  a Ga»a,  291.  , 
&baluya,  or  Jfj&uluya.  See  Roha- 
gupta. 

KbukM,  an  interjection,  84. 

Jfitri,  name  of  an  asterism,  276, 
Jfolapa'/aka,  73  n 2, 

Jifyavana,  202, 262. 

lAdbi)  name  of  a country,  84,  85. 
Lake,  compared  to  a teacher,  49. 
Laukantika,  gods,  19$,  256,  272. 
Lava,  a division  of  time,  263,  265. 
Leader  of  the  battle,  epithet  of  a 
monk,  61. 

Le£*£aki.  See  LUA&avi,  266  n z. 
Liberation,  its  nature  inexpressible 
in  words,  52. 

LiM&avi,  princes  of  Koiala,  266. 
Lives,  six  kinds  of,  14. 

Living  beings,  all  sorts  of,  J4,  &c. 

Madhyama,  name  of  a Sikh&,  293. 
MadhyamikS  (Mug-^imilla),  name  of 
a £&kh&,  292. 

Mahagiri,  name  of  a Sthavira,  287, 
289.  i 

Maharddhika,  165. 

/ Mahasuvrata,  female  lay  votary,  278. 
Mahavideha,  name  of  a country, 
194. 

Mah&vira,  venerable  ascetic,  191, 
See . 

Maighika,  name  of  a Kula,  291. 
Maker  of  an  end,  269,  &c. 

Mallaki,  princes  of  Kajl,  266. 

Malli,  name  of  the  nineteenth  Tir- 
thakara,  280.  4 

Maloha^a,  106*41 1. 

Mllyaka,  name  of  a Kula,  292. 
Ma*aka,  287. 

Miwava,  name  of  a Gana,  292* 
Mandara,  mount,  261, 
MaWikaputra,  name  of  a Gana- 
dhara,  386. 

Mawibhadra,  289. 

M4ra,  29,  30. 

Margajiras,  name  of  a month,  194, 
357. 

Maslpflrikl,  name  of  a Sakha,  290. 
Mfrfera,  nam^  of  a gotra,  287, 288, 
293, 


Matipattrikk,  name  of  a Slikht, 29. 
Mauryaputra,  name  of  a Ga#adhara, 
286. 

Megha,  291*  • 

Mekhallyiki  (MehalWiyk),  name  of 
a Sikh*,  29i*« 

Metkrya,  name  of  a Ga/radhara,  286. 
Metre,  221. 

Milk  Ocean,  199. 

Mithill,  name  of  a* town,  264. 
MleM&a,  137, 185. 

Monk's  hall,  88. 

Mukhavastrika,  57  n 2. 

Mukta,  name  of  a respiration,  265, 

— epithet  of  Mah&vira,  265. 
Mukunda,  92. 

Munisuvrata,  name  of  the  twentieth 
Tirthakara,  280. 

Musical  instruments,  different  kinds, 
183.  • 

NEbhi,  first  king,  287. 

N&ga,  gods,  198. 

— name  of  a Kara#a,  265. 

— name  of  a Sthavira,  294. 

— proper  name,  290. 

Nagabhfita,  name  of  a Kula,  290. 
NSgaputra,  290. 

Nagar^una,  32  n 2. 

Nagila,  name  of  a Sthavira,  288. 
Nakshatra,  name  of  a Sthavira,  294. 
Nalanda,  name  of  a town,  264. 
Name  and  gotra,  Karman  relating  to, 
226.  f 

Kami,  name  of  the  twenty-first  Tir- 
thakara, 281). 

Nanda,  a lay  votary,  278. 
Nandanabhadra,  289. 

N&ndika  (Nandigga),  name  of  a 
Kula,  290. 

Nandita,  name  of  a Sthavira,  395. 
Nandivardhana,  name  of  the  elder 
brother  of  Mah&vlra,  193. 

— name  of  a fortnight,  365. 
Niggha#/u,  321. 

Nirgrantha,  38,  &c. 

Nirriti,  name  of  a night,  265. 
Non-Aryan  people,  137. 

Nurses,  five  kinds  of,  192. 

Occupations,  the  three,  of  men, 
382.  4 

Oggaha  (avagraha),  23  n 5. 

PaJiggahadhlri,  117  n a. 

Padma,  *93. 


INDEX. 


317 


Padmaprabha,  name  of  the  sixth 
TSrthakara,  380. 

Padmila,  napie  of  a Sthavira,  288. 
Paryusan,  *30  n a,  396,  &c. 
Palyopamk,  a long  period  of  time, 
280. 

PWubhadra,  289. 

Pt«lpsi%gahiya,  1 17  n a. 
Pa#itabhGmi,  264. 

Piovagamaea,  a religious  death,  73. 
P&p8,  name  of  a town,  269. 
Parigraha,  23. 

Parihasaka,  name  of  a Kula,  290. 
Pari«»S,  comprehension  and  renun- 
ciation, 1 n 2. 

Parisrava,  37  n i. 

Piriva,  name  of  the  twenty-third 
Tirthalara,  194,  271. 

Paryaftka,  a certain  posture,  187. 
Passions,  enumerated,  35. 

Paurushi,  wake  of  the  day  or  night, 
«57. 

Paushya,  name  of  a month,  273. 
Phalgumitra,  name  of  a Sthavira, 
294. 

Plants,  endowed  with  intellect,  10. 
Players  and  other  performers,  253. 
Policemen,  252.  ® 

Poshadha,  266. 

Prabhasa,  name  of  a Ganadhara,  286. 
Prabhava,  name  of  a Sthavira,  28^. 
Prisma,  name  of  a gotra,  287,  288. 
Pr&iate  Kalpa,27i. 

Pnunav&hanaka,  name  of  a Kula, 
292.  # 

Pratyekabuddha,  66  n 1. 

Preaching,  27. 

Prish/iiampa,  name  of  a town,  264. 
Pritidharmika,  name  of  a Kula,  292. 
Pritivardhana,  365. 

^/Priyadanana,  daughter  of  Mahavlra, 

193. 

Pnyagantha,  393. 

/ Priyakami,  name  of  TrlralS,  193. 
Pronunciation,  221. 
Pu/u/ravardhanty&,  name  of  4 <&kh&, 
■288. 

Punyabhadra,  289. 

Purimatila,  name  of  a town,  283. 
Purisantarakaia,  90  n 3. 
PflmapattrikV  name  of  a SSkhi, 
290. 

Pdrva,  274,  *78,  284..  . 

Fushpadanta,  name  of  the  ninth 
Ttrthakara,  280* 

Jushpagiri,  name  of  a Sthavira,  293. 


PushpaMli,  name  of  a nun, 274. 
Pushpottara,  name*  of  a Vimlna, 
190,  218. 

Pushyamitrika,  name  of  a Kula,  292. 
Quality,  15. 

R%agr/ha,  capital  of  Magadha,  264, 
287. 

Ra^oharm,  broom,  57  n 2. 
Rl^yapilikl,  name  of  a £&kh&,  291. 
Rahasya,  221. 

Raksha,  name  of  a Sthavira,  294. 
Ratha,  name  of  a Sthavira,  393. 
Reciprocity,  law  of,  1 3. 

Real,  289. 

Renunciation  ofvMah&vlra,  357. 
Retinue  of  a king,  243. 

Revatf,  name  of  a female  lay  votary, 
268. 

Revatika,  name  of  a park,  277. 
Rigup&lika,  name  of  a river,  263. 
Rohagupta,  290. 

Rohawa,  290. 

Rudra,  92. 

R,£umati,  289. 

Rig-veda,  221. 

R/shabha,  name  of  the  first  Tlrtha- 
kara^  281,  &c. 

R/shabhadatta,  190,  281,  &c. 
Rishabhasena,  284. 

Rishidatta,  293. 

Rishidattika,  name  of  a Kula,  292. 
R/shigupta,  292. 

Rishiguptika,  name  of  a Kula,  392. 
Rishipalita,  293. 

Sidharmika,  70. 

SlgaropamS,  a long  period  of  time, 
190,  218,  271,  &c. 

SamSdhi,  49  n 2. 

S&m&ga,  201,263. 

S&ma-veda,  221. 

Samaya,  3303* 

— a division  of  time,  262. 

Sambhava,  name  of  thef  third  Tir- 
thakara,  380. 

Sambhfitav\gaya,  name  of  a Stha- 
vira, 287, 288*  # 

Samita,  393. 

Sawidbika  (S$n»k<Uyik&  ?),  name  of 
a SMfbi,  391. 

Samkha/i,  93  n a. 

Sawlekhana,  74  n 9. 

Sampatita,  name  of 4 Sthavira,  294* 


(7 AINA  SUTRAS. 


3*8 


Samparyahka,  a certain  posture,  Suicide,  68  n 5. 

269.  * /Sulas&,  name  of  a female  lay  votary, 

Samudravfcaya,  king  of  Sauripura,  268.  , 

, 276.  Sumanobhadra,  289. 

Sandhi,  31  n 4.  Sumati,  name  of  $he  fifth  Ttrtha- 

Sarvlrthasiddha,  name  of  a Vimana,  kara,  280. 

281.  / Sunandi,  name  of  a female  lay  vo- 

— name  of  a Muhfirta,  265.  tary,  274. 

Sattha  (Sastra),  1 n 2.  Suparjva,  name  of  the  seventh  Tir- 

Saudharma  Kalpa,  a celestial  re*  thakara.  280. 


gion,  222. 

— Avatawsaka,  a celestial  abode, 
222. 

Saumya,  274. 

Saurash/rika,  name  of  a Sikha, 
292. 

SautaptikS,  name  of  a Sakht,  290. 
Sciences,  seventy-two,  28a. 

Self,  the  Knower,  50. 

Sent,  289. 

Senika,  293, 

ShaWavana,  name  of  a park,  259. 
Siddha,  epithet  of  Mah&vlra,  264. 

— name  of  a Stoka,  265. 

Siddhartha,  father  of  Mah&vtra,  191, 

&c»,  226,  &c» 

Siddharthavana,  name  of  a park, 
283. 

Simha,  name  of  a Sthavira,  294. 
Siwhagiri  Gatismara,  nan*.'  of  a 
Sthavira,  288,  293. 

Sin,  causes  of,  2. 

Skanda,  92. 

Snake  gods,  92. 

Soittiyl  See  Sautaptika. 
Som&bhtita,  name  of  a Kula,  290* 
Somadatta,  289, 

Soul,  2. 

Sthavira,  286. 

Sthiragupta,  name  of  a Sthavira, 

295«  . 

SthCUabhadra,  name  of  a Sthavira, 
287. 

Stoka,  a division  of  time,  262,  265. 
Subbhabh&mi,  name  of  a country, 

84. 

/Subhadra,  name  of  a female  lay 
votary,  284. 

s Sudarsand,  elder  sister  of  Mah&vtra, 
193. 

Sudharman,  name  of  a Gaaadhara, 
1,  286, 287* 

— name  of  a council  balk  of  the 

gods,  222, 

Suhastin,  name  of  a Sthavira,  a88,. 
290,  • 


— paternal  uncle  of  Mahlvtra,  193. 

Supratibuddha,  name  of  a Sthavira, 

288,  292. 

Suras,  198. 

Sushama,  name  of  a period,  189, 
218. 

Sushamasushama,  name  of  a period, 
189,  218. 

Susthita,  name  of  a Sthavira,  288, 
292. 

Suvidhi,  name  of  the  ninth  Ttrtba- 
kara,  280. 

Suvrata,  name  of  a lay  votary,  274. 

— name  of  a day,  198, 257,  263, 

— name  of  a gotra,  294. 

SuvratSgni,  name  of  a day,  265. 

Svastika,  190. 

Svsiti,  name  of  an  a£terism,  189, 218, 
269. 

Svayambuddha,  66  n 1. 

• 

Saka/amukha,  283. 

«$akra,  222.  9 

SWilya,  name  of  a Sthavira, 
294.  » 

Sankhajataka,  name  of  a lay  votary, 
267, 

S&nti,  name  of  the  sixteenth  Tir- 
thakara,  280. 

Santisenika,  293. 

Sauripura,  name  of  a town,  276, 

Sayyambhava,  name  of  a Sthavira, 

' 287. 

Sirarddhi,  290. 

Si  tala,  name  of  the  tenth  Tirtha- 
kara,  280. 

/5ivl,  name  of  a queen,  276. 

.Sivabhtiti,  name  of  a Sthavira,  294. 

Sramaaas,  194,  &c. 

Sr3va#a,  name  of  a month,  275  * 

977. 

Srivasti,  name  of  a town,  264. 

Sr8vaSiiki,  name  of  a Stkhtj  291, 

Srtybmto,  name  of  the  eleventh 
Ttrthakara,  280. 

— name  of  Mahlvira,  193,  2 $6.  *- 


INDEX. 


3*9 


SreyEmsa,  name  of  a lay  votary,  VairEB,  capital  of  Videha,  264, 

274.  Vakramana,  or  Maisravaita,  195, 

Sridhara,  274.  199. 

Stfgupta,  2^1.  / VEmE,  name  of  a queen,  ayrf 

Subha,  274.  Vanassal  Vanaspati,  $ n 2. 

Sfidra,  15 1,  • VE*i*agrima,  name,  of  a town, 


TEmraliptika,  name  of  a Si khE, 

288. 

Tapasa,  name  of  a Sthavira,  288. 
Tasa«trasa,  3 n 2. 

Tlrthakara,  224. 

Tishyabhadra,  289. 

TrairEjikE,  name  of  a SakbE,  290. 
Treasures,  hiding-places  of,  248. 
Tree,  likened  to  a worldly  man,  53. 
T ri/alE,  mother  of  Mahavira,  19 1, 
' 193,  226,  &c. 

Tortoise,  likened  to  a worldly  man, 

53.  * 

TungikEyana,  name  of  a gotra,  53. 

Uddeha,  name  of  a Uana,  290. 
IMimbarika,  name  of  a Sakha, 

290. 

LVuvatika,  name  of  a Ga»a,  291. 
U/bfcEnEgari,  name  of  a Sakha,  292, 
293.  * 

Ullaga kkba,  name  of  a Kula,  290. 
Upananda,  289. 

Upaftga,  221. 

UpapEda,  202,  264.  # 

U pajama,  name  of  a day,  265. 
UpEjnfya,  1 1 5, 

Utsarpwi  era,  189,  218,  &c. 

Uttara,  289.  9 

Uttarabalissaha,  name  of  a Gana, 

289. 

Uttarakura,  name  of  a palankin, 
277. 

Uttaraphalguni,  name  of  an  asterism, 
189,  &C.,  2I7,&C. 

Uttarash^a,  name  of  an  asterism, 
281,  &c. 

Va^gabhGmf,  name  of  a country, 

84. 

Vagra,  name  of  a Sthavira,  288, 
>93* 

VagranEgari,  name  of  a SEkhE, 

291.  o 

Va^rasena,  name  of  a Sthavira,  288, 
>93*  • 

Vy it,  name  of  a .SEkhE,  29a. 
VatrJkha,  name  of  a month,  201, 

* >** 


264* 

VEntya,  name  of  a Knla,  292, 
Varadatta,  277. 

VardhamEna,  name  of  MahEvira, 
192,  i93,>49»  >55* 
Vardhamanaka,  190. 

Vasish/£a,  274. 

Vasish/Aa,name  of  a gotra,  191,  &c., 
226,  &c.,  286,  288,  290,  294. 
VEsishrMyE,  name  of  a SEkhE,  292. 
Vasudeva,  225. 

VasupG^ya,  name  of  the  twelfth  Ttr- 
thakara,  280. 

Vatsa,  name  of  a gotra,  287,  293. 
VEtsaliya,  name  of  two  Kulas,  291, 
292. 

VEyubhGti,  name  of  a Ganadhara, 
286. 

VedanE®  feeling,  302, 

Vedaniya,  269. 

Vena,  286. 

Vesamana,  248,  251. 

Vejava/ika,  name  of  a Ga»a,  291. 
Yideha,  native  country  of  MahEvira, 
286. 

VidehadattE  (°dinnE),  name  of  Tri- 
jalE,  193, 194,  256. 
VidyEdharagopEIa,  293.. 

VidyEdharas,  197. 

Vidyadhan,  name  of  two  SEkhEs, 
292,  293. 

Vi^aya,  name  of  a muhflrta,  199, 
201, 257,  263. 

Viharabhfimi,  90  n 1,  306. 
Vi^arabhGmi,  90  n 1,  306. 

Vimala,  name  of  the  thirteenth  Hr- 
thakara,  280. 

VimEna,  celestial  abode,  190,  218. 
VimEnavEsin,  one  of  the  four  orders 
of  gods,  19 1. 

Vi  nit  E,  name  of  a town,  283* 
Virabhadra,  274. 

VijEkhE,  name  of  an  asterism, 
>7i*  * 

Vij&lE,  name  of  a palankin,  273. 
Vishnu,  name  pf  a Sthavira,  294* 
Vows,  thiipe,  63. 

— five,  203. 

Water-bodies,  5. 


320 


GAINA  SUTRAS. 


Water-lives,  5m, 
Whirlpool  ~Saars3ra,  9. 
Wind-bodies,  9. 

/ Women,  21. 

Ya^ur-veda,  221. 

Yaksha,  289. 

Yakshadattl  (°dinnS),  289; 
Yakshas,  92. 


/Yakshi#!,  name  of  a nun,  278. 
Yasas,  274. 

Yajobhadr^  name  of  a monk,  289. 

— name  of  a Kula,  291. 

— name  of  a Sthavira,  287. 
Yajoda,  wife  of  MsQt&vtra,  193. 
Years,  former,  58, 

Yoga,  13  n 5. 

Yo^ana,  297,  &c. 


Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Translations 
of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East. 


TRANSLITERATION  OF  ORIENTAL  ALPHABETS.  32! 


3 


1 

! 

•*. a S . • • 

•a  . . . . . . \ . 

I 

s 

' 

n n ^ n r. 

Arabic. 

*8  *;  j 

*0 

* — * 

i 

■a 

» - U*J'L)  • u)  • ' 

t 

I 

*\  4 *10yf  ^ 

9 ’ C;  C « * ‘ ‘ 

8/ ; ; ; ; ; <2/ ; jJ  ; ; 

• ^ 

| 

s 

< 

X 

$ 

< 

> ' 
tt 
< 

X 

0 

So 

s 

j 

s 

• • • 

• * # 

• 

♦ 

• 

. • • • * 

•*••• 

3 

• • • 

• • • 

• • • 

3 

0 

^ # t s • * • 

“'Sl'r  " ■**  ’ 

£ ••  #•«•* 

CONSONANTS. 

• • • 

• • • 

is* 

1 • • 

• * • 

ffl  # • • 

© • • • 

1 : i n 

rt  • 8 . j 

J cfl 

i s,s 

# 53 

IN  N CO  * 

.2 

1 

LS 
i . 

i 

O & 
*0  <£ 

• * * W.  2 M * * * ‘ * 

: : | II f ft  : : : : : 
; :f  1*1  If  :t  : j : 

If  ; r : tl 

!•••••  rii- 

GO  $ P A 

N <0  6)  O H M O * W>  0 N 

*■<  *•*  **  *>4 

TRANSLITERATION  OF  ORIENTAL  ALPHABETS 


.) 

■mrag 

n 

I 

^ . D • <3  o . •'i  3*o  . . ^ • ">  ^ • 

• » i § • • « • « 

) 

/"■s' 

3>  • • ^ j)  • <3  *>  • ***  D*o  • • ^ ^ ^ 

• • • • • • t|  • i*^ 

! 

«>  : :?«,  t : : „ : :_*5  : : s,  :v>  : : 

• • • • • • ^ • • • • • 

i 

N 

imt.  ••  • *!•••••• 

sTw  : : &>3  : ^ ^ : : 

5%  ^ • • i t • i • • tl 

t 

1 

« « I • • i « • i t 

if  • • pj-  • ic|f»fu'$x»fr|£|8*i$**#» 

• i • • • « i i • • 

ill 

s : 

• • • • • c ' ~ Cs 

• •«••  V • *e 

• •••#  • • ^ • • A • • i * * ^ ^ jj, 

• •«••  ••  •*  • «L  • »®* 

! J 

I B 

• • ■«••«*,  •!«••« 

• »%)  »&J  cokj  

l[l 

HMMBKW 

CONSONANTS 

! • •••«  •••••••*•»••*•* 

1 A • • • • • • ••»>••*•»••••• 

• • • jj  jj  **«^  ••••••«*•••* 

• • * 5 s 

■t*  a 

• * * ,2  JS  ••••#•••••  ' 1 ' H C4 

• * • Jo  j§  * * M • > IMS 

• • • ’S3  ® 2 * • * 2 2 

• ’ ! 2 3 ’i*  ’H  • • 1 *3  - « •11 

: nil!  ;f!  :1i  ::Sas.Ms.t 

1 J1  ’•*  1 :|'3  :||  -|  rsJ’» 

> 1 ■ *3  .2  Hi  § * * S . « 

§ :! s s s I « *3  * «!i  :i 

CO  go  H £ fc  CO  CO 

jeo  6)  o h n M«iot0N«(ROHC)n^io(O!; 

•H  rtNWN  CMNCaOJNCNIN«eO«OWCO-*OeOM 

38  Tenuis 


FOR  THE  SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST. 


5G  Spirit  us  as  per 

57  „ lenis . 

58  Anusv£r&.  . . 

59  Visarga . . . . 


VOWELS. 


324  TRANSLITERATION  OF  ORIENTAL  ALPHABETS 


26  Labialis  *! 


