[Music]
I'm going to introduce Terrence and uh
then um
uh you'll be in for an experience that I
think you will find instructive
uh entertaining.
inspiring and challenging.
Um this lecture is um uh this evening is
um uh an independent lecture but it's
also uh the introductory part of a of a
workshop which will will continue
tomorrow and Sunday 9:30 to 3:30 uh for
those of you that might want to um uh go
into these subjects more in depth and
Terrence I think will say give you some
indication of uh what will be covered in
the in the workshops
uh tomorrow and Sunday. So um
uh Terrence is a um I think I would like
to say that uh Terrence who is my good
friend is one of the most remarkable
individuals I know. Um he is an
explorer, a student of uh shamanism and
of uh history, of
ethnobbatony and of a whole variety of
other disciplines which would be too
numerous to list. He has a very uh
unusual u gift for articulating with
exceptional clarity
uh connections, insights and
understandings
u from really the frontiers of human
exploration and knowledge. Uh he has a
gift for combining scientific knowledge
with uh poetic sensuous expression.
um that is quite exceptional and he has
a truly visionary
um mind that uh is able to range uh
deeply and widely across a very wide
spectrum and
um it's impossible to put Terren into
categories. Uh he transcends the usual
kinds of academic categories. the the um
um but the topic the focus of this uh
workshop is in u is on ethnobbatony and
shamanism in particular his work in the
last several years um has focused on the
uh preservation the study and the
preservation and propagation of
knowledge and information about the use
of um
botanical uh plants uh plants in the
context of the expansion of human
consciousness and
knowledge. And uh uh I can assure you
that um if you haven't heard Terrence
before, and even if you have, you're in
for an exhilarating uh journey into uh
uh spaces of the mind
um that uh you won't forget. So with
that, I'll turn you over to Terrence
McKinnon.
[Applause]
Well, I want to thank Ralph
for an introduction that will be hard to
live up to. I want to commend Ralph and
CIS for the act of intellectual courage
that inviting me here represents.
Um, I'm sort of returning to my home
turf after a year spent in the Hawaiian
Islands,
uh, where Cat and I were managing a
botanical
garden that is a nonprofit foundation
specifically set up to preserve plants
with a history of human usage, foods,
drugs, fiber, plants, uh food plants,
all the plants that are part of the
spectrum of human interactions with the
botanical world. I'm sure you're all
aware of the crisis in the world's
rainforests that they are being cut down
and radically affecting uh
uh the
uh ecosystems in the tropics and by
implication the whole world. But what is
not so well understood is the impact on
tropical cultures that capitalism and
modernity is having. These tropical
tribal cultures are much more fragile
than the rainforest itself. Every time
we go to the Amazon, we are struck by
how much information is being lost
irrevocably because uh people who in a
former time would have become apprentice
shamans are instead becoming the foremen
of sawmills and that sort of thing. So
I've been away in the Hawaiian Islands.
I'm delighted now to be back in the
fast, deep flowing current of American
culture. I certainly feel that that's
what it is after a hiatus that brought
great peace of mind but not a whole lot
of
excitement. Before I um make my way into
tonight's subject, I'll cover
uh what I think of as preliminaries and
business. First of all, as Ralph said,
this is the opening lecture of a weekend
that will be conducted all day tomorrow
and uh all day Sunday. In addition to
that, I'll be speaking at shared visions
tomorrow night on a completely different
subject in Berkeley. So, if any of you
are interested in attending um the
follow-on meetings of this workshop, you
should see the staff of CIS. If you're
interested in hearing what I have to say
about a new calendar, you should come to
shared visions tomorrow evening. How
many of you heard the talk on KPFA
today? A few. So, I shant fear if I
repeat myself. Uh, I want to call your
attention to a couple of projects that
have finally been completed. Psilocybin,
the magic mushroom growers guide, which
has been out of print for about 5 years,
is now back in print with more
photographs, expanded text, better
paper, etc., etc. Anyone who is
interested in literally cultivating a
relationship with a shamanic ally, this
is uh the place to
begin.
Uh also
uh Lux Nura which is the company which
is sort of a clearing house for my
ideas, tapes and books has completed
work on a software
package which uh is software which runs
on the Apple 2E 2C or 2GS machine.
software which supports the theories of
time that are explained in the invisible
landscape. This was an extremely arduous
task of uh
conceptualizing and then turning it into
software. My colleague Peter Meyer, the
best dBase hacker around, is here
tonight. Peter, why don't you stand up
and share the glory?
[Applause]
So any of you who have that kind of a
machine and are interested in the ideas
in the invisible landscape, this is our
best shot. This is state-of-the-art
stuff. At the moment, we can do no
better than timewave
zero. Very briefly, I want to mention an
article in this month's magical blend uh
graphically. It's by me. Uh called I
called it alien love. They called it
love aliens.
Uh graphically I think they took revenge
on me for knocking crystal power. But uh
the text is there if you're interested.
I'm going to talk for 45 minutes or an
hour then we will break. And uh if
you're interested in what Lux Nura has
available, there are cataloges here.
There's uh another piece of paper which
describes the work that Botanical
Dimensions is doing. And uh also I want
to promote a very interesting event
that's going to take place in November,
a conference here in San Francisco
called Alien uh pardon me, Angels,
Aliens, and Archetypes, which uh should
be very interesting. It's going to uh
happen at uh the Fairmont Hotel. And
besides myself, uh Whitley Strieber, who
wrote Communion, which is now on the New
York Times bestseller list, I
understand. Jose Arguual, who I
understand has disappeared into the
Imperium, will descend to uh share his
thoughts on UFOs with us. Jacques Valet
will be there, Ken Ring, the near-death
experience man, Michael Groso who wrote
the ultimate question,
uh Richard Ginger, a number of other
people, uh people that I have wanted to
publicly debate for years. So, I think
it should be a very lively uh weekend
conference. There are flyers on that.
Okay. so much for all of that. The
um the theme, the overarching theme of
this weekend here at CIS is psychedelics
before and after history, shamanism and
ethnobbotany. The succeeding meetings
will deal with the details of uh
shamanic usage of hallucinogenic plants
worldwide. in a kind of survey format
with special emphasis on those places
and peoples that I have personal
experience with which is uh the Amazon
basin and Southeast Asia and uh I
understand that if you are a student at
CIS there is credit for that. Tonight's
lecture is uh an attempt to set the
stage and sort of enunciate the
philosophical themes that stand behind
uh the effort to uh understand and
enumerate psychedelic plants and their
usage.
Uh anyway, I mean what is the point of
it? And the reason I called it uh uh or
the reason I invoked history before and
after is because I think that the
psychedelic
experience, especially as it is induced
by uh plants, is a phenomenon that too
little has been made of in an effort to
uh sort of preserve the chestnuts. of
modern science and
society. The psychedelic experience is
an extremely old part of uh the smorgus
board of human experiences on this
planet. In fact, the emergence of human
consciousness and the emergence of an
awareness of the properties of these
biodnamic alkaloids scattered throughout
a number of plant genera uh may be
nothing less than the same
thing. We know that
uh the aroreal primates of Africa at a
certain point in the past and people of
good will differ on exactly when came
under pressure from an advancing
phenomenon of desertification of the
African continent and at that time new
lifestyles new adaptations had to be put
in place. the aroreal canopy uh dwelling
lifestyle of these primate tribes had to
be put aside. They descended to uh
ground level. They abandoned
vegetarianism in favor of an omnivorous
diet. And their already highly evolved
system of signaling became even more
evolved as they uh took to hunting and
preying upon herds of unulate animals
that were evolving in this grassland
situation.
uh in response to the same set of
environmental pressures that were
forcing the primates out of the trees.
Um Rand Fiser did work showing that
visual acuity is increased if uh small
amounts of psilocybin are given to
graduate students. psilocybin in uh
doses that are sub threshold for uh the
triggering of uh psychological changes.
And in fact, he made the point to me
when he told me about this that this was
a clear instance of a drug allowing a a
being, a person to have a uh truer
picture of reality than if they had not
ingested the drug. But Fiser, who was a
psychologist, never drew the the uh
conclusion regarding what the
consequences of such an increase in
visual acuity would be on the lifestyle
and uh adaptive skills of an animal.
It's very clear in the same way that if
you have a plant in your diet which uh
stimulates or challenges your immune
system that will increase your adaptive
advantage. It's very clear that the
presence of a biodnamic steroid or
alkyoid which increases visual acuity
will also have a tremendous impact on uh
the adaptive uh strategy and the success
of that strategy in a given animal. So
it's possible to suggest that once uh
psilocybin was established in the food
chain, those primates that uh utilized
it quickly became the dominant and then
the exclusive form. Well, now how did
this uh how did this psilocybin enter
the food chain of these primates? very
simply because it was
uh
copitic meaning it grew in the manure of
these unulate animals. So that once the
unulate animals became uh a food source
and a focus of interest and attention of
these primates, they could not help but
notice as they tracked and followed
these herds that uh the
mushroom was thrust upon their uh
attention. If any of you have observed
straferia cubensus, which is the species
I'm speaking of, growing in the tropics,
you know that it is quite an astonishing
natural object to come upon in any
environment. Uh, I've seen them the size
of dinner plates in the Amazon and they
have a very rich golden color and they
rear their uh heads above uh the
surrounding grasses in the meadowand
situation. In fact, they actually look
like small fleets of flying saucers that
have come in and settled on the grass.
Uh to this day, baboons have the habit
of baboons are also primates of this
grassland environment. They have the
habit of rushing over to uh cowpies and
turning them over and picking up bugs
and uh searching for protein in this
way. So it is no great leap of faith to
suppose that very early on they would
have uh these primate animals would have
noticed the presence of the mushroom
directly in their path and being
omnivorous they would have eaten it and
first in small experimental doses doses
which confer increased visual acuity
that would have established a selective
reinforcement loop in favor of those
animals with a taste for mushrooms as
opposed to those animals without such a
taste. Very quickly they would have bred
out the other preference and uh very
farseeing monkeys would have been
established. The next level of the
argument requires a somewhat uh greater
leap. It has to do with the fact that at
increased doses the psilocybin in these
mushrooms seems to activate uh the
language forming centers of the brain
broca's area or uh the ceruius it isn't
clear but what is clear that
experientially these things are
catalysts for language and that from the
signifying ing uh or I'm sorry from the
signaling repertoire of these primates
to the act of
signification is a a symmetry break a
leap into the unknown that it is
reasonable to speculate was actually
triggered by the presence of these
biodnamic plants in the diet. Once that
happened, there is the establishment of
a set of
associations. The cow, the mushroom,
which in the mind of uh these creatures,
I'm sure that the mushroom was thought
of as coming from the cow because after
all, the manure came from the cow and it
seems to be just a seamless web of
associations. So the cow, the mushroom,
and lying ineffably behind that, the
experience of the tremendum, the
experience of an ineffable mystery that
now some 100,000 or 35,000 years later
is no less mysterious. Uh in spite of
the fact that we have made an immense
intellectual conquest of the world in
which we live, we extend our metaphors
of explanation to the most distant
stellar objects and down into orders of
magnitude of the physical
universe, many levels beyond which we
can perceive with our unaded senses.
Nevertheless, this tremendum that these
early primates contacted remains
precisely that, a mysterium, a
transcendental mystery that beckons
across the epigenetic landscape of human
culture and
organization. And uh some of you who
have heard this lecture uh or these
ideas before know that it is my opinion
going beyond Gordon Wson that this
really lays the basis for uh the genesis
of religion. Religion begins in the
notion of the holy. The holy is another
way of indicating the felt presence of
the tremendum. And the early goddess
religions of the of the Middle East were
essentially cattle religions. There are
people in this audience who have done
tremendous work on the ethmology of
these languages showing how these words
and roots uh can be traced back into a
kind of convergence where the mystery
and the mushroom are seen to be one.
So this means that in spite of the
um prejudices and intellectual
predelections of western man which are
essentially pretensions that have uh
arisen in the uh dimension created by
ignorance. the dimension of ignorance
created by the
Judeo-Christian attitude toward nature
which sees it essentially as uh
something to be exploited rather than uh
integrated or uh
or made a resonant part of the psyche.
In the light of that ignorance, the
connection to the vegetable world has
fallen away. Although even as late as
the 19th century
uh mythographers and mythologists like
Fmax Mueller and Frasier were talking
about the vegetation goddess as as a
kind of archetypal category into which
all of these early religions could be
subsumed. Then uh in the 20th century
this idea fell into uh
disrepute and the interest uh in the
psyche became detached from the
historical career of man through time
and became a kind of
um well a hologram if you will the
yungian hologram of the archetypal
matrix which if you've ever read Jung
you know that he has very little uh
appreciation for historical chronology.
He will site a 16th century alchemist in
the same breath that he will site a uh
4th century hermeticist or a 16th
dynasty uh papyrus text because his
notion was that the collective
unconscious was somehow a temporal and
there is something to that. uh but
beyond and beneath that is the greater
reality of the accumulation of this uh
this experience with these plant
hallicens. It's interesting that to this
day in the rainforest uh ecologies of
the world the faith has never been
broken. And in a way that brings me then
to the second theme which is after
history. History you see is a kind of uh
a kind of prodigal wandering a kind of
breaking of faith with the vegetation
goddess. a descent into what Merciliod
called the profanity of history, away
from the paradigmatic world of ritual
and magic and into the secularized
linear progression of uh historical
phenomena based on
technological advance. However, uh
because it rests on no
uh epistemic bedrock, it is simply a
cultural assumption. It is now in our
own time playing itself out. The the
fact that it has a false bottom can now
be seen as we through modern
anthropology and modern chemistry and
pharmarmacology before it was repressed
and shut down in the 1960s. We have
rediscovered the mystery almost by
accident and then quickly acted to make
it illegal, inaccessible and trivial.
These seem to be the three uh ways that
we deal with drugs. We make them
recreational or illegal or inaccessible.
all strategies for uh turning away from
the real
implication which is that man as a
thinking creature on this planet is
necessarily a a portion of a symbiotic
relationship. Man without the synergy
that these plants have imparted to the
formation of our genome is no better
than a monkey.
So that recognizing that we are forced
to recognize that the experience of
spirit for which most of us rely upon u
the testimony of Meister Echart and Juan
Dela Cruz and Hildigard von Bingan is in
fact a birthright of each and every one
of us. But the bias of the scientific
mentality which is the bias which says
the world must be known through the
pristine agency of the
unencumbered
observer. It has to be abandoned and by
unencumbered I mean unoned.
This is the idea that nothing is true
except that which emerges from the most
sober sorts of reflection in every sense
of the word sober. And yet we know that
uh a substantial portion of the meaning
of reality is contacted in the dionic in
the dionic excess in orgy in the
abandonment of the sanctity of the
individual ego and emerging into the
group mind of the tribe or even the
condo complex in our own
time. Yes. So
that but that entire uh spectrum of
human experience the the
groupminded
emotive
orastic swept away spectrum of
experience is denied and in its place is
put uh a real horror of nature. And when
you have horror of something, you move
in such an epistemic
mirc. Uh, you know, the the rape of
nature has been analyzed as precisely
that, a rape, a a subjugation of the
feminine, and it certainly is that, but
it's something else as well. It is a
horror that gives permission to destroy.
A a microcosm of this which everyone who
works in the Amazon is aware of is the
myth of cannibalism in the Amazon. The
myth of cannibalism was specifically
promulgated to give white people
permission to carry out
atrocities on the native peoples because
it was said they are uh uh homopages.
the most horrifying thing we can imagine
gives us permission to deny their
humanity and then ride rough shod upon
them and and in a on a larger time scale
this kind of relationship has been
extended to all of nature
now because of the work of people like
Hoffman and Wson and Metsner and Liry
and uh earlier people Luen and others
the 20th century has come full circle.
We have dug so deep into the toy box of
matter that we have actually come upon
the residence of the god or the
residence of the mystery and it cannot
now be denied. This is I believe a lot
of what the cultural struggle over
hallucinogens and the impact of plant
induced hallucinations is about. It is
that
uh science cannot continue as usual in
the face of this phenomenon.
It is what the
parasychologists have been seeking but
have not the courage to proclaim because
so strong is the bias against drugs in
this culture that automatically anything
having to do with drugs is ruled out of
bounds in the realm of evidence
precluding forever in my mind uh the
validation
of these phenomena. So-called psychic
phenomena are an everyday occurrence
where hallucinogenic drugs are taken.
But where hallucinogenic drugs are not
taken, these things must be sought by
the most torturous and excruciating
kinds of methods. You know, the flipping
of cards and that sort of thing.
Um, even and I don't want to dump on
Whitley because I don't know the man,
but I read his book. I was amused. Those
of you who are aware of Whitley
Strieber's book, uh, Communion, he takes
great pains to say that he never uses
drugs. He even has an appendix in the
back of his book which is a polygraph
session where he he insisted that he be
asked the question, "Do you use drugs?"
Well, to my mind, it's no wonder the
poor man can't understand what is
happening to
him without a symbiotic relationship to
the biodnamic godladen constituents in
the exterior natural environment. The
unaded human mind is almost certain to
fail in its effort to assimilate the
mystery of being. Because throughout the
historical and prehistorical career of
human beings, this is how understanding
was achieved. And uh you know I bring
great wrath upon myself by suggesting
that even the most uh respected methods
of spiritual transformation such as uh
yoga and mantra mantriana and that sort
of thing are in fact efforts to mimic uh
intoxication of plants without
committing the heenous act of ingestion.
You see again this uh a a masculine
paternalistic society has such a
penetration fear, such a fear of having
mother nature come at them with the
large thick reality of things that you
know excruciating or
uh will be substituted in lie of that.
uh not eating uh flagagillation
uh sitting for hours and hours obeying
for years the orders of BDI
opportunists all of this sort of thing
will be tolerated in lie of making the
commitment to nature that's what it is
it's a commitment to nature to the
ethicacy of
nature our Our the and by our now I mean
the rationalist scientific view of
nature is that it is something entirely
passive which we
perceive and that the act of
perception to become an act of
understanding has to go through all
kinds of transforms and processing in
the human brain.
Nothing could be further than the truth.
The I'm sure many of you are familiar
with the Gaia hypothesis which
fundamentally is a theory about gas
exchange in the atmosphere but which
really says that the planet is a
self-regulating
organism in which we are moving around
playing a role somewhat like an organel
in a cell. The consequences to be drawn
from the Gaia hypothesis is that nature
is not a a passive matrix which requires
analysis but that in fact it is
communication that the perception of
nature is the perception of nature's
intent. And if we could, and this begins
as a kind of
outlandish notion is nature talking to
us. Is that what is happening? And ends
I think in the conviction that that is
absolutely what is happening. We do not
live on this planet. We live in this
planet. Hundreds of miles of
atmosphere rise above us. We move along
on a kind of membrane which is which we
call the surface but which is really
simply a symmetry break in the
physiology of the planetary organism.
The the planetary organism for us is a
continuous stream of communication to us
which we
deny and we deny it by uh strategies
that have been spun out over millennia.
Um one of which is of course the subject
object dualism inherent in our
languages. Uh the notion of the
passivity of the exterior. uh the notion
that
uh mind is a
phenomenon in fact an epipenomenon of
the functioning of brain. We are
unwilling to see that mind is a flowing
river into which the brain is inserted
much in the way that a dipstick is
inserted into a crank case to take the
measure of the lubricant. That's what we
are doing. And um you know there's a lot
of talk about paradigm shift. What will
it be? Where will it come from? etc etc.
And people keep claiming they have it,
but I don't think people realize I mean
they they have trivial paradigm shifts
or many paradigm shifts. The real
paradigm shift that is being acted out
in the 20th century is a return to the
archaic notion of the primacy of spirit.
And uh it was contacted first and most
abstractly by quantum physics where it
was finally realized when all other
intellectual avenues had been exhausted.
That particulate matter conceived of as
tiny billiard balls whizzing through
empty space was going to have to be
replaced by a notion of fields of
interacting fields. described
probabilistically and not really
localizable in the here and now uh kind
of matrix that we are used to moving
through. But they they called uh the new
concept of matter probabilistic or wave
mechanical. It actually is not
mechanical at all. Waves are not
mechanical. wave mechanical is a
curiously bastardized kind of term which
tries to have it both ways. Uh but how
many of us are quantum physicists and
how many of us who are actually have
access to the instrumentalities that
confirm these notions. Uh so it emerges
it emerged and is emerging then in other
areas such as uh abstract art and uh the
effort by the precursors of abstract
art, the pathophysicists, the dads and
the surrealists to introduce uh the
notion of an animate and active
unconscious.
The notion of the unconscious is
actually an effort to blur the notion of
the point consciousness of the ego and
to replace the model of the point
consciousness of the ego with this more
uh deployed and fuzzy uh notion of u a
gradation of awareness spreading out to
the very earliest memories of uh animal
organization. You see, but all of these
intellectual efforts to launch the
paradigm of spirit have been somewhat
academic and removed from the ordinary
experience of people. What is not
removed from the ordinary experience of
people is the availability of the
psychedelic experience conceived not as
a kind of uh a kind of
masturbation where the laboratory
facilitates
uh the experience through the production
of historyless drugs. drugs absolutely
empty of morphogenetic content. But
through the acceptance of the fact that
this generalized communication from
nature is most excruciatingly focused
and particularized in these
informationbearing molecules that have
been evolved over billions of years in
the
biosphere by the matrix of life
itself for purposes of communication.
ation. All of life is really a ocean of
communication and this is now being
understood even by the hardnosed uh
Darwinian evolutionary thinkers. It is
really not uh all tooth and claw. It is
not survival of the fittest. It is
survival of those who can cooperate best
with those around them of the same and
different species. Well, the essence of
coordinating cooperation is
communication. And the essence of
communication is the free flow of
linguistic intent. Uh we're all
familiar, I'm sure, with the way in
which um ants regulate their behavior by
the laying down of
pherommones. But and that seems quite
acceptable to us because we say, well,
they are the average ant is not such a
big deal. It is the hive which is so
exquisitely organized and coordinated
and able to execute its intent and carry
out its plans. But you know have you
noticed that the individual atoms of the
human hive are no great shakes either in
most cases.
Um, I mean, I'm speaking now to an
intellectual elite, self- selected by
being able to get yourselves here this
evening to this kind of an event. But
I'm sure you all uh are aware of the
public opinion polls which show that the
average high school graduate cannot
locate Venezuela on a map or and similar
things. believes that Herman Guring
served in the Nixon
administration. And someone said, "But
he did, didn't he? O only his
spirit." So coordination of
communication is really what these
psychedelic compounds uh are about. And
once this is recognized, I think uh the
role of the spirit as a transforming
paradigm begins to come into focus. You
see, it is not enough and this is again
another argument I have with the
so-called mystical tradition. The intent
of the mystical tradition seems to be to
trigger the presence, the experience of
the presence of the tremendum. But in
fact, what is necessary is to be able to
act in the presence of the tremendum to
to execute
behaviors based on the felt experience
of the tremendum. And this you do not
get. You get a strange quietude, a
quesence, a glorification of the
hermitage and the monastery as being
somehow uh conccommatant with the a an
awareness of the spirit. Nothing could
be further from the truth. An awareness
of the spirit carries with it an
obligation to
action. obligation to action within the
context of, and I say this as generously
as possible, the
hive. So that
uh the appearance in modern times of the
anthropological data and the
pharmarmacological
sophistication and the botanical
sophistication to
reccognize the role of these psychedelic
plants in the formation of human culture
is extremely important. It seems to me
it is the seinal event of the 20th
century toward which all the other
things I mentioned Freudian and Yungian
psychology, modern art, nostalgia for
the archaic etc. point and
uh one can almost make the metaphor that
we are approaching a new level of self
unfolding as a species.
uh comparable to
adolescence in the
individual. What happens in adolescence
is that the DNA the DNA reaches the
place in its program where there is a
symmetry break and a new set of messages
begins to be sent. Hormonal messages,
you can think of them as pherommones
within the body. That's what a hormone
is. an organic catalyst within the body
which suddenly shifts the focus of the
individual from the what Freud called
the polymorphic perversity of the ego to
the felt presence of the other conceived
in that case as uh a sexual partner and
and sex which had never before been an
issue or which had only very
peripherally been an issue suddenly
becomes an absolute obsession and
pointing toward the
um attainment of sizzagy with the
mystery fusion with the felt presence of
the other in the form of uh early
adolescent sexual experiences. Well, I
have many times found myself saying to
groups like this, "What a tragedy that
someone might go from birth to death
without ever having the psychedelic
experience. It is a the birthright of an
intelligent species. In the same way
that I am I I would hate to think of
someone going from birth to death
without the sexual experience." These
are completing and illuminating and
transcending transcendental dimensions
of experience
which one must have in order to fully
claim the dimension of humanness.
Uh now in the process of culture
recapitulating anttogyny and fogyny we
have reached our childhood's end and our
childhood was uh the world of naive
Newtonianism
uh Hamiltonian atomic systems uh a place
for everything and everything in its
place. We have come to the end of that
process. Now we must invite the presence
of a greater mystery. And in the same
way that though we enter into the sexual
dimension at adolescence
uh we leave it some 50 60 or 70 years
later depending on how lucky we are
still without a full understanding of
what went on. I'm sure you've all seen
the the little sign which says uh we
grow too soon old and too late
smart. Well, it applies to sex as well
as to the psychedelic experience. Now,
as a culture, we must come to grips with
the fact that the world is not simple in
the same way that a 9-year-old must come
to grips with the fact that the world is
not simple. It is not as mommy and daddy
said it was. There are tremendous vistas
and abysses to be plunged. And uh ask
your uncle and he will tell you that
nobody knows what's going on in these
areas. Ask a shaman and he will tell you
that nobody has found the bedrock of the
psychedelic experience. Nevertheless,
this wish to live with a bedrock of
experience is a kind of trivializing of
the great mystery in which we find
ourselves embedded. We would have a far
more accurate and complete picture of
reality if we were willing to live with
the felt presence of the mystery. And
the way to do this is
to experience what these plant teachers
are trying to say. What these
planetarily manufactured
informationbearing pherommonal molecules
are trying to imbue into us. Now shamans
throughout history have shortcircuited
uh the fall. They are those who know
that's what nosis is. It is privilege
knowledge vouch safe to the courageous.
And the fact that we have fallen into a
childish or a neurotic style of relating
to being uh is nothing more than a
statement about the inherent biases of
our languages and our institutions.
Many peoples have not perhaps because
they carried out their lives in the
vastness of the tropical forests where
the force of nature cannot be denied.
You see, had we stayed in the tropics,
we probably would never have taken the
fall into history. The fall into history
is what happens when one moves into
progressively more and more barren
landscapes and and substitutes for the
input of organic nature the uh uh
self-generated
uh neurotic maps that are based on
incomplete information.
Now that cycle is being closed. I often
think that uh the discovery of the new
world and its
subjugation which was like the uh
carrying out of the ultimate
fantasies of the neurotic
Judeo-Christian tradition, a world to
plunder ends very oddly with Gordon Wson
and Valentina Wson in
1953 penetrating into the jungle
highlands of Mexico and finding there
something more astonishing than a flying
saucer or an alien artifact. Finding
there the true heritage of the human
species in the form of the intact
mushroom psychedelic
religion. OS lost since the
dismemberment of Osiris. lost uh since
great Pan's death at the rise of the
Christian era but not dead only sleeping
and now through cultivation techniques
and the propagation of uh ethnographic
literature and the work of people like
Mner and Hoffman and Wson and
Schulties shoved directly in the path of
the careening cultural juggernaut of
Western civilization. This is why I've
called the weekend psychedelics before
and after history because I see history
as I say as a prodigal um hiatus, a
wandering in the desert of unknowing, a
indulgence in an easily cured neurosis.
If we will but take upon ourselves the
personal personal responsibility for
cultivating a relationship with the
mystery. We have bought in so thoroughly
to the notion of a hierarchy of
information and a declenion of truth
from experts whether they be
politicians, priests or scientists that
we have
devalued ourselves as the primary
instruments of our knowing. And this is
why I think among other reasons why uh
psychedelics are so repressed, why it is
so important to society to keep them out
of the hands not only of children and
high schoolers and uh
hedonistic experimentalists, but to keep
them out of the hands of research
psychologists, pharmarmacologists and
physiologists as Well, because
uh fully
appreciated, they will explode the
Newtonian Einsteinian universe the way a
stick of dynamite explodes a rotten
apple. And in the process, the
hierarchies of
paternalism,
scientism, and reductionism will just be
completely swept away. And this is all
going to happen, God willing, in our
lifetimes. Uh my faith is that if it
doesn't happen, then the cultural
momentum toward a lethal conclusion will
continue unto the ultimate catastrophe.
And so that's why I am willing to
address groups like this and seek to
inspire psychologists and chemists and
students of anthropology and culture to
examine this because I think we have
wandered far from our birthright and
trivialized uh the mystery of being in
the process. And to recoup that mistake,
we are going to have
to become as little
children in the face of the shamanic
phenomenon and investigate it
intellectually,
experientially,
linguistically,
individually, and collectively. Only in
that way will we be able to rescue the
enterprise from its momentum toward
catastrophe. Let's not forget that each
one of us is here in this room because
what a thousand or 10,000 generations of
thinking beings did not drop the ball.
However tough it was, nine times the
glaciers have ground south from the
poles in the last 150 years, 150,000
years. Nine times they have retreated.
This planet has witnessed all kinds of
catastrophes and uh and uh cemetery
breaks and uh still the trust the
implicit trust that the environment must
have in us as the catalytic species and
we are the catalytic species. Everyone
is worried about the impact of of uh
humankind on this planet. Well, let me
tell you, before the pyramids ever rose,
the impact of human beings on this
planet was staggering. The CO2 level had
been affected. The grasslands had been
created. The great mammals had become
extinct. All of this is tolerated
because we are the prodical sons. We are
uh the pride of the planetary parent
because we are the omniadaptable
catalytic species that if able to carry
out the program which consciousness
endows us with the power to impart, we
will be able to carry the biosphere of
this planet throughout the stellar
system in which this solar system is
embedded. And life has this atmporal
sense of itself. The reason it tolerates
the risk that we represent is because it
is gambling on the hope that we
represent. And the way to get in aligned
with that and to get in resonance with
it is to clear the noise from the
circuitry of communication. And the way
you clear the noise from the circuitry
of communication is by backing out of
the garbage of profane culture,
reductionism, linearity, all of these
things and uh abandoning the fall into
history and returning to the garden. If
we each do it, it will be feta accomply
for the collectivity. If we all sit
around waiting for it to come in the
form of benevolent extraterrestrials or
a religious conversion on the part of
Reagan and Gorbachev, we will all go to
hell in a hand basket together. So that
is the stunningly central import of the
botanical hallogens in the planetary
ecosystem. And that is this evening's
formal presentation as well. Thank you
very
[Applause]
much. Um, as I understand it, there is
tea and coffee downstairs. Let's take a
10-minute break and then I will
entertain vigorous and even hostile
questioning by the audience. And here is
the various sorts of propaganda that I
mentioned earlier. Thank you very
much. It's later than we think. So, uh
I'm not sure it was up to me to call
this back together, but I will do so. I
know there are people with questions.
Before I take questions, I was handed an
express mail package in the
intermission. Uh Robin Silvin, who some
of you may know as the former director
of the Ohigh Foundation, is now running
something called the Fair Haven
Mysteries Project in Bellingham,
Washington. and Cat and I have agreed
with him to uh do a
um 22 a 9day pilgrimage in Hawaii this
uh coming January at the uh botanical
garden site there and uh it's been named
Volcano Orchid Mind. So, if any of you I
don't have enough of these flyers for
everyone to get one, but if any of you
think you might uh wish to and can
afford to spend 9 days with us in Hawaii
next January, I'll just leave these out
for interested parties. And if there
aren't enough to go around, why uh share
at least theformational contact uh with
other
people? Okay.
Uh is there anybody burning to ask a
question? Yes. Terrence, what are your
views on some non-botanicals such as
MDMA and ketamine which you're currently
Well, I I think I implied in the talk uh
I really make I'm as the longer I deal
with this problem, the more strongly I
feel about it. It began as a sort of a
very gentle separating and it's become
more and more clear to me that
um and I guess I rely on Rupert
Sheldrake to give me a basis for saying
this uh drugs which come out of the
laboratory have no history. They do not
vibrate with millennia of usage or with
being products of the natural
environment. They are as I implied in my
lecture somewhat onistic. So I view them
as drugs and drugs do different things.
Some drugs stimulate you, some depress
you, some may even uh cause the release
of personalistic
uh content or repressed traumatic
material. Drugs are for people who are
ill is basically my approach to it.
While botanical
hallucinogens are for extremely healthy
people who want to go deeper into
experience. I've tried the drugs that
you mention. I've certainly found them
interesting, but I could not imagine
building a uh career around
communicating with people about them. To
my mind, what's interesting about them
is the contrast with theformational
depth of natural hallogens.
Uh I think the word drug applied across
the board to MDMA, ketamine and
psilocybin, measculine and those kinds
of things does great injustice to the
natural compounds. There really should
be a linguistic distinction made. So I
try to speak of organic substances or
more specifically plants. I don't deny
the worth or the efficacy of these
laboratory compounds, but they are not
planetarily evolved pherommones carrying
the messages of Gaia. They are humanly
constructed
nanotechnological machines
uh useful for intervening in the
personalistic dynamics of the
psyche. EMTT, what do you know?
EMTT. Okay.
As a germ warfare,
AIDS as a germ warfare. Um well I don't
know anything. I certainly um have
noticed that within 10 years of the
discovery of retroviruses which the AIDS
virus is you know the one of the dogmas
of molecular biology was that there was
never transcription from RNA to DNA. It
was always from DNA to RNA. Then they
discovered the so-called family of
retroviruses. Within a very few years,
three or something after that, AIDS
appeared with its curious political
selectivity. I mean, this is a drug
which goes after
homosexuals, people who shoot
intravenous drugs,
uh, black people and loose people.
If they could have just somehow gotten
the tay saxs thing in there too, so it
would have gotten Jews, I'm sure they
would have really been pleased with
themselves if it is in fact a piece of
political engineering. Uh I don't know
that it is, but I certainly notice its
curious uh selectivity. If it is, you
may be sure that this is a secret buried
far deeper than anything having to do
with Avitz or Watergate or anything
else. You want to talk about a crime
against humanity, this is a crime
against humanity on an a previously
inconceivable scale. Um there's been a
lot of speculation about this. Granted,
some of it has emerged from eastb block
countries, but on the other hand, it's
well documented that other
bacteriological and chemical agents were
tested in this very city uh in the 50s
and 60s. Some of you may know the
incidents that I'm referring to. So, um
it's a it's a possibility not to be
ruled out certainly. Uh I said that you
would be next. Yes. H you talked about
uh the psychedelic experience and
mushroom um contrast to but similar to
also a mystical state or achieving
enlightenment through uh other
means.
Um my understanding somewhat has been
that uh use of yoga or meditation or
whatever to achieve these states would
produce ultimately some kind of a
permanent uh state of mind that uh would
would alter one's consciousness if if it
is indeed be achieved that way. It would
alter one's consciousness 24 hours a
day. um with with drugs. Um you're
suggesting is there's an easier way to
to to learn similar things um about this
uh
uh state of being or whatever through
drugs. Um but through plants really
through plants but I know that you know
you take a drug and you you have
experiences and um certain kinds of uh
realizations and then you come down. So
is your would is is do you feel that um
there's some kind of program for
ingesting the mushroom or do you is is
it would it become something that would
become part of your your diet or you
reach a state where you do indeed that
she is sort of a permanent symbiosis.
Well I think that
uh your point is well taken.
Nevertheless, it uh the mushrooms, the
psilocybin affects the
imagination. It is a stimulant to the
imagination. And I don't really think
that that is dissipated or if it is
dissipated, it's very slowly. Also, I'm
not entirely convinced of the claim of
the of the yogic schools that they can
lock in these extraordinary states. uh
permanently.
Uh it seems to me that
that the shamans that I have had
acquaintance with certainly are not
abusers of these substances. On the
other hand, they are regular users. And
uh I think that it's fine that the
insights are tested against uh the uh
momentum of down reality. Uh
yoga most schools of yoga in fact I
believe all schools of yoga can be
traced back to the 2 century uh the
yogic sutras of Patanjali. Well,
Patanjali explicitly states that
lightfilled
herbs, his phrase light-filled herbs are
one of the legitimate paths to uh
achieving these high states. Certainly
if you look at the Rick Vades, the Rick
Vades are a vast and enthusiastic paying
of praise to something called
S which was greater than Indra, greater
than the gods of the old Vadic pantheon,
the central mystery of the Vadic
civilization.
Gordon Wasson has argued very
persuasively that it was a mushroom of
some sort. So I I really believe that uh
if we had a completely clear picture of
the evolution of Indian culture, we
would see that for some reason open at
this point in history and looking back
at it only to
speculation, a botanical an institution
of botanical shamanism was transformed
into the notion of a lineage and a
secret teaching. and a set of
physiological practices. So, uh I
I the the issue of permanence is a kind
of an odd one. Obviously, one once you
are not always stoned if you take a
hallucinogen, a plant hallic, but I am
living proof that you're never the same.
So somewhere between always stoned and
never be the same uh is where one falls.
Yes. This grasp of the verbal language.
Is that one of your changes? Well, who
were you like in high school?
Different questions. No, I I've thought
about this a good deal because people
keep bringing it up and I find myself
saying, you know, that it synergizes
command of language and so forth and so
on. But the most honest answer I can
give you is I was always glib and and in
high school uh we had a big forensics
scene going in my high school. Well, you
had two choices. You could be in debate
or extemp. And they said, I said, "So,
what is debate?" And they said, "Well,
you stay after school and you make 3x5
cards on uh resolve that the general
association of trades and tariffs should
admit the United States as a member."
And I said, "Okay, so what is extemp?"
And they said, "You go in cold and you
draw three topics out of a hat and you
have three minutes to choose one of them
and prepare a 15minute talk." And I
said, "I'll go with that." And I was
very, very good at it. But
I as I went as I grew up and went to
Asia and wandered around as a freak
basically I had no sense of myself as
having great verbal facility. I
discovered that really on the mushrooms
and uh if any of you there's a book I
can recommend that is excellent reading
on the subjects we've been talking
about. It's edited by Michael Harner,
although he does not make a contribution
other than to edit it. It's called
Halosenogens and shamanism and it
contains about nine articles on various
plants with shamanic usage. Henry man
who is an anthropologist who has spent a
lot of time in the Wakan Highlands has
an article in there called the mushrooms
of language. And he says, you know, they
catalyze language, they catalyze verbal
facility. And we don't know what the
basis of the well doumented traditions
of oral
poetizing that we find when we go back
into the western tradition. It still
exists in rural Yugoslavia. We don't
know what the factors were that created
that. I think that uh most people who
take plant hallicens are simply inspired
to attempt to clean up their
communication skills because you do wish
to communicate it. And it's uh the the
stereotyped view of the uh
intoxicated mystic in our society is of
a an idiot. You know, the inarticulate
hippie, the guy who can't who just says,
"Well, you know, man, it's like, you
know, in my experience, that is not what
it is at all. it. They are an extremely
potent catalyst for
communication. Yes. The blonde woman in
the back. And then do you think it's
possible um through artificially created
um
hallucinogenics to program someone even
if maybe just some one really good trip
to program them perhaps to change in the
their whole outlook on life? Not. And I
I get the idea with with what you're
speaking of with natural substances.
You're bringing out something that's
already in you or allowing some
consciousness that perhaps is intact.
I'm speaking about introducing perhaps
some foreign consciousness into your
mind
through chemically altered. Do you mean
as in a control or in a psychoanalytic
sense like curing an addiction or an
obsession? I'm talking about like having
been given acid at one point and I mean
even many years later still sometimes
having like flashbacks on it wondering
what perhaps might have been in that
drug or what it did to you.
Well, I think that the most complex
phenomenon in our world is the human
psyche. And one does occasionally meet
people who are horrified by my position
and say, "I took LSD 25 years ago and
it's taken me this long to get it back
together and even now I don't feel that
together." To me uh the the psychedelic
is uh responsible only in the sense that
it gave an x-ray of the psyche to the
ego. And people who have been severely
traumatized or abused or molested as
children who have real problems are
going to uh discover the breadth and
depth of this traumatic material. and it
may uh inhibit their ability to set
themselves free and become great
psychedelic explorers. I don't advocate
this uh for everyone. In fact, I counsel
people and I don't always tell people
they should go ahead with their plans if
they're contemplating uh a psychedelic
experience. Sometimes I tell them they
need to do more reading or have more
therapy or and sometimes I tell them
they shouldn't do it at all. It's a
calling. Shamanism is a calling. And uh
in traditional societies, shamans pick
and choose very carefully who they will
take on as apprentices. So uh it's by no
means a given that everyone is going to
find these things to their taste. On the
other hand, those who do find it to
their taste will inculcate it into their
lives uh very readily and it will become
very important to them their
self-defin and their psychic growth. in
in to address possibly another aspect of
your question. Is it possible to program
people with these drugs or a combination
of these drugs and hypnosis and that
sort of thing? I have no doubt that it
is. The little bit that we see that we
are able to get declassified from CIA
experiments in the 60s is hair raising.
I mean, they dreamed of people who would
commit acts of violence or assassination
and then completely forget that they had
done it. Now, how far down the road with
these kinds of programs they got, we
don't know to this day. My uh I am very
careful about who and what I am around
in uh in a state of psychedelic uh
awareness because uh you do imprint
these things and and that's why you know
in the same way that the shaman chooses
his apprentice very carefully, the
apprentice should be very aware of
choosing the teacher very carefully.
you sir. Yeah, I've had some uh major
experiences with LSD in terms of ego
death and a just a complete crushing of
my psyche and what I my point of view
and then have come through into some
brilliant light and really a very
spiritual experience. Uh and I'm only
now starting to play with the mushrooms
uh for that for more of that experience.
I wonder if you could relate if the
mushrooms have the potential to
um have that painful aspect of the
crushing and and the the ego death kind
of experience. So far, I haven't had
that kind of experience with the
mushrooms. Well, a very nice thing about
the mushroom is that it's extremely uh
tolerant of beginners.
Nevertheless, downstream from those
early experiences,
uh, you know, you're dealing with, call
it the overmind, the super ego, it will
give you not what you want, but what you
need. And, uh, and it can
be extremely painful. It can be
extremely humbling. It can be
terrifying.
Uh it seems to me in the people I have
known and in looking at my own trips
that had that quality to them, it's
always to the good. The ego is
completely obsessed with control and
wants everything to be ameliorated and
presented in easily digestible
increments and to proceed along an
orderly uh program of unfoldment. And uh
it isn't like that. It's uh it has its
own weather. It has its own dynamics.
And you're much more in the position of
someone sailing alone in a small
sailboat. You can uh check the weather
very carefully and this will give you an
edge. Nevertheless, squalls can turn
into great storms with astonishing
rapidity. And yet then you're in a
position to really learn. But the
learning is not the real intense
learning is not necessarily painless.
And I see people nodding their heads all
over the room. It is not for the
fainthearted. You know, I mean, uh, it
just simply is not for the
faint-hearted. Uh people talk about how
there are no frontiers left and we we
we lead such coddled lives uh within
this society and in our wellfernished
apartments with our stacks of CDs and
all this. Actually, it isn't true. You
can turn uh your living room into the
helm of Mellin's ship.
uh it's simply that the great unexplored
dimensions are internal and
psychological but no less dangerous for
that. So it's a calling for uh the
exploring spirit someone who really uh
wants that thrill. Yes. Yes. If I
understood you correctly, I thought you
were saying that history is always
profang. Uh, and I wonder if that's true
because I'm thinking of say the
prophetic tradition. The idea of um that
there's a meaning in history that
there's social ninja. I'm thinking of
someone like Martin Luther King for
instance who sort of comes out of that
tradition. Did I understand you
correctly uh on that? Not
exactly. This is a distinction that
Merciliod made in a book which was very
important to me called uh uh the myth of
the eternal return. Cosmos and history
myth of the eternal return. If you
haven't read it, read it. It's a great
book. And he simply set up these two
terms, sacred and profane. And what he
means is that sacred space is
paradigmatic space. That means that it
is all it is ritualistic space. It is
always involved with the repetition of
an archetypal activity. He uses the
Latin phrase
intempor which literally in English
simply means in that time. But what it
really refers to is the time before
history. So the juxtiposition of sacred
and profane is not a value judgment. Uh
it's simply a way of talking about two
kinds of time. one that is cyclical and
engaged in the ritual establishment of a
kind of archetypal space and the other
that is linear and rational and proceeds
from a beginning toward a future. No,
obviously it's history is studded with
uh examples of great saintliness, great
insight, great uh displays of compassion
and understanding. So I didn't mean to
imply that and hope that I didn't. Yes.
Uh earlier you made a excellent
delineation between uh laboratory
produced drugs and botanicals. The
question is, are the effects of each of
these two different ones
uh of
people? Well, um something more that I
could have said about that, a very
practical argument for botanical drugs,
especially ones with a history of
shamanic usage, is simply that they have
a history of human usage. That's where
the market testing was done over
thousands and thousands of years. If a
if a compound is uh toxic or uh uh
triggers psychosis or mutagenic or uh
induces tumors, it will have been
dropped long ago by human groups who
experiment with these things. something
can come out of the laboratory and be
psychoactive, elicit some change in the
self-perception of psyche and can have
all kinds of unknown or potential side
effects. So uh uh what I always say to
people if I can reconstruct it here uh
who ask this kind of a question is there
are three tests to apply to a compound
that you're thinking of ingesting. First
of all, does it have a history of
shamanic usage? Uh does it come from
plants? Plants are also biological
systems like us. they cannot produce
uh truly alien compounds. And thirdly,
does it have a relationship to known
human brain chemistry? And I usually say
to people, if you get two out of three
on this test, it's probably okay to go
ahead. But if it fails two of the three
or three of the three, I would steer
wide of it. A perfect example, I mean, I
don't want to dump on anybody's favorite
drug, but just because I'm familiar with
the literature, let me give an example.
Ketamine. Ketamine is a fascinating
experience. I had a lot of psychedelic
experience under my belt before I came
to ketamine and I was amazed at what it
does to psyche.
However, uh there's a significant amount
of literature which indicates that it
can cause epileptic kindling. There is
another significant body of literature
which indicates that it depresses the
immune system to such a degree that it
has now been dropped from general
surgery. It's even, I understand, being
dropped from veterary use because all
these vets were reporting that a very
large percentage of cat patients were
not recovering from quite
straightforward operations being spayed
and that sort of thing. Uh, and ketamine
begins to look like the culprit in that.
Well, now if it didn't have that bad
rap, I would be willing to grant that it
was a very interesting compound, but I
just, you know, my immune system is very
precious to me and also I find the
notion of epileptic kindling to make me
very uncomfortable. So uh in spite of
the fact that the experience is quite
interesting, I would go very slow with
that. I certainly wouldn't settle into
it as a
lifestyle. So uh so just to reiterate,
does it come from a plant? That means
that it is benign to life.
Does it have a history of shamanic
usage? That means that it is benign to
human populations. And then this third
thing, does it have an affinity with
brain chemistry?
Um because you see the brain views a
drug as an insult to it. The brain has
what is called the bloodb brain barrier
and then behind that many enzyatic
mechanisms for degrading any foreign
substance and turning it into harmless
substrates. Uh the perfect case example
would be dimethylryptamine.
Dimethylryptamine is without contest the
most powerful
hallucinogen known to me and I've spent
a while looking into the matter. Okay.
Uh it does occur in plants. It does have
a history of human usage in the Amazon
basin. But what is most astonishing
about it is when you smoke it within 7
to 12 minutes uh you completely return
to normal. Now what is happening there
is that the DMT is crossing the bloodb
brain barrier very rapidly giving you a
phenomenal psychedelic experience and
enzyme systems are locking on to these
molecules and saying I know what this
is. I know how to deanimate, dealkalate
this compound and quickly turn it into
indoleic acetic acid which is a common
excretoryy pathway for these kinds of
compounds in the brain. So the speed
with which DMT clears the human brain
and returns you to normal is a very very
strong argument for its harmlessness.
So, uh, if if if you take a drug and the
next day you feel lousy and the next day
you sort of feel okay, that's not a very
good drug. That's an insult to the
physical brain and uh and should not be
done because uh you know we're in this
for the duration. Uh this is a task of a
lifetime. So you want compounds which
are extremely effective in delivering
the noetic the the noetic experience the
plunge into the tremendum but you also
want to be able to race again another
day and that involves paying attention
to these other factors. uh people who
are contemplating this as an experiment
or a lifestyle, this dealing with
psychedelics as a growth uh program. The
first thing I say to people is make a
trip to the library. A great deal is
known about these things. Read the
physiological literature, read the
ethnographic literature, and assimilate
that data so that you're not just going
into it blind. take a little
responsibility for what you're doing. Uh
I'm appalled at people who take eight
different kinds of drugs in an evening
and uh tell me they have astonishing
experiences. I'll bet they
do. But that is not that's not for the
duration. You can't build a lifestyle on
that kind of thing. What you want to do
is have access into the dimension in a
way that is clean and informed and
ethical and uh intelligent. That's how
these shamans in the Amazon do it. I was
tremendously impressed by their
authenticity by and by their awareness
of these issues. These people are not
naive as so much of the ethnographic
literature insists. They are extremely
sophisticated obviously in these matters
more sophisticated than we are. We have
much to learn from them. That's why uh
visionary and ecstatic shamanism is the
model for doing this kind of exploratory
work. Sir, uh I got a question which is
crucial to me. I think everyone
uh the one version is uh you spouse two
different positions well many but these
particular two uh the first one
acknowledges that it's possible to
transform yourself or investigate the
world in a different way thereby save
the planet you were saying at the wrong
point that even though you know
individually uh in the face of
insurmountable arts it's possible to
actually do that you seem to be quite
optimistic
within your realm of possibility that's
involved
with on the other hand uh obviously you
know a lot of people aware there's a
whole body of end time scripts coming
from from shames from uh Indian tribes I
mean going back to there is to my
knowledge maybe I'm wrong but there
exists this overwhelming body of
prophecy which is a lot of which we
produce only psychedelic drugs how do
you reconcile those two positions
with some sense of hope. How do you
reconcile having free will to change
them or save it? On the other hand, up
against this face, this monolithic block
of information which says we're going to
come up against this stuff very soon.
The short question is how do you do the
horrors from the trip to the modern
world?
Okay. What about these as you so aptly
put it these endtime scripts? The only
one which is truly
pessimistic is the fundamentalist
interpretation of the
Judeo-Christian appetite for
apocalypse. That is a lethal script for
the planet in which only
144,000 are uh saved. Uh I agree and
participate in the generation of these
endtime scripts, but what I always say
is it's an onlogical transformation of
categories, not the toxification or
explosion of the planet. Uh that is a
unique uh point of view claimed by uh
these Christian groups. And I think to
the degree that they do that, they
uh place a heavy burden on the rest of
us. It's bad enough that we have these
nuclear arsenals and the capacity to
destroy us ourselves without having an
explicitly stated death wish as a
cultural ideal. So I will, you know,
it's a question of apocalypse or
millennium and I believe that it will be
a millinarian unfolding beyond the end
time, not a cessation of life and a
general judgment and a consigning of
99.99% of us to eternal damnation. Uh
how do you avoid getting uh the
willies? A lot of people do get the
willies be when they are tripping and
they come up against this end time
stuff. I think the the only cure is to
stick with it. I always think of uh
Frank Herbert's excellent advice that he
puts into the mouth of his character
Muab Din Dune. He says when the fear
comes it comes like a great wind and
what you do is you simply clamp down and
wait and it will blow itself out. One of
the first things a psychedelic voyager
must learn to do is to discipline the
hind brain. The hindb brain is a
creature of fight or flight. And you
must just turn to that and say now see
here you know we are neither going to
fight nor fly from this. We are simply
going
to freeze and watch and the fear builds
up. It's a it's a chemical thing and it
builds up and then those same systems
that destroy the DMT that deanimate and
dealate it will take the fear apart
before your very eyes and uh leave you
in peace. So
uh we are in a great temporal vortex.
This is not the subject of tonight's
lecture, but it is the subject of much
of my thinking. The fact that we are
being funneled toward a kind of ultimate
historical crisis. To the degree that
you have bought in to the assumptions
and values and aspirations of historical
society, it's going to look to you like
the world is just flying to
pieces. To make it make sense, we have
to decondition ourselves from those
values and those assumptions and realize
that we are embedded in the body of
Gaia. The creode along which the
development of life on this planet is
being propelled has walls which are
extremely steep and high. There is very
little possibility of us jumping out of
that groove and creating a kind of uh
apocalypse for ourselves and the planet
because we are not in this matter free
agents. This matter of whether or not
the planet shall be destroyed is
something which the overmind or the
super ego of the species reserves unto
itself. The proof of that in the present
historical moment has got to be that uh
a bloodthirsty nudnik like Ronald Reagan
will sign an IMF agreement if if it is
in the interests of people like that to
support disarmament and disengagement
and rethinking of the lethal momentum of
history. then how much more it will be a
part of the program of those who will
eventually replace these people. We have
reached the point I think where
ideology has given way to a a perhaps
even more base desire, the desire to
make a buck.
And it is bad
business to have thermonuclear wars.
Therefore, uh the hysterical warhawks of
uh capitalism or or of not even
capitalism but this fundamentalist
self-righteous
uh demagoguic democracy and of Marxist
millinarian save the world types has
been completely read out of the picture.
Governments are growing more and more
irrelevant while banking, commerce, and
investment are beginning to dictate
terms to these institutions. It is bad
business to blow up the world. And this
is the great salvation of all of us even
though we may not be particularly keen
on the business ethic or excuse me or
mentality. So, uh I'm very optimistic. I
think great changes will be seen in our
lifetime. And I think the the lethal
mythologies are being overthrown very
very subtly by the super ego by placing
goals that even the dullest of us will
turn to uh in preference to waging a
thermal nuclear war.
Anyone else? Yes. Um just interested a
little bit in the vision you have a
posthis historical relationship between
the people and the technology that
they've created which sometimes go crazy
with that builds the glasses and the the
other good things that improve our
well I think that culture is a
dimension
literally and that uh for uh 10 or
15,000 years it has been a very uh
um um low dimension. In other words, if
you think of it as a dimension
orthogonal to uh nature, it has been uh
just a slight
adraation of nature. But now we are
taking unto ourselves through human
machine interfacing and
nanotechnology and this kind of thing
this dimensionality of culture is
becoming rather more expanded. So my
notion of a posthistorical world is a
world where uh all of the
technological aertinances of the present
world have been shrunk to the point
where they have disappeared into uh and
are scattered as grains of sand along
the beaches of this planet. And we all
live naked in paradise. But only a
thought away is all the cybernetic
connectedness and ability to deliver
manufactured goods and uh data that this
world possesses. So really when I see
the the uh historical process running
off the
scale, it is not that we are destroyed
at the end of it. It's simply that it
runs off the scale into another
dimension. Culture is where we are all
going to live. But culture need not be
something which is toxic to nature. It
need not come tangential to nature at
all. It can be in an entirely different
dimension. This is why I often talk
about what I call living in the
imagination. The imagination which
begins as a slight almost a flicker of
iridesence o across uh the mental world
of ordinary reality is going to grow and
self-reinforce and expand until uh it
will be virtually all there is if that's
all one chooses to experience. Now, a
person living in, let's say, Midtown
Manhattan, they live in a dimension
where nature has been entirely read out.
The problem is it has been literally
read out. It has been bulldozed into
non-existence. What we need to create is
the equivalent of Midtown Manhattan, but
in a dimension such that it nowhere
comes tangential to the body of the
planet. either by uh scenario one, the
engineering scenario, by placing it in
outer space, or scenario two, the
post-modern engineering scenario,
putting it into
nanotechnology, or scenario three, the
psychedelic engineering scenario where
we somehow uh put it into mind, whatever
that is. So uh the posthistorical world
is the world where thought defines the
modalities of being rather than the laws
of physics and inertia. If wishes were
horses, beggars would ride. Well,
eventually I think wishes will be horses
and beggars will ride, but not across
the surface of this planet, but through
and across the endless grasslands of the
imagination. One or two more. Yes. Uh is
there anything to be said for MDMA
because of its
uh friendly nature just as a means of
turning on large numbers of squares?
Yes. I think in my lecture I said that
drugs are for sick people. Anybody
anybody who doesn't love their neighbor
needs chemical or therapeutic
intervention.
And uh you know if MDMA in the hands of
a skillful therapist can do that more
power to it. But it addresses sort of
trimming the fingernails of the ego not
these dimensions that I am talking about
someone else. Yes.
An area that you talked about that
reminds me of something that that I've
been very interested in studying. Um,
we've come to call it the ecology of
history. Can you say something about why
a culture that grew up or evolved in the
tropics would be so different than one
that grew up in land? Because of the
overwhelming presence of ordered organic
systems at every level. I mean, if you
spend, you don't have to grow up in the
Amazon. If you're there 3 weeks, you
begin to get the message that my god,
this is some kind of a brain. Uh you
take a lung full of air and it's like a
symphony of odors which you know to be
pherommones carrying messages uh from
one member of a species to another, from
species to species. So then you shift
your sensory focus to sound and you
realize you know that languages are
going on all around you. Hundreds of
them between species among species. The
tropical rainforest is the most
exquisitely ordered process on the
planet. And any culture which grows up
with that as its front yard is going to
be a a a culture immersed in the Dao
inevitably because you don't survive
unless you come to terms with it on its
terms. You none of your rules count for
anything. It sets all the boundary
constraints. And you see the exquisite
ordering how it all works. the economy
of form, the economy of resource, uh,
and the the depth of its its pure
communication. So that's the great
difference. You know, Hinrich Zimmer in
his massive study of Indian art says of
the cultures that wrote the vades, he
says their great breakthrough was they
had no cosmic mountains, no sacred
rivers, no holy spots. They worshiped
fire. And where the sacred fire was
kindled, the center of the universe came
to be. they could erect this ritual
space anywhere. This is in a sense a
breakthrough in consciousness but also
it's a denial of the power of place and
it gives then permission for um you know
greater uh misuse and disregard of
nature to come and I view those Aryan
people not as an eastern culture but as
the furthestmost extension of western
culture. They set us on this path as
surely as the Greeks. The two probably
can be traced together somewhere south
of the Caspian Sea. One last question. I
I've heard you speak before of
man's uh role in the mological spreading
of the mological network of mushroom. I
wonder if you could if you knew of how
it's born in Europe. I mean of home
propagations.
Oh yes. Home propagation is now a
worldwide uh phenomena. It was a great
change for the mushroom to become no
longer an endemic of the grasslands of
the tropics, but to become an endemic of
the sellers and attics of the industrial
democracies, bringing a shamanic ally
into the very heart of high-tech
culture, uh, which it does very nicely.
It treat it teaches cleanliness,
punctuality, discretion,
uh all virtues that definitely need to
be cultivated. So you see it is a
symbiotic relationship. What the
mushroom is giving us is information
about the world outside of and beyond
history. What we are giving it is uh an
extremely extended range which is by
definition one of the things that
defines the successful adaptation of a
species. So it isn't all going one way.
It is uh not a parasetism by one upon
the other but definitely a uh a real
symbiosis. I'm sure many of you are
aware uh that in the Amazon, one of the
major life forms that quickly thrust
itself upon your attention in any
tropical forest are the leaf cutting
ants. They move in in great coordinated
streams and they chop up leaves. They
can strip a a huge tree in hours. And
what they do with these leaves is they
take them back to their hive and they
chew them up and make a paste out of
them and stick them all over the walls
of their underground cavities. And then
they place spores into this mulch. Not
any spore, but spores that they have
over the tens of millennia selected.
These spores change the the inedible
cellulose of the leaves into edible
sugars and the ants eat those sugars and
thrive. So the uh symbiotic
relationship between uh social animals
and
fungi is a uh very wellestablished
phenomenon of the biome of this planet.
And in fact, isn't it interesting that
the social insects are the one other
area of organic nature where we begin to
see uh similarities with our own style
of social organization. They use
chemicals to communicate. We use small
mouth noises. But if the scenario I laid
out for you this evening is correct,
both societies were called into being
through symbiosis with fungi that were
operating in a uh mutual uh a reciprocal
relationship of mutual uh reinforcement
and support. So uh it's a model that has
been tried before and it's generally
agreed that these leaf cutting ants are
the most sophisticated of all the social
insects. So u the
micological mind seems to do this. It
can take primates or insects and through
the slow passage of the millennia
organize them into great
self-reflecting societies held together
by communication. Uh the breakthrough
with us was with a much larger brain
with a much stronger hand we have then
evolved a kind of open-ended symbiotic
relationship with the mushroom. While
the insect societies have been caught in
a closed loop probably because of the
small size of their individual brains
and the uh and the small their limited
ability to manipulate physical matter
but the principle is the same. The
distinguishing difference is that our
relationship with the mushroom is
open-ended and promises a bright future
not only for ourselves and the mushroom
but by implication for all life on the
planet. Because as we come to realize
the ethics of biology, we will cease to
be so
xenophobic and
homosentric and much more willing to see
ourselves as the stewards of the
planetary garden. And this is, I think,
ultimately what the psychedelic
experience and what psychedelic
shamanism leads us into. Stewardship of
the planetary garden in order to create
an endlessly
self-trcending horizon to all of our
futures. Thank you very much.
[Applause]
I started out my academic career as an
art historian with a major in Asian
languages and uh that uh took me to Asia
and sort of disillusioned me with uh
traditional spiritual ual uh approaches
uh in the Asian style. And
I reconnected then with my uh childhood
love of nature and pretty much abandoned
the humanities and went into the
sciences. But by then it was too late to
become a real scientist. And I was too
tainted by my time again among the poets
and the artists. So I had to become a
very
soft hard scientist. So I got a degree
in conservation of natural resources
about as soft as science as you'll ever
hope to
touch. And
uh I did a lot of traveling around
looking for a viable, vibrant, numinous
approach to spiritual reality. And the
only place I found it was uh in the
Amazon basin where as you know there are
extremely
archaic groups of people. People who
never submitted themselves to the the
historical process the way uh the
peoples of the Middle East and Europe
did. And there there flourishes through
the use of uh chemically complex plants.
Uh techniques and traditions for
accessing uh a world invisible to the
rest of us. A world of forces and uh
information that is uh
transhuman, supernatural. if the word
means anything. But this
um this supernatural dimension is uh
anchored in the plants that live in our
world. And my brother was a botonist and
I had botanical training. As we studied
the psychoactive plants of the world,
especially the new world tropics where
they seem to be concentrated, we were
simultaneously exalted by the
realization that we had found a doorway,
a real doorway into
hyperspace. and at the same time
tremendously
uh upset and uh and alarmed by the fact
that this doorway is in the process of
being dismantled by the forces of human
ignorance that are not even aware of its
existence. So uh this was the impulse
behind uh the decision on the part of my
partner Cat and I that these plants must
be saved. They must be preserved in germ
plasm repositories or botanical gardens
or something like that uh toward a day
when they can uh be studied and the uh
power the dimensions within them can be
given their real weight.
So to this end, we founded a botanical
garden in Hawaii that is specifically
dedicated to preserving plants with a
history of uh shamanic importance. And I
mention this because this is the
realworld political work that we do. And
everything else I will say today will be
barely anchored in any world familiar to
most of us. But there is a political
anchoring. There is a place where it all
comes tangential to the World Bank and
the IMF and the host governments and so
forth and so on. It is
tremendously important to preserve this
shamanic
option if for no other reason than we do
not know what it is. We do not know uh
uh what it is.
Well, um, so at the break, if you come
up there, uh, newsletter of our
botanical garden is the large stack of
beige paper, and there are 300 copies of
that. So, I hope there's enough for for
everyone. Uh, we do exist on uh uh
donations. So, any of if any of you are
philanthropists, uh, we can certainly
tell you how to spend your money. We
have many plans for your money. What's
your plans? Okay. Um,
I wasn't kidding about what an honor I
think it is to address the Yung Society.
At one point in my life, my greatest
desire was to become a Yungian analyst.
And I had the good fortune of coming
upon Yung very young. I was about 15
when a very precocious friend of mine
brought uh psychology and alchemy in the
Kerry Fains translation. I think it had
just been brought out and we were
stunned and we read it from cover to
cover and then went on to mysterium
ions the studies in the phenomenology of
the self. I said to someone yesterday,
we read all the books of Jung that the
Yungians never read. Uh they seem to
stop up there toward the front of the
line with the archetypes of the
collective unconscious and the
personality type. But to my mind, it was
the late stuff that was fascinating. And
I am slightly puzzled and we were
talking about it last night at the
distance between the Yungian community
and the psychedelic community because
they seem to me the unschooled observer
to be uh definitely sharing the same
concerns and strangely enough they share
much of the same history and geography.
Basel was of course Jung's hometown. It
was Albert Hoffman's hometown. Did one
half of town know what the other half
was
doing? I'm not sure.
Um the the relationship of Jung to the
unconscious to the collective
unconscious as its discoverer has been
always somewhat puzzling to me because
of course if you know the history of
20th century art you know that da which
was the great prefigurative movement for
surrealism rose in Zurich. So, you know,
we've got LSD, the uh schools of modern
art that laid great stress on the
irrational, and the great schools of
psychology that extended the boundaries
of the unconscious all raffling around
in these little Swiss towns. And uh uh
it's interesting to imagine
conversations or meetings that might
have taken place uh when people slightly
left their ordinary habits and wandered
into bars they didn't know and drank
with people they'd never met
before.
Um because Jung provided maps of the
unconscious. And at 16 when we were
beginning to experiment with this and
and let me stress this was before the
great social waves of LSD taking of the
1960 just preceding that from about 1963
uh to 65 we were frantic for maps of the
unconscious and Freud was useless. I
mean, the notion that the contents of
the psychedelic experience could be
reduced to what Freud called day
residues and repressed sexual desire
stuff like didn't wash. Within 10
minutes, you could tell that was not a
serviceable metaphor.
Jung on the other hand offered a vast
uh
pantheon of uh gods and archetypes and
psychic complexes forgotten or
abandoned. I mean I thought of Jung
basically as a know what I call a
knowetic archaeologist.
someone who goes with toothbrush and
nutpick to dig away the detritus from
the bones of vanished idea systems. And
if any of you have ever read the
complete the works of Jung in the in the
Bowling set, you know that the richness
of it is all in the footnotes. I mean,
here was a man who raised the footnote
to a high art and who was aware of a
literature that nobody else to my mind
seemed to know about that Jung's
references reach a thousand years deep
into the past with great uh uh density
of reference. I mean, this is where I
learned about Macrobiius and Dosius and
Dionicius, the pseudoaga guy and all
those folks that you just never hear
about. It was uh my introduction to the
under to the underbelly of western uh
civilization
uh was through young. Well
uh to my mind and now I'll theme this in
to today's theme. Uh I think Maria
mentioned that uh Jung did not have a
lot to say about shamanism. He came to
it late in his life and he had already
worked through the massive the exigesis
of the symbol systems of the European
mind and so he was sort of content to
indicate shamanism as an area where more
work was to be done and then the great
followon scholar was
Meciliad who then actually u studied
shamanism showed what its archetypal
underpinnings were in all times and
places. And uh the combination of Jung
and Ilad, I think pretty much delivered
us as firm a map of the psyche, as
dependable a map of the psychic
geography as we can expect to have until
we make the trip ourselves and uh you
know readjust the landscape with our own
notes and uh observations.
For for Jung, the great path into the
unconscious
uh was
alchemy. And alchemy
uh is an interesting pivotal
uh domain because I think we could in a
way say it lies halfway between the
concerns of an archaic shamanism and
halfway between the concerns of a quasi
scientific
uh
psychedelic attempt to explore
consciousness.
Mercilead wrote a brilliant book on
alchemy called the forge in the crucible
which is the bridge to show you how you
go from yungian psychology into an
understanding of alchemy that
approximates Iliad.
The notion for the alchemists that Jung
brought forth very strongly was the idea
of projection of psychic contents,
projection of the active
imagination onto
processes and uh objects in the exterior
world. In the case of the alchemists, it
was the swirling chemical processes in
their Olympics, in their alchemical
vessels that they projected
uh the
um the great round of the archetypes on
to these chemical processes. They saw
crystallization,
sublimation, separation as statements
about the contents of the psyche as much
as statements about uh the exterior
world. Because for them, the firm
division between mind and matter, the
firm ontological division between mind
and matter that is built into western
thinking now did not exist. that comes
with Renee Deart with the invention of
what's called the res extensor the
extended world and the reverence the
interior world which has no spatial
extension. Uh so for the alchemist, mind
and matter were were two terms whose
mutual exclusivity could be blurred
under certain circumstances and the
terms of one could migrate toward the
other. Well, now we as
moderns ordinarily only experience this
state when we are intoxicated by
hallucinogenic drugs or when we are in a
state of severe um psychic uh weakness
when there is then overwhelmment from
the unconscious that is not uh not with
the permission of the ego as happens in
the psychedelic experience. Well, all of
these various ways of approaching the
psyche
uh seem fairly abstract and bloodless
and removed from daily existence unless
the psychedelic experience is uh present
and then it vivifies these metaphors. it
makes clear what these various perennial
traditions are uh talking
about. So what I thought I would try to
do today and you're welcome to try and
steer it other directions in the
question and answer period is the the
workshop is sacred plants as guides. uh
a lot of information has to be imparted
if we're going to satisfy my pedagogical
urge here because I would really like to
leave you with information that you
didn't have before some of which may
have practical efficacy in in your own
uh life. So in thinking about this very
large issue, sacred plants as guides, uh
I basically break it down into three
categories for ease of handling uh in a
context like
this. And they are a kind of
survey. What how many of these plants
are there? What are the chemicals that
drive them? And what is their
geographical distribution? In other
words, just what are the botanical facts
of the matter? And then uh secondly, I
think in order to understand what these
things mean for spiritual growth and
psychic development, you have to place
them in the context. And the context is
chronological and
historical. Have these things always
been around? Have shamans always been
taking them? How do they relate to the
synthetic drugs that have been developed
in the last couple of centuries? So, the
history of our relationship to the
pharmarmacologically induced ecstasy.
And then finally, and probably we'll get
to this uh this afternoon, the
phenomenology of the experience and the
techniques for achieving and controlling
it. uh because this is a practical there
is a practicum here. This is not a
course in Mongolian philology or
something like that. Uh the ultimate
idea is to get those who feel called to
the task sufficiently informed and
psychically empowered that they can push
off into the oceans of mind in the
interior with some fair amount of
confidence that they'll return to
port with all hands.
So uh
Let's start sort of with the survey. Let
me see. I'm going to talk until 11:30.
Uh so let's start with the survey then
and just talk about what the options are
and this will be sort of unstructured
and conversational with foray into other
areas. First of all, the striking uh
thing when you want to study
psychoactive drugs and plants and their
impact on human culture and that's
really what interests me uh is how drugs
affect culture. After I went through
Jung and Mlu and and Ilon, my next port
of Cole was McLuhan. And I absorbed very
deeply the notion that media structure
civilizations in ways that the
civilizations are never aware of. And
Jung of course talked about print and
manuscript and electronic culture. He
did not talk about drugs but drugs are a
form of media because they information
travels through the drug to the mind.
That's a medium of communication and
various societies wear drugs
uh like clothing with no awareness of
their existence at all somewhat in the
way that a fish relates to water. So
that for instance, if you're in Dublin,
you are swimming in the ambiance of an
alcohol
culture. You don't have to be drunk to
be in Dublin, although it helps. But the
the entire society is premised on the
possibility. You see, the entire society
is premised on the possibility. In
India, the entire society is premised on
the possibility of uh hashish
intoxication.
and social mores, building design, uh
everything takes account of this.
Cultures don't see this. We do not think
of ourselves as a meat, sugar, alcohol
culture. People do not walk around
saying, "Oh, wow. I'm so high on meat,
alcohol, and sugar. You know, I can
hardly stand it." But they are. and
certain
consequences flow from that. So as I
make my way through this survey, you
need to bear in mind that a culture uh
takes its tone, its clothing from the
drugs that it admits. And you can know a
great deal about a culture from the
drugs that it excludes, the drugs that
it excoriates and fears. uh because
various drugs accentuate and suppress
different parts of the psyche. So these
are statements about anxiety about
various parts of the psyche. Uh the
striking thing when you set out to do a
cultural survey like this is you
discover that our culture, the culture
of Europe for most of us, some of us are
black, some of us are Asian, but the
largely the roots of American culture
lie in Europe. This is the most uh
pharmarmacologically
impoverished cultural area on the entire
planet. It has the longest history of
um disconnection from any kind of
ecstatic intoxication.
And the cultural forms of Europe,
linear, abstract, narcissistic, and
promoting of male dominance are, to my
mind, exactly what you would expect in a
culture long deprived of the boundary
dissolving, numinous encounter with the
vegetable mind. So, uh, a lot of the
cultural problems we're dealing with are
based on the fact that we as Europeans
have no place for drugs. We don't really
know quite what to do with that. As uh
as you move south from Europe into the
continent of uh human origins, Africa,
you discovered that while Africa
supports a tropical
ecosystem, which because that means
increased speciation of plants, you
would think would indicate an increased
number of
hallucinogens. Africa is surprisingly
poor in hallogens.
This is not well understood. As we go
through this survey, I will make
reference to numerous unsolved mysteries
in the field. And I always try to do
this because I'm hoping that there are
graduate students listening who are
looking for research topics and there
are numerous research areas where
important work can be done. One of them
is this question of the poverty of
hallucinogens in Africa. Why uh does it
have something to do with the extreme
length of time that Africa has been
subject to human impact? Probably uh
because Africa is species poor generally
for a tropical continent. However, uh in
the interest of thoroughess, there is
one uh hallucinogenic drug complex that
should be mentioned because it raises
issues that are important for the
broader context and that is uh Iogane or
tabernantha ibogga, the so-called bowiti
cults of Zire and Gabon. Now, this is
the psychedelic about which we in the
west probably know the least. It has
spawned no waves of social hysteria. Uh
it has not been the subject of pgrams or
uh media
freakout. It's and it's a powerful
hallucinogen. And it's not only a
powerful hallucinogen, but it has a a
component of sexual excitation to it
which is ancillary and unusual. Uh if
you actually have ever looked into the
subject of aphrodesiacs,
uh the truth is there ain't any uh there
are things which cause genital itching
and prolonged erection and so forth. But
a true aphrodesiac, a chemical which
would impel you to want to have sex.
There's nothing quite like that. Except
this
tabernac is very interesting. We tend to
think of an aphrodesiac because we tend
to break our heart away from our
genitals as a kind of a as a kind of
um cold thing I think. But when you talk
to these people who are taking ebo gain,
they don't talk about aphrodesiac. They
say this causes
openheartedness.
Oneheartedness they call it. And
one-heartedness is what they are
striving for in the Biti cult. And they
achieve it. And they achieve it uh and
it allows them to resist cultural
incursions by Christian missionaries.
Biti is the main cultural force that is
holding back uh conversion to
Christianity uh by these people. uh the
Fang culture, the the people who are
using this ebo game, it's an interesting
culture. It there's a great deal of
anxiety in Fang culture about divorce
because and relationships between men
and women, divorce is very easily
obtained among the fang. Uh but it's
always followed by extremely lengthy and
protracted negotiations with the family
of the divorced partner about return of
dowry and a huge amount of neurosis and
agony and murder and violence goes on
over these dowy return negotiations. The
EPO game stands right in the middle of
this as a source of one-heartedness
making divorce less likely. So it's very
important as a force for social
cohesion. And I mention this because
when we reach Iawaska, we will see I
mean when we reach South America, we
will see
IA functioning not as an aphrodesiac or
a thing to unify couples but as a kind
of telepathic pheromone that unifies
whole small tribal groups together into
a onehearted one-minded modality. And if
we get into a discussion of the possible
evolutionary impact of hallucinogens,
we'll see that it always lies in the
direction of these collectivized states
of mind and uh dissolution of boundaries
uh between people other than
tabernog Africa's hallucinogens are
trivial and I won't mention them in the
time we have. Cannabis is in Africa as
well, but cannabis is worldwide now and
probably has been for quite some time.
Cannabis is a special case chemically
and culturally. We tend to think of
cannabis as a
recreational drug, but that's because in
the 20th century, we always smoke our
cannabis. In the 18th and 19th century,
cannabis was eaten and jellied forms of
cannabis that were eaten, judging by the
pros of people like Theodore Goutier,
Bodilair,
um, Fitz Hugh Lello and people like
that. It was as powerful as LSD without
doubt. I mean, these people were being
swept in tight to
titanicly alien uh dimensions. Well,
when we cross from Africa to India,
India interestingly of course as you all
know tremendous depth of at least
concern with the spiritual dimension if
not realization of it. That's a tougher
call. uh uh India um would be a likely
place to look for indigenous
hallucinogenic plant cults simply
because of the spiritual obsession that
characterizes Indian thought. When we
look at the historical foundations of
Indian thought, we find that it all
rests on a group of texts composed
between 4500 and 2,000 years ago called
the vdas. And the vadas are nothing less
but the world's longest continuing
advertisement for a hallucinogenic
plant. The problem is we don't know what
this plant is. This is the mysterious s
of the rick vades and mandela nine of
the rick va is an entirely a hymn to s
held uh hinduism of the vadic phase
together. Later it was
repressed and again graduate students
pay attention. One of the very
interesting problems to be looked at by
sociologists, social psychologists and
anthropologists is how if a drug once
discovered or a plant once discovered is
so wonderful, how can these things ever
be lost or forgotten?
And yet in several instances we deal
with literature'ses which sing the
praises of some plant or drug the
identity of which we cannot figure out
or it becomes a a big arm wrestle
between various competing schools of
scholarship. We do not to this day know
what s was. Rob uh Gordon Wson who some
of you may know as the discoverer the
modern discoverer of the mushroom cults
of Mexico founder of the science of
ethnomicology believed to his dying
breath that s was amanita mascaria the
red topped white speckled ammonita.
Um, this is a mushroom which has a major
role in tungus and arctic
shamanism. But to say asan did that this
is the supreme enthogen of all time uh
is not supported by the evidence. I
think was own efforts to become
intoxicated on amanina mascaria were not
successful.
uh my efforts have not been successful.
Occasionally you will hear anecdotal
evidence. Someone will tell a story
about eating ammonita mascaria that
obviously they had a staggering
breakthrough to a rupture of plane as
mercelia in his wonderful phrase but
it's extremely undependable and when you
look at the botany of ammonita muscaria
you discover that its chemical
constituency is seasonally variant
genetically variant uh geographically
variant and so forth. So often I think
as we gain understanding of a given
shamanism, we will see that it depended
on an extremely deep local knowledge and
if you take what a Yakut shaman says
about Amanita Mascaria and attempt to
apply it in the national forests of New
Mexico, you know, you could end up with
a tag on your toe.
uh these things do this kind of
information doesn't travel well. One of
the one of the you know there are old
shamans and bold shamans but there are
no old bold
sham in looking at the Indian
subcontinent for other hallucinogens
uh that may have made a contribution. Uh
the obvious one to my mind is stfaria
cubensus the mushroom which grows in the
dung of cows and that the book my
brother and I was uh wrote was about
other possibilities. Some of you may
know that there are a family of the
argeria family of uh morning glories an
Asian family of morning glories
distributed from India to the s to
Micronesia. 13 species all containing
psychoactive urgot alkyoids none with an
a history of human usage. Now this is
another area which really fascinates me.
Uh why do some plants become discovered
by human beings and become the objects
of cults which last millennia and
others are never discovered at all in
societies absolutely obsessed with
spiritual advancement. This argeria
nervosa is a perfect example because you
take the seeds. The seeds are the active
part and you don't need much of this
thing. You need uh four or five seeds
less than a tablespoon of plant material
which I would bet would make it per unit
volume probably one of the most powerful
hallucinogens in nature.
And
uh the hallucinations are absolutely
stunning. And nobody has ever claimed
this. It's free for the taking. This
means you can cut a deal with an ally
that doesn't belong to the Hindus, the
Mayans, or the somebody else. It's an
unoccupied parking space in uh
hyperspace. And uh
it's very interesting. Uh the
discoveries are continuous. Uh just a
year ago uh some phytochemists in the
Midwest discovered a new a plant. It's
always been there. Nobody's ever taken
it very seriously. Treated it like a
weed.
Desmanthus
alanoensis, the Illinois bundleweed.
This is suggestive that it's called
bundleweed because a medicine bundle is
of course a shaman's mojo bag, you know.
But so bundle weed 6% by dry weight n
dimethylryptoamine the largest
concentration of DMT in any plant and
unclaimed by native peoples unknown to
the folk medicine of the North American
Indians as far as as uh we can tell.
Well, so this is very interesting.
Um, continuing our survey, uh, since
we're now somewhere on the Eurasian
continent, we should mention, uh, uh,
the papers sa forum, the opium poppy
with cannabis. This is probably the
oldest human narcotic known. uh in the
the later phase of Minoan civilization
was entirely based on opium on the use
of opium and in fact when Michael
Ventress translated the tablets the
linear B tablets they got these tallies
and they thought at first that the
symbol for opium must be the symbol for
wheat because the tallies were so huge
of the stuff being moved and sold. And
then when they sorted out, they
realized, no, in the for the last
thousand years of its existence, the
Manoan civilization drifted deeper and
deeper into an opium narcosis that was
its way, I think, of
anesthetizing the pain of the death of
this last outpost of the goddess
religion because that's what it was. It
was a cultural anacronism. While Asia
Minor had gone over to godkame city
states and bronze tipped spears, the
people of Manoan cree had kept the old
old archaic religion that came out of
Africa. And then in the last gasp of
that Manoan culture, those mysteries
were handed on to the mainland of Greece
and became the mysteries at uh at Elusus
and uh and other cult sites. It was said
by the by the commentators, contemporary
commentators of the henistic world, the
site the the rights practiced in secret
at Elusis are practiced in public at
Kosis. And this this was the difference,
you know, the going underground of the
old
protoman mother
religion. Uh in modern times, we have a
horror of opium. Uh I mean people are
amazed that I even mention it in the
same breath but it doesn't hurt to
remind ourselves that this virulently
addictive substance opium was not even
noticed to be addictive by anybody until
1627 when the English physician John
Playfair for the first time commented
that opium once taken over a long period
of time then there would be a
requirement that it be taken
uh throughout life.
Um we're right in the middle of a drug
war at the moment and it's interesting
in that context to uh notice how the
goals of drug wars can change. A hundred
years ago uh the British Navy was
involved in what was called the opium
wars in China. Very few people in the
modern world have bothered to inform
themselves to find out that the opium
wars were about the right of the British
government to deal opium.
The emperor of China did not want opium
dealt in the ports of China. And the
British government used canon to enforce
their desire to sell opium in the ports
of China. Why were the English trying to
sell opium in the ports of China?
Because the tea trade had collapsed
through overproduction and they were
stuck with all these tea ships. They had
created a whole global infrastructure
for the sale of tea. When the market
fell out on tea, they just turned to
opium. They grew it in Goa and they sold
it in China. This was government policy
less than 120 years ago.
Okay. Well, um, moving on then from
Eurasia, and I'm sure I'm missing
different things, but if I missed your
favorite thing, bring it up in the
question period. Uh, to the North
American continent, and the North
American continent is, uh, I almost said
similarly cursed like Europe, but that's
just my prejudice. The North American
continent is similarly poor in
hallucinogens.
uh there are
no very interesting hallucinogens in
North America and North American
Indians, North American culture did not
avail itself of this ecstatic plant
induced shamanism. It tended more to go
for what's called ordeal shamanism, the
Sundance thing where you hang yourself
by your pectorals on hooks and stuff
like that. I mean there are other ways
to attain these visions but you see that
absence of good hallogens in North
America just reinforced that whole beer
and woolen and uptight thing that came
from Europe. Uh the only major
hallucinogen to have a role in Native
American culture is of course peyote.
And many people without informing
themselves imagine that peyote is
something which goes millennia into the
past and that it and this is absolutely
not true. Peyote use may well be less
than a thousand years old among Native
Americans. When you go back into the old
graves and the old burial sites in the
Rio Grand Valley and south, you don't
find peyote. What you find are the beans
of Sephora
secundoglia. You all probably know this
plant, though you may not know its name.
It's the plant that produces the very
hard red and black bean that they can
can string. If you all know what color
are, these are athrinus which are
related to these things. Okay, that
stuff contains uh uh cytosine and cyine.
This is uh these are what are called
ordeal poisons. And it might be
worthwhile to just talk for a minute
about ordeal poisons. I said there's
more than one way to skin a cat. There's
more than one way to have this
experience that shoves you through to an
awareness of the numminous. That's what
we're trying to do is have an awareness
of the numinous. Well, in certain parts
of the world where hallucinogens were
not present in the biome, people
concentrated on ordeal poisons. And what
an ordeal poison is is it's a chemical
compound that you take it and you think
you're going to die and you beg for
death and you do not die. You get
better. You're
fine and you're so damn glad to be
alive that you undergo an ab reaction.
You get straight. you shed some of your
complexes and you make a you turn over a
new leaf is uh is what it is. Well, in
Madagascar, these ordeal poisons have
been brought to a high state of
perfection. Also, in Malaya, there's a
poison complex that replaces a
hallucinogenic drug complex, and these
are horrific poisons. So, uh, what
apparently was going on in the Rio Grand
Valley was after centuries of this
Sephora Secundapoglia cult, someone
discovered peyote and said, "My
god, you know, thank God." And then the
other the other plant which was big in
the in
the southern California, northern Mexico
and across the southwest were the um
tropane containing detouras the
so-called tolatch religion of Southern
California. Well, these are delirant
confusants that are unless you have a
psychic constitution that is not like
mine, you can't take these things.
They're too I just found them
confusing. It was like a kind of madness
and also physically very difficult to
handle. I experimented. I had a phase
with these things when I was in Nepal
because there are sadus, holy men in the
Catmandeue Valley who swear by this
stuff. And if you're in Catando, you may
notice in the gutter. Well, you'll
notice plenty in the gutter, but you may
also notice these
detours, empty detours. And I noticed
them and started asking questions. And
then out at the king's game preserve
past Pashupatina, I found a bunch of
these things and laid in a
supply. And but it is an occult
watery. It's a dimension of confusion,
not a dimension of high awareness. And I
think some of you have heard me tell the
story about the reason I gave it up was
an Englishman, a friend of mine who
lived in this little village in Nepal
where I lived. He was also experimenting
with this stuff. And one day I was
buying potatoes and tomatoes in the
market. And I ran into him and we
started having a conversation and in the
course of the conversation he revealed
that he believed we were in his
apartment and then I
knew that uh you know we were we were
losing hold on our grounding. Uh, so I
don't recommend that. I don't have a
whole lot to say about it. Apparently,
it's a it's a thing for magic, power
magic. And I've never been particularly
interested in that because I'm afraid of
it. I'm uh I'm a watcher. I like to
look. I like to get very close to it and
watch it, but I'm not into grabbing it
or doing anything with it. I I have a
feeling that would lead to catastrophe
uh for me personally.
[Music]
Uh okay, where are we now? Northern
Mexico. Now we've gone all around. We
started in Europe, we went down into
Africa, crossed the Eurasian continent,
North America, Northern Mexico. Now
things get interesting because as you
leave the Sonoran uplands and go
south in the Sierra Mazite, uh it is
this mushroom complex which Valentina
and Gordon Wson discovered in the
1953s 17 to 22 species. It depends on
who's counting of extremely endemic
meaning very localized species of
mushrooms all producing
psilocybin coincident with the Mayan the
cultural side of the Mayan mixtech and
Mazitechan
civilizations and this is psilocybin an
extraordinarily powerful visionary and
benign
hallucinogenic metabolite. night. Once
the
Wasins had nailed down this Mexican
mushroom complex, then people started
checking and they discovered these
mushrooms or non-specific species in
many localities.
Uh, two that are worth mentioning are
the Pacific Northwest, Oregon,
Washington, and British Columbia, which
appears to be the world's center for
species density of the psilocybin gene.
And strangely
enough, very good ethnographic research
turns up no hint that these uh quaudel,
shim, sham, clingut, and other people
had any hint of this. They lived in the
center of the psilocybin distribution
complex. And as far as we can tell,
their shamanism, which was highly
evolved, never discovered or made use of
this. Not so these civilizations of Meso
America. The other place where these
mushrooms have now been discovered and
the range seems to be extending every
year is uh Europe. The tragedy of
European civilization is that the logos
was apparently there all the time. Uh uh
the English countryside, I understand,
is now practically a scene of annual
mushroom runs that are not unlike the
lemming runs of Scandinavia. And
everybody pours out to to collect the
semilanciata mushrooms. the I've been
told I haven't been to these sites but
I've been told that uh Ionia where the
book of Kels was composed and where uh
St. Cola went is covered with mushrooms
is very clearly an an mushroom ecology.
Attention graduate students, the tracing
of mushroom motifs in European art and
civilization and culture is an extremely
rich untapped field. Uh if you need some
clues, uh look at family
escotchins, look at family crests. Uh in
France, in France and the Italian parts
of France, the Morel family has the
morel on their scutchin. There are other
mushroom families and mushroom uh names.
So uh there may have been you know this
may have been the struggle between
paganism and Christianity may have
revolved uh around a mushroom. We know
druids were into plants. We know they
were into oak groves. But uh the plant
that is always mentioned as the druidic
psychedelic psychic plant of choice is
mistletoe. But mistletoe is chemically
very disappointing. And I've wondered if
mistletoe is
not it wasn't the plant they wanted to
symbolize. They wanted to symbolize the
symbiosis of one plant upon another.
It's that the mistletoe symbolizes
epithetic existence. Uh anyway, this is
an un uh an untapped area.
Once you get into the new world tropics,
then you are in the great domain of uh
of the hallucinogenic plants and no one
knows why it is that the tropics of the
new world are tremendously rich in
hallucinogens. I mean I don't know how
many of you are botonists or or
biologists but try to imagine uh
figuring out a set of evolutionary
constraints that were operating on one
side of the planet but not on the other.
You know when we take for instance the
jungles of southern Colombia and compare
them with let us say the jungles of New
Guinea. These are both continental
floras both equatorial both climaxed at
a
speciesrich climax and one has dozens of
hallucinogens in it and the other has
none. None.
uh this is not well understood. I mean
theories range as wildly as uh obviously
that South America must be where the
flying saucer landed and uh you know
that's where the genes were seeded. I I
confess I'm not sure why it is. Uh, at
first I thought that it had to do with
the extremely primitive state, so-called
primitive, these extremely archaic state
of culture in the South American jungles
that they represent a real stone age
culture where when you go into
Indonesia, it may look primitive to you,
but the Dutch were there before the
English arrived in North America. uh it
is it has had centuries and centuries
for wi in which these things could be
forgotten. But of course then come the
botonists who care nothing for
ethnographic data and who simply carry
out uh plant surveys and chemical
analysis of plants. They can't find
these hallucinogens either. So this is a
great
mystery in the tropics of the of of Meso
America and uh and uh the equatorial
tropics of the new world there's a vast
uh paniply of hallucinogens not only the
mushroom complex but then also this
iawasa or
yah complex that we've referred to
several times. Uh this is a huge jungle
vine. And as we cross into the Yahi
area, we also cross we we cross an
interesting um
barrier because we move from plants,
single plants which are
hallucinogenically active into the realm
of preparations. We're on the threshold
of the concept drug here because what
Iaska is is uh two plants which are not
active unless brought into combination
with each other. One plant uh contains a
monoamin oxidase inhibitor and the other
plant contains
DMT which would be destroyed in the gut
if taken orally unless it were taken
orally in the presence of an MAO
inhibitor. Well, this was not understood
by Western pharmarmacology until
1956, but it was understood by Amazonian
shamans millennia ago. So they bring
these two things together and by varying
the ratio between the plant containing
the beta carbolines that inhibit MAO and
the plants that contain DMT they can
intensify or uh
deemphasize the
visions. Well, most of the
um most of the hallucinogens in the
Amazon basin run on tryptoamine of some
sort. Uh uh usually DMT in the upper
basin of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru like
that. You get these bananister these
Yahawasa beverages. These are things you
drink and then it comes on. You have
these outlandish trips. As you go down
into the lower basin, the banisteropsis
cult gives way to these snuff cults,
ebina and neopo, depending on the
languages. These are don't depend on an
MAO inhibitor for their activity because
they're absorbed through the subnasal
mucosa which is an extremely effective
way for getting drugs uh into the
system. The problem with these with that
complex, the snuff complex, is that we
are just physically such delicate and
wimpy people that we can't stand that
route route of drug administration
because what they do is they toast these
seeds of anodona paragrina this huge
leguminous tree which is the source of
the seeds. They toast these seeds and
powder them. So what you get is a kind
of rough cross between sawdust and
charcoal. And then they have a hollow
tube about this long and they load it up
with this stuff. And you squat down and
put the nostril the tube into your
nostril and your friend your friend not
you because you would not do it hard
enough. Your friend then takes a huge
breath of air
and and it's just like being hit in the
face with a a 2x4. I mean, it's like
being hit in the face. And you fall over
backwards. You scream. You salivate. You
squirm around there in the dirt for a
minute or two. And then you sit back up.
And by that time, the tube has been
reloaded for the other nostril.
And then you know and your eyes your
sinuses can't believe what's happening
to you. So you have to sort out this
whole sinus shock which is going on in
parallel with then an evolving strange
state of mind which is beginning to take
over and uh and clarify everything. And
then there are numerous minor variations
uh on these themes. Uh might talk just a
little bit about the chemistry of these
things and the chemistry of
hallucinogens generally. My attitude
toward uh these uh this question of
plants, compounds, drugs, should these
things be used for spiritual growth?
uh if the answer is no then that
finishes you don't have to go any
further. If the answer is maybe or yes,
then other questions arise. which
compounds out of this whole survey and
at what frequency and at what dosage and
under what uh
circumstances and over the years I've
sort of evolved a three-way test that I
will share with you because I think it's
maybe the operationally the most useful
thing you'll hear this weekend and that
is if you are contemplating some some
compound, some plant, then the first
thing to ask yourself is does it occur
in
nature? Does it have some
tangentiality to what is already
existing? Because obviously what exists,
that's nature, has undergone some uh
vast winnowing process out of the set of
all things which might exist. in that
wonderful phrase of Alfred North
Whiteheads, certain things have
undergone the formality of actually
occurring,
you know, and and and so certain certain
compounds have undergone the formality
of actually occurring in the biological
matrix. And so they should be they
should be our pool out of which our
experimental compound should be drawn.
But this is thousands of compounds. How
can we further narrow it? Well, uh, an
excellent way of narrowing it further is
to ask the question of this compound,
does it have a history of human
usage? Does it have a history of human
usage? that is your uh FDA
approval because if you can point to a
tribe of people who have been taking
this plant or mushroom or whatever it is
for millennia and they don't have
miscarriages, tumors, cataracts,
blindness, down syndrome, eight fingers
on the left hand or whatever it is, then
you can be fairly confident that this
thing is benign, that these people have
observed its action on pregnant women,
the elderly, the those with you know and
and that it has passed uh uh that
test. Then finally the mo the narrowest
gate through which a compound has to go
to to intersect my precious body is it
has to have an affinity to ordinary
brain
chemistry. It has to have an affinity to
ordinary brain chemistry. We don't want
to launch something on your brain that
it can't recognize at all. That it has
no biosynthetic pathways to degrade.
That it has no receptors for just some
crazy thing, you know, five amino 3
triethylinthioine or something. We don't
want that. There's not the spirit that
we're acting in here. Uh so if a
compound can get through those three
barriers then it's an excellent
candidate for uh providing spiritual
gain at low physiological
uh impact. Well now some people may say
oh well you've taken all the fun out of
it. All the good things have been tossed
aside in this mad rush to purity or
something. Not at all. The very best
stuff was retained in this process
because
uh in terms of relative strength and
bizarness of effect and so forth, the
strangest, the most powerful, the most
transformative of all hallucinogens in
nature or out is
dimethylryptoene DMT.
And uh it's worth talking about DMT for
a moment because it will raise certain
issues and
distinctions that you may not have been
aware
of. First of all, DMT is hands down the
most powerful of all hallucinogens. I
mean it is so powerful that whatever is
in second place is lost over the
horizon.
Yet yet it is the most benign of all
houseins because it occurs as an
endogenous
neurotransmitter in the normal human
brain. We every single one of us at this
moment have NN dimethylryptamine being
synthesized activated and degraded in
our synaptic membrane. So this is almost
a paradox. The most benign of all
hallucinogens, the most fast acting I
should also add is also the most
harmless, the the easiest to take. It
sort of remove it sort of puts a certain
obligation on the experient because
there is no reason to hold back except
that there is this question uh does it
drive you mad and then the more serious
version of that question what about the
possibility of death by astonishment
[Music]
this is no joke uh death by astonishment
is I I think probably the major risk we
run uh with this stuff because the
impact of the breakthrough is uh is so
total, so complete, so unexpected. And
in a way, this sort of brings me back
around to my theme because I encountered
DMT, LSD, all of these things in that
very period when I was getting set to uh
take flight as a Yian analyst. And what
completely blew my mind about DMT and uh
I mention it in again here's an
opportunity for research is how trans
here's a heretical construction how
transarchetal the content of the flash
seemed. I was appalled because not only
had I a certain amount of interest in
Jung and proclivity along those lines,
but my original major had been art
history, art historians. What we're
trained to do is to be able to look at a
motif and say, "Oh, yes, I'm familiar
from with this from ceramic from second
millennia Peru and also
Mandian embroidery work. We know motifs.
We're trained to recognize and connect
disperate aesthetic domains. Well, when
I smoked DMT and came down, I said, you
know, this is not on the map. I can't
believe it that this doesn't connect up
to anything. How can there be domains of
the human mind that do not announce
themselves in folklore, fairy tales,
dreams, or Mandelola painting that are
so removed from the ven of what is human
that they are apparently not accessible
in structuring our uh maps of our self
and our psyche. And that for me was the
contact with what I call and I didn't
call it this. Rudolfph Otto called it
this. And this term influenced Jung Otto
preceded Yung was it is the holy
other. And if there is an archetype of
the holy other then this is it. But
perhaps the holy other transcends the
archetypes. This may explain to some
degree Jung's interest
innosticism especially the Valentinian
school ofnosticism which holds you know
that there is a higher and
hidden father all god who is outside the
machinery of cosmic fate. And it seemed
to me that in those extremely profound
DMT flashes, I was actually witnessing a
domain outside the machinery of the
archetypes, which is for us as moderns.
That's what the machinery of fate is.
It's not zodiacal machinery. It's hard
wiring in our psychology and our genes
that gives us our fate.
Well, so having said that, uh, I've not
only made the the survey, but also
brought us to by ending with
DMT, the subject matter of this quest.
And I want to make it clear. I speak
about the power of the psychedelic
experience because I think people should
be informed of their
birthight. And I feel very antsy around
the notion that someone might go from
birth to the grave without ever having a
psychedelic experience. It makes me as
antsy as the notion that somebody might
go from birth to the grave without
having a sexual experience. It's a
strange kind of
uh protective denial or a a a kind of
expression of fear. This is our
birthright. This is part of what it
means to be human. These altered states
of consciousness I think are pretty much
scripted in to the existence of women
because they most of them will give
birth which is an organically scripted
psychedelic experience from which there
is no escape unless of course you go for
the drug knockout the spinal and then
you miss everything. But biologically,
physiologically, women are set up for uh
this experience. Men are not. It's
possible to build such barriers against
overwhelmment that it never happens in
your whole life. And I believe that if
we psychologically analyze the effects
of these uh psychedelics, what they do
is they dissolve boundaries. That's all.
I mean, if you interview 10,000 people
who've had a psychedelic trip, each one
has their own herophony, their own
herosamos that unfolded for them. But
the sum total of it is boundaries
dissolve and then whatever's on the
other side of your boundary comes
flooding in to claim you and to and to
reshape and remake your psyche. Well, I
see the entire illness of our
civilization as an as an egoinflationary
illness. We have gone so sick with ego
that we are literally murdering the
planet rather than confronting the
consequences of our psychic imbalance.
And uh the psychedelics act to redress
this. They are almost an
inoculation against the ego. And I I see
the ego as a phenomenon arising in
historical time or rather actually
history is caused by the ego. But the
ego is a component of the
psyche that
arose in the post archaic phase in the
post psychedelic phase. Uh it's entirely
a modern invention. It's less than
15,000 years old. And the assumptions of
the ego are the source of
our neurosis, our
disequilibrium. Why did the ego
arise? It arose because of the
climatologically enforced abandonment of
these psychedelic religions of the
archaic period. In other words, here is
the scenario as I see it.
Um, primates, even primitive, even
um, I don't non-advanced primates like
squirrel monkeys, howler monkeys, these
kinds of primates all have male
dominance hierarchies. The whole thing
with primates is about male dominance.
But uh a lot of things about human
beings mark us as the most unique member
of the primate group. Uh obviously we
look different from any other monkeys.
Even the stranger monkeys look more like
the normal monkeys than than we look
like them or they uh look like us. Our
upright posture. The other thing about
us is our suppressed estrus cycle. We
cannot tell at a glance whether a woman
is uh in heat or not. And yet obviously
that had a tremendous shaping force on
the social psychology of uh of the
primates. I believe that everything
about us that is noble and worth saving
uh occurs against the
grain. That if we had followed the
grain, we would still be uh competing
with jackals for the carcasses left by
lions of uh large game kills on the
plains of Africa. But when the African
continent began to dry up and we were
forced out of the trees where we had an
aroreal vegetarian lifestyle, we came
under great pressure to expand our diet.
And the I believe that the great
unstudied factor in human evolution and
human emergence is the effect of a
complex diet on our emerging species.
And it's not only the presence of
hallucinogens such as
psilocybin in the in the diet but other
things as well. Psilocybin is the most
spectacular case and you know if you
came to see Darwin you'd have to hear
about evolution so you came to see me so
you have to hear this little theory
about human emergence most of you can
probably recite it by heart now
uh but it's a
three-step it's a three-step feedback
loop from a fairly bright monkey to a
fairly stupid human being and uh The way
it works like this, these monkeys come
down out of the trees. They're uh
predating on on kills of of unulate
mammals made by lions. They're competing
with jackals. They're testing all the
foods in the environment. And lo and
behold, in the manure of these unulate
mammals that are radiating across the
African continent, uh there are what are
called coprofitic mushrooms. And the
presence of large amounts of tryptophan
in manure as a substrate means that
these copitic mushrooms elaborate
psilocybin. So here in this new
grassland environment are the psilocybin
mushrooms. Well, uh, these
protohomid creatures testing foods for
their diet would reach the psilocybin
and would test it. Well, then this
threepart feedback loop to humanness
then comes into play. And it works like
this. Very, very light doses of
psilocybin. So light that you cannot an
hour and a half or two hours later tell
you've taken anything. say, "I don't
feel it. I feel completely normal. I
must not have taken enough." That dose,
if you would submit yourself to being
tested by an optometric apparatus, we
could show you that your vision has
improved
slightly. This is an effect of eating
small amounts of
psychoactive amines, uh, increase of
visual acuity. Well, you don't have to
be a rocket scientist to know that if
you're a hunting animal competing in a
highly competitive environment and
suddenly somebody hands you a pair of
chemical
binoculars, you are going to be a more
successful hunter than other members of
your uh species who are not availing
themselves of this food item. So, there
was reinforcement there. Aha. if we eat
these mushrooms in small amounts, we
will be more successful hunters. Or
maybe it was never raised to
consciousness as an if then
relationship. It was just we eat
mushrooms, we hunt well kind of thing.
[Music]
Then if you eat slightly more of the
psilocybin, if you bring slightly more
of it into your diet, uh it's what's
called a CNS stimulator, central nervous
system stimulant. An effect of all CNS
stimulants is what's called uh arousal.
And arousal means simply that you can't
sit still. You're very restless. You're
very energetic and often in the male
animal you have an erection. It's an
overall systemic
arousal. Arousal and uh if you if you
give if you witness this situation in
monkeys, monkeys are very hang loose
kind of characters. And so then they
just all fall together in a heap and
make love.
uh and this
[Music]
uh increases what anthropologists and
primatologists like to call successful
instances of
culation. This means that this increased
in interest in sex in combination with
an increased success in obtaining food
is creating the perfect situation in
which there will be a population boom of
these creatures. They're eating better.
They're enjoying themselves more and
they have better relationships with each
other. So, population boom is on the
way. Well, then the next and final level
is when you raise the dose higher. So
you're no longer restless or interested
in sex or any of that, but you're
flattened with the ecstatic unfolding of
the full numminous hallucinogenic
rupture of plane. Then and this occurs
uh you know in the tribal context then
there is boundary dissolution
uh group sexual activity and group
bonding and identification. And this is
where uh this telepathic coherence, this
inner dynamic of of cohesion and caring
that we see in primitive people to some
small degree and that we imagine must
once have been our birthright. This is
where it came to be. And at those higher
levels of
psilocybin, most of you probably know
language is formed by an organ on one
side of the brain called Broca's area.
Uh Broca's area, the brain being always
symmetrically constructed. Broca's area
has a twin on the opposite side of the
brain, but no one knows what's going on
there. It's apparently a silent area of
the brain. Well, when you take
psilocyon, there is
spontaneous linguistic
activity. Glossalia. Henry man has
written about this in his essay, the
mushrooms of language. It's almost as
though psilocybin is a pheromone that
promotes linguistic activity, an effort
to
take verbal intentionality and connect
it up to the entos of being in some way.
And then it's almost as though words are
born out of you. You give birth to words
and uh these concretences of meaning
then create a kind of unitary ambiance
which we call understanding. Language is
a miracle. I mean make no mistake about
it. I don't think any amount of
dissection of monkeys or human
cadaavvers will give you any insight
into language. Language is a behavior of
some sort so bizarre, so many orders of
magnitude more complex than anything
else we do that for all practical
purposes, this is the thumbrint of God
upon creation, human language. And it's
a self uh transforming thing. It keeps
bootstrapping itself to higher and
higher levels and it creates for us the
entire ambiance of reality. Once we had
words, we quickly replaced reality with
them. And so I I believe that what
psilocybin promotes is cognitive
activity, the coordination of visual
input with plans and strategies for
hunting or acquisition or whatever. Uh
it promotes this uh increased arousal
which really in a way this arousal is
nothing more than a reclaiming of your
animal body. You feel restless. You feel
your muscles, you feel your genitals,
you feel your place in space and time.
You are reclaiming your body. And then
finally, it inducts you into this domain
of uh the locos, a religious herophony,
something that we as moderns are
absolutely as in awe of as our mushroom
munching ancestors 25,000 years ago. We
can't reduce it. We don't know what it
is. You know, Jung was always so
concerned that people say it's only
psychological. It's only the psyche.
I've got news for you. It may only be
the psyche, but the psyche is all there
is. And uh as as we came into a
relationship with the mushroom,
humanness emerged on the African belt
and was able to stabilize itself for a
few millennia and then uh we fell into
history because of climatological change
for many reasons. We literally fell into
history and now we operate in this lower
domain, a domain of limitation, of
misunderstanding, of lowgrade languages.
Uh but the and and we are neurotic, we
are unhappy, we are dysfunctional. And I
believe this is because our connection
to the logos, to the informing voice
that gives meaning to
being has been broken over 10,000 years.
It's fallen away and all we're left with
is our spiritual yearnings, our
nostalgia for paradise and uh our our
pathologies. And miraculously we are
left with the time capsule of
preservation represented by the
rainforest shamanic cultures that use
hallicens. There lies our answer. But
it's like the oraoric serpent taking its
tail in its mouth. The the salvation of
the super future of the planet lies in a
recovery of the values, modalities, and
religious practices of 25 to 50,000
years
ago. Break break break.
I'm going to disappear if some and we
haven't screened the pile. So, we're
just going to go through them and I'll
I'll read them aloud. And normally I
give long answers, but there's such a
stack of questions here. I'll try and be
General Neil and
[Music]
or General Breeze then keep it Neil. Why
don't
Since DMT is present in the brain, does
the introduction of excess DMT shut down
the production of natural DMT in the way
that the body stops producing opiates
during opium usage? If so, what are the
effects? Is DMT really so perfectly
chemically benign?
The first point to make is that many of
your questions cannot be answered
because research into these areas is not
allowed. So uh often uh we can't answer
your question. This question does the
prod introduction of excess DMT uh limit
endogenous production? I can say with
fair confidence that that's never been
studied. My guess would be that it does
not because the DMT is in no sense of
the word do you become habituated to
DMT. I mean a person who does DMT once a
year is a fanatically heavy user I would
say. And uh and the question is DMT
really so chemically benign? Again, this
has not been studied the way you would
study with rats and so forth to
determine it. But experientially
speaking, the amazing thing about DMT is
the speed with which you return to
normal. You return to the baseline of
consciousness in under 10 minutes. Well,
that tells you that the brain is very
well able to deal with this compound.
One way of judging how toxic a drug or a
plant is is to ask yourself the
question, how long after I take it do I
feel completely
normal? And with DMT, you feel
completely normal, 15 minutes after
taking it. It's the shortest recovery
time of any uh
drug. This question is concerning the
bundle weed. While it does not directly
meet the criteria of long-term use, is
it to be considered safe? I'd say the
way to answer that question is to do a
chemical analysis of the bundle weed. If
there's nothing present but DMT in it, I
would think it should be considered
safe. Now, there may be other compounds
present. Uh in South America, uh it's
possible to contrast two plants. uh
psychotria veridis which has almost
entirely nothing in it except DMT as the
portion of its alkaloid fraction or
variola
carthagenis which is uh used in the
making of snuff and chemically it's a
mess it looks like they swept the floor
you've got nn DMT 5 DMT alphylamine
monomethylryptamine 6 hydroxyomethylry
All of this this you don't want. You
want a a narrow a surgical strike on the
synapse is what you're going for. Not
splattering all kinds of junk all over
the place. Uh what is the best medium
for psilocybin spore germination? Uh
potato agar or what? Uh the best medium
is rye malt. Agar. No question about it.
Go with rye.
organic rye malt
extract. In today's climate, talk about
access to shamanic pharmaceuticals for
the average person. This is the where do
I get it
question dressed up in respectable
terms.
Well, uh, without being too selfserving,
let me say my brother and I wrote a book
on cultivating mushrooms called
Psilocybin, the Magic Mushroom Growers
Guide by Otto and Oan Eric. I'm Otto, as
you can see. And
um, I really believe in growing
mushrooms. Uh if you are as you sit here
not psychically strong enough or
balanced enough to take
psilocybin then if you learn to grow it
at the end of that process you will be
because growing the mushroom teaches you
cleanliness,
punctuality, attention to detail,
uh uh steadiness, all of these virtues
which are the very virtues you need to
travel smoothly in that dimension. Other
hallicens, other shamanic hallicens that
you will find easily available to you
without breaking any laws. Uh the
heavenly blue morning glories sold in
every seed store and garden store are
not to be taken. Do not take them. They
have been dipped in a fungicide that
will make you sick. grow them and
collect your crop and take that. And uh
this is a major hallicen of uh of great
antiquity, extremely visionary. Um the
Hawaiian wood rose. Uh you can obtain
this from uh people who make dried
flower arrangements often have these.
Pay attention. You want the Hawaiian
baby wood rose. If they try to give you
something called Hawaiian wood rose, a
big clunky thing that is inactive and uh
and won't do it. Um the detouras are
freely available. I do not recommend
them. I recommend against them, but
they're a common landscaping plant in
Southern California. And the gy of
course is growing out in the desert out
around Lancaster and other places like
that. Uh there are a couple of companies
which have very uh forthrightly decided
to sell plants with a history of
shamanic involvement. I have own no
stock in these companies. So uh I can
recommend them without fear or
favoritism. Uh, one is called of the
jungle up in Sebastapole, California,
and the other one is called Dream
Gardens, and I think it's here in Santa
Monica. These both of these groups
publish astonishingly complete cataloges
of psychoactive and shamanically
uh important plants. Okay, that's access
without going to the streets or
committing crimes or anything like that.
Can you tell us any more about Illinois
bundleweed? I just did. Um, and that's
really all I can tell you about
it. All these questions are the same
question. Having convinced us of the
wonder of DMT, what would be the easiest
and quickest way to obtain
it? How does one acquire DMT?
comment about the Supreme Court ruling
against the use of peyote by North
American uh Indians. Um a very bad law,
obviously law so bad that the National
Council of Churches, the National Jewish
Affairs Committee, and some very large
Catholic organization all filed briefs
protesting this thing. And I think that
it was actually realized that it was a
goof and it will be brought back in the
ne it you can't bring something back to
the Supreme Court in a hurry because
then that's unseammly. But I would bet
that within 5 to 10 years this will be
overturned because a a close reading of
this law means that uh wine for Pesak or
communion could be construed as a
psychoactive substance. and uh the whole
thing it was just bad law bad
idea. Has consideration been given to
the possibility that in the case of
certain plants which are recounted in
writings but the identity is unknown
that the reason they are unknown is
because shamans purposefully kept their
identity a secret. Perhaps such secrets
are still being kept. This goes to this
question I raised this morning. How can
a powerful hallucinogen once discovered
ever be lost? And I've only been able to
figure out one scenario in which this
could happen. It happens like this.
Uh people discover a wonderful plant
that imparts visions or insight or
something and everybody takes it and
enjoys it and then slowly a hierarchy
emerges. a professional class, priests,
and only they they decree that only they
will be allowed to take it. And then
they lord it over the rest of society
with an iron hand. And then the rest of
the society gets fed up with that and
there's a slave revolt and everybody in
the ruling class is killed and the
sacrament is lost. I can't figure out
any other way that it could happen. And
the vadic thing this seems quite
reasonable. Obviously s was being more
and more confined in its use to a single
class and then that class be became
viewed as obnoxious and its overthrow
and the death of this sacrament then
follow each other. Perhaps such secrets
are still being kept. Uh perhaps they
are.
I the fact that this bundle weeded could
turn up at so later a date probably
means that there are shamanic lineages
with secrets that we don't know. As a as
a field ethnobbotonist and an explorer,
I'm always interested in the
unconfirmable rumor and there are some
doozies.
uh the mysterious beetle from eastern
Brazil which causes intense
hallucinogens if eat here's a career for
somebody no hallucinogenic insect has
ever been found and yet there are
persistent rumors in different parts of
the world of either a butterfly or a
beetle that is uh uh
hallucinogenic most shamans in the
Amazon if you spend five or six weeks
with them and take Iawaska with them and
trump around with them. When you finally
get to know them, they will allow us how
there are is another magic which they
call the magic of the big trees. And
I've spent half my life trying to find
out the names of the big trees and I'm
still working on it. We have collectors
in Peru and nothing is more exciting
than a clump of rootstock or a seed
packet that comes across our desk
labeled suspect
hallucinogen. That that gets me to the
edge of my chair.
What do you think of Robert Monroe, the
journey out of the body man? Uh well,
this is a good uh time to discuss what
do I think of all these other things on
the spiritual market. Uh I don't know
what to think about them. I'm not a
spiritual consumer. Uh I've never been
to a workshop that wasn't my own unless
it was free. And uh there's a lot of
stuff out there, you know, astral
traveling,
channeling, all of this stuff. And I
tend to either believe it's bogus or
it's for people with a psychic
constitution considerably different from
my own. Uh sometimes people say to me,
"Well, these states that you're talking
about, can't they be achieved without
drugs?" Well, the answer to that is my
God, who would want
to what what would be proved by
achieving these things without drugs? If
the things I'm talking about began to
happen to me without drugs, I would be
very very concerned and
alarmed because
uh you know I I I just don't uh and also
I I think there's something to be said
for admitting that we cannot do it
alone. But if you want this spiritual
insight, if you want the Gian matrix to
welcome you, then humble yourself to the
point of making a deal with a plant.
That's the key. You can't enter the bank
without the key to the bank. The key to
the bank is a plant. jumping up and down
outside the bank and exhorting the
banker to recognize your inner worth and
open the door is just not uh not going
to do it.
But I can understand that psychoactive
alkaloids are a survival mechanism for
the plants. Why is that effect
psychoactive in man or perhaps animal?
Um, well, first of all, maybe we have to
argue with your premise. You're right
that a lot of these so-called secondary
and tertiary compounds are elaborated
supposedly to make things taste bad so
that birds and will spit out things and
stuff like that. uh but on the other
hand they've studied this question
fairly closely and a lot of these
alkaloids are produced specifically to
attract animals to bring them in to
nectaries and as pollinators and that
sort of thing.
Uh, old style botany always believes
these compounds are what's called
tertiary to metabolism, meaning they're
kind of like waste products and not very
important garbage. But when you look
carefully at a psychoactive
plant, invariably what you see is that
the psychoactive chemistry is going on
where metabolism is most active. This is
an indication that actually these things
aren't tertiary at all. They are doing
something for the plant but we don't
know what it is as to why they have this
peculiar effect that they do in us.
Uh I think that's because there was
anciently and over the evolutionary life
of human beings actually a connection
between us and nature and uh that these
these drugs are the antenna the switches
that switch us back toward the logos of
uh of the natural world. I suspect that
all of nature is a seamless web of
pherommonially mediated connections and
interactions and that we are just not
yet at a sufficient level of analysis
and sophisticated observation to see
this interconnected web. You know, our
idea of nature is that it's all tooth
and claw. Survival of the fittest and
the devil take the hindmost. The new
version of evolution is entirely
different. It says the way you attain
survival is by making yourself
indispensable to everybody else. So it's
not by triumphing over the ecosystem,
but by integrating yourself so
thoroughly into it that it can't
function without you. then you're on
your way to being a dominant uh species,
not by crushing the
opposition. Uh let's see how we're doing
here. What are deconstructionists doing
to our understanding of the language? Is
it
helpful by deconstructionists? I suppose
uh you mean uh Jacqu Dered Da and uh
that crowd. Well, I think deconstruction
serves a very useful function. I think
we are unaware of uh of
what how thoroughly language is the
medium in which we swim, how thoroughly
our world is built of language. In a
way, the boundary dissolving character
of the plant hallicens is a dissolving
of language barriers. They show you that
the surface of reality was not the
surface of reality. It was the surface
of your local language and now it's
gone. And uh and here is uh what lies
beneath it.
At what point in the evolution of
organic matter on Earth do psychoactive
plants appear and
why? Interesting question. If we're
talking about psychoactive fungi, we're
severely limited by the fossil record
because no fossil mushroom has ever been
found older than 40 million years. This
is because fossil mushrooms are very
softbodied ephemeral kind of things. as
primary decomposers, which is what fungi
are doing on this earth. It's reasonable
to assume that they must have been here
from the very beginning of the conquest
uh of the land. But proof in the fossil
record has not been forthcoming. Now, if
we're talking about higher plants,
flowering plants, which is mostly what
we're talking about here, then no
flowering plants existed before 65
million years ago. flowering plants
emerged out of the same catastrophe that
destroyed the dinosaurs and set the
stage for the emergence of the mammals.
This is something people don't realize.
Flowering plants are as recent as
mammals. You know, if you look at the if
the period of life on Earth is
visualized as a yard stick, the period
of the flowering plants is the last inch
and a half. And it's also the the rise
of the mammals occurs in that last inch
and a half. So before that the plant
life on the earth was of a very uh
different sort and we know nothing about
its chemistry. Here's someone who asked
a zen question.
[Music]
What would make the present government
interested in the study of
psychedelics? really
I don't know about me if they could make
a buck out of it.
I I don't think they're very interested
in psychedelics. I don't think any
political ultra what ultra program CIA
they were very interested in
psychedelics except that they abandoned
it. Yes. MK Ultra for those of you who
don't know stands for mind control
spelled the southern way. Mind Control
Ultra was a program the CIA pursued in
the 1960s where they tried out all kinds
of psychedelic drugs and they also
worked with it in combination with
hypnosis. They were trying to make what
they called the Trojan horse. This was
somebody who would be an assassin but
not even know
it. And uh how far they got with all of
this, we will never know because of
course it all disappears behind the
walls of secrecy. But the declassified
history of the CIA and LSD is very
interesting. Some of you may know the
book Acid Dreams by uh by uh Martin Lee.
Uh fascinating history of the way the
government tried and really failed I
think to use psychedelics. the the
government's initial approach to LSD was
uh this is great. This is a truth serum.
We can give this to enemy agents and
they'll tell us all we know. Well, a few
months of following that path, they
decided
no, this is an obscurity drug. We can
give this to our agents and they can
take it if they're captured and no one
can learn anything from it.
And you know clearly this was not a
fruitful path either. And I I really I
don't fault the government. I don't
really fault the government for this.
After all the government is in the
business of being the government. I
don't think any
institution can inculcate psychedelics
into its own program because
psychedelics destroy
institutions. All institutions. I mean,
it's like trying to move an acid around
that corrods whatever pipes you pour it
through. And because the boundary
dissolving quality of
psychedelics is precisely the quality
that government is involved in
resisting. government builds up labels,
hands out role models, explains how
everything is, and this stuff just then
melts that back into a primal chaos. So,
it's pretty corrosive of any social
values that don't arise spontaneously
out of biological
organization. It's
anarchist. It It's the acid of anarchy
in a way.
All right, we're never going to get
through this list, but it's gratifying
to know it's here if we need it. No,
that's not the gift to
Here's a here's a question about the
time wave, which I'm going to skip
because we're not talking about the time
wave today and pity the poor soul who's
never heard of
it. Know of any herbal sources to raise
serotonin as a treatment for
depression? Uh, no. I'm not uh I don't
uh know a lot about herbal medicine and
that sort of thing, but uh raising
serotonin level as a treatment for
depression seems like a pretty good
strategy. U
I don't know of herbs. Usually
inhibition of serotonin is what's going
on. And with these psychedelics, they do
compete with serotonin for the bond
site. That's what the that's what it's
all about at the atomic level is in your
synaptic clft in the synaptic cliffs of
your neurons there are uh what are
called receptors and if you were to fly
down and look at these things they look
like
complex locks there are hooks
protuberances little drawers and fit in
places well then the drug molecule comes
is carried carried into the sematic
cleft by the bloodstream and it seeks to
what's called occupy the bond site or
simply bond and it's trying to fit in.
Well, the normal thing which fits in
those bonding sites is
serotonin. But some of these
hallicenogens are much better fits than
natural serotonin. They are what
pharmarmacologists say competitive at
the bond site and so they literally
elbow the psiloc the serotonin out of
the way and then they fit themselves
into the receptor. Well, once the
receptor and its uh its fit, its agonist
are in place, then the
biodnamic the bio electric uh field of
the syninnapse can be activated. Well,
if you swap out serotonin for an exotic
molecule like harm or measculine or
something like that, well, then this
shifts the mode of this uh molecular
level electrical environment. And I
believe that that is what then registers
as a higher cortical experience that we
call the trip. It's the experience of
hundreds of millions of these introduced
molecules displacing the normal
serotonin and then broadcasting this
signal in a slightly different way than
it is normally uh
perceived. So there's a molecular
connection. There's a connection down
into the molecular level. This will be
our last one this morning.
language transcendence. Huxley Jung and
others often mention liberating and
enlightening liberating and enlightening
epiphies as beyond language and iconic
imagery. You yourself mention this. Can
you explain further the use of
transcendental language?
Yeah, and we might talk about that a
little this afternoon.
Um, I sort of alluded to it this
morning. My idea is that language is a
process that is half completed in us as
we sit here and that language is really
something which wants to be seen not
heard but that we are on our way to
evolving toward this visible language
and we currently are operating with
these somewhat substandard acoustical
codes and I think in a way history is
the process of getting out, revealing,
defining, refining uh this natural
language. The place where the
psychedelics impact upon us as social
creatures is the language domain. I mean
you may have
tremendous herophanies and breakthroughs
but if you can't talk about it or paint
about it or dance about it or in any way
communicate it to anybody then it is not
efficacious for the species. It's just
your uh private entertainment. So the
domain of language is where the
collective impact is coming. And one of
the things I think about psychedelics is
that they are probably capable of
helping us force the evolution of
language because we cannot move into the
future any faster than our uh language
of description for the future. So if
we're interested in streamlining culture
and getting away from this sort of
random walk style of cultural evolution,
then we have to look at rationally
[Music]
uh interfacing with the evolution of
language and maybe we can talk about
that when we come back. Thanks very
much. We discussed basically the
distribution of these psychoactive
plants with a history of shamanic use
and then discussed a little bit about
the history of them. And I didn't really
finish with that uh because I want to
stress uh that this I think what we
talked about this morning is we got them
all to a good place. We got them all to
paradise in Africa with clear vision,
much food, and plenty of horsing around.
And then we broke for for lunch.
uh the forces that created that
partnership
society in prehistory, the forces that
allowed the emergence of a non-male
dominant social style were the same
forces which then eventually destroyed
it as well because it was nothing more
than uh climatological change is what
was happening.
Uh, as the African continent became
drier,
uh, the grasslands retreated, the water
holes became less frequent and further
apart, and the mushroom came under
pressure because of increased dryness.
And at that point I think probably
uh the mushroom festivals became less
and less frequent. The whole thing
became more tenuous and there was great
pressure then to try and figure out how
to preserve the mushrooms through the
dry times of the year to have them
available for ceremonies. And I think
that
um it's the uh the use of honey as a
preservative that uh really set the
stage for things to go wrong. Because
honey
um turns into a psychedelic compound on
its own if you do nothing to it but
leave it alone. It ferments. it becomes
mead and me is a primitive kind of
alcoholic beverage. So over several
millennia what began as a an
ecstatic mushroom cult turned into a
beer cult, a cult of alcoholic
intoxication. And then you get the same
shift of ratios that you see in our own
society. I mean, how many women in our
own society have their first sexual
experiences in an atmosphere of alcohol,
abuse, and misuse? The two almost go
together. And less in the 20th century,
before the 20th century, it's almost
possible to imagine nobody got laid for
a thousand years in the West without
being pretty juiced up because it was
pretty unappetizing, I imagine. So uh
this is a way in which
uh the sensory
modalities and emphasis on different
aspects of psyche change over time uh
without a culture even being aware of
it. And then I talked this morning a
little bit about the the fall into
history, the
neurotic
dysfunctionalism that
characterizes historical existence. And
I think it's worth going back to that
because some people have the idea that
psychedelics are a kind of instant
psychotherapy and that they address the
concerns of the individual, but they're
not concerned to link it up to history
to see what it was for us in the past
and what its absence has done for us. I
think that the whole phenomenon that we
call the fall into
history is the
uh scenario of
abandonment that we underwent as we
broke the umbilical connection to the
Gian matrix of organic life. That's what
we were
um embedded in in this African context.
But when we when Africa dried up and we
moved out of Africa and into the Middle
East, we then were transformed from
nomadic pastoralists into primitive
agriculturalists and then later
citybuilders. And the entire pattern of
male dominance and anxiety is set in
place. If you look at the world of 7,000
BC, the most uh the most sophisticated
human structure on the earth of let's
say 7500 BC is at Jericho in what is now
Palestine. And it what is it? It's a
grain storage tower built at Jericho
7275 BC. Uh it indicates that the
primitive pastoral nomadic form has
given way now to an agricultural form
that uh allows for the accumulation of
surplus and hence the need to defend
sane and hence the establishment of uh
have and have not psychology and so
forth and so on. So all of the
institutions that we now must attempt to
reform and grapple with began then. uh
urbanization, kingship, male dominance,
representative politics, all of these
things uh begin then and are further
exacerbated a couple or 3,000 years
later by the western decision to go with
a phonetic alphabet as a method of
communication. See, a fanatic
alphabet further removes you away from
anything uh uh concrete or real or
related to nature. There's no idoggram.
There's no glyph. There isn't even a
reebus. There is simply an abstract
symbol which stands for a sound. I mean,
this is about as far away from the
hands-on approach of of language that
you could get. Well, the culture that
made these decisions, which is our
culture, the culture of Europe and the
ancient Middle East, has evolved into
the dominant culture on the planet and
has put in place institutions like
science and so forth and so on. Our
metaphors have grown ever more cogent in
their ability to manipulate matter and
energy as they have evolved less and
less relevance to
ourselves. So now we have ideological
systems of tremendous power that none of
us can understand or relate to, which is
a kind of an odd relationship to
knowledge since knowledge is supposed to
be an experience of empowerment, not an
experience of
disempowerment. But our society has done
it differently. And so we all wander
around with a sense of disempowerment
because we're surrounded by
accomplishments that we couldn't
possibly duplicate. Well, I mention all
this because I think that it shows where
the solution lies. If we were in balance
15,000 years ago, and it was achieved
through the use of
psychedelics, deemphasis of the ego,
non-existence of the nuclear family, and
the suppression of the concept of
ownership, we should look at these as
possible styles of existence that might
be put in place in the future. That's
this psychedelic society that you've
heard me talk about at various
times. Well, that's probably enough on
that. I thought it Well, you thought so,
too.
When I said we'd look at the
geographical distribution, the history,
and then the
phenomenology, I thought that we would
put most of the phenomenology of the
thing in here in this section because it
it's important to establish just what
we're talking about and also to empower
people to describe their own experiences
which are often so peculiar that unless
there is a group such as this, a person
tends to just define themselves as
starkers. I mean, what else can you say
about some of this? But, you know, if
you're stalkers and you get 10 people to
agree with you, you're not stalkers
anymore. You're a movement. You have to
have a good
So I mentioned this morning about DMT
and I made of it the kind of
paradigmatic compound because it's so
brief, so natural, so powerful, so quick
to recover from and and it's also a very
good paradigmatic case when talking
about what the psychedelic experience is
like to have because I think if you have
the DMT experience erience on the way to
the center of that flash, you'll
probably have all the other ones. It
seems to lie at the center of the
mandelola. The most startling thing
about the DMT flash, and I mentioned
this this morning when we were talking
about Jung, is how
astonishing it is that death by
astonishment seems the major danger. And
this is even if you're an art historian,
a yungian, an aicionado of symbols and
so forth and so on. It seems to come
from some dimension orthogonal to uh the
human world. And it is not a
unitary experience the way the famous
white light and all these other wordless
indescribable elusive mercurial things
are. It isn't like that at all. It's uh
it's extremely multiplistic and it's
extremely specific in its in its
presentation. And when you smoke DMT,
you have the feeling that you have burst
into a place that you have not had a
psychological experience. You are not
having a mental experience. You have
burst into some kind of a space. And
within that space
um there the first shock is that it's
inhabited. And this is the shock I've
never recovered from because it was just
the last thing I expected to find inside
a chemical compound was the equivalent
of a Bugs Bunny cartoon.
uh it is
inhabited by um entities is the only
word to describe them and they are as
I've said many times they are like
jeweled self dribbling
basketballs and there are many of them
and they come out of the background and
they present themselves to you they're
literally vibrating up and down with
excitement they're faceted and rotating
ing and they see you as clearly as you
see
them. They even uh greet you. Some of
you may recall the Pink Floyd, the old
Pink Floyd song, The Gnomes have learned
a new way to say
hooray. I think it's on Piper at the
Gates of Dawn. It's the first album.
Those Floyd fans were looking puzzled.
It's cuz it was 40 years ago or so.
But anyway, as you burst into this
space, the gnomes say,
"Hooray." And they present themselves,
and they are the tr they are truly the
gnomes of uh of central European fairy
tales,
archetypal gnomes. They are
[Music]
um they're very humorous. They're very
uh mercurial and delightful, but I think
it's Jung warns against the humor of the
spirit
mercurious because it can turn on you.
It's not a friendly humor. It's too
crazy. Too many plates are being thrown.
Too many cars are exploding. It's like a
Marx Brothers cartoon that hovers just
on the edge of changing from mayhem to
mania, you know, very intense. And the
most striking thing to me and really the
motivation for my career is they are
displaying
um new models of language that have
never been seen before. They sing and
out of their singing elf and chatter
condense
objects which look like nothing at all
in this world. I mean the closest I've
been able to come to them are the fabric
the eggs of
fabraier. You know these constructs in
sapphire and ivory and crystal and
vitrius glass that the French designer
Fabriier created. Well, these things are
like that, but they're like that raised
to some
excruciating pinnacle of completion.
Because as they show you these
objects, you know, beyond any
possibility of contravention that if a
single one of these objects were to
exist in this
world, it would change this world
forever. If a single one of these
objects were to exist in this world, we
would spend a thousand years studying
this object. The last time this happened
was a guy gave a speech up on a hill
about moral obligation. We studied it
for a thousand years. Um, this is the
same kind of thing.
And these fabraier
hyperdimensional objects are
themselves undergoing a dynamic
transformation. They're not static
objects like the fabriier eggs. They are
undergoing changes, singing, condensing
other objects. These objects are
crawling all over the ground in front of
you, clamoring for your attention. Now
remember 12 seconds before you were
sitting in a suburban living room
somewhere grappling with some drug
somebody wanted you to take. Now all
that's gone.
And here are these things. I called them
tikes because I wanted to capture the
sense of their
childlikeness. I don't know why I called
them tikes actually. It just seemed like
the appropriate thing. If some of you
are classicists or students of the
literature of the prescratic
philosophers, you might recall the 52nd
fragment of
Heracitis which says uh the Aon is a
child at play with colored balls. The
Aon is a child at play with colored
balls. And when you break your way into
the presence of the Aon, it's
extremely con I don't know, it's
upsetting. You can't believe it's
happening. There's a lot of cognitive
dissonance. You could believe this if it
just weren't happening to
you. And there is this tremendous
affection and interest in humanity. And
then there is urgency. A lot of urgency.
The tykes want to initiate you. They
have a message. And the message
is you can do what we are doing. And
what they're doing is using their voices
to make physical objects condense out of
the air. And they're saying, "You can do
this. Do it. Do it. do it and they're on
you and they they jump in and out of
your chest which is something that is
described in the Amazon too. the hik in
the tryptoamine snuff cults of the
Yanomamama
uh that they jump in and out of your
chest and they are saying do this thing
do it do it suspend your belief and
eventually you do do it you you discover
that you can drop the filter of meaning
that your voice can move back several
registers and out comes elf chatter and
this elf chatter is able to ring the air
in front of you like a washcloth and get
alchemical gold to drip out of the air
and to begin to condense in front of
you. Well, at this by this time, most
people would like to call time
out so they can make phone calls to
various
philosophers. But there is no time out.
It it just keeps going. Uh, and these
things have an a very the aura of
strangeness, of alieness is palpable.
There's an emotion in there that we just
don't have in this world because it's
composed of
unbelievable
alieness in the presence of unbel
unbelievable familiarity.
It's a it's a an ecstasy that is a
coincidencia
aosiatorum
simultaneously. It is both what it is
and what it is not. And the human mind
can't handle that. That's called
cognitive dissonance. I mean, you just
go into a a coniction fit of some sort.
Well, the very first time I smoked DMT
in 1967 with absolutely no expectation,
this happened to me. And it has happened
every time since. And then I've had
occasion to observe people taking DMT
uh in countries where it's legal. And
what I see is there is an archetype
which surrounds DMT which you must make
your way through it. But at the center
of the archetype, the archetype is not
present and only the alien is present.
The archetype is that of the circus or
the carnival. The
carnival. Think for a moment about the
carnival. It has two aspects. One is
blazing light and activity. At the
center of the triple ring, the lady in
the spangled costume is high above the
main floor and the lions and the tigers
and the clowns are parading around.
That's part of it, but it has another
aspect. Just off to the side of the big
tent, there are the sideshows, the
hoochie coochie dancers, the two-headed
man, and so forth and so on. In other
words, there's this kinky, peculiar
shadow side of it. And I often uh if any
of you are fans of the film of Federrico
Fellini, here's a man who understood the
archetype of the circus and how in if
you remember in Ammerord that circus or
if you remember in Juliet the desperi
the flaming doorway into the room with
the bed with the bedsp springs and the
crate paper flames. These are carnival
carnival images that relate back uh to
DMT. When you finally come into the
center of it, these are all seen to be
veils. It it veils itself that way
because that's how you uh it's the old
candy to the baby routine. It treats us
as people who would like to go to the
circus and then it takes us to the
circus. that then there is a revelation
beyond that. And I I don't know how many
people present in this room have
confronted the thing I'm talking about.
I always at this moment I'm aware that
some people are saying my doesn't he
perfectly get it and other people are
saying huh what is this? What is this
guy talking about? The point I want to
make is it's real. It's not vague. You
don't have to strain for it. Nobody
wonders whether or not it happened to
them. It's just like somebody walking up
to you and taking you by the arm and
saying, "There's something I insist on
showing you. Come this way, please." And
I am very, it was the presence of the
entities that shattered the person who I
was because I was a scientific
rationalist, a reductionist. I had no no
room for elves in my cosmology and here
they were hundreds of them. So it seems
to me that this is a central question
that shamanism has always dealt with
perhaps not with the kind of onlogical
sophistication that we imagine ourselves
to have. But this is the question that
must be asked. Who's in
there? Who is this?
There are at least three possibilities
and I'm not sure which is the most
conservative. The first possibility is
that um we don't understand how the
world is constructed and that in fact
there is a parallel universe running
alongside of ours uh full of elves who
use a language to make objects. Okay.
and then why you can burst through to
this place on this one drug you know
then that raises each explanation raises
a lot of questions uh then the other
possibility is uh
um this is the yian possibility and yung
in uh I can't remember which one it was
but one of the later things he talks
about these elves because of the kibiri
the kibiri are the alchemical children
that appear in act three of FA that Jung
spent a lot of time on these alchemical
kibiri and the question of the
homunculus. And uh he says at one place
I think he says uh uh he describes them
as autonomous psychic elements that have
escaped from the control of the ego.
This is a weird way to go about it. I
mean, it's probably an accurate
description, but how much does it tell
us? You know, it means that the psyche
is to be visualized as a half gallon of
mercury. And when we throw it on the
floor, the mercury balls up and spreads
everywhere. And each ball of mercury you
look at by by gadget, it has a little
face looking back at you. That's because
Mercury is a mirrored surface. You're
looking at your own psyche shattered
into thousands of of pieces around you.
Another possibility, and one I leaned
toward for years, and I still lean
toward because I've noticed the radical
nature of your explanation, uh,
diminishes with the distance since the
last time you smoked a DMT.
uh the longer it's been, the more likely
you are to have some humrum notion that
you can pour it into. So the humdrum
notion that I settled on was, well,
clearly these are just
extraterrestrials. This is they don't
come in silver ships demanding to be
taken to the National Defense
Agency. This is how they come. Why they
come this way, who knows? They're coming
through mind. Mind is the medium in
which they travel. Where do they come
from? Who knows? Can it even be located
in the Newtonian space-time matrix? I
mean, what do you want here? A star
catalog number. Would that satisfy you?
Uh, and then finally, and I think I've
exceeded my number of possible
explanations.
[Music]
Um, and then finally, the explanation,
which is my current
favorite, it dis it's a little
disturbing. Um, and I haven't quite
figured out what to do with it, but I
have a sense we're on the right track
here. The reason the DMT space feels so
peculiar, both alien and excruciatingly
uh uh familiar, is uh because these
things in this other
place represent what I call an ecology
of souls.
This place is the one place you never
thought you were going to make a visit
to and come back to chatted around the
coffee maker. This they're dead. That's
who these things are. This is the realm
of the dead. Well, I have to confess in
all of my psychedelic voyaging and idea
mongering and all of that, I never was
able to go that far to reach that far in
my imagination. It sort of had to be
presented to
me. But if you go to shamans worldwide
and talk to them about their spirit
helpers and say, you know, what's the
deal with this? You know, who are these
things? They say, well, these are the
ancestors. Didn't you know these are the
ancestors? It's perfectly cut and dried
and
normal. Uh I I had an occasion. I won't
use his name to embarrass him, but I had
occasion to expose a very well-known
Tibetan high mucky muk to
DMT. And he said after he took it like a
man said
afterwards that is the lesser
lights. That is the lesser lights. And
if any of you are students of Mahayana
Buddhism, you know that the lesser
lights are the lights you see at the
edge of the Bardau. As you start into
the 42day process of dying, you
encounter the lesser lights. This guy
was saying to me, you cannot go further
in the in the body and have any
expectation of returning. In other
words, once you see the lesser lights,
you have stretched the umbilicus to
matter to the breaking point. If you go
one step further, it's eternity for you.
Well, I don't know how I feel about
this. The the head tikeke, I've had to
then ask myself the head tikeke, is that
me? Do you actually encounter your
dead soul? Is there a dimension where
you are both simultaneously dead and
alive? Both simultaneously witness and
observer. Um, I don't know. But I
certainly think that if we're going to
use a
conservative explanation for these
things, the only cons the only theory
more conservative than that they are
dead people is the theory that says that
they are nothing whatsoever and that
just simply will not serve. I think it
would come as a tremendous surprise to
20th century uh civilization if
orthogonal to all our expectations of
space flight and virtual reality and all
this
technosme stuff that we're lining up in
front of us. There would be a
broadside from 90° out of the unexpected
and it would be a doorway swinging open
into the realms beyond organic
existence. I resisted this fiercely, but
I just don't know what we're going to do
with these DMT creatures if we don't uh,
you know, try to find a rational
explanation. And
the oh any rational explanation will be
exotic because the facts of the matter
are exotic. Those of you who have not
had this experience who are sitting
there thinking it would never happen to
me. You're full of it. It will happen to
you. This isn't this doesn't require the
willful suspension of disbelief. This
doesn't require a pure heart or dietary
prescription. No, this is part of the
human birthright. And the fact that we
deny the existence of a
nonhuman entity, intellect intelligence
on this planet is just part of our
heritage from
rationalism. And you know, you don't
have to take it very seriously because
rationalism, the philosophy that gives
us permission to deny the invisible
world. You know who founded the
philosophy of rational
materialism? Any takers? Aristotle?
Aristotle was early. I think I'd give
credit to Renee Deart for modern
materialism and
rationalism. Well, uh, you know who told
Renee Deart to found rationalism and
materialism?
An
angel. Are you ready for this? This is a
suppressed This is a suppressed history
episode in the history of human thought.
Here are the facts, folks.
1619, Renee Deart is 21 years old. He's
a a young Frenchman in search of
adventure. He joins a Hopsburg army that
is going off to Prague to lay siege to
Prague to put down an alchemical revolt
there. They kick butt on these
alchemists, win the war, and they're on
their way back to France. And in
September 1619, this French army camped
at M in southern Germany. Some of you
may know as Einstein's hometown. And in
fact, that figures in our story
obliquely as you will see. This French
army camps at M and uh Renee Deart hits
the hay and in the middle of the night
an angel appears to this young man in
the radiance of his rooms and says the
mastery of nature is to be achieved
through number and measure.
Modern science is founded folks right
there, right then by an
angel. So how you know how far away are
the informing voices? Uh how how
rational is rationalism? How material is
materialism? Uh all of you must know,
I'm sure, the famous story of Coule, the
the German chemist Culle who discovered
the benzene ring. He he was struggling
with this problem in physical chem
chemistry. Could not figure it out. Fell
asleep in his study. Okay. And the
oraoric serpent appeared before him in
his dream and took its tail in its
mouth. And he came out of a sound sleep
and said, "I've got it." He walked to
the blackboard. He drew the first
benzene
ring. Angelic intervention. intervention
uh from the unconscious. So I my the
point of all this is to suggest that
human history is completely inner
penetrated by the peculiar, the
nonhuman, that which has
intentionality and affection for
mankind, for humanity. And this is what
shamans call to their aid. This is how
the curing is done. It's done through
these spirit helpers. They're called
elementals. And
um so far as I know,
unionism is the only modern intellectual
position where you can even raise this
issue without having a net dropped over
you. I mean I mean this is absolutely
forbidden by the modern world view. Uh
and yet it lies very very close to the
surface in our culture. I mean as an
example of how close to the surface it
lies in our culture. Consider for a
moment
um Santa Claus.
What's this about? Santa Claus is the
master of the elves.
The elves that he is master of are demon
artificers. They make toys for the
world's children in their vast
underground toy shops. And where are
these underground toy shops? At the
North Pole. I don't have to tell a room
full of youngans that the North Pole is
the axis
mundi, the magic world ash, the center
of uh the mandala. What are the colors
of Santa Claus? Red and white. The
colors of Amanita Muscaria. Absolutely.
What is the titularary animal of Santa
Claus? Reindeer. Reindeer are very
central to the Amanita Muscaria cult
because reindeer uh eat the mushroom and
then excrete their urine. And this is
thought to be a cleaner and easier way
to take the mushroom than to take it on
the so-called first pass. The second
pass is after the reindeer have had it.
Uh, you know, just an anecdotal aside,
if you're ever in the Yakut basin, one
of the great perils of the intoxicated
ammonita user is to crawl out of the
yurt in the middle of the night to take
a leak in the snow and before you can
back off, the reindeer come and knock
you headlong because they want to get to
this ammonita flavored snow. So here is
Santa
Claus right in the center of our culture
and when you take it apart all the
motifs are there the demon artificers
the elves the cosmic axis uh the magical
flight I mean it's a beautiful example
of the preservation of pagan u
psychedelic use into
a modern context.
Well, what can we say about this?
[Music]
Oh, well, I know the one thing, one more
thing I wanted to say about it that this
program that these tikes are pushing is
a language skills program and we don't
know how long people have been bursting
into this place. This may be the source
of language. You know, how did where did
language come from? We learned it from
elves in hyperspace is as as good a
possibility as any other. And this is
still ongoing. this language
reformation program. They want us to
activate our language forming ability
and language in
the DMT flash. As I said this morning,
it's something
beheld.
Syntax is something potentially to be
looked at, not to be heard. And we don't
understand this because for us language
is something that you hear. We can't
imagine a language that you see. But
have you ever noticed the way in which
we preserve clarity of intention in
language with verbal metaphors? We say I
see what you mean. He painted a picture.
It means we unconsciously believe that
truth will be beheld. And some of you
who are students of the ancient
literature may know uh Pho Judeus uh
henistic Alexandrian Jew absolute
contemporary of Christ born before died
after. And in one of his treatises on
the logos which he was always talking
about uh Pho Judeas uh presents an
ethmology of the word Israel. talking
about the word Israel and he says Israel
means he who sees God. This is the
meaning of the word Israel. And then he
goes on to say uh this he who sees God.
He's talking about that. And he says
what would be the more perfect logos.
Now I should assume most of you know the
logos was an informing voice, a voice in
the head which was the sinquanon of
Alexandrian spirituality. Uh Socrates
had it, Plato had it, the logos. So,
Phoeas asks, "What would be the more
perfect logos?" And then he answers his
own question. He says, "The more po the
more perfect logos would go from being
beheld, I'm sorry, would go from being
heard to being
beheld without ever crossing over a
noticeable moment of transition."
Well, that is precisely what you
encounter in deep psychedelic
experiences and the DMT flesh. You
behold the logos in the in the
initiation of the experience. You don't
behold it. You hear it. It sounds in
Michael Harner's wonderful phrase like
the sound of rushing water or like the
sound of tinkling bells. and it's very
far away and then it begins to come
closer. You can you can you begin to
form a picture of it in your mind the
way you would form a picture of a Nepali
marching band if you just heard it about
a half mile away and the pa pa and it's
getting
bigger coming closer. Thi this is the
elf parade. And when it finally comes
into view, it actually goes without ever
passing over a noticeable moment of
transition from being heard to being
seen through the phenomenon of approach.
You hear it before you see it. Then you
see it far away. Then you see it very
close. And when you see it very close,
who cares what it sounds like? Because
you're seeing it. This more perfect
logos is what the tykes, the spiritual
helpers want to teach. And I think that
it's important to spend a little time on
this because I think this would have
tremendous historical impact upon our
situation if we could by hook or by
crook create a uh a more visible logos.
a language which could be seen. You've
probably all considered at some time or
another, what would telepathy be like?
And I think most people answer that
question by thinking that telepathy
would be for me to hear what you
think. But how would it be if telepathy
were for me to see what you
mean? That's
telepathy. If it puts you in the other
guy's shoes, if you stand in the other
person's shoes, you are the other
person. To have a person's point of view
is to be that person in regard to that
single u uh datam of experience. So I've
spent time with virtual reality people
and all these technical folks because I
think that ver visual language is
something that wants to be born and it
may be that it is can be technologically
coaxed into existence that we're going
to have to wear goggles and have fast
computer or it may be that it can be
physiologically coaxed into existence.
There may be drugs which shift the
processing of language from being an
auditory phenomenon to being a visible
phenomenon.
Iawasa is an excellent candidate for
this. Uh if you spend time with the
iawaska taking populations in the
Amazon, there's great stress in these
populations on acquiring what's called
an ikaro.
Ikaro means magical song and the ikaro
is a spontaneous chantlike song which
comes to you during the intoxication.
The thing that's interesting about these
ikaros is that they are
critiqued as visual
objects not as sound. People never say
of an ikaro it sounded beautiful. They
always say it looked lovely and then
people will say but there should have
been more
blue. This kind of thing it's clearly
being criticized as a visual modality.
Well I think that these Iawasa using
people are at the cutting edge of
evolution. They are forcing
the evolution of the
They are forcing the evolution of the
modality of language. It may be that the
processing of language is not hardwired,
not
physiologically wired. It's uh software
function having to do with culture,
language, upbringing, and so forth.
because some people claim they are great
visualizers and that they do think
visually and so forth and we have no
reason to deny this. So it may be that
we are just a one gene or even a an
expression of gene ratios difference
away from an entirely different way of
processing communication between each
other. And this is what the new age, the
end of history, the anticipation of this
great breakthrough that we can feel but
not really outline is about. If that
seems far-fetched to you, you should
notice how far-fetched the original
emergence of language must have been
because I think people were fully people
and full and totally mute or you know
unable to articulate a thought and then
either an accumulation of neurons or
some synergistic effect was brought into
play and lo and behold spoken spoken
language emerged out of that. Well,
something similar could happen to us. In
the morning session, I talked about um
the forced evolution of language, paying
attention to our language. I really
think that the way to think of these
psychedelics is as catalysts for the
imagination.
Uh if any of you are chemists, you know
a catalyst is something that when you
add it to a chemical process, the
process is tremendously speeded up, but
in the end the catalyst is not
destroyed. The catalyst is
reconstituted at the end. So
psychedelics, one way of thinking of
them is as a catalyst for cognition. The
original description of psychedelic
drugs was they were consciousness
expanding drugs. Well, if we take the
idea that they are consciousness
expanding seriously for even a moment,
then we have to put a lot of attention
in on this because it's the absence of
consciousness that is murdering us and
our planet. We need all the
consciousness we can get. We need to
ring it out of computers, get it out of
plants, raise it in ourselves and our
children. Uh wherever we can get it, uh
we need it. And the present
uh you know the present situation with
the planet is very dire. Very dire
because of us. Our unchecked evolution
in a single direction along the gradient
of culture has now created a toxic
planet that is an endangered planet.
Uh since this situation has arisen
entirely within the confines of history,
aren't we going to have to look outside
of history in order to redress this
problem? I think so. And when we do look
outside history, then we find the
institution of plant shamanism there
waiting to inform us, to educate us, and
to show us how to set our uh uh a course
out of the present dilemma. I don't
think we can find our way out by
ourselves. I don't think we can get high
by ourselves. And I don't think as a
species that we can save this planet by
ourselves. We have to have a partner. We
have to uh get an ally into this
situation.
Um just in closing and as an example,
the mushroom has a
tremendous
problemsolving ability. And because we
can talk to it, we can ask it questions.
We can actually get a nonhuman
perspective on human problems. Y a few
weeks ago, I made this statement before
a group of people somewhere and after
the talk was over, somebody came up to
me and said, "Well, so why don't you ask
the mushroom how to save the
world?" And I just put it off. Thought
it was the wrong attitude. But then
later I wondered about this question,
how to save the world. And and I
thought, well, maybe I've been too
circumspect with the mushroom. Maybe I
should just put it to
it. So I carried out the
experiment and put to them, how do we
save the world? And now I don't offer
this as the solution. I'm going to tell
you the mushroom's answer so that you
can see how our backs aren't quite to
the wall yet. There are still avenues to
be explored. I said to the mushroom,
"How can we save the world?" There was a
hesitation of onethird of a second
approximately. And then the mushroom
said, "No woman should raise more than
one natural
child." And I said, "What?" That made
said, "No woman should raise more than
one natural child.
So I took that home with me and I
thought about it. Uh here are the
consequences of following that piece of
advice. Uh the population of the earth
would be cut in half in 50 years. 50
years following that it would be cut in
half again. 50 years after that in half
again. In 150 years the population of
the earth could be under a billion
people. Nobody was shot. No wars were
fought. No one was told they could not
have a child. No one was coerced. No one
was starved. Um then I started looking
into this thing about children and
population. And most of you like me
probably imagine that the world has a
population problem. And this population
problem is going on in places like
Pakistan and Bangladesh because dag
nabbit those little brown people will
just not stop having children. Well, I
looked into it and I've got a surprise
for you.
An America, a child born in America will
use between 600 and 1,000 times more
natural resources and energy than a
child born to a woman in
Bangladesh. Suppose you went to
Bangladesh and you met a woman, a young
woman of childbearing age and she told
you that her ambition in life was to
have a thousand children, you'd be
appalled. I mean, what kind of social
responsibility is this? What kind of
person are you that you want to do
this? An American woman having one child
is having the equivalent of those
thousand infants. Now, an another
interesting thing about this suggestion
made by the mushroom that each woman
should rear one natural child. When we
think of population control schemes, the
first objection is, "My god, you can
never sell this to people. They have
these religions. They have these
centuries of tradition and so forth. It
just won't wash." Notice that what the
mushroom suggested is most likely to be
accepted by the person most important to
convert.
We don't want to convert the women of
the back streets of Bangladesh to this
policy. We want to convert the women of
Sherman Oaks, Malibu, Santa Monica,
Gross Point, Boston, New York,
Philadelphia because these are the women
whose children are using the resources.
So here is in one sentence, the mushroom
was able to answer a question I put to
it with a suggestion I had never dreamed
of that seems at first glance anyway to
stand up pretty well. And I've spent a
lifetime trying to figure out ways to
solve human problems. See, we're a
little
stupid because we're all alike. And
something years ago the mushroom said to
me which deals with this was uh people
are always uh this question of
enlightenment. And the mushroom said for
one human being to expect to obtain
enlightenment from another is like a
grain of sand on the beach expecting to
attain enlightenment from another grain
of sand on the beach. Don't you get it?
You're all grains of sand. I mean Joe
Schmo who runs a body shop and Moo D
Ruby Baba are the same people there.
There's no difference between those two
guys. No reason to assume so. Uh so I
think we need help. And that little
exercise in what do you do about the
population problem shows that there are
suggestions out there we haven't thought
of avenues we haven't tried.
When I thought about why haven't we
tried this avenue of one woman, one
natural child, it took me about 30
seconds to understand that it's real
hard to make a buck in a situation when
population is uh retracting at a rate of
50% per generation and our whole world
is based on making a buck. I told this
idea to someone and they said, "But if
the women of Malibu stop having
children, they will lose all their
political power because political power
is numerical." This is not true.
Political power is power. And if the
women of Malibu stop having children,
they will be quite a bit wealthier than
they already are.
Notice that this deciding to voluntarily
have one natural child is also very
helpful to you personally that uh a a
woman will have to work less hard, will
have to cut fewer deals with the in
place structure of male dominance if she
has only one child. a woman with two
children has got to cut a deal with male
dominance or she has a trust fund or
something. Uh the reason we are I think
instinct we have a tendency to clench at
this suggestion and not follow it
through uh is because we imagine that
there is something holy and sacred about
the nuclear family and that we don't
want to attack this biological unit that
has such integrity. But this is a bunch
of nonsense. The nuclear family has no
biological integrity whatsoever. It's a
creation of the postindustrial
reformation. The extended family is the
natural human unit to ease the pressure
of child rearing on young women and to
give everybody the benefit of contact,
intergenerational contact and so forth.
No, this nuclear family that our
politicians are always beating their
breasts about is the absolute cauldron
of neurosis in this society as far as I
can see. And when you look at the
demographics of what is happening, the
number of women with one ch the number
of households that are one woman, one
child household, I think you can see
that maybe our unconscious has already
been in communication with the mushroom
and it's just the ego who's going to get
the news uh last. Well, I don't want to
spend too much time on that, but it's an
example of how these things offer
solutions to human problems. And if it
can offer solutions to a human problem
like
overpopulation by 6 billion people on a
planet, then it can surely take care of
the needs of and concerns of a group of
rainforest hunter gatherers that number
70 or so people. I doubt they can
conceive of a question that it doesn't
have an answer to because it can operate
uh on many levels uh
simultaneously. And this is an example
of consciousness in action. You see, me
plus nothing had nothing new to say
about the population problem. Me plus
psilocybin had a whole new take, a
suggestion. We can swat it down and
ultimately decide it's a bunch of
malarkey. But at least there was a new
thought, a new try, a new hope. This is
the consequences of consciousness. And
we're beset by problems like this. And
we shouldn't assume that they are
insoluble simply because we haven't
solved them. In fact, we must assume
that they are soluble or else we are not
going to have a place to hang our hat in
50 years. But we the the solutions come
through an act of humility, an act of
opening to the dynamic of nature, the
feminine, the psyche. The ego is the
calccarious knot of tumorous tissue that
stands outside of all that and cannot be
trusted and cannot be relied upon. Uh
and so by attempting to dissolve that to
to mitigate its hard edges to smooth it
out into the greater context of being
then we really discover uh what
humanness is about because humanness is
not something that can be encompassed
from the point of view of the ego.
That's why having created the ultimately
egoistic society, we've created a
society with so little humanity in it,
you know. And uh I see the psychedelics
as a siren song calling us back to what
is authentic, to what is real and to
what instead of closing off our future
options, begins to open them up so that
we can see that you know uh human beings
are a part of the larger universal
destiny and we can comport ourselves
with grace. and dignity and make the
world a better place than we founded,
which is certainly not our record so
far. But it's not too late. I mean, HG
Wells called history a race between
education and disaster. It's not mere
coincidence nor even mere
synchronicity that at this moment in
time and space with these tremendous
crises bearing down upon us that we have
reached out to the archaic peoples with
a new attitude not an attitude of how
can we enslave them but how can we learn
from
them. My hope is that here in the final
ticking of the clock of history, we are
going to end our prodigal descent into
the desert world of the ego and return
with what we have learned, the fruits of
the prodigal journeying of the errant
son, which is what history has been. We
turn with the fruits of that prodal
wandering to the larger human family
that waits on us in the
rainforests, in the deserts, in the
marshes, in the thorn forests of this
planet. The archaic people are waiting
for us to get on the train and then the
train will be able to depart. But we
have to awaken to our past and then we
can set a course toward a meaningful
future. That's the wrap
basically. So let me explain uh
something.
The DMT flash is very brief. The
mushroom experience is very
long hours. You can, if you are
fortunate and took enough on a
psilocybin trip, you can work your way
into a place which looks like a DMT
flash, but it will take you couple of
hours of breath control and sitting in
darkness and paying attention to get to
this place. So I wanted to make clear
that for my
money these hallicoscinogens all pretty
much lead into the same place but the
experience of psilocybin and DMT is very
different if only because one is
tremendously gradual although it may not
seem like that when it's happening but
compared to DMT it's very gradual it
unfolds over several hours while the
other you know you measure the DMT flash
in hundreds of seconds. I mean, it is a
flash for
sure. Okay,
I'll just make my way through these and
we'll do as many as we have time for and
I guess we'll go till about
four. A recent LA Times magazine article
on Mayan excavation made passing
reference to hallucinogenic enemas. Any
knowledge of such practice? Good
question and
humorous. Uh, enemas were invented uh by
the new world Indians. Strangely enough,
they were it was a route of drug
administration unknown to Roman or Greek
medicine. The reason the people of the
Amazon basin invented enemas, two
reasons really. First of all, they had
these very strong corrosive drugs that
they wanted to find a route of
administration for. Uh and and the
second reason was they had rubber. The
South American forests are the source of
rubber. So they invented the first
enema, the first hot water bottle, and
god knows what else. Decency should
probably not even inquire. Um, quite
literally I I've never I've never taken
a hallucinogenic enema, but in principle
it may not be a bad idea with some
things that are very sickening or or
like that. If you do an enema though,
remember that you cut doses to onethird.
You don't do a full dose that way or
you'll leave a human-shaped hole in the
roof.
[Laughter]
Once the European contact began, enemas
became just a fad in Europe. And they
were even doing tobacco smoke enemas at
one point, which is really weird.
[Music]
Please explain. Uh I guess it says
propagation and appropriate dosage of
beetle nuts and cava. I don't know too
much about beetle nuts. That's piper
beetle. It's a vice throughout Southeast
Asia. You probably all know the song
from South Pacific. Bloody Mary's
chewing beetle nut. That that's what
that about. Uh cava
cavacava is um uh
piperisticum. This is a plant that
occurs throughout Oceanania and
Micronesia and uh has very exotic
chemistry. Bisor
young and
noryine are the active principles. These
two compounds are known otherwise only
from a mushroom. Uh cava is a kind of
dreamy intoxicant. You feel you don't
feel like doing much but you really
enjoy just sitting there on the beach
and it's soporrific kind of it causes a
bizarre condition which is called
crocodilianism.
And
crocodilianism is where your skin dries
and cracks and migrates into little
parameal
shapes. And uh when Captain Cook landed
in the Hawaiian Islands, he was of
course meeting the high mucky mucks of
the Hawaiian royalty. He thought
everybody had leprosy. He didn't know
what kind of a hell he'd fallen into
until they put it together. He said,
"No, no, these are the royal families.
All of these people are suffering from
cava addiction,
crocodilianism. Uh it's not pleasant
tasting. It's not a pleasant high. But
recently I was uh in another state and I
had an errand to go. I a very chance
errand carried me to the house of
someone I didn't know. And there on the
table in this house was this huge bowl,
this carved Fijian kava bowl. And I
walked over and and looked at it and it
was full of this milky creamy stuff. And
I stuck my finger in and I tasted it and
uh it was cava. And I turned to the lady
that I said, "What's the story?" And she
said, "My husband was in the Peace Corps
in Fiji. He loves this stuff.
And uh I so then I met him and talked to
him about it. He said, "I'm a chronic
alcoholic. I can't touch a drink. I
can't touch a drop, but I drink this and
I love it." And I said, "Well, do you
know about
crocodilianism?" And he he said, "Oh
yes." And he lifted up his shirt and
scratched his chest and a huge cloud of
dandruff rose.
So sometimes you never know. It's the
people I hang out with, you
know,
and could you ask the mushroom what we
should do about George Bush?
I have hope for the man. He has such a
botanically promising name.
[Laughter]
[Music]
The ones that I'm not reading aloud are
the ones which seem to go to areas of my
concern that I haven't addressed here
today. So I don't carry you over into
them. This is an important question.
What is your view of introducing
psychedelics uh to children and the
initiation of children into altered
states? Uh this is so
controversial, so hot
that other than reading the question,
I'm not sure what I could say. Uh at the
bridge conference at Stanford a few
weeks ago, there was a woman's panel. Um
Cat was on it. Carolyn Garcia, uh Cindy
Palmer Horowitz, Nina Graoy, some of the
great psychedelic women. And uh this is
very important to discuss. Some of you
may have read odd John by Robert Bllye
where he makes a tremendous case that
fathers should provide initiatory
experiences for their children. And you
know, we're not talking an overnight
trout fishing trip here, folks. Um
doesn't it? I I think this definitely
needs to be discussed. I'd be more
comfortable with women discussing it
because I think women are the caregivers
and the child rearers uh largely. But
it's really a problem. I mean, it's a
problem for us that we even do these
things in a climate of legal intolerance
and then, you know, to put it onto our
children to make criminals of our
children. You know, I mean, you can lose
your children with a stunt like that.
This is very touchy. And yet, I see it
as a first amendment right. It's a
matter of religious conviction. Uh, and
I don't know. My hope is that someday
this religious conviction issue is going
to collide right into the psychedelic
issue because I do not see how we can
live under a constitution that
guarantees life, liberty, and the
pursuit of
happiness and say that psychedelic drugs
are illegal. I mean, if the pursuit of
happiness means anything, it must cover
that. Now, I've had constitutional
scholars explain to me that, "Well, no,
you don't understand. Hamilton wanted it
to say life, liberty, and the right to
own property." And
Jefferson objected. So, they decided
they'd put in language that was
meaningless. So, they settled on the
pursuit of happiness. But I say, let's
take that meaningless language in the
Constitution and turn it into the
greatest social revolution that's ever
been
seen. Children and
psychedelics. Here's a technical
question that uh is the about mushroom
media that we should spare the rest of
you.
Um all three explanations of the tikes
are interesting but are interpretations
of experience. What if your tikes are
contemplations which are becoming as
diversely as they see themselves? The
self reflection of intelligence contains
all forms. Correct. But then why these
forms and why so persistently? You know
to anybody who says something is
everything devolves the obligation of
explaining then why it appears to be
specifically something. And uh I've
taken lots of psychedelic uh compounds
and I don't get tikes anywhere else. I
think this is somehow specific to the
beast.
Well, this is an interesting this is
more a statement than a question.
Quantum
mechanics, especially the Schrodinger's
cat experiment, show that we are
simultaneously dead and alive rather uh
uh like a culie resonance structure of
the two. DMT creatures are consistent
with contemporary science. Um, this is
true. I mean, language is what divides,
but what is divided is not divided. It
simply is uh appears divided through the
convention of uh language. I'm real
uncomfortable with this death and DMT
issue because I don't know quite what to
do with it. It's a little I like
profoundity, but even that seemed like
deeper water than I uh wanted to get
into. How does he gain relate to MDMA in
opening the heart? Well, this is a funny
thing about compounds.
Most uh most
drugs after their discovery in the
process of entering
uh uh general
awareness undergo a phase in which they
are the love
drug. This happens. Marijuana has been
the love drug. LSD has been the love
drug. Psilocybin has been the love drug.
a slightly different kind of love, but
cocaine has been called the love drug.
MDMA is called a heartopening drug. And
Ebo gain, as I talked about, and then
I've had tremendous heart openings on
other things not related to this. and
and even DMT sends you down with an
acute perception and appreciation of
what a wonderful thing it is to be
alive. Uh chemically MDMA doesn't relate
to ebo gain at all. I think this opening
of the heart thing is something that
many drugs make possible and we just
need to give ourselves permission to do
it. The great power of MDMA is in uh
what's called directed psychotherapy
where a therapist helps you sort out
your problem. But we haven't seen nor
are we likely to see any comparison
studies of how well MDMA stacks up
against
LSD or psilocybin or masculine. I I uh
some therapists have preferred MDMA
because they like how it sort of stays
on the surface. No Titanic
hallucinations, no visitations by flying
saucers, just an acute awareness of what
a schmuck you may have been. Well, uh
other people uh want this deep material,
want the dreamlike mythological stuff.
uh to be brought up. Uh so uh that's
sort of a matter of fadism. I think that
any drug any drug that you're unfamiliar
with may well open your heart uh just in
poking around. Opening the heart is an
act of attention in a state of unusual
psychic dynamics. And the unusual
psychic dynamics part can be provided by
number numerous uh
substances. How rich in psychedelics are
the Caribbean islands especially Haiti
and the Dominican
Republic? Uh there are psychedelic
plants in the Caribbean islands. There
are the mushrooms certainly and there
are these anodenanthther trees the
source of the neopo snuffs and there are
detouras there is also a fairly highly
evolved folk medicine in some of those
areas if some of you are ethnobbotonists
or aspiring ethnobbotonist but you have
language difficulty think about some of
the English-speaking islands of the
Caribbean or think about ble
Bleise is a fascinating cultural area.
Uh the three language groups of Biz are
English, Spanish and Mayan. And it's not
at all unusual to meet someone who
speaks Mayan and English. And that's
what you're looking for because then
you're informant. You can actually form
a a real relationship there. So, uh,
there are many interesting plants in the
new world tropics, including the the
Caribbean islands. Pardon me.
Frogs. I don't know about Caribbean
frogs, but since you raised this
question, uh, they're not frogs. First
of all, they're toads. Uh, we don't want
the toads to feel left out.
Uh this is a phenomenon that's arisen in
the past few years. Some of you may know
of it that these large toads, buffo
alveris toads, you can capture them out
in the American Southwest at a certain
time of year and take them back to your
four-wheel drive vehicle and and put
pressure on the glands on the back of
their neck and get them to squirt out
5me
DMT fairly pure. I mean, I it must be it
looks like it must be 70% the real
thing. Squirt it onto the windshield of
your four-wheel drive vehicle. And then
with your frost scraper, after a few
hours, you can scrape this stuff up and
bag it up and rush back to Berkeley and
sell it on the street for $80 a
gram. Toad foam. It It's interesting. Uh
toad foam is what it's called. It it
raises some interesting issues because
so far as I know it's the only
animalbased
psychedelic to have any availability at
all. There are known animal
psychedelics. The most spectacular
example is a fish off the coast of
Norfolk Island in in the South Atlantic
where and this fish contains DMT and
there are other fish with DMT in them.
But this toad foam is the first example
of an animal-based hallogen actually
showing up as a product on the
underground. So that frog well Peru tree
frog from Peru. This is pardon
me. G A I
is that the mati word?
Yeah. Well, this is all Peter Gorman's
fieldwork and I respect Peter Gorman.
He's not a personal friend of mine
because I haven't spent that much time
with him, but he seems to know more
about this than anybody else. He's the
only white person to have any
information firsthand about it. His
account is that uh these extremely uh
uncontacted people in the Amazon have a
tree frog which exudes something on its
belly and they take a a burning stick
and burn a hole into the muscle of the
upper arm just like you would take a
cigarette and burn a hole into your arm.
And then they pack this hole with this
material from the underbelly of this
frog and then a spectacular trip
results. But um this is entirely the
reports of one field worker which it's a
dream come true for him. This is what we
all want to do is go off and find a
powerful alosinogen that nobody else
knows anything about and and then uh
bring it back. So, that's a case of
that. Uh, here's a question, not
terribly relevant, but I like talking
about my friends. Uh, can you talk a
little about your association with
Rupert
Sheldrake? Rupert is a good friend of
mine. He and Ralph Abraham and I are
writing a book together. He's the
morphogenetic field man. And this is an
a alternative
uh hypothesis to the scientific
hypothesis. Um one way of thinking about
psychedelics and I didn't mention it
because I didn't want to have to sketch
you Sheldrake's cosmology but since the
question was asked one way of thinking
about psychedelics is they amplify the
morphogenetic field. We see then what
connects whatever you're looking at.
Whatever you're looking at, then you see
what is connected because the
morphogenetic field which is there all
the time but which is sort of mitigated
against by our language habits becomes
suddenly uh visible and then my time
wave which I've strictly avoided talking
about today is an effort on my part to
actually write an equation for the
Sheldraian morphogenetic field.
You see, Rupert's idea is not that
powerful until somebody can walk to an a
blackboard and write the equations for
the morphogenetic field. Until that's
done, he's in the position that James
Clerk Maxwell was in visav the
electromagnetic field until somebody
then James Clark Maxwell in this case
figured out the inverse square law and
what the constraints were and then wrote
the equations of electromagnetic
radiation. What uh could you elaborate
further on the nature of MAO inhibitors?
I will since I mentioned it and it's
worth
understanding. It's that
um uh
monoamines are these simple chemical
compounds that are very active in
biological systems including all the
drugs we've been talking about and many
drugs we haven't mentioned. These are
all
monoamines. Well, then you have a a
system in the body called monoamine
oxidase. The ace on the end of a word
indicates you're dealing with an enzyme
transcriptase. But this is monoamine
oxidase. It's it oxidizes
monoamines. It makes them harmless
byproducts.
So if you take a a drug uh one of these
monoamines, it is
monoaminoidase that will render it
harmless and shunt it to your urine. But
there are what are called
monoaminoidase inhibitors. And that
means that if you take the mio inhibitor
now the monoamine oxidase can't destroy
the monoamine and the monoamines
accumulate and you get high. That's what
happens. And and sometimes monoamine
accumulation can be a a self-generated
toxic state where for some reason toxic
byproducts aren't breaking down. then
they will give you monoamine oxidase to
oxidize these products away. But it's a
reasonable strategy to try and jam the
monoamine oxidase machinery to allow an
exogenously introduced monoamine to then
accumulate to intoxicating levels. So
it's just a pharmacological strategy.
Where does one obtain highquality
cubensus sporp prints or cultures? Well,
I mentioned my brother and I wrote a
book on growing psilocybin mushrooms.
You can order it out of the cataloges
that are at the front. There's an ad in
the back of that book for high quality
spore prints and a company called Sizzy
will send you a little plate of glass
with more spore prints on it than there
are people in North America.
We used to have two are North American
uh cubensus mushrooms do they have lower
potency and can this be overcome by
selective
breeding? Selective breeding of
mushrooms is an excruciating task. First
of all, you have to be able to work with
a microscope powerful enough that you
can push one spore against another,
keeping a third spore out of the
picture. Uh what people call breeding is
where you inoculate to a plate two
separate strains and where the two
growing edges meet you cut a square out
of that and osterize it and then
reininoculate. But that's not really
selective breeding. Are North American
cubensus mushrooms lower in potency?
Yes, they are. Apparently equatorial
heat has something to do with the
production of psilocyin. say something
about San Pedro cactus as a psychedelic
agent. This is one of the ones that sort
of got left out of the survey this
morning because I was ripping right
along. This is a very large columnar
cactus that grows on the northeast coast
of Peru and contains measculine just
like the peyote cactus and it has been
used for a long long time. We have uh
pottery out of Peru
3rd millennium BC of this uh of this San
Pedra cactus. It's a very powerful uh
shamanic agent.
Marian Woodman, who I just spoke to you
recently, has stated, "One of the most
noteworthy archetypes to surface in
recent analysis dreams is the black
Madonna, a blending of mother and [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
energies. Would you comment on this in
the light of your psychedelic
experiences and the reemergent of the
feminine energy?" Well, I think uh you
know, the goddess is on the move. Um the
goddess is uh this archetype is drawing
energy with a a fury that has not been
seen since the anivine court of
Elellanar of Aquatine. And uh
[Music]
uh it's a reimaging of deity that is
going on at every level. And uh
certainly on psychedelics you have
immense moving experiences of the
goddess. If you invoke the goddess in
that situation you can confront her.
This is all part of this archaic return.
I mean it's happening on many levels and
uh imaging the supreme power of the
universe as feminine boundaryless
penetrating
uh is very important. Let me say just a
bit about gender politics because
sometimes people think I have no use for
men.
Um when you look at human beings against
the background of of the rest of nature,
we are all so yang that the struggle
between the masculine and the feminine
is not something that should be fought
out between the two varieties of human
beings.
uh a proper
reconnection to the feminine would be a
reconnection to the
vegetable matrix. This is the passive
infolding caring
uh
bearing matrix of life on the earth and
all animal life comes off as
tremendously young regardless of its uh
sexual expression. So I think we do have
work to do on gender relationships
between men and women but more than that
we all have a great deal of refeminizing
to do visav the living
earthy
right does one need a shaman guide in
enter in order to enter the world of
sacred plants is there a danger in
working with sacred plants without a
shaman. Does one need a shaman guide in
order to enter the world of sacred
plants? This is the question of the
sitter, you know, if you're going to
experiment with these things, should you
have someone sit with you? I think in
the name of prudence, the answer has to
be yes, at least the first time. I'm a
little uncomfortable giving that advice
because I don't like sitters. They hold
me at the surface
and they um I just if there's a person
around that's what I end up thinking
about. I want to get everybody out of
the way so that I can make a very clean
deep plunge to where I'm going and I
don't want any witnesses because one of
the things that happens in psychedelic
states is often you're going through
something you're totally ecstatic but
the presentation of it is crisislike.
You're there you are. You're on the
ground covered with dirt, moaning,
screaming and and she say, "So, are you
all right? Is something wrong?" And the
answer is, "No, nothing's wrong.
Everything is fine." But the the person
who has the expectations of the culture
of what means right and wrong will bring
you down with their and this is why
remember in uh
inos the solid when uh
Joseia chained himself to the tree. This
is a good technique. I've done this.
I've chained myself to a tree so that I
would not present a problem to myself.
And then I took it with perfect
confidence all by myself because I knew
I couldn't get away from my tree. Uh
although maybe I could fall out of my
tree. Uh is there a danger in working
with sacred plants without a shaman?
Well, I suppose the new age answer is
certainly. My answer is uh no less
danger than there is working with a
shaman, I would say. I mean, you got to
watch these shamans, you know. They're a
fairly bied lot. It it is the archetype
of the trickster. Don't forget that. I
mean, the notion that this is just some
openhearted little forest fellow who
wants to tell you all his hard ones
secrets. I mean, that's a cheerful
assumption.
Of of course you don't want to go too
far the other way. I I always have I
find over and over in the Amazon when
I'm off with these people, we come to
the place where now we've taken the IAS
or whatever it is and I'm sitting across
the fire looking at this guy and I
realize, you know, we're four days up
this river and two days down this trail
and and then I realize with perfect
certainty that they're going to kill me
right there that evening. this you have
to have a chat with yourself about this
kind of thing well ahead of time because
you must be able to discipline your hind
brain. Your hind brain is always telling
you crazy stuff to blow your focus and
you just have to say, "No, no, he's not
going to kill me." And even if he tried,
I'm bigger than he is. So, you know, and
work your way out.
But this thing of cross-cultural
shamanism, I don't really know what to
do with it. I see the shamans noble
souls brought from the Peruvian jungles
and they they do not do well in these
cultures. We don't understand what a
corrosive force we are. We don't
understand what an air ticket to Paris
means to somebody who's never been to
the big town at the bottom of the river.
And we tend to hold things so close to
our chest that we smother them. I think
it would be a good idea to leave the
shamans in the jungle. And if it's so
damn important to you to spend time with
them, then bite the bullet. Go there. Go
to them. I mean, what kind of spiritual
quest is this where we fly the teacher
in to a waiting group of psychopans?
[Music]
Uh, how are we doing?
Oh, we're not doing so well. That was
the last question, folks. Um,
well, let me I'll I'll I'll smooth the
gaff by by saying this is important, and
it may sound like fluff, but it isn't.
We look exactly like everybody else to
most
people and we will now leave this hall
and disappear back into our lives. But
you might take a moment. This is your
affinity group. It's preposterous,
demeaning, and unhealthy to focus on one
person. You know, the Terren McKenna,
the Tim Liry, the John Lily. I mean,
hell yes, we're great people, but so are
you. And this is your affinity group.
Someone in this room has what you need.
[Music]
So look at each other and pay attention.
We are each uh like a a virus empowered
now to go out in society and spread this
new meme, this new permission, this new
uh community of awareness of the archaic
option. And so I think you are to be
congratulated. You are what makes this
all go. If it weren't for you, I would
be behind bars. I don't know whether it
would be a mental hospital or a state
prison, but they'd figure that out
later. Thanks to
you, we have a movement. And this
movement
uh offers hope and I think we need to
speak clearly about this hope to people
who are not aware of it. An idea has no
power unless it is
communicated. And boy, we are to some
degree in the closet. We are prudent. We
don't say we're gutless. We say we're
prudent. We're prudent. say this is no
political climate in which to be x y and
zing. But actually there's no better
political climate than the present in
which to raise these issues because the
rainforests are being destroyed. The
native cultures are being destroyed. Our
authenticity as freethinking people is
being destroyed. all around the issue of
the suppression of altered states and
freedom to conduct the spiritual quest
any way we want. And if we don't raise
our voices in protest against this, then
without doubt, it will be slowly drained
away and we will be left in even more of
a psychic desert than we already
inhabit. So this is the last
opportunity. I think that in a hundred
years the earth will be empty and
whether that will be because we are
extinct or because we found home is
entirely up to us. But our story, the
story of the errant monkey is coming to
an end. The final seconds of that story
are ticking out. Is it to be followed by
no more story or a new chapter, a new
story? Well, this has to do with how
much integrity, how much
self-generated love, and how much
intelligence we can bring to bear to the
human dilemma. And these plants, these
sacraments are central to a full
exploration and understanding of what it
means to be a human being. It's just
that
simple. Thank you very much.