I have 20 minutes in order to explain to
you 35 years of research and 2,000
pages. Um, so I'm going to do my best.
And it's about the brain.
Isn't that exciting?
Yes, it is.
The brain. You may say, I don't mind
about what's going on in my brain as
long as I keep thinking, as long as my
consciousness works. But your
consciousness and your brain have an
interesting relationship.
But it is not one that is reductive.
It's not that the consciousness can be
reduced to the action of the brain. It's
that very clearly when things go wrong
with your brain, they change who you are
and how you think and how you see the
world. So they're obviously connected.
But how? Well, there are really only
three possible
ways in which the world can be construed
by the brain. Either it emits
consciousness in the way that the
kidneys secrete urine or it transmits
consciousness in the way that a radio
set transmits a program. It doesn't
generate the program. It just transmits
it or it permits it. And it's the last
of these that I think is the most
cogent. Nobody has we can get rid of the
first one that the brain emits
consciousness pretty much straight away.
Nobody having debated this for a couple
of centuries has come up with even the
slightest plausible way in which the
brain could give rise to consciousness
ultimately and I haven't got time to go
into that. I believe that the whole
cosmos is conscious. It's a field of
consciousness. And so what the brain
does is permit restrict the field of
consciousness in such a way that I have
a personal consciousness. In this way
it's like water falling on a landscape.
It falls randomly on the landscape. It's
everywhere on that landscape. But in a
river, the banks of the river, they
don't make the water, but they constrain
the water.
And the banks aren't the water and they
don't cause the water, but they do
permit the water to take a certain
course. Now, that's the way in which I'd
like you to think of it. Now, I'm going
to be talking uh very broadly about
differences in the brain hemispheres.
And this is a toxic topic because
everybody's got their own lunatic idea
about what these differences are.
There's been a lot of nonsense talked in
the sphere of pop psychology and we now
know that almost all of that is
completely wrong. So I want you to
unless you know my work, please put
everything you think you know about
hemisphere differences out of your mind.
No, it is not true that the left is
reliable, a bit boring, but at least
rational and dependable. Nor is it right
that the right hemisphere is a bit
untethered and exciting and given to
painting pictures. This has been shown
by all the subsequent research really
this came out of the 1970s
80s and early 90s and we've now know
that most of that is completely wrong.
Now the difficulty is that just because
something is wrong is not a reason for
stopping asking the question why the
brain is divided. The brain is divided
and all the brains we know are however
far down the evolutionary tree you go.
If there's a brain is divided and the
other thing about it is asymmetrical.
Why if the brain just all did the same
thing would it be asymmetrical?
And furthermore in humans there is
actually a band of fibers that connects
the two hemispheres at their base. Only
2% of neurons actually cross it. And
it's a mamleian invention. Up until
mammals,
birds, amphibians, reptiles, and all the
rest, they had divided brain, but they
had no corpus colossum. And get this,
with further evolution, the corpus
colossum is getting smaller in relation
to the size of the brain, not larger.
And a lot of its activity is actually
inhibitory. It's telling the other
hemisphere, keep out of this. I'm
dealing with it. So there's something
very interesting there about hemisphere
differences. Don't let anyone tell you
that there aren't any important
differences. Any clinician who has seen
people with strokes and diseases or
injuries that affect their brain will
know that the side matters as much as
the sight. Let's ask a different
question from what do they do which was
the machine question. Effectively people
used to think of the brain as a machine
and so they asked the question you would
ask of a machine. Well, what does it do?
And so we come up with, you know,
language and reason on one side and I
don't know what on the other. Indeed,
there was a sort of feeling in medical
school where I learned a lot about the
left hemisphere. And what did the right
hemisphere do? Nobody knew. But it was
probably put there to stop the left
hemisphere falling over. In those days,
the right hemisphere apparently didn't
do anything. Actually I have to tell you
a very very different story that pretty
much everything important about
understanding the world comes from the
right hemisphere. So what are the
differences? Well the differences the
real differences are in the way of doing
things. So for example it's wrong that
the left hemisphere is science and maths
and the right hemisphere is art and
literature and things like that. Both
hemispheres contribute to all of those
in different ways. But the different
ways are consistent across the whole
field of experience. What are those two
ways
here? We have to do a little bit of
evolutionary history. Every creature has
to solve a difficult problem. How to eat
and yet stay alive. Now, that doesn't
sound difficult in Budapest in 2025, but
for most creatures, it does present a
problem because if you're going to be
quick enough to catch something and pick
it up quickly before a competitor, you
have to be really focused on a target.
So, one whole half of our brain has a
very narrow focus to a target that it
already knows what it is and it knows
that it needs it and wants it. But the
trouble is that if that's the only
attention you're paying to the world,
you'll soon end up being somebody else's
lunch while you're getting your own. So
you have to have exactly the opposite
kind of attention at the same time. And
that is what the role of the right
hemisphere is. The left hemisphere sees
about a 3°ree arc out of the 360 degrees
it could be attending to. But the right
hemisphere has a broad sustained
vigilance without preconceptions as to
what it may find. So in one case you're
targeted on something, you have to go
for it in a quick and dirty way. And
indeed that need to do things in a quick
and dirty way as we say in English is is
the reason the left hemisphere is
frankly deluded most of the time. As VS
Ramachandran says, some of you may know
his name, a great neuroscientist, the
right hemisphere is the devil's
advocate. It is the one that is saying,
you might be wrong about that. It might
be something else. And it's really
important that we have that voice as
well as being able to accomplish the
grabbing and getting rapidly. Now I make
a distinction but it's just my
distinction between apprehending which
in Latin comes from adrehender to grasp
onto something which is what the left
hemisphere does and it's the left
hemisphere's language areas that say oh
I've grasped it that grasping and
getting and grabbing and having for
yourself is the left hemisphere's entire
row. The right hemisphere meanwhile is
to comprehend
and comprehend means to take together
and that is essential for understanding
the world. Now what kinds of worlds do
these two hemispheres yield?
My friend Richard Tarnas
says and I think it's a very good line
that world views
aren't just views. They also create
worlds. The only world that you can know
is the world that your brain permits you
to know. And it permits you to know two
different worlds. Get that?
How do we cope with that? Largely
because most of the time we're not aware
of this. But as soon as we start to be
explicit about things and having an
argument with somebody, we really have,
if we're going to be consistent, to
adopt one or other of these visions
because they're not compatible. What are
those experiential worlds like that of
the left hemisphere is made up of little
bits that it knows exactly what they
are. It knows it needs them. They're
certain. They're fixed. They're static
until gobbled up. They are not connected
with one another. They have no context.
They're no longer embodied. They're
abstracted.
They are general in nature. Nothing
unique about them, interchangeable,
replaceable.
And everything about them is explicit.
I'll come back to that in a second, but
it's very important. And effectively,
this left hemisphere world is inanimate.
In fact, when people have damage to
their right hemisphere, they start to
think that people are machines or
zombies or that they themselves have
become an article of furniture. Whereas,
if you suppress experimentally, which
you can, the left hemisphere, people see
things as alive and they even see the
sun as alive because it is a life-giving
force that comes to us and moves across
the heavens. Most importantly of all is
that the left hemisphere's version of
the world is a diagram, a theory, a map,
an abstracted thing that is in this
sense like a map in relation to the
world that is mapped, the real world
that we inhabit. The problem is that I
think we can easily mistake the map for
the real world and I think that's the
world in which we now are living. So the
qualities of these worlds are quite
different. The right hemisphere's world
is not made up of fragments but is seen
as interconnected elements which are
never quite certain and fixed because
they're always in process. They're
always flowing. They're always becoming,
not just being things.
In fact, it might be right to say that
in the right hemisphere there are no
things. And that was going to be the
title of my more recent book, The Matter
with Things, until I realized it gave an
idea that I might be some sort of
postmodernist that denied the existence
of anything. And that's not who I am.
That world of the right hemisphere is
animate. It is unique. So the elements
in it are, yes, of course, you can see
that they're like one another, but you
still see the unique case. Now here
there are a couple of very interesting
cases of people who had right hemisphere
strokes in the temporary parietal region
which enables us to understand a unique
instance. [snorts] And one was of a
farmer who before his stroke knew all
his cattle by name just by looking at
them. But after the stroke he could
hardly tell a cow from a horse. And
another is very touching one is of a
woman who'd spent her whole life getting
to know, cataloging, illustrating the
birds of Switzerland. And after her
stroke, she said, "All the birds look
the same." So that is the kind of world
in the left hemisphere. The right
hemisphere's world is alive,
interconnected, flowing, changing,
uncertain, but that gives reason for
seeing something new. It is the world
that we live in and cannot do without.
The other is a record of the world, a
map of the world, a theory about the
world. It's not immediate. It is a
representation, not the living presence.
And a representation is after all
something being present when it no
longer is present. That's what
representation means. If this is a
representation, it is no longer the real
thing. And what happens as the great
English poet Werdsworth realized is that
when we are young we are in the presence
of the world. It presence is to us. We
we see it in all its all inspiring
reality. But as we get older a a veil is
drawn over the world. A veil of
familiarity in which we say oh yes
another picturesque view. I can put that
in my little catalog of picturesque
views. Next. And that is a different way
of living the world. Why is this of
relevance? It's relevance for two main
reasons. One is that I can show that the
left hemisphere is deluded. I I'm not
using that in a kind of common
parliament's way. I'm using that in the
technical sense that a psychiatrist
would use it. And in the matter with
things, I look at 25 of the most
extraordinary syndromes in which people
are fully deluded. And of those all but
one uh follow damage to the right
hemisphere not damage to the left. And
the left hemisphere on its own uh is is
uh gives rise to delusions and
hallucinations and also does something
called confabulation which the large
language models also do. Says something
that sounds like it should fit in here
but there's no evidence for it. We
shouldn't be relying on that left
hemisphere. And we can see the structure
of a theory about the world in a new
light. Because in the past in
philosophy, one had to say, well, this
school thought like this, the other
school thought like that. Take a pick.
There's no reason to prefer one or the
other. Now I can say there is a reason
to prefer the one that has the stamp,
the hallmark of the left hemisphere. not
to prefer that to prefer the one that
has all the signs of being generated by
the right hemisphere. So it makes a
difference to how we evaluate various
schools of philosophy, schools of
politics, schools of sociology and so
forth. The second thing is that it's
[snorts] not just individuals that have
to make these choices between two
different ways of viewing the world.
[snorts] And most most of the time we we
don't obviously consciously choose. It
just happens. In a society that
relentlessly
feeds back to us a mechanistic
rationalistic vision of the world, there
is no room for all the things that
really matter to us. And this is where I
want to come back to the implicit.
Everything that matters to you is
degraded when it is made explicit. The
most obvious example is a joke. Once
you've made it explicit, it's just not
funny anymore. But I used to teach
literature at Oxford. And I realized
that once you had explained the poem,
the poem no longer had any effect on
you. Nor can you make explicit what a
piece of music says or a great work of
art or architecture. Nor can you say
what your loved one means to you. You
know, if I say, "Oh, she means
everything to me." The left hemisphere
says what really everything. So exactly
what does she mean? But of course the
word mean has a quite different sense in
the right hemisphere. We end up with um
these two kinds of ways of thinking
waring with one another. And in the
world we're in now where we're all
taught from early on in school to think
in this mechanistic way that we are
machines that the whole natural world is
a mechanism. We miss all the things that
really matter. As I say, once you've
made things explicit and mechanical,
they no longer are what they were by
taking them out of their context. You
radically change them. Let me just give
you an amusing example of that from
serial packets. So serial packets, at
least in America, have four sizes. And
there is jumbo, which means very large.
And then there comes economy, which
means large. And then there comes
family, which means medium. And finally
there is large which means small. So
context changes everything. It can even
change the meaning of a word never mind
of an experience. So what I'm suggesting
is these two worlds tend to um war with
one another in culture. And in the
second half of the master and his
emissary um and I'm sorry about these
names but you have to have to look me up
and look at the books I've written. I
should have pictures of the books here
but I don't. But in the second half of
the master's embassy, I look back over
the history of the west from the Greeks
um forward through the Romans to the
Middle Ages, the Renaissance, the
Reformation, the Enlightenment, the
Industrial Revolution, Romanticism,
Modernism, and postmodernism. And I
think what I can see in three cases over
the course of that history is that a
civilization started working very well
with both hemispheres working at the
same time and working in collaboration
always with the right hemisphere being
the dominant one. That is very
important. It is the master of my title.
the right hemisphere. The left
hemisphere is the emissary, a
bureaucrat, a high functioning
bureaucrat who goes about and does work
and ends up thinking that it actually
does all the work. Now, I've worked in
hospitals and universities and in my
lifetime I've seen a gross expansion of
bureaucracy that is hideous to behold
and it defeats creativity. It wastes
time and it gets in the way of
professionals who are trying to do their
job healing people, teaching people.
It's a neoplasm, a cancer in our world.
And it is an expression of the left
hemisphere's mentality. I fear that AI
is another way of exporting this kind of
way of thinking. However it's dressed
up, however it may mimic something that
looks less threatening than that, that
is really what is going on.
So in our world, we see all kinds of
left hemisphere phenomenon. The rise of
bureaucracy, the um the doing away with
concepts of skill and wisdom which are
embodied and come from lived experience,
they're replaced by following
algorithms. Um there is a huge influence
of the eitheror mentality which is the
left hemisphere style. Remember I said
it was the quick and dirty one. It has
to go it it is what I want and I'm going
to get it. It can't think well maybe it
is or maybe it isn't by that time it's
got away. So if I'm right that the left
hemisphere is the dominant one in our
culture. We see wars of people saying no
I'm right. No you're wrong. No, no
suggestion that both may be right in
important ways. Indeed, a very important
insight that the right hemisphere is
able to have is that the thing and its
opposite may both be true. This has been
found to be the case in physics and
we're beginning to catch up with that.
But it is a very important insight which
is common in eastern cultures if not in
the west. So it it becomes either or it
becomes simplistic. It becomes general
in nature. no respect for the unique or
for the embodied or for the implicit.
These things have to be explained. I
mean, I don't like to say this, but when
I first went to America, I had the odd
experience in the lab of making
conversation with people and then they'd
look at me in a puzzled way and they go,
"Really?" And then I say, "No, not
really, but never mind." Um, because a
lot of the way we talk in England at
least is based on irony, on things that
are not said and so on. But this
explicit mentality is very strong in
America and strong across the west. Now,
now looking at the future, we need to
rehabilitate the right hemisphere's
understanding. How can we do that? The
first thing is to be aware of what we're
missing. That is the crucial thing. Be
aware of what has gone missing from your
world and don't allow it to escape your
mind. The second thing is to have
different thoughts about education. that
it's not just about stuffing information
and techniques into people, but drawing
out from them their critical mode of
thinking, their imagination, the
humanities. The key is in the word
humanities that help you understand what
it is to be a human being. That business
of
poetry, of drama, of philosophy, of
learning to see a point of view and then
express its opposite and see how you can
mediate between them. That would be a
very valuable thing if everybody left
school with that knowledge. We can of
course adhere to and work for global
movements such as the as green peace and
so forth, but they have been notably
ineffective so far. If the west should
lose its current civilization, then we
have to survive in a new way. And that
is something that we can do. We can
begin building communities in which
people live closer to the land and
closer to one another, trust one
another, share their meals with one
another, perhaps worship together. That
would be a very fine way for starting
seed places from which a new
civilization could spread. And it's
rather like the role of the monasteries
in the middle ages. But the third thing
you can do today, not this evening, but
right now you can start it and it makes
all the difference in the world. It
sounds like a small thing, but you're
not asked to solve the problems of the
world. Nobody could. You are asked to
take responsibility for yourself. And
both for your own good and for the good
of society, you need to begin examining
the way in which you look at the world.
Change your heart and mind. In other
words, move towards it in a spirit of
humility. compassion and a deep
understanding that is based not just on
reasoning further and further that is a
very useful thing but on using intuition
and imagination. Thank you very much.
[applause]
&gt;&gt; Thank you so much again Dr. Migle Chris.
Uh Dr. Mel Chris has very graciously
agreed to take the hot seat if you're
comfortable to embrace the flames.
&gt;&gt; Of course. Um then uh let's start moving
and please do keep your questions brief
so we can get through a few of them.
&gt;&gt; My question is we haven't got here to
this mechanistic world with a conscious
decision. Do you think that with a
conscious decision we can get out of
here or we have no other choice than
trying to get out of here? So that's my
question.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Good question. And I think
the answer is of course we have to make
a conscious decision. We haven't got
much time and we need to make that um at
the forefront. I have hope that this
will happen. I call myself a hopeful
pessimist by which I mean that it
doesn't look good. Uh I think we'll all
agree about that. Um but we do have
signs of hope that people have got fed
up with the old reductionist materialist
view of the world. Young people in
particular feel they're being cheated of
something and they bloody well are.
they're being cheated of the wonder of
the world and they need to get back to
that. So I think we we we will see a
shift in society against this way of
thinking. But it's quite difficult. We
need to push hard because one of the
things about the left hemisphere is that
it really only understands itself. So it
is like being in a a cell with no
windows. The right hemisphere has a
window on the world and it's constantly
checking. Is that really true? is my
theory is what the map says actually
what is going on out there. But the left
hemisphere isn't. It's just referring
back to itself. So it tends to reinforce
itself very badly. And sometimes you see
this in bureaucracies where they make a
decision we're going to do X. After a
while it becomes obvious that X didn't
work. But instead of saying oh we made a
mistake let's try Y. They just say we
haven't done enough of X yet. This is
the world we now live in.
the question over here.
&gt;&gt; You mentioned your friend Richard Tarnes
and I would like to mention another
historian of ideas, Steven
&gt;&gt; Grow Krueger.
&gt;&gt; They represent some kind of two opposite
views on where philosophy is today. Who
is the go-to philosopher right now who
I'm can consult with and maybe advance
my research for the for the benefit of
all? Well, I don't know who I would say
is the greatest philosopher to follow
that's living. But philosophers don't go
away. They leave their works. And it's a
huge mistake of modernity to think that
it's got to be new if it's going to be
any good. The the idea that it's new and
good is a lovely one, but it may happen
occasionally, but it's in the nature of
things is not going to happen much of
the time. So the people I would look at
are William James, Alfred North
Whitehead and their views of the world
as a a world that is in process. I mean
particularly William James was able to
draw together philosophy with feeling,
emotion, reason, science, all these
things, intuition. He was an
extraordinary figure and I think we
should all when I was 14 one of my
teachers lent me varieties of religious
experience and that completely changed
my life. So I suggest that we look to
the past for the big insights into how
to go forward. I don't know if that's
any help at all. Probably not. Um but
yeah and unfortunately we only have time
for one more question. Please do keep it
brief. Yes, the lady there.
&gt;&gt; If I've understood correctly, then the
right hemisphere of the brain helps us
to comprehend our surroundings and our
environment. And then one example was
something about with poetry or a joke if
we're told that we sort of let go of
that straight away. Then am I right in
thinking that the right brain or the
right side of the hemisphere helps in
processing trauma and letting go for
example of a traumatic experience? There
were various theories of trauma and
different kinds of trauma, but one is
where the right hemisphere goes into a
sort of shocked state and closes down
and you see that sometimes in people who
suffered very severe trauma. The word
trauma is grossly overused I believe in
our society. Everyone has been
traumatized apparently. Um I I think
though that it needs to be reserved for
very serious trauma and I have seen it.
Um I think the most important thing is
that the right hemisphere is empathic.
The right hemisphere is what enables us
to understand what another person is
thinking. It what understands music,
poetry. It enables us to go beyond
reason. That I didn't choose the title
something about the limits of reason.
But there are limits to it. I I spend
half my time defending science and
defending reason because they're under
attack from people with political
persuasions. But actually they're very
important. that neither of them can go
to the they have perfectly reasonable
limits. Everything has limits into what
it in what it can do. And neither reason
nor science can tell us the answer to
everything. Mozart's G minor quintet is
not irrational. It's just super
rational. It's beyond reason. And most
of the important things in life are. So
I've argue in my work that there are
four great pathways to understanding.
Science, reason, intuition, and
imagination. And those last two get left
out a lot in our world. And I think we
need to refocus on those instead of
worshiping science as giving us all the
answers.
&gt;&gt; Please join me in thanking Dr. A. Miguel
Christrist. [applause]