Carnegie Hall, in New York City, the home of the world's greatest musical events.
Today's event is one in a series of New York Philharmonic Young People's
Concerts, under the musical direction of Leonard Bernstein.
And here is Mr. Bernstein.
Okay. Now, what do you think that music is all
about? Can you tell me?
That's just what I thought you'd say. Cowboys, bandits, horses
the Wild West. I know my little daughter Jamie, who's
five years old and who's sitting up there,
agrees with you. When she heard me play this piece, she said - "Ooh, the Lone Ranger
song, Hi-ho Silver!" Well, I hate to disappoint her, and you
too, but it really isn't about the Lone
Ranger at all. It's about notes.
E-flats and F-sharps. You see no matter how many
times people tell you stories about what music means,
forget them. Stories aren't what music means at
all. Music is never about anything; music just is.
Music is notes - beautiful notes and sounds put together
in such a way that we get pleasure out of listening to them. That's all there is
to it, and when we ask "What does it mean? - " What does this piece of music mean?",
then we're asking a very hard question, and that's the question we're going to
try to answer today.
Now, it's a funny thing about this meaning
business in music anyway. When you say "what does it mean?", what
you're really saying is "what is it trying to tell me - what ideas
does it make me have?". Just like words. When you hear words you get ideas from
them. If I say to you "Ow, I burned my finger!", then immediately you get an idea from
what I said, or some ideas; you get the idea that I burned my finger, that it
hurts, that I might not be able to play the
piano anymore, or that I have a loud, ugly voice when I
scream. Lots of different ideas like that. That's words.
But if I play you notes: just notes on the piano like that, those
notes don't tell you any ideas. Those notes aren't about burning your
finger or sputniks or lampshades
or rockets or anything. Well, what are they about?
They're about music, For instance, take this piece by Chopin:
Beautiful isn't it? But what's it about?
Nothing. Or take this Beethoven sonata:
That's not about anything either. Or take this piece of boogie woogie:
It's not about anything either. None of them about anything,
but they're all fun to listen to. And why should they be fun to listen to?
I don't know, it's just part of human nature to like to listen
to music. You see notes aren't like words at all,
Because if I say one single word all by itself to you,
like, rocket, immediately you have an idea -  you see a
picture in your mind. Rocket, bang! Picture. But if I play a note one note all alone:
that means nothing. It's just a plain old F-sharp or a B-flat;
a sound that's all higher or lower, louder or softer; a sound that can seem
very different if I play it: Or if I sing it:
Or if an oboe plays it:
Or if a xylophone plays it: Or if a trombone plays it:
Very different. It's all the same note,
only with a different sound. Now all music is is a combination of
sounds like that one and that one and that one and that one,
all put together according to a plan, and the guy who plans it is called the
composer, whether he's named Richard Rogers or Rimsky-Korsakov he's the
composer, and his plan is to put the sounds together with
rhythms and different instruments and voices or whatever in such a way
that what finally comes out is exciting or fun or touching or interesting or all
of those together. That's called music, and it has a musical meaning which has
nothing to do with any stories or pictures
or anything like that. Of course if there is a story connected to the music,
okay. Sometimes it's good. In a way it should
give an extra meaning to the music; but it's extra, remember that.
And so whatever music means, it's not the story.
Well what does it mean? That's what we're going to find out.
Now let's take the first step to finding out. Remember the piece we played at the
beginning: that Wild West piece of music?
Well for one thing it can't mean the Wild West
for the simple reason that it was written by a fellow who never heard of
the Wild West. an Italian named Rossini. We think his music means cowboys and
horses and the Wild West because we've been told so by so many movies and
television shows. But rossini really wrote this piece
as an overture to an opera called William Tell which is about people in
Switzerland which is pretty far from the Wild West.
Well then, maybe the music's supposed to be about William Tell and Switzerland
instead of about cowboys. Is that what it's about?
No! It's not about William Tell or cowboys
or lampshades or rockets or anything. Then what makes it so exciting? Well there
are a million reasons, but they're all musical reasons. That's
the main point. For instance take the rhythm:
which is like the rhythm of galloping
horses. Or like the rhythm of drums in a battle.
but that doesn't mean that the music is about
drums or horses or battles. The meaning is only the excitement of that rhythm,
you see? Now another reason it's exciting is that
it has a mighty fine tune; one that's easy to remember and stirs
your blood. It starts with a phrase going up:
and answers itself with a phrase going down:
It's like a question and answer. Or maybe it's more like an argument with the second
person winning it. Let's try to have that argument,
you and me, and see who wins. I'm going to sing the first phrase:
and you're going to argue back with the second phrase:
and i'm going to argue back again with the third phrase:
and you're going to wind it up with the fourth phrase:
Okay. Ready? Go!
You win!
You see how exciting that last phrase is?
It has all the excitement and triumph of winning an argument, it makes you feel
good. But there are still more reasons why
this music is exciting. For instance the way it's played - the
instruments that play it, like those trumpets at the beginning:
or the violins who use their bows in a jumping way to make that galloping sound:
Would you show us, Mr. Corigliano?
You see? Now when all the strings do that together it really gallops. Watch.
So you see this music is exciting because it was written to be exciting
for musical reasons and for no other reasons.
Well if all that's true, then why does a composer put names on
his music at all? Why doesn't he just write something
called Symphony or Trio or Composition No. 900 50 12
or anything? Why does he give his music a name like
The Sorcerer's Apprentice or whatever it happens to be,
if it's not important to the music? Well, every once in a while an artist is
stimulated to express himself by something outside
himself; something he reads or something he sees or something that's happening to
him. Haven't you ever felt like that? That you wanted to
dance or sing because something happened to you that made you want to dance or
sing and express your feelings in some way? I'm sure that you've all had that
feeling. Well it's the same with a composer. For
instance, Johann Strauss wrote an awful lot of waltzes and one of them goes like
this:
You know the name of this one?
Right! The Blue Danube. Now,
maybe the Danube river inspired Strauss to
write that waltz. I don't know, I have my doubts,
but in any case those notes don't have anything to do with the Danube river, do
they? Now what's this one?
Right! Tales From the Vienna Woods. Well, why couldn't that one be called By The Blue
Danube? Or the Emperor Waltz? Or the Tennessee
Waltz? Or the Missouri Waltz, for that matter? What's the difference?
A Strauss waltz by any other name is still just a lovely waltz.
The name doesn't matter, except to help you tell one waltz
apart from another and maybe give the music a little more color like a sort of
fancy dress costume. Now i'm going to try a trick with
you. We're going to play you a piece that has
a story; a very good story,
but i'm going to tell you the wrong story;
I'm just going to make one up out of my head that doesn't belong to this music
at all, and I'm not going to tell you the real
name of this piece, and you see if the story and the music
don't go together just as well as if it were the real story.
Okay, here goes:
In the middle of a big city, there stands an enormous jail, full of
prisoners. It's midnight, and all the prisoners are
asleep, except for one who can't sleep because
he was put in jail unjustly, and he spends the whole night practicing
on his kazoo, while all the other prisoners are
sleeping and snoring all around. You all know what a kazoo is?
Now this kazoo playing prisoner
has a friend who's going to come and rescue him tonight, and this friend's
name is Superman.
So Superman comes charging down through the alley on his motorcycle:
Then he whistles his secret whistle so that his friend the prisoner will know he's coming:
Now as he gets near the prison, he hears all the prisoners snoring away
peacefully in the dead silence of the night:
And over this snoring he hears his friend playing on his kazoo
which gets louder and louder as he gets nearer:
Suddenly he charges into the prison yard and bops the guard over the head:
The kazoo stops playing and with all the snoring still going on he grabs his
friend and whisks him away on his motorcycle:
Then the snoring gets farther and farther away until we don't hear it at all anymore:
And our hero arrives at last to freedom:
That's the story. now let's hear how this music sounds all
put together and remember to keep this story in your mind.
Here goes.
Here comes Superman!
There's the whistle!
There goes the snoring.
There's the kazoo.
and now here comes Superman!
The snoring gets softer,
They're free!
Now all that makes good sense, doesn't it?
Makes perfectly good sense. But that's not the real story at all.
What this piece really is is part of a much longer piece by Richard Strauss
called Don Quixote.
And in it, Strauss was trying to tell a whole a story which goes something like this:
Don Quixote is the name of a silly old man back in the days of knights and
armor and horseback, a foolish old man who read too many
books about knighthood and chivalry and conquering armies for his beautiful lady
and all that sort of nonsense, and who finally decided he was a marvelous
knight himself. So off he goes on his skinny bony old
horse to conquer the world:
And he has with him a companion named Sancho Panza, a little fat jolly fellow
who is very faithful to his master but who is also sensible enough to know that
his master is a little cuckoo. So we hear him laughing at old Don Quixote:
Suddenly Don Quixote spies a flock of sheep
in the middle of a field going "Baaaa"
That's all that stuff you heard before which we thought was snoring.
And with them is a shepherd keeping the sheep and playing on his pipe the way
all shepherds do:
Not a kazoo, but a shepherd's pipe. And Don Quixote in his mixed up mind
thinks that the sheep are an army specially put there for him to conquer,
so in he charges with his sword flashing:
And the sheep run off in all directions baaing wildly:
And he's convinced he has done a truly knightly deed, and is he proud:
Now let's listen to it all over again with the real story in mind and see how
it sounds:
Sheep, you understand.
Now was that music any different from what we played before?
Was it? Is it more exciting or more fun or
better music? No. Does it have any different musical
meaning? No. It's exactly the same.
Only the story is different, and in fact there are a hundred other stories I
could have made up out of my head for the same piece of music.
But the music would still have been just as good or just as bad as it is without
any story at all. Now do you see what I mean?
Well if you don't, then I'm going to have to try again.
I'll take another little bit of this Don Quixote piece of Strauss. Later in that
same piece there's another part about another adventure the old fellow has
when he and his friend Sancho Panza take a wild ride through the air on a
wooden horse. It goes like this:
Now in this part there's even a wind machine in the percussion section to
give you the effect of wind whistling by as they whoosh up and down through the
clouds:
Now, why couldn't this music be describing
the flight of a jet plane? Or a satellite whistling around in its
orbit? Or maybe some old giant snoring like the
prisoners in the jail?
Could be. Well now, let's make believe it is about
some old giant snoring and see how the music fits:
Now isn't that exciting music? No matter what it's about it's still
exciting because the music is exciting and for no
other reason. Now that's enough talk about music that
tells stories. Let's take a big step now toward finding
out the answer to our first question "What Does music Mean?"
by listening to some music that doesn't try to tell a story, but only tries to
paint a picture in a general sort of way, or to describe an atmosphere; the look of
something; the feel of something. like a night in the
woods or an old haunted house or a sunrise.
Now we're getting closer to real musical meaning,
because we don't have a story to worry about while we're listening.
You see all we have to think about is the general idea
and that's easier so we can concentrate more on the music
and enjoy it more. Now for instance take Beethoven's Sixth
Symphony. Here's a wonderful piece full of
charming tunes and marvelous rhythms. Driving, peaceful, happy,
all kinds of things. But in Beethoven's mind,
this symphony was somehow tied up with the idea of the countryside;
farmers, brooks, shepherds, birds, and so we called it the Pastoral Symphony (as you
know Pastoral means anything to do with the country)
Now at the beginning of the first movement he wrote the words "Awakening of
cheerful feelings on arriving in the country",
and the music goes like this:
Sounds happy, cheerful, and pretty all right.
But these feelings after all could be happy for any other reason, too.
Supposing Beethoven had written the words "Happy feelings because my uncle
left me a million dollars" or
"Happy feelings because my bellyache went away".
He could still have written this happy music and it would have been just as
good and just as happy. Well now let's try something.
Let's change the title of this piece and call it
"Happy feelings because my bellyache went away", let's say
and let's listen to it with that in mind and see if it sounds any different.
It's still the same happy music whether it's about your bellyache or a trip to
the country. Now the second movement
Beethoven calls "By the brook" And in this movement he is trying to
describe or imitate or suggest the motion of water in the brook:
But supposing we call this "Asleep in a hammock"
And that this motion we're describing gently rocking back and forth in a
hammock instead of the water. Let's see how the music would sound then.
See it doesn't change a thing does it whether it's about water or swinging in
a Hammock it's the same lovely music. Now one of the best pieces that paint
pictures is by a Russian composer called
Mussorgsky and he wrote a piece named Pictures at
an Exhibition what Mussorgsky did
was to take a lot of pictures hanging on a wall in a museum
and write music that he thought could
describe them in other words to try and do with notes what a painter does with
paint. Now of course all of us know that notes
can't do what paint can do you can't draw your nose with F-sharps and you
can't draw a building or paint a sunset with notes.
But you can sort of try to do it.
Anyway, here's one of those pictures he tried to do it with. It shows children
playing in a park and what Mussorgsky did to make it sound like children
playing was to imitate the way children talk when they play games almost like
singing. You know when you go in a game "Olly Olly In Free!"
There's a kind of tune you're singing. Or when kids are taunting each
other, making fun of each other when they play, and they go "Nya! Nya! Nya! Nya!"
Well, Mussorgsky took this and watch how he uses it:
Nya, nya, nya, nya. You see how he uses this, almost to paint children with notes.
Then there's another picture Mussorgsky painted
with notes of many little chickens not yet out of
their eggshells, who do a dance. Now listen to how he describes chickens in
notes the way he imitates their pecking and squawking
And then the final picture - the last one of the series, where he
paints a big gate in the Russian city of Kiev, a tremendous stone structure and
you can see what Mussorgsky had in his mind when you hear these great big
strong chords like pillars holding up those tons of stone. Listen:
Now that made you think of a big gate, didn't it?
Okay. But only because I told you beforehand
to think of a big gate. if I had told you beforehand to think
about the Mississippi River flowing majestically down the middle of America,
you would have had that in your mind. when you heard these big chords. So again
there's the old answer: the picture that goes with music goes with it only
because the composer says so. But it's not really a part of the music.
It's extra. Now we're going to take another giant
step toward finding out our answer to what music means.
And this is a really big step. We're getting closer now to the answer,
because now we're going to forget all about those pieces that try to tell
stories or paint pictures - we've had enough of that -
and we're going to listen to music that describes
emotions. Feelings.
Like, pain,
happiness, loneliness, anger,
love. I guess most music is like that,
and the better it is the more it will make you feel those emotions that the
composer felt when he was writing it. Tchaikovsky was a composer who always
tried to do this who always tried to have his music mean something
easily recognized as emotional. Take this part of his Fourth Symphony
for instance:
I guess the best way to describe that would be by saying that
it has the feeling of wanting something very badly that you can't have.
Did you ever feel that you wanted something more than
anything else in the world and you said so and they said "No, you can't have it"
and you said again "I want it!" and again they said "No" and again you said louder
and more excited "I want it!" and again louder "I want it!"
until it seemed that something would break in your head and there's nothing
left to do but cry? Well that's like this music.
Listen:
I want it!
And finally something breaks in your head
and you cry. now listen to the orchestra play it and
see if you don't feel something like those emotions.
Pretty emotional stuff, Isn't it? Well now, sometimes
Tchaikovsky uses the same tune to describe two different emotions
for instance at the beginning of his Fifth Symphony,
he writes this tune which sounds sad and gloomy and depressed:
Pretty depressing. But at the end of the symphony, in the
last movement, he changes a few notes (what musicians
call changing from minor to major -  some of you will know what that means)
and it all comes out joyful and triumphant
like someone who has just made a touchdown and is the hero of the
football game:
Didn't you feel triumphant?
Didn't that make you feel like the winner at least of a football game -
maybe of a presidential election? Now we can really understand what the
meaning of music is. It's the way it makes you feel when you
hear it. Finally we've taken that last giant step
and we're there. We know what music means now, and we don't have to know a lot of
stuff about sharps and flats and chords and all that business
in order to understand music. If it tells us something -
not a story or a picture - but a feeling,
if it makes us change inside and have all those different good feelings that
music can make you have, then you're understanding it.
And that's all there is to it, because those feelings aren't like the
stories of the pictures we talked about before. They're not extra, they're not
outside the music, they belong to the music.
They're what music is about. And the most wonderful thing of all is
that there's no limit to the different kinds of feelings music can make you
have. And some of those feelings are so
special and so deep that they can't even be
described in words. You see we can't always name the things
we feel. Sometimes we can. We could say we feel joy,
pleasure, peacefulness, whatever, love, hate. But
every once in a while, we have feelings that are so deep and so
special that we have no words for them, and that's where music is so marvelous.
Because music names them for us, only in notes instead of in words.
It's all in the way music moves. You must never forget that music is movement,
always going somewhere, shifting and changing and flowing
from one note to another. And that movement can tell us more about the way
we feel than a million words can. Now we're going to play you a tiny,
little piece by a modern composer named Webern,
who writes music that's so special in its sound and in its meaning that a lot
of people don't understand it at all and just call it crazy modern music.
But I know that very often young people can understand this kind of music better
than older people so I'd like to take a chance and play it for you, crazy as it
is, and see what you think of it:
That's pretty special stuff, isn't it? You see if you even sneeze or cough you're,
liable to miss it. It's so delicate and so deep inside that you mustn't even
breathe while it's going on. What did you think of it? Did you think it
was ugly? Was it funny?
Think it was pretty? Did it make you have feelings?
Well that's wonderful, because you see that's just the wonder of music, that it
can make different people have different kinds of
feelings. for instance if I play a note on the
piano, just one note: and I hold it a long time that has no
meaning at all, has it.? But
let's say I play the note and then I move to another note.
Right away there's a meaning, a meaning we can't name, a sort of
stretch or pulling or pushing, something like that. But it's there and the meaning
is in the way those two notes move and it makes something happen inside of you.
If I move from that first note to another note like this:
The meaning changes, something else happens inside of you, the stretch is
bigger somehow, and stronger. Now this note for instance means one thing with
this chord under it:
and it makes you feel a certain way. and it means something completely different
with this chord under it: and it makes you feel another way.
Then with this chord under it it means something else:
or with this chord: and with each way
each different chord makes you feel a different way.
Now what about these notes? Do you know what these notes are?
What's that? Right! Okay,
well, now they mean something exciting and spooky is going to happen like
Dragnet. but if I take the same notes and just
play them in a different way they'll mean something else:
Silly! It's just light and silly, and they're the same notes!
So you see, the meaning of music is in music.
It's in the melodies and the rhythms and the harmonies and the way it's
orchestrated and
most important of all in the way it develops itself. But that's a whole other
program - we'll talk about that some other time. Right now,
all you have to know is that music has its own meanings right there for you to
find inside the music itself and you don't need any stories or any pictures
to tell you what it is. If you like music at all,
you'll find out the meanings for yourselves just by listening to it.
So now I want you to listen to a short piece without any explanation from
anybody. I'm not going to tell you anything about it except
the name of it and who wrote it and you just all sit back
and relax and enjoy it and listen to the notes and
feel them move around jumping and hopping and bumping and
flashing and sliding and whatever they do and just enjoy that without a whole
lot of fuss about stories and pictures and all that business.
Now the piece we're going to play for you is by Ravel and it's called La Valse.
I think you'll like it because it's fun to listen to,
and not for any other reason. Not because it's
about anything. It's just good, exciting, music.