Hey, thanks so much for watching. We
have so many more programs, so don't
forget to subscribe.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Hey everyone,
thanks for joining us for one of these
live Q&amp;A. We used to do these
frequently. Those of you who are
regulars to this channel know that we
haven't done this in a while. I don't
even know if we've done it since the
pandemic. Could that actually be? But in
any event, I'm happy to spend a little
time with you answering your questions.
Before we jump right in to some of the
things that you've already asked and are
asking in real time, I should mention we
got folks who are monitoring
YouTube, Instagram, X. So, wherever your
favorite place to post a question might
be, we've got folks who should be able
to pass it on to me. I'll get to as many
as I can, uh, for sure. But I just want
to start with a little bit of science
news that our team here has pulled
together. Exciting developments over the
last few weeks. Some of you may have
been following. There's a wonderful new
supernova that has been observed. In
fact, a friend of mine, good friend of
mine, Alex Filipenko, some of you may
know him as a wonderful scientist, also
a remarkable lecturer at Berkeley. I had
the pleasure of spending some time with
him this summer. his team collaborated
with some others to observe supernova
2021 YFJ if that's the correct
pronunciation of the terms and the thing
that was special about the supernova is
we all have learned you know in in
astrophysics classes that when you have
a a massive star you've got the more
complex atoms closer to the center and
you've got the ever more simple and
lighter atoms out towards the outer
shell. And usually a supernova just
blows the outer shell off. But the
unusual thing here is that somehow the
supernova before it exploded shetted
those outer layers,
revealing, if you will, the inards of
the supernova itself, a kind of direct
confirmation of this onion like
structure of every ever heavier atoms as
you head toward the center. silicon,
sulfur, argon were directly available in
a way that normally are shrouded in
these systems. That's a exciting
development. What else have we got here?
James Webb telescope.
Apparently, it has just found a brand
new moon orbiting Uranus, which is kind
of cool. It's a little moon. It's only
six miles across, so it's, you know,
pretty tiny, but it's fun to learn of a
new inhabitant or an old inhabitant that
we only just became aware of in our
solar system. Uh, final thing, I'll note
that LIGO has recently detected the
largest black hole merger ever recorded.
Right? You may recall, I hope you do,
that back in 2015,
LIGO for the very first time confirmed
Einstein's predictions of gravitational
waves. And the way it did it, I remind
you, is there were two black holes. I
don't remember their exact masses, but
something like 26 and 31 times the mass
of the sun. Don't quote me on that, but
close to that. They orbited each other
rapidly near the speed of light. This
happened a long time ago as these were
about a billion lighty years away. They
slammed into each other and
created a tidal wave in the fabric of
space that ultimately by the time it got
to planet earth we were able to detect.
But the remnant of that collision
between black holes is itself a black
hole. And over the years more and more
of these events have been detected. In
fact that's a footnote I should mention.
And a number of people always ask me,
hey, we heard a lot about LIGO back in
2015.
What's it done since? Has it detected
more of these collisions, neutron star
collisions, black hole collision? The
answer is yes. I don't know the exact
number now, but it's in the hundreds. It
could be even a few hundred by now of
these collisions between black holes and
leaving in their wake one large black
hole from the merger. I think the record
record to date was on the order of 140
times the mass of the sun was the
remnant. This one again don't quote me
I'm going by memory. I believe the
remnant is 225 times the mass of the
sun. So that's kind of cool. The largest
black hole merger that LIGO and I should
also say LIGO is in collaboration with
the other gravitational wave
observatories in Italy and also in
Japan. So, it's a global effort to
detect these gravitational waves. All
right, with that, let me jump in to um
some of your questions. I'm going to go
Oh, there's a
one at the top to do with black holes.
Is it true that the larger the black
holes mass, the weaker the gravitational
force is at the event horizon? It's
actually a two-part question. The answer
to that is absolutely yes. sort of, you
know, if you want the black hole to be
big, you need more mass. You might think
that would yield a stronger
gravitational force. But at the same
time, the size of the black hole is
proportional to the mass as well. When
you take the competing effects of having
a larger size and a larger mass, you do
find that the curvature at the event
horizon of a black hole is smaller as
that black hole is bigger. So yes indeed
that is correct. But the second part of
this question is if that's the case
could it possibly could it be possible
to cross the event horizon successfully
without getting spaghettified? Right?
Spaghettified the technical term that we
use when you're headed toward the edge
of a black hole. Say you're going feet
first. I'm sure most of you are familiar
with this. The gravitational pull on
your feet will be stronger than on your
head. And so you will be under tension
from being in the vicinity of a black
hole which sounds you know pretty
uncomfortable and certainly as you get
toward the center of a black hole it
will become very uncomfortable become
deadly. But the question is if you have
a big black hole and the gravitational
force at the event horizon is relatively
small could you cross it without feeling
that spaghettification? The answer is
absolutely yes. Absolutely yes. In
principle, right now, a moment ago, we
all could have just passed through the
event horizon of a black hole. If it was
big enough, we would not notice it. We'd
only notice it as we get closer and
closer to the singularity, the center of
the black hole, as then the
gravitational effects will become
manifest. But the questioner rightly
conjectures that we could cross the edge
of a black hole without being
spaghettified. Question number two, if
there were an
anti-aging pill, would you take it in
order to live longer, discover new
science, and keep contributing to
research?
Well,
yeah. Right. Maybe just leave it at
that. Yes. But maybe fill it out a
little bit. you know, um, look, you
know, there's nothing more precious to
us as human beings than time. That's
the, uh, finite quantity that we're
given. We never know how much we've got
left. And so, yeah, I'm not getting
choked up, but I just got excited at
that question.
And so, yeah, you know, um, I think, um,
most of us would take up that
opportunity to stick around here a
little longer. I'm not so sure I would
list at least in the order given that
those would be my priority to like do
science and research, you know. Yeah,
all that's cool, but you know, if I had
this anti-aging pill, I would try to
share it with those in my vicinity
because as social beings, I think what
matters to us most is community and
relationship. So that would I think be
the the dominant motivation to do that.
What impact could AI have in research on
physics? This is a a good one. And look,
I don't know, nobody really does know
what the impact of AI on physics
research can be. There are gatherings
around the world where physicists are
discussing these questions and
opportunities
right now and people have already jumped
in and are using AI in various guises,
you know, to analyze astrophysical
images and to try to find patterns in
various particle physics data and so
forth. But to my mind, the real
opportunity here is that as these
systems improve,
number one, they can do the calculations
that are challenging and timeconuming
for us much more quickly and much more
accurately, but at the same time, they
can also potentially find patterns that
we've missed or have not had the
creative juices to recognize or mind.
You know, I just had a wonderful AI
conversation just an hour ago and with
Yan Lun, you know, one of the leaders in
AI and we happened to be talking about
that move 37
in Alph Go's, you know, defeat of the
world champion in that famous battle
between human and machine where, you
know, AI was able to find something that
humans would otherwise have never
considered. that this move that seemed
ridiculous based upon human experience
was actually the right thing to do and
no human would have chosen it because
we're biased by our experience which is
such a limited representation of what
happens in the world. So, you know,
could we get to a place where AI would
find those things in fundamental
physics? I suspect so. Let me just give
you one example. I've been involved in a
research project, I don't know, for the
last year with uh some wonderful
collaborators who put up with the
slowness of my research output as I do a
variety of other things these days. But
it's a fun project where we've been
looking at string theory and extra
dimensions, which perhaps you know is
the field that I've spent decades
working on. We've been looking at some
rather esoteric qualities of these forms
of the extra dimensions. And I began to
wonder could could AI have found what we
found. We haven't published the paper
yet, but we will shortly. It's kind of a
fun result. And I just wanted to see
whether chat GPT with a little bit of
proddding might be able to find this
result. And the answer is pretty much
yes. I kind of had to treat Chad as if
it was a good graduate student, but a
really good graduate student and and
lead it to think about doing certain
calculations, which it did really well.
And to learn certain mathematics, which
of course it doesn't really learn. It
just has it in its database because it
has scoured the internet and books and
things of that sort. And so chat would
have gotten like an a A+ and it was
basically able to reproduce the work
that we've done in 15 minutes, you know,
with the right proddding. So yes, long
answer to a short question. I I do think
that AI could have some powerful
implications for research in physics.
Next question. Why is it so difficult
for general relativity and quantum
mechanics to work together? And are
black holes the ultimate testing ground
for this? Well, yeah. I I mean, it's a
famous issue, the tension between
general relativity and quantum
mechanics. And it's interesting the way
I used to answer this question, and by
used to I only mean, you know, roughly
10 years ago. The way I answered it, for
instance, if you're familiar with my
first book, The Elegant Universe, or you
know, things of that sort, I used to
always say, and not that it's wrong, but
I'll tell you a reframing in a moment. I
used to always say, look, general
relativity talks about space being nice
and gently curving. That's Einstein's
insight. Quantum mechanics from
Heisenberg and the uncertainty principle
talks about space being uncertain, kind
of having a a jittery quality.
And it's sort of the jitteryness
of quantum mechanics versus the
gentleness of general relativity which
when you translate that into mathematics
makes the equations of the two very
difficult to blend together. And that's
true. There's nothing wrong with that
description. But more recently, we've
recognized there's another way of
framing it that might be more
insightful,
which is the following surprising fact.
We have gained more and more evidence
that
general relativity and quantum mechanics
may already be blended together from the
get-go. It's as if within general
relativity you can find answers to
questions that seemingly would require
quantum mechanics.
And so it's not as though general
relativity is on the left and quantum
mechanics is on the right, sort of the
big on the left and the small on the
right. It's more that this structure of
general relativity and quantum
mechanics, they're already sort of
blended from the get-go and it's up to
us to try to understand the details of
that blending and how it actually works.
So, in the old days, perhaps we would
have framed it as we need to squeeze
general relativity and quantum mechanics
together and we're having trouble
squeezing them, blending them together.
Now, we might say they're probably
deeply interwoven from the get-go, and
it's up to us to understand the details
of that marriage that nature already
presents to us. So, that's the nuance
that I would give from a more modern
perspective on that particular question.
All right. As I study higher levels of
physics, this is Sawa D from Thailand. I
realize that matrices show up
everywhere. Do matrices merely serve as
mathematical tools or do they reflect
something fundamental about the physical
world itself?
Um,
look, matrices are a powerful tool. You
may know and maybe this is what you're
referring to that when Heisenberg back
in 1925 wrote down the very first
mathematical formulation of the
dynamical equation of quantum mechanics.
It was in terms of matrices. It was
called matrix mechanics. The matrices
had basically the results of all
possible measurements that could be
taken on a physical system. And there
are many other examples too. And no
doubt that's part of what motivated your
question. I don't I I don't consider
matrices to really be some fundamental
aspect of reality. They're an
interesting mathematical tool that in
certain applications is quite powerful.
And my guess is that that's the best way
of thinking about it. If you go on and
you study general relativity, you will
find generalized
matrices. matrices that don't just have
two indices like a row and a column, but
rather matrices that have three or four
indices on them. And so these structures
begin to
put pressure on our brains to think
about them as sort of a big table of
numbers. You could talk about a 3D table
or a 4D table. After a while, it's just
a useful encapsulation
of data. In general relativity, the data
is how space is curved. And the indices
on for instance the reman curvature
tensor talk about how space is curved in
this direction when you move in that
direction and some particular component
of that curvature that you can
detect by moving around various loi in
your geometrical space. My feeling is
it's better to understand the underlying
structure,
what the matrices are trying to tell you
rather than getting distracted by the
particular mathematical tool of matrices
themselves.
Do you think advanced civilizations will
ever visit us? Well, look, nobody knows
the answer to a question like that. And
of course, some think we've already been
visited, but I would throw out a couple
quick things. Number one,
the evidence that some people put
forward that we've been visited, you
know, probably not anybody in this
audience, but you know, these what are
they called now? UAPs, I don't know,
used to be UFOs.
Look, if a alien civilization
could cross the galaxy, if they had that
kind of technology and reach us, I'm
pretty sure they could evade our feeble
little video cameras. I don't think
they're going to have to quickly turn on
their engines because they see a camera
pointed at them. I mean, it's kind of
ludicrous.
More than that, would they be interested
to visit us? We're primitive on the
scale of being able to undertake
interstellar travel in any reasonable
period of time, right? And so any
civilization that could visit us
presumably is able to undertake
interstellar travel fairly easily. That
means they're pretty far ahead of us.
Would they maybe as an anthropological
research project for some alien PhD
student? They say, "Yeah, okay. Go visit
Earth." Yeah, you sort of want to see,
you know, the bacteria of the universe
in an early stage. Yeah, go to Earth.
There there's a few of those. What do
they call human human bacteria floating
around there? But yeah. Um, so is it
possible? Sure. Has it happened?
Absolutely not. Um,
all right. Do you think physics will
ever have a complete theory that
explains everything? And will there
always be unanswered questions? Well,
you know, the answer to that question is
largely dependent on what you mean by
everything.
When we have used the phrase theory of
everything as string theorists, which I
don't favor that language at all, it's
kind of antagonistic to people in
science working on another field. If
you're working on the theory of
everything
and they're not, what are they working
on? Theories of nothing. And I don't
mean nothing in the profound sense of
what do we mean by nothing. I just mean
something that nobody cares about. So
that's why I don't like the language.
But when we have used that language, it
was really a very limited version of
everything referring to the fundamental
particulate ingredients or quantum
mechanical angel whatever you want to
describe them and the fundamental forces
by which those ingredients influence
each other. So it's a very reductionist
stance. The thought being that if you
know the ingredients and you know their
behavior, then at least in in an
inprinciple sense you understand
everything because everything is made of
those ingredients acting on each other
through those forces. But the
imprinciple needs to be underscored.
Nobody ever imagined that a theory like
string theory or whatever your favorite
unified theory theory of everything
might be would you know be able to
predict our behavior tell us what we're
going to have for lunch tomorrow or be
able to understand the nature of
consciousness or the nature of life. I
mean perhaps a way of saying it is this
one way to organize your thinking and
this is a good exercise but one way to
organize your thinking about the
universe is to say look there are big
things stars galaxies black holes and so
forth there are small things molecules
atoms and subatomic particles but there
are also complex things where you're not
talking about a single black hole or a
single electron the way we do in a
course on astrophysics or a basic course
on quantum mechanics. You're talking
about a huge number of say particles
that are swarming around together in
some hot bath, a liquid like in a human
body. And that's a completely different
arena from the big and the small. The
complex is different. Now it doesn't
mean that there are fundamentally new
laws. But the language that's useful for
talking about the complex is generally
not the same language as the big and the
small. You need to talk at the level of
aggregates, right? You don't want to
talk about individual electrons when
you're talking about a human cell. You
want to talk about the chemical nature,
the biological nature. And that takes
you to very large molecules and to
cellular systems. and then collections
of cells and then collections of cells
that yield some multi-ellular living
system. And even beyond that, when you
get to complex life, who's ever going to
use an electron to talk about the mind?
It's just in congress. It's not the
relevant language for deep insight.
There are certain
ideas that you can extract by blending
these things together. And if anybody
asks about it, free will. I think is one
of those but more generally
theory of everything would be very
limited in its applicability.
All right. Can you briefly explain the
Hubble tension?
Sure. So the Hubble tension refers to
measurements and sorry I keep
clearing my throat. I'm not sure why
I've got so much fle today. That's a
question perhaps maybe somebody in the
audience can answer.
The Hubble tension refers to
measurements of what's called the Hubble
constant or it really should be called
the Hubble parameter. And that's a
measure of the rate of expansion of
space. Roughly speaking, how fast space
is expanding. And there are various
techniques for doing this. One technique
is to look way back in the early
universe at say the cosmic microwave
background radiation which really was
set in place a mere few hundred thousand
years after the big bang.
use observations of the microwave
background radiation to predict how
space was expanding back then and then
interpolate from way back then until
today using our understanding of
cosmology and general relativity and the
dynamical evolution equations of the
universe to get a number for how fast
space should be expanding today. That's
methodology number one, early universe
methodology. Methodology number two is
to just look nearby in the universe. Not
way back toward the beginning but nearby
and you can look at objects and based on
their properties you can more directly
measure the expansion rate of space.
Now, in the best of all worlds, the
expansion rate that you got from
measuring the early universe and
extrapolating till today should be
pretty close to the expansion rate of
space that you directly measure today.
But they're not matching, at least not
yet. There's roughly, you know, five 7%
difference between the two approaches.
And at the level of precision, which is
remarkable in its own right, the level
precision that we can bring to bear on
these measurements, the discrepancy
doesn't seem to be explainable by just
saying, well, the measurements aren't
completely accurate. There's always some
source of error. No, the errors are too
small. The sources of error are too
minute to explain the mismatch. And
that's the tension. Which if either of
these is correct and if one is wrong why
is it wrong and that's what people are
trying to figure out now.
Question do you think spacetime is more
likely to be emergent or fundamental? My
guess is that it's emergent.
My guess is that what we call the fabric
of spacetime
is made up of finer entities and we have
started to gain indirect evidence for
what that might look like. It's by no
means a done deal but there's evidence
for instance that space itself may be
stitched together by the threads of
quantum entanglement.
And what that means is in principle if
you could cut cut the threads of quantum
entanglement, you wouldn't do it
necessarily with a quantum scissor, but
we do know how to break the entangled
relationship between entities. If you
were able to do that, it appears that
space would kind of fall apart. it would
fall apart, kind of pixelate, sort of
like, you know, that terrible moment
when you're looking at your computer
screen and it's just about to die and it
just sort of pixelates and goes away.
That may be what would happen to the
fabric of space if the bonds of quantum
entanglement were somehow cut. And and
that suggests to us and again this is
all mathematics so don't get me wrong no
one's observed any of this but very
confident in the calculations suggesting
that space itself may be held together
and if space can fall apart into
something else that something else would
be more fundamental than space itself
and in that sense space as we know it
would be emergent. It would emerge
perhaps only in certain special setting,
certain special environments,
which means that the very language with
which we describe reality, which is
currently very space-time centric,
right? We talk about things in space, we
talk about the expansion of space, we
talk about the passage of time. Those
notions might be highlevel notions and
underneath them might be more
fundamental ideas, fundamental
ingredients and that would be where the
deepest description of reality would be
focused. So that's my guess. Um,
Professor Green, do you think our
inability to decipher the fundamental
properties of dark matter is due to the
distinctive properties of its particles
or unknown types of interactions or is a
result of our current methods and
theoretical assumptions being too
narrow? Ah, good question. And just to
distill it, like we've been searching
for dark matter
gosh, how many years now? It's uh you
know you can you can go all the way back
to the 1930s. Fritz Zwicki
was an astrophysicist who put forward
the possibility that there was more out
there than we can directly see through
observations of the motion of heavenly
bodies. He recognized that their motion
could not be explained on the basis of
the other matter that was visible. So he
suggested maybe there's some matter
that's not visible. Maybe there's dark
matter. Then it was Ver Rubin and uh
Kent Ford whose observations of rotation
curves of galaxies came to the same
conclusion. The galaxies should be kind
of flinging their stars outward because
they're spinning at a rate that their
luminous matter would be unable to hold
those stars at the outer edge within the
confines of the galaxy itself. So there
had to be more stuff that we don't see
that's supplying the missing gravity
that holds everything together. Now look
this is an idea uh what year was Ver
Rubin doing that? Gosh, you know 60s7s I
guess. Certainly by the time I was a
graduate student. I started graduate
school in 1984
at Oxford where my son is starting in
the fall which is fun. But I started
graduate school in in 1984. The very
first paper I wrote was a analysis of a
potential dark matter candidate. It was
sort of a straightforward research
project for a beginning student. No one
knows what the dark matter is. So make a
guess, hypothesize a new kind of
particle with new kinds of interactions
to speak to the questioner's question
and work out whether cosmologically
enough of that stuff would still be
around to supply the missing gravity
that the astronomical observations
required. And so studies of that from
the theoretical standpoint, from the
experimental standpoint have been
undertaken now for decades. But we don't
have any direct detection as yet of dark
matter. So what are the options? Option
number one, we just got to keep on going
and we'll find it. And there are dark
matter searches that are happening right
now. Even with more exotic candidates,
things called axons is one possibility
that people are somewhat excited about
as a real potential solution to the dark
matter problem. But there are other
people who say look maybe our
understanding of gravity is what is
misleading us. Maybe if we modify the
gravitational force
it would without dark matter be able to
hold stars and spinning galaxies and
galaxies and spinning clusters. And so
which of those two is the right way to
go? I don't know. But I will say the
evidence for the more traditional kind
of dark matter, some stuff that we don't
see is really strong. You should look up
the bullet cluster. I don't have access
to any images right here, but the bullet
clusters is a wonderful example of two
colliding galaxies. And you can see how
the dark matter separates from the
luminous matter by virtue of the way
light beams are bent by the presence of
the dark matter. And it's really hard to
imagine explaining that in a way that
wouldn't ultimately make use of some
dark stuff that's exerting a
gravitational pole. So that's my guess.
We just got to keep going and we will
finally find it. What do you think
physics will achieve in the next 100
years? What do you think will be the
next big breakthrough? Saba from
YouTube. Oh, well, I love questions like
this, but the truth is if I if I knew
the answer, I'd be like heading in that
direction right now. So, of course,
nobody does. But what are the most
exciting areas? I think gravitational
wave physics is enormously exciting.
There is a real chance that we will
detect gravitational waves not of
colliding black holes which is how I
began today's discussion recounting this
225 solar mass remnant from the
collision of two black holes that LIGO
and collaborators have recently
detected. Rather, the big bang itself so
jostled the fabric of space that those
ripples
should in principle be detectable either
directly or through their impact even on
the microwave background radiation. And
when we achieve that, and I think that
we will, that will be a wonderful moment
because we'll be looking or really
listening, but looking right back to the
big bang itself. Why is that light?
Regardless of the
wavelength or frequency, it can't
penetrate the plasma that was generated
just
before recombination. When electrons and
nuclei came back together and released
light, this is the microwave background
radiation. Before that, the electrons
and protons, they were separate from
each other and charged particles scatter
light. So any light from the earlier
time, it was just bouncing around in the
cosmos. It wasn't able to travel
outward. So you can't literally see.
Even if you have a most powerful
telescope imaginable, you can't see back
to the Big Bang. Gravitational waves are
able to penetrate the fog. They can
penetrate the fog that comes from
electromagnetic radiation being
scattered by the charged particles in
the early universe. And so that's a
wonderful possibility that the ripples
really from the beginning will just pass
right through the fog and keep on going
and we may one day be able to detect
them. So I think that's one big one. The
other big one I think reflects back to
AI.
That to me is the big wild card. You
know who will be doing physics a hundred
years from now?
Will it be human beings? Will it be AI?
Will it be human beings using AI? That
latter option of course seems to be the
happiest. And as of today, it would seem
to be the most likely.
But given that the
development of AI may yield
exponentially
better systems not in a hundred years
but maybe a much shorter number of years
maybe our role
becomes increasingly diminished you know
the example or analogy
and I don't think it's a bad one you
know how many of us still get custom
handmade furniture. Some do, but many of
us just get, you know, factory
machinemade furniture. How many of us
get, you know, custommade clothing?
Maybe the wealthy 1% or tenth of 1%,
maybe they do that, but the rest of us,
we're relatively satisfied with
machinemade clothing. Right? Good
enough.
You know, if we focus on
custommade things, it's more for the
novelty. Maybe in the future, a
physicist actually doing the work
directly will be the novelty and we'll
be satisfied for the AI to continue its
explorations
and report back to us what it's finding.
Now look, ultimately if we're still
around and if we're still in control, it
will certainly be gratifying that a
machine of our own making is pressing
forward with the kinds of questions that
we have been asking since our species
emerged.
Absolutely fantastic.
But will it be the same kind of dynamic
with human beings pushing the boundaries
of understanding? I I don't know. Part
of me suspects that they that may not be
the case.
Is there any chance we find out what
dark matter actually is in our lifetime?
Well, I won't go through the whole
rigomeroll again. Yeah, absolutely. I
mean, there are detectors now capable of
detecting for instance this particle
called an axion that I mentioned in
various windows and parameter space and
sure they could be successful that that
might be where this all ends up. Similar
question. Do you think string theory
will be proven experimentally someday?
And how much time do you currently spend
on string theory research? So two
questions. Part one, will it be
experimentally proven someday? If it's
right, I suspect the answer is it will
be experimentally proven, right? I mean,
that's
how we know the ideas that we're putting
forth are actually
making progress, right? It's the
ultimate barometer, right?
Unfortunately, to date, I think as many
in this audience know, string theory has
had
enormous success on the theoretical
front. The mathematical developments
going way back to the 80s have been
remarkable. the insights that we have
been able to uncover on the nature of
black holes, the nature of space, the
nature of particles, and the strange
dualities that string theory has given
rise to. Feel free to ask about those if
you want. I won't go into them now.
They're just enormously exciting,
enormously gratifying. But there is zero
direct experimental evidence for string
theory. And the weird thing is
sometimes, and I don't know how many
times I've said this, sometimes people
think I try to hide that or some people
say string theories failed, which is
such a strange idea. I'm not going to
belabor the point here as I've discussed
it elsewhere, but a theory fails when
it's disproven either because there's a
mathematical inconsistency
or because it makes a prediction that
disagrees with observation. Now, I wish
we could bear bring to bear on string
theory that latter criterion. As I
mentioned, we can't. But in the former
criterion, the deep way that the
mathematics of string theory locks
together with coherence and and elegance
and beauty and it all works as a
mathematical structure is breathtaking.
So it's just so irresponsible when
people say these things like string
theory has failed. You know, I think we
live in a culture where like we have
this competitive mindset. Maybe it goes
back to hunter gatherer days when you
had to make sure you got enough food and
maybe you had to make sure that your
neighbor didn't. Although I think the
anthropologists have archaeologists
evidence that hunter gatherers were
pretty copacetic groups of individuals.
But anyway, let's not go down that
particular trajectory. I think there's
an inherent competitive nature that
drives people to basically say for me to
succeed I've got to cut down somebody
else.
A, it's not true. And B, it's
irresponsible when people are out there
saying things of that sort. So, I'm
happy to go further on that if you'd
like, but let me not let me not get too
worked up on that at the moment.
If you had to guess, how bad is what is
going on in the USA for science over the
next decade? Yeah, it's pretty
it's pretty bad. Look, I'm not going to
start getting all political here, but I
think you know where I'm coming from.
And putting aside
everything else,
it's a fact that science has driven this
country to its place of global
prominence. Okay, science has done that
and to undercut the fundamental research
that is the engine of science is
tragically foolhardy. And it's not as
though you can simply say, "Close your
eyes, bear it, and hopefully in, let's
call it three years, something radically
changes." Because we're losing the next
generation brain power. There are so
many young scientists who look at
America now as a place to shun. Go
someplace else in the world where you're
not going to be persecuted. go someplace
else in the world where you're going to
be appreciated, you're going to be
supported, right? America used to be
that, right? I mean, look at what
happened after World War II. What did
America do? Opened its arms, welcomed
the world's scientists, the world's
physicists, and look what this
collection of immigrant scientists was
able to do, right? Einstein, right?
General relativity did it in the early
days but then brought his genius here
because we were the country that didn't
close our fists but opened our arms
and now what are we doing? Closing our
fists and punching. And so yeah, is that
disastrous for science in America in the
future? Absolutely.
Hello Brian. And you often discuss the
block universe view of time. How does
this perspective grounded in Einstein's
theory of relativity change our
intuitive notion of the flow of time?
Actually, I don't talk about the block
universe version of time that often
because
while useful, it's a highly classical
idea at least in the usual formulation.
But I'm happy to say a few words about
it which is you know most of us don't
have a problem imagining
all of space right we only see parts of
space but at least in our mind's eye we
can imagine even if space goes on
infinitely far we can imagine all of
space existing right we usually don't
think about time in those terms we sort
of think about there's one moment like
the now moment
And we view the previous moments as gone
and the future moments as not yet
existing. And the block universe picture
of time encourages us not to be so
parochial in the way we think about
time, but rather to think about time
much as we think about space. So much as
all of space is out there, the idea is
all of time is out there too. It's as if
like I can't do the 3D version, but if
this plane is all of space at one moment
of time, imagine all these nearby
planes, sort of like big slices of
bread, a moment before, a moment before,
and so forth, and then slices of bread
going this direction, a moment in the
future, and a moment after that, and so
forth. So if you put all the slices of
bread together in this giant loaf,
you've got all of space on each slice
and you got all of time as you sweep
across the loaf itself. So that's a loaf
as opposed to the block. You you know,
it's just poetic metaphorical language.
And the beauty of this way of thinking
about things is that in special
relativity, as some of you may have
already encountered, and if you haven't,
I have a whole free course on special
relativity. Just go click on it. It's a
12 hours on the subject or something
like that. In in special relativity, we
learn that if one observer claims this
is all of space at one moment of time,
then another observer moving relative to
this person will slice up the block
universe or the loaf into different
slices of bread. The moving person will
say, "This is one moment of time. This
is another, this is a moment in time,
and so forth." all of their so-called
now slices will be at an angle relative
to the now slices of the initial
individual. So it's a visual way of
understanding how two people in relative
motion do not agree on what happens at
the same moment in time. And if you take
all points of view, all perspectives,
all observers, real and hypothetical
throughout the entire universe, there's
every point in this block will be on
somebody's now slice.
Which suggests that all these moments
really are equally real, which suggests
that this block universe might be more
than just a poetic metaphorical device
for thinking about reality. Maybe it's
real. Now, as I mentioned, you have to
update this using quantum mechanics and
you can do that little complex. So, let
me not go down that direction right
here. But at least that should give you
a feel for what for instance Einstein
said, right? His famous quote where he
said, "The distinction between past,
present, and future, Einstein said, is
only an illusion, however persistent."
is persistent because we beings via
evolution by natural selection find it
useful to think about moments in time
and positions in space. But stepping
outside the organizational framework
that we have developed via its survival
utility,
the bigger picture is perhaps at all
moments in time and all positions in
space are equally real. Okay, how we
doing here? Um, what's next? Um, can we
move through spaceime in ways other than
the linear manner we are experiencing?
And the answer to that's absolutely yes.
Really, I didn't even see this question
was up next, but it's kind of perfectly
positioned
because one other consequence of special
relativity is that two individuals who
are in relative motion, their clocks
will tick off time at different rates.
And so if you change your own motion
relative to somebody else, then the way
they're dynamically evolving through
time will be different from the way you
evolve through time. Your clocks will
take off time at different rates. And in
fact, the beautiful thing is, you know,
if this is observer number one, and
let's say I'm pinching observer number
two, if they're right next to each
other, their clocks are ticking off at
the same rate. But if this observer then
goes off into space and then turns
around and comes back, if they're
traveling fast enough, their clock will
have ticked off a different amount of
elapsed time compared to the elapsed
time measured on the stationary clock.
In fact, if you go out into space and
come back, less time will have elapsed
on your clock. And so when you step out
of the spaceship, this person over here
will be much older than you would have
thought. They will have aged much more
than you did during your round trip
travel. And in fact, if you go fast
enough, when you step out, this person
could have aged a hundred years or a
million years or a billion years. When
you step out, therefore, you are
stepping into the future. A billion
years into the future. And so yeah,
that's very much unlike the traditional
experiential
linear passage through time that we all
are familiar with.
Is Hawking radiation random or could it
encode information in subtle quantum
patterns that we have not yet been able
to decode? And
I'm not sure if this is a leading
question or if whoever asked this
hard for me to imagine that you could
ask that question without knowing the
answer because it's framed with uh too
much aerudition. So in any event, let me
just quickly answer it. Uh we don't
know. But our strong belief is that
Hawking radiation does encode
information. Stephen Hawking initially
thought it was just random particles and
that created a big problem because if
something falls into a black hole, it
carries information about its own
structure. For instance, the
organization of the particles, how they
relate to one another or little
information, right? could throw the
canonical example that physicists often
site is you throw an encyclopedia if you
know what that is any longer. You know,
throw a big encyclopedia into a block.
You've got information in there, right?
And quantum mechanics says information
can't be lost for a very simple reason.
If you lose information, then you don't
have enough left to determine how the
quantum state of the system will evolve.
And so if you lose information, you've
lost your ability to do physics as we
know it. And so physicists were very
reluctant to agree with Stephen Hawking
that any information could be lost
inside of a black hole.
What do you do? Well, the questioner
really has what we believe the answer is
that as the radiation comes out, there
are these subtle intricate relationships
between the stuff that comes out that do
encode all the information of the entity
that fell in. So in principle, if you
were sufficiently industrious and had
enough time, you'd be able to gather all
of this Hawking radiation, analyze it,
and extract all the information about
anything that ever fell in. No
information would be lost. Have we been
able to do that? Well, look, we've not
even seen Hawking radiation. Let's be
clear about it. Traditional, not
traditional, but black holes that we
see, their temperature is so low. It's
lower than the 2.7 Kelvin of the
microwave background radiation. So yeah,
so for black holes the size of the uh I
think the moon or larger, they wouldn't
even Hawking radiate in our current
cosmological environment. So this is all
quite theoretical, but in in principle,
in theory, that's what we believe would
happen. Now, there are many other
subtleties that if you're interested,
you can follow up with that have to do
with ideas such as entanglement, quantum
entanglement.
People have put forward ideas that are
less exciting today than perhaps at
their outset, firewalls, firewall
paradox, fuzzballs to describe black
holes in a manner that might be aligned
with certain ways of thinking about
string theory and so forth. But the
bottom line is yes, we believe the
information does come out.
Okay. Oh, look. Wow. This is wonderfully
uh coincidental. So, what do you think
about gravitationally induced
entanglement as a way to probe the
quantum nature of gravity? So yeah, I
think it's a a a beautiful idea, very
hard to pull off as gravity is the
weakest of all forces. But again, in our
studies of black holes, the cutting edge
things that are happening today all
emerge from studying entangled particles
in the vicinity of a strong source of
gravity like a black hole. So yes, I do
think that is going to continue to be uh
a vital way that we think about things
going forward. Uh what makes gravity the
weakest force among the fundamental
forces? I don't know what makes it that
way. Is it God? Is it some kind of
multiverse theory? It depends how you're
asking the question. It is an
experimental fact that using the
language of your question, whoever asked
that that gravity is the weakest of the
fundamental forces and I'm sure you've
seen this demonstrated. I will do the
demonstration for you right here. Watch
this very closely.
I just proved it. How did I prove it?
I'm not a strong guy, right?
I have, you know, relatively meager
capacities and yet my meager muscles
just beat out the entire gravitational
pull of the earth. The earth is pulling
with all its might on my glasses. All
its might. And yet I go over here and I
go,
in other words, gravity is a
fundamentally weak force. And that's why
the electromagnetic force which is
driving the motion of my muscles and
allow me to grasp the glasses so easily
triumphs under the force of gravity. Now
why is it that way? I don't know but it
is that way. In fact you can quantify
it. You know if you have whatever like u
uh an electron and a posetron say let me
give another example. Let's do an
electron and electron. If we have two
electrons, right, gravity will tend to
pull them together. That's what gravity
does. But the electromagnetic repulsion
will tend to push them apart. You can
compare them numerically. And the
difference between them is on the order
of a billionth of a billionth of a
billionth of a billionth. That's gravity
is to the electromagnetic force as this
fraction of a billionth of a billionth
of a billionth of a billionth. So,
gravity is that much weaker than the
electromagnetic force. Why is it that
way? I don't know, but that is how it
is. All right. Um,
will the Yankees win tonight or will
will we always suck and forever be
disappointed? Well, um, I'm glad someone
has brought baseball into our discussion
and I am a perennial optimist, so I will
leave it at that. I think we just have
to stay the course. All right. Do you
think there are aspects of reality that
will remain forever inaccessible to
scientific inquiry, not because of
technological limits, but because of the
structure of reality itself? Yeah, I
mean it's a really deep question and um
hard to answer, but here's a one way of
framing it, right?
We human beings are one life form among
many on this planet, right? And were it
not for
some very specific events in our
evolutionary past, we would just be
another runof a mill life form, right?
We would not have risen to dominance on
this planet. Good. Given all that
historical contingency of our even being
able to have this conversation, why
would it be that a structure, even let's
just focus on our brains, why would it
be that the human brain which evolved
through this long process of natural
selection in order that we could
survive? Why would it be tailor made to
understand the fundamental workings of
the universe?
It's not. The brain is not actually
tailor made for anything. But it's good
enough to have gotten us where we have
arrived.
But to get here, we did not need to know
anything about quantum mechanics or
general relativity or string theory or
quantum gravity or any of that stuff
because none of that stuff mattered to
our survival in our ancestral past
through the ancestral lineage. And so
the fact that we're able to use a brain
that was shaped by the forces of
survival to do things like work out
quantum mechanics and calculate the
magnetic moment of the electron to 16
decimal places. I mean it's just
remarkable that we're able to do that.
But should that give us any confidence
that we'll be able to understand
everything
that every secret about the workings of
nature will somehow
be amenable to a mind that emerged from
this evolutionary process? No, I don't
see it. You know, you know, I love to
give the example which is sometimes
misinterpreted, but you know, years ago,
if some of you knew of the work I was
doing back then, I had a television show
on this program called NOVA. It was
actually an adaptation of my book, The
Elegant Universe. And one of the opening
scenes, I was at a Blackboard
lecturing on the general theory of
relativity, getting a little frustrated
because whoever I was lecturing to
wasn't getting it, and then the camera
pans and it was a dog, right? What was
the point? Some people misinterpreted as
my trying to say the audience was like
the dog, which was not the point. The
point was a dog is a smart creature,
right? It can do things and yet it has
limits on what it can understand about
the nature of reality. Dogs, I think,
don't understand quantum mechanics or
general relativity. Now look, every time
I say that, I always wonder if the dog
community is sort of barking behind our
back, saying how silly we are, thinking
that they don't get it when they do. But
putting that possibility to the side,
you've got this smart creature that is
limited in what it can understand about
the nature of reality. Why would we be
any different? Right? We're smart
creatures, but presumably we too are
limited in what we can understand about
the nature of reality. What do we do
about that? Nothing. You keep on
pressing forward. You keep going
forward. Maybe you invent an
artificially intelligent system to take
your desire to explore even further.
Maybe that's what we are doing right
now. But in terms of the biological
brain of a human being, even the
smartest one that you could imagine, I
believe would be limited in what it
could understand about the nature of the
world.
Along those same lines,
if super intelligent AI emerges, how can
humanity ensure that we remain the ones
guiding the decisions
rather than seating control to the AI?
Well,
obviously you need guard rails.
Obviously, you need to go forward in a
manner where the entire world is on the
same page, where we're all recognizing
the power of this new technology and all
recognizing the destructive capacities
of this new technology and working
together in order to ensure that these
systems have as their target the kinds
of goals that
we approve of are we doing that? Of
course not.
Working together as a world.
Are you kidding me? You know, so the
answer to your question is clear in
principle is absolutely
foggy. It is absolutely unclear in
practice. So look, I hope that the
researchers who are responsible stay
ahead
of those who are not. I think in
practice that's what it will be. You
know, if the if the good guys with AI
happen to be smarter than the bad guys
with AI,
then putting the guard rails in place
and protecting against those who don't
really care about the destructive
capacity, in fact, are excited about the
destructive capacity will lag behind and
can be controlled. But am I confident
that will happen? No. Again, as with the
question about the Yankees, I am an
optimist. So, I'd like to think that
some way, shape, or form, we will rise
to that challenge. But if you were to
ask me to press me on that question, I
couldn't really tell you where that
optimism is coming from.
Um, what advice would you give to
independent researchers? That's a good
question because I get a lot of
communication from independent
researchers and I wish I had more time
to actually go through. But if I was to
show you the stacks of manuscripts and
papers and diagrams and posters that
that I receive, it's it's just enormous.
Now, on one level, it's it's gratifying,
right? It just shows that there is a
community of likeminded individuals who
are deeply interested in understanding
the nature of the world, the nature of
life, the nature of mind. And that's a
great thing. On the other end of the
spectrum, it can be a little distressing
because
I give you an example.
It is not uncommon that I will get
letters from people who say, "I've read
your book, Fabric of the Cosmos," or
something like that, and based on my
reading, I now believe that I've got the
next step in the evolution of general
relativity or quantum physics. And it
makes my heart sink because let's be
really clear by reading any of my books
you cannot push the boundaries of
understanding the boundaries of science.
My books are a translation of a rich
deep complex mathematical body of
research which I translate into everyday
language to make the ideas more widely
accessible. But to push the boundaries
you have to actually go into the
mathematics.
And so
to independent researchers, I would
suggest if you really want to push the
boundary, you got to do that.
You got to jump in and learn some of the
math. And wonderfully, Lenny Suskind,
who I'm sure many people in this
audience are familiar with, his YouTube
lectures, uh, his books, you know, one
of the most brilliant physicists of our
generation or many generations. He has
taken the time to write a whole series
of books called the theoretical minimum.
And in these books, what Lenny does is
he says, "Look, you want to do research,
you got to learn some of the math.
Here's the minimum amount of mathematics
that you need in order to really
understand the basics of of relativity
or quantum mechanics or particle physics
or thermodynamics or statistical
mechanics or whatever. the five books
happen to focus upon. And so to an
independent researcher, make sure you
know everything that's in those five
books. Once you have that, really have
that, you can then begin to read the
literature so you're not out there on
your own with wild ideas that are
completely untethered from the questions
and approaches that we're pursuing
today.
So, I think that's the uh the best
advice that I could give you on that
front. All right, what have we got left
here? We'll keep on going. Oh, by the
way, I probably should have said at the
outset, this really is live. Sometimes I
do these live sessions and people are
like, "Ah, it's not really live." So,
just to prove to you, I'll put I picked
the latest thing that I see scrolling
by. Hello, professor. You being an
incredible science communicator. I can't
do that. It feels like it was self-
serving. Um, sir, you visited India. How
was your view? All right. So, someone
just asked that a moment ago. I did. I
had a great time in India. I visited and
I visited some schools and spoke to some
of the students. I was so impressed by
Sorry, I got a piece of food stuck in my
tooth here. I was so impressed by the
level of of energy, the level of
excitement and honestly the level of
respect for fundamental science. And so
yes, I do think there's an enormous
possibility for India to become a leader
in so many arenas beyond those that it
has already had great impact on so far.
Um,
oh yeah, it's live already. Okay, good.
I've I've convinced you. All right, let
me go back to my list of questions that
are being cold and vetted from the list
that's scrolling by, which is easier for
me to see.
Do you believe that we were born without
consciousness? I feel that we were
taught to walk, talk, and eventually we
saw ourselves in the idea of self
manifested. I don't know if it's a
matter of being born without
consciousness, but I do think that
consciousness may be somewhat less
mysterious than people have through the
ages imagined. And look, if you just ask
how it could be that inside of a gloppy
gray threePB structure, we have these
inner worlds rich with color and sound
and and and touch and sense. I mean, how
is it that these inner worlds can be
created by an appropriately organized
collection of particles?
I don't think most of us think that an
electron or a quark or a proton has some
inner world. So how is it that when you
put enough of them together an inner
world emerges? How's that possible? And
look, it's a very tough question. On the
other hand, I would put forward the
following. You know, none of us except
maybe the most vanguard of the AI
scientists and among those I know it
wasn't a common view that if you had
enough processing power and you had
enough source data that a system could
converse with you intelligently
on any subject under the sun. But that
is what we have right now, right? With
the large language models that we've all
played around with. And so you could say
that kind of shows that the creative
facility with language, which we really
did previously look at as one of those
pieces of evidence for human
exceptionalism. Like we're the only
species that does what we're doing right
now. sort of having a a kind of
conversation, right? But now we see
that's not so special. Just have enough
compute power, have enough training
data, and a system that is just a bunch
of integrated circuits can do just as
well or almost just as well as we human
beings do. So that's an example where
something deeply
enriching and seemingly mysterious has
been reduced to computational power. My
guess is that the same will happen with
consciousness.
From where we're sitting right now, it
seems special and mysterious. How do you
explain it? And I think when we start
having
a world that is replete with AI systems
that claim to be conscious, are doing
everything as if they were conscious,
are manifesting all the signs of
consciousness,
I think we'll start to believe that as a
real possibility. Look, we believe it
right now with each other. You don't
actually know that I'm conscious and
neither do I have any direct way of
knowing that any of you are conscious.
But yet, none of us really question that
because of the behaviors that we all
share and the feelings that we
articulate that we all recognize. Right?
Through all of that, we gain confidence
that human beings are conscious. I think
we're going to go down the same
trajectory. That's my guess. This is
just hypothetical. But my guess is we
will have those same kind of
interactions with artificial systems and
ultimately we'll say okay yeah we're
convinced or at least just as convinced
that the AI system is conscious as we
are that any other human being is
conscious. And at that point I think
it'll just be a mystery that dissolves.
We'll say it's compute. It's computer
power. It's
sufficiently rich connections between
the circuits
and maybe a whole slew of other features
that will become clear as progress goes
on. But at the end of the day, it won't
be any magic. It won't be any
supernatural. It won't be any super
physical quality. It'll all be physics
when you get down to brass tax.
Okay? So,
uh,
let's see. Can you elaborate on the idea
that dark matter might be gravity
spilling out from other universes? Yeah,
I thought it said spitting out from
other universes, and I wasn't quite sure
what that meant,
but this is an idea that comes from
string theory. And the idea is something
called the brain world scenario. Brain
is B R A N E not B R A I N and brain as
in membrane. And so one of the ideas of
string theory is that reality as we know
it might be like one of those slices of
bread that I mentioned before if you
were here that reality itself might be
some giant membrane you know
three-dimensional membrane in terms of
its spatial dimension and that might be
just one piece of a wider cosmos which
has other membranes nearby. I now when
you study this mathematically you find
that the electromagnetic force and the
nuclear forces and familiar particles
they are all tethered to our brain.
They're tethered because there are
basically little strings whose ends are
stuck on our membrane. The ends can move
around but they can't detach.
But you also find in these scenarios
that gravity can leave the membrane.
Gravity through the so-called graviton
particle is a string with no loose ends.
It's a closed loop of string. A closed
loop has nothing to tether it to the
brain, which means that gravity can
escape. Similarly, if there's another
brain nearby, its gravity can escape. It
can spill out.
And so if things are set up correctly,
that there's a membrane nearby with a
lot of mass on it, powerful gravity,
that gravity could spill out from that
membrane,
enter our membrane and maybe supply the
missing gravity that dark matter was
proposed to provide. So that's an
interesting other idea in which dark
matter would simply be the gravitational
pull emerging from a nearby brain in the
context of the brain world scenario.
How are your trips to Antarctica and
India? How do people know? I posted
Yeah, what am I talking about? I don't
use social media much, but I think I did
on that. How are your trips to
Antarctica and India? And did these
trips shed light on the effects of
global warming in Antarctica?
Well, they were wonderful trips. I will
say on the positive side, I mean, I
couldn't directly see effects of say
global warming. I wasn't there studying.
I'd actually been there 20 years before.
So, in principle, I should have been
able to see the differences, but you
know, it's pretty hard to do that with
the naked eye. But I will say the
following, which is very hopeful. When I
went to Antarctica 20 years ago, it was
like the wild west. You could do
anything you wanted. We got off the
boat. We walked right through the
penguin colonies. My wife was fond of
the penguins like coming right up to her
and she'd photographed them at a
distance of about 4 in or something,
right? But now when we went back, it's
highly regulated in the best senses of
the term. You've got to stay a distance
from the wildlife, from the penguins.
Most of the time we weren't even walking
on the actual peninsula. We were on
these zodiacs that were watching and
exploring from the safety of the water,
nearby water, the inlets and so forth.
So I mean that gave me hope that at
least some people are thinking the right
way about maintaining the integrity of
that particular resource.
Your thoughts on cosmic perspective? Do
you think humans can experience the
overview effect without going to space?
Right. So the overview effect I think as
many of you know is this famous effect
that has been reported by many
astronauts where you know you go out
into space and you look back on planet
earth overview of planet earth and it
just changes you uh changes your sense
of self and how you fit into the wider
picture of reality. Now, I've never
experienced that. I've never gone to
space. I never will go to space. I would
be so claustrophobic. I would freak the
moment I was inside the capsule. Does
that mean that I can't ever experience
the overview effect? Probably, at least
not directly. But I will say
I don't want to call it the overview
effect because I don't want the
astronauts to tell me I don't know what
I'm talking about. But I have
experienced
a kind of transcendent wonder
just by thinking about the universe and
understanding the universe.
Understanding quantum physics has given
me moments of utter awe. Understanding
general relativity has given me moments
where I have felt a deep connection to
the cosmos which I can only describe as
a transcendent feeling. And so I do
think that a certain kind of communion
with reality through an understanding of
the fundamental laws of physics is
absolutely possible. And how do I know
that? Because I've experienced it. And I
think any of you can experience it too.
If you throw yourself into the real
ideas, the real
ideas that have emerged from humankind's
deep conviction that we could make
progress and understand things that are
so beyond the everyday. And so, is that
the overview effect? I don't know. But
maybe labels don't really matter. Is it
a way to be in the world differently
than you otherwise would be? Yeah,
absolutely is. Absolutely is.
All right. Um, what advice would you
give to students beginning in the field
of physics, especially given the
emergence of AI? Yeah, sort of similar
to the question before, but focus
instead on young students. Look, um,
here's my view, which is I think it's
becoming more common. I've had this view
since the beginning, but I'll give you
an example. You know, I teach at
Columbia University,
and I don't know if it's still the case
because I didn't pay attention for
reasons that will become clear in a
moment, but it was certainly the case
early on that using AI systems was
banned for all students.
And and I get that it is absolutely
vital that a student engages with the
texts in the core curriculum that a
student sits down and can solve
Schroinger's equation. You know, these
experiences are vital. At the same time,
I don't think the answer is to ban an AI
system. rather I'd rather my students
not me I'm too old but I'd rather my
students become deeply expert at these
systems as a helper as a tool allowing
them to do things that otherwise they
might not be able to it doesn't mean
that you substitute rich engagement of
the old sort only with AI doing it all
for you no who would ever advocate that
that's crazy but to say that you can't
use The AI I think is equally crazy
because it's closing your eyes to a
reality and you want your students to be
at the at the vanguard at the forefront
of using the most sophisticated tools
available. So it's got to be a blend.
It's got to be a blend between the two.
Now what does that mean for young
students who are starting out in
research? I think exactly the same
perspective applies. Be right up in the
forefront of the latest tools. become
expert at them while you're doing your
graduate work and understanding how to
do the equations, solve the problems in
Jackson on electronamics, you know,
solve the problems in whatever Quantum
Brook, Mertzarker or or whichever one
you happen to be using. You've got to
really be able to dig your fingers in.
But it doesn't mean you only have to dig
your fingers in. in parallel use these
systems because I think five years from
now it's going to be hand and glove
human and artificial.
All right. Um
Brian, I've always wanted to know more
about the alien on a bicycle you talk
about in your world science classes. The
direction the alien is biking determines
what they perceive as to be happening
now in that moment. How does that affect
the idea that we don't have free will
given that the information about the
direction of travel would take a vast
amount of time to reach it? Okay, so
it's a I I understand the question. Um,
look
goes back to that block universe which I
guess is playing more of a prominent
role than I anticipated here. That block
universe idea that I mentioned before.
If this is the entirety of reality, sort
of all of space and all of time. I
mentioned before that observers in
relative motion slice up reality into
different now slices and that's what
that alien on the bicycle which does
come from one of my books that's where
that notion comes from. So if you and an
alien are at rest at any given moment in
time, your now slices agree. But if that
alien then starts moving away from you,
they're in motion relative to you.
They're now slices will cut through the
loaf at an angle. Things that you would
consider right now, they would consider
the past. Or if they're moving the other
direction toward you, things that you
consider the future would be on there
now. And so it's a rich understanding of
how time and the conception of now is
very much in the eye of the beholder.
Now how does this affect which is what
the question is things like you know
free will. Can we make free choices?
I I I don't I'd rather not frame the
issue of free will as a question of
relativity and time. Rather the
individual in and of themselves can
speak to the question or analyze the
question for I don't need to invoke an
alien far away in order to somehow say
time is locked because of the fact that
they're able to in some sense talk about
things that are in my past or my future.
The only real way I think that physics
impacts free will is if you believe in
physicalism, which is the perspective
that conscious awareness is nothing but
the motion of particles coursing through
your brain. There's nothing beyond the
physics. Then look, we know that those
particles are governed by insensate laws
of physics. Laws of physics that we
cannot affect. We can't intercede in the
lawful motion of those particles. And
the motion of those particles is what it
requires to have a decision. If I say
yes or no, it's my particles moving one
way or another. If I go left versus
right, it's my particles coursing
through my brain, affecting my body one
way or another. And since I can't
determine that particulate motion, it's
the laws of physics that do. I can't
intercede. I can't influence. I don't
have the freedom of will that I perhaps
initially would have thought I had based
upon common experience. All right, let's
do a couple more here before we wrap it
up today. Um,
what have we got left? Ah, so this was a
question that I remember we did a little
short video on, so you can follow it up
there. But mathematics the question is
is it invented or discovered? Which side
are you inclined towards? Well, the side
that I'm inclined towards is that
mathematics is invented. And I quickly
should say as I've said before that if
you asked me that question I don't know
30 years ago
I would have given you a different
answer. I was of the mindset which I
think is the default mindset for many
physicists and mathematicians
that mathematics is kind of out there.
The Pythagorean theorem is out there and
it's up to us to discover it, you know,
and and that's what mathematics truly
is. My view is that as I mentioned
before, we are pattern recognition
machines who have survived by virtue of
their ability to find patterns in the
natural world. And after a while, we got
the luxury of being able to focus upon
patterns that didn't matter to our
survival. And as we did, we invented a
language to codify those patterns.
That language is called mathematics.
And so using this language, we found
patterns
and we wrote down equations to embody
those patterns. And among those
equations was a^2 + b^2= c^2.
And so I don't consider the Pythagorean
theorem as having an existence
independent of a mind that's able to
impose upon this conception called the
triangle a relationship between its
sides. That to me is what mathematics
is. That's of course a simple example,
but I think that's what all of
mathematics is. So we've had a
wonderfully rich experience developing a
language that's really tailorade. That's
why we invented it for codifying in a
rigorous manner various kinds of
patterns real and imagined. That doesn't
denigrate mathematics. Some people say,
"Oh, come on. That's an awful way of
thinking about mathematics." In fact,
I've gotten this reaction more from
mathematicians than from anybody else.
Because many mathematicians think of
their profession
as
this collection of seekers who are
seeking the most rarified
qualities of reality, the mathematical
truths. And somehow if you reduce those
truths to things that we made up,
it feels denigrating. But no, the fact
that we can make up that we can invent
these wondrous relationships
and they're useful too to explain
approximately qualities in the external
world that speaks to the grandeur of
human creativity. That speaks to the
power of the human mind. So rather than
viewing this as somehow denigrating
mathematics, to me it only a grandizes
it. All right, I think I'm myself
running out of steam here about 90
minutes. So I hope you've enjoyed this
live Q&amp;A. At least it was live when we
did it. You should subscribe to World
Science Festival for updates on our
upcoming programming which will be
spanning the gamut of sciences as well
as various things that go beyond that.
And I look forward to seeing you at the
next one of these sessions and also at
the next one of our conversations at the
forefront of scientific research. Thanks
so much for joining us.