another history of science seminar in
the news for archives series.
and a special welcome to the Czech
ambassador
uh as well as to our speaker.
And as usual, I will ask you a question
first. And the question is, is there
anybody who wants to be wants to be on
our invitation list but are not on our
invitation list?
Okay, good. So, we'll send this around.
The name and email address
Uh, Philip Priger, he has a background
in the history and philosophy of science
uh, with an emphasis on Lor's philosophy
of science and Edmund Hussels and Martin
Higher phenomenology. They're all here
uh, this year.
He uh received the prestigious Yousef L
award in the Czech Republic for a book
that I have lying here and I could send
it around for you who are interested in
looking at it, but we really need to get
it back to the
um the this event is co-sponsored by the
Danish embassy in Prague.
Um and I am also happy
to have the Czech ambassador here, uh,
Jerry Baroski, uh, and, uh, he has even
helped us promote this event. So, it's
wonderful.
Now, we look forward to learning about
the approach to BR and his thinking in a
country that we rarely communicate with
in this respect. And uh, I look forward
to a continued contact in this respect.
And uh I think I have said enough
because I know that Philip has a lot to
say too. So the word is yours Philip.
&gt;&gt; Uh thank you for your kind invitation to
this famous auditorium and to the mecca
of Tanon the uh surely you remember
Marcelus from Hamlet who said to Horatio
that something was written in the state
of Denmark. Uh but I am convinced that
uh modern Shakespeare would write that
something rare was rooted in the state
of Bmar the news was born. uh in my
check extensive uh book about Bor's
complimentary thinking I among others
outlined some parallels between Bor's
philosophy of science and husel's
intentional and hideer's hemenotic or
interpretative phenomenology
and I want to develop this issue much
deeper and go far than current
discussions about B's philosophy of
science are
firstly I'm going to uh summarize
selected notes to complimentarity then I
am to say something about phenomenology
and bor's epistemological lesson of
quantum theory after it uh it uh after
it I shortly suggest some scopes of
phenomenological interpretation of bor's
conception of complimentarity which is
narrowly connected uh with his notion of
two levels of language and phenomenon.
And lastly, I intend to demonstrate uh
uh complimentarity as a new
epistemological framework uh with help
of graphical scheme. Any quotations I
will use uh I can give with references
to you after lecture.
Now to the first part of lecture.
Uh Bor's idea of complimentarity enables
to uh to supplement contradictory or
incompatible descriptions of a certain
phenomenon or problem. However, it needs
to be pinpointed that uh complimentarity
is not as traditionally suggested a
scientific principle or specific
interpretation. Complimentarity also
cannot be simply mixed with a paradoxal
duality of wave and particle and it
cannot be considered as some sort of
derivative of Heisenberg uncertainty
principle complimentarity and bor
philosophy of science is neither
interchangeable for so-called Copenhagen
interpretation
regarding the use of uh word
complimentarity B probably introduced
this word in the summer of 1927. But we
can trace B's complimentary thinking
even back to his youth. Young Bore was
greatly influenced by cross-disciplinary
discussions organized by his father
experimental physiologist Christian
Boore who had them in their home. As we
know among the regular guest there was
philosopher Harold Hibding, linguist
Thompson and physicist Christiansen.
And frequent topic of uh these
disputations was a controversy between
mechanistic and vitalistic or teological
approaches to the animated or living
nature. Bore also often witnessed these
discussions in his father's laboratory
and Christian Bore's conclusion of these
disputations was that the more we pursue
the chemical physical explanation of
animate nature the more essential
features of the life or living organisms
are lost in such explanation. And on the
contrary, the more we pursue only
teological or philosophical descriptions
of the living nature, the more we lose
the result which can be results which
can be shown only through mechanistic or
experimental approach. And Christian
Boore promotes this you can say paradox
to the role in general descriptions or
public discussions about the meaning of
life or animate nature and the point is
that in this unusual approach rests
newsborth thinking he was also
influenced uh by reman's menu valued
functions by Christianen or Edgar Rubin
Abore was also very cautious to believe
in any given presuppositions and hence
he had no problem to put together older
or quite new hypothesis which were not
compatible and through this way of
thinking B later solved not only his
atomic model. What is complimentarity?
With the act of visual demonstration we
can use picture of Rubin. Edgar Rubin
was Bor's step and as we know they often
debated about philosophical and uh
psychological
problems.
So and we can use another picture. It
doesn't matter which one. In the picture
in one moment we can see really sharply
and distinctly either the base or two
profiles of a human head. From the
profiles we cannot derive the ways.
There is no causal connection to the
ways and vice versa. But for a complex
understanding of the whole perception of
the picture, we must take into account
both exclusive ways of perception. The
same case holds in the quantum theory.
for meaningful understanding of the wave
particle duality of light or matter or
for complementing exclusive experimental
arrangements that compression is
according an abstraction.
Complimentary can serve al serve also as
a huristic approach for instance in
biology for complex understanding of the
phenomenon of the life or genes for
complex understanding of the climate
change maybe refugee problem and so on.
Generally we can define bor's idea as an
epistemological framework
this way.
A phenomenon
may be comprehensively described by
means of two mutually exclusive
languages, ideas, concepts, models, etc.
Language A and language B. One aspect of
the given phenomenon may be understood
by means of L of LA A and another by
means of LB. There is however no aspect
of this phenomenon which would be
describable simultaneously by means of
LA and LB. Likewise, it doesn't apply
that the examined phenomenon
correspondence only to LA or only to LB
and neither that LA is transferable or
derable from LB and vice versa.
Now to the second part of my lecture.
From now it will be a little bit tricky
because to say something about uh
complicated phenomenology and moreover
in combination with war it's a it's a
real hazard. However, the meaning of
certain parallels between thinkers so
different in uh is lies in seeing
examined issues from desperate
philosophical or scientific viewpoints.
Similarly,
generally speaking, both bore and husel
or hideer have more or less defined
themselves in opposition to the modern
subject object tradition and purely
mechanistic or objectivistic modern idea
to unify explanation and understanding
of nature or reality. So as we know
ancient and medieval man was essentially
fitting in cosmic or providential order
everything what that man or some thinker
did. For example, searching for truth or
purpose of nature was meaningfully
suspended in and developed from this
cosmic order. But approximately from
17th century the searching was replaced
by the search for objectivity because
modern man was excluded from that cosmic
order. From the cart we are aware of
ourselves from within
independent on the out world and cosmos
or order and any event
became me objects for modern scientific
research. With this historical process
is related
methodical distinction of soul and body
which was step by step changed on real
distinction between consciousness or
closed subject on the one side and
lifeless bodies or extensive object in
spaceime on the other side. Further
Deard's term realitas objectiva actual
content or thinness objectness of our
ideas in our mind was step by step
changed on so-called objective reality
out of us independent reality with inner
properties or hidden parameters which
subject can examined independently of
his subjective relative experiences.
Einstein, Rosen and Podski wrote this in
1935. I quote, "Any serious
consideration of a physical theory must
take into account the distinction
between the objective reality which is
independent of any theory and the
physical concepts with which the theory
operates. In a complete theory, there is
an element corresponding to each element
of reality.
Modern sciences have been built among
other on those standpoints of course
together with belief in continuity and
causal explanation of any event in
nature which was doubted for example by
plank's discovery of quantum of action.
Every science it is if it is to remain
science must do its specialized research
objectively and thanks to this we
achieve fantastic technical achievements
and rapid progress. Objective is
everything standing in the opposition to
closed subject or consciousness like
things, numbers, words, theory. So
objective is positively positively
describable, thinkable, teachable and
real. And Haidiger quoted plank's
statement
I quote real is what can be measured.
Everything else like a question of sense
of being or nothingness is nothing is
not real and it is not interest it's not
interesting for proper sciences.
However, for B Husel and Haidiger,
despite persistent scientific efforts to
eliminate any inconsistency from
unifying ideal of modern science
in everyday life as well as in
scientific descriptions, we encounter
phenomena which cannot be fully causally
or unambiguously explained on the basis
of modern objective presumptions. There
is no only one explanation of lie.
light, matter, uh concept of genes or
our experiencing of spacetime colors
or or immovable earth is not the same
like physical chemical explanation.
Husel Haidiger Bore Husel who was
originally
a talented mathematician writes in his
last work crisis of European sciences
that modern sciences lost confidence in
the ancient idea of universal knowledge
as a specific unity of scientific
rationality philosophical rationality
and the idea of humanity and according
to Husel modern objective sciences is
neglected and finally forgot reflect
their roots in experience pre-scientific
activities in the priority of so-called
label life world or transcendence
transcendental subjectivity but is not
so important who sell assets I quote
merely fact-minded sciences make merely
fact-minded people science became for
him only techn for the application of
success ressive processes of the total
mathematization of the nature and he
warned that I quote a one-sided
rationality can certainly become an evil
concerning Haidiger
he became seriously interested in the
principle of atomic physics uh due to
his early studies in mathematics and
physics and conversation with Wer
Heisenberg and Carl Fredick from
Whitaker and Hyde at Pascal Yogdan's
book and Heisenberg's book and articles
and in Haidiger's analysis of modern
science and technology Haidiger
distinguish between Heisenberg's and
Bor's original philosophical thinking
and subsequent quantum mechanics as
regards this conventional quantum
mechanics he considers it as the
culmination of essence of technology in
German does gest Tell is not possible to
translate it but it is translated as the
infraring or the setup which is nothing
technical but merely only one dominant
way of nowaday thinking and revealing
everything.
I quote in framing means the gathering
of that setting upon which sets up a man
that is challenges him force to reveal
the real in the mode of ordering a
standing reserve he's hideer but don't
remember it it's okay it's not important
for you
by this for hideer encompassing
calculative thinking
and thoughtlessness.
Right. Science doesn't think is because
it it lost ability to engage in
meditative thinking based
to think in pre-scientific and
pre-predictive dimensions or the
existential structure of our being in
the world in their design and the
concept of world for hide doesn't mean
set of planes or material world but
instantaneous understanding ing of
anything we do without us there is not
some bad concerning B he didn't engage
in any special kind of philosophy
thanks goodness but he emphasized an
epistemological philosophical or general
lesson that quantum theory teaches us in
relation to the to the very condition
remember this to the very condition of
understanding explaining observing
measuring and describing nature and this
is closely associated with the critic of
modern uh science based on physical
causality and strict subject object
splitting or as bore called it
psychophysical uh parallelism.
Therefore, bore attempted to create a
suitable meaningful framework not only
for different interpretations of quantum
theory but also for cross-d disciplinary
research and this is idea of
complimentarity. It became the climax of
Bor's long last longl lasting search for
a unit new unity of knowledge and as he
stressed I quote regardless of whether
its surface manifestation is se such
widely differing human instruments used
by a biologist for example his father a
physicist Christianson a philologist
William Thompson and a philosopher
Harold Hd for example
Simultaneously for him all our or
scientific activities are deepened on
everyday language. Bor's last assistant
or Peterson remembers how we used to
call attention that we are not able to
look beyond our words. Thus I quote the
famous sentence we are suspended in
language. Hence bore husel and hideer
well didn't deal with a problem of
objective reality which would preede
language because as bore declared the
word reality is also a word a word which
we must learn to use correctly it's
excellent and further he pointed out
known statement that I quote it is wrong
to think that the task of physics is to
find out how nature is physics concerns
what we can say about nature. Excellent.
And Bore applied the same reasoning uh
to other sciences. For example, biology
cannot be preoccupied
with what life as he says or living
organisms are but with the comprehension
of what the position of living organisms
in our picture of the world is. Again,
it's fantastic. And on top of that, I
quote, we can by no means dispense with
those forms of perception which color
our whole language. It's really
important. We can by no means spend with
those forms of perception. What does it
mean? Which color? Our whole language
and in terms of which all experience
must ultimately be expressed. So bore
emphasized that we should be content
like in US and Haidiger's philosophy
with preproative and pre-scientific
forms or features
which constitute using of our concepts
and ideas for any description.
Bore Huser or Hideigger naturally knew
that uh any investigations
proceed by virtue of immense
reductionism across all fields of study.
But this approach as Bore warned implies
the danger of prejudice.
Modern science uh for him evidently
provides as he says a deeper insight
into our our being. He used being and
our place in existence but is but it is
only one asserted manifestations
of how to understand nature or being
and again it is a typical war. He re
realized that uh the new situation
disclosed that I quote in the process we
may have to learn what the word
understanding really means again it's
fantastic
in other words with hideer famous being
and time if I am it means for me to be
and I'm constantly taking care of it
this organ and if I choose not to wash
my hair not to drink carsburg is not my
case uh or to believe in objective
reality or uh to theory of everything.
It is only one from nalist possibilities
of continually taking care of my being
all the time and thus I constantly
somehow understand how to be or our
being. So everyday behaving any
intention, religion, hobby, uh science
or mathematics are motivated by that.
They are only explicit articulations of
this a priori understanding push of the
existential structure of our being in
the world in their time. And those
exposed manifestations or objectivizing
activities of that first term we call
according to Haidiger interpretation or
in in Greeks hemenotics.
And this is the hemenical circle of any
interpretation
suspended
in fundamental understanding of being
from which we cannot exclude. As regards
regards bore he realized that all
accumulated
problems standing at the birth of
quantum theory the question of language
paradoxical results of experiments and
descriptions problem of continuity
discontinuity and principle role of
conditions of the observation observable
distinction show that I quote
it is just this state of affairs which
primarily gives to the problems in
question their general philosophical
interest. Therefore, it was for him also
necessary to address other fields of
study. For example, I quote, psychology
or even that kind of epistemological
problems with which already thinkers
like Buddha and La were confronted when
trying to harmonize our position as
spectators and actors in the great drama
of existence. And we are back again. It
is not possible to be clearly strictly
excluded as closed subjects from closed
objects or fittiness in our uh
perceptions and language or to be
excluded from our theories and
experimental arrangements. We are
constantly an understood being in the
world or with bore we constantly
understand each other or things as a
spectator actor in the existence.
Now
some quotation
longer quotation. Bore asserted that the
distinction between
subject and object necessary for
unambiguous description is retained in
the way that in every communication
containing a reference to ourselves. We
so to speak introduce a new subject
which doesn't appear as a part of the
content of the communication.
And bore realized that it is just our
freedom of choosing as he says
the subject object distinction and this
cut is not in nature
but here in our head. Uh Bore got the
idea of subject object uh entanglement
among others from favorite Paul Müller's
uh book for teenagers and dance students
adventure.
I'm sorry for my pronunciation. Uh which
we he quoted frequently and his
colleagues uh knows that that too. In
the book a young man tells this problem.
It's fantastic for teenagers.
I get to think about about my own
thoughts of the situation each in which
I find myself. I even think that I think
of it and divide myself into an infinite
retrogressive sequence of eyes who
consider each other. I do not know at
which I to stop as the actual and the
moment I stop at one there is indeed
again an eye which I stops at it and my
pondering finally result in terrible
headache. book for teenagers. Fantastic.
And the physicist in the institute had
to study this book because uh then they
knew about something about Bor's
dialectic and interpretation of quantum
theory. So, Husel describes uh but in a
very complicated way. Similar examples
and H Higher Haidiger
expresses this issue for example via his
hermeneutical circle.
Every interpretation, every behaving,
everything what we do is interpretation
of our constant understanding of our
being or the time. Bore also referred
referred to the similar question of
psychological introspection. It is I
quote clearly impossible to distinguish
sharply between the phenomena themselves
and their conscious perception. Thus if
we try to analyze our own emotions
we hardly possesses them any longer. So
in introspection or reflection
we reduce flowing spontaneous activity
in time nonobject for example V music
on an object of this reflection but this
objectivising and description of that is
already not the original experiencing of
music. Accordingly, Bore declared that I
quote
words like contemplation
and valition or we can use more words.
Words like contemplation, reflection,
thinking and valition,
instincts, spontaneity feelings.
These words like contemplation,
evolution, referring to situations which
are mutually exclusive but equally
characteristic of conscious life have
been used in a typical complimentary
manner since the very origin of
language. It's fantastic
incredible really in conclusion to this
part phenomenology contemplates the
relation between our activities and
their object uh objects. I see
something, I remember something, I count
something, uh I do this or that all the
times intentionally or herotropic
correlative pose and quantum theory
discusses
uh the relation from the perspective of
interactive systems. So we are not
entirely able to determine or
distinguish between what belongs we can
say on the side of uh an observer with
his hair various prestanding and
theories and what belongs on the side of
objects observable or measurable systems
and this situation appeared in extreme
position just in one two mechanics.
Similarly like the problem with speaking
about my ego because I must produce
another ego to speak about the previous
ego and so on and so on. Any attempt to
determine in quantum measurements the
interaction
between a measurable system and
measuring device because of
uncontrollable uh exchange of energy and
momentum
would require the installation of an
additional device. This would again
interact with the system under control
and so on and so on.
Bore harshly answered to the Einstein
Rosen Bodoski article and he wrote that
the new situation
in fact discloses only an essential
inadequ inadequacy of the customary
viewpoint of natural philosophy for a
rational account of physical phenomena
of the type with which we are concerned
in quantum mechanics.
Indeed, the finite interaction between
an object and measuring agencies
conditioned by the very existence of the
quantum of action entails because of the
impossibility of controlling the
reaction of the object on the measuring
instruments. the necessity of a final
renunciation of the classical ideal of
causality and a radical revision of our
attitude towards the problem of physical
reality. And Patrick Yelan who is both
experienced quantum theorist and
phenomenologist
maintains that I quote any measurement
is a heotic performance like the playing
and replaying of a game or like a
musical or theatrical
performance.
Now to the set part of my lecture.
Um
I believe that in the case of uh
phenomenological deepening of uh
bor complimentality it would be possible
to introduce this conception in the
methodology of science or in education
system as a new flexible and
cross-disciplinary epistemological
framework of thinking or teaching. I was
a teacher at gimnazium for 10 years. So
I know exactly what I'm speaking about.
It is possible
uh with the continuous growth of new
specializations. It is a good idea how
to moderate dangerous uh facultism or
pseudociences or as bore wrote bridging
extreme modes of materialism, pragmatism
and mysticism in a negative way. B for
example would have never agreed with a
proclamation from the well-known
textbook essential cell biology there is
written this it is to cell biology that
we must look for answer to the question
of what life is and I'm not speaking
about the Richard Dawkins book uh then
phenomenological analysis should first f
should first uh focus on three
inseparable uh notions Firstly
complimentarity, secondly phenomenon,
thirdly language.
Now to the first point and take it easy.
U
it is only for your information uh what
is possible to do with this mixing bore
and phenomenology. Now to the uh first
point on the basis of huseros and
hideigra phenomenology it should be
distinguished between we can say sharp
and nonsharp complimentarity
uh
okay I can say non-sharp complimentarity
and then sharp complimentarity non-sharp
complimentarity means make complementing
of contradictions which are from the
meaning somehow mutually dependent
without one. The second has no meaning.
For example,
opposite yinyang which bore has in his
code of arms uh life and death pupil and
teacher complimentary coupling of DNA uh
change basis velocity and position.
Sharp complimentarity means a meaningful
complementing of phenomena or ideas
which are originally or essentially
exclusive
mutually and causally nondeducible.
Without one, the second is still own
meaning
and their completing raised in a new or
some special situation. For example,
quantum experimental arrangements, wave
and particle, faces and ways, instinct
and introspection or reflection, perhaps
justice and charity or mercy. And in my
opinion, the complimentarity of
requiring pairs or opposites is not
really philosophically interesting
because many philosophers handled with
this issue from Heracle to Hegel for
example. However, sharp complimentarity
is sovereign philosophical question and
thinkers interested in war still doesn't
distinguish between these two kinds of
complimentarity.
Now to the second point
through Husel's conception of
intentionality we can deepen Bor's
description of phenomena that appear as
Bore used to say in context of the whole
of the experimental arrangements
that is an entire complex of visible or
describable compartments that is
measuring uh instruments microscopic dot
left after some particle including
observer and his theory.
So
I will
yeah take it easy
there is flower but you can use uh
microscopic devices instruments or dot
left after the uh particle. So this is a
dimension of our uh seeing something and
thinking something in our head.
Dimension of appearing there in my
consciousness
design conscious of being in English
consciousness is related to something is
intentional. So intensio intentum coatum
activity and objects act of seeing the
scene smelling the smell thinking the
thought etc etc and instead of flower we
can put instruments or dot left on the
uh detector. So
uh according to this of course it's much
it's more complicated uh phenomenology
according to this an electron is not an
existing object independently of us nor
sole product of measurement but it is an
intentional object there in our
consciousness that is the phenomenon
constituted within an innumerable
intentional synthesis. is of
transcendental subjectivity or
consciousness as such
and through Haidiger's
another point through Haidiger's
hemenotic phenomenology we can deepen
Bor's notion of inexplicability
of the primordial performance of the
living or dimension of the very
conditions of thinking observation or
description and this nonobject objective
or according to Haidiger ontological
phenomena constitute the cycle structure
of our pre-understanding for any
interpretation of how intentional
behavior thinking proposing theories
experiments etc. Then in the light of
the ontological phenomena, the electron
is interpreted with an physical
pre-understanding
and ontological or a priori
understanding of being in the world or
with war.
It is interpreted with an spectator
actor circle in the great drama of
existence. Now to the set point
uh similar like in previous point it is
needful to distinguish between
inb's philosophy of science two
dimensions of language or understanding
by means of hideiger's hemenotic
analysis we can better comprehend we can
say point a oh yeah point a bor's
emphasis on the indispensable use of
classical terms in quantum theory or in
any objective description because of our
settlement in language. This is explicit
or predicative level of language and for
H highaidiger in being and time it is
dishra
but H highaidiger subsequently says that
I quote the existential ontological
foundation of language is discourse dra
and this is connected with bor's another
or deeper level of language that is
point B's
insight to the very conditions
or pre predicative dimension of
articulation and understanding of our
being or to be. This is insight to the
implicit framework of any explicit
language including mathematics and in
being in time discourse
together with this that a priori
understanding
is ontological character of existence
structure of being in the world or with
bore or spectator actor into existence.
uh bulb gives examples with a function
of our organs or with any treatment of
thin like for example stick
number stick long stick
and uh to uh to distinguish between
explicit onic objectivizable level on
the one hand and implicit or ontological
dimension of primordial livingness or
our understanding of being on the other
hand. I quote, "Thus we are normally
unconscious,
of our respiration and the beating of
the heart and hardly aware of the
working of our muscles and bones during
the motion of our rimps."
In this situation, these organs are not
objects. They are not reflected. We use
them. We don't reflect them.
Or when we find our way in a dark room
only by means of touch of a stick or
says we lose the sensation that it is
foreign body and the impression of touch
becomes immediately localized at the
point where the stick is touching
wall or floor. But when the stick is
held loosely or something happened with
the stick, it means at that moment that
we don't use the stick, but it appears
to us a mere object. In H Higher's
words, implicit prepative understanding
of our organs or stick or anything lies
in our ultimate activity or practical
usage. As soon as we just have something
before us as a mere object,
it means for him a situation of a
failure to understand it anymore. This
lack of understanding or a prior
understanding
requires change of attitude. or guns or
the stick ceases to serve their primary
purpose like heart failure or stick is
broken or some check person stolen that
stick in venture square in Prague it
doesn't matter and they suddenly becomes
objects of our reflection
that can be manipulated
recovered repaired scientifically
examined etc and every science is
interested
in this exposed objects.
Phenomenology is interested in these
implicit sources for these explicit
objects or explanation of these objects
or nature and B is interested
in both of these levels in both.
Now the last picture
on
Yes. Yes. Here I use uh Patrick Helan's
diagram.
So for obtaining the complex
understanding of some studied problem or
phenomenon we can say LA A B C and for
example phenomenon of the living.
There are three or more equally
necessary and to a certain extent
mutually exclusive ways of description
or specific languages
theories LA, LB and LC
and LB and LC with upper comma
advert to contexts which somehow
intervene or influence crosswise those
three approach. approaches. And each
meaningful, not stupid, meaningful
language, description, theory makes
accessible from own point of view some
features to which the other languages,
theories, descriptions only refers or
eliminate them.
And L0
is a dimension or dimension of being in
the world or the bore active spectator
in the existence as implicit source of
our infinite interpretative
activities for our behaving and any
description of something and everything
takes place in the honotic circle L0 L A
L LB LC to L A B C and again L0 and so
on and so on. Some examples
as Bore after his father proposed
we can say LA
can be mechanistic interpretation of
living nature where life is limited to
the physical chemical regularities.
But life is not just an execution of a
program written in DNA and through
genetic code like in cell biology. This
imagined reduction of life should be
complemented
by for example LB which can be as B
writes in his articles theological
interpretation for understanding of
various levels of the life as purposeful
complexity interacting within its
surroundings with other atoms or living
systems for maintaining of the
complexity of the life and LC LD
L E can be as bore used to say I quote
strings of emotion poetry painting and
music
or else as Bore and Delri reflect how to
comprehend complex complex electrons
atoms and molecules I quote an
experiment for preparing a chemical
compound LA is exclusive or
complimentary
do an experiment for measuring the
orbits of the electrons generating the
bond
LB. If I do LA, I can't do at the same
time LB
or Hideker says this sentence is normal.
You can say Tal shines and was only to
shine. If we try to make it
comprehensible by analyzing it into
numbers of oscillations, it is gone. It
shows itself only when it remains
undisclosed and unexplained.
It is again like with automatic using
sins or unawareness of our organ which
is the ontological or non-objective
understanding or a prior understanding
of our being exposed description of the
object some color
is a failure to understand it anymore.
Not only that, our everyday descriptions
of colors we can say la is influenced of
course from education by context of
physics lb with upper comma which
explains
from viewpoint of wavelength
or frequencies of electromagnetic
radiation. This we can say is LB. But LB
is not color in its appearing
experiencing. and vice versa.
Sophisticated and fantastic physical
explanation LB is influenced by LA with
upper comma that is context of everyday
subjective relative experiencing of cal
sins
of our understanding of being in the
world. Before physicists
begin to examine gull, they must already
understand what is experienced gull wave
or length.
And those ld
those complimentary descriptions LBLC
are within their their context
irreducible, real, true and excellent.
And last example,
Heisenber
pictures what bore one day mentioned
about famous
Chron Castle or Elsino.
Isn't it strange how this castle changes
as soon as one imagines that Hamlet
lived here? As scientists, we believe
that a castle consists only of stones
and admire the way the architect put
them together. The stones, the green
roof with its patina, the wood carvings
in the church constitute the wall
castle. You can say la or objective or
onic phenomena.
None of these should be changed by the
fact that Hamlet lived here.
And yet it is changed completely.
Suddenly the walls and the ram parts
speak a quite different language. Albe
we can say the Rama of our existence or
being in the world. The courtyard
becomes an entire world. A dark corner
reminds us of the darkness in the human
soul. We hear hamlets to be or not to
be. And final note, I agree with the
statement uh which Bore had in last
conversation with Thomas K and his
colleagues uh the day before Bore passed
away. He compared complimentarity to the
copernican revolution which has stepby
step gained a privilege position in the
education system and bore said I think
it will be exactly the same with the
complimentary
description.
Thank you.