They have superhuman intelligence.
&gt;&gt; They are vastly more intelligent the
average person.
&gt;&gt; Knowledge of other worlds.
&gt;&gt; He was able to access information that
there's no way he could know about
&gt;&gt; and possess mysterious powers.
There was one girl who could wave her
hands and spontaneously the flower buds
popped open right in front of everyone's
eyes. On every continent, there are
incredible stories of children so
advanced that some believe they come
from the stars.
And so these star children in a way are
some new race perhaps that's living
amongst us right now.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings. What if it
were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history?
And if so, might there be a connection
between extraterrestrials
and star children?
Throughout the world, there are children
who possess a stunning punishing
abilities.
In 2002, Sho Yano graduated Sumakum Laad
from Lyola University Chicago at the age
of 12.
6 years later, he received a PhD in
molecular genetics and cell biology.
In 2006, six-year-old Einan Celeste
Collie of Singapore, who spoke his first
words at 2 weeks old, gave a science
lecture about acid and alkyoids.
And in 2013, Adam Kirby became the
youngest member of British Mensah at
just 2 years old,
scoring 141 on an IQ test and reading
books by the age of 10 months.
Highly gifted children often know things
that they shouldn't know. They often
surprise us with the things they're able
to understand at very young ages.
And they're able to bring together
disperate pieces of information from
history, scientific discovery, and their
own experiences and heightened intuitive
sense.
Throughout human history, there have
been children who stand out for their
advanced knowledge and incredible
abilities.
But are these uniquely talented and
intelligent children simply the product
of good genetics? Or could there be
another explanation for why some
children display abilities far beyond
their years?
Some ancient astronaut theorists believe
there are children born here on Earth
who have a connection to beings from
beyond our world. They call them star
children.
When we see these star children, these
children who are gifted with
extraordinary human function,
born seeming to know things already,
show that there is some sort of
interaction going on with a non-physical
intelligence.
The concept is that children are being
born with a higher level of awareness.
These kids, many people believe, are
being born in order to help usher in a
true new age, a time of peace, a time of
greater consciousness and greater
prosperity for the planet.
What is commonly termed the star
children has always been with the
American Indian people throughout the
ages
and uh these are special children.
They're the ones that can heal with our
hands.
These star children are said to have
lots of special qualities. Their psychic
abilities are quite enhanced. And so
these star children in a way are some
new race that's living amongst us right
now.
Is it possible that some of the world's
most gifted children really have an
otherworldly connection? A connection
that endows them with special gifts and
the power to transform society.
Today, there is evidence that a higher
number of unusually gifted children are
being born than ever before.
There is genetic evidence to prove that
humans are evolving at a rapid rate of
speed. For example, an anthropologist
from the University of Wisconsin named
Professor John Hawks studied human DNA.
And what he found was that in the past
5,000 years alone, human DNA has evolved
by 7%
in its overall genetic structure. That
is a staggering amount. Every decade,
we're getting smarter and smarter and
smarter.
&gt;&gt; But those who have studied the star
children phenomenon say that these
unusually gifted children display more
than just superior intelligence.
&gt;&gt; Star kids are advanced in several
departments. These kids are much
brighter than the old school child of a
previous generation. They are very
sensitive.
They are compassionate. They have a
mission sense. They're using uh special
gifts they have as advanced star kids.
For example, in the area of telepathy,
they can pick up on things that somebody
else is thinking or sensing.
&gt;&gt; Parents of star children know that their
children are different. Maybe their
child is psychic and talking about
seeing things that other people can't
see
or hearing things other people can't
hear or knowing things that other people
don't know.
Some of the star children have very high
energy. They can go long periods without
sleeping, without eating. It's just not
your normal typical child.
According to Nikki Patillo, her daughter
Maddie has told her that her home is in
the sky and has displayed numerous
astonishing abilities like telekinesis
and psychic visions.
But could 10-year-old Mattie Patillo
really have superhuman abilities?
If so, where did they come from? And is
it possible that star children have been
with us for thousands of years?
Ancient astronaut theorists say evidence
that star children may have existed on
Earth in the distant past can be found
in a story that dates back over 2,000
years.
Greece the 6th century BC.
Nesarcus, the father of philosopher and
mathematician Pythagoras, was traveling
home from work one day when he came upon
an abandoned infant staring at the sun.
And he was surviving solely on the dew
from a nearby tree. Narcus named this
baby Ostrios, which literally means star
child in Greek. And here is one an early
example of a magical child. He he
adopted it. He raised it with Pythagoras
and his two brothers. So it was part of
their family.
&gt;&gt; According to the Greek myth as recorded
by Antonius Dioynes, Nesarcus gave the
child to Pythagoras to be his servant
and apprentice.
Although Pythagoras is considered one of
history's greatest mathematical minds,
some ancient astronaut theorists believe
he may have received advanced knowledge
from the boy Estrellus.
It's believed that Estrayos was actually
sent to Earth in order to instruct
Pythagoras whose mystic concepts became
foundational to the ancient world. So
here we have a curious story of someone
named Starchild who had these special
powers uh whose birth is really a
mystery. And so this child, Estraos, was
perhaps one of the early
extraterrestrial children sent to planet
Earth.
Could this peculiar child have actually
instructed one of the greatest minds of
the ancient world? And considering the
Greeks described powerful beings who
came down from the sky, is it possible
as ancient astronaut theorists suggest
that Estreas was the offspring of the
gods, part human and part divine?
Many ancient cultures, among them the
ancient Greeks and the Egyptians and
many others, describe how some children
were born from humans and the so-called
gods.
Star children are what some consider a
new breed of people.
Is the story of Estreas really an early
account of a star child?
And if the star children have existed
here on Earth throughout our history,
what is the source of their superior
intelligence and unexplainable
abilities?
Science tells us that in addition to the
two strand double helix DNA, there's an
additional 10 a etheric strands of DNA
that is dormant in humans and has been
since recorded history. It's highly
possible that alien creators have
designed us this way and certain
individuals are chosen throughout time
to awaken these dormant strands in order
to help mankind advance.
Are star children really tapping into
something inherent in our DNA?
According to geneticist David Reich of
the Harvard Medical School, there is in
fact something mysterious inside us that
has yet to be identified.
In his study published in the fall of
2013,
Reich examined the genome of
Neanderthalss and another group of
ancient hominids known as Dinisovvens,
both of which interbred with humans.
He discovered that their DNA dating back
more than 400,000 years contains an
unknown ancestor.
Now, this is incredibly exciting to me
because I've always maintained that what
some geneticists currently refer to as
junk DNA might not be junk after all.
And this study proves this in part. DNA
is a code. And just because its code
hasn't been cracked yet doesn't mean
it's actually junk. And to speculate
even further, what if this unknown
species was not of earthly origin and
every human being already is parti?
Is it really possible that
extraterrestrial beings modified
mankind's DNA in the distant past as
ancient astronaut theorists contend?
And if so, might certain exceptional
people like star children have found a
way to channel their alien origins?
Perhaps additional clues lie in the
Mexican desert where a discovery was
made of a mysterious skull.
Copper Canyon, Mexico.
In 1930, while exploring a mine tunnel,
a teenage girl unears two skulls.
One of them is oddly misshaped.
Radioarbon dating tests reveal the skull
is roughly 900 years old.
And according to a dentist who examined
the upper jaw, the mysterious relic came
from a child no more than 5 years old.
Mainstream scientists insist the
deformation of what is now known as the
star child skull is due to a genetic
disorder,
most likely hydrophilis,
a condition in which an abnormal amount
of fluid causes the skull to enlarge.
But paranormal researcher and caretaker
of the skull, Lloyd Pi, says he has
ruled out this possibility based on the
skull's unique shape.
Wasn't hydrophalic because it's clear
that if you're hydrophalic, you blow up
like a balloon. You don't blow up with a
defined shape and with a crease down the
middle. You definitely don't grow grow
up with a crease down the middle between
two of your suture lines.
But many researchers are not only
baffled by the volume of the skull,
which measures more than 10% larger than
that of an average adult, but also a
number of other characteristics they say
are distinctly not human.
The star child skull has half the
thickness of ordinary human bone, but
it's also twice as dense as ordinary
human bone with a consistency more
similar to dental enamel.
It has bizarre thick strands in it,
almost like there's some extra powerful
weave inside the bone.
It also has this bizarre reddish residue
that appears to be similar to bone
marrow, but very different from what we
normally see.
There are no sinus cavities, for
instance.
There are many attachments inside the
skull for tendons that human beings
don't have.
And it appears to be some sort of
hybridization. It's part human, but also
part something else.
When the star child's skull is subjected
to forensic reconstruction, the face
that is produced appears eerily similar
to descriptions of gray aliens.
It has all the physical attributes that
are typically described by people who
have encounters or alleged that they
have encounters with gray aliens. It has
very unusual eyes.
It has expanded parietals.
It has a crease down the middle.
It has a very, very narrow lower face.
Plus, it has a monster brain in that
head.
Lloyd Pi launched what he calls the
Starchild project,
working with independent researchers to
determine exactly who or what this
unusual skull belonged to.
According to him, DNA tests carried out
by Trace Genetics in 2003 revealed
shocking results.
While scientists uncovered mitochondrial
DNA or DNA inherited solely from the
mother,
they were unable to detect nuclear DNA
or DNA from both the mother and father.
When we tried to recover the star
child's nuclear DNA in six attempts, no
recovery.
So at that time, what that obviously
indicated was if the star child's
mitochondrial DNA was recoverable, that
meant it had a human mother. And if its
nuclear DNA was not recoverable, then
there was something wrong with the
father's DNA.
Cuz if the father had been human, you
would have had as easy a recovery of it
as you did of the human mother. So we
knew right then in uh 2003 something was
very wrong with at least dad.
And so we formed the assumption based on
the evidence that it was a human alien
hybrid with a human mother and an alien
father.
But more advanced DNA testing in 2011
revealed something even more shocking.
The DNA not only of the father but also
the mother did not appear to be human
after all.
Once we began to recover longer
stretches of the mitochondrial DNA, we
found out that they didn't really fit at
all.
And so now the genetic evidence
indicates that it didn't have a human
mother. It's just purely alien.
reasons mainstream science resists any
kind of information that is in support
of UFOs and aliens
is simply because it's going to change
everything about a certain aspect of
their baywick of their purview.
Although Lloyd Pi passed away in
December of 2013,
his research team hopes to one day
recover the entire genome of the star
child skull,
ultimately revealing the truth about
what they and other researchers maintain
is an otherworldly species.
By looking deeper into this skull and
looking at the genetics, it's very
possible that if we can analyze the full
spectrum of the genome, we might find
our first proof of extraterrestrial
intervention.
One of the things we have to seriously
consider is the possibility that human
life on Earth did not originate on
Earth. That we might be the surviving
remnant of settlers who came here long
ago.
When we find brain sizes that are twice
as big as a normal human brain, we are
left with compelling evidence that the
extraterrestrials that we think we're
looking for might be a lot closer to us
than we ever would have dared to imagine
before.
Might this extraordinary skull have been
that of an alien child that lived here
on Earth hundreds of years ago?
And if so, is this an ancestor of the
star children that some believe are
among us today?
Perhaps further clues can be found by
examining cultures who believe certain
children are born with a direct link to
the stars.
Currently, there are 562 Native American
tribes in the United States.
Many of them, like the Navajo, Hopi, and
Zouri have stories of other worldly
beings visiting Earth.
Often referred to as star beings, these
alien visitors are said to come down
from the sky to teach mankind.
And in some cases, they are even said to
mate with human women, resulting in the
birth of star children.
The stories of star children are quite
common in native culture.
There can be quite a variety of forms of
that sort of thing as well, but
typically there's a star and a human
being that join together and a child is
born from that union.
They were then cared for and raised by
the Indian tribes until the age of six
when the star beings would return and
retrieve the star children
and leave the entire tribe staring up
into the night sky wondering what had
happened to them and where they'd gone.
&gt;&gt; That's quite an interesting story in
itself to give birth to a star child and
and then have it taken from you.
There's also the story of some star
children have been left behind
to become interwoven into the tribe. A
lot of them later in life become elders
even at a very young age.
And that's because they're believed to
carry the ability or the knowledge to
heal the earth.
According to the Hopi people, a tribe of
more than 18,000 living on a reservation
in northeastern Arizona,
it is the star children who will
ultimately repair what they call the
Coyani Scotsy,
meaning a life of corruption and turmoil
or life out of balance.
The hope you believe the earth is out of
caner. It's not balanced any longer. And
it's these star children that live among
the Hopi that advise even the elders on
how to put the earth back into balance
again.
The star kids job as they grow up is
going to be not only to inherit the
earth as the phrase goes but to reform
the earth to remake human society.
In the Hopy legend, it is said that the
star children will prepare humankind for
the arrival of what they call the blue
star and the cacina or star being who
will arrive with it.
There's a lot of debate what the blue
star is,
but when the blue star comes,
it will crash to the earth.
This dwelling place in the sky will
crash to the earth
and the blue star Kacachina will take
off his mask in the village plaza
and that will be the end of the fourth
world.
Many Hobie refer to the blue star as a
house in the sky, leading some ancient
astronaut theorists to suggest that this
prophecy is a reference to the impending
arrival of extraterrestrial life.
Some hopey refer to the blue star as a
house in the sky or a dwelling in the
firmament that one day will descend from
the stars amidst a fiery crash.
Now, what does this mean? To me, what is
described here might be the eventual
arrival of extraterrestrial craft? The
day they will return will change
mankind's history forever, because then
the truth will be revealed to the masses
in one instant for everyone to see.
But if the star children of Hobie
mythology really were advanced
otherworldly beings,
might there be some still living among
us in the present day?
And if so, might we find other ancient
cultures with similar legends of unusual
children possessing extraordinary
powers?
Tibet, just northeast of the Himalayas.
This plateau is the world's highest and
largest, spanning more than 450,000
square miles.
Known as the roof of the world, it is
here that the Buddhist spiritual leader
called the Dalai Lama began his rule
more than 600 years ago.
In 1937, the 14th Dalai Lama was
recognized.
Now living in exile in India following
the Chinese takeover of Tibet in 1959,
Tenzin Giatzo is believed to be the
reincarnation of a Buddhist deity.
So all of these Dalai Lamas are then uh
the bodhicat incarnated beings
and uh then Dalai Lama is obviously the
incarnated being of the previous Dalai
Lama. So in essence they all are the you
know incarnations of the bodhicle.
&gt;&gt; Upon his death the outgoing Dalai Lama
will transfer his essence into the form
of a Buddha. until the time at which his
spirit can reincarnate into its new
chosen body.
A committee of high llamas or priests is
tasked with searching for the young boy
who will be the next leader.
The choosing a Daly Lama is a long and
arduous process.
The 13th Daly Lama before his death
pointed towards the east. And so when he
died, the expectation was that the 13th
would be reincarnated in the eastern
part of Tibet. Now the first thing that
they do is they go to Lamolo Latte, a
lake that is sacred to Paulen Lammo, a
protector deity of the Daly Lamos line.
And the viceroy then Ray King went and
had a vision and saw a house close to a
monastery with a turquoise roof in the
east.
And so they began to send out
explorations of that
a selection party. They will go and look
for the signs of the previous Dalai
Lama. And if this particular child
exhibits certain those qualities and
then he will be presented also with many
of the personal belongings that the
Dalai Lama had along with other new
objects and if he's a true reincarnation
of that particular Dalai Lama then he
will identify those objects that belong
to the previous Dalai Lama.
And this is seen as a test of the Daly
Lama that the Daly Lama would have some
access to past memories and
familiarities of a previous incarnation.
&gt;&gt; There is some sort of interaction going
on with a non-physical intelligence.
They are essentially downloading
information that they shouldn't seem to
have in and amongst themselves. One
explanation for this is the possibility
that there is a soul aspect that is from
the gods from extraterrestrials
that is somehow coupling with people on
Earth.
&gt;&gt; This idea of a reincarnated child
carrying knowledge from beyond our world
mirrors the modern-day star child
concept.
&gt;&gt; These souls are coming from all areas of
the galaxy.
Some of them are souls that have
reincarnated here on Earth many, many
times. Other souls come from other
places.
So, you have to wonder if the Daly Lama
himself isn't some early star child
who's here uh on Earth to to help the
Tibetan people, especially and all of
mankind.
&gt;&gt; Could the Dalai Lama really have a
connection to other worldly beings?
And might he like the blue star cacina
of the Hopey stories be here to help
shape the future of mankind?
While most stories of star children
describe them as being here to aid
humanity,
could there be some that have a more
sinister mission?
Abalene, Texas,
180 m west of Dallas.
Late one night in 1996,
journalist Brian Bethl was waiting in
his parked car just outside a movie
theater when two young boys walked up
and asked for a ride home.
Bethl was nervous initially at the
approach of these children and he wasn't
sure why.
He estimated their ages to be somewhere
between 10 and 14 years old. They began
to speak to him in a very strange
manner.
And they came up with this unlikely
story of needing money to go to the
local cinema. Could he give them a ride
back home?
And they seemed very malevolent, very
evil. There was something deeply
unsettling about them.
Finally, the children made eye contact
with Bethl. At which point he realized
their eyes were solid black.
Not just the pupil, but the entire eye.
Solid black. This sort of pushed Bethl
over the edge. Put the car in reverse.
He pulled away from these kids as
quickly as he could. And when he glanced
back, there was nothing there.
Bethl documented his account on the
internet and soon others were posting
similar encounters with the so-called
blackeyed kids.
&gt;&gt; Since publicity has been given to the
phenomenon, other people have come
forward who talked about sightings and
encounters in the 40s and the 50s. So,
we're not really sure when it all
actually began. Is it possible, as
ancient astronaut theorists suggest,
that these strange beings are star
children with evil intentions?
What differentiates the blackeyed
children from the star children is the
fact that the star children are very
often described as being friendly,
benevolent, and positive.
The blackeyed children are devilish,
occult driven, and totally negative.
&gt;&gt; There's a contemporary urban legend that
there are blackeyed children that will
show up at your door and ask for a glass
of water or beg some food or ask to use
the phone or something.
They are demonic. They are trouble. They
are children, so they seem innocent. But
watch for the black eyes that will give
away the trouble to come.
&gt;&gt; As the years have unfolded, more and
more people have come forward with their
encounters. It seems very clear at this
point that there's something much more
sinister going on than just a simple
urban legend.
Most people describe the blackeyed
children as being in the age range of 10
to early teens. They're described as
having very pale skin.
Not a blemish is ever seen on the skin.
Their eyes are solid black.
Now, this is the most startling trait.
Obviously,
they tend to speak in a very cold manner
and repeat phrases frequently as if
they've memorized certain key things to
say and repeat.
And they say things like, "We're hungry.
We want in," but with this dead look.
And I mean, again, black eyes. You're
looking at these kids with black eyes.
Close the door. They will leave. They
won't like try to break in or anything
like that, but they want in. And I think
if they get in, I think maybe they're
after your soul or something like that.
&gt;&gt; Now, of course, if a kid comes knocking
on your door, your first thought is,
well, you want to help him. But that's
the very last thing that crosses the
mind of the blackeyed children
witnesses. They want to get as far away
from them as possible.
There have been cases where security
cameras were present during the
encounter.
Very mysteriously, the security cameras
experienced glitches in their tape.
In some ways, it makes it all the more
intriguing.
There are many theories about the
blackeyed children, but some ancient
astronaut theorists believe their
appearance and mannerisms
reveal an extraterrestrial origin.
They have these jet black solid eyes,
hence the name. Look very, very creepy
and weird.
It's reported that the blackeyed
children too may be hybrids,
but they're a little more evil than the
normal star children that we're
accustomed to.
It's possible that for all the white
that is coming in with these star
children, there's also a counterbalance,
something dark that is coming in at the
same time.
And it may be that these blackeyed
children represent the negative side of
the actual star children that are coming
into our world.
Could the blackeyed kids actually be
extraterrestrials
in a limbo state between dimensions?
And might these childlike beings be part
of a much larger other worldly agenda?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes
and point to the hungry ghosts of
Thailand as proof.
According to this legend, the spirits of
some children can become trapped in
between the worlds of life and death.
And every year during the full moon of
the seventh lunar month of the Chinese
calendar,
these spirits are free to roam the
earth. The Hungry Ghost Festival is
designed to plate these spirits.
People believe that because of their
desires, because of their needs, they
can make contact with humans. Often
these desires translate into extreme
desires for food.
The hungry ghosts that come out of
Thailand seem to be descriptions of what
appear to be children. and their
insatiable appetite can never be filled.
&gt;&gt; These hungry ghosts are to be feared.
Some people in Asia believe that the
appearance of these blackeyed children
is a manifestation of a hungry ghost
asking you to invite it inside so that
it can have food or water or whatever
else that it desires.
Are the hungry ghosts of Thailand
somehow connected with the blackeyed
kids seen in America today?
And if so, is this further evidence that
there really are star children among us?
Some ancient astronaut theorists believe
the answer might be connected to the
prophecies of one of the world's most
legendary psychics.
Edgar Casey has been called the most
documented psychic of the 20th century,
having given thousands of psychic
readings to seekers while in an
unconscious state.
He was known for diagnosing illnesses
and for revealing information about the
past and future.
In July of 1932,
Edgar Casey predicted that between the
years of 1998 and 2015, a new humanity
would emerge.
According to him, this highly evolved
group of humans referred to as the fifth
root race would be capable of great
powers that would benefit humankind.
These children, he said, would be super
advanced humans with extra sensory
capabilities. They'd be psychic.
They might have the ability of
telekinesis, the ability to move objects
with their minds.
And Casey said that they would actually
be able to trace their lineage back to
the ancient world.
What Edgar Casey was getting in his
future visioning
uh was a transformed society. And that
is the same kind of vision that the Hopi
ancestors have handed down their oral
tradition that there will be a
transition from current corrupt fourth
world to a much better kind, just
peaceable, environmentally sensitive,
made over society.
Edgar Casey was talking about star
children manipulated genetically by ETSs
planted on this planet for some future
event. I think Casey saw it in his
trances and it's happening now.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible Edgar Casey foretold of
the coming of star children? Advanced
beings that can be traced back
throughout ancient mythology.
And if the star children do exist, how
do we identify them?
In 1982, the Chinese government launched
a nationwide search for children with
extraordinary abilities.
Some of the talents they looked for were
psychic powers, telekinesis, and the
ability to manipulate time and space.
There was one girl who could wave her
hands over a bush that had buds of
flowers on it and spontaneously
accelerate time so that the flower buds
popped open right in front of everyone's
eyes. Some could read while blindfolded.
Some could move objects to
telepathically. We don't know what
became of these children because this
was some years ago now. But the fact
that the research was done and something
was identified seems to bolster Casey's
prophecies.
&gt;&gt; The question then becomes, where does
this extrahuman function come from? Is
it some part of our extraterrestrial DNA
that's been activated by the process
that the Chinese put them through? Could
we actually see a new, higher
functioning, more advanced, superior
human being in our future?
In total, the Chinese identified more
than 100,000 children who had what
researchers refer to as extrahuman
function or EHF.
Is it possible, as some ancient
astronaut theorists suggest, that this
is evidence that the star children
phenomenon is real?
A lot of people believe that these star
children that are coming into our world
actually vibrate at a higher level of
existence than most humans do. It's a
higher level of connectivity, a higher
level of sensitivity that allows them to
connect into the collective
consciousness in a way that most of us
have forgotten how to do. The potential
of these children is exciting and the
possibilities are unlimited.
There are those who believe that human
beings are going through an evolutionary
leap and that some children are being
born today with special abilities that
future generations will eventually all
possess.
But could they also have been sent here
with a profound plan? Perhaps one of
extraterrestrial design.
I believe that the star children, they
have a mission from different parts of
the universe.
But I believe that they're here for a
purpose and I think one of them is to
correct what has happened into the the
planet that we're on, mother earth.
The timing of all these star seed
children suddenly appearing with all
these new attributes and gifts would
make sense if alien creators would
awaken these DNA strands in order for
these star seed children to advance us
into this new era of enlightenment
with these star children. a new phase,
an advanced, more spiritual, more
knowledgeable type of humanity is
appearing all over Earth. Won't this be
really the end result of
extraterrestrials manipulating us and
helping us to grow and achieve the kind
of civilization that the
extraterrestrials have planned for us
all along?
Are there really alien children
numbering in the tens of thousands being
born here on Earth as some ancient
astronaut theorists suggest?
And if so, why are they here?
Is it to replace us? Or is it to teach
us about our potential and to guide us
into the future? One in which we will
all become
star children.
It has been called the key to the
universe.
&gt;&gt; We are just discovering something which
is completely blowing our minds.
&gt;&gt; A gateway to new technologies.
&gt;&gt; We're going into vast unknown territory.
Who knows what we'll find?
&gt;&gt; And possibly the most important
scientific breakthrough of all time.
It's going to open up new layers of our
understanding of reality.
Could the so-called God particle really
reveal the truth about our origins?
And might clues to its significance have
been left here on Earth thousands of
years ago by extraterrestrial beings?
We can use this to understand our place
in the universe and even to teleport and
travel through time and space.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really helped to
shape our history? And if so, might
there be evidence in the discovery of
the God particle?
Every religion seeks to answer the same
question. Where did we come from?
Philosophers, sages, and priests have
pondered our origins since the dawn of
humanity,
while science has looked for evidence
that might one day give us the answer.
Both religion and science approach the
idea of where we come from with a set of
rules.
Science has the scientific method.
Religion comes at the same question with
its own set of rules, a presupposition
that a god or gods exist.
Religion gives us a certain view of
reality. And science gives us a
different view of reality. And yes,
there are points at which these two
worldviews are compatible.
&gt;&gt; Science and religion at their best
moments are searching for truth as is
philosophy.
Especially at moments like the moment of
the big bang,
the moment of creation, the genesis.
These
streams of thought converge. In effect,
science and religion and philosophy are
all searching for the same thing.
&gt;&gt; It reminds me of Einstein's question,
what were God's thoughts when he was
making the universe?
&gt;&gt; If science and religion are both
searching for answers to the same
questions, then why do we so often
consider them at odds?
Is it necessary that one negates the
other?
Science speaks nothing whatsoever about
the existence of God.
And because of that, there's still an
opening for God. Right? There's still a
possibility that God stands behind all
this, that God's responsible for the Big
Bang.
In the ancient world, the philosophers
were the scientists. There was no clear
distinction between hard research and
theological speculations. All serious
thinkers were trying to figure out the
nature of reality.
Now we consider these to be separate
pursuits.
If we truly want to bridge the gap
between religion and science,
we must recognize
that religion needs to become more
scientific
and science would benefit by becoming a
wee bit more religious. not in the
mythological sense, but by looking back
to the religious in quote what they
interpret to be myth and say if there's
any legitimacy or reality to this, what
is it? Let's explore. Let's discover.
Let's find out what the truth is.
As our technology advances at an
increasingly rapid rate, are we getting
closer to discovering our true origins?
and finding out whether or not we really
are alone in the universe.
Some believe a recent scientific
breakthrough may prove to be a giant
leap forward in our search for the
truth.
Geneva, Switzerland.
Here, buried over 300 ft beneath the
Earth and covering a remarkable 17-mi
expanse,
is the largest and most complex machine
ever created,
the Large Hadron Collider, or LHC.
Smashing tiny protons together at speeds
of nearly 670 million mph, the LHC
creates such intense energy that some
people are afraid it could actually
create a black hole and swallow up the
entire Earth.
The Large Hadron Collider is a real
triumph of human civilization. It's
easily the most complicated and powerful
device that the human beings have ever
built.
You're actually firing two protons into
each other and having them collide with
an enormous release of energy
recreating conditions in a very small
area similar to the big bang in its very
earliest instant.
It is a bit like going back in time
towards the big bang or the beginning of
the universe getting to points in the
history of the universe where the
energies were that high.
On July 4th, 2012,
thousands crowded outside an auditorium
at the European Organization for Nuclear
Research or CERN to hear the
announcement of the LHC's first major
finding. Streaming the event live across
the world, scientists prepared to reveal
a discovery that could solve a decades
old mystery about the nature of our
universe. The atmosphere in the room was
was incredible. It was not like a normal
physics symposium or seminar. It was
truly something of completely different
magnitude was was going to be announced
that it is completely extraordinary
which it was.
As a layman, I would now say
I think we have it.
What the scientists at CERN had
discovered was a tiny bit of matter that
some call the God particle.
Scientists around the world celebrated
the discovery of the God particle as a
milestone in human knowledge and thought
that it's going to open up new layers of
our understanding of reality.
But just what is the so-called God
particle and what is it telling us about
the universe?
Known in the scientific community as the
Higs Bosen, the particle was first
theorized by physicist Peter Higgs in
1964.
Its discovery confirms the existence of
an invisible force throughout the
universe known as the Higs field.
Scientists believe when particles
interact with this field, they acquire
mass, which slows them down and allows
them to form matter such as planets and
stars. A image that's often used is ping
pong balls moving through sand or sugar.
Sometimes they're pushed down real deep.
Sometimes they're on top of the sand. If
you're on top, you move around quickly.
If you're deep in, you move slowly. And
that interaction
with this other Higs particle is what
gives other particles their mass.
&gt;&gt; You really can't overemphasize the
importance of finally saying there is a
Higs particle and that we really are on
the right track.
&gt;&gt; There's great excitement in the
scientific community because the Higs
field permeates all of spaceime.
It's possible theoretically to
effectively switch off the mass of
particles and achieve near light speed
very easily. This could open up not only
the planets but the stars to human
exploration.
Whether it's through science, religion,
philosophy, or the ancient astronaut
theory, the fact is we are all seeking
answers to the same questions. Who are
we? Where did we come from? And
ultimately, where are we going? And so
we celebrate a discovery like the Hicks
Bzon or God particle because it brings
us that much closer to answering the
questions that have fascinated humanity
for thousands of years.
Scientists believe that the discovery of
this tiny particle could represent a
quantum leap in our understanding of the
universe.
Some have even proposed that it could
open the door to anti-gravity
technology, travel at the speed of
light, and the creation of wormholes.
However, ancient astronaut theorists
proposed that the God particle is not a
new discovery, but rather a rediscovery.
Chandagar, India.
This thriving city at the foot of the
towering Himalayas is the capital of
India's Punjab state.
It was in this region of northwest India
that scholars believe a series of
religious texts called the Vedas were
compiled from oral stories that had been
passed down for centuries.
The Vedas according to the Indian
tradition itself were put together in
their final form about 5,000 years ago.
But these hymns had been circulating in
the Indian region for a long time. We do
know that not a single letter of the
four Vedas has changed
unlike any other texts in the world. So
there was a belief that the text of the
Vedas should not be tampered with
because they represent the entire
cosmos.
In the Hindu lore, the vadas are not of
earthly origin. They are from mysterious
sources and they are from before time.
They are from before human history and
are said to be from before even the
gods.
Major figures in modern science were
ardent students of the vades. Boris and
Schroinger read arduously. Oppenheimer
could read it in Sanskrit.
Even Einstein and Tesla were known to
have read it. It had a profound
influence on modern thinking.
Inside these ancient tombs are
Hinduism's first stories of creation.
In one Vic text called the Rigveda,
creation was said to have begun suddenly
and explosively from an infantessimal
point of pure energy. It describes this
strange cosmic egg that begins as a
single concentrated point and everything
expanded from this single concentrated
point to form the universe. Now if you
look at this from a modern perspective,
this actually reflects modern science's
big bang theory where the universe began
as a singularity
and it expanded to form the universe as
we know it today. To me, the
similarities are astounding.
&gt;&gt; It's not like this idea was just banging
around for anybody to see. It was a
concept that our scientists didn't start
to embrace until the 20th century. And
yet, it was already there in these texts
that are at least 3,000 years old, if
not much older.
What is remarkable in the Vedas is that
they were able to come to an
understanding which is very similar to
the understanding that modern science
has reached through the intuitions of
our great contemporary scientists.
Is it really possible that the Hindu
creation story from the rig beta is
evidence that people living thousands of
years ago may have had knowledge of the
precise scientific process involved in
the creation of the universe?
A process modern scientists are only
just beginning to understand.
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
believe that further proof can be found
in another early creation story. The
Hebrew Bible's book of Genesis.
One of the first phrases in Genesis, let
there be light. And this is like the
moment of the Big Bang. The whole
universe began effectively as light, as
energy.
We're speaking of moments of existence
that humans would experience just as a
great flash of light.
And in that sense, the story of Genesis
in the Bible and science converge.
We have in this verse the description of
the very first light, the light out of
which all things came. The light which
led finally to matter, to things of
substance, to the universe itself.
In current scientific theory, fractions
of a second after the big bang, the
Higsfield transformed what had been
particles of light into mass, matter
into creation itself. We have very
strong parallels with the scriptures.
First light and then matter.
Similar descriptions of the universe
beginning from a single point of light
can be found in cultures throughout the
ancient world
from Egypt to China and to the American
Southwest.
In the Egyptian creation narrative, the
very first god was Atum. He emerged from
the darkness to create Egyptian
civilization.
the Sumerian, the Egyptian, the Norse.
Something emerges out of darkness. Order
emerges out of chaos. Where there was no
form, form begins. There is something
about these stories that is beyond any
one of them that seems to elude to a
greater reality.
But how is it that the ancient world's
most sacred texts all describe creation
in much the same way as our current
scientific theory? And where did our
ancestors get this seemingly advanced
understanding of the origins of the
universe? Ancient astronaut theorists
believe the answers may lie in the
stories of the man who compiled the
vadic texts in written form. a
mysterious sage named Va Viasa.
&gt;&gt; In the Hindu mythologies, Viasa is
believed to be a reincarnation of the
god Vishnu and that Vishnu specifically
took on a human embodiment to be able to
write down these classic texts. This
sage Vasa was the author of the vadas
was said to be an immortal and
ultimately one of the gods himself.
Some have suggested that Viasa came to
earth to record and impart this vadic
knowledge to mankind.
Now could it be possible that he was in
fact an extraterrestrial who came here
with a direct mission to bring knowledge
to mankind and guide them in their
understanding of science and physics?
Could Veta Vasa really have been an
extraterrestrial?
and mighty have educated mankind about
the workings of the universe thousands
of years before the Large Hadron
Collider was ever even constructed. But
if so, why?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe
further evidence can be found in the
stories of a Greek scientist
2500 years ahead of his time.
The Thrian coast, Greece.
At the northern end of the Aian Sea lie
the ruins of an ancient metropolis.
2500 years ago, Abddera was a thriving
seapport and trading center. It was a
wealthy hub of commerce between empires
and the home of one of history's
greatest thinkers, Democrus.
Democrus was a Greek philosopher in the
fifth century before the common era. He
was not just a philosopher but a
scientific theorist. In fact, his great
gifts have led him to be revered as the
father of modern science.
Democrus was born to a wealthy family
and educated by Persian magi.
Learned priests who were said to control
the fates.
It was believed that he was trained by
the magi, these priests of the east, and
that he also traveled to Egypt and to
Babylon and studied with the secret
masters who had these ancient wisdom
teachings hidden in their lineage.
Democrus traveled quite a bit and
through his travels learned uh quite a
lot. Traveling east through what we call
the ancient near east, studying with the
magi and studying with Chaldans who were
uh known for their magical mysterious
learnings and their magical mysterious
knowledge as well.
Through his travels and his interactions
with people said to have mysterious
knowledge, the young philosopher and
mathematician came up with a radical
theory concerning all matter in the
universe.
Democrus theorized that everything,
people, plants, stone, and sun were made
of the same stuff, tiny particles he
called atomos.
He developed an early version of the
atomic theory. It is an early theory of
everything in the world being made up of
these very very small uh invisible
particles which Democratism called
atoms.
&gt;&gt; Democrus argued that there's a
fundamental building block even though
we couldn't see them. That was the
theory the phil philosophical theory
that was in ancient Greece. This is is
long before science. When Democratus was
talking about Adams, it's amazing how
close he got to what we really know.
What he was motivated by was the idea
that if you cut something up, the pieces
still have the same properties. And so
he just did the thought experiment.
Well, if I keep cutting it smaller, then
eventually I'll have the smallest
possible piece. And that's the atom. And
that's what gives it its properties.
That's basically our picture of matter.
Now, that smallest piece is the protons,
neutrons, and the electron that make up
the atom.
What Democratus articulated 2500 years
ago is remarkably similar to today's
standard model of physics, the basis of
our search for the Higs bosen or God
particle.
But how could Democrus have known about
the atom and the forces that govern it?
Could it be that Democrus had access to
advanced and perhaps even
extraterrestrial information about the
quantum realm?
Some ancient astronaut theorists believe
that the answer may lie in an even more
radical suggestion Democrus made about
the cosmos.
In his writings, Democratus proposed
that there are many worlds and that
these worlds even sustained life. Now,
could it be that by other worlds he was
maybe even referring to parallel
universes?
As we fast forward from Democrus to the
the more current era, where the idea of
parallel universes have really taken off
is the multi-universe view where all
possible universes has occurred. This is
very similar to Democratus' idea of the
making all possible universes, but now
they're very much next to each other,
parallel in space, as well as occurring
in time.
Some cosmologists today believe our
universe is one of many and that the God
particle could lead us to discovering
these other universes.
Is it possible that Democrus had
knowledge of this 2500 years ago?
And might that information have come to
him not only from a different world, but
perhaps a different universe?
Democrus claimed to communicate with
what he thought were parallel worlds. He
sometimes would exercise his energy by
going into places of the dead and would
receive what he thought were voices and
information which would predict the
future.
Some accounts of Democrus describe him
as having access to magical powers with
which he could control the weather and
predict natural disasters.
He also allegedly communicated with what
he referred to as other worlds. And he
described images and voices that came to
him giving him all sorts of information.
Is it possible that the priests of the
magi, the priests of the Egyptian
mystery schools, and the priests of
Babylon taught him some form of ancient
practice that allows the human body to
become an instrument to connect directly
on a telepathic level with
extraterrestrial beings.
&gt;&gt; The more that we draw forth in science,
we're going to discover the truths of
the past that have long been hidden from
us. Yes, mankind has been directed from
the beginning.
But did Democrus truly understand atomic
theory and the concept of multiple
universes all the way back in the fifth
century BC?
Or is it possible, as some ancient
astronaut theorists suggest, that he was
simply documenting information passed on
to him by more advanced beings?
clues about our universe deliberately
left for us to discover over time.
Perhaps the answer can be found by
looking at the discovery of the God
particle and its connection to the Mayan
calendar,
Mexico.
These majestic stone ruins are all that
remain of the once powerful Mayan city.
With its towering stone pyramids and
ornate plazas, Palenke reveals the true
sophistication of the Mayan
civilization.
In terms of scientific and artistic
achievements, the Maya were among the
world's best ancient civilizations.
Their advancements in math, engineering,
astronomy, geometry were unparalleled in
the entire Americas.
It was in this ancient Mayan city that
researchers have unearthed, one of the
best examples of a remarkable calendar
that tracked not only days and months,
but also ages spanning thousands of
years.
The Maya were very very intent on
recording the passage of time. So much
so that early scholars called the entire
culture esoteric time worshippers. They
had a number of colundal cycles. The one
of the last ones they made we call the
long count. To the western mind you
could look at it as the odometer on your
car. It clicks through time. And
scholars have a difference of opinion
whether it is a cycle that will reset
itself or whether it is a system that
can go backwards and forwards into
perpetuity.
The Mayans were obsessed with the idea
of time cycles and worlds. They believed
that we had existed in three previous
worlds and that they could forecast or
predict the emergence of a new world.
And that was the purpose of the Mayan
calendar was to pinpoint a specific date
in time when one world would end and a
new world would begin.
The Mayan calendar last turned on
December 21st, 2012.
Thousands of people from around the
world descended on Mayan sites to mark
the event.
Some however sought dire omens in the
occasion.
&gt;&gt; The Mayan prediction of the end of the
world in December 2012 caused a
firestorm of prophecy watchers and
people believing that it was actually
doomsday. But as we know now, nothing of
that nature actually happened at that
time.
If it wasn't a doomsday clock, as many
believed, then just what was this
ancient calendar predicting?
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest it
may have in fact been counting down, not
to the end of the world, but to the dawn
of a new era in human history.
The Mayans never said it was going to be
doomsday. They simply said it would be a
new moment of creation.
Maybe the Mayan calendar predicted a
monumental leap forward, a transition
that would lead us into a whole new era
of scientific understanding and
possibility.
What did happen was we discovered the
god particle, the Higs bosen. So perhaps
what the Mayan calendar was trying to
predict was not some terrible
catastrophe, but our own very important
discovery of the God particle and how we
can use this to understand our place in
the universe.
If the Maya did indeed predict the
discovery of the God particle, did they
also leave a clue as to where this
knowledge will take us?
Some ancient astronaut theorists believe
the answer may be found 480 mi north on
carved blocks of hard volcanic andite at
another Mayan archaeological site in
Isaba.
On Stella 5, there is a depiction of a
mythological tree that the Maya believed
connected the cosmos and the earth.
For the Maya, the world tree bridged the
seen and the unseen, the celestial and
the earthly.
The Mayans believed the tree exuded a
kind of syrup or sap called the its. It
had qualities that allowed portals to
open, to make contact with unseen
dimensions. It was the key, if you will,
to other worlds.
The Mayans talked about this type of
cosmic ooze that they thought literally
emanated from the world tree. It's
actually opened up portals to other
worlds. Maybe they're talking about some
type of advanced energy that they didn't
directly have access to, but had the
understandings and teachings possibly
taught to them by extraterrestrials.
When I looked at this symbolism of the
sacred tree, I got to thinking, what if
that sap is the Higs Bzon, the God
particle, and you have scientists saying
that it could potentially lead to time
travel and our ability to create tiny
wormholes.
Now, is it possible that we can use the
discovery of the God particle and the
Higs Bosen to understand our place in
the universe and even to teleport and
travel through time and space?
Was the Mayan calendar devised to
predict the discovery of the God
particle?
And if so, could this mean that we are
getting closer to a reconnection with
alien beings that visited Earth long
ago?
Some ancient astronaut theorists believe
another clue may be found just outside
the entrance to the large Hadron
Collider with the statue of Shiva.
Geneva, Switzerland.
Outside the headquarters of CERN's large
hadron collider is a 12-oot statue of
the Shiva Nataraja
or the dancing Shiva, one of Hinduism's
most powerful gods.
Lord Shiva is one of the three great
gods of the Hindu teaching. He is the
god of destruction. His job is to
destroy, but it is in order to renew. He
destroys and creates
his energy. The dance, he's considered
the lord of the dance, a a cosmic dance.
And it is the the dance of destruction
and recreation.
&gt;&gt; God Shiva is a complex character. It's
very difficult to understand Shiva in in
one uh in one word because he's the god
of procreation and he is also the god of
destruction. He is also the god that
destroys everything because everything
that is created must come to an end.
According to Hindu mythology, Shiva is
the god who will one day destroy the
universe to make way for a new one.
Shiva's cosmic dance is not seen as a
negative even though it is greatly
destructive.
It is destroying in order for something
new to be created. So it is an essential
part of the process of life that things
are cleared away so new things new
possibility better possibilities can
emerge.
But could the various attributes
associated with this Hindu god be
connected to a recent discovery made at
the large Hadron Collider about how our
universe could suddenly and
catastrophically end?
One of the intriguing outcomes of the
Higs Bzon mass measurement is the
realization that the Higs Bzon and the
top quark
may put us right on the ragged edge of
an instability condition in the
universe. The universe can exist in
several different states.
water. It can exist as steam, as liquid
water, frozen ice.
If the universe changes state, it would
produce bubbles of spaceime expanding at
the speed of light that could destroy
everything, all normal matter, all
everything in the universe as we know
it.
Some people are seeing theories that say
there's going to be expanding bubbles of
nothingness that will create new whole
new universes. And in a sense, we know
that the universe has to be unstable
because it made the big bang in the
first place.
Could Shiva not only be a mythological
deity that represents the ancient
Hindus's understanding of the universe?
But might he also have been an
otherworldly being who passed on
information to our ancestors that we are
only now rediscovering?
Maybe the great god Shiva, the
destroyer, was actually trying to
communicate in ancient times things that
we're learning today about breaking
things down to the finest particles and
understanding that these are how we
understand the basis of life at a
subatomic level. In Hindu tradition,
Shiva was often portrayed as blue
skinned with a third eye in the middle
of his forehead. And if you look at the
different depictions of Shiva's dance,
you see that he is almost always
surrounded by some type of a circle
structure with flames.
We see parallels to technology where
he's always depicted in this circle when
he's doing his cosmic dance. It seems
very similar to what we see at the
Hadron accelerator and this large
circular particle accelerator. Maybe
there's some tie-in between Shiva being
depicted in a circular device and the
way we're smashing particles now in the
Hadron accelerator.
Now, what did our human ancestor artists
try to depict here? Do the accounts of
his cosmic dance
refer to some type of misunderstood
technology very much similar to the
Large Hadron Collider?
In the Catholic mass, there is a
ceremonial artifact called a monstrance.
If you look at this image, if you look
at this item, it has a burst of light
very similar to the pattern of Shiva's
light, this dance of creation. Some say
this shape can be seen in the Hedrin
collider at CERN.
Does this suggest that the invention of
tools like the Large Hadron Collider are
happening as part of a plan? Did
celestial beings who came to Earth in
the distant past give early humans
insights into the origin of existence?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the
answers may be found not in what CERN
has already uncovered, but in
discoveries yet to come.
CERN headquarters,
Geneva, Switzerland.
The Large Hadron Collider was heralded
as a monumental success when it helped
to discover the Higs Bosen or God
particle in 2012.
But that was only the beginning. Since
then, researchers have embarked on a
multi-year project to upgrade what is
already the most powerful machine on
Earth by retrofitting it with bigger,
better, and more efficient systems.
When the Large Hadron Collider is
activated again in 2015,
it will wield at least double the power
it did in 2012 and could boast even 10
times more by the end of the decade.
And when you look at the size of the
detectors at the Large Hadron Collider,
you realize that we really are pushing
the limits of technology.
The large hadron collider is something
like seven times more powerful than
anything else that's existed before.
Will we even able to get even closer to
conditions in time even closer to the
beginning of the big bang?
The work that is happening right now
during the LHC shutdown is to prepare
the detectors and the experiments
for the big energy step. We are going
into even more higher energy and that
means that we're probing deeper and we
can be just around the corner of
discovering something which is
completely blowing our minds.
The human race is going to be focusing
more energy in a small area than we've
ever done before. So, we're looking for
a whole new phenomenon.
The scientists at CERN hope that by
increasing the power of the large Hadron
Collider, they will not only be able to
learn more about the God particle, but
also uncover other, perhaps even more
profound secrets of the universe.
But some scientists have voiced concerns
that the large hadron collider could
create a black hole that would swallow
up the Earth,
set off a massive nuclear explosion,
or even form a vacuum bubble that could
tip the balance of the entire universe.
Perhaps this is a little hubris and we
all know what happens when physicists uh
get full full of hubris. Uh but there's
always a little bit of fear when you're
pushing back the frontiers of science.
It's part of the frontier spirit.
&gt;&gt; We have to admit that we don't know how
the universe started. And as we go into
higher and higher energies, we don't
know what we are going to find because
this physics at these levels is an
experimental completely experimental uh
science. We don't have the complete
understanding and description of the
universe that can create this anxiety
and fear that we might create something
that will end the universe. When we look
at the experiments that have been
conducted at CERN with the Large Hadron
Collider, it may be that humanity is
taking its first baby steps towards the
actual construction of the universe.
We're manipulating matter at the
subatomic level and we are literally
harnessing the forces of creation
themselves. The amount of the universe
that we see and know that is part of the
standard model of of physics is only
like 4% of the mass of the universe.
We're going into vast unknown territory.
We're going to be witnessing events that
no human being has ever witnessed before
at energy density scales no human being
has ever been able to create before. So,
it's very exciting.
Who knows what we'll find?
&gt;&gt; By wielding the incredible power of the
large Hadron Collider, could we one day
recreate the Big Bang to form an
entirely new universe
and at the same time destroy our own?
Or might we instead be reaching the
threshold of a new age for mankind?
If ancient astronauts came to our planet
hundreds of centuries ago, perhaps they
deliberately planted the seeds of
knowledge that would eventually lead us
to where we are today.
Perhaps finding the so-called God
particle will allow us to finally answer
mankind's most persistent questions. Who
are we? Where did we come from? And the
most persistent of all,
are we alone?
Every action is being monitored.
There are millions and millions of
cameras everywhere you go. Every
conversation is recorded. Cell phones
are actually sending information about
who we're communicating with on a daily
basis.
&gt;&gt; And every secret is exposed.
&gt;&gt; We are headed into this direction where
with a stroke of a key, you can figure
out anything you want about a person. As
technology advances, information about
everything and everyone is becoming more
accessible than ever before.
But in this age of unlimited access,
should we be asking not only who is
watching us but from where? These
watchers who are extraterrestrials were
all over the earth in ancient times
watching people on Earth watching
civilization grow. And you have to
wonder, isn't this still happening
today?
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings. What if it
were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history? And if so, might they be
among us today?
June 5th, 2013,
the British daily newspaper, The
Guardian, reveals that classified
documents from the United States
National Security Agency have been
leaked.
Among them is an order from the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court
requiring Verizon to hand over metadata
from millions of Americans phone calls
to the FBI and NSA.
4 days later, Edward Snowden, a former
cyber security expert for the Central
Intelligence Agency, comes forward to
identify himself as the source of the
leak. When asked to explain his actions,
Snowden states, "I can get your emails,
passwords, phone records, credit cards.
I do not want to live in a world where
everything I do and say is recorded."
The NSA is the National Security Agency
or some people call it the National
Spying Agency which is in control of
monitoring the communication systems
throughout the world.
Every form of electronic communication
supposedly for the purposes of national
security to identify and neutralize any
threats to America. One of the documents
that Edward Snowden released was about a
project mystic which has the capability
to record the actual audio of every
conversation in an entire country if not
the planet.
Technology is really interesting as it
enhances our life in so many ways. But
with each of those enhancements, there's
also something potentially taken away
depending on how you see it. For
example, our privacy is changing or is
uh actually getting reduced almost
daily.
We've never experienced a society where
there are so many microphones, millions
and millions of cameras everywhere you
go. We are moving our entire lives into
what is known as the cloud. We are
headed into this direction where with a
stroke of a key, you can figure out
anything you want about a person.
As technology continues to advance at an
everinccreasing rate, we gain greater
access to information both from and
about each other, becoming
interconnected unlike any other time in
our history. There are those who believe
that this evolution of technology is not
entirely of our own making. but that we
have been guided by visitors that first
came to Earth thousands of years ago.
From the perspective that I look at it
all is that a long time ago
extraterrestrials provided the basic
tools, the basic knowledge with the idea
that ultimately we would turn or become
the society that we are today.
So, is it possible that we are still
being observed? And the answer is a
resounding yes.
Ancient astronaut theorists contend that
it is by extraterrestrial design that we
have become so technologically
interconnected and that we are being
watched not only by agencies of the
government but by beings from beyond our
world.
They also claim that they set us on this
course in the ancient past and that we
can find evidence of their existence in
the stories of a group of ancient aliens
known as the Watchers.
In the fourth chapter of the Hebrew
Bible's book of Daniel, the Watchers are
described as a group of divine overseers
later associated with angels.
&gt;&gt; The Watchers are essentially messengers.
And so this is why many scholars
understand the watchers to be a class of
angels since angels were understood to
be messengers in the Bible. They're
tasked with managing the earth and
watching over humans.
And some of these are said to be good
watchers. They do their jobs dutifully.
Uh and others are said to be bad
watchers.
It is said about the watchers that
nothing happens on earth that is not
ordained by their hand and executed by
their agents. Who are they? What are
they? Well, Daniel doesn't necessarily
go into greater detail, but there were
numerous other texts that teach more
about that which is recorded in the
biblical books. One of the most famous,
of course, is the book of Enoch.
The book of Enoch containing the
firstirhand account of the
greatgrandfather of Noah was stricken
from the Bible's Old Testament at the
council of Leodysa in the 4th century
AD.
In the third book of this apocryphal
text, Enoch says an angel known as a
watcher took him aboard a fiery chariot
that ascended to heaven.
Enoch is brought up into outer space
into heaven.
It's fascinatingly detailed. And the
reports of crystal walls with light
coming out of them and crystal rooms
sounds like someone with primitive
language skills trying to explain going
into a super highfidelity science
fiction reality.
In many ways, when you read the book of
Enoch, he is an abductee by
extraterrestrials, and they're taking
him into a spaceship. They're showing
him the Earth. They're giving him
special instructions.
The Book of Enoch also states that 200
Watchers descended to Earth to oversee
humankind and aid in our advancement.
The Watchers were said to have taught
mankind uh many different arts and
sciences that had previously only been
known to the angels of heaven. And these
included astronomy,
metrology,
the use of weapons.
Enoch is talking about flesh and blood
beings who came saw potential for
mankind and imparted knowledge. Those
are who the watchers were.
Could it be that the watchers described
in the book of Enoch are
extraterrestrials that came to Earth and
taught early humans in the distant past?
Did they plant the seeds of knowledge
that would lead us to this point in our
technological evolution?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
suggest that evidence for this can be
found in every corner of the world.
Around the world we find stories that
are strikingly similar to that of the
watchers coming to earth and giving
humanity forbidden knowledge especially
the secrets of heaven.
Inca legend states that the god
Vericosia created humans and taught them
astronomy, agriculture and other
advanced arts.
The Maya civilization believed their
supreme god Kukan taught humans writing,
mathematics and science.
And in ancient Chinese legend, the
divine ruler Juan D introduced numerous
advancements such as the wheel, weaving,
and writing.
In Egypt, you have the god Osiris
revealing the wisdom to mortal kind on
how they could construct civilization.
And you find this again and again um
within the the Eurasian continent in
Africa but also obviously within South
um West Asia you have the stories of the
Anunnaki.
The stories of the Anunnaki or the
Watchers or the the gods in the Greek
pantheon or any of the ancient gods were
based on physical visitations.
They are all the same group, the same
extraterrestrial. They just have
received different names among the
tribes and among the continents.
If extraterrestrials really did come
here to Earth to assist humanity, what
happened to them?
Perhaps the answer can be found with one
of the ancient world's most powerful
secret societies, which still exists
today.
The Netherlands,
March 24th, 2014.
58 world leaders gather at the World
Forum in the HEG for the third byanual
nuclear security summit.
In the center of the room is a giant
spinning hologram of a pyramid with
three smaller upside down pyramids
inside it.
This symbol, which is also worn as a pin
by the delegates, is the summit's
official logo.
But there are some who claim it
represents something else. The allseen
eye of the Illuminati.
Conspiracy theorists suggest that this
centuries old secret society is alive
and well in the 21st century
as evidenced by symbols flashed by
celebrities, industry mogul, and even
heads of state.
The modern-day Illuminati was organized
by Adam Weiss in Germany
and he formulated plans so that his
group could infiltrate all the key
powers of society. The political sphere,
the banking sphere, the media sphere
back in the late 1700s.
When we're talking about the Illuminati
today, we're talking about essentially
the most powerful secret society.
These are the people that pull the
strings from behind the scenes.
&gt;&gt; Is this just paranoia? Or might the
Illuminati still be around today
embedded in the highest levels of
society? And if so, what is their
agenda?
Some say the answer can be found with a
much older secret society which may have
been the precursor to the Illuminati,
the Knights Templar.
This band of warrior monks was formed in
1118 AD to protect pilgrims traveling to
Jerusalem during the Crusades.
But many claim that their true purpose
was to find lost religious relics hidden
at the Temple Mount.
And during their time in Jerusalem, they
rose from relative obscurity to being
the most powerful order of the Crusades.
So farreaching was their influence that
it became widely rumored they were in
league with demons.
Jacqu de Mole, the leading figure in the
history of the Knights Templar, was
brought up on charges of treason and
heresy for something like devil worship.
Somehow worshiping the dark side. This
was the charge brought against not only
De Mole but the Knights Templars in
general.
Is it possible the Knights Templar
really were in contact with other
worldly entities they encountered at the
Temple Mount?
And if so, just what were these
so-called demons? We are taught that
these Shadim the Elmonts in many ways
they're like human beings and in many
ways they're like the angels. Some are
evil, many are good. Rumor has it that
the Templar knights endeavored to
communicate with these spiritual
entities.
&gt;&gt; This concept of demons is very different
than the way we think of demons today.
Essentially, what a demon was was an
otherworldly being, a being that was not
of this earth, potentially an
extraterrestrial being with the word
extraterrestrial meaning not of this
earth.
Could
the Templars really have been influenced
by aliens that they misinterpreted as
spiritual beings?
Some ancient astronaut theorists say
that the Knights Templar were in contact
with the same extraterrestrials that
were known in biblical times as the
Watchers.
And as evidence, they point to one of
the Templars's most prominent symbols.
The same symbol that some say was
virtually present at the nuclear
security summit, the allseeing eye.
This symbol, which is sometimes just an
eye, but often an eye within a pyramid,
was used by the ancient Egyptians,
the Knights Templar,
the Rosacrruian,
the Freemasons,
the Illuminati,
and is even incorporated into the great
seal of the United States.
It is a symbol that is most commonly
interpreted to mean that someone or
something is watching us.
&gt;&gt; The eye of providence symbolizes the
idea of an omnisient intelligent
universe that is overseeing all of the
affairs that we have here on earth. For
many, the eye of providence was a symbol
that God was watching over us. But
others believe that it had a much deeper
meaning and actually extended well
beyond many other cultures. possibly
even connected to extraterrestrials.
Could the symbol of the allseeing eye be
secretly telling us that the watchers
are still here on Earth working behind
the scenes in secret societies and even
the top levels of government.
Curiously, the Book of Enoch tells of
the Watcher's arrival, but it never
tells of their departure.
&gt;&gt; We have the records as described in the
Book of Enoch and other literature that
when the Watchers came down, corrupted
the human gene pool, introducing hidden
technologies centuries before they were
meant to be introduced, things were off
track.
It was then ordained by whatever
heavenly powers that we had to start
from scratch. The flood was to come.
But yet, what happened to the Watchers?
They were not human and therefore they
were not subject to a human decree. Or
could they be susceptible to human
death? Well, the Bible doesn't say what
happened to them, but the other legends
do.
In the mystical legends, it is taught
that a good number of them escaped the
flood by escaping to secret hidden
places.
Is it possible that ancient aliens
called the Watchers actually survived
the cataclysm known as the Great Flood?
And could they not only have survived,
but managed to live among us in secret
for thousands of years?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
claim that proof can be found deep
beneath the earth.
Nevshi province, central Turkey.
Hidden 60 m below ground lies Daring
Kuyu,
an ancient subterranean city that
archaeologists believe once housed more
than 20,000 people.
First discovered in 1963,
some ancient astronaut theorists contend
the once fully functioning underground
city is evidence that ancient people
really were forced underground by a
great cataclysmic event
and that they may have had help from
more advanced beings
like the Watchers.
The amazing thing about Darren Cu is
that it was built around 9,000 BC
just before the last ice age. And you
have to ask, is it possible that it was
built by the Watchers as a refuge for
themselves or perhaps as a refuge for
humanity?
Archaeologists in the Middle East have
surmised that around 5,000 BC there was
a huge flood throughout the Middle East
and it destroyed and flooded much of
Sumeriia and Anatolia.
This is the same time where the city of
Daruyu was being occupied underground.
So we might surmise that this was one of
the refuges of the watchers.
Is it really possible that the
underground city of Darenuyu was
constructed with the help of
extraterrestrials to provide shelter
from a great flood?
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest that
Darren Kuyu is just one of numerous
locations where it appears someone or
something built a fortification to serve
as a refuge from a great cataclysm.
In a remote area of the Himalayan
mountain range in Nepal at an elevation
of 14,000 ft. Over 10,000 man-made caves
have been found carved into sheer
cliffs.
Archaeologists believe they could date
back more than 3,000 years and struggle
to explain how ancient people would have
been able to access these caves, let
alone create them.
&gt;&gt; It's not easy to get up there at all.
It's not known why would people take the
trouble to climb up a vertical cliff in
the middle of the Himalayas.
It suggests that whoever built them
might have had some sort of flying craft
technology.
Perhaps even more baffling are the wash
gro in the Onway province of China.
They are the largest ancient man-made
caves in the country, containing stone
rooms, bridges, and pavilions.
Archaeologists have no idea how they
were built, by whom, or why?
Could these ancient sites that defy
explanation have been built by alien
visitors in order to survive the great
flood?
Ancient astronaut theorists contend that
perhaps the strongest proof that the
Watchers survived the flood can be found
not in the Middle East, Asia, or India,
but in the American Southwest,
northeastern Arizona.
Sprawled across this desolate and arid
region lie the three maces.
Settlements of the Native American Opie
tribe that some have long believed align
with the stars of Orion's belt,
Anolam, Onitak, and Mntaka.
In addition to their strong ties to the
constellation of Orion, the Hopi also
have numerous legends of the Ant people,
an advanced race of beings that came to
the aid of mankind.
I've seen some of these carvings on the
rock cliffs in Arizona.
The ant people helped the Hopi survive
two major cataclysms. the destruction of
the first world by fire,
some kind of asteroid strike, or perhaps
a comet hit the Earth uh and the second
world by ice, maybe a pole shift.
But each time the ant people led the
Hopi down into caverns and helped them
survive in a subterranean world.
This story is strikingly similar to that
of the watchers who sought to protect
the humans that they had interacted
with. You have to wonder, are the ant
people somehow related to, if not the
same as the watchers of the biblical
story?
But what ancient astronaut theorists
find most fascinating about the story of
the ant people is what they are called
in Hopi.
The Hopi word for ant is Anu and the
Hopi word for friend is naki. So you put
the two together, the Anu naki, the ant
friends that the Hopi have interacted
with for centuries and millennia.
And this ties in with the Bible and with
Samrian mythology. It's all tied in
together. These ant people are pervasive
in human history.
According to Samrian texts, the
Anunnaki, much like the Watchers, were
beings who came down from the sky
and helped mankind's earliest
civilization to develop writing,
medicine, and irrigation.
Could the Hopi stories of the ant people
actually be describing the same star
travelers that the Samrians called the
Anunnaki
and that the Bible refers to as the
Watchers?
Might the ant people have been
extraterrestrials that took refuge in
the caves of the American Southwest
to survive the great flood?
But if the Watchers really did remain
here on Earth, did they also continue to
manipulate the evolution of human
society?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
claim the evidence can be found with the
strange cave dwelling entities known as
the Jin.
Muscat, Oman.
Here on the shores of the Arabian Sea
lies one of the world's 10 largest
caves, Mashless Al Jin or meeting place
of the jin. According to Islamic texts,
the jin are beings from a higher realm,
but they are not angels.
They have free will and they disobey
Allah. Just as the watchers are said to
have disobeyed God in the book of Enoch.
And many Muslims believe this 14 acre
cavern is still inhabited by these other
worldly beings.
In Islam, there is a class of beings
known as jin. The jin are angelic and
yet they are not of the ethereal realm.
They are of the earthly realm. They're
neither good nor evil. They're shape
shifters. They can help you. They can
also trick you.
&gt;&gt; They are supposed to have had magic
abilities, supernatural powers. And
humans greatly feared the jin. They're
just exiled beings who crossed over a
forbidden boundary and now find
themselves trapped in the earth plain.
In the Islamic texts, the jin appear
only when they want to be seen, often
influencing humans by whispering
instructions to them while invisible.
In order to understand the nature of
these entities, we must understand that
in many ways they're the intermediary
race.
Like human beings, they eat and drink.
Like human beings, they sexually
procreate.
But like the angels, they can
shapeshift, fly, and know the future.
Stories of encounters with the jin can
be found throughout the Muslim world.
But could they be true?
And if so, are these the same other
worldly entities that are said to have
descended to Earth before the time of
the great flood, known as the Watchers?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
claim that further evidence can be found
with the stories of similar strange
beings found all over the world.
In Africa, there are stories of the
orisha
demigods who came down from the sky that
are said to speak every language and
secretly influence events on Earth.
In Japan, the Tangu are bird-like
creatures that are said to hide out in
the mountains and change form to
manipulate humans.
But if the Watchers were active on Earth
hundreds of years ago, could they still
be living among us even to this day?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes. And
for proof, they suggest we look no
further than recent accounts of alien
abductions.
January 25th, 1967,
South Ash Burnham, Massachusetts.
30-year-old Betty Andreasen is in her
kitchen after dinner while her mother,
father, and seven children are in the
living room.
Suddenly, the power goes out.
And when it comes back on a moment
later, a beam of red light shoots
through the window.
We saw a flashing reddish orange light
coming through the pantry window.
Five beings entered my home right
through the wooden door.
They had large black eyes, tiny nose,
thin slit mouth, tiny holes for ears, a
large bulbous head. And I was quite
shocked wondering who who what is this?
You know, at that point I was taken up
into the craft.
Betty ends up going with them to some
place that she thinks is their world.
And she said it was more vivid than life
itself.
&gt;&gt; Betty Andreas's reports are very
detailed and thorough.
There's lots and lots of specific
drawings that she makes of technology on
these ships. This is before the era that
anybody was talking about this stuff.
So, it was a totally unique experience
for her.
&gt;&gt; A devout Christian, Andreas describes
her abduction as a religious experience.
The only thing I could think of that
they must be angels for them to be able
to pass through the door like that and
to take me through that door the same
way.
&gt;&gt; But for ancient astronaut theorists,
this encounter is most significant
because of how these strange beings
identified themselves.
&gt;&gt; They said that they were the watchers.
But if extraterrestrial beings known as
watchers are still living among us
today, why?
Perhaps the answer can be found by
examining other cases of
extraterrestrial abductions and by
examining whether the watchers are
watching us or if there are other beings
watching them.
June 1st, 1990,
UFO investigator Raymond Fowler
publishes The Watchers, an unprecedented
inside look at the Betty Andreasen case.
After years of hypnosis, psych exams,
and interviews,
Fowler concludes that the strange beings
Andreas encountered that called
themselves the Watchers
were the same entities that are commonly
identified today as gray aliens.
It's very interesting this word
watchers,
because when you talk with so many
people, you begin to hear patterns. And
even if you're not sitting across from a
man or a woman or a child who says, "I
was taken by a watcher, what you hear is
the abductees
knew that they were dealing with
something that knew everything about
them."
Again, the watcher idea whether you use
that name or not.
According to Betty's account, the
extraterrestrials who took her aboard
their craft subjected her to medical
examination.
&gt;&gt; And I was floated to a table. And as he
was examining me, he he said they were
going to have to measure me physically.
And at that point, they started to take
this needleike thing and thrust it into
my navl.
and I could feel it going round and
round inside me.
&gt;&gt; As incredible as Betty Andreas's
abduction story sounds, it is not
unique.
Many alleged alien abductees give very
similar accounts.
In 1961,
Betty and Barney Hill of Lancaster, New
Hampshire, made one of the earliest
alien abduction reports when they
claimed that they had been taken aboard
a ship,
placed naked on examination tables, and
probed by what they described as gray
aliens.
Linda Porter of Coina, California
reported that in 1963
she too was taken aboard a ship
where she witnessed strangelooking
creatures examining humans held in
states of suspended animation.
But if these accounts are true, what is
it that's being done to these abductees?
Watchers have two key areas of interest
as concerns humanity. One is genetics
and the other is technology and both are
found in the phenomena of alien
abductions.
So one idea would be that the purpose of
the abductions is to continue to tweak
the human body to assist humanity in
climbing the evolutionary ladder so to
speak.
Is it possible that the watchers that
were described in the Bible and the Book
of Enoch really are responsible for the
modern alien abduction phenomenon
and that they are continuing to alter
our genetic makeup?
Or might there be another explanation?
Some ancient astronaut theorists suggest
it is possible that modern alien
abductions are not the work of those
same watchers that survived the great
flood, but that instead they are carried
out by another group of
extraterrestrials.
Watchers that have returned to Earth in
search of those who stayed behind.
All of the people that I've interviewed,
they would tell you the same thing.
These watchers, they're not all of the
same mind.
There seems to be conflict about what
the future of humanity on this planet
will be.
Legends teach us that watchers fight
amongst themselves and that they will
each manipulate segments of humanity so
as to express their own agendas. And
therefore, it is they who influence
nations to go to war and to fight
for their purposes and not necessarily
for our own betterment.
And you have to wonder if many of the
modernday abductions such as Betty
Andreas
are really extraterrestrials who are
searching for the watchers.
Could it be that extraterrestrials are
abducting humans because they are
actually looking for other alien beings
hiding among us?
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest that
the answer may be found by taking a
closer look at the United States
government's most secret projects.
San Francisco, California, June 6th,
2011.
At the annual Apple Worldwide Developers
Conference, Steve Jobs introduces the
world to his latest technological
breakthrough.
iCloud.
This new service allows users to store
all of their digital data such as music,
email, contacts, documents,
photos, and internet search history
on pools of remote servers collectively
known as the cloud.
This revolutionary technology takes off
so fast that within 2 years there are
over 300 million people on the cloud.
And because it is built into every Apple
device, some people use the cloud
without even realizing it. But while
Apple assures its customers that their
personal files are secure. In August of
2014, explicit personal photos of female
celebrities begin to pop up online. The
cloud has been hacked.
All of your information is now on the
cloud. It's now somewhere else. Sure,
you can always potentially access it and
read that information back. But that
also means someone else now has access
to your data. That data could be your
emails, it could be your messages, it
could be phone calls, it could be
voicemails. It's incredible because
you're literally just handing your data
over to an unknown location run by you
who knows who. Many people see very big
security issues with these. You're no
longer personally having control of your
own data on your own hard drive. You're
just sending it off into the ether uh to
who knows where.
When Edward Snowden revealed in 2013 the
extent to which our privacy has been
compromised, it drew public outrage.
But as the march of technology moves
forward, are we adapting to the notion
that nothing is sacred or secret?
And is it possible that
extraterrestrials who have been watching
us for thousands of years actually led
us to this point? Could it be that our
increased reliance on computers, cell
phones, tablets, and anything else
connected to the internet is the product
of extraterrestrial design, giving the
watchers greater access to us than ever
before.
We're living in a day and age now where
everybody is carrying literally a camera
and a microphone in their hand or in
their pocket that can be remotely
activated by the NSA or various number
of intelligence agencies or even
hackers. The webcams in all laptops and
the microphones can be easily remotely
activated.
It really seems that because of
technology, these extraterrestrials
step up their monitoring and watch every
little detail of what goes on. And they
want to see our planet nurture certain
civilizations that are technologically
minded.
But there are some who believe the
highly interconnected society we now
live in provides for even more shocking
implications.
They say that extraterrestrials may
actually be in league with world
leaders, monitoring each and every one
of us in an effort to root out the
watchers who have been hiding among us
for thousands of years.
The United States government has proof
that at least three competing
geopolitical territorial
extraterrestrial groups that are in
conflict with each other have been on
this planet.
The intervention
may actually be positive for humans
going forward.
But we are also presented the idea that
we are dealing with intelligences
that may actually want to do harm and
have done harm. It is as if there were
political parties in the cosmos.
Is it possible, as ancient astronaut
theorists contend, that the Watchers
really do exist
and are still here on Earth watching
over us?
Could we be under surveillance by not
one group of watchers,
but several? And might a secret
conglomeration of the world's most
powerful leaders have actually taken a
side in this extraterrestrial conflict?
Perhaps very soon we will discover that
aliens have been among us all along,
watching us and guiding us. Not only in
the interest of our own future, but also
theirs.