This Wellness Couch podcast brought to
you by our brand new Facebook group
called the Wellness Couch Tribe. Come
join us and chat about any episode at
any time. Keep up to date with all our
events and connect with a like-minded
group of wellness enthusiasts just like
you. To join the Wellness Couch Tribe,
simply search for the Wellness Couch
Tribe on Facebook.
The wellnesscouch.com
streaming wellness into your lives.
This is up for a chat with Cindy Omera,
Karen Smith, and Kim Morrison.
[Music]
Welcome to today's podcast with Dr. Jack
Cruz. We strongly recommend that you
listen to today's podcast with an open
heart and an open mind and shield the
ears of any young kids who may be
listening to this podcast with you as
there are some exploitives.
Dr. Cruz is opinionated and he does have
some very strong views when it comes to
health and well-being. You might even
find some of your own views being
conflicted. Our suggestion is to try to
keep an open mind and listen to the
message that has great power and great
value behind it. We hope that you enjoy
today's podcast and get a lot from it
just as we did. Here we are up for a
chat about the hottest topics that are
important to you, inspiring you to
awaken the change within. I'm Kim
Morrison
&gt;&gt; and I'm Cindy Omira. And this week we
have an extraordinary guest on the show.
Someone that the three of us have been
following for quite some time now and
have certainly fallen in love with
around his philosophy for living. Uh the
information he's learned and I'm sure
when Cindy introduces him, you guys are
going to be absolutely astounded as to
who we have with us today.
Yes, we have Dr. Jack Cruz. Dr. Jack
Cruz is a neurosurgeon in Texas. So, um,
but I've watched him since 2012 when I
got to interview him, um, regarding his
story. So, what I think we'll start with
Jack and Welcome, Jack.
&gt;&gt; Hello.
&gt;&gt; So, um, what, um, I'd like you to talk
about how you, um, got on to what you're
doing right now. I know you're far from
where you were in 2012, but, let's talk
about what happened to you um, at a
conference many, many years ago.
&gt;&gt; Actually, Cindy, I'm going to be honest.
I'm not I I really don't agree with
that. I I don't think I'm far from it. I
think the difference is now that most of
the people that follow me now begin to
realize what you interviewed about with
me a long time ago. Um I just never told
you really what pinned down the leptin
prescription, the cold thermogenesis
protocol. I never really got into the
physics behind it because I knew most
people back then. Um, we're still in a
diet and exercise paradigm that it was
going to take uh a couple of things that
had to happen in society for people to
kind of wake up to see what the cause
was. So, I would say everything from my
perspective is still exactly the same
today in 2019 as it was in 2012. The
difference is is all the predictions
that I made over the last 10 years have
now come to fruition.
&gt;&gt; Ah well let's let's talk about how you
got into leptin in the first place
because I I talk about it a lot and the
importance of it but let's talk about
how you first learned about it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well I mean it was from an injury
that I had while I was giving a talk on
spine surgery. I just stood up uh and I
got a horrible pain in my right knee and
um long story short, I was at a a
meeting with a bunch of orthopedic
surgeons and neurosurgeons who did spine
surgery. One of the orthopedic surgeons
wives was there and she happened to work
for a very powerful biotechnology
company. Uh and she said, "Look, I think
I know why this happened to you."
She goes, "I'm going to send you a book
and six papers." And she did. and what
she really wanted me to do is out the
industry and uh that's not how I took
it.
&gt;&gt; I went a totally different way. I
actually said, "Is she trying to tell me
what's in this book is somehow possibly
true?" And you know, long story short,
she's now divorced from that orthopedic
surgeon. And she's actually contacted me
many times since that has happened. and
she's kind of stunned about where I took
this
&gt;&gt; because what she allowed me to realize
is that the physics of organisms
was the real problem behind what leptin
is. And leptin basically is a protein
that is filled with a bunch of um for
want of a better term benzene rings that
act like u playgrounds for photons. They
actually absorb sunlight. And it turns
out that the way that leptin works, it
has to be programmed properly by the
light that you live in in your
environment. That includes not only
light we see, but also light we don't
see, light that we're using actually
right now to communicate between
Australia and United States. And it
turned out that I was um how shall we
say in my lifestyle and and my uh job. I
was in em in a little bit too much in
that non-native EMF and blue light. And
it made me leptin resistant. And when I
realized that, I said, you know, I think
I understand this pretty well. It took
me about 18 months to really figure it
out. uh I came up with the leptin uh
prescription which if you look at those
six steps you know on my website you'll
never see some of the things that I just
told you about and the reason why is
because when I wrote it 15 years ago
nobody was ready for the story about
light water and magnetism the reason why
is because nobody truly in medicine or
biology uh really understood it really
well and I knew that if I talked about
those issues that I would lose people at
hello. So, there was another big
researcher in the United States. His
name is Dr. Doug Wallace and he's at the
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and
he's the world expert in mitochondrial
medicine. And basically, when you're
leptin resistant, it causes major
problems in the second genome in your
cell. See, everybody probably down under
knows about the nuclear genome that
everybody talks about adnauseium. The
thing is, see, in the United States, we
spent about $3.8
trillion on cancer studies since 1971
when President Nixon declared the war on
cancer. And we haven't done uh with
that money or that time in cancer
research. And it turns out the reason
for that, Dr. Wallace has laid out over
his entire career about 45 50 years that
cancer and most of the diseases that you
face in Oz and what I face here they're
mitochondrial based not DNA based uh in
fact he said in most of his public talks
that approximately 80 to 85% he believes
I have upgraded his information I
believe it's actually 95%
is mitochondrial based and the reason
I've said that is because
when I started to understand all this, I
made a lot of predictions early on that
uh especially since I've talked to you
last time have really come to fruition.
You know, I predict predicted the
obesity crisis. I I predicted the opiate
crisis. I predicted the suicide crisis.
I predicted that as soon as doctors went
to electronic medical records here in
the States, they'd start killing
themselves at record rates. That's
happened in the United States. Um, the
other thing that's happened is the
number one cause of death between 19 and
25 year olds used to be car crashes in
the United States just five or six years
ago. Now it's suicide. I also predicted,
let's talk about oz. I predicted in your
country that you would have obesity,
autoimmunity, and melanoma rates higher
than any place in the world because your
real problem down under isn't the sun.
It's that you have really shitty water.
And it's tied to the water cycle. And if
you understand what mitochondria
fundamentally do, they take sunlight and
CO2 and water and they I should say C u
glucose with sunlight and they turn it
into water at the fourth cytochrome in
your mitochondria. And it turns out most
people in Oz can't do that well. Um so
fast forward to 2019.
See, Jack, I guess 10 or 15 years ago
would have been characterized as a
heretic, a skeptic, uh, a crazy sob on
the internet, you know, saying the
things I'm saying. It turns out, Cindy,
now in 2019, I'm a lot less crazy. I'm a
lot more popular and a lot of people
want to talk to me because a lot of the
things that I predicted have now come to
fruition. And you know, I was probably
the first person in the uh paleo scene
telling people that blue light was a
huge problem. It was the number one big
non-native EMF that we all had to
understand. And there was reasons why I
got involved in that. And I knew that
blue light was tied to leptin
resistance. But the problem was when I
talked to you in 2012, I didn't have the
smoking gun to give people. Well, I got
the smoking gun in three studies. One in
2014 when we found out that melanopsin,
which is the blue light detector, was in
the arteries of our skin. And it turns
out it's in the arteries everywhere in
our body. And then uh it really got
upgraded in December of 2017
uh when we found out that u that
melanopsin was in our subcutaneous fat.
And then that's when everything clicked.
Why? Because where's leptin found?
Leptin is found in the subq fat. And one
of the things confounded all the uh PhD
nutrition researchers is you know why
did God or evolution put this hormone in
our subq fat when its mechanism of
action is actually at the hypothalamic
level? Well, when you begin to
understand that none of this process has
to do with biochemistry, that it's all
photonically based, it makes eminent
sense that you would put this receptor
where the sun hits you on the surface.
That's the key
&gt;&gt; when you get in the sun. See, that's the
EMF that you're designed to have your
cognitive bias to. So, my my um message
to people in Oz is a very
counterintuitive one because I'm about
the only person you'll have on your show
that's going to tell you that every
single health metric in Australia that
tells you to wear sunglasses, sunscreen,
and all that is absolute abject
horseshit. And if you believe that, you
you are a based on the latest
data. The key is you need to understand
why the melanoma is taken off in your
country, why the skin cancers have taken
off, why you have certain cities around
your country that have average BMIs over
40, and why you actually have more
autoimmunity in your country on a per
capita basis than we do in the United
States. It actually turns out that the
power density in your country um is tied
to these effects. And when I say power
density, I'm talking about the
non-native EMF, the things that you guys
create uh in those cities are radically
different than what we have here. And
that's the reason why your health
metrics vary from us. The same reason
why people in in the uh European Union
actually have a lot more electrohyper
sensitivity. The reason for that is that
one of the major EMS they're affected by
is the 50 Hz power grid. uh and we're
beginning to see that a little bit in
the states because uh 5G actually puts
you at that risk. So all of these EMFs
that do not come from sunlight, which is
250 to 780 nanometer light in the
visible range, every single part of the
electromagnetic spectrum causes leptin
resistance. And it turns out certain
parts cause it quicker and faster than
others. And it happens in my country.
Here's where Australian people get a a
benefit. My country's rolled out 5G
faster than everything else. Telra down
where you guys are have done you a
disservice in some places. Like if you
happen to be listening to this, you live
in Melbourne, you're in trouble. Uh if
you live in Sydney, parts of Sydney,
you're in trouble. Even if you're up in
Queensland now, 5G is up there, too. And
you know, you guys probably know that I
have a lot of Australian members. In
fact, one of my big members is Jason
Bowen Smith, who's actually
&gt;&gt; uh embarked on an incredible
journey to actually help your entire
country. Most of you don't know what
he's doing, but he's aiming to fix the
water problem in your country. And just
so you guys know, Jason's a guy uh that
had over 20 mitochondrial diseases
before he became one of my members. He
actually had half his face hacked off
from uh three different skin cancers.
&gt;&gt; He now goes in the sun constantly all
the time. In fact, he just was in the
States and he's go back he's now back in
Australia.
But he is looking to build a plant that
makes the right kind of water that's
going to help the people everywhere in
Australia, but it looks like he's going
to have to build a plant in the United
States because your government is a
bunch of
Um,
&gt;&gt; I don't think there'd be many people who
disagree with you on that one.
&gt;&gt; Well, here's the here's the key thing.
If we can get the water situation right
in Australia, we can actually knock the
disease metrics down very quickly. This
is the reason why for my members have
been with me for 10 or 15 years, I've
I've told them that Australia has always
been my canary in the coal mine. I have
to be honest with you guys.
&gt;&gt; You said that in 2012,
&gt;&gt; right? And Australia is becoming less
and less my canary in the coal mine
because there's other parts of the world
now that have adopted
um parts of the spectrum that are going
to cause leptin resistance even faster.
It turns out if if you would have talked
to me in detail about this topic in
2012, and believe it or not, most people
did not because they didn't understand
my perspective well enough to actually
ask me good questions. Uh now they do
and back in 2012 if you would have asked
me as a betting man I would have said
that the microwave part of the spectrum
that we're using for communication is
the real problem. I'm going to tell you
I disagree with that now. I think the
real problem and this is really
problematic. It's the radio frequencies
that are the biggest issue. And it turns
out those are the ones that are most
ubiquitously used because uh all cells
tend to use RF radiations. And many of
you down in Oz probably don't know this,
but in 2015 the federal government,
United States federal government did a
study that they actually paid for um
that showed without a doubt that RF
radiation causes cancer in nocturnal
mammals. And the study was done on rats
and mice. the the study was so
devastating to the CTI industry, that's
the cell carriers, and Telstra is one of
those members, um that the United States
government sheld the study, sent it back
out to 50 scientists uh for three years.
And then on November 1st, 2018, we're
talking a couple months ago, the final
tally came out from the NTP study and
showed beyond a shadow of a doubt that
RF radiations cause cancer. and
nocturnal mammals.
Now, why is this a big deal for all of
you and Oz to pay attention to? Because
I know nobody down there outside of
maybe Charlie Teao are talking about
this. Um, well, nocturnal mammals, their
melanopsin system is bound to this
vitamin you may have heard of called
vitamin A, and it's got a very strong
covealent bond. Well, we're dal mammals.
And what does it mean for us as dal
mammals? We're designed to live in
sunlight. We have a weak covealent bond.
So if these dala I should say these
nocturnal mammals got cancer from the
lowest part of the spectrum that we use
for communication
that means that we're more at risk
because of this situation. So when you
begin to understand why Charlie Tea has
been in Australia saying look the brain
tumor registry down in Australia is
definitely showing some changes and you
have people in the government you know
trying to say Charlie Teao is now crazy.
um he's not crazy because guess what?
We're seeing this effect globally and
we're going to see it continue to rise
as time goes on because of how RF
interacts with our skin and our eyes.
And now that we know that melanopsin is
in both places, the game is really
changed. Now, now if you if you're a
person listening to this podcast and you
don't know about leptin, I'm just
going to tell you, you better get on the
bus and learn really quick because 5G is
already in Australia. It's in most of
your major cities. Um, Telster's been
trying to hide that for a period of
time. They've been testing it for over
five years. I've got plenty of members
down there with meters that can confirm
that. And the thing is, you need to
begin to start to pay attention to zip
code changes in Australia. And believe
it or not, there's a lot of doctors down
there that are already contacting me via
Twitter and social media that they have
seen some really bizarre things
beginning to happen in cities. And the
number one city where it's already
occurred is in Melbourne. Uh it's also
going to get pretty bad in Tasmania. Um,
there's a lot of things that people need
to understand about how this is going to
interact. And you can't be scared about
it. You actually have to understand it.
People don't change their behavior until
they understand the why of something.
And since you don't have control of this
because your government controls it, you
really need to understand it. And the
rules of engagement in Australia,
believe it or not, are stricter there
than they are in the states. Um, the
states, the federal government has the
power. But it turns out there's a lot of
local governmental power that's being
now inflicted in a lot of 5G cities.
Why? because it's become very obvious to
not only activists and doctors here that
all these predictions when everybody
thought Jack was about hyperbole. Um
it's no longer hyperbole. I don't have
to convince anybody anymore that I'm
right. Now people come to me and they
want to know why this has happened and
and what do I do practically to try to
fix this issue. Now the answer the
prescription
is different for different parts of the
world. Why? Because it turns out the way
electromagnetic radiation works with
your mitochondria it it means the
environment that is literally one or two
feet around you is the single most
important part of the equation. So if
you understand that you have to control
that part of your environment like a
crazy person then you'll do pretty good.
the the real problem becomes if you
don't know about any of this going on
and say you happen to work in a hospital
in Oz and you start seeing all these
doctors and nurses who work shifts kill
themselves you know all of a sudden
people go this is bizarre why all of
sudden this start happening well it
turns out that when you work at night
you're around blue light and you happen
to be around electromagnetic radiation
because every everybody's gone to
electronic medical records all the Light
bulbs have been changed from
incandescent to LEDs. LEDs have massive
blue light spikes and this affects
melanopsin and this is what's driving
the leptin resistance. So when you have
most of your other guests come on here
and tell you, "Oh, it's all about food
and and diet." Those are people that
Jack will say are morons and you should
not listen to them because they clearly
don't know the foundational science that
this is tied to. Why? When you guys
laugh and you don't hear me laugh,
that's
&gt;&gt; what people don't realize is that food
is an electromagnetic footprint of
photosynthesis.
Okay? Food is also a story about light.
And not too many people understand that.
People who come on most podcasts talk
about carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins. When you're a black
swan mitochondriac and part of my tribe,
we talk about electrons and protons and
power density changes. When things grow
in oz in spring and summer, they don't
grow in certain places in winter and
fall. Why? What controls that? The power
of sunlight that is controlled by the
rico enzyme. And it turns out on planet
Earth, we have three different pathways
to make food. They're called C3, C4, and
CAM. Each one has a different aspect of
how it takes CO2 and water and sunlight
and turns it into sugar. That difference
changes the free radical signal that's
possible in the food as it's broken down
to electrons and protons. And it also
even has to do with the quantum spin
state of the hydrogen that's in those
foods. And it turns out your
mitochondria only cares about electrons
and protons. That's why the input is
called electron chain transport. What
sits in the matrix and what spits out
through the ATP?
Hydrogen
&gt;&gt; and it has to be in its lowest isotope
form meaning H+ if it happens to be in
the next iso form which is called
dutarium it's a real problem and that's
what leads to significant leptin
resistance.
So I've heard you talk about the
dutarium um quite a bit and the
different states of hydrogen. Can you um
discuss that now about the different
states of hydrogen and what deterium is?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's it's really easy. But let's
let's discuss it from a basic uh easy
standpoint that people can understand.
Everybody knows this famous guy named
Einstein. He came up with this equation
in you know the early 1900s called E=
MC^². It's known as the mass equivalence
equation. What did he fundamentally say
in that equation? That energy equals
mass times light. So he's basically
saying that light and mass are exactly
the same things. The only thing that
determines the difference is the
environment they're found in. So what
else does that mean? It means when light
slows down, it becomes things made out
of mass. That actually freaks people out
when I say it to them. But guess what?
It's actually true. So when sunlight
comes from the sun and hits the
chloroplast in a leaf, it gets slowed
down and it gets turned into something
called glucose. Okay, so this is no
longer, you know, Jack Cruz hyperbole
folly. People actually now know that
every single part of photosynthesis is
quantized. Here's where it gets
interesting.
Anything that has a lower atomic mass,
meaning that it's more like light,
actually allows you to live longer.
Anything that has a higher atomic atomic
mass, tends not to stick around too
long. Why? Because it has actually less
energy per unit density in it. So when
you think about hydrogen, which is the
lightest element on the periodic table,
H+ is is atomic mass number one or or
the first element on the table. Well,
dutyium
um and what just so people understand,
hydrogen is a proton with an electron.
That's all it is. Okay, dutyium is a
proton plus a neutron plus an electron.
So what does that mean? It has double
the atomic mass of regular hydrogen. So
that means it's twice as heavy. Okay,
that is a massive change. But here's one
of the crazy things about physics and
nature. The the how dutarium reacts in
electric and magnetic fields is
remarkably different. In other words, it
has a different spin state. And it turns
out that anything that has mitochondria
or anything that has a chloroplast, do
you do you know what's unusual about it
in nature? It's racist. You know what
it's racist to? It's racist to H+. It
does not like dutyium at all. In fact,
if you put heavy water, which is what
dutarium laden water is, and you try to
use it to grow bacteria or plants, they
grow about 40 to 50% less fast.
And people didn't realize this for a
really long time. It turns out that your
mitochondria is the one part of the cell
which makes water at the fourth
cytochrome. All the water your
mitochondria make is designed to be
dutarium depleted. And guess where it
gets the hydrogen and oxygen to do that
from? From food. So Cindy, if you happen
to eat man-made food that has no
hydrogen quality assurance program
because it's made in a damn lab
and it's not got the QA program that
photosynthesis has,
&gt;&gt; do you think maybe that's why processed
food is a problem and not all the
you hear from the food girls?
Guess what? That's correct.
&gt;&gt; People didn't realize how deep Jack was
going with this. So now we are in 2019,
you know, and if you look back on my
YouTube videos that I did in Vermont in
2016, I gave people literally in two
hours that whole story. You want to
learn more about it, go watch the damn
video. If you want to learn about how
your skin and your eye works to keep you
thin and healthy, go watch the Vermont
2017 video on YouTube. Now, if you want
to learn about dutarium, you got a
little problem. You're going to have to
join either my website or my Patreon
blog because the Vermont 2018 video that
covers all that is protected. See, Jack
has done a lot for free.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; you do, Jack. I I've I've been, like I
said, I've been following you and all
the information that you give and the
blogs that you give. I loved when you I
don't know if you're still doing it, but
I love when you used to do for the you
called it either the simple version or
the hard version. I can't remember
exactly how you said it, but I always
read the simple version.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The geeks and then the non-geeeks.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And the reason and the reason why was
because and Cindy, you'll appreciate
this. people only seem to understand
where they are in that station of life.
Like if you only understand food by
fats, proteins, and carbohydrates,
you're only going to stay in that
culture. What I do is I refuse to sink
to your level, I am going to elevate
your game to my level.
&gt;&gt; And the reason I'm going to do that is
for what we just got finished talking
about for the last half an hour. Why?
Because if you never get to my level,
you're really never going to understand
what left and resistance is all about.
Can I can I interrupt here as a
non-geeek please Jack and I this has
blown me away listening to you and it's
fascinated me but I am someone who is
not in deep in knowledge can I just ask
if I have got this right that you are
saying that the way the sun reacts
either with a chloroplast or mel is it
would it be the melatonin in the skin is
how we then create the best outcome for
our body based on the water.
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm going to I'm going to teach
you something right now that's going to
&gt;&gt; Everybody in Australia will probably
the bed when they hear this. Um
there's been nine meta analysis done in
the United States. Actually, it's
worldwide.
Everybody in Australia who is not
listening to their doctors there and the
government will not believe this. All
cause mortality is reduced by the
sunlight globally. Let me repeat that.
That means every single disease on
planet earth, this includes melanoma, is
reduced by solar exposure.
It also means that blue light exposure
and non-native EMF shorten life. So when
you understand this fundamentally and
then you think about the things going on
in the streets of Sydney with uh
slathering sunscreen on kids and telling
them to wear sunglasses.
Do you realize that you guys are making
this exponentially worse? You know why?
Because you're blaming it on the wrong
thing. And and it it's absolutely
idiotic for you to think in Australia
that the sun somehow is different there
than it is right here in New Orleans.
Turns out the sun has been about the
same for about the last 650 million
years. It did change 650 million years
ago uh at the Cambrian explosion. That's
actually why we went from two kingdoms
of life to the third kingdom of life.
You all happen to be part of or members
of the third kingdom of life like I am.
And the reason do you know the reason
why that happened ladies is because our
sun is a G-class star. When it gets to
midlife it starts to emit 10% more UV
light. The light that your people down
there thinks killing them. But yet in
the evolutionary record Darwin showed us
that complex life all 32 fathers showed
up overnight when that UV light showed
up. So, how how how
confident are you in your supposed
experts in Oz? I now you can see why I
think they're absolute morons and I
think you need to get message out to
people because you need to understand
see there's other there's two other legs
of the stool. See NASA goes to look for
extraterrestrial life and they they use
three things. They look for light, water
and magnetism. And it turns out
Australia's really pro real big problem
is the other two legs of the stool.
That's the real reason you have the
problem. And once you begin to
understand what the data says, the last
uh meta analysis that was done on solar
exposure, I just went to Los Angeles
u couple months ago and actually showed
this slide because somebody asked me,
they wanted to see it. The last study
was done in Sweden in 2016 that showed
that all cause mortality, again I'm
going to say it again because it's this
important and your countrymen need to
hear this. All cause mortality is
reduced by sunlight. Going out in the
sun is absolutely a smart move. The
problem is you got to fix the other two
parts. And my Australian members know
what the the details are on the other
two parts. We'll probably never get to
the basis of what the other two parts
are in this podcast because it is pretty
deep science, but it's actually related
to mitochondrial biology and it's
related to the type of water that your
guys mitochondria make down there
because it turns out you have a little
bit too much dutyium
in your system based on the location of
your island continent and where you all
live. See, you live in a desert and all
of you live on the exterior of that
desert on the edge. Nobody lives in the
middle. And if you know anything about
the way nature builds dutyium in the
water supply, uh it turns out that in
around deserts, the especially with
latitude, the dutarium level is worse at
the shorelines. Uh it's best at
mountains, it's best where it's freezing
cold, it's best at high latitudes. These
are all places that are not present in
Australia, but you have a neighbor in
New Zealand where it's actually pretty
good. Um, and they don't have the same
problems that you guys have. That tells
you that there's a zip code effect. And
there's definitely a big difference. The
people who are going to do best in
Australia are going to be the people
that live between Darwin and KS up by
the Great Barrier Reef. The people are
going to do worse are the people that
live in Tasmania and Melbourne. Uh and
that's because they're high latitude. Uh
it turns out the way water works uh the
hydraology cycle on Earth that the best
water is at the highest latitudes. Well,
there's no if you know anything about
the southern hemisphere versus the
northern. Most of the world's people
live in the northern hemisphere and they
tend to live at a high latitude. It
turns out that everybody in Australia,
if they really knew where their hapllet
types came from, none of you are really
originals. You're all imports. and you
all have uncoupled mitochondria. You're
living you're living a life of being a
mismatch. And it turns out Doug Wallace
has laid all this out. That's the real
reason why you guys have the problems
that you have because you're not really
adapted to live in the place that you're
in. Um, and the irony is the people that
are the aboriginals in the middle, they
do extremely well when you get out of
their hair or your government gets out
of their hair. Problem is,
&gt;&gt; they haven't been able to do that for
about 250 years. Uh the issue really is
is that you have to understand nature
and and that's really what my message
was in the leptin prescription and the
cold thermogenesis protocol because it
teaches you the fundamentals of how that
three-legged stool really operates.
Because when you begin to understand it,
you don't have to know it as well as me.
All you have to know is what the key
metrics are to get things correct for
where you are and you can do well. If
you happen to be a guy like Jason who is
one of my members with, you know, 20,
that means he's on the deck of the
Titanic, he can't afford to make any
mistakes otherwise he's going to get
taken out by nature. And he didn't. He
actually has done exceedingly well. And
now he wants to actually help out what I
call the other obedient idiots that live
in your country that don't have a clue
what they're doing. They'd be more
interested in watching The Real
Housewives of Melbourne or Sydney or
Netflix more than they would realize
that going out to the beach and and
maybe having water that's not from
Australia, actually paying a premium for
water that comes from a high latitude
makes a lot of sense because that's
actually what you should do if you live
there. Jack, we obviously can't make 22
million people leave Australia and go
and live in New Zealand. And a lot of us
Kiwis have actually left New Zealand to
live in Australia.
&gt;&gt; And I'm asking you in a for the key
metrics to understand what we can do,
the mom in the home, the general
everyday family by hearing this podcast.
I would love for you now in layman's
terms to give us some of the key metrics
that we could be doing on a daily basis
that would support us with our family.
Is that possible?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's going to be the same one that
I tell everybody worldwide. The single
number one, if you get this right,
you've done yourself a service. You have
to see the AM sunrise. If you don't see
the AM sunrise, you can kiss your ass
goodbye in Australia. Um the second big
thing is when the sun sets, you have to
protect your skin and your eyes from the
effect of blue light. Um if you don't do
that, uh down there, you're in trouble.
The third big metric, this one's
different. This one is very different
for you guys compared to us. You already
you already heard me say that I already
live in a a pretty well-developed 5G
country. Well, guess what? Australia is
getting it because the big mistake
Australians make, everything we do in
the States, you guys copy. And this is
going to be the biggest mistake that
Australia will ever make because it's
going to make you guys sicker faster
than it will make us sick here. And the
reason why is because your magnetic flux
in your continent sucks. That's the
reason why you have a desert that makes
up 90% of the land mass. Because a
desert is a geopathic stress zone. You
don't have any active volcanoes. Um you
don't really have any of the things that
other places have like fault lines and
things like that because your continent
used to be, you know, connected to
Antarctica and it's been moving towards
India for the last 65 million years.
You're right now in dead man zone in the
southern hemisphere. And the other
effect that we didn't talk about is you
have this donut hole that's caused by
the ozone layer above your head that
affects the rain that falls on your
entire continent. So what does that
mean? It means the water that falls in
Australia compared to the water that
falls in Europe and United States has
less
ability to absorb sunlight in it than it
should. And that's the real problem.
And when you understand that, when you
understand that water is a capacitor,
it's a battery for sunlight and your
water sucks, you start to realize that's
how we got the bad idea. The sun is
toxic. Because if the water's bad and we
don't realize that water is really a
battery for ourselves, we're going to
blame it on the sun. And that's exactly
what y'all done. That's the real
problem. So the third thing that you
need to do is absolutely like a a crazy
person avoid the the adaptation of 5G.
If you have to do things locally in your
environment, do it. Uh, and if you
can't, if you're stuck in a 5G area like
Jason is right now, then you have to go
the extraordinary length that he went
to, is you have to get the best water
you can in the globe and import it in to
Australia and drink that. And do not
drink any of the water that comes from
your continent.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Does filtered water or any of these
amazing mineral reback systems do
anything of the like?
&gt;&gt; No, it comes from Australia. Australia's
water routinely. Uh I'm I'm going to try
I'm I'm trying to be tackless here
because I really want to make an impact
for the people listening to this. So I'm
going to say something. The water in
Australia, I've taken shits that are
worth more than the water in your
country. That's how bad the water is.
That's really what the problem is. So
instead of you I'm I'm probably going to
shock you when I say this, Cindy,
because I know your members will will
not believe this is coming out of my
mouth. I want you to buy
I'd rather you buy regular food and
expensive water. That's how big the
problem is in Australia. If you're
wasting an extra 20 30% on buying
organic food, you're making a
catastrophic mistake.
That's a comment that I guarantee you
haven't heard from anybody else.
&gt;&gt; No, I I haven't. Um and I I know that we
Well, it
&gt;&gt; is the problem in your country. That is
the problem. Nobody is telling you the
truth. And the reason they're not
telling you the truth is because they do
not understand the physics of organisms.
It's it's really ironic. Everybody in
Australia takes the lead scientifically
from everybody else around the world.
You guys are not paying attention to
what's going on in the literature
globally because I got news for you. 15
years ago, we were like you are right
now. That's why I was crazy. I'm not
crazy anymore. Now people are paying
attention. Why? Because now all of our
big cities in the United States, they're
all in 5G and people are dying at record
rates. People are waking the hell up.
Why? As I said before, when people start
to get blood in their mouth,
that's when they start to change. When
you're on the precipice
of really bad things happening, that's
when people realize you're not joking
anymore. When you guys can get me on a
podcast and you can chuckle and you see
I'm not chuckling. You can hear from the
tone of my voice, I'm not playing a
game. I am dead serious about this.
&gt;&gt; And every year,
&gt;&gt; the serious level is going higher and
higher and higher. Just so you guys
know, globally, we have a huge fertility
issue everywhere. In the United States,
almost one in three women can't get
pregnant the natural way by by having
sex. They have to go to a doctor. Guess
what? In big cities in your country,
it's bad. It's as bad.
There's a there's a a term in Asia
called the celibacy syndrome. Do you
know what it is? Kids that are 15, 25
years old don't even want to have sex
anymore. Let me ask you two girls a
question. When you growing up, do you
think your parents had to worry about
you with boys? Absolutely. Guess what?
Parents today in Japan, South Korea,
they don't have to worry about their
kids.
You know why? They all have Samsung
phones. They all have the blue screens
in their face. They're on Facebook.
They're on Twitter. They're on LinkedIn.
They're on Tinder. That's what they're
doing.
&gt;&gt; Do you think we're just wiping ourselves
out? Is this the
&gt;&gt; Just so you know, I don't know if you
guys read books from the States up here.
There's a there's a very famous New
Yorker magazine article, I should say,
author. She's a writer for this
magazine.
Four years ago, she wrote a book. And
one of the reasons why I got called
crazy 10 or 15 years ago is because I
predicted there is something go going on
called factor Y. What's factor Y? It's
the sixth extinction that's going on in
the planet right now. See, the dinosaurs
saw their extinction event when that
asteroid hit the planet 65 million years
ago. Obviously, their brains were so
small they couldn't figure it out. We're
the smartest animal on the planet. We've
created our own asteroid and we're
addicted to it and we don't realize it.
And every single thing on this planet is
dying. If you don't believe me and you
live in Australia, go up to KS and talk
to the researchers up there like I have
about what's going on with the Great
Barrier Reef and what's going on with
all the water around you and why there's
no fish around Australia and why my
friends in Australia um have to get into
aquaculture so that you guys can eat
fish. Tell me why the toads up in Darwin
are taking over. Tell me why all the
insects are dying down in down under.
Why is it now being generalized to other
parts of the United States? Why are the
monarch butterflies dying? Why why do
bats get white nose disease? Why do the
elk in Pennsylvania now get pron
disease?
Tell me. Well, she wrote a book called
The Sixth Extinction. It was five years
ago. And guess what? I said it 10 years
ago. Nobody listened to me. Nobody
listened to her. People are paying
attention now. Why? Because 15 to 25
year olds are killing themselves.
&gt;&gt; All of our all of our creatives in
Hollywood are killing themselves. You
heard about Anthony Bourdain. You
probably heard about Kate Spade. You
know what you didn't hear? Jack
predicted both of them would die. You
know why? He found out in 2015 that one
of the cell companies put a 80 gigahertz
microwave antenna on their roof in New
in Manhattan. He made a prediction that
people in that zip code would get
sicker. Guess what? That's exactly what
happened.
&gt;&gt; Jack, I would love to know from your
perspective, are you a father?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I got a a son who's 26 and I have
a daughter who's 18. And trust me, when
they were growing up, it was rough. But
I can tell you, my son, he's an engineer
now, so he really gets it.
&gt;&gt; And he just got married. My daughter is
18 and um something really cool has
happened this year with my daughter. My
son's wedding in fact in early December.
She actually we actually got into a
family fight between me, my wife, and my
daughter where my daughter came to me
and said, "Dad, I think I want to take
over where you're going to leave off."
And this is a this is a kid that really
wasn't into this. She's now she actually
wants to be a dermatologist and teach
people to go in the sun. Think about
that irony. And the reason why is
because from the time she was 9 years
old to now she heard how crazy her dad
was,
now she sees that everybody wants to
talk to her dad because her dad has
answers that nobody else has.
Let me just tell you something. This is
the single most important thing about
optimal health. It's the way you think.
If you think it's diet and exercise,
never join my website. I never want to
see you. I don't even want you to read
my social media post. Why? Because when
you're in a big event going on in the
planet, you have no time to educate
people who are idiots, who don't have an
open mind to realize what's going on on
this globe. What I am looking for is
people with open minds that are willing
to read books now that are written about
the things that we're talking about on
this podcast so that they get up to
speed really fast so that I never come
on another podcast in Oz and ever get
asked a question about food or exercise
because it does not matter. what
matters. It's what's going on in the
environment around you and that affects
what your opinions and beliefs are about
food.
That is the key. Once you get that
message, that's how you can fix
yourself. Because here's the thing, for
too long in medicine, we have been
focused in on the wrong things. That's
why we keep making mistakes. It's why we
put people on statins. It's why
functional medicine doctors are wasting
people's time with supplements and
testing. That's not the answer. The
answer is light, water, and magnetism.
Soon as you uh embrace it and you
understand it because it does take a
little time to get to the point where
you have to understand it. It's much
easier to do though these days because
guess what? 10 or 15 years ago, there
was no books out there that I could hand
you when you said, "Okay, I want to
learn everything about water. I want to
learn everything about light. I want to
learn about magnetism. I couldn't give
it to you then, but now those books are
available. You know what the problem is?
Getting your nose in those books and
reading and then asking questions about
them and say, "God, I had no idea this
was going on." And the reason you did is
because you were watching the
Kardashians or Netflix. That's the
problem. What we are what we have all
become addicted to is our asteroid.
When Elon Musk tells my country that he
wants to put 400 satellites in the air
to deliver 5G from above, including what
you're going to get in in Telra, because
that's who the Australian uh government
has contracted with. You got big
problems coming. You got really big
problems coming. Um,
&gt;&gt; you mean even bigger problems.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I got an issue. I I just did a
couple of podcasts here in the States
that I'm sure you guys probably haven't
heard, but I'll give you a little a
flavor because it's going to be
important for you to understand in
Australia. The United States is a pretty
big country. It's not as big as
Australia, but it's population-wise,
it's way bigger, but we have this river
that goes right down the middle of the
country called the Mississippi River.
East of the Mississippi, 5G is going to
be delivered a different way than it is
west of the Mississippi. Do you know the
reason for that? The federal government
owns 90% of the land west of the
Mississippi and only owns 3% of the land
east of it because that's the oldest
part of the United States. Also turns
out we have the most trees on the
eastern slope and that's where most of
the population density is. So the
companies are going to have to put cell
towers much closer to people there. So
what does that mean for people that live
in New York, Philadelphia, Chicago?
They're going to get sicker faster.
What's what does it mean for people that
live in LA and San Diego? It's going to
be delivered from above. So, if you
don't have protection and understand
what you're doing there, and believe it
or not, California has exactly the same
problem Australia does. They have a
horrendous water problem, which is the
reason why that people in California
have this real big problem with
thinking. You've probably saw our
elections not that long ago. It turns
out people in New York and California
are about the only people who voted for
Hillary Clinton. Guess why?
The rest of the country didn't. And
everybody thought we were crazy. Well,
turns out what's going on in California
right now, the social unrest, the uh the
amount of depression, the amount of
deaths just in Hollywood the last five
years, uh in the music business. Um
we've got nurses, residents in New York
City jumping out of buildings. We used
to have when I was in training as a
neurosurgeon, we had one death maybe
five or six years. Now we have two or
three a month
&gt;&gt; and we're seeing the same thing here,
Jack. A lot of suicides um the same
effect. And and this is what I'm trying
to tell you. The difference is going to
be subtle because the way non- negative
EMF works to to give it to you very very
quickly. It changes the free radical
signaling in mitochondria that changes
the type of matter you can make in your
cell. So for example, when you're around
too much blue light, one of the things
that it does on a chronic basis, it
causes a chronic light stress from this
melanopsin dysfunction that causes the
leptin prescript uh the leptin uh
resistance. This destroys dopamine in
your brain. What does everybody know
about dopamine? If you have altered
dopamine, you like sex, drugs, and rock
and roll. Okay? And if you do that long
enough and you keep going, you usually
wind up in trouble unless you're Keith
Richards. Um, and that's kind of what's
going on on a global basis. The problem
is it's been very sped up because of how
we've changed light around us. like the
the light that we're using in the states
from 1980 to now if if you look at the
evolution of light bulbs alone, it it
describes what's going on at NH Hannes
data better than uh what processed food
does. But if you get on Twitter and you
listen to all the idiots that are PhDs
over here, they're still having
arguments about, you know, high fructose
corn syrup and fake food and all that.
it it it that's not what's causing the
problem. See, we've had high fructose
corn syrup for 50 years here, but you
know what? 15 year olds aren't killing
themselves. We're not Everybody here uh
I'm sure everybody in your country's
heard about guns. Uh because I know that
your government took the guns away.
That'll never happen in the United
States because of how our government was
formed. But it was very unusual. We
didn't have any school shootings here
until 1999. Well, you guys are probably
old enough to remember when did we get
AOL in the United States? 1994.
And guess who's addicted to this stuff?
Kids. Kids are now coming in my office
with diseases that your mothers have.
And this is the reason why it happens.
You age faster when you use this stuff.
And and the way it happens is so
insidious, so counterintuitive to what
the doctors learn in medical school that
they can't believe it. Which is part of
the reason why the fastest growing
segment of people that are my members
are actually medical students and young
doctors.
Go figure that out, Cindy, if I'm crazy.
Huh?
&gt;&gt; Because guess what? They're going
through training now. And none of the
people who are their mentors can explain
to them why the disease epidemics that
we're facing in the United States are
what they are. You want to talk about
one, I can explain it to you from a
mitochondrial perspective anytime.
That's what makes me really popular now.
Jack, you were talking about the three
things to do to help ourselves on a
daily basis to see the morning sunrise
from sunset on protect ourselves from
the blue light and to number three avoid
the adaptation of 5G and get the best
water we can. Can I ask you personally,
Jack Cruz, on a daily basis, what do you
do in order to help those three legs of
the stool around light, water, and
magnetism? What do you do? Cindy, I
haven't missed the sunrise in 15 years.
So, that should tell you number one. I'm
sitting here in my house. You guys know
we put the uh video on before. You saw
what I was sitting in.
&gt;&gt; I'm sitting in an infrared A light
because right now the sun is setting as
I speak uh because it's 6 pm here in the
States at the 28th latitude. Um
I uh
just I have on my eyes right now I have
raw optics glasses that that block
everything from 435 to 550 nanometer
light. Why why does is that important?
That's actually the light that destroys
your melatonin that's tied to melanopsin
but we didn't really talk that much
about because I've been giving you the
water hose because we haven't talked in
seven years. Uh
that's the light frequencies that
protect melatonin. What does melatonin
functionally do? You know, everybody in
Australia believes, oh, it controls
sleep. You'll be shocked to know that it
controls mitochondrial DNA. It controls
autophagy and apoptosis. So, melanopsin
dysfunction, what does it primarily
cause? It lowers your melatonin level.
And here's the shocker for you two, and
I'm I'm going to keep hammering this
stuff about the sun. Melatonin is made
from an aromatic amino acid called
tryptophan. You want to know what's
interesting about tryptophan. Tryptophan
absorbs light between 200 and 400
nmters. That is dense UV light. So, I
want you to think about this. The number
one big chemical that you hear about in
the alternative health world is
melatonin
and UV light makes it. Yet, it acts at
nighttime.
Explain. Have some of your experts who
come on here explain because guess what
turns out? You make it from AM sunrise.
When that sun transitions from blue and
red to UVA, that's when you start making
melatonin. The key is it doesn't act
until it's dark at night. But guess
what? It's kept contained in those
aromatic rings. It stores all the light
to be released at night so that you can
regenerate your bad engines, your bad
mitochondria.
And that's what controls everything
about you. And it turns out that blue
light at night destroys you. So you need
to have the glasses. I wear raw optics
glasses. Why? Because I check all my
glasses with a spectroscope. Do I listen
to any marketers? No. My advice to
anybody in Australia, if you listen to
any marketer, you're a fool. If you take
any supplements, you're a fool. If if
you can get off of all your prescription
medicine, very wise choice. But the only
way you're going to do that is you have
to control your circadium biology like a
crazy person. Why? Because the data is
now clearcut. And if you don't know
anything about circadian biology,
there's a guy on Twitter I want you all
to follow. His name is Satchin Panda.
He's become pretty popular here. Why?
Because he's a PhD researcher. And just
about every damn paper he writes, he
finds another control mechanism for
another part of the body that's
controlled by sunlight.
So when one of your idiot friends sits
you down and you're having wine and
says, "No, no, I don't believe this guy.
The sun's not bad." You follow these
people and after about a year, you're
going to start to go, you know, this is
starting to make way too much sense what
he's saying. And you know, if you want
to keep putting sunscreen on and not
going outside and wearing sunglasses and
putting sunglasses on, uh, you can do
that. I I tell people here in the States
that if you give your kid an iPhone, an
iPad, or a computer, it's equivalent to
child abuse. I personally believe if you
do if you put sunscreen and sunglasses
on your kid and you live in Australia,
that's also child abuse. And if you give
them a a computer on top of it, it's
doubly worse.
&gt;&gt; You know, Jack, it's really interesting
that you should say that. Um, when I was
um a young mom, um, my kids are, you
know, late 20s now, but when I was a
young mom, I wouldn't put sunscreens on
them. Um, and they didn't wear the
sunglasses. And I had a mother say that
I was creating child abuse to my
children.
&gt;&gt; Well, but you got to remember the
paradigm of where she was back then.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. She could get away with saying
that and I would tell you I think you
could still get away saying that in Oz
now. I mean I have a lot of Australian
members so I trust I just had a Q&amp;A last
night with some of them so I know what's
going on. I've got a pulse on that
country like you can't imagine
&gt;&gt; and I'm doing a lot of stuff behind the
scenes to actually help your country you
know by bringing the right kind of water
there because if it happens that's going
to be the game changer down there. I've
already told Jason if he brings this
water to market down there, as soon as
people start taking it, they're going to
start seeing all their disease metrics
go away. Why? Because here's the good
thing. Your country has great sun.
&gt;&gt; And that's the single biggest thing.
Your solar redux is the single fastest
way to improve your mitochondria. The
problem is the water is so bad there
that
it can create big issues. Um,
I I actually joked with some of my
Australian members. I told them the best
water in Australia probably is in Sarra
Grapes from, you know, in the in the
southwest part of the the country.
That's how bad the water is. Um, and the
thing is, you've got to get people to
understand that the real big problem,
the real reason why the Kiwis have it
better than you guys do, and you know
this, um, because one of you said you're
from there, they have huge volcanoes
over there. So, they got huge magnetic
flux. So, the magnetic field in New
Zealand is way better than it is
Australia. Australia really is a dead
it's it's very much like Mars. It's a
it's a dead red desert. um and it gets
horrible rain, you know, around the
clock. Um that's really the problem. And
almost all the people that live on that
island, they're they all have northern
European hletypes, you know, and I try
to tell people maybe I'll I'll say this
to you and then make it make an impact
on you. Uh so I'll give you a third
grade analogy of what I just said from a
mitochondrial perspective so you
understand it. If I told both of you
ladies that we were going to take a
cactus tree and put it in the tundra,
what do you think would happen?
&gt;&gt; Would die.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Well, guess what? That's
exactly what I just said to you. You're
all northern European by heritage.
&gt;&gt; And you don't live at a high latitude
climate, do you?
&gt;&gt; No. At sea level.
&gt;&gt; And here's the thing. You need to
understand that you've been paying a
biologic toll for that since your people
got there about 15,000 years ago. And
that's gone through all those
generations. So now it's left you with
those deficits. Those deficits have
actually set you up for the disease
epidemics that you see right now. And
that's the key. That's part of the
reason why I tell people who are sick
Aussies, you listen to me. The smartest
thing for you to do is go up to the top
of the island so you can get to about
six latitude north and then import your
water. And I haven't had anybody yet. I
I'll tell you guys a story because
she'll probably listen to this and I
know this will help her. She has a
genetic disease and she's cool with me
talking about it. Um she's got
Huntington's and you know Huntington's
is a devastating disease. It's a genetic
one not a mitochondrial. Most people get
get it in the mid-50s and you basically
die from a horrible neurologic death.
&gt;&gt; So most people in Australia don't know
that the highest uh incidence of
Huntington's disease is in that is in
Tasmania. And Tasmania, as you guys
know, is like 40 to 45 latitude south.
Uh and what people haven't realized in
the Huntington's community there is that
if they just moved to the top of the
island that they would do much better.
So Michelle has been a member of mine
for about six years. When she started
off, she knew less than you guys did.
And she's actually uh in law
enforcement, just so you know this. So
she doesn't have any basic science
background. And she said to me, "Jack, I
go to the doctor and it's devastating.
They're telling me I need to get my will
in order and this and that." She goes,
"What can I do?" And guess what I told
her? Just what I told you guys, right?
shall never not see the sunrise. I want
you to go from the bottom of the island
to the top and I want you to import you
water. Happy to tell you she's eight
years later. She has no signs of the
disease. She pissed off her family. She
pissed off her kids. And the reason I'm
really proud of her and the reason why
I'm talking about her on this podcast
because a lot of her idiot friends that
have made fun of her hopefully will
listen to this. And I I told her this
and and I can't say this enough. Who are
you good for if you're not good enough
for yourself?
And she got the message. And she did the
very unpopular thing. So when Cindy
asked me, "Tell me the top three
things." Let me just tell you something,
Cindy. You really need to know the top
10 things when you live on a continent
that's dying faster than any other
continent on this planet.
If you want to settle, you do so. But I
got news for you. The people that are
going to listen to this podcast,
this this is designed to be a full
frontal assault to your intelligence
because what you believe is the big
problem. And until you get this message
that this is going on all around you
while you're oblivious to it, then
you'll begin to understand why you're in
deep where you are. And the
greatest thing about humans is we have
the ability to change our reality by
changing our mind and changing what we
believe and changing what we do. We're
the only animal on this planet that can
break all of nature's laws by a choice.
See, I don't have to teach lions and
hippos quantum physics. Do you know why?
&gt;&gt; I know it by nature's law.
&gt;&gt; They don't break it. But we do it every
single time. We're doing it right now by
getting this message out.
&gt;&gt; And we're very grateful for it, too. I
can't begin to tell you. And and I can
honestly say, Jack, thank you. Thank you
for today. I know we've taken up more
time than we can imagine. You've had a
lot of messages here and a huge impact,
I'm sure, on our listeners, and it does,
in all honesty, feel like a full frontal
assault.
&gt;&gt; Um, but I would love So,
&gt;&gt; I would love for you to give us what is
your what is your final message and how
can we follow you, be a part of your
tribe and your community. And what is
your final message to us?
&gt;&gt; Um, I'm going to tell you something
unusual. I don't want you to follow me.
I want you to become a leader in your
own place and teach people what I'm
going to say next. If you want to
understand Australia's problem, I want
you to buy some books and I want you to
read these books and I want you to
understand them. The first book is
Gerald Pollock wrote a book. It's called
The Fourth Phase of Water. You need to
learn everything you possibly can about
water. The next book is called Light
Sculpting Life. It's written by Roland
Van Wick. You spell his name RA
N D. Van Van Wick Wi J K. That's where
you're going to learn about light and
biopotons.
The third book is called Going Somewhere
written by Dr. Andrew Marino. It will
teach you everything that you need to
know that about about electromagnetic
radiation. If you read those three
books, you start there.
You come back and listen to this podcast
after you finish each one of those
books. I don't want you to follow Jack
Cruz. I want you to become a leader in
your town. I want you to tell everybody
that you possibly can what you've
learned and how you've changed, that's
your job. Um, you want more from me, you
know where to find me. It'll I'll be on
my website. I'll be on my Patreon blog.
You know, I've got tons of information.
It takes you seven, eight years to read
everything that I've written. That's not
the goal. The goal is now is you have to
understand
even if you understand 5% of what I said
here, if it's made an impact on you, I
need you to stop and act. I need you to
educate yourself. I need you to change.
And the only way I can get you to change
is to to get you to understand the way
you think about your world right now is
radically poor.
Thank you, Cindy. What are your top two
takeaways from Jack's message today?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think my um top takeaway is my
heart's beating crazily.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I think that would be number one. Um
and uh number two would be I'm I'm doing
the best that I can right now because I
get up, I watch the sunrise. I've been
listening to Jack for a while. I watch
that sunrise every morning. I swim in
the ocean. I don't wear my sunglasses um
when I do all of that. Um so I'm I'm I
guess my second top tip would be that
I'm a fifth of the No, no, I'm not a
fifth of the way. I'm 5% there I feel
like now and I've got a lot of reading
to do. What about you, Miss Kim? What
was your top two?
&gt;&gt; Well, Jack scares me and I love him at
the same time. Um I really have
appreciated the message, Jack. And I
think the big take-home for me was your
trifecta about light, water, and
magnetism because I have focused so long
on chemicals and food and exercise,
which I still believe perhaps play an
important role, but certainly not the
way these are. I'm grateful for the fact
that I've always been a sun advocate and
I'd never wear glasses hardly. And I
really am excited now to look closer at
things like the blue light blockers,
infrared, and of course, the most
important thing that I've taken from
today is the power of water. And Jack,
I'm not a scientist and I am not a geek.
And I hope you don't think I'm a fool
for doing so. But I am a smart person
who will listen. And I am very intrigued
in the science behind the density of the
water. And now what that doarium
um that I I can comprehend I'm not sure
I can repeat it but I can comprehend now
that the levels of doarium is what's
waiting the water which is stopping the
process of photosynthesis and our
mitochondria reacting to that. That's
what I've taken and that on a cell level
&gt;&gt; you've done pretty good if if you for a
non-geeek and that's good but I promise
you the books that I just told you if
you start there
&gt;&gt; you'll probably instead of Cindy waiting
seven years to talk to me again she may
say in six months okay we've read those
give us
&gt;&gt; let's get them back
&gt;&gt; let's get let's let's go three more
books like maybe some of your listeners
will post comments and they'll say what
else can we do what what's the next
thing? Because they likely heard what I
said. You're on a continent that's dying
faster than any other continent. And you
know, it's not hyperbole. But I I would
tell both of you this and I hope you
take it to heart. Um
being scared is the wrong emotion
&gt;&gt; to be quite frank with you. Um I think
it's better to know than not to know.
And the point that I would try to make
to you is I want you to think about the
people on the Titanic. There was two
types. those that listen to the music
and those that fought like hell to get
in the boat. I think this is the kind of
podcast where you find out what kind of
person you are.
&gt;&gt; Um, and the people who will take the
good away from this, they'll realize
that I came on here to give you a very
distinct message. I knew what you wanted
to talk about and I can tell you we
weren't talking about that.
&gt;&gt; We were going to talk about what you
needed to hear. And sometimes people
don't realize that what they need to
hear is exactly what makes them
uncomfortable. And this is for you
especially, Kim. I tell people there's
black swan credos because that's what I
call my tribe. Black swans are rare. I
know in Australia they're not. They're
actually pretty common, but here in the
States I use that moniker. Um they're
rare in nature. We do things and we go
to levels that other people can't even
fathom to find the truth, the real truth
that's based in nature's laws. And I'm
going to tell you that you always get
success from your failure. Um, you have
to find comfort in discomfort and that's
what actually makes you better and
smarter than you were yesterday. And to
me, that's the most powerful
thing in optimal health. Once you change
someone's opinion about how they think
about things and that they'll go and
read things that they normally would
never have read, I can promise you, Kim,
if you read those three books, you're
going to come back and you're going to
say to me, "I can't believe I wasted 40
years of my life on food, chemicals, and
exercise." Because they're really not
that important. You know why? There was
no gold's gym two million years ago.
Okay? There was plenty of chemicals
around. Uh the the thermodynamic events
on this planet have always been the
same. It's light, water, magnetism. They
vary with seasons. They vary by your
latitude. They also varied by your
continent. But here's the crazy thing.
Those continents have been moving on the
tectonic plates for 4.8 billion years.
All the change programs that you need
are built inside you. You have a giant
compound pharmacy inside you that works
with nature's native electromagnetic
radiation.
That's the take-home.
&gt;&gt; It's not Here's the crazy part. It's
actually not that hard to do the things
that I'm telling people to do. In fact,
it's really cheap. You know what the
problem is? It's going to create some
problems for your husbands, for your
wives, for your kids. That's part of the
reason why I wanted to share Michelle's
story with you because you know what?
That was her greatest problem. Her
husband was a real to her. Her
kids even bigger And you know
what? She still persisted as an
Australian woman
against all odds even when she didn't
know all the science. But you you know
why? She knew that she had a genetic
disease and she was fighting for her
life. I tell everybody, every single
person listening to this, there's nobody
on this planet's getting out of this
alive. The goal here is so that you can
live out your days, not tethered to big
pharma and my profession. And if you
think that this is horseshit,
you will be tethered to those people
quicker than you want to know. And I'm
perfectly fine that people want to do
that. I I don't have an issue with that.
My focus and my issue is in the people
that want a different reality than what
we're getting right now.
&gt;&gt; And how can I know you say we can't
follow you, but we are intrigued to be a
part of your and become one of your
black swans. How does that happen?
&gt;&gt; Well, you become you can become a member
on the website. I would tell most people
uh if you're interested in anything you
heard from me, uh my website is free.
You go to jackcruz.com. I have a form.
If you just read my form, you'll be
there for five or six years. It's it's
like ridiculously detailed and I talk
about all different diseases. In fact,
if you have any disease, put your
disease in a Google box in my name and
you'll probably get shocked. Uh you'll
get an answer. Um if you want more, you
want more of my time. My time costs
money. Um so I have memberships, silver,
gold, platinum, and titanium. You can
sign up for that. If you just want to
sample me via tapis menu, I have a
Patreon blog. It's uh
www.patreon.comdrjack
cruz in there. That's where you get the
dutarium story. That and that's that's
highlevel science that's going to make
Kim's hair fall out and her head split
open. But it's the good kind of stuff
because it's going to teach Kim just how
much she's left on the table.
in terms of understanding this and she's
going to begin to understand why I'm so
adamant and go after food gurus because
they don't know what they're talking
about. And the thing is once you
understand this mitochondrial
perspective, it's a very very powerful
thing. In other words, you're going to
begin to tap the power that you came
into this world with. Um, and I I tell
all my members this. There's a doctor
inside of you waiting to be found. The
problem is you got to get your mind and
your way of thinking out of the way to
get there. That's the real key. And
honestly, my goal is to create about 70
to 100,000 people on this planet that
get this message because I think we can
change the world. And and I have no
illusions that there's going to be
billions of people that are not going to
be helped. Guess what? The reason I'm
okay with that as a physician now is uh
because I learned this lesson from
evolution. Evolution doesn't save
anybody. It's called survival of the
fittest for a reason. And it turns out
when you're the smartest person on the I
should say the smartest mammal on the
planet, you have a duty to do a better
job than the other mammals that have
become lazy because they like the
Kardashians. They like the Real
Housewives of Melbourne. They like the,
you know, uh, Netflix. That's not my
That's not my people. Not everybody is
my people. If if I helped one person in
Oz with this podcast, I feel like I've
done my job. If I pissed off 10,000,
that doesn't bother me. You know why?
They weren't my people.
&gt;&gt; Well, I I would love to say on behalf of
Cindy and I and Karen, who couldn't be
with us today, that this has been one of
the most eye-opening podcasts we've
recorded in six years. And I would love
to say to you that in appreciation for
your time, knowing that your time is
incredibly valuable. You have given us
way more in the gift of knowledge and
and probably more than anything my
favorite quote from you today is to get
comfort from the discomfort as it's the
most powerful thing for optimum health.
And I think that's exactly I think you'd
agree Cindy what you've given us today.
&gt;&gt; So Cindy, is there anything you'd want
to learn
&gt;&gt; success from success?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. learn the best lessons from
failures. This is the reason why even in
my country I I I have a huge problem
with parents giving everybody, you know,
trophies. That's not the way it should
be. That's not the way nature works.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And we all need to realize it. I mean,
you got to cut through the political
crap. You got to cut through whether you
have, you know, an ideology, whether
it's left, right, or center. Look, this
is our cognitive bias as humans. We are
creatures of light. We are creatures of
nature and when you begin to realize how
we work, life gets really simple. You
you it becomes very focused on what you
need to do. Uh all the extraneous stuff
you just don't have time for anymore.
You just It aggravates me when people
invite me on a podcast and they want to
talk about carbohydrates.
I'm I'm just not I'm I'm so far past
that. You know, that was 10 years ago.
That's not now. Uh, now it's it's on. We
are doing some really dastardly things
to our mitochondria. I want everybody to
know, you know, what the answer is. You
may you don't have to know it. Great.
Here's the good part. You lions and
hippos get by just fine. You can, too.
Just make sure you do some of the things
that we talked about in this podcast and
you can do well.
&gt;&gt; You're amazing. And I loved it when you
said, "Humans, we humans have the
ability to change our reality, to change
what we believe, to change what we do."
&gt;&gt; So, thank you from the bottom of our
hearts.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, Jack. Um
&gt;&gt; to all our listeners, I'm sure like us,
you've been just as moved and hopefully
just as confronted. Um, and I do believe
this full frontal assault will be
something that we as a community can
also support one another and together
create a synergistic effect where we can
all be a part of the change that I know
Jack and his followers are creating. So
to those of you that would like to place
a comment, please go to the website the
wellnesscouch.com
up for a chat. You can also go to the
Facebook page, but do not spend too much
time there. um up the wellness couch
forward slashup for a chat and and and
get those bleeding glasses on and the
infrared happening. Um Jack, thank you
from the bottom of our hearts. You're
amazing. You're incredible.
&gt;&gt; Maybe maybe we won't wait seven years
next time.
&gt;&gt; We won't, Jack. I'm going to read those
books and um we will talk again.
&gt;&gt; Sounds good.
&gt;&gt; Definitely. Thanks, everybody. become
part of the ripple effect that's
changing the world. We'll see you next
week.
&gt;&gt; We hope you enjoyed this Wellness Couch
podcast. Did you know we've launched a
brand new Facebook group where you can
chat about any episode you like with a
tribe of like-minded people? The group
is called the Wellness Couch Tribe, and
it's an inspirational digital meeting
place to connect with like-minded
wellness lovers just like you. To locate
it and to come join us, simply search
for the Wellness Couch Tribe wherever
you enjoy Facebook.
[Music]
This has been a production of
thewwellnesscouch.com.
Check us out on Facebook and join in
conversation on
facebook.com/thewwellnesscouch.
Subscribe to each show on iTunes and
check us out on Twitter. The wellness
couch streaming wellness into your
lives. While the World's Coach presenter
endeavor to provide accurate and helpful
information to their listeners, these
podcasts cannot take into account
individual circumstances and are not
intended to be a substitute for health
and medical advice from a qualified
health professional. You should always
seek the advice of a qualified health
professional before acting on any of the
information provided by any of the
world's couch podcasts.