Music Education Research , Vol. I , No. 1 , 1999 


9 


Music king — the meanings of performing and 
listening. A lecture 


CHRIS I OI 1 1 IK SMALL, Cal le Rafael Uopart 45, T 2", 08870 Sitges, Barcelona, 
Spain 


( e-mail : 1 01364. 707@compuserve.com) 


abstract The essence of music lies not in musical works hut in taking part in 
performance, in social action. Music is thus not so much a noun as a verb, ‘to music'. 
To music is to take part in any capacity in a musical performance, and the meaning of 
musicking lies in the relationships that are established between the participants by the 
pcrfoi mance. Musicking is part of that iconic, gestural process of giving and receiving 
information about relationships which unites the living world, and it is in fact a ritual 
by means of which the participants not only learn about, but directly experience, their 
concepts of how they relate , and how they ought to relate, to other human beings and 
to the rest of the world. These ideal relationships are often extremely complex, too 
complex to be articulated in words, but they are articulated effortlessly by the musical 
performance, enabling the participants to explore, affirm and celebrate them. Musicking 
is thus as central in importance to our humanness as is taking part in speech acts, and 
all normally endowed human beings are born capable of taking part in it, not just of 
understanding the gestures but of making their own. 


I offer here some thoughts on some abiding issues concerning the nature of the musical 
act and its function in human life. I have been thinking about this for the last few 
years as I have been writing my third book, which bears the same title as this 
paper Musicking: The Meanings oj Performing and Listening. In doing so 1 make no 
claim to speak ex cathedra or to tell anyone what they ought or ought not to be doing; 
lathci 1 want to olfcr such philosophical support as I can in these confused and worrying 
limes to those who are actually out there doing the work, to clarify as best 1 can the 
reasons why I am certain that music is of central importance in human life and to be 
defended stoutly, not only in the education of the young but as a lifelong practice. 

for more years than 1 care to think about I have been worrying away at the question, 
or rather, a pair ol questions: “What is the nature of music?” and “What is the function 
ol music in human life?” — in the life, that is, of every single member of the human 
species? I have reached some tentative conclusions. 1 make no apology for throwing my 

1 46 1 -3808/99/0 1 0009- 1 3 ©1999 Christopher Small 


1 0 C. Small 


two cents’ worth into a pair of questions that seem to have defeated some of the best 
minds in Western thought, at least since the lime of Plato, since I feel I do have 
something to contribute to the formulation of the questions and possibly even to the 
quest for an answer. 

In the search of that answer I have, over the years, read as widely as I could in the 
philosophy, the aesthetics and history, and the sociology of music, and while I have 
found much of interest and dashes of insight, and even sometimes a kind of beauty, I 
have found it hard to make myself believe that so universal and so concrete a human 
activity as music should require such complicated and abstract explanations. It all seems 
very remote from real-life musical experience. 

And then again, with the exception of certain sociologists, and some of the younger 
American musicologists, there is a strong tendency to work more or less exclusively 
within the assumptions of the Western high-art tradition and to accept them without 
question as universal of music. It is rare indeed in Western writing on the aesthetics of 
music to find so much as a glance outwards at the experience of other cultures, even as 
far as Western popular traditions. 

I also have a problem with the writers’ use of the word ‘music’. One moment it is 
treated as if the ail itself were a thing, a living thing, with powers of growth and 
development and action, and then suddenly, by a stealthy process of elision, the thing 
‘music’ becomes equated with those works of music which are undoubtedly the 
justifiable pride and glory of the Western tradition. And then the assumption is quietly 
made that it is in those works, those music objects, that the nature and meaning of music 
reside. 

And so, when we read about the effect of music — the emotions it arouses, for 
example — what is really being talked about is the effect of a work of music. And further, 
what is meant is specifically the work’s effect on an individual listener, not a composer, 
and certainly not on a performer. In fact, performers and performance are hardly ever 
mentioned in writings on the meaning of music. It seems as if a performer and his 
performance are thought of simply as the medium through which the musical work has 
to pass before it reaches its goal — the listener— and the more transparent the medium the 
better for the musical work. 

This is strange when you think about it, since you can have music without a listener, 
and you do not even need a composer, but without a performer there is no music. Why 
people should want to sing or play would therefore seem the most fundamental question 
of all, yet it hardly rates a mention in the aesthetics and philosophy of music. 

It seems that each musical work is thought of as having an ideal platonic existence, 
over and above any possible performance of it. Each work is thought of as floating 
through history, untouched by time and social change, waiting for its ideal listener to 
draw its meaning out, by a process that Emmanuel Kant called disinterested contem- 
plation. Performers, those troublesome folk, whom many composers would eliminate if 
they could, apparently have nothing to contribute to that meaning. They can clarify or 
obscure it, but the meaning has been completely determined by the composer before the 
performer ever sets eyes on the score. Just as an example, Stravinsky (1947), in the 
series of lectures entitled Poetics of Music, condemns what lie calls ‘interpretation' 
(by which he means any creative contribution from the performer) much as the Church 
condemns heresy, and he demands of performers instead what he calls ‘execution’, 
which he defines as “the strict putting into effect of an explicit will that contains nothing 
beyond what it specifically commands”. 

This attitude is only an extreme manifestation of an idea that has been with us since 



Musi eking 1 1 

the time of the Ancient Greeks, the idea of the primacy of the musical text and the 
subordination of performance to it. 

The te nor John Potter (1998), in a very interesting new book called Vocal Authority, 
subtitled Singing Style and Ideology, gives us a glimpse into the social origins of this 
assumed primacy of the musical text, tracing it back as far as the ancient Greeks: 

In such a polarized society (that of the ancient Greeks] ... two distinct strata 
were the norm: a free class of apprcciators, consumers of broad education who 
formed the potential audience, and an understratum of unfrec specialists 
ranging from artisans to gymnasts and musicians. Free men developed the 
science of music as an academic and philosophical discipline; practical 
music-making, beyond the minimum necessary for educational purposes, was 
the province of the unfrec. This separation of music into its practical and 
theoretical aspects was to have important consequences for later European 
culture, contributing to the idea of a permanent intellectual elite in whom 
resides the true nature of music, a music whose existence is in the first instance 
a written one. 

The same idea continues to dog us today. For example, Carl Dalhaus, the doyen of 
contemporary European musicologists, states flatly in his book Foundations of Music- 
History (Dalhaus, 1982) that “I he concept ‘work’ and not ‘event’ is the cornerstone of 
music history. Or, to put it in Aristotelian terms, the material of music history resides 
not in praxis, or social action, but in poiesis, the creation of forms”. 

1 he use ol the words ‘poiesis’ and ‘praxis’ is a cue, on which we arc all expected to 
murmur, “Ah yes, Aristotle" and bow our heads to the superior wisdom of the Ancient 
Greeks. And it is this legitimizing authority that permits historians, philosophers and 
musicologists, and sometimes even composers, who ought to know belter, to go on 
burying their heads in the scores, which is where they tell us the essence of musical 
meaning is to be found, with scarcely a glance outwards to the real world where people 
actually perform and listen to music. Like Kant, writing away day after day in his musty 
study— I sometimes wonder what would have happened to his concept of disinterested 
contemplation if he had ventured out down the road as far as the nearest tavern. Or like 
Brahms, who, we arc told, turned down an invitation to a performance of Don Giovanni 
saying he'd rather stay at home and read the score. I hale to think what Mozart, the 
supreme practical musician, would have had to say about that. A hearty bit of Viennese 
scatology, I’ll bet. 

The idea that musical meaning resides uniquely in musical objects bears little relation 
to music as it is actually practised throughout the human race. Even within the Western 
classical tradition the exclusive concentration on musical works and the relegation of 
performance to subordinate status has resulted in a severe misunderstanding of what 
music is really about, and an impoverishment of our experience of it. For it is not true 
that performance takes place in order to present a musical work; it is the other way 
around. Musical works exist in order to give performers something to perform. 

In that real world where people actually make and listen to music, in concert halls and 
suburban drawing rooms, in bathrooms and at political rallies, in supermarkets and 
churches, in record stoics and temples, fields and night-clubs, discos and palaces, 
stadiums and elevators, it is precisely what Dalhaus calls social action, which is to say 
performance, that is central to the experience of music. You do not actually need what 
Dalhaus calls a created form, which is to say a musical work, at all. Many of the world’s 
musical cultures get along very well indeed without any such thing. And you don’t even 



12 C. Small 


need a listener, at least not one apart from the performers, who of course are always 
listeners as well. 

So it seems to me self-evident that the place to start thinking about the meaning of 
music and its function in human life is not with musical works at all, but with performing 
and listening. 

If there is anything that is clear about performing and listening it is that they are 
action, they arc something that people do. As 1 thought about this I realized that if music 
isn’t a thing but an action, then the word ‘music’ shouldn’t be a noun at all. It ought to 
be a verb — the verb ‘to music’. Not just to express the idea of performing — we already 
have verbs for that — but to express the much broader idea of taking pari in a musical 
performance. As those who have read my book Music of the Common Tongue (Small, 
1987) will know, 1 have taken the liberty of defining this verb. 1 offer it to you now, the 
verb ‘to music’, with its present participle ‘musicking*- — the added ‘k’ is no caprice but 
has historical antecedents — not as one of those gratuitous coinages so beloved of 
academics, but as a genuine tool for understanding the nature of the music act and its 
function in human life. 

This is how 1 have defined it. It is quite simple. To music is to take part, in any 
capacity, in a musical performance. That means not only to perform but also to listen, 
to provide material for performance (what we call composing), to prepare for a 
performance (what we call practising or rehearsing), or to take part in any activity that 
can affect the nature of that style of human encounter which is a musical performance. 
We should certainly include dancing, should anyone be dancing — in many cultures if 
no-one is dancing then no music is happening — and we might even on occasion 
stretch the meaning to include what the usher is doing who takes the tickets at the 
door, and the hefty men who shift the piano around, and the cleaners who clean up 
afterwards, for what they do also affects the nature of the event which is a musical 
performance. 

It will become clear as we go along how useful this verb can be, and I shall use it from 
now on as if it were the proper English-language verb I hope it will become. 

I have to make one thing clear. To music is to pay attention in any way to a musical 
performance, at whatever level or quality of attention, even taking in Muzak in an 
elevator or supermarket, or having your ears assaulted, as mine were the other night 
during a liesta, by Carmina Burana at a volume near the threshold of pain, that some 
idiot has decided will make a (it accompaniment to a lireworks display. In other words, 
the verb to music is not concerned with valuation. It is descriptive, not prescriptive. It 
concerns all participation in a musical performance, whether active or passive, whether 
we like the way it is being done or not, whether we consider it constructive or 
destructive, sympathetic or antipathetic. The word will remain useful only as long as we 
keep our value judgements clear of it. Value-laden uses that I have heard, such as 
“Everyone ought to music” or “You can’t call listening to a Walkman musicking” distort 
its meaning, weaken its effectiveness as a investigative tool, and plunge us back into 
futile arguments about what music is or is not. There is a time for value judgments, ol 
course, but they come later. 

Apart from favouring the idea that music is action, the verb has other useful 
implications. In the first place, it makes no distinction between what the performers arc 
doing and what the rest of those present arc doing. It thus reminds us that musicking — 
and you see how easy it is to slip into using it — is an activity in which all those present 
are involved, and for whose success or failure all those present bear a responsibility. It 
is not just a matter of composers, or even performers, actively doing something for the 



Musi eking 13 

passive rest of us to contemplate. Whatever it is that is being done, we arc all doing it 
together. 

I am not so silly, of course, as to sec no distinction between what the performers are 
doing and what the cleaners are doing; they are obviously doing different things. When 
we want to distinguish between them we already have an adequate vocabulary for doing 
so. By using the verb to music we arc reminded that all these activities add up to a single 
event, whose nature is affected by the way in which each of them is carried out, and we 
have a tool for exploring the nature and the meanings of the event as a whole. We 
acknowledge that musical performance is an encounter between human beings where 
meanings are being generated, and that those meanings arc bigger than simply the 
meanings of which a musical work is assumed to be the bearer. Like all human 
encounters it takes place within a physical and a social space, and that space makes its 
own meanings, which have to be taken into account as well when we ask what meanings 
arc being generated by a performance. 

And if musicking is action and not thing, verb and not noun, then we should look for 
its meaning not in those musical objects, those symphonies and concertos and operas, or 
even in those melodies and songs, that we have been taught to regard as the repositories 
of musical meaning. You will understand that I am not trying to deny the existence of 
those music objects, which would be silly, or to deny that they have meanings in 
themselves. But those meanings exist only in performance and arc part, but only part, of 
the meaning of the performance as a whole. 

That being so, the question that is most useful to us is not ‘‘What is the meaning of 
this musical work?”; no, the useful question is “What does it mean when this 
performance lakes place at this time, in this place, with these people taking part?”. 

You will notice, on the one hand, that by framing the question in this way we do not 
have to assume the existence of a stable musical work at all. As 1 have said, in many 
of the world’s musical cultures there is no such thing. But on the other hand, it docs not 
exclude the possibility of a stable musical work. It just removes it from centre stage and 
subsumes whatever meanings it may possess into a larger meaning, that of the total event 
which is the performance. In this way we can consider the meaning of all musical 
activity, anywhere and at any lime, and transcend the boundaries of the Western high-art 
tradition. 

The question then arises “In what does the meaning of this human encounter that is 
a musical performance consist?”. The answer I want to propose is this. The act of 
musicking brings into existence among those present a set of relationships, and it is in 
those relationships that the meaning of the act of musicking lies. It lies not only in the 
relationships between the humanly organized sounds that arc conventionally thought of 
as being the stuff of music, but also in the relationships that arc established for the 
duration of the performance between the participants within the performance space. 
These sets of relationships in turn stand for, or model, ideal relationships in the wider 
world outside the performance space, as they arc imagined to be by those taking part: 
relationships between person and person, between individual and society, between 
humanity and the natural world and even perhaps the supernatural world. Those arc 
important matters, perhaps the most important in human life, and whenever we engage 
in the act of musicking, even the most seemingly trivial and frivolous, we incur a 
responsibility towards them. 

I want to make it clear what I mean. I mean that when we music, when we take part 
in a musical act, the relationships that we bring into existence model those of the 
cosmos as we believe they arc and ought to be. We do not just learn about those 



14 C. Small 


relationships, but we actually experience them in all their wonderful complexity. The 
musicking empowers us to experience the actual structure of our conceptual universe, 
and in experiencing it we learn, not just intellectually, but in the very depths of our 
existence, what our place is within it and how we ought to relate to it. We explore those 
relationships, we affirm their validity and we celebrate them, every time we take part in 
a musical performance. 

There is nothing metaphysical or supernatural about this process of exploration, 
affirmation and celebration, nothing mystical. It is part of that natural process of giving 
and receiving information which links together all living creatures in a vast network that 
the great English anthropologist Gregory Bateson (1980) has called the pattern that 
connects. 

All living creatures, from protozoa to human beings to sequoia trees, need to be able 
to give and receive information; it is a condition of being alive. The means of 
communication arc extremely various. It may be a colour or combination of colours, a 
shape, a posture, a way of moving, a chemical secretion, a sound or pattern of sounds. 
But always the information concerns relationships, “How do 1 relate to this entity?”. For 
example, is it predator, or prey, is it offspring, parent or a potential mate? This is vital 
information for all creatures, and how they respond to it can make the difference 
between life and death for them — for us, I should say. 

How the stimuli that are picked up by the creature’s sense organs are transformed into 
sensory experience is mysterious. But for our purpose it is important to recognize that, 
whatever the mechanism may be by which images are formed, it is an active and creative 
process, not mere passive reception of whatever stimuli are presented. The creature 
works on the stimulus and creates a meaning from it. No information can be received 
unless the creature is ready to receive the raw stimuli and transform them. The receiver 
creates the context in which the message has meaning, and without that context there can 
be no communication, and no meaning. 

That being so, all knowledge of the world outside ourselves must derive not only from 
the nature of the thing outside that is being known but also from the way in which we 
transform the stimuli in our nervous system. Knowledge is not something that exists Out 
There wailing for us to pick it up, but is a relationship between the knower and the thing 
known. It partakes of the nature of both. There can thus be no such thing as completely 
objective knowledge, knowledge of the external world exactly as it is, since everything 
we can possibly know about it is mediated by the way we, the knowers, work on the 
stimuli to convert them into usable knowledge. 

This fact of the irreducible clement of subjectivity in all knowledge has reduced some 
European philosophers to something like despair. But Gregory Bateson (1980) points out 
that a creature that did perceive everything outside itself exactly as it was would be an 
automaton, without freedom or power of choice. Human beings are not completely 
objective in their knowledge of the world, but neither are they completely subjective, and 
it is in that broad gap between ‘completely subjective’ and ‘completely objective’ that 
human freedom and creativity arise. 

So it is that even at the simpler levels of life there is room for some flexibility in the 
response to information. As we ascend the scale of complexity the gestures and 
the possibilities of response become more and more varied and complex. Posture and 
ways of moving — what we call body language — as well as facial expression and vocal 
timbre and intonation, provide in the more complex creatures a wide repertory of gesture 
and response. Those gestures and responses, however, still concern relationships, and in 
complex and contradictory creatures like human beings the gestures and responses can 



Musicking 15 


be complex and contradictory also. Gestures from me to you might indicate that I love 
you, and hate you, and fear you and treasure you, all at the same time. Such complexities 
arc not unknown in human relationships. 

Whatever form the gestures of relationship may take, they have one thing in common. 
They do not state who or what the entities are that are relating. So that if I make a 
gesture that indicates that 1 dominate, or submit to, you, the ‘I’ and the ‘you’ are not 
stated and in fact cannot be stated. Only the relationship that unites us is stated. There 
arc no nouns, or pronouns, in the language of biological communication, no negatives 
either and no past or future tense. We cannot say ‘He does not submit to her’ or ‘She 
will dominate him’. The language cannot deal with relationships that arc not actually 
happening or with entities that are not actually present. It is a hcrc-and-now communi- 
cation. 

In contrast, verbal communication as it has developed, uniquely among human beings, 
has equipped us to deal with entities that tire absent, and with past and future events, and 
with abstractions and with the contexts in which they occur. But unlike the language of 
gesture, it can deal with matters only one at a time. 

This is both a strength and a weakness. It is a strength in that it has made possible 
those analytic capacities, that step-by-step logic and that ability to compute about things, 
that have proved powerful tools in gaining such mastery as we have over the material 
world. But it is a weakness in that words in general have proved less than adequate in 
dealing with the complexities of our relationships with one another and with the rest of 
the cosmos. One thing at a time is just too slow and cumbersome for the many-layered 
quicksilver nature of relationships. 

But the language of gesture continues to perform functions in human life that words 
cannot. These functions lie specifically in the exploration and the articulation of 
relationships, and in this function they arc as precise as words arc in their field. In 
addition to those innumerable gestures that we make and interpret every day, human 
beings have elaborated them over their million-year history into those complex patterns 
of gesture we call ritual. 

Ritual is a type of organized behaviour in which humans use the language of gesture 
to affirm, explore and celebrate their ideas of how the relationships of the cosmos 
operate, and thus how they themselves should relate to it and to one another. In the 
concentrated and heightened lime of ritual, relationships arc brought into existence 
between the participants, which model ideal relationships as the participants imagine 
them to be. In this way the participants not only learn about the relationships but also 
actually experience them in action. In the memorable phrase of the anthropologist 
Clitford Gccrtz (1973), in the ritual act “the lived-in order merges with the dreamed-of 
order”. 

Now ritual, as we know, may bring together and orchestrate an enormous variety of 
what we today call artistic genres: acting and miming, dancing, musicking, designing and 
building, painting, sculpting, making and wearing costumes, decorating the body, 
cooking and eating. It can, in fact, include at one and the same time all those activities 
that we call the arts. But 1 think we’re belter saying it the other way around. It is not 
that ritual brings together all the arts, but rather it is that each of the activities we call 
the arts is a fragment of that great unitary and universal performance art we call ritual, 
and almost certainly had its origin there. Ritual is the mother of all the arts. Each of the 
arts is a mode in which we use the language of gesture to explore, affirm and celebrate 
our concepts of how we relate, and should relate, to ourselves, to one another and to the 
world. I should go so far as to assert that all art is performance art. 



16 C. Small 


It could be that we have what we call art or the arts only when we cease to be aware 
of the ritual function of the activity and try to divorce it from its ritual purposes. 1 say 
we try to divorce it, because I believe we never can do so. No matter how secular or 
frivolous, or even trivial it may appear, however primitive, or crude or even incompetent 
it may seem, the ritual function of art is always present for those who can perceive it. 

We notice that the way the arts issue from, and return to, ritual is as action, as 
performance. In the enactment of ritual it is the making, the wearing, the exhibiting, the 
dancing, the musicking, in a word, the performing, that is valued, not the objects that arc 
made, or exhibited, or worn, or performed, however carefully and lovingly they have 
been made. The created objects arc of value only in so far as they serve the ritual 
purpose. And we sec further that if every living creature is able, needs to be able, to 
understand and to articulate the gestures that constitute the language of information 
concerning relationships, then the ability to take part in the activity we call art is not 
confined to a few gifted people but is part of the evolutionary inheritance of every 
normally endowed member of the human race. 

What has musicking to do with all this? We can expect that, as a fragment of the great 
performance art that is ritual, the act of musicking will bring into existence a complex 
web of relationships for the duration of the performance. At the centre of that web arc 
the relationships that the performers create between the sounds. Radiating out from 
these, and feeding back to them, arc the relationships among the performers, between the 
performers and the listeners should there be any apart from the performers, and with 
the composer, should there be one apart from the performer, and with anyone else who 
may be present. 

Broadly, the relationships of a musical performance fall into three groups. In the first 
group are those of the physical setting in which the performance takes place. In the 
second group arc the relationships among those taking pail, performers and listeners and 
anyone else involved, while in the third are those between the sounds. We shall see in 
a moment that these three groups of relationships themselves interrelate in complex 
ways. To enumerate them all would take more time than I have here (I have tried in my 
new book to give a somewhat more comprehensive list but even that is not by any means 
exhaustive). So let us just take a quick glance at some of the relationships that are 
brought into existence at one kind of event, a contemporary symphony concert as it 
might take place in a concert hall. 

The modern concert hall is designed and built around certain concepts of human 
relationships, and, like all buildings, it has the power once it is built to impose those 
concepts on what takes place within it. The physical space shapes the social space. Its 
great size and its opulence tell us that what goes on here is socially important. It isolates 
everyone within it from the world of their everyday lives. The big foyer with its loose 
layout tells us that this is a place for socialization while the auditorium with its rows of 
scats all facing in the same direction tells us that this is a place for listening and paying 
attention only, not for socializing. The boundary of the stage forms an impassable 
division of the place into two, keeping some people apart and bringing others together, 
allowing some to dominate and others to be dominated. 

When we come to the second group, the relationships between those taking part, we 
start to get really complex. Again let us consider a symphony concert. First there arc 
those among the orchestral players; they can relate to one another as they play only 
through the notations they have before them and through the gestures of the conductor, 
on whom they depend to coordinate their efforts. He (almost never she — a commentary 
perhaps on another set of relations, those of gender) is the power centre of the 



Musi eking 1 7 


proceedings. He mediates all the relationships between the players, because he is the 
only one who has a complete image of the musical work before him. But even he is not 
a free agent since everything he docs, or gels the orchestra to do, has to be justified by 
reference to the composer’s score. The composer, ultimately, is boss, even if, as is the 
case moie often that not, he is dead (again, it is almost always he, almost never she). 

And what about the listeners/ They sit still and quiet during the performance, not 
communicating with one another in any way, each individual alone with the sounds in 
the midst of the great crowd of people, not sharing the experience with their neighbours, 
who arc quite likely strangers to them. They cannot affect the course of the performance 
in any way, because the set of relationships which dictates that is all located on the 
orchestra’s platform, and we have already noted that the social barrier formed by 
the edge ol the stage is as impassable as il it were a brick wall. Their relationship with 
the players is of the most distant kind, since the two groups enter and leave the building 
through separate entrances and never address a single word to one another. 

With the third group, the relationship between the sounds, we enter an area of 
enormous complexity that I can hardly begin to deal with here. In general they fall into 
two categories: those relationships which occur in succession, over time, and those 
which occur simultaneously. In the first category would fall melodic and rhythmic 
relationships as well as tempo, while in the second are not only harmonic ones but also 
concern the number of sounds occurring at one time, whether one voice is leader or all 
voices arc equal, whether the texture is unified and blended or individualistic, how 
much dissonance is tolerated, and so on. I hen there arc also relationships between 
simultaneous and successive relationships: how many rhythmic patterns arc going on at 
once, for example, and a whole slew of relationships between rhythm, melody and 
harmony. 

I he sc thiec groups of relationships do not exist in isolation, but themselves interact 
in complex ways, in what we might, following Gregory Bateson (1987), call second- 
oulci relationships that is to say, relationships between relationships. When we try to 
articulate those in words the formulation comes out so complex that we arc led by the 
verbal bias of our culture to think they are too complex for our minds to encompass. 

I will try to show what I mean. 

There is, foi example, a second-order relationship between the relations between 
composer and performers, on the one hand, and the relationships between the sounds, on 
the other. Hence, should the composer prescribe everything the performers arc to do, the 
performers will lack the freedom to make their own sound relationships, and their 
relationships to one another will not be direct but will be mediated through the notations 
in the score. Such second-order relationships may take some figuring out when we try 
to verbalize them, but they are articulated perfectly clearly in the gestures of the 
performance itself. Here is another one. There is a second-order relationship between 
the ways in which the performers relate to the listeners, on the one hand, and, on the 
other, the relationships between the performers and the sound-relationships they create; 
the more preset ibed the sound-relationships, the less control the listeners have over the 
way in which the performers perform. 

But it is when we come to third-order relationships that we really test verbal language 
to destruction. One set of second-order relationships between first-order relationships 
between, on the one hand, performers and composer, and, on the other, between 
performers and listeners relates in a third-order relationship to a second set of second- 
order relationships between the first-order relationship between the sounds on the one 
hand and, on the other, those between the sounds and the space in which they arc played. 



1 8 C. Small 


I bring out that virtually incomprehensible sentence not to confuse but to show what 
is really the crux of this paper; that while the complexity of the relationships of the 
performance stretches the resources of verbal language about as far as it will go, if not 
further, it docs not begin to test the power of musicking to articulate them. It does 
not matter if we understand this or any other verbal formulation; in the act of musicking 
we arc able to do it effortlessly. In musicking, in taking part in any capacity in a musical 
performance, we arc articulating (which is to say, we are exploring, affirming and 
celebrating) human relationships in a way for which words arc not only inadequate but 
also unnecessary. 

What 1 am trying to say is this: to take part in a musical performance is to take part 
in a ritual whose relationships minor, and allow us to explore, affirm and celebrate, the 
relationships of our world as we imagine they arc and ought to be. If this idea has any 
validity, then current ideas of music as some kind of code for the expression, or the 
communication, of the emotions, or for the representation of emotions, or even, heaven 
help us, for the representation of the morphology of the emotions, which is the term 
Suzanne Langcr (1957) uses, emanating from a composer to each individual listener 
through the supposedly neutral and transparent medium of the performance, just don’t 
stand up. 

In the first place, as 1 have tried to show, performance is not neutral at all but is itself 
suffused with a rich texture of meanings. And in the second place, to my mind the idea 
of music, or musicking, as the communication of emotions doesn’t jibe at all with my 
own experience. I cannot remember ever being made happy by a happy piece of music, 
or sad by a sad one, and I am not even sure 1 could tell which was which. 

Nevertheless we all know that the experience of musicking can pack a powerful 
emotional punch that must come from somewhere. Once again Gregory Bateson (1987) 
has an idea that can be useful to us. He suggests that emotions arc not free-floating states 
of mind but rather are the ways in which our computations (that is the word he uses, 
suggesting precision and clarity) about relationships resonate in consciousness. If all 
creatures, from protozoa to human beings to sequoia trees, need some means of getting 
an answer to the question, “How do I relate to this entity?” then clearly they need some 
means of representing this relationship to themselves. And at least for those more 
complex creatures that have attained to consciousness, it is through the emotional state 
that is aroused that the relationship is represented. 

So that when I music, it is not any built-in emotional content residing in a piece that 
arouses my response. My response is to the relationships of the performance. Different 
performances of the same piece of music can arouse different responses, including 
sometimes no response at all, depending on how the total set of relationships of the 
performance fits in with my concept of ideal relationships. When I found myself being 
half deafened by Carmina Burana the other night, I fell myself being bullied and 
dominated (wrong relationships) and naturally I was angry. 

But when things come together in the right way, whether it is others playing or, on 
rare but doubly fortunate occasions, myself that is playing, I know the source of those 
feelings of elation and joy that can produce tears; it is the knowledge that this is how 
the world really is when all the dross is stripped away, and this is how I relate to it. The 
emotion that is aroused, in fact, is not the reason for taking part in the performance, but 
the sign that the performance is doing its job, the sign that for the duration of the 
performance the lived-in order has merged with the dreamed-of order. 

It is not any old performance that will do that for us, of course. Only performances 
in which we, the participants, arc empowered to explore and affirm and celebrate the 



Musi eking 1 9 


relationships of our world, will do. That means that the performers must explore 
the sound-relationships as subtly, as comprehensively and as imaginatively as they are 
capable of doing, and that the listeners' response must be equally imaginative and 
comprehensive. 

The experience of musicking is much richer and more complex than conventional 
Western aesthetics allows, since in experiencing the relationships of the performance we 
arc experiencing the relationships of the wider world as we conceive them to be and as 
we believe they ought to be. Once again, we arc not observing those relationships from 
the outside but arc actively involved , each one of us, in their creation and their 
maintenance. 

The phrase “as we conceive them to be” is of course a vital modifier, since not 
everyone perceives the relationships of the world in the same way. Members of different 
social and cultural groups, as we know only too well, have different senses of the nature 
ol the pattern which connects, different concepts of how we relate, and ought to relate, 
to one another and to the world, different senses, in fact, of who they are. That this is 
true even within a single society or nation-state is a truism; it is the stuff of politics. And 
so we need not be surprised to find that members of different social groups pattern their 
musicking in different ways to generate sets of relationships that model their ideal. That 
means not only the style of the sound-relationships they bring into existence or listen to, 
but also the whole way in which the performance is structured. 

We might find, therefore, within a single society not one but innumerable different 
ways of musicking. Of course, as we might expect, there is a great deal of overlap both 
in musical style and in style of organization of the performance as a whole; highbrows 
and head-bangers have more in common than they would like to believe, since all 
members ol a society or a nation-state have in common a number of social experiences 
and assumptions about relationships. That is what makes them a society in the first place. 

In any case, we should understand that those taking part in different kinds of 
musicking are looking for different kinds of relationships, and we should not project 
those of one kind of performance on to another kind. Any performance must be judged 
on its efficacy in empowering those taking part to affirm, explore and celebrate their 
concepts of ideal relationships. Only the best musicking of which all those taking part 
are capable will do that, and only those taking part will know for sure what those 
relationships are. And I believe that the best musicking is done, always, by those who 
do the best they can with what they have. And when I say the best musicking, we should 
remember that there arc many ways of musicking well, and the technical dexterity that 
is so prized in Western high culture is only one of them. 

So, what can we conclude from all this? First, I think, is this: music is not a collection 
of works that we study and play and listen to, but is an activity, something we do. It is 
first and foremost performance, and if we would look for the meaning of music we 
should ask, not “What docs this musical work mean?” but rather “What does it mean 
when this performance takes place at this location, at this time, with these people taking 
pail, both as performers and as listeners?”. We do not even need musical compositions — 
in many of the world’s musical cultures there is no such thing — and we can certainly do 
without notation, since most of the world’s musicians do not feci the need for it. But if 
no one is performing there is no music. 

And, second, that if I am right that musicking is part of the ancient language of gesture 
which enables human beings, like all other living creatures, to articulate their relation- 
ships with one another and with the rest of the world, then the ability to music must be 
part of the evolutionary inheritance of every single human being. That is to say. 


20 C. Small 


everyone, every normally endowed human being, is born with the gift of music no less 
than with the gift of speech. And when I talk about the gift of music I do not just mean 
the ability to understand, or to appreciate, someone else’s utterances. Aftcrall, we take 
it for granted that every normal human being is born with the ability to make and 
perform their own utterances; everyone docs it all the lime. Such everyday transactions 
arc of central importance in human life. 

I am convinced that taking pail in acts of musicking is of equal importance in human 
life. As a part of the ancient language of gesture it enables human beings to articulate 
their relationships with themselves and with the rest of the world, in ways that speech 
cannot. There arc of course important differences between speech acts and music acts, 
but in this they arc alike: everyone is bom with the potential not only to understand them 
but also to make their own. 

If that is so, then all musicking is serious musicking, and no one style of musicking 
can be said to be more serious than any other style. Within each style or tradition there 
may be differing degrees of seriousness, but all styles are equally serious. All perfor- 
mances, in whatever style, arc ultimately to be judged on their efficacy as instruments 
for exploration, affirmation and celebration of ideal relationships, and only those who 
have taken the trouble to immerse themselves in the culture arc in a position to make 
such judgements. 

We can ask our questions, not just of formal concert performances, but also of the man 
in the bus with his Walkman clamped over his ears (he may be listening to anything 
from the Spice Girls to the Ride of the Valkyrie, but the gesture of exclusion is the same) 
or of the underpaid Spanish cleaning lady who sings as she mops the floor, or of the 
crowd singing patriotic songs at a political rally, or of oF pals singing bawdy songs at 
a drunken party, or of the singing congregation at a church — or, if it comes to that, of 
those taking part in the Ghanaian adzida dance or of the players and listeners to a 
Balinese gatnclan performance, or of the participants in any one of thousands of different 
kinds of musicking across the world. Any attempt to explain the meaning of musicking, 
and its function in human life, that docs not at least try to deal with all the tremendous 
variety of human musicking, however strange, or primitive, or even antipathetic it might 
sound to our cars, isn’t worth the paper it’s written on. 

We may feel, and we have a right to feel, that there arc ways that accord with our 
concepts of ideal relationships and other ways that do not. The choice of ways of 
musicking may not be done consciously or deliberately, but it is never a trivial matter. 
It reflects always an individual’s, and a society’s, quest for those right relationships 
which most of us spend our lives seeking. 

NOTE 

This paper was first presented as a keynote lecture at a National Association of Music Educators’ 
conference held in June 1998 at Brctlon Hall, Wakefield, England. 

REFERENCES 

Bateson, G. (1980) Mind and Nature: a necessary unity (London. Fontana/Collins). 

Bateson, G. & Bateson, M.C. (1987) Angels Fear: towards an epistemology of the sacred (New York. 
Macmillan). 

Dauiaus, C. (1982) Foundations of Music History , translated by J.B. Robinson (Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press). 

Cii i k iz, C. (1973) The Interpretation of Cultures (New York, Basic Books). 

LANCER, S.K. (1957) Philosophy in a New Key: a study in the symbolism of reason, rite and art 
(Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press). 

POTTER. J. (1998) Vocal Authority: singing style and ideology (Cambridge. Cambridge University Press). 



Musicking 21 


Small, C. (1987) Music of the Common Tongue: survival and celebration in Afro-American music 
(London, John Caldcr and New York, Rivcrrun Press). Reissued October 1998 by Hanover and 
London, University Press of New Lngland/Wcsleyan University Press. 

Small, C. (1998) Musicking: the meanings of performing and listening (Hanover and London, University 
Press of New Lngland/Weslcyan University Press). 

Stravinsky, I. (1947) Poetics of Music (Cambridge. MA, Harvard University Press). 



