Good morning.
Hey, how about that? But this was Castle
Bravo March 1st. The reason I'm using
this is because it's a 15 It's a 15
megat ton explosion, which is pretty
much in the same ballpark as Tungusa,
right? So all this nuclear testing we
did there was a huge downside to it but
you know the the upside is is it gave us
a lot of insight into the power of
cosmic impacts. So let me just play this
and see what happens.
[music]
There we go. Yeah. [music]
This is the largest uh bomb ever tested
by the by the United States.
[music]
Uh this would have been probably the
Marshall Islands. [music]
So a lot of this is recently
declassified within the last 5 to 10
years I think. [music]
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Is there anybody in here old enough to
remember duck and cover?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Even when I was like first grade,
I knew this is ridiculous.
I don't think.
And then Sar Bomba, which is the largest
hydrogen bomb. This is like 50 to 55
megat tons. This was the largest
hydrogen bomb. Luckily, they couldn't
use it cuz it was too big and unwieldy
to even transport. But this also is
recently declassified footage after uh
well post thawing of the Cold War. We we
were Americans were given access to
this. So here we go.
Impressive. Uh but I wouldn't like that
to happen again.
Okay, let's go to the let's go on. So
comets a celestial body moving about the
sun in an elongated orbit usually
consisting of a central mass which is
the nucleus surrounded by a misty
envelope the coma which extends into a
stream the tail uh in the direction away
from the sun. Now the tail or the stream
is a essentially a stream of ionized
gas. um it's not a debris stream. That's
the the trail is the any debris coming
off the comet. Uh and that's different
than the the tail which is the ionized
gas. So when you see a comet, the tail
that you see in the sky is always
pointing away from the sun. Right?
uh it's taken from the Latin from the
stem cometa taken from the Greek which
is modification of cometes which means
long-haired because ancient peoples
looked at a comet in the sky and they
pictured a long-haired probably a woman
with long hair streaming behind. So the
architecture of the cometary zone in the
solar system we we can think now that
the solar system doesn't end at Pluto or
Neptune. continues out into the zone of
comets. And the this kind of is a maybe
an oversimplified graphic, but it kind
of shows you the idea here that the
Kyper belt is a generally a flat disc
that lays more or less in the plane of
the ecliptic and then the Ort cloud is a
much larger zone farther out almost
spherical. So, typically the shorter
period comets um that come into
elliptical orbits and that leave a lot
of the meteor streams are going to be
from the Kyper disc. Um they're usually
going to be on elliptical orbits. The
comets that come in from the UR cloud
are going to generally be on hyperbolic
or parabolic orbits, which means the
geometry is open. they don't um they
come in, they make their passage around
the sun and assuming uh that they never
return. Um originally the torid meteor
stream or the the comet Anky was
believed to be on a parabolic orbit, but
then was later discovered by Fred
Whipple to be on an elliptical orbit.
And here's another graphic
kind of like this this graphic. Oh, I'm
looking down here. Yeah. So here you can
kind of see again a a a rendering of the
the orort cloud, the spherical orort
cloud and the kyper disc which is the
zone of comets.
Uh call it a reservoir.
So just some interesting photography
here. Um, you can see comet Hail Bop and
you can see there the the blue coming
off that's the plasma tail, the ionized
gas coming off as the comet nucleus is
devolatalizing
and hayuki. So um the the interesting
thing I found about hyokitaki was it was
some spectral analysis showed that there
were uh high concentrations of acetylene
gas in the in the nucleus along with
methane and ethane
which are of course highly flammable
gases.
And comet Swan discovered March 25th,
2020 by the solar wind uh anisotopic
camera and isotopus camtopi camera
discharging an estimated 2,866
pounds of water every second. Uh or
cloud in origin.
So we probably won't be seeing comet
Swan again. Comet West early 1976.
And there's Hayuki again. very long
streamer of a tail.
Now what? Yeah. And here's comet Mac
Holtz in passing right in front of the
Pleaides.
And then this is just showing this would
be a uh comet linear which is its orbit
is highly tilted to the plane of the
ecliptic. So, it's going to be less
likely to be uh an impactor at any at
any point because generally it's going
to be the the comets that are laying
close to the plane of the ecliptic that
discharge debris that the Earth could
potentially encounter.
And comet Atlas, you see there's a huge
inclination there of 139°. So again,
it's on a this one's on a parabolic
orbit. Yeah, word cloud comet discovered
the 9th of January 2023.
And again [clears throat] there you can
see the distinct difference between the
two tails of the trail and the tail.
Okay. So after the last passage of comet
Halley in 19 what was it 86
um we kind of came up with a new model
of a cometary nucleus which essentially
it's almost like an egg that if you look
at a cutaway it could be an icy matrix
with any number of various materials
entrained within it. And you know once a
comet begins to come into the inner
solar system into the zone of the
planets it begins to heat up. It begins
to devolatilize.
Uh it'll come in typically often
depending on perihelion passage which is
its closest passage to the sun. It'll
often times begin to uh undergo a
process of disintegration
and and when it does that it gives birth
to meteor streams.
And then the Earth crosses meteor
streams regularly. There's probably a
dozen of them or so every year that the
Earth crosses. Some are more spectacular
than others. Uh I always have liked the
Draconids and the Geminids and the
Leonids. I like the Leonids because
they're come out in the um uh in the
fall when you can see them very nicely.
Um
the Torids, we cross the Torid stream
twice each year. once in late October,
early November. There have sometimes
been called the Halloween meteors and I
did a whole presentation on that that I
think is online about the origins of a
Halloween and its possible connection
with the torid meteor stream and um then
we cross again in the spring late June
early Jul not spring summer uh late June
early July
and this is perhaps the origin of the
Tangusa object. I mean, I don't think
it's been proven one way or another, but
the timing was certainly correct. And
I'll show you in a in a slide coming up.
It's uh its position, its radiant point
in the sky that it came from, which is
fairly consistent with where a torid
meteor uh would be coming from on June
30th.
Now I would mention by the way that um
you know the fallet type nucleuses I
think are the halli nucleus is maybe 10
miles or so along the long axis. So an
object like this disintegrating could
potentially produce
you know many thousands of tenusized
objects
and luckily you know what it seems is
that like the torid meteor stream seems
to be very dispersed. It's also wide
very wide. It takes several weeks to
cross, which means that it's probably an
old meteor stream because it's had
plenty of time to become diffused along
its orbit. A young meteor stream uh
which has just been produced by the
disintegration of a comet is going to be
uh it's not it's it's going to be
clumped in certain air there because it
hasn't dispersed yet around the meteor
stream. every trip around the sun, that
material is going to become more
dispersed and eventually it'll become
uniformly distributed more or less along
the um along the the path of its orbit.
But if it's a if it's an old one, it's
going to be already dispersed. And
that's pretty much what we see with the
torid stream. Uh if it's younger, it's
going to be perhaps areas where the
amount of the meteors are going to be
more concentrated.
And [clears throat] after
Shoemaker Levy 9, which how many of you
remember that? Right. Shoemaker Levy 9
was um interesting because named after
Jean Shoemaker and Carolyn Shoemaker and
David Levy who sort of co-discovered it
when it was first observed. It was just
emerging from its uh paraj Jovian if you
want to call it that way passage. It had
swung by Jupiter and it had apparently
passed within the Ro limit of of
Jupiter's gravity field where the
gravity of Jupiter was strong enough to
overcome the cohesiveness of the
nucleus. So it began to disagregate and
so as it's coming around Jupiter and was
discovered it was already beginning to
uh disassemble into 21 individual nuclei
and I think it was about a 3 months of
observations the astronomers were able
to calculate the the orbit pretty much
you you use what's called the the
orbital elements and the orbital
elements were you have to know you have
the timing you have to know the geometry
of the ellipse you have to know the
inclination. There's other factors. I'm
not going to try to explain that right
now. But after about 3 months of
observation, they were able to project
its orbit um a year or so in about a
year or more into the future and then
realize that when it crossed the Jovian
orbit again, it was going to be crossing
precisely at the point that Jupiter was
going to be occupying. Now what I
suggest or suggest happened was that you
know uh the shoe maker had been had had
been moving in an orbit uh a jovian
orbit and had probably made multiple
passes between the sun and Jupiter and
on each pass got progressively closer to
Jupiter itself being drawn in by
Jupiter's gravity field and then um and
eventually the the orbits intersected
and we witnessed in the second week of
July In 1994,
uh, 21 pieces of the original nucleus
plunged into the Jovian atmosphere, um,
with pretty impressive results.
And after that, I think there was a a
more of an interest in looking at
evidence of multiple impact events. And
these are called Kina. I think that's
the proper pronunciation or kana. Kina,
it's spelled C A T N A which are these
um
like apparently where you have a like
this this would have been an object that
broke up had not had time to disperse
along its orbital path and so when it
struck the struck the surface of this is
I believe this one's on the moon um it
was like almost like a rapid machine gun
fire and I think Robert Shock would say
that this was probably a plasma
discharge. I'm more inclined to believe
that it was a multiple impact event. And
I will just say that I think there's a
lot of merit to what Robert's doing, but
I I don't I think that, you know, we
know that impacts occur. We know that
there's all kinds of debris out there in
space. Um, so I'm of the mind that yes,
we should absolutely consider the sun as
a as a major factor. uh and there is
evidence like he showed yesterday
there's evidence that the sun I think
does go through hyperactive phases but
at the same time I don't dismiss the
impact phenomena uh as being in my mind
is still the dominant effect um and uh
for example meteor crater
uh which I interpret to be an impact
I've been there many times and there is
remnants of the iron asteroid the iron
meteor right that impacted there. I
mean, you actually have it a piece
sitting in the museum there. It's really
heavy. I tried to make off with it, but
it was completely impossible. It was way
too heavy. Um,
and there's multiple examples of this um
on mostly on Mars, I mean on the moon.
Uh but several of the uh the Jovian
planets uh moons have these kina on them
as well.
[laughter]
And I think that maybe we should
consider and I think I have a slide
showing this in here that'll be coming
up that perhaps an impact encounter on
Earth may have involved a catina like
this. There's a there's a an array of
craters across central US. They're not
all proven to be craters, but enough of
them are now, I think about four of them
are definitely proven to be craters. Um,
and they're more or less in an
alignment. I think at the 37th or 30th,
I think it's 38th parallel, moving more
or less from east to west. And I think I
have a slide of that coming up here. Uh,
so you can see there are, you know,
there's there's quite a few examples.
Once we really started looking, these
things show up and they looked like
again, you know, um, Shoemaker Levy 9
had by the time it hit Jupiter, the
pieces had become pretty well spread
out. So, it took almost a full week for
all 21 pieces to plunge into the Jovian
atmosphere. But, um, these look like,
you know, you've got an object that was
just probably broken up, tidily broken
up, you know, shortly before impact.
So just a few uh comets in the process
of of disintegrating.
Uh so cometsman
walkman. Everybody say that really
quickly three times in a row.
Okay, that'll do. Um
yeah, so here's a closeup. You can see
uh that it's it's fragmenting into
multiple pieces. And this is this is the
standard life cycle of a comet at some
point when they're out there in the
Kyper disc or the or cloud. It's almost
like they're in deep freeze hibernation
and something has to trigger I think
something would trigger them to begin
their journey sunward. Uh I don't know
exactly what that would be. Um Stephen
do you have any thoughts on that?
Okay. Well, so but something we have to
agree something will dislodge them from
the equilibrium of their orbits,
possibly even sending them further out
or sending them sunward. And once they
go sunward, then um they begin to
undergo well, first of all, it's almost
like you switch on the ignition, they
come alive. That's the first thing they
do. They begin outging, they begin
devolatilizing, and then with enough
passages, they'll eventually
disintegrate. And I think the final end
result is that they could literally turn
into streams of dust. I introduced the
idea yesterday of the um of the uh Kit's
family of sungrazers and the sun divers.
I showed a one video of a sun diver
falling into the sun which was
interesting because just maybe I think
most of the commentary I've seen on it
said well it was just a coincidence that
there was a giant solar outburst in the
moment after but I noticed that the
solar outburst seemed to occur on the
antipity of the impact point. So, I'm
wondering if there could have been some
kind of a I mean, I've actually seen and
I'll be pulling some of this up to look
at talking about um sunquakes that are
connected to the infall of some of the
sunding comets. So, I this is this is a
lot of this is new that we didn't know
20 years ago, but 25 years ago, but with
the deployment of solar observing
satellites, we're learning a whole lot
more about the sun than we used to. And
I think that the crates family of
sunrazers was not even discovered until
we like maybe it was the Soho the solio
helio solar heliospheric
telescope that was trained on the sun
that we began to that we discovered a
whole another family of comets.
Comet linear here you can see two stages
of its disintegration.
And so comets begin as a single nucleus
and then they disintegrate. they end up
in meteor streams. Those meteor streams
can produce dust. Then that dust can
either u continue to become part of the
you one of the ideas is it be it's the
source of the zodiacal light. Um other
possibilities are that it's swept up by
planets or it's most likely fate is it's
going to fall into the sun or get swept
into the sun.
So here's your second generation
disintegration of comet Schwashman
Wakman fragment B photographed by Hubble
Space Telescope April 18th 2006. So I
think you see the original progenitor
nucleus up there on the top followed by
this material that's disintegrating now
within that within that trail of stuff
there. I mean there could be some
extremely large stuff that could you
know rank as a planetary killer. Um and
then who knows how much smaller stuff.
Now the Tangus object of 1908 that would
be on the very small end of the
spectrum. And remember we talked about
Chelabinsk that was I think around 50 to
60 ft in diameter about onethird the
diameter the estimated diameter of
Tangusa but you know the um the energy
is the volume is going to scale
according to the cube of the radius. So
you can do the math on that. You'll find
that the Tungusk object, even though
it's three times larger in diameter,
it's going to be many times greater in
volume. And then presumably also in
energy, kinetic energy released at the
moment of impact. Now, of course, the
Tungusa, the studies I've seen most
recently suggested was quite a low
density object, which again is
consistent with a comet, piece of a
comet. Um, and it's going to have a
different atmospheric effect. let's say
than a high density asteroid, iron
asteroid uh encountering the earth. So
you've got on the one end you've got
maybe almost the the density about a
gram per cubic centimeter which is you
know going to be the density of water
you know almost like a snowball. On the
other end you've almost got more like
cast iron and then you've got your
carbonacious
um meteors right almost in the middle
that are basically about the same
density as a typical rock. it would pick
up three 3 and a half grams per cubic
centimeter.
And so they're all going to have
different effects. Um, you know,
typically the object that struck and
created the the big hole in Arizona at
Meteor Crater. How many of you guys have
been to Meteor Crater? Okay. We've done
I've done three or four tours now uh in
the Southwest and that's always on one
of our stops. Um, Meteor Crater was an
iron piece, an iron asteroid, and it
plunges all the way through the
atmosphere and strikes the ground.
Tangus, as I was talking about
yesterday, did not strike the ground. It
blew up in the atmosphere, and that's a
function of the density, but it's also
going to be a function of the angle of
approach. You can picture that an object
coming in vertically is going to have to
pass through a much thinner layer of
atmosphere than one coming in at in a
very oblique angle which now has to pass
through a lot more atmosphere. So it's
also a function of the the angle at
which it impacts. Um
so you've got
multiple variables that are going to
affect the outcome. the density and
composition of the object, the angle of
approach, the [clears throat] the
composition of the target rock also. For
example, it's going to have a different
effect if it plunges into limestone,
which is going to release a lot of
carbon dioxide. Um, as say for example,
if it plunges into basalt or granite
bedrock, uh, obviously it's going to
have a very much different uh effect if
it plunges into an ocean uh rather than
into the into the earth. And then you're
going to get an enormous injection of
water vapor into the atmosphere that
would then rain out. It would also
generate tsunamis. So, you know, if you
have a half kilometer object plunging
into any of the global oceans, all of
the coastal areas are going to be um
affected by very large tsunamis. And I
haven't looked at the studies recently,
but I mean, we could be talking about
tsunamis that are, you know, several
hundred feet at height when they make
landfall. And if you recall, if you have
ever seen any of the videos from the the
tsunami of 2004 and um the the more more
recent one in Japan, they're pretty
impressive. And those you're looking at,
I think maximum uh wave height at
landfall around 50 to 60 ft. um
generally more around 20 ft. But you can
if you've seen some of those videos, if
you haven't, you can go online and see
some of those and and you'll see the
power of a tsunami and the power of
moving water. And we'll be looking at
some of the landscape effects of the
power of moving water shortly.
So let's keep going here. So this is
again um showing here. You can see here
how there each of the nuclei is it's in
essentially become multiple nuclei. Each
one with its own plasma tail. And
there's your string of pearls. This was
a photograph of Shoemaker leaving nine,
the commentary debris chain.
And this is an artist depiction of its
approach to to Jupiter.
And over that week, um, you know, 21
pieces fell into the Jovian atmosphere
and created these gigantic plumes that
were larger than the Earth itself. And I
think that was a point in in the history
of our study of uh the denisens of the
deep as I like to call them where a lot
of I think a scientists, astronomers and
others even geologists
across the spectrum begin to take the
idea of cosmic impact more seriously. Um
because yeah nobody expected this. I
think I remember Jean Shoemaker quoting
quote from Jean Shu the late Jean
Shoemaker that this was like a once-
ina-lifetime event and or a once in a
millennium event. I don't remember
exactly I think it was that once in a
millennium event but since we've only
seen it this happen actually in real
time once that's not enough to make any
kind of statistical conclusion from as
to frequency or periodicity of such an
event. Um
and here and I brought this up
yesterday. Um you know we we know that
Tungusa event uh say compared I used I
like to use this comparison between
Meteor Crater and Tungusa because Meteor
Crater leaves a scar. It's estimated to
be around 50,000 years old. So 50,000
years ago, an iron asteroid slammed into
the um into the deserts of of if it was
probably was not a desert then. I think
if I recall, it was not a desert at that
time. But in any case, [clears throat]
it slams into the earth. It leaves a big
crater that we can come by thousands of
years later, see it in the ground, and
here's the mute evidence of this
catastrophic event. Right. Well,
Tangusa,
if if we did not know about it, you
know, a few centuries after the effect,
we you know, if it had happened a
century earlier, we would not have known
about it simply because, you know, the
story of of Kulich and his intrepid
efforts to track down the zone of
destruction caused by the Tangus event,
you know, in 19 I think it was n between
1927 and 1928 when he was finally able
to access the site.
And as a result of that um he it was
already you know he was able to see the
blow down of the trees you know as far
as the eye could see but even now it's
rapidly regenerating and in another
century or two it'll be very difficult
except to the trained eye that there
would ever been something like that that
happened. Well, if you look at the the
the stat the the the uh the census of
the things that could strike the earth,
the low density stuff is really a lot
more prevalent than the things that so
it suggests that a tongusa type event
may be [clears throat] considerably more
uh prevalent than the kind of event that
leaves a crater. So if we do crater
counting and our and our um conclusions
about the the the frequency of earth
impacts which to me would include
atmospheric impacts uh may be off
maybe uh may be too low um because
certainly a Tangusa event as I showed
you I mean I I played Castle Bravo to
just give you an idea of what a 15 megat
ton explosion looks like and the energy
kinetic energy released by Tangusa was
considered to be in that range. I've
seen it it's I've seen it from five up
to like 40 megat tons. So I'm taking
kind of a little bit on the conservative
side towards the low end, but they're
even there at a 15 megat ton. Any a 15
megat ton explosion on any urban area in
the world is going to completely destroy
that urban area. And if Tungusa had
happened over a populated area instead
of the remote Tyogga forest of Siberia,
it probably would have completely
altered 20th century history.
Um I [clears throat] I made the point
about Chelabinsk which happened on
February 15th, 2013.
It was um you know was much smaller than
Tangusa yet the it um damaged over 7,000
buildings and caused over 1,500
injuries. Now if it had been just
slightly larger or slightly denser or
coming in at a slightly steeper angle it
could have caused quite a few casualties
and then it maybe would have see at this
point among most people you know was
very much in the news. It was very much
talked about at the time in the
immediate aftermath.
Excuse me. But now it's um for the most
part forgotten.
Nobody's considering that anymore. But
again, it was like to me it's like a
wakeup call. Hey, these things are out
there. They um Earth encounters them
with a far greater frequency than
anybody had imagined. But you also if
you're paying attention one of the
things is is that you know for took over
a century or a century and a half to
discover the first four asteroids and
now we've discovered
you know every few months one comes
flying into near earth space. Now I say
near earth space I don't mean like
within the atmosphere although several
of them recently have come within the
zone of communication satellites. So
that's pretty darn close. Now, luckily
they were for the most part relatively
small, but we've also seen some pretty
darn big ones coming, you know, um,
pretty close. I mean, certainly close in
the cosmic sense. So, these things are
out there. Um, so this is kind of how
I've broken down the five stages in the
life cycle of a comet. I call
aggregation is is that first phase. Now
we you know the original zone of comets
generally the idea is and I have no
reason to question that it's it's
essentially the leftovers from the
creation of the solar system and the
planets right that's what I'm calling
aggregation
then hibernation they're going to be out
there in their zone in their reservoir
and they're and um they're there like
the kyperis is slowly rotating right
it's it's sort of a coherent system
slowly rotating about the sun um and
it's in a quasi stable
orbit so that um a very small
perturbation can can cause it to migrate
either further out or in. But um in that
region of space, there's generally not
going to be a lot of effects that are
going to cause it to dislodge. But there
are that's the thing that that I'm very
curious about if we can at some point
see what those uh what the triggers are.
Uh perhaps um perhaps something on the
galactic level. Now this is pure
speculation. Perhaps something you know
something energy being released from the
galactic nucleus. Perhaps the passage of
a large object like a like a star.
One theory that I've seen that's kind of
interesting is conjunctions of the outer
planets may be able to and I think I've
got something on th those studies that
were done maybe 15 or 20 years ago might
be enough. Uh if you if you can if those
say the comets into in the Kyper disc
are moving slowly. If you can accelerate
them if something if some gravitational
force can pull them and accelerate them
they're going to migrate outwards. If
you can slow them down or almost like
put the brakes on, they will then
migrate inwards and that could be the
beginning of a process of transferring
those comets from the disc outside of
Neptune into um into uh the inner solar
system. So once they're whatever
whatever the process is that that causes
that, that's what I'm calling
activation. So now once they become
start their sunward journey they sort of
they come alive uh they start outgassing
they start devolatilizing
and then eventually they're going to
disintegrate as we've just seen and then
I call amalgamation is where um they are
actually swept up by planets or the sun
and that would be the final the final
stage in the life cycle of a comet is it
ends up being dust which which is going
to can also be um aggregated to a planet
through gravitational attraction or
drawn into the sun or the nucleus just
like we've seen from some of the sun
gracers. What what we've seen through
solar observing satellites is the comet
will come uh making parihelion passage.
It'll disappear behind the sun but then
it never reemerges. So the assumption is
that it's swallowed up by the sun.
So we just a little bit of elaboration.
Aggregation is the accretion of
interstellar matter, condensation,
integration, ejection from the inner
solar system. And I like this metaphor.
The stone the builders rejected.
Of course, it's a biblical reference,
but um if you're into that kind of
thing, I find it sort of appropriate in
its own way. And this is the reservoir
formation. Hibernation is your deep
freeze in the urt cloud or the kyper
disc. Activation is perturbation,
orbital transfer, sunward journey,
outgassing, tail formation,
transformation to a devolatilized
nuclei. And then the disintegration is
going to be vapor vaporization of the
ice matrix, formation of meteor and dust
streams after successive orbits. And
finally, amalgamation, which is going to
be your solar and planetary encounters,
crater formation, raw material injection
to Earth's atmosphere, hydrosphere,
lithosphere, biosphere as a possibly or
likely a primary stimul stimulus to
extinction and evolution cycles.
So meteor streams,
just a little bit of the nomenclature
here. This is a nice little graphic. It
shows you the the perspective. If you go
out and you're watching a meteor stream,
you'll always know like the radiant
point. The radiant point is going to be
targeted on a specific starfield, right?
If it's and and since all the stars are
constellations, whatever that radiant
point is targeted upon, that gives its
name to the meteor stream. So as you can
see here the X that you see up there to
the right that could be like let's say
if it's the Taurus that X is going to be
almost superimposed right on the
Pleaides star cluster right and so
Pletes traditionally is the shoulder of
the bull Taurus the bull and so from
Taurus the bull we get the the name the
Torid meteor shower right and just
showing the the perspective effect of uh
below with the highway looking at the
telephone lines and stuff because when
you're looking up into a meteor stream,
you almost have to visualize you're
looking up into a tunnel and this stuff
is flying out from that point and is
that's why it's called the radiant
point. It's because the material is
flying out from that point. And if you
go and it's a really heavy meteor
shower, you really can get that
perspective effect. And I've only seen a
couple of those. Some of the ones I've
read about like the the the uh that that
I'll show you some slides about here
like uh have must have been just
mind-bogglingly awesome to the to the
witnesses.
And so here's a time-lapse photo of the
Leonid meteor shower clearly showing the
radiant, right? So you can see the star
pads are the things going from upper
left to lower right. But then if you
look at the and I don't have a pointer
here so I can't but I think you can see
the the streaks of light that are if you
follow them back they're going to
converge more or less in the center of
the screen. Um if I had my
Can you see that? Can you can you make
that out? Good. Okay.
And this was a Leonid fireball. The
Leonid stream has produced some pretty
impressive fireballs that have been seen
by folks. Um,
oh, the interesting thing about this is
that you actually look at it. You can
see that the major main fireball has got
a little companion. You can see up there
to the upper right that little streak.
So, it actually is a main piece of the
uh the Leonid meteors and then it's got
a much smaller one that's accompanying
it in. Now, this thing burned up in the
atmosphere. it didn't didn't strike the
earth.
Okay, so here this is a this was I think
a woodcut and you see these people are
all out of their homes. This was I
forget the year but I think I've got it
on the next slide, but they're all out.
You see they're all looking up in the
sky and uh the next one actually shows
the rest of the woodcut here what they
were seeing.
Now you can see why I'd say I'd love to
see something like that. Okay, there it
was. November 13th, 1833.
So t the peak of the leonids is usually
around the 17th of November.
Um but yeah, I remember reading the
accounts of these. A lot of these people
who came out and saw this thought this
this was it. This was the end of the
world right here. Um these days we'd
know it probably wasn't the end of the
world and they're could enjoy the
spectacular awesomeness of something
like this. So again, this is what this
is showing us is that you know that that
the meteorite debris is not uniformly
distributed throughout its orbit. So we
might cross the uh orbit, the earth
might cross the orbit of the Leonid
stream at some point where there's
rather low population, but then at
another time it might pass the through
the stream when there's a really a
cluster. And that's that's what happened
here in in 1833.
And this this was another representation
of it from uh seen out in the Atlantic
Ocean.
So here are your selected meteor streams
uh
with data. So you've got the name of the
stream on the left and then the comet
associated with it because most of them
have comets associated with them. So
uh and your date of the peak. So you've
got your quadrant quadrantids, the
lurids, the Ada Aquarids which are
connected with Hal's comet, the Percads
which is associated with comet Swift
Tuttle. Uh and uh the Percads is the one
that you can get out and see in the
summer. Uh, I've oftenimes tried to time
some of my tours out west in the western
states to coincide with the Perced
stream because it's a it's a sometimes
can be a pretty impressive stream and
it's nice to, you know, be out in the
desert or in the the clear air of the
high al the high elevations of some of
the western states. You can see some get
some pretty impressive effects. like you
might see one one really good blazing
meteor like every minute or two,
sometimes three or four within a minute.
Um the Draconids, which uh notice the
date there, October 7th through 9th. The
radiant is in the head of Draco, as you
might guess. That's why they're called
the Draconids. They were a very
impressive performer a few centuries ago
and there's many stories about people
being blown away by the by the intensity
of a Draconid meteor shower. Not
literally blown away but psychologically
blown away. Okay. the torids which are
associated with comet Anki early
November peaks um around they're they
have been referred to as the Halloween
meteors because they actually do peak
right around uh you know Halloween all
saints and all souls day and there I've
made the conjecture that in times past
the Halloween observation was actually
associated with with this particular
meteor stream and the possibility that
there were encounters with more
macrosized
uh pieces of the of the Draen of the
Torid meteor stream that could
[clears throat] have caused uh severe
consequences for people in the past.
There's a whole group uh Victor Clue
will William Asher William Napier uh and
a group of others I call them the the
neoc catastrophists that have been
studying and publishing about the the
torid meteor stream for years. William
Napier has written a paper suggesting
that um that the uh encounter the
younger lower younger dus boundary may
have been triggered by an encounter with
the torid stream. And then the leonids
uh as it says there radiant in Leo they
peak around November 17th. They can be
an impressive performer as well. Of
course it's also getting fairly cold in
November. So, if you're going out in
November to try to witness the Leonids,
make sure you dress warm. But I would
highly recommend um taking a note of the
Perciads and trying to be somewhere out,
you know, during that period from August
12th to August 15th. Uh
and uh oh, comet Swift Tuttle is
associated with and also comets. is a
prominent stream that has frequent
fireballs and I've seen some really
breathtaking fireballs out, you know,
witnessing watching that stream. So,
make a note of that. And uh then
finally, the Geminids. Um I've got a
question mark there because we're not
sure 3200 fat and whether that is the uh
associated comet or not. Leonids is
associated with Temple Temple Tuttle.
Now, let me go back to the Taurus for a
minute and say that it's associated with
comet Anki. Enki is part of that stream,
but that was probably not the original
progenitor comet. Enki is probably a sub
comett, if you will, that um there's
also another comet associated with that
called Red Riki, Rniki. And uh it's
likely that they are pieces of the
original very large comet that came into
the inner solar system. And the
estimates I've seen are 25 to 30,000
years ago at some point. I've noticed
interestingly that there was a major
climatic shift around 26 to 27,000 years
ago which is which geologists and and
paleontologists and paleoclimatologists
have looked at and and have referred to
as the onset of the late Wisconsin phase
of the longer Wisconsin ice age which
followed in the aftermath of the emian
or marine isotope stage 5e which I
mentioned yesterday which lasted from
about 116,000 to 129,000 years ago,
which is often considered to be the
closest parallel to our own holysine
epoch. It was a period of um it was the
warmest period that we know of within
the last couple of hundred thousand
years at least. And it was warmer than
now. In fact, a lot of sea level
studies. I I've just got a um on my
podcast, Squaring the Circle, I've done
a two-parter on sea levels from the
past. And I've kind of focused in on the
emian because there's evidence of sea
levels 20 to 30 feet higher than now.
And also evidence of a perhaps a 50%
delaciation of Greenland and that
Greenland was actually quite verdant
during the emian and probably would have
been very conducive to settlement and
agriculture and so on. also the the
latitude belt at which um you know the
the the the tundra shifted far to the
north. In fact, most of the tundra was
not even was pretty much gone during the
emian. Uh that I would now probably
concur with um Robert on this that the
emian was the result of of a period of
active sun. And uh [clears throat] so
anyways,
we'll come maybe come back to the the
excuse me, the em it's called it's
double em i a n emian. Write it down.
Look it up. It's a very interesting
period of our of earth history. We now
know that modern humans were around
during that time. And I think that that
would be a very um I I think we're just
really kind of like almost as far as
with the emian we're kind of like where
we were at maybe 20 years ago with the
younger dus. And I know when I first
started talking about the younger dus
nobody had ever heard of it except a few
was in a scientific papers. I'm sure you
know some of the folks that were
involved in the early publications um
you know in the 2000s and stuff were
were aware of it but it was very much
pretty much an exclusive uh province of
people that that were knew what the what
the younger dus even was. I discovered
it maybe in the 80s when some of the
early studies were first coming out when
they were realizing without connecting
it with any cosmic event. I'll I'll
point that out. For at least a couple of
decades of research, there was no
connection with a possible cosmic event.
Um, but yeah, it was the the polar
wildflower dus octopatala that gave its
name to the younger dus. The younger dus
implies that there was also an older
drius. So the older dus I think was
right there leading up to about 14,600
years ago. Then there was a period
called the baling and then the all
alarod. There was a let me see I'm
trying to remember maybe the younger dus
came between it the older dus came
between the two but I think it was
before anyways there was the there was
that warming period
that led up to the younger dus that was
consistent I think was consistent with
mealankovich uh forces which is orbital
changes uh geometric changes in the
orbital relationship of earth to sun and
[clears throat] those those forces are
generally going to be very slow acting.
The problem was is that you seem to have
a period of warming rather gentle
warming that occurred between say 146
and 15,000 years ago and then the the
lower younger dus boundary um that seems
consistent with Malankovich. But then
you get to that younger dus boundary and
then something happens uh with extreme
rapidity and this is the boundary at
which the impact proxies are being
found. I don't know of anybody other
than Robert that has suggested that
those are not impact produced. Um he
said that you could produce those with
solar events. I haven't looked at any of
that research so I have no opinion on
it. uh he's probably right in some
cases, but I mean there's been such a
wealth of research done on the impact
proxies, the microsphererals, the
magnetic grains, the iridium, the
platinum, the shock quartz particularly.
Um all of these things that have been
associated with in one way or another
with the lower younger dus boundary that
I definitely come down on the side of of
a cosmic impact.
However, I'm open to the idea of
considering the a significant solar role
and do believe that we probably have to
be thinking in a grander scheme of
things where we're kind of looking at a
unifying process. And I showed the uh
the the video yesterday, I can show it
again today of that [clears throat]
connection between the the sun diver and
that amazing solar outburst that
occurred at that moment. And uh we'll
we'll quote from some stuff here later.
Maybe this afternoon when we have part
two of this uh we'll quote with some
stuff uh that suggests that um this
could be a factor that that the solar
stability might be connected with the
infall of cometary masses. Um
again how you know I mean that the
probably the standard response to that
would be well a comet nucleus falling
into the sun would be too small to have
a significant solar effect but you don't
know I mean because there's potential
feedbacks and I mean and again I mean
maybe it could be that there has to be
certain um conditions that that would be
u conducive to a significant solar
response.
um maybe that those conditions don't
always prevail all the time. So I don't
know again this is this is kind of new
area for me to study and research and
it's I find it very fascinating to think
that there could be this integrative
process that between um the influx of
cometary debris into the solar system
possibly related to a a heightened solar
response but I'm not going to give any
definitive opinions on it until I've
learned more.
Uh, and [clears throat] then just a few
um
a few accounts that I always like
eyewitness accounts of things. This was
a May 30th, 1911.
And it says here about [clears throat]
7:00 p.m. the 30th of last May.
I was standing in my yard facing west
when a brilliant meteor caught my eye
which I will try to describe though no
words can carry any adequate picture of
it to one who did not see it. It
consisted [snorts]
distinctly of a head or nucleus and a
long tail. The head about three or four
times the apparent diameter of the sun
showed a mass of intensely brilliant
streaks and patches of color. Much like
the effect of a bursting sky rocket,
this stately meteoric train, steadily
moving with perhaps 1/4th the annular
velocity of a shooting star, spurning
both Earth and sky and aimed at some
unknown faraway point in space and never
to be repeated in the experience of one
lifetime will remain as long as earthly
memory survives the most striking
striking emblem of the majestic.
Yeah, I like that. If you ever read
these accounts from, you know, the 18th
18th and 18th and 19th centuries,
they seem so aerodite. Then it's, you
know, you find out, yeah, it's some
farmer standing out in his field and
[clears throat]
uh yes, the the extraordinary meteoric
display of 1913. This was published in
the Journal of the British Astronomical
Association.
At about 9.5
p.m., this is at night. On the 9th of
February, 1913,
there suddenly appeared in the
northwestern sky a fiery red body, which
quickly grew larger as it came nearer,
and which was then seen to be followed
by a long tail. To some observers, the
tail seemed like the glare from the open
door of a furnace. To others, it was
like the illumination from a search
light. To others, like the stream of
sparks blown away from a burning chimney
by a strong wind. The body moved forward
on a perfectly horizontal path with
peculiar, majestic, dignified
deliberation. And continuing its course,
it moved on to the southeast where it
disappeared in the distance.
Before the astonishment aroused by this
first meteor had subsided, other bodies
were seen coming from the northwest
emerging from precisely the same place
as the first one. Onward they moved at
the same deliberate pace in twos and
threes with tails streaming behind. They
all traversed the same path and headed
for the same point in the southeast.
Gradually, the bodies became smaller
until the last ones were but red sparks,
some of which were snuffed out before
they reached their destination.
As to the number of bodies, there was a
great diversity of statement. The usual
estimate was from 15 to 20. Some said 60
to 100, while others said there were
thousands.
The entire time occupied by the display
was about 3 minutes. Now, if you've ever
seen shooting stars, you know that they
just last for moments, a second, a few
seconds. So, so to see something lasting
3 minutes, that would be pretty damn
impressive.
Just as the bodies were vanishing, there
was heard in many places a rumbling
sound like distant thunder. The stretch
of country over which the display was
seen is unprecedented.
In the present case, persons dwelling
2,500 miles apart saw the same bodies.
Moreover, the descriptions furnished by
observers in Bermuda, in Ontario, and in
Saskatchewan
do not materially different. Got that?
Saskatchewan, Ontario, Bermuda.
Ob. Now, this is interesting.
Observations of the size of the bodies
were very discordant, but there is
sufficient evidence to show that they
were of considerable size. Several
observers considered the leading body to
have a diameter equal to that of the
full moon or nearly so. One observer
estimated the diameter at half that of
the full moon and another at 115th of
the moon's diameter. The last estimate
gives a real diameter of 123 feet. The
largest bodies were probably at least
100 ft in diameter. The tail of the
largest meteor is estimated been 39 mi
long. Now let's [clears throat] just
stop for a minute and consider that 123
ft. Now you're getting into a Tangus
sized object. If there were multiple
objects at least 100 ft in diameter,
you're talking about objects which if
they penetrated the atmosphere to a low
enough altitude
would detonate just like Tangusa did,
right? Um I think we've got a Yeah.
Okay. Here's a painting by Gustav Han of
the Great Meteor Procession of 1913.
And notice how it's going more or less
parallel to the horizon. And so what
most likely happened was an object was
captured into a geocentric orbit and it
traversed probably half the planet while
it was disintegrating. But it was
captured in such a way that its orbit
its pathway was tangential to the earth.
Had it been slightly steeper tilted.
Now it could have been very interesting
consequences.
Here's the path of the Great Meteor
Procession. If you can see up there at
the upper left in Saskatchewan coming
down over Manitoba,
if you get down there over the Great
Lakes, you'll see that it is passing
right over New York State, passing over
uh you know, Boston, New York, that
area. You can see it's passing right
between Lake Ontario and Lake Erie. Now,
if you had multiple objects in that
stream that were the size of the Tungusa
object and this thing was just a little
bit more oblique to its entry into the
Earth's atmosphere,
imagine what could have been different
if this thing in 1913 had come in with
multiple Tangusized impacts over the
Northeast, over the areas of New York,
Philadelphia, Boston, and Toronto,
Montreal
that could have been a major historical
event. Uh the outcome of the 20th
century could have been very different
if that had happened. But as it was, it
just provided a very spectacular
uh visual experience for the people who
witnessed it. And uh but other than
that, it was harmless.
Uh, this maybe wasn't quite a cosmic
catast. This this was an object about
the size of Chelyabinsk
sort of making a glancing blow. I think
this was in 76 I believe. Uh, it sort of
made almost like imagine a stone
skipping off the water. It came in again
at a very uh tangential angle to the
earth at that point and it essentially
just skipped off the atmosphere.
But it again, if it had been coming in
at a slightly more oblique angle, uh I
don't think nobody would have been
killed, but would have made a a heck of
an event. It would have been, like I
said, similar to Chelabinsk.
Then we'll get a little bit into the Tor
media stream. Um this is Victor Clube
here. Uh and um this is from the book,
uh The Mass Extinction Debates: How
Science Works in a Crisis 1994.
I'm going to not Let's see. I'm going to
go down to about the fifth uh
line there that I've got underlined. He
says, "Thus a large circumolar stream of
cometary asteroidal material
intersecting the Earth's orbit,
previously only suspected in modern
times has now been confirmed in subjvian
space. Streams of this kind containing
both active and inactive cometary debris
are a natural consequence of the breakup
under the influence of the sun's
radiation field of very large comets of
heterogeneous composition.
So this is pretty much again focusing on
the the torid stream which according to
this school of thought played a much
more prominent role uh in history than
has heretofor been recognized.
I'm going to show you here the uh the
[clears throat] orbits of the torid
meteors.
There was the work of Fred Whipple who
did the first photographic study of the
torids back [snorts] in the 1940s.
Uh actually go no this is even earlier
than that the 1937
you'll notice the date here uh October
31st November 10th. Now, what we have
here is we have the two the two yellow
ellipses.
Uh you can see there you've got the sun.
That's obvious what that is. And then
you've got the the orbit of Mercury is
the first white circle. Orbit of Venus
is the second and the orbit of the Earth
is the third. And you'll see in there
that the green arrows are showing you
all the movement. And you'll see that
the green arrow showing the Earth moving
counterclockwise. It's showing the the
meteor stream moving counterclockwise.
Now you see there you have number 712
and number 697. What this is is is for
this particular graph I chose two meteor
[clears throat] photo uh meteor
positions orbital positions that sort of
define the the more or less the outer
limits of the you can see there from
nove October 31st to November 10th. So
you've got you know not quite two weeks
apart. So what we're seeing there is
kind of a definition of the the outer
limits of the particular stream. Now go
to the next slide
and you'll [clears throat] see here that
again if you're looking at this follow
the earth around and you'll see where it
says June 30th. Okay. So around June
30th the earth is crossing the stream
and you'll see that the stream has just
made its perihelion passage. In other
words, it's closest passage to the sun.
So, it's coming around the sun and we
don't really see as a rule, we don't see
the summertime torids because of the
fact that to see them, you would have to
look in the direction of the sun, right?
So, the light of the sun blotss block
blotss them out. But follow the orbit of
the earth around counterclockwise until
you cross the stream again on November
1st. Now again if you again look at the
green arrows are showing the the orbital
direction of the torrent stream. So what
you see there is that during uh nove on
November 1st or let's say around
Halloween to to if you're looking up
towards the radiant point of the torid
stream you're looking away from the sun
and in fact you're looking almost dead
on targeting the pleades the shoulder of
the bull. Is this making sense? So you
can see how the earth crosses the stream
twice. We generally don't see it during
the summertime torids, but we do see it
during the the the fall torids. And
what was the date of the Tangus event?
June 30th. So June 30th is right there
pretty much prominently in the middle of
the summertime torids.
Also, I'll show you in a minute here
where um the where the uh radiant point
coming out of the sky was of the Tungusa
based upon the collection of several
hundred eyewitness accounts and it puts
it very close to the sun. So, its
position in the sky and its timing were
both consistent with being a member of
the torid stream. Now this does not
prove that it was a member of the torid
stream but it makes it a highly
circumstantial case that it was.
[clears throat] So going back to to club
and napier again the long evolution of
the earth then is distinguished by a
relatively steady evolution superimposed
on which are rapid sometimes
overwhelming changes whether in the
evolution of life or mountain building
or even disturbances in decor itself.
Many geologists over the years have
voiced suspic suspicion that these
changes have a galactic periodicity and
have speculated that somehow the galaxy
is affecting the affairs of earth. What
was lacking in all these speculations
was a mechanism for inducing the
galactic periodicities and it was not
until the late 1970s with the discovery
of the molecular cloud and Apollo
asteroid systems that the mechanism was
discovered. There are two main causitive
links in the chain connecting the galaxy
and the earth. The first of these is the
eb and flow of the galactic tide which
have we seen which we have seen is
reflected in the eb and flow of comets
into the interplanetary system. The
second link is the existence of giant
comets. Rare though they are, it is the
giant comets which contain the bulk of
the mass which enters the planetary
system. And it is their disintegration
products which interact most strongly
and directly with the earth. As we have
seen, the breakup of a very large comet
will produce a wide range of debris from
objects 10 kilometers across to probably
hundreds of kilometersized bodies to
temporary swarms of sub kilometer
objects down to dust in quantities
sufficient to block the path of
sunlight. We now ask, how would the
Earth machine respond to the influx of
such material?
Between the 3rd and 15th of November
each year, the Earth runs through a
meteor stream coming from a small area
in the constellation of Taurus, the
Bull. A young stream made up of meteors
not long released from their parent
comet would be narrow and probably
strong, and the Earth would pass through
it in a half a day or so. The Geminid
meteor stream is one such, the Earth
encountering it on the 10th of December
each year and the shower being over by
the 12th of December. The torid meteor
stream on the other hand takes the earth
12 days to cross and it is not very
intense. It looks old. It has two main
branches northern and southern emerging
from slightly different parts of the
constellation. The branches being about
equal intensity.
Orbiting the torid with the torid meteor
is a small comet discovered in 1818 by
pawns. An orbit was calculated for this
comet by Johan Anki, a pupil of the
famous mathematician Gaus, who had
developed a method for calculating the
orbits of bodies from their movement
across the sky. There are about a
hundred known short period comets. All
of these, with the sole exception of
Anki's comet, are in orbits which sooner
or later lead to a close encounter with
Jupiter and ejection from the solar
system by the powerful gravitational
pull of that planet. But Ankkey's comet
has somehow established itself in a
stable orbit such that it never comes
with the within the Jovian sphere of
influence. It does however come close to
Earth.
In addition, now this is where I think
it gets interesting. There may be one or
2,000 asteroids over a kilometer across
in orbits which make them a potential
collision hazard with the Earth. None is
more than about 10 km across. Their
surface is extremely dark and fewer than
50 have been discovered. They are known
as Apollo asteroids. After the prototype
discovered in 1932,
Ankkey's comet is in fact the sole
example of an active comet in an Apollo
orbit. The orbit is highly elongated and
the comet may approach to within 34
astronomical units of the sun and go out
to 4.1 astronomical units. Do you know
what an astronomical unit is? It's the
distance simply from the earth to the
sun, about 93 million miles.
uh the comet's orbit is inclined at only
12° to that of the earth's. This low
inclination and the shortness of the
orbital period ensure that there is
frequent interaction between the earth
and the material of the torid stream
with the potential for occasional very
close encounters with Enk's comet and uh
this is from technology review Peter
Tyson comet busters I just found this
may be appropo
with regards to the encounter of
clusters of objects
Recent studies have shown that a host of
fair-sized pieces could have more
devastating global consequences than a
single wintercausing object which would
be in the kilometer range and above by
igniting many separate conflrations that
merge into a global firestorm. And we've
seen that's exactly what happened with
the fire bombings of Dresden and Tokyo
is that the smaller fires merged into
one great firestorm that seem to have
synergistically more energy than all of
the combined smaller fires put together.
And what this particular article in
technology review was talking about was
that this may be uh also a function of a
clustered bombardment. So in other
words, if you had multiple objects
coming in that were on the scale of a
Tangusa event, um the consequences could
be more devastating. In other words, you
take the same mass and put it into a
single object bringing it in. But now
bring that same mass, disperse it,
disagregate it, bring it in as a bunch
of separate pieces and it would actually
have more devastating consequences over
a greater geographic range than the
single object. You might think of it I
the way I think of it is the difference
between like a a single bullet and a
shotgun blast.
Any questions,
comments?
just an artist rendering that I thought
was sort of express the idea that we're
talking about here. Yeah.
I just
sign that planetary nebula with them and
there's a couple very specific nebula
that
you
represent that scale of mag
&gt;&gt; I did I didn't hear the first part of
your question.
&gt;&gt; Come here.
&gt;&gt; Maybe if you could somebody give him the
megaphone.
&gt;&gt; Do we have a
&gt;&gt; We do have
&gt;&gt; Do we have a microphone here that you
can use?
&gt;&gt; Check. Check.
&gt;&gt; Ah, there. That's much better.
&gt;&gt; So, the the scale that we're looking for
is um above solar and uh of the the
impact energies, excuse me, the energy
input
that in that is indicated by the warming
trends.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um several of those trends, the
Dangard Ersker cycles correlate with the
Cats Eye Nebula and the evolution of
that. Um the Helix Nebula is timed and
oriented with the Younger Dus.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And all of those major commentary
streams also orient to zodiacal or
astrological signs that have nebula
within them.
&gt;&gt; Interesting. Now, I was not aware of
that. And that would bridge the the gap
between the solar flux that we recognize
and these other longer duration high
amplitude temperature spikes. And you
basically have a cosmic ray gun. The the
Helix Nebula itself is polar oriented to
our solar system.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Maybe you could give me some
resources that I could look at.
&gt;&gt; Sure. Sure.
&gt;&gt; Excellent. Thank you.
Hey, uh, two questions.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Um, so I just wanted to make sure that I
was following. So you said that the
Torian Toridan meteor um, not the Torid
meteor stream, the the surrounding
um, meteors that kind of uh, are
&gt;&gt; the Kyper disc
&gt;&gt; Kyper disc
&gt;&gt; or Kyper belt. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So you said that um, they're essentially
regularly arranged now and there's some
kind of energy injected that can pull it
into into like coming towards the earth
is that
&gt;&gt; yes I mean something does I'm just you
know the question is what exactly does
that what causes the migration of comets
from that reservoir into the inner solar
system okay that's the question
&gt;&gt; yeah my question is do you have a
hypothesis of what that energy
&gt;&gt; well there is I think I've got it coming
up here there's an interesting idea that
was proposed maybe a decade or two ago
that that I think we've got coming up so
we'll We'll address that.
&gt;&gt; Perfect. And then second question, it
was uh it was a lot of slides ago, but
you had a lot of moon impact craters.
I'm assuming they were impact craters.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But the the diameter of the craters,
they seem to all be about the same
depth.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Regardless of the diameter of the
craters, do you know why that is?
&gt;&gt; Oh, well, that kind of gets as far a
field into the the structure of the
moon. But yes, that's one of the kind of
anomalous things about the moon is that
there seems to be a maximum depth crater
to uh crater depth to diameter ratio.
It's extremely shallow. In fact, some of
the larger craters on the moon are so
shallow that if you were at the center
of the crater, you would the the
mountains that formed the rim of the
craters would be below the horizon.
Well, it what it tells us is the moon is
an extremely rigid object.
um which raises a whole bunch of
questions which are very interesting
about the structure and architecture of
the moon, the inner composition and so
on
which are kind of beyond what we're
going to talk about today. But at some
point when I'm a little more confident
because some of the some of the thoughts
and ideas about it are kind of on the
outrageous end of the spectrum. So um
I'm not really want to go there. not
really too prepared, but we could
possibly we'll see how much time we have
here today. We could possibly get into a
few things uh relative to your to your
question.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I just had a question for
clarification regarding the uh young
impact hypothesis.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. Is it that mainstream
archaeology is denying that there was an
apocalypse or is it just that we haven't
found evidence of common impact to to
verify it so to speak? I don't I'm not
really up exactly where the I think
you've probably got younger
archaeologists now that are certainly
willing to look at it. I mean the
evidence for the disappearance of the
Clovis culture is quite robust at this
point. Um perhaps the Salutrian culture
in Europe may have been affected. Um I
don't know um where they stand at this
point. Certainly I think though that
they need to factor this into their
thinking because in my mind it's pretty
clear something happened and and we
we're also seeing evidence more and more
evidence like I want to refer you to um
Stephen Collins work over there um on uh
what was the name of your paper Stephen?
Yeah, it's an it's an excellent paper.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; In fact, I've recommended it numerous
times. So, and I can give you a link or
I bet you Stephen can give you a link. I
think I imagine it's downloadable.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; PDF.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, I would highly recommend that paper.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. cuz I see that the human record
shows us there were seven comets that
triggered the younger Dus.
&gt;&gt; There was what?
&gt;&gt; Seven comets.
&gt;&gt; Oh.
&gt;&gt; Um that's why we have seven snake
headdress all around the world because
there were seven snakes that fell to
Earth. The Maharaba says seven torches
fell to Earth.
&gt;&gt; In fact, the seventh one supposedly hit
Northwest USA, which is why I'm so
interested. Um that's what triggered the
younger Dryus. Um it was so big it made
it look like dawn was coming from the
west.
&gt;&gt; And that's the morning star. as Lucifer
himself was a comet the seventh
apocalypse.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I'm certainly
somewhat somewhat aware of the fact that
you know a lot of the ancient traditions
and so [clears throat] on are going to
be very useful in in deciphering these
events and that what you've just
mentioned could be that I I'm leaning
towards the younger dest being
multi-impact. I think that you know I
think some of the critics have have kind
of created a straw man by by assuming
that it was just a single a single
object
&gt;&gt; large object which then should leave a
very obvious crater. But as we know from
Tangusa we can even have larger than
Tangusa that is not going to leave that
obvious crater. And if you had impacts
into the ocean or into the ice sheet
itself then obviously you're not going
to have the same type of a crater. Now,
we can get into some of this if we have
time today. Um, I've kind of played with
the scenario of what would happen with
an impact into an ice sheet. And I can
show you some stuff we when we get into
part two here of
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Um, I think that Drumland swarms may be
a clue, geomorphic clue to impact sites
in the um in the ice sheet.
But um
&gt;&gt; part of the record was that um uh it
appears that the book of Revelation is
actually a story of what happened. It's
not what's going to happen. It tells you
what each of the seven comets did.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And so it again co coincides with all of
it.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Um and I I I'm wondering if how much the
human record could weigh in on a
scientific discussion of of the younger
dus impact hypothesis.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I' I've read the book of
Revelation many times and of course so
much of it in there seems perfectly
metaphorical for cosmic impact type
events.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Uh hey, how you doing?
So [clears throat]
given um given the the prevalence of uh
asteroids and impacts and the moving
bodies, how much do you think that we
have been able to observe versus what is
out there? And then how as far as like
the common research group is concerned
and and tracking these bodies, how much
do you how fast and how much would you
feel safe as far as our ability to
observe and if we got to a certain
number that we tracked? Would we get a
fair idea of what's out there?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think
&gt;&gt; my understanding that there's a very
small percentage that we know about.
They came to seem to come out of uh the
middle of nowhere. At what point would
you feel safe and that we have an
accurate consensus of the bodies out
there and the the amount that could
interact with us?
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm at that not at that point yet.
&gt;&gt; I'll put it that way that um I think the
larger objects Yeah, I think we've got a
pretty good handle on the larger um you
know kilometer and above objects um but
not all of them. Of course, we're also
discovering that the possibility of uh
dark cometary nuclei which may change
the the statistical numbers somewhat. Um
it's the smaller stuff. I mean I think
you know it's the the subclometer
objects that really of more concern to
me. um not so much the planetary killers
that are going to cause like a global
mass extinction along the lines of the
perian triacic or the Cretaceous I still
call it the Cretaceous tertiary but it's
now the Cretaceous Paleo gene but the
Cretaceous tertiary event you know we're
looking at a sixmile roughly asteroid
producing a what 130 mile crater you
know in the in the uh I don't think that
that's the danger I think the danger
really is going to be smaller stuff. And
like what Peter Tyson said in that that
quote from technology review, if we had
a cluster, let's say if you had a couple
of dozen Tungus sized objects or even
several hundred. I mean, if we're
looking at several hundred now, we're
talking about event on the scale of like
an allout thermonuclear war,
&gt;&gt; minus the radiation, of course, but
&gt;&gt; or being able to track the activation
events of a larger object being able to
break into a smaller object.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, we're we're identifying I
think that
&gt;&gt; small object. were probably like what we
know of, you know, and again that the
qualification was the question of dark
cometary nuclei that are there more of
those than we've identified so far uh
that have basically very low albido.
They we don't we don't really see them
but they're out there. They're they're
dark objects that could come slamming
into the earth unannounced
&gt;&gt; and as they get closer then they may
become activated and then we see them
&gt;&gt; perhaps yes
&gt;&gt; seemingly coming out of the middle of
nowhere. But
&gt;&gt; but hopefully yeah hopefully we discover
them before they're you know on an earth
impact trajectory. But again it's like
the thing about Tungusa was that nobody
saw it coming. Um, and we'll look at
some of the recent the some of the
statistics of recent encounters here we
we get a little further into it. Um, but
yeah, so the my my thought would be more
what we're more concerned about now is
not the big planetary killer mass
extinction events, but what I would call
the city busters, I guess, if you had,
you know, a few dozen objects like this.
I that's why I cited this example of the
the the 1913 meteoric train. If there
were dozens of objects in there between
100 and 200 feet, now we're looking at
dozens of objects that would be in the
scale of the Tangusa event. And you know
if and again you saw it passed right
over populated areas of the Northeast.
If something like that were to happen
again, see that could be again it could
lead to millions of casualties. It would
not lead to a planetary extinction
event, but it could still be very
disruptive on a planetary scale. An
event of that magnitude could disrupt
the whole economy of the planet for
years. Um, that to me is really the more
concerning
uh possibility.
Don't rule out I guess that yeah we
discover some dark comet nucleus but
that's statistically I think it's far
more improbable than you know something
along the lines of Chelabinsk up to
Tangusa maybe a little bit bigger but if
we had a multiple event particularly but
even a Tangus sized event coming in now
let's say over the eastern seabboard or
over a populated region of Europe I mean
if that if that detonated ated over a
major metropolitan area, you'd have
several million casualties and probably
tens of millions of injuries. Um, so
yeah, that would be that would be pretty
significant event.
&gt;&gt; And then the solar forcing possibilities
&gt;&gt; and then what
&gt;&gt; and then if it just gets too close to
the sun and the solar flare and chronal
mass ejection as well.
&gt;&gt; If Yeah, if that's Yeah, if that's not
just a coincidence. Um, but yeah, I've
got to do more study into that. I'm I'm
very intrigued by that possibility. I
don't know enough yet to have any
definitive opinions on it.
&gt;&gt; Are one one final u are you familiar
with the electric universe theory?
&gt;&gt; Uh somewhat and you know it may fit in
with the ideas of plasma technology.
Um, but yeah, I I yeah, I'm not I'm not
going to claim to be an expert on
because up to this point so far I've
found that, you know, the idea of of of
impacts of comets and asteroids and
possibly, you know, the sun, which could
then take us into the realm of of
plasma. Of course, that's what Robert
was saying. Um,
have seemed to to me to be adequately
explaining the phenomena that we've
seen. I I I could be wrong on that, but
that's my impression at this point, but
it's probably worth looking into.
&gt;&gt; I h I haven't Yeah, I haven't looked
into it enough again to have there's a
lot to learn out there and
&gt;&gt; I only have one brain. I'm working on
cloning myself so I can have at least
one more brain,
&gt;&gt; but I'm a little ways away from that
yet.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for your time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Will we have a chance to discuss
the Pestigo fires?
&gt;&gt; Well, we could, I guess. Yeah, that's a
kind of a whole thing. That's a
fascinating Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's like such a great example of
a comet interacting with uh
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Well, we'll see how much time we
have.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; All right. So, let's go on for a little
bit more, then we'll take a break. I
call this ancient legacy because this is
some of the stuff that I've kind of come
across that looks to me like it could be
references to cosmic impact phenomena.
William Won um who wrote in his book a
new theory of the earth from its
original to the consummation of all
things wherein the creation of the world
in six days the universal dead delusion
the general confflagration is laid down
in the holy scriptures are there are
shown to be perfectly agreeable to
reason and philosophy how about that for
the title of a book
um and this is the quote from it that I
always found really intriguing. We know
no other natural causes that can produce
any great and general changes in our
sublunary world, but such bodies as can
approach to the Earth, or in other
words, but comets. And we may observe a
new possible cause of fast changes in
the planetary world by the access and
approach of these vast hitherto
littleknown bodies to any of the
planets. So he said that in 1696
which I find interesting because as you
know he was in a sense he was a one of
the early catastrophists as were a lot
of the scientists in particular
geologists in the early days 1600s right
through the 1800s where most of them
actually were catastrophists who
believed that catastrophe was an
integral part of the history of this
planet and they drew their inspiration
for that idea from a number of sources.
Some of them for obs from observations
out in the field. Some of them like
Wiston with is probably obser
observations of comets, others from
scripture and sacred writings and
traditions and legacies that have come
down to us. But
so Edmund Halley who used Newton's laws
of gravitation to compute the orbit of
the comet that bears his name and was
thereby able to predict its return also
speculated that encounters with comets
played a major role in Earth history.
Like Wiston, he assumed Noah's flood to
be historically authentic and proposed a
comet as being the instrument of
causation. In a paper presented before
the Royal Society in 1694, he describes
his conception of the effects of the
shock of a cometary impact on the Earth.
Quote, I have proposed the casual shock
of a comet or other transient body, the
great agitation such a shock must ne
necessarily occasion in the sea
sufficient to answer for all those
strange appearances of heaping vast
quantities of earth and high cliffs upon
beds of shells which once were the
bottom of the sea, and raising up
mountains where none were before mixing
the elements into such a heap as the
poets describe the old chaos that some
such thing has happened may be guessed.
For the the earth seems as if it were
new, made out of the ruins of an old
world, wherein appear such animal bodies
as were before the deluge. Now,
sometimes in my travels looking over the
landscapes of this earth, I come away
with that very same impression that the
earth, it seems, as it were, were made
new out of the ruins of an old world of
the and and I'm going to show you in
part two of this examples of that. what
I believe are the effects of these
gigantic cosmically induced catastrophes
and the imprints that they have left in
the landscape and how we can learn to
identify those, see them that they can
range from the inconceivably spectacular
like we see in some of the western
states, particularly the Northwest, but
also pretty much everywhere about us.
Once you know how to recognize the even
the more subtle effects of these
hyperscale events uh particularly
involve uh the extreme movement of water
over the landscapes
uh which leads me to you know the the
insight or the conclusion that you know
so many of the flood myths that have
come down to us um from all parts of the
globe uh are based upon real events.
And that these events are not just in
fact I was recently somebody was
criticizing me online. It was an
archaeologist as a matter of fact saying
that well these stories are just
exaggerated versions of regional events.
And my thought in fact I think I may
even do a response to that to say well
excuse me but a half a billion a peak
discharge of a half a billion cubic feet
per second is not a regional event.
Okay.
And I'm going to show you what the
passage of a half a billion cubic feet
per second over the landscape looks like
shortly.
Fred Whipple. Fred Whipple was a Harvard
professor, director of the Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory, a
presidential medalist, and his name is
synonymous with comets. He was one of
the few great innovative thinkers in
20th century planetary science. Yet
through it all, he remained just Fred to
all who knew him. Whether you are a
young student or a distinguished
internationally recognized scientist,
this gentleman treated everyone with the
same kindness and respect. The entire
planetary science community has
benefited immeasurably from his
wide-ranging insights. We've lost a
creative scientist
uh
uh where am I? uh we've lost a creative
scientist and a kind mentor, but he
remains a superb role model for his all
for us all. This is from the obituary by
Donald Yman's appeared in the journal
nature. Um I had become aware of
Whipple's work I guess around the late
70s and the uh the photographic evidence
that I showed of the torid meteor shower
uh was based the the the evidence in
that graphic I showed you was based upon
his photographic uh studies of the torid
meteor shower.
And here is some of the I I missed
Chandra's presentation. How many of you
saw it? Good. Okay. So, these are some
of the books I would recommend. Uh if
you want to get more deeper insight into
this, um there's Clue and Napier's work,
The Cosmic Serpent. That was one of the
early books I read. I remember I've got
a hard copy version of it that came out
that I bought probably within a year of
its first publication
and um 1982, although they've done a lot
of work since then. And uh they've done
one called the cosmic winter that's
worth reading and I think you can
download the entire book online. I
believe I've found it in PDF form. Um
and then Chandra's book the cosmic
dragons. Now what's interesting about
this both of these titles invoke images
on one hand a serpent on the other of a
dragon. This is a very uh typical way of
representing
ancient cosmic phenomena like meteors,
fireballs, comets and so on.
Yeah, there's the cosmic winter and then
um also evolution from space, a theory
of cosmic creationism which leads us in
some very interesting ideas um and the
idea that perhaps life on Earth was
seeded from the cosmos. And we do know
that the precursors to life to the
biogenic precursors are found in comets
even in asteroids.
So these are just if you want to dive
deeper into this on your own and then
Steven's work like I recommended that
his his paper on uh Tel AM is is really
a good read and go to Google Scholar
you'll find it right there you can
download it print it out
which brings us to the deluge or the
great meltdown.
So, what we're going to do is we're
going to segue from the sky to the earth
and we're going to look at some of the
catastrophic events on the earth that I
think may be related to activity in the
sky. Okay. So, I called this part of my
program the deluge, the great meltdown.
Now obviously I think one of the things
Robert and I are in total agreement on
is that there was a great catastrophe
and around the time of the younger dus
part of that catastrophe included
gigantic floods really gigantic floods
and those of you let me see anybody out
there who's been on any of the tours.
Okay. So, were you on the Cumberland
East tour or were you on the some of the
Were you on the Scablands tour
and Montana?
Okay. So, you have a pretty good idea of
what we're talking about. So, you know,
we've covered hundreds of miles from
western Montana across eastern
Washington across northern Idaho. And
we're seeing the effects of a flood that
affected all three of those states plus
Oregon plus Alberta plus British
Columbia. So this is really just more
than a regional flood in my opinion when
the archaeologists say, "Well, this was
just an exaggerate, you know, the idea
of the great flood. It was just an
exaggeration of a a re a local or a
regional flood." And I I remember
encountering this decades ago. They're
still stuck in that parag paradigm. They
have not kept up with the the uh the
evidence of paleo hydraology which is
what we call this particular discipline
uh the study of ancient water flows. So,
I'm going to introduce you here to I
know some of you are going to be
familiar with this, but we'll get into
it just so you can get a kind of wrap
your head around this and why I think
that the current models the current
explanations for these floods don't
really make sense. So, the Ice Age
Floods Institute, when my my buddy and
colleague Brad Young and I first visited
that in 1998,
the [snorts] Ice Age Floods Institute
had one headquarters that was in the uh
little back office of the Chamber of
Commerce in uh Moses Lake, Washington.
And it was staffed by one very sweet
little old lady who was the only one in
there. And they had one one chapter. Now
I don't know what they've got a dozen 20
somewhere in there. The the interest in
this phenomena has grown exponentially
since that year in 1998.
Um in [clears throat] '98 that was
actually the first year we were able to
go and make a uh what I think of as kind
of a scientifically oriented rec
reconnaissance
and becoming familiar with the
landscapes and so on. My discovery of
all of this went back I would place it
in the year 1979 to 1980. I actually
crossed traveling as a very young guy
just out of high school in 1970. I
crossed the scab lands and did a
traveled up through the Columbia Gorge
and saw the evidence of these gigantic
floods but had absolutely no clue what I
was seeing. But I had an impression that
stuck with me and and I've used the
analogy of you know from Guller's
Guliver's travels when he was in uh
Liiliput the Liipuchians were the little
people there and uh I remember coming
away from that trip with this almost
sense that I was like a liipian in this
landscape of giants and um in a sense
that's what it was because the phenomena
and I'm going to show you some scale and
variant phenomena here uh that you can
see uh water does very similar work
regardless of the scale and that's why
you know when you're if you were to take
a hydrarology course in a university
you would probably have what's work with
in one of the labs you would have a
stream table it's called it's usually
dietimmacous earth and you've got
sources of water where you can control
uh number of variables you can control
the volume of the water. Uh you can
control the velocity out of a spigot and
you control can control the tilt of the
stream table which uh recapitulates the
the gradient of the landscape. And so
you you can [clears throat] create all
the landscapes that water create but in
miniature.
Now, I have a stream near where I live
that um I like to go to and walk along,
particularly after heavy rainfall, to
watch to observe the geomorphic work
that's been done. And I'm going to show
a few examples here, but you can see
once you start paying attention, you uh
can see just walking along a normal
stream or river along a sandbar or a
gravel bar. And then what you're going
to see uh on landscapes where it's the
the result of mega floods. And one of
the things I've learned now about
traveling over these landscapes is that
the scale of the phenomena is so huge,
is so grand, that you oftenimes don't
even really understand what you're
looking at. And I'm always surprised at
the number of locals who just don't even
have a clue of what the landscapes that
they're living in. It's just, you know,
it just to me that
I I I mean, I guess I just have never
had that psychological orientation where
I have not had any curiosity about the
about the things around me because I
mean, even growing up in rural
Minnesota, I was always interested in,
you know, I mean, it was like, why is
that, okay, we got this flat field, but
right out in the middle of that flat
field, there's a hill. Why is that hill
there? you know, or the lakes, like I
would lived on a lake and it was part of
a chain of lakes. And I then learned, I
guess, at seven or eight years old, that
there had been an ice age. And then as I
got older and I learned more, I learned
that right where I lived and grew up was
sort of at the edge of what's called the
superior lobe of the Laurentide ice
sheet. And so during throughout the
course of the ice age, that margin of
the ice sheet wasn't stable. it moved,
it advanced, it retreated, advanced, it
retreated. So I was kind of living right
in that zone where of advance and
retreat. And so pretty much 100%
sculpted and created the landscapes I
grew up in. And I can even remember
being just even a small kid. Um, you
know, and certainly by the time I got
10, 11, and 12, you know, playing out
there, there was a big hill next to our
house and I would go sit up on that hill
and I could just look out. I could see
the lake and I could see kind of the
contours of the land and you know I
couldn't put words into it at the time
but I I always got this impression that
there was you know there's a story there
you know that it was almost like I got
this sense that the landscape was trying
to speak to me but I couldn't understand
it. I just was was sort of in a way
entranced by just the lay of the hills
and the way when the particularly the
sun go a lot of times this hill was to
the east of where I lived in the house.
So I would often times go on the hill,
sun would be going down in the west, and
then the low sun angle, the the shadows
of the sun angle would really bring out
the contours of the of the of the
landscapes. And I I just, you know, got
that impression at a very early age
that, you know, that there was something
unique. Um, and I guess that kind of
carried over into my uh into my adult
years. And this um I read a couple of
books about Atlantis in the late '7s.
One of them was called uh um the secret
of Atlantis by a German physicist named
Ottom Moo. And he proposed that that
Atlantis was sunk because of a bolide
impact into the Atlantic Ocean. And this
is was an interesting time because in
1980 is when three separate independent
authors or teams came out with similar
scenarios for the extinction of the
dinosaurs at the Cretaceous tertiary
boundary
um 65 then 65 but now it's been refined
to 66 million years ago. Uh that it was
an extraterrestrial
cause and that was there's three of them
that came out in 1980. And I always kind
of consider that sort of a turning point
year in our acceptance of catastrophism.
Um that that catastrophes have happened
in earth history. Now the evolution from
there is that well 1980 it was proposed
but there was a lot of resistance to it
because you know gradualism or
uniformitarianism was deeply entrenched
as a paradigm into the thinking about
earth history. But that changed that
that that inflection point was the year
I think the year 1980. And it was then
that we go, okay, well, it looks like
the dinosaurs got killed by an asteroid
impact. Well, that means that the
dinosaur extinction was catastrophic. It
wasn't gradual over millions of years.
It was catastrophic. And so it took
another decade, I think, before most of
the scientific community accepted that.
For a long time it was a controversy uh
between two catastrophic scenarios. One
impact from outer space, the other
vulcanism. I now think it was both
because we do know that the extrusion of
the deck and traps took place pretty
much centered right around the KT
boundary and it was extremely
catastrophic. But interestingly the
outpouring of the deck and traps was at
the antipode of the impact site. So it
has been proposed and perhaps it makes
sense that you know there was the
impact. I mean you think of a six-mile
dense space rock slamming into the earth
at 20 m/s.
It's going to cause a seismic ripple
that travels around the entire globe and
and then it's going to meet at the
opposite side. So the idea that perhaps
the volcanism itself was a consequence
of the impact. Um I haven't seen the
latest studies on that but the the the
timing of it uh the duration of those
basalt floods that formed the deck and
traps has shrunk considerably as uh
dating has improved. So it's very
possible that there's a connection. The
other fact that I think [clears throat]
is very plausible is that the big impact
that left the crater in the Yucatan
wasn't the only one clustered around
that boundary. I think there could have
been and probably was multiple impacts
that we probably were during a period
where the earth was susceptible to some
you know it's been proposed a comet
storm um the object that struck the UT
Yucatan I believe the latest evidence
suggests it was probably an asteroid but
also studies are also blurring the
division between asteroids and comets
that there's now kind of a middle ground
where things that we believed were
asteroids might actually be devol
volatilized cometary nuclei.
In any case, 1980 was kind of a turning
point and it took about 10 years and
most of the doubters were um saying,
well, you know, well and good, but until
you can show us a crater, we're not
buying into this catastrophic impact
scenario. Well, eventually they found
the crater and it straddles the Yucatan
Peninsula uh Gulf of Mexico and it's
about 130 mi wide at least. Uh, it's
buried under nearly half a kilometer of
limestone rock and it dates precisely to
the KT boundary. And we've been able to
find the the tectites and the uh there's
actually evidence now going up into
Louisiana and Texas of a huge tsunami
that made landfall that resulted from
that impact. It's pretty much accepted
by this scientific community. Now,
[clears throat] that was associated with
one of the great impacts in the history
of life on Earth. I mean, one of the
great mass extinction episodes in the
history of life on Earth. Um, one of the
so-called great five. There was four
others. The the probably the the most
severe being the uh pre perient triacic
event. Now, it's known [clears throat]
that there was a volcanic outpouring
similar to the deck and traps that took
place during the PT boundary. Was there
an impact? Well, it's not known for
sure, but there is some evidence that
there could have been a great impact or
even several impacts. Likewise, at the
late eosene. Now, another one of the
great um uh extinction episodes occurred
in the orivvician. There was a late
Cambrian. There was a a midjurassic. So,
there was a there's been a bunch of them
through Earth history. The great five
though, you're talking about at least
3/4 of all species of life on Earth
erased. But there have been multiple
smaller extinction episodes, almost too
many to count. Now these smaller
episodes, you know, like for example,
Tangusa, no mass extinction at all. Um
the younger dus, there was mass
extinctions of half of the megaponal
species of Earth disappeared.
Now, you know what the prevailing uh
explanation has been for that for many
decades and and it's it's so um to me so
incomplete and so uh inable to explain
what happened. But nonetheless, it it
was basically boiled down to human
hunting, over hunting. And I don't know
how you eliminate half the species of
great megapa on Earth. Um, we joked on
Cosmography with with Russ and Kyle
Allen um, you know, talking about um,
you know, Birkenstock clad hunters in
their loin claws with spears chasing the
woolly mammoths down. Um, but I've read
trying to come up with a census of okay
at the boundary of the younger D just
how many people were there in the world?
Okay. So, the the estimates that I've
seen have ranged between 5 and 10
million people globally. That's not very
many.
How many how many mammoths were there?
Well, the estimates I've seen for the
global census of mammoths is about 12
million.
Okay. So, what that means is that there
was more mammoths than there were
people. Now, if you take the total
number of people and you assume that the
hunters were mostly grown men in their
prime, what is that? 25% of the people.
I don't think it's, you know, you don't
have 5year-olds and six-year-olds out
there hunting the the mammoths. Um, you
don't have 80 years old, 80-year-old men
or women. You don't have pregnant women
out there presumably. And so, what does
that [clears throat] leave? I mean, so
you're talking about Okay, so if
there's, let's say, 10 million. Well,
let's say there's two and a half million
viable hunters globally, but they're
responsible for killing off 12 million
woolly mammoths.
How is that even possible? I mean, h how
how do you I mean that that you presume
now you're talking about every single
woolly every single mammoth,
every last one has to be killed. Now, of
course, Robert mentioned the word
yesterday, teonomy. Now, teonomy, I'll
define that. Taffonomy is the process
that occurs between the death of an
animal and its introduction into the
fossil record. And there's a number of
different processes by which that can
happen.
But typically if animals die in nature
like now if you look at an animal dying
in nature their carcass does not become
part of the fossil record. No, they're
they're carcasses consumed by scavengers
and bacteria and and and erosion. I mean
there even even during the 80s when
there was this mass three or four
million elephants died because of the
extreme droughts and there would be
multiple elephant skeletons
of around gathered around watering holes
that had dried up. So paleontologists
went out there and studied that and and
what they learned was that even an
elephant skeleton just laying there on
the ground was pretty much gone
reconsumed within about five or six
years. So the point is is that when you
talk about
preservation of animals, you have to
remove them from those pro their their
carcasses from the the the circumstances
under which they would be recycled into
by nature through multiple different
ways. So how do you do that? Well, you
first of all get the first thing is you
have to bury them so that they're away
from oxygen and they're away from
scavengers. they they're away from the
the the microscopic
uh entities that would be consuming
their remains and that's how they end up
in the fossil record. Now, out of
Siberia going back hundreds of years,
there have been thousands and thousands
and thousands of uh mammoth remains
found. In fact, there was a whole
industry of mammoth tusks during the 17
and 1800s where they would come in with
whole ship loads of them. And I've got
some slides. Maybe we can get into those
uh somewhat, but here's my point. The
the uh mass extinction of the megapona,
and of course, we're just talking about
one species. There were over a hundred
species of megaponal animals that went
extinct. somewhere. Now, Robert says,
and this could be right. I think there
was a major pulse of extinction at the
lower younger dus boundary and a major
pulse of extinction at the upper. So, it
let's say in round numbers 12,900 and
11,600,
right? And then after that you don't
find the giant ground slaws the you know
look this where we are living where we
are right now there was at least one
species of of mammoth and and mastadons
roaming through the forests of of North
Carolina which by the way at that time
were similar to the forests you now find
in Canada with spruce trees, large
trees, um alder trees, what you would
call a boreal forest, a northern forest.
It was not the same trees as you find in
North Carolina. Now there were um
camels, huge camels in America who you
know with their humps 7 8t high. You had
the cave bears Ursus spalius. You had um
castasterides, the giant uh bearsized
beavers. You had um the the American
pletoine lion that was almost as big as
a horse. you know, the the the list goes
on and on. I mean, and of course,
they're all gone. So, my question is to
to these uh paleontologists is, well,
did
spear throwing hunters kill all of those
animals? And I just the more you think
about it, it just doesn't make sense.
But so entrenched were the gradualistic
models that they realized, I think, on
some level, well, if we admit that it
wasn't hunters, then what was it? Well,
okay, it was climate change. Okay, so
now it's like the two contending views
are Paleoindian hunters or climate
change. But then when they talk about
climate, oh well, climate change, maybe
you're moving in the right direction.
Then you read what they're talking
about. Well, it was probably global
warming that did it. You know, in other
words, they're they're invoking a
scenario that uh is not unlike what's
going on right now and what has happened
since the end of the little ice age. In
other words, they're anthropomorphizing
it and they're saying, well, climate
change, they're using it as a as as an
analog for what's going on now. In other
words, it's not some catastrophic event
in the sense of a solar outburst or cast
an asteroid impact or gigantic volcanic
eruptions. It's something that's similar
to what's going on now. And because of
that, it's fueled this scenario of we're
in the middle of a sixth great mass
extinction, right? Comparable to the
great five, which when you again when
you look at it in particular, use the
the KT catastrophe as a model is just
ridiculous. It's totally ridiculous. But
anyways, that's where it's kind of left.
Now, I think that slowly we're shifting
to the idea that yeah, there was a
catastrophe coming out of the ice age
and the mass extinction of the megapon
was part of that catastrophe.
And it's getting harder and harder to
evade that conclusion even though
they're trying their damnedest. And I
think that the attempts to evade that
conclusion are mostly driven
by by essentially by political agendas.
But anyways, Ice Age Floods Institute
has grown exponentially since the '9s.
I was pointing out that my interest in
that area uh really began I think you
know I I would say I was sort of I was
gradually coming to understand
catastrophism
throughout the 70s and I met a gentleman
who was writing a book in 1978
and uh one of his primary sources was
Charles Hapg good how many of you are
familiar with the work of Charles ah
quite a few of you that's good yeah now
he wrote a book called path of the pole
which he later kind of repudiated his
own his own idea, but he didn't
repudiate repudiate the idea that there
had been a catastrophe. He just, you
know, kind of left it open as to what
was the explanation for the catastrophe
if it wasn't a pole shift. Okay. But um
what I I discovered that book uh this
friend of mine who was writing the book
told me about it. He was using it as a
reference and it was not available. It
was out of print at the time. I thought,
"Man, I sure would like to get that
book." And of course, he would not
relinquish it. He wouldn't b loan it to
me because for for for one thing, he was
using it. You could couldn't go online
and find stuff back then. And I just
happened to go into a library book sale
one day in this tent in a parking lot.
And there it was, a hardcover version of
Path of the Pole. So, for like a buck or
two. So porked over my money, got the
book, went home, read the book, and it
has an extensive bibliography. So I set
out a goal. I was going to try to track
down every resource that he referenced
in that book, like over 300 references.
So in [clears throat] my where I in the
county that I live, the cab county,
there's a there's a science center. It's
called Fernbank Science Center. It's
kind of affiliated with the school
system, but they have a public science
library there. They have a they have a a
great science collection of tectites and
fossils and all kinds of things and
shows and programs that they do. They
have an observatory, a telescope, all of
that. But they also have a science
library. So I went in there and I
started researching.
One of the things I just came upon was
the Carolina Bays. I found a book uh a
reference. In fact, when I read these
these two books on Atlantis, one of them
was called uh I don't remember the full
name of it was s it was Cedric Leonard
was the author and he talked about the
uh the Carolina bays. No, no, no. It was
it was Edric. It was it was uh Ottomuk,
the other guy I told you about. He
mentioned the Carolina bays and then uh
Leonard mentioned the uh the channel
Scablands floods as evidence that there
had been tremendous these giant floods.
And when I read that I remembered that
yeah I crossed that landscape you know
in 1970 and had no idea what it was but
I just got fascinated by it. So there
was two things the mention of the
Carolina Bays and the mention of the
Scablands flood. So, I got obsessed for
about the next year or two. Tracked down
every single thing I could find on the
Carolina Bays, every single thing I
could find from the references in um uh
Hapgoods work and everything I could
find on this channel Scab Lamps. So, I
just spent like the next probably couple
of years just immersed in that,
researching and reading and everything.
I didn't actually get out there um to
the Scablands until 98. But by that
time, I had read every paper that Harlon
Brett had written and pretty much
everything else that had been written on
the subject by other researchers
subsequent to uh to Bratz. So, I kind of
knew what I was looking for and I've
probably made I've lost count 25 or 30
trips over these landscapes since then,
exploring every nook and cranny to try
to understand what actually happened and
have become completely convinced that
the that the prevailing dogma that there
was this gigantic lake in western
Montana held in by an ice dam just
doesn't make sense. just like the uh the
anthropogenic explanation for the
extinction of the megapona doesn't make
sense and it's interesting as I learned
as I learned more about taffonomy and
the circumstances under which megaponal
remains were found was they were more
often than not found in deposits that
would have been the the the consequence
of really big floods you know um now
that could be gravel pits it could be
pete bog dogs. It could be perafrost. Uh
per uh some of the perafrost deposits in
Alaska and Siberia are amazing things.
They're just uh huge conglomerations
like many times thicker than this room
is tall. And in there there's just
countless remains of of megapa. And when
you when you become aware of that, you
realize that now wait a second. This had
nothing to do with human hunting at all.
But that kind of evidence just seems to
be ignored altogether
by you know the the the the promoters of
this human hunter which was really going
out of fashion until recently. But see,
with now the uh what is it? The
extinction um what is the environmental
group? The extinction rebellion. The
extinction rebellion who they're they're
one of the groups that go out and lay
down on the highways and stuff to block
traffic. And uh of course they're the
ones proclaiming we're in the midst of a
sixth great mass extinction. And so
there's like there's a whole political
agenda now uh that our activity is
causing the sixth great mass extinction.
And so one of the things they invoke in
support of that claim is the extinction
of the megapona. Well, you see what we
did already. You know, you let humans go
and see what they're going to do.
They're going to decimate the whole
ecosystem and they're going to kill off,
you know, all of these species of
animals. Here's a little perspective.
The number of megapona megapana species
that went extinct during that younger
dus period around that window that
number of species is roughly equivalent
to the number of species of megapaa on
earth today. So if you wanted to
actually simulate an equivalent
extinction event today, you'd have to
kill off pretty much every single animal
on Earth over 100 pounds in body weight.
and then you would have created an
extinction
extinction episode of the equivalent
severity to the younger dus episode.
I just don't buy the idea that human
hunters were responsible for that. In
fact, it's just the opposite. The
evidence is showing that humans suffered
a near extinction event as well during
that period of time. Um, and I don't
know, we won't have time to talk about
that today, but I am going to be
covering a lot of this in detail with
graphics and all kinds of cool stuff on
my uh squaring the circle podcast. So,
the result of all this is we went out
there in '98, went to this to the flood
institute. One little old lady sitting
there, I remember she was very sweet and
very kind and thought it was really
great that somebody showed up and who
actually was interested in these floods.
and how remarkably it's grown and how
exponentially it's grown since 98. Um,
this was this is their tagline. It may
be the greatest story yet untold. And I
would modify that a little bit to say it
is the greatest story yet untold. And
let's get into it.
So, this is a satellite view taken back,
I think, in the actually in the 70s. Um,
it's a NASA and what you can see here if
you're looking is let me see can you do
you see my cursor? Oh, good. Okay. So,
here we have what's called a channel
scabland tract. And here we have another
one over here. And what it what the
situation is here is this was this is
the Colombia basalt plateau
which was a one of the great outpourings
of flood basults that occurred it
started around between 16 and 17 million
years ago. It lasted till about six
million years ago. And you had this
repeated succession of these great
basalt floods, liquid rock, melted rock
just gushing out over the earth
[clears throat] created this plateau
which in some cases is is couple of
miles thick of crystallized basalt rock.
Once the floods subsided, then you had
the formation of soil and things on top.
And you had uh one of the soil deposits.
The thickest is called lust. L O E S.
And when you're looking at this this
image right here, you know, you've got
the tract itself, which is darker
because what you're seeing is the
basalt, the dark that's the bedrock
that's been exposed. And then the
lighter areas, which are also
farms and agriculture is the lust top
soil. In some cases, it's two and 300 ft
thick laying on top of the basalt
bedrock. The floods came from the north.
This is my opinion uh because I think
the evidence is consistent with that and
the main scientist who first studied
this starting back in the 1920s and
wrote a succession of papers was Jay
Harland Brett and his first impression
was that these floods these two trackcts
here the one on the left to the west
right here is called the Cheney Paloo no
I'm sorry this is the Telford scabland
track and this one is the Cheney Paloo
scabland track. So, we we go over all of
this when when I do the tours. I, you
know, we have briefings where we get
together and I show this and I explain
it all so people can learn the
terminology and we we sort of go over
the maps of where we're going to be
visiting so people so so it's not just a
sightseeing tour. That's the point. It's
it's about learning the science of paleo
hydraology. So you got these two great
scabland tracks here and then over here
to the west you have this feature coming
down here which is called upper grand
kulie and then here you have lower grand
kulie and this was a great channel. It
varies from 1 to 5 miles wide uh 800 to
900 ft deep and it was cut by these
gigantic floods and the estimate are is
that the peak discharges were around 350
million cubic feet per second. Now how
big of a how big of a flow is that?
Well, to give you some idea, if we could
take the entire planet of Earth, every
continent, North, South America,
Eurasia, Africa, Australia, every
continent, and we were to take the flows
of every single river on Earth. Think
about North America. The biggest rivers
are Mississippi, Missouri, Columbia.
You've got the McKenzie, you've got the
Hudson River, you've got the Connecticut
River, you've got the Rio Grand. We
could take all of those rivers, and
those are only the major ones. Go to
South America, you've got Amazon, the
Oruronaco, you've got multiple rivers in
South America. Go to Africa, think about
the Nile, think about the Congo. go to
Eurasia, the huge rivers there, the the
uh the yellow river in China, the Poe,
the the uh the Rine, the Ron, the Tims,
all the rivers on Earth.
Add them all together, it wouldn't even
be onetenth of the flow that created
Grand Koulie.
So obviously there's nothing like that
in recent history, in recent natural
history of the earth. Then over here
you've got another. Now the difference
between a and a channel is this.
A basically does not have flowing
water in it or the flowing water in it
is so insignificant that it had nothing
to do with the formation of the
itself. Right? So it's distinguished
from a channel like a river channel will
have a significant river flowing in it.
And if it's created through generally
protracted slow erosion, what it does is
it tries to create a V-shaped channel.
Now when you look at coolies, you have
sheer vertical walls, right? Because if
you can picture this, now look at my
hands up here. Imagine you've got flat
ground bedrock, let's say, and you have
a fracture. It could be a fracture. It
could be a fault line in the earth.
Right now you've got water pouring over.
Now this is water that's moving at
perhaps anywhere from 20 to 60 m an hour
depending on again depending on this the
gradient of the land. Now as that water
is moving what the water is wanting to
do is to exploit any weakness right in
the in in the substrate that it can. So
if there's a fracture or a fault line,
the water will begin to penetrate that
and it'll exploit that. It will it will
initially
erode relatively slow. But again, if
you've got overlying, let's say you've
got, you know, dozens of feet of water
or even hundreds of feet of water on
top, there's pressure at the bottom of
that water column that's forcing the
flowing water into the apertures, into
the cracks, into the fra into the fault
lines. So it moves into the fault lines
and now it's being uh it's moving
through that fault line or through that
fracture under pressure. So what does it
do? Well, it starts eroding the
sidewalls.
And then as the as the as the aperture
as the crack begins to enlarge, what
happens is more and more water from the
surface is now captured down into that
channel. Does that make sense? Okay. So
then as more water goes into it, it
accelerates the erosion. Now let's say
that that water continues for a few
days, a few weeks, a few months,
whatever the case may be. At the end of
that, whenever the source of the flood
waters ceases, you now have a vertical
walled channel. We call that a
So that that's a Also, they can
be called slot canyons if they're
smaller.
Same process. A slot canyon is just
going to be a narrow canyon, but if you
start pushing water through it under
pressure, it'll widen it this way. It'll
also deepen it. So, it's widening it
this way, and it's deepening it. And
what you end up with is a
cross-sectional profile. It's almost
rectalinear,
right? Rather than V-shaped, right? So
this is really one of the indicators of
of major water flows. Okay. So that's
what we'll find in Grand Coulie. I'm
going to show you some photographs here
in a minute. Now over here you've got
another It's called Moses
It comes down this way. You can
see it dog legs to the west right here
and then comes down and it flows. It it
opens into the Colombia Valley right
here. And then you're also going to
notice that there's this kind of arcuate
feature right here that's darker gray,
right? That's pretty obvious, right? You
see that? Okay. So, that darker what the
what's happening there is south of that
gray arc, you've got top soil and it's
being farmed. But as soon as you get to
that gray arc, what's happening is
you're into a terrain that's composed
mostly of terminal morane.
Now, what is terminal morane? Okay,
terminal morane is the material that
forms at the snout of a glacier. Now,
you picture a glacier is coming from
whatever its source is. And here, this
glacier is called the Okonagan lobe
after the river, the Okonagan River,
which you can't quite see here, but it's
the Okonagan River, and this is the
Okonagan lobe of the Cordieran ice
sheet. Okay, the Cordieran ice sheet. I
talked about some of that I think
yesterday. I showed the Laurent tide. I
showed the Cordier. I said the Cordieron
is about the size of the modern-day uh
Greenland ice sheet. And I showed that
the Laurentide ice sheet is
approximately the size of that now
covering the South Pole, the Antarctic
ice sheet. Imagine you take the gigantic
5 million square miles of the uh South
Pole ice sheet, you pick it up and you
set it down over North America with its
center roughly on Hudson Bay. So it now
reaches from the Arctic Circle down to
the northern United States. At the same
time, we go and we get the Greenland ice
sheet. We bring it over and we drop it
over western North America and now it
reaches from Washington state up to
Alaska and we've got 6 million plus
miles of glacial ice covering
north more than half of North America.
So, I like I mentioned yesterday, all of
the northern cities from from Boston,
New York, Philadelphia, Detroit,
Chicago, Twin Cities of Minneapolis,
Seattle, they were all buried under
thousands of feet of ice. And we're only
talking thousands of years ago, not
millions, thousands of years ago.
So, that's a pretty remarkable change.
Okay. So, what we have over here Whoops.
is let's see I think there we go. Did
that come back? Okay. So, what we have
stop that. Stop that behavior right now.
Okay. What we have right here is the
terminal mooring. Now, picture this. As
the glaciers are growing, you've got a
zone of accumulation
and you've got a zone of ablation.
So, the ice snow falls over the zone of
accumulation. It piles up. The weight of
that causes a slow movement, a flowing
movement within the glacier. It's almost
like living ice. But as that glacier is
growing and moving over the landscape,
it's gouging up the ground beneath it,
right? So it both you can think of it in
a simplified form as almost bulldozing
but it's really it's a little more
complex than that because material is
actually entrained up into the ice mass
itself conveyed along almost as if it's
on a conveyor belt and then of course
what happens is when it gets to the
snout of the glacier all of that stuff
gets dumped. Then when the glacier
melts, it recedes back. It leaves this
very distinctive calling card of of in
which you can then use to determine how
far the glacier advanced over the
landscape. I think that's making sense.
That's what we've got right here. So
this was the Okanagan lobe and you can
see the terminal morane forms this
arcuate feature and you can see that the
channel this scar in the landscape which
is a tremendously great impressive scar.
How many of you have been on a tour with
me and we've been down Moses Culie?
Anybody here? Well Pat I know you have.
Would you agree [clears throat] with me
that it's one hell of an impressive
feature?
&gt;&gt; What did he say?
It's one hell of a impressive
You would never know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. When you're standing on the edge
of this thing looking into it, it's just
phenomenally huge. And then when you
realize, wait a second. Are you telling
me that this thing was full of water?
The answer is yes. So anyways,
you see here that Moses Koulie, as it's
called after Chief Moses, he was one of
the I forget what tribe he was, but
anyways, you can see that the scar
extends off the snout of this terminal
morin here, which to me always suggested
that it was emanating directly from the
ice sheet itself. Now, the current
theory is that that Moses Culie didn't
come from north. It came from the east.
And I'll show you see what I'm talking
about in a minute. Here's a here is a
color aerial photograph where you can
very clearly see Telford Scabland on the
west, Cheney Paloo over here on the
east.
Um, you can also see they're kind of
interconnected in a few places. If you
look at this up here, it's coming
off of Telford flowing down this way
over to Cheney Paloo. This one here,
which is the Crab Creekie, is extending
off of uh the Cheney Paloo and flowing
to the west. But what we see here is
that you can see that the that the that
the dark areas are very distinct
preservations of where the water flew
where it flowed where it flew where it
flowed. So you can see that there are
almost would have been like islands of
this lust top soil within the flows of
of water. Now the top soil varies
between 100 and 300 ft thick. So the
first thing that happens is the water is
flowing over this land and it quickly
eats it eats its way through the top
soil and gets to the bedrock. Okay, once
it does that now it's flowing over the
bedrock and it does this we what I
described earlier channelization.
The water's flowing over the surface
spread out and then it begins to exploit
the the the low areas or the cracks the
fractures and so on. Then what'll happen
is once they get deep enough and big
enough, they will capture all of that
water from the surface. So now you just
have bare bedrock, but you will have
these channels with the water flowing in
it because the channels have captured
the flow. Is this making sense? Okay,
good. Um, now when we look at Cheney
Paloo, you can see it basically starts
right about here. Now, my impression is
and and and spoke the city of Spokane is
right here. In fact, the area the the uh
the airport that you ever fly into
Spokane is right in this area. These and
there's a series of lakes right in here
called Medicine Lakes. But my impression
is that this is probably marks the
terminus
of what is called the Spokane lobe of
the cordier and ice sheet. But the
problem is is uh the floods that came
down through here were remember I said
350 million cubic feet for grand
10 times the flow of all rivers on earth
the flow that came down through this
area was double that
so I don't think there's any really much
morane left because it was all flushed
away in the process of these gigantic
flows and then But I think that this is
probably originally when the floodwaters
first came on. This area right in here
was where the lobe what's called the the
actually what some have called it the
Spokane lobe. Others have called it the
Pere lobe. Others have called it the
Purcell trench lobe, but it's all the
same idea. There's a tongue of ice that
came down. You'll see it um in one of
the graphics coming up here. Um and
you'll see the whole the whole
configuration of the landscape. This up
here is the Col. This is This is
actually the Spokane River here. Flows
into the Colombia River coming out of
British Columbia right here. It arcs to
the west right here where you see this
change in in width. That's where the
so-called Grand Culie Dam is. And we
always will visit there's a overlook
there called Crown Point. We'll overlook
where you can see the mile wide channel.
You can see the the Grand Koulie Dam
which is over 400 ft high. And I like to
point out that this was right at the
edge of the Okonagan lobe. Right where
that dam is, that was the edge of the
Okonagan lobe where the ice was
thousands of feet thick. And where the
water that came through there was many,
many times the volume of the modern
Colombia River. The river down here at
the bottom is the Snake River. And you
can see the water flowing down that's
carving out the Cheney Paloo hits the
Snake River right here. And in fact, the
flows when they inter inter encountered
the Snake River reversed the flow of the
Snake River almost 200 miles to the
east. And there's a place there which
we're hoping that in a future our next
uh next one of our next tour in fact the
next tour that we're going to do in
September there's a huge gravel pit
right there where the flood waters where
the back flood in the spo in the Snake
River terminated. And what's interesting
about that is the second largest flood
documented in North America is the
so-called Bonavville flood.
The timing between the Bonavville flood
and the Missoula flood is interesting
and rather controversial. I think they
happen very close together in time. But
anyways, the Bonavville flood, how many
of you ever heard of the Bonavville salt
flats where high performance racing cars
are tested and everything? This was the
bottom of this vast lake that covered
nearly 100,000 square kilometers, almost
1,000 feet deep at the end of the last
ice age. If you fly into Salt Lake City
or just in Salt Lake City, if you look
to the east to the Wasach Mountains, you
can see the shorelines of Lake
Bonavville above the the flats that that
great that that Salt Lake City is built
upon. You almost a thousand feet up on
the side of the Wasatch Mountains. And
this flood burst through a sedimentary
dam. Actually, what I think happened is
that there was an enormous amount of
rainfall. This B Lake Bonavville rose up
to nearly a,000 ft deep. And the lowest
saddle, you know, that that Great Salt
Lake basin has no outlet to the ocean.
That's why the Great Salt Lake, if it,
you know, if it rains, it'll fill up a
little bit, but then it'll quickly
evaporate down to what it is now, which
is just a few feet in depth, right? It's
the remnant of this great lake glacial
lake called Lake Bonavville. It rose up
to above this peak where it's in a place
called Red Rock Pass. And we're actually
planning a tour to follow this flood.
And it's it's an amazing route. And I
think I've got some pictures here of it
I'm going to show you in a minute. But
there, think of this now. You've got
this soft rock, mostly sedimentary rock.
It's about 300 ft thick. And it's
sitting on top of a hard granite rock.
And that granite is is the sill. The
water rises up. It spills over the top
of this block blockade there. And it
quickly eats its way down through 300 ft
of softer sedimentary rock. And then
when it hits that hard granite sill, it
stabilizes.
And when you look up on the shorelines
in the Wasach Mountains, you can see the
higher shoreline is when it rose up to
over top the dam. And then it took about
a year to drain down flowing at about 40
million cubic feet per second discharge
out of there. it when it hit that
granite seal, it stabilized and you can
see that second shoreline on the
mountain sides. So, when we do the tour,
we'll point all of that out so you can
see that. And then what we do is we'll
follow the route of that flood through
the pass up onto the Snake River plane
and we'll follow it to the west. And
there's some amazing stuff along there.
Now, this flood is not as as huge as the
Missoula floods that created this stuff
that we're looking at here, but here's
what I'm getting at. There's a place
called Tamony Bar along the Snake River.
Um, and it's right at the limit of when
when the waters of Cheney Paloo hit the
Snake, they reverse the flow of the
Snake and you had this huge surge almost
like a tidal surge that moved backwards
up the Snake River up current, right?
And it's supercharged with look at look
at here all of the sediment picture. You
can see all of the sediment that it's
ripped up and is carried along in the
water. That surge is moving upstream
right now. It gets to this place called
Tamony Bar. And when you go there, you
can see there's an that they've been
mining the gravel there for decades. But
you can see that on the bottom is this
big gray bouldery stuff that was the
Bonavville flood that was coming down
the snake down current. And sitting on
top of it is this fine buffcoled silty
stuff where you can actually see the
layers in it. It's very impressive to
see that is the Missoula flood backwash
that came up and these two floods met
right there. Now there Brad Young is
trying to get us access to the gravel
pit. Maybe even if there's a geologist
in there um who would actually allow us
in and maybe even give us a guided tour
through there and explain. But it's very
clear. You can see the distinct two
different kinds of sediment very
clearly. And I think that it could be
very significant to understand because
the first thing I noticed the the first
year we went there, which was 1998,
was that the line of demarcation between
the Bonavville flood deposits and the
Missoula floods was very distinct and
there appeared to be no hiatus between
them. It appeared as if the the Missoula
flood sediments were right on top of the
Bonavville flood sediments. Now, if
that's the case, then there's an
implication there. They're happening
very very close in time. So, how do we
explain that? Right? In one case, we
have a giant lake, the theory is, and it
spilled over a sedimentary rock dam, and
that's in Utah. On the other hand, we've
got this giant lake up in western
Montana that's being held in by glacial
ice. So, it's a glacially damned lake.
It breaks through that glacial dam and
flows out. Now, that's the conventional
theory, which I I don't buy that, and
we'll get into why I don't, but let's
keep moving on here. So, here's a map of
the terrain. So, here's what's called
glacial lake Missoula, right, at full
pool, which is 4,200 ft above sea level.
And here is the channel Scabland. And
right here is the so-called ice dam.
Now, right here at the snout of that ice
dam is where Spokane is. And this is the
this is where we're the Cheney Paloo
Scabland area. Here the Telford is over
here. You can see where it says Grand
Culie Dam. Dry Falls. I'm going to show
you a picture of that in a minute. And
right over here, this represents Moses
Culie right here coming off the snout of
the Okonagan lobe. And this is the
Colombia.
And as you can see, says the Colombia
Rivers up here. But obviously when this
ice was fully extended to the south,
there was no Colombia River as we know
it now. But what you did have was you
had this massive discharge of water
right over here that I think was not and
and and we're not going to have a chance
to really break down all the details of
the the it's because it's very
complicated. It's extraordinarily
interesting to get into it, but here's
the general idea is that you had this
ice lobe here and you had this big lake
that formed behind it. Now, I said that
the full pool elevation was 4,200 feet
above sea level. Just to the west of the
ice dam here, I'm sorry, just to the
east of the ice dam here, the elevation
of the ground is 2,100 ft above sea
level. So, do the difference. 2,100 ft
to full pool, 4,200 ft. You're looking
at a 2,100 ft hydraulic head against a
tempered glacial dam, which I will state
categorically I think is impossible. Yet
that's the prevailing theory. Um, we
won't have time to get into this now,
but I've done quite a bit of research
into modern ice damned lakes. In other
words, of the last 50 to 100 years.
Remember yesterday I was talking about
the little ice age. Robert mentioned it
in his talk. During that little ice age,
glaciers worldwide grew to the biggest
they had been since the end of the Great
Ice Age. Well, as a result of the
warming that began in the early 18 to
mid 1800s, they began to shrink back.
Well, as they begin to shrink back, a
lot of meltwater lakes formed adjacent
to the ice. Well, what we see then is
that these lakes would sometimes
catastrophically drain. The problem is
is those lakes would overwhelm the ice
that was holding them in once they
reached between one and 300 ft in depth
typically. And the volumes of water
discharged in these modern ice damned
lake drainages typically only 110,000th
of the peak discharges that we see right
here. Yet the geologists just
extrapolate upwards and without no
there's no problem. We just take this
model of what we've seen in recent times
and we just enlarge it by three orders
of magnitude and we can explain what
we're seeing here. And I say guys, guys,
time out. We got to think this thing
through. Because first of all, if you
look at a water column 2,000 ft deep,
you're looking at about 200 960 PSI at
the base of the ice dam. There ain't no
way. There just no way. Those kind of
pressures, you don't see anything. Look,
what's the tallest dam in North America?
It's Hoover Dam out there on the on the
Colorado River. Right. The the hydraulic
head behind it's about 500 ft. Right
now, this is a steel reinforced dam with
bedrock grouting. And why do they do
bedrock grouting, Nate? that injects um
grout into every crack and hole and
aperture in the bedrock beneath the dam
because you can't have a single little
means of that water to move through
because it'll start out maybe le Whoops.
It will create a catastrophe up here.
I'm getting so excited here. um
um it will create a leak that will
percolate for a while, but then it'll
begin to grow and it'll exponentially
grow and then you'll have a catastrophic
outflow. And there's Ben speaking of
catastrophes. Hello, Ben.
Just passing through.
&gt;&gt; Just looking for coffee.
&gt;&gt; Looking for Oh, okay. Yep. There's
probably some back there.
&gt;&gt; That's Ben, by the way.
Ben's a good man.
I've traveled with, you know, when you
travel with somebody, that's when you
get to know them. I've done several
trips with Ben now.
And we have the best old time. Okay, so
let's keep moving here. So, here's
another variation. And you can now you
can see Glacial Lake, Missoula in
Montana. You can see that the ice dam is
in the panhandle of Idaho. And you can
see that the uh the light blue is
everywhere that the channel scablands
floods uh all the land that it covered.
Now in the current models,
this doesn't make sense. Why? Because to
have the full terrain of the scab land
submerged like it's implying here with
it being blue,
the the the reservoir of glacial lake
Missoula would be empty. Right now, in
my scenario, this would be more accurate
because I'm maintaining that that the
reservoir of Lake Missoula was full at
the same time the channel's gablands
were completely submerged.
So now what I'm going to do here is I'm
going to go we're going to start we're
going to see some photos from the ground
and some from the air. And if we go
right in this area, this this basin
right here, that's where the town of
Missoula is. And right there along the
outskirts of uh Missoula are two
mountains. Lake I mean Lake Mountain
Mount Jumbo and Mount Sentinel. And on
those mountains, you see this. You see
the horizontal lines? They're called
strand lines. But what they actually are
is shorelines.
And the top shoreline is nearly 1,000 ft
above the basin floor. So we can then
gauge from that how deep the water was
here. Now against to the west against
the ice dam. I'm using the terminology
from the the con the conventional
terminology just because it's
convenient. Right? So at the ice dam
position the water was 2,000 ft deep.
But of course now you move to the west
to the east a few hundred miles. The
gradient has gone up even though the
water level has stayed level at 4,200
ft. Gradient has gone up 1,000 ft.
Right. So here
w high high high water mark still 4,200
ft above sea level but the floor of the
valley is about 3,200 ft where the town
of Missoula now is.
This picture here was taken. This is an
old black and white one where you can
actually with the snow melting on it. it
really brings out where you can really
see the horizontal strand lines.
[clears throat]
Now, I'm going I mentioned the idea of
scale and variance a little earlier and
I took this picture uh this was on it
like it says here. This is current
ripple sand deposit on the flood plane
of the South Fork Peach Tree Creek after
Hurricane Ivan flooding which I believe
was 2004.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; The flood plane is now occupied by
Medlock Park. And it's always a good
idea to not put, you [clears throat]
know, houses and stuff on flood planes
because they do flood, right? It had
been decades since any flood had
overtopped the modern banks of the
creek, which are actually in that
foliage. If I went 20 ft into that
foliage, I'd be going dropping down
about 15 feet into the modern stream
channel. So what had happened is there
was so much rainfall because Hurricane
Ivan came up and sort of stalled over
North Georgia for a while and it
completely filled the channel of Peach
Tree Creek and it overtopped the the the
modern flood plane. And I was able to
gauge how deep because you could see
there was actually the the the clearest
evidence was there was buildings that
were on the park and you could see the
high water line very clearly on the side
of the buildings and the water was 2 ft
deep and after the water drained away it
left these current ripples here. Right?
So here you see that very this is you
know evidence that there was water flow.
water flow has not been overtopped since
then. Right? So these ripples are
obviously long gone. But you can kind of
see there it shows the cord length and
amplitude of the ripples. Cord length if
you look carefully you'll see is between
2 and 3 in. Amplitude is about 3/4 of an
inch. So you can gauge there. Think of
the the size the amplitude of these
ripples and the depth of the water. Now
let's look at this. This is at Cameas
Prairie in western Montana
and this is uh called West Bar in along
the Colombia. Now in both cases here
you're looking at a series of you're
we're looking to the north and we're
looking at a gigantic ripple train and
these ripples are between 30 and 50 feet
in height. That's the amplitude with a
cord length of between two and 300 ft.
And then you can see there's actually a
fan delta up here. Um, I'm not going to
explain every single terminology now,
but this is a basin. It's about 5 miles
wide. And you can see the shoreline
again, 4,200 ft above sea level. The
water that came rushing through here
from the north, right? And then there's
actually a row of hills. You can't see
it in this picture. In my more elaborate
uh slideshow, I do have a lot more
pictures, but I took this from the air.
I'm probably I don't know about 1,000 ft
up I think from the floor. So, I'm not
even actually in the airplane as high as
the water was deep because the water
coming through here was 1,400 ft deep.
So, I want you to visualize in your mind
if you can a river that's 5 miles wide,
1,400 ft deep. It's probably moving at
60 m an hour and it's choked with
thousands of gigantic icebergs.
That's what you would have seen here if
you could have gone back in a time
machine. You'd probably want to be in a
UFO in high orbit looking at this. Um,
but that's what you would be witnessing
here.
So,
how do you explain all this? Well, and
then this is West Bar. This is a three
miles long. Same same scale of ripples.
The water that came through here was
about between 8 and 900 ft deep. Uh this
is on the Columbia River. This is one of
our stops that we we we have a place we
stop on the far side here where there's
an overlook where you really get a
beautiful view of this gigantic gravel
bar, boulder bar, which is about 300 ft
thick. It's a fossil feature because the
the forces that created it were so
beyond anything that has occurred since
then that the feature that it built is
still there 12 13 for whatever 14,000
years later. The same with same with
this one. This this is a gigantic ripple
train we call it and nothing has really
dis there's there's been no force of
nature since the the creation of this
ripple train that has been able to erase
it or disturb it or destroy it. It's
still there because the forces
subsequent to the creation of this have
just been minuscule compared to the
power of the force that created this
ripple train that created this one and
so on.
And it does as it says note three-story
building for scale. Let's see if we can
The three-story building is right there.
There's a little white building there.
Um
let's go to the next one. So this is AC.
This is from the overlook. And if you
look very closely right here for scale,
you'll see a little guy standing right
there.
Okay. So now one of the other
diagnostics for these giant floods
uh is this. As I just said, there are
thousands of icebergs being carried in
this flood water. Many of these icebergs
have really have rocks in them,
boulders. And sometimes these boulders
are really big. Right now, if you look
at this, this is along the Colombia. You
can see there's a boulder here. You can
see there's another one here. They're up
here. You can see they're all the way up
here to the top of the hills. Uh almost
2,000 ft higher up. Right there they
are. And you see this rock. Now, when I
took this picture, a couple of buddies
of mine were standing right in the front
of here. And I just took them out just
because I wanted you to take in the
whole scene first. And then what we'll
do is we're going to Oops.
Ah, darn. The slide is missing. Okay.
Well, there's a couple of little little
midgets standing there in front of the
rock that you can see, but I've got
more. I think it'll you'll get the idea.
This is the this is the the scenario
here. And this was interestingly, this
was u what was his name? Rio, I forget
the artist's name. This he did the
illustrations for this book uh a geology
book published in 1872 by Lewis Figure.
And this was in a chapter called Deluge.
And he was still a catastrophist
geologist. And he was looking in Europe.
And he he saw similar evidence there.
And this was the scenario showing huge
flows of water. And um and some of these
they're carrying icebergs. Some of these
icebergs have um huge boulders on them.
Ah, here we go. Okay. We just got a
little bit out of order. Okay. So, here
says, "This giant deposited by melting
iceberg that was stranded on the
hillside is found near the mouth of
McNeel Canyon along the Columbia River."
Now, let me put my buddies in there so
you can really get a sense of the scale.
Um, so this rock was carried aboard an
iceberg. The iceberg stranded on the
hillside and then probably over years it
took for that iceberg to melt. And as it
melted, essentially the final act of
putting this rock in place was actually
pretty gentle because it's sitting on an
iceberg. The iceberg is melting and then
the rock sits down and then sits strands
on the landscape on this ridge here and
nothing has moved it since.
And there's a like a 15,000 ton behemoth
sitting 400 ft above the river. Again,
same process. This is being carried.
This is a gigantic basalt boulder ripped
ripped out of the walls of basaltt north
of here. When this water gushed out and
hit the the rim of the basalt plateau,
whamo, it just is gouging up thousands
of these huge boulders of rocks. Some of
them end up on the icebergs that are
being carried in that flood water. When
those icebergs are swept down, sometimes
as the water levels begin to drop, the
icebergs get stranded on the ridges, on
the hilltops, and the ones that have the
big boulders above on them, they will
melt and then there's the consequence.
So try to imagine,
you're looking at this boulder. The size
of the iceberg that's carrying this
boulder is probably like a tanker ship.
Now imagine the flow of water that's
floating an iceberg of that size. And
you start to get the impression as you
go across the what's called the
Waterville Plateau, you begin to see
things like this scattered from as far
as the eye can see, gigantic boulders.
This is called Jerger Rock. It sort of
marks the very beginning of the down
cutting of Moses Kouli.
We're we're looking to the east here. So
south is to the west. You can see
there's another large boulder here. You
can see there's a large boulder over
over here. When you get up to Jerger
Rock itself, it's like that. And it sits
in a Berg mound. A Berg mound is when
you have an iceberg, the the glacial ice
is dirty. It's filled with gravel,
rocks, boulders, dirt. So
when a gl a glacier I mean an iceberg
like that melts, it leaves a mound of
debris. Makes sense, right? So, you have
here a gigantic erratic boulder of
basalt sitting in a bird mound. Now,
there's lots and lots of bird mounds
without big boulders in them. And every
time every once you learn to recognize a
a bird mound, you go, "Okay, there was
an iceberg there." And so, that's one of
the paleocurren
indicators.
There's a whole set of these diagnostic
features that if you're tracking the
route of one of these floods, there's
things you look for, right? One of them
is, okay, you know, we know that there
were icebergs because the the whatever
the force that caused this water, like
what was the source of this water? Well,
in the conventional models, it's just
the Lake Missoula gradually fills over
50 to 100 years. And I'd reject that
idea. I don't think the lake Missoula
was even a lake. I think it was a just a
gigantic temporary back flood holding
pond, right? And I have amassed an
enormous amount of evidence that I think
supports that. And I've done multiple
traverses all throughout the valleys of
Lake Missoula. And um anyways, then of
course it raises the question, what was
the source? Well, I think the source, if
you want to look at the geographic
source, not the cause, but the source,
you have to go all the way north to
British Columbia to an area called the
Nakaco Plateau up there near Prince
George. So, I would highly recommend if
you're really interested in this, go to
Google Earth or Google Maps, Google
Maps, go to terrain view and you can
trace these north south trending
valleys. they converge right on the the
nako plateau it's called and Prince
George is right there and I think that
is where the floods emanated not from
Lake Missoula and that's one of the
major differences between my thinking
and the conventional models is the
conventional models go to Lake Missoula
and they say this was the source of the
floods and I say no no no no the floods
actually came from the north and it's
actually the the the the opinion
scientific opinion is beginning to shift
now in In fact, it showed up, you know,
uh, Nick Zentner, who does really nice
job of, uh, doing videos about all of
this. He had a meeting, maybe a couple
of meetings with Jerome Lesman not too
long ago, and Jerome Lesman, I've been
out in the field with him a couple of
times. He's been on my on Cosmographia
podcast. He was a student of John Shaw.
Now, there's a whole backstory there we
need to get into. John Shaw
was the guy who studied these gigantic
drumland swarms. And I don't know if
we're going to have time to get into
what Drumlands are today, but I am going
to be I'm going to be trying to put this
out on my on my new podcast to try to
break it down into digestible chunks. It
maybe take me half a dozen or 10
episodes to cover all of this, but I
would highly encourage you that when
this when I start getting it out there
to to to look at it and and to learn
about this because I think see that this
phenomena goes way beyond what the
conventional thinking uh uh permits.
So, we'll just look at some pictures.
This is as you travel over the train.
This is my buddy Brad up here just for
scale. Um, nice color overview of upper
and lower Grand Coulie, which is right
here. Oftentimes when we do the
Scablands, we've made good friends with
uh the owners of the Soap Lake Resort,
which is right down here
and they kind of roll out the red carpet
for us and we stay there and we use that
as our base and we go out for day trips.
Uh Pat Dmer has been on a bunch of these
trips with us. He's one of the the
stalwarts who's helping to make these
trips possible by his contributions. And
um what what what is your impression of
what you've seen so far, Pat? I think
we're getting close to time to break for
lunch. So I'll just show you a few quick
little graphics here so you can see the
relationship of the lobe itself
and the moringane.
And you can see the moring is very
distinct. Morine is the feature the
material composing the feature is called
till til l or glacial till. And then you
can see that Moses actually
begins up under the ice sheet. Whoops.
See that?
Now I [clears throat] read several times
the Larry Hansen who was a geologist who
did his doctoral dissertation on Moses
Koulie in the n in 1970 was published
and
he said that he didn't think that Moses
Koulie was coming from Lake Missoula. He
thought it came from the north. But his
opinion on that was for the most part
completely ignored. Um but now his his
interpretation is being vindicated. This
is just some of the erosional features.
This is this is that dog leg. So Moses
Kulie comes down here. It hits this
anticleal mountain ridge and gets
diverted to the west and then it dog
legs down here. And you can see that
when you look at this, you'll see that
the um that the just ignores the
pre-existing drainage pattern. Um and
you see this hummicky terrain in here.
And here's where Moses Culie meets the
Colombia. And this was two gigantic
flows that came together right here. And
this point, you think of it like as the
prow of a ship. Okay.
Uh let's see if I've got some aerials of
this. Yeah. So, imagine that we're in an
airplane right down here and we're
looking up this way and we're looking up
this way and that's what we're seeing
here. And so, we're seeing a
Moses up on the on the right up
here and then the Colombia uh river
here. And you'll notice the sheer walls.
And then there's huge gravel deposits,
boulder deposits uh l uh flanking the
bottom of these. This is not normal
talis in place by gravity. This is wash
up material that was being carried into
floods. And when the flood waters
subsided, they wash this stuff up
against the cliff walls. Okay. These
walls are between 8 900 feet high. the
there's like 300 feet of sediment on the
floor of Moses and uh if you were
to clean that out the would
actually be closer to,200 ft deep.
Here's another view of the same and you
can see here how thick this sediment
layer is. It comes out of Moses Koulie
and then it spllays out across the
Columbia Valley and the modern Columbia
River has insized a channel
and here you can see the truncated hills
and and the waters of Moses Koulie
completely ignored the pre-existing
drainage. They just sliced right across
it. And of course, what happens now is
that during rainfalls, you have channels
of water coming down these troughs and
they form waterfalls.
And we're just going to speed through a
few things here.
Yeah, here's Cameas Prairie. So, this is
where I said visualize the the river 5
miles wide and 1,400 ft deep. We're up
at a level here. We're still not above
the water level where we took this
picture, but we're looking out across.
We're looking to the west here. And that
blue line represents uh 4,200 ft above
sea level.
And there you can see, you know, this is
like thousands of people will drive down
these roads. They will not notice or if
they do, they don't know what they're
really looking at. But now you know
these are shorelines. These are fossil
shorelines.
And this is the Clark Fork River. And
this is Lake Pere up here. And somewhere
right in here is where the supposed ice
dam was. Right now, I do believe that
there was ice filling these this valley
here, but I don't think it formed a dam.
I think it was basically just a
temporary impediment to the flowing
water which quickly washed it away. And
in here, you can see, let's see if I got
it. Yeah. So, as we travel through the
Clark Fork River, we can see that high
water line at 4,200 ft. You see the
transition from basically bare rock to
where it's still forested. That
represents the high water mark. But to
give you a little bit of perspective on
this, let's see. Um, like look at the
little figure down here and the water
moved from right to left. And I want you
to look at the texture of that rock
because these are the kinds of things
you learn to look at. And that is rock
that has been subjected to extreme sheer
pressures of flowing water, probably
moving 50 miles plus per hour, literally
scouring the surface of the rock.
And so on this one, I don't know if you
can see it very well, I've got two
transsects.
One of them is right here where the
valley before while the valley is still
constricted. And then there's another
one right here where it opens into the
basin. So what I've done is I've taken
that cross-section profile like right
here. And here's the water level at 4200
ft. Here's the bottom of the valley
floor. Uh as it says here, a southwest
to northeast transect through the basin
of the Cabinet Gorge Reservoir about
three miles west of Cabinet Gorge, which
is a place we usually stop at. There's a
there's a modern dam there overlooked.
It's a great perspective. Um, and now
what I'm going to do is I think I've
used the profile of uh the skyline of
Atlanta that I put in there, but it
could be the the tallest building in
Atlanta is uh about 1150 ft tall. It's a
Bank of America building, right? And I
could put any city in there. I could put
New York. I could put Detroit. I could
put Chicago. I could put Washington.
Doesn't matter. It's about the same. So
there's the skyline of Atlanta.
So you can see we're not talking about
any kinds of floods uh similar to
anything that's happened in recent
years. And here Yeah. So here's just
another version. That's skyline of
Atlanta. And that would be the depth of
the flood
as it's moving through through uh the
Clark Fork Valley.
So here's a point that I want to make is
that if some by some fluke you were able
to witness an event like this and
survive,
well I mean you would easily be I mean
for those of you that were here
yesterday and I talked about the Tungusa
event [clears throat] spawned a new
religion and that they believe that this
was the visitation of the god Agi from
the heavens who came down to punish them
for their transgressions. Well, can you
also imagine how in the aftermath of a
flood on this kind of scale would leave
survivors thinking very similar kinds of
things? Now, what I'm showing you here
as some of the most spectacular flood
evidence on Earth. However, once you
learn to recognize it, there have been
gigantic floods over the entire planet.
Okay?
There are features in in in northern
Europe um that were produced by gigantic
floods almost this big. There are
features in uh Russia, Mongolia,
um Siberia almost the same in the Alte
Mountains where Russia no where China,
Siberia which is Russia and Mongolia
come together the Alte mountains there
are floods that are at least the same
scale as what we're seeing right here.
uh recent studies, you know, some really
great studies were coming out of Russia
on their giant floods. Of course, all of
that has stopped now with this cold war
Um, so now all of the
scientific communication has been mostly
cut off and terminated. So all the
things we were learning about their from
their astronomers about impacts and
asteroids and comets and the Tangus
event, that's all cut off now. um the
floods and all of that. We're not, you
know, we're not, our scientists are not
communicating anymore on that. Um so, I
mean, there's so many downsides to this
foreign policy. I don't mean to get off
on that, but it's it's crazy. Um
anyways, you can see here these
features. These were islands there.
There's a term here called that
describes these. It's a scientific term.
It's streamlined
erosional residuals.
All right, streamlined erosional
residuals.
Write that down. Learn it. You can use
it any you can pull it out when you want
to impress your friends because that
that's important, right? Impressing your
friends. You can add that to
paleocurrent indicators,
right? Paleocurrent indicators. anything
that you can use to determine the flow
of an ancient current that is no longer
operational.
So when you look at one of these like
when you look at one of these features
right here from the ground they look
like this. That's about that's a hill.
It's about 200 ft thick. The thing to
appreciate here is that pre flood this
was the land surface up here.
Now, post flood, this is just an an
island, right? 200 foot thick of top
soil. So, here is a typical gravel bar
on that same creek that I showed you
before, Peach Tree Creek. And
basically, here's another one, a giant
gravel bar in the Snake River. And uh
it's miles long, hundreds of feet thick,
but it's basically the same thing as
you're seeing right there, just a
gigantic version of it. Here's another
one. Now, see, these are things like
people come every day. You're driving
across this bridge and going on this
highway. No concept of what the secrets,
the story that this landscape is
concealing and revealing and preserving.
So, we left it here looking at this
large boulder bar, several miles long,
several hundred feet thick on the river.
This is on the Snake River, by the way.
And uh this is one of the indicators of
gigantic mega floods. Now I'm going to
show you a cross-section of one of these
uh back flood bars right here. And
what's interesting about this is you can
actually learn to kind of read how the
current slloshed in and out and back and
forth by looking at the sediments they
leave behind.
Interesting thing about this is you'll
notice there's a land surface on top.
And it just so happens that this is in a
place where there is an uh an incision
in the land where you can actually see,
you know, if you were walking, hiking,
or riding horses or four-wheeling or
whatever on top of that land surface,
you would have no idea what's underneath
your feet, right? But when you look at
this now, this is essentially, think of
this. If you look at this, you've got
like uh where the gentleman is here,
that's probably Bradley. Uh you see down
where he is, it's more fine grain
sediment. And then you look throughout
there and there will be like larger
rocks suspended within some of those.
That looks like it's probably about 3 ft
in diameter. You can see it gets pretty
bouldery up here. So what you have here,
I've been to this spot a couple of times
trying to decipher it. It's quite
complicated. We went with um Jerome
Lesman to this site and basically you
know the conclusion was is what you're
looking at here is multiple surges of
sediment laden water sloshing into this
back flood area and slloshing out
ultimately where you would you know to
look at where the origin of this stuff
was. Um it was almost certainly up in
the Okonagan Valley in British Columbia.
But the two things you would need is the
lithology, which is the type of rock.
And if you look in there, you'll see
there's some dark rock here, which is
probably basalt. There's this light
colored rock, which I believe was um
limestones,
and there's a mix of other things.
Anyways, you know, here's the thing.
There's many many areas
uh of this planet where if you were able
to look at what's under your feet, you
would see that there's a whole epic
story con preserved there in the in the
sediment layers. Uh and and one of the
things like if you look at this, this is
probably between 12 and 14,000 years ago
during the peak of the melting. Uh it I
think that this was probably also
deposited at the same time. The uh I
think that the waters that deposited
this ultimately are what carved Moses
Kulie because this is almost directly
north of Moses Culie and there was
surges of water coming down the Okonagan
Valley. And that's one of the recent um
papers that just come out by Jerome
Lesman um is documenting the evidence
that at least some of these flows didn't
come from Lake Missoula but came from
the north which is essentially what I've
been uh arguing for several decades now.
One of the things is when I listen to
some of the archaeologists and you know
um again Robert kind of brought this up
the other day and when I heard the
debate between Graeme Hancock and Flint
Dibble that was on uh Joe Rogan you know
Dibble's argument boiled down to well
you don't you know you don't have any
pottery you've got to show me some
pottery from that era right well here's
the thing the land that might have had
pottery on it. Like if you had a
settlement and and you know you've got
the community of people living there and
they have pottery. Well, that's in that
gravel pile right now. And and what I
would say to Dibble is this. Have you
ever looked in something like this for
pottery? Do you know? Can you say
definitively there's no pottery, broken
pottery remains in in that right there?
No, you don't know that. Have you ever
looked? Has any archaeologist ever
looked? Well, no. Probably not. And
there are many, many, many areas where
this is essentially the situation. Well,
I mean, yeah, who knows? I mean, there
could be all kinds of busted up pottery
in that in this deposit. Nobody would
know it. Um, now this is one of the
places that will be included in the uh
this tour in September. This is Oniian
Falls. Now this is down in the Columbia
Gorge and what's interesting about this
is well you can see the people down here
for scale and you see the undercutting.
So that undercutting is the consequence
of extreme turbulence. Now the water
going through here was enough to over
top the cliff that you see right here.
Now I think I've got a graphic coming
up. Let's see. Well, we'll come I think
I do. But basically, picture this.
You've got a a a typical valley, maybe a
fairly gentle profile sloping down to a
river, right? And you've got tributary
creeks that are flowing into that river,
right? Now, you got a mega flood that
comes through. And that mega flood down
cuts that valley and cuts a channel
anywhere from a few hundred feet up to,
in the case of the Columbia Gorge,
there's places where it's 800 feet deep,
right? or Grand Koulie which is 800 feet
deep. So now instead of a gentle
gradient like this, you've got the the
uplands where it's still the original
gradient. Then it comes to this place
that has just been excavated hundreds of
feet deep and left these shear walls.
And now what happens is once the normal
drainage regime is re uh reactivated,
what you've got is it flows down and
then it becomes a waterfall. And that's
exactly what you're seeing here. And
there's, you know, Maltima Falls, Oni,
Lel Falls. There's a bunch of these
magnificent falls along the gorge
between the Colombia Plateau and
Portland. Right now, Portland, the city
is place where the floodwaters
uh reached a major obstruction to the
west and the waters diverged, went to
the south and back flooded and filled
Wamid Valley 400 ft deep all the way to
the south. Then another flow flowed to
the north um and went up by Atoria and
then dumped out into the Pacific Ocean.
where that water turned the corner, it
left a gigantic boulder bar and that's
the city of Portland is built on that on
that boulder bar. Uh and and I've talked
to builders and so forth that live in in
Boulder and they've they've told me that
yeah, they go to excavate for a building
and they constantly encounter gigantic
boulders and stuff that are buried
underground.
Okay, so here's a digital elevation map
of upper and lower Grand Koulie. Now you
see where it says kulie monocline. Okay.
So a monocline there's there's a klein
it has the same comes from the same root
as the word incline. Right now you've
got an anticline a sincline and a
monocline. And why you can you can
define those for me can't you? That is
an anticline. An up when you have
compression and you have an upfold
that's an anticline.
How about a sincline? Ah, when it folds
down, that's a sincline.
Can you def remember a monocline? So,
you only get 66.6. Okay. Yeah. He Okay.
A monocline. Well, mono means one,
right? So, in an anticline will be an
upfold and a downfold. A sincline will
be a downfold and an upfold. A monocline
will just be a single fold. So, that's
what Yeah. Good.
&gt;&gt; Wyatt, you have earned at least Yeah.
Wyatt gets an attab boy. Way to go,
Wyatt.
So, what we have here is the
monocline.
So, that monocline from the east side
here to the west side here, it's about
an 8 to 900 ft difference. So, it's an
upfold like this. Okay? So, you see
upper Grand Couli. It has a lake in it.
Now, that's not [clears throat] a
natural lake. It's an artificial lake.
There's a dam at the south end here
called Bank. This is called Banks Lake.
Banks Lake Dam is here. You can't quite
see it, but right up here at the top is
Grand Coulie Dam. And so this is um
uh uh what is it? Franklin Delano
Roosevelt Lake. Let's see. It's uh
is it Roosevelt Lake? Maybe it's called
Roosevelt. It's named after Roosevelt
anyway because Grand Pulley Dam was
built during his administration in the
late 1930s.
&gt;&gt; [clears throat]
&gt;&gt; And um the Okonagan lobe came down along
the west side of Grand Coulie and then
it arked over this way. And here you can
see those lakes that were the top end of
Moses Kulie that were up under the ice
sheet. Right? So the water that created
Gran is flowing right along the
edge of the lobe right across right
along the edge of the of the Okonagan
lobe.
Of course again the the the usual
explanation is is that water came from
the east from Lake Missoula. I don't
agree with that. I think it came from
the north and it just basically spilled
off of the ice sheet um and then flowed
along the the margin of the Okonagan
lobe and then you can see it flows down
here and it kind of is converging. You
can see the monocline right here. Then
it hits the monocline, right? And then
it breaches the monocline. And then from
that point on, you can see that uh lower
granuli now sort of follows the axis of
the monocline. And that makes sense when
you think about it because think about
it. You compress the rock, it upfolds.
What's going to happen to that rock?
It's going to fracture and break and
shatter and all of that, isn't it? In
that compression and that upfolding.
Well, then when the when the water hits
that, the water [clears throat] is
always looking to exploit areas of
weakness. So right there you have lower
granuli is exploiting the weakness in
the rock and that's why it follows the
rock here along this string of lakes,
but the water actually spread out. And
one of the things that Brett's realized
is that when that water first hit the
monocline and spilled over. Now, this is
about a mile right here because if you
look carefully, there's a bunch of
little squares here. And each of those
little squares is one mile. So, it's
about a mile to I don't know, mile and a
half in width. And the waterfall itself
would have water would have been 3 to
400 feet deep. And we we know that
because we can we can find high water
marks along the pathway there. But then
the drop off was about 900 ft. So what
you had was temporarily an a mile to a
mile and a half wide
waterfall that was 900 ft high. So that
is probably could qualify as one of the
most impressive waterfalls
on the planet within the last you know
at least few hundred thousand years.
Um the water actually spread out. So you
this the erosion came all the way over
here and it followed this route down at
the very south end. This is Soap Lake
here at the bottom of Grand Coulie right
at its mouth and that's where the resort
is that we stay at. So we make
excursions you know up the this
way and right in here where you have the
transition between upper and lower Grand
Koulie is where you have this great
cataract complex that we'll z uh zoom in
on here in a second. One of the things
that happened here now once this
waterfall started pouring over the
monocline, what's happening? If you can
picture this, picture you've got the the
rock and then you have this difference
in elevation. The water is pouring over
and it's got such force that as it pours
over, it's plucking the rock. I've I
have a picture coming up of of Niagara
Falls. If you've ever been to Niagara
Falls, you can see that effect of the
rock plucking because at the base of
Niagara Falls, there's a big pile of
boulders, right? Well, now Niagara Falls
is minuscule compared to this flow. So
the the the transport capability of the
flows of Niagara are not anywhere near
the capacity of this. So the rocks
mostly pile up at the base of the of the
of the cliff uh and don't get washed
downstream. However, here the the rocks
were washed out because there was such a
tremendous flow of water coming through
here. Then what happens is that the
the waterfall as it's plucking the
rocks, it's going upstream. Does that
make sense? It's it's called a
recessional cataract. So the cataract is
this big horseshoe shaped feature and
that results because of if you think of
a a think of a channel of water. It's
flowing at the bottom and sides of that
channel there's friction and that slows
the water down. If you go right to the
middle of the flow, that's where the
water is moving the fastest. Now the
competency of water to erode is a
function of its velocity. the faster
it's moving the the more effectively it
erodess. So if you can picture this like
picture from above you're looking at a
horseshoe shape and the water is flowing
it's flowing faster in the middle and
then gets progressively slower as you
get to the to the edges of the flow. So
what happens then is that the erosion of
the recessional cataract is fastest in
the middle and gets slower as you move
towards the edges. So what happens is
what's called the velocity profile of
the water. Picture you've got the water
flowing and picture like a horseshoe
shape and you've got arrows and the
arrows are longest in the middle because
that's the fastest moving water and then
they get shorter towards the edges.
That's called the velocity profile. The
cataract will be the inverse of the
velocity profile. Does that make sense?
You'll see it here in a second. We'll
pull up. There's so there's dryfalls
cataract. This is extinct obviously. So
these cliffs are about 400 ft high. This
we call this right here that we call
this an al cove. This this horseshoe
shaped feature here is an al cove.
There's another al cove over here
further west. There's an al cove here.
And you'll notice, okay, so this is the
bottom of Banks Lake. There's that dam
that I was calling your attention to.
Um, but if you went up the the the the
floor of Upper Grand Culie, the whole
floor would look like this. Just you can
see this tremendous scouring. There's
even like if you look right here, this
round pothole like feature that's from
vortexes,
intense vortexes that are in the water.
Now, this water here is 400 ft deep.
It's before it hits the rim of the
cataract. So if you were able to witness
this at the time at the peak of the
flood, you wouldn't really even see a
waterfall. What you'd see is this
massive river that right here would be 5
miles wide, 400 ft deep, and where the
cataract is now, it would just be a bump
in the river. And only at the final
stages of the flood is it actually going
to be a a a classical waterfall like you
would expect to see at uh at um Niagara.
And yeah, so here's a topographic map of
the entire complex of dry falls uh
cataract complex right here. And it's uh
it's very impressive to see. And so here
you can see the transition from upper to
lower Grandi. Here you see a part of the
monocline, the uplift here. And then
here's the top end of lower Grandi,
which is occupied by natural lakes. And
then there are what are called, you
know, that if you got a river and and
and smaller rivers or creeks are flowing
into it, they're called tributaries. But
if you have a flow and you have
typically this can happen during a flood
and the water is flowing out of it,
that's called a distribuary.
And this right here is the remnant of a
distribuary. So you got all this water
flowing down here and it splits and part
of it is flowing off in an independent
flow. And you can look at here the whole
look carefully at the topography. This
tortured landscape here is again what
results when you have like 400 ft of
water moving 50 or 60 miles an hour over
bare bedrock basalt. And here you can
see um a cataract. This is Niagara Falls
from the air. And you've got American
Falls here and you've got Horseshoe
Falls here. And there's your typical
it's called horseshoe falls because it's
your typical horseshoe shape. Now if and
then in between the two you've got an
this island right well both of them are
recessional cataracts but they're moving
only over thousands of years eventually
after another thousand or 2,000 years
both faults will have migrated upward
and this will be like a mesa standing
independent within the channel. I think
the height here is about 120 ft. So once
this eats its way back on both sides,
they'll meet upstream above this and
it'll be an island mea standing out
within the the the much wider channel.
Now in upper Grand Koulie, there's uh
Steamboat Rock, which you'll see in a
second, but here you can really get a
sense of the sky. Now, how many of you
said you've been to Niagara? Quite a few
of you. Any of you been down on the boat
ride? Okay. Well, you know, it's an
impressive flow of water, right?
Well, here is dryf falls again from the
air. And then what I'm going to do is
I'm going to juxtapose Niagara to scale
so you can get a sense of comparison. So
there's up in the upper leftand corner
is horseshoe falls at Niagara and you're
only looking at one al cove here, right?
So this thing is much much wider. It
extends way over here. So you can see
that it's much higher, much wider than
Niagara. Niagara would be dwarfed by
this this complex of waterfalls here.
Again, you can see Niagara. Very
impressive. And so here's here's dry one
al cove of dry falls from the ground.
And then we'll put Niagara in there for
scale.
So you can get a sense of the magnitude.
This would have been one impressive
waterfall to go on a honeymoon at.
Although with the caveat that you
probably wouldn't survive and what
&gt;&gt; it would be worth it.
&gt;&gt; It would be worth Well, so below
uh Grand Coulie, below South Lake, you
have mile after mile of this kind of
stuff.
This is uh basalt rock that was ripped
out in the creation of
uh of Grand Koulie. This is called
afraid the afraid of fan. And uh most of
this is black basaltt but scattered
around are these isolated blocks of pink
granite which came from north out of
Canada. So this to me is an important
clue that this water flow that came down
Grand Koulie did not necessarily flow
from the east out of Lake Missoula, but
again came from the north. There you can
get a sense of it. So one of the things
we do, we have it, you can't see it
here, but on the far side of this uh
there's an overlook we'll take. We drive
up overlooks. You can look out over this
thing and you see the mouth of the
and then you see this huge fan of
this material spled out from the mouth.
Now it's it's when you look at think
about some of the stuff we've seen now.
We've seen giant current ripples. We've
seen these major back flood sedimentary
sequences that form hundreds of feet of
ground. We've seen the coolies. We've
seen the giant boulders. We see the
outwash uh material here now. We've seen
the cataracts.
So what it is, think about this. It's
like when the critics attacked Jay
Harlon Brett who was origin originally
uh exploring these these landscapes and
writing papers on it they would take one
thing and then they would try to explain
that one isolated component of it by
means of a more normal process a more
normal sequence of of events right and
that would satisfy them but the thing to
understand here is that when you start
looking at the whole suite of features.
Each time you add another element to
this explanation,
you're going you're it's like a
logarithmic curve. It becomes more and
more impossible to explain it by normal
events. And when you look at all of it
together, you know, the CA recessional
cataracts, the boulder bars, the giant
boulders, the current ripples, all of
that, there's only one other
explanation, and that is you're looking
at floods that are just an inconceivably
huge scale. Now, I just showed you Grand
Koulie. Now, Gran Kulie was one flood
flow. You had Telford Scabland tract,
you had Cheney Paloo Scabland Tract, you
had the Columbia River, you had Moses
Koulie. We didn't even talk about this.
On the west side of the Columbia River,
you have another called Altaculi,
which there's no conceivable way that
could be connected to Lake Missoula over
in Montana.
Now, the assumption now is is that each
one of those had to be flowing
separately.
But I think there's problems with that.
I think that it's almost certainly that
they were all flowing simultaneous.
But what that does is it jumps it up the
whole thing up an order of magnitude.
You know, because now you're looking at
um if Grand Coulie is 300 to 350 million
cubic feet per second. Moses Culie is on
the same scale. So is Telford. So is
Cheney Paloo. So is the Colombia on the
west. So is Ala. When you put all those
together, now if they're all flowing at
the same time, well, now you've got in
excess of a billion cubic feet per
second. Now we're really are talking
biblical scale floods here.
And if anybody managed to survive, like
one of the places I take people is
called Stetobute, which is on the
eastern side of the Columbia Basalt
Plateau. It's a vol ancient volcanic
outcrop that stood well above the flood
waters at the time. So if somebody took
refuge up there and they weren't
destroyed by the atmospheric phenomena
that was clearly going on during these
floods um when the flood waters subsided
you would be on a prominence and in
every direction as far as the eye could
see the world would be devastated.
And I don't know if we'll have time. We
probably won't. But I could go on. I
could show you evidence from all over
the North American continent. Right here
in North Carolina. I'm going to show you
a couple of slides right here from North
Carolina that could have only been
produced by extremely large floods. And
if any of you have been hiking up in
some of the hollows up in the Blue Ridge
area, you're going to know that there
are deposits of rocks up there, boulders
that are the size sometimes stacked up
to the sizes of SUVs and even bigger.
Those did not get put those were not in
placed by the modern creek flows. Okay.
Um
this is an interesting thing. Now we've
I've taken a group here. This is on
private property so we have to get
special permission but this is um this
is back floods and there's 39 layers
here and I'm not going to get into a big
explanation u because there's just too
much to talk about here but this is you
know think about this now how
um if I had a map and one of the things
I usually like to do is I usually have
my Google maps or Google Earth open so I
can jump over to a app and show you.
Okay, that's where this is. But picture
this. You've got these flows of water
coming into a basin. There's a mountain
range actually in anticline on the lower
end, which in this case is the south
end. There's a whole it's called um uh
uh horse horse heaven hills it's called.
It's an anticline and it forms a rim on
the southern section of the basalt
plateau and there's an opening in it
called Wula Gap. It's right near the Tri
Cities area, Kenowick. Um what are the
two other cities? There's three cities
right there at the mouth. Right. So you
had all this water converging there on
this one gap. It's a mile wide and 800
to 900 ft deep. I took uh Graham Hancock
up there when he was writing Magicians
of the Gods. I took him up there because
from that overlook you can see on the
one direction down to Columbia Gorge
where the water was going and in the
other direction you're looking out over
the Pasco Basin. And the Pasco Basin is
a place where all of these surging
sources of water came together. Now, you
have to picture that this this water is
choked with icebergs. It's probably
ripped up entire forests. Um there's a
huge amount of debris in it. There's
more water converging onto this point
than can pass through the aperture.
Right now, the water that's passing
through the aperture has tremendous
force to it. And uh somebody here went
and visited the twin sisters. Who was
that? Was it somebody here? Tell me that
they went There's two pillars right
there at the mouth of the of this Wula
Gap that were formed by the tremendous
turbulence. Also at the flanks going
into it, there are huge circular
potholes because the water coming in is
doing this, right?
What do you think happens when that
water when the volume of water flowing
into that basin is greater
than the water to flow out? Well, it's
going to it's going to get deeper. It's
going to back flood, isn't it? Well,
what's going to happen is that this
outcrop you're seeing here is about
somewhere between 6 and 700 ft above the
floor of Alula Gap. So, if the water
gets 600 ft deep, it's going to
backflood into this basin. And here's
what I think happens because I used to
see this as a kid growing up in
Minnesota in this in the spring when the
ice would break up on rivers, you would
often have ice jams that would sometimes
if there was a constriction or a bend in
the river or uh let's say bridges with
an ab with abutments. There would be
different circumstances, but the iceberg
jams could get the ice, the broken up
ice could get jammed. So what happens
when the ice gets jammed and there's no
flow? The water backs up behind it. Does
that make sense? Well, as the water is
rising behind it, it's increasing the
pressure. Now, what'll happen usually is
that increasing pressure will push that
broken ice downream,
right? and then the water flow will
drop. Sometimes you will get multiple uh
ice jams. And
the difference [clears throat] between
my interpretation and the standard model
is that in the standard model, each of
these layers represents an individual
flood separated by 50 to 100 years from
the other floods.
Which means that you had 50 there's 39
layers here. That means that you had 39
ice dams creating 39 Lake Missoulas.
So then what I would say is okay first
of all let's take a good hard critical
look at the whole ice dam model.
And I think if you do that you come to
the conclusion that it doesn't really
make sense because of the nature of
glaciers.
It would have to be a tempered glacier.
think of that because I mean how do you
have a glacier there and a huge body of
water next to it and that that the only
way you would have the kind of
capability of holding in water would be
as if the glacier was solidly frozen to
the bedrock.
But in a tempered glacier, you don't
have that. You have water at the base of
a glacier. I don't know if anybody's
ever hiked over or around glaciers.
You're always going to see water gushing
out from the snout of the glacier,
right? And if you look under the
tempered glacier, there's going to be
large volumes of water pulled under
there. And the glacier is going to be
riding on that water. Now, I think you
could talk to any civil engineer and
propose here. Here's here's my
challenge. Here's the challenge I'm
going to give to you. You've got a
valley.
It's at its floor. It's five miles wide.
And at its top, it's seven miles wide.
Okay. Now, what I want you to do is to
come up with a a dam that can dam that
valley.
And the water at the water level, the
high water level, 4,200 ft above sea
level, is going to be 2,000 ft deep.
What how could you do it? What material
could you use? And I've actually spoken
to a number of civil engineers that have
had expertise in dam and they said,
"Well, that's impossible." What about
glacial ice?
Well, as a rule, I don't know a whole
lot about glaciers. But if you did talk
to a glaciologist, they would probably
tell you, "Oh, well,
uh, if it's a tempered glacier, you've
got water, basil water. You've got
fractures all throughout the ice. You've
got water flowing through the ice,
right?
How in the world do you get pressures of
over 900 lb per square inch? It's an
impossibility. So, I don't agree that
what we're looking at here
represents each separate individual
floods. First of all, if you have 50 to
70 50 to 100 years separating each of
these layers, well, by the time that
each successive layer is, do you think
that after 50 years that flood surface
that that back flood, it's it picture
it's going to be mud basically when when
it's deposited. There's nothing growing
on it. But if you have ever seen barren
soil after a flood or you know like go
to Mount St. Helens, here's a good
laboratory, natural laboratory for this
kind of thing. How long do you think
that that surface is going to be there
without vegetation on it? I'll tell you
how long. Maybe a year, but within a
couple of years. First, usually you have
ferns growing and then you'll have all
kinds of plants growing. Eventually,
you're going to have trees growing
there. Think if it's been existing for
50 years. If you went out and a
bulldozer bulldozed
an acre of land, 100 acres of land,
right, to bare dirt and you just left it
and you came back 50 years later, you
think it's still going to be bare dirt?
No. It's going to have grown. It's going
to have been repopulated with
vegetation, right?
Where is the evidence that there was
actually a hiatus between each of these
layers? This is why I think it's more
likely that what we're looking here is
that you have sediment laden back surges
that are really only separated probably
by a few days that the that the that the
water carrying the icebergs and the the
forest and everything trying to get
through Wula Gap jams the gap causes the
water to rise. the water rises and and
in fact early geologists in the n 1800s
called this evidence for big ponding of
water Lake Lewis after Lewis and Clark
the water would rise push the the the
icebergs through the water level would
drop but you're still coming from the
north now if you look at this one of the
things you'll notice is that the layers
are bigger on the bottom and getting
progressively smaller towards the top
which I believe is a function of the
fact that the last one that's up there
was pretty much the last of the melting
of the ice sheets to the north
rather than the last breaking of an ice
dam. Then one other thing I'll call your
attention to you before we go on here is
the top. You'll notice that you've got
horizontal layers until you get to the
top six feet and then it looks like a
single massive layer, right? That is
lust and this is the stuff that was in
the atmosphere. So after the last flood
layer, after the last flood waters
flowed off and left this top thick layer
of mud, 6 ft of material precipitated
out of the atmosphere. And if you recall
from when Mount St. Helens erupted, you
had 6 in of ash and it turned day into
night. So that's what I'm saying is
that, you know, even if you were here,
you probably couldn't have seen
anything. It's also said that, you know,
that the oncoming flood would have
caused the ground to shake and tremble
from a half an hour to an hour before
the flood actually arrived. Within a
half an hour of its arrival, you would
hear a dull roar that would get so loud
that by the time it was almost ready to
reach you, it would almost be deafening.
Um, so this is a lot of energy being
expended here throughout this process.
And this is just this is the lower uh
gorge. And there's a notch right up
here. Look, you can see a high water
mark up there. Right there.
Now, when that water first came through
here, I don't think the floor of the
valley is where it is now. I think it
was above this prominence here. And so,
I kind of showing what I think would
have been the original valley profile.
And then when the water came through,
this is what led. Now, this picture is
taken from Crown Point. This will be one
of the vantage points that we visit on
the September tour. And it's interesting
because Crown Point is pretty much right
at the high water mark. So, when you
stand up on Crown Point and you're
looking, you you can realize, okay, the
water came up to this level.
And again, here's a a view of Berling
Game Gully. Now, notice here the rolling
landscape. There's there's many many
square miles of this. Farmers are
farming this. There are roads. There are
housing developments on top of it. And
nobody has any idea what's under their
feet. But if you have this, what
happened here was back in the 30s, they
had built a big irrigation pipe to bring
the water from Lake Roosevelt to to to
distribute over the um over these uh
lust covered land of the scablands for
agriculture.
and uh it busted. So there was this big
gush for several weeks coming out and it
cut down this this gully a couple
hundred feet deep. Well, nobody thought
anything of it other than a man, what a
disaster, you know, we've got to fix it
and all of that, which they did. But
what it did was it exposed what was
hiding under the surface of the ground.
See, and this is the other thing, one of
the takeaways from this is that the
evidence for these gigantic events is
everywhere about us, but we don't have
the eyes to see and understand what
we're looking at. So, what I do is I
start, well, let's start with the
spectacular stuff and then progressively
move to more subtle effects. And then
once you understand that and can
visualize and you get the eyes to see
it, then you begin to see the world
through in in a new perspective and you
begin to realize, oh my gosh, these
these events have left their imprints
all over the planet, which they have.
Yeah. So, here's another close-up
example of some of these. They're called
rhythmites.
And here in these sandwiching, this is
13,000y old Mount St. Helen's ash within
flood rhythmmites. Now what's
interesting about that date is it's
13,000 years plus or minus like couple
of centuries. So it means that the age
of that ash is right at the younger dry
lower younger dest boundary. Now if the
succession of of deposits that created
these layers is not separated by 50 or
100 years that they were very quick with
each other.
It means that these floods were
happening very close to the lower
younger driest boundary. Does that make
sense?
Yeah. And just a couple of quick here's
here's the basin and range province. You
actually right up here is uh Great Salt
Lake. Here's the lower Snake River
plane. So this is in the Bonavville
flood tour. We would start in this area
and we would head up through this way
and follow the Snake River plane. And
then I'm going to show you that all of
these the basins of the basin and range
all have lake sediments on the bottom.
Hundreds of feet thick of these lake
sediments. So I'm not necessarily in the
next graphic I'm going to show you. I'm
not necessarily going to show you that I
think that all of those lakes were
simultaneous.
But if you show water in all of the lake
basins, it's this.
Now this would be a very very very
different world.
And this is essentially sometime during
the late ice age. So this is what's
going on in in the arid deserts of of
Nevada and Utah, primarily Nevada. But
some of these, like this area up in here
where Lake Bonavville is, I mean, that's
literally so large that if you're in a
boat going across it, when you're in the
middle of it, you don't see a shoreline
in any direction. It's like a vast
inland sea. This is a product of the
Bonavville flood. And this is a great
example of scale invariance.
You're seeing here the modern river, the
Snake River. I think I've got No, I
don't. But this is this modern Snake
River. You can see here. And this is the
ancient Snake River, which is really the
Bonavville flood.
And the uh oh, let's see. I think it was
the the Bonavville flood flow was about
7 to 800 times greater than the Snake
River peak discharges of floods.
[clears throat]
So again, a lot of people from the
ground you don't really get the
perspective. You've got to get up to get
the big picture. And then you realize
that virtually, and I can show you, but
we probably don't have time, but I can
show you now from what we've learned
from liar is that virtually every river
in North America is overfit or underfit,
meaning that the river is too small for
the channel it's flowing in. And it
makes sense, doesn't it, that if you've
got this tremendous flow, creates a big
channel, once the modern river gets
captured into that large channel, it's
stuck. It's not, you see, that modern
river is not going to flow up and flow
over the rim. It's going to be confined
to this much larger channel from now on
until another flow of 40 million cubic
feet per second comes along. And then
when you're down in the floor, you come
upon stuff like this. This is the
sediment being carried within the flood
waters of the Bonavville flood.
And you have mile after mile of this
kind of stuff. And here's aerial views
of desert floor in Arizona, remote
desert floor. And there are fossil giant
current ripples over the desert floors
all over the southwest that you don't
even know from the ground. Um,
but they're there now. their sand is
blowing over them. But if you were to
brush the sand off, you would have these
huge dune like remnant uh basically
formed of boulders and gravel from huge
flows flowing over the desert floors.
And so here you got what's called ribbed
morane forms, fluial forms or ribbed
morane forms along the peach tree creek
initiating roen or ribbed morane compare
with paloo landscape. I want you to look
closely at some of these features. Like
look at these. These are called
lemnsuscate features. Look at this. It's
almost kind of a boomerang shape, right?
You see that there? And you look at
these kind of undulating features here.
Now this is formed fine sediment
relatively slowm moving water. Right?
Now again water's going to move slow if
the ground is pretty flat. Well now from
the next image is from stebute.
So I'm 1100 feet above the valley floor
there. And check this out. You right.
See there's that same lemnuscate feature
right there. That boomerang shape. It's
it's an exact replica of what you just
saw except orders of magnitude bigger.
This is an area of the Columbia Basalt
Plateau where it's relatively low
gradient. So the water was moving slow.
So when the water is moving slow, it's
just kind of rearranging the sediment,
smoothing it out. It's not
it's not uh you know sculpting it. It's
not washing it away. It's not flushing
it out to expose the bedrock because the
water doesn't have the energy to
accomplish that. Now here is uh go down
to New Mexico. This is the James River.
uh that's next to um Valis Calderas and
you can see Bradley standing on a
boulder that's rounded. It's 8 ft in
diameter.
Now a round the roundness is a measure
of how far it's been transported in
water. So if a boulder doesn't break
apart, but it's transported in water,
the first thing happens if it's
fractured and got like edges and square
corners is those edges and square
corners get broken off and it eventually
ends up rounded like you see here. Now
look, if you can you can hike up this
we've hiked up this miles up this this
river and you find all along this river
gigantic boulders and the modern HZ
river had nothing to do with the imp
placement of those boulders. They're
fossil boulder deposits. And then you
have culking which is a whirlpool like
eddying current created by extremely
high velocity turbulent flood waters
that drill or can drill deep potholes
along scabland channels and coolies
right it's in fact this is this is from
the glossery of uh Bruce Bjornstead's
book on the trail of the ice age floods
and
it's uh a function of the vorticular
motion think of really like an
underwater tornado. And I was able to
find one graphic to kind of depict
what's happening in a culking. Now, of
course, in a water that's turbulent
enough to cause culking, it's not going
to be clear enough. You're not going to
see this because that water is going to
be very choked with sediment. You're not
going to see see this. But this shows
you what's happening. Again, think of a
tornado, a water tornado that can
literally drill into bedrock.
Now, here, this is in North Carolina,
Tuckiji River. Here you have the remnant
of a pothole that's 6 ft in diameter.
And one thing I can absolutely guarantee
you is that the modern Tucki River did
not create that pothole.
Here's a pothole along the St. Croy
River in uh that forms the the border
between Minnesota and Wisconsin. Some of
these potholes are up to 20 ft wide and
80 ft deep.
And you see sort of remnant potholes
here along the Mississippi River in
Indiana. But you can see this is called
the the um seven pillars. And again,
what you see in here is the results of
turbulence like this eating into the
limestone cliffs.
So once you know what to look for,
again, you're going to see this all over
the place. Now, here is to me always
been an interesting conundrum and it's
challenged to explain
rock arches like this. However, in the
pathway of the Missoula floods, you find
rock arches
and they were created probably within a
matter of a day or two. Now, is it
possible that this was created by
floods? This is in Utah. How many of you
ever been to Arches National? Yeah,
you've seen some of these arches. Now,
the thing is also if when you bear in
mind that culking can also be
horizontal.
And what's this up here? What drew what
drilled that hole into the side of the
rock there?
&gt;&gt; It looked like what?
&gt;&gt; Elephant.
&gt;&gt; An elephant.
Um,
it kind of looks like an Well, I was
going to say yes, but what what what we
now know is that this is giant
fossilized mammoth.
No, it's not. We're just kidding. Um,
but yes, um, I wondered about this for
years and then I finally
found rock arches that were associated
with both the Bonavville flood and the
Missoula floods. And that's when I
thought, "Oh my gosh, is this really
possible?" And then some people have
asked me about Grand Canyon. If I if I
could pull up some maps here, we would
talk about that. But I will be doing
this on on the pod on my podcast and on
my website. But if you look at Colorado
Plateau,
you've got the Green River, the Colorado
River, the San Juan River, watersheds,
all of that water, and it's thousands of
square miles.
The one drainage off the Colorado
Plateau is on the southwest rim, right
where Grand Canyon is. I don't really go
to the electric universe theory and
that's a big plasma arc. I don't because
I don't need that because I know that
you can you can create tremendous flows
of water if you have if you have mega
precipitation events and I think when we
look when we go back and we look at at
this okay there's no glaciers in North
Carolina
right I I've got other images where I
can show you we I've hiked all over the
the the creek hollows of of North
Carolina of Tennessee of Virginia and
you'll find the same thing all up and
down the whole spine all the way up into
Pennsylvania. You can follow it all the
way up to the rim of the ice sheet up
there. And this was not being fed by
direct glacial water. So where did this
water come from? Well, it had to come
from intense prolonged rainfalls. So now
here we could say well perhaps we could
conjecture that the sun would be able to
evaporate enough water and uh inject
enough water into the atmosphere to
cause extended rain outs. But obviously
so could impacts. And if you had impacts
into the oceans or impacts into an ice
sheet, uh if you have a hypervelocity
into an impact into an ice sheet, I
showed you even a tangusized object
could release energy on the equivalent
of 15 megaton megatons. I mean, what if
you had dozens or even hundreds or
possibly even more? What if you had
something along the line of shoemaker
leave 9 even? I always have thought now
since 1994
maybe maybe nature was giving us a
little clue as to the nature of what
happened at the younger dus that it
might have been an event similar to but
on a smaller scale of course than um
than um Shoemaker Levy nine and we're
not going to get into this today but one
of the things that I've done is
following in the work of John Shaw I do
believe that he was right that that
Drumland's are elongated fluodnamic or
aerodynamically shaped hills that were
produced by extremely intense subglacial
floods.
See, so you you have water flowing under
a glacier and the glacier forms a lid
which then forces the water to flow
under greater pressure than if it was
flowing under a free surface where it
could it could go to any elevation it
wanted. Right? But with that ice cap
over it, it's it's forced to flow under
pressure.
And what it does is picture this. You've
got the um you've got the the land the
the glacier grinding over the land,
pulverizing the land, forming the till.
Remember the till is the material that
composes borrain.
Then you have the high-pressure
subglacial floods that now uh uh shape
that till into these aerodynamic forms.
And I'm going to show you a couple of
Drummlin images in a second. So now we
can add potholes to our list of
diagnostics
which are consistent with gigantic water
flows. Natural bridge of sandstone in
Kentucky. And again, how do you explain
this? When we actually look at things
like this and this, they are not being
produced by modern processes. They're
being slowly destroyed by modern
processes. They're not being created.
This thing here is a fossil feature.
This is a fossil feature. It is these
are not being created now. Show me
anywhere in the world today where
something like this is being created.
Good luck.
But they are being destroyed.
So I maintained that features like this
cannot be explained by resorting only to
processes and forces like we see going
on today because we don't we don't see
it. So if that's true, then they're
created by forces and processes that are
no longer operational.
Boulder fields, another example of a
diagnostic. This is um in Pennsylvania.
We could talk about this a lot, but
these are this is what happens when you
have a slurry moving out over a
relatively flat
piece of ground and then the the the
finer grained matrix that these boulders
are being carried in gets eventually
washed away leaving only the glacier
only the glacier only the boulders. Um
this is here the Takasiji River. uh and
it has numerous potholes. And you see
the way to understand what you're
looking at here is that this is
literally the wreckage
of the previous world.
If you want to use more prosaic terms,
this is the wreckage of the
anti-dolivian world right here. That's
what you're looking at. The modern flow,
you can see the modern creek flowing
right down here. Do you think this creek
can place these boulders? No. Well, you
can say, "Well, Lord, there's big floods
along here." Yeah, sometimes there might
be a big flood that lasts a day or two.
And you can go up there. I have I've
gone up there after, you know, there
have been large major storms, floods
today. The boulders are still there.
They haven't been moved. Some of the
smaller ones may have been moved a few
feet, but not things like this.
No, I mean, this is this is a pile of
gigantic boulders. Now, how do you
explain getting that there? Well, you do
not get there by gradualistic processes.
This is along the Cumberland River in
Kentucky. Look at the size of those
boulders going up into the trees. Do you
think the modern river put those
boulders there? Uh-uh. No, they didn't.
And in fact, just uh upstream from these
boulders is Cumberland Falls, which is a
recessional cataract. So now you have
the association of giant boulders with a
recessional cataract. And on the upper
rim of that recessional cataract, you
have extremely scoured rock just like I
showed you above the rim of dryfalls
cataract which again is the force of the
sheer force of the water moving over the
rock
along the Wabash River in Indiana.
You've got very similar to what I just
showed you. You've got giant backwash
features there. Look again at the top,
the vertical stuff. That's the loss.
That's the stuff that came after the
flooding was over. This is the stuff
that came out of the atmosphere. And I
think the only way to explain it is that
it was a rain a rainstorm of mud.
And you know, you can look in if you
look up lust, l o e ss, you'll find some
interesting stuff about it. Uh but
you'll also find that it's controversial
as to how it originated.
Right? So again, here you have gigantic
floods and and then oh, and then look on
top. So you've got under your feet,
you've got these giant flood deposits.
Then you've got this lust, which I
attribute to a rain of mud. And then on
top of that, you've got the modern
world, the farms, the houses, the
forests, the trees, the meadows, etc.,
etc. But then what's underneath your
feet?
What's underneath your feet is the
remnants of the anti-dolivian world.
Now, what I'm showing you here in North
America, we could go all over the earth
and find the equivalent.
You see, Okatoes, the big rock, Alberta,
Canada. And this is an 18,000 ton
behemoth sitting on the the plane the
plains or the prairies of Alberta.
Now what's interesting about this rock
is that it had to have been transported
by icebergs. It's transported nearly 500
miles from its place of origin up on
Mount Edith Caval which is up in Jasper.
It's a type of meta court site that's
only known to exist on Mount Robson and
Mount Edith Caval which are up in Jasper
Park. And here it is sitting out on the
western prairies of Alberta, south of
Calgary. 18,000 ton metacartzite boulder
that's now broken into three pieces. And
you can actually see that how it's sunk.
It's actually as it sunk it the the two
pieces split apart. Now, also notice the
sharp edges, right? You're not going to
tra you're not going to transport that
rock
500 miles
within a glacier and then have it come
out that pristine with those sharp
angles and corners like those would be
ground off completely or the rock would
be pulverized. The only way you're going
to get this rock that's in three pieces
transported hundreds of miles from its
location is via iceberg transport. Now,
what's interesting about this is again
we're talking about an iceberg that's
size of a tra of a tanker ship. So,
think about the scale of the water flows
that would be transporting that. Now,
what's interesting about this is that
the Missoula flood stuff that I've been
showing you is on the west side of the
continental divide.
This is on the east side of the
continental divide. The source rock, the
meta quartzite source rock is on the
west side of the continental divide.
So now we have a very interesting
problem here. We have to quarry this
rock
boulders and this is only one of a this
is the largest but it's a train of
boulders called the foothills erratics
train that's over 500 miles long. It
comes from where the Aabaska River
discharges out of the Rocky Mountains
north of here turns south for 500 miles
and ends in Montana. Right. How do you
do that? How do you get an 18,000 We're
using this. How do you get an 18,000 ton
boulder quaried from the from the
shoulder of a mountain put on an a chunk
of ice that's now being floated a chunk
of ice the size of a tanker ship set
into a flow of water that can float an
iceberg that far. Transport it hundreds
of miles and dump it out on the prairie.
How do you do that?
Well, it's a very interesting sequence
of events by which such a a phenomena
could occur. First of all, you have to
have something powerful enough to break
off gigantic chunks of rock literally
from the flanks and shoulders of these
mountains. At the same time, you have to
be fracturing the mountain glaciers that
are filling these valleys and and areas
because at the time now bear in mind
these huge mountain peaks are only the
peaks of the mountains are sticking
above the ice, right? So now you have to
shatter those mountain peaks,
load up the glaciers,
fracture the glaciers, melt the
glaciers. So you've got the melt water
to carry the icebergs that were formed
out of the the the uh this the destroyed
glaciers and then that has to float to
the south. And then as you get down to
the um near the Montana border, here's
an aerial view of what you're seeing.
There's a little white line right here.
These are gigantic current ripples. That
line there is nearly a mile long. So,
you can see the scale of these current
ripples. And where is all this water
going? It's created a gigantic carved
valley that is now the valley occupied
by the Missouri River.
Okay. Is it are are you starting to get
it here? Are you starting to get this
picture? We are living literally in the
rune and wreckage of the former world
that preceded us here. We're living on
top of it. The gravels that we have
used, the limestones that we've quarried
and the gravels we've used to to cast
the concrete that we've used to build
our civilizations are literally the
remnant of that former world. We have
built our new civilization out of the
wreckage of the former antid-doluvian
world. And this is a simple scientific
fact. How many people realize this and
understand this? Almost no one. But it
is a fact and it's a demonstrable fact.
And we could go on and on and on and on.
But I think we've managed to get to the
point. I think we'll end this session by
introducing you to drumlins because
drumlins are very important key. And I
think drumlins are going to be the key
to understanding where those sources of
energy occurred on the ice sheet that we
could then
blame that we could blame on the melting
the catastrophic melting. This is a
drumland. Blunt end faces up current.
Tapered end faces down current.
Drumland swarms.
giant current ripples. These are up on
the Bruce Peninsula along the shore of
Lake Huron. We see giant current
ripples.
Here's what happens. We see a drumland
swarm under where the ice was
showing that there were water. Now, how
do we can we can demonstrate that it
almost certainly that those drumlands
were created by gigantic subglacial
floods is because where that water dis
emerges from the source the the edge of
the glacier, we find giant current
ripples.
So, this transition from water flowing
under pressure to now water on a free
surface.
Is that making sense? I hope so.
Gigantic ripple forms in western
Nebraska.
Here's a forest covered drumlin in
Saskatchewan
buried under thousands of feet of ice,
but you had gigantic
flows. in some cases flows that would
have been several hundred miles wide of
water subglacially. Now, so here's the
problem. See, and this is why John
Shaw's work was always rejected because
just like with with Jay Harland Brett
when he first proposed these gigantic
floods, all of his critics said, "Well,
you can't provide a source for these
floods. Therefore, they didn't happen."
And he said, "Well, I'm not sure where."
He speculated. So, I'm not sure where
the source of the water was, but the
floods happened. I mean, the evidence is
is conclusive. It's incontrovertible.
These floods happened
right now. Eventually, when the uh it
was proposed that Lake Missoula was the
source, it was almost like all of the
the geologists that were desperately
trying to find some modern analog went,
"Oh, okay. Okay. Well, it's just we know
that that we have ice damned lakes.
We've seen them. They're in Iceland. We
know in Alaska and British Columbia.
We've seen them in Scandinavia, etc.,
etc. So, all we have to do is just
extrapolate upwards. No problem.
End end of controversy. The floods
happened. It was just a big ice damned
lake. End of controversy. That's pretty
much where it stands today, right?
The problem was though that um there's
so many inconsistencies within that. And
now we come fast forward to the 80s and
the 90s and the work of John Shaw and
he's proposing Drumlands were formed by
subglacial floods. And the critics all
said, "Well, some of those floods you're
proposing are huge, like the Livingstone
Lake event that you've talked about, and
you're saying 84,000 cubic kilometers of
water total were involved in that. Get
out of here."
Can you provide a source for that? Well,
I'm not sure. Could it be subglacial?
Well, no. No, no. There's no way that
you could form a water reservoir that
big under the ice. What about on top of
the ice? Supra glacial. Well, same way
because we know that every year glaciers
will get melt water on the surface
because of the warm weather of the sun
and then eventually that water will
drain through the glaciers down to the
bottom and it'll flow out. but it
doesn't produce drumlands. So the
critics said if you can't provide a
source for this water those drumlins are
not produced by subglacial floods and he
couldn't he passed away before he could.
But we had communicated with him just
before he this was about a year two
years before COVID hit.
We were going to go and visit a place up
in Canada called Lake Nipagon. Look it
up. Lake Nipagon. Look at the maps
carefully. and he was going to go with
us and then three weeks before we were
to depart he passed away. So we did not
do that trip. So that's still another
upcoming trip in the future. But
the critics said there's no way you
could produce a reservoir that will
accumulate 84,000 cubic kilometers of of
uh water to to create these drum vast
drumland swarms. Um here's what I would
tell you to do. Go to Google Maps and go
to terrain view.
Right. Then here's a good start. Go to
and explore the area between the finger
lakes of western New York and Lake
Ontario
and see what you see what happens. See
start zoom in on that region when you're
in terrain view the 3D view and see what
you see. [clears throat] Now
they said to Sha, "If you can't provide
a source for your for these the water
that creates these subglacial floods,
then it was not subglacial floods. So
get out of here." And he couldn't.
However, if we have a scenario, one of
two, now my preferred scenario is
multiple impacts into the ice sheet. We
don't need a reservoir. We have
instantaneous melting. We have
instantaneous fracturing fracturing of
the ice which now allows easy access to
the base of the ice by all of the super
glacial melting that has occurred. We
also have injection of water vapor on a
large scale into the atmosphere that's
going to require a rain out.
[clears throat] And I think from having
studied the the erosional forms of where
the ice sheet was, the Drumland fields,
I think I can pinpoint at least seven
areas where there were actual impacts
into the ice sheet. Now, using Robert's
scenario, it would probably be solar
plasma bolts or something that would
produce the same thing. I again, I'm
going to come down on the side of
impacts. I am not going to eliminate or
reject out of hand Robert's ideas.
I think we need to look at all of the
evidence, but I think we can pinpoint
and I'll give you I just gave you a
hint. Look at Lake Nipagon. Also look at
Lake St. Jean in Quebec
and look at uh Great Bear Lake
in Northwest Territories. So do do some
research on your own. I think you'll
have fun with it. So,
aerial view of Livingstone Lake Drumland
Field and we'll end with this
here. You can see gigantic meltwater
flows coming south.
And this is Lake Winnipeg up here.
There's Lake Superior. You can see very
clearly the flow paths. Can't you
look at the size of those flow pads
compared to compared to Lake Superior?
They're huge. These are gigantic
meltwater flows coming off the
Laurentide ice sheet. And then look up
here. You can see the streaking the the
flow here. You had water flows coming
down this way. You had water flows
coming this way.
So do some research on your own. looks.
You can um you can start with Google
Earth. Great tool. Um the National Map
Viewer.
It's put up a US Geological Survey and
it's based on LAR. You'll have fun with
it and you'll make you can contribute to
this research and you'll make
discoveries.
So,
I think you've got a perspective. I hope
I've warped your minds a little bit. And
ultimately, of course, what I'm trying
to do here is connect these kinds of
events,
the things that have done these kinds of
things and left these kinds of
impressions on our planet with what's
going on out there, connecting Earth and
sky. And I think we could have a
potential uh explanation why our
ancestors were so obsessed with tracking
the motions of the heavens for multiple
reasons, but that would be one of the
most important. Okay, here's two quotes
and then we'll end with that. Sir James
Hall, one of the founders of geology
back in 1815
in a paper titled on revolutions on the
revolutions of the earth's surface from
the transactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburg.
The facts brought forward in the
following paper according to my view of
the subject clearly indicate the
operation of immense torrance.
and he's talking about over Europe right
now. Let's fast forward to two of the
most prominent paleo hydraologists in
the field working today. One American,
one Russian, Clute Baker and Kimotu.
So wait a minute, there it is. Yes, from
1999.
Recently identified pleaene flood
features in the Eurasian continent
indicate that planetary scale movement
of water has been a major agent in
shaping the landscape of our planet. Let
that sink in. Planetary scale movement
of water.
Now when people like Flint Dibble and
some of these archaeologists and stuff
are dismissive of, oh well that was just
a local flood. No, dude. You got no
clue. You got no clue. So don't be so
damn dismissive and arrogant because you
don't know what's going on here. You
have no idea why. Because here's the
thing. the kinds of things I have shown
you here today and yesterday.
If those kinds of events were to happen
again,
if we were to have a planetary scale
movement of water
10,000 or 15 or 20,000 years from now,
what would archaeologists find to
demonstrate that we were here?
Not much. Not much.
So on that note, I think we'll conclude
for uh for now.
Just by the way, here's what a
visualizing a flow of what 300 million
cubic feet per second might look like.
And this is from uh
uh Church's Albert Church's book on
Atlantis. So he was kind of already on
to the thing. And uh we'll stop there.
So, thank you guys for coming and uh to
me it's been a great weekend.
I'm really hoping some of you guys
really get get into this kind of
research and if you've make some good
discoveries, let me know. It's it's a
big task. There's a lot to learn here
and there's a lot of things. What we've
looked at is only a small piece of the
puzzle. So there's a lot more to learn
and there's a lot more for contributions
that can be made by people who aren't
quote unquote professionals.
Okay. All right.
Thanks again.