[music]
Heat. Hey. Hey. Hey. [music]
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Hello everybody. Thanks for joining me
this afternoon. I've got a great stream
with a great guest that I think you're
really going to enjoy. I had the
pleasure of meeting Dr. Milgillust over
in the UK during Jordan Peterson's
conference that he was holding there.
Actually, we were introduced by Rob
Dreer. Funnyly enough, at that time I
did not have a grasp of uh Mr.
Gilchrist's work, but I have dove into
it and found it very interesting and I'm
excited to talk to talk to him about
that today. So joining me is Dr. Ian
McIll. He is among many things a
philosopher, a neuroscientist, a
biologist, a psychologist, all kinds of
impressive accolades. Thank you so much
for joining me, sir.
&gt;&gt; That was a great pleasure, Ron. Thank
you. I'm looking forward to it.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. So, as I said, you've
written a number of books. The master
and his emissary might be the one most
people are most familiar with, but you
also have uh philosophical toms, many
different disciplines all coming
together. And that's what I found so
interesting when exploring your work.
And uh it it all builds, I think, uh at
at some level on your understanding of
the human mind and the way that it
works. And so perhaps it would be best
for people who are unfamiliar with your
work to you lay out kind of your basic
thesis on uh the different hemispheres
of the brain and why so many people have
gotten this wrong and kind of the pop
science understanding that is circulated
around.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Okay. Um,
when I started researching it, I was uh
I was told in no uncertain terms by
those who had my best interest at heart
to leave the subject alone because it
was considered toxic pop psychology. And
indeed, most of the things that did go
into the um box pop back in the ' 60s,
'7s, and 80s about hemisphere difference
were wrong. Um, why were they wrong? And
how on earth did people get excited
about this around that time? Well, I
think the the the reason they got
excited about it was that there was a
life-saving operation uh called
commisserottomy, which is the surgical
division of the corpus colosum, the band
of fibers at the base of the brain that
unites the two brain hemispheres.
And for people who had intractable
epilepsy, cutting this connection
between the two hemispheres meant that
if you like the electrical storm
couldn't take over the entire brain. And
so this was was very important for for
those who suffered in this way. But it
gave psychologists a marvelous
opportunity to examine one hemisphere at
a time. I mean, I should perhaps just
say for those of you who are not um
spending your days gazing at brains that
they look a bit like a walnut, these two
two halves and there's this big divide
down the middle and and uh yeah, so they
they they were able to examine them and
they came up with um some stuff you've
probably heard. The left hemisphere is
uh verbal and rational and dependable. a
little bit boring, but at least you
you've got something that's got wisdom
and insight and all that. Whereas the
right hemisphere is a bit sort of uh
airy fairy and way with the with fairies
painting pictures and uh being uh quite
emotional in a in a not very dependable
way. I mean I I will explain shortly
that all of that is completely wrong. In
fact, it's almost the inverse of the
truth. the the right hemisphere, as I
will explain, is far more dependable. Um
far more stable uh and the left
hemisphere is prone to emotional
outbursts of a very um narcissistic
kind. It it uh is prone actually to to
anger and and uh to disgust and
self-righteousness and
emotions of that kind. So
um why did I get interested in it? I was
I was a
a lecturer in uh in in in literature at
Oxford. Um my main interests have always
been philosophy but I decided to study
literature for reasons I don't need to
go into now. But um I was soon after I
graduated I got a fellowship to a
college called All Souls at Oxford which
uh if you get this uh fellowship you get
seven years to do anything you like and
nobody asks you questions or need to
report or anything. You just do what you
need to do with total intellectual
freedom. And um I wanted to explore why
the whole business of examining
literature was un unsatisfactory
cuz I did feel it was that in a way we
were destroying the very things we were
trying to find meaning in. Um and and I
I thought this was uh to cut a long
story short because what we did was we
took something that was in fact
embodied. It wasn't an abstract
statement. It was something that
physically affected you like a piece of
music when you read it. Um, uh, you took
it out of its context. So when you
analyzed it and said, "Well, it really
means this." You were left with, "What
really?" But that's almost nothing. I
mean, it's like I sometimes use the
example of the the great poems that
Hardy wrote at the end of his towards
the end of his life after his wife's
death. And you say, "Well, what are they
about?" Well, he says it's very hard
when somebody you love dies and think,
well, what's all the fuss about? I think
I could hear that down in the pub any
evening. Um, whereas in fact, it's the
exact expression, the whole context of
the thing that makes it meaningful. And
the other thing was that we turned what
was individual and unique into something
that was general in nature, generalized
and abstract. Now there is a reason for
going into that because I think it will
illuminate something about hemisphere
difference. So I decided that um there
was a problem uh which the philosophers
used to call the mind body problem.
Probably still do. Um although in my
view it's only a problem if you
misunderstand the relationship between
the mind and the body. Um and
I thought the thing to do was actually
the philosophers didn't cut the mustard.
I went to their seminars and really at
the end of it they [clears throat] were
just too abstract and uh I wanted to do
it in a more embodied way and so I
thought I ought to become a doctor and
uh that's what I did. I I trained rather
late 10 years older than most people uh
as a physician and then specialized in
neurossychiatry the area of overlap
between neurology and psychiatry. And
while I was training, I noticed a few
things that just set me thinking. One
is,
okay, it's obvious the brain is divided
in this way. But why? I mean, just stop
and think about it. The brain is there
to make connections. Its whole power is
making connections with billions of
neurons. Why make a great big divide
down the middle of it? And we're not the
only ones who have these divided brains.
All creatures that have brains have
evolved with this division. And so I
thought why is that and why is the brain
asymmetrical in function and structure
and why is the corpus colosum this band
of fibers that only 2% of neurons
actually cross why is it a lot of the
time sending messages to the other
hemisphere saying keep out of this I'm
dealing with it. So the story that I was
inheriting at the time I was training
was that all that bad pop psychology was
wrong and it was wrong but that it was
assumed that that meant that there were
no differences but that's a complete
nonsequittor. Just because we haven't
found the right differences doesn't mean
there aren't any differences. It would
be illogical for there not to be
differences given the things I've just
mentioned. And so I set about
researching what those differences were
and why they had come about. And I think
uh again uh people may well have heard
me say these things but I can need to
say them again.
It seems that
the division of the brain and of all
brains of all creatures
seems to stem from the difficulty of
paying two kinds of attention to the
world at once. Both of them profoundly
important but quite contradictory in
nature. What are those? Well, the first
is the attention that you need to use to
get something to eat, to manipulate as a
tool, uh picking up a twig, to build a
nest, whatever it might be, you've got
to have precisely targeted attention to
something that you're already quite
clear in your own mind about what it is,
and you just want to guess it and grab
it. [snorts] And that is so important
obviously because without it we we
starve all of us or perhaps not now in
2026 but but but [snorts] generally
speaking creatures will starve if they
can't bring this attention to bear but
it's not enough to have that attention.
In fact it's fatal if you only have that
attention because while you're getting
your lunch you become some other
creatures because you're not looking out
for the predator. You're not looking out
for the interests of your mate and your
offspring. So you need to juggle two
quite different types of attention. One
precise narrow beam targeted on
something you want to grab and the other
broad sustained open and vigilant
looking for everything else. [snorts]
And when I say everything else, I really
mean the vast majority of everything
that we we we experience.
um that attentional beam in the left
hemisphere is really about 3° of the
360° arc. Um the rest is the job of the
right hemisphere. So they have different
roles and they they look at things
differently and when you attend to
things differently they change their
nature. So that if you think that
everything is a machine
um then you start to look for the
mechanical aspects and then you think oh
that's good uh that just confirms that I
was right that it is a machine so next
time you're even more likely to look at
things in that mechanistic reductive way
and it was this that explains why people
had got it wrong about the hemispheres
back in the say ' 70s and 80s they'd ask
the question you'd ask of a machine.
They just assume the brain is a
mechanism, a set of mechanisms, a
machine. And the question you ask of a
machine is what does it do? You know, is
it a photocopier? Is it a dishwasher?
What's it doing? And they found that in
the end after they'd researched it
enough that each hemisphere was involved
in absolutely everything. So there's
really nothing that you do that the two
hemispheres don't contribute to. But it
was wrong to conclude that therefore
that was the end of the story because
you ought to have asked a different
question. A question you'd ask of part
of a person. I'm sorry. A brain is part
of a person. A very important part. In
what way does it do this? To what end
does it do it? With what values? What is
it concerned about? Because it will
produce a quite different um
experiential world. So in brief, what
are those two experiential worlds like?
In the left hemisphere,
you see things that you already know
what they are and you know you want to
get them. They're fixed. They're
isolated.
They're in a way fragmentaryary. They're
decontextualized
and they're examples of a kind. It's a
seed. It's another rabbit. It's whatever
it is that you're interested in. You
don't see the unique. You don't see how
it fits into the context. And frankly,
it has no meaning except if it can give
you food or power. Basically, power to
manipulate.
Meanwhile, the right hemisphere is
seeing a completely different world.
It's seeing a world in which nothing is
ever fully certain. It always might be
something different. That our prejudices
and our assumptions, our quick and
dirty, I know what that is. I'm going to
get it attitude has prevented us from
seeing. Uh it doesn't mean that we don't
know anything. It just means that we're
never fully certain and determined that
something is and that and and definitely
right about it. Um the that that world
is also flowing and changing and
multiply interconnected. There's nothing
that's isolated and fragmentaryary.
Everything takes its nature from a a
seamless web in which it takes part. And
uh I think this is a a very important
point certainly very important all my
life really literature philosophy and
science that context changes everything.
So
the the the fragmenting way of thinking
in which you take things apart and say,
"Well, it's one of those and two of
those and that's got got it
[clears throat] is not really seeing
what those things are because they only
are what they are in a context. In a
different context, they would actually
be different." And you I sometimes use
the slightly amusing
example of serial packets in America
where there are four sizes. There's
jumbo which means very large.
There's economy which means large and
there's family which means medium. And
finally there's large which means small.
In that context the word has shifted its
meaning through 180°. And everything we
look at we need to remember that the
context changes it. So when people quote
a a remark out of context, they may have
completely misrepresented what was
intended. Uh they may have in fact
totally betrayed it. They may have made
large small and small large. [snorts] So
that all that is very important and it
also sees the world as made up actually
of unique things. Of course, it can
group them together, the right
hemisphere, but it doesn't in grouping
them lose the sense that all the same
they are individual and unique as um uh
trying to think what who who it was now
actually who said every you know two
blades of grass are never the same. Um
so there we are. So that's that's the
sort of difference and I ju I'm just
finishing don't worry but um one of the
differences that sounds least exciting
but is terribly important is
[clears throat] that the the right
hemisphere sees what is implicit and
frankly this is everything that matters.
So if if you make the things that give
us
pleasure, meaning, fulfillment in life,
if you make them fully explicit, you
destroy the their power. And this was
what I was referring to when I said you
you you try and make a poem explicit,
you've lost it. But everything that
really matters to us, our our sense of
um uh love u sex itself which you know
you can make it explicit but it changes
its nature. It becomes something quite
different from if it's experienced uh as
part of a a loving relationship. um
friendship,
religious faith, um myths, narratives,
poetry, architecture, music, all these
things can't be reduced to a little
formula. If you try to do so, you've
travestied them and changed their
nature. So the right hemisphere is
holding that very important element that
gives us the sense of connection, the
sense of context and what is implicit
and it also
sees the thing as it comes into being
for us. I believe that everything we
experience is not just sort of fixed and
out there and it's just a matter of
contacting it [snorts] but that it comes
into being a new every time it is
experienced. I mean this is very much in
keeping with um physics in the last 100
years that the the the consciousness
that observes something is affected by
it and it is also affected by that
consciousness. There is an interaction.
It's not that we make it up but it's
also that it doesn't just exist apart
from our knowing it. So we always have
to take those things into account. And
what I'm suggesting is that when we
experience things, certainly when we're
young and and our our thinking is fresh
and not already stale and cliched, we
are amazed by every new experience
because it's an encounter with something
else. Um, and
Wsworth, for those who were interested
in the great man, lamented the fact that
when he was young, the mountains, the
lakes, the waterfalls, even a single
outcrop of rock astonished him with its
all inspiring nature. But as he got
older, he couldn't recapture that. He
just saw these things as elements of in
the left hemisphere way. Oh yes, a
picturesque landscape. I know about
those. I'll put this one in my box. So
th those are some of the big
differences. The left hemisphere only
sees representations
which is a funny idea because of course
it it's it's pretending that something
is present after the fact. Represent. It
isn't actually present. So a lot of us
are not living in the presence of the
world at all. We're living only in
representations. Now I've said quite
enough and take it away. [laughter]
I I I do love that your origin story is
basically CS Lewis in Abolition of Man,
also at Oxford, but uh you just decide
to then become a neurobiologist to
figure it [laughter] out. Like, yeah, we
we'll just we'll we'll just do this
minor uh minor uh transfer of of
specialty to to to pull that all
together. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um, yes.
&gt;&gt; So, um,
&gt;&gt; one of the things that I am, uh, very
interested in when it comes to your work
is the idea that we have leaned almost
entirely on, uh, the very narrow but
very specific processes of the left
brain in order to build modernity. uh
when we look at the explosion of
capital, when we look at uh the
enlightenment, all of these things are
really a triumph of uh when when I think
of it, you know, kind of economies of
scale and the left brain is essential in
building these things. We need a world
that is mechanical and predictable ones
that we can uh order correctly and and
then manage uh through specific
processes. We need less introduction of
the human and more understanding of
things as rigid. Uh and so this has
really become the dominant way that we
view uh everything around us. We find
this to be the superior method by which
we reason, the superior method by which
we should understand even everything
even the world's most intimate processes
be it uh you know finding a mate or the
these kind of things religion they all
have to fall into the domain of this
very rigid structured understanding. And
I I guess my question would be uh you
know so much of what I now try to do
when I speak with people is to for them
to understand what has been lost in this
specialization in this transfer to this
one mode of thinking which is why when I
read your work I was simply okay this is
a fantastic way to to further explain
this. So maybe you could could talk a
little about that why we have gotten
stuck in this mode and what we have lost
uh by by by just narrowing our
understanding but building on that uh
ability of the left brain.
&gt;&gt; Yes. [gasps]
Okay. Um
in in in um a book I wrote uh some while
ago published in 2009 called the master
and his ammistry. Um, in the first part
I look at philosophy and neuroscience.
In the second I look at the history of
the west. I'm looking at the main
turning points in the history of ideas
from the ancient Greeks through to the
postmodernists.
And
what I see is patterns in which there
are changes over time. And they seem to
go somewhat like this. That as a
civilization
rises up with all its if you like new
fresh um imagination, intelligence,
insight, vigor. [snorts] The two
hemispheres work very well together. But
after a while there is always a tendency
for the left hemisphere to come to
dominate. And that coincides with the
decline of that civilization. I trace it
in the Greeks. I trace it in the Romans.
And I trace it uh in our own uh
civilization since the enlightenment or
perhaps what's called the scientific
revolution at the end of the 17th
century. Um so uh I should say um that
if I had been alive at the time of the
enlightenment I think I would have
embraced it. Um, I hope not uncritically
and not without reservation, but I would
have seen it as a a a great step forward
in freeing people from superstition and
helping them to
um pursue a kind of a beautiful goal of
clarity and lucidity. So that that is
that is okay. The trouble is that
everything can quite quickly be taken
too far. And what happened there was the
idea that everything could be made lucid
and simple in this way and that
everything could be reduced to something
that was a statement that could be
transferred to somebody else and they
would understand it. So you know the
idea is everything can be reduced to a
formulaic expression that is rational
and linguistic and then I can pass that
on to another person and they've got it
which is not actually what happens in
experience. Very importantly it's not
just knowing things cognitively. It's
knowing them through experience that
makes us wise and gives us a full sense
of what it is we're encountering.
So I do think that this very um
simple-minded and uh
intellectually shallow, morally um
desolate uh mode of thinking has taken
over.
sloshing what I just said there, it's
worth saying that in in the in the
matter with things which is the book
that um came out in 2021
I was trying to address the question
what is true and in the first part of
the book I it's neurossychiatry there's
three three parts to it but the first
part is neurosychiatry and
neurosychology
and and what I'm saying is look if there
are two different ways of looking at the
world which of them can we take to be
true I
uh or do they both have a bit of the
truth? And the answer is well, they do
both offer something that is true, but
one of them offers massively more
dependable truth than the other. So the
one that we used to think was so clever
and and reasonable and down to earth and
and dependable, the left hemisphere
turns out to be seriously prone to
delusion. And I'm not using that word in
the sense of street slang. I'm using it
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; as a psychiatrist that in fact I I look
at 25 or so really staggeringly um odd
um neurossychiatric syndromes in which
people become completely deluded and
almost all of them depend on damage to
the right hemisphere not damage to the
left. So the I just want to recap this
the left hemisphere is not dependable.
It makes poor judgments. It attends to
only things that it already thinks it
knows what they are and is quite often
wrong. Um it uh its perceptions are not
as good as the right hemispheres. Its
intelligence is not as good as the right
hemisphere. And certainly its emotional
and social intelligence are way behind
that of the right hemisphere which is
quite important because that's where we
live in the world of understanding
people the natural world and all around
us not just through equations but
through actually understanding what this
means in human terms. But the really,
you know, the corker here is that IQ,
good old, you know, good oldfashioned
IQ, cognitive intelligence is more
dependent on the right hemisphere than
the left. So that all that stuff people
used to say is just so so badly wrong.
Now the reason I'm I'm I'm bringing
forward this at the moment is just to
say um it's not just that these two
hemispheres may have equal things to
offer just they're different but that
they are likely to have quite different
validity that the left hemisphere is
basically not getting it and but it
thinks that it is and that's a function
of the fact that it knows so little. So
there's something that's now called the
Dunning Krueger effect, but I think
people have known this since time
immemorial that people who don't know
anything very much think that they know
everything. And the people who know a
lot are quite cautious about claiming
how much they know. They're aware of all
that they don't know. So we live in a
world I think now in which the tech
technicalizing way of looking at the
world of the left hemisphere is
dominating
and it's it's neither um likely to be um
a realistic way of looking at our
situation nor is it actually able to
help us understand how to even approach
the business of of living in the world.
So, for example, we would um
in in a left hemisphere world, we we'd
uh see only um the narrow thing, not the
big picture, not the big picture in time
and space, but focus on what I want now.
And I do think that that's a criticism
of our society that we don't see the
impact of the things we do in a broader
sense on the rest of the world and we
don't see our place in a sequence which
is like a a stream that flows from the
past to the future. We we no longer
respect the past which didn't contain
people who were stupider than us just
because they didn't have technology but
probably contained people who were much
wiser than us and we don't think enough
about what's coming. We're we're
betraying the future of our children. So
that narrow vision which is also one
which is mechanistic, reductionist and
just about value and so fascinating
because the word value so often now in
discourse means money.
&gt;&gt; But wait a minute, there are plenty more
values than money. In fact, money might
not be anything to do with value at all.
Um what about things like the truth?
What about beauty? What about goodness?
These things have all been reduced in
our um our world to ticking boxes and
saying the right things and being in the
right set and seeming smart. But this is
this is a terrible terrible delusional
um world to be inhabiting
and and you know furthermore things
would be black and white and either or
uh the left hemisphere hasn't got time
you see it's the one that's quickly
moving in to grab and get uh before
somebody else gets it. I need that thing
now. So but so is the the right
hemisphere is saying but hang on mate
you might be quite wrong about this. The
left hemisphere says, "No, I I haven't
got time to worry about that." So the
left hemisphere is the quick and dirty
one. The right hemisphere is the one
that actually deliberates, thinks
broadly, thinks wisely.
And when you look at public discourse,
at least the social media kind of
discourse these days, it very often
suffers from extreme points of view that
are rigid in which the other person, if
they don't hold the particular views
that you hold, um is is is vilified um
often quite viciously.
These
very stupid culture. I I I think I think
you know this is the culture of uber
doom height. I mean if if we survive
into the future, people will look back
on this time as the absolute low point
of human wisdom and intelligence. Um
being seduced away from that into just
being able to manipulate things. So, you
know, we'd also be people who are
obsessed by control, obsessed by
measurement, obsessed by procedures, uh,
algorithms, and bureaucracy. Uh, you
know, there'll be an enormous
explosion of bureaucracy, which is
really the child of the left hemisphere.
It's aiming to control to limit in terms
of um, you know, reproducible
statistics, metrics and and and and
paths that are linear. Whereas in fact
most things that are deep need to be
approached in a much more rounded way
not just in this linear targeted way.
[snorts] What do you think?
&gt;&gt; I I find this fascinating because I find
echoes of this in other thinkers. So for
instance the sociologist Vfredo Paro
talks about the different residues and
that uh you know you have the the more
conservative I think more integrated
understanding and then you have uh the
more expansive uh you know the one that
scales better is able to discover new uh
solutions. But he says that ultimately
we end up topheavy in the kind of more
uh uh this more specific the one that
allows us to scale is the one we lean on
as we get to the end of uh of of
societies. Again, you can think of
someone like Oswald Spangler talking
about uh how civilizations uh kind of
end in this uh you know that loses the
metaphysical animating spirit and it
finds itself in a rigid civilizational
phase that allows it to scale but it
loses all of its integration of uh the
metaphysical along with the real and
therefore starts to lose its ability to
to continue on. I I'm fascinated with
this thought that scale is actually the
killer of civilization. That in a way it
it it ends our ability to think in an
integrated fashion and understand life
in a way that is necessary. It seems
that we are required to almost shut off
part of our brain in order to enter into
this more bureaucratic mechanical
understanding of the world and allows us
to do amazing things. But it also
destroys us as human beings. And again,
so much of what I try to talk to people
about in politics is hindered by this
understanding because they have a
difficulty seeing this as a limitation.
They think, well, no, I I am rational.
I'm a rational person. And that is was
necessary in the world. And if you try
to talk me into understanding the world
in this other way, you're being
irrational. You're in some way, you
know, limiting your understanding,
you're being a fool. or you're uh I also
often get this you're you're arguing for
some kind of relativism because
everything needs to be experiential and
I can't just you know I can't always
just pin the butterfly down and kill it
to understand it and that that that is a
problem and so I I just think it's um I
I'm very interested that the fact that
whether you come from this sociology or
history or uh biology we always seem to
come to this problem this this you know
complexity uh issue where we can't get
past the way that we need to organize
the world in order to scale up. But by
doing so, we seem to lose a critical
part of our humanity. And this is a a
problem that we keep running into over
and over and over again. And we are just
flabbergasted every time we run upon it,
even though it seems to manifest itself
across many different disciplines.
&gt;&gt; Yes. That's why we can often learn from
past experiences and cultures. But uh
there we go. I mean, another person I'd
mention in connection with the people
that you um commented on would be Hannah
Arent, who has become for me um almost
a saintly figure because of her
extraordinary insight into the problems
of totalitarianism, total control,
bureaucratic thinking, bureaucratic
organization
and the way in which um that helps to
eventually erode and destroy a society
through cultivating um violence and that
when people no longer have trust in
institutions which I think is happening
a pace um then a society is near the
end. I mean can we still trust
universities? Can we still trust the
media? Can we still trust um the
educational system?
What are these things still functioning
in the way that we used to? I mean trust
is a very important thing and it's
enormously economical and one of the
reasons that everything is so difficult
to bring about is that trust cuts
corners. When you can trust people, then
you don't have to have lawyers and
lengthy contracts and court cases that
go on for for for for years. It's been
pointed out to me that um the Quakers
uh were very good at business. I mean,
it's it's interesting that early
capitalism in a way depended on it's not
a a slur on the Quakers, but they they
were very good at business because
people knew if they said they were going
to do something, they'd rather die than
not do it. [snorts]
&gt;&gt; And the the other interesting one there
is the relationship between Orthodox
Jews and trading invaluable products
such as precious stones and and gold.
and and again uh that was something that
required extraordinary levels of trust
and they knew that their fellow Orthodox
Jews would not betray them. If they ever
did that then their name would be like
wiped out of the history of mankind and
nobody would deal with them at all. So
we there are these things that don't
look rational but are actually very very
important from a purely reasonable point
of view. I'd like to make a distinction
between rationality and reason. So
rationality is something that any kid
with a computer can work out. But reason
is something you need to have lived to
understand that things are not
reasonable even though they look
rationally right. And you know GK
Chasterson said this wonderful thing. A
madman is not someone who has lost his
reason as we say but has lost everything
but his reason. Uh and and this is
actually very good description of
somebody who is um perhaps a a
delusional schizophrenic. Um they have
odd experiences. They hear their
thoughts spoken aloud and they look
around and and see nobody in the room,
but they definitely heard somebody. So
they think, okay, let's think about this
rationally. Somebody is speaking, but
they're not in the room. So how are
their voice getting into the room? I
know it's that socket in the wall. It's
the only opening into the room and
therefore the neighbors must have got
into the electrical circuitry and are
sending me messages. There's nothing um
irrational about it. As I say, the left
hemisphere is profoundly deluded most of
the time. If you want to be very stupid
and get everything wrong, then just be
narrowly rationalistic. You need to
learn how to use reason. You know, and I
make a distinction between kinds of
knowledge. In most languages other than
English, there's different words for
different kinds of knowing. So, you
know, if you learn French or German, you
know that in French there's ketra and
savoir. In German there's kenan and
viss. And these refer to different kinds
of knowing. Knowing the facts, which is
savoir and and viss in German. um and
knowing through experience which is keta
and uh kenum and it that kind of
experience is much broader and deeper.
So you know I give the example that I
know that Paris is the capital of France
and that's my left hemisphere doing
knowing but I also know Paris because I
spent several years living there and of
course what I mean by knowing it is
infinitely rich and complex unlike the
single word that it is the capital.
It's interesting because so much of our
society now seems to be a war on
experience. If we think about COVID and
the fact that everyone was locked in
their homes, they were experiencing the
entire world through social media and
television. Uh increasingly young
children don't play with each other
because it's considered too dangerous.
What if they hurt each other? What if
they get catch a cold? You know, we we
are encouraged at every moment to reduce
risk and thereby reduce interaction and
thereby reduce experience because
everything can be safely observed
through some other medium. Uh making us
more and more reliant on this idea of
rationality assuming that this will give
us a proper [snorts] understanding of
the world. But we never grasp that the
map is no longer the terrain that these
things have fundamentally diverged and
we are be being fed something
entirely different. Uh, you know,
Bodriard of course hits on this quite
well, but it it really creates the
scenario where people seem to almost be
driven mad by their rationality. Uh,
they they have a hyperrationality, but
are in some ways the most naive people
who have ever existed and find it very
difficult when they have to then
interact with the real world. uh in in
many ways I think is what causes
post-traumatic stress disorder because
it's people who have had very
&gt;&gt; isolated understandings of the world
suddenly introduced to a far more
visceral grasp of it and they can't
reconcile the difference.
&gt;&gt; Yes, disembodiment
um is is enormously
um
widespread these days. we're further and
further from embodied reality. And that
is that that I've been pursuing through
literature, philosophy, and and
neuroscience. Uh is one of the big
strands in it. And yes, we've lost the
coency of experience.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; And you know emotion is not emotion is
worth commenting on along with reason
because as the enlightenment philosopher
Vanog said in the 18th century it is
emotion feeling that has taught us how
to reason and in our own age um Antonio
Damasio has rather popularized this idea
that you know if you don't actually have
your emotions you can't think straight
at all and the most basic things. You
get caught up in complex things and may
easily be led astray, complex chains of
thought. Whereas if you if you nourish
your intuitions by carefully attending
to experience, you would be far wiser.
And it's that wisdom that we've lost.
I'd like to go back, if I may, to your
point about scale because I do think
that it's not enough um commented on.
And I noticed that that is one of the
things that you are particularly
interested in. Um and I do write a bit
about this in the mass with things. We
we imagine somehow that if
we get a lot of things wrong. First of
all, we imagine if something is good,
more and more and more of it will be
better and better and better, but quite
often it becomes worse and worse and
worse. Um so things need to have a
certain um measure in order to be useful
and valuable. So for example,
freedom is certainly a value and to have
no freedom is tyranny. But to have total
freedom and not have any constraints uh
on what you do and how you behave is to
produce a tyranny which is called um
chaos. basically things fall apart. And
so we need both to be free and to be
responsible to the world that uh gave us
being, the society that gave us being,
the natural world that gave us being.
And we cannot pretend to cut ourselves
off from these things. But on the other
hand, we're not um with due respect to
um dear Sapolski, we're not determined.
Um we're not entirely free. That's true.
Um I'm afraid I was never going to make
a basketball player. Um I have to suck
that up. But but you know, there are
limitations to what we can do. But the
idea that we're determined is a very
toxic one, which again comes back, I
think, to mechanism. to the idea that
there are mechanisms. Of course, in in
in the um in the post-New
universe um those mechanisms do not
predict in any case. So in complex
systems, you simply can't predict
outcomes in the way that you could in a
limited um more limited mechanistic
system. Not because we don't know
enough, but because actually in
principle you can never know enough to
be able to do that. So as things get
larger they change in quality and a
society does that. So I mean
Robin Dunbar has uh put his name to this
concept that a small group of people
about 130 150 people form a community in
which people know one another and
therefore have experience of one another
and have knowledge not just in some um
savvoir version but conet. they actually
do know these people and that makes a
huge difference to the running of the
society because again trust you know you
don't want to piss on your doorstep if
if if you if people will know what it is
about you and what your reputation in
that group is you have an investment in
being trustworthy in being faithful to
people and once societies become much
bigger they have to become more
operative in a in a manipulating way. So
a large society has to have you know
more hierarchies, more rules, more
procedures, more abstraction and
ultimately more bureaucracy that changes
the nature of things. But there's
another sense in which things change
their nature and and that is
I think an example might be tourism. So,
[snorts] and if there's a a certain
amount of people visiting
places that are unfamiliar,
uh, and they don't arrive in such
numbers that they basically turn the
place into an extension of where those
people have come from, but actually
allow it to be itself, then there is a
fruitful exchange of experience between
those who have traveled and those who
have received them. But uh when all this
gets o overblown, it not only destroys
the planet, but it also ceases to be the
same thing at all. It it's no longer
enables people really to to experience
the the important differences. Hence the
um famous witism that uh uh travel
narrows the mind and uh nothing so
narrows the mind as as as travel. um an
inversion obviously of the of the usual
cliche that it broadens the mind but it
just does very much depend on the nature
of it the context and part of the
context is the scale how big this is so
yeah
&gt;&gt; so I hate to do this to you because I
know this will probably be the least
popular thing you want to discuss but
since I spend a lot of my time in
politics I am very interested on the
implications this has in our political
life and One of the things especially as
we understand ourselves as these kind of
liberal democracies in which we're
theoretically having some kind of
dialogue over the issues but
increasingly that becomes obviously
impossible. There's simply no way that
countries like the United States could
have a meaningful dialogue at 350
million plus people. And so therefore we
switch to a very different mode. We we
continue to pretend that we are
reasoning our way through this
understanding at scale. But that
obviously can't be the case. And so more
and more our politics is this
disembodied understanding. It is the
thing fed to us through social media
feeds and communicated through
advertisements and headlines and these
things. People feel like they know more
about the world than they've ever known
when in reality they know not even their
neighbor or the issues that they face
politically. And so these things have
become completely disconnected. To my
mind, the way that this is evolving is
that we are basically becoming less
human in all of our political
interactions, making it very difficult
for us to to then understand the other
uh as human to to understand the society
and the world around us. We can't even
really fathom having a conversation
about these issues because they become
so taboo and abstract. But
simultaneously we understand
[clears throat] this to be the core of
our system and see no contradiction in
this. And I just wonder ultimately if
&gt;&gt; this doesn't mean that we at some level
will have to I I I'll be honest you a
little dower on this. I see a collapse
in our political systems bringing us
back to more of a city-state model.
bring us back to an understanding where
we would be able to at least engage in,
you know, some social interaction that
mimics Dumbar's number that where we can
truly understand uh, you know, the
people around us and the communities
that we're interacting and do you think
that we can continue to see these large,
you know, superstates uh, expand and
continue to lean on this idea that they
have some kind of meaningful input from
uh, the individuals involved in their
citizens or do you think that ultimately
we will have to ract and once again deal
with each other at a much more local
level when it comes to political
organization.
&gt;&gt; I do think we will need to do that very
definitely if we're to survive. Um it's
I was just reading a paper today for a
colleague um who was making the point
that the Roman civilization, the
Baantine civilization and the Mayan
civilization
all eventually, no surprises, uh
declined. Um, but they declined not by a
collapse and that the way of shoring
yourself up against the collapse is to
make bigger and bigger entities that are
so big that they can't be destroyed. It
is instead to be much more
desentralized,
more locally based and you know as I say
the whole quality of life changes when
it is embedded in a place that is known,
a history that is known, people that you
know and so on. Uh my friend Paul Kings
North has just written a book called
Against the Machine which you'll be
surprised to learn I think is very good.
Uh um but he says you know the past
people
um uh prayer and uh I'm trying to think
what the other one is now anyway I
shouldn't have embarked on that but but
the you know not knowing your place I
the place where you belong being sort of
de drastinated and just slithering
around on the sort of um artificial
surface of the invented world is quite
different from being in a place where
you know people perhaps your your
forebears lived and so on. That's that's
important. Um people your relationship
to the people that you know uh prayer um
and uh probably patience is another one
that are important that deepen the way
in which we um we we we relate to the
world. So yes, I I I do think that we
will have to rediscover the virtues of
intermediate size uh and that it might
look like this is a downfall of a
civilization. But it might actually
enable the regeneration of a much better
way of life in which we lived with more
modest demands on the earth, closer to
the earth, cultivating the earth in
common with um our own community,
sharing our lives with them, helping and
supporting one another. That would be a
very different one from the one in which
we are alien from one another. our our
um aim is to rip off as much as we can
and make ourselves as rich as we
possibly can. And and believe me, as a
psychiatrist, being rich does not make
you necessarily happy. In fact, it much
more likely to produce the opposite.
But yeah, so I I think that is right. I
think also
it's it's not just about
we'll get we we need to sort of produce
smaller and more viable communities. But
something you touched on there which is
so so so important is that we can't have
conversations anymore.
Um and
I mean maybe that that is partly
something to do with the very democratic
nature of media now that in the past um
public conversations tended to be
between people who had learned
a good deal and achieved a level of
understanding and intelligence
and that the door is open to everybody
now. uh to spout, but I think it's more
to do with the loss of cognitive
freedom. A topic that is very much on my
mind at the moment because in um two
weeks [snorts] exactly, I'm going to be
at Duke um giving the opening keynote on
a conference on cognitive freedom and co
not having cognitive freedom is
incredibly dangerous.
uh if we can't say certain things I mean
obviously the there are always have been
and always will be limits on on hate
being thoroughly hate hateful and and
and so on. I mean hatred is been
recognized in the law for ages. But all
these now subjects that just in the last
20 30 years have become taboo subjects.
You can't say any you must just follow
the party line on them is first of all
it's anti-intellectual.
It's anti- um
uh
compassion because actually although
people think they're being very
compassionate in saying you can't say
certain things, they're actually
creating hatreds and tensions that are
welling up. You know, the trouble with
not saying things is that eventually
people will say, "And the elephant in
the room is this that we're not talking
about." And then
I think some of that is happening with
Trump. Trump is a very divisive figure
and um Trump like most politicians is
not all good or all bad actually. Um I I
can see huge problems with his
personality and his political style and
and so forth. But at least he has
shifted the conversation somewhat so
that people feel able. I mean that's
probably the only good thing he's done
is enabled people to think well okay we
can resume a conversation now that
conversation can be a very civilized and
must be a very civilized thing see what
is wrong with two people who completely
differ and this is how things were when
I was growing up and was in university
and it's the basis of intellectual life
is you have a debate in a way it doesn't
have to be a formal debate in a debating
chamber but you say that's very
interesting So, I see what you mean, but
I see it differently. I see it this way.
Uh, what would you say about that? And
the other person says, "Yeah, I guess
there's a point in that." But you see,
the trouble is bloody bloody bl. No,
those people are behaving like mature,
intelligent adults. And that is not how
people now behave. They scream vitrial
and and horrible things at people. I I
I'm in a difficult position because I I
think I'm I'm happy to say if I like the
work that somebody does and uh again not
not that I embrace every single thing
they say in some uncritical way that
would be very unlikely but I I found
recently that on my Substack
there [laughter] were people who say oh
I always thought he was so intellg
igent, interesting, wise. But now he
says he likes Rodrea. I mean, what I
mean, how can that happen? And so now I
have to, you know, discard him
completely. Now, there's a very
illogical train of thought here, which
is that I just know that somebody that
they probably have never met is and
probably not bothered to pay much
attention because they've heard that
he's, you know, unfashionably
espousing certain positions. They
they've heard that and therefore the
left hemisphere's category that this
anything to do with this is toxic trumps
their own experience. So instead of
saying, well, if Ian McGill Chris thinks
that he's all right, perhaps I should
revise my view of Rodri. Now, that seems
to me a logical consequence of thinking
that they they've read all my work. They
spent hours, countless hours in my
company, and then they go, "Oh, we like
Rodria." Well, that can't be, can it?
So, you know, I've just used that as an
example, but I think there's a lot of
that going on in our culture.
&gt;&gt; No, there is. And and the first rule of
internet life is never read the
comments. But I think a uh a very
important uh you know part of that is
really that uh it's parasocial. You know
you you they don't know you. They they
know your work but they don't know you
as a person. And so the minute that
they're kind of per you know carefully
curated understanding of you is breached
then it's easy to just discard this
because they don't have those bonds. And
so yet again we run into this problem of
context. without it, without that
deeper, richer context, no conversation
is ultimately possible. And I I fear,
you know, that that the basis of all of
this really is that shared understanding
and this is why we can't have
discussions because we are doing
everything we can to annihilate that uh
for for many different reasons. So,
&gt;&gt; exactly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that I sadly don't
&gt;&gt; I was just going to say I sadly don't
think that's a problem that's going away
anytime soon.
&gt;&gt; No, probably not. I mean and and and I
just want to gloss the word shared
understanding. I mean that doesn't mean
everybody has to think the same thing.
&gt;&gt; In a shared understanding there are
different points of view but they are
held
in a courteous suspension together in in
a way that is fruitful and intelligent.
Uh just having a slanging match is
stupid. Um,
and so
it brings me to something that I think
is so important, which is the
relationship between
um, diversity
and integrity or unity. So a good
society is one in which there is a
diversity of opinions are voiced and
discussed. Um, but it doesn't fall
apart. Um the strange thing about our
society is there is a narrowness.
There's no diversity in the things that
can be discussed and yet it is falling
apart. So often in order for the thing
to have sustainable integrity as a
whole, it has to also respect its inner
differentiation. Do you see what I'm
saying? And and this this is a another
theme that's very strong in my work and
it's is summarized in in Gerta's saying
that
dividing the united, uniting the divided
is the whole work of nature and I think
this is a massively um important insight
that things are simultaneously being
differentiated but also held together in
a broader integrity which is which is
beautiful. I mean [snorts] it's Hegel's
image of the flower that emerges from
the bud. So the bud gives up its
buddiness in order to be a flower. But
has the bud been destroyed? Not really.
It's been fulfilled in becoming the
flower. Now you see that what was there
in a very compressed form was actually
better seen when it's opened out and
then it will reenlose itself and become
the fruit which generates the next
cycle.
Absolutely. It is uh yeah that that
understanding of that metamorphosis that
you know we can't we can't understand
the value of the viewpoint of someone
who disagrees with us unless we again
understand their connective value to the
whole until we recognize that the man
who holds a different opinion is also my
baker. He's also the father of my friend
of my child's friend. And in those
moments that allows us to then say, "Oh,
well then our differentiation on this
one issue is no longer
&gt;&gt; somehow critical. You know, it no longer
destroys our relation because we have
all these other natural ties that bind
us together. But without that relational
substrate, we cannot we cannot differ on
these core issues."
&gt;&gt; No. And you know, I hate to be such an
oldie, but um people of of of my
generation and age remember that it was
very common that we we liked people, we
loved talking with them and so on. And
you know, eventually we discovered they
had completely different political
position from our own. But it never
occurred to us to drop them or think
worse of them. we just took it for
granted that there will be different
positions. Um and and there should be
[laughter]
it wouldn't be healthy if there was only
one permitted political position. But if
the price of having them is that people
will go to war over them, then we've
misunderstood the process. So I would
like to see an educational um imperative
in you know that nobody should have left
school without at least having learned
how to debate a position in this way
which is the way I was taught and and
and no doubt you were um speak on a
subject that you feel very strongly
about and explain why you think it's so
important. That was very good. Now, um,
espouse the position of somebody who
completely differs from you and do the
very best job you can of explaining why
they think differently about it. I think
it's a very educative experience
[snorts] and it means that people learn
how to see different ways, you know.
Sorry. Go on.
&gt;&gt; No, I was just going to say, you know, I
I was myself a a school teacher. Uh and
I will say that I while I think that
that is of course a a powerful skill, I
do think that actually education is not
the answer in this specific scenario
because I think it really is truly
relational. I think we'd actually need I
think I think we need more time simply
experiencing uh and and and you know
discussing the things we have in common
and these are what ultimately allows us
to then have those exchanges because we
already see the value that you don't
need a theory of mind for people you
don't need to interact with. You only
need theories of mind for people with
whom you you have to constantly uh share
things you you on whom you rely. I think
more and more our what we need what we
want is to rely on no one. We we want to
rely on mechanisms and systems. We don't
want
&gt;&gt; we don't want to have statesmen in
politics. We want to have managers. We
don't want to have uh you know friends.
We want to have uh you know the utility
of whatever you know what every
individual can bring. And I think
without building that reliance on each
other, we can not have that connection.
And without that reliance and
connection, we can't then discuss
important issues because we don't have
uh th those those thicker bonds that
would allow us to to discuss that. The
the practice of having the debate is of
course a good one and one I'd encourage
people to engage in, of course, but I
think without those uh th those kind of
prior commitments to each other, we
cannot uh we cannot properly have that
exchange.
I think you're entirely right, but I
would just want to um add a rider to
your thing. Not in school because it's
got to be relational.
But but that's what school is. I it is
an integral part of society and if you
want societal change then school must
play a part in that.
&gt;&gt; And my experience of school was that it
was profoundly relational in in in a
number of ways. I mean of course one had
one's schoolmates and a a lot of one's
time was spent talking with them and and
and sort of engaging in mutual education
but also the people who taught me the
the the teachers um didn't just instill
um facts or or or give me information or
or um hold forth and then say
regurgitate this please but but modeled
a mode of intelligent um discourse which
I think is really really important is
what I'm saying. So education is
profoundly relational and the whole idea
that you can do this at one remove over
the internet know is is again wrong
because it was the relations I had you
know I really felt I had you know
different kinds of relations with
different teachers because they were
different personalities and they had
different subjects and so on but it was
very much a network of relations so I
just say it has it has its part to play
but I agree with It's not the only
answer and indeed we can't we can't well
we can actually but I was going to say
we can't wait for education to come
through because actually if we were to
change the educational system
sufficiently and rehabilitate the
humanities I think we'd start to see
huge differences in the public discourse
in only 15 to 20 years.
I think you're probably right, but I
think that would take a revolution on
the scale of [laughter] pretty much uh
any other that would be I I mean I I
remember very specifically I'll never
forget when I was teaching during COVID
and we had to have the remote classes
because you know everything that was
going on there. I was one of the few
teachers who was still doing like video
courses. I was holding them on Zoom when
and these things uh because most most of
the teachers didn't have to. And I had
students uh you know who had spent their
whole uh time you know just being awful
and disinterested in those things and
they flocked to those classes. Not only
did they do that kids I didn't even have
in my class would join just because they
could have that interaction just to have
that social connection. um you know
again that just radical transformation
from children who could not have cared
the least and paid no attention when
they were required were suddenly like
just so thirsty for that interaction
that uh that they would they would join
involuntarily. So I think you're right
that the relational aspect of of
education is highly underrated by those
and poorly understood.
&gt;&gt; Um
&gt;&gt; under those circumstances,
&gt;&gt; sorry, go ahead.
&gt;&gt; No, under those circumstances, they were
starving for um connection and even
connection over the internet was better
than no connection. But what I'm really
saying is I don't think that it should
become the norm. I think it should be
something where one is in the presence
of people. You you
&gt;&gt; you I mean even this conversation if we
were together
&gt;&gt; um in a couple of chairs in a room would
be a different different experience for
both of us I guess. Although um it's
much better that we can do these things.
I do them all the time around the world
with people I couldn't possibly travel
to visit. So
&gt;&gt; yes, once again the the blessing and the
curse. We must learn how to how to use
this technology in a way that benefits
us but not lose our our connection in in
the day-to-day. And that is the the true
difficulty that I think we're all trying
to to reckon with. But uh Dr. McGill,
this has been a fascinating conversation
and I could literally do this all day,
but obviously I can't take uh all of
your time. So uh per perhaps we can we
can do this again uh sometime in the
future. But it's been fantastic talking
with you. You have so many things that
you're doing right now. Is there
anything coming out that you'd like to
share with my audience? A new book, a
new talk, anything that you'd like to
point them towards?
&gt;&gt; I'm doing um an enormous number of
talks. Um and that actually is um
not easily compatible with um writing
books.
&gt;&gt; Uh but I think that I I I put so much
into the matter with things. Um it is
you know it is my last will and
testament basically. It covers most
things that I think are important um to
do with matter and consciousness and
values and purpose and the sense of the
sacred as well as time and space and the
the coincidence of opposites. So I mean
it's all there. If people want want
something I think they'll find it's a
nutritious um I I was going to say snack
but I think it's a bit more than that.
So
&gt;&gt; yeah, more more more more of a 10 12
course meal, but yes. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think probably. Um, so uh, no,
not really. I mean, it's just that No, I
I if people keep up with my if they go
to my website called channel Melchrist
there and and you don't have to be a
member or anything, you can browse the
website. Most of it, most of the content
is free. Um, but there's also um a
schedule. you can join the newsletter
and know what I'm talking about, where
I'm doing it. I'm just about to go to
America. Very nice thing um is happening
um in early March. I'm receiving
something called the Trotter Prize,
which um I was delighted to learn that
Francis Crick had um had won. and uh I'm
going there and giving a talk at Texas
A&amp;M and then I'm going to Juke as I say
to do the uh opening keynote speech on
cognitive freedom. Um and then I'm
coming back and
uh I'm going almost immediately to Spain
where there's going to be there is a
thing where I wish we had this still. We
used to 50 years ago. They have a
program in which they interview people
with interesting ideas in depth and it
goes out right across the Hispanic the
Spanish-sp speakaking world um which I'm
really looking forward to and now coming
back and giving a talk on AI and
spiritual growth in uh Pusy House in
Oxford. Uh and then I'm giving something
called the boil lecture which is a
longstanding
uh endowed public lecture in honor of
Robert Bole the the um the chemist and
and and physicist and uh and then I
think oh no I'm giving a talk at the
Polymath Institute and and then I'm
coming back and going to have a bit of a
rest before going off and doing anything
else. Well, it sounds like you're very
lazy and you should really take up a
hobby or something to fill your time,
but uh it's been abs. It's been an
absolute pleasure speaking with you. And
uh guys, if it's your first time on this
YouTube channel, please go ahead and
subscribe, click the bell, and the like
and everything so you know when we're
going live with these. By the way, this
is not a live broadcast, so
unfortunately we won't be able to answer
the audience questions today. But I
appreciate everybody for watching and as
always, we'll talk to you next time.