[Music]
So today we're going to delve a little
bit more deeply into the realm of
symbolic representation. And I'll I'll
tell you what I think I'm doing and uh
then I'll show you a bunch of examples
of it. Then I want to tell you a couple
more stories. And so I'll tell you the
stories in the second half of the class.
So
you know it was Carl Jung who
popularized and differentiated the idea
of archetypes. They weren't his idea.
Platonic forms are an are archetypes
essentially. Um ideals are an archetype.
And so but Jung the thing that I think
he did that that hadn't been done before
was to suggest that
he as well as suggesting as Freud did
that human beings are composed of
subpersonalities.
Jung pointed out as Freud did to some
degree that some of those personalities
has have a universal character and so
that they can be thought about as
transcendent entities and you could
think about those while they have been
thought about and even put forward as
gods of one form or another. Um now when
Jung talked about archetypes it was
never clear what he meant and I think
the reason for that was because the
archetype is a very complicated idea and
a very complicated phenomena and you can
think about it biologically and you can
think about it socially and you can
think about it as something that the
individual participates in creating. So,
it's not that easy to localize it. And
and as well,
it's not that easy to localize it. And
as well,
Jung was never clear about what the
universe of archetypes looked like. At
some times, he spoke as if they were a
relatively small number, and then at
other times, he spoke as if they were
innumerable. And I think the reason for
that is in part it depends on the level
of analysis, right? The more
transcendent the archetype, the fewer
there are they are, but they
differentiate because you might say,
well, how many hero archetypes are
there? And one answer could be one. But
they differentiate all the way out into
the diverse range of works of fiction
that we have. So you could say there's
as many variants of the hero archetype,
roughly speaking, as there are works of
fiction. So you think about it as a
hierarchy with the ultimate archetype at
the top. So then another question might
be what does the landscape of ultimate
archetypes look like? And I think that
that's well that's what I tried to lay
out and that's what I'm trying to lay
out in this diagram. So now why do you
want to know that there's a practical
reason there's a number of practical
reasons as well as intellectual reasons.
One of the most relevant practical
reasons as far as I'm concerned is that
integrating narratives and so those
would include political narratives.
Integrating narratives
have their force because they draw on
universal archetypes otherwise they
wouldn't have any power, right? because
they're basically stories, an
integrating archetype like the story
that people that Hitler to sold the
Germans or that the Germans and Hitler
co-created, which is a much more
accurate way of thinking about it, that
had motive force because it had an
archetypal essence. And so political
stories derive their power from the
underlying archetypal representations,
obviously, because they have to be
concerned with the things that people
find important, right? How can you sell
a political message to someone if it
isn't about something they find
important? And if it's important to
them, it's going to be grounded at least
to some degree in their biological uh in
in their biological substructure. I
mean, if you're talking to hungry people
about food, it's a story that you can
tell, right? Because it it it hooks them
deeply. It hooks them hooks deep into
their motivational systems. To talk to
use a narrative of utopia, which is the
land of milk and honey, roughly
speaking, a very very old idea. you're
also tapping deeply into intrinsic human
longings. And so the idea that political
narratives
incorporate archetypal themes is is not
really it's it's not an idea that I
would consider particularly
controversial. Putting it that way might
be. Okay. So the problem with political
narratives in my estimation is that they
can rapidly transform themselves into
ideologies and ideologies are dangerous
for a variety of reasons but the primary
reason for their danger I think this is
a hypothesis is because of their
one-sided nature. What happens is that
they capitalize parasetize I think is
even a better way of thinking about it
uh a profound underlying narrative but
they don't tell the entire story. And so
then if you're looking for orientation
in the world because you're fragmented
and chaotic and somebody provides you
with a partial story that's going to
serve an integrating function and it's
very one of the things you see in
psychotherapy is that if you're chaotic
and confused and you go see a therapist
who has a particular kind of practice
Freudian behavioral cognitive rogerian
whatever there's a high probability that
undergoing that course of therapy is
going to be good for you and that you
might even come to view your life in in
the uh in the terms of that therapeutic
practice and you might say well you why
why is that therapeutic practice right
for you may maybe it could have been
Rogerian instead of Freudian say and the
answer to that is yeah well it probably
could be could have been because roughly
speaking any coherent ordering principle
is better than none and so that's also a
good way to think about human
development from a intellectual
perspective is
Partly what has to be provided to
individuals as they mature into an adult
adults is some kind of ordering
structure. And this is one of the
facts
that people who criticize the dogmatic
element of religious belief don't really
understand. They they don't understand
that you can't you have to provide
people with a determinate structure of
some po
even if it's constricting and and
restricting and and crushing for that
matter. You have to pass through a
disciplinary structure before and even
in principle you could be free before
you're disciplined you're not free.
You're just chaotic. And so you have to
practice some set of routines and
rituals. Now, you could say, "Well, they
don't necessarily have to be religious,
and they could be secular. You could
become a lawyer. You could become a
plumber. You could become a carpenter."
And I would say, "Yes,
that's far better than not becoming
anything." But the problem with an
identity that isn't rooted into the
archetypes is it leaves you incomplete
because the archetypal rooting of the
identity is what helps you grapple with
the fundamental existential problems of
life. And whether you're a carpenter or
a plumber or a lawyer, there's still
going to your soul is still going to
hunger for some deeper form of identity.
And you're not going to get that without
being without having your practical
identity encapsulated in something
that's that's greater from a
philosophical perspective and perhaps
even deeper than philosophy, which I
think the archetypal stories are.
They're the they're the structure within
which philosophy itself is embedded and
outside of that is a behavioral
structure. We've talked about how those
evolve. You know, there's there's
behavioral evolution of something
approximating a consensual morality and
then stories about that consensual
morality emerge and then inside that the
the structures of philosophy nest and
all of those things have to be addressed
by your identity to some degree or
you're weak. That's the problem. You're
beset by doubts. You're beset by
anxiety. You're easy to stop and you
don't have much motivation. And none of
that's good. It's not good at all
because life presents you with enough
real obstacles in the for in the face of
genuine suffering so that unless you're
strongly grounded and have a real moing
forward, you're going to get stopped.
And as soon as you're stopped, you are
one miserable thing because it's it's
almost like the definition of human
misery is to be par paralyzed by anxiety
and emotional pain and also have no
motive force forward. It's a terrible
state and so you don't want to be in
that state and you have to have an
identity that's powerful enough and
deeply rooted enough so the most
profound doubts that might emerge about
your life are met by something of
equivalent force. Okay. So we're going
to review the symbolic domain and
briefly and then I'm going to show you a
bunch of different examples of how it
plays itself out
partly archetypally and symbolically but
also partly politically because I I want
to show you how both of those things how
those things parallel one another. And
partly what I'm hoping is that
understanding the full domain of
archetypal symbolic representation will
also inoculate you against ideological
possession because you'll know when
you're told a halfsided one-sided
ideological story. You'll know that
there's something missing in the story.
There's there's there's pieces that
aren't being told or there's part of the
story that isn't being revealed. So if
it's a story about how tyrannical modern
culture is and how oppressive you think
well yes obviously but what about the
beneficial aspect of it and how is that
being represented and dealt with and and
so and it's the same story about the
negative element of the human being
which you hear stories like that all the
time because I think perhaps more
intensely since the 1960s but but but
because I wasn't around before then I
don't know what it was like previous to
that there is this idea that people hold
and that's promoted that there's
something fundamentally know cancerous
about human beings. The it was the club
of Rome I think when they pronounced
that everyone on the planet was going to
die of starvation by the year 2000 that
human beings were no better than a
cancer on the planet. It's like well
yeah you know there's lots of things
about us that could be improved but when
you when you portray the human only as
negative the question should arise it's
like fair enough but what about the
positive part why aren't you telling
that story and it doesn't take you you
know all you have to do is be sick once
and go to a hospital where you get
competent care to understand that you
know and you can get incompetent care
too but sometimes you get really
competent care you think yes it's really
good that there's some people out there
who have their act together and are
trying to put things together, you know,
and you can't forget that in your story
and you you don't want to forget that in
your story about yourself either. So, so
what is the fundamental landscape? Well,
the basic idea is that it's
it's it's predicated, you can look at it
multiple different ways. It's predicated
on the contrast between explored and
unexplored territory or the contrast
between the interpretive structure that
philosophers like Kant talked about and
the real world manifestation that
underlies under whose existence
underlies the validity of empirical
thinking right there's you in your
structure you interpret the world but
there's also the world informing you and
so that's the explored territory versus
unexplored territory something like that
or it's order versus chaos or it's or
Another variant of that would be it's
the hero going out into the unknown to
encounter the dragon of chaos and to
gather the information that that's out
there in the unknown. And and and I
tried to make the case to you because
I'm often accused most recently on Sam
Harris's podcast of making up post hawk
stories. You know, you have a set of
stories, you can interpret them any way
you want. Of course, that is a danger
because you bring an interpretive
structure to bear on every set of facts.
How do I know that this isn't just an
arbitrary post hawk analysis? And my
answer to that, it's a technical answer
is it manifests itself at multiple
layers of analysis simultaneously. And
the probability that it's merely an
imposition of an a priority interpretive
structure is decreased by the number of
different levels of manifestation that
you can detect the phenomena. It's it's
an it's it's aimatic. That's why you
have five senses. That's why in because
they each report a different level.
That's why in science use multiple
methods to detect the same thing. So one
of the things I tried to point out is
that you can map this archetypal
structure onto brain structure quite
nicely uh even onto hemispheric
structure and the function of the
subcortical systems. But even more
particularly you can map it on to the
function of specific neurosychological
systems within the within the neur
within the biological neurology. We do
have an interpretive structure, right?
That's your map so to speak of of
expectation and desire in the world.
That's your model. There's a brain area
roughly the hippocampus although this is
an oversimplification. It compares that
with incoming sense data which is also a
model but we won't get into that for the
sake of argument. So that's explored
territory, unexplored territory, and the
thing in the center doing the
comparison, that's the knower. And so,
so it strikes me as highly unlikely,
although you're welcome to criticize
away that you'll see that kind of
stacking of evidence across multiple
domains of inquiry without there
actually being a pattern there. So it's
not merely post hawk analysis. And even
the people who derived these patterns
like Jung to begin with let's say looked
cross-culturally at least to say well
here's here's a manifestation of a
pattern and here's a separate culture
and you can see the same pattern. So
there's some attempt there to be
methodologically rigorous he did the
same thing with people's fantasies and
dreams and then again by mapping those
on to people's behavior and therapy also
had them test out the ideas in the
world. So these aren't as trivial
methodologically as people make them out
to be and especially that's the case
when you can put a biological
underpinning underneath them. So the
proposition is explored territory,
unexplored territory and the explorer
roughly speaking and then a
differentiation of those two things into
positive and negative. Why? Because
everything complex has a positive and
negative element. And so explored terri
explored territory can become stalifying
and crushing. That's tyranny. But it's
also provides the structure that informs
and protects you. And unexplored
territory, well, that that can kill you
obviously. But it's also the place that
you need to go when you're static and
dead and you need new water and you need
new life and you need new information.
So, it's a constant movement out into
the unknown and back and out into the
unknown and back. And that's what human
beings are like, right? We're
information foragers. And then the
individual is both positive and
negative. And you know that
because you know yourself and you know
other people and you know yourself you
can be there's parts of you that are
that are good classically speaking or
good even by your own definition and
other parts that really could use to say
the minimum a tremendous amount of work.
And you also know that about other
people. And if you get truly unlucky
with yourself or other people, it won't
merely be that you're not trying hard
enough. You'll encounter something in
you or someone who's absolutely
malevolent and bent on destruction. And
that's also not a hypothesis. You know,
the the literature on posttraumatic
stress disorder reveals quite quite
clearly that people typically develop
post-traumatic stress disorder because
they encounter some form of malevolence.
And if it if it's ever happened to you,
you know that it's no joke. It's not
some figment of your imagination. Quite
the contrary. So, and then that entire
world that's sort of the world that can
be comprehended is nested inside a
broader symbolic network. And that seems
to be the symbolic network that's made
up of the dragon of chaos, which is
something like our representation of the
set of unknowable
things. It's a very strange category,
right? It's like the category of zero or
the category of infinity. And the reason
that we formulated that category is
because we don't only want to know how
to solve a problem. Just like we don't
only want to know how to win a game, we
want to know how to win the set of all
possible games. And we want to solve the
set of all possible problems. And so
what human beings have been trying to do
for the last
forever is trying to figure out how to
solve the problem of the set of all
problems. And we actually have some
ideas. One is play to win the metag game
and not the game. That's one solution.
Another solution is go out into the
unknown voluntarily and gather the
information that lies there because that
continually updates you. Um
the other one is to make sacrifices. And
that was discovered in an articulate
form not very long ago. And the idea of
sacrifice is something like well you
don't just have to solve the problem of
how do you survive in the present which
is roughly the problem that animals are
always trying to solve. You have to
solve the problem of how you survive in
the present given that you also have to
survive next week, next month, next year
and among other people. And the answer
to that in part is the answer of
sacrifice which is to give up something
that you desperately want now that would
even be useful right now so that you
acrew more benefit across a broader span
of time. A very very difficult lesson
for animals to learn. Animals have a
terrible time learning that. But even
human beings have a terrible time doing
it because there's some real
intelligence in getting while the
getting is good. But it's a suboptimal
strategy. If you can stabilize the
environment and spread out your adaptive
capability over wider spans of time,
well, so much the better. You get what
you need now and you get what you need
later and you get what you want and so
does your family and other people. A
much better solution. But that requires
it requires precisely sacrifice because
it requires sacrificing the present for
the future. And that idea of sacrifice
emerged like all of our ideas first in
in action in acting these things out and
then conceptualizing them with our
bodies like in drama just the way that
PJ described children first assimilating
the structure of their parents' actions
by imitating them rather than by
breaking them down into systems of
rules, understanding the rules and
incorporating the rules. That isn't how
we work.
We act and figure things out in action.
Then we imitate our own actions. And to
imitate your own actions is to act
yourself out or to act other people out.
You can do that without having explicit
articulated knowledge. And that's it's
so crucial to understand that because it
it it explains a great mystery which is
how can we tell stories that have
meanings that are deeper than we know?
And the answer to that is we have
information encoded in our behavior that
transcends our understanding. Well, how?
Well, we're constantly modifying each
other constantly, and the world's
constantly modifying us. And there's no
reason that while being modified, we
should also be able to track how it is
that we're being modified. We have to
figure that out afterwards. And and it's
extraordinarily difficult to look at a
whole culture or even a single
individual and to say, well, what is
that person or what is that societal
structure? It it it it supersedes our
conscious capacity for representation.
We're always playing catch-up. That
doesn't mean that we don't act out
things we think sometimes, you know,
that the causal pathway can't go the
other way because it can. But more more
frequently, it's bottom up rather than
top down, which is how everything works
in the biological world. Animals do and
have wisdom, but they don't know what
they do, and they can't articulate their
wisdom. So, it's self-evident that a
process like this must have occurred. I
mean, I was talking about
wolf dominance behaviors online the
other day and somebody tweeted and said
that it's only captive wolves that
dominate each other through aggression.
It isn't necessarily the most aggressive
males that are dominant in the wild. And
I thought, well, yes, I know that that's
what DeWalt has already documented among
chimpanzees.
The thing that emerges as as appropriate
to lead and then to be imitated as
leader isn't untraled aggression. It's
some process that is akin to my
interests and your interests matching
over some period of time with all of us
considered simultaneously. Right? That's
some equilibrated state of social
behavior embodied even in the behavior
of wolves, the behavior of rats who who
know how to play fairly, the behavior of
chimpanzees and certainly in our own
behavior much more complexely in no
small part because our social structures
are much bigger than those of animals.
So therefore much more complex. Robin
Dunar has indicated for example that one
of the best predictors of brain size
predictors or coralates more likely one
of the highest coralates of brain size
especially I think he only looked within
primates is group size and that makes
sense right because the complexity of
the social organization increases
dramatically as the number of
individuals involved increases and I
wouldn't say it's group size brain size
that determines group size it's brain
size determines group size determines
brain size determines group size in a
loop and many other factors are involved
in expanding cortical representation as
well. So, as far as I can tell, there
isn't anything contentious in those
claims. And it gives us a it gives us a
a basis out of which the archetypal
stories can emerge. And it explains why
we can see revealed truth in them, so to
speak. Because the truth was
instantiated in the behavioral realm,
not in the conceptual realm. And through
the, you know, you you see this in your
own life. You watch yourself and one day
you go, "Aha, that's what I've been up
to this whole time." That happens to
people in therapy all the time. or
you're dealing with some other person
and they tell you something. It's like
it's like the last piece fell into
place. They say, "Oh, I had you
completely wrong. Now I get what you're
up to." And what's happened is my
representation has become more complete,
but also matches your behavior better.
There's a concordance between what I've
observed and what actually manifests
itself. And so well so for the
derivation of of wisdom from the
observation of behavior you do the same
thing when you analyze a Shakespeare
play you know a Shakespeare play never
happened but Shakespeare extracted out
patterns that happen all the time and if
he hadn't extracted them out no one
would watch the plays right the plays
are interesting precisely to the degree
that the play is about something that's
about you and something that's about you
and something that's about you it has to
be something that's common to everyone
and you watch the play and you partake
in it through imitation. Even though
you're sitting down, you partake in it
through imitation and then maybe later
you go for coffee with your friends and
say, "Well, what was that all about?"
And that's your attempt to take the
behavioral wisdom that's coded in the
story and make it articulate. And we're
doing that all the time. Whenever you
discuss a movie, you do that. And that's
how educated people actually interact
with literature, right? Because if
you're uneducated, roughly speaking, you
go see a movie and you just go see it.
You never think about it as a as
something that was produced. You never
think about it as a cultural entity and
you never do that higher order analysis.
And when you're f first encounter the
idea of even doing that, you might be
resistant to it because it seems in some
sense to destroy some of the magic of
that of that pure immersion in the form.
So, but that doesn't mean that people
who go to movies and don't talk about
them afterwards aren't learning
anything. Quite the contrary. They're
just learning. They're learning using a
very abstracted form of imitation. And
then you might imagine
you don't go to a movie, you go to a
hundred movies
and you imitate something that's in
common across all the movies. Well,
what's that? Well, that's an archetype.
The archetype is what's common across
stories. And so, we're trying to get to
the bottom of what's common across
stories. And this is the best I've been
able to do. It also maps quite nicely
onto Haidiger's representation of the
world, which is something I only found
out later. He has three domains of
reality that correspond to this very,
very precisely. And then Freud's
conception is also very similar. ID,
ego, super ego. Right? The id is the
natural force within you, positive and
negative. Because Freud was smart. He
knew there was always that dichotomy.
Then the ego, that's you, the
individual. Positive element, negative
element. and the super ego which
controls you, represses you, inhibits
you and civilizes you, but is also can
also be a complete tyrant. And so part
of the reason Freud's theory
obtained such purchase so rapidly was
because it filled a it filled an a hole,
an archetypal hole that needed to be
filled for psychotherrapeutic
practitioners who in some sense had
taken the place of priests and ministers
and and that sort of and rabbis and that
sort of person. So okay so that's the
the representation
and then well we've talked about the
representation of chaos and I would
think about that and this is a radical
thing to think it's sort of predicated
on the idea that what you confront
in your in your experience is not so
much the material world but potential as
such. It's the potential that you're
constantly contending with that can
destroy you and bring you down, but also
has has as part of its nature that which
you can extract and use to build and
grow. And and we don't think of
ourselves as interacting with potential.
We think of ourselves as determined by a
material substrate. But I don't think
the idea that we're determined by a sub
material substrate is as powerful an
idea as the idea that we interact with
potential. And I also don't think that
the idea that we're determined by a
material substrate is a more scientific
idea than the idea that we're
interacting with potential. Because I
think that, and I do this with hesitancy
because anytime you delve into the
quantum realm, the hypothetical quantum
realm to ground your arguments, you're
doing something very dangerous. But the
quantum view of the world seems to be
something like
being is a field of potential from which
forms emerge. It's something like that.
And some of the physicists like Wheeler
for example believe that consciousness
plays a key determining role in that
whatever that role might be. So it's not
reasonable to think of these ideas as
somehow outside of the realm of of
scientific conjecture. not not in the
least, especially because they can also
be given a deep evolutionary
grounding. And that is why do we
represent potential with a symbol like
this? Well, it's because it's a great
symbol for what lies outside our field
of competence. What is that? Predators.
Dangerous predators. Snakes,
raptors,
carnivores, all amalgamated together in
a monster. And it's the monster that
well it's also the monster that even
offers fruit. That's the story in in the
in the story of good and evil. Well, or
in the story of Adam and Eve. Well,
obviously because you always hunt for
nourishment in the face of predation.
Obviously. Always.
And that's a paradox,
but it's a paradox that's embedded in
everything that you do. The strange
thing about these categories is they're
not exactly logical categories. They're
paradoxical categories and those sorts
of things aren't supposed to exist
because generally the rule for a
category is it can't contain itself and
its opposite at the same time. But if
you've ever dealt with a person on an
intimate basis, you know perfectly well
that the category indicated by their
name
contains many paradoxical elements. And
they might be paradoxical enough so you
can't even live with the person, right?
They're not homogeneous enough so that
you can plot a path forward with that
entity. Too many things pulling both you
and them apart. So some things are A and
only A and not B. But some things are A
and B at the same time. And complex
categories have that nature.
I showed you some of the representations
of Osiris and Isis emerging from the
conjoined serpent and that's what this
diagram represents to some degree. It's
well what does the cha what does the
chaos of potential first differentiate
itself into? You could say well it
differentiates itself into yin and yang.
That's the right way of thinking about
it. Differentiates itself into chaos and
order. And those and those are the
father and the mother of everything that
comes after them. That's one way of
thinking about it. And they each have
their symbolic realms. And so I've
listed some of the common symbols that
are associated with these two realms.
Now, it's a difficult thing to pin down
because
what one of the symbols mean has to be
defined in relationship to the other. So
for example, if you think about the sky,
the the the earth in relationship to the
sky, it's easy to make the earth
feminine and the sky masculine. That's a
common symbolic representation. But if
you contrast the earth with the water,
then the water tends to be represented
as feminine and the earth is masculine.
And so the the symbolic rep
representations can shift depending on
the literary context. Let's let's say
the broader literary context. And that
means you can't just do a onetoone
mapping of the symbolic entity on onto
the underlying on onto the underlying
archetypal structure. You have to be
attentive to context and nuance. Of
course, because we're talking about
literature, you know, it's it's not like
you can use a dictionary of symbols to
get your way through something as
complex as Shakespeare, but you can see
you can see the underlying patterns and
use them, especially, I think, if you
know the fundamental map. But anyway, so
here are the more common symbolic
representations. Uh, chaos transforms
itself into the great mother. That's the
queen. Can be the evil queen or the good
queen. It can be the fairy godmother or
the queen that provides the poisoned
apple to Snow White or the or the queen
that locks the the prince. What's his
name? I don't remember. The prince in
Sleeping Beauty in the dungeon and tries
to destroy him. The queen Taiamat. We've
talked about Taiamat. Um the material
world material matter mother mother
right so the material world is the
mother of all things and matter is
mother
the land of the dead dark water
unexplored territory nature mother
nature obviously the night sky
contrasted against the day sky is queen
of the underworld the womb the forest
barbarian lands anomalous occurrences
and the grave and the great father the
king
the Emperor Abbsu and Tyiamat locked
together as we discussed in the
Mesopotamian creation myth. The
ancestral spirits, the family, the city,
explored territory, culture, the day
sky, Osiris, God the father, the
village, the nation, the predictable,
the monument, stone, anything that's
built in stone to last is a
representation of the great father.
That's why there were monolithic
religions spread across the northern
hemisphere for thousands and thousands
of years. Those people were building
things and carving things in stone to
make memories. That's what their
monuments were for, to bring the past
into the present and future on a
permanent basis and to try to
instantiate something solid that
everyone could stand upon. Well,
sometimes solid isn't what you need.
Sometimes what you need is fluid and
liquid but the solidity is there to give
you something to stand on even though it
can become something aid and dry. You
see in the story of Exodus is Moses is a
master of water and the pharaoh is a is
the king of desert stone roughly
speaking and the and the Egypt feronic
Egypt is portrayed as a tyranny because
it's nothing but dry stone and Moses
brings water to that. That's chaos.
That's partly the Red Sea story and
partly Moses' ability to to get water
out of rocks and that and and when when
that's necessary and part of the reason
that he's found to begin with floating
on water when he's an infant, which is
also something that almost killed him,
right? Because well, you don't want to
put your infant in a basket of rushes
and put them to float on the water. So
that's
a brief overview of the manner in which
images and stories can be used to
represent the first division of this
underlying reality. You know nothing.
What do you do? You establish a center.
You explore from the center. It's a
domain of safety and that's surrounded
by the unknown. So and that's what
children do. We already know this if you
watch how children explore. It's more
evident if you look at children who are
somewhat inhibited because really
extroverted and emotionally stable
children, they'll just explore. They
won't recede. But children that are sort
of balanced in their emotional response,
imagine you bring a 18-month-old
to a new playground. A mother's standing
there. She's the pillar at the center of
the world. Around her is explored
territory. And the reason it's explored
is because the child knows how to
interact with the mother. And so one
thing you want to know about kids is you
can have multiple caregivers for your
kids. You can have a nanny. You can put
them in daycare, but they do not like
having their primary caregiver switched.
It's like it's like everything
transforms when that happens and it
destabilizes them badly. So if you're
going to have other people take care of
your kids, it's better that it's the
same other person. Well, obviously, I
mean, they're going to form an intimate
and loving relationship with them with
any luck. And if that disappears, it's
like a death, but it's worse than that
in some sense. Or or the reason that the
death is bad because the child's
conceptual world, their familiar world,
familiar family, their familiar world
collapses. So, children hate that. Now,
they can bond to multiple people. That's
not a problem. But they do not like
having their caregivers shifted because
that defines their territory. So the
child is adapted to the mother's
presence and has been ever since birth
if if everything's gone well. So it's a
place of security and stability. Partly
because the child knows how to act
around the mother, but also partly
because if the child encounters anything
that he or she doesn't understand well
in the presence of mother, the mother
will instantly intervene to provide the
knowledge necessary to encapsulate the
unexpected occurrence. Okay. So, the
child's by the mother and maybe he's
holding on and that gives him vententral
contact. It's sat it's comforting. It's
comforting. It's it produces opiates. It
decreases pain. It's directly
comforting. And so then the child is
maybe they're shy and they're going to
take a few looks at what's around first
and start to they're frozen, clinging to
something secure. And then if nothing
negative happens, they start to relax.
Just like a rat that's been put into a
new cage, they start to relax. Then
they'll start to look. And that's the
first manifestations of voluntary
exploratory behavior. And maybe if
there's other people around, they'll
look and smile. And then they'll hide,
right? And the smile is an invitation to
play or interact. But so it's it's a
foray out into the world. Smile, eye
contact, then hide. Maybe they'll do
that multiple times and get a game
going. That establishes something stable
going on between them and the stranger.
Does the stranger know how to play? And
then maybe they'll loosen up and they'll
start to explore. And then they go out
away from the mother and start
interacting with the world until
something happens that overwhelms them.
Then they'll run back, get a hug, maybe
have a sleep because maybe they've
processed enough. And then you can
encourage them to go back. And so what
they're doing is they have the flag
planted on an unknown territory. That's
mum, the flag, right? They they
circulate around there because it's
secure. make foray outwards where the
dragons are. Gather what's of interest.
And if it's too much, they run back. And
then they and the mom says, "It's okay.
No problem." You know, or gives them a
little, you know, rock or maybe feeds
them something or and lets them have a
little rest and then off you go play
again. Out they go again. And so what
the child is doing is continually moving
out, extending its explored territory
into the unknown, just like the Star
Trek Voyagers, and then moving back to
security and then moving out farther and
then moving back to security. And
hopefully at some point they carry with
them their own security. Once they
become competent, once you've
incorporated all the competence of your
parents, you don't need to go back.
Well, and even if you do, it isn't going
to help. you've you've that you've
transcended the security and that's what
makes you an adult. Hopefully that
happens. So So that's why the the hero
archetype is the central human story.
It's because that's how we learn. It's
it's an imagistic representation of the
process by which we make sense out of
the world. So of course it's redemptive
because by definition that's the pattern
we use to expand our competence in the
world. How could it be anything other
than redemptive? And it's tied in with
the Here's how it's tied in with the
idea of sacrifice.
Every time you learn something,
especially painfully, which really means
you learned it, there's a bunch of
things that you already knew that you
had to let go of because they're wrong.
And so there's no learning without
sacrifice. And now that means is that
there's no learning without the
retooling of structures that you've
already been using. And that's because
you actually have a complete map of the
world always. But it's low resolution.
It's low resolution. And then if you go
out there and into a particular area
that you've only mapped in a
lowresolution way, you'll learn details
that force you to update the
lowresolution representation. And
sometimes that can mean abandoning whole
pieces of it because they're just wrong.
You think this is like this. You think
your girlfriend is like your mother.
Well, you may find out that that's
absolutely wrong. and the degree to
which you use this lowresolution map to
map her, you're going to experience
nothing but trouble. So, in in fact, in
all likelihood, that's what you'll
experience because your girlfriend is
not your mother
or at least she shouldn't be.
So, when you go out and you encounter
something new, it always means the
demolition of parts of you that are
still unformed and un incomplete. And
so, there's a sacrificial element to
exploration. That's partly why people
don't like to talk to people who have
ideas that are different than theirs.
Because you might think, well, sure, we
differ. Why can't we just talk? If you
know things I don't, all the better. But
no, if you know something I really don't
know, it's going to challenge something
I already presume. And if it really
challenges, it will disintegrate and
I'll do a little trip into the
underworld before I can restructure
myself. And if you really challenge me,
it might be a almost complete
dissolution.
So you who wants that? Well, here's how
you want that. The only circumstance
under which you will want that is if you
know that the alternative is worse.
Continual small updates
differentiate you and make you strong.
You shy away from that. your map stays
low resolution and you make yourself
weak because you're not you're not
practicing that process of letting go
and transforming and letting go and
transforming because you want to become
a master at that. You don't want to be a
master at guarding your territory. Even
though that's extraordinarily useful,
you want to become a master of taking
the walls apart and extending them and
building them up and taking the walls
apart and extending them and building
them up and that because you'll never
run out of utility for that. And that
can mean that the unknown becomes
something that's your friend instead of
your enemy. And that would be a
wonderful thing because of course people
respond to the unknown as if it's their
terrible enemy. It's like don't be so
sure about that. What you know might be
your enemy. What you don't yet know
might be the best friend you have. And
it's highly probable because what do you
know? And there's an infinite number of
things you don't know. So, you might as
well make friends with them. And then
you also start to understand that you
are precisely the thing that can move
into the unknown as if it's welcoming
and grow and develop as a consequence.
And that makes you a much different
thing than the thing that has to be
terrified of everything it doesn't
understand. you're just in a permanent
state of existential horror under those
conditions and you're dangerous to other
people too, especially if they don't
agree with you. There's another way of
representing it. The dragon of chaos
stands for the potential that surrounds
us. Inside of that, there's the unknown.
The unknown that you actually come into
contact with, right? That's the unknown
as it actually manifests itself in your
world as something you don't understand
instead of just the potential for that.
Because we say, look, you know perfectly
well that as you're sitting here,
there's all sorts of things you don't
know everywhere, but where are they?
Well, they're not manifesting themselves
at the moment. They're only in
potential, but you could we could have a
discussion that that became
argumentative. And then all of a sudden,
it would be as if emissaries of that
unknown had entered the space. And
that's the unknown that's defined in
relationship to what you know. That's
what you actually experience instead of
it only being potential. It's a tough
thing to get because they're both
unknown, right? You think, well, how can
there be two different categories of
unknown? Well, latent and manifest.
That's a good way of thinking about it.
You know, you in a relationship, it's
going stably, but you know that sooner
or later something will come up. Okay.
Up from where? Why up? Well, from from
beneath. Well, what do you mean beneath?
Well, it's from it's from your complex.
the person you're in a relationship with
in in with is complicated and complex.
That's implicit in you. It's it's inside
your conceptual structure. That's that's
a way of looking at at it. Now and then
when there's a disagreement, it will
manifest itself and you know that you
know that there's still trouble brewing
ahead in a relationship always. And
that's part of what keeps them alive.
There's an interesting piece of
empirical work done on this a while
back. So you might think, well, what
does the optimal relationship look like
in terms of positive and negative
emotion? You might say, well, utopia,
nothing but positive interactions. It's
like, no, imagine you get people to code
the interactions they have with their
partner during the day. You know, you
sample it. You say, was that interaction
positive or negative? And then what
you're trying to do is predict the
longevity of the relationship. Okay, so
here's the data. If it falls under five
positive interactions to one negative
interaction, the relationship doesn't
continue. Fair enough. Too much
negative. That's easy to understand. If
it exceeds 11 positive to one negative,
the relationship doesn't last. Why?
No challenge,
right? What do you want from your
partner? Bliss? No. No. No, you don't.
You want periods of peace punctuated by
a good fight. And that because that
means you respect them. means you have
something to offer each other and it
means that you're both growing. And so
you don't want the fight to be too
dramatic because well then you retreat.
You can't settle it. But the person that
you can completely map and who only does
positive things for you, it's like a you
don't know that person. B they're not
communicating with you nor you with
them. Maybe they're just subordinating
themselves to you or you to them and
you're not growing. You want someone who
can it's a real relationship is a
wrestling match. It's a grappling It's a
grappling phenomena that you both emerge
transformed from. And that's what people
want. They don't want to push over. Not
Not unless there's something wrong with
them. Now, a narcissistic person who
never wants to be challenged will want a
partner who does nothing but deliver
exactly what they're told to deliver,
but they will mistreat them beyond
belief and perhaps deservedly so.
All right. So, here's some symbolic
representations.
The two on the left are Jonah.
Jonah and the whale. So, the story of
Jonah is an interesting one. I I'll just
go over it very briefly.
There's a city and the city is full of
people who are sinful. What does that
mean? Well, to sin is an archery term.
It means to miss the mark. So, these are
people who aren't oriented properly. And
so, the city is in a chaotic state. And
God tells Jonah that he's going to go to
that city and tell them just exactly
what's up with them. And Jonah thinks,
"No, I'm not going to do that." And why?
Well, that doesn't require much
explanation. It's like, how popular are
you going to be if you go to a city full
of chaotic people and tell them why
they're stupid and wrong? It's Jonah
thinks, "No, I'm not going to do that. I
don't care if God's telling me to do
it." So his conscience is telling him to
do it or his destiny is telling him to
do it or or his orientation with higher
morality is telling him to do it. You
can read it any way you want. And so he
thinks, "No, I'm hopping on this boat
and I'm getting as far away from that
city as I possibly can." And so he does
that and then the storm comes up cuz God
thinks, "No, you're not getting away. If
I told you to do something, you're not
getting away from it." A storm comes up.
Well, what does that mean? Well, it's
easy.
betray your destiny
and see how long it takes you to be
drowning in a storm.
It'll happen immediately. And and of
course it will because what what's
calling you to be your best is exactly
the thing that's pushing you forward to
manifest yourself most fully in the
world. It's what you need. You run away
from that, the boat's going to start to
rock very, very quickly. Well, you all
know that. You you know that perfectly
well. It it it's hell. All you have to
do is not study for an exam that you
know that's coming up to see everything
start to the storm waters start to rise
and everything start to rock. It's
pretty bloody obvious. So anyways, he's
on this boat and there's a storm. And
all of the people on the boat who who
can't quite discriminate chaos from
weather because they haven't
differentiated the world to that degree
think, oh, the boat wouldn't be about to
be swamped if we hadn't, some of us
hadn't done something stupid and wrong.
And there's logic in that. You know, you
might think, well, God has nothing
personal against you because of the
storm, so you're confusing levels of
analysis. But you got to give these
people some credit. It's like, maybe
they did do something stupid. Maybe they
didn't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the damn boat properly.
Maybe the ropes aren't in as good a
shape as they might be. Maybe they
weren't paying attention to the weather
when they went out on the ocean, you
know, or maybe they haven't made peace
with their brother and so their hearts
are bent, twisted out of shape, so they
don't make particularly good sailors.
It's like the idea that you encounter a
storm because you're stupid and wrong is
a really good idea even though it's not
of infinite applicability. Anyways, they
draw lots. It's a primitive thing to do.
It's like, well, it's one someone's
fault. We don't know who. We're going to
throw someone overboard, the worst
sinner. Obviously, that's what God
wants. Some kind of sacrifice. So, they
all draw lots and someone loses. And
then Jonah stands up and says, "Well,
sorry, guys. Like, I know that I've got
a problem with God at the moment, so
it's probably me. You better throw me
over." And they don't really want to.
But he finally convinces them. Over he
goes. And the storm settles. Well, you
know,
Sometimes if you're in a group of people
in an organization, there is someone in
the organization whose head isn't
screwed on exactly straight and they
know exactly why it is and what they've
done wrong and what puts them in that
position and they are poisoning the
entire enterprise. And if you throw them
overboard or better if they agree
voluntarily to leave, then the storm
will abate and everything will be okay.
So anyways, they throw Job over or Jonah
overboard and a whale comes up and
swallows him and takes him down to the
bottom of the ocean. Well, we already
know what that means because we watched
Pinocchio. It's like when God abandons
you because you've abandoned your
destiny and the storms come up, the
probability that you're going to be
taken down to the to the depths is
extraordinarily high. And that happens
in people's lives all the time. Well, so
down there, Jonah repents. Well, what do
you do when you're in the underworld?
Well, you've been there before when
things fall apart on you. Your friends
have abandoned you. You're not as
popular as you could be. can't stand to
look at yourself in the mirror. Into the
underworld you go and you think, "Geez,
I've done a lot of things wrong." You
know, maybe I should reconcile myself
with the world and I could get out of
this. Well, so that's what Jonah does.
He thinks, "All right, I've got this
destiny. I better go do what God says."
So the whale spits him out onto the
beach and off he goes to the city to
tell them what's wrong. Well, that's
what that represents. That's these
symbols. You know, it's so cool. This
second one I really I really like. It's
so interesting because you see Jonah
reemerging from the whale and he's got a
halo around his head. You say, "Well,
what's a halo?" Well, have you ever
looked at a quarter?
Well, think about a quarter. A quarter
is the moon.
And who's on the quarter? The queen. The
queen is surrounded by the halo of the
moon. The queen's queen of the queen of
the night. Gold coin. That's the king's
head on the sun. That's the halo. Well,
what comes out of the belly of the of
the fish? It's the illuminated human
being. It's the spirit of the
illuminated human being. That's what
that means. Well, what does that mean?
Well, what else would come out of chaos?
You know, if you if you fall apart and
then you put yourself back together,
what is it that comes back out? Well, at
least you're in better shape than you
were before, you know, and and then
maybe you do that 20 times in your life
or 50 times and you do it voluntarily.
every time you do it, you're more like
the thing with the halo and less like
the thing that's, you know, being thrown
overboard by your friends. And then you
see this representation on the right.
This is a very complicated
representation. So in this one, you see
Christ who's carrying his cross with a
sun behind him. That's the halo that I
was talking about. He's the person who's
voluntarily accepted the necessity of
death and renewal. That's what the cross
represents. And so it's a it's an it's a
what would you call it? an abstracted
representation of this, a further
developed idea of this. And then you see
in the back, this is a feminine symbol,
right? It's a it's a symbol of birth.
And you'll you'll understand more when I
when I show you the symbols later. This
is the eternal opening in the world from
which new forms emerge. It's the place
from which babies emerge. And you can
tell that if you look carefully because
you see all these little heads there
with wings on them. Those are all
spirits waiting to be born. And so the
hero emerges from the from the eternal
feminine
willing to die and suffer and in doing
so defeating the snake the snakes down
there and the adversary at the same
time. Well, it's no wonder we don't
understand those images. I mean, they're
so unbelievably rich that how could you
possibly articulate them? That's why
they emerged in imagistic form to begin
with. The artists get there before the
philosophers, long before the
philosophers. the dramatists get there
way before the artists even. And so we
we figured it out. We represented it in
art and literature and music and drama.
And then we're on the cusp, so to speak,
of understanding it in a fully
articulated manner and not a moment too
soon.
So what does it mean for this symbol to
emerge from the feminine symbol, let's
say, to emerge from chaos? Well, this
picture, this is a picture of Venus, the
goddess of love, right? And so I cut
this picture out of a larger picture,
and it's Venus manifesting herself in a
transcendent space in the sky in the
same way that Christ did in the previous
representation. And she has rays coming
off her, and there's all these men who
are knights kneeling in front of the
image. Well, what does that mean?
Well, it means that men use the image of
female perfection to motivate
themselves. And that's exactly right.
That's precisely what they do. You see
that in the Tom Sawyer story. So Tom
Sawyer is about 12 years old and he's
still hanging around with his friends
like Huck Finn and this W girl moves
across the street, Becky, and she comes
out and he's struck by her for the first
time in his life. Something's changed.
And the first thing he does is hop up on
a picket fence and show off and balance
in front of her. And he's saying, "Well,
look at me. Look at me. I'm He's like
the male bower bird building something
beautiful so the female will approve of
it." And it's it's motivation, you know,
and that's something that I think modern
women don't really understand about men.
They don't understand that
at least to the degree that males are
uncorrupted and and not bitter because
of being rejected, they're doing
everything they can to kneel before the
eternal image of the feminine
and try to make themselves worthy.
That's the chivalry story, right? That's
what you should encourage in your
partner. So, and so out of chaos emerges
this first form. It's the feminine form.
It's partly the form that represents
novelty as such. So, and and on one hand
it's promise and the other hand it's
threat that you wouldn't believe and I
don't know because I don't know I I
don't understand the situation with
women as well as I understand the
situation with men obviously being a man
but I I don't know if women have any
idea how paralyzing they are to
especially young men
a large very large number of my clinical
clients but also young men I've talked
to in general are absolutely terrifi
rified of women because they're
terrified of being rejected. And the
terror exists in precise proportion to
their attraction to the woman, which is
a horrible paradoxical situation to be
in. It's often why men make such fools
of themselves in front of women that
they're attracted to. It's because first
of all, they don't see the woman that
they're attracted to because what the
hell do they know about her? They don't
see her as an individual. They see her
as the manifestation of a judgmental
ideal. And then it's only in
establishing the relationship with the
actual woman that they can start
differentiating between the judgmental
ideal and and the actual individual
woman. And that also requires a
sacrifice. And the sacrifice is
you never can have an ideal woman.
So to have a relationship with any
woman, you have to sacrifice the
relationship with the ideal woman. And
you have to see the individual woman
and separate her from the ideal. And
that's the same thing that happens to
the hero in Sleeping Beauty, right? He
sees the evil queen who actually turns
into the dragon of chaos and it's not
until he can a he can defeat her that he
can establish a relationship with the
actual princess. And that's exactly the
case. I had a one of my clients who ran
this men's group which was quite
interesting. One of the things they had
the initiates
do which was very intelligent was to go
out and ask 50 women in one day for
their phone numbers.
Why? Plightly properly. You know, it
wasn't it wasn't it was a game but it
wasn't a stupid game. And the idea was
get over your fear of rejection. And how
do you do that? by encountering it
continually and continually and
continually so that you're no longer
paralyzed by this.
Here's I love this cartoon. This is from
a a underground comic for for people who
smoke way too much marijuana. And it's
called uh the these people are the
fabulous furry freak brothers and they
were created by Gilbert Shelton who was
one of the first underground cartoonists
and one of the least pathological ones
with the best sense of humor. And he
writes these stories about these stupid
hippies, three of them, the fabulous
furry freak brothers. You see two of
them there. and all they do is smoke pot
and avoid responsibility and and run
away from the police and but it's a nice
satire and so and they have this cat and
the fat one Fat Freddy has the cat and
they're too lazy to even give the cat a
name so it's Fat Freddy's cat and it has
its own adventures mostly with like the
an army of cockroaches that that lives
inside their like horrible slummy hell
hole of a living place and so anyways
it's quite comical and so
the the hippies have stumbled across a
small fortune and stoned out of their
minds on cocaine. They go out to set up
utopia in the countryside. They buy this
terrible piece of property, but they're
so diluted that they think it's like a
mansion and they bring their cat. And I
don't know if you've ever had a cat, but
cats don't like to move. It really bugs
them. And so they're not comfortable
when you bring them to a new place.
They're like the rat that's been taken
out of its comfortable cage and put into
a new cage. in the cat. You put a cat in
a new room and it depending on the cat
obviously, but generally they'll retreat
into a corner and be and meow pitiously
and be very unhappy for quite a
substantial amount of time. And so the
cartoonist actually mapped this out
quite nicely. So the hippie takes the
cat out of the box and says, "Our new
home." It's they're out in the forest.
This is an urban cat. It's never been in
the forest. It doesn't know what the
hell's up in the forest. And the cat's
looking rather dubiously and thinks, "So
this is the country." And then it's put
on the ground and it starts to slink, as
he says, slink, slink out into the
forest. And that's actually what animals
do. It's a it's a predator evasion
crouch. And so if they're put into a new
territory, they'll hunker down and
freeze first and then they'll slowly
unfreeze and start to explore. They
sniff first and then they'll start to
move. And but they do it like with
trepidation and slowly and try to hide.
And so that's what the cat's doing. And
the cat goes out into the unknown far
enough. sniffing and all of a sudden,
pow, it goes underneath the house. It's
like the toddler running back to the
mother. And the other another hippie
there, uh, I think that's Phineas, says,
"Where'd the cat disappear to now?" And
the Fat Freddy character says, "Under
the house." And then the cat's under
there in the dark with big eyes looking
terrified, saying, "You'd hide too if
you'd smelled what I did." And so what
it smelled was this thing that has like
the head of a wolf and the and the and
antlers like a deer and the tail of a
skunk and the feet of a like a chicken
and horrible claws. It's like, well,
what is that? Well, it's a monstrous
amalgam of that which lurks in the
unknown. And so the the cartoonist, the
comedian got it perfect. Said, well,
what is there? What is out in the
unknown? Well, you need one
representation,
not a thousand. And so you take pieces
of what's out there that are relevant
and you create a single image out of
that and you say, "Well, this is what's
out there." And you might say, "Well, no
such animal as that exists." And that's
actually incorrect.
An animal very animal very much like
that exists. It's just a superordinate
lowresolution category. It includes all
those weird animals that might hurt you
that are out in the forest. That's a
useful category. Weird animals that
might hurt you. And that's a real
category. You know, you might say, well,
there's differentiated things within
that category. It's like, yeah, every
category has that nature. It can still
be further differentiated. Maybe not
protons, you know, they can even be
differentiated with regards to location
at least. So, every category can be
further differentiated. The question is
whether the category has some functional
utility or at least that's one of its
questions. It's like that's the thing to
be afraid of. Okay, good. Now you got
it. This is the category of all things
to be afraid of. What do you do in
response to that category? All right. So
then we go to the next representation.
This is Kelly.
K A L I Hindu goddess of destruction.
She's the thing that you encounter.
She's the thing that makes things go
bump in the night. What is that thing?
Well, let's take it apart a little bit
because you can't see this image until
you until you understand it. You would
be able to if you were Hindu because
you'd be in the culture and you'd know
what the image represented, but some
people in here might be Hindu, but not
very many people. So, okay. So, let's
talk about this image. It's horrifying
image. And so, here's how this image
emerged. It emerged in the imagination
of people who were tormented for
millennia about just what the hell
lurked out there in the unknown. and
some some artist was seized by a
revelation, a horrifying revelation of
just what that was. Okay, so what is it?
Well, first of all, she's in a uh a
container of fire. Why fire? Well, fire
is useful and destructive, right? And
you also cannot look away from fire. And
so, it's a really good symbol of that
which you cannot look away from. It's
eternally meaningful. Fire is eternally
meaningful. Why? We can't keep our hands
off fire, right? were descendants of the
first insane ape who was so obsessed by
fire that he couldn't stay away from
from a burning landscape and learned how
to master it. He's our forefather, that
person. We're obsessed by fire. It's
magical to us and it transforms. It
burns and transforms. So from a symbolic
perspective, it's a very useful source
of of imagistic representation. Okay,
the fire is there and then inside the
fire, these are skulls. You see them all
lined up there? So, it's not just fire,
it's it's the fire of death that
consumes. So, that's where Kelly lives.
So, that's that's fun to start with. And
then there she is with her with her hair
hair on fire cuz her hair is on fire in
case she isn't frightening enough just
because of where she lives. Her hair is
on fire and her headdress is made out of
skulls. So, that's nice. And then she's
like an insect, like a spider. See, she
has all these legs. And why is that?
because we don't really like insects and
you know they set off our bug detectors
and they can bite us and they're quite
horrifying and many people have spider
phobias particularly and uh and no
wonder and then she's got a weapon in
one hand here and but and then her you
see she's eating something and you see
here her belly is concave. Well, why?
Well, she's in a birth position. She's
just given birth to this unfortunate
character who happens to be who she
happens to be standing upon and he's
disembowled and she's eating in the
intestines first and that's Kelly. It's
like that's horror. It's a
representation of horror and death and
destruction and transformation. It's
feminine as well. What do you do in the
face of mother nature? That's another
negative element of mother nature. What
do you do with something like this?
Well, that's the eternal question. And
the answer is quite straightforward. You
make sacrifices to her. And if you make
the proper sacrifices, then she turns
into her beneficial counterpart. And
that's exactly what you do do in life.
If in the face of horror and death, you
make sacrifices. So you transform the
terrible destructive element of nature
into that thing that continually offers
you what you need. It's an it's it's of
that discovery is one of unparalleled
brilliance and you know we don't get it.
We think it's primitive. It's and no
wonder you know you you can understand
human sacrifice that sounds pretty
primitive man. It's terrifying but the
idea of sacrifice it's an act the idea
itself is a conceptualization of utter
genius. And why do you expect it to come
forward first in its perfect form? It's
not going to do that. It's going to come
forward imperfectly and roughly and
brutally and then hopefully be refined
across time which is exactly what has
happened. You see even in the biblical
stories the transition from human
sacrifice to animal sacrifice. And then
with us now it's a transition from
animal sacrifice to psychological
sacrifice because we're sophisticated
enough to do that. We can let go of
concepts and abstractions and things
that we're holding on to that we should
no longer hold on to and progress in
that manner. It's it's increasing
articulated psychological
sophistication, but we still make
sacrifices and we hope that they'll be
accepted and we hope that they're of
high enough quality so that they work.
Well, that's a representation of Diana.
You could think of Diana, there's an
opposite uh Durga in Hinduism and she
comes forth if you make the proper
sacrifices to Kelly. But I wanted to
show you alternative representations
from different cultures of these
archetypal forms. This is Diana,
positive feminine. Whoop, multi-
breasted, right? She's the thing that
nourishes the world. And so that would
be on one hand your mother who obviously
protects you from the terrible aspects
of fire and danger but also m nature
conceptualized as the positive feminine
in general.
The source of all fertility and all food
and all beings and all good things.
Something that you want to have on your
side. That's for sure. And you might
say, if you acted heroically, properly,
and you played the metag game and not
the game, and you made the proper
sacrifices, then you'd never encounter
Kelly. You'd only encounter her
benevolent counterpart. And so then you
might say, well, does she even exist?
Then that's something that's very
interesting is because the degree to
which the terrible part of the world
manifests itself in your life is
proportionate to how insufficient you
are. And we don't know the full extent
of that. If you got your act together
completely,
maybe all the suffering would disappear
from your life. Or at least maybe all
the unbearable suffering and maybe all
the suffering or the unbearable
suffering from the lives of people
around you too. And you already know
that because there are people that
you'll go to in a crisis that you can
rely on and you know they'll help you.
And you wonder what would the world
would be like if you were like that and
everyone else was like that too. we'd
have a lot fewer crises and the ones
that we do have would be a lot more
manageable. And so when people say,
well, why is the world so rife with
suffering? One answer to that is because
we're not yet what we could be. And at
least that's an answer that we have some
control over, right? You're not going to
talk God out of making the world suffer.
That's for sure. And you're not going to
negotiate directly with mother nature,
but you might be able to put yourself
together a little bit and see if that
works. At least it's under your control.
And God only knows what the upper limit
of that might be.
Well, here's the decomposition of the of
the fundamental archetype. The dragon of
chaos differentiates on the one hand
into the feminine. That's the unknown.
And the feminine differentiates further
into the negative feminine than the
positive feminine.
The negative feminine is the reason for
witch hunts. It's the reason for um do
you know
there's a whole group online called men
going their own way MG t that's a very
interesting group to go study there's
lots of them I don't know how many of
them there are and most of them are
older many of them are men who've been
through a particularly horrifying
divorce for one reason or another and
they're they've had enough of women so
they they tell the young men that
they're teaching never have a permanent
relationship Never share your territory
with a woman. Never share your
possessions. Make sure you never live
live together. And don't stay with one
long enough to enter a common law
relationship because you will be
stripped of everything that you have.
Well, that's a hell of a thing to be
telling people. But what's happened is
that the female has been manifested in
their life only as the negative
archetype. And they've got that confused
with all women. And that's partly, you
know, you got to ask yourself if you
know the mythological story is maybe if
you made the right sacrifices, you
wouldn't have so much trouble with
women. It's a it's a good question to
ask yourself first. And and I would also
say, you know, if you're a woman who has
trouble with men or you're a man who has
trouble with women, it's not the women
and it's not the men, it's you. Because
the women are telling you what's wrong
with you and the men are telling you
what's wrong with you. And if you don't
listen, then it's you. It's either you
or all men. Well, that's easy. It's all
men. Well, that's certainly how it's
played out in the world right now. It's
like, no, it's not all men. You can be
sure by definition. By definition, and
it's not all women, that's for sure. I
don't want to have anything to do with
women. It's like, you're a pathetic
weasel. That's the same statement.
Here's some lovely representations. This
is Mary from represented in in in very
different eras. This is a very old one.
This is about 12th century. I absolutely
love this image. It's so profound. So,
what you see here is Mary as in as
eternal mother of the infant. Okay.
She's sitting on the cresant moon here,
queen of the night. And underneath, you
can't see this very well, but underneath
the moon there's a there's a reptile and
she's got it crunched nice nicely
underneath her feet. And that's Satan in
part, which means protect your children
from malevolent from malevolence. And
it's the predator. And so what's the
what's the proper orientation for a
mother? Protect your infant from
malevolent predators obviously, right?
That's the holy image of the mother. So
she's holding the infant safely in her
arms. She's queen of the universe. And
she's coming out of this strange tunnel.
It's the same these are called a
mandola, by the way. This tunnel and
it's it's it's actually
this is going to be very strange, but
I'm going to tell you what it is
anyways. It's like a hole into the
fabric of time and space. And it's
revealing an an image that's eternal
that's outside of time and space. And
it's outside of time and space because
it recurs all the time. It never ages.
That it's it's it's it's an image that
transcends temporality. Now, you might
say, well, is it real? And the answer to
that is, well, it depends on what you
mean by real. Something that transcends
temporality is pretty damn real. And so,
that's that's what that that that hole
in the sky represents. It also
represents the place from which all
forms emerge. So there's a biological
component to it too, right? So it's as
if the as if these divine figures are
standing in front. Well, I'll show you
in a minute of what they're standing in
front of. And you see here the same
thing with these little pouty. That's
what they're called. Sort of embedded in
the flesh-like folds along around here.
And you see Mary here holding the infant
again away from the terrible predator.
That's the ca serpent of chaos down
there in the in the ocean. And that's
again, what does that mean? Why would
the serpent of chaos be in the ocean?
Well, how many of our ancestral infants
do you suppose were eaten by crocodiles
at the water hole? And plenty. Plenty of
them. And so that's something to be
terrified of and to take precautions
against. And so, and then this image
here, the older one, see all these weird
little figures in the background here?
You can't see them, but they're musical
instruments. They're they're all sorts
of archaic musical instruments. And so
here's here's what the image means. It
means the the potential from which this
figure is emerging is like a musical
construction. So it's like a symphony.
It's this patterned layer. It's
patterns, layer upon layers of
harmonious patterns that make up being.
And out of that emerges this image. And
that's what that image represents. And
that's what music represents. It
represents this patterned potential that
we're constantly interacting with. It's
deeply, deeply meaningful. That's why we
love music so much. But that's an
absolute work of genius to put those two
things together. It's it's it's
remarkable remarkable image. So,
well, let's stop there and we'll meet
again in 15 minutes. And then this. So,
that's the positive feminine on the
left. And then on the right, that's the
gorgon. And and that's the thing that
fills you with terror when you look at
it. There's another representation of
the positive feminine. It's another
representation of Mary. There are
representations very much like this of
Isis with Horus on her lap. And people
often consider those precursors. They're
Egyptian Egyptian statues precursors to
the Christian iconography. And well, I
suppose in some sense they are in so far
as they predated them in time. But the
the fundamental issue is that well that
this image has to be held up as
transcendent. And by that I mean it's
it's got to be it's an image that's got
to be at the basis of a value structure
that actually works in so far as there's
going to be human beings because there
aren't any human beings without the
infant and the mother. And so if that's
not held up as a as an image of of
ultimate value, then everything falls
apart. And it's something our culture
does extraordinarily badly. I had a
client recently admit to me in ashamed
tones that she wanted to have children.
I thought and I said, "Well, you don't
have to be ashamed of that, especially
not if you're talking to me." And she
said, "Oh, that's such a relief because
I can't talk to anyone about it at work.
They they seem to think that it's, you
know, degrading." I thought that you can
hardly diagnose a culture as more
pathological than than that. That's so
appalling and it's so hard. This one of
the things I really feel badly for young
women because they're not guided through
this with any sense whatsoever. And I'll
tell you what my experience has been
working with women. And you can take
this for what it's worth. And and I've
worked with women who've achieved the
highest levels of their profession. I
don't mean just in academia, but in a
number of different fields. This is what
happens. We'll take the typical woman,
conservative woman, because they're more
typical, conscientious, not particularly
open. So they're they're beautiful
people, you know, they're existing
within the structures of their society.
So I'll take female lawyers as a classic
example. So they're very good at high
school, very hardworking, very
intelligent, but very but very beautiful
and often rather agreeable. And that's
important because it means to some
degree that they want to please and
they'll do what they're told. And so
part of the reason I think that women
are outperforming men in in elementary,
junior high school, high school, and
university is because they're more
likely to be obedient. And I know that
to some degree because we did analysis
of students in Quebec and found out that
one thing that predicted grades over and
above intelligence and conscientiousness
was agreeableness and agreeable people
got better grades than their IQ and
conscientiousness would predict and
that's particularly negative for men. So
imagine this is what's happening. So
you're a borderline student and you're
also a bit rebellious and antisocial.
I'm going to fail you like you're right
on the cusp. don't like you much, you
fail. You have exactly the same grade
profile, but I like you. Tick. You move
ahead. You don't. And so, one of the
things that's dividing men from women as
they progress through school is the
degree to which they're agreeable. Now,
that works out to some degree for women
in so far as the agreeableness moves
them forward, but they encounter the
negative elements of being agreeable
later in their careers. Anyways,
the women are very good in high school,
then they go to college. They're very
good in college. They nail their damn
grades. They do their studying. They get
their A's and they and they ace their
LSAT, so they're smart, too. Then they
go off to do their articling and they're
really, really good at it. And then they
get offered an associate position and
they're really, really good at it. And
then by the time they're 30, they make
partner and let's say they're in high
pressure, highpaying jobs, $250,000 a
year, $300,000 a year, $500 an hour.
Okay. What's your life like? You work
all the time, period. 70 hours a week,
75 hours a week, flat out. And you don't
get to make any mistakes. And if your
client calls you at 3 in the morning on
Mon on Sunday, you say, "I'm really glad
to hear you hear from you." Because if
you don't, there's some hot law firm in
New York that'll take your client from
you at a moment's notice. And the client
is paying you whatever the firm $750 an
hour of which maybe you get 350. And
what they want is an answer about
something really complicated right
bloody now. And you can say all you want
about the fact that women have a
difficult time with that because it's a
male dominant patriarchy. Any any female
lawyer who's hit 30 and has a partner
that has any sense at all knows that's
complete bloody rubbish. It's market
determined right to the core. What
happens to the women when they're in
their 30s? They all leave the high-end
law firms. Why? Because who in their
right mind would want to live like that?
That's the issue, right? Once you make
about $60,000 a year for your family,
but let's say for you personally,
additional income makes zero has zero
impact on your quality of life. Zero. So
why work 80 hours a week? Well, men will
do it. Some men, very few. A handful of
hyperco competitive men who are obsessed
with hitting the pinnacle of the given
dominance hierarchy they're in will
happily work 80 hours a week and they'll
forgo everything else. Relationships,
family, children, way in the second
category. And so those men are often
very difficult to live with too because
they're so obsessed with their career.
It's hard to have a relationship with
them. And maybe they don't have much of
a relationship with their kids, but
they're damn good at what they do. And
part of that is is they're smart and
disciplined and they'll work. non-stop
all the time. It's like an obsession.
And that's the sort of people who run
things. Those are the people who run
things. Well, they're often also
disagreeable, too. Because you want to
you want to manage people really,
they're not going to like you, you know,
and it's not an easy thing to not be
liked. And actually, if you're an
agreeable person, and women are more
agreeable than men, it's quite painful
to be disliked. But if you're in a
managerial and executive position, the
probability that people are going to
like you is quite low. Now, if you're a
real son of a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] then they're going
to dislike you more, but it's it's those
those positions are very stressful,
partly because of the interpersonal
dynamics and they're also incredibly
incredibly competitive. So, the women
hit that at 30 and they're completely
qualified and the law firms are bloody
desperate to keep them because it's
really hard to find highly qualified
people, especially once you've put all
that time into training them, especially
if they're also good at bringing in
business. The law firms trip over
themselves to try to keep them. They
can't. The women think, why in the world
am I doing this? Why in the world would
anyone in their right mind do this?
Especially because they're often married
by that point, too. And generally,
they've married a husband who makes as
much money or more than them. So, they
don't need the damn money. And so, they
think, well, there's more to life than
this, which is exactly the right thing
to think. And so, then they go and find
a job that's 9 to5 and controllable so
that they can hire a nanny and have some
kids and have a life. And it's like,
yes, that's the intelligent thing to do.
So, we've got things backwards in our
culture. We're thinking, at least in
part, why aren't there more women in
positions of power? Wrong question. The
right question is, why are there any men
at all who want those positions of
power? Because it's not just positions
of power. You have to be such a nad to
think that. Oh, it's a position of
power. It's like, sure, but it's a
position of overwhelming responsibility.
And if you make mistakes, you're done,
right? It's not like you occupy that
position of power and everyone does what
they're told all the time and your life
is easy. It's like, forget about that.
People are on your case to do exactly
the right thing all the time, 100% of
the time. And maybe you want that, maybe
you don't. So the what I don't know what
people think is these people are all
sitting in their offices with their like
feet up on the desk smoking cigars and
oppressing the world. It's like that
isn't how it works. those people, they
work flat out all the time. So, and it's
fine if that's what you want. And some
people are like that. They're
hyperindustrious people, right? From a
trait perspective, no matter where you
put them, if you put them in a forest
with an axe, they just wander around
chopping down trees non-stop, right?
Because they're it's built into them.
But if you want to have a balanced life
and and you should want that, you know,
because the other thing you'll find, and
this is God's gospel truth, is that the
older you get, if you have any sense at
all, the more important your family is
to you. Like that the the utility of
your career, maybe that peaks around 35
or 40, and it starts to decline pretty
rapidly after that. And what happens if
you're fortunate, you have someone in
your life that you love, that you've
woven yourself together with, and you
have some kids so that you have
something to do from the time you're 50
till the time you're 80. And so it's a
real mistake. It's a barren future
without children. Man, I can tell you
that. It's a real mistake. And so we do
a terrible job of of say putting that
image forward and saying well yeah now
you know because women have access to
the birth control pill now and can
compete in the same domains as men
roughly speaking there is a real
practical problem here. It's partly an
economic problem now because when I was
roughly your age it was still possible
for a oneincome family
to exist.
Well, you know that wages have been flat
except in the upper 1% since 1973. Why?
Well, it's easy. What happens when you
double the labor force? What happens?
You have the value of labor. So, now
we're in a situation where it takes two
people to make as much as one did
before. So we went from a situation
where women's career opportunities were
relatively limited to where they were
relatively unlimited and there were two
incomes to where and so women could work
to a situation where women have to work
and they only make half as much as they
would have otherwise and now we're going
to go into a situation this is the next
step whereas women will work because men
won't and that's what's coming now. So
we there was an economics e economist
article showing that 50% now of of boys
in school are having trouble with their
basic subjects. And you look around you
in universities you can see this
happening. I've watched it over decades.
I would say 90% of the people in my
personality class are now women. There
won't be a damn man left in university
in 10 years except in the STEM fields.
And it's a complete bloody catastrophe.
And it's a catastrophe for women because
I don't know where the hell you're going
to find someone to to have a, you know,
to marry and have a family with if this
keeps happening. So, and you think when
you're 19, because you're so clueless
when you're 19, you don't know a bloody
thing. You think, well, I'm not really
sure I want children anyways. It's like,
oh yeah, you tell how well you've been
educated. Jesus, dismal.
Dismal.
Without fail, I got to tell you, without
fail, I've watched women go through
their professional careers, many, many
of them. It's a very rare woman who at
the age of 30 doesn't consider having a
child her primary desire. And the ones
that don't consider that generally in my
observation there's something that isn't
quite right in the way that they're
constituted or looking at the world.
Sometimes you get women who are truly
non-maternal, you know, by temperament.
They're they have a masculine
temperament, disagreeable. They're not
they're not particularly compassionate.
They're not maternal. They don't really
they're not that interested in kids.
Fair enough, man. But there aren't that
many of them. And there's plenty who
will not admit to themselves that that's
what they most desperately want.
Do you think women would be better off
if they had kids earlier, focused on
career, say in their 30s?
Who knows? Like it's like it really is a
problem.
Seems like a more rational decision to
me.
Yeah, it's a really tough one. I don't
think anybody knows the answer to that
because
I mean if you're if you're 35 and your
kids are say 10, 11,
Yeah.
then you can go get a bachelor's degree,
get your masters.
Well, So, it seems it's even more easy
that way.
Yeah.
Than having the career first and then
trying to raise young kids.
Yeah. I I I can't answer that because
I've seen women do a good job of it both
both ways. And you do get the odd woman
who manages a high-powered career and
kids, but Jesus, those women, man, like
they they they buy more powerful
microwaves because it'll take 45 seconds
to cook the food instead of a minute.
And I'm not kidding. It's like they're
they're up at 5. They exercise for half
an hour. They make breakfast. They get
their kids ready to work. They go to
work. They work 14 hours at 14 hour days
flat bloody out. They come home and work
for another two hours to get their kids
organized. They have a nanny to to help
them out. Then they work for two more
hours before they go to bed at like
1:00. And then they're up at 5:00 and
they do that again. And I'll tell you,
you better be tough if you're going to
do that physically, too, because you'll
just burn yourself to a crisp. I've seen
some women manage it, you know, but
they're like they're tough and they're
rare because that's a hell of a hell of
a regimen. And then if anything goes
wrong, you know, you have a sick kid or
something like that or there's any sort
of crisis in your family, it's just, you
know, it it's then it becomes too much.
And I don't know the answer to that. You
know, I mean, the advantage women have
is they live about eight years longer
than men because testosterone kills men.
So, but they have a limited time span to
have children, right? Well, that that
that's right. They pay upfront and and
gain on the on the on the in the long
run, but how it isn't clear how our
society should sort this out. We don't
know. And it's partly we don't know what
to do now that women have control of the
reproductive function. It's a big
mystery. Yep.
Um I don't have an answer to that
either, but I think from a practical
aspect, and this goes for both men, even
if women were to enter the workforce
later on, they'd be at competition with
people who are younger. And that's
always a conflict in the workforce that
people are always hiring younger talent
um because of how lost they need to be
in the workforce.
Yeah. Yes. Well, and the thing is young
stupid people have the advantage of
being young.
Middle-aged stupid people have the
disadvantage of being middle-aged. And
so if you're going to hire a young
stupid person or a middle-aged stupid
person, you'll go for the young stupid
person. And I'm by stupid I mean, you
know, no not I'm being sarcastic
obviously, but I I mean without without
experience and just getting started in
the world, you're much more likely to
favor someone young because there's an
instant explanation for their relative
cluelessness. And it's a problem, you
know. So, so I don't know what the
answer is, but one one answer certainly
is at least in part is to start letting
young women know what being 30 and being
female is like because and also to
dispuse them of the notion that there's
something magical about a career. First
of all, most people don't have careers,
man. They have jobs. And the reason you
get paid for a job is because you're
being asked to do things you wouldn't do
unless you were being paid. And so it's
not it's not some it's not some utopia
of cigar smoking with your boots up on
your desk. That's for sure. Not not that
that would be such a utopia to begin
with. But all right. So so anyways,
so this is more differentiation of the
archetype fundamentally. So you see the
dragon of chaos here that potential
manifesting itself into this ambivalent
feminine figure both both promise and
threat. And then I've I've mapped this
one out. So the ambivalent feminine
figure, so sort of multivalent gives
rise to the positive mother and then the
positive mother gives birth to the hero.
And that's Hercules there. And this I
like this image a lot. So Hercules is in
this container. So that's that you can
interpret that both as something
feminine, the container, but also as a
representative of culture because it's a
boat that's floating on the chaotic
ocean here. So that's Hercules. He has
to be in a container that sustains him
in the murky water of chaos. And you
see, he's going out into the unknown and
he's got a lion skin on. And that's
partly because one of the inituation
rituals for for young men when there
were lions, say, in the Middle East, and
that wasn't very long ago, was that you
had to go out and kill a lion with a
spear or with a bow and arrow or
something like that. It's like, that's,
you know, impressive all things
considered. I mean, you really think
about that for a minute. You really want
to go out and try to kill a lion with a
stick. It's like it probably you
probably wouldn't be quite the same
after you did that. That would be my
guess. And so anyway, so there's
Hercules. He's got his lion skin on and
that shows that he's assimilated to the
lion, the dominant sort of animal, and
that he's also mastered it. And he's got
his bow and arrow. So he's he's going to
hit the target properly. He's not he's
someone who doesn't sin because he can
hit the center of the target. And he's
got this club, which I really like
because it's covered with eyes just like
Marduk, the Mesopotamian hero. Well,
what do you want to do when you go out
into the unknown? It's like arm yourself
and pay attention. And so that's what
you're trying to produce if you're a
good mother is this figure that can go
out into the unknown, armed, accurate,
and able to pay attention. And that's a
hell of a thing to participate in. It's
really fun. I found having children
incredibly entertaining. It's
ridiculously entertaining thing to do
because for a bunch of reasons. One is
that it's the only relationship you'll
ever have in your life where you where
you actually have a chance of
establishing something that's close to
perfect is with your kids because when
they're delivered to you, so to speak,
they're they're in some sense they're
perfect. And your job is to maintain
that perfection if you can. And you do
that by being a good parent, by being
encouraging, by being on their side, by
taking care of them. And you can have a
absolutely pristine relationship with
the child. That doesn't mean it's not
full of trouble because it is. But it's
it it can easily be the best
relationship you'll ever have in your
life. And and in fact, I think that's it
can be the worst, too. And you know,
sometimes you get unlucky and your child
is sick mentally or physically and
things fall apart and it's not your
fault, but and sometimes it is your
fault, but it's a real gift. And you you
have to play this game of protection and
encouragement, right? Protection and
encouragement. And get that dynamic
right. And then you build you help
someone develop into something that's
well exactly this that can take on the
trouble of the world forthrightly. And
man, that's what you want. That'll make
it worthwhile. That's for sure. Now,
let's see. I got to figure out where I
want to go next. Well, I've talked about
the dragon fight, so I won't do that.
Oh, yes. We might as well look at some
of the the we'll look at the same thing
on the patriarchal side of the equation.
So, the it's the great father and the
great mother that emerge out of chaos.
Let's say that um you you can think
about that over the evolutionary time
span too because it's the fundamental
differentiation of life into one into
two sexes. You know the fundamental
differentiation of being into two sexes
that interact creatively to produce to
produce new being. It's a very very deep
motif. And so the dragon of chaos
differentiates itself into the great
father. And that's God the father.
That's an image there. And you see he's
sitting in front of the sun and the sun
is behind him. And the sun is the thing
that comes up out of the darkness in the
morning and then shines the light on
everything with which we can see and
then collapses again into the darkness
at night. Right? And so and at night it
fights its battle with the forces of
darkness and chaos and emerges
triumphant in the morning. And that's
why we have solar gods because the the
the highest deity is assimilated to the
dominant the dominant phenomena in the
sky. And well and no wonder because the
sun is also what gives life and that
provides light and that does send the
darkness away. And to notice that
there's something symbolically useful in
that that you can also apply to the
ideal person is another act of of
conceptual metaphoric genius. And so
behind God the father is the son of s o
n son. And you see he's ruling over a
walled city here. And you could think
about God the father here as the spirit
of the walled city. That's a good way of
thinking about it. And so and why? What
does that spirit mean? Well, forget
about the supernatural element of this
or the transcendent element of it even.
How do you represent society?
Okay, you've got your walled city. Okay,
why is it walled? That's the fundamental
structure of a city. Why is it walled?
Well, because you have to have a border
between what's yours and what isn't
yours or border between your territory
and the outside world, right? Otherwise,
it's not delineated and defined. So, the
first thing is it's something that's
walled off. It's a it's a defined space.
Inside that, there's a dominance
hierarchy. It's a masculine dominance
hierarchy because like chimps, our
fundamental dominance hierarchy is
masculine. Okay? So the dominance
hierarchy is what's the same across all
the men. And then it's more than that.
It's it's what's it's what's the same
across all men in so far as they found
their position in the dominance
hierarchy in so far as they're
supporting it, in so far as they're
expanding it, and in so far as they're
trying to strive up it. So, it's
averaged across that. But then it's more
than that because it's not just the men
that live now. It's also the men that
used to live and the men that will live.
And you think, what are you relating to
when you relate to other people? Well,
in part, you're relating to the spirit
of the men that will soon live. And
that's what a contract is, right? You
make a contract with the potential
society of the future. It's embodied as
a spirit. And so you act appropriately
in relationship to the patriarchal
spirit because if you act in accordance
with that structure, then you can extend
your contractual relationship with other
people across time. It's brilliant. It's
a brilliant conceptualization. That's
independent of any supernatural or
transcendent reality. I'm not saying it
exists in in necessary opposition to
such things. I'm just saying that you
don't have to introduce the idea of such
things into the conceptualization in
order to understand the symbolism.
Now, I think it's more complicated than
that because if you think about this
thing as a spirit, a spirit is an
essential pattern of personality. Let's
call it that. To the degree that you're
a well civilized representative of the
social world, you are actually inhabited
by that spirit. And so what should
happen as you mature is that as you
become older, you should become God the
father. That's what you're aiming at.
You want to embody that central spirit
that characterizes the civilization. And
that spirit's very complex. And that's
why you see often see it in relationship
with the representation of God the sun
because the masculine spirit isn't the
spirit in general. The spirit of
civilization isn't exhausted by its
patriarchal representation. That's the
dogmatic form like Osiris, right? It's
only the structure that has to be allied
with the thing that keeps the structure
alive. So you want to be both of those
things at the same time. The embodiment
of the civilization and the force that
transforms it and moves it forward. And
that's what you're supposed to be be
being taught. That's what university is
for. Well, that's what it used to be
for. Now it's mostly there to produce
politically obsessed idiots. Oh,
anyways, sorry about that. But it gets
very frustrating. So all right. So that
you get the picture. That's what that's
what that represents. That's what it's
trying that's that's an idea that's been
trying to emerge in the human
imagination since the beginning of time.
And it's not a trivial idea. It's a
unbelievably profound idea. And it it
differentiates too. And this is what
makes it complicated.
What kind of relationship do you have
with your father? Your real father. It's
often ambivalent, right? Because there
was an element of him that encouraged
you hopefully because without the
encouragement of your father man the
world is a dismal place. It's very
difficult to be a courageous person
unless you have your father in in body
and spirit behind you. It's very de
demoralizing like it really kills people
not to have their mother. They just
don't recover from that. But and and I
think people can recover from a
fragmented father relationship. But it's
the next worst thing, you know, because
if your father rejects you or doesn't
form a relationship with you, it's as if
the spirit of civilization has left you
outside the walls as of little worth.
It's very difficult for people to
recover from that. So the father should
be an encouraging force, but can be a
tyrannical and crushing force. And so
that's very that's a very difficult
thing to get right. Partly because
if you're my son, then I should impose
the highest standards of behavior on you
and I should always be judging what
you're doing. I should be judging it
with with the aim of making the best in
you come forward. But but getting that
balance exactly right is very difficult.
And so it's easy to for a father to
swing too much into judgment, let's say.
And of course, mothers can play this
role too, to swing too far into the
domain of judgment and to be too harsh.
And to the degree that the father has
his own pathologies, he's going to do
that imperfectly. You know, he might be
someone who's who's the father who
devours his son because he's jealous of
the new possibility, the new potential,
the the struggle for for uh attention
and love from the mother or from the
other children in the family. There's
all sorts of things that can go terribly
wrong.
So, that's the father as wise king. And
that's another symbol that's been lost,
I would say, to a massive degree in
modern universities because all we're
taught is to tear that down and and to
not even notice that it manifests itself
everywhere, especially in the
universities, which are like they're as
close to an ideal environment as you
could as human beings have ever been
able to create. It's as simple as that.
And if you can't be grateful for for the
structure of the university with all its
imperfections, then then you're
completely blind to this element of the
archetype.
And that's the opposite of it. That's
the son that devours the king that
devours his own son. That's a tyrant.
You know, that's like the mother who's
too overprotective. It's the male
version of that. And the mother that's
too overprotective says, "I'll never let
anything happen to you." It's like,
well, maybe you actually want to have
something happen to you. You know, it's
a bit of an all-incclusive statement.
It's like, no, I'm going to make you
strong so any number of things can
happen to you. And when you're when you
need some care, I'll be there, but
otherwise, like out into the world with
you. That's the right attitude. And for
the father, it's like get your bloody
act together. But I'm on your side. It's
because not because I want to destroy
you or demean you or push you down in
the dominance hierarchy, but because I
want the best in you to emerge. And so
you need standards. It's like what are
you doing waste in your life? There's
way more than that to you. Get your act
together and and bring it out. And
that's a message that people really want
to hear if they have any sense at all.
And generally they do want to hear it.
So, you know,
I was talking I've been talking to a lot
of people recently as as perhaps you
know, and I was talking to one of the
leaders of the Conservatives this
morning and they're they're asking me
about the person was asking me about
Bill C16, but more specifically about
talking to young people because the
conservative leadership
struggle is going on right now. I've
been talking to a bunch of them and I
said, "Well, look, one of the things you
could do for young people that no one's
doing is to talk to them about
responsibility because you everyone
talks to young people about rights. It's
like we need our rights." It's like,
"Oh, God, how many rights do you need?"
You know, really like you have more
privileges than any people who've ever
lived anywhere. Well, it's so dull to
hear. It's so dull. It's so pathetic and
and uh what would you call it? It's so
demeaning that you have to be protected
and have your rights. It's like I said,
there's a huge marketplace for
responsibility. That's what you want to
talk to young people about. It's like
get your act together and do something
worthwhile with your life. For the first
time in my entire adult life, the
conservatives actually have something to
sell young people, right? They can sell
them responsibility.
It's like, well, why? Because that's
where me life has meaning with
responsibility.
The more responsibility you take on, the
more meaning your life has. And the the
higher degree of responsibility that you
agree voluntarily to try to bear, the
richer your life will be. And no one's
ever told that. And it's the case. You
know, it's like you have you have four
kids. Say, well, that's plenty of
responsibility. You're going to have
meaning. It's going to be rough, you
know, because it's complicated. You have
a complicated job and you try to help
the careers of the people around you.
You try to solve tough problems and aid
suffering and do all of that. It's like
it's weight. It's responsibility. But
it's there's glory in it. There's real
glory in it. There's deep meaning in it.
And and and young people are starving
for that because no one ever tells them
that. It's like you're way more than you
think. Man, stand up. Do something
difficult. Do something difficult and
heroic, right? Burst out of your bonds.
It's like that's a good message.
It's a necessary message because we have
to be more than we are because if we if
we aren't, we're not going to survive.
Well, that's the sun devouring
father. That's a painting by Medina of
Satan. It's pretty horrifying one.
And that's Captain Hook. I really like
the figure of Captain Hook. Some of
these popular mythological stories, myth
based fairy tales, modern fairy tales
have got things really right. Captain
Hook, well, he's a pirate. So, I think I
told you that in the Google engineers
investigations of female sexual
fantasies. The pirate played a large
role. Werewolf, vampire, pirate,
surgeon, billionaire. Incredibly comic
comical. Well, pirate, you know, captain
of the high seas and someone willing to
break rules. There's a romance in that
figure. Well, so the idea of the great
father as the pirate is a good one.
Well, Hook is kind of a pathetic pirate.
And of course, pirates are precisely
that because they're also crooked. And
so, what makes him pathetic?
Well, it isn't because he's got a hook
precisely because maybe that's just a
sign of adventure. It's because he's
being chased by a crocodile with a clock
in its stomach. Well, that's the dragon
of chaos, right? That's time. Tick,
tick, tick. Your life is going to end.
It's already got a piece of you and it's
coming for the rest. And so Hook is
terrified of that. He's terrified into
resentment and and and evil roughly
speaking. It's why he can pray on other
people. And so that's the father in the
Peter Pan story out in Neverland, which
is the archetypal domain. Captain Hook's
the father. Well, why would Peter Pan
want to grow up to be Captain Hook?
Well, he doesn't. And so he stays pan.
Pan means everything, right? Like
pantheism. He stays everything. He's
this divine child. He never wants to
grow up. Well, why would you sacrifice
the potential of youth to become nothing
but a death obsessed tyrant? Well,
that's the story in in Peter Pan. And of
course, Wendy's in this story, and so is
Tinkerbell. Tinkerbell is the imagined
feminine. She's just she doesn't even
exist. She's just this perfect little
thing that's always around whenever
Peter Pan needs her. But the problem
with Tinkerbell is that she's a fairy
and fairies don't exist. He has Wendy
there. She's a real girl. She grows up
and actually marries someone. Peter Pan
stays king of the lost boys forever. And
you know, maybe it's better to be king
of the lost boys, but than not to be
king at all, but maybe not too. King of
the damned is not exactly something to
it's not a dominance hierarchy to strive
for dominating. So that's the Peter Pan
story and it's a right it's the right
story for the modern age. That's for
sure. So that's a negative element of
the great father.
There's a positive element of the great
father. These are both this is a
representation of Moses receiving the
the the rules for living from God on
high. Well, we talked about that
already, you know, and I see that re
that's a story of the revelation of
structure. That's the story of mankind.
We're acting out a moral structure.
Well, what is it? Now and then we get a
glimpse of what the moral structure is
and it hits people with the force of a
revelation. Then it can be articulated
and that's partly what the story of
Moses lays out. And you see here this
picture. I really like this one too.
This is a supplicant basically someone
who's who's hit hard by a divine vision.
It's God in heaven. Again, very very
similar to this with a with the cross in
the background. And it's something like
to transcend your littleness because
look, he's looking up. That's what's at
the top of the dominance hierarchy. It's
what's at the top of all possible
dominance hierarchies. Look up.
That's the father who supports the son
that's transcending his own
vulnerability, right? Willing to bear it
voluntarily and not to and not to sherk
from that.
It's exactly right. And it is what you
admire in people. You know, you admire
people who are courageous and who are
strong. And when you decompose that, it
means that they're able to act
appropriately and in a helpful,
compassionate, wise, and tough manner
despite the fact that they're beset with
all of the problems of mortality that
beset everyone else.
Well, how does it go wrong? Well, that's
all propaganda for Hitler. You look at
the imagery, you know, he's a knight.
That's on the right. He's the He's the
knight of nationalism. Well, that's God
the Father, too. You know, it's a little
bit one-sided, right? Because there's
more to the father than the state.
That's the thing. And that's the problem
with nationalism and its totalitarian
variance. And we're moving in the that
that direction fast, right? You see
Europe right now fragmenting again
because the European Union is too
amorphous and maybe not well enough
bordered and everyone is getting nervous
and they're saying back to the state.
Back to the state. It's fair enough.
Fair enough. You you need to be around
people who are like you, so to speak,
that you have built a consensus with,
but to subordinate yourself to the state
and to make its head the the bearer of
the the the the archetype of the knight
without having that element of
individuality in it is absolutely
pathological. We've already been down
that road, right? Because the national
socialists were hyper national just like
well both in Germany and in Italy. And
it's attractive again. It's interesting
here you see Hitler as a knight and up
here there's a bird you know and that
bird should be the dove because that
should be the Holy Ghost if the
iconography was proper but it's not it's
an eagle and an eagle is a bird of carry
an eater right it feeds on corpses well
it's worth thinking about so that's the
woman worshiping the strong father
representation of Hitler as a knight and
then there's Hitler as wise father you
see he's surrounded by people there who
focused in on him as if he's of archite
archetypal import. And then this is a a
poster from from the Allies, an
anti-Nazi poster from the Allies. And
you see right there that Hitler and the
Nazis are assimilated to a mess of
predatory snakes. It's like, well, why?
Well, if you want to appeal to someone's
determination to destroy, you say,
"Well, here you are and you're all ready
to go. Let's go kill some snakes." And
everyone can say, "Yes." And then you
say, "Well, there's the snakes right
there." And the thing is it's true to
some degree because you you have plenty
of snakes just like everyone else. And
so it's easy that's the first step
towards demonization. And you can do it
just like that. It's no problem. The
archetype will map perfectly. Especially
if there's already tension between the
groups or if the other group is
identifiable in some manner or you can
make it identifiable. Disgust is the
best way to do that. Not fear. Disgust.
Fear. To fear someone you have to
respect them. You don't want to burn
everything that the person that you fear
owns. You want to burn everything that
the person who disgusts you owns. And so
you'll see people who are pushing the
nationalist agenda hard. And Hitler did
this beautifully. Everything that was
outside of the Aryan domain of purity
wasn't to be feared. It was disgusting.
It was contemptuous. And it should be
destroyed and purified by fire. And that
was his message. The Nazis were
unbelievably great at using fire of
purification as a symbolic message.
Well, it has an archetypal power. Then
you see here, this is an English uh uh
poster from the World War II um asking
people to buy bonds to fund the American
or the the British war effort. And you
see these these talon-like claws, Japan
and Nazi Germany reaching out to the
virgin mother and her infant child,
right? Deep deep use of deep
subordination of archetypal imagery for
the purposes well I hesitate to say
propaganda because World War II in some
sense was pretty clear-cut, but you you
get the point. And there's the uniform
reoccur the uniformity of the state,
right? So the goostep, everybody moves
exactly the same way. Everybody's put
everybody's turned into exactly the same
carbon copy of everyone else. All the
diversity is pushed out of the state.
It's subordinated to the supreme leader
and the hierarchy becomes incredibly
rigid and and and and and
homogeneous. It's like, well, that's
great for fast action, but it's terrible
if you don't know where you're going.
You need some diversity. You need some
flaws in the crystalline structure in
case you're on the wrong path. And
that's why you can't have everyone being
the supreme leaders acolytes. The whole
bloody thing wanders off in one
direction and because we don't know the
right direction to go. Wandering off in
a single direction is extraordinarily
dangerous. You will eventually fall over
a cliff. So
there's the Nazis use of of light at
night. They were unbelievably good at
their at their this one of the things
that made fascism so difficult to fight
because with communism because it was a
fully articulated philosophy. You could
attack it rationally. But fascism never
really did that. What they did instead
was use ritual, right? Huge mass rallies
and highly emotionally supercharged
meetings and then the use of light and
fire. And so Hitler built the biggest
parade grounds in human history to host
the Nerburgg rallies. And he would get
in front of them on this huge stage
with, you know, with Greek columns, very
impressive looking, and have blocks of
thousands of people organized perfectly,
orderly. The Germans are good at order,
and order is associated with disgust
sensitivity. Incredibly organized,
orderly displays, complete. And then at
night with fire and behind him, he would
have all of the search lights from the
Luftwaffa lined up, dozens of them,
shooting their lights straight up miles
into the sky. So he stand in front of
these incredibly impressive displays of
light long before there were rock shows
and so forth doing that. You know, it
was unparalleled in history and and
address the crowd. And he was very good
at addressing the crowd. He'd say
something and if people were listening,
he'd say more of it. And if they were
listening, he'd say more of it. And
because he was addressing the mob, the
mob got exactly from Hitler what they
wanted. And we saw what that was like,
right? 120 million people dead in no
time flat. and the worst horrors that
were ever perpetrated on people
maybe because there's no shortage of
perpetrated horrors.
Stalin, same thing. Stalin, the great
father, right? Wise man at the helm of
the ship of the state. This is after the
wall came down. Some old man kissing uh
a gilded statue of Stalin before it's
going to be before it's going to be torn
down. And there he is with happy
children
and and not the children that his
policies starve to death as you as you
might well imagine. There he is in his
military uniform sitting on what's all
for all intents and purposes a throne.
And this is this is really an uncanny
one. It's very positive. Right? That's
Hitler as or still in his head of state.
He's in this hellish mandola of fire
perfect with God the father at his head.
That's Lenon. you know who people still
who people still rever um you may know
and perhaps you don't that I was
nominated to be recctor of the
University of Glasgow and so which is an
honorary position and um today yesterday
the uh different candidates put up their
manifestos and and the student newspaper
put them up and then wrote analysis of
the manifestos which were biased and
they were appallingly biased and
one-sided and I wrote and told him that
they said, "Well, we have a perfect
right to our political opinion." And I
thought, "Yeah, well, for sure, but you
know, you are journalists after all, and
maybe you could be just trying to tell
what's happening." It's like, "No, no,
no. There's none of that." And they said
that one of the candidates that they uh
that they clearly recommended, who seems
to be a person who's perfectly heroic in
his own right, I mean, he's taken on
very many difficult legal cases and and
worked for the oppressed and downtrodden
who clearly exist. um it was either him
or another candidate, it doesn't really
matter, that they described as bullshy
and unoutspoken. Bullshi meaning bolevik
like. It's like, well, you know, he's
appropriately [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] It's like it's
no different than saying, well, he's
appropriately Nazilike. Like, what the
hell is that? I mean, there were 50
million people that were killed in the
Soviet Union by the bullshies and maybe
twice that many in in China. And that
says nothing about Cambodia and all the
other places there were radical left
blood baths. You think it's cute to call
someone bullshy? Jesus, it's appalling.
It's appalling. It's not some
fashionable thing that you do. It's a
participation in some of the deepest
intellectual morasses of evil that human
beings have ever managed to create. And
yet it's fashionable. It shows you what
the universities are worth.
Well, there's the downside of Stellin.
Yeah. as Stellin is hangman. That sort
of cartoon would have got you killed in
the Soviet Union. There's Stellin as
Satan himself in a stained glass
representation. There's a statue of
Stellin covered with red paint for the
blood after the wall came down. There's
Stellin as what? It's very much like
Modina's Satan, right? You look at that
and it's exactly the same archetypal
idea. There's the Americans going hat
cap in hand to get a little large S from
Papa Stella. That's uh a painting of the
communists forcibly collectivizing the
productive farmers in the Soviet Union
in the early 1920s. The Kulacs, right?
Everything from whom they stole and
raped them and murdered them and shipped
them off to Siberia and killed them and
wiped out the productive farmers of the
Soviet Union and then starved six
million Ukrainians to death. And there's
some poor kid in the 1930s whose ribs
are showing, you know, taking a bath in
this pot with his eyes wide. And, you
know, he's one of the fortunate ones
because he's still alive. It's like
bullshy. Yeah. Cute, pretty, fun,
fashionable, lovely. Well, that's the
decomposition of chaos into God the
Father. Half providing security and
order and half providing tyranny. That's
the archetype. You have to put up with
it. That's what your society is like.
You try to interact with it in a way
that enables the positive part of it to
come forth and then it does the same
thing.
Chaos gives rise to the father who's
nurturing and and and and encouraging
and that gives rise that produces the
son. It was very far hard to find that
image I could tell you. So and then that
gives rise to the the proper balance of
the proper attitude from the father
produces the same thing. the son. Who's
the hero? The individual who's the hero.
The consciousness, the conf
consciousness of the child that's
willing to go forth, eyes open, and
voluntarily confront chaos and turn it
into order. And that's the proper
pathway for human beings. So, here's a
way of thinking about it. I showed you
that diagram, you know, of how you
decompose a value structure. And you can
do it right down to the level of detail,
you know. So you want to make dinner,
you go below that higher resolution. You
cut up vegetables, you move your arm,
you it decomposes all the way,
differentiates down all the way to
skill. You put these skills together and
you represent them with abstract
concepts.
I can make dinner. I can take care of my
family. I can undertake this job at
work. That makes me a decent father.
That's part of being a good per of being
a good person. The question is what's at
the pinnacle of that at the upper end of
the abstraction hierarchy because these
things should be organized all the way
up into a complete hierarchy. What does
it mean to be a good person? Well, it
means we we've walked through it. It
means
you win the set of games. You go out
into the world and explore and you bring
back what you've found and you build
yourself out of it and you share it with
other people. That's an old old story.
That's no different than the story of
the collective hunt. It's exactly the
same thing, right? You you build
yourself into someone that can has a
have a long-term relationship with
someone of the opposite sex, generally
speaking, so that you can bring children
into the world and turn them into
exploratory heroes and stabilize the
state. That's what should be at the top.
And that thing that's at the top, it's
the same thing. It's the integration of
all of those things into the same thing.
And that's the same as the sun. That's
the same as the halo. It's the same as
the thing that emerges from the belly of
the whale. It's all of those things. And
you also know that because you know that
you have the capacity for admiration.
It's in you. It's in you. It's locked
into your biology and it's locked into
your sociology. You see what you admire
and that's a partial representation of
the ultimate ideal. It's as simple as
that. So I I kind of nested this. Hey,
so I should just explain this diagram
briefly. So it was a map I tried to make
in some sense of my own identity. I mean
just using myself as an example of of
someone typically situated in society.
So you know I have this role which is
kind of a high resolution role. I'm a
father and a husband and I also run a
business and so the father and husband
thing is sort of nested inside of that
because it's dependent on my economic
success to some degree. And then that's
nested inside a capitalist structure.
And then that's nested inside well I
said American personality but it's sort
of that's good enough. And then that's
nested inside the humanistic western
personality and inside the
Judeo-Christian personality. And that's
all nested inside this thing that's best
conceptualized as something
approximating the exploratory hero. And
so that's a that's a value structure
that's and you know you can different
you could differentiate that to a much
higher level than father and husband.
And we did that when we decomposed
things right down to, you know, their
motor actions. And you want what you
want,
and this is, I think, there's something
that's transcendent about this. You want
all those things stacked up so they're
all operating properly at the same time.
All the way up and and all the way down.
And I don't even know how far down
means. Like if you get all those things
together, your physiology be organized
and oriented properly, too. Oh, you
know, and that means your organs work
properly. and the micro elements of the
board properly and all the way down. And
then if everything is organized like
that too, the society starts to work and
everything starts to organize itself
along a horizontal axis where each level
of the structure supports every other le
level and you can feel that. I believe
that's what you feel when you're engaged
in doing something meaningful. You can
feel those things coming together and
you can also feel like that that as a as
a kind of strength that pushes you
forward instead of pulling you
backwards. So, and it I I think that
your our nervous systems are very
sophisticated and they orient us in time
and space and they can tell us when
they're in the right place at the right
time and people love that. And I think
you experience that when you're deeply
engaged in music as well. It puts you
there momentarily, right? Say you're in
a cathedral and you're listening to some
remarkable music. You have the light
pouring in. You're in trees because
that's what a cathedral is. That's what
this that's what the the arches is. It's
light coming through the trees. That's
what's represented in the stones. You're
in there. You're looking at the light.
It's it's it's pouring down at you.
You're in this you're at the center of
the world and there's a great piece of
music playing and it's an an indication
that everything is stacking up along
this one pole. That's what it's supposed
to produce. That produces a religious
experience if it works properly. You
know that you go to rock concerts, you
go listen to music. So, what the hell do
you think you're doing there if you're
not having a quasi religious experience?
you think you'd go otherwise. And just
because you don't know that that's what
hap that's what's happening doesn't mean
it isn't what's happening. People have
been gathering together in groups and
transcending the limits of their
pathological individuality through music
and ritual since the beginning of time.
Why would it be any different for us?
And the lights there. That's what the
light show is for. It's the same thing.
It's just that the religious element of
it is stripped away partly because we've
criticized that to death so carelessly
that we can't integrate it anymore into
ceremonies like that. And I mean fair
enough, but but it's not like that comes
without a loss. People hunger for that
more deeply than anything else.
Questions? Yes. Um you touched on this
uh topic today but also in your
conversation with Sam Harris. Um wanted
to ask is there a relationship between
the mythological idea of sacrifice and
human sacrifice or whatever type of
sacrifice and the psychological idea of
delayed gratification and if so could it
be a factor in the relation in the
correlation between conscientiousness
and
it's exactly the question is is there a
relationship between the idea of
sacrifice and delay of gratification and
is that related to conscientiousness
and religiousness?
Yes. Well, the conscientiousness
relationship is a tough one. You know,
we tested to see if conscientious people
were more likely to delay gratification
in classic delay of gratification tasks
and we found no effect. We found IQ
effect and we found a reverse effect for
extraversion and positive mood. And so
what happens is that happier people are
more impulsive. They're more likely to
grasp what's right in front of them in
the present. But conscientiousness is an
extraordinarily tough nut to crack. And
I do think it's associated to some
degree with the proclivity for sacrifice
of the present to the future. But
finding ways of testing that has proved
very very difficult. So but the the the
relationship between sacrifice and delay
of gratification those are the same
words right delayed gratification is a
sacrifice. It's it's and you know
there's famous experiments you know you
may know the marshmallow experiment
um and that is well basically you take
kids four or so and you say you sit them
in a room and at a little table and you
say here's a marshmallow if you don't
eat that for 10 minutes we'll come in
and give you another marshmallow right
and so the kids and they videotape the
kids and the tapes are actually pretty
funny because the poor kids do
everything they can not to look at that
candy or marshmallows like they sit on
their hands they hum they look at the
ceiling it's They try to distract
themselves and some of them just you
know it's like oh to hell with it and
they eat it and then others can manage
it and and those well the the the data
showed you know and I wouldn't say this
study has been replicated many times but
the data showed quite clearly that the
kids who could delay gratification at an
early stage were doing quite a bit
better later in life. Now I don't know
to what degree that was controlled for
IQ because such things matter but the
point is is that well the point is the
point that you're making is that you can
delay you can only delay gratification
intelligently though if the social
structure is stable right because
basically what if you delay
gratification you're making a bargain
with the potential future and the
bargain is everybody's going to keep
acting the same way so that the future
is the same as the present because
otherwise you'll delay gratification and
then everything will fall apart. and you
won't get your cake and you won't get to
eat it. And so society has to be quite
stable. It has to be stabilized by the
contractual relationship between people
before delaying gratification is a
useful strategy. This is also why you
see um in chaotic circumstances
where the future becomes uncertain,
people forego delay of gratification
very very rapidly and and and perhaps
appropriately so although you can get a
spiral going in the other direction. So,
so could the idea of sacrifice be like
the behavioral precursor of the
psychological sorry the ethological idea
of sacrifice be the behavioral precursor
of psychological delay gratification for
the same thing you know how you usually
say to for something to become part of
us we have to out first and then
become and then understand it at least
I would say it's a chicken and egg
problem because what happens as you
stabilize societies being conscientious
conscientious becomes more useful and so
then you're going to be selected for as
a consequence of being conscientious and
that's going to stabilize the society
even more. These are these are roughly
known as Baldwin effects. So that's
where let's call it a genetic
transformation produces a behavioral
transformation that transforms the
environment. So the genetic
transformation is more likely to
propagate. You can get unbelievably
rapid evolutionary movements when when
you get a loop like that developing and
and they they happen frequently and
that's that's also how in some sense a
meme can be turned into a genetic
can manifest itself genetically. So if
you have an idea that spreads through
the culture and it tilts the culture in
a certain way such that those who hold
that idea are likely to be more
successful then the meme and the biology
will align themselves across time and
and well I think you see that happening
that's that to some degree that's what's
happened as religious stories have
propagated themselves as well because as
as the idea of the hero becomes clearer
so to speak and then it manifests itself
more clearly in the society then there's
more rewards for doing it then the
selection pressures get more positively
related to that kind of behavior and the
whole thing loops upwards. So it's
something like that.
Um in terms of treating mental health
disorders where do you think we should
draw the line or how should we draw the
line between uh pharmaceutical
interventions and uh very psychotherapy?
I mean to what at what point is
depression and anxiety should be treated
with medicine and at what point should
it be
is it a uh
okay that's a good question. So the
question is how do you differentiate the
utility of behavioral psychotherrapeutic
treatments for conditions like
depression versus medical treatments.
Okay. So the first thing I would say is
um don't underestimate the utility of
medical interventions.
Depression is a cat catastrophe. It
carries with it a very high suicide rate
and it also levels people out and it's
really hard on their families. And so
and it and it's physiologically
extraordinarily damaging. And so if
you're in a depressive state and it's
severe, you can try an anti-depressant.
You'll know in a month if it works. If
it works, well, maybe it'll help you get
your life together. Like we could say,
well, maybe you're depressed because
your life isn't very well together.
Could be. Sometimes people are
depressed. their life is just it isn't
fine because no one's life is fine.
Everyone's life is a tragedy. But
sometimes people have their lives in
order as much as you could expect anyone
to have. They have friends. They have an
intimate relationship. They have a
career that they like. You know, they're
they're qualified industrious people
working hard on what they're doing and
and and really playing a minimum number
of games with themselves and they're
terribly depressed. Anti-depressant,
man, that's sometimes that will just fix
it. And so hooray, like you're a
biological entity. If if there's
something out there that can help you
strengthen yourself so that you can
prevail, great. And you know, people you
hear everyone takes anti-depressants.
You know, everyone's taking them. It's
like no one takes those bloody things
without serious consideration. Half the
time I spend with my clients who are
depressed is often the two yearslong
attempt to get them to tentatively try
an anti-depressant because they're so
guilty that they're relying on an
external crutch to sort out their lives
that they can't even tolerate it. But
you know, I say, "Well, look, man, what
if you had diabetes?
You're not going to take your insulin."
It's like you got stressed. You blew out
at your weakest point. That's what
happens when you get stressed. If
there's something out there that might
help you, it's like try it for God's
sake. you'll know in a month and and you
just stop if it doesn't work. Now,
having said that, you want to do a
multi-dimensional analysis. It's like,
well, do you have any friends? Do you
have an intimate relationship or are you
pursuing one? Do you have a reasonable
career? Are you as educated as you are
intelligent? Do you have something
useful to do with your time outside of
work? Do you have a drug or alcohol
problem? Are there other behavioral
issues like sleep dysregulation and lack
of eating that are contributing to the
pathology? You want to differentiate all
of that. And wherever you can make a
behavioral intervention, so much the
better. But sometimes too, you're
dealing with people whose lives are so
wrecked that they don't even know where
to start. They're different than the
ones who have everything in order, say,
and you say, "Well, try this man. Maybe
you won't cut your throat in the next
month because if you're dead, it's going
to be hard to work with you." And so, so
medical interventions, anything. If
you're sick, you do what it's necessary
to get better and you leave your pride
behind if you if you have to. And that
that says nothing about the utility of
the behavioral interventions. You want
to hit the problem with everything you
have at your disposal. But some
anti-depressants,
especially especially for people whose
lives are together and who are
depressed, anti-depressants can be
absolutely miraculous.
So, you know, when you hear about the
clinical evidence in their favor being
iffy, and that's partly because the
diagnosis of depression isn't very well
formulated, there's it's very different
to have a terrible life than to be
depressed. And anti-depressants can only
help you so much if you have a terrible
life. So,
yeah.
Yes.
you you've spoken about um you know
these activities that are meaningful and
how our our consciousness might be very
good at identifying those and how they
show themselves as a light. Do you you
know what I'm talking about right?
Mhm.
And
I feel like uh some things can hijack
that some things that are not actually
meaningful or useful to your life can
can make themselves
sure that that's what does some
personalities
Yeah. Video games for example are
now video games are okay. So the
question is can that sense of meaning be
hijacked? And the answer to that is
absolutely absolutely. Um because you
could say that the ultimate sense of
meaning is composed of the union of
fragmentaryary senses of meaning. And
the fragmentaryary senses of meaning can
be overwhelmingly powerful. anger,
sexual lust, and and and the sorts of
things that you experience when say when
you're playing a video game, which are
very carefully calibrated to keep you on
the on the edge of exploration, let's
say. Now, I'm not a a foe of video games
because games are complicated and it
isn't clear what people are doing when
they're playing them. You know, they may
be expanding their cognitive skills.
They may be learning to cooperate. Okay,
maybe learning to engage in complex
problem solving and so but part of it's
also a matter of balance. You know, 50
hours a week probably not unless you're
going to go pro, right? Because there's
other things you need to be attending
to. It's not a stable solution for you,
your family, your society. It's too
one-sided. Yeah. And you can get pulled
down rabbit holes of all sorts that that
are one-sided pursuits of meaning. So,
and it's something we're actually going
to talk about as the later classes
unfold. The question is, how do you stop
yourself from falling prey to a pathized
sense of meaning? And I think one of the
answers to that is don't lie.
Because what you're hoping is that your
nervous system is sufficiently healthy
and well programmed so that what it
reads out to you is reliable. And if you
pathize your psyche by either through
sins of omission, let's say, or or
outright deception, you're going to warp
that internal structure and it's not
going to read out properly to you and
then your sense of meaning will lead you
astray. So like one of the reasons for
speaking the truth, I shouldn't say that
because you don't know how to speak the
truth, but you do know how not to lie.
And it's a game you're playing with
yourself. You can define the damn lies.
No one else has to do that for you. You
you you try not to utter falsehoods
because you warp your neurological
structure by doing so and then it will
read out pathologically and then if you
rely on it to guide you, it will run you
right off a cliff. So that's why there's
a moral element to this is if you're
going to rely on your sense of meaning,
make sure that you don't pollute the
mechanism.
See, this is this is partly why people
go to confession,
right? which is m which is like a
psychotherrapeutic technique. It's like
okay what stupid miserable wretched
things did I do this week? That's a good
thing to to make conscious, right?
Because maybe you cannot do them the
next week. And you think, well, why
would you bother? It's like, well,
you're in a ship. It's sailing across
the the the stormy seas. If if you're if
you're hacking holes in it with a
pickaxe, you should probably pay
attention to that before you sink. So,
it's a good idea to keep to keep what
you're doing that's stupid in mind so
that you can stop doing it. And so, then
you can more and more rely on yourself
and your and your own, you know, your
own conscience, let's say, as a guide to
proper action. You know, in the
Pinocchio story is that the conscience
was not an unairring guide for
Pinocchio. It had to learn. And so and
so it's also partly pushing yourself
into new situations and differentiating
yourself so that you get wiser and and
so it's courage as well as truth. Those
those might be the two. There's more.
Beauty, courage, truth, you know, the
fundamental virtues.
Yeah. Why be virtuous? That's the
question. It's so that you can bear the
suffering of life without becoming
corrupt.
Right? It's practical.
It's practical. There's nothing more
practical than that. So unless you want
misery and people do, you know, it's
exciting misery. So other questions.
All right then.
See you next
Wednesday.