So, Jack Kruse, good to see you again,
my man. Thanks for coming back on the
show. Good to see you, too. Glad to be
here. Yeah, you were I think you were my
second or third guest when I started
this thing a year ago and I I really
appreciate you coming on back then when
I was virtually a unknown podcaster. In
the past year, I've grown quite a bit
and largely due to some of the great
people like you that came on in the
beginning and gave me some leverage and
credibility. So, thanks again, dude.
No problem, anytime. But you didn't need
me, you're already got a lot of
credibility. Ah, thanks, man. Thanks.
Yeah, it's been good. We're up to almost
600,000 downloads in the first year. So,
we're we're coming along slowly but
surely. It's been really fun. Yeah. So,
enough about me. What's going on in the
life of Jack Kruse at the moment? What
are you excited about? What's going on
in your career, your discoveries?
Well, I mean, I'm I'm still on the the
path for biohacking. I I have had a
pretty big discovery
towards the end of 2016, beginning of
2017
that um
all the things that I rail on about to
both my members and
um to people on different podcast
I realized that I'm up against my own
heteroplasmy rate because of my job. You
know, and you know
my day job is being a neurosurgeon and
one of the things about being a
neurosurgeon
that is a really difficult thing to
overcome is that we have to take call.
And when we're on call, that means
this stupid thing right here goes off at
all all hours of the night and then we
have to respond. And when we respond,
it's usually in a blue-lit environment
filled with non-native EMF. So,
when we do this between 7 and 10 nights
a month um it becomes a real big issue.
And for I've been doing some pretty
crazy hacks
for since 2014. And
I've come to the realization about
I would say probably
about 8 months ago that I was going to
have to change the way I did business,
you know, in my day job. And I've been
actively moving towards that trend of
being able to figure out how to
outsource uh being on call in
neurosurgery. And just so you know that,
I'm trying to explain this to you as
best I can. That would be
Luke trying to say, well, that's like
living your life by outsourcing oxygen.
So, it's that kind of level of
difficulty and it's taken a good year to
kind of get it squared away.
But I would say that I'm like 99.9%
there. So,
um my goal was to have it done by July
1st. And it looks like I'm going to, you
know, hit that that goal.
Uh but it's you know, it's a long
process. Um
but I'm excited because I may never have
to take another day of call the rest of
my life. So, that's 27 years
you know, of doing this. So, I'm kind of
you caught me at a really good time, you
know, it's
it's it's it's uh something I've been
really looking forward to.
You know, and I've been sharing that
information with my friends. In fact, I
just came back from from meeting one of
my buddies cuz he said, "Look, tell me
what's going on."
And uh I kind of let the rabbit out of
the bag. So, you're about the second or
third person I've talked to about it.
Good for you, man. Good for you. That's
you know, at a at a point in in in our
lives, I think that self-care really
starts to become important. You know, I
was in the fashion industry for
19 years and after, you know, I don't
know, I guess it's been about a year and
a half. It was just like, "Dude,
I can't drive around in LA traffic for
12 hours a day anymore." Right. It's
like there's a lot of benefit in having
that career. You make money, you know,
it's fun, it's creative. There I'm sure
like, you know, you enjoy your job, but
it's like at what price at a certain
point, you know? You do come up. That's
the that's exactly the point that I
would make to you is that, you know, I'm
I'm in my 50s. I'm in technically my
sixth decade now. And the way, you know,
this non-native EMF and and biophysics
works that every 10 years we age, our
heteroplasmy rate goes up. Well, here's
the thing. When you have a blue-lit life
and a non-native EMF life kind of like I
do that's why I have to do extraordinary
things to mitigate my risk. And
I've been doing really good job up until
I'd say the last three or four years.
And I always thought it was the social
media aspect, you know, the podcast and
this and that. And it turned out after
Ruben and I made the Quantlet
uh I figured out probably in about three
or four months that it actually wasn't
that. It was actually my job.
And you want to talk about a big swift
kick in the balls? Dude,
you know, it's kind of like what I tell
everybody else. You live by the sword,
you die by the sword. So, you know, um
you know, in true Jack Kruse form, what
do I do? I jump off the cliff without
wings and I make it happen. And you
know, just like anything else, Luke, you
know,
you you can never plan for all the
contingencies.
But like I said, you caught me right at
the right time. If you would have talked
to me six, seven, eight months ago
uh I was in the process, you know, the
the hardcore process of doing this. But
you know, I'm I'm pretty stoked right
now and I'm going to be able to do
neurosurgery
during daytime hours. I'm not going to
have to work on weekends. I'm not going
to have to take call. So, from my
standpoint, dude,
um
it couldn't get any better. The only
thing that would be better is if
Hurricane Cindy here gets out of my
backyard. Right, right. So, for those
for those of of us listening that
aren't, you know, like
from from a layman's point of view, what
exactly does a neurosurgeon do? Does
that mean that you carve open people's
skull with a saw and get in there and
mess with their brain?
Yeah, I do that. The other thing
neurosurgeons do is they operate on all
aspects of the spine. So, like when
people break their spine in two and
they're paralyzed, I take care of that.
Uh the other thing we do is we take care
of peripheral nerve injuries. So, if
anybody happens to be a fan of NFL
football and they're a Dallas Cowboys
fan, there's a football player there
named Jaylon Smith they drafted last
year. He had foot drop after having an
you know, a knee injury.
I take care of stuff like that. I see.
You know, whether it's whether it
requires surgery or not uh we do that.
You know, the simplest thing is like a
carpal tunnel which, you know, most
people know about. But I can do all
things from the ultimate complex like if
you get stabbed in the neck and all your
nerves coming out of your spinal cord
going down your arm don't work, that's
called a brachial plexus injury.
Um I fix those, too. So, anything that
has to do with the central and
peripheral nervous system, whether it's
surgery
and most of it's most of it is surgery,
but even non-surgical stuff that's the
kind of stuff I do. So, I reconstruct
a lot of spines, both necks, thoracic,
and lumbar spines. And you know, some of
the the crazy thing is what we're
talking about earlier. I may not have to
do the big crunch injuries anymore cuz a
lot of that stuff comes in at nighttime
when people are out you know, doing [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
they're not supposed to be doing. And
they come in with, you know, hellacious
injuries and we have to put them back
together again. That's kind of the thing
I'm trying to move away from. While it
was great when I was in my 20s, 30s, and
40s
um and even early in my 50s
it's one of the things that takes a toll
on a surgery. You know, you you do this
to help the patient, but I don't think a
lot of times that the lay public and and
and patients realize that the doctor
also puts himself at risk by doing this.
And you know, uh on top of this, you
know that when we do that kind of
surgery, especially when we're putting
spines together, we're around X-ray
machines and floral machines which I
think everybody knows is not good for
you. And when that makes up a a
predominant part of your practice,
that's when you have to start to think
about yourself cuz you know, one of the
things I tell my members and I'm going
to share this with you cuz I think
you'll appreciate it especially
is who the hell are you good for if
you're not good enough for yourself?
And that is my come-to-Jesus moment in
2016. And that's when I said, "You know
what? 2017 is the year that I have to
fix this problem in my life." Yeah.
Yeah. And that's the big that's the big
ticket. So, when you talk about you
know, to to your audience and your
members of your tribe and your website
and all that, they know what non-native
EMF is and what bad LED and fluorescent
lighting is. Could you give us a
breakdown of what you mean by this EMF
exposure that you're getting? Cuz I know
subjectively, I was just at the dentist
a couple days ago. They lay me back in
the chair, I look up and they have those
like sort of round encased metal, you
know, reflective light fixtures with
these long tube LED or fluorescent
lights in there and I look up and it
just like hurts my brain. You know, it's
like I immediately know I'm in an
environment that is not healthy. And I
look around at, you know, these guys are
in there all day, man. There's very
little natural light and if there is,
it's coming through a window which is
blocking, you know, the spectrum of the
some spectrums of the light that are
actually good. So,
what what is it about that environment
that's bad for someone that doesn't
understand how this stuff works?
Yeah, I mean, it's pretty simple. This
one is is is easy. Our cells are
optimized to work with sunlight. And
that carries frequencies from 250 up to
780.
Um the issue is anything that's outside
of that is a real problem uh for us. So,
since we're talking on Skype, I'm going
to send you a little picture
so that if you want to put this in the
show notes afterwards I want you to take
a look at that picture Awesome.
And you'll see that the visible part of
the spectrum is right where it is and
then you have the the extreme low
frequency end, which is the Schumann
resonance.
Everything that's between those two is
non-native EMF, and that's what we use
to communicate. But, what people don't
realize is when the incident ray the
incident electromagnetic ray comes in,
our cells are optimized for things only
within the spectrum that's present on
Earth. So, man has figured out how to do
what me and you are doing now. How can
you be in uh California and me be in
Louisiana? Because we're using
RF and microwaves, which are part of the
electromagnetic spectrum, but not part
that biology is optimized to. So, when
you build a life around
the other parts of the spectrum outside
of the sun,
that's when you have a problem. And and
that ties directly to how we opened this
podcast. That's really what my job has
put me at risk for, cuz you know, being
a neurosurgeon 27 years ago, I didn't
have a lot of those risks. Like when we
used to do certain types of surgery,
I didn't wasn't around a lot of that
stuff. Now, in the modern operating
room, dude, I can't get away from it.
So, it's like being in Chernobyl nuclear
reactor when you're with somebody. And
when you do this constantly every single
day, you know, you're building up uh uh
a toxicity to it. And that toxicity has
got a special name called heteroplasmy.
And what heteroplasmy is, for those of
you who don't know, we have respiratory
proteins on in our mitochondria. And
that's called cytochrome 1, 2, 3, and 4.
The other one is number five, which is
ATPase. And heteroplasmy is very simple
to understand. Normally, the things are
supposed to be this close together.
Heteroplasmy means it's like that. So,
when that happens, remember what
channels are crossed, there's electrons.
Physics says the closer things are
together, the easier energy transfers.
Well, if it's further apart, that means
that you're losing energy in the system.
And when that happens, you get sick. And
that's the key. And it's that simple.
The sun is optimized to work
with our cells and our mitochondria. So,
that's why we call it native cuz it's
native to the Earth, and we evolved on
this planet. Therefore, everything
that's outside of that 250 to 780 window
is what we call no bueno in my in my
Okay. And hence non-native. So, yeah.
So, and like when I come in my office
{slash} podcast studio here, for
example, um I have a couple sort of
amber incandescent bulbs that I usually
keep it lit with, which is really nice.
But, if I need more light, I only have
one option, and that's this LED light
that's in my overhead fan. And when I
turn that thing on, again, like I was
seeing at the dentist's office, it hurts
my eyes, and it literally like hurts my
brain. And so, what you're saying is is
that LED light has such a narrow
unnatural spectrum of light that my
brain and and optic nerve
literally doesn't know what to make of
that. It's like, what the what the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
is that light? We don't know what that
is. And so, it sort of scrambles your
your system, so to speak. Is that kind
of right? Well, it's it's actually even
simpler than that. I mean, I like the
way you described it, but what I want
people to understand, because it's
really cool. I'm going to send you
another picture probably later on that
you can use in the show notes. But, what
people don't realize when the sun rises
in the morning, equal amounts of blue
and red are present. There's other
frequencies, but the one frequency
that's not present is UVA and UVB. Why?
Cuz that comes a little bit later,
unless you're on the equator. So, here's
the take-home.
Blue light from native situation,
meaning the sun, is always balanced by
red. So, it turns out, guess what runs
all the regeneration programs in us? The
red. So, you're never designed to see
blue by itself. So, you just mentioned a
really cool bulb, an incandescent. The
reason why we didn't see spikes in
mitochondrial diseases
from 1879 up until about 1980
is because incandescents were the
primary bulb we used. And believe it or
not, they have red in them. Not a lot,
not like the sun. The
For those of your listeners who don't
know, 42% of sunlight is infrared A. So,
that means 42%
of sunlight has the regeneration
protocol. So, for those of you who don't
know this, there's a whole section on
PubMed called photobiomodulation or
LLLT, which is the science of red light.
It turns out one of those cytochromes in
our mitochondria is called cytochrome C
oxidase, and it has four absorption
spectrums. And guess what they are? All
in the red. What's the other big red
chromophore in the body? Water. So, all
of a sudden, then you start to see how
the system works.
So, anytime you have blue, you've got to
have red with it. And sunlight never
comes with blue without red. So, that's
how you start to understand why modern
technology really destroys us. And I
think most of your listeners
probably know that chronic blue light
has been well shown in the literature to
destroy melatonin. Well, we all know
that when we don't sleep, we can't
regenerate. But, now you know the real
reasons why. It's because you've
subtracted the red from your life.
So, what do I teach my tribe and my
misfits?
How to add back purple and red into your
life, cuz purple is UV, and red is the
infrared. And it turns out all the
modern bulbs, specifically LEDs and
fluorescents, have subtracted out the
purple and the red. Why?
Because they're energy efficient. And
that that's from the power company and
your wallet's perspective. But, here's
the flip side. It costs a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton more
to come to me as the neurosurgeon
Exactly. than it does to pay PG&amp;E.
Exactly. Exactly.
what we have That's the message, really,
that I'm trying to get across to people
that we are we are being penny wise and
pound foolish with our decisions on
light.
Right. So, same thing with with people
that are like, "Oh, I'm not going to go
to Whole Foods and buy organic food cuz
it's too expensive. I'll go to Costco
and get the GMO pesticide shit." They
don't realize that they're going to have
to pay for chemo,
uh cardiologist, et cetera, dialysis,
all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] later on. Espe- especially
when they're under blue light and do
this. That's That's the real kicker. I
mean, you know that one of the things
that I'm a stickler about is food is not
the top priority for me. The top
priority for me is getting your light
environment right, because if you do
that, you can almost eat [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] on a
shingle and get away with it. And I know
that's contrary to the message that a
lot of people give, but that's how
incredibly important understanding light
really is. And it really is powerful. I
would I tell people that if you can get
in natural sunlight, you'll be doing
more benefit for yourself than you could
ever imagine um that's earthly possible.
Then you fix the other problems, like
the water that we've talked about before
in previous podcasts, and the food
issue. But, I've got to get people's
focus on the thing that matters the
most. And it turns out that sunlight is
that big issue. So, let's So, let's
start with the with the indoor lighting.
In your opinion, in terms of the types
of bulbs that we can light our homes
with, what's the hierarchy in terms of
like how I I would look at it would be
fluorescent worst, then LED, then
halogen, then incandescent?
What's your What's your take? Backwards?
LED is by far the worst.
Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it's worse than fluorescent?
Yeah, it is. Now, fluorescents have a
couple of other issues. And I'm actually
looking on my computer right now to send
you a picture to prove you why that's
the case, cuz I do want you to link it
in the show notes. Okay. But, the key
key thing is the LEDs are by far the
worst. And the reason why is they have a
big spike between 435 and 465, which is
which is what destroys melatonin. Uh
The The fluorescents have other issues.
But, uh they're they're equally as bad.
If you ask me, let Instead of focusing
on what's bad, let's focus in on what's
good. What I do in my house at
nighttime, post sunset, I use fire. So,
I'm a big believer in having natural
fireplaces. Now, I know when you live in
LA, that's pretty freaking hard to do.
Your AC bill would definitely be pretty
high, yeah.
Yeah, well, the other thing you can do
though is you can put your fire pit
outside and live an outdoor life. That's
one of the cool things about LA that you
can get away with. Um it turns out I can
do the same thing here. Now, when I do
come inside, cuz you know, it is pretty
hot here, even though we're going
through this Hurricane Cindy crap, um
it's probably 93, 94° here, and the
humidity is over 95%. Wow. So, the the
key issue And here comes that picture. I
just found it. Oh, cool. One of my
little Instagram quotes, but you see on
that picture I sent you, it shows you
the spectrum. The back spectrum is the
one of sunlight, and the front spectrum
is the one of fluorescents.
But, the key thing that you need to
understand about light,
the best one is fire, as far as I'm
concerned. So, one of the cool things,
cuz you used to be a style stylist,
um and you still do stuff like that, I
would tell you I You know I have a big
wine collection, and I can actually show
this to you right now, cuz I have one in
front of me.
This is a bottle of '99 Grange, and you
notice
that I have a wick inside of it, and
it's got some lamp oil. So, this is what
I use at night. So, people who are
watching this are seeing I just pulled
this right off of my coffee table. So,
here is a 1995 Mouton Rothschild. For
those of you who don't believe, there's
the label.
And look what's in the top.
That's wild.
This is called the Vino Glow. So, at
nighttime, this is what my house is lit
up like. So, when you watch like the
Game of Thrones and things like that in
Jack Kruse's house,
we actually have
that. We use that and candles. And now
I'm really going to freak you out.
Since we're sitting here. For those of
you listening, you got to go on YouTube
and check this out. This is amazing.
It is a 1967
I'm sorry not a silver oak. But you see
all the candle wax on it?
So how do you think you get that candle
wax on there, Luke? Well, that's what
Jack uses at night. So Okay. believer in
natural light. And the reason why I'm
going to explain to you the reason why
so you get it and the reason why people
should understand this is fire has very
little blue in it. Has a ton of
infrared. So guess what?
At night time, since I told you red
regenerates
you have a period of time where red even
at night time is okay. And here's the
reason why. Our retinas do not see
infrared light. You have to have an
infrared camera. Turns out we can't see
UV light either. And do you know why
that is? It's a quantum reason.
Because if you observe the frequencies
of light that are used for signaling
it inactivates the quantum process
because you probably have heard of all
these crazy things in quantum mechanics.
If you observe the effect, it changes
the result. So what has nature done?
It's blinded your eyes to purple and red
light so that you can't observe the
effect. And that effect, it's called the
quantum Zeno effect. That's how deep we
get at my site.
Dude, that's so trippy. It is. And and
you
And you know how deep I get into this
stuff Luke. But the reason I want people
to know this is because no matter where
you are, you can set a fire pit up at
your house.
You can have a fireplace anywhere. You
can do it outdoors, indoors. But that's
the stuff I use. And if if
since you live in LA, what I would tell
you to do is go to Home Depot and get
one of those, you know, headlights that
you see like coal miners wear. But just
get a red LED on it and I'd be okay with
that you reading on that.
I just don't do a lot of that unless
it's winter time, you know, when it gets
dark at 4:30. But even when my daughter
does her homework in the kitchen, we
have two UVA bulbs. You know, those are
party bulbs that you've seen that make
things glow in the dark with an
incandescent. That's what she does her
homework under. Wow. Wow. And okay, so
if that's not feasible or someone wants,
you know, just needs more brightness,
would the next step up then be like
amber incandescent bulbs? Like that's
what I I get them on Amazon, you know,
cuz they're decorative so it got around
that you know,
the EPA regulations or whatever that try
to get rid of incandescents. You can
still get them. They're just like
decorative. Right. You have to go You
have to go to just to the the lighting
outside of Lowe's. They still sell them,
you know, Lowe's and Home Depot sell
them but they're called specialty
lighting. You can still find them. It's
not hard to do. But I tell my members
because you have to realize
I'm a stickler about this stuff. I
really don't want even an incandescent
on afterwards because remember on
incandescent, that picture I just sent
you, there's still a little spike in the
blue. Okay? So you want to kind of get
rid of all that because here's the the
way sunlight works. Once it sets
the way it goes is the blue goes away.
Now red is still present in our
environment. But where is it present?
And you know this better than anybody.
When you're out in the in the in the
desert, you pick up a rock, it's still
pretty damn hot. You can't see the heat,
but if you had a flare infrared camera,
you'd say damn, that's hot.
And here's the thing. That infrared is
still present in your environment
because your environment holds it in.
So I'm okay with red light post sunset
for about two to three hours, but then
out.
And that's the reason why I'm a big
stickler about even incandescents after
night because if especially if you have
trouble sleeping or you have a
mitochondrial disease like cancer,
autism, you know, autoimmune conditions,
any any of the ones that what what I
call low hanging fruit, you know, in the
community that you and I serve you need
to let them know that that needs to be
taken out. So if you do use those bulbs,
here's the the the switch. For example,
you don't realize this, but any of you
who listen to me and and Luke talk, you
go to YouTube, I'm wearing these glasses
that you can't tell are blue tech
lenses, but they are. They're blocking
50% of the blue while me and Luke talk
over Skype. I take these off and these
are the glasses that I operate to. And
these block everything between 400 and
500 nanometers. So now technically, I've
completely eliminated all the blue. The
red still gets through these.
Okay? So does the greens and and
yellows. But during the day, I'm not
worried about that. But when I'm working
at night I want total blue protection.
Why? Because that's what destroys
melatonin and dopamine first in the eye
and then in the brain. And when that
happens
that's when you're going to wind up
getting walloped off see by my
profession down the pike because those
are the precursors to all the metabolic
diseases that everybody hears about in
the doctor's office.
And you know, the drug companies are
making a mint off selling people drugs
that can't fix this problem. Why?
Because it's a light mediated phenomenon
and it affects both our eyes
and our skin. And we don't realize
how this is tied together because guess
what?
Humans don't know that much about light.
They don't know that much about quantum
mechanics.
And my job as a doctor, the way I look
at it is to teach people
how to know these things. You don't have
to know it as deep as say I do. But I I
I think you'll like this little analogy
a lot.
We don't have to teach the hippo or the
lion how to eat or live. They just do it
and they don't get in trouble. But the
reason why, Luke, we need to talk to
humans and have podcasts and have blogs
is because we have this incredible thing
in our head called the human brain. And
that thing is so amazing that allows us
to break all of nature's laws.
So when we break those laws that the
hippo and and lion live by we don't
realize that something as ubiquitous as
the light that we live around
can cause the diseases we get. And
that's what makes this very
counterintuitive.
And when you decide to jump down Jack
Kruse's rabbit hole, I promise you when
I get done with you
you'll know everything you need to know
about light, water and magnetism.
And then you'll begin be be able to put
it together and you become a
mitochondriac. And a mitochondriac is a
person
who really wants to know the nth degree.
Then you'll know why I'm such a stickler
about the light that I use at night
because
I don't want any person coming to see me
or talking to me on a podcast or
listening to my podcast
and and getting a half truth because I
felt like for the first 40 years of my
life in my profession that that's what I
gave people. And the reason I gave
people that is because that's what I was
taught in school because I didn't know
any better. And then
I got enlightened, so to speak, a good
pun
about 12 years ago and I've been sharing
this message for the last 12 years out
there with anybody who wants to learn.
And you know, my message is now
beginning to resonate very, very loud
because now the science is very much
behind me. 12 years ago, you couldn't
find this information anywhere. Now
there's books written on it. There's
articles constantly. I mean God, if you
go to my Dr. Jack Kruse Facebook page
and just to pop put my name in and any
topic you want, you're going to get a
bing and it's not going to be just my
opinion. You know, 12 years ago, 10
years ago, even 7 years, it was my
opinion. You know, based on me reading
the science. Now it's blatantly obvious
to everybody. The problem is it's just
still not well known, especially in your
community, especially out in LA.
And you know, when me and Luke first
met, we met at an event with Neil
Strauss
and Luke's story about how he went to
get his water. You know, he made the
comment that people think I'm crazy to
do this and I'm sitting in the back of
the room and I'm going dude, you're not
crazy at all. You're you absolutely are
like the hippo and the lion. Why?
Because instead of because you lived as
a zoo animal in LA because of your job
you knew that you had to do something
extraordinary between light, water and
magnetism. You probably didn't know that
much about light. You didn't know that
much about magnetism, but you said [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
I know water's important. So guess what?
That's the part of the stool that you
hit hard and that's the reason why I
consider you, you know, a good dude and
also a little bit of a mitochondriac.
You still need to add the other parts,
but dude, you're going to your podcast
the tribe that you hit, these are people
that I will never be able to hit. And
the reason I like doing and reaching out
you know, to guys like you is because
even if we affect one or two people by
listening to saying, you know what? I
need to think about this whole blue
light thing maybe a little bit
differently.
That's dude, that's a win. That's a win
for both me and you. And when people
want to jump down the rabbit hole more,
then yeah, come to my site and I'll
split your head open and teach you
everything you need to know. But here's
the crazy thing.
The hippo and the lion, they don't have
to know this. So you know what that
really means? This should make us
everybody smart. Neither do you to get
it.
Exactly. Well, I mean it's like with the
with the the light piece in the sun,
I've made this correlation that when we
go on vacation, we think that we feel so
good and we're so happy and relieved
maybe cuz we're away from our job or
we're in some place that has some sense
of novelty or excitement, you know,
tropical island or whatnot. But I think
a lot of it or even just going to the
pool on Sunday or something or the
beach, I think a lot of it is that
you're in the sun. Absolutely.
You know, just like we like sun. You
know, that's there's a reason why and
there's a reason why I like the spring
water that comes right out of a goddamn
rock 10,000
feet up in the mountains. I mean, it's
just like I don't have to know the
science. I just know intuitively my body
and spirit are just like yes, more of
that. Well, do you want to I I can tell
you exactly the reason why very simply.
It is a little bit of science, but it's
going to be the kind of science that
even somebody with no background can
get. In third grade all of us learned
about this process called
photosynthesis. It's where we take CO2
and water, mix in sunlight, we make
sugar. Everybody knows that. That's not
controversial.
But what people forget is that
mitochondria reverse that process 100%.
So, what does that mean?
It means when sunlight hits us, we make
CO2 and we make water. Guess what? Your
mitochondria is designed to make water.
So, Luke, the most important water in
your life isn't the stuff that you go
get out of the spring.
It's the sunlight that you're in builds
water inside your cell. That's how life
went from the the sea to the land.
That's the key. And when you begin to
realize that sunlight is what builds
your battery in your body called water,
dude, everything changes. That's the
key. And it turns out the EMF that
signals that in a mitochondria is
sunlight 250 to 780. That's the reason
why the stuff that Apple, Cisco, and
Google makes not so bueno for a
mitochondria. So, if you're going to
live and swim in that kind of sea, you
got to do a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton more to stay well.
Well, that's what I was going to ask
you. What about, you know, when it comes
to blue light in this technology? Cuz I
know you and I aren't giving up our, you
know, Skype or laptops or anything
anytime soon.
What about these like blue blocking
screens? And now, you know, Apple's put
like this night shift app on there. I
mean, does that help at all? You're just
giving a thumbs down, listeners. Does
that I mean, does that does that help at
all? like It helps, but that's like
saying I put filters on my camel
cigarettes. So, let's just make it real.
The the type of screen technology that
you need to look into is Iris software
and Iris screens. If you use that, they
really take the blue out. That's the
best that's out there. But truthfully,
where you are, Luke, I'm looking I'm
hoping that there's some entrepreneurs
out there. You know, guys like Neil
Strauss and his crew that these guys
start to put their money behind red base
screens instead of blue gray screens.
Because I told you red already offers a
huge benefit. If we just made that one
change in the technology arena, we could
help humans tremendously. Okay? So,
I will tell you that we started this
podcast off, you know, I'm I'm I don't
like disagreeing with my host, but I'm
going to tell you I already told you in
2017 that I changed my life in
neurosurgery. And why did I do it? It's
because of this non-native EMF. So, I'm
going to tell you that yes, it is that
big a deal. Now, I'm going to still do
maybe podcasting and this and that, but
I have to tell you, Luke, I now pay
people to do a lot of my social media
stuff. Why? I'm not willing to trade
dollars for life or time. And 10 years
ago I was willing to do that. I'm not
willing to do it anymore. And I know
people listening to this,
they're going to be willing to make that
trade, but I think the reason they're
willing to make the trade is because
they really don't understand the trade
that they're making. And then when they
do get a mitochondrial disease or they
do need a guy like me,
and that's when that's when the game
changes for them. You know, and I I I
remind everybody how Steve Jobs died.
Okay? It's called a laptop cuz it was in
his lap for a long time. And guess what?
That's really close to your pancreas and
your liver.
And you know, people don't realize that
I think he knew it. If you watch
uh his bibliography, the things that he
wrote, the fact that he didn't let his
own kids use his own technology, what
does that tell you, Luke? Wow, I didn't
know that. That's intense.
Yes, absolutely. And not only that, I'll
tell you something else you may not
know. In the iPhone 4 and the second
iPad that came out, do you know that it
had an infrared sensor built into it
that that Apple never marketed? Do you
know why? Because that would tell them
when the device was next to their body
when you were kicking off heat and it
would turn it off. Why? Because that
device stays on as a bidirectional
microwave device. And they know it. The
problem is they're protected by the FCC
law. But the the key crazy thing is the
more non-native EMF and blue light you
allow in your environment, you become an
obedient idiot, meaning that you can't
think as well. And that's why they're
not telling you about it. And they know
that you're an obedient idiot cuz it
makes you a good customer. And that's a
function of dopamine. Okay? And Damn,
this gets deep. This is great. Really?
Well, it's kind of cool it's kind of
cool for people to hear this stuff
because
when you understand how this works, the
way to solve the problem is just get
back in the sun because that's how you
build your dopamine level up. And it's
the craziest thing, you know, we've
recently just had a couple of high
profile deaths, you know,
especially in the music business, you
know, Chris Cornell died from
Soundgarden. And I I released a a blog
post on LinkedIn that really really
resonated with a lot of people. And I
tried to explain to people that when you
have a low dopamine state, you're you
get addicted to sex, porn, pedophilia,
food, wine,
drugs, and weed. And the reason why
people don't realize Do you know there's
a chemical that's made in your brain and
your body when you're in sunlight called
POMC, spelled p o m c. It stands for a
big long chemical, but we cleave it into
six different things. You know what two
You know what one of those things is?
Called beta-endorphin. You've heard
about it from exercise. You know what
that is? It's a natural opioid. So, you
know what happens when your dopamine
level goes low? You don't make enough
POMC. So, what is your behavior? You go
and use things to raise
your dopamine level other ways. That's
what addiction fundamentally is. So, you
know what that means? Cut to the chase.
That means that nature built us to be
addicted to sunlight because of
beta-endorphin. Do you know what the
crazy thing about beta-endorphin is?
It's the only opiate that we know of
that doesn't cause you to be addicted to
any other opiates. Wow.
So,
nature knows what she's doing. Dude,
that's crazy. You're talk I mean, you're
talking to a former opiate addict for a
long time. And, you know, another part I
got another part for this story that
This is this great. And the thing is too
is once, you know, once I was able to be
freed from that, then, you know, all of
the other [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you mentioned, the sugar,
the social media pings on your phone,
like all of those other little dopamine
spikes.
addiction for the next.
Exactly, exactly. And here's the crazy
Same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know.
It's all the same thing. It's the
dopamine hit you're trying to replace.
Here's the other one. It's the flip side
of the story. We have another system in
our body called the endocannabinoid
system. And most people know about
cannabinoids, THC, smoke the weed. So,
anytime somebody comes to me and say I
like smoking weed, you know what it
means to me as a quantum clinician? That
they're not in the sun enough. Cuz guess
what makes that endocannabinoid? Turns
out it's sunlight. So, nature has
figured out anybody who uses opiates and
weed, they're not in the sunlight
enough. So, guess what the answer is?
The answer is to change your
environment, not to go to rehab, not to
do this, just go to freaking Hawaii and
sit on the side of a volcano. And that's
part of the reason
love a guy like you because
I see you do the things that you're
doing when you're out in nature. And you
said you're a former opiate guy. Well,
guess what? I don't think you're going
to go back to that as long as you keep
doing the stuff that you're doing in
nature. You are designed Your best Wi-Fi
signal, dude, is connecting wirelessly
with the sun with your feet on the
ground. That's why I tell all my
members, all my misfits, everybody in my
tribe, I want them to be like the
sphinx. I want all four extremities on
the ground looking to the east every
morning. Why? Because it turns out
sunlight is much more powerful for us as
humans in the morning than at any other
part of the night because that's what
turns on the giant system in your
pituitary gland called the what I call
the compound pharmacy. See, you can use
the compound pharmacy, you know, on
Rodeo Drive for a couple thousand a
month, but you'd be a whole lot better
off using the one that's in your own
brain. And what do I teach people? How
to do that naturally cuz here's the
crazy thing that Big Pharma doesn't want
you to know.
It's free.
Doesn't cost a penny.
Exactly. So, that's an interesting thing
about the the the cannabis and lack of
sun. I wanted just poke one hole in that
theory that because it popped in my
head. What about the Rastas in Jamaica
that are getting plenty of sun and all
they do is smoke weed? Yeah, well, you
got to remember, what else do they do?
They play music at what time? Did you
Have you ever seen a Bob Marley concert
at 8:00 in the morning or is it always
at 1:00 or 2:00 in the at night? That's
a good point. That's So, guess what?
That does This is the thing that people
don't realize. Think about all the guys
that died. I mean, think about Carrie
Fisher. What did she do?
She was a big time drug addict, right?
She just died of a heart attack. Where
is more mitochondria in humans? In your
heart and your brain. She died on a
plane disconnected coming home. They
found all kinds of drugs in her system
when she supposedly recovered. So, what
did she do? What was her job? She's an
actress. What is she around, Luke? Blue
light, non-native EMF since the time she
was probably 10 years old. How about
somebody else in your industry? Michael
Jackson. What What did he do? He went
and found a crazy doctor to give him
Diprivan. Do you know what Diprivan is?
It's called It's It's a chemical that we
used to put people to sleep. But you
know what people don't know? It's
actually a mitochondrial toxin. So, why
did he have the heart attack? Because
the drug that he needed to sleep, cuz he
couldn't sleep cuz of the blue light and
the non-native EMF, he used that and
that wound up offing his mitochondria in
his heart. See, these are the
connections people don't make. Kurt
Cobain. Why was he depressed? He was in
Seattle. What do you know about Seattle?
There's no sun. And he's playing music
on electrified guitars. The links are
always there, but you know what the key
thing is? We don't see them because
we're obedient idiots because we're
addicted to modern things that reduce
our dopamine level. My job is to make
those connections for you. Jack, can you
explain we we're using the the term
mitochondria. Can you explain to the
listeners what that is?
Yeah, it's pretty simple.
Even if you don't have a science
background. We have two genomes in our
cell, every cell in our body with the
exception of a couple. One is the
nuclear one that everybody knows. That's
where the genes are. And the other one
is the mitochondria. The mitochondria
you only inherit from your mom. And the
mitochondria is the powerhouse of the
cell. So, if you think of a car,
the the mitochondria would be the
battery and the alternator of the car or
the engine. It's probably better to
think it's the whole engine. Whereas the
nuclear genome is the mechanics that put
the whole car together.
Uh the key thing is is all energy flux
in the cell. Everything that turns the
lights on in your cell comes from a
mitochondria. And the crazy thing is
medicine is focused on the nuclear
genome and it turns out this genome is
the most important. So, that's why I use
the term mitochondria because all my
members, all my misfits, everybody in my
tribe, we focus in on that genome, not
the other one. And that fundamentally
is the reason why medicine
is looking they're looking under the
wrong stone. For example, remember Nixon
in '71 said, "Let's have a war on
cancer." We spent now over close to 1.5
trillion dollars on research. We've done
nada. And you know the reason why? Cuz
we're looking in the nuclear genome and
it turns out the answer cancer is a
mitochondrial disease. So, it's no
shocker why we haven't found a cure. And
the reason why there's no impetus in big
pharma to go that way because dude, this
become a billion-dollar a business
because if you're looking in the wrong
place for the disease, you get to keep
selling drugs that treat the symptoms
and not the cause. It's very very
simple. It's a very
It's it's it's a it would be a really
bad business decision to expose the
actual root cause of things like that. I
I want to Think about how crazy it is
though. The sun is free. All you got to
do is get your ass outside, but here's
the problem. We've now created we let
Google, Microsoft, Cisco, you know, all
these companies create an existence.
Technology doesn't bring us outside, my
friend. It brings us inside. I mean,
you're too young to know this, but I
guarantee you there's going to be some
millennial that's going to talk to their
dad, "When when I was 6 to 10 to 12
years old, I was outside riding my bike
playing baseball."
These kids are inside doing this, dude,
and texting and on their iPad and doing
that. Their their existence is so
radically different than what it used to
be just 40 years ago, but people today
do not realize that coming inside takes
you away from 250 to 780 and brings you
right to 430 to 465. That is an alien
sun, dude. And and and it's very apropos
that I said that because I want you to
think about Chris Cornell's major song,
Black Hole Sun.
And you want to hear something else
that's crazy about it? If you have any
musicians out there listening to this,
if you know anything about the music
composition, that song was written all
in flats. And do you know why he did
that? Because when you have a low
dopamine state, you begin to see the
fractal nature of I should say the
fractal fabric of nature. And there's
another guy in your neck of the woods,
in your I would say
I'll be a little bit older than you, but
you've heard about him. Jackson Pollack.
Remember him? He was a raging alcoholic.
What what made him famous? He used to
paint fractally. And the only way you
can see the fractal fabric of nature is
when your dopamine level's low. So, now
I just gave you two examples of low
dopamine people who actually can see
that fractal nature. When your dopamine
level's high, it blocks you from seeing
those fundamentals in nature. That's
what the sunlight does, dude. That's the
reason why we see life in a movie and
when dopamine level goes low, we start
to see it just like isolated picture
frames and that's when you make bad
connections. It's because you're not
putting things together properly.
It's very important. Two things for
yeah, I've gotten this
you know, people dispute the sun thing
that I know that I've recommended that
that are fair-skinned. How can someone
who's, you know,
lightly complexioned acclimate
themselves to sunlight cuz what they
always say is like, "Oh, that's fine for
you, Luke. You're Italian. You got olive
skin. It doesn't burn cuz I really don't
burn, you know, except if I go to Brazil
or something
close to the equator. But here I I mean,
I could lay naked in the sun all day. I
just get tanner and tanner until I look
like Wesley Snipes or something
eventually. I don't know.
But my my my ginger friends, my
fair-skinned friends are like, "Oh, I
can't do it. I have to wear sunscreen."
And I'm like, "Ah, god, you're putting
you're putting cancer-causing [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] on
your skin going into your bloodstream
cuz you're afraid of getting cancer from
the sun that gives you melatonin that
actually prevents cancer." It's like so
frustrating, but I can't tell them how
to do it safely. Maybe you can. Yeah, I
can. In fact, guess what? As you're
talking, I'm getting ready to send you
another picture for the show notes. Oh,
good. So, you've met me, right? And you
know, here's the picture coming.
Uh I want you to take a look at that
yourself. Um you know that I'm an Irish
guy. I have a K haplotype. I'm very
white. I have Fitzpatrick type one skin.
Okay? So, in that picture that I just
sent you is a biohack that I did with
the Quantlet. So, it turns out when you
live at a high latitude, which is where
Ireland and UK is,
uh you never get to see much UV light.
So, the reason why red hair, freckles,
and Fitzpatrick type one skin's there,
you're designed to absorb as much as you
can get. Well, it turns out there's
something really funny on that slide I
sent you. The more infrared A light you
absorb, what did I tell you earlier? All
sunlight has 42% of it. So, if you're
naked at that high latitude, it
preconditions the skin to absorb UV
light better. So, take a look at the
slide I just showed you. It'll show you
when your skin is preconditioned with
infrared A light,
look at you don't get erythema. You
don't get burned. So, how does Jack
at the 28th latitude who lives in New
Orleans now stay out in the sun 5 to 8
hours a day and I don't have that
problem, Luke. See, you now dude on your
Rolodex
who can explain this to them. Why?
Because I'm always in it. And when
somebody tells me they have Fitzpatrick
one or two skin and they get red, you
know what it tells me?
They're vampires. They're full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
They don't go in the sun enough cuz
they're not getting infrared A both in
their eyes or on their skin. So, here's
the crazy hack in LA. Say if you have a
job where you can't do this, remember I
told you that red light doesn't get you
in the trouble say from sunset to about
two or three hours later,
go call up Thor Industries, go get
yourself a tanning bed that's only red
light. Now, it's going to cost you
anywhere between 30 and 100 grand, but
if you get a group of your friends
together or a chiropractor, they put it
in their practice,
20 minutes a day. Sometimes three times
a day if you're really white. So, how
did I do it in me, Luke? I didn't spend
the money on the bed. I went from
Nashville to New Orleans. And what did I
do? Got naked in the backyard and that's
how I built up my solar callus. And you
know what causes that? The aromatic
amino acids in your skin. There's four
of them. Tyrosine, tryptophan,
phenylalanine, and histidine. And it
turns out that what makes these amino
acids really special, they have what we
call a six-carbon ring in them. You've
probably heard of benzene before.
Well, every one of those has it. You
know what's special about those rings?
They absorb UV light. So, guess what?
The infrared A light stimulates the
water that's around all of those and
that acts as a molecular engine for you
to bury more UV light within that
benzene ring.
And that's how you avoid the erythema.
That's how I can go
to Mexico at the 20th latitude next week
and not get uh
red like lobster. So, I'm going to tell
your your members and your friends that
tell you this, that they just proved to
me that they're ignorant about life. I'm
not trying to down them. I'm trying to
elevate their game. I'm trying to teach
them that there's something else here
because most people know
that there's people that live on the
equator and they do it just fine. Well,
does it mean that a guy with uncoupled
haplotype mitochondrion and and really
light skin is going to live there? But
if you know what you're doing, you can
adapt to that environment. And you can
do it very successfully as long as you
know what you're doing.
So,
could it could someone who's more
fair-skinned also just gradually
acclimate themselves where, you know,
they they go out like you said earlier
in the day, later in the day, or even
solar noon when the sun's really strong,
but just you you go out for 10 minutes
at first and you get the hell out and
you kind of like work your way up? Well,
you can do that, but you got to realize
that the UVA and the UVB light is going
to give you the erythema response. The
most important thing to do, remember I
told you in the morning there's no UV
and later in the day not this time of
the year is bad cuz we're talking right
now at round the solar the the solar the
summer solstice, so it's strongest now.
So,
depending on what your latitude is, you
have to make the decision, but as soon
as the sun rises, 6:00 to about 7:00
a.m. here,
there's no UV. So, that's the time for
you to be naked outside. That's when
you're getting 42% infrared A with no
UV. The flip side of that is true, too.
The last hour of sunlight, same benefit.
Now, just for argument's sake, say we're
in April. Well, guess what? Then it goes
all the way to maybe 6:00 to 9:30.
Okay? It's bigger. The key thing is,
remember I told you before what nature
does? You're designed to be addicted to
sun. But our modern society, our
culture, our beliefs have brought us out
of the sun. So, what you call enough
solar exposure, nature's telling you
it's not enough. When you get
erythematous and you have Fitzpatrick
one skin, wrong answer. That by
definition, you are wrong. Your belief,
your dogma, your paradigm is absolutely
wrong. But here's the cool thing. When
you understand how light, water, and
magnetism work,
then you can use a bio hack, or what I
call a mito hack, which is that picture
that I just sent you. That shows you
that if you use infrared A LEDs on your
body to offset your shitty lifestyle,
dude, you can go out midday sun and not
get red. And you'll be like,
"Damn." And I always tell people,
building up your solar callus is like
buying a brand new pair of Ferragamo
shoes. That first time you wear those
Ferragamo shoes, they hurt like a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Soon as you wear them out, they're all
nice, they're broken in. Same thing is
true with sunlight. And the best way to
do it is not the way you mentioned, you
know, going and getting 5 or 10 minutes.
The best way is use infrared A, know
when it's present and when it's not, and
that's the way you're designed to work
with nature. So, very interesting, Jack.
So,
the red light seems to be the missing
link. I want to ask you one other thing
that I've heard, and I don't know if you
have an opinion on this, but what about
taking astaxanthin as a supplement, you
know, that red seaweed oil? Is that
going to do anything to improve our
tolerance to sun? It can, but here's the
here's where you're going to run into
some of my quantum rules. You're not
designed to take pills. Like a million
years ago, Luke, there was no pills. You
know what
as that the the antioxidant that you're
talking about, you know where it's
designed to come from? Shellfish. What
do you know about the book that I wrote?
What's it all about? It's got an
Epi-Paleo period pyramid in it. And what
is that pyramid? Tells you that
shellfish is the top.
So, guess what? You're designed to get
it from nature. So, I'm very quantum
coherent with my misfits. I don't
believe in pills at all. And that means
pills from my profession or pills from a
supplement maker. Cuz I always make this
comment and I it rubs a lot of people
the wrong wrong way. But I think it's
important for people to hear directly
why I feel this way.
Um,
supplement makers,
um,
they make a lot of money off of the off
of obedient idiots, people with low
dopamine level. And they're banking on
those people being foolish.
And the key thing is, once you realize
there's no shortcutting nature,
and I'll explain to you why. Everything
in biology, everything in a cell is a
couple system, meaning there's a
positive and negative feedback. So, if
you take an exogenous thing that we're
designed to make normally,
and you add it to the mix, you've just
uncoupled that system. So, we have
an example of this that I use in with my
members that I'll share with you. You
know that the coupled system in nature
is predator and prey. What happens when
you change either the predator
population or the prey population when
you take it to the nth degree? They both
become extinct. So, I want you to think
about that. If you think taking
melatonin or any of the antioxidants is
a good idea,
you're not part of my tribe. Why?
Because you don't physically understand
how these things work. Now, the crazy
thing, a lot of the skeptics out there
will come and say, "Well, isn't food
technically a supplement?" Yeah, but
what people don't realize, the entire
food web is linked to what, Luke?
Photosynthesis.
We're back to the light again, aren't
we? So, that means all the electrons
that are in food are programmed by
sunlight frequencies. And guess what
your mitochondria's job is? It's to yoke
the light that comes through your eye
and your skin
to the electrons that go in your body.
That's the reason why I famously said 5
years ago at the PaleoFX conference that
if you live in Boston and eat a banana
on December 31st, you're a freaking
idiot.
And and it was not met with uh
a lot of a plum. People were pissed off
when I said it. And I said, "Just
because you can buy a banana in Boston,
doesn't mean you can eat it. Why? Cuz
nature doesn't allow bananas to grow at
a high latitude when there's poor solar
light." So, what did you just create
there? You just created a circadian
mismatch in your gut. Okay? And this is
this is a real key point.
People do not know, lay people do not
know that the entire food web on Earth
is linked to photosynthesis. So, that
means that your mitochondria knows that
and it's dialed into that. So, that
means the frequencies that go through
your eye and your skin, they don't match
with what you're eating,
therein lies why your gut microbiome
gets screwed up. It's not because of the
foods you eat. It's because of the light
that you're allowing, and it throws off
the software that runs the hardware in
us. And that's the key. That's why I'm
I'm a really big pain in the ass to
people who sell supplement boxes every
month to people. I'm cool with you
wanting to buy it. If you want to enrich
somebody, I'm fine with that. But I want
you to understand fundamentally how we
work, because if I can put you back in
nature, like you do, Luke,
that's the best supplement you could
ever get. And it's free, and it's easy
to do. The problem is, we've created our
lives
in such a way that it disconnects us
from that connection.
And if I can get people to reconnect
with that more, then I feel like I'm
doing my job. And here's the crazy
thing, you don't have to be in it 24/7,
but you have to be in it enough. And you
know, probably when you were using
opiates compared to now, you probably
weren't in it a lot back then,
uh but you are now. And and maybe that's
the real reason that you've noticed a
tremendous change in the way you think
about things. Because, you know, when I
first met you, the reason I loved you,
you could see that passion.
You knew you were plugged into
something. You didn't know all the
science, and it didn't matter to you.
And I I remember thinking to myself when
you were there with Ben Greenfield, I
said, "Both of these guys, one's a lion,
the other one's a hippo." And and it's
so cool to see a person turned on.
Um, I just I have to be a little bit
more of a stickler with my crew, because
you know, doctors are skeptics and they
want to tear you down. And they need the
science. They need the sites. They need
to know that this isn't some crazy
madman on the internet that's got his
own ideas. But trust me, I back up
everything I say with hardcore data. But
you don't need to know that. You just
need to know that living as a wild
human, you know our friend Daniel
Vitalis,
the wild human versus the zoo animal,
okay?
Modern humans are zoo animals. And I'm
trying to teach them how to go back and
be their wild self. Because if you do
that,
you can get better, and you don't need
anything extraordinary to do it,
especially a pill from a supplement
maker. Well, you just saved me about
1,200 bucks a month.
Thank you. I'll give you your commission
at the end of next month.
Yeah, that's that's an interesting
perspective for someone who's been, you
know, very into supplements. But you
know what? Honestly, I think I've I've
felt better and better over the years,
so I've actually toned down a lot of
that, where I'm just kind of doing basic
stuff that I really don't feel I'm
getting from food. There's one other
thing with the sun exposure though that
in addition to astaxanthin that I've
heard is effective, and that's chaga
mushroom, which isn't in a pill, but
rather, you know, a tree a medicinal
tree mushroom that you I I boil it and
make this tea, and it's very high in
melanin, and it's said that that makes
you more resilient to sunlight and in
the absorption of vitamin D. Would you
agree?
Absolutely. And I have zero problems
with that, because remember, that is
something that grows, but where does it
grow? It grows at different latitudes.
So, what's the difference in chaga tea?
I have a good friend named David
Limacher, who owns a company in in
Saskatchewan. And he does chaga, and it
grows at different latitudes. So, where
you buy your chaga is actually
important. So, for example, if you're up
in Saskatchewan at the 55th latitude,
it's not going to have a ton of melanin
in it. But if you buy your chaga, say,
inside the 20s, which are the Tropic of
Capricorn and Cancer, dude, you you've
got a way of dealing with that. I would
tell you the better way to augment it is
what I told you before, infrared A
light, meaning
light is the key. But do I have a
problem with chaga? I have none. None at
all, because what you need to do is when
you take the food in, what I'm trying to
teach you even here now, Luke, so I want
you to yoke it to the light environment
around you. See, taking chaga from 55
and you live, say, at 15, that makes no
sense at all. You know, you you want to
make sure they're yoked. That's part of
the reason why I used the example with
you before, eating a banana should
happen this time of the year in the
northern hemisphere. We're cool with
that. All right? Because it's a long
light cycle. We have strong UV light,
and that's when carbohydrates grow. But
the flip side of that is, if this was
December 21st and you were in LA or I'm
here in Louisiana, dude, you you
wouldn't catch a banana in my house at
all. At all. Yeah.
And that's the reason why, because guess
what? That incident EMF that I told you
from the sun,
guess what your mitochondria pays
attention to? It is counting those
frequencies. And if you make or eat the
wrong thing, there's this little thing
in the mitochondria called the MCU
transport. It allows too much calcium
in. The amount of calcium determines
what kind of free radicals you make.
That's how this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] works, dude. And
this thing is all controlled by light.
Everything about us is like a rock
concert. And we don't realize that we
are beings of light because we don't
understand all the details. But guess
what? Science has all these details
published. My job, I haven't discovered
any of this. I'm just an innovator. I
take all the pieces together and sit
down and can do a podcast with a guy
like you and explain why eating a banana
may not be a smart move in December, but
it's perfectly fine in June. You know,
based on where you live. You know,
You don't understand that. Yeah, that
totally makes sense.
Uh absolutely like seasonal eating just
again going back to the common sense
just basic mother nature. It's like Hey,
live like a lion or a hippo. Remember I
told you you don't That's why I said
this thing in our head because when we
go into Whole Foods on December 31st and
we see a kiwi or a banana, we
immediately grab it. We're like, "Oh,
this is organic. This is okay." That's
part of the reason why I try to get
people even off the organic thing
because that's a bad meme, a bad
narrative to get. And I I mean, out in
your neck of the woods, it's it's
horrible because people don't realize
it's actually got to be linked to the
light cycle. When food grows locally, I
mean, you the only way you can find out
what food grows locally at your
latitude, you got to go to a farmer and
ask him because most people have no
clue. Right. So, you could solve that
problem and not even research [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Just
shop at the farmers market. And whatever
vegetables and fruits are there like in
Southern California, you know, we we get
a lot of sun and there's a lot of
agriculture here. So, there's a lot of
availability, but I know when I go to
the farmers market, there's a certain
time of year when I'm not going to find
a peach.
You know what I mean?
So, that's a pretty that's a pretty
simple where even like we have a health
food store here. Well, it's actually
more of a nightclub now. It's called
Erewhon and very trendy spot in
Hollywood. And you can go there and all
of their their produce that's local is
marked local. So, you can guarantee that
it's then in season and in sync with
that light cycle, right? Yeah, just make
sure when you go to Erewhon at night
that you're not eating any
carbohydrates.
Because remember there is also a diurnal
cycle, too. Don't eat when the
sunlight's out. So, that's why
breakfast, you eat like a king. The next
meal at lunch, not so much. And dinner
like a pauper. Why? That's also tied
That's the diurnal cycle. See, we're
talking circadian. Now we're talking
diurnal. All these things actually
matter.
Diurnal meaning the time of day.
The day. Correct. We're designed to eat
our biggest meal during the the
breakfast time. And most people say,
"Well, I'm not hungry at breakfast." You
know what they just announced to you
when they say that? That they have a
circadian light mismatch through their
eye and their skin. That means that they
are night night owls. They may not
believe it, but they are. And it could
be because they may get up at the right
time, but they may be in front of a
computer all day. Or they may be a day
trader and don't realize that the blue
light that's in their eyes is totally
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] them in the shorts.
Well, you just described the exact
opposite of my eating schedule cuz I
just have a bulletproof coffee in the
morning. Then I don't eat anything till
about 2:00. I have a light lunch and
then I'll have like a heavy dinner at
like, you know, 6:00 7:00. Well, guess
what? This is this is maybe Luke
Storey's, you know, biohack for the
second half of 2017.
Right. Right.
I'll tell you reverse it. And it The big
thing is it's probably cuz of your job.
I know what you do. I see you out on
social media. And I do think you got a
blue light thing. I got to get you
on these, bro. Oh, that's what I was
going to ask you about that. He's
pointing You guys listening, he's
pointing to his blue blocking glasses.
Are those prescription, but you've got
orange lenses? Yeah, mine are
prescription. Let me show you I'm going
to go get something. Give me Give me a
break. Let me go in my bedroom. Show you
something else.
Okay.
Okay. So, Jack just stepped away for a
moment. He wanted to show me something
else. Before you do, where did you get
those prescription glasses? How did you
get the nice orange lenses in there?
Well, these are my untinted blue tech
lenses. These only block 50%. So, when
do I use these? I use these when I'm
seeing patients,
working on electronic medical record.
Okay? They're not great. How do I fix
that problem? In between when I have a
lull in my day, I go right out the side
office
into the sun. And I'm constantly doing
that. So, people would call those
smoking coffee breaks. I call them sun
breaks for me and that's the reason I do
this. So, when I'm outside, Luke, I'll
even put these down when I need to see.
I go like this. And when I don't, I'm
getting the sun in there. So,
say I'm at night time. Say it's in LA
and I'm hanging out with you and you
take me to that store that's so trendy
on Hollywood. And we're shopping. Well,
since these only block 50%,
then I put those on over.
Oh, nice, dude.
Okay. And what these will do, like say
if we're watching TV or say, you know,
you took me to the studio and you want
to show me or introduce you some
friends,
this is one thing I would wear, but
you'd say, "Jack, these aren't trendy."
So, the flip side is if I
had these in my pocket, I would just put
these on. They do the same thing. Now,
these are prescription, but these are
blue techs, but they have a BPI tint.
And these can be tinted by any, you
know, optometrist once you know what to
ask for. Turns out I'm a little bit
lucky because on one of my members
is an optometrist and he owns a store in
Michigan. So, he will make these for any
of my members. You know, if you just go
up there and tell him what your
prescription is and you can do it. But I
tell people if you don't have a
prescription, the simple thing to do is
go to Walmart, get frames that you like
and just tint them. You know, so that
way you're knocking out. The key
frequencies you want to knock out are
435 to 465.
Uh I tell most people if you can get 400
to 500, that's what these are. And I did
this specifically. In fact, Tom is the
one that made these for me because I
used them in surgery. Okay? And in
surgery, you know that my risks are off
the chain. So, I do rotate glasses big
time. Now,
I have myopia. But myopia when I started
this, like when I was 360 lb 12 years
ago, was about 7.4
diopters. Today, with the sun and
everything that I'm doing, I'm now 4.25.
So, you can see that sunlight actually
will improve nearsightedness. And the
reason why that happens when you're in a
blue light environment,
I told you the other chemical besides
melatonin that's made in the eye is
dopamine. Well, what else does dopamine
do? Not only does it make you stupid and
an obedient idiot, but it elongates your
eye. And when your eye gets elongated,
it's not a circle. That's what
nearsightedness is. But it also sets you
up for AMD, which is acute macular
degeneration, retinal tears, and also
thickens the choroid. And the choroid is
actually the beginning part of the
central retinal pathway that connects
your retina to the leptin receptor. And
you know how I got pretty famous on the
internet? It was that whole leptin
prescription. Well, turns out this is
the beginning of it. So, you need to
protect your eyes. So, I'm going to tell
you the reason why we started this whole
discussion down this path is the reason
that you eat less at one time and eat
more at night is because I think you're
chronic blue light toxic. And what that
means is you have a blue light hazard
and it's because of your job. Because I
always look at you when I see you on
social media and I notice your eyes
aren't protected. And sometimes when
they are, you have sunglasses on. And I
always tell people the trendiest place
for sunglasses are right here.
On top of your Listeners, on top of your
head. He's referring to that. Right
here. Yeah. I actually don't wear
sunglasses anymore. You know, I I quit.
I weaned myself off. Uh but I I That was
leads into my next question in terms of
prescription glasses because I about I
don't know, a year ago just seemingly
suddenly became nearsighted. I'm not to
the degree that not that diopter or
whatever. I'm just learning this this
terminology cuz it's new. Uh I'm like a
1. whatever. It's it's not that bad, but
I can't read say like a license plate
two cars in front of me. And it seemed
to come on suddenly. And I was going to
ask you if you thought there was a
correlation between walking around at
night in such a dimly lit environment
and wearing my orange blue blockers. I
thought it might have been caused by
just eye strain from not having enough
light present while I'm trying to avoid
the blue light. You know what I mean?
It's caused by you don't realize that
you're getting more blue light. See,
here's the thing that I need you to
really understand. And I'm glad you
brought this up. Right now, you're
screwing yourself. You're making your
myopia worse. You don't realize that in
front of that screen, that screen is
5700 K. That's equivalent to to noon
light. Well, I don't Right now, I have
it I have my flux program on which is
doing something to cut the blue. Cuz
watch watch what happens on video if I
Let me cut it off right now and you'll
see. I mean, I'm not saying, you know,
let me let me disable this. Uh
So, I just turned my light blue. Can you
see the difference? You can. And and the
crazy thing is though, even if you have
it set on the lowest
uh amount, it's 2700 K on the flux.
Well, guess what? You know what AM light
is? 1400 to 1600.
Ah, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] So, here's what I want you to
to understand cuz this is really
important. It's going to be important
for the people listening to this. If you
do this for say 10 years constantly, all
that's adding up. That's going to start
the myopia. What happens with the
myopia? Not only does the eye elongate,
but the choroid thickens. Guess what?
All the mitochondria in that choroid all
are undergoing heteroplasmic changes.
What does that do? That sets you up for
all the other chronic diseases tied to
the leptin receptor in your brain.
That's exactly how I got sick,
you know, 20 years ago and led to this
whole thing. So, these are the things
that's what causes Alzheimer's. That's
what causes Parkinson's. That's what
causes all the diseases that everybody
is scared to the Jesus out of. So, what
am I trying to tell you? You You You are
learning something during this podcast
that's huge and I hope so your members
are getting it. If you know that you're
not hungry in the morning and you eat
more at night, that tells you that
you're blue light toxic through the eye
and like the skin. So, how do you fix
that? When you're on the computer, block
the blue. So, that's the reason why you
always see me wearing blue protection
anytime I'm on social media and I don't
know if you can see my phone, but I have
the blue screen on here constantly. In
other words, I I have never seen my
iPhone clean without this skin over the
top of it cuz it blocks all the blue. I
don't want any blue in my life unless
it's coming from sunlight. Why? I told
you it's balanced by the red that's
present.
Right. And the two healing frequencies,
the regenerative frequencies, are red
and purple. That's the reason why when
you're outside, I want your eyes getting
the normal stuff. So, you're right.
You're in LA, you do have a benefit when
you're cruising around, I want you
outside in the sun because that can
actually improve it. But if you start to
notice over the next 5 years that your
myopia goes from 1 to 1.25 to 1.5 to 1.7
cuz one of the things that you said I I
don't want to let go. This seemingly
showed up, Jack, out of nowhere. Well,
guess what? That's exactly how
mitochondrial disease is. Didn't autism
show up out of anywhere? Didn't
Alzheimer's show up out of nowhere? I
mean, we didn't have these things.
Cancer was not common
until 1874.
In fact, uh the medical school that I
went to and the guy's name on the
building is called Alton Ochsner. I'm
going to tell you a story that he told
me my first year of medical school. It
It was the old man that owned the
hospital. He said he used to tell the
medical students in 1920s when they saw
a case of lung cancer come in and see it
cuz you're likely never going to see
another case of this in your life. I
want you to think about that for a
minute, Luke.
So, here's the thing. I told you the
first bulb ever made and when the power
grid was built out was between 1879 and
the 1920s. The reason why cancer wasn't
common
is we didn't have the stimulus that
caused it. And guess what? Today, in in
1900, colon cancer was the 37th leading
cause of cancer in the United States.
Five generations later, it's number two.
How'd that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] happen?
Well, guess what? Where's your
No pun intended.
Right. Well, your colon.
Think about where you're calling it.
It's your colon is inside your gut. How
many people do you think who get colon
cancer let infrared A light go right
through their belly? Remember, infrared
A light penetrates 10 to 30 cm.
Okay? Everybody wants to blame it on the
food, but you know I'm not that dude.
Okay? I'm going to blame it on the light
that you allow in your environment and
I'm going to explain to you exactly the
reason why it happens because let me
tell you something.
When you go from 37th to second in five
generations, that takes Darwin and the
nuclear gene genome right out of it.
Changes don't happen that fast to
nuclear DNA. And guess what? What are we
studying? We're studying the nuclear DNA
to look for the cause of colon cancer.
Epic freaking failure. Why? It's a
mitochondrial disease and mitochondria
all respond to incident EMF and the type
of EMF they respond best to, 250 to 780.
Don't forget it.
Can you tell our listeners why it's a
bad idea to sit around with a laptop or
iPhone or iPad on top of their genitalia
and reproductive organs? You're hitting
all the physics now. See, you You wanted
me to keep this simple, but I'll explain
it to you. We're going to use the cell
phone. Okay? We're going to use
I want to ask cuz on my laptop I have
something called a Hera pad which, you
know, they showed me a a scientific you
know, some kind of experiment that
showed that it blocked the the radiation
coming off the bottom of it. So, I'll
sit with that on my lap if I have to.
Otherwise, I sit it next to me. You
know, that might be a way to mitigate
it, but what Whenever I see like
especially a woman who wants to have
kids or something like sitting there
with that laptop on her on her uterus,
I'm like, "Oh my god, stop that." You
know? So, what's up with that? Cuz I
think I don't think anyone knows this
stuff, dude. Like I say this to people
and they're like, "What? It's fine. I
feel great." Yeah. Well, you may feel
great, but your germline doesn't. But
I'll explain it to you as simple as I
can and I'm going to use an analogy that
everybody who's listening to this knows.
We're going to use your cell phone, your
GPS device. Most people don't know that
GPS works by Einstein's general and
special relativity. So, how does it
work?
Garmin has a satellite 38,000 mi above
the Earth uh that is circling, okay?
Going around really fast and it talks to
your cell phone. Okay? It has to run 38
microseconds faster than the chip in
your phone, okay? And the reason why is
because certain light frequencies bend
under the force of gravity. It's called
gravitational lensing. You don't have to
know any of that, okay? But here's the
key. That means the clock that's higher
up has to run faster than the clock down
here on Earth. Otherwise, you're going
to be off by a factor of 10. So, if
you're trying to find Erwin at late at
night on Hollywood Boulevard and say the
clock up here is slower than this one,
you're going to be off by 100 km. That
means you're going to be in San Diego
and you're not going to be in LA, okay?
Now, let's flip the switch to biology.
Your main clock, most people know, is
right here in your eye called the super
chiasmatic nucleus, the SCN, okay? And
we've been spending a lot of time in
this podcast talking about the eye,
haven't we? Well, it turns out that
central retinal pathway that we just
talked about
connects directly to the SCN. And you
know why this clock runs faster than
every other peripheral clock? Cuz it has
more DHA, which is fish oil, in it than
any other part of your brain. And what
does fish oil fundamentally do to this
clock? It turns sunlight into a higher
DC electric current. So, the more
current that goes through here runs this
clock faster than this one here. So, if
you take the laptop and put it on your
lap, guess what it does? This clock
speeds up faster than the one up here.
So, you become infertile or you bleed
like crazy or you don't make enough
testosterone and your sperm doesn't
swim.
That's exactly the reason why it
happens. And if you do this long enough
like Steve Jobs did, you'll go from
having fertility problems to actually
developing cancer. Why? Because this
growth is sped up. That's what the
clocks do. That's what circadian biology
is all about. So, the way we're built,
the top clock always has to run faster
than every other. And the reason is a
physics reason. It's tied back to
Einstein's general and special
relativity because of time dilation.
Why? Because light bends under the force
of gravity. And even though you don't
think your 6-ft difference between your
toes and your eyes make a difference, it
does to your cells. Remember, you have a
colony
probably about of a trillion cells, but
you have 100 trillion mitochondria in
those cells. And guess how they all
work? They work on a central clock and a
peripheral clock and they have to go
perfect timing. And the only way to have
perfect timing is the clock in here is
called an optical lattice clock. It
works by light frequencies.
Guess what? You You just stepped into my
world now. So, I'm trying to hang on.
I'm like, we just we just left the
matrix. I'm like, "Okay, hang on, Luke.
Pay attention. Pay attention." So, do Do
these Do these The laptop here speeds
the clocks up distally from this That's
the reason why it occurs. And what does
that mean? You're going to be off by
huge factors because remember, when you
design to ovulate occurs at certain
times of the month because of the light
frequencies and the lunar frequencies
that are there. For men,
sperm production the same way. Well, if
those the timing mechanism's off, you
become infertile. And that's the reason
why we have massive amounts of
infertility because it turns out not
only does non-native EMF, the laptop, do
it, but you know what what the single
biggest reason is? Blue light.
Blue light's the number one non-native
EMF that leads to infertility and none
of the Beverly Hills doctors want
anybody to know this.
Right. Well, there's a lot of money in
fertility uh
drugs and and mitigation, right? No
doubt.
So, do these Do these radiation blockers
on, you know, that you can get for your
cell phones and underneath your
computer, do they do anything or is it
just a total waste of money? It They do
something, but not enough. And here's
the reason why. We got to go back to
physics. This is again something you
know. It's called the inverse square
law. Meanings the the closer something
is to you, the worse the risk is, okay?
So, everybody knows like when you have
X-rays, if you stand at least 6 to 8 ft
away, you don't have to worry too much.
Well, what people don't realize, the
same thing is true of blue light. The
same thing is true of non-native EMF.
But here's the problem, Luke. Uh these
days, every human, especially in LA,
owns about 15 wireless devices. So, that
means that their devices are all around
you. And how many times have you seen a
lady stick the phone in their bra or the
guy put it in their pocket? Dude, that's
like putting their dick or their their
vagina in a microwave oven and saying,
"Hey, there's no problem." That's
brutal. I always I always keep my phone
on airplane if it's if it's on my body,
always. I mean, it's just And that's
that's the hack for it. That is actually
the hack. And what I would tell you, all
these blockers that people are being
sold, they're being sold because they
don't understand the inverse square law.
Listen, your machine when it runs, even
if it's blocking it through the bottom
and it's sitting on your lap, dude, it's
still coming out the keyboard. It's
coming the screen. It's coming from so
many different directions,
you you have to have a Faraday cage
around your computer to really do it.
The best way to mitigate the risk is to
make sure the computer is wireless I
mean wired hardwired into the wall and
not Wi-Fi. Anything that runs by Wi-Fi,
dude, if if we could see light
frequencies, you would see that we live
in a sea of non-native EMF around us.
You know, and we joked before the
podcast started, you asked me, "Jack,
what kind of microphone are you using?"
And I said, "Dude, you never get a
chance of me putting anything with a
wire on my head." Now you know the
reason why. Right. Because I'm telling
you, even when I talk on a phone, I
don't put the phone up to my ear. I put
it on speakerphone, and I don't give a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] who hears what I'm saying. Why? I'm
not willing to put the microwave oven to
the side of my head. And remember,
what's my day job, bro? My day job is
I'm a brain surgeon. What does that tell
you?
Wow. Uh I want to go back cuz I you you
speak quickly fast, and there was
something I missed, and that was I want
to know for someone that doesn't live in
Michigan or wherever you got your orange
prescription glasses, what are those
what's that uh that lens filter called,
the really orange one? Because a lot of
people that wear prescription glasses,
you know, don't want to do the 50% tech
that you've got or whatever, but how do
we get those orange ones? Yeah, you can
you can you can find them online
yourself. You can actually, believe it
or not, um on my site somewhere there is
a a one of my members, Jason Lorenzen,
actually uh wrote um
a protocol for you to learn how to do
this yourself. You can buy the chemicals
and do it at home, but it's really messy
and it's not easy to do. I would just
tell you to talk to your local
optometrist, and they can talk to their
their shop about doing the BPI. They're
called BPI tints.
BPI tints, okay.
Right. And there's a lots of different
lens manufacturers that are making blue
blocking glasses, but here's a take
home. Not all blue blue blue blocking
lenses are the same. So I would tell you
there's a couple out there that, you
know, some of the supplement makers are
selling. We me and Ruben have checked
them with spectroscopes, they're not
good enough. So the key, you want to
make sure that you're really blocking
435 to 465, but I tell my members 400 to
500 for nighttime. So when you're out in
LA, you really want to knock it down. If
you do that, you're good. You're really
you're helping yourself. The other thing
I I want to make sure we also get this
out. This is the one time where Jack
Kruse wants you to be completely
covered. I want all your body covered at
night. Like you going out with skin
exposed in blue light is as bad I
shouldn't say as bad, it's not, but it's
not good. When I want you naked is when
the sun's out, but I want you covered at
nighttime when blue light's out. Right,
cuz your skin has photoreceptors that
pick up the blue light just like your
eyes, right? Is that the deal?
there's a there's another receptor in
our body called neuropsin, and you know
that there's all these opsins. You
probably heard of rhodopsin and
melanopsin. Melanopsin is the one that's
the blue light uh um
uh receptor in the eye that we're really
focusing in on. This is why we're
talking about the glasses so much, but
there's another one that not too many
people know about because we just found
it in 2009,
and neuropsin is a UVA receptor. And
remember, UVA light usually shows up in
in daytime light. Well, it turns out
that it's present in our skin and it's
present in our eye. And I always catch
the dermatologists with this, and I'm
like, "Well, if you UV light's so bad,
why is it that we have a receptor in
both places? Could it be that that's
for something else?" And it turns out it
is. So that UVA receptor, believe it or
not, actually gets stimulated by blue
light. So I always tell my members who
have Hashimoto's, one of the things that
you have to be careful for if you stand
in front of a computer and you have this
exposed right here and your thyroid's
out, people don't realize that blue
light penetrates all the way down to the
fat layer. Your thyroid sits only about
half centimeter below your skin. So
guess what?
Boom. Dude, what? That's crazy. Yeah,
well, dude, hey listen, science usually
is. People don't want to understand the
quantum mechanics of light, but Luke,
you know that that's what I cut my teeth
on. I teach my people these things, and
believe it or not, Luke, there's now
studies out that show that we can use
red light lasers right through the skin
to actually reverse autoimmune
conditions of the thyroid. Do I have
members on my site that are doing just
that now? The answer is yes. Why don't
you hear that from the paleo guys?
Because they don't know [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about
light. That's the problem. Well, because
they think um eating enough beef liver
is going to is going to solve the
problem.
True.
Um And that's that's the that's the
that's the thing about a half truth. You
know, I always tell people the reason
why I'm a stickler about being tied to
nature cuz half truths always lead to
full lies. And that's the reason why I
got on before about the supplements,
same thing. You know, I didn't tell you
this story, but I'm going to give it to
you quick. When I met Ruben, Ruben was
spending $2,000 a month on supplements.
You're talking about Rick Rubin? No, I'm
talking about Ruben Salinas who who's
the light engineer. Oh, oh, okay. Oh,
your your guy, okay. Cuz we were both at
that conference and Rick Rubin was
there. I made a correlation, okay. Yeah,
so Ruben was spending two grand a month
doing this, and within 4 months of
meeting me,
I convinced him, and he was still having
tons of problems on all these
supplements he was using. And once we
got him on a light program, dude,
everything normalized. That's when
that's when it was the most ironic
thing. Here he is as a light engineer,
and he was still using drugs, and when I
explained to him about the predator and
prey, he goes, "Well, why don't we build
a device that's made out of light?" I
said, "Great. I got a a perfect idea."
And here's what we do. That's what we
did. See, light is the supplement. Food
technically is a light supplement, and
it's tied to photosynthesis. You just
have to get the signaling right. When
you do that, dude, you can change
everything.
On the topic of light, and then I want
to ask a couple other questions about
things not related to light, but there's
just so much I mean there's so much
here. We could obviously have a 12-hour,
you know, a 12-hour docu-series on the
light, but I'm sitting here next to my
or standing here now. I'm on my standing
adjustable desk for the moment. I'm
sitting next to my infrared sauna,
and this has become just part of my
routine for the past 15 years. I've had
this same unit, and uh
I tend to use it a lot at night before
bed. I notice that nights when I use the
infrared sauna before bed that I sleep
more deeply. My sleep apps reflect that
it's beneficial for that. What's your
take on on infrared saunas or saunas in
general? I I I love them because it's
all again, what are you doing? You're
augmenting your infrared A that you're
not getting during the day. And
remember, most saunas give you infrared
A and infrared B. We don't our bodies
are not optimized for infrared B as
much. We still have the ability to do
it. The reason why is blood absorbs all
the way from 600 I should say not blood,
but water absorbs from 600 to 3,000. And
believe it or not, all of those
nanometer frequencies are actually in
sunlight. So the reason why infrared and
sauna and all that stuff works is
because you're augmenting red. So I'm a
fan. The only difference is
is what I told you before. Too much
infrared the wrong time of the day can
actually uncouple melatonin. So I tell
people if the sun sets at 5:00, you're
good to use that up to 8:00, then cut it
off. Why?
You want at least two to three hours
where you're completely dark, and here's
the reason why. Remember I told you
about that neuropsin receptor in your
skin?
You need that thing to quiet down. Oh,
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cuz I'm doing my sauna at like
11:00 and then going to bed at midnight.
Well, you're
still yourself a little bit, but you
don't realize if you do this
chronically,
then guess what? You just gave me
another reason why you don't eat that
much in the morning and you eat more in
the day. See, you you've created the
shift with the light that you've chosen.
And that's what happens when people
don't understand how solar light is
built and how the light we use is
radically different.
Right, okay. And another issue with the
infrared sauna is there's a lot of
debate with, you know, the sauna
industry as to whether the near infrared
light or the far infrared light is
superior. Any take on that? Yeah, near
infrared is is better. Why? Because that
most approximates, you know, sunlight.
Here's another hack if you want to do
this, Luke. Uh when you buy a near
infrared sauna, one of the ways you can
uh make it even more powerful is to take
gold foil from Michael's, you know, the
the craft store. Yeah. Put all over the
wood on there, and the reason why, gold,
and it has to be elemental gold. It
can't be like, you know, fake Mylar.
Gold is a perfect infrared mirror.
So what does that mean? More reflection.
And just so you know, cuz I know you'll
appreciate this, this is the reason why
the Egyptians, the top of their
pyramids, always had gold foil on it
because they knew when the solar light
hit, they were able to get healthier
with the reflection off there because it
increased the effective yield of red
light in sunlight. Well, that's cool,
man. So so gold foil, like is it like
aluminum foil? Like that can come in a
roll like that?
It kind of looks like gold. Like if
you've ever seen like artists use it in
their work, it's expensive, but not
nearly as it would be if you had bricks
of gold. I I don't want you to go out
and do that cuz you'll have to have a
fortune to do it, but gold foil, you can
take and put it all over in different
parts, and you can increase your yield.
Um the the flip side of that is that
aluminum is the perfect uh reflector for
UV light. That's the reason why you see
the old ladies on the beach have the
cardboard with the aluminum foil on the
outside. So that's another way for you
to increase the albedo effect, say if
you lived at lived at a shitty latitude
to improve the situation.
cool. So, there there there's other ways
to hack
It's so dude so fun. Well, that the
saunas that I like and I don't have one
yet just cuz I I was given this one as a
gift and it's got really high EMFs. It's
it's a piece of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in terms of saunas
goes, but
I I still like it, but the Clearlight
saunas have near and far infrared and
they have very very low almost
undetectable levels of EMF. So, those
are the ones that I always recommend is
Clearlight. Anyone listening, I've I've
researched the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] to, you know, the
nth degree and and to me they're the
most legit saunas. I'm just saving up to
get one. They're a couple grand for a
small one, you know, and
As I was saying
people that the best the best sauna is
the ones that are in Iceland called
geothermal units. If you ever get a
chance to do that Oh, really? Suckers,
dude. Dude, if you've ever sat in a
volcanic bath, there is nothing that
comes close,
you know, to that. I mean, you got
something relatively close to you in
Calistoga. Like a
just there. I was there 2 weeks ago.
Yeah, they have they have stuff there
that is phenomenal. So, I just say
people want to try this out before
plunking their money down, go use the
nat- nature's way of doing it. See how
you feel. Then decide, you know, whether
you want to do a sauna, but I would tell
you sauna, hot tub, and, you know, cold
tubs, those are all
those are all next level things that I
teach people and I teach them why they
work. What an excellent segue. Uh I've
been, I think since discovering your
work a few years ago, been doing ice
baths, uh cold and hot exposure, you
know, nonstop. I do ice bath or
cryotherapy, I'd say, five out of seven
days a week.
People always ask me, "You're crazy. Why
do you do the ice bath?" Give us like a
just a short explanation about why an
ice bath is good for you. Okay, this one
is going to be simple. It's it's
something that I haven't told you
before.
Um
heat and cold release a chemical in you
called HSP70.
HSP stands for heat shock protein, okay?
What the heat shock protein does, it
keeps the proteins in your body
completely their 3D dimension perfect.
Well, all proteins in your body are
light antennas. So, if you want your
light antenna to be perfectly working,
it cannot move in different dimensions.
So, it turns out that cold, one of the
major things that it does, it can
improve your circadian biology the more
you use it just from using cold. Now,
here's the crazy thing. You know, we've
talked about mitochondria. You heard me
use the word uncouple.
What uncouple means is that you have a
mitochondria that comes from a high
latitude.
The people that are tightly coupled,
they happen to live on the equator. They
have L0. Those are like the Kenyans and
the Ugandans. Well, it turns out heat
works better for them, Luke, but cold
works better for most people with
uncoupled. So, it turns out heat and
cold stress release this protein HSP70.
So, the more blue light you live around,
the more cold you need. Why? Because it
can improve your circadian coupling
mechanism everywhere in your body. And
we talked about that at some length
before when you asked me about the
laptop and lap. If you have that problem
and you want to restore your fertility,
the smart move for you is to actually
put your lower half of your body
where your germline is in cold water and
leave your top part in the sun. That's
the fastest way to improve your
situation. That's called the use of the
Fournier effect utilizing hot and cold
stress to fix a circadian mismatch.
Awesome, man. And so, in terms of the
ice baths, what I do is I uh I I
retrofitted a freezer, like a, you know,
a horizontal lay-down freezer that'd be
in your garage. Basically got one of
those from Sears, uh built like it some
insulation around it, and then I fill it
up with water and it keeps the water at,
you know, anywhere between 35, 40° or
something like that. Would you say
that's a good temperature if you're
going to have an ice?
I I would for most people who start out,
probably not. For a guy like you, since
I know that you've embraced CT big time,
uh the key temperature's between 50 and
55°. So, for people who live in
California, this is awesome because
that's the Pacific Ocean.
That's it that when I when my bath warms
up and it gets up to 50, 55, it's like
it's boring. It doesn't seem to do
anything. I mean, if maybe for someone
who's starting out, but if you if you
acclimate to it, what what would be like
the ideal temperature?
Well, that is the ideal temperature
based on the research. If you go lower,
it truly means that you have you're
really doing well. Most people don't
need to go that low because when you go
below 50°, that's when you run the risk
of getting hypothermia. So, you're not
going to recommend that for a newbie.
That this is That's what I call deep CT.
I don't talk about that kind of stuff
publicly because as a physician, you can
get in trouble with that. But the people
who are high-level athletes, people who
are like Navy SEALs, things like that,
that's where I teach them how to use
that. Can you stay in water between 28
and 35° for a really long time once
you're adapted? The answer is yes. Is it
quite healthy for you? It is, but it's
not healthy for somebody who hasn't cold
adapted first.
Okay. Okay.
That has to happen. Cool. That's that's
great cuz I'll invite people over to my
ice bath and it's 35° and I'll sit in
there for 10, 15, 20 minutes and just
hang out and meditate, you know. And
they get in and they're like, "Ah!"
They freak out, you know, and I say,
"Just get in for 10 seconds, you know,
and get out." But that's that's good to
know. Maybe it's a little extreme for
someone who's just starting out. It is.
And I tell people the easiest way I have
a CT protocol on my blog. You can read
it. It's very simple to do. It doesn't
take long to adapt to the temperatures
you're talking about as long as you do
it the correct way.
Uh you did mention cryotherapy. I'm not
a fan of cryotherapy for one reason. Um
the way water releases heat, it's 24
times more effective in water than it is
from the nitrogen gas you get. So, when
people are trying to save money to do
really cool mito hacks, I would tell you
go to Tractor Supply, get yourself a
metal tub, put it on the ground, use
ice. That's the easiest way to do it.
Cryotherapy to me is it's okay. You're
getting a benefit. Any amount of CT
helps, but it's not as effective because
it's gas versus liquid. So, the
cryotherapy that I go to here in
Hollywood, it's at a place called Next
Health. And I do it just because it's
it's fast and it's convenient and it's
right across from my yoga studio where
I'm there almost every day. They don't
use the nitrogen. They use cold air.
Yeah, you can use both, but
I I like it better because it for some
reason it just feels more natural. They
turn on the the jets, man, the fans, and
it's like I feel like I'm outside in a
snowstorm versus that weird gas. And you
know, you can breathe in there and it's
whole body. I I I prefer that. Do you
have any opinion on that being uh
superior to the nitrogen? Or is it I
don't I don't think when it come
Remember, gas in terms of chemistry, gas
is gas is gas. What you're really
interested in not as the gas, it's
actually the thermal change. And gas is
not as effective as liquid water. Right.
Liquid water, the only thing better than
liquid water is metal, but you know that
you do not want to put your tongue next
to cold because you'll get stuck to it.
And that's the reason why. But, you
know, I mentioned this to people,
plastic surgeons now are using cold
plates to get rid of people's fat. You
know, it's called CoolSculpting. So,
that's the reason they don't use water
and that's the reason they don't use
gas. They're using the metal to do this.
And if you know what you're doing, it
can be very effective. But again, that's
one of those other things that I don't
advocate to people across the internet
because most of them don't have the
knowledge that I have. Uh this is
something that, you know, when we do
live member events, these are the kind
of things that we talk about.
Right. You know, the crazy mito hacks.
Like, how do I biohack, you know, being
up all night doing craniotomies? Well,
yeah, I do some pretty stupendous
things, trust me. Right. Right. Okay,
cool. Well, that's that's good to know.
And then in terms of uh in terms of
being grounded, you mesh you mentioned
uh you know, stepping outside into the
sun and making sure you get, you know,
your uh extremities touching ground.
What do you think about, you know, this
has kind of been a popular thing in the
health world, grounding and earthing.
And then there's these technologies,
these, you know, you can get these
sheets and um little pads that go under
your computer so that you can kind of
stay grounded all the time. Do you think
there's any validity in the in the
grounding technology that's out there?
Uh here's here's what I'm going to tell
you the flip side. Again, this is where
we get back to the supplement maker.
Anybody who's making stuff, you need to
check the claims. So, the easiest thing
to do is just take your shoes off and
get on the grass. The reason for that,
the sun is cathode ray, each planet's an
anode. Anytime light comes and hits a
planet, it releases free electrons.
That's the photoelectric effect. So,
your feet have sweat glands on them.
That's the reason why you're designed to
absorb those electrons. You're designed
best to absorb the most sunlight
wirelessly when your feet or your
extremities are touching the ground.
That's the reason why I always tell
people, I want you to think about the
Sphinx.
You're connected, you're plugged into
the earth while you're wirelessly
connected to the sun. That's the best
way. Now, grounding sheets, any things
that you have to plug into the power
grid, absolutely I am I will never
advocate for that. And the reason why is
the the the way grounding works in
biology, that's a DC electric current.
We turn sunlight into a DC electric
current. Anything that's plugged into
the power grid works on a AC current.
Meaning that it's it's modulated.
Anytime it's modulated, that's setting
you to get a dirty electricity. I will
never advocate that for that. And I
don't care how much they tell you that,
you know, oh, it's safe. When you do
your own testing, you'll find out that
most of the marketing claims are full of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Okay, so with my grounding sheet,
what I did this is this is good. I love
this stuff cuz I talked to people like
you and then there'll be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that I've
been doing for years, you know, and then
someone's like, "Are you crazy? Don't do
that anymore. It's dangerous." And I
don't want to recommend anything to my
listeners or anyone that is not backed
by science, but here's what I do with my
grounding sheet is I have it a wire
running out my bedroom window and it
goes into the actual ground with about a
foot-long metal spike that's in a piece
of wet dirt that's always wet cuz the
sprinklers. Is that Do you think that
has some validity? Yeah, that's fine. I
mean, if you ground that way,
technically you're grounding the way
you're supposed to ground. I I have zero
problems with that, but most of the
stuff that's sold is plugged into the
power system. Anything within the power
grid by definition is bad. And if you
want to discuss why that's the case,
it's very simple.
Our power grid oscillates at 60 Hz. Your
mitochondria, the inner mitochondrial
membrane, oscillates at 100 Hz. So, I
want you to think about that for a
minute. It's close to the second
harmonic. The real problem for people is
when they live in Europe, their power
grid oscillates at 50 Hz. That means the
second harmonic is 100 Hz. That's the
reason why electromechanical
hypersensitivity is much more
problematic in Europe than it is in the
States. But guess what? We have found
out that that 60 Hz oscillation tends to
link with more cancer and more
autoimmune conditions. And that's the
reason why we get these different
diseases in different parts of the world
because we don't realize that the power
grid isn't consistent across the planet.
And that's the reason why the
epidemiology of non-native EMF is so
hard for people to really, you know, pin
down. So, I would tell people your real
goal, the place that you sleep, what I
recommend my members do is you hire an
electrician to put a kill switch right
next to your bed. So, wherever you
sleep, that that room has no power going
to anything in that room at night.
Awesome. That's that's Yeah, that's
really good advice. I mean, I you know,
I do a lot to mitigate this stuff. I
don't like I don't even use the Wi-Fi in
my house. Everything's hardwired, for
example. So, there's you know, over the
years I've kind of
made my place, but I live in an
apartment, so even if I don't have Wi-Fi
or I want to shut, you know, I can go to
the breaker and shut off the power to my
bedroom, but it's like the whole I'm
getting 35 Wi-Fi signals, so you know, I
you know, it's it's difficult. I mean,
that's that's city living, you know,
that's the disadvantage of of living in
a place that's not remote. Well, that's
reason why you do what you do for your
water. That's why I said, you make up
you make things up by going to
extraordinary lengths to get your water.
And see, that's that's what I want
people to hear. I want people to know
that every time we do something, we're
making a trade-off. And you know, your
trade-off is, "Yeah, I'm living in LA.
This is how I make my living. This is
what I do, but I want to tell you this
is the other thing some do." And that's
that's why I like a guy like you because
you know what? You're not trying to sell
people a line of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You're
saying, "Look, I know some of the things
I'm doing is wrong." Just like I I told
people, "Look, my job, I know it's big
problem. You don't have to tell me. I
get it loud and clear. But we need to
talk about these things so that when
somebody listens to this who doesn't
have a big background say, "You know, I
never thought about that. Maybe I need
to do a little bit more because say I am
Rick Rubin or say I am Neil Strauss and
I I need to do things that maybe normal
ordinary people that live in Uganda
don't need to do."
So,
why would in in terms of the EMF
exposure from cell towers, cell phones,
Wi-Fi, smart meters, all this stuff that
we're getting bombarded with,
why would living in a high-rise in New
York City, you know, on the 38th floor
be worse for you than living, say, in LA
on the first or second floor?
Well, that's simple. It it goes to all
the things that we already talked about.
Why did Carrie Fisher die in a plane?
She already had a mitochondrial disease
that we know of from all her drug
addiction and low dopamine state, so she
just stressed the system. Well, where's
her mitochondria dense in her brain and
her heart. So, anytime you disconnect
from Earth, you don't have that
connection to Earth. So, the higher you
go up, the worse the effect is. That's
the reason why people who fly a lot,
like business travelers, they get what?
Pulmonary embolus. You know, why do Why
are pilots getting sicker and sicker?
Not only are they chronically
disconnected, they sit in a cockpit
around all the avionics. So, I have a
blog out on my my uh
site called the jet lag prescription.
You know what a mighty contract does
when they fly? They take their shoes off
and put their foot directly on the metal
stanchion in front of it. Why?
Okay, check it out. Check it out. I was
I was doing that and then I got the idea
to take a a wrist grounding strap and
plug it into the ground of the outlet.
Am I tripping or is that just as good?
No, it's not. It's bad because
Oh, man. I thought I had it figured out.
No, the reason why is because you're now
plugged into the electric power grid of
the plane. So, here's the crazy thing.
Because all the avionics in the plane
have to be grounded while it's flying,
it turns out if you just make contact
with something metal that's bolted to
the substructure of the plane and it
turns out those metal stanchions where
you put your feet are, that works. Okay,
but you're saying definitely do not plug
into the grounding plug with the strap
on your wrist. Dude, all you got to do
is put a voltmeter in that outlet and
you watch it and you'll be like, "Oh my
god." Cuz basically, what you just did
is you you basically plugged into their
power grid. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Okay. What about
another thing I bring on the plane just
to annoy people and try and cuz I get
Dude, when I fly, I get destroyed more
than anyone I know flying.
you know why you get destroyed cuz
you're plugged into the goddamn
But even even before that, that was a
way that I was attempting to mitigate.
But another thing I do is I bring my
biomat. I'm not sure if you're familiar
with what this is, but it's like an
infrared kind of amethyst heating pad
essentially. Do you see any benefit or
detriment to that practice? I already
told you, anything that's infrared, as
long as it's not run off any kind of
EMF, helps because what does that do? It
builds the regeneration programs up.
That's great, but I would always put my
naked foot on the metal before I'd even
use that. Or if you want to do one and
the other, I'm fine with that. But
infrared is always helpful
because the key red light chromophore in
every mitochondria is a is cytochrome c
oxidase and the other one big one is
blood. Blood is 93% water. And remember,
in in a cell, 99% of the molecules in
the cell are water because water is a
small molecule. It's only H2O. Right.
Okay, perfect. And then in closing, I
got a couple questions that are
unrelated to any of that, you know, and
I know you don't emphasize the food
thing. It's all about the light, water,
and magnetism, which makes perfect sense
to me. But if you were going to
recommend the three healthiest foods,
what would they be?
Uh that's going to vary by where you
live. So, for example, if you're inside
the 20s, coconut would be on the top of
my list. But remember, coconuts don't
grow outside the 20s. And you're talking
you're talking about longitude and
latitude, right?
Right. Talking about tropic of Capricorn
and Cancer. So, this time of the year,
where we are in the northern hemisphere,
coconuts would be fine.
Um another healthy food
uh bok choy is pretty much high on my
list. I'm a big fan of that.
And probably the the single best
thing that everybody should eat as much
as they can, especially in a blue-lit
microwave world, oysters. Raw is better
cooked. I've heard you talk about
oysters before. I think I think actually
I can credit you as the guy that made me
start eating oysters cuz I like them,
but they're not like my favorite tasting
food, but I I believe you said something
about them having a really high level of
DHA. Is that Am I right? And and
minerals, selenium, zinc, things like
that? They have everything that a
mitochondria needs. Why? Cuz the things
that go screwy in a mitochondria from
blue light non-native EMF happen to be
the voltage gated calcium channels,
magnesium. Everything is tied through
this interaction. And I don't want to
get too much into that because it is
high-level stuff. But just know that if
you eat oysters consistently,
uh you'll be doing yourself a benefit. I
tell people, when you eat a dozen
oysters, it's equivalent to eating 5 lb
of grass-fed liver. Wow. Awesome, man.
And then in terms of eating fish in
general,
every time I recommend that people eat
wild fish as part of their diet for, you
know, the
fatty acids and all this kind of, you
know, the good nutrients that they have,
everyone always balks about the heavy
metals. So, I always say, "Well, drink
you know, eat sardines or wild salmon,
like smaller fish, lower on the food
chain."
Is there really a heavy risk with the
heavy metals and it does it depend on
how you methylate, where one person can
handle a heavy metal load when another
person can't? What's the deal with the
danger of fish? Yeah, you're you're now
you're now getting into the areas that
really
kind of piss me off. Uh cuz this bad
thing This is bad information that
people have gotten from the functional
medicine doctors. Look, you heavy metals
are a problem for people with low redox.
What does low redox mean? It means that
your mitochondria doesn't make enough
water. That means you're not in the sun
enough. So, you always hear functional
medicine doctors, "Well, if you have
methylmercury in your body, you need to
detox it." In my site, my tribe, we
redox before we detox. Why? Because when
your mitochondria is able to work well,
you get rid of just about everything you
possibly can. And that includes
methylmercury. So, I don't follow that
part of functional medicine because I
think
they're just not deep enough. Their
science is on a surface level. And I
promise you, when I I off here, I'm
going to send you
something again by that side message
that you can use. I have a Google
Scholar link that gives you all the the
level detail. Mercury and seafood is not
a big issue as long as your redox is
good. Now if you tell me you have three
autoimmune conditions and you had
melanoma and you got myopia, yeah, I'm
going to tell you don't eat tuna or
swordfish, eat sardines. Why? Because
the predator fish, you know, have the
highest levels, but I'm going to tell
you this. Tuna and sardines are better
than the best grass-fed meat one can
buy. There's
no replacement for seafood for a
mitochondria, especially when you live
in a blue lit world. And here's the
crazy thing. The more blue light and
more non-native EMF you need, the more
seafood you need. The less you do, the
less seafood you need. And and the
reason for that is what I told you
before about that clock in the eye. That
clock in the eye constantly needs DHA
and especially when it's blue lit. And I
mean, dude, I've written extensively
about the details and I don't want to go
into it.
Well, we'll we'll send the links to your
site cuz I know you got a million blog
posts on this stuff. I just wanted to
get a little taste of that. And then
lastly on the fish thing, do you think
there's any truth in in the speculations
that the Fukushima radiation has leaked
into the the sea life on the west, you
know, in the Pacific Ocean?
Yeah, that's that's more [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Okay,
okay.
No one has a Geiger counter to check
their [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] salmon, you know what I
mean? But it's like I don't know, a lot
of radiation went into the ocean.
There's fish out there. You just never
know, you know?
Yeah, bro, I just found what I'm going
to send you. I'm just going to I'm going
to send you the radiation and the
mercury thing together. Okay, good.
People don't re- realize that radiation
is actually hormetic. And when I mean
that, it's actually a stressor that
helps. So here you go. It's coming on
the side right there. Okay.
You got it all. Um
you can put that in the show notes. I'd
even give a link to several of those
things because I get asked this question
all the time. But here's the key thing
that I really want to leave with.
If you get out in the sun and you're
connected to the earth, you can repair
your mitochondria so that nothing you
face, remember I said before that you
can eat [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] on a shingle. If you want
to put mercury on that shingle, even
that can be overcome,
you know, within reason. Obviously, I'm
not telling you to pure mercury alone,
but the point is is that your system is
built in an amazing fashion. The problem
is we don't understand the key to making
the whole system work is being in
sunlight connected to the earth allows
your mitochondria to make water. You
make electricity from that water
utilizing sunlight. And that is the key
to charging your battery that drives
your life. When that battery fails, you
get sick first and then you die. Okay,
noted.
I
said that was my last question and I got
to go and I know you got to go, but I
just remembered when I tested for my
heavy metals, I'm cool with mercury,
cadmium, all the rest of them, but for
about 3 years I've had multiple urine
pre and post heavy metal tests and I'm
like off the charts in lead. Any
recommendations on how to get that out
or if that matters? It's actually the
same it's the same issue, but that tells
me that if lead's not going away, that
it means it's chronically in your
environment and I would tell you the
number one thing I would say in your
case, you live in LA, lots of people
have cars from the '80s and '70s.
Gasoline is probably the number one
thing. You're breathing that. So it may
not be lead paint. And I'll be honest
with you, the southwest tends to have
more of this because older cars are
there because they don't rot as much.
Like down here, dude, Oh, that's
interesting. Yeah, yeah. you can't have
a '69 Chevelle here without a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] ton
of body work because it rusts out
because of the humidity. But see, guess
what? Down in southern Cal and Arizona,
dude, you guys have way more levels of
lead in your air than we do for that
reason cuz people are still burning the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] gas. Okay, noted. In closing,
you've taught me tons of stuff on
today's episode. I mean, this has been
one of the most epic interviews I've
ever done. It's going to definitely be a
two-parter cuz we've we've gone long and
I'm thankful for your time. I have
learned a lot. The audience has learned
a lot. Who have been three teachers that
have influenced you, whether it be a
book, a philosophy, someone who
personally trained you, anything you
want to name that people might be able
to go look up and
learn some more from? My three mentors
in my life are Michelangelo, DaVinci,
and Einstein.
The books that I would tell people to
read, the first one, Gerald Pollack's
The Fourth Phase of Water.
Second one be Roland Van Wick,
Life or I should say Light Sculpting
Life.
And probably the third book I would tell
you to read is a book that's recent
called Cosmosapiens by John Hands. It
tells you
exactly where we really are in science
today, not the stuff that most people
believe. Awesome. All right, and lastly,
where can we find you and your work?
You've mentioned your tribe and your
members. Like let's send some people
over to find more of what you do.
You can find me at jackkruse.com. That's
spelled k r u s e. I have a blog there.
I also have a forum. I write extensively
on my Dr. Jack Kruse Facebook page,
which is open. I also have a book called
The Epi-paleo Prescription on Amazon.
And I also invented a light and cooling
device that fits on your wrist called
the Quantlet. You can find out more
about that at the quantlet.com.
That's pretty much me. Awesome, man.
Thank you so much for coming back on the
show, dude. We've covered some great
stuff. Very powerful interview and I
look forward to speaking to you again.
All right, take care, Luke. It was good
talking. Yeah, see you soon.