[applause and cheering]
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you all so much for being here.
Um, before I get started, I'm going to
ask you all to do something that may or
may not be a little uncomfortable. Um,
at to preserve the integrity of the
sound of the instruments that I'm
playing this evening, I'm choosing to to
play them uh without any any
amplification or microphones. Um, so in
order to maximize your own experience, I
would encourage you all, if you're
willing and able, to move as far forward
as possible. This space is very resonant
and and the guitars carry well, but I
encourage you to get as close as
possible.
careful, Dana, I'll make you play.
&gt;&gt; All right. Well, for those of you that
don't know, which I think is maybe zero
people in here, my name is Xander BS.
Uh, I'm a senior music and economics
double major here at Mberry, and tonight
is the culmination of my thesis project
in music. So, thank you all for being
here.
I'd like to begin by acknowledging some
of the people and uh and others that are
responsible for making this project and
this evening possible. First, thank you
to Professor Danielle Simon for her
guidance over the last eight months.
Thank you to Jackson Eli, my first
guitar teacher, who inspired me to use
the guitar not only as an instrument,
but as a medium of personal expression.
Mr. Eli is also responsible for my
understanding of the steel string
acoustic guitar and the classical
guitar. I'd also like to thank Mr.
Alvaro Antona, my flamco mestro in
Madrid, who taught me everything I know
about the beautiful art and tradition of
flamco. Thank you to my family for
supporting my musical journey and coming
all the way from Dallas today. Um, and
finally, thank you to the Mberry Music
Department, Antonio Alvarez Bernal, and
the Breedlove Guitar Company for
supplying the instruments that you will
hear this evening.
When I left for my study abroad program
in Madrid, Spain in the spring of 2025,
I had reached out to a guitar instructor
in Madrid, who you see on the right
here. And I had plans to begin flamco
lessons. I flew from Dallas, Texas to
Madrid, Spain with a guitar of mine that
I had purchased my sophomore year of
high school. This breed love guitar had
very modern appointments, but had nylon
strings. So to my juvenile and
inexperienced understanding, it would
serve me just fine as I began my study
of flamco, a guitar form that employs a
nylon string guitar. When I sat down for
my first lesson, my instructor,
Alvarado, took one look at my guitar and
said that it would not work. He
continued by saying that it could be
fine for the first two weeks or so, but
at some point I was going to be held
back by the fact that it was not a true
flamco guitar. Eventually, it was clear
that he was correct. There were playing
techniques and passages in the music I
was learning that while they function on
the guitar that I had were not neither
comfortable nor as expressive and
resonant as they could have been. This
began a personal study of the flamco
guitar and particularly some of the ways
that the flamco guitar is constructed to
facilitate the guitar player's art in
that specific musical tradition. I also
had the privilege while I was in Spain
to travel to Seville where you see on
the left uh and I had the honor of
purchasing a handmade flamco guitar
which I'll talk about a little bit more
later. I begin with this story because I
believe that it was the beginning of my
research. Even back in early 2025 before
I was truly thinking about my thesis
project I had begun my study.
Ultimately, my research became a study
of the guitar and its construction over
the years since its standardization as
an instrument around the mid- 16th
century. I analyze how these instruments
are built and the considerations
builders take as they design guitars to
produce certain sounds, tambers, and
tone colors. Furthermore, I compare this
analysis with the playing styles of
these instruments, as each guitar family
has specific techniques and methods that
differentiate them. As my project took
shape, I developed a framework that I
applied to four different historic
guitar families in order to reveal the
differences between them and the unique
characteristics that set these guitars
apart. This framework is made up of four
specifications: wood species, bracing,
string material, and neck geometry.
These specifications have the most
potent effects on a guitar's tamber and
playability, therefore most affecting
which genre they are best suited for.
Over the course of my research, I
applied this framework to the four
standardized families of acoustic
guitars from the 16th century to the
present. These are the early guitar
family, including Baroque and
Renaissance guitars, the classical
guitar, the flamco guitar, and the steel
string acoustic guitar. I'd like to
acknowledge that I did not consider any
electrified or extended scale
instruments because their tambers are
determined by a different framework of
characteristics. Tonight, I'd like to
share with you all some of my findings
and offer demonstrations that will help
you better understand the differences
between each family's sound and playing
style. And I hope you enjoy. Now, for
those of you here that may not be as as
nerdy as I am when it comes to these
instruments, um, allow me to provide
some context for what my framework
actually is. First, the wood species
that a guitar's body is made of regards
the top, back, and sides of the
instrument. These pieces of wood
translate the vibrational sound of the
strings throughout the resonant body and
out of the sound hole. Based on the
hardness of the wood and the closeness
of the grain, certain woods are
predisposed to resonate certain
frequencies while other frequencies are
deadened or stop it altogether. For
example, rosewood is generally regarded
as a more mellow, low frequency rich
sound. Its lower density absorbs higher
frequencies while carrying the lower
ones. On the other hand, maple is
considered a snappy, bright tone wood
due to its high density and quicker
response. [snorts] I'll explain later
how these choices differ between guitar
families. The next specification that I
analyze is string material. Early guitar
strings were made of cat gut, a material
created by drying, twisting, and
stretching animal intestines, usually
sheep or cattle, no relation to feline
creatures. During World War II, there
was a shift to nylon strings for reasons
of scarcity and comfort for the player.
Two of the guitars that I have up here
with me today have nylon strings.
Finally, in America, as guitars were
beginning to play in ensembles
accompanied by mandolins and banjos,
which are much louder instruments, a
steel string was developed out of a
necessity for more volume and a slightly
different playing style.
Next, in my study, I analyzed bracing.
Something that many of you who are not
guitarists may not know is that
underneath the top of a guitar is a
complex configuration of wooden ribs
that have both reinforcement and sonic
value. These ribs, called braces, are a
constantly evolving technique to
strengthen the top of a guitar to
withstand string tension as well as
manipulate the frequency response of the
instrument. I'll speak more on how this
process has evolved over time, as well
as how it changes the sound of the
instrument later. Finally, I analyze
neck geometry. This category holds a lot
of things, but in my research, I found
that the most important characteristics
of the guitar neck are its width, its
length, and the fretboard's curvature.
As guitars gained and lost strings over
the years of innovation, the width of
the guitar mattered for fretting hand
technique, as well as facilitating
certain kinds of playing over others.
Additionally, certain guitars required
longer or shorter necks depending on the
range necessary to play the style. And
finally, fretboards were nearly all flat
until the 20th century when steel string
guitars began exhibiting a slight curve
across the fretboard to facilitate
playing with a pick.
Now, I chose to begin my study in the
16th century when the guitar became a
standardized instrument. This family of
guitars preceded the sixth string, the
six string instrument that we're all
familiar with today. But [snorts] these
early guitars exhibit many of the same
characteristics that guitars today do.
This early guitar family, including the
Renaissance guitar and the Baroque
guitar, is characterized by a small
wooden body, several courses of double
strings made of catgut, ladder bracing,
and a shorter, thinner neck than its
modern successors. What you see behind
me is a baroque guitar. These
instruments were usually played in
European courts for dance music, courtly
musical genres, and the earliest
examples of solo guitar repertoire. They
were built from a variety of different
woods, but the most common option was a
spruce soundboard complemented by a
maple back and sides. This was most
likely the common choice for wood
species because similar early orchestral
instruments were made with the same
wood. The combination of spruce and
maple makes for a snappy highfrequency
sound that lacks a lot of low-end, but
served it its purpose in the setting of
small audience court music. Underneath
the soundboard of these instruments is a
very simple configuration of ladder
braces. Extra pieces of wood from the
soundboard glued perpendicular to the
grain of the top, serving as structural
reinforcement more than anything else.
Above all, these instruments were
created to be easily portable,
benefiting traveling court musicians and
trouidors, while still being elegant and
intricate enough to be worthy of royal
European courts. As you can see here,
I unfortunately do not possess a period
accurate Renaissance or Baroque guitar
as much as I would like to. Um, so I'd
like to play a short video of a Baroque
guitar being played
[music]
This piece is called Talentas as you saw
and it was composed by a Spanish
composer named Santiago de Murcia in the
early 18th century. The complete piece
is well worth listening to and I highly
recommend it but for the sake of time
this evening I've chosen to show just
the first 20 seconds. Now I would like
to play it again and I'd invite you to
listen for a few specific things.
Firstly, the combination of plucking
single notes and strumming chords was a
musical technique that was popularized
by the early guitar. It was certainly
possible on earlier loot instruments
while they were often used more for
picking individual melodies. Um, but the
um the thinner necks and the shorter
range on early guitars made strumming
chords um quickly in particular even
easier. Now, for those of you that are
familiar with flamco music, you may also
hear Spanish influence in this piece in
terms of the percussive elements and
strumming. As the guitar evolved over
time, the flamco playing style developed
from these early Baroque techniques. If
you have any questions about this video
or the early guitar family, I'd be happy
to answer them at the end. But let's
listen again.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Now, as early guitars were played more
in a solo performance setting like this
one, a need for more volume, sonic
range, and sustain arose. Now volume is
obvious, how loud the instrument is
capable of being. Um, and then sonic
range is the lowest note that the guitar
is capable of producing to the highest.
And sustain is how long the sound
produced can sit in the space or last.
Thus, the next jump in guitar innovation
resulted in a largerbodied six string
instrument that bore a great resemblance
to earlier guitars, but had clearly
developed and changed. In Italy and
France, guitar builders began adding a
sixth string to early guitars based on a
need for greater range. In the early
19th century, the classical guitar and
the flamco guitar emerged standardized
from Spain. These two instruments,
as you can see here,
look remarkably similar and are often
mistaken for one another. And in fact,
they share the same design origins with
a Spanish guitar builder named Antonio
de Torres, who established the modern
dimensions of a larger and deeper body,
a longer and wider neck and fan bracing
configuration. By the way, this is a
flamco guitar. This is a classical
guitar.
Try not to break them while I put them
away.
Now, as I mentioned, fan bracing took
influence from ladder bracing, but was
configured with five to seven wooden
ribs fanning out from the sound hole
underneath the top. However, a closer
look at these two instruments reveals
some of the clear differences between
them and reasons for them. Beginning
with the classical guitar, these
instruments were created for concert
performance with a focus on sustain and
volume. This result comes from
construction with spruce or cedar tops
and rosewood back and sides. The example
I have here is a classical guitar with a
spruce top uh and moranti back and
sides. Moranti is a budget alternative
to rosewood or mahogany, but it exhibits
similar hardwood characteristics in
terms of density and frequency response.
Additionally, the classic guitar bears a
much wider neck than early guitars meant
to accommodate the additional string as
well as facilitate more complicated
plucking and fretting techniques because
the strings are farther apart. Now, the
classical guitar also has a longer neck,
increasing string tension, which affects
projection and sustain. Additionally, as
I mentioned, around World War II, there
was a shortage in gut strings, and they
were becoming increasingly expensive.
So, by necessity, a nylon string was
developed that yields a similar sound,
but is more budget friendly and more
comfortable and more humane on a
guitar's fingers. comfortable on a
guitar's fingers and more humane. The
piece I'd like to play for you tonight
is a study published in 1828 by a
composer named Fernand Fernando. The
piece is called Studio Number 17 in D
major from his opus 35. The piece is
intended for beginning or intermediate
level classical players, but it exhibits
exactly what the classical guitar is
made for in terms of volume, sustain,
and expression. I'd like to play the
first passage and invite you to listen
for how the sound reaches your ears in
each seat of the hall and how the sound
lingers after I finish playing. Please
also take note of my posture as I play.
The posture of a classical guitarist is
carefully regimented to maintain contact
with the instrument and position the
player's arm and and position the
player's arms comfortably to play the
style. I hope you enjoy
like I did with the video. I'll play the
first phrase of the piece and then I'll
repeat it and continue on.
So that's the first phrase. You can kind
of hear the mellower sound of the
strings and the carries through the
space.
Thank you very
&gt;&gt; [applause]
&gt;&gt; Thank you for listening. As you may have
noticed and as I mentioned, the guitar
has a very mellow sound, but one that
still lingers in sustain and volume.
Now, while the classical guitar was
developing in different ways around
Europe, in Andalusia, Spain, the guitar
was beginning to be incorporated into
flamco music as an accompaniment to
singing and dance. For those of you who
are not familiar, flamco music is most
often performed in an ensemble with
dancers and singers. It's a very
rhythmic and percussive style. Thus, the
guitar was developed by Andelusian
builders to target a more snappy
percussive sound quality. This
manifested in a much lighter
construction with thinner soundboards,
backs, and sides meant to increase the
amount the instrument could resonate,
therefore yielding a brighter, faster,
and more percussive sound. Flamco
guitars are most traditionally built
with Cyprus, a lighter wood that
produces a much snappier sound than
rosewood. As far as the neck and strings
go, the standardized instrument is
extremely similar to the classical
guitar. Now, I'd like to offer two
demonstrations of the flamco style this
evening. Since I personally am still in
my early phases of learning the
tradition and the style and do not have
access to flamco dancers and singers
regrettably, I'd like to show a
recording of a traditional flamco piece
performed with percussionists in the
traditional Palmas style. Please enjoy
the absolute genius that is Danielle
Casares playing his own piece titled
Tras Malo.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; See, I could totally do that if I had
people up here to clap along with me.
He's He's insane. Anyway, as I'd like to
play it again, and as we watch and
listen again, I'd invite you to listen
for the claps, particularly in the
percussion, and how the percussive sound
and nature of the guitar's tamber
complements this style.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; It occurs to me that I'm already
upstaging myself on that one.
Anyway, as you can hear, this style is
defined by its rhythm and percussive
elements. Thus, the guitar used in
flamnco must be defined by similar
conditions. So, the flamco guitar I have
here is built with a cedar top and
cypress back and sides. It was built by
hand last year by a luier named Antonio
Alvarez Bernal in Seville, Spain, but it
is designed to replicate the building
techniques and methods that have been
employed and perfected over over 150
years and more. I would like to
demonstrate an example of flamco solo
performance that was design that was
developed later in the 20th century.
This piece is titled Pontaon and it was
written by a guitarist in from Pmplona,
Spain called Sabikas in the 1940s or
50s. I'd like to note that Sabias was a
child prodigy and began playing the
flamco guitar at age four. Uh I'm an
American kid that started playing last
year. So in Damascus's words, I've
presented to you my positionality on
that one.
The piece has been an intense challenge
to learn and I continue to get better at
it every day. And despite my own
beginner's understanding of the style,
this piece in particular in studying it
has served as a great experience in
understanding the techniques and playing
styles of this beautiful tradition. And
I invite you to watch and listen for
those things as I play. As I did with
the sore piece, I'll play the first
phrase and then begin again.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; So as I continue to the full piece, I
ask that you again consider my playing
posture and how it differs from the
classical guitar. You'll notice the
guitar is now elevated on my leg and the
neck is more parallel to the floor.
And this posture rather than the 45
degree angle from classical performance.
This posture facilitates contact with
the instrument but also allows for more
power and precision with the right hand
when pl when flamco style. Also, please
note the percussive elements and
fretting techniques and how they differ.
I hope you enjoy
Sabas.
&gt;&gt; [music]
[applause]
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much.
Now, the final family of acoustic
guitars that my research covers is the
first to be originally developed in
America. In the late 19th century,
Christian Frederick Martin, a
German-born American luier, was one of
the very first builders to develop steel
strings for the guitar that allowed it
to compete with louder instruments like
the banjo and the mandolin that were
popular in the music of the time. These
strings were also less expensive and
more durable than gut or nylon strings,
and they produced a brighter, twangier
sound, especially when played with a
pick that fit better with evolving
country, folk, and blues styles.
However, the innovation was not as easy
as putting different strings on the same
guitar. The woods generally stayed the
same, but the bracing and neck geometry
was forced to change. First, Martin
developed a stronger X-yle bracing that
would allow the guitar to withstand the
much greater tension pressure from the
steel strings without collapsing.
Additionally, the steel string guitar
eventually evolved to bear a slightly
thinner neck as the thickness of the
steel strings is less than nylon or gut,
meaning the strings could be closer
together. Most other conditions,
including the standard tuning range and
size, stayed generally the same.
Now, I felt most overwhelmed choosing
the demonstration that I would play to
exhibit this guitar, but I ultimately
settled on Brad Paisley's arrangement of
What a Friend We Have in Jesus. This
instrumental piece exhibits both
strumming and fingerpicking and comes
from country and bluegrass influences,
which seems appropriate since the steel
string guitar first developed out of
that space. This particular guitar is
made with a spruce top and mahogany back
and sides. The mahogany contributes a
deeper low-frequency rich sound while
the spruce produces a snappy response
when picking higher strings. In my
opinion, it is the best of both worlds.
Please enjoy What a Friend We Have in
Jesus, arranged by Brad Paisley.
&gt;&gt; [music]
[applause]
&gt;&gt; Thank you all for listening. I'd like to
conclude by sharing that through my
research, what has become apparent to me
is that there is not one reason for why
the guitar has evolved the way that it
has. At times, we see in flamco guitar
and the steel string guitar, innovations
are made out of necessity to fit a
style. In other cases, the guitar's
evolution creates different and new
styles, like late Baroque period guitars
and classical guitars becoming solo
performance instruments. There is also
always a guitar player or builder that
pushes the limits of their craft to the
point of creating something completely
new. There's a mutual relationship
between musical style and guitar
construction methods. And I have no
doubt that the instrument will continue
to change and evolve as builders bring
new innovations to the table and the
musical world in which we live continues
to change and evolve itself. I'm
continuously fascinated by the growth
and development of this particular
instrument and music. itself, but I have
learned to respect its ancestors and
predecessors just as much. In a world of
electronic music and electrified
instruments and modern technology, which
is beautiful and inspiring in its own
right, there is a blissful simplicity in
just an acoustic guitar. I'm grateful
for this instrument for helping me to
find my own musical voice and the
inspiration that I get from studying the
immense catalog of styles and musical
periods that have used this instrument.
After all, I wouldn't have these
instruments and works of art if not for
those that came before them. Thank you
all so much for listening. [applause]
[cheering]
[applause]
&gt;&gt; [applause]
&gt;&gt; So, if people have to leave, feel free
to trickle trickle out. Um, I also can
stick around for a couple minutes if
there are questions in the audience. Um,
I'll also put my email up and you can
reach out to me separately if you if you
would like or if you have questions.
I've got a a 20page paper incoming on
this topic that you're more than welcome
to read or provide feedback on if you
email me between now and Friday. So, um
shoot me an email, please.
&gt;&gt; But anyway, any any questions in the
room before we send off Dem.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
I noticed that there were three strings
that were very obvious and then like
there weren't anymore.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; So, what's what's the difference there?
&gt;&gt; So, on a guitar, and this applies for
both nylon and steel strings, uh, as you
go up in pitch, the gauge or the
thickness of the string goes down. Uh,
and so on a nylon string, they are
wound. So, there's the n there's a nylon
core, and then sometimes they're wound
with a light wire or further nylon. Uh,
and then as you get to the top three
strings, which are what you were not
seeing, um, they're just clear nylon, so
they often disappear uh, in certain
lights. But good question.
&gt;&gt; Um, about the cluster, I noticed on that
third one you were still putting the
guitar on your right leg, but not on
that crossover. Is that just your
natural posture?
&gt;&gt; Just personal preference. I think I
think the the posture for classical
guitar and flamco guitar is a little bit
more um dictated by the style. I think
it's for me personally in my own
experience, it's particularly my
right-hand positioning and technique. Um
the having the the guitar strings kind
of like parallel with the floor gives me
a little bit more force and percussive
uh strength in my right hand for flamco.
And then if it's at that that 45 degree
angle for classical, it's a little bit
more delicate. Um, and then for for a
steel string, it's just kind of personal
preference. I play with a strap a lot,
too. So, um, it just kind of depends.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Robbie,
&gt;&gt; uh, on the first guitar you played, I
noticed that you sometimes let your left
hand drop and then reconnect. Is that
like a stylistic thing or is that just a
personal thing? totally personal and I
was not aware that I was doing it. I
think some sometimes particularly for
something like that where I'm playing
something more del delicate um and
precise that I want to kind of ring out
uh I significantly diminish the risk of
like muting the strings with my left
hand if I can drop it down and leave let
the strings just resonate uh until they
stop. So, I'm I'm sure subconsciously
there's a very academic reason that I
was doing that, but it's just personal
uh habit and preference.
&gt;&gt; Uh what what do some of the earliest um
examples of repertoire for guitar as a
solo instrument look like and and where
do they come from? I'm
&gt;&gt; so glad someone asked this question. Oh,
this is a great question. So um before
music was standardized into the notation
that we're uh we as as some of us who
are musicians are very aware of of you
know a is 440 hertz and before I get too
nerdy about it basically in modern music
now we've assigned pitches uh to certain
frequencies but before then uh it was
music theory was generally either
non-existent or based on intervals and
so um a lot of early guitar uh notation
and music was either taught like
guitarist to guitarist or it was notated
in tablete which is what guitarists
nowadays um use particularly those that
don't read music and it basically just
assigns a line on the staff or the a
line on on the notation to a string and
then a number to a fret. So you know
like the third fret on the first string
would be the lowest string or the lowest
line and then the number three. Uh and
so we see a lot of that in early uh
early preserved guitar notation that
it's just tablete like what we see
nowadays. Um because a lot of it was
based on intervals. So a guitar player
would tune their instrument based on
intervals between the strings. So like a
a fourth for example between the lowest
note uh and the second lowest note. Um,
and then you could play these melodies
and things with the frets and the and
the notation that you're given without
having to be perfectly pitch accurate.
Um, so yeah, hopefully that answers your
question. Dana, did you have one?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. When you were playing guitar,
&gt;&gt; sure
the right one.
That sounds like fun. Um, okay. Well,
for those of you that want to close your
eyes, close your eyes now.
[clears throat]
off to number one.
Is that first one the one that your
micro teacher snubbed?
&gt;&gt; No, actually this one is a rental from
the department. Um the one the one that
he snubbed is uh is at home in Dallas.
It didn't make the cut this year.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; So that one was much deeper.
Yes,
&gt;&gt; good ear.
&gt;&gt; That's the intention is that this can be
a little bit more high frequency rich,
snappier, more percussive. Uh, and this
one is deeper, has a little bit more
sustain. So, hopefully you're able to
hear that.
&gt;&gt; Of course.
&gt;&gt; Any other questions? Yes, please.
centuries.
&gt;&gt; That's a good question. Um, I'm not sure
if I have a totally educated answer for
you. I would imagine that as our
definition of pitch changes, to my
understanding, the standard tuning of a
six string guitar um is and since its
conception has been uh an E standard. So
the lowest and highest are E and then
going up in pitch it's E, A, D, G, B,
and E. Um, and so I would imagine that
because those are assigned to letter uh
letter tones, letter note pitches, um,
that as our definition of a as it goes
from 440 438 to 440 to 442, uh, would
would arise similarly uh, as we just
redefine those those standardized
pitches. Um, but that's an educated
guess. I'm I'm not totally certain.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Aiden,
&gt;&gt; you mentioned that early broke guitars
were tuned in intervals.
&gt;&gt; Are those intervals more like modern
guitars? Like tuned in fourths or
&gt;&gt; Yes, it was usually a series of fourths
and thirds. U so very similar. Um I it
depended on the number of strings. So
like Renaissance guitars often had um
four courses, sometimes four, sometimes
five. And then Baroque guitars, as you
saw, were pretty consistently five. Um,
often it was four courses of double
strings and then the highest string was
single to help with that kind of melodic
playing. Um, but yeah, it was usually a
series of fourths and thirds and it
really changed changed a lot in terms of
what was standard for the time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, Joseph.
shape your fingernails.
&gt;&gt; I do. It's disgusting. Um it's it's
extremely unsightly actually. Uh and I
hate that I have to do it. But yeah, I
was uh Mark actually asked me before my
presentation if if my flamco playing is
dependent on my on my nails. And in a
lot of ways it is. I've I've gone
bowling before and broken a nail and I
like can't play flamco for a week or two
because it it is like it would be like
playing a strumming guitar song on a
steel string guitar without a pick. Um
so as much as I hate it and it really
looks terrible, um I I can't really play
the style without it. Um so yeah, and
then in terms of like the shape, uh
there are some differences. I' I've seen
some like very serious classical
guitarists that have like much longer
nails. Um, flamco it's usually because
it's more percussive on the top of the
nail. They don't have to be quite as
long as classical guitar, but the
thumbnail is pretty important. Um, and
then in terms of of classical, it's just
longer on on on each finger. Um, and
it's actually interesting. The shape the
shape can affect the sound, but more
than anything, it affects how the um how
the nail bounces off the string. And so,
it yet again is another kind of question
of personal preference for the guitar
player. But thanks for asking.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; How many frets are there above where it
joins the
body? And how frequently do you play
those upper frets?
&gt;&gt; Um, good question. I So most classical
and uh flamco guitars, at least all the
ones that I have seen are 12 fret. So
it's an octave from an open string to
the fret at the body. Um, and then
there's anywhere from uh six to eight
frets that are actually playable. And
then for aesthetic purposes, there's one
here that's that's really not used at
all. Um, on the flamco piece, I played
above the above where the body meets the
neck a couple times. Um, but I really
think that that's more of just a result
of it of it being a song that I play
with a capo. So, it's um the the
I guess the bass note, the key is raised
a little bit. um and so it um
necessitates a little bit higher
playing. In general, what I've seen and
what I've experienced in classical and
flamco playing is that every now and
then it'll go above there. Um but it's
fairly rare and it never stays for very
long. Um in terms of playing the
acoustic guitar, it really just depends
on what style. I mean, if I'm like
strumming and singing or something, I'm
never up really past the fifth fret. Um,
and then if I'm playing something more
finger style or or I'm again have a capo
on the on the guitar, I'm I'm just kind
of shifting everything a little bit
higher.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; No, it's it's purely stylistic. It it
was these are obviously very ornate uh
instruments and uh I think it was just
kind of another example of kind of art
and the art and vanity that we see in in
uh in European uh kind of royal design.
So to my knowledge, it it it has no real
sonic effect other than maybe
deadening or or diminishing the
projection of the instrument, which
again it was it was played in smaller
settings. So there was more of a focus
on what it looked like um than how far
the sound could carry.
&gt;&gt; Sure. Um I mean generally I I find that
it's it's the same or similar. Um, I I
will say that the angle of the of the
guitar has a little bit of just a feel
difference. Um, but they're all tuned
the same with the exception of the steel
string, which I had the lowest note
tuned down uh a whole step to a D. Um,
that the the chords as a result of the
tuning, the chords are all the same. Um,
so if I were to play an E chord on any
one of these guitars, it would be the
same um same placement. Um, I have found
that just in terms of kind of the
influence of each style, there's a
little bit different placement. So like,
and I'm if I'm playing like a very
casual, less proper kind of acoustic
guitar, um, the the neck is often a
little bit more situated in the kind of
base of my hand, um, where I can hold it
like this. Whereas when I'm playing a
more, um, like classical especially has
these long reaches and things like that.
And so I've there's a shift from kind of
my hand like this to having the my thumb
pretty squarely on the back of the neck.
And my my classical instructors and my
flamco instructor has have consistently
scolded me on that of just there that
your life is so much easier as a guitar
player if you have your thumb planted
particularly for those styles that have
these intricate melodies that jump um
large intervals uh to have better hand
positioning on the back. But uh
generally it's it's about the same uh
between styles in my own experience.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; I I mean I've got to imagine that
there's an element of that. I do think
and especially in my research here I I
was experiencing a lot of kind of
mutually beneficial relationships. There
was not a kind of cut clear and dry
example of like okay this was created
because this happened or this happened
because this was created. Um if only it
were that easy. I think that that it may
be some something kind of in in the
middle of of what I've suggested and
what you're suggesting of yes that
obviously there is an access there's a
very clear and indisputable access
difference in cypress trees uh and that
being the wood that's accessible. I
would argue that maple as a tone wood
has a has a somewhat similar sound and
could arguably be used in a lot of the
same ways that cypress has been used in
flamco uh and was just cypress was
picked because of because of the
accessibility of of that particular
wood. So we've experienced particularly
I think of like cypress and maple and
mahogany and rosewood as two pairs of
tone woods that have similar sounds and
similar tambers uh and that are targeted
for similar reasons. And so then the
question is often of aesthetics or
accessibility.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, Jeff,
&gt;&gt; when you're reading sheet music, I do
know
which string to play.
&gt;&gt; I don't um tonight I was reading tab, so
it was it was made a lot easier for me.
I I can read sheet music on the guitar.
I cannot site readad sheet music on the
guitar because um for those of you that
aren't guitar players, the reason Jeff's
asking this question is because if you
were to tell me to play C4, which is
middle C on the piano, there are four or
five iterations of that exact tone on
that I can access access on the neck of
the guitar. So I can look at a note head
on a sheet of music and it could pertain
to four different places on the neck
that are often, you know, here and then
five frets up and then five more frets
up. So, um, it often is just a slow
process of figuring out which notes are
the closest. Um, so if I'm if I'm
playing a melodic passage that's a lot
of just like skips and steps, then most
of those things are just ascending one
one string a couple frets and then I
jump to the next the next highest
string. Um, but yeah, I I have I have
seen virtuosic guitar players that can
sit down and read a sheet of music um,
just off the rip. Uh, but I would I
would argue that it's a much diffic much
more difficult task than um than on a
piano, for example, where you've got one
key that corresponds to each note on the
staff. So, the answer is I don't always
know, but I can figure it out from
context and just from what feels most
comfortable to my hand.
Um, I think it just depends on the mood
that I'm in. I think I find myself
picking up different guitars.
Um, which I I think Yeah, I I I I pick
up different guitars depending on what I
feel like playing. Um, which I think is
a really simple answer to a not simple
or stupid question. I think um it really
just it's almost like
um gosh, I don't even know how to
compare it to uh another example. But I
I think like sometimes the guitar that I
choose is dictated by the style that I'm
playing. But if I had to pick one, I
think it really just depends on what I'm
feeling most inspired by um at at at any
given moment. So, it just depends.
That's at least what I tell myself when
I walk into a guitar store.
Any other questions?
All right. Well, anyway, feel free to
email me. Thank you so much for being
here. [applause]
That's so fake, bro. That's so There's
no way.