- What a blessing and honor and privilege
to return to this consecrated space.
The New School.
Once the Social Research and New School University.
The New School, whatever you call it.
(audience laughing)
It is unique and singular among institutions
of higher learning in the American empire.
And I'm just so very glad to be back.
It's always a kind of homecoming for me.
You know, I teach just up the road
at the Union Theological Seminary,
and there is an elective affinity
of Union Theological Seminary with its deep commitment
to prophetic witness and intellectual engagement
and The New School going back to 1919,
the old brothers, Alvin Johnson and James Harvey Robinson
and Charles Beard and Thorstein Veblen.
These are just not names.
These are folk who were pushed out of the mainstream.
And by 1933, with the vicious gangsterism of Hitler,
pushing out those towering intellectuals as refugees.
They come to where? The New School.
Now, we had Paul Tillich, who was pushed out.
He went uptown. (audience laughing)
But he was part of the Frankfurt School.
And so for me to return and then to come back
and see my dear brother as the captain of the ship.
(audience applauding)
Dwight McBride, oh, my brother.
Oh, he's the son of James and Betty.
Oh, if you had a chance to meet them, what gems they are.
What salt of the Earth.
And to be able to think back,
that's now 33 years ago, brother.
He's sitting in my seminar on David Hume.
He's the only undergraduate in the graduate seminar.
That's the kind of president you have.
And I was thinking to myself,
"I know he's been wrestling with the great John Milton,
dealing with regicide and divorce and other things
let alone writing "Paradise Lost" as he's losing his sight.
But when it comes to David Hume's relation to a Milton
or a Coleridge or a Wordsworth and all the graduate students
showing how smart they are every week
and you sitting there taking it in
and ends up writing one of the best papers.
32 years later, he's now head of this consecrated space.
Let's give it up one more time for brother Dwight McBride.
(audience applauding)
Lord, Lord, Lord, Lord.
Brother Will Milberg, good to see you.
I used to sit in on the lectures
of the great Robert Heilbroner.
I'll never forget him.
He was one of the few economists that believed
that there was such a thing as history.
(audience laughing)
And not just mathematics.
Not just maximizing preferences of rational agents
under conditions of free markets
that were rendered X, Y, and Z.
Get off the crack pipe. (audience laughing)
No, Heilbroner said economics
is rooted in human practices and social institutions
like Thorstein Veblen, like Joseph Schumpeter,
like my dear brother Paul Sweezy
and my dear brother Harry Magdoff
and my dear brother Richard Wolff.
Richard still teaches here, right?
Oh, I love that.
Let's give it up for all of 'em including Will, absolutely.
(audience applauding)
Absolutely.
And I look forward to meeting the new leadership.
I've heard so many wonderful things about you,
my dear sister, oh, absolutely.
Cause we gonna break bread right after, is that right?
Very, very much.
Very much so.
And I'm graced by the presence
of my magnificent wife, Annahita Mahdavi West.
She's a distinguished professor
in psychology in Long Beach.
Give it up. Just wave, just wave, baby.
(audience applauding) Just wave.
And she's sitting next to her daughter, my daughter,
Nirvana, who's a graduate student
in University of California, Santa Barbara in English.
Give it up to Nirvana.
And she's sitting next to her companion,
my dear brother, Alec as well.
Give it up for our brother Alec.
Yes, we in a celebratory mood here at The New School.
(audience applauding)
And you say, "Oh Brother West,
you tend to be in the spirit, huh?"
And I said to myself,
"You know the motto of this institution is what?
To the living spirit."
Where did that come from?
That was a sign torn down by the thuggish Nazis
at University of Heidelberg.
So when they founded this institution, the American empire,
they said, "We want to be a living spirit
and a beacon of light in such a moment
of catastrophic realities."
Grim, dim.
All you leftist intellectuals talking about the spirit.
You don't say. (audience laughing)
Mm-hmm, a subject to alternative descriptions
and interpretations, but there's something
that's gonna sustain us
more than just our materiality and our interest.
There's something called integrity,
honesty, decency, principles, ideals.
There's something that's bigger than us.
There's something majestic and bigger than us called what?
Truth, the quest that we never possess of truth,
but the quest and the condition of that truth
is to allow suffering to speak.
Beauty, yes, The New School, given all of its concerns
about politics and social analysis
and ecological vision and on and on and on,
there is a crucial role of beauty.
I've been blessed to meet my dear brother Zed Adams
who was the distinguished professor
of the philosophy of art.
And he's locked into talking about beauty
in his own subtle ways under the influence
of my dear brother, the the one and only Stanley Cavell
and the host of other teachers.
Now it's the University of Chicago.
We won't hold that against him.
(audience laughing)
The great Leo Strauss, I'm reminded,
taught at The New School more years
than he did University of Chicago.
That's what Brother Simon reminds me.
And I love Leo Strauss
because he loves the life of the mind.
I oppose Leo Strauss because he is wrong
on a whole host of things. (audience laughing)
That's all right.
That's part of the robust conversation and dialogue
that ought to take place, that does take place,
that has taken place at this grand institution.
Mighty brothers, Brother Simon, though,
I mean, I could just stay up here and sing a song.
You know, he's my fellow blues man.
We've been together at the Brooklyn Academy of Music,
and we made some music in that academy.
Philosophic music, theoretical music, personal music.
So not just friendship. He's not just my friend.
He is my brother.
He's my soul brother.
And he loves Curtis Mayfield the way I do. (laughs)
(audience laughing)
And his corpus is a magisterial corpus
that has so much to do with what I've been talking about
these last few hours, last two days.
Philosophy is vocation, philosophy is invocation
and now philosophy's provocation.
What does it really mean to take seriously the calling,
the love of wisdom and the recalling of those earlier voices
that wrestle with that love of wisdom in such a moment?
And I want to begin with this category of beauty,
its relation to truth and its relation to goodness.
And for me as a revolutionary Christian,
as a relation to the holy and of course my secular brothers
and sisters can have sacred values
without believing in sacred entities
'cause there are such things as horrific realities.
Barbaric realities that violate sacred values,
violate the preciousness of fellow human beings.
We talked about, it was invoked
with our precious Ukrainian brothers and sisters.
What they're undergoing right now
is barbaric, it's criminal.
It's what happens when an empire is wounded
and feels as if its back is against the wall
with its repressive and regimenting practices
already operative within the Russian Federation
building on some of those practices
that were already operative under the Soviet Union.
But how do we talk about that in such a way
that is not truncated in the forms that we see,
corporate media, mainstream dialogues,
especially the very deodorized neoliberal discourses
that are really fearful of keeping it funky.
(audience laughing)
'Cause then we might talk about the US invasions
and occupations of Iraq. (audience applauding)
Oh, then we might talk about Saudi-based invasions
of our precious Yemen brothers and sisters.
Or they might talk about our friendliness with gangsters
and dictators in Latin America
and various parts of the world.
Or we might get to the West Bank in Gaza.
Oh wait a minute, wait a minute.
Any slice of humanity ought to be the very source
of our deep concerns and solidarity, not uncritically.
You see our Jewish brothers and sisters
almost everywhere they go,
they still have to deal with prejudice
and hatred and attack and assault.
France, Russia, Pittsburgh, across the board.
But you know and I know that all of us as human beings
have the potential, especially elites in high places,
to accommodate ourselves.
The empire, domination, subjugation, exploitation.
And the great legacy of the best of The New School,
I'm thinking of my dear sister, Agnes Heller.
Oh, I loved her so. Never met her.
Felt like she was my sister with her text.
Part of it's because we come out of Georg Lukacs.
I don't exist without Lukacs, his history and class content,
as wrong as he was in his inferences,
I love the quality of his synoptic vision
and his synecdochel imagination
that connects parts to wholes.
I loved his synthetic analysis
that was always kindly critical
of the disciplinary division of knowledge
and professional managerial sites called universities.
So he was very suspicious,
young brothers and sisters of all colors.
What are you majoring in? X.
What are you majoring in? Y.
Oh.
Where is your sense of the whole?
Don't polish your nut in the corner
if you have no sense of what the forest looks like.
That's intellectual work.
But the forest looks like the relation of the parts,
the interdependence of the parts,
the way they're intermingled,
the way the existential goes hand in hand with the economic,
the way the social goes hand in hand with the spiritual,
the way the political goes hand in hand with the personal,
the ways in which the national,
the most powerful ideology of the modern world,
and by modern world I mean the age of Europe
between 1492 and 1945 when the European colonial empires,
those between the Ural Mountains and the Atlantic Ocean
reshaped the whole globe in their interest
and in their image, 35% of the world by 1835, 87% by 1914,
before the guns of August of 1914, you see?
So none of us escape from that Europeanization,
too often colonization.
And yet what is distinctive in part about The New School
is what I love, which is that it wants to stay in contact
with the humanity of yes, even our intellectuals,
those European intellectuals
who were aware of European crimes, but could bring critiques
of those European crimes as Europeans
because they believed in intellectual integrity.
They believed in freedom for everybody.
They believed in mechanisms of accountability,
namely, democratic practices on the ground.
That is the level of the philosophy as vocation.
Finding one's voice.
Weber talked about it in those two essays
in 1917 and 1919, didn't he?
That science is a vocation and politics is a vocation.
What do you mean, brother Max?
What do you have in mind
when you talk about the ethics of conviction
versus the ethics of responsibility?
Are you disproportionately accommodating yourself
to the nationalism of your day?
Because nationalism remains the most powerful ideology
of the modern world
that people are willing to live and die for.
No matter how much we talk about class and race and gender
and sexual orientation, the international versions of those
fall in the face of the nationalism.
For most Black folk in America, they're waving the flag.
They're gonna fight for the US Army
before they fight for race.
Most women tied to the nation state
before they fight for an international version
of feminism or womanism.
Most workers, unfortunately, fight for the nation
rather than fight for class solidarity
across that most powerful of ideologies, of nationalism.
How do we stay at the deep levels
of what Vico called humando?
We're talking about that today 'cause I tell you,
you got some magnificent students here at The New School.
I can tell you all that.
Oh, we had some conversations.
I see some of 'em right now. Oh yes you are.
Let's give the students a hand in The New School here.
Give the students a hand at The New School here.
(audience applauding) Lord, Lord, Lord, Lord.
When I was at Harvard and my dear brother Jim Fuerst,
I don't know whether brother Jim is.
There he is. Oh, I love that brother.
What a rioter he is. We're gonna be together, my brother.
We used to steal away right there in the Casablanca.
At the club, not the club, but it was kind of a...
(audience laughing) It was a bar.
But it was after my class on modernity
and the problem of evil so we wasn't doing anything
but just wrestling with Dostoevsky and Turgenev, and Chekhov
and drinking some Cognac. (audience laughing)
For me in the name of Jesus, but that's all right.
(audience laughing)
But I said, "How blessed you are
on your way to The New School."
And he's been at The New School,
and what a major force for good.
He has been here dealing with what?
Humando.
What does it mean to be human tied to the fact
that we are the kind of creatures with language
on our way to burial or cremation.
The centrality of death in all of its various forms.
Not just physical death, social death of slavery,
psychic death, spiritual death,
national death, imperial death.
Empires come and go.
1991, the Soviet empire is over.
British empire, over.
French empire, Belgium empire,
Spanish empire, Portugal's empire.
Now we got the US empire. Oh, what a moment.
And are we in any way ready?
Can we get beyond our sense of feeling so innocent?
The great F. O. Matthiessen who gave the money
for "Monthly Review" in 1949 to Paul Sweezy and Baran.
He used to begin his lectures at Harvard.
"Would America ever be able to move from perceived innocence
to corruption without a mediating stage of maturity
to grow powerful and grow rich, but not grow up?"
Disneyland mentality, you see.
The green light that "The Great Gatsby" talked about
at the end, that F. Scott Fitzgerald talked about
in the language and the words of Gatsby.
"He believed in the green light. Tomorrow will be better."
Tomorrow will solve our problems. We have no constraints.
We have no limits because we're on the permanent road
to perfect union on automatic, progressive all the time.
Really, really?
Well, you see, I come before you tonight,
or at least this evening as a very, very small moment
in a tradition of a great people at our best.
A Black people who at our best
never been duped in a massive way
with the claims about ignorance.
The genius from Harlem put it so well.
James Baldwin, of course.
Our dear brother McBride is founder
of the James Baldwin Review and magnificent scholarship.
He said, "Innocence itself is the crime
if the authorizers of devastation
view themselves as innocent."
That's part of the slice of the genius of James Baldwin.
That's the lifting of voices,
the anthem of Black people to lift every voice,
not lift every echo and be an extension of an echo chamber,
but to lift one's voice,
to have a dignity in your voice the way Ben Webster
or Mary Lou Williams or John Coltrane
has dignity in their sound.
I don't have any hatred of Kenny G,
but he just doesn't have that. (audience laughing)
It's too cotton candy.
You can't have dignity of your sound
unless you have the William Butler Yeats-like sense
of examining the dark corners of your own soul
and recognizing it takes more courage to do that
than it does for a soldier to fight on the battlefield.
You see, that's tremendous spiritual power.
That's substantial power. That's where I come from.
Oh, what a blessing to be born
Clifton West and Irene West, my mother and my father.
Just lost my mother a few months ago.
Never be the human being anywhere near their integrity
and courage and vision and depth and scope of love.
Might be more famous. Fame means what?
Well, go listen to David Bowie on fame
and you get a sense of what I'm talking about.
And I like his funk, too. (audience laughing)
Which shows his funk
is not a function of skin pigmentation, is it?
Looks like it sometime, but no.
No, Bowie is funky. (audience laughing)
Meaning what? Trying to tell the truth.
Get beneath sanitized and sterilized discourse.
It's having the courage to cut radically against the grain
and take a risk and be willing to pay a burden
in what you have to say just like Malcolm X.
Say what you mean and mean what you say
and take the consequences.
Even if you're wrong you recognize
you're putting something out there
that is at stake bigger than your ego.
Oh, what a wonderful way of being in the world!
That's the tradition that I come from.
I don't even ask to be shaped by that tradition.
I consent to be a small part of it,
of people who've been hated chronically
for 400 years every day with their own bodies
and memories and minds and so forth.
But in the face of that kind of chronic hatred
to keep dishing out love warriors every generation.
(audience applauding) Every generation.
I saw brother Cory Booker last night
talking about Harriet Tubman.
Did you all see that exchange last night
with our dear sister Jackson?
A lot of people surprised.
"Oh my God, I can't believe the Republican Party
is treating our dear Black sister in a racist way."
(audience laughing)
And the sky is blue and grass is green.
And all of us try to love our mamas.
No, no.
What's going on is a Harriet Tubman who goes far beyond
even fighting for a slot in the Supreme Court.
It's a beautiful thing to see Black brilliance
and Black arete and Black success, but I expect that.
I'm not surprised.
A lot of vanilla brothers and sisters really get surprised.
"Oh, she sounds so eloquent."
Wow, you don't say.
I grew up with eloquent Negroes.
Brilliant Black folk don't surprise me at all.
Whole lot of 'em in jail.
A whole lot of 'em shot down by the police.
Whole lot of 'em dealing with all kind of mess.
But what's important is the Harriet Tubmans in the face
of so much systematic hatred decided to be love warriors,
in the face of so much trauma decided to be wounded healers
rather than wounded hurters.
In the face of so much overwhelming terror,
decided to be freedom fighters.
Almost echoes of Rilke.
Remember those early moments in his "First Elegy."
Beauty is the first touch of the tear
that we think we can bear.
There's no discourse of beauty
that's not wrestling in some way
with the varieties of terror of the soul,
of society, of structures, of institutions.
And when it comes to Black people,
what makes Black people lovers of wisdom at our best.
I didn't come here to talk about the history
of Black thugs and gangsters.
I could spend a lot of time on that,
but I'm talking about Black people at our best.
That the highlight, that strength and the sources
and resources that allow us to persevere
in the face of the hatred
and terror and trauma.
See, that's why when my dear brother Simon says,
"Brother West, blues man in the life of the mind,"
he's exactly right.
But I stand with Bessie Smith
and Ma Rainey and Howlin' Wolf.
I stand with Robert Johnson and Leroy Carr.
I stand with various blues persons,
the blues in Aretha, the blues in Luther,
the blues in Billie not as entertainers,
but they're persons who decide
to be love warriors in their artistry,
wounded healers in their artistry.
It's hard to find a figure who's spread more joy
in the most barbaric of centuries of recorded time,
which is the 20th century.
It's hard to find a figure who spreads more joy
than Louis Armstrong or Moms Mabley.
Some of the graduates of this grand institution.
If not graduates, they passed through.
We were just there.
The 95th anniversary of our dear brother, Harry Belafonte.
He's got that New School stamp.
The genius from the South Side of Chicago,
Lorraine Hansberry, got that stamp, New School stamp.
Marlon Brando, we know he's not chocolate,
but he's about as chocolate as he can get.
(audience laughing) He's like Harold Arlen.
He's about his chocolate as they come
on the vanilla side of town.
Marlon Brando's got that New School stamp.
So does the great Stella Adler.
We could go on and on and on.
These are they
who have tried to stay in contact
with Du Bois's great challenge,
which is to muster the courage
to face oppression with integrity
and to face deception with honesty
and to face insult with decency
and to face brute force with courage.
And to live at a moment in which the commodification
and the marketization of nearly every nook and cranny
of our society makes it very difficult
to even keep alive certain memories of genuine integrity.
It's just been reduced to cupidity.
And by cupidity I mean not just love of money,
but I'm using it in the Augustinian sense
the way Hugh of Saint Victor used it.
The dominant ways of the world that reminds us
of Clausewitz, the philosopher of war.
What Hegel meant when he said,
"History is a slaughterhouse."
What Gibbon meant when Gibbon said,
"History is a series of crimes and follies."
And I like that last word, follies, because we talked today
about Sebastian Brant's "Ship of Fools" of 1419,
two years after the encounter of Europeans
with precious Indigenous brothers and sisters
and the embarking on the subjugation, you see.
And then "In Praise of Folly"
a text that I hope every undergraduate and graduate student
gets a chance to read in these dim times.
There's no way you could engage in philosophical,
intellectual resource gathering
without some sense of the comic
and the humorous and the satirical.
Let me just raise hands of all of the students
who are undergrads and graduate students
in the place right now.
Raise your hand. Let's give 'em a hand.
Let's give 'em all a hand.
(audience applauding) And I hope you all...
I hope and pray.
I hope and pray that this is not
just some kinda off-the-wall lecture that you go to
and go back home and don't feel in any way subject
to self-interrogation and transformation.
No, there's some texts to shake your world,
take you into the lower frequencies
of the funk master activity.
That's what Erasmus does in 1511.
But Lucian, the greatest of all comic writers in the West
that would mean so much to Mark Twain and Ishmael Reed
and Nathanael West and Charlie Chaplin, Lenny Bruce,
Phyllis Diller, so many of the great comic.
I'm not talking about these comedians these days just coming
and talk about whoever's sitting on the front row.
(audience laughing)
No, that's Hobbesian conceptions of humor.
It's just sudden glory.
You're just reveling in the misfortunes of somebody else.
That's not the comic in its deepest sense.
We're talking about Lucian, we're talking about Erasmus.
We're talking about Joyce.
We're talking about Beckett.
And of course the deepest of all for me is Chekhov
along with the blues, the tragic comic at the deepest level.
And there's no way that we will ever be equipped
to deal with our present circumstances,
the effects and consequences of the various structures
of domination and exploitation.
The ways in which the market
has so thoroughly colonized our minds and hearts and souls,
that it's hard to even conceive
of being agents collectively organized
or even individual in our relationships
because intimacy and vulnerability
have been so thoroughly called into question.
That's one of the reasons why we're experiencing a moment
of not just polarization.
Again, that's just deodorized talk.
America's not polarized.
America's polarized and gangsterized.
And gangsterization is different than polarization.
It cuts much deeper.
Where is my dear brother who was teaching at NYU,
dealing with Black Lives Matter?
Just wave your hand, brother.
It's so good to see you. Give it up for this brother.
He's now at The New School, now at The New School.
(audience applauding)
Oh yes, we had a wonderful time together in class.
We talked about it then.
Gangsterization is about the enactment
of wholesale nihilism,
which is not simply epistemic skepticism
or ontological skepticism.
It is lovelessness.
It is touchlessness.
It is meaninglessness.
It is what Dostoevsky called hell in "Brothers Karamazov,"
which is wrestling with the incapacity to love
because the gifts that one has been given
have not been cultivated in such a way
that you even know how to love anymore.
So even the discourse of love and justice,
and any justice that's only justice
soon degenerates into something less than justice.
If all you got to offer is just justice,
and you're not doing it because you really love
and have a caring concern about the people catching hell,
it's just a lifestyle choice.
It's not a fundamental way of being in the world.
That's what we learned the best in The New School.
Oh, yes.
Even when we have contested conceptions of what justice is.
That's how dim and grim our situation is.
And we were talking in class about that line
of Immanuel Kant, in the "Critique of Pure Reason"
where he says, "Examples are the go-cart of judgment."
That you have to have concrete exemplars.
And I'm not talking
about abstract market-driven role models.
So and so's my role model. Oh please, spare me.
Probably just talking about some market success.
You just want some big move in your career.
We're not talking about career tonight.
We're talking about your calling
and the way you use your career for your calling.
And you can't have a calling without a recalling,
a relation to the voices, the figures,
the exemplars who have come before who shape us and mold us.
And if there's going to be any kind of serious philosophy,
love of wisdom in a moment of imperial decay,
countervailing truth-telling against the present status quo,
countervailing organizing against the status quo,
countervailing arguments,
countervailing stories, countervailing analysis,
counter-hegemonic ways of being in the world,
it has everything to do with basic things
like trying to get us to see the world more clearly,
comprehensively with a subtlety and sense of complexity
that is inseparable from feeling deeply
and shattering callousness and indifference
so that we actually can have genuine care and solidarity.
And last but not least,
most importantly, being willing to act.
It's no accident that irony remains so often
the dominant trope of the professional managerial classes
when it comes to education 'cause irony allows us
to revel in how smart we are, which is a beautiful thing.
I'm not promoting stupidity up here.
(audience laughing)
But if we're reveling in our smartness
and unable to acknowledge the forms of complicity
and complacency and cowardliness,
given what we're willing to adopt ourselves to
without being truthful about ourselves,
then smartness becomes just another kind
of rationalizing the hierarchies in place,
the forms of silence in place, the forms of taboo in place.
And none of us, not one of us
are free of spot or wrinkle.
What I mean by that is that all of the lenses
in which we view the world have blind spots.
Adorno reminds us of this.
"The splinter in one's own eye
is the biggest magnifying glass."
You start with yourself.
No one of us have a monopoly on truth and beauty
and goodness of the whole,
no one of us a part of any pure social movement
that allows a Manichaean analysis
as if we are on the one side all light, good, and purity,
and all those who disagree with us are to be demonized.
No, leave that for Disneyland
and the popcorn on Main Street
and come back to history with all of its contradictions
and incongruities and the history deposited inside of us.
We wrestle with this these days
in terms of a robust conversation.
How far do we go in listening to people
who we fundamentally disagree with?
Are we to wrestle with the genius of an Edmund Burke
who was so cold and callous
when it came to precious brothers and sisters
in the French Revolution?
But had a powerful critique
with British imperial practices in India.
Disagree, wrestle, find your voice,
but don't shut him out.
Not at all.
We wouldn't have had the responses of Mary Shelley.
We wouldn't have had the responses
of Diderot and others in the conversation, you see.
I had a challenge the other day.
Somebody in my class said, "You know Brother West,
I'm a white sister and I just feel as if
I can't say too much about the great brother Ambedkar."
You know the great Ambedkar.
The great dollared intellectual critical of Gandhi
because Gandhi was against untouchability
but did not call for the dismantling of caste.
I said, "Well, what makes you think
your white body's getting in the way?"
Please don't fetishize this thing.
Use your imagination and your empathy.
John Brown wasn't no joke.
Lydia Maria Child, white sister, wasn't no joke.
Close to David Walker. What are we talking about?
Rabbi Heschel ain't no joke
writing that telegram to Kennedy.
"I think Americans oughta forfeit the right to worship
if they can't treat Negroes with humiliation."
Kennedy said, "I think we invited the wrong rabbi here
(audience laughing)
'cause we got some more moderate rabbis out here
who just can't wait to get to the White House and sip tea.
Well, Heschel's not gonna do it.
He's not doing it just because of his skin pigmentation.
He believes in something deeply. He's got a calling.
He's got a sense of invocation.
His conception of piety is grounded
in remembrance of the best,
reverence of something bigger than him, and a resilience
and a resistance in the light of his prophetic understanding
of his own Judaic tradition.
What a magnificent witness.
Does he have a monopoly on truth? No.
Does he have some truths that are indispensable? Absolutely.
Say the same thing about my prophetic brother, Malcolm X.
I don't exist as a Christian without Malcolm X.
Does he have some blind spots? Absolutely.
Early Malcolm, later Malcolm less so, but still has 'em.
And I'm just using brief examples
because you can't be one who wants to take seriously
my own tradition of Black folk who have chosen
to be love warriors and freedom fighters
and wounded healers and joy spreaders.
You violate Frederick Douglass,
you violate Ida Bell Wells-Barnett,
you violate James Baldwin, you violate Aretha Franklin,
you violate John Coltrane, you violate Mary Lou Williams.
All of these were human beings
who somehow mustered the courage
to be lovers of beauty and truth and goodness
and sometimes the holy.
Mary Lou became a Catholic under the influence
of Barry Ulanov and a few others.
She had been very much secular in her own way.
Dorothy Day, another great example.
Thoroughly secular for a minute
and then is converted to Catholicism.
People are, "Oh my God. What happened to Dorothy?"
(audience laughing)
No, she still has anarchistic sensibilities.
No, she's in love with poor folks.
She is a leftist to the core in terms of her hybrid spirit
as Catholic Dorothy Day.
Mary House just right down the way here,
still going 89 years later.
Why do I mention all this?
I could talk about a Buddhist who New School
had the vision to bring, our dear sister bell hooks.
My God, we miss sister bell.
What does this got to do
with wrestling with imperial decay?
Everything, everything.
Because if we are unable to be blues-like,
be Chekhov-like, to be Beckett-like
and have a sense of the tragic comic,
which means that oftentimes the best of who we are,
democratic movements, democratic ways of life are episodic.
They come and go like the great Sheldon Wolin
taught us in "Fugitive Democracy," often crushed.
Well, what do we do in the face of being defeated?
What do you think?
What do we do in the face of failure? What do you think?
What do we do when it looks like at times
that our very movement has the chance of a snowball in hell?
Do we give up? Do we succumb?
Blues men, blues women, what you got to say?
O, Brother West, I've been down so long
that down don't worry me no more.
That's why I just keep keeping on,
and I'm strong as I can be.
Ooh, I like your blues. Ain't nothing innocent about it.
Nothing sentimental about it. Nothing romantic about it.
Nothing naive about it.
It's grounded in the funk and the realities of struggling.
But at the same time,
it understands hope as a verb as well as a virtue.
You got to, as Curtis Mayfield say, "Keep on pushing."
Stay in motion, not just by yourself, some isolated ego.
And that's subversive piety.
What is subversive piety?
Well, we can go back to the Euthyphro
and wrestle over definitions.
Or we can go with John Dewey and say,
"Ah, I'm a naturalist, I'm secular."
Piety is a virtuous acknowledgement
of the sources of good in our lives.
So that even we atheists and even we agnostics know
that there have been people in our lives
who fundamentally shape and mold who we are.
I loved that about Sister Jackson the other day.
I don't get a chance to watch TV too often.
She starts with her parents.
All of the cynicism and skepticism
and even threats of nihilism in the world
should never allow any of us to overlook the forces of good
in our own treks from womb to tomb.
Who loved us? Who cared for us?
Who sacrificed for us?
How did it spill over in family and community?
How did it spill over in school?
How did it spill over in sports?
How did it spill over in music?
And then how did it spill over for those
who were no longer quick and breathing but the dead?
Feeling down and out, turn on some Stephen Sondheim
and let that brother's genius float through your soul.
I'm talking about the tragic comic sections,
not just those upbeat ones
that he got from Oscar Hammerstein.
This is not June busting out all over.
This is no more in part two of "Into the Woods."
This is the Stephen Sondheim
who says dreams come true but not free
because when Cinderella finally gets her prince,
she finds out he's not worth a dime.
What you gonna do now, Cinderella?
(audience laughing)
That's part two. That's after Disneyland.
That's after the sentimentalism once upon a time thing.
No, you got to live a life in the dark,
in the grim, in the dimness, blues-like.
And let us be very clear, not just in the American empire,
but in the world, ecological catastrophe
and pending nuclear catastrophe,
gangsters have their hands on the button.
Economic catastrophe, thank God for Brother Bernie.
People call him Johnny one-note.
The critique of Wall Street over and over again.
At least he's got that critique up front
'cause it's tied to corporate greed.
It's not just economic, it's moral, it's spiritual.
And then the political catastrophe of our elected officials
wrestling with colonized bribery and normalized corruption
shot through their practices.
What are we to do?
How do we sustain ourselves?
Vocation, invocation, provocation.
You can't do it by yourself.
You've got to situate and locate yourself in a tradition
that has been able to empower others before you.
That's why we talked about Vico today.
That's why we talked about Montaigne today
with the eight wars of religion from 1562 to 1592.
Thousands and thousands
of precious folk in Europe's heads cut off, parts mutilated,
Huguenots against Catholics, Catholics against Huguenots,
class struggles going on, catastrophe, nothing new.
I could hear my grandmother telling me now.
"Little Cornel, don't you ever be surprised by evil.
Don't you ever be paralyzed by despair.
You wrestle with despair."
Goethe used to say,
"He or she who has never despaired has never lived."
And he's not the most greatest of artists
when it comes to the tragic sensibility.
Tragic sensibility scared Goethe.
His very metaphor is a cloudless sky.
That's not the blues-like orientation I have.
When the sun comes out, I love it.
I get all I can 'cause I know it's not gonna last too long.
(audience laughing)
And I'm not just talking about Seattle.
(audience laughing)
I count my blessings.
My mama passed.
I count my blessings I had her for so many years.
I lose James Mtume. I count my blessing for his music.
I lose bell hooks. I count my blessing for what she gave.
That's what hope is about. Nothing to do with optimism.
Nothing to do with upbeat.
Nothing to do with the green light.
Nothing to do with tomorrow, things are gonna get better.
That's Chekhov. Chekhov is deeper than the blues.
You say, "Ooh, that's blasphemy in America."
(audience laughing)
Truth often is blasphemy in America.
(audience applauding)
He's deeper than the blues.
'Cause the blues is still American shot through
with certain romantic and sentimental elements
thinking that tomorrow things might get better.
Good morning heartache.
Maybe the next morning there won't be.
No, Billie, it's gonna be there waiting for you, sister.
Don't you think?
No, no, but we Americans always think that somehow
we ascribe almost metaphysical status to the future.
Russians don't worry about that.
Chekhov doesn't, Dostoevsky doesn't. Why?
Because they know energy must be focused
on not just staying woke.
I love that language with my young brothers and sisters,
but I tell 'em, "If you stay woke,
you're going to suffer from insomnia."
(audience laughing)
Don't you stay woke, stay woke, stay woke, no.
Well brother, it's just a slogan.
Well, I just want to get my insights right on this.
You got to stay fortified.
When you're fortified you're like a jazz woman
or a blues man, you got good timing
with phronesis, practical wisdom.
So you know when to be woke, when to take a nap,
when to sleep, when to get your work done,
when to bring together your talent and your discipline
and your energy in such a way and when to laugh at yourself,
when to criticize yourself.
When they acknowledge that you can be better
than you can be, when to listen to your best friends,
when to listen to your enemies,
when to listen to your critics.
It's all in the timing.
And Alfred North Whitehead even went further
in "Adventures of Ideas."
That was the first book
that I told my brothers and sisters to read yesterday.
"Adventures of Ideas." Oh, what a classic.
'Cause he talks about what?
He talks about not just noble discontent
and radical discontent that flow from the Socratic legacy
of Athens and the prophetic legacy of Jerusalem.
He says, "I'm concerned with the tone of a thinker."
See, that's jazz-like.
See, Ben Webster got a sweet tone
that gets all inside of you and makes you feel
like you want to be tender and kind and sweet.
And then we got some other horn players
that's a different tone.
That's all right, that's their tone.
They're just loud. (audience laughing)
And it's their temperament that William James would pick up.
The temperament of a thinker and a philosopher
and a human being wrestling with decay and decline
and loss and catastrophe.
Crucial is the tone and temperament
of how we relate to each other.
And if we measure American culture
in terms of tone and temperament,
oh, we're in deeper trouble than we thought.
It's not just the ideas exchanged. It's the how.
And the only way to be counter-hegemonic is to point it out.
And when in one's own practice, you see, try to enact it.
As to what happened in Charlottesville.
We went down to Charlottesville.
Gave a talk at sunrise.
We must have had 2,000 people at six o'clock in the morning,
which is a miracle for me 'cause I don't get up early
almost for anything other than trying to catch a plane
to be part of some movement.
And by the time we got out to march, we had about 100.
And by the time we got to the Robert E. Lee statue,
we had about 16 of us.
I'm just singing "This Little Light of Mine,"
about to get crushed by thousands of sick white brothers.
There was a few white sisters.
Sick white brothers, neo-Nazis, and the Klan.
I walked by the park, they're listening to Motown.
I said, "Ooh, (audience laughing)
very American." (audience laughing)
Motown, you're gonna kill me
and wanna listen to the music we produce.
'Cause that music speaks to you on a very deep human level,
but you decide to be a gangster
therefore you can't respond humanistically
to the humanism in the music.
Then they come to me and spitting
and cussing and carrying on.
An example of imperial decay.
He said, "I got one question for you, so and so.
How come you call everybody brother and sister?
I see that S-H-I-T on TV all the time. I can't stand that."
And I looked over I and said,
"Well brother, (audience laughing)
I'm not naive. I'm not sentimental.
But I recognize you, a human being
on the same continuum that I am as a human being."
And I know I got some elements inside of me,
gangster-like that is hegemonic at the moment
and for a good while in your soul.
So this is not a moment for Socratic dialogue now.
You see, but it's also not a moment for self-righteousness
and self-indulgence and easy Manichaean perception,
the product of the same culture that I am, you see.
The hypocrisy of neoliberal elites,
same continuum of humanity, talking about democracy
and freedom, but willing to drop drones on innocent people.
Don't wanna move against a grotesque wealth inequality.
Just simply wanna make the empire more colorful at the top.
And I'm concerned about the structures, you see.
Same critique.
And then I went into my Christian mode and I just told him,
I said, "You know, you choose to be a gangster,
but you are made in the image of God.
You're a human being
and you have the capacity to be different.
It's just that at this moment and maybe for a good while
that you're gonna remain my foe."
I said, "I was a gangster
before I met a Palestinian Jew named Jesus,
and now I'm a redeemed sinner with gangster proclivities."
(audience laughing) See, don't mess with me.
I'm a Christian, but not a pacifist.
(audience laughing)
But then I recognized without Antifa,
we would've got crushed like cockroaches
'cause they came at us
with loaded ammunition, with their face mask
and we singing, "This Little Light of Mine."
I wouldn't recommend that under any circumstances.
Why is that important?
Because without some kind of deeper commitment
to integrity, honesty, decency, solidarity, you see,
the very hope that we need to be enacted and embodied
will in the end be too superficial.
So it's a spiritual and a moral issue
as well as a political and an economic one.
And we need to be very explicit about this
as the world continues to slide down a slippery slope
to multiple catastrophes, and that in our thinking,
in our philosophizing,
let us not reduce the catastrophic to the problematic.
There's never been a woman's problem.
There's never been a Black problem.
There's never been a working people's problem in America.
There's been catastrophes visited upon them.
There's never been a non-binary problem.
There've been catastrophes visited on them.
Never been a homophobic problem.
That's a way of trying to reduce it
to something that is not just manageable,
but it downplays the role of the moral and the spiritual.
And that language of problem
is so often a language of our social scientists.
And I love social science work
at its best in The New School.
I'm gonna hold on at its best, now.
But we're dealing with a time now where the catastrophes
are so intertwined and intermingled
that if we don't have the seeing required,
the deep feeling of compassion and the courage,
I cannot stress more, courage.
That is the enabling virtue.
All the other virtues are empty without courage.
And being a spectator won't do it.
Ironic consciousness won't do it.
That's the critical moment, the ironic consciousness.
We need intervention, being a participant, being an agent,
being part of collective actions on a variety
of the catastrophes with which we're dealing.
And so in the end, I know I've been going too long,
but I'm just so blessed to be here
that I do want to end on a blue note.
I started on a blue note.
That now that the whole nation
thoroughly has the blues,
there's a fundamental sense in which
if we don't learn from the best of a blues people,
a world historical people
who have disproportionately shaped the sonic world,
the cultural world out of sheer spiritual fortitude
and creativity and moral action,
if we don't learn from a blues people,
we're gonna lose everything.
It's just that simple.
Hearing, seeing, and it's not a question
of some kind of a sensitivity to the people
who have been excluded for 400 years.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
It has everything to do with how seriously we take our quest
for truth and beauty and goodness and justice.
And all persons, all colors and genders
and sexual orientations can contribute to the quest
for those particular ends and aims by taking very seriously
a variety of the voices raised
and the examples enacted and the movements created.
And in the end, that still might not be enough.
So what?
We go down swinging.
And I come from a tradition that says
with all the style and a smile,
it don't mean a thing if it ain't got that swing.
(audience laughing)
That's nobility at its height.
Thank you all so very much. (audience applauding)