LECTURES ON 
GAS THEORY 



Ludwig Boltzmann 




Pufic. 7^ai/icj*uziuMzi ~Ph.y - A . LC - A . 



LECTURES ON GAS THEORY 


Ludwig Boltzmann 

Translated by Stephen G. Brush 


DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
NEW YORK 


~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toL2c.a/ P/tyJxci 




~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ P/tyJxci 




LECTURES ON GAS THEORY 


~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Copyright 


Copyright © 1964 by The Regents of the University of California. 
All rights reserve. 


Bibliographical Note 

This Dover edition, first published in 1995, is an unabridged, unaltered republication of the English 
translation originally published by the University of California Press, Berkeley, 1964. The original 
work, in German, was published in two parts by J. A. Barth, Leipzig, Germany, 1896 (Part I) and 1898 
(Part II), under the title Vorlesungen iiber Gastheorie. 

The Dover edition is published by special arrangement with the University of California Press, 2120 
Berkeley Way, Berkeley, California 94720. 

This translation was originally “published with the assistance of a grant from the National Science 
Foundation.” 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Boltzmann, Ludwig, 1844-1906. 

[Vorlesungen iiber Gastheorie. English] 

Lectures on gas theory / Ludwig Boltzmann ; translated by Stephen G. Brush. — Dover ed. 
p. cm. 

Originally published: Berkeley : University of California Press, 1964. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-486-68455-5 

1. Kinetic theory of gases. I. Title. 

QC175.B7213 1995 
5 33’.7—dc20 

94-41221 

CIP 


Manufactured in the United States by Courier Corporation 
68455503 

www .doverpublications.com 


~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ P/tyJxci 



CONTENTS 


Translator’s Introduction x 

PARTI 1 

Theory of gases with monatomic molecules, whose dimensions are negligible compared to 

THE MEAN FREE PATH. 

Foreword 2 

Introduction 3 

1. Mechanical analogy for the behavior of a gas 3 

2. Calculation of the pressure of a gas 7 

CHAPTER I 14 

The molecules are elastic spheres. Extebnal forces and visible mass motion are absent. 

3. Maxwell’s proof of the velocity distribution law; frequency of collisions 14 

4. Continuation; values of the variables after the collision; collisions of the opposite kind 19 

5. Proof that Maxwell’s velocity distribution is the only possible one 25 

6 . Mathematical meaning of the quantity H 29 

7. The Boyle-Charles-Avogadro law. Expression for the heat supplied 34 

8 . Specific heat. Physical meaning of the quantity H. 40 

9. Number of collisions 47 

10. Mean free path 54 

11. Basic equation for the transport of any quantity by the molecular motion 57 

12. Electrical conduction and viscosity of the gas 61 

13. Heat conduction and diffusion of the gas 67 

14. Two kinds of approximations; diffusion of two different gases 72 

CHAPTER II 82 

The molecules are centers of force. Consideration of external forces and visible motions 

of the gas. 

15. Development of partial differential equations for f and F. 82 

16. Continuation. Discussion of the effects of collisions 85 

17. Time-derivatives of sums over all molecules in a region 93 

18. More general proof of the entropy theorem. Treatment of the equations corresponding to the 101 

stationary state 

19. Aerostatics. Entropy of a heavy gas whose motion does not violate Equations (147) 110 

20. General form of the hydrodynamic equations 116 

CHAPTER III 132 

The molecules repel each other with a force inversely proportional to the fifth power of 

THEIR DISTANCE. 

21. Integration of the terms resulting from collisions 132 

22. Relaxation time. Hydrodynamic equations corrected for viscosity. Calculation of B 5 using 142 

spherical functions 

23. Heat conduction. Second method of approximate calculations 155 

24. Entropy for the case when Equations (147) are not satisfied. Diffusion 173 


^Pufi-C- 7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



PART II 

Van der Waals' Theory; Gases with compound molecules; Gas dissociation; Concluding 

REMARKS. 


192 


Foreword 192 

CHAPTER I 194 

Foundations of van der Waals - theory. 

1. General viewpoint of van der Waals 1 94 

2. External and internal pressure 195 

3. Number of collisions against the wall 196 

4. Relation between molecular extension and collision number 197 

5. Determination of the impulse imparted to the molecules 199 

6 . Limits of validity of the approximations made in §4 201 

7. Determination of internal pressure 202 

8 . An ideal gas as a thermometric substance 204 

9. Temperature-pressure coefficient. Determination of the constants of van der Waals’ equation 205 

10. Absolute temperature. Compression coefficient 206 

11. Critical temperature, critical pressure, and critical volume 208 

12. Geometric discussion of the isotherms 211 

13. Special cases 214 

CHAPTER II 218 

Physical discussion of the van der Waals' theory. 

14. Stable and unstable states 218 

15. Undercooling. Delayed evaporation 219 

16. Stable coexistence of both phases 221 

17. Geometric representation of the states in which two phases coexist 223 

18. Definition of the concepts gas, vapor, and liquid 225 

19. Arbitrariness of the definitions of the preceding section 226 

20. Isopycnic changes of state 227 

21. Calorimetry of a substance following van der Waals’ law 228 

22. Size of the molecule . 231 

23. Relations to capillarity 232 

24. Work of separation of the molecules 235 

CHAPTER III 239 

Principles of general mechanics needed for gas theory. 

25. Conception of the molecule as a mechanical system characterized by generalized coordinates 239 

26. Liouville’s theorem 241 

27. On the introduction of new variables in a product of differentials 246 

28. Application to the formulas of §26 250 

29. Second proof of Liouville’s theorem 253 

30. Jacobi’s theorem of the last multiplier 257 

31. Introduction of the energy differential 261 

32. Ergoden 264 

33. Concept of the momentoid 267 

34. Expression for the probability; average values 271 

35. General relationship to temperature equilibrium 278 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. 



CHAPTER IV 

Gases with compound molecules. 


283 


36. Special treatment of compound molecules 283 

37. Application of Kirchhoff’s method to gases with compound molecules 284 

38. On the possibility that the states of a very large number of molecules can actually lie within very 286 

narrow limits 

39. Treatment of collisions of two molecules 287 

40. Proof that the distribution of states assumed in §37 will not be changed by collisions 290 

41. Generalizations 292 

42. Mean value of the kinetic energy corresponding to a momentoid 294 

43. The ratio of specific heats, k 296 

44. Value of k for special cases 298 

45. Comparison with experiment 299 

46. Other mean values 300 

47. Treatment of directly interacting molecules 302 

CHAPTER V 306 

Derivation of van der Waals - equation by means of the virial concept. 

48. Specification of the point at which van der Waals’ mode of reasoning requires improvement 306 

49. More general concept of the virial 306 

50. Virial of the external pressure acting on a gas 308 

51. Probability of finding the centers of two molecules at a given distance 310 

52. Contribution to the virial resulting from the finite extension of the molecules 313 

53. Virial of the van der Waals cohesion force 316 

54. Alternatives to van der Waals’ formulas 317 

55. Virial for any arbitrary law of repulsion of the molecules 319 

56. The principle of Lorentz’s method 321 

57. Number of collisions 323 

58. More exact value of the mean free path. Calculation of W’ according to Lorentz’s method 326 

59. More exact calculation of the space available for the center of a molecule 327 

60. Calculation of the pressure of the saturated vapor from the laws of probability 329 

61. Calculation of the entropy of a gas satisfying van der Waals’ assumptions, using the calculus of 332 

probabilities 

CHAPTER VI 339 

Theory of dissociation. 

62. Mechanical picture of the chemical affinity of monovalent similar atoms 339 

63. Probability of chemical binding of an atom with a similar one 341 

64. Dependence of the degree of dissociation on pressure 344 

65. Dependence of the degree of dissociation on temperature 347 

66 . Numerical calculations 350 

67. Mechanical picture of the affinity of two dissimilar monovalent atoms 354 

68 . Dissociation of a molecule into two heterogeneous atoms 356 

69. Dissociation of hydrogen iodide gas 358 

70. Dissociation of water vapor 360 

71. General theory of dissociation 363 

72. Relation of this theory to that of Gibbs 367 

73. The sensitive region is uniformly distributed around the entire atom 368 


vi. 


f^uJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



CHAPTER VII 372 

Supplements to the laws of thermal equilibrium in gases with compound molecules. 

74. Definition of the quantity H, which measures the probabilities of states 372 

75. Change of the quantity H through intramolecular motion 373 

76. Characterization of the first special case considered 375 

77. Form of Liouville’s theorem in the special case considered 377 

78. Change of the quantity H as a consequence of collisions 379 

79. Most general characterization of the collision of two molecules 381 

80. Application of Liouville’s theorem to collisions of the most general kind 382 

81. Method of calculation with finite differences 385 

82. Integral expression for the most general change of//by collisions 389 

83. Detailed specification of the case now to be considered 391 

84. Solution of the equation valid for each collision 391 

85. Only the atoms of a single type collide with each other 393 

86 . Determination of the probability of a particular kind of central motion 394 

87. Characterization of our assumption about the initial state 399 

88 . On the return of a system to a former state 400 

89. Relation to the second law of thermodynamics 401 

90. Application to the universe 402 

91. Application of the probability calculus in molecular physics 403 

92. Derivation of thermal equilibrium by reversal of the time direction 404 

93. Proof for a cyclic series of a finite number of states 407 

Bibliography 410 

Index 433 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ “Pity. 



TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION 


Gas Theory 

Boltzmann’s Lectures on Gas Theory is an acknowledged masterpiece of theoretical 
physics; aside from its historical importance, it still has considerable scientific value today. 
It contains a comprehensive exposition of the kinetic theory of gases by a scientist who 
devoted a large pail of his own career to it, and brought it very nearly to completion as a 
fundamental part of modem physics. The many physicists who are already familiar with 
Gastheorie in the original German edition (1896-1898) will not need this Introduction to 
remind them of its stature. But perhaps some scientists who scarcely have time to keep up 
with the latest publications in their subject may want to know why they should bother to 
read a book published more than 60 years ago; and a brief account of the place of the book 
in the development of modem physics may be of interest. 

Ludwig Boltzmann (1844-1906) played a leading role in the nineteenth-century 
movement toward reducing the phenomena of heat, light, electricity, and magnetism to 
“matter and motion” —in other words, to atomic models based on Newtonian mechanics. 
His own greatest contribution was to show how that mechanics, which had previously been 
regarded as deterministic and reversible in time, could be used to describe irreversible 
phenomena in the real world on a statistical basis. His original papers on the statistical 
interpretation of thermodynamics, the //-theorem, transport theory, thermal equilibrium, the 
equation of state of gases, and similar subjects, occupy about 2,000 pages in the 
proceedings of the Vienna Academy and other societies. While some of his discoveries 
attracted considerable attention and controversy in his own time, not even the handful of 
experts on kinetic theory could claim to have read everything he wrote. Realizing that few 
scientists of later generations were likely to study his long original memoirs in detail, 
Boltzmann decided to publish his lectures, in which the most important parts of the theory, 
including his own contributions, were carefully explained. In addition, he included his 
mature reflections and speculations on such questions as the nature of irreversibility and the 
justification for using statistical methods in physics. His Vorlesungen Uber Gastheorie was 
in fact the standard reference work for advanced researchers, as well as a popular textbook 
for students,* for the first quarter of the present century, and is frequently cited even now. 
A recent example is the following statement by Mark Kac:f “Boltzmann summarized most 
(but not all) of his work in a two volume treatise Vorlesungen Uber Gastheorie. This is one 
of the greatest books in the history of exact sciences and the reader is strongly advised to 
consult it. It is tough going but the rewards are great.” 

The modem reader will rightly assume that some parts of Boltzmann’s theory must have 
been rendered obsolete by later discoveries. In particular, we know that one cannot expect 
to develop an adequate theory of atomic phenomena without using quantum mechanics. 
However, it turns out that almost all the properties of gases at ordinary temperatures and 
densities can be described by the classical theory developed in the nineteenth century, and 
for this reason there has been a considerable revival of interest in classical kinetic theory 


i+ix± 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



during the last few years, in connection with rarified gas dynamics, plasma physics, and 
neutron transport theory. The reason why the classical theory works is that, while the 
internal structure of molecules must be described by quantum mechanics, the interaction 
between two molecules can be fairly well described by a classical model which ignores this 
structure and simply uses a postulated force law whose parameters can be chosen to fit 
experimental data. Aside from phenomena at very high densities or very low temperatures, 
the only property that the classical theory fails to account for is the ratio of specific heats. 
However, this failure was already well known at the time Boltzmann wrote this book, and 
he is therefore quite cautious on this point. He simply concludes that for some unknown 
reason all the possible internal motions of a molecule do not have an equal share in the total 
energy, and takes this into account as an empirical fact. 

As for various questions of a more fundamental nature, such as the relation between 
entropy and the direction of time, quantum theory has thrown new light on these problems 
but has not solved them. Boltzmann’s remarks are therefore still of interest. Thus Hans 
Reichenbach proposes to define the direction of increasing time as the direction in which 
entropy increases, so that in a universe in which entropy fluctuates, 

we cannot speak of a direction of time as a whole; only certain sections of time have directions, and 
these directions are not the same. The first to have the courage to draw this conclusion was Ludwig 
Boltzmann [Gas Theory, Part II, §90]. His conception of alternating time directions represents one of 
the keenest insights into the problem of time. Philosophers have attempted to derive the properties of 
time from reason; but none of their conceptions compares with this result that a physicist derived from 
reasoning about the implications of mathematical physics. As in so many other respects, the superiority 
of a philosophy based on the results of science has become manifest... .* 

The only respects in which the book may be considered out of date are, first, the 
emphasis on the inverse fifth-power repulsive force model for calculating transport 
properties, and, second, the molecular model used to explain dissociation phenomena. The 
reason for choosing the inverse fifth-power force law was that Maxwell (1866)t had 
discovered that the calculation of transport properties is particularly simple for this case, 
because the collision integrals do not depend on the relative velocity of the colliding 
molecules, so that one does not need to know the velocity distribution. Maxwell and 
Boltzmann therefore believed that it would be more worthwhile to develop an exact theory 
for this model, rather than attempt to work out a more complicated approximate theory for 
other force laws. However, it was later shown by Chapman and Enskog (1916-1917) that 
the important phenomenon of thermal diffusion does not occur for this particular force law, 
and a quantitative treatment of the general case does require a determination of the velocity 
distribution in a nonequilibrium state, although it is still not necessary to use the quantum 
theory. Boltzmann’s model for dissociation, employing molecules with small “sensitive 
regions” on parts of their surfaces, is an interesting historical curiosity, but the need for such 
ad hoc assumptions to explain the directional character of chemical bonds has been 
el im inated by quantum mechanics. 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 


History of the kinetic theory 



The development of the kinetic theory of gases has been discussed at length elsewhere* 
so only a brief summary will be given here. 

The modem concept of air as a fluid exerting mechanical pressure on surfaces in contact 
with it goes back to the early seventeenth century, when Torricelli, Pascal, and Boyle first 
established the physical nature of the air. By a combination of experiments and theoretical 
reasoning they persuaded other scientists that the earth is surrounded by a “sea” of air that 
exerts pressure in much the same way that water does, and that air pressure is responsible 
for many of the phenomena previously attributed to “nature’s abhorrence of a vacuum.” 
We may view this development of the concept of air pressure as part of the change in 
scientific attitudes which led to the mechanico-corpuscular view of nature, associated with 
the names of Galileo, Boyle, Newton, and others. Instead of postulating “occult forces” or 
teleological principles to explain natural phenomena, scientists started to look for 
explanations based simply on matter and motion. 

Robert Boyle is generally credited with the discovery that the pressure exerted by a gas 
is inversely proportional to the volume of the space in which it is confined. From Boyle’s 
point of view that discovery by itself was relatively insignificant, and though he had 
provided the experimental evidence for it he readily admitted that he had not found any 
general quantitative relation between pressure and volume before Richard Towneley 
suggested the hypothesis that pressure is inversely proportional to volume. Robert Hooke 
also provided further experimental confirmation of the hypothesis. It was long known as 
“Mariotte’s law” on the Continent, but there are good reasons for believing that Mariotte 
was familiar with Boyle’s work even though he does not mention it, so that he does not 
even deserve the credit for independent (much less simultaneous) discovery: see any good 
book on history of science for details on this point. 

The generalization that pressure is proportional to absolute temperature at constant 
volume was stated by Amontons and Charles, but it remained for Gay-Lussac to establish it 
firmly by experiments at the beginning of the nineteenth century. 

Boyle’s researches were carried out to illustrate not just a quantitative relation between 
pressure and volume, but rather the qualitative fact that air has elasticity (“spring”) and can 
exert a mechanical pressure strong enough to support 34 feet of water in a pump, or 30 
inches of mercury in a barometer. His achievement was to introduce a new dimension— 
pressure—into physics; he could well afford to be generous about giving others the credit 
for perceiving the numerical relations between this dimension and others. He also proposed 
a theoretical explanation for the elasticity of air—he l ik ened it to “a heap of little bodies, 
lying one upon another” and the elasticity of the whole was simply due to the elasticity of 
the parts. The atoms were said to behave like springs which resist compression. To a 
modem scientist this explanation does not seem very satisfactory, for it does no more than 
attribute to atoms the observable properties of macroscopic objects. It is interesting to note 
that Boyle also tried the “crucial experiment” which was to help overthrow his own theory 
in favor of the kinetic theory two centuries later, though he did not realize its significance: 
he placed a pendulum in an evacuated chamber and discovered, to his surprise, that the 
presence or absence of air makes hardly any difference to the period of the swings or the 
time needed for the pendulum to come to rest. In 1859, Maxwell deduced from the kinetic 


x 


P’sm+uc. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



theory that the viscosity of a gas should be independent of its density—a property which 
would be very hard to explain on the basis of Boyle’s theory. 

Newton discusses very briefly in his Pliilosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica 
(1687) the consequences of various hypotheses about the forces between atoms for the 
relation between pressure and volume. One particular hypothesis, a repulsive force 
inversely proportional to distance, leads to Boyle’s law. It seems plausible that Newton was 
trying to put Boyle’s theory in mathematical language and that he thought of the repulsive 
forces as being due to the action of the atomic springs in contact with each other, but there 
seems to be no direct evidence for this. Neither Boyle nor Newton asserted that the 
hypothesis of repulsive forces between atoms is really responsible for gas pressure; both 
were willing to leave the question open. Boyle mentions Descartes’ theory of vortices, for 
example, which is somewhat closer in spirit to the kinetic theory since it relies more heavily 
on the rapid motion of the parts of the atom as a cause for repulsion. Incidentally, it is 
important to realize that there is more to the kinetic theory than just the statement that heat is 
atomic motion. That statement was frequently made, especially in the seventeenth century, 
but usually by scientists who did not make the important additional assumption that in gases 
the atoms move freely most of the time. It was quite possible to accept the “heat is motion” 
idea and still reject the kinetic theory of gases—as did Humphry Davy early in the 
nineteenth century. 

Despite the tentative way in which it was originally proposed, the Boyle-Newton theory 
of gases was apparently accepted by most scientists until about the middle of the nineteenth 
century, when the kinetic theory finally managed to overcome Newton’s authority. Thus a 
theory which was decidedly a step forward from older ideas nevertheless was able to retard 
further progress for a considerable time. 

It is difficult to understand the relative lack of progress in gas physics during the 
eighteenth century as compared to the seventeenth. Several brilliant mathematicians refined 
and clarified Newton’s principles of mechanics and applied them to the analysis of the 
motions of celestial bodies and of continuous solids and fluids, but there was little interest 
in the properties of systems of freely moving atoms. The atoms in a gas were still conceived 
as being suspended in the ether, although they could vibrate or rotate enough to keep other 
atoms from coming too close. This model was rather awkward to formulate mathematically, 
as may be seen from an unsuccessful attempt by Leonhard Euler (1727). 

One contribution from this period has been generally recognized as the first kinetic 
theory of gases. This is Daniel Bernoulli’s derivation of the gas laws from a “bi ll iard ball” 
model—much lik e the one still used in elementary textbooks today—in 1738. His kinetic 
theory is only a small part of a treatise on hydrodynamics, a subject to which he made 
important contributions. From the viewpoint of the historical development of the kinetic 
theory, his formulation and successful applications of the principle of conservation of 
mechanical energy were really more important than the fact that he actually proposed a 
kinetic theory himself. Bernoulli’s kinetic theory, while in accord with modem ideas, was a 
century ahead of its time, for scientists were not yet ready to accept the physical description 
of a gas that it employed. Heat was still generally regarded as a substance, even though it 
was also recognized that heat might have some relationship to atomic motions; Bernoulli’s 


xi. 


^Pu^jc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



assumption that heat is nothing but atomic motion was unacceptable, especially to scientists 
who were interested in the phenomena of radiant heat. The assumption that atoms could 
move freely through space until they collided l ik e bi ll iard balls was probably regarded as 
too drastic an approximation, since it neglected the drag of the ether and oversimplified the 
interaction between atoms. 

Late in the eighteenth century, Lavoisier and Laplace developed a systematic theory of 
chemical and thermal phenomena based on the assumption that heat is a substance, called 
“caloric.” Laplace and Poisson later worked out a quantitative theory of gases, in which the 
repulsion between atoms was attributed to the action of “atmospheres” of caloric 
surrounding the atoms; they were able to explain such phenomena as adiabatic compression 
and the velocity of sound, as well as the ideal gas laws. 

The caloric theory was being brought to its final stage of perfection by Laplace, 
Poisson, Carnot and Clapeyron at about the same time that John Herapath (1790-1868) 
proposed his kinetic theory (1820, 1821). Herapath attempted to explain not only the 
properties of gases but also gravity, changes of state, and many other phenomena. His 
memoir was rejected by the Royal Society, mainly because Humphry Davy (then its 
president) thought Herapath’s theory was too speculative, even though Davy himself had 
advocated the view that heat is molecular motion. Herapath published several papers on his 
theory, but did not succeed in converting other scientists to his views. Another British 
scientist, J. J. Waterston (1811-1883), submitted a memoir on the kinetic theory to the 
Royal Society in 1845; it was not only rejected, but remained buried in the Society’s 
archives until 1891 when it was discovered by Lord Rayleigh. 

During the period 1840-1855, the equivalence of heat, work, and other forms of energy 
was established experimentally by Joule, and the general principle of conservation of 
energy was formulated by Mayer and others. Joule himself revived Herapath’s kinetic 
theory (1848) but did not make any further developments or applications of it aside from 
calculating the velocity of a hydrogen molecule. Kronig independently proposed a simple 
kinetic theory in 1856, and soon afterwards Rudolf Clausius (1822-1888) and James Clerk 
Maxwell (1831-1879) stalled to make substantial progress towards the modem theory. 
Clausius introduced the idea of the “mean free path” of a molecule between successive 
collisions (1858), and Maxwell, Clausius, O. E. Meyer (1834-1915), and P. G. Tait 
(1831-1901) developed the theory of diffusion, viscosity, and heat conduction on this 
basis. One of the most surprising results—whose confirmation by experiment helped to 
establish the kinetic theory—was Maxwell’s prediction (1859) that the viscosity of a gas 
should be independent of density and should increase with temperature. The mean free path 
method is still the easiest way to understand transport phenomena, but it does not yield 
accurate numerical results and, as mentioned above, it failed to predict thermal diffusion. 

The foundations of the modem theory of transport were laid by Maxwell in his great 
memoir of 1866; it is essentially this method which Boltzmann used to make his 
discoveries, and which he presents in this book. Maxwell proceeds by writing down 
general equations for the rate of change of any quantity (such as molecular velocity) at any 
point in space and time resulting from molecular motions and collisions. These 
“microscopic” equations are then compared with the corresponding “macroscopic” 


xi„ 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



equations (for example, the Navier-Stokes equations of hydrodynamics) and the 
coefficients of viscosity, etc., are thus related to certain characteristic functions of molecular 
collisions. Boltzmann’s transport equation, derived in 1872, is a special case of Maxwell’s 
general equation in which the quantity of interest is the number of molecules having a 
certain velocity—in other words, the velocity distribution function. As soon as this function 
has been found, all the transport coefficients can also be computed. Much of modem 
research in statistical mechanics is based on attempts to solve either the Boltzmann equation 
or similar equations for other kinds of distribution functions. In a sense there are two 
alternative ways of developing transport theory: one based on solutions of Maxwell’s 
equations, and the other on the solution of Boltzmann’s equation, and these two approaches 
were followed by Chapman (1916) and Enskog (1917) respectively, the final results being 
essentially identical. However, Boltzmann was able to deduce immediately a very 
important result from his equation, which was not at all obvious from Maxwell’s original 
formulation: a quantity called H, which can be identified with the negative of the entropy, 
must always decrease or remain constant, if one assumes that the velocity distributions of 
two colliding molecules are uncorrelated. The molecular interpretation of the law of 
increasing entropy is thus intimately related to the assumption of molecular chaos and the 
relation between entropy and probability. H remains constant only when the gas attains a 
special velocity distribution which had previously been deduced by Maxwell (1859) in a 
less convincing manner. 

There is apparently a contradiction between the law of increasing entropy and the 
principles of Newtonian mechanics since the latter do not recognize any difference between 
past and future times. If one sequence of molecular motions corresponds to increasing 
entropy, one should obtain a sequence corresponding to decreasing entropy by simply 
reversing all the velocities. This is the so-called reversibility paradox ( Umkehreinwand ) 
which was advanced as an objection to Boltzmann’s theory by Loschmidt (1876, 1877) 
and others. Another difficulty is the fact that a conservative dynamical system in a finite 
space will always return infinitely often to a state close to any arbitrary initial state; hence 
the entropy cannot continually increase but must go through cyclic variations. This is the 
recurrence paradox ( Wiederkehreinwand ) based on a theorem of Poincare (1890) and used 
against the kinetic theory by Zermelo (1896). Some scientists held that if there is any 
contradiction between macroscopic thermodynamics and the kinetic theory, the latter 
should be rejected since it is based on a hypothetical atomic model, whereas 
thermodynamics is firmly grounded on empirical observations. Boltzmann’s reply to these 
objections is given in this book. 

Another broad field of theoretical research was opened up by J. D. van der Waals 
(1837-1923), who published his celebrated investigation of the continuity of the liquid and 
gaseous states in 1873. Although van der Waals’ equation of state was supposedly deduced 
from the virial theorem of Clausius (1870), and was therefore considered an application of 
the kinetic theory, its derivation relied partly on concepts of the older Laplace-Poisson 
theory of capillarity, in which molecular motions were ignored. Nevertheless the van der 
Waals equation of state gives an excellent qualitative description of condensation and 
critical phenomena, and Boltzmann devotes a substantial portion of Part II of these lectures 


x 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



to an exposition of van der Waals’ theory. He also describes his calculation of the next 
correction term to the equation of state of hard spheres—i.e., what we now call the third 
virial coefficient. 

The failure of the kinetic theory to give a satisfactory explanation of the specific heats of 
polyatomic gases—and spectroscopic evidence that even monatomic gas molecules must 
have internal degrees of freedom which apparendy do not have their proper share of energy 
as required by the equipartition theorem —stimulated several theoretical studies of 
mechanical models later in the nineteenth century. These studies were directed toward 
attempting to prove rigorously the necessary and sufficient conditions for equipartition. It 
was generally agreed that a sufficient condition would be that the system passes eventually 
through every point on the “energy surface” in phase space before returning to its stalling 
point; in other words, no matter what might be the initial velocities and positions of the 
particles, they would eventually take on all possible values consistent with their fixed total 
energy. This statement is now known as the “ergodic” hypothesis, and it is frequently 
asserted that Maxwell and Boltzmann believed that real physical systems have this 
property. If the hypothesis were true for a system, then it would be legitimate to replace a 
time-average over the trajectory of a single system (which is what one can actually observe) 
by a “phase” or “ensemble” average over many replicas of the same system with all 
possible sets of positions and velocities consistent with a specified energy. From a 
mathematical point of view, the existence of an ergodic system would imply that ann- 
dimensional manifold (the energy surface in phase space) can be mapped continuously onto 
a one-dimensional manifold (the range of the time variable) so that every point in the 
former corresponds to at least one point in the latter. 

While Boltzmann did make certain statements in some of his papers (1871, 1884, 1887) 
to the effect that a mechanical system might exhibit such behavior—the Lissajous figure 
with incommensurable periods was one alleged example—there is no foundation for the 
belief that Boltzmann thought real systems are ergodic. Moreover, Boltzmann did not 
clearly distinguish between the “ergodic hypothesis” (which we now know to be false) and 
the so-called “quasi-ergodic hypothesis,” that the trajectory of a system may pass arbitrarily 
close to every point on the energy surface. The latter hypothesis does indeed provide a 
reasonable basis for statistical mechanics, even though it has not yet been proved that it is 
valid for real physical systems. To anyone acquainted with the modem mathematical theory 
of sets of points and infinite classes, the distinction between the two hypotheses is obvious, 
but we must remember that Boltzmann did not accept this theory, although he may have 
been aware of it (the fundamental papers of Georg Cantor were published during the same 
period that Boltzmann was publishing his papers on gas theory, some of them in the same 
journal). On the contrary, Boltzmann often stated that infinitesimal or infinite numbers have 
no meaning except as l im its of finite numbers, and for this reason he gave alternative 
derivations of some of his theorems using sums of discrete quantities instead of integrals. 
To say that a trajectory passes through every point in a region would (to him) be 
meaningless unless one meant by this that the trajectory passes arbitrarily close to every 
point, and in at least one paper Boltzmann uses the two statements interchangeably.* 

Part of the confusion regarding Boltzmann’s views is due to the fact that the Ehrenfests, 


x 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



in their classic encyclopedia article (1911), and later writers following their terminology, 
took Boltzmann’s word “ergodic” and used it to refer to a single mechanical system whose 
trajectory passes through every point on the energy surface, whereas Boltzmann h im self 
had used the word in a completely different sense, to mean an aggregate or ensemble of 
systems whose positions and velocities are distributed over all possible sets of values on the 
energy surface. The Ehrenfests recognized this distinction, and used the term “ergodic 
distribution” for the latter concept, but since then Gibbs’ terminology has come into general 
use, and we now use the phrase “microcanonical ensemble” for what Boltzmann called an 
Ergode. (Boltzmann’s justification for using Ergoden in gas theory is given in Part n, §35, 
and in other remarks scattered through the rest of this book.) 

The statistical mechanics of J. Willard Gibbs (1839-1903) represents the next level of 
abstraction and refinement of gas theory, following direcdy on Boltzmann’s introduction of 
Ergoden , and relying heavily on the methods of analytical mechanics which Boltzmann 
applied to gas theory (see Pail II, Chapter HI). Instead of considering an ensemble of 
systems with different initial positions and velocities but the same total energy, Gibbs 
proposed to consider the more general case of a “canonical ensemble” of systems having all 
possible energies, the number of systems having energy E being proportional to e~P E 
(where [i = VkT). Gibbs also introduced the “grand canonical ensemble” in which the 
number of particles in each system may vary, the number of systems with N particles being 
proportional to e~^ N , where /./ (called the “chemical potential”) is chosen to give the desired 
density. These generalized ensembles are easier to deal with mathematically, and enable 
one to treat systems in contact with a heat reservoir at constant temperature, or systems in 
which chemical reactions may take place. 

There is not space here to describe the modifications of statistical mechanics by quantum 
mechanics, associated with the names of Planck, Einstein, Bose, Fermi, and Dirac. It may 
however be worth mentioning that Planck’s discovery of the quantum laws of radiation 
owed much to Boltzmann’s statistical theory of entropy. At the same time it must be 
remembered that during the years preceding the introduction of the quantum theory, the 
inadequacies of classical mechanics had become increasingly more evident, as theoretical 
physicists tried in vain to construct satisfactory classical models of atoms and of the ether. 
There was also a growing reaction against “scientific materialism,” and a movement to 
replace atomic theories by purely descriptive theories based only on macroscopic 
observables. The most famous leader of this movement was Ernst Mach (1838-1916), 
whose criticism of mechanics prepared the way for Einstein’s theory of relativity. In a 
series of articles and books, beginning with a critical study of the law of conservation of 
energy (1872), Mach attacked the use of atomic models in physics, and asserted that the 
basic purpose of science is to achieve “economy of thought” in describing natural 
phenomena, not to explain them in terms of hypothetical concepts such as atoms or ether. 
Gustav Kirchhoff (1824-1887) expressed similar views in his lectures on mechanics (1874) 
but did not develop them as fully, and indeed in his lectures on heat (published 
posthumously in 1894) he included a section on kinetic theory. One of the striking features 
of Boltzmann’s Gas Theory is the large number of references to Kirchhoff s exposition. 

The school of Energetics included many members of the positivist movement, in 


xv. 


^PuJut*. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



particular Wilhelm Ostwald (1853-1932), Georg Helm (1851-1923), Pierre Duhem 
(1861-1916) and others. The Energetists proposed to develop thermodynamics, and the 
theory of energy transformations in general, on a purely macroscopic basis without any 
reference to atomic theories. Their attacks on the kinetic theory were particularly strong 
during the period when Boltzmann was writing this book, and this circumstance helps to 
explain its polemical flavor. There are many passages justifying various assumptions, 
defending the theory against possible criticisms, and attacking rival theories. Boltzmann 
knew he could not get away with vague “heuristic” arguments or appeals to authority, since 
many of his readers would not be convinced. (It might well be argued that a text written in 
such a style is really more effective—provided that it contains no serious errors—than a 
modem text expounding a noncontroversial theory which the student is not encouraged to 
doubt.) 

According to Lenin* the arguments of Mach and other “idealistic” (in the philosophical 
sense) scientists subverted many Marxist philosophers, who accepted them as the latest 
results of science. Lenin quotes with approval the views of Boltzmann, who, while “afraid 
to call himself a materialist” nevertheless had a theory of knowledge which was “essentially 
materialistic.” Consequently Boltzmann now has the dubious distinction of being a hero of 
scientific materialism in the eyes of the Marxists.* 

As the leader of the atomist school in the 1890’s, Boltzmann frequently had to engage in 
debate with the Energetists. One such debate took place at the meeting of the 
Naturforschergesellschaft at Liibeck in 1895. As Arnold Sommerfeld recalls it,f 

The champion for Energetics was Helm; behind him stood Ostwald, and behind both of them the 
philosophy of Ernst Mach (who was not present in person). The opponent was Boltzmann, seconded by 
Felix Klein. The battle between Boltzmann and Ostwald was much like the duel of a bull and a supple 
bullfighter. However, this time the bull defeated the toreador in spite of all his agility. The arguments of 
Boltzmann struck through. We young mathematicians were all on Boltzmann’s side; it was at once 
obvious to us that it was impossible that from a single energy equation could follow the equations of 
motion of even one mass point, to say nothing of those for a system of an arbitrary number of degrees of 
freedom. On Ostwald’s behalf, however, I must mention his remark on Boltzmann in his book Grosse 
Manner (Leipzig, 1909, p. 405): there he calls Boltzmann “the man who excelled all of us in acumen and 
clarity in his science.” 

What did Boltzmann really think about the existence of atoms? One commentator^: has 
asserted that “even the most convinced adherents of this [kinetic] theory, such as 
Boltzmann, ascribe to it merely the value of a mechanical model which imitates certain 
properties of gases and can afford the experimenter certain useful indications, and are very 
far from believing bodies to be in reality composed of small particles ...” Indeed, a 
curious feature of Boltzmann’s attitude toward the molecular model of gases is his attempt 
to justify the use of asymptotic l im its in which the number of molecules in a volume 
becomes infinite, while their size becomes in fin itesimal. He is perfectly aware of the fact 
that one can deduce finite numerical values for these molecular parameters from experiment 
by using gas theory (Pail I, §12; Part II, §22); and he refers to Maxwell’s theory of rarefied 
gas phenomena (radiometer effect, etc.) as a triumph of molecular theories over the 
phenomenological approach (Part I, §1). Yet his desire to obtain a more intuitively clear 
(anschaulich) presentation of his theory impels him to assume that each infinitesimal 


xv, 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



volume element in the gas contains a very large number of molecules (Pail I, §6) and, in 
attempting to justify this assumption, he goes so far as to say that it is futile to expect to 
observe fluctuations from the asymptotic laws resulting from the fact that there may be only 
a finite number of atoms in a small space (Part n, §38). This statement was of course 
contradicted only a few years later by experiments on Brownian motion and Mil li kan’s oil- 
drop experiment. 

We cannot give here a comprehensive analysis of Boltzmann’s views on the philosophy 
of science, but must refer to his extensive writings and the studies by Broda and Dugas 
cited in the Bibliography. The following quotation is chosen only because it was originally 
published in English (in a letter to Nature , February 28, 1895) so that there is no danger of 
distorting Boltzmann’s meaning by translation (assuming of course that he is expressing his 
own views accurately in English): 

I propose to answer two questions:— 

(1) Is the Theory of Gases a true physical theory as valuable as any other physical theory? 

(2) What can we demand from any physical theory? 

(The first question I answer in the affirmative, but the second belongs not so much to ordinary 
physics (let us call it orthophysics) as to what we call in Germany metaphysics. For a long time the 
celebrated theory of Boscovich was the ideal of physicists. According to his theory, bodies as well as the 
ether are aggregates of material points, acting together with forces, which are simple functions of their 
distances. If this theory were to hold good for all phenomena, we should be still a long way off what 
Faust ’sfamulus hoped to attain, viz., to know everything. But the difficulty of enumerating all the 
material points of the universe, and of determining the law of mutual force for each pair, would be only 
a quantitative one; nature would be a difficult problem, but not a mystery for the human mind. 

When Lord Salisbury says that nature is a mystery [Presidential Address to the British Association 
meeting at Oxford, 1894], he means, it seems to me, that this simple conception of Boscovich is refuted 
almost in every branch of science, the Theory of Gases not excepted. The assumption that the gas- 
molecules are aggregates of material points, in the sense of Boscovich, does not agree with the facts. But 
what else are they? And what is the ether through which they move? Let us again hear Lord Salisbury. 
He says: 

“What the atom of each element is, whether it is a movement, or a thing, or a vortex, or a point 
having inertia, all these questions are surrounded by profound darkness. I dare not use any less pedantic 
word than entity to designate the ether, for it would be a great exaggeration of our knowledge if I were 
to speak of it as a body, or even as a substance.” 

If this be so—and hardly any physicist will contradict this—then neither the Theory of Gases nor any 
other physical theory can be quite a congruent account of facts, and I cannot hope with Mr. Burbury, that 
Mr. Bryan will be able to deduce all the phenomena of spectroscopy from the electromagnetic theory of 
light. Certainly, therefore, Hertz is right when he says: “The rigour of science requires, that we 
distinguish well the undraped figure of nature itself from the gay-coloured vesture with which we clothe 
it at our pleasure.” [Untersuchungen iiber die Ausbreitung der elektrischen Kraft, p. 31. Leipzig, Barth, 
1892], But I think the predilection for nudity would be carried too far if we were to forego every 
hypothesis. Only we must not demand too much from hypotheses. 

It is curious to see that in Germany, where till lately the theory of action at a distance was much more 
cultivated than in Newton’s native land itself, where Maxwell’s theory of electricity was not accepted, 
because it does not start from quite a precise hypothesis, at present every special theory is old-fashioned, 
while in England interest in the Theory of Gases is still active; vide, among others, the excellent papers 
of Mr. Tait, of whose ingenious results I cannot speak too highly, though I have been forced to oppose 
them in certain points. 

Every hypothesis must derive indubitable results from mechanically well-defined assumptions by 


xi. 


*Pu*ic- Mo£4cjvi(i£icaZ 



mathematically correct methods. If the results agree with a large series of facts, we must be content, even 
if the true nature of facts is not revealed in every respect. No one hypothesis has hitherto attained this 
last end, the Theory of Gases not excepted. But this theory agrees in so many respects with the facts, that 
we can hardly doubt that in gases certain entities, the number and size of which can roughly be 
determined, fly about pell-mell. Can it be seriously expected that they will behave exactly as aggregates 
of Newtonian centres of force, or as the rigid bodies of our Mechanics? And how awkward is the human 
mind in divining the nature of things, when forsaken by the analogy of what we see and touch directly? 

Nevertheless, Boltzmann’s pessimism about the future of the kinetic theory, indicated in his 
Foreword to Pail n, deepened in the following years, and led to fits of severe depression, 
culminating in his suicide in 1906. This suicide must be ranked as one of the great tragedies 
in the history of science, made all the more ironic by the fact that the scientific world made 
a complete turnabout in the next few years and accepted the existence of atoms, following 
Perrin’s experiments on Brownian motion and an accumulation of other evidence. By 1909 
even Ostwald himself had been converted, as he admits in the Foreword to the fourth 
edition of his textbook on chemistry. Atomism had triumphed, though only at the cost of 
denying to atoms almost all the properties with which they had originally been endowed. 


* In his endeavors to satisfy the demands of all his readers, Boltzmann has not forgotten even the 
faculty adviser of graduate students in physics. At the end of Part II, §86, he mentions a class of 
problems that would be suitable for doctoral dissertations! 

t M. Kac, Probability and Related Topics in Physical Sciences (New York: Interscience, 1959), p. 
261. Reprinted by permission. 

* H. Reichenbach, The Direction of Time ( Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 
1956), p. 128. 

t References for this and other works cited here will be found in the Bibliography at the end of this 
volume. 

* See the papers by S. G. Brush and E. Mendoza listed in the Bibliography; also D. ter Haar, 
Elements of Statistical Mechanics (New York: Rinehart, 1954), Appendix I (//-theorem and ergodic 
theorem), and Rev. Mod. Phys. 27, 289 (1955) (recent developments). A series of selected annotated 
reprints of the most important original papers on the kinetic theory is to be published by Pergamon 
Press. 

* Boltzmann, Sitzungsber. math.-phys. Classe K. Bay. Akad. Wiss., Miinchen [“Mun. Ber.”] 22, 329 
(1892); the statement referred to is on p. 157 of the English translation in Phil. Mag. [5] 35 (1893). 

* Materialism and Empirio-Criticism Izdanie “Zveno,” Moscow, 1909. 

* See, e.g., the article by Bogolyubov and Sanochkin, Usp. Fiz. Nauk 61, 7 (1957), and Davydov's 
introduction to the Russian translation of Gas Theory. 

t A. Sommerfeld, Wiener Chem. Zeitung 47, 25 (1944); see also G. Jaffe, J. Chem. Educ. 29, 230 
(1952). 

$ A. Aliotta, La Reazione idealistica contro la scienza (Palermo : Casa Editrice “Optima,” 1912); 
quoted from p. 375 of the English translation by Agnes McCaskill (London, 1914). 


^Puh.c. 7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 




PARTI 


Theory of gases with monatomic molecules, whose dimensions 
are negligible compared to the mean free path. 


NOTE ON LITERATURE CITATIONS 

All the numbered footnotes correspond to Boltzmann’s notes in the original text, but the 
numbers start with 1 in each section rather than each page, and the form of citation of some 
journals has been changed for the sake of consistency with modem style. Footnotes 
indicated by asterisks, daggers, etc., have been added by the translator. More complete 
information including titles of articles cited will be found in the Bibliography at the end of 
the book. 


NOTE ON GOTHIC LETTERS 

To forestall possible difficulties in recognition, here are the alphabetical equivalents: 


ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ 

SRttO¥Qfo62:U80 l 03 

abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 

abcbefgf)iiflmnopqr8tut>tojtn 


“PufLC- 7^ai/uiMui£ica/ P/tyJxci 





FOREWORD TO PART I 


“Alles Vergangliche 
1st nur ein Gleichniss!”* 


I have often before come close to writing a textbook on gas theory. I remember especially 
the enthusiastic request of Professor Wroblewski at the Vienna World’s Fair in 1873. When 
I showed little inclination to write a textbook, since I did not know how soon my eyes 
would fail me, he answered dryly: “All the more reason to hurry up!” At present, when I 
no longer have this reason, the time seems less appropriate for such a textbook than it was 
then. For, first, gas theory has gone out of fashion in Germany, as it were; second, the 
second edition of O. E. Meyer’s well-known text has appeared, and Kirchhoff has devoted 
a longer section of his lectures on the theory of heat to gas theory.! Yet Meyer’s book, 
though acknowledged to be excellent for chemists and students of physical chemistry, has a 
completely different purpose. Kirchhoff s work shows the touch of a master in the selection 
and presentation of its topics, but it is only a posthumously published set of lecture notes on 
the theory of heat, which treats gas theory as an appendix, not a comprehensive textbook. 
Indeed, I freely confess that the interest, on the one hand, which Kirchhoff showed in gas 
theory, and on the other hand the many gaps in his presentation because of its brevity, have 
encouraged me to publish the present work, which likewise originated from lectures at the 
universities of Munich and Vienna. 

In this book I have hied above all to make clearly comprehensible the path-breaking 
works of Clausius and Maxwell. The reader may not think badly of me for finding also a 
place for my own contributions. These were cited respectfully in Kirchhoff s lectures and 
in Poincare’s Thermodynamique* at the end, but were not utilized where they would have 
been relevant. From this I concluded that a brief presentation, as easily understood as 
possible, of some of the principal results of my efforts might not be superfluous. Of great 
influence on the content and presentation was what I have learned at the unforgettable 
meeting of the British Association in Oxford and the subsequent letters of numerous 
English scientists, some private and some published in Nature .f 

I intend to follow Part I by a second part, where I will treat the van der Waals theory, 
gases with polyatomic molecules, and dissociation. An explicit proof of Equation (110a)— 
which is only indicated briefly in §16, in order to avoid repetition—will also be included. 

Unfortunately it was often impossible to avoid the use of long formulas to express 
complicated trains of thought, and I can well imagine that to many who do not read over 
the whole work, the results will perhaps not seem to justify the effort expended. Aside from 
many results of pure mathematics which, though likewise apparently fruitless at first, later 
become useful in practical science as soon as our mental horizon has been broadened, even 


~PuJi.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the complicated formulas of Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism were often considered 
useless before Hertz’s experiments. I hope this will not also be the general opinion 
concerning gas theory! 

Vienna, September, 1895 


Ludwig Boltzmann 


INTRODUCTION 


§ 1. Mechanical analogy for the behavior of a gas. 

Clausius has made a sharp distinction between the general theory of heat, based 
essentially on the two fundamental principles of thermodynamics, and the special theory of 
heat, which starts out by making a definite assumption—that heat is molecular motion— 
and then attempts to construct a more precise description of the nature of this motion. 

The general theory of heat also requires hypotheses which go beyond the bare facts of 
nature. Nevertheless, it is obviously less dependent on special assumptions than the special 
theory, and it is desirable and necessary to be able to separate its exposition from that of the 
special theory, and to show that it is independent of the subjective assumptions of the latter. 
Clausius has already done this very clearly, and indeed has based the division of his book* 
into two parts on just this principle, and it would be useless to repeat his procedure. 

Recently, the mutual relations of these two branches of the theory of heat have changed 
somewhat. Through the exploitation of some very interesting analogies and differences, 
which the properties of energy exhibit in various phenomena of physics, there has arisen 
the so-called Energetics, which is unfavorable to the view that heat is molecular motion. 
This view is in fact unnecessary for the general theory of heat and, as is well known, was 
not held by Robert Mayer. The further development of Energetics is certainly very 
important for science ; however, up to now its concepts are still rather unclear, and its 
theorems not very precisely expressed, so that it cannot replace the older theory of heat in 
dealing with new special cases where the results are not already known.| 

Likewise in the theory of electricity, the older mechanical explanations of phenomena 
by action at a distance, customarily employed especially in Germany, have suffered a 
shipwreck. Indeed, Maxwell speaks with the greatest respect of Wilhelm Weber’s theory, 
which by determining the conversion factor of electrostatic and electromagnetic units and 
by discovering the relation of that factor to the velocity of light has laid the first stone in the 
structure of the electromagnetic theory of light; yet one accedes to the contention that 
Weber’s mechanical hypothesis about the action of electrical force is harmful to the 
progress of science. 

In England, views on the nature of heat and on atomistics have remained relatively 
unchanged. But on the continent, where earlier the assumption of central forces, useful in 
astronomy, had been generalized to an epistemological demand, and for this reason 


~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«taL2c.a/ P/tyJxci 



Maxwell’s electrical theory did not receive much notice for a decade and a half (only this 
generalization was obnoxious), the provisional character of all hypotheses has now been 
generalized, and it has been concluded that the assumption that heat is motion of the 
smallest particles of matter will eventually be proved false and discarded. 

It must however be remembered that any similarity between the kinetic theory and the 
doctrine of central forces is purely coincidental. Gas theory has in fact a particular kinship 
with Maxwell’s theory of electricity; the visible motion of a gas, viscosity, and heat, are 
conceived as phenomena that are essentially different in stationary or almost stationary 
states, while in certain transitional cases (very rapid sound waves with evolution of heat ; 
viscosity or heat conduction in very dilute gases 1 ) a sharp distinction is no longer possible 
between visible and thermal motion (cf. §24). Likewise in Maxwell’s theory of electricity, 
in borderline cases the distinction between electrostatic and electrodynamic forces, etc., can 
no longer be maintained. It is just in this transition region that Maxwell’s electrical theory 
has yielded new facts; l ik ewise the gas theory has led to completely new laws in these 
transition regions, which appear to reduce to the usual hydrodynamic equations, corrected 
for viscosity and heat conduction, as purely approximate formulae (cf. §23). The 
completely new laws were indicated for the first time in Maxwell’s 16-year-old paper, “On 
stresses in rarefied gases.”* The phenomena which the theories based on older 
hydrodynamic experience can never describe are those connected with radiometer action.! 
Researches under many different conditions, and quantitative observations, have definitely 
proved that the stimulus and explanation for this previously unknown realm of 
experimental investigation could only have come from the theory of gases; likewise, the 
tremendous fertility of Maxwell’s thcoiy of electricity for experimental investigations for 
more than twenty years has seldom been pointed out. 

Although in the following exposition any qualitative difference between heat and 
mechanical energy will be excluded, in the treatment of collisions of molecules the old 
distinction between potential and kinetic energy will be retained. This does not basically 
affect the nature of the subject. The assumptions about the interaction of molecules during a 
collision have a provisory character, and will certainly be replaced by others. I have also 
studied a gas theory in which, instead of forces acting during collisions, one merely has 
conditional equations in the sense of the posthumous mechanics of Hertz,* which are more 
general than those of elastic collisions; I have abandoned this theory, however, since I only 
had to make more new arbitrary assumptions. 

Experience teaches that one will be led to new discoveries almost exclusively by means 
of special mechanical models. Maxwell himself recognized the defect of Weber’s electrical 
theory at first glance; on the other hand, he pursued zealously the theory of gases and the 
method of mechanical analogies, which goes beyond that which he calls the method of 
purely mathematical formulae.! 

As long as a clearer and better representation is not available, we shall still need to go 
beyond the general theory of heat, and without impugning its importance, cultivate the old 
hypotheses of the special theory of heat. Indeed, since the history of science shows how 
often epistemological generalizations have turned out to be false, may it not turn out that the 
present “modem” distaste for special representations, as well as the distinction between 


“PufLC- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ P/tyJxci 



qualitatively different forms of energy, will have been a retrogression? Who sees the 
future? Let us have free scope for all directions of research; away with all dogmatism, 
either atomistic or antiatomistic! In describing the theory of gases as a mechanical analogy, 
we have already indicated, by the choice of this word, how far removed we are from that 
viewpoint which would see in visible matter the hue properties of the smallest particles of 
the body. 

We shall first take the modem viewpoint of pure description, and accept the known 
differential equations for the internal motions of solid and fluid bodies. From these it 
follows in many cases, for example collisions of two solid bodies, motion of fluids in 
closed vessels, etc., that as soon as the form of the body deviates the least bit from a simple 
geometrical figure, waves must arise, which cross each other ever more randomly, so that 
the kinetic energy of the original visible motion must finally be dissolved into invisible 
wave motion. This mathematical consequence of the equations describing the phenomena 
leads (to a certain extent by itself) to the hypothesis that all vibrations of the smallest 
particles, into which the ever diminishing waves must finally be transformed, must be 
identical with the heat that we observe to be produced, and that heat generally is a motion 
in small—to us, invisible— regions. 

Whence comes the ancient view, that the body does not fill space continuously in the 
mathematical sense, but rather it consists of discrete molecules, unobservable because of 
their small size. For this view there are philosophical reasons. An actual continuum must 
consist of an infinite number of parts; but an infinite number is undefinable. Furthermore, in 
assuming a continuum one must take the partial differential equations for the properties 
themselves as initially given. However, it is desirable to distinguish the partial differential 
equations, which can be subjected to empirical tests, from their mechanical foundations (as 
Hertz emphasized in particular for the theory of electricity). Thus the mechanical 
foundations of the partial differential equations, when based on the coming and going of 
smaller particles, with restricted average values, gain greatly in plausibility; and up to now 
no other mechanical explanation of natural phenomena except atomism has been 
successful. 

A real discontinuity of bodies is moreover established by numerous, and moreover 
quantitatively agreeing, facts. Atomism is especially indispensable for the clarification of 
the facts of chemistry and crystallography. The mechanical analogy between the facts of 
any science and the symmetry relations of discrete particles pertains to those most essential 
features which will outlast all our changing ideas about them, even though the latter may 
themselves be regarded as established facts. Thus already today the hypothesis that the stars 
are huge bodies millions of miles away is similarly viewed only as a mechanical analogy 
for the representation of the action of the sun and the faint visual perceptions arising from 
the other heavenly bodies, which could also be criticized on the grounds that it replaces the 
world of our sense perceptions by a world of imaginary objects, and that anyone could just 
as well replace this imaginary world by another one without changing the observable facts. 

I hope to prove in the following that the mechanical analogy between the facts on which 
the second law of thermodynamics is based, and the statistical laws of motion of gas 
molecules, is also more than a mere superficial resemblance. 


~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ P/tyJxci 



The question of the utility of atomistic representations is of course completely unaffected 
by the fact, emphasized by Kirchhoff,* that our theories have the same relation to nature as 
signs to significates, for example as letters to sounds, or notes to tones. It is lik ewise 
unaffected by the question of whether it is not more useful to call theories simply 
descriptions, in order to remind ourselves of their relation to nature. The question is really 
whether bare differential equations or atomistic ideas will eventually be established as 
complete descriptions of phenomena. 

Once one concedes that the appearance of a continuum is more clearly understood by 
assuming the presence of a large number of adjacent discrete particles, assumed to obey the 
laws of mechanics, then he is led to the further assumption that heat is a permanent motion 
of molecules. Then these must be held in their relative positions by forces, whose origin 
one can imagine if he wishes. But all forces that act on the visible body but not equally on 
all the molecules must produce motion of the molecules relative to each other, and because 
of the indestructibility of kinetic energy these motions cannot stop but must continue 
indefinitely. 

In fact, experience teaches that as soon as the force acts equally on all parts of a body— 
as for example in so-called free fall—all the kinetic energy becomes visible. In all other 
cases, we have a loss of visible kinetic energy, and hence creation of heat. The view offers 
itself that there is a resulting motion of molecules among themselves, which we cannot see 
because we do not see individual molecules, but which however is transmitted to our 
nerves by contact, and thus creates the sensation of heat. It always moves from bodies 
whose molecules move rapidly to those whose molecules move more slowly, and because 
of the indestructibility of kinetic energy it behaves l ik e a substance, as long as it is not 
transformed into visible kinetic energy or work. 

We do not know the nature of the force that holds the molecules of a solid body in their 
relative positions, whether it is action at a distance or is transmitted through a medium, and 
we do not know how it is affected by thermal motion. Since it resists compression as much 
as it resists dilatation, we can obviously get a rather rough picture by assuming that in a 
solid body each molecule has a rest position. If it approaches a neighboring molecule it is 
repelled by it, but if it moves farther away there is an attraction. Consequently, thermal 
motion first sets a molecule into pendulum-like oscillations in straight or elliptical paths 
around its rest position A (in the symbolic Fig. 1, the centers of gravity of the molecules are 
indicated). If it moves to A ', the neighboring molecules B and C repel it, while D and E 
attract it and hence bring it back to its original rest position. If each molecule vibrates 
around a fixed rest position, the body will have a fixed form; it is in the solid state of 
aggregation. The only consequence of the thermal motion is that the rest positions of the 
molecules will be somewhat pushed apart, and the body will expand somewhat. However, 
when the theimal motion becomes more rapid, one gets to the point where a molecule can 
squeeze between its two neighbors and move from A to A" (Fig. 1). It will no longer then 
be pulled back to its old rest position, but it can instead remain where it is. When this 
happens to many molecules, they will crawl among each other like earthworms, and the 
body is molten. Although one may find this description rather crude and childish, it may be 
modified later and the apparent repulsive force may turn out to be a direct consequence of 


“PufLC- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ P/tyJxci 



the motion. In any case, one will allow that when the motions of the molecules increase 
beyond a definite limit, individual molecules on the surface of the body can be tom off and 
must fly out freely into space; the body evaporates. If it is in an enclosed vessel, then this 
will be filled with freely moving molecules, and these can occasionally penetrate into the 
body again; as soon as the number of recondensing molecules is, on the average, equal to 
the number of evaporating ones, one says that the vessel is saturated with the vapor of the 
body in question. 




0 • • B 

• • • 

A A' A' 

E • • C 


Fig. 1 

A sufficiently large enclosed space, in which only such freely moving molecules are 
found, provides a picture of a gas. If no external forces act on the molecules, these move 
most of the time like bullets shot from guns in straight lines with constant velocity. Only 
when a molecule passes very near to another one, or to the wall of the vessel, does it 
deviate from its rect il inear path. The pressure of the gas is interpreted as the action of these 
molecules against the wall of the container. 

§2. Calculation of the pressure of a gas. 

We shall now undertake a more detailed consideration of such a gas. Since we assume 
that the molecules obey the general laws of mechanics, then in collisions of the molecules 
with each other and with the wall, the principle of conservation of kinetic energy, and of 
motion of the center of gravity, must be satisfied. We can make as varying pictures of the 
internal properties of the molecules as we like; as long as these two principles are satisfied, 
we shall obtain a system which shows a definite mechanical analogy with the actual gas. 
The simplest such picture is one in which the molecules are completely elastic, negligibly 
deformable spheres, and the wall of the container is a completely smooth and elastic 
surface. However, when it is convenient we can assume a different law of force. Such a 
law, provided it is in agreement with the general mechanical principles, will be no more 
and no less justified than the original assumption of elastic spheres. 

We imagine a container of volume Q of any arbitrary shape, filled with a gas, against 
whose walls the gas molecules are reflected exactly l ik e completely elastic spheres. Let a 
part of the wall of the container, AB, have surface area cp. We place perpendicular to it, 
running from inside to outside, the positive axis of abscissas. The pressure on AB will 


~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ P/tyJxci 




clearly not be changed if we imagine behind this surface element a right cylinder on the 
base AB, in which the surface element AB is lik e a piston which can be displaced parallel 
to itself. This piston will then be pushed into the cylinder by the molecular impacts. If a 
force P acts from the outside in the negative direction, then its intensity can be chosen so 
that the molecular impacts are kept in equilibrium, and the piston makes no visible motion 
in either direction. 

During any instant of time dt, there may be several molecules colliding with the piston 
AB ; the first exerts a force q\ , the second a force qj, etc., in the positive abscissa direction, 
on the piston. Denoting by M the mass of the piston, and by U the velocity in the positive 
direction, then one has for the time element dt the equation 

dU 

M — = - p -|- 0i -f qi + • • • 
dt 


If one multiplies by dt and integrates over an arbitrary time /, then : 

M(Ui - U») = - Pt + £ f qdt. 

J 0 

If P is to be equal to the pressure of the gas, then the piston must not show any noticeable 
motion, aside from invisible fluctuations. In the above formula, Uq is the value of its 
velocity in the abscissa direction at the initial time, and U\ is its value after an interval of 
time t. Both quantities will be very small; indeed, one can easily choose the time t such that 
U | = Uq, since the piston must periodically assume the same velocity during its various 
small fluctuations. In any case, t/j -Uq cannot continually increase with increasing time, 
and therefore with increasing time the quotient (U\ - U 0 )/t must approach the limit zero. 
Whence follows: 


(1) P = 7Zf«* 

t J 0 

The pressure is therefore the mean value of the sum of all the small pressures that the 
individual colliding molecules exert on the piston at different times. We shall now calculate 
\qdt for any one collision which the piston experiences during the time t with a molecule. 
Let the mass of the molecule be m, and let the component of its velocity in the abscissa 
direction be u. The collision begins at time t\ and ends at time t\ + r, before time t\ and after 
time f| + r, the molecule exerts essentially no force on the piston. Then 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 




During the time of the collision, however, the force which the molecule exerts on the piston 
is equal and opposite to the force which the piston exerts on the molecule: 


du 

m — = - q. 

dt 


We denote by £ the velocity component of the colliding molecule before the collision in 
the direction of the positive abscissa axis, and by the same component after the collision, 
and we obtain : 



Since the same is true for all other colliding molecules, it follows from Equation (1) that: 

(2) P = yIX 

V 


where the sum is to be extended over all molecules that strike the piston between the 
instants 0 and t. Only those which are in collision with the piston at the instants 0 and t are 
thereby omitted, which is permissible when the total time interval t is very large compared 
to the duration of an individual collision. 

We shall see (§3) that even when only a single gas is present in the container, all the 
molecules can be no means have the same velocity. In order to preserve the greatest 
generality, we assume that in the container there are different kinds of molecules, which 
however are all reflected like elastic spheres from the walls. n\Q molecules will have mass 
m | and velocity cq with components £\, rj \, (\ in the coordinate directions. They should be 
uniformly distributed, on the average, throughout the interior volume Q of the container, so 
that there arc n | in unit volume. Further, there are« 2 fi molecules distributed similarly, 
having another velocity C 2 with components £ 2 , // 2 , (2 an d perhaps also a different mass 
m 2 . The quantities n 3 , c 3 , T 3 , // 3 , d 3 , m 3 , etc., up to n b <q, £ h ty, Q, nij have similar 
meanings. The state of the gas in the container should remain stationary during the time t, 
so that when during a time t some of the n | Q molecules cease to have velocity components 
//|. C\ as a result of collisions with other molecules or with the wall, an equal number of 
molecules on the average will acquire the same velocity components during the same time. 

We must first calculate how many of our n \ Q molecules strike the piston in the time 


~Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ P/tyJxci 



interval t, on the average. During a short time dt, all n | Q molecules travel the distance c ( dl 
in a direction such that their projections on the coordinate axes are P\dL rj\dt, and C\dl. If 

is negative, then the molecule considered cannot colhde with the piston. If it is positive, 
we construct in the container an oblique cylinder, whose base is the piston AB, and whose 
side is equal to and in the same direction as the path c \ dt. Then those, and only those, of 
our n\Q molecules which at the beginning of the interval dt are in this cylinder—whose 
number we shall denote by dv —will colhde with the piston during time dt. The n \ Q 
molecules are on the average uniformly distributed in the entire container, and this uniform 
distribution extends even up to the wall, since molecules reflected from the wall move 
backwards as if it did not exist and there was instead another gas with the same properties 
beyond it. Then n j D is to dv as Q is to the volume of the oblique cylinder; 2 the latter, 
however, is equal to cp^\dt, whence it follows that: 

( 3 ) dv = nupijidt. 

Since now the state in the container remains stationary, during any arbitrary time t, n \ cp£\ t 
of our n | D molecules colhde with the piston. They all have mass m \ and velocity 
component P in the abscissa direction before the colhsion, and contribute to the sum Yjn£ 
in Equation (2) the term: 


2 

and since this is hue for all molecules, we obtain 

— = 2 


where the sum is to be extended over all molecules in the container whose velocity 
components in the abscissa direction are positive. P/cp = p is the pressure corresponding to 
unit surface. The formula will also be vahd when cp is infinitesimal, so that the container 
wah need not be flat anywhere. Under the assumption (whose validity will be shown later, 
in §19) that in a stationary gas there is no preferred direchon in space for the direction of 
motion of a molecule, there must be equally many molecules of each kind in the positive as 


in the negative abscissa direchon, so that ^ 'j flh£h~ 


summed over all molecules with 


negative is as large as the sum over molecules with posihve P h , and thus one gets 





V=Yj nwtik, 


A-1 


where the summation is now over all molecules in the container, and therefore over all 


^PiUuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



values of h from h = 1 to h = i. 

When any quantity g has the value g \ for n | molecules, the value g 2 for n 2 molecules, 
etc., and the value g i for n t molecules, then we shall denote the expression: 

A-i 

A-l 


n 

by g and call it the mean value of g. Note that 

A«i 

n=Y,n h 

km 1 

is the total number of all the molecules. Then we can write 


(5) p = nm ¥' 

If all molecules have the same mass, then 


p = nm{ 2 . 


Since the gas has the same properties in all directions, we have 
furthermore, for each molecule, c 2 = fi+rf+fi, then also 


_ =£ =C 

c i =p+i) s +r 


Since 

and 


P 


l ^ 2 . Hence we obtain 



p = \nmc 2 ; 


where nm is the total mass contained in unit volume of the gas, i.e., the density pof the gas; 
one has therefore 

(7) p = Ipd 

Since p and p can be determined experimentally, one can calculate One finds that at 
°° C ’ V? is 461 m/sec for oxygen; for nitrogen it is 492 m/sec; for hydrogen it is 1,844 
m/sec. It is this velocity whose square is equal to the mean square velocity of the molecule; 
it is also the velocity with which all molecules must move in order to produce in the gas the 
prevailing pressure, when all molecules have equal velocities and move equally often in all 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



directions in space, or when one third of the molecules move back and forth in a direction 
perpendicular - to the surface considered, the other two thirds moving in parallel directions. 
On the other hand, Vc* is of the same order of magnitude as the mean velocity of a 
molecule, but differs from it by a numerical factor (cf. §7). 

When other gases are present in the container, let n', n", etc. be the number of molecules 
in unit volume, in', in", etc. the masses of each molecule for the different gases, and p', p", 
etc. their partial densities—i.e., the density which each gas would have if it were alone in 
the container. It is then evident from Equations (4) and (5) that 

(8) p = $(n'm'c /2 + n"m"c" 2 +•••)“ i(pV 2 + A" 2 • • •) 

is the total pressure of the gas mixture; it is also equal to the sum of the partial pressures, 
i.e., the pressure which each gas would exert if it were alone in the container. 

The force that two molecules exert on each other during a collision can be completely 
arbitrary, provided only that the sphere of action is small compared to the mean free path. 
On the other hand, it will be assumed that the molecules are reflected at the walls like 
elastic spheres. We shall make ourselves independent of the latter restrictive assumption in 
§20. A second general derivation of the equations of this section from the virial theorem 
will be given in Part n, §50. 


* Goethe, Faust, Part 2, Act V, final “Chorus Mysticus.” At least seven different English translations 
of this couplet have been published; roughly, it means that all transitory (i.e., earthly) things are only 
symbols or reflections (of reality). It is suggested that the reader interpret this in the light of 
Boltzmann's philosophy of science (see Translator's Introduction). 

t O. E. Meyer, Die kinetische Theorie der Case (Breslau: Maruschke und Berendt, 1877; second 
edition, 1899). Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen iiber die Theorie der Wdnne, p. 134 et seq. (Leipzig: B. G. 
Teubner, 1894). 

* Poincare, Thermodynamique (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1892). 

t Bryan, Nature 51,31,152,176,262, 319 (1894-1895); 52,244 (1895). Culverwell, Nature 50,617 
(1894) ; 51,78,105,246, 581 (1894-1895) ; 52, 149 (1895). Burbury, Nature 51, 175 (1894); 52, 316 
(1895). Fitzgerald, Nature 51,221 (1895). Boltzmann, Nature 51,413,581 (1895). 

* Clausius ,Abhandlungen iiber die mechanische Wdnnetheorie (Braunschweig: F. Vieweg, Part I, 
1864, Part II, 1867, Part III, 1889). More complete bibliographic information on this and other works 
cited may be found in the Bibliography at the end of this book. 

t There is space to cite only a few of the many works on Energetics : Georg Helm, Die Lehre von der 
Energie (Leipzig, 1887); Grundziige der mathematischen Chemie (Leipzig, 1894); Ann. Physik [3] 57, 
646 (1896); Die Energetik (Leipzig, 1898). Wilhelm Ostwald, Leipzig Ber. 43, 271 (1891), 44, 211 
(1892); Ann. Physik [3] 58, 154 (1896); Verh. Ges. d. Naturf. Aerzte, Th. 1, p. 155 (1895) ; 
Individuality and Immortality (Boston: Houghton, Mifllin; 1906); Die Forderung des Tages (Leipzig, 
19 10); Energetische Grundlagen der Kulturwissenschaft (Leipzig, 1909) ; Monistische 

Sonntagspredigten (Leipzig, 1911); Der energetische Imperativ (Leipzig, 1912 )\ Die Energie (Leipzig, 
1912); Die Philosophic der Werte (Leipzig, 1913). Boltzmann, Ann. Physik [3] 57, 39, 58, 595 (1896), 
60, 231 (1897) 61, 790 (1897); Wien. Ber. 106, 83 (1897); Verh. Ges. d. Naturf. Aertze, Th. 2, p. 65 
(1898); Th. 1, p. 99 (1899). Pierre Duhem ,Traite d’energetique (Paris, 1911). Max Planck, Z. phys. 
Chem. 8, 647 (1891); Ann. Physik [3] 57, 72 (1896). Abel Rey, La Theorie de la Physique chez les 
physiciens contemporains (Paris, 1907). Jules Sageret, La vague mystique (Paris, 1920). Rene Dugas, La 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 




Theorie Physique au sensde Boltzmann (Neuchatel-Suisse: Editions du Griffon, 1959). 

1 Cf. Kundt and Warburg, Ann. Physik [2] 155, 341 (1875). [Numbered notes are by Boltzmann.— 
Tr.] 

* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 170, 231 (1880). 

t William Crookes, though not its original discoverer, was the first to investigate extensively and 
publicize the radiometer effect: see Proc. R. S. London 22, 37 (1874), Phil. Trans. 164, 501 (1874), and 
many other papers. It created a sensation in the scientific world during 1875-1877, since it apparently 
was a demonstration of the long-sought pressure of light. However, it was immediately suggested by 
Osborne Reynolds [Proc. R. S. London 22,401 (1874)] and others that the motion of the radiometer 
plates was probably due to the reaction of gas molecules leaving the heated sides. Arthur Schuster [Proc. 
R. S. London 24, 391 (1876)] showed that when the entire radiometer is suspended in a larger evacuated 
vessel, the case turns in a direction opposite to that in which the plates turn, so that the effect must be due 
largely to internal rather than external causes. The light shining on the radiometer plates provides 
energy to heat them up, but not momentum to move them in a particular sense. While it was thus 
recognized that the kinetic theory must provide the explanation for the radiometer, the detailed 
mechanism and quantitative theory were not worked out until much later. See E. H. Kennard, Kinetic 
Theory of Gases (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1938), pp. 333-337, and L. B. Loeb, The Kinetic Theory of 
Gases, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1934), pp. 364-386. 

* Heinrich Hertz, Die Prinzipien derMechanik (Leipzig, 1894). 

t See A. E. Woodruff, Isis 53,439 (1962). 

* Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen iiher mathematische Physik. I. Mechanik (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1874.) 

2 Concerning the conditions of validity of a similar proportion, cf. §3. 


Ma£4cjvi(i£ieaZ 



CHAPTER I 


The molecules are elastic spheres. External forces and visible mass 

motion are absent. 

§3. Maxwell’s proof of the velocity distribution law; frequency of collisions. 

We shall suppose for a moment that in the container there is a single gas composed of 
completely identical molecules. The molecules will also from now on—unless we specify 
otherwise—be assumed to behave like completely elastic spheres when they collide with 
each other. Even if all the molecules initially had the same velocity, there would soon occur 
collisions in which the velocity of one colliding molecule is nearly in the direction of the 
line of centers, but that of the other is nearly perpendicular to it. The first molecule would 
thereby end up with nearly zero velocity, while the velocity of the second would become 
y/2 times as large. In the course of further collisions it would soon happen, if the number 
of molecules were large enough, that all possible velocities would occur, from zero up to a 
velocity much larger than the original common velocity of all the molecules; it is then a 
question of calculating the law of distribution of velocities among the molecules in the final 
state thus reached, or, as one says more briefly, to find the velocity distribution law. In 
order to find it, we shall consider a more general case. We assume that we have two kinds 
of molecules in the container. Each molecule of the first kind has mass m, and each of the 
second has mass rri\. The velocity distribution which prevails at any arbitrary time t will be 
represented by drawing as many straight lines (stalling from the origin of coordinates) as 
there are m-molecules in unit volume. Each line will be the same in length and direction as 
the velocity of the corresponding molecule. Its endpoint will be called the velocity point of 
the corresponding molecule. Now at time t let 

(9) /({, 11, f, iWvM = fdu) 

be the number of m-molecules whose velocity components in the three coordinate 
directions he between the li mits 

( 10 ) {and £ + ?7 and 77 + drj, f and f + di; 

and for which the velocity points thus he in the parallelepiped having at one comer the 
coordinates T, //, C and having edges of length df, dij, dC parallel to the coordinate axes. We 
shall always cah this the parallelepiped duo. We shah also use the abbreviations duo for the 
product dfdrjdt, and / for /(T, //, C, t). If duo were a volume element of any other shape, 
though still infinitesimal, the number of m-molecules whose velocity points he inside dco 
would still be equal to 


14 _ 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(11) /({, V, f, 0<*«, 

as one can see by dividing the volume element da> into even smaller parallelepipeds. If the 
function/is known for one value of t, then the velocity distribution for the m-molecules is 
determined at timet. Similarly we can represent the velocity of each mj -molecule by a 
velocity point, and denote by 

( 12 ) F(i i, iji, fi, t)di-\driidli\ = F idcoi 

the number of molecules whose velocity components he between any other l im its 

(13) £i and + dfi, tj\ and rji + dij\ } fi and fi + dfi 

and for which therefore the velocity points lie in a similar parallelepiped dco\ . Likewise we 
write dojy for df\di]\dC\ and F 1 for F(/|, rji, C,\, t). Moreover, we shall completely exclude 
any external forces, and assume that the walls are completely smooth and elastic. Then the 
molecules reflected from the wall will move as if they came from a gas which is the mirror 
image of our gas, and which is thus completely equivalent to it; the container wall is 
thought of as a reflecting surface. According to these assumptions, the same conditions will 
prevail everywhere inside the container, and if the number of molecules in a volume 
element whose velocity components lie between the li mits (10) is initially the same 
everywhere in the gas, then this will also be hue for all subsequent times. If we assume this, 
then it follows that the number of m-molecules inside any volume <D> that satisfy the 
conditions (10) is proportional to the volume <b and is therefore equal to 

(14) tydu) 

l ik ewise the number of in |-molecules in the volume «f> that satisfy the conditions (13) is: 

(14a) $F idcoi. 

From these assumptions it follows that the molecules that leave any space as a result of their 
progressive motion will on the average be replaced by an equal number of molecules from 
the neighboring space or by reflection at the walls of the container, so that the velocity 
distribution is changed only by collisions, and not by the progressive motion of the 
molecules. We shall make ourselves independent of these restrictive conditions (made now 
to simplify the calculation) in §§15-18, where we shall take account of the effect of gravity 
and other external forces. 

We next consider only the collisions of an m-molecule with an m 1 -molecule and indeed 
we shall single out, from all those collisions that can occur during the interval dt , only those 
for which the following three conditions are satisfied: 

1. The velocity components of the m-molecule lie between the limits (10) before the 
collision, hence its velocity point lies in the parallelepiped dco. 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



2. The velocity components of the m \ -molecule lie between the li mits (13) before the 
collision, hence its velocity point lies in the parallelepiped da >\. All m-molecules for which 
the first condition is fulfilled will be called “m-molecules of the specified kind,” and 
similarly we speak of “m |-molecules of the specified kind.” 

3. We construct a sphere of unit radius, whose center is at the origin of coordinates, and 
on it a surface element dk. The line of centers of the colliding molecules drawn from m to 
m | must, at the moment of collision, be parallel to a line drawn from the origin to some 
point of the surface element dk. The aggregate of these lines constitutes the cone dk. 

(15) Direction mm\ in the cone dk 

All collisions that take place in such a way that these three conditions are fulfilled will 
be called “collisions of the specified kind” and we have the problem of determining the 
number dv of collisions of the specified kind that take place during a time interval dt in unit 
volume. We shall represent these collisions in Figure 2. Let O be the origin of coordinates, 
C and C| the velocity points of the two molecules before the collision, so that the lines OC 
and OC\ represent these velocities in magnitude and direction, before the collision. The 
point C must lie inside the parallelepiped dco, and the point Cj inside the parallelepiped 
da>\. (The two parallelepipeds are not shown in the figure.) Let OK be a line of unit length 
which has the same direction as the line of centers of the two molecules at the instant of the 
collision, drawn fromm to m,\. The points must therefore lie inside the surface element 
dk , which is also not shown in the figure. The line C\C = g represents in magnitude and 
direction the relative velocity of the m-molecule with respect to the in \-molecule before the 
collision, since its projections on the coordinate axes are equal to £ - £\, ij - i ]\, and C - 
respectively. The frequency of collisions obviously depends only on the relative velocity. 
Hence if we wish to find the number of collisions of the specified kind, we can imagine 
that the specified in | -molecule is at rest, while the m-molecule moves with velocity g. We 
imagine further that a sphere of radius ff (the sphere a) is rigidly attached to each of the 
latter molecules, so that the center of the sphere always coincides with the center of the 
molecule, cf should be equal to the sum of the radii of the two molecules. Each time that the 
surface of such a sphere touches the center of an m\ -molecule, a collision takes place. We 
now draw from the center of each sphere a a cone, similar and similarly situated to the 
cone dk. A surface element of area erdk is thereby cut out from the surface of each of 
these spheres. Since all the spheres are rigidly attached to the corresponding molecules, all 
these surface elements move a distance gdt relative to the specified in | -molecule. A 
collision of the specified kind occurs whenever one of these surface elements touches the 
center of a specified m \ -molecule, which is of course possible only if the angle & between 
the directions of the lines C| C and OK is acute. Each of these surface elements traverses by 
its relative motion toward the in | -molecule an oblique cylinder of base o 2 dk and height g 
cos ddt. Since there ar efdaim molecules of the specified kind in unit volume, all the 
oblique cylinders traversed in this manner by all the surface elements have total volume 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




(16) $ = fdu^g cos ddhdt. 

All centers of m 1 -molecules of the specified kind lying inside the volume <E> will touch 
during the interval dt one surface element ad/. and hence the number dv of co ll isions of 
the specified kind which occur in the volume element during time dt is equal to the number 
Z f[) of centers of »q -molecules of the specified kind that are in the volume ® at the 
beginning of dt. But according to Equation (14a) this is 

(17) = $F \do)i. 

In this formula there is contained a special assumption, as Burbury 1 has clearly 
emphasized. From the standpoint of mechanics, any arrangement of molecules in the 
container is possible; in such an arrangement, the variables determining the motion of the 
molecules may have different average values in one part of the space filled by the gas than 
in another, where for example the density or mean velocity of a molecule may be larger in 
one half of the container than in the other, or more generally some finite part of the gas has 
different properties than another. Such a distribution will be called molar-ordered [molar- 
geordnete ]. Equations (14) and (14a) pertain to the case of a molar-disordered distribution. 
If the arrangement of the molecules also exhibits no regularities that vary from one finite 
region to another—if it is thus molar-disordered—then nevertheless groups of two or a 
small number of molecules can exhibit definite regularities. A distribution that exhibits 
regularities of this kind will be called molecular-ordered. We have a molecular-ordered 
distribution if—to select only two examples from the infinite manifold of possible cases— 
each molecule is moving toward its nearest neighbor, or again if each molecule whose 
velocity lies between certain l im its has ten much slower molecules as nearest neighbors. 
When these special groupings are not limited to particular places in the container but rather 
are found on the average equally often throughout the entire container, then the distribution 
would be called molar-disordered. Equations (14) and (14a) would then always be valid for 
individual molecules, but Equation (17) would not be valid, since the nearness of the m- 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 


molecule would be influenced by the probability that the m 1 -molecule lies in the space <D>. 
The presence of the mj -molecule in the space ® cannot therefore be considered in the 
probability calculation as an event independent of the nearness of the m-molecule. The 
validity of Equation (17) and the two similar equations for collisions of m- or in \ -molecules 
with each other can therefore be considered as defining the meaning of the expression: the 
distribution of states is molecular-disordered. 

If the mean free path in a gas is large compared to the mean distance of two neighboring 
molecules, then in a short time, completely different molecules than before will be nearest 
neighbors to each other. A molecular-ordered but molar-disordered distribution will most 
probably be transformed into a molecular-disordered one in a short time. Each molecule 
flies from one collision to another one so far away that one can consider the occurrence of 
another molecule, at the place where it collides the second time, with a definite state of 
motion, as being an event completely independent (for statistical calculations) of the place 
from which the first molecule came (and similarly for the state of motion of the first 
molecule). However, if we choose the initial configuration on the basis of a previous 
calculation of the path of each molecule, so as to violate intentionally the laws of 
probability, then of course we can construct a persistent regularity or an almost molecular- 
disordered distribution which will become molecular-ordered at a particular time. 
Kirchhoff 2 also makes the assumption that the state is molecular-disordered in his definition 
of the probability concept. 

That it is necessary to the rigor of the proof to specify this assumption in advance was 
first noticed in the discussion of my so-called H-theorem or minimum theorem. However, it 
would be a great error to believe that this assumption is necessary only for the proof of this 
theorem. Because of the impossibility of calculating the positions of all the molecules at 
each time, as the astronomer calculates the positions of all the planets, it would be 
impossible without this assumption to prove the theorems of gas theory. The assumption is 
made in the calculation of the viscosity, heat conductivity, etc. Also, the proof that the 
Maxwell velocity distribution law is a possible one—i.e., that once established it persists for 
an infinite time—is not possible without this assumption. For one cannot prove that the 
distribution always remains molecular-disordered. In fact, when Maxwell’s state has arisen 
from some other state, the exact recurrence of that other state will take place after a 
sufficiently long time (cf. the second half of §6). Thus one can have a state arbitrarily close 
to the Max-wellian state which finally is transformed into a completely different one. It is 
not a defect that the minimum theorem is tied to the assumption of disorder, rather it is a 
merit that this theorem has clarified our ideas so that one recognizes the necessity of this 
assumption. 

We shall now explicitly make the assumption that the motion is molar - - and molecular- 
disordered, and also remains so during all subsequent time. Equation (17) is then valid, and 
we obtain 

(18) dv = = $Fi(2a>i = /dwFi<W 2 <7 cos dd\dt. 

This is the number of collisions of the specified kind in unit volume in time dt , which was 


^Puli-C- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



to be calculated. We ignore the grazing collisions, whose number is in any case a higher- 
order infinitesimal, so that in each collision at least one velocity component of each 
molecule changes by a finite amount. In each collision of the specified kind, the number 
fdco of m-molecules whose velocity components lie between the l im its (10), which we call 
m-molecules of the specified kind, and also the number F\du>\ of mj-molecules of the 
specified kind, both decrease by one. In order to find the total decrease \dv suffered by fda> 
during dt as a result of all collisions of m-molecules with in |-molecules (without restriction 
on the magnitude and direction of the line of centers), we must consider f, //, (, dco and dt 
as constant in Equation (18) and integrate r/oq and dJ. over all possible values—i.e., we 
integrate duty over all space, and dk over all surface elements for which the angle & is 
acute. We shall denote the result of this integration by J dv. 

The decrease dn which the number fdco experiences as a result of the corresponding 
collisions of m-molecules with each other is obviously given by a completely analogous 
formula; we simply denote by , t ]\, C\ the velocity components of another m-molecule 
before the collision. All other quantities have the same meaning, except that one replaces 
m | by m and the function F by the function/, and a by the diameters of an m-molecule. 
When we have instead of dv the expression 


(19) 


dn = //i<Wcoi$ 2 <; cos M\dt, 


where f\ is an abbreviation for /(A| // 1 , C \, t). To obtain Jdli —i- e -> the total decrease of 

fdco resulting from collisions of the m-molecules with each other during dt —one must 
obviously consider /, ij, C, dco, and dt as constant and integrate du>\ and dk over all possible 
values. The total decrease of fdco during dt is therefore equal to fdv -b fdn . If the state 

is to be stationary, this must be exactly equal to the number of m-molecules whose 
velocities at the beginning of dt do not fulfill the conditions (10) but which during this time 
interval are changed by collisions in such a way that they now satisfy them—they obtain by 
collision a velocity lying between the limits (10). In other words, fdv+fdn must be 
equal to the total increase of fdco resulting from co ll isions. 


§4. Continuation; values of the variables after the collision; collisions of the 
opposite kind.* 

To find this increase, we shall next seek the velocities of the two molecules after a 
collision of the specified kind. Before the collision one of the colliding molecules, whose 
mass is m, has velocity components /, //, (; the other, of mass m |, has components , rjy, 
/l. The line of centers drawn from m to m 1 forms at the instant of collision an angle d with 
the relative velocity of the molecule m with respect to m |. If the angle e between the plane 
of these two lines and any other given plane—for example, that of the two velocities before 
the collision—is given, then the collision is completely specified. The velocity components 
C, >l', and v'u t'i of the two molecules after the collision can thus be expressed as 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



explicit functions of the 8 variables i], C, f \, t ]\, C\, ■&, e\ 

= ^i({) J l, f, £l> Vh fl>#> € ) 
(20) | rj' = fait, tj, f, {i, iji, fi, d r e). 


We prefer however the geometric construction to the algebraic development of the 
functions (20), and we return to Figure 2, p. 39. We divide the segment C,C at the point S 
into two parts, such that 

C\S:CS = m'Mi. 

Then the line OS represents the velocity of the common center of mass of the two 
molecules; for one sees that its three projections on the coordinate axes have the values: 

mi + mil mi; + mm i 

( 21 ) - 1 - ) - 

m + mi m + mi m + mi 

But these are in fact just the velocity components of the common center of mass. Just as we 
have shown that C\C is the relative velocity of the m-molecule with respect to m,, it 
follows also that SC and SC | are the relative velocities of the two molecules with respect to 
the common center of mass before the collision. The components of these relative velocities 
perpendicular to the line of centers OK will not be changed by the collision. The 
components in the direction OK are p and p \ before the collision, and p’ and p { after the 

collision. Then according to the principle of conservation of the motion of the center of 
mass: 

mp + mipi = mp f + m\p{ = 0, 

and according to the principle of conservation of kinetic energy: 

mp 2 + mipi 2 = mp' 2 + mi pi 2 . 

Whence it follows that 

v' = V, Pi = Vb 

or 

v' = - V, Pi = - VI 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i Ze i. 




and one sees at once that, since the molecules must separate from each other after the 
collision, only the latter solution is correct, and that hence the two components of relative 
velocity with respect to the center of mass, which fall in the direction K\K 2 WOK, will 
simply be reversed by the co ll ision. 

From this one obtains the following construction of the lines OC' and OC ( which 
represent the velocities of the two molecules after the collision in magnitude and direction. 
One draws through S the line K | K 2 \ then one draws in the plane of the lines K\ Kj and 
C| C, the two lines SC' and SC \ which are equal in length to the lines SC and SC |, and 
are equally inclined on the other side from The two endpoints C' and (J { of the 

latter two lines are at the same time the endpoints of the required lines OC' and OC{ We 
can also call them the velocity points of the two molecules after the collision. The 
projections of OC' and oci on the three coordinate axes are thus the velocity 

components V'r t'i fl ) Vl f fl of the two molecules after the collision. 
These geometrical constructions completely replace the alternative algebraic development 
of the functions (20). The points C{, s. and C' obviously fall on a straight line. This 
line Q^ represents the relative velocity of the molecule m with respect to the molecule 

m | after the collision, and one sees from the figure that its length is equal to C ] C, whereas 
the angle it forms with the line OK is 180° - C. 

Up to now we have considered only one of the specified collisions, and we have 
constructed the velocities after the collision for it. We now consider all the specified 
collisions, and ask between which limits the values of the variables after the collision lie, 
for all these collisions—i.e., for all collisions such that the conditions (10), (13), and (15) 
are fulfilled before the collision. Since we assume the time duration of the collision to be 
infinitesimal, the direction of the line of centers is the same at the end of the collision as at 
the beginning, and it is only a question of finding the limits between which the velocity 

components £'» v', f', ft, Vi t fi are found after the collision. Had we 

calculated the function (20), then we would have considered j?and e as constants and C, //, 
C, <(j, }]\, C| as independent variables, and we would have to express 
d £' dr,' d{' dU d v { d{i’ in teims of d£ ch / dt d£\ dij\ dC\ by means of the 
well-known Jacobian functional determinant. However, we prefer the geometric 
construction, and we must therefore answer the question: what volume element would be 
described by the points C' and (J { when, without changing the direction of the line OK, 
we let the points C and C| describe the volume elements da> and da>\ ? First, let the position 
of the point C as well as the direction of the line OK remain fixed, and let C| sweep out the 
entire parallelepiped da>\ . From the complete symmetry of the figure, it follows directly that 
(J/ describes a congruent parallelepiped which is the mirror image of da>\. Likewise if the 
point Cj is fixed and the point C sweeps out the parallelepiped dco, then the point C' 
sweeps out a parallelepiped congruent to dto. For all collisions that we earlier called 
collisions of the specified kind, the velocity point of the m-molecule lies in the 
parallelepiped dco' after the collision, and that of the in | -molecule in c/o.q , and it is always 


Uuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



true that = f/ox/u) i The same result would also be obtained by explicit 

calculation of the functions (20) and construction of the functional determinant 1 

ar it l 

d£ dri 

We shall now consider another class of collisions of an m-molecule with an in | - 
molecule, which will be called the “collisions of the inverse kind.” They are characterized 
by the following conditions: 

1. The velocity point of the m-molecule lies in the volume clement do/ before the 
collision; the number of m-molecules in the volume element for which this condition is 
satisfied is, by analogy with Equation (9), fdoJ, where/ is the value of the function / 
obtained by replacing /, ij, C by /', if, C —i.e., it is the quantity/;/', if, C t). 

2. The velocity point of the mj-molecule lies in the volume clement before the 

collision. The number of in \-molecules in unit volume for which this condition is satisfied 

is F i c/co/’ where F\ is an abbreviat i° n for F (£i', Vjl , f / , t)- 

3. The hne of centers of the two molecules at the instant of the collision, drawn from in | 
to m, is parallel to some line drawn from the origin of coordinates within the cone d/ 1. (In 
those integrals that refer to the collision of identical molecules, there will of course occur in 
place of the molecule of mass in | simply an m-molecule whose velocity components are 

Zbdl’ Cl-) 

Figure 3 represents the same collision as Figure 2, the lines having been kept fixed as far 
as possible. Figure 4 represents the opposite collision. The arrow directed toward the center 
of the molecule always represents its velocity before the collision, while that directed away 
from the collision represents its velocity after the collision. In all collisions of the opposite 
kind, the relative velocity of the m-molecule with respect to that of the in |-molecule before 
the collision is represented by the line ^ Q r in Figure 2. Its magnitude is thus equal 

again to g, and it forms the angle d with the hne of centers drawn from m to ni\ , since we 
have likewise reversed the direction of the hne of centers. The angle & must of course be 
acute if the cohision is to be possible. The number of inverse cohisions in unit volume 
during dt is, by analogy with Equation (18), given by 




7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



Fig. 3. 


(22) dv' = f'F i du'dul <r 2 g cos tidkdt. 

We have called these collisions those of the opposite kind, since they follow exactly the 
opposite course as those originally specified, so that the velocities of the two molecules 
after the collision lie between the same limits, (10) and (13), as those before the co ll ision 
for the originally specified collisions. 



An opposite collision increases both fdoj and F \duj\ by one. In order to find the total 
increase of fdco resulting from all collisions of m-molecules with m 1 -molecules, during time 

dt, one must first express v’, f', , vl , f.' in terms of f, ij, C, F\. //|. t h &, and 


e. Since (iiii'dwl = (1 OH/cOr we have: 

(23) dv' = f'F{ dwdwio 2 g cos ddXdt. 


We leave the letters/, f ' and d/ 1 in the equation, remembering however that one must 

v !, 

&. e and also d/. through the differentials of the latter angles. As is well known, one can 
show that dl = sin dddde (cf. beginning of §9). In the differential expression (23), one 


fY to be functions of F, //, C, F \, >j \, C \, 


consider their arguments Yj' } ) f 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ ~Ph-y-&XjcS- 



now considers f, //, (, da> and dt constant and integrates over all possible values of doj\ and 
dX. Thereby all collisions will be included that can take place between an m-molecule and 
an in |-molecule, such that the former has velocity components within the limits (10) before 
the collision, but without any other restrictions. The result of this integration, \dv', thus 
gives us the increase of fdco resulting from all collisions of m-molecules with in | -molecules 
during dt. Similarly, this quantity increases by fdn' as a result of collisions of m- 

molecules with each other, where 

(24) dt i' = /'// dwdwis 2 0 cos #d\dt 

Her £ f { is again used as an abbreviation for F{%\> li > tit 0 

r, ll, nl, tl are here functions of f, ij, C, f\, ij\. C\, & and e, inasmuch 
as the former represent the velocity components after a collision, and are determined by the 
initial conditions (10), (13), and (15), in which however both molecules have mass m. 

If we subtract from the total increase of fdco the total decrease, we obtain the net change 

df 

— dadt, 
dt 


which the quantity fda> experiences during time dt. Thus: 


d[ 

dt 


dtdw = / dv' - J dv + f dn' - f dn. 


In the integrals \dv and j dv’ the integration variables are identical, and lik ewise in the 
integrals fdn and fdn ' 

If we combine these integrals and divide the whole equation by da) ■ dt, then it follows 
from Equations (18), (19), (23), and (24) that: 


(25) 


fa/ , 

- = / (fF{ - jF y-g cos dduA + 

dt 

+1 ifH - //i)s s 0 cosi?(WX. 


The integration is to be extended over all possible da>\ and dX. Likewise, one obtains for 
the function F the equation 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ TRk.y l i .Ze l 



( 26 ) 


IdFi r 

— - } (J'Fl iV 2 0 cosM* >d\ + 

- dt 

+ / (F'Fl - FFi)s[g mtidwdX. 

Here ,V| is the diameter of an m 1 -molecule; in Equation (26), f \, /q. and f) are arbitrary and 
should be considered constant in the integral, while f, rj, and C are to be integrated over all 
their possible values. In the first integral, f', a, vl, il are the velocity 

components after a collision of the specified kind in the case that one of the colliding 
molecules has mass m, and the other has mass mp while in the second integral they refer to 
the case that both molecules have mass m \. dFfdt, F, and F’ are abbreviations for dF(f \, 
tT\, C|, t)/dt, F(f, >1, C, t ), and F(F rf, t). 

If the state is to be stationary, then the quantities df/dt and dFfdt must vanish for all 
values of the variables. This certainly occurs when in all the integrals the integrand 
vanishes for all values of the variable of integration—when one therefore has for all 
possible collisions of the m-molecules with each other, the in | -molecules with each other, 
and of m-molecules with in | -molecules, the three equations 

( 27 ) //,=/'/,', FFi-FFi,JFi-rFi. 

Since the probability of the originally specified collision is given by Equation (18), and that 
of the opposite one by Equation (23), the general validity of the third of Equations (27) is 
equivalent to the statement that, however cho, daj\, and d/. | may be chosen, the originally 
specified (or briefly, “direct”) collision is as probable as the opposite one. In other words, it 
is equally probable that two molecules should separate from each other in a certain way as 
that they should collide in the opposite way. The same follows from the two other parts of 
the system of Equations (27) for the collisions of m-molecules with each other and of m | - 
molecules with each other. However, one sees at once that a distribution of states must 
remain stationary when it is equally probable that two molecules separate from each other 
after a collision and that they collide with each other in the opposite way. 

§5. Proof that Maxwell’s velocity distribution is the only possible one. 

We shall deal later with the solution of Equations (27), which presents no particular 
difficulty. It leads necessarily to the well-known Maxwell velocity distribution law. For this 
case the two quantities df/dt and dF/dt vanish, since the integrands of all the integrals 
vanish identically. It still remains to be shown that the Maxwell velocity distribution, once 
established, is not altered by further collisions. It has still not been proved that Equations 
(25) and (26) cannot be satisfied by other functions that do not make the integrands vanish 
for all values of the variables of integration. One may give such possibilities as little weight 
as he wishes; I find myself inclined to dispose of them by a special proof. Since this proof 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



has, as will appear, a not uninteresting connection with the entropy principle, I will 
reproduce it in the form given by H. A. Lorentz.* 

We consider the same gas mixture as before, and retain the earlier notation. 
Furthermore, we denote by If and IF the natural logarithms of the functions/ and F. The 
result obtained on substituting in If for /, C the velocity components of a particular gas 
molecule of mass m at time t, we call the value of the logarithmic function corresponding to 
the molecule considered at the time considered. Similarly, we obtain the value of the 
logarithm function corresponding to any in \ -molecule at any time when we substitute in 
IF j the velocity components f \, rft, C\ of that molecule at that time. We shall now calculate 
the sum H of all values of the logarithm functions corresponding at a particular time to all 
m-molecules and in | -molecules contained in a volume element. At time t, there are in the 
volume element fdco m-molecules of the specified kind, i.e., m-molecules whose velocity 
components lie between the li mits (10). These clearly contribute a term/- If - dco to the sum 
H. If we construct the analogous expression for the in | -molecules and integrate over all 
possible values of the variables, then it follows that: 

(28) H = f J-lf-du + / Fi-lFi-dui. 

We now seek the change experienced by H during a very small time dt. This will be due to 
two causes: 1 

1. Each m-molecule of the specified kind provides at time / the term If in the expression 
(28). After time dt, the function/experiences the increment 



dt 


Hence /experiences the increment: 


1 

7 



and each m-molecule of the specified kind provides in the expression (28) the term 



All m-molecules of the specified kind provide together the contribution 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 




in (28). Applying the same arguments to all other m-molecules and m 1 -molecules, one 
finds for the total increment of H, resulting from the variation of the quantities If and IF 
under the integral signs in Equation (28), the value : 



df r dF i 
— dtdoi -f* I — dtdwi. 
dt Jdt 


But this is nothing more than the variation of the total number of molecules in unit volume, 
which must be equal to zero, since neither the size of the container nor the uniform 
distribution of molecules should undergo any change. 

2. The collisions change not only If and IF but also fdco and F\daj\ —i.e., the number of 
molecules of the specified kind changes a little. The variation clH of H due to this second 
cause will, according to the above, be equal to the total variation of FI during dt. In order to 
find it, we again denote by dv the number of collisions of the specified kind in unit volume 
during dt. Each such collision decreases both fdto and F\du>\ by one. 

Since each m -molecule contributes the addend If to (28), and each m 1 -molecule 
contributes IF \, the total decrease of H resulting from these collisions will be 

(If + Wi)dv 


Each of these collisions increases fdco' by one, and consequently H is increased by Ifdv. 
Finally, each of these collisions increases F{d<a{ by one, and consequently H is 
increased by IF {dp The total increase of FI during time dt is therefore : 

(If + IFl -If - IFyjdv 

= ( Ij ' + IFi - 1} - lFi)JFidwdwyg cos dd\dt. 


(cf. Eq. [18]). 

If we keep dt constant in this expression and integrate over all the other variables (where 
of course r, v', ?, {»', vi, n are to be considered as functions of f, tj, C, F \, 
r/j, C|) then we obtain the total increase d\H that H experiences as a result of all co ll isions 
of m-molecules with /U|-molecules. We write this symbolically in the form 

(31a) d\E = dtf (If + IFl - If - IF^'Fi-dw-dui^g cosM. 

We can also calculate the same quantity by considering inverse collisions, of which 


7fca^4e«ta£Zc.a/ 



there are dv' in the time interval dl. These collisions will decrease both fdaJ and F( do) i 
by one, and increase both fdco and F\da:>\ by one. Consequently the inverse colhsions will 
increase Ft by 


(IJ + lFi-lf-lFlW 
= (If + IFi - lf f - IFDf'Fl dudui<j 2 g mdd\dt 


(cf. Eq. [23]). 

If we keep dt constant and integrate over all the other variables, and average the result 
with (31a), we then obtain for d^H the value 




• [fF i - f'Fl ]duduic 2 g cos dd\. 


This is the total increment experienced by H during dt as a result of all colhsions of m- 
molecules with ni\ -molecules. The increment diFt of the same quantity resulting from 
colhsions of the m-molecules with each other will clearly be found in a completely similar 
way. We simply have to replace m \ and F by m and f and cf by ,v. However, one must 
remember that when the two colliding molecules are identical, each colhsion will be 
counted twice in the expressions for the integrals, so that the final result must be divided by 
two. (The same thing happens in the calculation of the self-potential and self-induction 
coefficients.) Hence we find 



• [//i - I’H ]<Mois 2 (? cos iMX, 

where f\ and j{ have the same meaning as before. If we calculate in the same way the 

increment of FI resulting from cohisions of/U|-molecules with each other, then we obtain 
for the total increment clH during time dt: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



dH 

dt 




) - l(/F,) ] \}'F{ -]F i\a 2 g cos ddudaA 


Kfjl ) - /(//l)] [/'// -//i]s 2 ff cos iMucMX 


[l(F'F()-l(FFi)} [ F'Fl - FF^lgmddoxLA. 


Since the logarithm function always increases when its argument increases, we see that 
in each of the three integrals the first factor in brackets has the same sign as the second. 
Since, moreover, g is essentially positive, and the angle & is always acute, all the quantities 
in the integrand are essentially positive, and vanish only for glancing collisions or for 
collisions with zero relative velocity. The above three integrals are therefore composed 
purely of essentially positive terms, and the quantity that we have called H can therefore 
only decrease; at most it can be constant, but this is only possible when all terms of all three 
integrals vanish, i.e., when for all collisions Equations (27) are satisfied. Since H cannot 
change with time in the stationary state, we have shown that for the stationary state 
Equations (27) must be satisfied for all collisions. The only assumption made here is that 
the velocity distribution is molecular-disordered at the beginning, and remains so. With this 
assumption, one can prove that H can only decrease, and also that the velocity distribution 
must approach that of Maxwell. 


§6. Mathematical meaning of the quantity H. 

We shall postpone, for the moment, the solution of Equations (27), and insert a few 
remarks on the meaning of the quantity called H. This meaning is twofold. The first is 
mathematical, the second physical. We shall discuss the first only in a simple case, a single 
gas in a container of unit volume. Naturally we shall be able to simplify the conclusions by 
using this assumption, though we must also relinquish a simultaneous proof of Avogadro’s 
law. 

First we make a few preliminary remarks about the principles of the calculus of 
probabilities. From an um, in which many black and an equal number of white but 
otherwise identical spheres are placed, let 20 purely random drawings be made. The case 
that only black balls are drawn is not a hair less probable than the case that on the first draw 
one gets a black sphere, on the second a white, on the third a black, etc. The fact that one is 
more likely to get 10 black spheres and 10 white spheres in 20 drawings than one is to get 
20 black spheres is due to the fact that the former event can come about in many more 
ways than the latter. The relative probability of the former event as compared to the latter is 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



the number 201/10! 10!, which indicates how many permutations one can make of the terms 
in the series of 10 white and 10 black spheres, treating the different white spheres as 
identical, and the different black spheres as identical. Each one of these permutations 
represents an event that has the same probability as the event of all black spheres. If there 
were in the um a large number of otherwise identical spheres, of which a certain number 
are white, an equal number black, an equal number blue, an equal number red, and so 
forth, then the probability of drawing a white spheres, b black spheres, c blue spheres, etc., 
is 



(a + b + c • • •)! 


a!D!C! 


times as large as the probability of drawing spheres of only one color. 

Just as in this simple example, the event that all molecules in a gas have exactly the 
same velocity in the same direction is not a hair less probable than the event that each 
molecule has exactly the velocity and direction of motion that it actually has at a particular 
instant in the gas. But if we compare the first event with the event that the Maxwell velocity 
distribution holds in the gas, we find there are very many more equiprobable configurations 
to be counted as belonging to the latter. 

In order to express the relative probabilities of these two events in terms of a 
permutation number, we proceed as follows : for all collisions in which the velocity point 
of one molecule is in some infinitesimal volume element before the collision, we saw that it 
will be in a volume element of exactly the same size after the collision (assuming that the 
other variables characterizing the collision are kept constant). We divide the total space into 
many (C) equal-sized volume elements a> (cells), so that the presence of the velocity point of 
a molecule in each such volume element is to be considered an event equiprobable with its 
presence in each other volume element—just as previously we considered the drawing of a 
black or white or blue sphere to be equally probable. Instead of a, the number of drawings 
of white spheres, we now have the number tiy(o of molecules whose velocity points lie in 
the first of our volume elements; instead of b, we have the number n 2 to of molecules whose 
velocity points he in the second volume element oj, and so forth. Instead of Equation (34) 
we have 


n\ 

( 35 ) Z =- 

(n 1 w)!(n 2 w)!(7i3w)! • • • 

for the relative probability that the velocity points of n \ oj molecules lie in the first volume 
element, and so forth. Then n = (ni+n 2 +ny I- ■ ■ ) oj is the total number of ah molecules in 
the gas. For example, the event that all molecules have equal and equally directed velocities 
corresponds to having ah velocity points lying in the same cell. Here we would have Z = 
n \/n ! = 1; no other permutations are possible. It is already very much more probable that 


7fca^4e«ta£Zc.a/ 



half the molecules have one particular velocity and direction, and the other half have 
another velocity and direction, than that all have the same velocity and direction. Then half 
the velocity points would be in one cell and half in another, so that 

n\ 

Z =-etc. 



Since now the number of molecules is extraordinarily large, ti \ (j) , n 2w , etc., can be 
treated as very large numbers. 

We shall use the approximation formula 


p! = V2^)’ 

where e is the base of natural logarithms and p is an arbitrarily large number. 1 
Denoting by l the natural logarithm, we see that: 

/[(ftiw)!] = -)- 2)^1 "1" - 1) -f- !(/o> 4" Z2 tt). 

Omitting - 1 , compared to the very large number n | <0 and forming the similar expressions 
for (n 2 &>)!, (« 3 &>)!, etc., one obtains : 

IZ = - o)(niln\ + 7i 2 Zn 2 • • •) + C, 

where 

C = I(»0 - n(h - 1) - - (Jh + 12j) 

td 

has the same value for all velocity distributions and is therefore to be considered a constant. 
Then we ask for the relative probability of the distribution of different velocity points of our 
molecules in our cells, where of course the cell divisions, the size of a cell co, the number of 
cells C and the total number of molecules n and their total kinetic energy are to be 
considered constant. The most probable distribution of velocity points of the molecules in 
our cells will be the one for which /Z is a maximum; hence the expression 

w[ni/ni + W2ZW2 + • • • 


'nfLc. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ lPl±y. i .Zc. 1 



will be a maximum. If we write dfdijdt for to and/f<f, rj, Q for n 1? n 2 , etc., and then 
transform the sum into an integral, we get 


«Wni + ^2^2 + • • *) = //($, 77, 17, t)d$T)dj;. 

This expression is completely identical to the expression into which the quantity H 
given by Equation ( 28 ) for a single gas transforms, however. The theorem of the previous 
section, which states that H decreases through collisions, says simply that through co ll isions 
the velocity distribution of the gas molecules comes closer and closer to the most probable 
one, as soon as the state is molecular-disordered, and thus the calculus of probabilities is 
introduced. I must content myself here with this brief illustration, and refer the reader 
elsewhere^ for more details. 

In connection with the foregoing, one should mention the following point, already made 
long ago by Loschmidt.* Let a gas be enclosed by absolutely smooth, elastic walls. Initially 
there is an unlikely but molecular-disordered state—for example, all molecules have the 
same velocity c. After a certain time, the Maxwell velocity distribution will nearly be 
established. We now imagine that at time t, the direction of the velocity of each molecule is 
reversed, without changing its magnitude. The gas will now go through the same sequence 
of states backwards. We have therefore the case that a more probable distribution evolves 
through collisions into a less probable one, and that the quantity H increases as a result of 
collisions. This in no way contradicts what was proved in § 5 ; the assumption made there 
that the state distribution is molecular-disordered is not fulfilled here, since after exact 
reversal of all velocities each molecule does not collide with others according to the laws of 
probability, but rather it must collide in the previously calculated manner. In the example 
cited, in which we assumed the mass of all molecules equal, all molecules at the beginning 
had the same velocity c. After a time in which each molecule has experienced on the 
average one collision, many molecules will have a velocity y. However, ignoring the few 
molecules that have experienced several collisions, all these molecules come from a 
collision in which the other molecule left with a velocity V 2 c*- 7 ‘ If we now reverse 
all velocities, then nearly all molecules whose velocity is 7 will collide only with molecules 
whose velocity is V2 c'-y , so that the characteristics of a molecular-ordered 
distribution are present. 

The fact that H now increases does not contradict the laws of probability either; for 
these only predict the unlikeliness, not the impossibility, of an increase in H. Indeed, on the 
contrary it follows explicitly that each distribution of states, even if very unlikely, has a 
probability different from zero, though very small. Similarly, when one has a Maxwell 
distribution, the case that one molecule has the velocity that it actually has at that time, 
likewise for the second, third, and other molecules, is not in the least more probable than 
the case that all molecules have the same velocity. 

It would clearly be a gross error to conclude that any motion whereby H decreases is 
equiprobable with one in which the velocities are reversed and H increases. Consider any 
motion for which H decreases from time / () to time t\ . When one reverses all the velocities 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



at time / () , he would by no means arrive at a motion for which H must increase; on the 
contrary, H would probably still decrease. It is only when one reverses the velocities at time 
/| that he obtains a motion for which H must increase during the time interval ty - t 0 , and 
even then H would probably decrease again after that, so that motions for which H 
continually remains very near to its minimum value are by far the most probable. Motions 
for which it increases to a considerably larger value, or sinks from a large value to its 
minimum value, are equally improbable; one knows however that H has many larger 

n 

values during a definite time interval, so it must decrease with high probability. 

Planck has attempted to base a proof that the Maxwell velocity distribution is the only 
possible stationary one on this reversibility principle.* From Hamilton’s principle he has 
not yet proved, to my knowledge, that through the reversal each stationary state distribution 
must transform into another one. One can still show the following: when, after a state 
distribution A (which is stationary to an arbitrary degree of approximation) has lasted for an 
arbitrarily long time, one suddenly reverses all the velocities, then he obtains a motion B 
which again remains stationary (with the same degree of approximation) just as long. We 
saw that a molecular-disordered distribution, after reversal of all velocities, can transform 
into a molecular-ordered one; one can therefore believe that the motion B will be 
molecular-ordered. Now for certain forms of containers there are certainly possible 
molecular-ordered motions that remain stationary for arbitrarily long times. It appears 
however that these could be destroyed at any time by an arbitrarily small change in the 
form of the container. We assume that the state distribution B cannot remain molecular- 
ordered during its entire duration. Moreover, for the state distribution A, we assume that 
each velocity is equiprobable with the opposite velocity. The state distribution B must be 
identical with A, since by value of the second assumption the magnitude and direction of 
each velocity in B has the same probability as in A, and by virtue of the first assumption the 
collisions follow the laws of probability. In B , however, each inverse collision must occur 
as often as the corresponding direct collision in A, since the two move in opposite 
directions. Hence in B, each inverse collision must be just as probable as the corresponding 
direct one in A. But since both distributions are identical, it follows that in each of them, 
each direct collision has the same probability as the corresponding inverse one, whence 
follow Equations ( 27 ), whose necessary consequence is the Maxwell distribution. 

When one may not assume a priori that each velocity has the same probability as the 
opposite one—for example, when gravity acts—Planck’s proof appears to be inapplicable, 
but the minimum theorem remains valid. 4 

A remark is necessary here. The quantities previously denoted by dco = d£ch]dt and now 
by to are volume elements, and hence really only differentials. The number n of molecules 
in unit volume is indeed a very large number, but it is still finite. (When we choose the 
cubic centimeter as volume element, then for air under ordinary conditions this number is a 
few trillion.) It may therefore be surprising that we treat the expressions n | to, n 2 co, and /(A, 
//, t, l)dfdijd( as very large numbers. One could also carry out the same calculations on the 
assumption that these are fractions; they would then simply represent probabilities. But an 
actual number of objects is a more perspicuous concept than a mere probability, and the 
considerations just carried out would have required complicated digressions and 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



explanations since one cannot speak of the permutation number of a fraction. Such 
thoughts remind us, however, that we could have chosen the volume element as large as 
we pleased. We could have assumed so many equivalent gases to be present in the volume 
element that even when u> is chosen very small, the velocity points of many molecules 
would still always lie in it. The order of magnitude of the volume chosen as volume 
element is completely independent of the order of magnitude of the volume elements u> and 
dfdijdf. 

Even more dubious is the assumption we shall make later, that not only the number of 
molecules in the volume element whose velocity points he in a differential volume, but also 
the number of molecules whose centers are in such a volume element, is infinitely large. 
The latter assumption is no longer justified as soon as one has to deal with phenomena in 
which finite differences in the properties of the gas are encountered in distances that are not 
large compared to the mean free path (shock waves of 1/100 mm thickness, radiometer 
phenomena, gas viscosity in a Sprengel vacuum, etc.). All other phenomena take place in 
such large spaces that one can construct a volume element for which the visible motion of 
the gas can be taken as a differential, yet which still contains a large number of molecules. 
This neglect of small terms whose order of magnitude is completely independent of the 
order of magnitude of the terms occurring in the final result must be carefully distinguished 
from the omission of terms that are of the same order of magnitude as those from which the 
final result is derived (cf. beginning of § 14). While the latter omission causes an error in the 
result, the former is simply a necessary consequence of the atomistic conception, which 
characterizes the meaning of the result obtained, and is the more permissible, the smaller the 
dimension of the molecule compared to that of the visible bodies. In fact from the 
standpoint of atomistics, the differential equations of the doctrines of elasticity and 
hydrodynamics are not exactly valid, but rather they are themselves approximation 
formulae which become more nearly exact as the space in which the visible motions occur 
becomes large compared to the dimensions of molecules. Likewise, the distribution law for 
molecular velocities is not precisely correct as long as the number of molecules is not 
mathematically infinite. The disadvantage of giving up the supposedly exact validity of the 
hydrodynamic differential equations is however compensated by the advantage of greater 
perspicuousness. 

§7. The Boyle-Charles-Avogadro law. Expression for the heat supplied. 

We now proceed to the solution of Equations (27). These are only a special case of 
Equations (147) which we shall treat in §18. From these equations it follows, as we shall 
prove explicitly there, that the functions/and F must be independent of the direction of the 
velocity, and can only depend on its magnitude. We could already give this proof in the 
same way here for a special case. In order not to repeat ourselves, we shall assume without 
proof that neither the form of the container nor any special circumstance influences the 
distribution of states. Since then all directions in space are equivalent, the functions/and F 
must be independent of direction, and can be functions only of the magnitudes of the 


34 _ 


ru*i.C- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ PA.ylic.1 



relevant velocities c and q. If we set/ = e <fj(inc } and J? __ ^(mjcf), then the last of 
Equations (27) becomes 

2 2 2 2 2 2 

<p(mc ) + $(miCi) = (p{mc') + $(mc + wa - me'). 

Here the two quantities me 2 and are clearly completely independent of each 

other, and also the third quantity me' 2 can take all values from zero to me"*- j- TTl 

independently of the first two. Denoting these three quantities by x, y, and z, and 
differentiating the last equation with respect to x, then with respect to y, and finally with 
respect to z, we obtain : 

Ax) = *'(i + y-z) 

*'(») = $'(2 + y-z) 

0 = if'(z) = V(x + y-z), 

whence it follows that 

Ax) = m = Az). 

Since the first of these expressions does not contain y or z' and the second and third 
must be equal to it, the second may not contain y and the third may not contain z. They do 
not contain any other variables; hence they must be constant; since they are equal to each 
other, the derivatives of the two functions cp and ® must be equal to the same constant, -h, 
whence it follows that: 

(36) / = ae~ hm \ F = Ae~ kmc l 

The number dn c of m-molecules in unit volume whose velocity has arbitrary direction 
and magnitude between c and c+dc is clearly equal to the number of those for which the 
velocity point lies between two spherical surfaces drawn around the origin of coordinates 
with radii c and c+dc, and thus in a space of volume dto = 4m 2 dc. Hence, according to 
Equation (11): 

(37) dn c = 47 rn^tyde. 

The molecules whose velocity has a magnitude between c and c+dc and a direction that 
forms an angle between & and d+dd with a fixed line (e.g., the axis of abscissas) are 
identical with those whose velocity point lies in a ring bounded by the two spherical 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



surfaces of radii c and c+dc and the two conical surfaces with apexes at the origin, whose 
common axis is the abscissa direction, and whose generators make angles j?and d+dd with 
the axis. Since this ring has volume 2nr 2 sin & ■ dcd9. the number dn c $ of such molecules 
is given by the following expression: 

, dn c m$‘d& 

(38) dn Ct a = 27rar /,mc c 2 sin • dcdd = 



If we integrate (37) over all possible velocities, so that c goes from 0 to oo, we obtain the 
total number n of molecules in unit volume. This and the following integrations are easily 
performed with the aid of the two well-known integral formulae: 


(39) 


' x 

d 0 


1-3 • • • (2fc - l)Vn 

dc = — 


2* + VA 2 * +1 


X 


k\ 


f c !i+l e- x '‘* = 

J o 2 X m 


One then obtains: 



and hence instead of Equations (36) and (37) one can write 



(42) 

(43) 



If we multiply dn c by c , the square of the velocity of those molecules whose number is 


7fca^4e«ta£Zc.a/ 



equal to dn c , integrate over all possible velocities and finally divide by the total number of 
molecules in unit volume, n, then we obtain the quantity that we call the mean square 
velocity and denote by r i. It is therefore equal to: 



Similarly one finds for the mean velocity the value: 



Therefore we have: 



We shall now put on the axis of abscissas the various values of c, and over them erect 
ordinates whose height is the quantity C 2 e~ hmc , which is proportional to the probability that 
the velocity lies between c and c+dc (where dc should have the same value for all c). We 
thereby obtain a curve whose largest ordinate is found at the abscissa 



This abscissa c w * is usually called the most probable velocity. 

If one now puts the velocity squared, x = c , on the axis of abscissas, and makes the 
ordinate proportional to the probability that c lies between x and x+dx, where the 
differential dx has the same value for all x, then the ordinates will be proportional to 


y/X6~ ^ mx - The largest ordinate is then at x — \ flTtl which does not correspond to 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ i Ze i. 



the velocity q = but rather to q — g „/V2 . In a certain sense, cl/2 could 

therefore be called the most probable velocity squared. 

If one considers in the gas a surface of unit area, and looks for the mean or most 
probable velocities of all molecules that strike the surface in unit time, then he obtains 
further quantities, which differ from those previously defined as mean and most probable. 

All these expressions therefore are not precisely defined; it is in no way uniquely 
determined what one should call the mean. Similar ambiguities will be encountered in 
defining the mean free path. 

Since 


_ __ _ 1_ 1 

(48) c 2 = £ 2 + I 2 + f 2 , therefore £ 2 = rj 2 = f 2 = -c 2 = — 

3 2 hm 


In the same way, many other mean values could be calculated. For example, 



e = 


Iff? 


e-w'+Mdfadi 


+00 


/// e -km<tW) dtfidt; 


l 


00 




3 


p 00 

! 


e~ hm(1 d£ 


4 h 2 m 2 


= m' 


The same is of course valid for the second gas, and since h must have the same value for 
both gases in a mixture, it follows from Equation (44) that for two mixed gases, regardless 
of the density of each, 

(50) mc 2 ”=miCi 2 . 

When two kinds of gas molecules are mixed in a space, in general those of one kind will 
impart kinetic energy to those of the other, or conversely. The above equation says that 
whatever happens, no matter what their density and other properties may be, in thermal 
equilibrium both have the Maxwellian state, and the mean kinetic energy of a molecule has 


^PiUuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



the same value for either kind of gas. 

In order to judge whether two gases have the same temperature, or whether one gas of 
higher density has the same temperature as another sample of the same gas of smaller 
density, we must imagine the gases to be separated by a heat-conducting wall, and ask for 
the thermal equilibrium in this case. The molecular processes in such a heat-conducting 
wall cannot be submitted to calculation according to such simple principles as those 
employed above, yet it seems likely—and can also be shown by calculations on the basis of 
certain assumptions—that the same condition of thermal equilibrium would still hold (cf., 
the mechanical device conceived by Bryan, discussed in §19). Experimentally, the fact that 
the expansion of a gas in a vacuum and the diffusion of two gases proceed without 
noticeable evolution of heat proves this. By the same assumption, it must in general be true 
that when two gases with the same properties but different densities, or with different 
properties, are in thermal equilibrium, then they have the same temperature, and the mean 
kinetic energy of a molecule must have the same value for one gas as for the other. The 
temperature must therefore be the same function of the mean kinetic energy for all gases. 
From Equation ( 6 ) it follows that for two gases at equal temperature, when the pressure at 
the surface is also the same, n = n\, hence the numbers of molecules in unit volume is the 
same—the well-known Avogadro law. Furthermore, since m is constant for the same gas, it 
follows that for a gas at the same temperature but different pressures, c 2 is constant, and 
hence by Equation (7) the pressure p is proportional to the density p—the Boyle or 
Mariotte law. 

We shall now choose a gas which is as nearly perfect as possible—say hydrogen—as 
the normal gas. For the noimal gas, the pressure, density, mass and velocity of a molecule 
will be denoted by P, p\ M, and C. For any other gas, lower-case letters will be used. We 
choose as our thermometric substance the normal gas at constant volume and therefore 
constant density—i.e., we choose the temperature scale so that the temperature T is 
proportional to the pressure of the noimal gas on a unit surface at constant density. Then in 
the formula P = p'C /3, the temperature T must be proportional to P at constant p', and 
therefore it must also be proportional to C 2 . We denote this proportionality factor by 3 R, so 
that for this density 

( 51 ) C> = 3 RT. 

If the normal gas is at another density, then the temperature T is the same when C 2 has 
the same value. Hence R is also independent of density and the formula P = p'C 2 /' 3 

goes over to P = Rp'T. The constant R can be chosen so that the difference between the 
temperature of the gas when in contact with melting ice and when in contact with boiling 
water is equal to 100. The absolute value of the temperature of melting ice is thereby 
determined. Then this must be in the same ratio to the temperature difference (100) between 
boiling water and melting ice as the pressure of hydrogen at the latter temperature is to the 
pressure difference between the two temperatures (all pressures being taken at the same 
density). This proportion gives the temperature of melting ice as 273. 


^Pi mJuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



For another gas, for which lower-case letters are used, one obtains in the same way 
p = pc 2 /3’ and since at equal temperatures yjigL = ■ it follows from Equation 

(51) that 

_ MC 2 M 3 R 

(51a) c ! = — = Z — RT = — T = ZrT, 

mm it 

where /,/ = m/M is the so-called molecular weight, i.e. the ratio of the mass or weight of a 
molecule (a freely moving particle) of the gas in question to the mass of a molecule of the 
normal gas. If we put this value of ^.2 into the equation p=pc 2 /Z , then we obtain for 

any other gas: 


R 

( 52 ) p = — P T = r pT , 

M 

where r is the gas constant of the gas considered, but R is a constant which is the same for 
all gases. Equation (52) is the well-known expression for the combined Boyle-Charles- 
Avogadro law. 

§8. Specific heat. Physical meaning of the quantity H. 

We now imagine a simple gas in an arbitrary volume Q. We introduce the amount of 
heat dQ (measured in mechanical units), which raises the temperature by clT and increases 
the volume by dQ.. We set dQ = dQ \ + r/(f 4 , where dQ \ represents the heat used in 
increasing the molecular energy, while clQ^ represents that used in doing external work. If 
the gas molecules are perfectly smooth spheres, then in collisions no forces act to make 
them rotate. We assume that such forces in general do not exist. Then, when the molecule 
happens to have some rotational motion already, it will not be changed by the addition of 
the amount of heat qQ. Hence the total amount of heat dQ | will be consumed in increasing 
the kinetic energy with which the molecules move among each other, which we call the 
kinetic energy of progressive motion. We have considered only this case up to now; 
however, in order not to have to repeat the same calculations later, we shall now perform 
the following calculations for the more general case in which the molecules have another 
form, or consist of several particles moving with respect to each other (atoms). Then in 
addition to progressive motion, intramolecular motion will also be present, and work can be 
performed against the forces holding the atoms together (intramolecular work). In this case 
we set dQi = dQ 2 + dQ 2 and denote by dQ 2 the heat consumed in increasing the kinetic 
energy of progressive motion, and by dQ 2 the heat consumed in increasing the kinetic 
energy of intramolecular motion and in performing intramolecular work. By kinetic energy 
of progressive motion of a molecule, we mean the kinetic energy of the total mass of the 


^PiUuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



molecule, considered to be concentrated at its center of mass. 

We have shown that when the volume of a gas is increased at constant temperature, the 
kinetic energy of progressive motion and also the law of distribution of the different 
progressive velocities among the molecules both remain unchanged. The molecules just 
move farther apart—i.e., there is a greater interval between two collisions. Although we 
have not investigated the internal motion, we could take it as probable that in a simple 
expansion at constant temperature, on the average neither the internal motion during the 
collision, nor that during the motion from one collision to the next, would be changed by a 
mere decrease in the collision frequency. The duration of a collision would still be 
vanishingly small compared to the time between two successive collisions. Like the kinetic 
energy of progressive motion, the intramolecular motion and the intramolecular potential 
energy can depend only on temperature. The increase of each of these energies is therefore 
equal to the temperature increment clT multiplied by a function of temperature, and if we set 
dQ-x, = then f J > can depend only on temperature. We can return at any time to the 

previous case, absolutely smooth spherical molecules, simply by setting J3= 0. The number 
of molecules in the volume Q of our gas is nQ, and since the mean kinetic energy of 
progressive motion of a molecule is racV2’ the total kinetic energy of progressive 
motion of all molecules is 



or, when one denotes the total mass of the gas by k, equal to 


k 


2 



since clearly k = pQ. = nniQ. 

Since, further, the total mass k of the gas is not changed by the addition of heat, the 
increase of kinetic energy of progressive motion is 

k _ 

— dc 2 , 

2 


If we measure the heat in mechanical units, then this is also equal to dQ 2 - But according 
to Equation (51a) 



mJuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



and hence 


m 

dQi = — dT, 

2/i 

3(1 + P)kR 

dq\ = dqt + dq^ =- dT. 

2/u 


The external work done by the gas is p ■ dQ ; this is therefore also equal to the quantity 
r/<2 4 measured in mechanical units. Now the total mass of the gas remains constant, hence 


dti = kd 



and according to Equation (52), 


hence 


1 _ R T 
t> up 




If one substitutes all these values he obtains, for the total heat added, the value: 


(53) 


dQ — dQi + dQi = 


Rk 

H 

Rk 
H L 


3(1 + (?) [T 

- - -dT + pi[- 

2 \p 

■3(1 + 0) /I 


If the volume is constant, then dQ/k = d( 1 Ip) = 0, and the added heat will be 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



m 

dQ, = — (1 + fldT. 

2/i 

On the other hand, if the pressure is constant, then d(T/p) = (dT)/p and the added heat 
will be 


Rk , 

dQ p = — [3(1 + j?) + 2 }dT 

2/i 


If one divides dQ by the total mass k , then he obtains the heat added per unit mass. If 
one divides by dT , then he obtains the amount of heat that must be added to raise the 
temperature by one degree, the so-called specific heat. Therefore the specific heat per unit 
mass of the gas at constant volume is: 





On the other hand, the specific heat per unit mass at constant pressure is: 



[ 3(1 + 0 ) + 2 ]. 

2/i 


In both expressions all quantities except /3 are constant. The latter can be a function of 
temperature. Since R refers only to the noimal gas and hence has the same value for all 
gases, the product j p ■ p and also the product j v ■ p will have the same values for all gases 
for which [3 has the same value—e.g., in particular for all gases for which [} is equal to zero. 
The difference of specific heats, j p - j v , is for all gases equal to the gas constant itself: 

R 

(55a) ip - % = r = — • 


The product of this difference and the molecular weight p is for all gases a constant equal to 
R. The ratio of specific heats is 



7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



Conversely, 


2 



In the case that the molecules are perfect spheres, which we have assumed previously, /3 
= 0 and hence ^ = 1 ^ • This value was in fact observed by Kundt and Warburg for 

mercury gas,* and more recently by Ramsay for argon and helium;f for all other gases 
investigated up to now, k is smaller, so that there must be intramolecular motion. We shall 
come back to this subject in Part II. 

The general expression (53) for clQ is not a complete differential of the variables T and 
p; however if one divides it by T, then since (3 is a function only of T, he obtains a complete 
differential. If f3 is constant, then one has 



dQRk 

— = —l[7»B/«a-M) p -i] + const . 

T m 


This is therefore the so-called entropy of the gas. 

If several gases are present in separate containers, then naturally the total added heat is 
equal to the sum of the amounts of heat added to the individual gases, so that whether or 
not they have the same temperature, their total entropy is equal to the sum of the entropies 
of each gas. If several gases whose masses are k\, k 2 , ■ • ■ , whose partial pressures arep 1? 
P 2 , ■ ■ ■ , and whose partial densities are p \, p 2 , • • • , are mixed in a container of volume f2, 
then the total molecular - energy is always equal to the sum of the molecular energies of the 
components. The total work is (pi+P 2 +- • -)dCl, where 

R R 

ft = Jci/pi = /C2/P2 • ' ‘ Pi = — P\T, P2 = — P2T • • • 

Pi M 2 


Hence it follows that the differential of the heat added to the mixture has the value: 



flE- 


3(1 + 0) 
2 


T + pTd 



From this it follows that the total entropy of several gases, when /ihas the same constant 
value for each one, is 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i .Ze l 



+ const. 


„ k r 

(58) RY l -l[T wnnB) p-' 

M 

where some are in different containers, while others may be mixed; except that in the latter 
case p is the partial density, and naturally all the mixed gases must have the same 
temperature. Experience teaches that the constant is not changed on mixing, as long as p 
and p do not change. 

Since by now we have learned the physical meaning of all the other quantities, we shall 
deal with the physical meaning of the quantity denoted by H in §5; for the present we shall 
have to li mit ourselves to the case considered in §5, where the molecules are perfect 
spheres, and hence the ratio of specific heats is K = 1 ^ • 

We obtain, according to Equation (28), for unit volume of a single gas, H = \flfdo)\ for 
the stationary state we have 


f = ae~ 


hmc 


hence 


H = lajfdu - hmj c 2 fdw. 

Now however j fdoj is equal to the total number n of molecules, and furthermore 



3n 

2 hm 


hence 


H = n(la - f). 

Furthermore, according to Equations (44) and (51a), 

3 __ 3 RM 

-= c 2 =- T, 

2 hm m 


hence 


1 

h = -—, 
2RMT 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



and according to Equation (40) 



Hence, aside from a constant, 

H = nl{pT~ 31 *). 

We saw that -H represents, apart from a constant, the logarithm of the probability of the 
state of the gas considered. 

The probability of simultaneous occurrence of several events is the product of the 
probabilities of the events; the logarithm of the former probability is therefore the sum of 
the logarithms of the probabilities of the individual events. Hence the logarithm of the 
probability of a state of a gas of doubled volume is -2 H; of tripled volume, -3 H\ and of 
volume Q, -QH. The logarithm of the probability SB of the arrangement of the molecules 
and distribution of states among them in several gases is 

Qnl(pT~ l «), 

where the sum is to be extended over all gases present. This additive property of the 
logarithm of the probability is already expressed by Equation (28) for a gas mixture. 

If we multiply by RM, which is constant for all gases (M is the mass of a hydrogen 
molecule), we obtain 

k 

RMM = - £KAfM(pT-»») = fl£- Kp-'T'i'). 

In nature, the tendency of transformations is always to go from less probable to more 
probable states. Thus if SB is smaller for one state than for a second, then to facilitate the 
transformation from the first state to the second, the action of another body may be 
necessary, but this transformation will still be possible without permanent changes in any 
other bodies. On the other hand, if SB is smaller for the second state, the transformation 
can occur only if another body takes on a more probable state. Since the quantity 
RMm which differs only by a constant factor and an addend from -H, increases and 
decreases with we can assert the same things about it as about SB- But the quantity 
RMm is in our case, where the ratio of specific heats is equal to 11, in fact the total 
entropy of all the gases. 

One sees this at once if he sets /3= 0 in the empirically correct expression (58). The fact 
that in nature the entropy tends to a maximum shows that for all interactions (diffusion, heat 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



conduction, etc.) of actual gases the individual molecules behave according to the laws of 
probability in their interactions, or at least that the actual gas behaves l ik e the molecular- 
disordered gas which we have in mind. 

The second law is thus found to be a probability law. We have of course proved this 
only in a special case, in order not to make it too difficult to understand because of too 
much generality. Moreover, the proof that for a gas of arbitrary volume Q the quantity 
QH —and for several gases the quantity Y. ElH —can only decrease through collisions, and 
thus is to be considered as a measure of the probability of states, was only hinted at. This 
proof can easily be given explicitly, and will be given at the end of §19. We still need to 
generalize and deepen our conclusions. 

Even if one concedes validity to the gas theory only as a mechanical model, I still 
believe that this conception of the entropy principle, to which it has led, strikes at the heart 
of the subject in the correct way. In one respect we have even generalized the entropy 
principle here, in that we have been able to define the entropy in a gas that is not in a 
stationary state. 

§9. Number of collisions. 

We shall now consider again the same mixture of two gases as in §3, and adopt all the 
notation used there. We proceed from the number of collisions, given by Equation (18), 
which occur between an m -molecule (a molecule of the first kind of gas of mass m ) and an 
m 1 -molecule (a molecule of the second kind of gas of mass m \) in unit volume during time 
dt, that satisfy the three conditions (10), (13), and (15). 

We consider now only the state of thermal equilibrium, for which we found in §7 the 
equations (41) and (42). 

We ask first, how many collisions in all, without any restriction, take place between an 
m-molecule and an in |-molecule in unit volume during time dt. We obtain this by dropping 
the three restrictive conditions to which the collisions have previously been subjected—i.e., 
when we integrate over the differentials. In order to find the limits of integration, we 
represent the velocities c and cq of the two molecules before collision by the lines OC and 
OC\ in Figure 5. The line OG should be parallel to the relative velocity C | C of the m- 
molecule with respect to the in | -molecule before the collision, and the sphere with centre O 
and radius 1 (the sphere E ) intersects the point G. The line OK should have the same 
direction as the line of centres drawn from m to in |, and intersects the sphere E in the point 
K. Hence KOG is the angle denoted by d. We allow the position of the line OK to vary in 
such a way that & increases by dd as the angle e of the two planes KOG and COCy 
increases by d e. The circle shown in Figure 5 should be the intersection of the sphere E 
with the latter plane, which we can choose as the plane of the diagram, when we imagine 
the coordinate axes (of which we are now completely independent) to be lying in some 
oblique way. When d and e take all values between & and 3+d&. and e and e+de, then 
the point K describes on the sphere E a surface element of surface area sin & ■ dd ■ de. As 
indicated in §4, we can choose this surface element as the surface element dA, so that we 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



obtain, according to Equation (18), 



Fig. 5. 

dv = fduF'iduigc 2 cos d sin ddddedt. 

We now leave fixed the two volume elements dco and da>\ within which the points C 
and C\ lie, but integrate dv with respect to & and e over all possible values, i.e., we 
integrate d from 0 to rd 2 and e from 0 to 2rc (see the conditions mentioned in §3). The 
result of the integration will be denoted by dv \, and thus we obtain 1 



This is therefore the total number of collisions that occur between an m-molecule and an 
m | -molecule in unit volume during time dt, such that before the co ll ision: 

1. the velocity point of the m-molecule lies in the volume element da>, 

2. the velocity point of the in \-molecule lies in the volume element da>\. 

On the other hand, condition (15) has been dropped, so that the direction of the line of 
centers is not subject to any restrictive condition. We shall now denote the angle COC \ in 
Figure 5 by cp , the point C being held fixed while C| varies so that the line OC\ takes all 
values between cq and c \ +dc \, and the angle cp takes all values between cp and cp+dcp. We 
thereby obtain the surface element, denoted by dcf in Figure 5, of area c \ dc | dcp at a 
distance C\A = c\ sin cp from the line OC. If we allow this surface element to rotate around 
the line OC as axis, it will sweep out a ring of volume 27TC 2 { sin cpdc | dcp. The two 

integrations over cp and cq can always be carried out in the same way each time, so that the 
velocity point Cj of the in | -molecule always lies inside the ring/?. We find the total 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i Ze i. 



number dv of collisions in unit volume in time dt between an m-molecule and an m | - 
molecule such that the velocity point of m lies in dco while that of m \ lies in the ring R by 
integrating the expression dv j with respect to clop over all volume elements of the ring R. 
In other words, we simply set 


rfcoi = 2 ttCi sin ipdcid<p 


in dv \, whereby we obtain 



2 2 2 

dvi = 2 tt fdwFiCigo sin <pdcid<pdt. 


In order to el im inate any restrictions on the magnitude and direction of the velocity c \, 
we merely have to integrate over all values of cp and c |. keeping c constant. Thus we 
integrate over cp from 0 to cp, and over c\ from 0 to oo, whence we obtain 



dv 3 = 2 tt 0 - dtfdu 



FiCtf sin <pdc\d(p. 


Since 

9 


2 2 

c *4" Ci — 2 cc i 


cos cp and sin cpdcp = gdg/cc ], we have 



3 3 

3cci 


The relative velocity for cp - n is c+cy. The relative velocity g () for cp = O is c: - C| if 
C\ < c, but it is c\ - c if cj > c. Hence one has 



x 

g sin <pd<p 


2(ci + 3c) 

-for Ci < c, 

3c 


but 


2(c + 3c!) , 

=-for Ci > c. 

3ci 

r\ 

One therefore must split the integration in Equation (62) into two parts:" 


Wtc, 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ “Pity. i .Zc. 1 




dvi = |tt V/dcrtfl £ 

/. 


2 cl + 3c 2 
F ,c,-At 

o C 

" 2 o 2 + 3c! ■ 

4 I fiCi-cfci 

Cl 


The above quantity <iv 3 represents therefore the total number of collisions which the m- 
molecules whose velocity points he in dco undergo with any m \ -molecules. If we divide 
this number by fdco (the number of such m-molecules) and call the quotient v c , then we 
shall obtain the probability that an m-molecule whose velocity is c collides during dt with 
an m\ -molecule; i.e., this quotient 



specifies what fraction of a very large number A of m-molecules, ah moving with the 
velocity c in the gas mixture, will collide with in \-molecules during the time interval dt. 

We can also say: we imagine an m-molecule moving with constant speed c through the 
gas mixture. After each collision, its velocity is restored to the value c by some external 
cause, and also the velocity distribution in the gas mixture is not disturbed by this one 
molecule. Then v c dt will be the probability that this molecule collides with an m | -molecule 
during time dt, v c will therefore be the number of collisions, on the average, with in | - 
molecules in unit time. The two equations (63) and (64) yield, on substituting for F j its 
value from Equation (42): 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ !Pl±.y. i .Ze l 



v c = 


(69) 


hence since 


/ 

L ^ 0 


2 -hm\c“ 

C\i 


2 2 

Ci + 3 c 


dci 


2 2 

2 -hmclC + 3Ci 

+ | CiC -aci 

Cl 


/» 30 

r 




1 

(2/wiiC 2 +1) —- e~ hm]C 


h l vn\ 


l 


+ cie 


2 2 
2 -fcmjcJ C 1 + 3C 


dci 


r 2n - xc u 

Ci e dci= - 


1 2n—1 -Ac? 2n — l C 2n-2 -Ac? 


- Ci e + 

2X 2X 


/ 


Ci c dci 


/ T 

. 2hm l c 1 + 1 r , ' 

(70) v c = ni<j 2 i /-— 

1 -- e -x fa 

V firth 

1 

CD 

-Ci 

> 

SO 

_1 


If we replace all the quantities referring to the second kind of molecule by those 
referring to the first—i.e., replace ti\, in |, and <7 by n, m, and s —then the above quantity v c 
becomes 


/ v 

, 2 mhc 2 + 1 r cVhm . ' 

(71) n c = ns 2 i /— 

e~ hmc H-=- I e~ x dx 

} km 

CD 

> 

so 

_1 


The number H c is the number of times that the m-molecule moving with constant 
velocity c through the mixture collides on the average with another m-molecule in unit 
time. 

The quantity cln c given in Equation (43) specifies how many of the n m-molecules have 
on the average a velocity between c and c+dc, dn c ln is therefore the probability that the 
velocity of an m-molecule lies between these limits, and when one follows an m-molecule 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



through a sufficiently long time interval T, then the fraction of the time T during which its 
velocity lies between c and c+clc will be equal to Tdnjn. During this time Tdn c /n, the m- 
molecule collides vj'dnjn times with a in | -molecule, and l\ c Tdtl c / U times with 
another m-molecule. Hence each m-molecule colhdes a total of ( T/n)\v c dn c times with an 
m 1 -molecule and (T/n)fn c dn c times with another m-molecule. Therefore in unit 

time each m-molecule will collide on the averager = (l/n)\v c dn c times with an in \ - 
molecule and ]j — ( | ft f\\ c ({fl - times with an m-molecule, so that there will be 
(,+n) collisions in all. 

Integration of Equation (69) yields : 


where 


V 


16 _ 

— n^hWnVlJ i -f J 2 ), 
3 




-hmct 2 

e cac 



2 2 

2 -hmicl C 

C\e - 

Cl 




3 (m + 2 mO j ?r 

8 ml v h\m + mi) 5 




2 -h mjc] Cl “(" 3C 

C\e - 

c 



In the latter integral, c has all values from zero to infinity, but cq can only run through 
those values smaller than the given value of c. If one interchanges the order of integrations, 
then C| has all values from zero to infinity whereas c assumes all values greater than the 
given (q Hence : 


Wte, 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ “Pity. i .Zc. 1 



QO 


Jl 


r •-**!*! 2 r 

= I c Ciaci I 


2 o 2 

2 -/iroc 1 Ci + OC 

C C -flCi. 


q 


Since one can label the variables at will in a definite integral, we can exchange the 
labels c and c j. Hence we obtain for / 2 an expression that differs from the one given for / 1 
only by having the symbols m and ni\ permuted. One thus obtains 7 2 by permuting m and 
mi in J|: 


J o = 


3 (mi + 3m) 


7r 


8 m 3 ^ /i 7 (m + mi ) 5 


hence 


(72) 


V = 


j lm + mi) /m + mi 

4/ —:-= irahii 4/- c 


hmrrii 


m i 


= TS^iVfc’) 2 + (ci) 2 = 2 y— a^iVc 2 + c 2 . 

• 3 


If one writes n, m, and .s' in place of n \, m\, and a, then it follows that: 


(73) 


n = 2 ns 2 



mh 


= ms 2 c\/2. 


Since in unit volume there are n m-molecules, each of which collides v times in unit time 
with an mi-molecule, there are in all 


(74) 


vn — 2(r 2 nn\y/j 


'm + mi 


hmrrii 


collisions between an m-molecule and an in |-molecule.* But since in a colhsion of two m- 
molecules, there are always two molecules of the same kind, the number of co ll isions 
between m-molecules is : 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 





A similar formula holds for the collisions of m 1 -molecules with each other. 


10. Mean free path. 


Let there be n m-molecules in unit volume; let the first have velocity C |, the second c 2 , 
etc. Then ^ = |^ . . • )/h is the mean velocity. We shall call it the 

number-average. Since the state is stationary, q does not change with time. If we multiply 
the last equation by clt and integrate over a very long time T, then: 




T 

hdt • • • 


Since during a very long time all molecules behave in the same way, all the summands are 
equal and it follows that ^ = where 

- 1 C T 

’• ’ TJ, 


is the time-average of the velocity of any single molecule. 



T 

cdt = Tct 


is the sum of all distances that it traverses during time T. But since it collides T(*- t-n) 
times with another molecule during this time, the mean distance traversed between two 
successive collisions (the arithmetic mean of all distances between two successive 
collisions) is: 


(76) X = 


1 


v + n / /m + mi 

7r (<r 2 ni \/ -b s 2 n\/2 


m 


The difference between time- and number-average will be ignored, since the two are 


54 _ 


PiifLc. 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



equal.* The same value for A would of course have been obtained if we had defined it as 
the average of all distances traversed by all the m-molecules in unit volume between two 
successive collisions, in unit time. For a simple gas we have: 

c 1 X, 

(77) X = - =-= = -= • 

n 7 msV2 V2 

This value is 2 V* times larger than the value Aq, ilis calculated by Clausius (cf. [60] and 
[67]). 

The molecule earlier imagined to be moving with constant velocity c through the gas 
mixture would in unit time traverse a path of length c, and since during this time it would 
have collided (*c+n c ) times with other molecules, it would travel between one co ll ision 
and the next the average distance: 1 

(78) \ c = . 

*e + lt e 

Since at any instant all molecules that have velocity c are subject to the same conditions, A c 
is also the distance that such a molecule will travel from any instant to its next collision. 
When at any specified instant many m-molecules all have the same velocity c, and we take 
the average of all paths traversed by each of them from that instant to its next collision, we 
obtain again the same value A c . The same holds of course if we go backwards in time. At a 
specified time t, many m-molecules should have velocity c. If we now ask, how great is the 
distance which these molecules have travelled on the average from their last collision to 
time t, we would again obtain the value A c . 

A false inference has been drawn from this, which Clausius* has clarified, and which 
deserves to be mentioned. We again consider an m-molecule which moves for a long time 
with the persistent velocity c. At some instant t it finds itself at the point B. We ask for the 
distance of the point/? from the place where the molecule last collided, and take the 
average of all these distances for all possible locations of the point B. This would be equal 
to A c . 

Likewise we could ask for the distance of B from the place where the molecule will 
suffer its first collision after the time t. The average of the latter distances would again be 
equal to A c . Since however the sum of the distances of B from the preceding and following 
collisions would be equal to the path between the two collisions, one might think that the 
mean distance between two successive collisions would be equal to 2A C . This conclusion is 
false, since the probability that B lies on a longer path is greater than the probability that it 
lies on a shorter one. If one takes the average of all paths between two successive 
collisions, then the shorter path-distances will be relatively more frequent than if one gives 
the point B all possible positions on the entire path of the m-molecule and then takes the 
mean of the various distances of the point B from the next collision following or preceding. 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i Ze i. 



A trivial example will illustrate this much better than a long explanation. We shall make 
several throws with a true die; between two throws of “one” there will be on the average 
five others. We consider some interval / between two successive throws. Between the 
interval / and the next throw of “one” there will be on the average not 2i but rather 5 

other throws. Likewise between / and the last preceding throw of “one” there will be on 
the average 5 throws. 

Tait has defined the mean free path A in a somewhat different manner. We saw above 
that at a specified time t there are in unit volume cln c molecules whose velocity lies between 
c and c+clc, and that all these molecules travel on the average a distance A c from any instant 
of time to their next collision. If we consider all the nm -molecules that are in unit volume at 
any time, and take the average of all the paths that they traverse from that time to their next 
collision, then we obtain: 




cdn c 

v c + H c 


This gives, after substituting the values (70) and (71) and making some easy reductions : 



where 




t(x) + 




The expression (80) reduces, when only m-molecules are present, to: 



I found the value of the definite integral to be 0.677464.“ Tait obtained a value that 
agrees to the first three decimal places/ Hence: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ !Pl±.y. i .Ze l 



(82) 


0.677464 

Xr =- 

7 ms 2 


One sees easily that the quantity k T must be somewhat smaller than the mean value 
earlier denoted by A. Previously A was the mean of all paths traversed by all the molecules 
in unit volume in unit time. Each molecule would thus contribute as many paths to the 
arithmetic mean as the number of collisions it experienced in unit time. By Tait’s method, 
however, each molecule contributes only one path. Since the faster molecules collide more 
frequently and also travel a longer distance from one collision to the next than do the 
slower ones, the first method counts the longer paths relatively more often; hence the 
average must be larger than by the second method. 

Tait points out that one could also define the mean path as the product of the mean time 
between two collisions and the mean velocity, which would give 


C 



dn c 

v c + tic 


whence for a simple gas one gets: 


0.734 /ms 2 . 


The mean duration of time between two collisions could similarly be defined in a 
different way; but we have already spent too much time on these less important concepts, 
which can only be excused by the attempt to attain the clearest possible understanding of 
the fundamental concepts. 

When we obtain different values for the mean free path, it is clearly not the fault of an 
error in the calculation. Each value is exact on the basis of its own definition. If any 
precisely performed calculation leads to a final formula that contains the mean free path, it 
will be evident from the calculation itself which definition should be used. Only when the 
calculation by which the formula is obtained is inexact can there be any doubt. 


§11. Basic equation for the transport of any quantity by the molecular motion. 

We now consider a vertical cylindrical column of a simple gas, whose molecules have 
mass m. We draw the z-axis vertically upwards, the plane z = Zq being the bottom and the 
plane z = Z\ the top of the gas column. As usual we assume that the distance between these 
two planes is small compared to the cross-section of the gas column, so that the effect of the 
wall that bounds the gas column on the side can be ignored. Let Q be any quantity which a 
gas molecule can have in different amounts. The top of the container shall now have the 
property that each molecule, however it may behave before the collision, will have after 
reflection the average amount G \ of this quantity Q. Likewise each molecule will rebound 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



from the bottom with the average amount G 0 of this quantity. For example, if the molecules 
were spheres of diameter s which conduct electricity, and the top and bottom were two 
metal plates, which had constant potentials one and zero, then each molecule would 
rebound from the bottom unelectrified, but would leave the top with electrical charge s/2. 
The quantity Q would then be the amount of electricity, and one would have the process of 
electrical conduction. If the bottom were at rest, and the top were moving in the direction of 
the abscissa axis in its own plane, then one would have the process of viscosity and Q 
would be the momentum measured in the abscissa direction. If the top and bottom were at 
two different temperatures, one would have heat conduction in the gas. 

To be specific, we shall assume that G \ is larger than Gq. For any z, and hence in any 
layer parallel to the xy plane lying between the top and the bottom, which we shall call the 
layer z, each molecule has on the average the amount G(z) of this quantity. 

We imagine in this layer a piece AB of unit surface area; a molecule that passes through 
AB from above to below will have experienced its last collision before its passage through 
AB in a higher layer. 

We say briefly that it comes from a higher layer. Hence on the average it will have an 
amount of the quantity Q larger than G(z). The molecules that pass through AB from below 
will carry on the average a smaller amount of this quantity with them, so that in unit time a 
definite amount r of Q will be transported from above to below, and the determination of 
this amount T is our next problem. We consider, out of all our molecules, only those whose 
velocities are between c and c+dc. There will be dn c of these in unit volume. Of these, 
according to Equation (38), 


dn c sin Md 

dn e ,0 = 

move in such a way that the direction of their velocity forms an angle between & and d+dd 
with the negative "-axis. Each molecule traverses during time dt a path of length cdt, which 
forms an angle j?with the negative z-axis. 

Hence there will pass through AB in time dt as many of the molecules considered as 
may lie at the beginning of dt in an oblique cylinder whose base is AB, and whose volume 
is c cos 1 9dt. This latter number is just 

dn c 

— csmdcosddddt 
2 

(cf. the derivation of Equation (3) in §2). 

Thus during unit time, when the state is stationary, 

(291 - \dn c c sin # cos M 


^Pufi-C- 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



molecules will pass through AB from above to below, whose velocities are between c and 
c+clc, and make an angle between & and &+d& with the negative z-axis. If we consider a 
particular one of these molecules, which passes through AB at time t, and denote the path it 
has traversed from its last previous collision to the instant 1 by A', then clearly it comes from 
a layer with z-coordinatc z+A' cos d. where each molecule possesses on the average the 
amount G(z+A' cos &) of the quantity Q ; it will therefore transport through AB this amount, 
which we can set equal to 

dG 

G(z) + X' cost? — 
dz 


since A' is small. 

All the cm molecules considered above will therefore transport the amount 


dG 

dyi’G(z) 4-cost? 

dz 



through AB from above to below, where Y A' is the sum of the paths of all the cm 
molecules. We can set Y A' equal to the product of the number cm of these molecules and 
the mean free path. This mean free path, according to the remark following Equation (78) 
in the text, is equal to the quantity denoted by A c . Hence £ A' = KdM and we 

obtain for the amount of Q transported through unit surface from above to below by the 
cm molecules in unit time the result: 



G(z) 4“ A c cos d 


dG' 
dz . 


If we substitute for cm its value, noting that dn c , A c , G, and dG/dx are not functions of 

&, and integrate over & from 0 to rd 2, then we obtain for the total amount of Q transported 
by the molecules whose velocities are between c and c+dc, from above to below, the value: 



c cXcdn c dG 

— dn c G(z) 4- 

4 6 dx 


Similarly we find that the molecules whose velocities lie between 
transport from below to above the amount 


the same l im its 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ TRk.y l i .Ze l 



c c\ c dn c dG 

(84) —dn c G(z) - 

4 6 dx 

Hence all these molecules will transport the net amount 

c\ c dn e dG 

(85) dr = — — 

3 dz 

more from above to below than in the reverse direction. If we make the simplifying 
assumption that all molecules have the same velocity c, then the velocities of all molecules 
present lie between c and c+dc. One therefore has to replace dn c by n, and A c by the mean 
free path of each of these molecules. Then dT will be identical with the total amount r erf Q 
transported in unit time through unit surface by the molecules from above to below, in 
excess of the amount transported in the opposite direction. Therefore we obtain 


( 86 ) 


n dG c dG 

r = -c\ — =-, 

3 dz 4 7T$ 2 dz 


since here the Clausius mean free path formula is applicable. 

If we do not make the simplifying assumption that all molecules have the same velocity, 
then we will obtain T by integrating the above value of dT over all possible values. 
Equation (78) gives (since there is only one kind of gas) 

C 

h = — 


If we substitute forH c and dn c their values from Equations (71) and (43), then after 
some easy reductions we get: 

1 1 dG f 00 4 xk~ x *dx 

( 87 ) / =-= — -> 

37t$ 2 <yhm dz J o 

where tfix) is the function defined by Equation (81). 

I found the value 0.838264 for the definite integral, by mechanical quadrature. 1 Tait 

'y 

calculated it later to three decimal places, which agree with my value. 

From Equations (44), (45), and (47) it follows that: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i Ze i. 




Likewise it follows from Equations (67), (77), and (82) that: 


1 _ n\ T 

— = Xn\/ 2 =- 

7TS 2 0,677464 


4 

^Xciaus • 

3 


When we substitute for \/y/hm and 1 Ires 1 any of these values, we obtain each time 


an equation of the form 



r = knc\ 


dG 

dz 


) 


where c is either the most probable or the mean velocity or the square root of the mean 
square velocity, A is the mean free path according to Maxwell’s, Tait’s, or Clausius’ 
definition, and k is a constant which is different in each case. If we understand by c the 
mean velocity and by A the Maxwell mean free path, then: 



l /t r* 4x 3 . 

k = - \ - \ — e-’dx = 0.350271. 

3 T 2 Jo iKx) 


The coefficient therefore differs only slightly from the coefficient * in Equation (86). 


§12. Electrical conduction and viscosity of the gas. 

We shall first consider intentionally an example in which the quantity Q is not a purely 
mechanical property of the molecule. Let the bottom and top of the container be two plates 
which are both good electrical conductors, maintained at the constant potentials 0 and 1. 
The distance between the bottom and top is one. The effect of the side walls will be 
neglected, as usual. We consider this problem simply as an exercise, and we therefore 
assume that the spherical gas molecule is a good conductor of electricity and that its 
electrical charge does not affect its molecular motion, without pretending that these 
conditions could be realized in nature. G is then the electricity accumulated on a molecule. 
For molecules reflected from the bottom it has the value G 0 = 0, and for those reflected 
from the top the value G \ = s/2. For the latter, the electrical potential in the interior and at 
the surface must be equal to 1. This electrical potential is equal to the quantity of electricity 
G | divided by the radius s/2. If the state is to be stationary, then T must have the same 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ TRk.y l i .Ze l 



value for each cross-section. Since we assume that the molecular motion is not disturbed by 
the electrification, the other quantities appearing in Equation (88) have the same value for 
each cross-section, and it follows from this equation that dG/dz is independent of z. If the 
distance between top and bottom is equal to 1, then: 

dG _ s 
dz 2 

The amount of electricity transported in unit time through unit surface by molecules 
from above to below in excess of that transported from below to above is therefore, 
according to Equation (88): 


k 

(90) T = — nc\s. 

2 

According to our assumptions (which of course are not proved) this would be the electrical 
conductivity of the gas. 

We shall now treat another example. The bottom will be at rest, but the top is being 
displaced in the abscissa direction at constant velocity. Consequently the gas molecules 
near the top are dragged along, while those near the bottom are held back. The mean 
velocity component of a molecule in the abscissa direction, i.e., the visible velocity of the 
gas in this direction, will therefore increase with increasing values of the z-coordinate. For 
the layer z it has the value u. We now understand by G the average momentum mu of a 
molecule in the abscissa direction, and hence we obtain: 

dG du du du 

— = m — > r = knc\m — = kpc\ — • 
dz dz dz dz 

If we denote the total mass of gas between the bottom and the layer z by M, and the 

velocity of its center of mass in the abscissa direction by J, then 

- ) 

where Yjn^ is the sum of the momenta of all particles in the abscissa direction. As a result 
of the molecular motion of the gas, more momentum T will be transported downwards than 
upwards in unit time through unit surface. Hence during the time clt the quantity Yjn^ 
experiences the increment 



We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i .Ze l 



Yadt 

while M remains unchanged. Here <o is the surface area of the cross section of our gas 
cylinder. Hence J increases by 

1 

dt = — Tudt 
M 

because of the molecular motion. The same increase would occur if the force Mdx/dt acted 
on the gas. If the state is to be stationary, an equal but opposite force must act from outside 
on the gas mass M. This can only come from the bottom, and since the action and reaction 
are equal, the gas exerts on the bottom the force 

du 

M — = Tw = kpcku — 
dt dz 

in the positive abscissa direction. This force is gas viscosity. It is proportional to the surface 
to, and to the differential quotient of the tangential velocity u by the noimal z. 

The proportionality constant is the viscosity coefficient. It has the value 

(91) 3t = kpck 

For air at 15°C and noimal barometric pressure, the experiments of Maxwell, 1 O. E. 

9 o 

Meyer, and Kundt and Warburg give, nearly in agreement with each other, 

grams 

9t = 0.00019-- 

cm sec 


Since oxygen and nitrogen have rather similar properties and the formula is only 
approximately correct in any case, we can set this equal to the viscosity constant of 

nitrogen. For this we find at 0°C, \/^2 — 492 ni' ^ nce C — 2 \/(2/3 7r) an< ^ 

since £ is proportional to the square root of the absolute temperature, it follows for nitrogen 
at 15°C that: 


c = 467 m. 

If one understands by c in Equation (91) the mean velocity, so that one should set k = 
0.350271, he then obtains: 


X = 0,00001 cm. 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ TRk.yi i .Ze l 



For the number of collisions that a nitrogen molecule experiences per second at 15°C 
and at noimal barometric pressure, one obtains : 

n = — = 4700 Million. 

\ 

Since according to Equation (77) 

1 

X = —— 

\/2 tns 2 

the two quantities n and s cannot be determined individually. They can however be found 
as soon as another relation between these quantities is known. 

According to Loschmidt 4 this can be accomplished by the following arguments, whose 
validity he justifies by consideration of the molecular volumes of various substances. The 
volume of a molecule considered as a sphere is tcs^1 6. If one does not have such a simple 
picture of a molecule, then he may consider this to be the volume of a sphere whose 
diameter is equal to the min im um distance of approach of the centers of gravity of two 
molecules in a collision. Thus rnis^/6 is the fraction of the total gas volume (set equal to 1) 
that will be filled with molecules, when one regards them as spheres of the above size, 
while the space 1 - (rnis^/6) between them remains empty. 

We assume that the gas can be liquefied and that in the liquid state the total volume is e 
times larger than the space occupied by the molecules; then ejms^/6 is the volume of the 
liquid resulting from liquefaction of the gas, and since the volume of the gas was equal to 
one, we have 


«m $ 2 Vf 

6 v 0 

where v g is the volume of an arbitrary quantity of gas of density such that there are n 
molecules in unit volume, whereas Vf is the volume of the same amount of gas in the liquid 
state.* On multiplying this last equation by Equation (77), one obtains: 

6\/2 Vf 

$ = -“X. 

€ Vg 

Now the volume of a liquid is not significantly changed by either pressure or 
temperature, and furthermore the force that two gas molecules exert on each other in a 
collision is probably greater than that which we can exert on liquids in our laboratories. 6 


6 


Pa.>ie 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Hence we may well assume that the volume of a liquid is not more than ten times as large, 
and generally not smaller, than it would be if two neighboring molecules were at that 
distance which is in the gas their minimum distance in a collision, so that e is between 1 
and 10. The density of liquid nitrogen was found by Wroblewsky to be not much different 
from that of water.* Also, from the atomic volume it follows that the difference between 
the two densities cannot be so large that it need be taken into account in this approximate 
calculation. If we set the two equal, then we find for nitrogen at 15° and atmospheric 
pressure: (v„/vy) = 813; and we obtain, when we set e = 1, s = 0.0000001 cm = one 
mil li onth of a mi ll imeter. Hence we may take it as probable that the mean distance of the 
centers of gravity of two neighboring molecules in liquid nitrogen, as well as the smallest 
distance to which two colliding molecules in gaseous nitrogen can approach on the 
average, lies between this value and the tenth pail of it. 

For the number n = (\/ \Z2tt s 2 X) of molecules in 1 cc of nitrogen at 25 °C at 

atmospheric pressure, one obtains a number which in any case falls between 91 and 250 
tril li ons. 

Substitution of this value into Equation (90) gives: T = (23 • 10 9 /sec). This would be the 
absolute conductivity in electrostatic units. The electromagnetic specific resistance would 
therefore be: 


(9* 10 20 cm 2 /F sec 2 ) = (4-10 10 cm 2 /sec). 

A cube of nitrogen, 1 cm on each side, has resistance (4 • 10 10 cm/sec) = (40 ohm) while 
an equal cube of mercury has resistance (1/10600) ohm. Since nitrogen actually is a much 
poorer conductor than mercury, it follows that the hypothesis that the molecule is a 
conducting sphere is incorrect. 

The order of magnitude of the diameter of a molecule was later calculated by Lothar 
Meyer, 6 Stoney, 7 Lord Kelvin, 8 Maxwell, 9 and van der Waals, 10 and they found, by 
several completely different methods, values in agreement with the one above. 

In order to find the dependence of the viscosity coefficient on the nature and state of the 
gas in question, we replace p by nm, and A by its value according to Equation (77). One 
obtains: 


kmc 

y/2 7rS 2 

and by virtue of Equations (46) and (51a): 

2k fRMTm 


TftnthdfuntlcLnl 



Thus the viscosity coefficient is independent of the density of the gas, and proportional 
to the square root of its temperature. The independence of density, which is of course valid 
only as long as the condition of our calculation is satisfied—namely, that the mean free path 
is small compared to the distance between top and bottom—was verified by experiment, 
especially by Kundt and Warburg.* As far as the dependence on temperature is concerned, 
Maxwell’s experiment gave a viscosity coefficient proportional to the first power of the 
temperature ( loc. cit.), which is correct only for easily coercible gases, especially carbon 
dioxide. For less coercible gases, several later observers found close agreement with the 
formula developed here for the temperature coefficient of the viscosity though most values 
lie between the value of this calculation and the one found experimentally by Maxwell. 11 

The first remark to be made is that a more rapid increase of the viscosity with 
temperature than the square root of the absolute temperature cannot be attributed to the 
inaccuracy of our calculation, since one perceives immediately the following: when one 
raises the temperature without changing the density, then on the assumption of elastic, 
negligibly deformable molecules, the molecular motion is on the average completely 
unchanged except that its velocity increases in proportion to the square root of the absolute 
temperature. It is as though time were shortened in this ratio, and hence it follows that the 
amount of momentum transported in unit time must increase by the same amount. On the 
other hand, according to Stefan, 12 s could decrease with increasing temperature. This 
would have the following meaning. The molecules are not absolutely rigid, rather they are 
somewhat flattened by the collision, so that their diameter appears to decrease, and indeed it 
decreases more the higher the temperature of the gas. Maxwell* assumes that the molecules 
are centers of force, which exert on each other a force that is negligible at large distances, 
but as they approach becomes a very rapidly increasing repulsive force, which is to be 
chosen as an appropriate function of the distance. In order to explain the temperature 
coefficient of the viscosity which he found, he sets this function equal to the inverse fifth 
power of the distance. I once remarked that one could obtain all the essential properties of a 
gas by substituting for this repulsive force a purely attractive force which is an appropriate 
function of the distance, and one could thereby explain dissociation phenomena and the 
well-known Joule-Thomson experiment.! Because of our ignorance as to the nature of 
molecules, all these models must of course be considered simply as mechanical analogies, 
which one must regard as all being on an equal footing, as long as experiment has not 
decided between them. In any case, however, it is probable that the diameter of a molecule 
is not a precisely defined quantity. Nevertheless, the neighboring molecules in the liquid 
state must be at such a distance that they interact strongly with each other, and the 
interaction of more than two of them is no longer an exceptional case. Hence they are at 
distances about the same as that at which gas molecules already experience a significant 
deviation from rectilinear paths. The quantities denoted above by s and cr represent nothing 
more than the order of magnitude of this distance. In order that the calculation may remain 
meaningful, we shall return to the assumption that the molecules are almost undeformable 
elastic spheres. Then it follows from the last formula for the viscosity coefficient that it is 
proportional to the square root of the mass of a molecule, for different gases at the same 
temperature, and inversely proportional to the square root of the molecular diameter. 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



§13. Heat conduction and diffusion of the gas. 

In order to calculate the heat conductivity from Equation (88), we have to assume that 
the top and bottom planes are maintained at two different temperatures. G is then the 
average heat contained by a molecule. The mean kinetic energy of progressive motion of a 
molecule is 


m 

2 



The total average energy of internal motion of a molecule will be set equal to 


m 




hence the total average molecular motion is 

1 + 0 — 

- me 2 . 

2 

or, by virtue of Equation (57), 

1 _ 

- me 2 . 

3 (« - 1 ) 

Since according to our hypothesis heat is nothing but the total energy of molecular 
motion, the amount of heat G pertaining to a molecule will be measured in mechanical 
units. If we assume that the ratio of specific heats, n, is constant, which is probably true at 
least for the permanent gases, then 

dG 1 dc 2 

— =- m - 

dz 3 (k - 1 ) dz 

Now according to Equation (51a), 


__ m 

c 2 =- 


Wtc, 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ lPl±y. i .Zc. 1 



where, as before, /./ = ( m/M ) is the molecular weight of the gas. We thereby obtain 


dG Rm dT 
dz (k - l)/n dz 

hence according to Equation (88), 

kRpc\ ST 

r =-- 

(k - l)/i dz 

The coefficient of dT/dz is what one calls the heat conductivity ^ of the gas. It therefore 
follows that 



8 * 




2k 


(k — l)n (k — 1)$ 2 


mPT 

t 3 m 


The dependence of the heat conductivity on density and temperature is therefore, as 
long as k is constant, the same as that of the viscosity. In particular, since k depends hardly 
at all on density for permanent gases at constant temperature, the heat conductivity is 
independent of density, which was confirmed by the experiments of Stefan* and of Kundt 
and Warburg, t 

For different gases for which k has nearly the same value, the heat conductivity 
coefficient is proportional to the quotient of the viscosity coefficient divided by the 
molecular weight—or, as the last expression in Equation (92) shows, inversely proportional 
to the square of the diameter and to the square root of the molecular weight. Hence it is 
significantly larger for the smaller and lighter molecules than for the larger ones. This has 
been confirmed by experiment. 

If we denote by j p and j v the specific heats of the gas referred to constant mass, at 
constant pressure and constant volume, respectively, where heat is again to be measured in 
mechanical units, then we have (Eq. 55a) 

R 7p 

= 7 ? “ 7 » = 7 t >(* — 1 ) “ (k — 1 ), 

M k 

hence 

1 

( 93 ) 8 = 7 .» = - 

K 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



In the last formula the unit of heat is arbitrary. If one puts, for air at 0°C and atmospheric 
pressure, 


g-Calor. 

k = 1.4, 7 P = 0.2376- 5 - 

(gram mass) X (1° C.) 

and for its value given above, then it follows that: 

g-Calor. 

2 = 0.000032—-- 

cm/sec. 1° C. 

For the heat conductivity of air, different observers have found values lying between 
0.000048 and 0.000058 in the above units. 1 Taking account of the fact that our calculation 
is only an approximate one, we consider this agreement sufficiently good. 

In order to calculate the diffusion of two gases, we shall again return to the gas cylinder 
considered in §11. Let the gas be a mixture of two simple gases. A molecule of the first 
kind of gas has mass m, and diameter s; a molecule of the second kind has mass ni\ and 
diameter In the layer z there are (in unit volume) n molecules of the first and n 1 of the 
second kind of gas, where n and n\ are to be functions of z. Also, the number dn c of 
molecules of the first kind for which the magnitude of the velocity lies between c and c+dc 
will be a function of z. One then finds by considerations similar to those in § 11 that in unit 
time 


dn c 

dyicj = —c sin# cos 
2 

molecules of the first kind move through unit surface with velocities between c and c+dc, 
the angle between their direction of motion and the negative "-axis lying between d and S 
+ dd. These molecules come on the average from a layer whose z-coordinate has the value 
z+X c cos d, for which therefore we can write in place of dn c : 

ddn e 

dn c -\-\ c md - 

dz 

If one integrates over & from 0 to rd 2, then the number of molecules of the first kind of 
gas that pass in unit time through unit surface at any angle but with velocity between c and 
c+dc has the value: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



cdn e c\ c ddn c 

-_L-. 

4 6 dz 


l ik ewise the number of molecules that pass from below to above has the value: 


cdn c c\ c ddn c 

4 6 dz 

Hence there will be a net flow of 



c\ c ddn c 

d% = - 

3 dz 


molecules of the first kind of gas from above to below. On the simplifying assumption that 
the velocities of all molecules are the same, one would have in place of < m e simply the 
total number of molecules of the first kind that pass in unit time through unit surface 
from above to below, in excess of those that pass from below to above, and instead of dn c 
one would have simply the total number n of molecules of the first kind in unit volume in 
the layer z. One would then have: 


cX dn 

9J =- 

3 

The occurrence of different velocities for molecules of the same kind will be taken 
account of only in the simplest case, where both kinds of gas have molecules of the same 
mass and diameter. In this case, which Maxwell calls self-diffusion, we assume that during 
the diffusion Maxwell’s velocity distribution holds for the molecules of each kind of gas in 
each layer, so that Equation (43), 




/hV 

dn c = 4 n M — c 2 e~ hnci de 

' 7T 


remains unchanged, except that n is a function of z, whence one obtains: 


ddn c 4 dn /hV 

-= — \ -c 2 e~ hmc dc. 

dz dz * 7T 


k^ie. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ lPl±y. i .Zc. 1 



Moreover, /. c has the same value as it would in a simple gas in which there are n+n | 
molecules in unit volume. A c is then given by Equation (78) in which v c = 0 but Jt c is 
given by Equation (71). In the latter equation, n+ni is to be substituted for n, and s means 
the diameter of a molecule, which is the same for both kinds of gas. Substitution of all these 
values in Equation (94) and integration over c from 0 to oo yields for the total number of 
molecules of the first kind that pass through unit surface from above to below, in excess of 

dn r* 4x 3 , 

— I - e~ x dx, 

dz J o i{x) 

a formula which one could have obtained directly from Equation (87) by replacing T and G 
b y SR and n/(n+n \). Thus the probability that a molecule belongs to the first kind of gas 
may be treated exactly lik e the quantity Q, introduced in §11, pertaining to a molecule, and 
T then means the number of molecules of the first kind that pass through unit volume in 
unit time from above to below, in excess of those that pass in the opposite direction. Self¬ 
diffusion thus takes place, according to our approximate formulas, just as we imagined in 
§12 that electrical conduction might; one merely replaces the electrical charge of the 
molecule by the property of belonging to one or the other kind of gas. But there is an 
essential difference when one assumes that the electrical charges of two colliding molecules 
are equalized in a collision. However, since our formulas are constructed in such a way that 
after the collision any direction in space is equally probable for each molecule, it must 
follow from this that electrical conduction is just as rapid when the molecules behave lik e 
perfect insulators in collisions with each other, and like perfect conductors in collisions with 
the top and the bottom. Then electrical conduction would be completely analogous to 
diffusion. 

If one introduces in Equation (96) the quantity k defined in Equation (89), then he 
obtains: 

dn SR dn 

SR = k\c — -- 

dz p dz 

If one multiplies on both sides by the constant m, then it follows that: 

d(nm) SR d(nm) 

SRm = k\c — = -- * 

dz p dz 

S Jim is the net mass of the first gas that passes through the surface from above to 
below, while nm is the mass of the first gas in unit volume in the layer z, hence c)(nm)/dz is 
its gradient in the z direction. The factor multiplying this expression in the last equation is 


those that pass from below to above, the value: 

(96) SR =- = - 

3irs : V km [n + nj 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



therefore what one calls the diffusion coefficient. This gives for air at 15°C and 
atmospheric pressure, based on the above value for 0^, the value 0.155 cm 2 /sec; while 
Loschmidt has found values between 0.142 and 0.180 for different combinations of gas 
that behave l ik e air. If one considers the dependence of the quantity p on temperature and 
pressure, then he finds that the diffusion coefficient is directly proportional to the ^ power 

of the absolute temperature, and inversely proportional to the total pressure of the two 
gases. At equal temperature and equal total pressure, the diffusion constant for self¬ 
diffusion is, like the heat conductivity, inversely proportional to the quantity as 

one finds from Equation (96), since h and n+n \ are constant. 

In this simplest case of diffusion, where the mass and diameter of a molecule are the 
same for both gases, the aggregate of the two gases behaves lik e a single stationary gas. If 
we denote by dN c & dn c & and dtl 1 „ the total number of molecules of both gases, the 

number of molecules of the first kind of gas, and of the second kind, respectively, for 
which the velocity lies between c and c+dc and its direction forms an angle between & and 
d+dd with the positive z axis; then according to Equation (38): 



hhn 3 


(n + ni)ck~ hmc2 dcmdd$. 


One might think that consequently at least in this simple case our calculations would be 
exactly correct. However, we shall see that when the molecules are elastic spheres, the 
faster molecules diffuse more rapidly and the slower ones less rapidly. 3 Where n is small, 
that is at a place where the molecules of the other kind of gas predominate over the 
diffusing molecules, then for large values of c the quantity dn c $ will be larger than 

n 

■ dN cj, 

n + n i 


whereas for smaller values of c it will be smaller than this. At the same place the reverse 
must be true for the other gas. Hence the exactness of the equation we obtained, 

n 

dn e ,i =- dN'j 

n + n i 


is in doubt. Likewise it is doubtful whether among the molecules that collide in a layer 
(according to Clausius, the ones sent out from a layer) all directions of the velocity are 
equally probable. 


14. Two kinds of approximations; diffusion of two different gases. 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i .Ze l 



One might think from what has been said up to now that Equation (87), and Equation 
(88), which was derived from it with the coefficient (89), are strictly correct; this would be 
an error. In fact, in deriving them we made the assumption that the velocity distribution 
would not be altered by the quantity Q associated with the molecules. In many cases, for 
example viscosity, when the visible motion is small compared to the mean velocity of a 
molecule, the velocity distribution will be altered only slightly; yet the value of the quantity 
cln c in Equation (83) will always be different from its value rfyi' in Equation (84). Hence 
there is added to the expression (85) a term of the form 

C 

— G(z){dn c - dnl) 

4 

which is of the same order of magnitude as the expression (85) itself. Also, the assumption 
that all directions of motion of a molecule are equally probable is doubtful. 

We assumed finally that each molecule transports through the surface AB that amount 
G(z.+a' cos &) of the quantity Q which a molecule would possess on the average in the 
layer in which it experienced its last collision. This assumption is also arbitrary. This 
amount can differ for molecules that leave the layer in different directions and with different 
velocities; it can therefore be a function O of c and d, so that dG/dz cannot be taken out in 
front of the integral sign in the following integrations over & and c. The amount of Q 
transported by a molecule through AB would then depend not only on the layer where it 
last collided, but also on the place where it collided the next to last time, and perhaps also 
on the place of the collision before that. 

This is related to a situation already discussed in comparing diffusion and electrical 
conduction. It can happen that in a collision each of the colliding molecules retains the 
amount of Q that it had before the collision; however, an equalization can also take place. If 
we call Q electricity, then the former corresponds to the case when the molecules are 
conducting but are covered with an insulating layer that is penetrated in collisions with the 
top and bottom but not in collisions between two molecules; the latter corresponds to the 
case when the molecules are composed of a conducting substance right up to their surface. 

In these two cases the function ® can be different, so that the transport of Q would be 
unequal even though the mean value of G in a layer z would be the same in both cases, 
namely 


(Ox- Go )(2 - 2 .) 

Go i-• 

Zl “ ZO 

In fact it is more probable that a molecule will continue in nearly the same rather than the 
opposite direction after a collision. One sees this in the formulas (201) and (203) derived 
later on. Hence the transport of Q is more obstructed and hence slower when it is equalized 
between two colliding molecules than when it is not. 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



Numerous researches have been carried out to take account of the terms neglected 
because of all these assumptions, especially by Clausius, O. E. Meyer, and Tait.* 
Nevertheless, in the case of elastic spheres the perturbation of the velocity distribution by 
viscosity, diffusion, and heat conduction has not yet been calculated exactly, so that in all 
the relevant formulas terms have been neglected which are of the same order of magnitude 
as those which determine the result, so that they are not essentially better than the ones 
obtained here in a simpler way. 

Such omissions, which make the results mathematically incorrect in the sense that they 
are not logical consequences of the assumptions made, are to be distinguished (as we 
explained at the end of §6) from assumptions that are physically only approximately 
correct, for example the assumption that the duration of a collision is small compared to the 
time between two collisions. As a consequence of the latter assumptions the results will 
also be physically inexact, i.e., their validity can only be determined by experiment. 
However, these physical approximations do not prevent the results from being 
mathematically correct, since they provide the limiting case to which the law must approach 
ever more closely as the physical assumptions are realized more exactly. 

We shall now calculate the diffusion of two gases when the mass and diameter of a 
molecule are different in the two gases, but only on the simplifying assumption that the 
velocities of all molecules of the first kind of gas are equal to c, while those of all molecules 
of the second kind are equal to c\. 

Equation (95) then holds for the first kind of gas. The mean free path will then of course 
be calculated from Equation (68). However, since the whole calculation is only an 
approximate one, we shall not take account of the occurrence of different velocities here, 
since this simplifies the calculation, and use Equation (76). Thus we obtain for the number 
of molecules of the first kind of gas that pass in unit time through unit surface from above 
to below, in excess of those going the other way, 


dn 

M = ® i-> 

dz 

whence 



C 


3tt 


a /A , S + S A 2 t /m+mi 
shi\/2 + -) n x 


m 


Similarly one finds for the number 0^ j of molecules of the second kind of gas that pass 
downwards through the surface in excess of the number passing upwards the value: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



bU\ dn 

911 = “ ®2 - = + ®2 — > 

dz dz 


since (n+ny) is constant in the gas as a whole. Here we have: 



There now arises the difficulty that the diffusion constant does not come out the same 
for both gases—i.e., according to the formulas, more molecules pass through each cross 
section in one direction than in the other. This actually happens in diffusion through a very 
narrow passage or a porous wall. However in our case where we assume that the mixture is 
at rest and the effect of the side walls is negligible, the pressure must always be equalized, 
and therefore according to Avogadro’s law an equal number of molecules must move in 
each direction. 

Our formula gives a false result. Similarly, Maxwell’s first formula for heat conduction* 
gave a visible mass motion of the heat-conducting gas. Clausiust and O. E. Meyer:;: have 
obtained other formulas for heat conduction, which avoid this visible mass motion, but for 
which the pressure is different at different places in the gas. Although this actually occurs in 
very dilute gases, as calculation and experiment both agree for the radiometer,** such great 
pressure differences as would follow from the formulas are inadmissible. 1 This is therefore 
a clear proof of the inaccuracy of all these calculations. 

In the case of diffusion, with which we now concern ourselves, O. E. Meyer* has 
removed the contradiction by superposing on the molecular motion calculated here—in 
which more molecules pass through unit surface in unit time downwards than 

upwards—an equal but oppositely directed flow of the mixture. Since the mixture consists 
o f n+n | molecules, n of the first kind and of the second, the flow of the mixture is 
imagined to be such that n(N\ - N)/(n+n |) of the first kind and //1 W| -N)/(n+n{) of the 
second kind pass downwards in excess of those going upwards. Hence according to this 
superposition, 



n(9?i - 91) 
n + ftj 


tti9! + n% 

n + n\ 


n®i + Wi® 2 bn 
n + iii dz 


molecules of the first kind pass downwards in excess of those going upwards, and equally 
many molecules of the second kind pass upwards in excess of those going downwards. 
The diffusion coefficient is therefore now 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



rti$i + n®! 

- ) 

n + ni 

where 5)i and have the values just found. According to this formula the diffusion 
coefficient would depend on the mixing ratio, and therefore would not have the same value 
in different layers of the gas mixture, so that for the stationary state n and n | would not be 
linear functions of z. Stefan 2 has developed another approximate theory of diffusion on 
other principles, and he finds that the diffusion coefficient should not depend on the mixing 
ratio. Experimentally the question is still open. Yet such a strong variation of the diffusion 
coefficient as that given by the above formula seems to be excluded. 

As for the various complicated revisions undergone by these various theories of 
viscosity, diffusion, and heat conduction, the comparison with experimental results for 
different kinds of gases, and the conclusions which may be drawn about the molecular 
properties of various gases, I cannot go into them here. They may be found, rather 
exhaustively collected, in O. E. Meyer’s Kinetische Theorie der Case. Of the works 
published later, those of Tait 3 may be mentioned.* 



One sees at once that the first two terms represent the increase in H by what is called the first cause in the 
text, and that for the reasons given in the text it vanishes. The other two terms represent the increase in H 
due to the second cause and give, after substitution of the values of dF/dt from Equations (25) and (26): 


(29) 


dH 

dt 


•jVtfFl -JFtidp+jWH +J IF i (f'F i -JF j)dp 


+ / lFi(F'Fl -FFi)dn, 


where dp=o 2 g cos ddiodw id A, dr = s 2 g cost9dwdw\dA and f/ 7 * j = $~g cosddaidui\dA. All the 
integrations are extended over all possible values of the variables. 

One sees at once that the sum Jf'lf'dv>' + [F'i IFld<o{ is likewise equal to H. Its 
differentiation yields: 








»F 1 

It" 



The quantities df/dt and dF'/dt can be found in the same way as df/dt and dFfdt if one considers, instead 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



of a collision in which the velocity components before the collision are £ //, d, F\, z/j, tj and afterwards 

v') ¥1 Jl t */» fl> a collision in which they are |j', f', $1 , 1 ){ , fj 


before and //, d, d|, //j, d] afterwards. Then by symmetry one gets 


— = / (/Fi — fF\ )<r 2 g cos ddu!fd\ + / (fj- ff!)s 2 g cost Jdulfdk] 


and similarly for dF'/dt. Substitution of these values in Eq. (30) yields (taking account of the fact that 
the first two integrals on the right hand side vanish and that ^ '(loj \ — cloorfu: i) : 



-fFl)dp+jlf(}h ~ff!)ir 
at 

+ ! IFl UFi - f'Fi )d P - ! IFl (FF, - F'F! )dr u 


Since in a collision of two /n-molecules or two znj-molecules, the two colliding molecules play the same 
role, it follows that 


/!/(/'/.' ~Sh)dr = /;/,(/'/,' -m 
JV'Uh ~!'j!)dr = /I//(//i -//i )dr 

with two similar equations for F. From this, taking the average of the two values (30) and (31) for 
dH/dt, there follows the value given in the text: 

~=-l /WFD-imYU'Fl-mdp 

at 

-if [*(/'/.') -!(//!)]• (/'/.' -fh)dr 

- 1 / [HF'F{) - l(FF{] ] ■ (F'F[ - FFi)dr t . 

(60) v T = 7r n<r 2 c 


for the number of collisions that a molecule will experience in unit time when it moves with constant 
velocity c among identical molecules at rest, a is the sum of the radii of a moving and a stationary 
molecule. The path traversed by the moving molecule from one collision to the next would have on the 
average the length 

10 If one writes in Eq. (61) the value n\ in place of 4:TrF \C*d,C p 1 i n pl ace of dt, and 1 in place of 


fdoj, and integrates over cp from zero to rrjust as in the text, then he finds the number v' of collisions that 
an m-molecule would experience with nq-molecules in unit time, if it moved with constant speed c. It is 
thereby assumed that there are in unit volume n\ mj-molecules, all of which move with the same 
velocity cj but with the velocity directions equally distributed over all possible directions in space. The 
integration yields 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



(65) 


7T(T 2 ni , 2 


V = 


V = 


3c 


(ci + 3c) for Ci < c 


7ro- z ni 2 


3ci 


(c 4* 3ci) for ci > c. 


If moreover the mi-molecules are identical with the ///-molecules, there being in all n of them in unit 
volume, and furthermore c =c\, and s is the diameter of the molecules, then one obtains for the number 
of collisions that one molecule experiences with identical ones of the same velocity moving in all 
directions, in unit time, the value 




4 

-xnA, 


The mean path (from one collision to the next) will be 




3 


3 

4 


X 


r* 


This is the value calculated by Clausius for the mean free path; it differs numerically somewhat from 
that derived in the text, which was calculated by Maxwell. [R. Clausius, Ann. Physik [2] 105, 239 
(1859); J. C. Maxwell, Phil. Mag. [4] 19, 19 (1860); Clausius defended his original value in a note in 
Phil. Mag. [4] 19, 434 (1860). Maxwell did not bother to give a detailed proof of his own result, but this 
was done by W. D. Niven in Maxwell’s Scientific Papers , Vol. I, p. 387. See S. G. Brash, Amer. J. Phys. 
30, 271 (1962); Bernstein, Isis 54, 206, (1963).—T R .] 

If one has in unit volume n molecules with diameter s and n\ with diameter sj =2o - s, and if all n of 
the former move with the same velocity c, while all n\ of the latter move with a different velocity c \, 
distributed uniformly in all directions in space, then one of the n molecules experiences v'+v" collisions, 
and its mean path is: 


( 68 ) 


X' = 


3c 2 


v' + v" 4t n$ 2 c 2 + 7r<r 2 fti(c 2 -(- 3c 2 ) 

3cci 

47rns 2 cci -f 7rcr 2 ni (c 2 + 3c?) 


for Ci < c 
for ci > c. 


1 Burbury, Nature 51, 78 (1894). See also Boltzmann, Weitere Bermerkungen liber Wurmetheorie, 
Wien. Ber. 78 (June 1878), third-to-last and next-to-last pages. 

2 Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen iiber Warmetheorie, 14th lecture, §2, p. 145, line 5. 

* See Part II, §77, for corrections to this section. For further discussion of opposite collisions, see R. 
C. To 1 man, The Principles of Statistical Mechanics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1938), 
Chapter 5. 

3 Cf. Wien. Ber. 94, 625 (1886); Stankevitsch, Ann. Physik [3] 29, 153 (1886). The fact that the 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 




angles z? and e also depend on the positions of c and c | does not weaken the force of the arguments in the 
text. One can first introduce in place of z?and e two angles which determine the absolute position of OK 
in space, then transform /, //,-■■ C\ into v, • • • e' and finally again introduce z? and e. 

* H. A. Lorentz, Wien. Ber. 95,115 (1887). 

4 One can present the proof given in the text in the following more analytical form. We shall 
certainly include all required values when we integrate the integrals in Equation (28) over all variables 
from - oo to + oo. Velocities that do not occur in the gas will not contribute to the integral, since for these 
velocities either/ or F must vanish. Hence the limits are constant and one obtains dffldt by 
differentiating with respect to t under the integral sign, which gives: 

This proof is somewhat shorter, but it appears to depend on certain mathematical conditions— 
permissibility of differentiation under the sign of integration, etc.—which affect only the ease of 
demonstrating the theorem and not its validity, since it is really a question of very large but not infinite 
numbers. The theorem was proved without introducing definite integrals in my paper in Wien. Ber. 66, 
Oct. 1872, Section II. 

5 See Schlomilch, Comp, derhoh. Analysis, Vol. 1, p. 437,3d ed. 

6 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 76 (Oct. 1877). 

* J. Loschmidt, Wien. Ber 73, 128, 366 (1876), 75, 287,76, 209 (1877). See also E. P. Culverwell, 
Phil. Mag. [5] 30, 95 (1890); Nature 51, 581 (1895). G. H. Bryan, B. A. Rep. 61, 85 (1891); Nature 52, 
29 (1895). G. J. Stoney, Phil. Mag. [5] 23, 544 (1887). J. Larmor, Nature 51,152 (1894). H. W. Watson, 
Nature 51,105 (1894). 

7 Cf. Nature 51,413 (Feb. 1895). 

* M. Planck, Mun. Ber. 24,391 (1895). 

8 It would be necessary to prove that the following cases are not possible: 1. Besides Maxwell’s law 
there is another molecular-disordered stationary distribution of states in which each velocity does not 
have the same probability as the opposite one; and a third distribution that transforms to the second one 
on reversing the velocities. 2. Besides the Maxwell (most probable) distribution—which does not in 
general transform to a molecular-ordered state on reversing velocities, since a molecular-ordered state is 
as probable as a disordered state—there exists a rare molecular-disordered stationary one, which on 
reversal transforms into a molecular-ordered one. 3. There are also stationary, molecular-ordered state 
distributions. 2 and 3 are also related to the case of the presence of external forces. The impossibility of 
case 3 cannot be proved from the minimum theorem, and probably cannot be proved in general without 
special conditions. Clearly the concept “molecular-disordered” is only a limiting case, which an 
originally molecular-ordered motion theoretically approaches only after an infinitely long time, though 
actually very quickly. 

* The subscript w stands for wahrscheinlichste, “most probable.” 

* Kundt and Warburg, Ann. Physik [2] 157,353 (1876). 

t Ramsay, Proc. R. S. London 58,81 (1895); Rayleigh and Ramsay, Phil. Trans. 186,187 (1896). 

9 If one substitutes in this formula the value 1 for fdu>, n for F\da>\, c for g, and 1 for dt, then he gets 

* An interesting application of Eq. (74) was made by Fiichtbauer and Hoffmann [Ann. Phys. [4] 43, 
96 (1914)] who tested Lorentz’s “collision broadening” theory of spectral lines for cesium atoms in a 
nitrogen discharge. They found that the Lorentz theory could not explain the observed line width except 
by assuming a collision rate 32 times greater than that calculated from Boltzmann's kinetic theory 
formula. This left the field open for Holtsmark’s theory based on the Stark effect [Holtsmark, Ann. 
Physik [4] 58,577(1919)]. 

* Boltzmann here ignores the “ergodic problem” concerning the validity of equating these averages, 
not because he is unaware of it but presumably because he does not wish to complicate the discussion of 
the elementary mean free path concept. It will be recalled that the basic postulate in this book is not the 
earlier so-called ergodic hypothesis—that the system will eventually pass through every set of values of 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



positions and momenta consistent with its energy—but rather the assumption that the gas is always 
molecular-disordered (§3). 

11 On substituting the values for v c and 1^, one easily sees that the quantity A c approaches the limit A,. 
(Eq. 60) with increasing c. In fact, when the molecule considered moves with a very large velocity, the 
others must behave as if they were at rest. The mean free path is of course unchanged when all the 
velocities are increased or decreased by the same amount; A therefore does not vary with temperature at 
constant density, provided the molecules can still be considered as negligibly deformable elastic bodies. 

* R. Clausius, Ann. Physik [2] 115, 1 (1862); see in particular p. 432 of the English translation in 
Phil. Mag. [4] 23(1862). 

12 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 96,905 (Oct. 1887). 

13 Tait, Trans. R. S. Edinburgh 33,74 (1886). 

14 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 84,45 (1881). 

15 Tait, Trans. R. S. Edinburgh 33,260 (1887). 

16 Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 156, 249 (1866); Scientific Papers 2,24. 

17 O. E. Meyer, Ann. Physik [2] 148, 226 (1873). 

18 Kundt and Warburg, Ann. Physik [2] 155, 539 (1875). 

19 Loschmidt, Wien. Ber. 52,395 (1865). 

* The subscript/stands for fliissig, “liquid” or “fluid.” 

2(1 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 66,218 (July 1872). 

* Wroblewsky, C. R. Paris 102,1010 (1886). 

21 L. Meyer, Ann. Chem. Pharm. 5 (Suppl.) 129 (1867). 

22 Stoney, Phil. Mag. [4] 36,132 (1868). 

23 Kelvin, Nature 1,551 (March 1870); Amer. J. Sci. 50, 38 (1870). 

24 Maxwell, Phil. Mag. [4] 46, 463 (1873); Scientific Papers 2,372. 

25 Van der Waals, Die Continuitat des Gasfdrmigen und Fliissigen Zustandes (Leipzig, 1881), Chap. 

10 . 

* Kundt and Warburg, Ann. Physik [2] 155, 337,525, 156, 177 (1875). 

26 Cf. O. E. Meyer, Die kinetische Theorie der Gase (Breslau: Maruschke & Berendt, 1877), p. 157 ff. 
[See also Hirschfelder, Curtiss, and Bird , Molecular Theory of Gases and Liquids (New York: Wiley, 
1954), Chap. 8 .—Tr.] 

27 Stefan, Wien. Ber. 65 (2) 339 (1872). 

* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 157,57 (1867); Scientific Papers 2,36. 
t Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 89,714 (1884). 

* Stefan, Wien. Ber. 65,45 (1872); 72,69 (1876). 

t Kundt and Warburg, Ann. Physik [2] 155, 337,525, 156, 177 (1875). 

28 O. E. Meyer, Die Kinetische Theorie der Gase, p. 194. From Winkelmann’s experiments Kutta 
found, according to an improved approximate formula, the value 0.000058 (Miinchn. Dissert. 1894; 
Ann. Physik [3] 54, 104 [1895]). 

29 Loschmidt, Wien. Ber. 61, 367 (1870); 62, 468 (1870). 

30 This follows from the manner in which g occurs in J* gbdb COS* 0 ( t4 ' §§18 and 21). 

* R. Clausius, Ann. Physik [2] 115, 1 (1862); Ann. Physik [3] 10, 92 (1880); Die Kinetische Theorie 
der Gase (Braunschweig: F. Vieweg, 1891), chap. ii. O. E. Meyer, Die Kinetische Theorie der Gase 
(Breslau, 1877). P. G. Tait, Proc. R. S. Edinburgh 33, 65, 251 (1886-1887); Phil. Mag. [5] 25, 172 
(1888); Trans. R. S. Edinburgh 35, 1029 (1890); Proc. R. S. Edinburgh 15, 225 (1889). See also J. H. 
Jeans, Phil. Mag. [6] 8, 700 (1904); The Dynamical Theory of Gases (London: Cambridge University 
Press, 1904). G. Jiiger, Wien. Ber. 102, 253 (1893), 105, 97 (1896), 108, 447 (1899), 109, 74 (1900), 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



127, 849 (1918). M. v. Smoluchowski, Rozprawy Wydzialu mat.-przyr. Ak. Um. (Krakowie) A46, 129 
(1906). 

* Maxwell, Phil. Mag. [4] 19, 19, 20, 21,33 (1860). 

t Clausius, Ann. Physik [2] 115, 1 (1862); Die Kinetische Theorie derGase, chap. iv. 

$ Meyer, Die Kinetische Theorie der Case (Breslau, 1877). 

** G. J. Stoney, Phil. Mag. [5] 1,177,305 (1876); 6,401 (1878); G. F. Fitzgerald, Sci. Trans. Dublin 
1, 57 (1878); O. Reynolds, Proc. R. S. London 28, 304 (1879); Phil. Trans. 170, 727 (1880); Maxwell, 
Phil. Trans. 170, 231 (1880); W. Sutherland, Phil. Mag. [5] 42, 373, 476 (1896), 44, 52 (1897). For 
summaries of later work see M. Knudsen, Kinetic Theory of Gases (London: Methuen, 1934); L. B. 
Loeb, The Kinetic Theory of Gases, 2d ed., (New York, 1934); E. H. Kennard, Kinetic Theory of Gases 
(New York, 1938). 

31 Kirchhoff, Voriesungen iiberdie Theorie der Wanne, ed. by Max Planck (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 
1894, p. 210). 

* Meyer, Die Kinetische Theorie der Case. 

32 Stefan, Wien. Ber. 65,323 (1872). 

33 P. G. Tait, Trans. R. S. Edinburgh 33,65,251 (1887); 36,257 (1889-1891). 

* As Boltzmann remarked, a satisfactory solution of these difficulties (regarding especially the 
dependence of the diffusion coefficient on concentration) could not be found until the perturbation of 
the velocity distribution was calculated. This was first done for general types of force laws by S. 
Chapman, Phil. Trans. A216, 279 (1916), A217, 115 (1917) and D. Enskog, Kinetische Theorie der 
Vorgduge in mdssig verdunnten Gasen (Uppsala: Almqvist and Wiksells, 1917). It was found that for 
elastic spheres and most other types of force law, there is a slight dependence on concentration, but not 
as great as that predicted by Meyer’s theory. More precise values of the numerical coefficients in the 
expressions for viscosity and thermal conduction were also obtained, and the relation between the 
temperature-dependence of these coefficients and the force law was clarified (see Rayleigh, Proc. R. S. 
London A66, 68 [1900] for a deduction of the temperature dependence by dimensional arguments). But 
the most significant new result of the Chapman-Enskog investigations was the prediction of thermal 
diffusion, which was then confirmed experimentally by Chapman and Dootson, Phil. Mag. [6] 33, 248 
(1917). For details of the calculations, comparisons with experiment, and a survey of the contributions 
of various scientists to the theory, see the monograph by S. Chapman and T. G. Cowling, The 
Mathematical Theory of Non-uniform Gases (London: Cambridge University Press, 2d ed., 1953). 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«ta£Zc.a/ 



CHAPTER II 


The molecules are centers of force. Consideration of external forces 

and visible motions of the gas. 

§15. Development of partial differential equations for f and F. 

We now pass to the consideration of the case when external forces act, and any arbitrary 
interaction may take place during collisions. In order to avoid the necessity of generalizing 
the formulas later on, we consider again a mixture of two gases, whose molecules have 
masses m and in \ respectively. We call them again, for brevity, m-molecules and in | - 
molecules respectively. Each molecule will be almost completely unaffected by the others 
during the greatest pail of its motion; only when two molecules come unusually close to 
each other will there be a significant change in the magnitude and direction of their 
velocities. Simultaneous interactions of three molecules occur so rarely that they can be 
disregarded. In order to achieve a precise exposition, we think of the molecules as material 
points. As long as the distance r of an m-molecule from an m \-molecule is greater than a 
specified very small distance a, no interaction takes place; however, as soon as r is smaller 
than a, the two molecules may exert on each other any force, whose intensity ifir) is a 
function of their distance of separation, and which is sufficient to produce a significant 
deviation from their rectilinear paths. As soon as r becomes equal to a we say that a 
collision begins. For the sake of simplicity we exclude those force laws which can cause 
the molecules to stick together, even though these are especially interesting since they may 
lead to a clarification of dissociation phenomena;* then after a short time, r will again be 
equal to a, and at this instant, which we call the end of the collision, the interaction ceases. 
For collisions of m-molecules or of mj -molecules with each other, we replace a and dir) 
by 5 and T(r), sq and v P 1 (r), respectively. The case of elastic spheres is now a special case 
obtained on assuming that the functions if), 4k and Tj represent repulsive forces whose 
intensities increase without li mit as soon as r becomes the least bit smaller than a, s, or sq, 
respectively. Everything presented up to now is therefore obtained as a special case of the 
equations to be developed here. In addition to these molecular forces, we now include 
those forces acting on the molecules that arise from external causes, called briefly external 
forces. We draw any fixed coordinate system in the gas. The components mX, mY, mZ of 
the external forces acting on any m-molecule should be independent of time and of the 
velocity components, and for all m-molecules they must be the same functions of the 
coordinates x, y, z of the molecule in question. X, Y, and Z are thus the so-called 
accelerating forces. The corresponding quantities for a molecule of the second kind will 
have the subscript 1. The external force can indeed vary from one place to another in the 
gas, but it should not vary markedly as long as the coordinates do not change by an amount 
large compared to the sphere of action (characterized by the lengths a, s, jq). Finally, we 
also do not exclude the case that the gas is in visible motion. A priori one can assume 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



neither that all directions of velocity are equally probable, nor that the velocity distribution 
or the number of molecules in unit volume are the same in all parts of the gas, nor that they 
are independent of time. 

We fix our attention on the parallelepiped representing all space points whose 
coordinates he between the l im its 

(97) x and x + dx, y and y + dy , z and z + dz. 

We set do = dxdydz, and we always call this parallelepiped the parallelepiped do. 

We assume, following the principles mentioned earlier, that this parallelepiped can be 
infinitesimal yet still contain many molecules. The velocity of each m-molecule that finds 
itself at time t in this parallelepiped shah be represented by a line starting at the origin, and 
the other end point C of this line will again be called the velocity point of the molecule. Its 
rectangular - coordinates are equal to the components f , rj, C of the velocity of the molecule 
in those coordinate directions. 

We now construct a second rectangular parallelepiped, which includes ah points whose 
coordinates he between the l im its 

(98) £ and £ + d£, v and 17 + drj, f and f + df. 

We set its volume equal to 


d£dr/df = du 

and we cah it the parallelepiped dco. The m-molecules that are in do at time t and whose 
velocity points he in d<o at the same time will again be cahed the specified molecules, or the 
“dn molecules.” Their number is clearly proportional to the product do-doj. Then all 
volume elements immediately adjacent to do find themselves subject to similar conditions, 
so that in a parallelepiped twice as large there will be twice as many molecules. We can 
therefore set this number equal to 

(99) dn = f(x, y, z, (, y, f, t)doda. 

Similarly the number of in \-molecules that satisfy the conditions (97) and (98) at time t will 
be: 


(100) dN = F(x, y,z,i f tj, f, t)dodo) = Fdodu, 

The two functions f and F completely characterize the state of motion, the mixing ratio, 
and the velocity distribution at ah places in the gas mixture. When they are given at the 
initial time t = 0 for all values of their arguments, and when the external forces, the 
molecular - forces, and the boundary conditions at the wall are also given, then the problem 
is completely determined, and it is completely solved as soon as one has found the values 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



of the functions f and F for all values of t. It is always assumed here that the state is 
molecular-disordered. We now have to find a partial differential equation for the change of 
the function f during a very short time. 

We shall allow a very short time dt to elapse, and during this time we keep the size and 
position of do and da> completely unchanged. The number of m-molecules that satisfy the 
conditions (97) and (98) at time t+dt is, according to Equation (99), 

dn' = }{x, y, 2 , i|, f, t + dt)dodu 

and the total increase experienced by dn during time dt is 

d} 

(101) dn' - dn = —dodudt, 

dt 

The number dn experiences an increase as a result of four different causes. 

1. All m-molecules whose velocity points he in dco move in the x-direction with velocity 
F, in the y-direction with velocity //, and in the z-direction with velocity C. 

Hence through the left of the side of the parallelepiped do facing the negative abscissa 
direction there will enter during time dt as many molecules satisfying the condition (98) as 
may be found, at the beginning of dt, in a parallelepiped of base dydz and height fdt, viz. 

t = $•/(*, y, 1, % f, t)dydzdodt 

molecules (cf. p. 33 and 88). Then, since the latter parallelepiped is infinitesimal and is 
infinitely near to do, the numbers £ and fdodco contained in the two parallelepipeds are 
proportional to the volumes fdydz.dt and do of the parallelepipeds. Likewise one finds, for 
the number of m-molecules that satisfy the condition (98) and go out through the opposite 
face of do during time dt, the value : 

£ f{x + dx , yz, £, ?j, f, t)dxdzdudt. 

By similar arguments for the four other sides of the parallelepiped, one finds that during 
time dt, 


/ d/ df df\ 

— (£ —b*? —bf — ) do- do)dt 
\ dx dy dz) 

more molecules satisfying (98) enter do than leave it. This is therefore the increase 
which dn experiences as a result of the motion of the molecules during time dt. 

2. As a result of the action of external forces, the velocity components of all the 
molecules change with time, and hence the velocity points of the molecules in do will 


84 _ 


ru*i.C- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ PA.ylic.1 



move. Some velocity points will leave dco, others will come in, and since we always 
include in the number chi only those molecules whose velocity points he in clco, cln will 
l ik ewise be changed for this reason. 

£, ij, and ( are the rectangular coordinates of the velocity point. Although this is only an 
imaginary point, still it moves like the molecule itself in space. Since X, Y, Z are the 
components of the accelerating force, we have: 



Thus ah the velocity points move with velocity X in the direction of the x-axis, with 
velocity Y in the direction of the y-axis, and with velocity Z along the "-axis, and one can 
employ completely similar arguments with respect to the motion of the velocity points 
through dco as for the motion of the molecules themselves through do. One finds that, out of 
the velocity points belonging to m-molecules in do, there will enter from the left of the 
surface of the parallelepiped clco parallel to the yz plane, in time dt, 

X’/(z, y, 2,1, v, {,t)dodiidtdt 

of them, while 

X-f(x, y,z,l + 4 if, 1, l)dodi\d$dt 

of them will go out through the opposite surface. If one employs similar considerations for 
the other four surfaces of the parallelepiped dco, he finds that in all 

/ df 8} 8f\ 

V,= -\X-+Y- + Z-)doiudt 

\ d£ 8y 8z) 

more velocity points of m-molecules (in do) enter dco than leave it. 

Since, as noted, a molecule is included in cln when it not only lies in do but has its 

velocity point in dco, this represents the increase of cln resulting from the motion of the 

velocity points. But those molecules that enter clo during the time dt, while during the same 
time dt their velocity points enter clco, are not taken account of, nor are those that enter clo 
while their velocity points leave dco during df, on the other hand, those that leave clo during 
dt while their velocity points enter or leave dco are counted in V 1 as well as in V 2 and are 
therefore counted twice. Yet this leads to no error, since the number of all these molecules 
is an in fin itesimal of order (dt) 2 . 

§16. Continuation. Discussion of the effects of collisions. 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i Ze i. 



3. Those of our dn molecules that undergo a collision during the time dt will clearly 
have in general different velocity components after the collision. Their velocity points will 
therefore be expelled, as it were, from the parallelepiped by the collision, and thrown into a 
completely different parallelepiped. The number cln will thereby be decreased. On the other 
hand, the velocity points of m-molecules in other parallelepipeds will be thrown into dco by 
collisions, and cln will thereby increase. It is now a question of finding this total increase V 3 
experienced by cln during time dt as a result of the collisions taking place between any m- 
molecules and any nq -molecules. 

For this purpose we shall fix our attention on a very small fraction of the total number v\ 
of collisions undergone by our dn molecules during time dl with in | -molecules. We 
construct a third parallelepiped which includes all points whose coordinates lie between the 
l im its 

(102) {1 and fi + $ 1 , t/i and rj i -f dif\ } fi an d fi + dfi* 

Its volume is (Iqj 1 = ' l constitutes the parallelepiped do)\ . By analogy with 

Equation (100), the number of in \ -molecules in clo whose velocity points lie in da>\ at time 
t is: 

(103) dN 1 — F \dodu\. 

F\ is an abbreviation for F(x, y, z, F \, i/\, (\). 

We now ask for the number v 2 of collisions that take place during dt between one of our 
dn m-molecules and an m | -molecule, such that before the collision the velocity point C | of 
the latter molecule lies in dco\. We again denote by C and Cj the velocity points of the two 
molecules before the collision, so that the lines OC and OCy drawn from the origin to C 
and Cj represent in magnitude and direction the velocities of the two molecules before the 
collision. The line C | C = g gives also the relative velocity of the m-molecule with respect 
to m \, in magnitude and direction; the number of collisions clearly depends only on the 
relative motion. Furthermore, we assume that a collision always occurs between an m- 
molecule and an in | -molecule as soon as they approach to a distance smaller than a. The 
problem of finding v 2 is thus reduced to the following purely geometrical question. In a 
parallelepiped do there arc dN\ = F\ cloda>\ points. We call them again the in | -points. 
Moreover, fclocko points (the m-points) move therein with velocity g in the direction C| C, 
which we call the direction g for short. v 2 is just equal to the number of times that an m- 
point comes so close to an m 1 -point that their distance is less than a. Naturally we assume a 
molecular-disordered, i.e., completely random, distribution of the m-points and the in | - 
points. In order not to have to consider those pairs of molecules that are interacting at the 
beginning or the end of the time dt, we assume that while clt is indeed very small, it is still 
large compared to the duration of a collision, just as clo is very small but still contains many 
molecules. 

In order to solve this purely geometrical problem, one can completely ignore the 
interaction of the molecules. The motion of the molecules during and after the collision will 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



of course depend on the law of this interaction. However, the collision frequency can be 
affected by this interaction only insofar as a molecule that has already collided once during 
dt may collide again, with its altered velocity, during the same interval dt, yet such effects 
would certainly be in finitesimals of order (dt) . 

We define a passage of an m-point by an in j -point as that instant of time when the 
distance between the points has its smallest value; thus m would pass through the plane 
through m 1 perpendicular to the direction g, if no interaction took place between the two 
molecules. Hence V 2 is equal to the number of passages of an m-point by an ni\ -point that 
occur during time dt, such that the smallest distance between the two molecules is less than 
a. In order to find this number, we draw through each in \ -point a plane E moving with m \ 
perpendicular to the direction g, and a line G parallel to this direction. As soon as an m- 
point crosses E, a passage takes place between it and the m\ -point. We draw through each 
m |-point a line m\X parallel to the positive abscissa direction and similarly directed. The 
half-plane bounded by G, which contains the latter line, cuts £ in the line m | H, which of 
course again contains each -point. Furthermore, we draw from each in \ -point in each of 
the planes E a line of length b, which forms an angle e with the line ni\H. All points of the 
plane E for which b and e he between the li mits 

(104) b and b + db, t and t + dt 

form a rectangle of surface area R = bdbd e. In Figure 6 the intersections of ah these lines 
with a sphere circumscribed about m \ are shown. The large circle (shown as an ellipse) lies 
in the plane E: the circular arc GXH lies in the half-plane defined above. In each of the 
planes E, an equal and identically situated rectangle will be found. We consider for the 
moment only those passages of a n m-point by an ni\ -point in which the first point 
penetrates one of the rectangles!?. 1 In their motion relative to mj, each of the m-points 
travels the distance gdt during time dt, in a direction perpendicular to the plane of all these 
rectangles. Therefore during time dt all those m-points that were initially in any of the 
parallelepipeds whose base is one of these rectangles and whose height is equal to gdt will 
go through the surface of one of these rectangles. (Cf. pp. 33, 38, and 113. The state should 
again be molecular-disordered.) The volume of each of these parallelepipeds is therefore 

II = bdbdtgdt , 

and since the number of m\ -points, and consequently the number of parallelepipeds, is 
equal to F \dodn>\, then the total volume of all the parallelepipeds is : 

£n = Fidoduigbdbdtdt. 

Since these volumes are infinitesimal, and lie infinitely close to the point with 
coordinates x, y, z, then by analogy with Equation (99) the number of m-points (i.e., m- 
molecules whose velocity points lie in dco) that are initially in the volumes LI I is equal to : 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



( 105 ) 


vi = n = JFidodudwigbdbddt. 



Fig. 6 


This is at the same time the number of m-points that pass an in | -point during time dt at a 
distance between b and b+db, in such a way that the angle e lies between e and e + de. 

By x >2 we mean the number of m-points that pass an m 1 -point at any distance less than a 
during dt. We find Vo by integrating the differential expression v z over e from 0 to 2n, and 
over b from 0 to a. Although the integration can easily be carried out, it is better for our 
purposes merely to indicate it. Hence we write: 

nh 

<j'b'j'F\'dbdi. 

j 

As we saw, vg is at the same time the number of collisions of our dn molecules during dt 
with m 1 -molecules whose velocity points he within dn>\. The number (earlier denoted by 
v |) of all collisions of our dn molecules during dt with in | -molecules is therefore found by 
integrating over the three variables . tj\. C\ whose differentials occur in d(u\. from - oo to 
+ oo ; we indicate this by a single integral sign, so that we obtain : 

/» r* 9 n 2r 

(107) v\ = do-dwdt I I I fFigbdwidbde. 

j J 0 d 0 

In each of these collisions, provided it is not merely a glancing one, the velocity point of 
the m-molecule involved is expelled from the parallelepiped dot, and hence dn decreases by 
one. 

In order to find out for how many m-molecules the velocity points lie in da) after a 
collision with an mj -molecule, we simply need to ask how many collisions occur in a 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i Ze i. 



manner just the opposite of that considered above. 

We shall consider again those collisions between m-molecules and m 1 -molecules, 
whose number was denoted by V 3 and is given by Equation (105). These are the co ll isions 
that occur in unit time in the volume element do in such a way that the following conditions 
are satisfied: 

1. The velocity components of the m-molecules and the m \ molecules lie between the 
li mits (98) and (102), respectively, before the interaction begins. 

2. We denote by b the closest distance of approach that would be attained if the 
molecules did not interact but retained the velocities they had before the collision. 
We denote by P and P\ the points at which they would be found at the instant when 
this smallest distance is realized, and by g the relative velocity before the interaction. 
Then b, and the angle between the two planes through g parallel to P\ P and to the 
abscissa axis, respectively, lie between the li mits (104) (cf. footnote 1). 

We call all these collisions, for short, direct collisions of the kind considered. For them 
the velocity components of the two molecules after the collision he between the l im its 



(' and £' + ij' and ij' + dif, and £' + 
ii and {/ + #1,1)1 and 1 j{ + rfiji/ f 1 and + df {. 


We denote by P^P the smallest distance to which the two molecules would approach if 
they always had the same velocities as those with which they separate from each other after 
the collision; and by g' the relative velocity after the collision. Thus for ah direct collisions 
the length of the segment P\P' and the angle of the planes through g' parallel to P\P' and 
to the abscissa axis, respectively, he between the l im its 

(109) V and h' + db\ t' and e' + dt 


All collisions that occur during time dt in the volume element do such that the values of 
the variables before the collision lie between the li mits (108) and (109) will be referred to as 
inverse collisions. For them the direction of g' is to be reversed. They clearly follow just the 
opposite course as the direct collisions, and after the collision the values of the variables he 
between the limits (98), (102), and (104). 

Since we assume that the force law acting in the cohisions is given, the values 
f', tf, vi, Si, V and e' of ah the variables after the colhsion can be 

calculated as functions of the values of the same variables P, rj, C, P \, tj \, C \, b, and e before 
the colhsion. Just as for the number of direct cohisions we obtained Equation (105), so one 
obtains for the number of inverse cohisions the value : 



7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



Here we have written: do/ for di'dr,'dt '; do>{ fr d{i dr,l df{ ; and /' and 

F{ for fix, y, z, *7\ C» 0 and F(«, 2 /, 2 , f i, n 1 , f 1,0 In order to be able to 
perform the integration, we must express all the variables as functions of /, //, C, f \ , r/\ , T|, 
b, and e. 

Later on we shall study explicitly the motion during the interaction (§21). Here we only 
note the following. The motion of m relative to m.\ (i.e., relative to three coordinate axes 
passing through m 1 and always parallel to the fixed coordinate axes, on which the 
quantities g, g',b,b', e and e' depend) we call the relative central motion. It is just the same 
central motion that one would obtain for the same force law by holding m \ fixed and letting 
m originally have the relative velocity g in a line that has the perpendicular distance b from 
m |. The latter material point must then have mass mm \ /(m+m \ ) instead of its actual mass, 
g' is nothing but the velocity of m at the end of the relative central motion ; b' is the 
perpendicular distance of the line described by m as it recedes from m \ at the end of the 
relative central motion. From the complete symmetry of any central motion it follows at 
once that g' = g, b' = b (cf. Figure 7, §21). The symmetry axis of the path of m in the 
relative central motion, which we call the line of apses, is the line connecting m \ with that 
point where m has, in its entire relative central motion, the smallest separation from m \. It 
plays the same role for central motion as does the line of centers for elastic collisions. The 
plane of relative central motion will be called the orbital plane. It contains the four lines g, 
g\ b, and b'. One sees that de = de' if he introduces for de the angle of rotation dd of the 
line of apses, so that /, C, /\. rft, C\ transform into V, f', U, *n', ti and 

then again introduces de' for dd; then the expression for de in terms of dd and the values 
of the variables before the collision must be exactly equal to that for de' in terms of dd and 
the values of the variables after the collision. 

The proof that f/co c/co r T d(j) i = (/id / has already been given for elastic 
spheres. Since we used there only the theorem of kinetic energy conservation and the 
theorem of conservation of motion of the center of mass in constructing the proof, and since 
these theorems are still valid here, the proof can be constructed in the same way ; in place 
of the line of centers one has of course to introduce the line of apses. Taking account of all 
these equations, one can also write : 

( 1 10) i 3 = fF[ dodudw\dtgbdbdt 

In Pail II we shall prove a general theorem, of which the law that here 

(110a) du'dulg'b'db'dt' = duduigbdbdt 

is only a special case. It is only to avoid the necessity of repeating here for a special case, as 
a useless digression, results that will be developed in general later on, that we have merely 
indicated briefly the proof of this theorem which is undoubtedly correct. 

As a result of each “inverse” collision, the number dn of m-molecules in the 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



parallelepiped do whose velocity points lie in the parallelepiped da> increases by one. The 
total increment q experienced by dn as a result of collisions of m-molecules with ni\- 
molecules is found by integrating over e from 0 to 2 rr, over b from 0 to a, and over , //|, 
C\ from - oo to + oo. We shall write the result of this integration in the form: 

<x /» 2x 

I j'Fl gbduidbdt. 

0 d 0 

Of course we cannot perform explicitly the integration with respect to b and e since the 
variables , //', C, and i.', vl, Si occurring in f and p* ' are functions of £, rj, (, f \, 

rji, C\ , b, and e, which cannot be computed until the force law is given. The difference q - 
v\ expresses the net increase of dn during time dt as a result of collisions of m-molecules 
with m |-molecules. It is therefore the total increase V 3 experienced by dn as a result of 
these collisions, and one has 


(112) 7 S = t, - x, = doMl fff (f'Fl - JFMbdudbdt. 

J J o j 0 

It is to be noted that in glancing collisions it may happen that the velocity point of the m- 
molecule lies in the parallelepiped da> both before and after the collision. These glancing 
collisions are counted in (105) and hence also in v 1; and are subtracted from V 3 , although 
in these collisions the velocity point of the m-molecule is not expelled from da> but is 
merely pushed from one place to another inside this parallelepiped. Yet this entails no error. 
It is precisely because the velocity point of the m-molecule also lies in dco after the co ll ision 
that these collisions are also counted in the expression ( 110 ) for i 3 and hence also in i\, and 
they are therefore added back to V 3 . 

These collisions are simply to be understood as collisions in which the velocity point of 
the m-molecule is actually expelled from dto at the beginning of the collision, but at the end 
of the collision it is thrown back into the same parallelepiped. Indeed, in Equation (112) we 
can extend the integration over b to values greater than a. We would thereby include in the 
number of passages in v l5 and exclude from those in V 3 , some passages in which no 
change of the velocities and directions actually occurred. But the number of these collisions 
will therefore be counted in the expression for q, and added back again to V 3 . Obviously 
the li mits of integration cannot be chosen differently in the two expressions, (107) for y | 
and (111) for/j. In Equation (112), where q -vj is united into a single integral, on the 
other hand, the integration over b can be extended as far as one wishes, since as soon as b 
is larger than a, the quantities {', v', S', fi', vl, Si will be identical to T, //, C, , 
7l , Ct; hence }'F{ =/F, and the integrand vanishes. This remark is important in all 
cases where the interaction of the molecules falls off gradually with increasing distance, so 
that no sharp boundary of the sphere of action can be specified. In such cases one can 


Uuc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



integrate in Equation (112) over b from 0 to oo, and since these l im its are permissible in all 
other cases, we shall retain them in the future. When no distance can be specified at which 
the interaction of two molecules drops off precisely to zero, we shall still assume of course 
that the interaction decreases so rapidly with increasing distance that the case where more 
than two molecules interact simultaneously can be neglected. 

The number of molecules that collide during dt but move in such a way that even 
without a collision they would have left do or their velocity points would have left dco is of 
course an infinitesimal quantity of order (dt) . 

4. The increment V 4 experienced by dn as a result of collisions of m-molecules with 
each other is found from Equation (112) by a simple permutation. One now uses <0, rft, C\ 
and £i, vi, ti for the velocity components of the other m-molecule before and after 
the collision, respectively, and one writes f\ and f { for 

/(*, y, *, h, in, h, 0 

and 

1 {x,y,z, 


Then: 



Vi = dodwdt 




Since now E 1 +V 2 +V 3 +V 4 is equal to the increment dn'-dn of dn during time dt, and 
this according to Equation (101) must be equal to (df/dt)dodoxlt, one obtains on substituting 
all the appropriate values and dividing by dodoxlt the following partial differential equation 
for the function /: 


(114) 


a/ df df df df a/ a/ 

-+i i +»-+r-+x-+f-+z i 

dt dx dy dz dx dy dz 

= [[* f (f'F! -JFJgbduM 

J J n J n 


0 0 
oo /»it 


+ 


f f * f ’(/'// -JfOgbduM. 

J J 0 * 0 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



Similarly one obtains for F the partial differential equation : 


dF i dF i dF i dF i dFi dFi dFi 

—+ ti —+ m —+ fi — + Xi—+ Fi—+ ft — 

M dx dy dz dx dy dz 



/* /» 00 /* It 



JFi)gbdudbdt 



- FF\)gbdu\(Mt 


Here we have used the abbreviation F' for F(x, y, z, F, if, C, t). 


§17. Time-derivatives of sums over all molecules in a region. 

Before we go further, we shall develop some general formulas useful in gas theory. Let 
cp be an arbitrary function of x, y, z, F, rj, C, t. The value obtained by substituting therein the 
actual coordinates and velocity components of a particular’ molecule at time t will be called 
the value of cp corresponding to that molecule at time t. The sum of all values of cp 
corresponding to all the m-molecules that he in the parallelepiped do and whose velocity 
points he in the parallelepiped da> at time t is obtained by multiplying cp by the number 
fdodto of those moleclules. We denote it by 

(116) = vjdodw. 

Similarly we choose for the second kind of gas any other arbitrary function <D> of.i', y, z, 
F, ip t, I and denote by 

(117) = $\F\dodui 

the sum of the values of <D> corresponding to all the in | -molecules lying in do whose 
velocity points he in dap. T | is the abbreviation for T(.i', y, z, F\ , rj\, C,\, t). 

If we keep do constant in these expressions and integrate with respect to dco and dap, 
over all possible values, then we obtain the expressions: 

(US) YcM = doj <pjdu and = dof 

which represent for the two gases the sums of all values of cp and <D>, respectively, that 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



correspond to all molecules in do at time t, without any restriction on the velocities. 

If we also integrate do over all volume elements of our gas, then we obtain the 
expressions: 

(119) L„,» f =JJ vfdodu and = // Vidatoi 


for the sums of all values of cp and <E> corresponding to all gas molecules of the first and 
second kinds, respectively. 

We shall now calculate the increment (d 'Ld, J uio ( pldt)dl experienced by the sum Y. c i 0K do ( P 
during an infin itesimal time dt, if there is no change in the two volume elements do and dco 
in size, shape, or position. According to the latter condition, which is expressed by the 
symbol d/dt, one should differentiate only with respect to the time. Since during the time 
interval dt, cp changes by (dcpldt)dt and / by (df/dt)dt, we obtain from Equation (116): 


d 

dt 



f d<p d}\ 

/ —b — ) dodu. 
, dt dt) 


When we substitute for dfldt its value from Equation (114), the above expression 
appears to be a sum of five terms, each of which has its own physical meaning. 
Accordingly we set: 


(120) —Yjia y io<p= [A 1 M+A 2 M+A 3 M+ Af,((p)]dod(j) f 

dt 


so that 


( 121 ) 


d<p 

AM = -/ 

dt 


corresponds to the effect of the explicit dependence of cp on f. 


( 122 ) 


, 5/ a/ a/' 

ox dy dz 


corresponds to the effect of the motion of the molecules; 

/ 

(123) AM = -f I-+F- + Z- 

\ a$ aij dz. 


94— 


PiLfLc. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



corresponds to the effect of external forces; 




corresponds to the effects of collisions of m-molecules with in |-molecules; and 




corresponds to the effect of collisions of m-molecules with each other. 

In order to find (d/dt) 'L (odo cp, we have simply to integrate (d/dt) 'L (jjdo ( P over a U 
possible values of dco. We shall again write : 

(126) = [B \W + + Bi(<p) -f Bi(<p) + B 6 (^)]do. 

dt 

One obtains each B by multiplying the corresponding A by dco = dfyhjdK/ and integrating 
over all these variables from - oo to + oo, which we indicate by a single integral sign. Thus: 

r dip 

(127) = -/<*» 

J dt 

r / d] d{ df\ 

(128) Bi(<p) = - I + + 

J \ dx dy dzj 

The third term which corresponds to the increase resulting from the action of 
external forces, can also be calculated in another way. Since we have to take account of all 
elements dco sooner or later, we need not compare th efdodto molecules whose velocity 
points lie in dco at the beginning of the time interval with those whose velocity points he in 
dco at the end of the same interval. Instead we may simply follow the foimer fdodco 
molecules in their motion during the interval dt. For each molecule the velocity components 
A, rj, C will change by Xdt, Ydt, Zclt respectively during this time interval. Hence for each 
molecule the corresponding value of cp changes, as a result of the action of the external 
forces, by the amount: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ TRk.y l i .Ze l 



( 129 ) 


+ 

The effect of the external forces thus amounts merely to the fact that each of these 
molecules provides this additional contribution to the sum 'L t0 ,do c P- The total increase 
Bi J (<p)dodt of this sum due to the action of external forces is therefore found by multiplying 
Equation (129) by fdodto and integrating over all values of dto, whereby one obtains : 

I* / dip dip d<p\ 

m * w -J(w , «r 

According to the method by which Equations (127) and (128) were found—i.e., by 
multiplying Equation (123) by dto and integrating over all values of this differential—one 
would obtain for the same quantity the value : 

(131) BiM = -| 7 x-+y-+z-W 

J \ d( drj df) 

Since X, Y, Z do not contain the variables f , tj, C and since moreover dto is merely an 
abbreviation for dfdijdt and the integration signs in Equations (130) and (131) signifiy 
integration over f, tj, (, from - oo to + oo, one sees easily that if he integrates by parts in the 
first term with respect to f, in the second with respect to tj, and in the third with respect to C, 
then the identity of the expressions (130) and (131) can be proved. For infin ite values of £, 
tj, or C, f must vanish, and the product ftp must also approach the l im it zero if X wdo tp is to 
have a meaning. 

We shall also compute directly the increase B^(tp)dodt experienced by the quantity 
E ( odo tp as a result of collisions of an m-molecule with an in \ -molecule. 

We again use the phrase “direct collisions” for all collisions that occur between an m- 
molecule and an in \ -molecule during time dt in the volume element do such that before the 
collision the variables lie between the li mits (98), (102), and (104). The total effect of each 
of these collisions is that an m-molecule loses the velocity components f, tj, C and acquires 
the components f, tj' , C. While it provides a term tp in X (jJcl() tp before the collision, it 
provides a term tp' in the same sum after the collision tp' is an abbreviation for tp(x, y, z, f, 

r\\ C> 0). 

This sum experiences an increase tp' - tp because of each of these collisions, and since 
according to Equation (105) the number of these direct collisions is given by v 3 , one 
obtains the total increase B^(tp)dodt experienced by the sum 'L (j)do tp as a result of co ll isions 
of an m-molecule with an m | -molecule when he integrates the product (tp' - (pYp, keeping 
do and dt constant, over all values of all the other differentials. One thus obtains: 



dip dip\ 

Y- + Z-)dt. 

drj df ) 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 






2f 

W " <p)JFigbdudw\dbde. 


One might just as well have calculated B^(ip) by considering those collisions between 
an m-molecule and an in | -molecule in which the vaiiables he between the limits (108) and 
(109) before the collision—i.e., those co ll isions which we have called “inverse.” For these, 
the value cp’ would correspond to the m-molecule before the collision, and the value cp 
afterwards. The sum X li)x[() cp would therefore decrease by {cp - cp') for each collision, and 
hence the total amount (cp - cp')i 3 , where i 3 is the number of inverse collisions as given by 
Equation (110). 

If we integrate over ah variables except do and dt, then we must again obtain the 
quantity denoted by B^(cp) dodt. However, we would then have : 

(133) B t M = ///;/: (<p - <p')f'F{ gbdudu { dbdt. 


We could set B^(cp) equal to the arithmetic mean of the two values found for it, and thus 
obtain. 


(134) B t M = i ///;/ b - If 1 ) {f FI - fFi)gbduduidbdt. 


Integration of Equation (124) would on the other hand lead to: 


(134a) BM = 



One easily sees that the possibility of all these different ways of expressing B^(cp) 
follows fron the two equations: 


Y <p'v 3 = Yj (pit, 

Yj ^3 = Y V v h 

where the summation signs express integration over all the differentials contained in 13 or in 
v 3 except for do and dt. These two equations follow directly; indeed, the summation over 
all V 3 or all z 3 includes all collisions, and cp and cp' are interchanged when one replaces the 
former sum by the latter, or conversely. 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



If one assumes in Equation (132) or (133) that the two molecules are identical, then : 





2r 

(<p' - {p)ffigbdwdwidbdt 




2 r 

(<p - *>')/'// gbduduidbdt. 


One may still consider the two colliding molecules to play the same role, so that one can 
interchange, in the last two formulae, the letters with subscript 1 and those with no 
subscript, without changing the value of B 5 (cp). Taking the arithmetic mean of the values of 
B 5 (cp) obtained by this peimutation, one gets from (135): 


(137) BM 



- <p - <pi)ff:gbdudwidbde f 


and from (136): 


( 138 ) BM 



+ fi - f - if l )j’j{ dbdwdvidbdt. 


The arithmetic mean of these two values is B 5 ((p) 



The same result is obtained when one considers the fact that, as a result of each co ll ision 
satisfying the conditions (98), (102), and (104), the value of cp for one of the colliding 
molecules changes from cp to cp\ while for the other it changes from <p\ to (p{, so that for 

each such collision the sum must increase by <p f ^ . Here cpy 

and ipi are abbreviations for cp(x, y, z, t], C, t) and <p(x, 1J, Z, , 7} \ , , /)'• 

Now 



of these collisions occur during dt. As a result of all these collisions, decreases by 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ “Pity. i .Zc. 1 



W + <p{ - <p - <p\)fjidbdoduduidbdedt. 

If we integrate over da>, doj \, db, and de, then we obtain the increase of Y. IjIC i 0 ( P resulting 
from collisions of m-molecules with each other, i.e., the quantity B 5 ((p)dodt. However, we 
must divide by 2, since we have counted each collision twice, and therefore we obtain 
Equation (137). Had we considered only the inverse collisions, then we would have 
l ik ewise obtained Equation (138). 

The special cases of Equation (136) obtained by assuming that cp is independent of the 
time and of the coordinates x, y, z will be treated in §20. 

We shall now set: 

(140) — = C\{(p) + C 2 W + C 3 W + Ci{<p) + C&M. 

dt 

Since in one has to integrate over all values of do and dco, this quantity is now a 

function only of time. Hence the use of the symbol d/dt is unnecessary, and we can express 
differentiation by the usual Latin letter d. 

Each C is obtained by multiplying the corresponding B by do and integrating over all 
volume elements, or else by multiplying the corresponding A by dodco and integrating over 
all do and doj. 

Since the total number of molecules remains unchanged, we can calculate the sum 
[C l ((p)+C 2 ((p) + C^((p)\dl —which includes all increments except those resulting from 
collisions—by simply following the fdodio molecules through their paths during time dt. 
During this time their coordinates increase by (dt, rjdt, (dt, and their velocity components 
by Xdt, Ydt, Zdt. Each of these molecules thus provides in the sum at time t the 

contribution 


<p(x, y , z } h ij, t)> 

and at time t+dt a contribution larger by the amount 

/ d<p dtp dtp dtp dtp dtp dtp' 

dtl —b{——hf— X —H Y—Z — 
\ dt dz dy dz d£ dij dj" 


and since the number of these molecules is equal to fdodoj, one has to multiply by this 
number and integrate over all differentials except dt. On dividing by dt, one obtains: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 



(141) 


C\((p) + Ci((p) + Ct(<p) 

C C /ty d<P dtp 

= /<i«U- + {- + ,- + f- 

JJ \dt dx dy dz 


dtp b^p dip 

+Z-+F-+Z- 
dy d[ 


This value represents the increase of Y. (jU) <p (divided by dt) arising from the three causes 
considered, and is also still correct when the walls of the container are in motion. If one 
wrote instead of C 2 (<^) simply the integral of the quantity B^Mdo, then he would consider 
the position of all the volume elements do to be fixed. Therefore when the walls are in 
motion one must add special terms to take account of the new parts of space that come into 
the volume of the gas or go out of it during dt. These correspond to the surface integrals 
that appear on partial integration of Equation (141) with respect to the coordinates. 

The two quantities C^(cp) and C^(cp) are obtained by multiplying the expressions B^icp) 
and B^(cp) by do and integrating over all volume elements of the space filled by the gas, 
whereby one obtains : 


(142) 




o ^ o 

gbdodwduidbde 

oo /* 2r 


CM = *//// / ^ + ?>-?' - Miffl - //>) 


0 ^ 0 

•gbdodwdwidbdt 


We have not considered here any effects due to motion of the walls of the container, 
since the molecules that would collide in volume elements entering the space considered 
because of such motion would provide terms only of order (dt) . 

Since the expression for the time derivatives of the quantities denoted by E^ W| t / 0 T [, 
'L,, n j 0 < b i and are constructed in just the same way, we shall not write them out. 

Since A, B , and C are only the increments of definite quantities resulting from specified 
causes, most authors express them as derivatives of those quantities. Maxwell* writes (3/30 
E ow / r /p, Kirchhoff t ( D/Dt ) E w . f / r /p for B$(<p) etc. As with all differentials, the A for a sum 


IQ 


'P*u 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



of two functions is equal to the A’s for the addends : 



Ak{<P + W = Ak (<p) + 

Bk(<p + W = Bk ((p) + BM, 
Ckiv + i) = CM + CM 


for any subscript k. These equations follow from the circumstance that cp occurs in all the 
integrals A, B, C only linearly. 


18. More general proof of the entropy theorem. Treatment of the equations 
corresponding to the stationary state. 


We shall now consider that special case when cp = If and <E> = IF, where l signifies the 
natural logarithm. Then 

Em ^ — If ~ J f fl/dodoif 

= ^ i = / / f llFidodui, 

and we shall set 

( 144 ) H = 2 ... IJ + IF , = J fflfdodu + / / FMn ■ 


One has according to equation (141): 


(145) 


cm + cm+cm = ff <w« 

af a/ a/ af a/ 

7 +(-+<i-+f- + x-+ 
to to 




If one integrates the fifth term in the parentheses with respect to £ the sixth with respect 
to tj and the last with respect to C, then he obtains zero each time, since X, Y, Z are not 
functions of F, rj, C, and f vanishes at the limits ( -oo, + oo ). If one integrates the second, 
third, and fourth terms with respect to x, y, and z, respectively, then he obtains an integral J 
over the total external surface of the gas. If dS is a surface element of this surface, and N is 
the outwardly directed velocity of an m-molecule, normal to dS, then J = WdSdcoNf 


IQ 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



One sees easily that Jdt represents the total number of K molecules that leave through 
the whole surface S, in excess of those that enter; while the first term on the right hand side 
of Equation (145) multiplied by dt, viz.. 


dt 



bj 

— dodw 
dt 


represents the total increase L experienced by the number of m-molecules lying within the 
surface S during time dt. 

It is to be understood that we do not consider the volume element do as fixed, but rather 
we allow it to move with the molecules. If the gas is surrounded by a vacuum, then the 
surface S and the molecules of different velocities will always move together. Hence no 
more molecules can go out through S than come in, so that L = K = 0. If the gas is enclosed 

'y 

by walls at rest, at which the molecules are reflected l ik e elastic spheres, then in the place 
of each molecule that arrives at a volume element do adjacent to the wall as a result of its 
motion toward the wall, there appears another identical molecule which simply has the sign 
of its component of velocity normal to the wall reversed. Hence L = K = 0. 

This argument will be valid as long as the wall is at rest, on account of the symmetry 
and equal probability of opposite motions (even though the action of the wall might be of 
some other kind) so long as the wall neither adds nor subtracts kinetic energy.^ In all these 
cases (d/dl) E (l ,. 0 If reduces to the terms C 4 (7/)+C 5 (//) furnished by the collisions, and 
Equations (140) and (142) yield: 

d V' 

-L,V 

dt 

=ifffTfm-wiWi - fhWoMuM* 



10 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Similarly: 



at 

■ ! ///n [/(FFO - l(F'Fl)](F'P! - FF^bdoiwiuM 
f 'OFi-VlWFl -fF^bdoMuM- 


Hence according to Equation (144): 


dH 

it 




gbdodwdw\dbdt 




/1 



gbdodwdvidbde 

-i in /;([«- ot')](/fi-/'f.') 

gbdodudwidbdi 


Like the integrals in Equation (33), these integrals are sums of terms none of which can 
be negative. Hence H can never increase. We could also have constructed the proof in the 
same way for any number of gases in any molecular-disordered initial distribution under the 
action of external forces. Thus the proof of the Clausius-Gibbs theorem—that at constant 
volume, excluding any addition of energy, the quantity H can only decrease—which was 
merely indicated at the conclusion of §8, has now been completely established for 
monatomic gases. 

The quantity dH/dt can vanish only when the integrand vanishes in all the integrals. For 
the stationary final state, however, which the gas mixture must reach if the walls are at rest, 
H cannot continue to decrease but must eventually become constant. Hence the integrands 


IQ 


~*Puii.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



in Equation (146) must vanish for all values of the variables, i.e., for all possible co ll isions 
the following three equations must hold : 


(147) //i = /'//, = F'Fl, }Fi =}'Fl. 

These functions cannot of course depend on the variable t in the equilibrium state; 
nevertheless, we shall not introduce this condition until later, and for the moment we look 
for solutions of Equations (147) that still depend on time. 

We first treat the last of these equations, and consider x, y, z, I constant; for the present 
we look only at the dependence of the functions f and F on the variable C, //, and C. We set 

f = W, y> *. i. i, f, 0 , *>' = W, y, z, v', f', t). 

so that the last of Equations (147) becomes 

(148) <f + *!-/- $i = 0. 

In any case the equations of conservation of kinetic energy and of the motion of the center 
of mass must not be violated in the collisions. One has therefore: 

Mt 2 + ij 2 + f 2 ) + Ml(£l + IJl + fl) 

+ / 2 + f/ 2 ) = 0, 

(149) - m(' - m^{ = 0 

mrj + m\t\[ - mrj' - m\iil = 0 

mf + mjfi - mf' - = 0. 

Clearly each of the eight vaiiables £, //, C, , t ]\, C \, b, and e can assume any of an 

infinite manifold of values, independently of the others; they are the so-called independent 
variables. The six quantities E, tl will be expressed as functions 

of the independent variables by six equations. 

All possible equations relating the twelve variables 

fi v, f, £i, % fi, *}', titVi'ffi 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 


( 150 ) 



can arise only from these six equations by eliminating b and e. However, by this 
el im ination only four equations can be obtained. Whence it follows that these four 
equations (149) are the only ones that can exist relating these twelve variables. Equations 
(147) and (148) must therefore hold for all values of each of the twelve variables that 
satisfy the four conditions (149). We note that these equations are completely symmetrical 
with respect to the three coordinate axes, so that one can permute the coordinates cyclically 
in each equation that follows from them, without endangering the validity of the equation. 

By the well-known method of undetermined multipliers we can make all twelve 
differentials of the twelve quantities (150) depend on each other, if we add to the total 
differential of Equation (148) the total differentials of the four equations (149) multiplied by 
four different factors A, B , C, D. These factors can always be chosen such that the 
coefficients of the total differentials vanish. Therefore we obtain: 


dt 



+ 2m 



" d<p 

-b 2m Arj 

_ dy 


+ m B 

+ mC 




ra$! 

-b 2mii4{i + m\B 

Ui 



• • • 



+ 2m M- + B 



• * i 



M>,' 

— + 2m, A({ + rthB 




With a suitable choice of the four factors, the coefficients of all twelve differentials will 
vanish; hence 


1 1 d$ i 

—— 4* — U + B = —■—b + # = 0 

m mi a£i 


IQ 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



or 


1 dip 1 d$i 

- 7 r~ 7 r =2A((i - () - 

m mi dfi 

Likewise it follows that 

1 ^ 1 d$i 

— 7-— = 2i%-q). 

m orj m i orji 

El im ination of A—which, as an undetermined factor, cannot in any case be set 
identically equal to zero—yields: 




1 Mi 

Mi dqj 


(fi - I). 


This equation contains, aside from the variables x, y, z, t, which we always consider 
constant, only the six completely independent variables f, tj, C, £\. >]], C \. If one takes the 
pai'tial derivative with respect to C, it follows that: 


3V 


(ii - q) 


dfy 

drjdf 


tti - {)• 


Further pai’tial differentiation of this equation with respect to rj\ gives: 

3V 

— = 0 . 

m 

Differentiation with respect to gives however: 

av 

— = o, 

a,ar 


and by cyclic permutation it follows that: 


IQ 


^ufuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



dfy 

— = 0 . 

dijdt] 


These three equations express the fact that cp must break into three summands, of which the 
first contains only T, the second only //, and the third only C. 

Similarly for the function <f> we obtain : 

Mi M, Mi 

(152) -=-=-= 0. 

dfadrn d(idfi dr/tf, 

Differentiation of Equation (151) with respect to £ gives: 

i av i df l a$>, 

(153) ( 11 - 1 ) = 

m d £ 2 m dij mi drj i 

since 

av 

— = o. 

d^drj 

Further differentiation of Equation (153) with respect to ?/ 1 gives however : 

l av l Mi 

■ —— ^ ■' ■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • 

m d ( 2 mi di}\ 

Since the two expressions on the left and right hand sides contain completely different 
variables, they can be equal only when both are independent of all variables and therefore 
are equal to a quantity independent of £ rj, (, fJi, (i- 

Since the y and z axes enter the equations to be solved in exactly the same way, one can 
l ik ewise prove the equation 


i av i m, 

m d( 2 m 1 dfj 

and also, that the last expression must be equal to 


IQ 


aV^lc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



1 dfy 

— ■ — — i • 

m drj 2 

Hence all these second derivatives are equal to one and the same quantity - 2 h, 

independent of f, rj, C, f \. ij\. and . From all these equations one easily draws the 

o 'y 

conclusion that cp must be equal to -hm(£ +t] +( ) plus a linear function of £, //, C. The 
coefficients of the latter can be written in such a form that one can write, without loss of 
generality, 


<P- - hm[(i - uY -f (v ~ »)* + (i - «>)’] + Ik 


where u, v, w and / 0 are new constants, which however l ik e h can still be functions of x, y, 
z, and t. Whence it follows that: 





and one obtains similarly 





The functions f and F must in any case have this form when the three equations (147) 
are satisfied for all values of the variables. One sees easily that, conversely, when f and F 
have this form, Equations (147) are in fact satisfied, provided only that u\ = u, rq = v, vrq = 
w. The quantities/o, Fq, u, v, w, h can be any functions of x, y, z, t. 

These functions are to be determined in such a way that the two equations 



and 


df d} df dj dj 

f + {- + 7- + l- + X- + 

dt dx dy dz 





dF dF dF dF dF 

—!{ — + >)—If—h Tfj —• + 
dt dx dy dz d% 


dF 3F 1 

Y l - + Z l - = 0 

dy df 


are satisfied; Equations (114) and (115) reduced to these, since their right hand sides vanish 
identically. 

The number of molecules at time 1 in do whose velocity points are in do> is: 

fdodo, = 


10 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



If one sets 

(158) { = f + «, i; = 5 + v, f = j + w, 


then he obtains just Equation (36), except that t), 3 re P' acc C *7> C 

From this one sees immediately that all the considerations attached to Equation (36) 
remain valid, except that all the gas molecules have a common progressive motion through 
space, whose velocity components are u, v, w. When u = U\, v = v 1; w = vtq, these are the 
components of the visible velocity with which the entire gas in do moves. If u, v, w differ 
fromz^, v|, vtq, respectively, then u, v, w would be the components of the velocity with 
which the gas of the first kind moves through the gas of the second kind in do. 

One can also see this in the following way. The number of m-molecules that lie in do at 
time t is : 


dn = do J fda = rfo/ 0 III e -hm[ ()*+ (f-«)*+ (f _w ). 


On substituting (158) it follows that: 

+00 


(159) dn = do/o 


Ilf 


e -hm ( ib\ = doja 


h 3 m 3 


If one multiplies this by m and divides by do, then he obtains the partial density of the 
first kind of gas : 



The mean value £ of the velocity component along the abscissa direction of all m- 
molecules in do is : 



This is clearly also the v-component of the velocity of the center of mass of the first kind 
of gas in do. If a surface element parallel to the yz plane moved with this velocity in the 
abscissa direction, an equal number of molecules of each kind would go through it, as 


IQ 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



follows directly from the concept of mean velocity. One can therefore call C the velocity 
with which the first kind of gas moves in the abscissa direction in do. 

On substituting (158), the numerator of Equation (161) is transformed to: 


dn = do 






One sees at once that the first teim vanishes, but that the second reduces to udn. Hence 

( 162 ) u = l 

Since J is the relative velocity of a gas molecule with respect to a surface element moving 
with velocity u, and f is an even function of JT, one sees at once that through each surface 
element _L to the v-axis, on the average as many molecules of the first kind go in as go out. 


19. Aerostatics. Entropy of a heavy gas whose motion does not violate 
Equations (147). 


On substituting the values (154), Equation (156) yields many solutions each of which 
describes a state of the gas when it is under the influence of specified external forces in a 
container at rest. The walls of the container satisfy the conditions employed in the 
derivation of Equation (146). Thus after the cessation of all heat conduction and diffusion 
phenomena, there is no persistent flow of heat into or out of the gas. We shall now look for 
these solutions. It is clear that none of the relevant quantities here can depend on time. 

Moreover, the equations u = v = w = u j = vy = viq = 0 must hold. Hence according to 
Equations (154) and (155): 





where / 0 , Fq and h can still be functions of the coordinates. If we substitute this into 
Equation (156), it follows that: 


11 . 


IPu+uc- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



/ dh dh dh \ 

- m({ 2 + 1} 2 + f 2 ) ({— + v — + f — ) 

\ dx dy dz/ 

+ - 2hmf a x'j + - 2hmfjj 

+ f(~ ~ 2/wn/ozj = 0. 

Since this equation must be valid for all values of f, ij, and C, we see that: 

dh dh dh 
- = - = - = 0 . 
dx dy dz 

Therefore h must be constant everywhere in space. 

Furthermore, the coefficients of T, //, C in the following terms must vanish separately. 
This can happen only when X, Y, and Z are the partial derivatives of one and the same 
function - x of the coordinates. If this condition is not satisfied, then the gas cannot in 
general be at rest. If it is satisfied, then: 

(164) /o = 

where a is an absolute constant, since in each volume element do the quantity/ 0 is constant, 
Equation (163) must have the same form as Equation (36). The velocity distribution in each 
volume element is therefore exactly the same as it would be if only one kind of gas were 
present, and the same external forces acted on an equal partial density of it. In other words, 
in spite of the action of the external forces, every direction in space is equally probable for 
the direction of motion of a molecule. Since the problem to which the equations treated at 
the beginning of §7 refer is only a special case of the problem treated here, we see that the 
assumption made there without proof, viz., that all directions of motion of a molecule are 
equally probable, has now been proved. Because of the identity of the forms of the 
equations, the equations developed in §7 and the conclusions drawn there from are now 
applicable without change to each volume element. Hence, again corresponding to 
Equation (44), the mean square velocity of an m-molecule is: 

_ 3 

c 2 =-, 

2 hm 


u 


' if^ufLC- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




i.e., under the action of external forces the mean kinetic energy of each molecule also 
remains the same; lik ewise for the second kind of gas, 



3 

2/wti 


and the constant h must have the same value for both kinds of gas. Let p be the partial 
density of the first kind of gas in do, and let p be the partial pressure which this kind of gas 
would exert on the wall if it were present alone in do', then according to Equations (160) 
and (164), 



Since furthermore dn/do is the number of molecules in unit volume, then according to 
Equation (6): 

me 2 ' dn pc 2 p 

3 do 3 

Hence pip has the same value everywhere in the gas. Since now the gas in each volume 
element has exactly the same properties as it would have at the same partial density and 
equal energy if no external forces acted, then just as in the latter case we have pip = rT. 
The gas constant r is, as earlier (§8), equal to \hmT, Since furthermore pip has the 
same value everywhere and is equal to rT, then the temperature is also the same 
everywhere in spite of the action of the external forces. 

For the second kind of gas one finds, completely independently of the presence of the 
first, 




F o = Ae- nm '*\ 


where 


Xi — — / {Xidx + Y4y + Zidz). 

The two gases therefore do not disturb each other in the equilibrium state. Thus in air 
completely at rest and in complete thermal equilibrium, each constituent of the air would 
form an atmosphere according to the laws given above, just as if the others were not 
present ; except that for each gas, h and therefore temperature must have the same value. 
According to Equation (165): 


11 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(1G7) P = poe-w-tx-w' = poc <*r*>' rJ \ 

and likewise according to (166), 

( 168 ) p = poe (x r x),,T . 

Here p, p, and x are the values of these quantities at any position with coordinates x, y, 
z, and p 0 , Pq, y {) are the values of the same quantities at any other place with coordinates 
x 0 , >’(), zq. These are the well known formulas of aerostatics (barometric height 
measurements). 

We shall now, following Bryan,* treat the following case which, although it does not 
occur in nature, is of theoretical interest. The two gases in the container will be separated 
by an arbitrary surface 6 j into two parts, a left part T | and a right part. To the right of the 
surface S 1 is a second surface S 2 , which lies everywhere very close ter S|. The space 
between .S'] and S 9 will be called t, and the space to the right of S 2 will be called T 2 . Let % 
be zero throughout T |, and let it have positive values between and S 2 , becoming infinite 
as one approaches S 2 . Thus an m-molecule experiences no force in T\ , but in t a force 
begins to act, pushing it away from S 2 toward Sj and becoming in fin ite if the molecule 
approaches S 2 . Conversely in T 2 no force acts on the in | -molecules; however, when these 
enter x, a force pushes them away from toward S 2 , and becomes in fin ite near S |. Thus 
■/1 is zero in T 2 , positive in t, and becomes infinite near S- 

If there are initially no m-molecules in T 2 , then none can ever get into T 2 \ if there are 
initially some m-molecules in T 2 , where no force acts on them, then each molecule that 
reaches the surface S 2 is expelled into T 1 and can never return. Hence we can assume in 
any case that the space T 2 contains no m-molecules, and likewise the space T\ contains no 
m-molecules. This illustrates the formula; for one has 

f = ^ f = ^g-AmiCef+^xi). 

In the space T \, ^ = 00 , hence F = 0; in T 2 , x = °°, hence /= 0. Also, Equation (167) 
gives the value zero for the partial density when y is infinite. This in both T\ and T 2 only 
pure gases are present; only in x where both y and y j are present does one find a mixture. 
Our formula gives theimal equilibrium only when h has the same value for both gases, 
which according to Equation (44) implies that the mean kinetic energy of a molecule must 
have the same value for both gases. This is exactly the same condition that we also found 
for the thermal equilibrium of two mixed gases. The mechanical conditions just discussed 
are of course somewhat different from those for two gases separated by a solid heat- 
conducting wall; but they have a certain similarity. We can imagine a third surface S 3 to the 
right of S 2 and everywhere near it. By an appropriate choice of y for three different kinds 
of gas, it can be arranged that molecules of the first kind are present only to the left of S 2 , 
those of the second kind only to the right of S 2 , and those of the third kind only between S| 
and S3. This third gas thus facilitates the heat exchange between the first and the second 


11 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



kinds; equality of mean kinetic energy for each kind of gas is then the condition of thermal 
equilibrium. Since experience shows that the condition of thermal equilibrium of two 
bodies is independent of the nature of the body that facilitates the heat exchange, then the 
assumption made in §7, that equality of mean kinetic energy is the condition of thermal 
equilibrium when the heat exchange takes place in some other way—e.g., through a solid 
wall separating the gases—is seen to be very probable. 

The solution of Equations (156) and (157) found in this section is the only one possible, 
provided that 


U = v = W = Ui = Vi = Wi = 0 

and that everything is independent of time. However, if one assumes that these quantities 
are different from zero, then each of these equations has many solutions, representing 
motions in which H does not decrease and hence the total entropy does not increase. One 
can have a gas mixture moving with constant velocity in some fixed direction in space. 
There are also many other solutions. One sees immediately that, if the wall of the container 
is an absolutely smooth surface of revolution, at which the molecules are reflected like 
elastic spheres, then 


d 

dt 



reduces to C^(lf) + C$(lf). Then entropy neither flows in nor out of the gas. For the 
stationary state we must have clH/dt = 0, hence Equations (147) and also (156) and (157) 
must hold. Such a possible stationary state consists however in a uniform rotation of the 
entire gas mixture around the axis of rotation of the container, as if the gas were a solid 
body. This state must certainly be represented by Equations (154) and (155). If the z-axis is 
the axis of rotation, then in this case 

u = U\ - - by, v = v\ = + bx. w = w\ = 0. 

One can then satisfy Equations (156) and (157); / 0 andF 0 will be functions of 
Vx 2 +y 2 : and will thus show the density variations created in the gas by centrifugal 

force. Other solutions of these equations, in which t can also occur explicitly, can also be 
found. 4 For example, there is one remarkable solution in which the gas flies outward from 
a center equally in all directions in such a manner that, first, there is no viscosity; and 
second, while the temperature of course drops as a result of the expansion, it drops equally 
everywhere in space so that no heat conduction occurs. We shall no longer concern 
ourselves with these matters, however; we shall only ask what value the quantity H has in 
all these cases. 

If we denote by H' the contribution to H for the first kind of gas, in Equation (144), 


11J_ 


Kuiuc- Ma£4cjvi(i£icaZ 



then: 


H' =J J doduflf. 

In all cases where Equation (147) is not violated, f is given by Equation (154). If one 
sets, in accordance with Equation (160), 


then: 



The integration over dco = d£di]dC can be carried out at once ; it is to be extended over 
all values of £, //, C from - oo to + oo and one obtains, on doing this: 



Now mdn = dm is the total mass of the first gas in the volume element. If we multiply 
Equation (169) by the mass M of a molecule of the standard gas (hydrogen), further by the 
gas constants of this gas, and finally by - 1, and if we again denote by // = m/M the 
molecular weight of our gas relative to the standard gas, then : 


C Rdm 

r / 

/hhn\ 

3 " 

-MKH' = - — 

i(pi 

/— 

1 7. 

J n 

. \ i 

/ 


Since according to Equations (44) and (51a), 




11 . 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



then: 


_ 3 3 R 

c 2 = — = — T 
2 hm p 


) = lipT-w) +1 



miw 


) 



the last logarithm is however a constant. Further, 



Rm 

M 


which is a constant in any case. If one combines all the constants, then it follows that: 



-MRH 


"/ 


Rdm 


Hp-'P' 2 ) + Const. 


According to Equation (58), however, this is just the sum of the entropies of all the 
masses in all the volume elements, and hence it is the total entropy of the first kind of gas, 
and one sees from Equation (144) that one simply adds the entropies of the two parts of the 
gas mixture. Neither a progressive motion of the gas nor the action of external forces has 
any effect on the entropy, as long as Equations (147) hold, and therefore the velocity 
distribution in each volume element is given by Equations (154) and (155). Thus we have 
completed the proof—which was given only incompletely in §8—that H is identical to the 
entropy, aside from a factor -RM which is constant for all gases, and an additive constant. 


§20. General form of the hydrodynamic equations. 

Before we pass to the consideration of further special cases, we shall develop some 
general formulas. Since u, v, w are the components of the velocity with which the first gas 
moves as a whole, one easily sees that during time dt there will flow through the two faces 
perpendicular to the abscissa axis of the elementary parallelepiped dxdydz the amounts 
pudydzdt and 


d{pu) 

pu +- dx 

dx 


dydzdt 


ii. 


jMcifte, 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ T^h.y.A.Lc.A. 



of gas, respectively. 

The sum of these quantities, added to the total amount of gas that flows through the 
other four faces, is the total increase 


dp 

—dxdydzdt 

dt 


of the amount of the first kind of gas in the parallelepiped; whence it follows that: 



dp d(pu) d(pv) d(pw) 


—h 

dt dx 


H-h 

dy 


dz 



This is the so-called continuity equation. If one imagines an equal parallelepiped 
doadxdydz moving in space at a velocity whose components are u, v, w, then during time 
dt the coordinates of the molecules contained therein will increase on the average by udt, 
vdt, and wdt. The average acceleration is therefore : 

du du du du 

— + U— + V — + W— • 

dt dx dy dz 

if 

YjM = pdxdydz 

is the total mass of these molecules, then their total momentum measured in the abscissa 
direction increases by 


/du du du du\ 

(172) — -f w — + t>— \-w— • pdxdydz, 

\dt dx dy dz] 

This increase in momentum will be in pail created by the external forces acting on the 
total gas mass Yjn , whose components are 

If only one kind of gas is present, the total momentum will not change, because of the 
conservation of the motion of the center of mass in collisions; however, it will be changed 
by entrances and exits of molecules in do. If we denote by tj, C the velocity components 


11 . 


^PuJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



of some molecule, and set (see Eq. [158]) £ == n_|_£, 7] — f = 

then t), J arc the components of motion of the molecule relative to the volume 

element do. If in unit volume there ar efdu) molecules whose velocity points lie within dco, 
then there will enter through the left of the side surface, facing the negative abscissa 
direction, of the parallelepiped do, during time dt, 

ifdudtdydz 


molecules, whose velocity points he within da>; these transport momentum 


mi(u + i)fdudtdydz 


into the parallelepiped. Since f“f+t 



so that the total momentum transported through the left side of the parallelepiped do is 


mdydzdtf ffdu = P, 

where the integration is to be extended over all volume elements doj. 
\fdoj is the total number of molecules in unit volume, hence 

mjfdos = p 

is the density of the gas. The quantity 

J ffdu 
Jfdu 

we call the mean value ^2 of ah £ 2 . Hence 

P = pfdydzdt. 


ii. 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Through the opposite face, momentum 



dydzdt 



will be transported. Similarly one finds that through the sides of do perpendicular - to the y- 
axis the amounts 


pfldxdzdt 

and 


- , )) , 
pW + —— dy 
9y . 


dxdzdt 


respectively of momentum in the abscissa direction will be transported. If one applies the 
same considerations to the last two sides, and finally sets the total increase (172) of 
momentum in the abscissa direction equal to the sum of the total momentum transported 
and the increase caused by the action of external forces, then it follows that: 

du du du\ 

+ w—b v — f- w — 
dx dy dz) 

d(Pt 8 ) d(pfl) d(ffl) 

dx dy dz 

with two similar equations for the y and z axes. These equations, as well as Equation (171), 
are only special cases of the general equation (126) and were derived from it by Maxwell 
and (following him) by Kirchhoff.* One can see this in the following way: 

Let ip be an arbitrary function of x, y, z„ 6, >h C 6 which may be equal to the function 
earlier denoted by <p or may be different from it. Then the average of all values taken by ip 
for all molecules in do at time t is : 




11 . 


"iPufuc- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ P4^.i.Zc.i. 


Further, 



mdof fdu = pdo 

is the total mass of the first gas contained in a volume element do, so that one therefore has 


( 175 ) mj tfdw = pty. 


Using this kind of notation, 


( 176 ) 


m Imo <p ~ mdoj ipfdw = pipdo, 


If one denotes by the mean value of ip in all volume elements of the gas, and by m 
the total mass of the first gas, then 


= _J Jifdodu 
* f Jfdodu 
in = to/ Jfdodu 


hence 




m r r 

—J J if/fdodoj. 


One may therefore write 


m= mi= =. = 

H = -lf+-lF = 3lf + 3ilF, 

m m i 

where and ^ ^ are the total numbers of molecules of the first and second kinds of gas, 
respectively. 

In the following, ip shall be a function only of /, tj, C, so that according to Equation 
(127): 


Bib) = 0. 

Since furthermore ip docs not contain the coordinates, then according to Equations (128) 
and (175) : 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ TRk.y l i .Zc. 1 



r a r dr dr 

= —m — I — I ripfdu 4— I jy/dw 

dzJ 


d(j>M d(m) dirt?) 

dx dy dz 

Since X, Y, Z are not functions of £, //, £ it follows from Equation (130) that: 


mB,{ip) 


dip 

= p X- 

L a? 


dip dip dip’ 

-+Y-+Z- . 

d% dt\ df. 


If one collects all these terms, then Equation (126) reduces in this special case to: 



aW + a(pfr) a(w) a(pM 

dt dx dy dz 

dp dp dp 1 r . 

- P I-+f- + Z- = m[5,W + 

. a$ 


From this equation Maxwell calculated the viscosity, diffusion, and heat conduction, 
and Kirchhoff therefore calls it the basic equation of the theory.* If one sets cp = 1, he 
obtains at once the continuity equation (171); for it follows from Equations (134) and (137) 
that 5 4 (1) = B 5 ( 1) = 0. Subtraction of the continuity equation, multiplied by cp, from (177) 
gives (using the substitution [158]) ; 5 

dp dp dp dp d(plp) 

p- + pu~ + p v~ + pw- + - 

dt dx dy dz dx 

( 178 ) ■ 

+ 

,= m[/W) + 


aW) aw) 

dy dz 


dip dw dip 

-P X-+Y-+Z- 
- d£ dij df 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i Ze i. 




If one has only one kind of gas, then B^icp) always vanishes. If one substitutes in the 
above equation : 




then 


<P + <P\ = + Vi 


by conservation of momentum. Hence B 5 ((p ) always vanishes. Further, 


_ dip 

r = i) = s = o, - 

and one obtains precisely Equation (173). 

If one denotes the six quantities 


dip dip 

= 1, — = — = 0 
d v d? 


Pt\ pi) 2 , P3 2 , Pl)i, Pli, Pfl) 


(179) by 


X„ Y„ Z„ Y, = Z„ Z, = X„ X, 

then Equation (173) transforms to: 


= Y 


t) 


(ISO) 


du du du du 

p( — + u — \-v — + w — 
dt dx dy dz , 

dX x dX y dX t 

+ —+ —+ —= pX; 

dx dy dz 


two similar equations are of course valid for the other two coordinate axes. 

One would obtain exactly the same equations in a case whose mechanical conditions are 
completely different from those just considered. Suppose that the molecules contained in 
each volume element have no motion except their common motion with velocity 
components u, v, w, but, as in a solid elastic body, when one constructs in the gas a surface 
element dS perpendicular to the abscissa axis, those molecules immediately to the left of dS 
(facing toward the negative abscissa direction) exert on those molecules immediately to the 
right of dS a force whose components are X x dS, X y dS, X z dS. Similarly, of course, there will 
be surface elements perpendicular to the other coordinates. 

Taking account of molecular forces, one would again obtain Equation (180) together 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ TRk.y l i .Zc. 1 



with the two analogous equations for the y and z axes. Each volume element in the gas has 
the same properties as if this force actually acted between the molecules on the left and 
those on the right of a surface element. The molecular motion produces the appearance of 
such a force; any force can be explained dynamically, as it were, in terms of the molecular 
motion in the gas. For example, when the molecules on the left of dS have larger velocities 
than those on the right, then the slower ones diffuse towards the left and the faster ones 
towards the right; the mean velocity of the molecules in a volume element to the right of dS 
will increase, and that of the molecules in a volume element to the left will decrease. The 
net effect is just the same as if the molecules on the left had exerted a force in the positive 
direction on the molecules on the right, and conversely. 

Thus molecular motion creates the appearance of a molecular force, and in an agitated 
gas the pressure is not exactly the same in all directions, nor is it always exactly normal to 
the surface. 

We now imagine that the gas is enclosed by a surface impenetrable to the molecules, 
and ask what force it exerts on the surface. Let dS be a surface element, and let its plane be 
perpendicular to the .waxis. Let the gas move with velocity components u, v, w at the place 
in question. If the motion of the gas itself experiences no sudden change, then during time 
dt there will collide with dS, Tfdwdt molecules whose velocity points he in dui, when £ 


is positive ; or they are reflected from it, when £ is negative. 

The total momentum in the abscissa direction transported by the reflected molecules is 
therefore JYldSdtJ^fdw — p^~dt- anc ' likewise that transported in the other 
directions is p^pdtdS an d p£\dt(lS X x , Y x , and Z x are the components of the force 


corresponding to unit surface which dS exerts on the gas, and which conversely the gas 
exerts on dS, as long as there is no discontinuity of motion at the surface. Likewise one can 
also find from the kinetic theory the well-known expression for the force acting on any 
arbitrarily directed surface element of the wall. 

In particular, when the gas is at rest in a container that is also at the rest, the pressure law 
follows directly from the principle of conservation of the motion of the center of gravity. If 
one applies this principle to a gas in a cylindrical container whose axis is parallel to the 
abscissa direction, then he finds that the pressure on the lateral surface of the container has 
no component in the abscissa direction. Application of the principle to the part of the gas 
between an end surface and a cross section shows that the pressure on the end surface is 
normal, and is equal to the momentum transported through unit cross section in the same 

direction; hence it must be equal to or also equal to MF+it’+r*) , since in 


this case 




Whenever Equations (147) are satisfied for all values of the variables, the number of 
molecules in the volume element do for which the components of the velocity relative to 
the total motion of the gas in the same volume lie between the limits £ and l+dt, t) 

and 

& anc * l+dl is equal to 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ TRk.y l i .Ze l 





where/o is a function only of x, y, and z. Therefore the probabihty of this relative motion is 
given by exactly the same formula as that which applies to the absolute velocities in a 
stationary gas. The only difference is that the visible motion, which has components u v, w, 
is included in the formula. This progressive motion of the gas as a whole obviously has no 
effect on its internal state, and hence no effect on the temperature and pressure of the gas, 
which are expressed in the same way in terms of £, J as they are in terms of A, //, C 
for the stationary gas. Hence, corresponding to our previous results, we have 

( 181 ) p = p? = p? = p?, « = fj=7 = o. 

As we shall see later, whenever there are no external forces the quantities 

( 182 ) 7-7, 7-7, 7-7, a, a 7 

rapidly approach zero as a result of the effect of collisions. When external forces hinder this 
process, these quantities still never differ significantly from zero as long as the external 
influences are not enormously sudden and violent. For the present, we assume as a fact of 
experience that in gases the noimal pressure is always nearly equal in all directions, and 
that tangential elastic forces are very small, so that Equations (181) are approximately true. 
Substitution of the values given by this equation into Equation (173) yields: 

/ du du du du \ dy 

(183) p( — -b u — b v — \- w — H- pX = 0 

\ dt dx dy dz) dx 

with two similar equations for the y and z axes. These are the well-known hydrodynamic 
equations without viscosity or heat conduction; they are to be regarded as first 
approximations. 

We now denote by <D> any function ofx, y, z„ and 1. ( d4>/dt)dt is the increase experienced 
by the value of this function at a point A fixed in space during time dt. Now let the point A 
move with a velocity (w, v, w) equal to the total velocity of the first kind of gas in the 
volume element do. During the time dt, A becomes A'. If one now substitutes for the value 
of the function ® at time t+dt at A' its value at time t at A, and divides the difference by the 
elapsed time, then he obtains 

d4> d<f> d<t> 

-b u - b v -b w — > 

dt dx dy dz 

which value we shall denote by d<P/dt for short. One can then write the continuity equation 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 




and the first of the hydrodynamic equations in the following form: 


(184) 

(185) 



/ du dv dw \ 

( —I-1-) 

\ dx fly flz) 

d(ptii) | fall) 

fly flz 


= 0 , 

- pX = 0. 


The latter equation reads, in first approximation : 

du dp 

(186) p T + --pX = 0. 

at flx 

The completely exact Equation (178) can however be written : 6 



df dM d(ppp) d(pi <p) 

P T" i-1-r- 

dt dx dy dz 


-p(l^+F^ + Z^) = m [B t W + B,(4 
\ of dr/ of / 


Now assume again that only one kind of gas is present. Then 

(187a) B,M = 0. 

Let cp be a complete function of T, //, C. Then 

nc 

(187b) ip(t, i),f) = f = « — + » — + » — + 

d| dp 3j 

where f is an abbreviation for^)(£ ? ^ g) and Q n denotes a function of u, v, w, 

containing no terms whose degree in u, v, w is lower than n. The coefficients of Q 2 are 
functions of b *), i- According to Equation (143), 


lu-TLe 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ lPl±y. i .Zc. 1 



(187c) 


Bi(ip) - Bj(\) + u8s^—j + 


Furthermore, 


dip dip df dQi 
d{ dll df dll 


hence 


(187d) 


dif df 

— = —b Qi etc. 
9( 


The coefficients of <2i are mean values of functions of ^ ^ and l. Similar equations 
follow for ^ 7]) an< ^ dfy' ^ one substitutes the values (187a-d) for cp, 

d<f/ dip/drj d ip/ d £ ^4^) and B 5 (cp) into Equation (187), then he obtains: 


df , 3(p|f) , d(pl)f) d(pif) 

p- + —- + —- mBi{ f) 

dt dx dy dz 


df /du \ / du df du df du df 

+ - P --X +p + + 

d% \ dt ) \dx d\ dy d$ dz dj 


d\ fdv \ (dv df dv df dv df 

+ -p -- Y ) + p( —J —+ —H —+ —J — 

dt) \dt / \dx dt) dy dt) dz dt) 


df /dw \ (dw df dw df dw df\ 

+ “P (“— z +p ( —j —+ —n —+ —j— =0. 

dj \ dt ) \dx dj dy d] dz dj 


In addition there are still terms containing first and higher powers of u, v, w. But these 
must vanish identically, since the internal state remains unchanged when one imparts a 


aV^lc. 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



constant velocity through space to the gas as a whole. This velocity can always be chosen 
such that u = v = w = 0. Referring to Equation (185), one can also write the last equation 
as: 


( 188 ) 


D ... rff aw) a(pjf) 

dt dx dy dz 


(dll df dll df dll d f' 

+ p( — J-1-1)-1- l — 

\dx d? dy dl dz dl 

%>)) a(pfj) 

H-1- 

dz 




dj\ dx 


dy 


(dv df dv df dv df' 

+ P ( —I- + —+ — 

\ dx dt) dy dt) dz dt) 

_ df/ d{pl t)) d(p^) d(pt)g) 

dt) \ dx dy dz 


(dw df dw df dw df’ 

+ p (— r—+ —+ —* — 

\dx dl dy dl dz dl 

_ df / d(p») d(pt)$) d(p$ 2 ) v 

dj\ dx d?/ dz 


If one sets 


here, then, since £ = Q, 


k^ie. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ !Pl±.y. i .Zc. 1 



(189) 


„ , n d ? , , 

mB S (f ! )=p —+ — + —— + 

at dx dy 


dz 


f _ du -du _ dv> 

+ 2p(f ! - + fl)- + {j- 

dx dy dz/ 


If one sets f = then 


(190) 


d(«) % J t)) a(pf? J ) a(pfi)j) 

«fli(n) = p—+—+—+ 


dt 


dx 


dy 


dz 


du _du —du —dv —dv _ dv 

+ p]r>) - + + >18- + ?- + a- + nr}> 

dx d?/ dz dx 5?/ dz 


which is exactly correct. 

If we now make the assumption that the state distribution corresponds approximately to 
Maxwell’s law, then Equations (181) are approximately correct. In addition, 

fi 

always rapidly approaches the Maxwellian distribution. Any mean value that vanishes for 
the latter distribution will therefore be quite small, as we shall see in the next section when 
we consider the effect of collisions explicitly. In this approximation, Equation (189) 
transforms (taking account of Eq. [186]) to 



. . . = Q, for as a result of collisions the distribution of states 


*(’) 

\p / du 

(191) mBi(f) = p —-— + 2 p - • 

dt dx 


We now construct similar equations for the y and z axes, add all three equations 
together, and recall that 

+ AjO) 2 ) + Bbil 2 ) - +1) 2 + 1 2 ) = 0 

since the total kinetic energy of two molecules is not changed by a collision. Thereby we 
obtain: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i .Ze l 




0 , 


it) 

\ p / /du dv dw\ 

3 p — -h 2p ( —I-1-) 

dt \dx by dz) 

or, using the continuity equation (184), 

4 -) 

\ p / 2 p dp dp 5 p dp 

3p-- - = 3--- - = 0. 

dt p dt dt p dt 

The integration gives, when one follows the gas mass in a volume element along its 
trajectory, pp~ 5/3 = constant, the well-known Poisson relation between pressure and 
density.* Conduction of heat is neglected here. In general we do not know anything at all 
about heat radiation. The ratio of specific heats is, in the case considered here, 5/3. Since 
the internal state of the gas is nearly the same as that of one in thermal equilibrium, moving 
with unifoim velocity components u, v, w, the Boyle-Charles law is valid. Thus p = r p T, 
hence Tp _5/3 = constant. Any compression is connected with an adiabatic temperature 
increase, and any expansion with a temperature decrease. 


* See Part II, chap. vi. 

1 b is the smallest possible distance of the two colliding molecules that could be attained if they 
moved without interaction in straight lines with the velocities they had before the collision. In other 
words, b is the line P\P, where P\ and P are the two points at which m\ and m would be found at the 
moment of their closest approach if there were no interaction. Thus e is the angle between the two 
planes through the direction of relative motion, one parallel to P\P and the other to the abscissa axis. 

* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 157,49 (1867). 

t Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen ilber die Theorie der Wcinne. 

$ See also Benndorff, Wien. Ber. 105,646 (1896) for calculations of Bftp) 

2 One sees at once that on this assumption a completely smooth flat wall would experience no 
resistance to its motion in a direction lying in its own plane. 

3 We understand as usual by S an arbitrary surface completely enclosing the gas, which can 
everywhere be taken as close to the walls as one wishes, and the integral over do extends only over all 
volume elements within this surface, while that over dS extends over all surface elements. We denote by 
K'dt the number of molecules that in time dt go out through the surface S in excess of those that come in; 
by L'dt, the decrease in the number of molecules lying within the surface S, so that we always have K' + 
L' =0. However, K' and L' are not identical with the quantities called K and L in the text, since in 
calculating (d/dt) X (JK q If we have followed each molecule along its path during time dt. The sum has 
therefore included the same molecules at the beginning and end of dt, and the difference of these two 
sums was divided by dt. We thus assume that the volume element do moves along with the molecules 
being considered, and that these same molecules always remain within the surface S. This is not the case 
as soon as S does not move with the molecules. We shall always sum over the same space element at the 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ TRk.y l i .Ze l 




beginning and end of dt, so that (d/dt) E (jJ 0 If is simply the expression given by Eq. (120), integrated 
over do and du>, in which of course If is to be substituted for cp. Then one obtains, on substituting the 
values (121-125): 


(145a) 






*1 

dri 


df' 


C4 (If) + C5 ( If) are the same quantities as before. The first term of the double integral is likewise the 
same as in Eq. (145), and therefore it is equal to K. Also, the last three terms can, by integrating by parts 
with respect to f, ij, (, be put in the same form as the corresponding terms inEq. (145). By direct 
integration of the fifth term with respect to f, the sixth with respect to //, and the seventh with respect to 

^ QB 

f, these can also be reduced to zero, since///' vanishes for infinite f, //, or ( (since must be 

finite). The sum of the second, third, and fourth terms of the double integral (145a) gives (since d(flf-f) 
= lfdf) on integrating over x, y, and z, the two surface integrals 

/ / dodSJN - j f dodSNfl} 


both to be extended over the surface S (which is now considered fixed). The first is the quantity 
previously denoted by K; the second represents, when it is multiplied by dt , the amount of the quantity H 
(defined by Eq. 144) that is carried into the surface S by the motion of the m-molecules, in excess of that 
carried out. There cannot be any creation of //inside the gas, any more than in the case considered in the 
text. The total amount of H contained within the surface S can only increase by an amount less than, or at 
most equal to, the amount of this quantity carried into the surface from without. 

The quantity -H, which is proportional to the entropy, will never be changed when visible motion is 
produced, or its direction is changed by external forces, or any other change occurs, as long as no 
molecular motion arises thereby through collisions. Even if initially one gas is in one half and another 
gas in the other half of the container, the entropy is not changed by their progressive motion. The 
mixing of course leads to a more probable state, but the velocity distribution is less probable, since each 
gas has an average motion in a particular direction. As soon as this average motion is annihilated by 
collisions (transformed into disordered molecular motion) then H decreases and the entropy increases. 

* Bryan and Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 103,1125 (1894). 

4 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 74,531 (1876). 

* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 157, 49 (1867); Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen iiber die Theorie der Wdnne 
(Leipzig, 1894). 

5 For a better understanding of §3 of the 15th lecture of Kirchhoff’s Vorlesungen we make the 
following remark: 

Since cp is a function only of A //, (, it transforms by the substitution (158) into a function of 

f -t-U, t) ~\~V, J + W, and therefore 

dtp dip dip 

d £ dll dt 

when in the last two derivatives <p is considered as a function of 'll ~}~ J, 1/ "l - 1), Therefore: 


13 . 


Pi£^ie 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



dp dip dp 

du dl 


Kirchhoff now denotes by (d<p)/(du) the derivatives obtained by leaving the quantities u, v, w, 
explicitly in *>(w+jr, v-l-1), w +1) and taking partial derivatives with respect to u, holding 
constant the mean values of the coefficients containing £, t), these coefficients do not need to be 
considered as functions of u, v, w, or their derivatives with respect to the coordinates. Nor are u, v, w to 
be regarded as functions of x, y, z- Then 


hence also 


dp 

du 


dp 

du 




dp 

di 


dp 

du 


The same holds of course for the other two coordinates. 

6 As Poincare (C. R. Paris 116,1017 [1893]) remarks, the derivatives of <p appearing in this equation 
may be functions only of £ r], ( or of y _J_ ^ ^ yjj _J_ j; they may not be arbitrary functions 

of tt> y, ^ j . In the following equations, however,^ is a function ofy^ j and 

is the expression obtained when one substitutes, in the expression (137) for <p, (p\, cp\ and 

pi, 4> j). Di> }i) ancl 50 for,h Since r'. >>'• 

i'. Jl , l)i , }l are given functions of fl, J, f,, (),, 

integrations over the latter 8 variables directly. 

* S. D. Poisson, Ann, chim. phys. 23,337 (1823). 


J 1 , b and e, one can carry out the 



13 , 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



CHAPTER III 


The molecules repel each other with a force inversely proportional to 

the fifth power of their distance. 


21. Integration of the terms resulting from collisions. 


We now consider cases where Equations (147) are not satisfied; in order to be able to 
calculate the values f, rf, C of the variables after the collision as functions of their values 
before the collision, we must now consider the collision process in more detail. 

We imagine a molecule of mass m (the m-molecule) to enter into collision, i.e., into 
interaction, with another molecule of mass in | (the ni\ -molecule). At any time t, let x, y, z, 
be the coordinates of the first and x\, y\, z\ those of the second molecule. The force that the 
two molecules exert on each other will be a repulsion in the direction of their line of centers 
r, whose intensity ifir) is a function of r. The equations of motion are: 


(191a) 





ii - x 

- } 

r 



x - X\ 
r 


with four similar equations for the other coordinate axes. 

In order to find the relative motion of the two molecules, we construct through m\ a 
coordinate system whose axes remain parallel to the fixed coordinate axes, but move 
parallel to themselves in such a manner that they always go through the in |-molecule, 
which is therefore at any time the origin of the second coordinate system. The coordinates 
of the m-molecule with respect to this second coordinate system, and thus its coordinates 
relative to the m 1 -molecule, are: 

a = x - xi f b = y - y h c = z - z\. 

If one substitutes 

mmi 1 1 1 

SO? =- f hence — = —\— > 

m + mi 2R m mi 

then he finds easily from Equations (191a) 



13 , 


“PiLh-d. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



with two similar equations for the other two coordinate axes. Since also we have 
r 2 = a 2+ b 2 + c 2, these equations represent just the central motion that the m- 
molecule would perform if its mass were W and it were repelled by the fixed in \ -molecule 
with the same force dir). Therefore we need to discuss only this latter central motion, 
which we call the relative central motion, or the central motion Z. It always takes place in 
the plane that includes ni\ and the initial velocity of m, which we have already called in 
§16 the orbital plane. The initial velocity of the m-molecule is considered to be that velocity 
which it has at a great distance from m\, before the collision, and which we already 
denoted by g in the same section. The line g drawn from the fixed in | -molecule in Figure 7 
will represent it in magnitude and direction. Its extension in the opposite direction is to be 
called ot 0. We specify the position of m at any time t by its distance r from in | and by the 
angle ft which r forms with m0. The work performed from the beginning of the co ll ision 
up to time t by the force dir) is: 



Fig. 7 



The integration can begin at r = oo since dir) = 0 for distances greater than the sphere of 
action. For the present we consider only the central motion Z of the m-molecule around the 
mass since we know that the actual motion of m relative to in \ is exactly equivalent. 
For this central motion Z, the kinetic energy before the collision is j 2’ but at time t it 
is: 




fdr\ l 

l\7i) + 



The equation of energy conservation for the central motion Z therefore reads: 


13 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(192) 


ski r /<fry 

2 Lw 




As in §16 we denote by b the smallest distance from m \ that the m-molecule would 
reach if there were no interaction—i.e., if both molecules moved in straight lines in the 
same directions as they did before the collisions. The orbit that the m-molecule describes 
during the central motion Z will therefore have the form of the curved line in Figure 7, 
which extends to infinity on both sides; both asymptotes have the same distance from in | 
namely b. Since before the collision the m-molecule has relative velocity g with respect to 
m | twice the area described by the radius vector r in unit time is equal to bg\ however, at 
time ! this must be equal to rdfS/dt. Hence, according to the law of areas, 

d8 

(193) r 1 — = bg. 

dt 


From this equation and Equation (192) it follows by well-known arguments that: 



where p = b/r. Since initially f J > and p are increasing, one must choose the positive sign of 
the square root until it vanishes. We now specialize the function xp in order to carry out the 
integration, by substituting: 


(194) i(r) = -4 • 

pn+1 

This is the repulsion between an m-molecule and an m 1 -molecule at distance r. At the 
same distance the repulsion between two m-molecules will be equal to frf|/r" +1 , while that 
between two /U|-molecules will be 1 • 

Then: 

K 2 R 2 K(m + m\)p n 

R = —> —=—-— • 

nr n 3 )lg 2 nmmig 2 b n 


n 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


If we substitute: 




b = a 


K(m + mi) 

L mmi0 2 


l/n 


then: 



In order to avoid all discussions about the value which the quantity under the square 
root sign may have, we assume that the force is always repulsive, so that dir) is always 
positive, and hence R and 2pP/na n are also positive. Since, according to Equation (193), /3 
always increases with time, and since the square root cannot change its sign without going 
through zero, we see that p must always increase up to the point when 



The smallest positive root of this equation we denote by p(a). For given n, it can be a 
function only of a. When n is positive, as we assume, then moreover p- + 2ff/na" can be 
equal to unity for only one positive value of p; hence Equation (196) has no other positive 
roots. For p = p(a), the moving body reaches that point A (the perihelion) of its orbit at 
which it is closest to m \, and at which its velocity is perpendicular to r. Since the quantity 
under the square root sign would become negative if p increased any further, and constant 
p corresponds to a circular orbit (which is impossible for a repulsive force), then p must 
again decrease; hence the root must change its sign. Because of the complete symmetry of 
the problem, a congruent branch of the curve will then be described, which is the mirror 
image of the pail described up to that point (with respect to a plane through ni\A 
perpendicular to the orbital plane). The angle between the radius vector p( a) = in \ A and 
the two asymptotic directions of the orbital curve is: 



It can also be computed as a function of a, as soon as n is given. 2& is the angle 


13 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



between the two asymptotes of the orbital curve, and therefore between the lines along 
which (in its motion relative to m\) the m-molecule approaches the m \-molecule before the 
collision and recedes from it after the collision. (The foimer line is opposite to the direction 
of motion of the molecule before the collision; the latter is in the same direction as its 
motion after the collision.) 

The angle between the two lines g and g', representing the directions of the relative 
velocities before and after the collision, is n -2 &. (These are the line DC and the extension 
of BD beyond D , in Figure 7.) 

When each of the two colliding molecules is an elastic sphere, only one modification is 
required in Figure 7. The sum of the two radii is m\D = a. The m-molecule moves relative 
to m | not in the curve BAC but rather in the broken line BDC\ for b < a, we have: 

b 

(198) d = arc sin — 

<7 


but for large values of b, &= tt/1. 

We now imagine, in Figure 8, a spherical surface of center in | and radius 1; it is 
intersected at G and G' by two lines drawn from m | parallel to g and g', and at X by a line 
through m 1 parallel to the fixed abscissa axis. Then the greatest circular arc GG' on this 
sphere is equal to rr -2d. 



The angle e has been defined in §16 in the following way. We draw through m \ a plane 


13 , 


Pi£^ie 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



E perpendicular tog. Further, we draw through m | G two half-planes, one of which 
contains the line b, and the other the positive abscissa axis. The first we called the orbital 
plane, e was then the angle of the two lines in which these two half planes intersected the 
plane E\ therefore also the angle of the two half-planes themselves, or also the angle of the 
two great circle arcs GX and GG’ on our sphere, where one is always supposed to 
understand by “great circle arc” the largest circular arc that is smaller than re. 

For the spherical triangle we have: 

(199) cos (G'X) = cos (GX) cos (GG 1 ) + sin (GX) sin (GG 1 ) cost. 

Now however: 

4 .GG'= * - 2 .J, g' cos (G'X) = 
g cos (GX) = {- h, g sin (GX) = vV - ft - h) 2 , 

where the positive sign of the root is to be taken, since GX < re. 

If we multiply Equation (199) by the magnitude g = g' of the relative velocity before or 
after the collision, then: 


- {/ = ft - ii) cos (ir - 29) + Vff 2 - ft - £i) 2 sin 29 cos c. 

If we multiply this equation by rri\ and add it to the equation 

+ Mi{i = + Wifi = (m + + mifi - m{, 


then: 

mi _ 

(200) ?*{+- [2fti- {) cos 2 1 ?+V 0 2 - ft - h) 2 sin 29 cos t ]. 

m+mi 

If only one kind of gas is present, then we have to put m\ = m, K = K\. Then: 

(201) (' = { + ({!- {) cos 2 # + \/g 2 - ((- (i) 2 sin d cos $ cos«. 

If we again denote £ - u, £ - u, rj - v ... by . . . then we obtain for 

£, t), l an equivalent equation: 

(202) j' = | + (u - j) cos 2 d + y/g 2 - (f - Ji) 2 sin t? cos cos t. 


13 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



In order to find , we have to integrate the quantity 

(f ' 2 + fi 2 - f 2 - 

over e from zero to 2jt. The entire orbital curve thereby remains unaltered. Then we have 
to integrate over b, keeping t, 9 J.ti, Pi. Ji constant. Then follows the integration 
over these quantities. Since the equations (201) and (202) are equivalent, we can obtain the 
expression for B 5 (£ 2 ) by simply writing f, tj, C for £ in Bdl 2 ) 

Leaving out the terms containing the first power of cos e, we get 

j' 2 - f = 2(jif - f) cos 2 d + (|i - j) 2 cos 4 d 

+ i [(7 2 “ (f - hY] sin 2 2d cos 2 e 

2 2 2 2 2 2 
= (f i - j) cos d - p sin d cos d 

+ (g 2 - p 2 ) sin 2 d cos 2 d cos 2 e. 

The components of the relative velocity with respect to the coordinate directions will be 
denoted by p, (J, T, so that 



P = (- h = f - fi 

q = n - 1)1 = t) - h 

t = f - fi = i ~ Ji. 


If one forms the expression 
permuting J and T l, it follows that: 



/2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
+ fi - f = 2 r(g - 3p ) sin d cos d. 


Since at the moment we are considering only one kind of gas, we must set m \ = m and 
K = K]_, and one has according to Equation (195): 




2k, V' 


g 2/n a. 


\ m / 


13 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Since t, t>, it ?i, >h, Ji and hence also g are considered constant in the integration 
over b and e, which now concerns us, it follows from this that: 





1 /» 

g~ 2ln da. 


b)bdbdt 

12Ki\ 2ln r * 

= 2ir(g 2 - 3p 2 ) (-) <r 4/n I sin 2 1 ? cos 2 dada. 

\ m J J o 

If one substitutes this in the expression B>(?) , then he obtains under the integral sign a 

factor g 1_ ( 4/ 'd; therefore since n must in any case be positive, there will in general be a 
negative or fractional power of g, which makes the integration very difficult. Only for n = 4 
does g drop out completely, and the integration becomes relatively easy. Since we have set 
the repulsion between two molecules equal to K/i Jl+] , this implies that two molecules repel 
each other with a force inversely as the fifth power of the distance. One then obtains, as we 
shall see, a law of dependence of the viscosity, diffusion, and theimal conduction 
coefficients on temperature which for compound gases (water vapor, carbon dioxide) 
appears to be in good agreement with experiment, though not for the most common gases 
(oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen). Other phenomena from which one could infer such a force 
law are not known. We certainly do not wish to assert that gas molecules actually act lik e 
point masses between which there is a repulsive force inversely proportional to the fifth 
power of the distance. Since it is here only a question of a mechanical model, we adopt this 
force law first introduced by Maxwell,* for which the calculation is easiest. 1 Moreover, 
with this law the repulsion increases so rapidly with decreasing distance that the motion of 
the molecules differs little from the motion of elastic spheres (aside from glancing 
collisions, which are of little importance). In order to show this, Maxwell" has published a 
very instructive figure* in which the paths of the centers of a number of molecules are 
shown, projected towards a fixed molecule with the same velocity, and repelled by various 
force laws. In order to compare these paths with the path that would be followed by elastic 
spheres, we can do the following: we imagine in Maxwell’s figure a marked circle whose 
center is S, and whose radius is Maxwell’s dotted line, so that its radius is the smallest 
distance to which the centers of the two molecules approach for each force law. Now if the 
molecules are elastic spheres, whose diameter is this smallest distance, and if we hold one 
of them fixed and throw the others at it (not all at the same time, of course, but one after 


Hence 


(205a) 


[TV+h 

J n J n 


” l “ 


13 , 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



another so they won’t interfere with each other) then Maxwell’s figure undergoes the 
following modification. The center of the fixed molecule is still S. The centers of the 
moving ones will come from the same directions as in Maxwell’s figure, but will be 
reflected like very small elastic spheres from the marked circle. 

One sees that the resulting paths for elastic spheres are indeed quantitatively different 
but not essentially qualitatively different from those following from the new Maxwellian 
law. 

In the following we set n = 4 with Maxwell. Then it follows from Equation (205a) that: 

f 2 ' ,2 ,2 2 2 / Kl A 2 

(206) (?' + tl - * - h)9bdbd* = A/-—(9* - 3p 2 ), 

Jo Y 2m g 

where 

/» 80 

(207) At = 4tt I sin 2 1 ? cos 2 a* da 

J 0 

is a pure number. 3 

According to Equation (197): 



The upper limit is the only positive value for which the quantity under the square root 
sign vanishes. & is therefore expressible in terms of a complete elliptic integral and a 
function of a. The integral (207) was evaluated by Maxwell by mechanical quadrature. He 
obtained the result:* 


(209) A* = 1-3682 • • • 

We now have, according to Equation (137), 

(210) Bi(| ! ) =jJJf j (f ! + h - l ~ hjfftfbdostkudbdt. 


14 


IRuJix*. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ “Ph-ySALcS. 


Substitution of (206) gives: 



(211) Bt(f ') -V|i.//V- 3p‘)//i<^i. 

We have: 

g — 3t> =i) + i)i + f + fi - 2{ - 2{i - 2t(i)i - 2!"fi + 4{{i 
= >) 2 + >)i + l + Ji - 2|* - 2fJ - 2l)p, - 2jji + 4f|i. 


In the integration over d<o\ we can take rj, C or y ? £ outside the integral sign, and 
similarly in the integration over da> we can take 7), //|, C] or ri. Pi, 8i outside the 
integral sign. According to Equation (175): 



Since, however, the two colliding molecules are equivalent—or, if one prefers, since 
one can give any labels to variables over which one integrates in a definite integral—we 
also have: 



and since y = l) = ^ = ()• wc have: 


(213) 


Btf) = 


2m 5 


dipV + f 2 - 2{ 2 - rv - M + 2H) 


j 2 -2f 2 ) = 

2m* 

K _ _ 

—AiP 2 (c 2 - 3f 2 ). 

2m* 


c = V? 2 +t) 2 +i 2 is the total velocity of a molecule relative to the average motion of 


14 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



all molecules in the volume element. 

The quantity b.(») is calculated by Maxwell by a coordinate transformation. We 
imagine new x and y axes placed in such a way that the old x and y axes are rotated by an 
angle X in the xy plane. We denote the corresponding quantities in the new coordinate 
system by capital letters: 

j = I cos X — $ sin X, 1) = 9 cos X + I sin X, 
p = $ cos X - 0 sin X etc. 

If we substitute these values in Equation (206), we obtain the same terms with factors of 
cos X, cos X sin X, and sin X. If we set X = 0, we see that the former must separately be 
equal; if we set X = nil, we see that the latter must l ik ewise separately be equal. Hence the 
terms multiplied by sin X cos X on the right-and left-hand sides of the equality sign must 
separately be equal. Setting them equal to each other, we obtain: 



Since the new coordinate axes are just as good as the old ones, one can again use lower¬ 
case letters instead of capitals. If one carries out the further integrations exactly as for 
Equation (206), it follows that: 

f 1 C C C* C u 

= - J j J J (?v + ii (i - n - fib) 

(214) ■gbff l du)daidbde 

§22. Relaxation time. Hydrodynamic equations corrected for viscosity. 
Calculation of B 5 using spherical functions. 

We now have to substitute this value into the general equation (187). We first consider a 
special, completely ideal case: a single kind of gas fills an infinite space. There are no 
external forces. The number of molecules in any one volume element do, whose velocity 
components lie between the limits / and / + d£, rj and rj + dr], C and C + d(, will at time t = 
0 be equal to /(T, rj, C, Q)dodfdi]dC, where the function/ is the same for all volume 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ ~Ph-y-&XjcS- 



elements. For any later time t, let this number be equal to/(T, //. C, t)dodfdi}dC. Since all 
volume elements are subjected to the same conditions, rj, C, t) also has the same value 
for all volume elements. If 




where a, h, u, v, w are constants, then we would have a gas in which Maxwell’s 
distribution holds, but which moves through space with constant velocity components u, v, 
w. Then we would have 


(S - «) 2 = (v - v)* = (f - v>y, ({- «) (»I - v) = (( - u) (f - w) 


= (7)-v)(f-u>)=0. and the distribution of states, seen from the viewpoint of an 

observer moving with the gas, would not change with time. >j, C, 0) is some other 

function of T, C, then at the initial time a velocity distribution differing from Maxwell’s, 
but still the same in each volume element, holds. This distribution changes with time, but 
the components of the visible motion of the gas 


- /{/<*<■> - Jnfdu - Itfd 

« = £ = T7T’ » = V = T—’ W = f = 


w 


ffd* 


J }du 


Jfd « 


naturally do not change with time, because of the conservation of the motion of the center 
of mass. If we again set £ — U = 7) — V = — W = fa then in general now 


f 2 - t) 2 , f 2 - i 2 , >) 2 - J 2 , P), n “d t)j 


differ from zero, and we ask ourselves how these quantities change with time. First, since 
nothing depends on x, y, or z, it follows that, from (188): 


(215) 


3f 

= f). 

dt 


If one now substitutes j OF then it follows with the help of Equations 

(213) and (214) that: 


df /Ki _ _ dp} /Ki _ 


Similarly, to the first of these equations, we have: 


14 


‘Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




and consequently 


/K, _ 


Since everything is independent of x, y, z, the differential quotients with respect to t are 
to be taken in the usual sense. Since furthermore all volume elements are equivalent, 
exactly as many molecules will flow in through each lateral surface as flow out through the 
opposite surface. The density p must therefore remain constant. Hence integration of these 
equations, using the index 0 to characterize the values at time zero, gives the results: 

f - t ) 2 = (f$ - 

Multiplication by p yields (recalling the notations [179]): 

X,-Y t = (Xl - 

Similar equations follow of course for the other coordinate axes. In the simple special 
case now considered, the difference in the normal pressure in two different directions (e.g., 
X x - Yy) and lik ewise the tangential force (e.g., X y ) simply decreases with increasing time in 
geometric progression. The time after which it becomes e times smaller is the same for all 
these quantities, and is equal to 


d{f - t) 2 ) 
dt 




1 /2m> 

u#VT, =T ' 

Maxwell* calls this the relaxation time. We shall see that it is very short. 

= Ptf 

but these quantities are still approximately equal. We shall therefore calculate their 
deviations from a quantity nearly equal to one of them. For this purpose we choose their 
arithmetic mean. Since, according to the assumptions necessary for the validity of 
Equations (181), this is equal to the quantity denoted by p, we shall again denote it by p, 
and therefore put 


We now return to the general case. In general we no longer have pj-2 




14 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 


(217) 


V = 7 (f - 1) 2 + f) = 7 C*. 

O U 


If we denote the right-hand side of Equation (189) by T and substitute the value (213) 
on the left-hand side for B*(t) , then it follows that: 


(218) 


_ - 1 /2m* 

c 2 - 3| ! = — \ —t. 

Ki 


We look for the small difference between the two quantities ^2 _ ^2 +»> 2 +i 2 and 
3r 2 This, and hence the right-hand side of the above Equation (218), are small first-order 

infinitesimal quantities; hence we need to retain on the right-hand side only the terms of the 
largest order of magnitude. The terms of smaller magnitude are also smaller than ^2 — 3t 2 
. In the expression for £ we can therefore set 


f>? = pt) ! = Pi 2 = p, ri = fj = uj = p = ti) 2 = fj 2 = 0. 


We saw that then (see Eq. [191]) 


r = p 


,p/ du 

— + 2p-. 
dt dx 


We wish to find j2 and thence X x and its dependence on the instantaneous state; we must 

therefore eliminate the term that contains a time-derivative. This is easy, since we find to 
the same degree of accuracy 


i V - 


2p / du dv dw \ 
3 \dx dy dz) 


P«.7ie 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 


Hence in first approximation 




2p / du dv dw\ 

r = —(2 -. 

3 \ dx dy dz / 


The following terms in the expression for X provide terms of smaller magnitude in 
c*-3r’. and therefore we can ignore them. Hence, according to Equation (218), 



therefore, since we set 


pc 2 = 3 P’ 




dv 



) 


_ 2p /2m 3 / du dv 

X, = pf = p - A —(2- 

9iip V KA dx dy 



We now wish to substitute the value (214) for B.(n) into Equation (190). On the 
right-hand side of this equation we can set p^2 __ p^2 — p^2 _ p for the same reason 
as before, and set the terms containing odd powers of£ ? ty, orj under the bar symbol 
equal to zero. We thereby obtain: 


(218a) 


p /2m 3 / dv du\ 

TiWiy) 


If one substitutes the abbreviation 



v /2m 3 

-{/— = pr = SR, 

U iP y K x 


14 


aV^lc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


then he obtains the following values: 



29?/ du dv dw\ 

^ 3 \ dx dy dz) ) 


29?/ dv du dw 

P-— 2- 

3 \ dy dx dz 


( 220 ) 


29?/ dw du dv\ 

^ 3 \ dz dx dy/' 


— I dv du\ 


_ (dw du\ 


__ (dv dw\ 

Y v = Z u = = - 9?( —+ —). 

\ dz dz I 


These equations are not completely exact, of course; however, they are one degree more 
exact than the equations X x = Y y = Z-=p, X y = Y x = X z = Z x - Y- = Z v = 0. Substitution of 
these values into the equations of motion (185) yields 


du dy 
P dt dx 


1 d (du dv dw 

9? Au +-( —H-h — 

3 dx\dx dy dz 


- pX = 0 


dv dy 

(221) \p~ + 7 " 

dt dy 


1 d (du dv dw' 

9 ? hv -)- 1 —|- 1 - 

3 dy\dx dy dz , 


- pF = 0 


dw dy 
P dt dz 


1 d (dll dv dw' 

9? A w + -— + — H - 

3 dz \ dx dy dy , 


- pZ = 0. 


Here ^ is considered constant, which is also not strictly correct, since ^ is a function 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



of temperature, and temperature changes during compression or rarefaction. However, 
since the actual temperature-dependence of ^ is still in doubt, and since the gas moves, in 
the case of less violent motions, almost like an incompressible fluid, so that there is no 
significant compression or rarefaction, this error is not important. Equations (221) are the 
well-known hydrodynamic equations corrected for viscosity.* These equations are satisfied 
and one obtains therefore a possible motion, when he sets p equal to a constant and X = Y = 
Z = 0, v = w = 0, and u = ay. Each layer of gas parallel to the xy plane moves with velocity 
ay in the x-direction. a is the velocity difference between two such layers at unit distance 
from each other. One of these layers must clearly be artificially held fixed, and another 
must be artificially maintained in a state of constant motion. The tangential force on unit 
surface of these layers has the value according to Equations (220), and ^ is therefore 
the quantity that we already called the viscosity coefficient in §12. From Equation (219) it 
follows that it is proportional to p/p and therefore to the absolute temperature, but at a given 
temperature it is independent of pressure and density. The latter statement is also true when 
the molecules are elastic spheres, but then ^ is proportional to the square root of the 
absolute temperature. Of course the mean free path cannot now be calculated from the 
numerical value of since the beginning and end of a collision are not sharply defined; 
this value can only provide a relation between the mass m of the molecule and the constant 
K | in the force law. It also permits the calculation of the relaxation time 7 - = /p. From 

the value of ^ for nitrogen used in § 12 , we find a relaxation time of about x = 2 • 10 _ 10 
sec at atmospheric pressure and 15°C. 

We now proceed to the calculation of B 6 ( |p 2 ) , etc. There is no difficulty 

in raising the expression ( 201 ) to the third power and then performing the integration, as we 
have done for the calculation of Btf) . The same coordinate transformation as before 

gives the values of «.( n*) and W) and the other 5 5 ’s, which contain as 
arguments of the function terms of third order in l), and J. B 6 (m) must be found by 
a spatial (3-dimensional) coordinate transformation. We shall adopt here another method 
which Maxwell, in his paper “On stresses in rarified gases ,” 4 indicated in bracketed notes 
added in the last months of his life. 

Any function p of the n’th degree in x, y, z, which satisfies the equation 

d 2 V d 2 fl d 2 p 

— + — + — = 0 

dx 2 dy 2 dz 2 

we call a (solid) spherical function of the n’th degree. If we substitute x = cos X, y = sin X 
cos v, c = sin X cos v, then it is transformed to a spherical surface function of the/z’th 
degree: p (n \X, v ). Further, we denote the coefficient of x” in the power series that arises 
from the expansion of 


14 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(222) (1 - 2ia + xV' 2 

by P in Hp) (zonal spherical function or spherical function of one argument). Now let G and 
G' be any two points on a spherical surface with polar coordinates X, v and X', v' and let G t 
be the symbol representing n + 1 arbitrary other points on the same spherical surface. Let 
the polar coordinates of G t be /.,■ and v- r Then 5 

»-2n+l 

(223) p w (X'/) = I cfcm 

i-1 

where is the cosine of the spherical angle G'G r The c,- are constant coefficients which 
can be determined. Now hold G and G, constant, while G' describes a circle such that the 
spherical angle GG' always remains constant. Its cosine is called /./. Finally, denote by e the 
angle between the great circle GG' and a fixed circle drawn through G. Then: 


| /» 2t t*2n+l q. /» 2t 

- p«(X', v')di = £ ~ P w (si)dt. 

2?r J o t-i 2tcJ o 


Furthermore: 6 


/, 


2r 


PM(si)d( = 2rP <%)•?<»>(*<), 


where ,v ; - is the cosine of the spherical angle GG,. One has therefore: 

2t i*2n+l 

pM(\',y , )d( = 2rP<*>(n)- E c,P<"»(«.)• 


f 

J o 


t -1 


As in Equation (223), the latter sum has the value p (n HX, v). One therefore obtains the 
formula: 7 




2r 

p<">(X', v')d« = 2tP M (n)-p M (\, v). 


We wish to show the application of this theorem to the calculation of B 5 in a special 
case, and in particular to calculate fis(jp) 

As before let{ f v , f, ( t , f|, fj, 1)', f', fri {{ be the 


14 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



velocity components of the two molecules before and after the collision; let 
X, h, U, hi, X', ti, lit %it I / bet h e same velocities relative to the 
average motion of all the m-molecules in the volume element, so that therefore 
£ — £ = 7 1 — X) = V * * * etc. where u, v, w are the components of the mean 

velocity of all m-molecules in the volume element. Further, let 

P = i I - lx, q = v - n= P - Pi, r = 1 - fi= J - )i, 

p'= r- ('.=i'- f'., q'=o'- »'.=pi', f = r- r.=f- if. 

be the components before and after the collision, respectively, of the velocities g and g f 
respectively of the molecule that has before the collision velocity components <^, //. ( 
relative to the other one that has velocity components rjC\ ■ The latter will again be 
called the m 1 -molecule, even though it actually has mass m. Finally, we denote by 

u=j+h=l'+?i, p=P+Pi=P'+Pi, >»=j+li=s'+ji 

twice the velocity components of the center of gravity of the system formed by the two 
colliding molecules, in its motion relative to the mean motion of all m-molecules in the 
volume element. These are equal before and after the collision. Then 

4f p = p q + uq + Dp + utt 

4fipi = p q - uq — Dp + u» 

4fp' = p'q' + uq' + Pp' + utt 

4{ipi = p'q' - uq' - Pp' + utt 


hence 

(225) 2(f'p' + {'ip/ - fp - fipi) = p'q' - pq. 

We now construct around m\ a sphere of radius 1. The lines through in \ parallel to the 
abscissa axis, representing the relative velocities g and g\ should intersect this sphere in the 
points X, G, and G' respectively (Fig. 8). X, v and a', v' are the polar coordinates of the 
points G and G' (i.e., X and X ' are the angles Xm | G and Xm | G', while v andv' are the 
angles made by the planes GmX and G'mX with the xy plane). Since p, Q, T and p / ^ 
q'^ ■£* are the projections of g and g' on the coordinate directions, we have 


15 


ifi-c. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



hence 


p = <7 cos X, q = g sin X cos v t r = g sin X sin v , 
p' = 0 cos X', q'= 0 sin X'cos /, v'= g sin X'sin v, 


pq = pV s) 0S »)> PV = ff 2 p (s) (X', /), 

where // 2 \A, v) is the spherical function cos X sin X cos v. Earlier we denoted by e the 
spherical-triangle angle XGG', and by tc - 2d the angle Gm\G'. Then, according to the 
theorem cited on spherical functions, 




= 2irp<»M •?%), 


where /j = cos(tt - 2d). On expanding Equation (222) one finds: 

P (2) {n) = in 2 - 2 = 2 cos 2 (2$) - \ = 1 - 6 sin 2 cos 2 


Hence 



+ = - irgY 2) {\ r) *6 sin 2 i> cos 2 t> 

= - 6 x|)qsin 2 0 cos 2 tf. 


Whence follows, by comparison with Equation (208), 



- fp - fipi)<2« = - U, 




- |p - (ith)gbffiduduidbd( 



15, 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



whence finally, according to Equation (212), we obtain: 



Since Equation (226) is valid for any spherical function of the second degree, it follows 
in general that: 


Btif'Kh »)] = - 34*« p ( »(f, 4 ) 

V 2m 6 

e.g. B t {f - If) = - 3 V J (d -if). 

V 2m 6 

When/is not a function ofv, y, z, andX = F = Z = 0 (and the effect of the wall 
vanishes) it follows from Equation (188) that 

(227) p-- = 

at 

Hence if f is any spherical function of the second degree, it follows in general that 

(228) | = f oe -jA„v5^r , )i i 

Therefore 

, , 1 /K 

,229) 

is the reciprocal of the relaxation time for all spherical functions of the second degree in 
J, tj, and £—i.e., the time in which, by the action of collisions, the mean value of that 
spherical function decreases to 1/e of its original value. This con fir ms our earlier result. 

We now pass to spherical functions of the third degree, e.g., r*-3nf By analogy 
with Equation (225) we find 


15, 


“Pul+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



C+ |C- 1 -6-8tfr + I^-»-!*)] 

= 3u(p' ! - q' 2 - p 2 + q 2 ) - 6#(p'q' - pq). 

If we denote the expression in brackets by <D>, then according to the theorem on spherical 
functions. 


/ >2 . , ,2 


f 
J 0 


2r 3ir 3 

= —(up 2 - uq 2 - 2bpq) — (,u 2 - 1). 


2 


2 


Now recall that /u 2 - 1 = - 4 sin 2 & cos 2 d. If one substitutes 

u=t+fi, »=P+Pi, P“I _ lii apphes Equation (212) and 

assumes that f=p = j=0. then it follows, on taking account of Equation (208), that 


(230) 


l r C C* C 

Bi(f - 3ft) 2 ) = — J J J J tyfigbdaduidbdi 

9 /Ki - — 3pp _ — 


The equality is vahd for any spherical function of the third degree. In general, 


(231) 


3pp 


P. l)] = ~ — 

2 myi 


The reciprocal of the relaxation time of a spherical function of the third degree is 
therefore 


3 _i 
2 9} ’ 

Any function of the third degree in J, ty, £ can be represented as a sum of spherical 
functions of the third degree and of the three functions 

*(f 2 +t} 2 +g 2 ), t)(* 2 +l? 2 -H 2 ), a(f 2 +t) 2 +i 2 ) each multi P lied by some 

constant. The latter three functions are the products of the spherical functions of the first 
degree by the expression (t 2 +9 2 +i 2 ) .The relaxation time of these latter products still 


15 


~*Puii.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



has to be found. 
We have 


2ti(i\)' + i) + n(n+h+it)-i(i+J + i) 


- f.(t! + + i!)] = «(p' 2 - p ! ) + #(pV - pq) + t»(pV - pt). 


If we denote the expression in brackets by T then we have 

r u ru d id 

*dt = + | t ( 2 P 2 - q 2 - d) + t pq + r P r 

J n 


6 


2 


2 J 


3ir(fi ! - 1). 


(231a) 


hence 


(232) 


/* « nit 

I gbdb I = — [u(2p 2 - q 2 - r 2 ) 
J o d o 2 

+ 3bpq + 3totjr]4 2 \/— 

V m 


#6fc(? 2 + P 2 + J 1 )] = — j j J J Vffigbduduidbde 
= - 2.v J ^ (F+tT ! +fT J )=~ (7+fT 2 +fT 2 ) • 

oWlji 


Therefore: 


2 vp 


(233) B.[(f 2 +P 2 +S 2 )p (1) (f, p, (f 2 +D ! +lV l) (l, 1, l)- 

3 mvt 

The reciprocal relaxation time of the product of (t’+P’+i’) by a spherical 
function of the first degree is 


15 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



2 p 

3 9J 


23. Heat conduction. Second method of approximate calculations. 


We now wish to set ^ in Equation (188) and retain only terms of the largest order 
of magnitude, thus neglecting the deviation of the state distribution from that which holds 
for a gas moving with constant velocity, so that r , =t)r J =p>)=o Thereby we 
obtain from Equation (188): 



Since the present approximate calculation is based on calculating the terms as if the 
Maxwell distribution were valid, if one writes X), J for //, C then he can apply 
Equation (49) provided he writes therein X}, $ in place of T, //, C. Hence 


Therefore 


p? = MfY = 3 — i pi* - p. 

P 




If one substitutes f=?» 2 then it follows using the same approximations that 





15 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Since now 



then 


Likewise 


hence 


—- f 

?y = f‘-i) , = -> 


V 

d\- 


mBfatf) = P 


dx 



mBii? - 3fl) ! ) = 0 



and according to Equations (230) and (232): 

f - 3jt) 2 = f - 3h 2 = 0 


(234) 


p(f + ft) 2 + f j 2 ) = - 



15 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Whence it follows that 



9 » 

f =- 


p 

d\- 


2 p dx 
similarly it follows that 


?! — 
— > M 2 


3 # 


V 
31 - 


= H - 


2 


fa 




j 2 i) = l)j 2 = 


3 9 } \p) 
2 p dy 





dz 


These values can be used to carry the approximate solution of Equations (189) and 
(190) one step further than has been done up to now. 

We next add to Equation (189) the analogous equations for they and z axes. Now we 
have B b (% 2 ) -\~B b (Xf 2 ) 4 -B b (l 2 ) =0 If one takes account of Equation (234) and 
the two equations obtained from it by cyclic permutation, as well as the continuity equation 
(184), and if one substitutes finally for pr2 = X Xf p Jt) = A ^ etc - the values given in 

Equation (220), it follows that: 


15 


Pu.^.e. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



i - 
3 p \p 

2 A 


v dp 15 

+_ 

p dt 4 


a 






2 /aw a^ au>\ 2 /ay aiy\ 2 /aw dwA 2 

3 \ax ay aj \a« ay/ ax/ 

/aw dv\ r 

+ -+- . 

\dy ax/J 


H ere Zp/ P = f +t) 2 +j 2 is the mean square velocity of thermal motion of a 

molecule in the volume element do. By thermal motion, we mean the motion of the 
molecule relative to the visible motion of the gas in do, the latter having velocity 
components u, v, w. pdo is the mass of all molecules in do. 



dt 


is therefore the increment of heat measured in mechanical units, i.e., the increase of the 
kinetic energy of theimal motion of all molecules contained in do during time dt. However, 
in this case the volume element do does not remain fixed in space; rather, during time dt it 
must experience that deformation and progressive motion which is required in order that 
each point in it may move with velocity components u, v, w. The same molecules therefore 
remain in do, aside from the exchanges effected by molecular motion. The amount of heat 
supplied by the latter will then be included in the calculation as that conducted and created 
by viscosity. 

From §8 we find that the amount of compressional work added to a gas during time dt is 
- pdkl = - pkdi 1/p). In our case, k = pdo and d( 1/p) = -(1 /pr)(dp/dt)dt. Hence the term 


15 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



V dp 

--dido 
p it 


in Equation (236) represents the work done by the external pressure p during dt on do, and 
hence the heat of compression produced by the pressure p. If one applies the same 
considerations by which the work of deformation of an elastic body is calculated, then he 
finds that the last teim with the factor ^ outside the differential sign in Equation (236), 
when it is multiplied by dodt, expresses the total work done by additional forces that must 
be added to the pressure in order to obtain the forces X x , X y ... given by Equations (220). 8 
This term therefore corresponds to the heat developed by viscosity. The next to last term, 
multiplied by the factor 15/4, must therefore represent (if one multiplies it by dodt) the heat 
introduced by heat conduction into the volume element. If we imagine the volume element 
to be a parallelepiped with edges dx, dy, dz, and draw the x-axis from left to right, the y-axis 
from back to front, and the z-axis from below to above, and denote by T the temperature, 
by ^ the coefficient of heat conductivity—then, according to the old Fourier theory of heat 
conduction (which is established by experiment, at least approximately) 

dT dT dT 

8 — dydzdt. 8 — dxdzdt and 8 — dxdydt 
dx dy dz 


are the quantities of heat that leave the parallelepiped on the left, in back, and below, 
respectively; 


and 


dT 

d . 

f dT\ 

i 


—+- 

8 — 

]dx 

dydzdt , 

dx 

dx 

( dx / 

i 

dT 

d , 

{ dT \ 

{ 1 


A A 

8 - 

)iy\ 

dxdzdt 


L dy dy\ dy! 


r dT d / dT 
8 — + - 8 — 
_ dz dz\ dz 


dz 


dxdydt 


are the quantities of heat that come in on the opposite sides. The total increment of heat 
caused by heat conduction into the parallelepiped do during time dt is therefore 


159 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




The term multiplied by 15/4 in Equation (236) is small. We can therefore neglect higher 
powers of this quantity, and treat the gas as if u, v, w were constant, while ty, 3 arc 
given by the Maxwell velocity distribution. Its internal state will then be determined only 
by Xj } J- and we can apply the formulae of §7 and §8 as if it were a gas at rest. If r is 
the gas constant of our gas, and R that of the normal gas, while m//i is the mass of a 
molecule of the latter, then according to Equation (52) we have 



R 

-T. 


Hence the term with the factor 15/4 in Equation (236), multiplied by dodt, has the 
following form: 


15 R[ B( BT\ B / BT\ B / BT 

4 it LcteV Bx / 3y\ dy ) Bz\ Bz j J 

This agrees completely with the empirical expression (237), if one sets 


dodt. 


(238) 


_ 15 fiiR 

4 7 


In order to make this independent of the thermal units used, we introduce instead of R 
the specific heat. Since we assume there is no intramolecular motion, the quantity /? in 
Equation (54) is zero; this equation then gives: 


hence 9 



7 * 




j 



5 

r x 


16 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



This value is 5/2 times as large as that given by Equation (93) and is about as much 
larger than the experimental values as the latter value is smaller than them. One should not 
expect quantitative agreement in cases where the assumptions made (e.g., // = 0) arc clearly 
not satisfied. Since R, ju, and hence also y v are constants, ft depends on temperature and 
pressure in the same way that ^ does. 

We have thus obtained all the formulae accepted by the so-called descriptive theory, 
except that a coefficient in the terms representing viscosity, which remains arbitrary in the 
descriptive theory, has here a particular’ value. In the descriptive theory 

(p-X,)-(3/29t) is equal to 


while here it is equal to 


du / du dv dw\ 

3-€(— + -+—) 

dx \dx dy dz) 


du (du dv dw 

3-i —|-1- 

dx \ dx dy dz 



i 


Therefore in the descriptive theory, in the expression for X x -p, the compression-dependent 
expression 


du dv dw 

—I-1- 

dx dy dz 

is multiplied by a coefficient that is independent of the coefficient of du/dx, while in our 
theory the latter coefficient is exactly three times as large as the former. The same holds for 
Y y and Z-. The latter coefficient must indeed here, as also in the descriptive theory, be twice 
the coefficient of 


dw dv 

- 1 - 

dy dz 

in the expression for K_, and thus it is twice the experimentally measurable viscosity 
coefficient.* 

In the light of our theory, all these formulas are approximate ones. There is no difficulty 
in carrying the approximation further. The equations thus extended to a higher degree of 
approximation would not necessarily agree with experiment everywhere, since many of our 
hypotheses are still arbitrary, but they will probably be useful guidelines when experiments 


16 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



are initiated. It will be difficult, but not completely hopeless, to test them by experiment, 
and it is to be expected that they will teach us new facts going beyond the old 
hydrodynamic equations. In order to indicate briefly how the approximation is to be carried 
further, we shall substitute in Equations (189) and (190) the values just found. From the 
latter, it follows by Equations (214, 235, 220, 52, 238) that 


(239a) 


9? 

Xy = Pl t) = - - 


drt) du du du 
P~-\-X y - b ^l/“ + Yt — 


p L dt 


dx 

dv 


dz 


dz 


dv dv dv 
+ X x —b X y —b X, — 
dx dy dz 

2 a /. dT\ 2 d / an a( P m) 

5 dx\ by) 5 by\ bx) bz J 


If one makes the substitution f=tw in Equation (188), he obtains only terms that 
vanish to the present degree of accuracy. One can therefore set 


mBi{ fi)}) = - 


3 P — 

n' m 


equal to zero, and therefore also 


b(m) 


dz 



ForX r , X y ... one is to substitute the values on the right side of Equation (220). Further, 
according to (218a), 


dp) 

dt 


d 

dt 


%(bv 
Lp Vto 



> 


and since one uses here only the terms of largest magnitude, 


lti 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



K d 
H- 

p dx 


d Iffl 
dt 


SR / dv du 


— ( ~+ ~ 

p\dx dy 


du dv dw 

—|-1- 

dx dy dz 


/I dp \ SR d /I dp \ 1 /dv bu\d SR 
\P dy ) p by\p dx / p\dx by) dt 


Similarly X x , Y z ... can be calculated. One would thus obtain some very complicated 
expressions, which would appear to Continental physicists as strange as did at first those in 
Maxwell’s electrical theory. Yet who knows whether many terms of these equations may 
not some day play an important role? Here we shall indicate only a special case already 
considered by Maxwell. 1. Let there be neither mass motion nor external forces acting on 
the gas; hence u=v = w= X = Y = Z = 0. 2. Suppose that some heat flow is taking place. 
Then the derivatives with respect to t will vanish, hence, according to Equation (239a), 


X,= Y, 


£91 
5 p 


a 

, 

Lai 


dy / dy\ dx I. 


In this special case, Equation (189) gives: 


391 

Y. + Z,-2X, = — 


. 9{pfrj) . a(pf’j) 


p l ai 

Therefore, taking account of Equations (235), 

2X, -Y,-Z, 


+ 


dy 


+ 


dz J 


691 


a / an a / ar\ a / ary 
5p L ail ai/ + ap\ ay/ + a^ \ dz ).I 


Id 


"‘Puh.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ P4^.i.Zc.i. 


hence since X x + Y y + Z_ = 3 p. 



x,= 


= v + 


29 ? 

r d i 

f dT 


3— 

? — 

bp 

L a/ 

v fa 

49 ? 

d / 

dT\ 

— 

- ? 


5 

fa\ 

fa / 


\ + LUE\±i l >T 


+-(«— 

dz\ dz 


since for stationary heat flow 

a / dT\ a /ar\ a/ ar 

- — + - ?— 
fa \ dx) dy \dy / dz\ dz 


= 0 . 


In this case we also have 


dX x dY x dZ s 

- 1 - 1 -= 0 ; 

dx dy dz 


therefore the volume elements in the interior of the gas are in equilibrium. But the 
customary view (cf. the last page of Kirchhoff s lectures on heat theory, already cited, 
where what is said otherwise about the old heat conduction theory is quite hue)—that in 
stationary heat flow the pressure can be everywhere equal—is shown to be false. The 
pressure varies from place to place, and at a given point it may be different directions, and 
not exactly noimal to the surface. 

Hence, if a solid body is completely surrounded by a heat-conducting gas, it will in 
general staid to move, since the pressure is not equal everywhere. Maxwell was quite 
correct in attributing the cause of radiometer phenomena to this effect.* Moreover, a gas in 
contact with a solid wall cannot remain at rest if the wall cannot exert a finite tangential 
force on the gas. These motions, created by pressure-differences inside the gas, are not to 
be confused with those which arise through the action of gravity, in consequence of the 
different density of warmer and colder gases. The latter motions canot play any role in the 
radiometer, since the axis of rotation is vertical. Also, our formulas do not apply to the latter 
motions, since we set X = Y = Z = 0. 


Up to now we have followed the ingenious methods devised by Maxwell, and applied 
by Kirchhoff and others. These methods permit one to avoid calculating the velocity 
distribution function/lx, y, z, f, //, C, t). There is another method which proceeds on the 
contrary from a calculation of this function. Although the latter method has not been used, I 
will say a few words about it here, since to calculate the entropy we need to know/. 

The stalling point is the general equation (114) in which, since we consider only one 
kind of gas, the next to last term vanishes. If we write, instead of the previously used 


16 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



constants a, h, u, v, w, 


k 

e a , —) uo, Vo, Wo, 
m 


then we know that the equation will be satisfied if we put 



j = ({-no) l + (r-'o) *+ ) *1 


as long as a, k, u 0 , v 0 , vv 0 are constants. Then « () , v 0 , vv () are the velocity components of the 
gas as a whole. 

Now let k, a, u 0 , v 0 , vv 0 be functions of v, y, z, t; their variations (i.e., their derivatives 
with respect to these variables) are assumed to be so small that only small correction terms 
need to be added to the expression (240) in order to satisfy Equation (114). We shall 
represent these corrections in the form of a power series. Since a, k, uq, vq, w’q are arbitrary, 
we can choose their values in such a way that the terms multiplied by rj, and C in the 
power series will vanish. This can therefore be done without any loss of generality. 
Moreover, we can choose the coefficients of , if, and C to be such that their sum is 
equal to zero. We introduce the variables 

(241) £o = { “ Mo, t)o = rj - t'o, Jo = J* “ Wo 


and put 



where 


(243) / (0) = e°“*W>+}o) 

and 

(244) b n + 622 *f ^33 = 0. 

The left side of Equation (114) is now transformed to 


Id 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



a/ a/ a/ a/ 

l = —b (fo + Mo) —b (t)o + fo) —b (jo + Wo) — 

dt 3x dy dz 

df df df 

+ 1 —+ Y— + Z-- 

3fo a>)o 5jo 

Since all the differential quotients are small, we can replace/by /°) in them. If we write 
Co f ° r ro+t>o+$o and d(/dt for d/dt + u 0 d/dx + v 0 d/dy + w () d/dz, then we find: 


f 1 d^a 2 d 0 k 

— I = —— Co — + fo 

/<°> it it 


+1) 0 


(245) 


da ( 
- 2k \ 




L dx \ dt 


- X 


1 

Oj 

© 

< doi'o Y 


aa 

(down \"l 

—b 

— -1 

+ Jo 

~2k \ 

-— z) 

Lay ' 

^ dt )\ 

L dz 

{ dt ). 


+ 2 k 


du 


2 C7U0 2 W O 2 


dv i 


dw 0 


/dv o 


Xo ——h t)o ——h go ——h t)o^ol — + — 

dx dlj dz \ dz dy 


/dwo duA /duo dv 0 \ 

2 / dk dk dk 

— Co fo—Mo —b Jo - 
\ dx dy dz , 


If one considers the coefficients b to be small, so that their products and squares may be 
ignored, then the right side of Equation (114) becomes 

r = f f f 7YW«e[6, 1 (f' 2 + rl) 

J J n J n 


, , /2 . /2 2 2 1 
+ &22O) + t)l ”1) “ t)i) • * * J. 


Id 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



In order to avoid an accumulation of too many indices, we shall drop the index zero 
from the quantities 3 unt ^ we S cl to Equation (246)—i.e., it will not be explicitly 

indicated that they arise by subtracting the quantities uq, vq, h’q rather than u, v, w from the 
corresponding quantities £, rj, £ Since and /1 0) it is Uq, v 0 , Wq and not u, v, w that 

are subtracted from £, ij, C, we find just as before that: 



Hence: 



The same result holds for the products £ } and t)$. Since now 



it follows that &ll^ 2 "h^22t) 2 + &333 2 can be represented as a sum of spherical 
functions of the second degree, and we have 


f f " f + bt® + M) 

J J 0 * 0 

3 / 2 Ki 

2 r m 2 


where the abbreviation ^ has been used for j '2 +r,' 2 

similar meanings. 

If one sets 


-i’-i? 9 and ^ have 


16 





v / /2 / /2 i S 

3£i = fc + fiCi -fc -fiCi 

S 0 l = l)C +>hCi - t)C ->)iCi 

~ M 2 . / / 2 2 2 

3 l = J C + J1C1 - JC - J1C1, 

then he finds likewise, according to the principles of the previous section (cf. Eq. [231a]): 

J gbdbj d(h = - A t ^ ~ [2(f* - {!)({- {,) 

- (F + fi)(>> ~ ^i) 1 - (f + Ii)(i ~ Ji)* 

+ 3(i> ! -i)!)(t-r,) + 3(} , -}!)(f+ri)]. 


f f f /i ( 0 , rfui(?MMf(cifi + C $1 + Cj3i) = 

J J o J 0 

- 2 A 2 p J ^ [(ciji + c 2 t } 2 + Cl]) c 2 

r 2m 3 


" 77 (ClJ + Cfl + C 3 J)], 

2k 


hence finally 


Id 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(246) 


f T /K\ (2 2 2 

r— = ~ 3A2P \/ — \ ^lljo + Mo + &33$0 

/< 0) V 2 m* { 

2 2 

+ Mojo + Mojo + Motyo + ~ Co(ciJo + C2P0 + Cajo) 

o 


5 


- — (C 1 X 0 + c 2 1)2 + C 3 Jo)^ • 

3fc 


Equation (114) must be satisfied identically. Hence expressions (245) and (246) must be 
equal for all values of xg, y 0 , and zq. The terms independent of xg, y 0 , zq must be equal; 
hence: 



Since by 1 + b 2 2 + ^33 + 0 , the terms of second order in Jo gi yc: 


16 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



(248) 


djc 2k/du Q dvo dwo\ 

——h ~(-1-1-) = 0, 

dt 3 \ dx dy dz ) 


In* 


bn = 


bn = 


2k 

9A2P 

2k 

9A2P 

2k 


2m 3 / dvo dw 0 duo\ 
Ki\dy ^ dz dx / 


2m 3 / duo dwt dv 0 

— (- 1 - 2 — 

Ki \ dx dz dy 


9A 2 p 


2m z /duo dv 0 dt^o\ 
\ dx cty 32 / 


623 = “ 


fcl3 - ~ 


fcl2=- 


2fc 

34 2 p 

2k 

3 A 2 P 

2fc 


2m l /dvo dwo 
Ki \ dz dy 


2m z /dwt dua\ 
K\ \ dx ^ dz / 


3 A 2 P 


2m z /duo 3v 0 \ 
Ki \ dy dx /’ 


Cl = 


1 

/2m 3 dfc 

2^4 2 P 

V Y { 7x 

1 

/2m 8 dfc 

2 A 2 P 


1 

/2m 3 3fc 


T 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ P4y.i.Lal 



Setting equal the terms containing first powers of Jo, Jo gives finally (taking 
account of the values found for cy, c 2 and C3): 

do^o 1 da 5 dk 

- X+ - 

dt 2 k dx 4 k 2 dx 

doVo 1 da 5 dk 

=- y + - 

dt 2 k dy 4 k 2 dy 

doWo 1 da 5 dk 

= - Z + -= 0. 

dt 2 k dz 4fc 2 dz 

Since by j + /> 2 2 + ^33 = 0, and each term containing an odd power of l}o or Jo 
vanishes on integration, it follows that (if one writes dat and cIojq for d£dijd( and 

dXodVfodio)- 

///>-///> 

Hence 




if we do not carry the approximation far enough to produce any correction to the density of 
the gas. Likewise: 


2, .(0) 


/ ($0 + tyo + Jo)/dw = / (f0 + t)o + Jo)/ dw0. 


Hence the mean square velocity of motion of the molecule relative to a point moving 


with velocity u () , v 0 , wq is equal to 3/2 k. 

On the other hand, uq, v 0 , h’ () are only approximately equal to the components of visible 
velocity of the gas in the volume element do. These components are actually defined as 


i, v, f . Now we have £ — Uq “I" £()' an< ^ f urt h ermore 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



_ _ /jo/du _ _ f ilctf dwo _ 5ci 

U ~ JJda ~ //<»><*«o “ ¥ ' 

If we denote the exact components V, l of the visible motion of the gas by u, v, w, 
and those of the motion of a molecule relative to the visible motion by t), j, then we 
obtain in this approximation 

5ci 5c 2 5 c 3 

u = Wo H— t v = To H-» w = ii>o H- 

2fc 2fc 2fc 


5ci 5c 2 5 c 3 

'-'•‘i" 

Furthermore, 

2 2 2 

P a a a P / a a a 25 Ci “j” C 2 ~i“ C 3 ^ 
p = -(f +>) +3)=-^o + l)o + Jo-- — 

/I 25 Ci + c 2 -f c 3 

_P \2fc _ 12 

One has therefore as a first approximation 

d 0 d pl 

U = Uq, V = Vq. W = Wq, — = —) k = — = — > 

A dt 2p 2 rT 


P /fc 3 \ /p 6 / 2 p -3/2 

a=i[«4/-]=im= 

\ wi\/8t 3 


H 


pT 


'-3/2 


r i 

Hence, according to Equation (247), 

pp" 6/2 = const, or pT _3/2 = const. 


my/Wr* 


17 


“PiLh-d. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



which is Poisson’s law. Furthermore, 


1 p da 5 dp 3 dp 1 dk 1 dp 1 dp 

2k p dx 2p dx 2 p dx k dx p dx p dx 

hence 

1 /da 5 dk\ 1 dp 
2 k\dx 2k dx) p dx 

Therefore Equations (249) yield: 

du 1 dp dv 1 dp dw dp 

-X + —- =-F + —- =-Z + — = 0. 

dt p dx dt p dy dt dz 


If we wish to carry the approximation one step further, we can make the above 
substitutions in the terms that are small, and thereby find: 



= - P 


/ lotyojdwo 

Jf w du> 



pb n 

4 k 2 


pbn 

2k 


V 

3i4 2 p 


'2m 3 /dv dw\ /dv dw\ 

Ki Vae ^ dy) \d* + dy) 


Likewise the rest of Equations (220) follow, and there is again no difficulty in extending 
the degree of approximation. 


§24. Entropy for the case when Equations (147) are not satisfied. Diffusion. 

Up to now we have calculated H only under the restrictive assumption that Equations 
(147) are satisfied. We now wish to calculate it under the general assumption that/is given 
by Equation (242), so that viscosity and heat conduction are present. We assume a simple 
gas. Then 


H = J J JlJdodu. 


173 _ 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 





Since/is given by Equation (242), it will be approximated by 


2 2 2 

If = a - k(i o + tyo + Jo) + 4 - — 

L 


where the expression in parenthesis in Equation (242) has been denoted by 1 +A. 

We now wish to construct the expression H for the gas contained in the volume element 
do. The value thus found will be multiplied by -RM and divided by do. Let this quantity be 

J = - RMjJlfdoi. 

Jdo is then the entropy of the gas contained in do. 

If we now substitute the above values for/ and If we obtain first a teim independent of 
the coefficients b and c This is the entropy (divided by do) that the gas in do would have if 
it had the same energy (heat) content and the same progressive motion in space, and 
obeyed the Maxwell velocity distribution law. It can be calculated just as in §19, and has, 
as shown there, the value 


Rp 

— 1 ( T* V 1 ) 

M 

apart from a constant. Second, we obtain terms linear in the coefficients b and c. These all 
vanish. Since 


/ toWo exp (- fc(f l + l)o + Jo*) I d «0 = o 

if one of the numbers a, b, c is an odd integer, the coefficients of Zq 2 , ^ 13 , 7>23> c l, c 2 ar| d 
C 3 all vanish. However, if all three numbers a, b, c are even integers, then the integral does 
not change its value under cyclic permutations of t)j and Jo- Hence bn, b 2 2 and Z > 33 
have the same coefficients, and the sum of the terms in question vanishes in any case, since 

fen + f>22 + feaa = 0. 

Since we are omitting higher order terms, there still remain in the expression for J only 
terms of second order in the coefficients b and c. Their sum is 


17 ; 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



3 A ,3 4 


a a 


Rp J4 . _ . . . 

J 1 = ” ~~(bnh + ^22^0 + ^3jJo + 2 &li 622 |ot)o 

2m 


a a 


a a . . a a a . ,a aa 


+ 2611633 ^ 0^0 + 2622633 ^ 0^0 + & 12 jot)o + 613 ^ 0^0 

a a a 1 44 a 94 334 

+ 623^0^0 t CifoCo + C2^oCo + C3J0C0). 


The next terms to be added in Equation (242) (which we have not calculated) will of 
course be of the same order of magnitude as these, but it is not improbable that they would 
also vanish on integration 
We now find: 


4 4 4 

fo = >)o = Jo = 


3 

4fc* 



and one finds easily: 


34 3 4 34 ■* 6 

foCo = l)oCo = J0C0 = — Co = 


35 

8 fc»’ 


Since 

1 RT 

2k m 

we have therefore 


J\ = - 


R'T'p 

~V~ 


(222 

1 3 ( 6 n + 622 + 633) + 2(6 h 6 o 2 + 611633 + 622633) 


2 2 2 
+ 612 + 613 + 623 


5-7-9 5 »v r/ary /st y nry 

16 RtfV A dx ) \ dy / \ bz /. 


n. 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



On substituting the value of b, one finds, writing 9 for 


bu bv bw 

—I-1- 

bx by bz 


the following value for the total entropy of the gas contained in the volume element do: 


Rpdo MWPpdo ( /bu 1 Y 

Jd0 = ; ( r»V)-— 2 ---a 

2p pV { \bx 3 / 


/bv 1 \ 2 / bw 1 \ 2 /dv bw\ 2 

+ 2 - 0 +2 - 0 + - + — 

\by 3 / \ bz 3 / \bz by/ 


/ bw bu \ 2 / bv bu\ 2 5*7*9 u ~/bT\ 2 
\ dx ds / \ dx dp/ 64 RP A bx j 


(250) 


/bT\ 2 lb r r \ 2 

+ (— ) + (— ) 
\ by / \bz / 


Rpdo 




49? 2 R 2 Ppdo j ~/buV“ / bvY /bw\ 2 
pY \ \bx) \by) \bz), 


2 /bu bv bw \ 2 /bv bw\ 2 

-( —I-1-) + ( —I-) 

3 \bx by bz) \ bz by ) 


/bw bu\ 2 / bu bi A 2 

+ - + - + - + - 
\dl bz) \by bx) 


5-7*9 p r/ary /ary /wy 

A 64 Rp\bxj \ 5?/ / [bz/ 


The sum of all the terms containing derivatives of u, v, w with respect to x, y, z. is what 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



Lord Rayleigh calls the dissipation function of viscosity.* The sum of the last three terms 
has been called by Ladislaus Natanson the dissipation function of heat conduction, t 

The energeticist holds that the different forms of energy are qualitatively different; to 
him, an energy halfway between kinetic energy and heat is very strange. Hence the oft- 
emphasized principle of the superposition of properties of different energies contained in a 
body. The principle is valid for the static state, and for completely stationary visible motion, 
where to a certain extent the forms of energy can be separated. On the other hand, if the 
above equation is correct, then in the presence of viscosity and heat conduction the entropy 
of the gas is not the same as it would be at the same temperature and velocity, when there is 
no dissipation. Thus we have to deal with a kinetic energy that is, so to speak, half visible 
kinetic energy and half transformed into thermal motion, so that in the expression for the 
entropy it appears in a form that would not have been foreseen from the laws of static 
phenomena. If we deform a completely elastic body by means of an external force, then we 
get back all the energy we put into it, in the form of work, when it returns to its initial state. 
If we produce viscosity in a gas by means of an external force, then the work done is 
transformed into heat energy. After the removal of external forces, this transformation 
becomes complete after a time considerably greater than the relaxation time has elapsed. 
While the external forces are acting, our equations predict that the entropy at each instant is 
somewhat smaller than it would be if the energy lost from visible motion were completely 
transformed into heat. Instead, this energy is in a state intermediate between ordinary heat 
and visible energy, and part of it can still be transformed back into work, since the Maxwell 
velocity distribution does not yet hold exactly. This description of the dissipation of energy, 
based on a purely mechanical model, seems to me especially remarkable. 

Now suppose that two kinds of gas are present. Let m be the mass of a molecule of the 
first kind, and m 1 the mass of one of the second kind. The mean value u of the velocity 
components £ of all molecules of the first kind found in a volume element will be called the 
x-component of the total velocity of the first kind of gas in this volume element. It need not 
be equal to the mean value u\ of the velocity components £\ of all molecules of the other 
kind of gas in the same volume element, rq will be called the x-component of the total 
motion of the second kind of gas in the volume element do. v, w, v\ and w\ have similar 
meanings. Let p and pj be the partial densities of the two kinds of gas—i.e., p is the total 
mass of all molecules of the first kind contained in do, divided by do, and similarly for pj. 
Let p and p\ be the partial pressures—i.e., the pressure that each kind of gas would exert 
on unit surface if the other were not present. Let P =p + be the total pressure. Finally, 
let J and£i, f) j, be the excess of the velocity components over the total 

velocity components of the corresponding kind of gas: 

i = u + f, >i = v + ij, I = w + a 

{l = u l + flj 'll = 1*1 + ?1> fl = Ml + }i. 

Then the continuity equation is valid for each kind of gas, as we already proved before we 


17 


Maf4cjvi(i££caZ 



made the assumption that only one kind of gas is present. Hence: 



dp 

d(im) 

a ((w) 

d/)W) 

-b 

-+ 


+ -= 0 

dt 

dx 

dy 

dz 

dpi 

d(pitti) 

a(piPi) 

9{m) _ 

-b 

-+ 


+-= 0. 

\dt 

dx 


dz 


We shall now imagine that the volume element do moves during time dl with the 
velocity components u, v, w of the first kind of gas in this volume element. The difference 
between the values of any quantity <D> at time l + dl in the volume element in its new 
position, and at time t in the volume element in its old position, divided by dt, we denote by 
d$/dt, so that: 


— =-b u -by-bw —. 

dt dt dx dy dz 

A similar meaning is given to: 

d$ d$ d$ d$ 

— =- + U\ -+ V\ -+ 101 - 

dt dt dx dy dz 


In constructing the latter quantity, one imagines that the volume element is moving with 
velocity components u\, iq, nq. Then the two continuity equations can also be written: 



f dp / du dv dw\ 

—+p —' = 0 

dt \ dx dy dz 

d\pi (du\ dvi dW\ . 

— + pi — + — + — l = o. 

dt \ dx dy dz 


We ignore the deviations from the Maxwell velocity distribution law. Then: 


17 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



p = p f 2 = p y = p j 2 , n = n = t)« = o. 

pi = Piii = pi>)I = Piii, Mi = fiji = wi = o. 


The mean kinetic energy of a molecule cannot in any case be very much different for 
the two kinds of gas. One has approximately: 


m _____ _ mi ______ 

7 ft*+ *’ + *•) = -«! + ’/? + !!)• 

L L 


Since to the present degree of approximation we can ignore the squares of the small 
velocity components u, v, w with which the gases diffuse through each other, compared to 
£ 2 , t] 2 ,... we also have: 

m{? +1) 1 + S ! ) = TOi(t| +1)| + jJ). 

We set these quantities again (cf. Eq. [51a]) equal to 3 RMT, and we call T the 
temperature in do. Here M is the mass of a molecule of some third gas (the normal gas) and 
R is a constant corresponding to the temperature scale to be chosen (the gas constant of the 
normal gas). Since each of the original two gases behaves l ik e a gas at rest, 

, v R R 

(253) p = rpT = - pT, pi = r { piT = - piT), 

p Pi 

where r and /q are the gas constants of the original two gases, and // = m/M, /./| = m\!M. 

We shall now set tp = £ = U -}- £ in Equation (187). Then: 

_ _ _ _ dip dp dp 

<P = tt, pf(p = PJ* = p, tyo = 1<P = 0, — = 1, — = — = 0. 

d( Sr, 

B 5 (cp) = 0. One therefore obtains: 

y v du dp 

(254) p T + ~- P X = mm 

dt dx 


17 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


where, according to Equation (132), 



«•■///;/. ({' - QfFidudutfbdbdt 


We now have (see Eq. [200]): 

mi 


(' - ( = —;— [2({, - i) cos 2 d + Vg 1 - (i ~ iY sin 2d cos«], 


m + mi 


hence 


| ‘V - Qdt = 

J o 

/» «o /» 2 t 

gbdb (('- 

J n •/ a 


({l - i) COS 2 0 


m i 

0* = —— ({ 
o o o m + nti 


/» oo 

>-{)p 

J n 


4tC 0S 2 lM). 


We also set (Eq. [195]): 


6 = 

“K(m + mi) 

mmi 


db = 

" K(m + mi) 

mmi 


4. Therefore: 

1 

» oo /» 2 t 


11/n 


g Iln.Q 


”11/n 


g~ 2,n da 


o ^ o 


= Midi - I) 




/» 00 

J n 


mmi(m + mi) J 0 

Maxwell calls this definite integral A | and finds* 


4ttcos 2 i )ada. 


18 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



A x = 2-6595. 


(255) 

We set: 

(256) 

and obtain 


^3 - A\. 


K 


mm\[m + wii) 


n it 

((' “ Qgbdbde = - {). 

j 

Whence it follows, furthermore, that: 

m# 4 ({) = At[mf fdu-niij hFidwi - mf tfdwmij F\du\\. 

Now according to Equation (175): 

mj fdu = p, mf tfdw = p£ = pu 

and since clearly the same result holds for the second kind of gas, 

inifFidui = pi, wii/fiFidwi = p\Ui f 


we have 


mB t (() = A 3 ppi(ui - u) 

and Equation (254) reduces to 

du dp 

(257) p -7 H - pX + A 3 ppi(w - U\) = 0. 

dt dx 

Likewise one obtains for the second kind of gas, 

du\ dpi 

(257a) Pi ——I- piXi + Aipp\(u\ - u) = 0. 

dt dx 


18 . 


^Pi l * lc - 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ “Ph-ySALcS. 



These are the familiar hydrodynamic equations. According to our present assumptions, 
viscosity and heat conduction cannot be important. Only the last term describes the 
interaction of the two kinds of gas. On these assumptions, therefore, this interaction has 
exactly the same effect as if one added to the force X pclo, which acts from outside on the 
gas of the first kind in do, the contribution - A^ppfu - u\ )do. We can arrange things so 
that this gas is unaffected by the other forces that act on it, and encounters only this 
resistance to its motion through the second kind of gas. Since the same holds for the y and z 
axes, this resistance is equal to the product of the partial densities of the two gases, their 
relative velocity V (u — u i ) 2 + (t; — v i) 2 + ( w— Wi ) 2 , the volume do of the 

volume element, and the constant At. It has the direction of this relative motion, and acts on 
each kind of gas against the relative motion. If we set <p = f + rf + Q in Equation (187), 
then we find that, according to the present approximations, 

d _ _ _ 

- (f + t)H i J ) = 0 
at 


as soon as initiallyJ/J+Z?) Therefore the 

temperature is not changed as a result of the diffusion process. 

We shall apply these equations only to the gas-diffusion experiments of Prof. 
Loschmidt.* These experiments were set up as follows: a vertical cylindrical container is 
divided into two parts by a thin partition. The lower space is filled with the heavier gas, and 
the upper with the lighter gas. The pressure and temperature are made equal in the two 
gases, and when all mass motion has stopped, the partition is suddenly withdrawn as 
smoothly as possible. After the gas has diffused for a certain time, the partition is again 
inserted and the contents of both parts of the container are analyzed. Here the effect of 
gravity can be ignored, hence we shall set X = Y = Z. Furthermore, the motion takes place 
only in the axis of the cylinder. If we choose this as the abscissa axis, then 

d d 

v = w = — = — = 0. 

by bz 

Finally, the motion takes place so slowly that it can be considered as stationary at each 
point, so that du/dt can be neglected. 

We can also justify this as follows: we have for the reciprocal relaxation time: 



18 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


and according to Equation (256): 



Azp\ = A\p\ 


' Ri 

mmi(m + m\) 


A i is a number less than twice as large as A 2 . p is of the same order of magnitude as p\ , 
and m is of the same order as in \. We also assume that the two constants^ and K 
appearing in the force laws for the interaction of m- and in | -molecules are of the same 
order of magnitude. Then in Equation (257) the magnitude of the first term is to that of the 
last as du/dt to (u - u | )/x. This ratio can be set equal to zero since, because of the slowness 
of the diffusion process, the time x 1 within which u can experience the increase u - u \ must 
be enormously large compared to the relaxation time r. We can therefore neglect the first 
term in Equation (257) also, and we obtain: 

dp 

(258) — = i3PPi(w - Mi). 

dx 

Likewise: 

dpi 

(259) — = Ajppi(tti - u). 

dx 


From the two continuity equations, however, it follows that: 


(260) 


dp ( 3(pti) dpi ( d(piMi) n 

| = f- = 0. 

d dx dt dx 


The temperature T should be held constant during the entire experiment. Hence, 
according to Equation (253), p is proportional to p and p \ to p t , and one can therefore 
write Equation (260) in the form: 



dp 9(pu) _ dp i d(piUi) 

dt dx dt dx 


If we set p + pi = P. so that P is the total pressure, then it follows from (258) and (259) 
that: 


~*Puii.c- 7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



Furthermore, from (261): 


dP 

— = 0 . 

dx 


dP d(pu + pit/i) 
dt dx 


and on differentiating the last equation with respect to x: 


d 2 (pu + pi«i) 
dx 2 


therefore 


pu + ViU\ = C\x + C,. 


Now no gas can flow in or out of the container, either at the top or bottom. Hence at the 
abscissa values corresponding to the top and bottom we have u = u\ =0, hence also pu + 

Piu i = 0. 

Whence it follows that C\ = = 0 and 

(262) pu + p\U\ = 0. 


If one uses this equation to eliminate U\ from Equation (258), then it follows that 

dv a PPi p 

— = - At — P’pu, 

dx ppi 

hence, according to (253): 

dp AinmP 

— =- pu. 

dx R 2 P 



If one differentiates again with respect to x, and refers to Equation (261), then he obtains: 



18. 


^PuJlc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



where 


R 2 P 

T) -- 

A, m I> 

This equation has the same form as the one established by Fourier for heat conduction. 
Both natural processes therefore follow the same law. In our special case, the diffusion 
takes place just as if instead of a cylindrical mass of gas one had a homogeneous metal 
cylinder, whose upper half is maintained initially at a temperature of 100°C, and whose 
lower half initially has zero temperature; through the entire surface of the metal cylinder, no 
heat may enter or leave, either by conduction or radiation. 

$ is the diffusion constant. It is directly proportional to the square of the absolute 
temperature T, and inversely proportional to the total pressure P. It is independent of the 
mixing ratio, so that it is constant at all times during the diffusion process for all layers of 
the container. If the molecules behaved like elastic spheres, $ would be proportional to 
the ?J power of T, and would depend on the mixing ratio. The dependence on P remains 
the same in both cases. 

A simple definition of the diffusion constant $ can be obtained in the following way. 
We multiply Equation (263) by — nT)/RT and obtain: 

R'T 1 dp dp 

pu =--= -$-• 

AytpiP dx dx 

pu is clearly the total amount of gas that goes through unit cross section in unit time. It is 
proportional to the gradient dp/dx of the partial density of the gas in the direction of the axis 
of the container. The proportionality constant is just the diffusion constant. 

If we retain the assumption of inverse fifth power forces, then we cannot draw any 
conclusion about K from the force constants K\ and Kj. Thus from the properties of two 
gases by themselves, we can draw no conclusion about their interaction with each other. 
However, we may be able to draw such conclusions if we imagine that the repulsive force 
is transmitted by means of compressible ether-shells. We can then ascribe the value s to the 
diameter of the ether-shell of an m-molecule, and the diameter ,V| to the ether-shell of the 
m 1 -molecule. In a collision, the centers of two m-molecules will approach up to a min im um 
distance s, on the average. If we imagine one such molecule held fixed and the other one 
moving toward it with mean kinetic energy [, then the latter will have zero velocity at the 

distance s. Then: 


18 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(264) 




A n m | -molecule will, however, approach an m-molecule up to a minimum distance 
equal to the sum of the radii (5 + .v | )/2 on the average. If we again fix one molecule and let 
the other approach it with the mean kinetic energy of all the molecules, then its velocity will 
be annihilated at the distance (5 + ,v j )/2, which gives: 

4 K 

1 = - * 

(s + s,)< 

From these equations it follows that: 

2</ r K = $5T + </Il 

Now we found (Eq. [256]): 



~ 4Af 8,! 

The viscosity coefficient of the first gas was (Eq. [219]): 

m p /2m 8 RTM slt j 2ji 

~u7pr Ti~ 34 2 y kT 

Likewise the viscosity coefficient of the second gas was: 


vWm + mi) 


rulLe. TfenT/tcuH aftm/ P /tylt e i. 




RTM'i* / 2 m , 
3 At VYt 


hence 


VJfi 
( 265 ) A t 


RTM >n y/2pt _ RTM* 1 ' V2m, 

-> \/Kt =- 

3d, R 3A, R, 

difir /y n y m y 

6 \Z 2 /l 2 \/ mmi(m + Mi) w® V®i/ 


_ 6vwr /iTTm i 

d.fi y ,1 ' 

V® + vrT/ 


This equation pemtits one to calculate the diffusion constant of two gases from their 
molecular weights and viscosity coefficients. It agrees approximately with experiment. 
However, one should not suppose that it is exactly correct. Nevertheless, it seems to have a 
more rational basis than any other formula yet proposed for this puipose. 

If in Equation (264) we set: 


then 



K\ = 2 mV, 


hence 


K = 


pm 


%AipS 2 y/ c 5 


18 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Now we have 



hence 


V 


p 




R =--0.0812- 

94 2 S 2 s 2 

According to Equation (91), 

9 } = knmc\, 

1 

X =-= • 

imsV 2 


Further, according to Equation (89): 

k = 0.350271, 



Therefore: 


9} = 0.350271 —= 
T\/3ir 




s l 


= 0.0726 




One sees that the numerical coefficient is only insignificantly different. 

The concepts of mean free path and number of collisions are not suited to the theory of 
repulsive forces proportional to the inverse fifth power of the distance. In order to define 
them, one must make a new arbitrary assumption. One must, for example, decide that an 
encounter of two molecules is to be considered a collision if the relative velocity is 
deflected through an angle greater than 1°. 

It would be of the greatest interest to carry the approximation further in the calculation 


18. 


IPm+lc- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



of diffusion, as well as to calculate the entropy of the two diffusing gases. In the first case 
there would probably be fluctuations of temperature during the diffusion, whose calculation 
according to the principles established would not be difficult; likewise, it would be easy to 
calculate a new dissipation function, that of diffusion, by determining the entropy of the 
two diffusing gases. However, we shall not pursue this matter any further.* 


* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 157 , 49 (1867). 

1 Likewise the assumption of an attraction proportional to the inverse fifth power of the distance 
produces a similar simplification (cf. Wien. Ber. 89 , 714 [1884]). However, one must then assume that 
for distances small compared to the distance at which the interaction becomes strong, the force follows a 
different law, according to which the attraction remains finite or is transformed to a repulsion, since 
otherwise the molecules would not separate in a finite time after collisions. In the text we always assume 
a repulsion inversely as the fifth power. 

2 Maxwell, Phil. Mag. [4] 35 , 145 (1868); Scientific Papers 2 , p. 42. 

* Here is Maxwell’s figure: 



3 Likewise one finds easily: 


(208) 2?r gbdb sin* 0 cos* 0 = A 

Jo 

* Later calculations ofA 2 were made by K. Aichi and T. Tanukadate, reported by H. Nagaoka, 
Nature 69 , 79 (1903), and by S. Chapman, Mem. Proc. Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. 66 , No. 1 (1922). The 
values found were 1.3704 and 1.3700, respectively. 

* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 157 , 49 (1867), esp. Eq. (130). Maxwell actually called it the “modulus of 
the time of relaxation.” 

* Now usually called the Navier-Stokes equations; however Boltzmann, following Maxwell (op. 
cit.) has suppressed the second viscosity coefficient (bulk or dilatational viscosity). This point is 
discussed in §23. 

4 Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 170 , 231 (1879); Scientific Papers!, p. 681. 

5 Heine, Handbuch der Kugelfunctionen (2d ed.), p. 322. 

6 Heine, op. cit., p. 313. 

1 1 thank Prof. Gegenbauer for this proof of Maxwell’s theorem. 

8 Cf. Kirchhoff, Vorlesungen iiberdie Theorie der Wdnne (Teubner, 1894), p. 118. 

9 As a result of an error in calculation, Maxwell (Phil. Mag. [4] 35, 216 (1868), Scientific Papers 2, 



18 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




77, Eq. [149]) found for ^ only ^ of the above value, as I noted in Wien. Ber. 66, 332 (1872). Poincare 
made the same remark: C. R. Paris 116 , 1020 (1893). 

* The result of Maxwell and Boltzmann, that a gas does not have two independent viscosity 
coefficients, is certainly not true in general for real gases, nor is it a strict consequence of the kinetic 
theory except perhaps for certain idealized models. For a list of recent papers on "bulk viscosity” see S. 
G. Brush, Chem. Revs. 62 , 513 (1962). 

* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 170 , 231 (1879). 

* Rayleigh, Proc. London Math. Soc. 4,357 (1873); Phil. Mag. [5] 36,354 (1893). 

t Natanson, Rozprawy Krakow 7 , 273, 9 , 171 (1895); Phil. Mag. [5] 39 , 455,501 (1895). 

* Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 157,49 (1867). According to the calculations of Aichi and Tanukadate, 
reported by Nagaoka, Nature 69 , 79 (1903), Aj = 2.6512; according to Chapman, Mem. Proc. 
Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. 66, No. 1 (1922), A\ = 2.6514. 

* Loschmidt, Wien. Ber. 61 , 367, 62 , 468 (1870). 

* Modern research on the properties of gases is reviewed by J. S. Rowlinson, J. E. Mayer, H. Grad, L. 
Waldmann and others in Handbuch der Physik, Vol. XII (Berlin: Springer, 1958). Older work is 
surveyed by J. R. Partington, Advanced Treatise on Physical Chemistry, Vol. I (London: Longmans, 
Green, 1949). 


19 , 


^Pi mJuc. 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



PART II 


Van der Waals’ theory; Gases with compound molecules; Gas 
dissociation; Concluding remarks. 


19 . 







FOREWORD TO PART II 


“The impossibility of an incompensated decrease of entropy seems to be reduced to an 
improbability.” 1 

As the first pail of Gas Theory was being printed, I had already almost completed the 
present second and last part, in which the more difficult parts of the subject were not to 
have been treated. It was just at this time that attacks on the theory of gases began to 
increase.* I am convinced that these attacks are merely based on a misunderstanding, and 
that the role of gas theory in science has not yet been played out. The abundance of results 
agreeing with experiment, which van der Waals has derived from it purely deductively, I 
have tried to make clear in this book. More recently, gas theory has also provided 
suggestions that one could not obtain in any other way. From the theory of the ratio of 
specific heats, Ramsay inferred the atomic weight of argon and thereby its place in the 
system of chemical elements—which he subsequently proved, by the discovery of neon, 
was in fact correct.* Likewise, Smoluchowski deduced from the kinetic theory of heat 
conduction the existence and magnitude of a temperature discontinuity in the case of heat 
conduction in a very dilute gas.f 

In my opinion it would be a great tragedy for science if the theory of gases were 
temporarily thrown into oblivion because of a momentary hostile attitude toward it, as was 
for example the wave theory because of Newton’s authority. 

I am conscious of being only an individual struggling weakly against the stream of time. 
But it still remains in my power to contribute in such a way that, when the theory of gases 
is again revived, not too much will have to be rediscovered. Thus in this book [this Part] I 
will now include the parts that are the most difficult and most subject to misunderstanding, 
and give (at least in outline) the most easily understood exposition of them. When 
consequently parts of the argument become somewhat complicated, I must of course plead 
that a precise presentation of these theories is not possible without a corresponding formal 
apparatus. 

I thank especially Dr. Hans Benndorf for collecting numerous literature citations during 
my absence from Vienna. 

Volosca, Villa Irenea, August, 1898 


Ludwig Boltzmann 


1 Gibbs, Trans. Conn. Acad. 3,229 (1875); p. 198 in Ostwald’s German edition. 

* In addition to the works cited in the footnote on p. 24, see: R. Mayer, Mechanik der Wdnne 


19 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




(Stuttgart, 1867), p. 9. E. Mach, “Die okonomische Natur der physikalischen Forschung, “ Wien. 
Almanach 293 (1882); Uberdie Erhaltung der Arbeit (Prague, 1872); Monist 1, 48, 393 (1891), 5, 167 
(1894); Die Prinzipien der Wdrmelehre (Leipzig: J. A. Barth, 1896, 2nd ed., 1900), pp. 362-364, 429- 
431. K. Pearson, The Grammar of Science (London: Scott, 1895), pp. 200, 214, 311. J. B. Stallo, The 
Concepts and Theories of Modem Physics (New York: Appleton, 1882), chap, viii. P. Du hem. La 
Theorie Physique, son Objet et sa Structure (Paris: Chevalier et Riviera, 1906). J. Ward, Naturalism and 
Agnosticism (New York: Macmillan, 1899). A. Aliotta, La reazione idealistica contro la scienza 
(Palermo, 1912). G. Hirn,Mem. Acad. Sci. Bruxelles 43 (1881), 46 (1886); C. R. Paris 107,166 (1888). 
W. Ostwald, Lecture at the 64th meeting of the Deutscher Naturforscher und Arzte, Halle, 1891, in his 
Abhandlungen und Vortrage, p. 34. H. Poincare, Nature 45, 485 (1892); Thermodynamique (Paris: 
Gauthier-Villars, 1892), p. xviii. F. Wald, Die Energie und ihre Entwerthung (Leipzig: Engelmann, 
1889). V. Lenin, Materialism andEmpirio-Criticism (Moscow, 1908), chap. 5. 

* Ramsay and Travers, Proc. R. S. London 62 , 316, 63,437 (1898). Ramsay, Mem. Proc. Manchester 
Lit. Phil. Soc. 43 , No. 4 (1900); The Gases of the Atmosphere (London: Macmillan, 1896), pp. 207-232. 

t Smoluchowski, Wien. Ber. 107 , 304 (1898), 108 , 5 (1899); Ann. Phys. [3] 64 , 101 (1898); Prace 
Mat.-Fiz. 10,33(1898). 


193 _ 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



CHAPTER I 


Foundations of van der Waals’ theory. 

§ 1. General viewpoint of van der Waals. 

When the distance at which two gas molecules interact with each other noticeably is 
vanishingly small relative to the average distance between a molecule and its nearest 
neighbor—or, as one can also say, when the space occupied by the molecules (or their 
spheres of action) is negligible compared to the space filled by the gas—then the fraction of 
the path of each molecule during which it is affected by its interaction with other molecules 
is vanishingly small compared to the fraction that is rectilinear, or simply determined by 
external forces. Then the Boyle-Charles law holds for the gas in question, whether the 
molecules are simply material points or solid bodies, or when they are compound 
aggregates. The gas is “ideal” in all these cases. 

Gases found in nature only partly satisfy these conditions of the ideal gas state, and 
hence a theory that takes account of the finite extension of the spheres of action of the 
molecules is very much to be desired. 

Such a theory was given by van der Waals,* who considered the molecules to be 
negligibly deformable elastic spheres, as we did at the beginning of Pail I. He generalized 
the theory in two ways: 

1 . he does not assume that the space actually occupied by the elastic spheres 
representing the molecules is vanishingly small compared to the total volume of the gas; 

2 . he assumes that, in addition to the instantaneous elastic forces that act during 
collisions, there is also an attractive force between the molecules, which acts in the line of 
their centers, and whose intensity is a function of the distance of centers. We call this 
attractive force the van der Waals cohesion force. 

The necessity of assuming an attractive force between molecules follows directly from 
the possibility—now demonstrated for all gases—of liquefaction, since the simultaneous 
existence of a liquid and a gaseous phase of the same substance at the same temperature 
and pressure in the same container is understandable only if there is a force between 
molecules that causes them to rebound at collisions, and also an attractive force. 

This attractive force can be demonstrated directly by the following experiment. One 
suddenly brings a container filled with a compressed gas into communication with another 
container filled with the same gas in a dilute state. As it flows out, the gas in the first 
container does work against the pressure and cools itself; in the latter container there is first 
a visible streaming, which turns into heat as a result of viscosity. If there were only a 
repulsive force between the molecules, then the heat finally created must be completely 
equivalent to the cooling in the first container. If there is also an attractive force, then this 
equivalence is not complete; rather there is a net loss of heat, since the average distance of 
the molecules will be larger, and hence a definite amount of heat must be used to overcome 


19 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the attraction. 

The experiments conducted by this method by Gay-Lussac 1 and later by Joule and Lord 
Kelvin 2 did not give a definite answer to the question of the presence of this attractive 
force, but the latter two scientists have proved experimentally, by a more indirect method, 
the existence of this attractive force, by expansion experiments with gases. 2 They showed 
that a gas which (without any addition of heat from outside) is pushed by pressure through 
a porous stopper experiences thereby a small cooling, while calculation shows that a 
completely ideal gas would not change its temperature. 

The simultaneous existence of an attractive force and an elastic core for a molecule has 
of course a certain improbability. In particular, it appears to be diametrically opposed to the 
assumption made in Part I, Chapter El, that two molecules repel each other with a force 
inversely proportional to the 5th power of their distance. Nevertheless, both assumptions 
can provide a certain approximation to the truth, if the molecules actually exert a weak 
attraction at great distance and repel each other at very small distances with an inverse fifth 
power force. The attraction must then turn into repulsion as the distance decreases, so that 
the former does not come into consideration in collisions, because of the greatly 
predominating repulsion at very small distances. 

We shall have to leave a more precise formulation of the possible assumptions to the 
future, and in the following we shall not be concerned with the exact relation between the 
hypotheses discussed in Part I and the assumptions of van der Waals. From the viewpoint 
of our theory, the latter assumptions are considered to form a picture that is correct in many 
but not all respects. Indeed, up to now, realizing our ignorance about the actual properties 
of molecules, we have not pretended that our assumptions are precisely realized in nature. 
On the other hand, we have laid the greatest weight on the requirement that the calculations 
must be exactly correct—i.e., that the results must be logical consequences of the 
assumptions. The resulting development of mathematical methods was our principal 
purpose. If we know the consequences of various kinds of assumptions, it should be easier 
to find experiments that will test them, and at the same time it should be made possible that, 
as our knowledge progresses, mathematical methods for the investigation of newly 
discovered laws should be readily available. 

Unfortunately, van der Waals had to abandon mathematical rigor at a certain point in 
order to carry out his calculations. Nevertheless, his theory has proved to be of great 
practical value, for the resulting formula gives in general a sufficiently good description of 
the behavior of a gas up to its point of liquefaction, even if it does not achieve complete 
quantitative agreement with experiment. From this one is justified in concluding that its 
foundations could hardly be replaced by completely different ones. 

In this chapter I will derive the equation of van der Waals in the simplest and shortest 
possible way, leaving further refinements to Chapter V. 

§2. External and internal pressure. 

A container of volume V contains n identical molecules, which are completely elastic, 
negligibly deformable spheres of diameter a. The space occupied by the spheres 


19 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



themselves will be fairly small but not completely negbgible compared to the total volume 
of the container. It will be shown that the formulas obtained are also approximately 
applicable to the state of the substance when it is no longer a gas but rather a liquid. 
Therefore in the following we shall call it simply a substance, not a gas, although we shall 
still always have in mind such cases when its state approximates that of a gas. 

Between the centers of two molecules there acts an attractive force (the van der Waals 
cohesion force), which vanishes at macroscopic distances but decreases so slowly with 
increasing distance that it may be considered constant within distances large compared to 
the average separation of two neighboring molecules.* Consequently the van der Waals 
cohesion forces exerted on each molecule in the interior of the container by the surrounding 
molecules are very nearly equal in all directions in space, and they balance each other in 
such a way that the motion of the individual molecule is like that of the usual gas molecule, 
and is not noticeably modified by the cohesion forces. Hence even though we did not treat 
such forces in Pail I, we can still calculate the molecular motions by the same principles 
established there. 

The van der Waals cohesion force has an appreciable effect only on the molecules that 
are very near to the surface of the substance. These molecules will thus be acted on by two 
forces. The first is the counter-pressure of the wall on the gas; the second is the cohesion 
force. The intensity with which the first force acts on the molecules lying on unit surface 
we call p, while that of the latter we call so that the total force on these molecules is 

(1) Pi = P + Pi. 

Now suppose that a part DE of the wall of the container has surface area Q. The total 
force 


% = fl(p + 

which acts on the molecules at the surface DE and which they exert back on the wall (in 
the equilibrium state) is, according to §1 of Part I, equal to the total momentum (in the 
direction of the noimal N to the surface DE) that the molecules would cany-through this 
surface in unit time, if it were placed in the interior of the gas, plus the momentum 
corresponding to the velocities with which these molecules are reflected from the surface 
back into the interior of the gas. 

§3. Number of collisions against the wall. 

We first pick out of all the molecules only those for which the magnitude of their 
velocity, c, lies between c and c+dc, and the angle & formed by the direction of the 
velocity with the outwardly directed normal N at the surface DE lies between d and 3+d■&; 
furthermore, the angle e between a plane noimal to DE containing the velocity direction 
and a fixed plane normal to DE must he between e and e+c/e. We call the set of these 


19 . 


Pi£h;e 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



conditions: 


“the conditions (2).” 


All molecules that satisfy (2) will be called molecules of the specified kind, and we ask 
first: how many molecules of the specified kind collide with the surface DE during a very 
short time dt? 

Each molecule is to be considered a sphere of diameter a, so that it collides with DE 
when this sphere touches it. During the time interval dt, the centers of all the specified 
molecules travel nearly the same distance, cdt, in nearly the same direction. We shall find 
the number of collisions between molecules of the specified kind and the plane DE during 
dt as follows: 

We allow DE to touch, at each of its points, a sphere whose diameter is equal to the 
molecular diameter a. The centers of all these spheres lie in a second plane of surface area 
Q. Through each point of this second plane, we draw a line that is equal in length and 
direction to the path travelled by the specified molecules during dt. All these lines fill up an 
oblique cylinder 7 of base Q and height 

(3) dh = cdt cos 

and hence of volume Qdh. One sees easily that the molecules that collide with DE during 
dt are just the ones whose centers lie in 7 at the beginning of the time interval dt. 

§4. Relation between molecular extension and collision number. 

In order to find the number dz of these latter molecules, we first determine quite 
generally the probability that, for a given configuration of the other molecules, the center of 
a particular molecule lies within the cylinder j. This molecule cannot be less than a 
distance a from the center of any other molecule. We find the volume available to the 
center of this molecule, when the positions of the other are fixed, as follows: we construct a 
sphere of radius cf, which we call the covering sphere, around the center of each of the n - 
1 other molecules. Its volume is 8 times the volume of the molecule, if it were considered as 
an elastic sphere. The total volume, 4n(n - 1 )<r/3, of all these n - 1 covering spheres is to 
be subtracted from the total volume V of the gas. We may also write n for n— 1, since n is a 
very large number. 

In order to find dz, we compare this space V - Amur 13 with the space available in the 
cylinder 7 . The latter is found by subtracting from the total volume Qdh of j the volume of 
that part of it which lies within the covering sphere of any of the n - 1 other molecules. The 
covering spheres of these n - 1 molecules will clearly be equally distributed throughout the 
entire volume V of the gas, except for those regions very close to the wall of the container. 
If 7 were somewhere in the interior of the container, then that part A of the total volume 
Ami (j 13 of the covering spheres of all molecules which lies within 7 would be in the same 
ratio to the total volume of these covering spheres as the volume Qdh of the cylinder 7 is to 


19 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the total volume V of the gas. Hence we would have 


47 ma 3 

A =- Qdh. 

37 


Of all the molecules whose covering spheres penetrate 7 , one can ignore those whose 
centers lie within 7 , since the height dh of this cylinder is infinitesimal. The centers of all 
molecules whose covering spheres penetrate 7 would he equally often on both sides of 7 , if 
it were inside the container. 

Since 7 is not inside the container but is rather at a distance }. (j from the wall, the 
centers of the n - 1 molecules can only he on one side of it. Hence one must omit half of 
the molecules enumerated above, so that the part of 7 occupied by any of the n — 1 
molecules is only: 4 


A 2jm<r 3 

- =- ildh. 

2 3F 


The total remaining volume, 


ttdh 


27rn<r 3 

1- 

37 


of 7 is available to the center of the specified molecule, in case we wish to know the 
probability that it lies in the cylinder 7 . 

This probability is the quotient of the available space in the cyhnder 7 divided by the 
available space in the entire gas volume, namely : 



1- 

tidh 37 


7 \m<j z 

1- 

37 


for which we can write (since the quantities subtracted in the numerator and denominator 
are very small) 


19 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




(5) 


Qdh 

V - B 


where 



2m<r ! 

B = - 

3 


is half of the space fi ll ed by the covering spheres of all the molecules, hence four times the 
volume of all the molecules. 


5. Determination of the impulse imparted to the molecules. 


Since there are actually n molecules in the gas and not just the one specified molecule, 
the total number of molecules whose centers he in j is: 

nMi 

-= v. 

V-B 

Of these, 

v<p(c)dc = v\ 



have a velocity that lies between c and c+dc, where 



<p{c)dc = 4 



is the probability that the velocity of a molecule lies between c and c+dc, i.e., the number 
of molecules whose velocities satisfy this condition divided by the total number of 
molecules n. Among the vj molecules we shall find 

V 

Vi = — <p(c)dc sin ddd 
2 

for which the angle & lies between the l im its & and &+d&^ and among these 


199 


KU-H.C- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ PA.ylic.1 



Vi de v 

— = — Mdcmddddt, 

2* 4t 


for which e hes between the hmits e and e+c/e. This is therefore the number of molecules 
(previously denoted by dz) that lie in a cylinder of volume 

(9) tidh = tic cos Mt 


and whose velocities satisfy the conditions (2) (see §3). These are the same molecules that 
collide with the pail DE of the wall of the container, of surface area f2, during time dt, in 
such a way that their velocities again satisfy the conditions (2). On substituting the values 
(7) and (9), the expression for the number of these molecules becomes: 




ntic cost? sin & 
4t(7 - B) 


<p(c)dMdtdt. 


We now assume that the state is stationary. During any time f 2 - 0, there will collide with 
the surface DE a total of (f 2 - t\)dz/dt molecules of the specified kind. Each of these has 
momentum me cos & in the direction N before the collision, and acquires on the average the 
same momentum in the opposite direction after the collision, so that momentum 2 me cos d 
in the direction of the normal inwards from DE must be imparted to it. This momentum is 
pail of the total impulse DpJtj - t\) supplied by the force f 1p„. All molecules of the 
specified kind therefore provide a contribution 

(11) 2mcm${ti - h)dz/dt 


to the impulse f2p ? (t 2 - t\ )- If one substitutes for dz the value (10) and integrates over all 
possible values—i.e., over e from 0 to oo — then he obtains the total impulse Op ? (t 2 - t{). 
If we divide through by Q(/ 2 - t\ ) in this equation, and perform the integration over e, we 
find: 


nm r* r r 

(12) pg =-I c 2 <p(c)dc I cos 2 d sin $d$. 

V — BJ o J o 

The integral over d has the value as is well known. Furthermore, Jq C?<p(c)dc 1S 
equal to the mean square velocity ^2 of a molecule. One thus obtains: 


20 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(13) 


nmr 


Vo = 


3(F - B) 


If the attractive force of the gas molecules (van der Waals’ cohesion force) were not 
present, then p g would be just the external pressure of the gas. Because of this cohesion 
force, however, the total pressure p g consists of two parts: first, the pressure p exerted by 
the walls; and second, the attractive force exerted on those molecules near the wall by the 
other molecules. If we denote the total intensity of the attractive force acting on each 
molecule lying at the surface by as before, then we obtain the equation already denoted 
H 'll: 


P» = P + Vi- 


§6. Limits of validity of the approximations made in §4. 

In deriving Equations (5) and (13) we neglected all terms of order B~/V . Hence we 
cannot expect that these equations will be valid for values of V comparable to B. In fact, 
Equation (10) predicts an infinite pressure for V = B. Yet this volume is still 4 times larger 
than the space actually filled by the molecules, so that the corresponding pressure is 
certainly not yet infinite. On the other hand, the pressure can be infinitely large when the 
molecules are so densely packed that one cannot put any more spheres into the space. 

One of the densest arrangements of many equal spheres can be obtained by piling them 
up in a pyramid like cannonballs. An easy calculation shows that the total volume that they 
occupy, including the small spaces in between the spheres, is then 3v/2/t of the 

volume occupied by the spheres themselves. 

If the gas molecules were arranged in this way, then 

o icy 

(14) V = ——B = 0.337625. 

4ir 

Thuspg would first become finite when V is about i b , 6 whereas according to 

Equation (13) it is already infinite when V = B. 

We shall see in Chapter V, §58, that Equation (13) does not give the correct coefficients 
even for the terms of order B IV . 

From this viewpoint it appears that van der Waals has substituted for the exact formula 
another one that is certainly wrong as soon as V is not large compared to B. Although there 
may be an important quantitative difference between an expression that vanishes lor V = B 
and one that vanishes for V-iB , the correct formula must still follow a course 

qualitatively similar to the one that van der Waals put in its place.* This fact helps to 


2ft 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



explain the beautiful qualitative agreement of the van der Waals equation with the actual 
properties of gases and liquids; however, it also clarifies the essential quantitative 
difference. Inasmuch as the calculation of the exact formula still encounters insuperable 
mathematical difficulties, one must be satisfied with van der Waals’ approximation. 

One has therefore to distinguish between the properties of a substance that exactly 
conforms to van der Waals’ assumptions, and one that is represented by van der Waals’ 
equation; in the following we shall always discuss the latter. 

§7. Determination of internal pressure. 

In order to calculate van der Waals assumes that the attraction between two 
molecules acts only at short distances, which are still large compared to the average 
distance between neighboring molecules of the substance. We now find the van der Waals 
cohesion force /q that acts on unit surface in the following way: we choose any surface 
element ds on the boundary surface of the substance, and construct inside the substance a 
right cylinder which has this surface element as its base. We also construct two cross 
sections of this cylinder at distances v and v+dv from the base ds. The volume between 
these two cross sections is C, = dsdv, the mass of the substance found in this volume is 
therefore pclsdv, if p is its density. 7 Since m is the mass of a molecule, we see that ( 
contains 

(15) - dsdv 

m 

molecules. Each of these molecules is at nearly the same distance from the boundary 
surface, and hence subjected to nearly the same conditions. It will be drawn toward the 
surface by those molecules nearer the surface, and away from it by those molecules farther 
from the surface. Since there are more of the latter, there remains a net resultant force away 
from the surface. 

If we select a particular molecule inside the cylinder t and any volume element oj near it, 
then all molecules in oj will exert nearly the same force on our specified molecule. Their 
total attractive force—and hence also its component normal to ds —will be proportional to 
the number of molecules in co, and hence to the density p of the gas. The proportionality 
factor can depend only on the size of oo and its position relative to the specified molecule. In 
particular, according to our assumptions, it is independent of temperature at a given density. 
Temperature merely determines the rapidity of the molecular motion, whereas according to 
our assumptions the attractive force between the molecules must be independent of their 
motion. All these conclusions hold equally well for all the other volume elements aq, op ■ • 
• lying in the neighborhood of our specified molecule, and the sum of the components 
normal to ds of all the forces exerted on it by the surrounding molecules must be 
proportional to the density but independent of the temperature. We write this sum as pC, 
where C depends only on the distance of the molecule from the boundary surface. Since all 


2ft 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the molecules in the in fin itesimal cylinder C are subjected to the same conditions, and the 
number of these molecules is pdsdv/m, according to Equation (15), we see that the total 
force that is exerted on all these molecules, noimal to ds, is equal to 


p 2 Cdsdv 

( 16 ) - 

m 


Since moreover the value of C does not depend on temperature or density but only on 
the distance v of the cylinder C from the surface, we shall denote it by f(v). The total force 
on all the molecules in the cylinder Z is 


p 2 ds 

m 



Since the value of the expression (l/m)Jof(v)dv depends neither on density nor 

temperature but is a constant characteristic of the substance, we denote it by a. The total 
force on all molecules in the cylinder Z is then afrds. It is proportional to ds. The force that 

O 

pulls in the molecules lying on unit surface—which we have called /;,•—is therefore apr, 
and we obtain, according to Equations (1) and (13): 


nmc 1 

p + ap ! =- 

3(F - 

where nm is the total mass of the substance. V/nm = v is therefore the volume of unit mass 
at the specified temperature and pressure, the so-called specific volume. Since the total 
mass is nm = pV, it follows that 





1 



V 


and we can write Equation (17) as follows: 




c 2 

3(» - b) 


2ft 


lIic- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


where 



( 20 ) 


b = 


B 2tt<7 2 


nm 


3m 


This is also a constant of the gas; it is equal to half the volume of the covering spheres in 
unit mass of the gas, or 4 times the volume of the molecules in unit mass. 


§8. An ideal gas as a thermometric substance. 

We shall now choose as a measure of the temperature, the pressure that an ideal gas (the 
normal gas) would exert at various temperatures, at constant volume. By an ideal gas we 
mean a gas of the kind considered in Part I, and defined in Part II at the beginning of § 1 : 
its molecules exert an appreciable force on each other only at distances that are vanishingly 
small compared to the average distance of two neighboring molecules. 

For a particular ideal gas we denote the mass of a molecule by M, the mean square 
velocity of the center of mass of a molecule by c *■ and the number of molecules in unit 

volume by A. Then, according to §1, Part I, the pressure on unit surface is 
p = $NMC* At constant volume, N is also constant. According to our choice of 

temperature units, the absolute temperature is therefore proportional to the quantity Q2. In 
agreement with Equation (51) of Part I, we shall set C*=RT where R is a constant 
determined by the temperature unit. 

In Chapter El, §35, and Chapter IV, §42, we shall give good arguments in favor of the 
proposition that, at equal temperatures, the mean kinetic energy of the motion of the center 
of mass of a molecule is generally the same for all bodies. We have already proved in Part I 
that this is the condition for thermal equilibrium of two ideal gases with monatomic 
molecules. The validity of that conclusion is not affected by the attractive force assumed by 
van der Waals, since this acts at distances large compared to the distance between two 
neighboring moelcules, so that it does not perturb the motion of molecules during 
collisions. Hence the condition for thermal equilibrium between the normal gas and another 
gas characterized by Equation (19)—assuming that the former is monatomic—will be the 
equality of mean kinetic energy of the molecules in each gas. Hence at equal temperatures, 
mc t =MC* Since the latter quantity is equal to 3 RMT, then at the same temperature 

we also have — 3 HAIT ^ 0I ot h er g as - We shall now compare the molecular 

weight of the other gas with that of the normal gas, and denote the quantity m/M by /./ and 
the quantity R/jj by r; then 


_ 3ft 

(21) c 2 = 3rT = T 


20 : 


^PuJlc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


and hence, according to Equation (19), 



( 22 ) 


RT 


a rT 

!/ s v - b n(v- b) 

This is the van der Waals relation between pressure, temperature, and volume of a gas. 
r, a, and b are constants characteristic of the gas; R is a constant referring to the noimal gas, 
and is completely independent of the nature of the other gas. 

In chemistry one usually understands by the molecular weight of a gas the ratio of the 
mass of a molecule of that gas to the mass of a single hydrogen atom. Thus for ordinary 
hydrogen, whose molecules are diatomic, p = 2, and the gas constant is ^ = 1/^, 

where R would be the gas constant of hydrogen if its molecules were dissociated into single 
atoms. If we do not wish to base our definition on such a dissociated gas, we have to define 
R empirically as being twice the gas constant of ordinary hydrogen gas. 



9. Temperature-pressure coefficient. Determination of the constants of van 
der Waals’ equation. 


We now consider a gas for which the relation between pressure, density, and 
temperature is sufficiently well expressed by van der Waals’ equation (22). 

We first determine for this gas the temperature coefficient of the pressure at constant 
volume—i.e., we shall heat it from T^toT 2 at constant volume, denote the pressure on unit 
surface at these two temperatures by p\ and p 2 , and determine the quotient (p 2 - p\)/(T 2 - 
T x ). We find, from Equation (22): 





rT, 
v - b 


whence it follows that: 



V2 - P\ r 

— “ ' ' ■' ■■ ■ • 

Tt-Ti v-b 


Thus the pressure difference is proportional to the temperature difference, and the 
proportionality factor is simply a function of the volume of unit mass. The pressure 
difference of a gas following van der Waals’ law, at constant volume, is therefore always a 
measure of the temperature difference. If we denote by p 2 the pressure at a third 
temperature T 3 —keeping the same volume per unit mass, v—then: 

(25) p s - Pt:p2 - Pi = Ti - T\.Ti - 7V 

We next assume that we have a second gas, for example hydrogen, which can be 


2ft 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



considered ideal with sufficient accuracy. For this latter gas, therefore, 


VsW-Pi = Ts'.Tt'.T i. 

One can therefore determine absolute temperatures directly, if he establishes a unit for the 
temperature degree—e.g., if he sets the difference between the temperature of boiling water 
and that of melting ice (both at atmospheric pressure) equal to 100. 

One can next test how well Equation (25) is satisfied for the first gas; in other words, 
one can determine how well van der Waals’ law predicts the actual dependence of the 
pressure on the temperature. If one calculates the temperature coefficient of the pressure, 
r/(v — b), from Equation (24) for two different densities, then he can determine r and b for 
the gas. If one knows the chemical constitution of the molecules of the gas, then he can test 
whether the equation pr = R is accurately satisfied. One can also determine p from the 
empirically determined van der Waals constant r, instead of from the vapor density. If one 
determines the temperature coefficient (24) of the pressure at constant volume for more than 
two values of r, then he can test how well it is represented as a function of v by the van der 
Waals formula. 

One remark should be made here. According to §6, the expression r/(v - b ) was found 
by an approximation that is no longer permissible when v approaches the value b. For the 
smaller values of v, one must replace b by (b/3). In fact, experiment shows that when 6 is 
determined in the above way for different values of v, it is not actually constant, but 
decreases with decreasing v. It does not by any means follow from this that the basic 
assumptions of van der Waals are wrong for such substances. Indeed, if the equation of 
state could be derived exactly from these basic assumptions, similar consequences would 
follow. Unfortunately it has not yet been possible to find what function of v must replace 
r/(v - b ) in the exact equation of state, on the basis of the assumptions of van der Waals.* 
In the following we must therefore l im it ourselves to the discussion of Equation (22), and 
keep in mind the fact that we cannot expect it to achieve any more than qualitative 
agreement for small values of v. From Equation (23) it follows that 

PtTi - ViT, 

0 = 1 )*-> 

r,-r, 

from which one may also determine the value of the constant a. If one calculates this value 
for several values of v, he can find out how well the term added to p on the left side of van 
der Waals’ equation (22) agrees with experience. Thus one can test the validity of van der 
Waals’ assumption that the cohesion force extends to distances large compared to the 
average distance of two neighboring molecules. 

§10. Absolute temperature. Compression coefficient. 

We can never actually determine the temperature by means of an ideal gas, since no 



2ft 


% J ti3uc- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



known gas, not even hydrogen, possesses exactly the properties that we ascribe to an ideal 
gas. The most rational definition of temperature is of course that based on Lord Kelvin’s 
temperature scale. As is well known, this scale is derived from the maximum work that can 
be gained by transforming heat from one temperature to a lower one. However, since the 
direct experimental determination of this work is always performed very inexactly, one is 
forced to calculate it from the equation of state of some body. Now the deviations of 
hydrogen from the ideal gas state are rather small, so that if one treats these deviations on 
the basis of van der Waals’ assumptions, one ought to be able to construct the absolute 
Kelvin temperature scale with an accuracy that can hardly be surpassed at the present 
time. 9 One can then use the equations developed above for the determination of the 
absolute temperature, except that one cannot assume that T |, T 2 , and 7) can be determined 
by comparison with another more ideal gas. One can first express the temperature 
differences in terms of numbers, by means of the proportion (25), if he merely chooses any 
arbitrary temperature unit, for example as indicated above. As a control, one can determine 
the temperature at several different densities. If one finds pressures pi, p 2 , p 3 , at 
temperatures T j, T 2 , T 3 for specific volume v, and pressures j){ f p' p ■[ at the same 
temperatures for specific volume v', then the pressure must satisfy the relation 

Pi ~ Pi-Pi - Pi = pi ~ pi-pi ~ pi 


if the gas is to satisfy van der Waals’ equation with sufficient accuracy. 

If V 1 and Vi are the pressures corresponding to temperatures T | and T 2 at a specific 
volume v', then one can write Equation (26) as follows: 






Ti-Tt 






If one defines T | to be the temperature of melting ice, and T 2 to be the temperature of 
boiling water, and sets T 2 - 7) = 100, then all the other quantities in the last two 
expressions in this equation are accessible to observation, and one can therefore calculate 
Ti . Moreover, one can determine the value of the constant a for hydrogen. 

Since one now knows the absolute temperature, he can immediately determine the 
values of r and b for hydrogen, according to the method given earlier. Here the following 
remarks must be made: when we consider the van der Waals equation (22) as simply a 
given fact of experience, then we must write on its right-hand side, instead of T, some 
functional) of Kelvin’s absolute temperature. The absolute temperature itself would not 
then be determinable without some empirical information about specific heats or Joule- 


2ft 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Thomson cooling, etc. 10 

In order to test the relation between p and v at constant temperature T —i.e., the pressure 
coefficient of density—we write the van der Waals equation in the foim 

rT a a - rbT 

pv =-= rT -- • 

b v v 

1 -- 

v 

As long as v is large compared to b, and also to a/rT, Boyle’s law is nearly valid; pv is 
almost constant at constant temperature. The gas is far from the region of liquefaction. As 
long as a>rbT, the correction to Boyle’s law resulting from the van der Waals cohesion 
force will dominate that due to the finite extension of the molecular cores, and pv = p/p will 
increase with increasing volume. The pressure coefficient of density, clp/clp, decreases with 
decreasing pressure. For any gas at very high temperatures, a<rbT, hence the latter 
correction must dominate the foimer, and therefor pv will decrease with increasing v. This 
is already the case for hydrogen at ordinary temperatures. 

In addition, the differential quotient of specific volume, v, at constant pressure with 
respect to temperature, which we shall call the temperature coefficient of the volume, is, as 
our formula shows, not constant. 

§11. Critical temperature, critical pressure, and critical volume. 

We shall now examine more closely the relation between pressure, temperature, and 
specific volume represented by Equation (22). We see that the pressure is infinite when v = 
b, for any temperature. For a substance that exactly conforms to van der Waals’ 
assumption, we saw that the pressure would not actually be infinite until the volume 
decreases to about * \). We shall not pursue this matter further, since the object of our 

present investigations is not the original assumptions of van der Waals but rather Equation 
(22), insofar as that equation is approximately correct for large volumes and gives at least a 
qualitatively correct expression for small volumes. 

The volume v = b is therefore impossible; and likewise any smaller volume, since for a 
stable equilibrium state the pressure must increase as the volume decreases, and it would 
therefore have to be even greater than infinity. 

We now seek the isotherms—i.e., the relation between pressure and volume at constant 
temperature. Since T is constant, it follows from Equation (22) that 

dp 2 a rT 

— ■■ “ ■ —’ - ■■ i 

dv v 3 (v - by 


2ft 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


( 27 ) 



Here the right-hand side is negative for the smallest possible values of v (those which 
are only slightly larger than b) and l ik ewise for very large values of v. Furthermore, it 
changes in such a way that its derivative with respect to v is continuous for all values of v 
considered. The right-hand side of (27) can vanish only for 

2 a(v - by 



w 3 

In this equation, the expression on the right side has a very small positive value for volumes 
slightly greater than b, and also for very large volumes. It is continuous in between, and has 
a single maximum value: T k = 8a/27rb for v = 3b. Hence when T>T k , dp/dv cannot vanish, 
and hence cannot become positive; the isotheim falls off with increasing v. When T < T/., 
dp/dv goes through zero to a negative value, and then again goes through zero to a positive 
value. The ordinate of the isotherm has a min im um and a maximum. For T = Tj., dp/dv is 
always negative; it is only once equal to zero, when v = 3b. Hence p decreases with 
increasing v, but at this point only by an amount that is an in fin itesimal of higher order than 
the in finitesimal increase in volume. This point is called the critical point. We give the 
values of v, p, and T corresponding to this point the index k and call them the critical 
values,* thus: 

(28) v k = 36, T t = 8o/27rf». 

For the corresponding value of p, the critical pressure, one finds from Equation (22): 

(29) Vk = a/276*. 

v k , Tf. and p k are therefore three real positive values. The former is larger than the min im um 
volume b of the substance. From Equation (27) one finds (with T constant): 



9 9 

and one easily sees that for the critical values, d p/dv vanishes, as was to be expected, 
since we have seen that for the critical values the isotherm has a completely regular 
max im um-min im um [point of inflection]. 

In addition I shall describe an algebraic property of the critical quantities. If we bring all 
the quantities to the same side of the equality sign in Equation (22), eliminate the fractions, 
and collect powers of v, then this equation becomes 

(30) py 3 - (bp + rT)v 2 + av - ab = 0. 


2ft 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



For given values of p and T, this is a third-degree equation for v. We shall denote its left- 
hand side by/(y). If not only /(y) but also/(v) and f'(v) vanish for a particular set of values 
of p, T, and v, then this third-degree equation has three equal roots for v; here/(v) is the 
first derivative, and f'(v) the second derivative of/(y) at constant p and T. 

If one keeps only T constant, then it follows from Equation (30) that 

dp 

(v 3 -bv t )—= -f(v), 
dv 



d 2 p dp 

- bv 2 ) -b (3^ 2 - 2 bv) — = 

dv 2 dv 



The quantities dp/dv and cl~p/dv 2 are the same ones mentioned above, which we have 
proved vanish for the critical values of p, v, and T. For these values, therefore, not only /(y) 
but also/(v) and/'(v) vanish—i.e., Equation (30) has three equal roots forv, if one 
substitutes the critical values for p and T. Now the coefficient of v , taken negative and 
divided by p, is equal to the sum of the roots. The coefficient of the term that does not 
contain v, likewise taken negative and divided by p, is equal to the product of the roots. 
Finally, the coefficient of v, taken positive and divided by p, is equal to the sum of the 
products of each pair of roots.* Hence one finds for the values p k and Tj. (for which Eq. 
[30] has three equal roots, whose common value we denote by v^,) the three equations 


rT k 2 a 

3y* = b H- ) dVk = — 

Pk Pk 


3 ab 

v k = —> 

Pk 


from which follow the values of v k , p k , and T k already found. For those values of the 
temperature for which the ordinate of the isotherm has no minimum, there corresponds to 
each value of p only one value of v, so that Equation (30) has only one real root, which is 
greater than b\ however, for any temperature for which the ordinate of the isotherm has a 
minimum p\ and a max im um p 2 , Equation (30) has three real roots for v, greater than b, 
when p lies between p | and p 2 , as one can perceive at once from the form of the isotherms. 

Up to now we have made no particular stipulation about the units of pressure and 
volume. The formula will become especially simple if we choose the critical volume and 
the critical pressure pj. of each substance as the units of volume and pressure, in discussing 
the properties of that substance. We shall also ignore the empirical unit of temperature 
derived from the freezing and boiling points of water, and choose for each gas its absolute 
critical temperature T k as the unit of absolute temperature. We therefore set: 


21 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




v = Vk'jo = 3 boo, 


V = PW 


a 

276 2 


T = T k r = 


8a 

27r6 7 


Thus we measure the volume by w (the ratio of the volume to the critical volume) and 
likewise the pressure and temperature by rt and r. 

These three quantities a>, re, and r we call the reduced volume, reduced pressure, and 
reduced temperature, or—when there is no question of comparison with another system of 
units—simply the volume, pressure, and temperature of the substance. 

We have of course introduced different units for each gas—which we shall call the van 
der Waals units—but this disadvantage is outweighed by the advantage that the equations 
become much simpler. Since we can calculate a , b, and r, and hence also v^, p^, and for 
each gas from its empirical properties, we can transform from van der Waals’ units to any 
other units whenever we wish. If in Equation (22) we replace p, v, and T by n, co, and r, 
then we obtain (after dividing through by a factor that can never be zero) 

8 r 3 

(32) t -- 

3co — 1 w 2 


All the constants characterizing the gas have dropped out of this equation. If one bases 
measurements on the van der Waals units, then he obtains the same equation of state for all 
gases. Van der Waals believes that this equation is valid up to the liquefaction of the gas, 
and indeed even into the liquid region. Only the values of the critical volume, pressure, and 
temperature depend on the nature of the particular substance; the numbers that express the 
actual volume, pressure, and temperature as multiples of the critical values satisfy the same 
equation for all substances. In other words, the same equation relates the reduced volume, 
reduced pressure, and reduced temperature for all substances. 

Obviously such a broad general relation is unlikely to be exactly correct; nevertheless, 
the fact that one can obtain from it an essentially correct description of actual phenomena is 
very remarkable. 


§12. Geometric discussion of the isotherms. 

In order to gain some insight into the relation represented by Equation (32), we shall 
draw on the positive abscissa axis OQ from the origin of coordinates O the reduced volume 
(o as the abscissa OM. Over the point M we erect the ordinate MP, representing the reduced 
pressure rr, parallel to the ordinate axis OIL Then each state of the gas, characterized by its 
pressure and volume, is represented by a point P in the plane. The corresponding reduced 
temperature is the value of r that would be obtained from Equation (32) for the assumed 


21 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



values of to and tt. If one assumes than van der Waals’ equation is correct, the reduced 
pressure would become infinite at ^ = A for any positive r. As we pointed out earlier, 
one can compress the substance to the volume ^ = A only by exerting an infinite 

pressure, and since the pressure must increase as the volume decreases, the smaller volumes 
for which the formula gives negative pressures are impossible. 

We must therefore limit our considerations to abscissas >i 

By an isotherm we mean the locus of all points representing those states of our 
substance for which the temperature has a fixed value. The equation of an isotherm is any 
relation between tt and to that follows from Equation (32) if we substitute any arbitrary 
constant value for r. We obtain the set of all possible isotherms by letting r take all possible 
values from a very small positive value to + oo. From Equation (32) it follows that for each 
r, tt has a very large positive value when to is slightly larger than A. On the other hand, tt 

has a very small positive value when to is very large. Moreover, at constant r it follows that 



Since this expression is finite for A < to < oo, all isotherms between w = A and to = oo 
must be continuous curves. As to approaches the limit they approach asymptotically the 
line AB, which is parallel to the ordinate axis at a distance A from it, on the side of positive 
ordinates. As to becomes very large, the isotherms lik ewise approach the abscissa axis on 
the side of positive ordinates. In the foimer case tt has a very large positive value, while 
clrr/dto has a very large negative value; in the latter case, tt is small and positive, while 
dTr/dto is small and negative. All isotherms have two branches, going to infinity on the 
positive side of the abscissa axis. On the other hand, it is possible for tt to be negative 
between ^ — A and to = oo; the curve representing Equation (32) for constant r can dip 
down below the abscissa axis. 

In order to form a picture of this behavior, we note first that, as a glance at Equation (32) 
shows, smaller values of r will always correspond to smaller values of tt, when to is the 
same. Therefore each isotherm must he below the isotherms corresponding to higher 
temperatures, so that for each abscissa to the isotherm at the higher temperature has a larger 
ordinate than the isotherm at the lower temperature; two isotherms can never intersect. 

We now discuss the expression for dTr/dto, Equation (33). It is a continuous function of 
to for to between -A and + co. For very large values of to, and also when to is slightly larger 

than the second term dominates, so that dTr/dto is negative, as we mentioned before, 
dTr/dto cannot become positive within this interval without going through zero. The latter 
event can happen only for 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



(34) 


(3u - 1)’ 
T ” 4 ( 0 " 


according to Equation (33). Not only when to is slightly larger than A but also when to is 
very large, the right hand side of this equation has a very small positive value. Its value 
changes continuously with to in this interval; as one can find by well-known methods, it has 
a single maximum value, 1, for to = 1. Thus there are three cases to be distinguished: 

1. For r > 1, Equation (34) cannot be satisfied, and clrr/cloj cannot vanish but must be 
negative in the entire region considered, so that the isotherm (marked 0 in Fig. 1) sinks 
continuously toward the abscissa axis as to increases. 

2. Let r = 1, so that the isotherm corresponds exactly to the critical temperature. Then, 
according to what we have said about the right-hand side of Equation (34), clrc/clto vanishes 
only for to = 1. According to Equation (32), then rr = 1 also. The substance therefore has its 
critical temperature, volume, and pressure. This state (the critical state) is represented by the 
point A' of Figure 1, whose abscissa and ordinate are both equal to 1. On taking the 
derivatives at constant r, it follows from Equation (33) that: 



Fig. 1. 


21 . 


f^&L+LC- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



9 9 

For the critical state we therefore have also d, rc/dur = 0 (as was to be expected since we 
know that cl 2 p/dv 2 vanishes for the critical state). However, dr’p/dc? is negative. The 
isotherm therefore has an inflection point. Its tangent is parallel to the abscissa axis, but the 
ordinate decreases with increasing co on both sides. The same isotherm has a second point 
of inflection at co = 1.87; it therefore turns its concave side downwards between this value 
and the abscissa 1, but for other abscissas it turns its convex side downwards. Curve 1 in 
Figure 1 represents the critical isotherm. 

The two inflection points first appear for isotherms corresponding to a reduced 
temperature r = 3 7 • 2 -11 = 1.06787, where they both occur at ^ 11 For smaller r 

they separate from each other. For larger r, the isotherms fall to the positive abscissa axis 
without inflection points, and drc/dco decreases steadily. 

3. Suppose the temperature is below the critical temperature: 0 < r < 1. Then, as one 
sees from Equation (33), drc/dco is positive for co = 1, while for large values of co and for 
values near i it is negative. Hence drc/dco must vanish for a value of oj greater than 1, and 
also for a value between 1 and i. For none of these values can d 2 rc/dco 2 also vanish, since 

3 9 9 

from Equation (35) it follows that drc/dco and d rc/dcor can simultaneously vanish only 
when co = 1. This follows also from the fact that Equation (30), which differs from the 
present equation only in the choice of units, must then have three equal roots for v, and as 
we saw this is possible only at the critical pressure, volume, and temperature. For the value 
of co between A and 1, at which drc/dco changes from a negative to a positive value as co 

3 9 9 

increases, and d rc/dcor is positive according to Equation (35), n therefore has a minimum, 
while for the other value of co it has a maximum, drc/dco cannot vanish for a third value of 
co, since Equation (34), which gives the condition for this, can be written in the form 

(36) W - (3(o - 1) ! = 0. 

The polynomial is negative for co = 0 and positive for ^ = A, so that its third root must he 

somewhere between these two values of co, and hence in the interval that we do not 
consider. For ah isotherms corresponding to temperatures below the critical temperature, 
the ordinate rc has a minimum for one abscissa co between A and 1, and a maximum for one 
abscissa greater than 1. Curve 3, Figure 1, shows its general form. 

§13. Special cases. 

We now consider two special cases of the third case. 

3a. Let r be slightly smaller than 1, say 1 - e. The two ordinates for which rc has an 
extremal value are then close to 1, and we can write them in the form 1 + q. Substitution of 
r = 1 - e and co = 1 + £ into Equation (36) yields (retaining only terms of the first order of 
magnitude) { = i \/4</3’ while Equation (32) yields n = 1 - 4 e. Therefore r and rc 

differ from 1 by an infinitesimal of order e, while the difference between co and 1 is an 


21 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



infinitesimal of order V* The isotherms just below the critical isotherm are therefore 

almost horizontal in the neighborhood of the critical point K, as would also follow from the 
fact that they have both a min im um and a maximum near this point. The locus of the 
maxima and minima of all the isotherms (the dotted curve in Fig. 1) therefore has its 
max im um at K where it touches the critical point. 

3b. Let r be very small, so that the temperature is near absolute zero. Then one easily 
finds, from Equation (36), the following value for the root near A: 



The other root in which we are interested is very large, and one finds for it 

9 

W2 = — ’ 

4 r 

The minimum of n therefore corresponds to an abscissa slightly greater than OA= | 
The value of this smallest ordinate is 


t, = - 27 + 12V3r. 


The isotherm in question (5a in Fig. 1) thus sinks infinitely close to the downwards 
extension of the line BA, to the ordinate -27 below the abscissa axis. It comes back again 
(Curve 5b, Fig. 1, where the branch going upwards is shown increasing much too steeply 
at first, and is drawn too close to the origin of coordinates) and cuts the abscissa axis once 
again. If we denote by u> 3 the abscissa for which it cuts the abscissa axis again, then: 


8r _ 3 

3 wj “1 W3 


3 9 

—j 4— = 8 r. 

to a w 3 


The transformation to the latter equation is permissible since we are not interested in values 
of u >3 lying near A; indeed we already know that there is such a solution of the equation, 

corresponding to the intersection of the descending branch 5a with the abscissa axis. 
Instead we now want the solution for which is large, and we see that in this case will 
be approximately 9/8 r. Thus for very low temperatures, the ordinates of the curve 5b do 
not become positive until the volume is very large. At co = <o 2 = 9/4x (in other words, for an 
abscissa twice as far from the origin) this ordinate attains its maximum, which is only a very 
small value: tx 2 = 16x /27. After this, the curve again approaches the abscissa axis. 

Between this extreme isotherm and the isotherm 3 of Figure 1, which has only positive 


21 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ P4^.i.Zc.i. 



values, there are of course numerous isotherms that go under the abscissa axis; curve 4 of 
Figure 1 is an example. One can understand the situation more clearly by drawing a third 
coordinate axis perpendicular to Oil and OH. In the various planes parallel to the plane 
OOII one constructs the various isotherms corresponding to a sequence of increasing 
temperatures, and one models in gypsum the surface formed of all these isotherms. 


* J. D. van der Waals, Over de continuiteit van den gas- en vloeistoftoestand (Dissertation, Leiden, 
1873); Amsterdam Verslagen [2] 10 , 321, 337 (1876), and many other papers (see the Royal Society 
Catalogue of Scientific Papers for a list up to 1900). 

1 Gay-Lussac, Mem. soc. d’Arcueil 1, 180 (1807); cf. Appendix to Mach’s Prinzipien der 
Wdnnelehre. 

- Joule and Thomson, Phil. Mag. [3] 26 , 369 (1845) ; Joule’s Scientific Papers, 171; German 
translation by Sprengel. [Boltzmann is incorrect in listing Thomson as a co-author of this paper.—T r.] 

3 Joule and Thomson, Phil. Trans. 144 ,321 (1854); 152 ,579 (1862). 

* See the remarks by van der Waals on this point, mentioned at the end of §61. 

4 This formula can also be derived in a more complicated way. We call the end-surface of the 
cylinder y that faces the wall of the container its base. A center of one of the covering spheres can 
naturally lie only on the side of the base away from the wall of the container. We now construct on this 
side two planes parallel to the base of y, both of surface area Q, at distances 2 and c+ dc from the base. 
The space between these two planes will be called the cylinder y\ its volume is y\ = ildf. The number of 
covering-spheres whose centers lie in y at any given time is: 

7i (n ~ 1) 

v - ~ 1 ^ gi 

3 


Since the term we are now calculating is only a small correction, we can write this as 

n7i nttdt 

T"T' 

Each covering sphere cuts a circle of area nio 2 - C 2 ), hence a space of volume Trio 2 - c 2 )dli from the 
cylinder y. If we multiply this by the number of covering spheres, nlldf/V, and integrate over all 
possible values of §—i.e., over 2 from 0 to o —then we obtain for the total space cut out by the covering 
spheres from the cylinder y —and thus for the space not available for the center of the specified 
molecule—the value: 


nttxdh 

T~ 



2 ? rn^ftdh 

3F 


in agreement with the formula in the text. 

5 Cf. Part I, Eqs. (38) and (43). 

6 Then we have the relation p = J between the quantities appearing in Eq. (19), and the quantity 
oj introduced in Eq. (32) would be equal to |. 

* The recent work of Alder and Wainwright (J. Chem. Phys. 27,1208 (1957), 31,459 (1959); Phys. 


21. 


^ufuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




Rev. 127, 359 (1962)) on phase transitions in small systems of elastic spheres throws doubt on the 
validity of this assertion. See also Brush, Am. J. Phys. 29,603 (1961). 

7 The van der Waals cohesion force will of course produce a variation in density near the wall of the 
container, which we neglect in the text, following van der Waals. We would still be led to the same 
formula if we assumed only that when the pressure or temperature changes, the densities at different 
distances from the boundary surface change in the same proportion. Then there would appear in Eqs. 
(15) and (16) a factor F independent of pand T, and we could set FC equal to/(v), instead of C = /’(v) as 
in the text. 

Furthermore, the calculation of the collision number performed in the text is certainly correct when 
the cohesion force is not present. When it is present, however, one might doubt whether it is permissible 
to leave this calculation unchanged and simply add the cohesion force to the external pressure, as we 
have actually done, following van der Waals, in §4. Finally, we have considered the wall of the container 
to be impenetrable, without any adhesive force with respect to the substance within. 

In chap, v, I will give a derivation of van der Waals’ formula against which none of these objections 
can be raised. 

8 This expression still needs to be corrected if the wall is curved. Indeed it is by this correction that 
van der Waals explains capillary phenomena in a manner similar to that of Laplace and Poisson (cf. 
§23). According to van der Waals, therefore, the pressure of a gas is not absolutely independent of the 
curvature of the wall. Nevertheless, this correction becomes negligible when the sphere of action of the 
cohesion force becomes larger compared to the diameter of a molecule. 

* One way to obtain a more accurate function is to calculate the available space taking account of the 
possible configurations of groups of two, three, or more other spheres, to obtain what are now called the 
third, fourth, and higher virial coefficients. Boltzmann discusses this approach in chap, v, but does not 
claim that the exact high-density equation of state can be obtained in this way. Van der Waals himself 
later adopted the position that the observed variation of b with density cannot be explained in this way, 
but is rather due to an actual compression of the molecule itself: s ee Boltzmann-Festschrift, p. 305 
(1904); Amsterdam Verslagen [4] 21, 800,1074 (1912-1913). 

9 For all temperatures that are not too low, the properties of air satisfy van der Waals’ assumptions 
with greater accuracy. One can therefore also use air (which is more convenient for experiments) instead 
of hydrogen. 

10 Boltzmann, Mun. Ber.23,321 (1894); Ann. Phys. [3] 53,948 (1894). 

* German kritische = critical, hence the subscript “k.” 

* For proof of these three statements see any algebra textbook. 

11 d 2 n/dar vanishes for r = (3 to - l) 3 /8w 4 . The expression on the right side is positive and 
vanishingly small for very large values of to as well as for values slightly larger than ^ . It is continuous 

between these limits and has a single maximum 3 7 • 2~ n for u = ^ . For t > 3 7 • 2 -11 , therefore, d~~r/dor 
cannot vanish. 


21 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



CHAPTER II 


Physical discussion of the van der Waals’ theory. 

§ 14. Stable and unstable states. 

Let us now consider the physical meaning of the diagrams in Figure 1. Each point P of 
the quadrant bounded by the two infinite lines AQ, and AB represents a certain volume and 
a certain pressure, and thus a certain state of the substance, since Equation (32) provides the 
corresponding pressure. We call this state simply the state P. Each curve PQ lying in this 
quadrant (which, like the point P, is not shown in the figure) therefore represents a 
variation of state, in particular the sequence of different states corresponding to different 
points on the curve. We say that the substance experiences the state variation PQ as it 
passes through all the states represented by the different points on this curve. 

The isotherm 0 in Figure 1 represents, for example, a compression of the substance at a 
constant temperature Tq > 1, stalling from a very large volume. The pressure increases 
continuously as the volume decreases, and for large volumes it is nearly inversely 
proportional to the volume, since then the quantities b and a/v~ in Equation (22) are 
relatively very small. The substance then behaves almost like an ideal gas. On the other 
hand, if co is slightly larger than 1/3, then the volume is nearly equal to 1/3 of the critical 
volume; then the isotherm rises very rapidly and approaches the line AB asymptotically. In 
this case, a very small decrease in volume results in a very large increase in pressure; the 
substance is almost incompressible, and behaves like a liquid. The transformation from the 
gaseous to the liquid state takes place very gradually; no break in the continuity of the 
transition is ever noticeable. This is also hue for the isotherm 1 corresponding to the critical 
temperature, in Figure 1, except that at the critical point the tangent of the isotherm is 
parallel to the abscissa axis, so that an in fin itesimal isothermal change in volume 
corresponds then to a higher order infinitesimal change in pressure. 



21 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Now suppose that we compress the substance at a temperature below the critical 
temperature. Then we follow an isotherm for which r < 1, for example isotherm 3 in Figure 
1, which corresponds to the temperature r 3 . We draw this isotherm again in Figure 2, and 
denote by C and l) the points whose ordinates CC\ and 1)1) \ have the minimum and 
max im um values, respectively. The lines drawn from C and D parallel to the abscissa axis 
intersect the isotherm again at E and F, respectively. Let the projections of the latter two 
points on the abscissa axis be £j and F \, respectively. As long as the pressure is less than 
EE\, we find ourselves on the branch LE of the isotherm. At a given temperature, only one 
state of the substance is possible for each pressure, and Boyle’s law is obeyed with greater 
and greater accuracy as the pressure decreases. On the other hand, as soon as the pressure 
becomes equal to EE | two completely different states (phases of the substance) are possible 
at the same temperature and pressure, represented by the two points E and C on the 
isotherm, which have equal ordinates. The phase represented by the point E (or simply, the 
phase E) corresponds to a huger specific volume, hence to a smaller density, while the 
phase C corresponds to a larger density. The former phase is the vapor, the latter the liquid. 
If the isotherm corresponds to a temperature that is only slightly below the critical 
temperature, then the two points C and E will be very close together, and the substance will 
have only slightly different properties in these two states. Far below the critical temperature, 
however, the liquid and vapor phases are completely different. 

As soon as the pressure becomes equal to DD |, there are again two points D and F on 
the isotherm, each of which represents a possible phase at that temperature and pressure. 
However, if the pressure is between EEy and DD | say GG |, then we have three points on 
the isotherm: G, H , and J, to which this pressure corresponds. One easity convinces h im self 
that the state corresponding to the middle point H is unstable. 

Suppose the substance is in a cylindrical container closed with an easily displaceable 
piston, and it is initially in the state H , so that at equilibrium the pressure HH\ is exerted in 
the piston. Now if we push the piston in a little bit, without changing the external pressure, 
then the volume will decrease somewhat. We assume that the substance is surrounded by a 
good heat conductor, so that its temperature remains constantly equal to that of its 
surroundings. Then, as the nature of the isotherm near// shows, the pressure of the 
substance on the piston will decrease; the piston will therefore be pushed in by the external 
pressure until the volume becomes equal to OC\. Since the same thing would happen for 
an infinitesimal isotheimal expansion, the least motion of the piston will cause the volume 
to change by a finite amount from its original value. Hence for any pressure between EE | 
a n d DD | only two stable phases are possible at the temperature r 3 corresponding to 
isotherm 3. 

§15. Undercooling. Delayed evaporation. 

What would happen if the critical volume of unit mass of the substance were between 
DC | and OD j at temperature r 3 ? Such a volume does not correspond to any stable state of 
the substance at temperature r 3 , yet it must be a possible volume since there must be some 
kind of transition between the smaller volume of the liquid phase and the larger volume of 


21 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



the vapor. This paradox is resolved by the possibility that one pail of the substance may be 
in the liquid phase, while simultaneously another part is in the vapor phase, so that the 
points representing the two coexisting phases must he on the same isotherm if there is to be 
thermal and mechanical equilibrium, and must have the same distance from the abscissa 
axis, since the temperature and pressure must be equal for the two phases. Under the 
influence of gravity, the heavier liquid phase will of course collect at the bottom of the 
container and the vapor will stay on top. 

Coexistence of the liquid and vapor phases can also occur if the volume is between OF \ 
and OC\, or between OD \ and OE\. If the substance first undergoes the state variation LE 
and then its volume decreases still further isotheimahy, then there are two possibilities, 
according to our present considerations. The further state variation can be represented by 
the curve ED, so that all of the substance is in the same state at every instant. However, at 
any moment it can happen that, while one pail of the substance continues along the curve 
DE, another part can go from a state G over to a state J having the same temperature and 
pressure. Further decrease in the volume can then cause a larger amount of the substance to 
pass from G to J, instead of continuing along the curve GD. In fact, if there is no dust or 
other substance present that can initiate condensation, a vapor can be compressed without 
condensation, even though under other circumstances—especially in the presence of a 
small amount of the same substance in the liquid state—it would already have stalled to 
condense. Since this state is more often reached by cooling than by compression, it is called 
the undercooled vapor. When condensation finally occurs, a larger amount of it suddenly 
liquefies irreversibly (i.e., the liquid-vapor mixture thereby produced cannot be transformed 
back into undercooled vapor in such a way that it goes through the same sequence of states 
in reverse). 

The same thing happens of course with evaporation. The substance first passes through 
the states on the curve MF, so that it is initially a highly compressed liquid. When the 
volume has increased isothermally to the state F, it can continue along the curve FJC; or, at 
any point, the coexistence of two phases can begin, so that from then on a pail of the 
substance is transformed into the vapor state. On further expansion, one pail of the 
substance will remain at the state J on the branch FC, while the other will go over to the 
state G, which has the same height, on the curve DE. Evaporation may be delayed when 
the liquid and the wall of the container are free of air. However, on further expansion or 
heating, a large amount will suddenly evaporate (evaporation- or boiling-delay). The latter 
process is lik ewise not reversible. 

If we find ourselves on an isotherm which, l ik e isotherm 4 in Figure 1, dips below the 
abscissa axis, then the pressure may even become negative. Mercury extracted from a 
barometer tube provides a good example of this. If one gradually draws the mercury out of 
a barometer tube (which is sealed at the top) then the pressure at the upper end continually 
decreases; the mercury itself goes through the sequence of states MFJC in Figure 2. The 
mercury column still does not break apart, even after it has become higher than the 
barometer position, which shows that the point C, where the ordinate of the isotherm has its 
minimum, lies below the abscissa axis, lik e isotherm 4 in Figure 1. Finally the column 
breaks and the mercury quickly evaporates; of course this is barely noticeable because of 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the small tension of mercury vapor. However, if distilled water is placed in the barometer 
tube above the mercury, then the copious evolution of vapor in the water is visible to the 
eye. 

A negative pressure can also occur in distilled water at room temperature. Hence for 
water the isotherm corresponding to room temperature also dips below the abscissa axis, 
l ik e isotherm 4 in Figure 1. On the other hand, for ether the isotherms do not go below the 
abscissa axis for easily observable temperatures. If one had put ether above the mercury in 
the experiment described above, then he could make the mercury column so long that the 
pressure in the ether would be smaller than the saturation pressure of ether vapor, though 
not so low that it would be negative. 

In processes that one usually calls boiling-delay (superheating), the substance is in 
contact with its own vapor. The state is not then an equilibrium state, but on the contrary 
violent evaporation takes place on the upper surface of the liquid; the temperature is equal 
to the boiling temperature corresponding to the pressure of the vapor standing over it. It is 
hotter in the interior, where the same state as in evaporation-delay is found, and this state 
can be maintained only by continuous evaporation at the surface and heat conduction 
through the interior. 

§16. Stable coexistence of both phases. 

It appears that our description of the nature of state variations is not uniquely 
determined. However, it is to be expected that a unique determination can be achieved if 
we exclude irreversible transitions, such as undercooling and delayed evaporation. 

For this puipose we consider a certain sample q of our substance, whose mass shall be 
equal to 1. It is initially in the state L (Fig. 2), and it will be compressed isothermally. As 
soon as it reaches E, it will from time to time be brought into contact with liquid at the same 
temperature and pressure. Initially, when q is still near the state E, this liquid will be in the 
state of delayed evaporation. It will explosively evaporate into q. Nevertheless we shall 
restore the previous state of q, compress it again a little bit, and again bring it into contact 
with the liquid at the same temperature and pressure. We repeat this process until eventually 
we come to a state in which, when q is brought into contact with the liquid at the same 
temperature and pressure, none of the liquid evaporates into q, and none of q condenses; 
thus liquid and vapor are in equilibrium. At this temperature the liquid is in the state J in 
Figure 2, and the vapor is in the state G. 

This equilibrium state cannot depend on the mixing ratio of the two phases, but only on 
the state at the surface of contact, for the molecules at the surface of contact are the only 
ones that are in equilibrium with the other phase. However, the size of the surface of 
contact cannot be important, since each part is subjected to similar conditions. 1 Hence any 
arbitrary quantity of the substance in phase J can be in equilibrium with any arbitrary 
quantity of the same substance in phase G, as soon as equilibrium between the two phases 
is possible at all. 

The state G then forms the boundary between the normal and the undercooled vapor, 
while J forms the boundary between the noimal and superheated liquid. 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



If one compresses q, excluding bodies that can effect condensation, then it can pass 
through states along the curve GD. In each such state, however, if it is brought into contact 
with the liquid at the same temperature and pressure, it will suddenly condense in an 
irreversible way. But if it is compressed while in contact with the liquid, starting from the 
state G, then it will condense more and more until it is completely transformed into the 
liquid state, and this process is reversible, since the substance can be evaporated again in 
the same way, if one increases the volume at constant temperature. 

The positions of the points G and J, which form the boundary between the normal and 
the superheated or undercooled states for a given isotherm, were found by Maxwell in the 

'•y 

following way, by introducing a hypothesis. As is well known, for any reversible cyclic 
process one has \clQ/T = 0, where dQ is the added heat and T the absolute temperature. The 
heat is to be measured in mechanical units. Maxwell assumes that this equation still remains 
valid even when unstable states intervene between the initial and final states, for example 
those states represented by the branch CHD in Figure 2. 

If the cyclic process takes place at constant temperature, then the factor 1 IT can be taken 
outside the integral sign, and one is left with \dQ = 0. dQ is equal to the excess dJ of the 
internal energy of the substance over the externally performed work. The latter is equal to 
pdv when, as assumed here, the external force is just the normal pressure force whose 
intensity on unit surface is equal to p for all surface elements. 

Since )dJ vanishes for any cyclic process, one has therefore \pdv = 0, for which one can 
also write \mioj = 0, since the choice of units is completely arbitrary. We now consider unit 
mass of the substance. It undergoes the following cyclic process at constant temperature. 
Initially all its parts are in the phase J, then it is transformed bit by bit into phase G. The 
pressure remains constant and equal to JJ\ , but the volume increases from OJ \ to GGj. 
The external work thereby performed, \rcdoj, is equal to the product of the pressure and the 
volume increase, hence it is equal to the area of the rectangle JJ^GiG = R. Now we 
imagine that we return to the original state by following the curve GDHCJ. The volume 
will decrease, so that external work is done on the substance. This work is equal to the 
negative of the integral J ndu) taken along the entire state variation. Since co is the abscissa 
and 7i the ordinate of the curve, the integral is equal to the area J \JCHDGG \J \ = O, which 
is bounded above by the curve JCHDG, below by the abscissa axis, and on the right and 
left by the two ordinates JJ\ and GGj. At the end of the process the substance returns to its 
original state K; \ndco extended over the entire state variation is therefore equal to the 
difference R - O, which is equal to the difference JCH - HDG of the two shaded areas in 
Figure 2. If one makes the Maxwell hypothesis that the second law must be valid even 
though pari of the imaginary path goes through unstable states, then he finds the following 
result: the line GHJ, which connects the two phases G and J, which are in contact at 
equilibrium (the two-phase line) must be drawn in such a way that the two shaded areas in 
Figure 2 turn out to be equal. If this condition is not satisfied, then the two phases G and J 
cannot be in equilibrium, even though they lie on the same isotherm and are at the same 
distance from the abscissa axis. (Concerning the equation that expresses this condition, cf. 
§60.) 


222 _ 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



17. Geometric representation of the states in which two phases coexist. 


If in the future we always mean by GHJ a line parallel to the abscissa axis, for which 
the two shaded areas are equal, then the results concerning the behavior of a substance 
under isothermal compression at a temperature r 3 can be expressed as follows. As long as 
the volume is greater than OE | it is in the vapor state. If the volume is between OE\ and 
OG |. the liquid phase still cannot coexist with the vapor phase. Condensation can occur 
only when a salt, or rather a body whose particles attract the particles of the substance more 
strongly than they attract each other, is present. The liquid thereby formed will dissolve the 
salt or cover the body, and, if an infinite amount is not present, the vapor pressure drops as 
this process continues (premature condensation). If no such body is present, the substance 
will remain gaseous until its volume becomes equal to OGy. Here, if it is brought into 
contact with the least amount of the same substance in the liquid state, further isothermal 
compression causes condensation, and the vapor pressure does not increase until all of the 
substance has liquefied, since vapor of a higher pressure cannot exist over the liquid phase 
(normal condensation). If no body is present to facilitate noimal condensation, then the 
substance can be still further compressed without condensation, so that its states are 
represented by the curved line GD (under-cooled vapor). However, if condensation sets in 
—which must happen in any case if the volume becomes less than OD |—then a finite 
amount of the substance suddenly liquefies, and the pressure drops to the value GG \ if the 
temperature is held constant. The substance behaves in a similar way if it is initially liquid 
and is gradually expanded; instead of bringing a small amount of liquid in contact with the 
vapor, one now creates in the liquid an empty or vapor-filled cavity. 

We must omit from each isotherm the section CHD , since it corresponds to states that 
cannot be physically realized. Moreover, we shall consider neither delayed evaporation 
(superheating) nor undercooled or prematurely condensed vapor, but only normal 
condensation, which represents the directly reversible transition from the liquid to the vapor 
state. We then have to retain only the parts MJ and GL for each isotherm, in Figure 2. In 
the intermediate region one part of the substance will be liquid, in a state represented by the 
point/, while the other will be gaseous, in the state (?, both parts being at the same 
temperature and pressure. Each such intermediate state can be represented by the two 
points G and / simultaneously, each point having a weight corresponding to the fraction of 
the substance in that state. It is preferable to represent these states by different points on the 
line JG (the two-phase line). The ordinate NN\ (Fig. 2) of an arbitrary point N on this line 
represents the pressure, which is the same for both coexisting phases. The abscissa ONy 
should be chosen so that it is equal to the total volume of the substance, i.e., the sum of the 
liquid and gaseous parts. The larger the liquid fraction, the closer to / will lie the point 
representing the state, and conversely. If we denote by x the mass of the liquid, and by 1 - 
x the mass of the vapor, in the state N, then x has the following property: since OJ\ is the 
specific volume of the liquid, and OG \ that of the vapor, then x • OJ\ is the volume of the 
liquid and (1 - x) • OG | that of the gaseous part of the state represented by N. Since the 
sum of the volumes is equal to the abscissa ONy, one has the equation 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




x-OJ i + (1 - x)'OG\ = ONi, 


from which it follows that: 

NiGi _ NG JJfi _ JN 

17Fi~Jg' ~ x ~ Jth ~ JG’ 

x NiGi NG 

If one imagines that the mass x of the hquid is concentrated at the point J, and that of the 
vapor, 1 - x, at the point G, then N is the center of gravity of the system formed from the 
two masses. The rule that the reciprocal of the abscissa always represents the density does 
not of course hold for points on the two-phase line. On the contrary, if p| is the density of 
the liquid, and p 2 that of the gas, then the abscissa is 

x 1 - x 

ON i = — +- 

Pl P2 

If we represent the states where hquid and gas coexist in this way, and ignore the 
undercooled vapor as well as the superheated liquid, then the isotherms will have the form 
shown in Figure 3 instead of that in Figure 1. The isotherm labeled 3 in Figures 1 and 2 is 
likewise marked as 3 in Figure 3. The part JG is a straight line, and a points on this line 
represents a state in which a part x of the substance is liquid, while the remainder 1 - x is 
gaseous, and the two parts are both at a pressure AW|, while the sum of their volumes is 
ONi ■ x and 1 - x are then given by Equations (37). Also, for those isotherms for which the 
pail representing delayed evaporation sinks below the abscissa axis, there is a line JG, 
always lying above the abscissa axis, for which the two shaded areas in Figure 2 are equal; 
for the area between the abscissa axis and the pail of the isotheim that goes below the axis 
is always finite, while the area between the pail of the isotherm corresponding to larger 
abscissas and the abscissa axis becomes logarithmically infinite as the abscissa goes to 
infinity. Hence equating the two shaded areas in Figure 2 always leads to a two-phase line 
lying above the abscissa axis. 



7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




Fig. 3. 


§ 18. Definition of the concepts gas, vapor, and liquid. 

We may denote the region lying above the critical isotherm 1, shaded horizontally in 
Figure 3, as the gas region. The points in this region that have large abscissas will in fact 
represent states close to the ideal gas state. The smaller abscissas, corresponding to points 
lying near the lineAB, represent of course states in which the substance behaves like a 
liquid, but since these states can be transformed isotheimally without discontinuity into 
states that are undoubtedly gaseous, we shall count them as belonging to the gas region. An 
example is provided by compressed air at ordinary temperatures. 

The region filled by two-phase lines will be called the two-phase region; it is shaded 
vertically in Figure 3. Since the dotted curve of Figure 1, which is the geometrical locus of 
all maxima and minima of the isotherms, lies entirely within the two phase region in any 
case, the curve bounding this region has a smaller curvature than the dotted curve at the 
critical point, and in any case it has no cusp. 

Beneath the gas region and to the right of the two-phase region lies the vapor region, in 
which the substance behaves l ik e a gas; on the left of the two-phase region is the liquid 
region (bounded by the lineAB) in which we call the substance a “condensable fluid.” 
These two last-named regions are shaded with slanted lines in Figure 3. They are 
characterized by the property that no state of one can be transformed isotheimally into a 
state of the other without condensation. 

A typical isotheim going through these regions is curve 3 of Figure 3. If one starts from 
the low-density region, he can make the following statements about the properties of the 
substance under isothermal compression : in the vapor region, as long as the volume is 
large, Boyle’s law is obeyed approximately. If one decreases the volume, deviations from 
this law become more and more appreciable. As soon as one reaches the two-phase region, 
the pressure remains constant on further compression, and an increasing proportion of the 
substance becomes liquid. After all the substance has been liquefied, the pressure increases 
rapidly on further compression. 

Two extreme cases are illustrated by isotherms 2 and 5. The first lies near the critical 
isotherm. Here the liquid phase differs but little from the vapor. Condensation lasts only a 


Wte, 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ “Pity. i .Zc. 1 


























short time, so that it has only the character of a temporary irregularity in the compressibility. 
Isotherm 5, on the other hand, corresponds to a temperature far below the critical; in 
general the vapor exerts only a vanishingly small pressure, and indeed it is hardly 
noticeable at all. As soon as the pressure reaches an appreciable value, and no other 
substance is mixed with the one considered, then it can exist only as a liquid, which has a 
definite volume that can be altered only slightly by pressure. The compressibility of the 
liquid at temperatures far below the critical temperature is therefore very small. Of course, 
according to our diagram, the vapor pressure can only approach asymptotically to zero. A 
trace of vapor must always be present even at the lowest temperatures. 

§19. Arbitrariness of the definitions of the preceding section. 

We have based our definitions of the concepts gas, vapor, and liquid on isothermal state 
variations. This is of course an arbitrary procedure, which can at best be justified by saying 
that in practice one usually tries to keep the temperature equal to that of the surroundings, 
and thus as nearly constant as possible. We could also consider state variations such that the 
substance is in a cylindrical container closed by an airtight, easily movable piston, subject 
to a constant pressure. Suppose the temperature is initially very high. As heat is lost, the 
volume decreases. We call such a state variation an isobaric one; it is represented by a line 
parallel to the abscissa axis (the isobar). If the constant pressure acting on the substance is 
greater than the critical pressure, then it goes over from an approximately gaseous state to 
an approximately liquid state, without discontinuity. If, on the other hand, the pressure is 
smaller than the critical pressure, then the temperature drops with increasing volume only 
until the two-phase region is reached. Since the isobar then coincides with the isotherm, the 
temperature remains constant until all of the substance is liquefied. If one wanted to base 
the definition of the concepts “vapor” and “gas” on isobaric compression, then the 
separating line between the two states would be a line parallel to the abscissa axis passing 
through the critical point, since above this line, isobaric transformation of any state into any 
other state never involves any condensation, whereas below it, isobaric compression 
always goes through the two-phase region. 

One would obtain yet another distinction between vapor and gas if he used adiabatic 
variations, i.e., variations not involving addition or loss of heat. In order to compute these, 
one must set the differential of the added heat, dQ, equal to zero (cf. §21). We shall not 
pursue this further, and we remark only that if one does not adopt some definite criterion— 
isothermal, isobaric, or adiabatic—for state variations, then a distinction between states that 
can or cannot be continuously transformed into other states is not in general possible. For 
one can go from any state into any other state without passing through the two-phase 
region, and thus without condensation or evaporation. One can see this in the following 
way: let points in the two-phase region have the significance that their ordinates are equal 
to the pressure, and their abscissas are equal to the total volume of the liquid and vapor 
states combined, so that any point of the quadrant BAD. in Figure 3 represents a possible 
state of the substance. Let two arbitrary states of the substance be given. In each of these 
states, let the entire substance be in the same phase, so that the two points, called P and Q, 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



are both outside the two-phase region. We can always connect them with a curve that goes 
above K from P to Q without going through the two-phase region. This curve represents a 
continuous sequence of states by which the substance can be transformed from the state P 
to the state Q without any part of the substance ever being in a phase different from the rest. 
However, we can also draw a curve from P toward the left boundary line AJK of the two- 
phase region, then across this region from left to right, and finally above it to Q . This curve 
would represent a state variation in which the substance starts out in the liquid phase, 
gradually evaporates, and then when it has completely vaporized, passes continuously to 
the final state Q. Conversely, a curve might go from P, above the two-phase region to a 
point lying on the right-hand boundary curve KGQ of the two-phase region, then across 
this region to a point on the curve AJK, and then above the two-phase region to Q. Such a 
curve would represent a state variation in which the substance is transformed from the state 
P continuously to a vapor state, then condenses, and finally ends up in the state Q. 

A substance can even be transformed from a liquid state to a vapor state, not by 
evaporation, but rather by condensation. One merely needs to stall with a small volume, 
heat the substance above the critical temperature, then expand it to a large volume, cool it 
below the critical temperature, then condense it, then again heat the liquid above the critical 
temperature, and then transform it to the desired final state. Likewise one can transform a 
vapor to a liquid by evaporation. 

Obviously one would call a substance a liquid, vapor, or gas, when its state is 
represented by a point near the lower pail of the line AB, or near the curve KGQ, or above 
the critical isotherm far from AB, respectively. In the intermediate region, however, these 
states can gradually transform into each other, so that if one desired a sharp boundary he 
would have to establish it by some arbitrary definition. 

§20. Isopycnic changes of state. 

If we enclose a fixed amount of a substance (say unit mass) in a tube closed on both 
sides, and gradually warm it, then we produce very nearly a change of state at constant 
volume (isopycnic change of state). If the volume is exactly equal to one-third of the critical 
volume (in general it cannot be any smaller than that) then the pressure is always infinite, 
except at absolute zero temperature. At any other volume, we would always find ourselves 
in the two-phase region at sufficiently low temperatures. Hence some of the substance will 
be found as a liquid in the lower pail of the tube. Above it stands the vapor of the same 
substance, whose pressure is nearly zero at very small temperatures, and increases with 
temperature. The boundary between liquid and vapor is called the meniscus. Since we 
assume that the volume is constant, the change of state must be represented by a line 
parallel to the ordinate axis, passing through the two-phase region—for example, the line 
N\N in Figure 3. In the state represented by the point A, the mass of the liquid part of the 
substance is, according to Equation (37), 


^Pi mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



and that of the vapor part is 


x = 


NG 

Jg 


1 




We now have to distinguish three cases: 1. The line N\N representing our state variation 
lies to the right of the line KK |, which is parallel to the ordinate axis and goes through the 
critical point. The chosen constant volume is then larger than the critical volume. Then, as 
the temperature increases, NG becomes smaller and smaller relative to JG. The amount of 
liquid in the tube decreases with increasing temperature, and the meniscus drops. Finally, 
when the line NyN has reached the boundary of the two-phase region, the entire substance 
becomes vapor. 2. The line NN\ lies to the left of KK |. Then JN will instead decrease 
relative to NG, the meniscus will rise, and the entire substance becomes liquid at the 
moment when the boundary of the two-phase region is reached. 3. When the substance has 
precisely the critical volume OK the ratio of TV to NG always remains finite as the 
substance is heated at constant volume, until the critical point is reached. The meniscus 
always stays between the upper and lower ends of the tube, until finally it vanishes at the 
critical temperature, since the liquid and vapor both have the same properties then. 

We saw that the boundary of the two-phase region becomes nearly horizontal in the 
neighborhood of the critical point. Therefore the meniscus almost vanishes if NN\ lies in 
the neighborhood of KK\ . Theoretically it must remain in the interior of the tube until the 
temperature is almost equal to the critical temperature, and then it moves very quickly to the 
upper or lower end of the tube.* This cannot be observed, since it has previously already 
become so indistinct that one can no longer see it. Moreover, small impurities in the 
substance cause significant perturbations at the critical point. 

§21. Calorimetry of a substance following van der Waals’ law. 

Since we have adopted a definite mechanical model, there is no difficulty in determining 
an expression for the differential of the added heat, dQ. As in Equation (19) and in Part I, 
§8, let q2 be the mean square velocity of the center of mass of a molecule (progressive 

motion), so that i^2 is the mean kinetic energy of the motion of the center of mass of the 

molecules found in unit mass of the substance. If the temperature of unit mass is raised by 
dT, then the part of the added heat used to increase this kinetic energy is (in mechanical 
units) 

dQi = ]d{c 2 ) = %rdT. 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



The latter relation follows from Equation (21). 

Although in the derivation of van der Waals’ law we assumed that the molecules behave 
almost lik e elastic spheres in collisions, in general we shall not exclude intramolecular 
motion; we set (as in Pail I, §8) the work done against intermolecular forces by the applied 
heat equal to 

(37a) dQz = pdQi. 


Since the van der Waals cohesion force acts on each molecule almost equally in all 
directions, it will not influence the internal motion. The same results that we shall derive in 
§§42-44 for an ideal gas of compound molecules will therefore be valid for this internal 
motion. It does not depend on how often the molecules collide with each other, but only on 
the temperature, so that /3 can only be a function of temperature. If the molecules are rigid 

2 ; but if they are rigid solids of some other 
shape, then /? is equal to 1. If intramolecular motions are present, and if/is the number of 
degrees of freedom of a molecule, then the corresponding fraction of the average kinetic 
energy will be f — ]. One may also add a contribution for the work done by 

intramolecular forces, which can be a function of temperature. 

At present we shall not go into these details, but simply consider /? to be some function 
of temperature in Equation (37a). 

The specific heat of unit mass at constant volume is therefore: 


solids of revolution, then, as we shall see, ft 



dQi 4 dQ) 

It 


3 

-r( 1 + 0. 


If the volume simultaneously increases by dv, then the work done to overcome the 
external pressure is pdv, while that done to overcome the internal molecular pressure is 
adv/v . Hence the total heat added to unit mass is 


(38) dQ = 


3r(l+fl 

2 


dT + 



rT 

- dv. 

v-b 


Since van der Waals’ kinetic hypothesis not only determines the equation of state but also 
permits one to make statements about the specific heat, it is clear how one can determine 
the specific heat by using a substance that satisfies the conditions of the hypothesis, but not 
for a substance that merely satisfies empirically the van der Waals equation of state. The 
entropy is: 



^PuJi.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



which, if /? is constant, reduces to : 


rt [(v - 6)r*a+«rt] + const. 

where l means the natural logarithm. Setting this quantity constant yields the equation for 
adiabatic changes of state. The specific heat of unit mass at constant pressure is 

_ 3r(l + j8) r _3r(l + (5) r 

2 ^ 2 a(v - b)' 1 2 ^ 2a{v - b) 

1 - 1 - 

rW vipv 2 + a) 


and the ratio of specific heats is 


K=l + 


3(1 + 0) 


1 - 


2 a{v - b) 
rTv z 


n 


If the gas suddenly expands into a vacuum (as in Gay-Lussac’s experiment) so that the 
specific volume and density have initially the values v and p, and afterwards the values v' 
and p', then the work done against molecular attraction, per unit mass of the gas, 



a 

v 



a(p - p'), 


is therefore independent of temperature. 

However, if the gas expands adiabatically in a reversible manner, then it follows from 
Equation (38) that 


(dT\ 2T T 

W/s " ~ 3(1 + 0)(r - b) ~~~ 

Let unit mass of the substance be originally in the liquid state, and then evaporate at 
constant temperature T, at the saturation pressure p of the vapor, corresponding to this 
temperature. Then one has to set clT = 0 in Equation (38). The total heat of vaporization is 



23 


lIic- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



therefore : 




+ p(v' -»). 


where v and p are the specific volume and density of the liquid, and v' and p are the same 
quantities for the vapor at the same temperature. 

The last term of this equation represents the work needed to overcome the external 
pressure on the vapor. If one neglects the density of the vapor compared to that of the 
liquid, then: 


I = ap 

is the work of separation of the liquid particles. 

One can now calculate the constant a from the deviations of the dilute heated vapor 
from the Boyle-Charles law. From this, one obtains for the liquid state of the same 
substance the co-called internal or molecular pressure (i.e., the difference between the 
pressure in the interior of the liquid near the surface, and that on the outside of the surface): 
ap 2 . The heat of vaporization of the liquid, measured in mechanical units (more precisely, 
the heat of separation of its particles) is ap, a quantity that can be compared with 
experiment. 

The latter result is independent of the assumption from which we have obtained van der 
Waals’ equation, and depends only on the form of that equation, so that it would remain 
correct if one one were simply given this equation as an empirical law. 

§22. Size of the molecule. 

By calculating the constant b from the deviations of a gas from the Boyle-Charles law, 
one can improve Loschmidt’s determination of the size of a molecule (see §12 of Part I). 
We can now calculate the amount of space actually occupied by the molecules in unit mass, 
since this is equal to 1/4 b, whereas in Part I we had to use the assumption that the volume 
of the molecules in the liquid state cannot be smaller than the total volume of these 
molecules themselves, and should not be more than ten times that volume. 

From Equations (77) and (91) of Part I, one obtains for the viscosity coefficient of a gas 
the value 9? = kpc/ 7rn<7 2 \/2’ where, according to Equation (89) of Part I, k can 
differ only slightly from ^ , if one understands by c the mean velocity of progressive motion 
of the gas molecule.* a is the diameter of a molecule, p is the mass in unit volume, n is the 
number of molecules in unit volume, so that p/n = m is the mass of a molecule. One can 
therefore write also 


23 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



kmc 




further, we have: 


2™ 2 

b = - 

3m 


hence 



<7 = —=— ; 

y/2 kc 

where the mean velocity c can be calculated with sufficient accuracy from Equations (7) 
and (46) of Part I. 

I will abstain from giving numerical values, since the choice of the most reliable 
numbers would not be possible without an analysis of the experimental data, and this 
would be completely out of place in the present book. 

§23. Relations to capillarity. 

Van der Waals obtained the term a/v 2 in his formula by a route somewhat longer than 
the one we used in §7; he employed the arguments by which Laplace and Poisson had 
derived the basic equations of capillarity.* Since this connection with capillarity is of some 
importance, I will summarize here the original derivation of van der Waals. 

The following considerations are applicable to both liquids and gases, but more 
especially to the former, wherefore we shall call the substance under consideration “the 
fluid” for short. We assume that the attraction of two mass particles m and m' acts in the 
direction of their line of centers, and is a function of their distance/, which we call mm'F(f). 
We set: 



mm= m 


so that mm'xif) is the work required to bring the two particles m and m' from the distance/ 
to a much larger distance. In any case F(f) will have a value different from zero at 
molecular distances. We assume that it decreases more rapidly than the inverse third power 
of/as/increases, so that not only F(f) but also x(f) and 1 'if) always vanish when/does not 
have a very small value. From our hypothesis it follows that the force acting between m 


23 


“Pul+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



and m' is equal to - mm 'dx(f) / df. 

We now construct a sphere K of radius b in the fluid, 3 denote by do a surface element of 
K. and further construct the right cylinder Z, situated outside this sphere on the surface 
element do, which has a very great length B - b. The center O of the sphere is chosen as 
origin of coordinates, and we place the positive abscissa axis along the axis of the cylinder. 

We now pose the problem of finding the attraction dA exerted by the fluid in K on the 
fluid contained in the cylinder Z. 

For this purpose, we construct in Z the volume element dZ, which lies between the cross 
sections with abscissas x and x+dx. Its volume is dodx, hence it contains mass pdodx of 
fluid (the density p is assumed to be constant everywhere). 

We then cut out from the sphere K a concentric spherical shell S, which lies between 
spherical surfaces of radii u and u+du, and from this shell we cut out a ring R, for which 
the line connecting it with the origin of coordinates makes an angle between & and &+dQ 
with the positive abscissa axis. The volume of R is 2tcu sin ddudd. When multiplied by p, 
this is the mass contained in the ring. 

Any fluid particle of mass in' that lies in R and has abscissa x' exerts on any other fluid 
particle m that lies in the cylinder Z and has abscissa x the attraction 

, d X (!) 

-mm - 

df 


whose component in the direction of the negative abscissa axis is 


d x (f) x-x 1 
- mm - 

df f 


- mm' 


dxif) 

dx 


The total fluid mass contained in the ring R therefore exerts an attraction 


- 27 Tprdodxu 1 sin OdudO 


dm 

dx 


on the mass in dZ. The total attraction of the fluid in the sphere K on the fluid in the 
cylinder Z can be found by choosing the following order of integration, which is the most 
convenient one for this calculation: 


r b r D d r v 

dA = - 2irp 2 do I udu I dx —I x(/)wsi 
d o d u dxd o 


sin Odd. 


In carrying out the integration over & we consider just the spherical shell S, so that we 


23 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



can consider u constant. Substituting/ for u as the variable of integration, we therefore 
obtain 


ux sin = fdf 


and the li mits for/will be x - u and x+u. Hence: 



l 

u sin M = — 


x 



-m)-iK* + u)], 


where ip is the function defined at the beginning of this section. The integration over x will 
now be performed by setting x = B in this expression and subtracting from this the value 
obtained by setting x = b in the same expression. 

It is to be recalled that the function ip always vanishes if the argument of the function is 
not very small. B and b are very large compared to molecular dimensions, and therefore 
also larger than all values of u that come into consideration. Hence ip(B+u), i//(B-u) and 
ifib+u) vanish. Only tfib - u) can take a value different from zero, and one obtains: 


hence 




r 1 

x(f)u sin ddd - - ij/ib- 




If one introduces the variable z = b - u in the definite integral, then it is transformed to 



6 

2 ^/{z)dz. 


Since t/Xz) vanishes for large values of z, one can write oo instead of b for the upper limit of 
the integral. If one sets 



23 , 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 


then 



dA 2 ap 2 

o r 

- = OLD 1 -- 

do b 

If the cylinder Z is surrounded by fluid on all sides, then clearly all the forces acting on it 
are neutralized. Hence the fluid surrounding the sphere K must exert a force on the fluid in 
the cylinder exactly equal and opposite to that which the fluid in K exerts. Now if the fluid 
inK is taken away, then there remains only a fluid mass whose outer surface is the 
spherical surface K. dA is then the fraction exerted by this fluid mass on the cylinder Z 
placed over one of its surface elements do, in a direction toward the inside, which was 
denoted in §2 by pjdo. 

If the surface is plane, or if its radius of curvature is so large that \lb can be neglected, 
we obtain the value already found in §7: p { = ap 2 . However, according to Equation (39) 
the constant a can be expressed in terms of the law of attraction of the molecules. 

The term -2 apr/b shows that this expression requires a small correction if the surface is 
curved. This correction gives rise to capillary phenomena, as is well known; when the 
surface is not spherical, it takes the form 


(40) - ap 2 ( —|- V 

\R, %/ 

where 91 j and 9 ?9 are the two principal radii of curvature of the surface. 

§24. Work of separation of the molecules. 

We shall now express the heat of vaporization in terms of the function x. We construct 
around a fluid particle of mass m a spherical shell S, which is bounded by two spherical 
surfaces of radii/ and f+df, in which therefore the amount of fluid mass is Arrpfdf. Since 
mm'xif) is the work that must be done in order to bring the fluid particles m and m' to 
infinite separation, if they are initially at a distance/, then the work required to bring m 
from the midpoint of the spherical shell S to a great distance is: 

4 * mPxWf. 

The total work needed in order to bring m from the interior of the fluid to a point far away 
from all other fluid particles is therefore: 


B = 47rpm 



29 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



If unit mass of the fluid contains n particles, we have mn = 1. If one assumes that in the 
vapor each particle is already far away from the sphere of action of all the others, then the 
work done in evaporating unit mass of the fluid, to overcome the cohesive force, is 



To this we must of course add the workjpdv done against the external pressure in 
evaporation. 

^ is therefore only half of nB, since in the expression for nB the work of separation of 
each particle from each other one is counted twice. In §21 we found the value ap for the 
work of separation where a is given by the first of Equations (39). Partial integration of 
the right hand side of this equation gives in fact: 



The value of ^ obtained previously therefore agrees with the one found here. 

One would obtain the work of separation directly by integration of the first of Equations 
(39), if he first calculated the work of separation of a particle at a distance h from another 
one in a plane layer of thickness dh in the fluid. This would be: 




When multiplied by n and integrated over h from zero to infinity, this gives the total work 
of separation 

By means of a similar formula we can solve the following problem. Let there be given a 
cylinder of cross-section 1; we draw through it anywhere a cross-section AB and ask for the 
work necessary to separate the fluid on one side from the fluid on the other side. 

We first calculate the work of separation of a layer of thickness dx at a distance x from 
the bottom of the container, lying below AB, from another layer of thickness dh above AB. 
We set m = pclx in Equation (41). Then the work of separation is equal to 

WiMx f /x(M. 

J h 

Here h is the distance between the two layers. We keep this fixed for the moment, and 
integrate over all allowed values of x. If c is the distance between AB and the bottom, then 


22 


Pi£^ie 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



when h is constant we have to integrate from x = c -h to x = c, which gives: 


/i oo /»e /»oo 

2 rfdh\ fx(f)df dx = 2rpM I / X (M 

4 k 4 e-k J h 

If one integrates h over all possible values from zero to oo, he obtains for the total work of 
separation of the fluid above AB from that below AB the value : 

/» 00 /» 00 

2irp 1 2 I W/i I / X (M = 2ap 2 4 . 

Jo J h 

Since in this process of separation the surface area of the fluid increases by 2 units, the 
work required to increase the surface area of the fluid by 1 is just half of this, and is 
therefore equal to ap . However, this quantity is at the same time the coefficient of 

1 1 

in the basic equation of capillarity, (40). In fact it is well known that this coefficient 
represents the work required to increase the fluid surface by 1 unit. 

These equations would be considerably more complicated if one introduced the 
improvement that Poisson made in the old Laplace theory of capillarity, by taking account 
of the variation of density during the transition from the interior to the surface of the fluid. 
Yet the form of the equations obtained remains the same; only the expression for the 
constant in terms of a definite integral is different. Since capillarity theory is only of 
incidental interest here, I will not go into this further, and merely refer to Stefan’s 
treatment. 5 


1 The curvature of the surface of contact will have an effect, if this is very small. Over a concave 
upper surface (as at the meniscus in a capillary tube) the vapor pressure is less than the hydrostatic 
pressure of the vapor column that lies between the level of the meniscus and that of the plane liquid- 
surface outside the capillary tube. Over a surface that is convex to the same degree, it would be larger by 
the same amount. (Cf. end of §23.) 

2 Maxwell, Nature 11, 357, 374 (1875); Scientific Papers 2, 424. See also Clausius, Die Kinetische 
Theorie der Case (Braunschweig, 1889-1891), p. 201. 

* See van der Waals’ remark on this point, mentioned at the end of §61. 

* According to the Chapman-Enskog theory, the correct value of kin this formula is 0.499. 

* Laplace, Traite de mecanique celeste (Paris: J. B. M. Duprat, 1798-1825), Supplement au X e 
Livre. Poisson, Nouvelle Theorie de Taction capillaire (Paris: Bachelier, 1831). 

3 This is not to be confused with the constant earlier denoted by b. 

4 a is the quantity given by the second of Eqs. (39). 


23 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




5 Stefan, Wien. Ber. 94,4 (1886); Ann. Phys. [3] 29,655 (1886). 


23 , 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



CHAPTER III 


Principles of general mechanics needed for gas theory. 

§25. Conception of the molecule as a mechanical system characterized by 
generalized coordinates. 

In all calculations up to now (except for the specific heat) we have treated the gas 
molecules as completely elastic spheres or as centers of force, without any internal 
structure. Many circumstances show that this assumption cannot exactly conform to reality. 

All gases can be made luminous, and their light then sometimes provides a wonderfully 
complicated spectrum. This would be impossible for simple material points; moreover, the 
vibrations of elastic spheres could scarcely produce the observed spectral phenomena, even 
if one took account in the calculations of the internal motions of the elastic substance, 
which we have so far ignored. 

Furthermore, the facts of chemistry compel the assumption that, in chemically 
compound gases, the molecules consist of many heterogeneous parts. One can show that 
even the molecules of the chemically most simple gases must consist of at least two 
separate parts. For example, if Cl and H are bound into C1H, then the C1H gas occupies at 
equal temperature and pressure exactly the same space that the Cl and H gases did together. 
Since, according to Avogadro’s law (Pail I, §7), there are the same number of molecules in 
all gases at equal temperatures and equal pressures, a molecule of chlorine and a molecule 
of hydrogen must combine to form two molecules of C1H; hence both the chlorine and the 
hydrogen molecules must have been composed of two parts. One half of the chlorine 
molecule combines with one half of the hydrogen molecule to form a C1H molecule; the 
other two halves of the two original molecules combine to form another C1H molecule. 

In order to take into account this undubitable composite structure of the gas molecule, 
one will have to consider it as an aggregate of a definite number of material points, held 
together by central forces. One does not obtain very good agreement with experiment in 
this way; on the contrary, for many gases the thermal phenomena, at least, are better 
interpreted by assuming that the molecules are rigid nonspherical bodies. Thus it appears 
that the connection of the parts of these molecules is so intimate that they behave like rigid 
solids with respect to thermal phenomena, even though in other cases the constituents 
appeal’ to vibrate against each other. 

In view of this circumstance it would be best to make our assumptions about the 
properties of molecules so general that all these possibilities can be included as special 
cases. We shall therefore obtain a mechanical model that will have the greatest possible 
capacity to explain new experimental results. 

We shall consider the molecule as a system of whose nature we know no more than that 
its changes of configuration are determined by the general mechanical equations of 
Lagrange and Hamilton. It is then a question of studying those properties of a mechanical 


23 , 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



system that will later be needed in the most general way. 

Let the state of an arbitrary mechanical system by given. The positions of all its parts 
will be uniquely determined by p independently variable quantities p \, p 2 ,.... p fl , which we 
call the generalized coordinates. Since the geometric nature of the system, and the masses 
of all its parts, are given, we also know the kinetic energy L of the system as a function of 
the velocity-changes of its coordinates. This is a homogeneous quadratic function of the 
derivatives p { f p . 2 f • • • } pj of the coordinates with respect to the time, whose 

coefficients can be any functions of the coordinates. The partial derivatives of the function 
L with respect to p' arc the momenta q, so that one therefore has for each value of i: 


dL(p, p') 



The q are therefore linear functions of the p and the coefficients in these functions can 
again be functions of the p. Conversely, one can express the p' as functions of the q. If one 
substitutes the appropriate values into Lip, p'), then he obtains L as a function of the p and 
q. This function Lip, q) is therefore also determined by the geometric nature of the system.* 

The forces acting on the various parts of the system should likewise be exactly 
specified. They should be derived from a potential function V, which is a function only of 
the p, and whose negative partial derivatives with respect to the coordinates give the force, 
so that for each arbitrary displacement of the system, the increase dV of this function 
represents the work done by the system. If the kinetic energy of the system increases by dL 
at the same time, then according to the conservation of energy, we have dV + dL = 0. 

Not only the geometric nature of the system in question but also the forces acting on it 
are given. The equations of motion of the system are thereby determined. If one wishes to 
calculate the actual values of all the coordinates and momenta at some time t, then the initial 
state of the system must also be given. One might be given the values of the coordinates 
and their time-derivatives at the initial time (time zero). However, one might equally well 
be given the values of the coordinates and momenta at time zero, since the momenta are 
given as functions of the p'. We shall denote the values of the coordinates and momenta at 
time zero by PpP 2 , - , Pjj, Qp C?2> - . Q > The values ppp 2 , - , /> q\, <?2> •••> of the 
coordinates and momenta at time t are to be considered as given functions of these values 
and of the elapsed time 1 . 

Since L and V are given as functions of the p and q, we can calculate L and V for each 
instant of time as functions of P, Q, and I. When we put these into the integral 



then it is also a function of the initial values P , Q , and of the elapsed time t, since the entire 
motion is determined by P and Q, and the integral can be calculated as soon as we are 


24 


IPuJix*. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



given the l im its of integration. 

We saw just now that the 2p quantities p, q are given as functions of P, Q, and 1 —i.e., 
there are 2 p equations between 4//+1 quantities p, q, P, Q, and 1 . From these 2 p equations 
we have to determine the 2 p quantities p, q as functions of the others. However, we can 
also imagine that we have solved these equations for the 2 p quantities q, Q, so that the q 
and Q are expressed as functions of the 2/r+l other quantities p, P, t. For the moment we 
shall indicate a function of these latter variables by putting a bar above it. Thus q , means 
that the quantity q, is to be considered expressed as a function of p, P, and t. Since we can 
find W as a function of P, Q, and t, we can also express therein the Q as functions of p, P, 
and t, so that W itself (now denoted by J J) becomes a function of p, P, and t. It is well 
known 1 that 


Whence it follows at once that 


(42) 


dW . 

dW 

c?* 

II 

1 10 

II 

1 

1 «■© 

l 

dQi 


dp,- 



; 


where the bar means that in the differentiation with respect to any one p, all the other p, all 
the P and the time are to be considered constant; similarly in the differentiation with respect 
to any one of the P. i and j can take any integer values from 1 to p, independently of each 
other. 


§26. Liouville’s Theorem.* 

When one wishes to discuss any curve whose equation contains an arbitrary parameter, 
it is customary to consider simultaneously all the curves obtained by giving this parameter 
all its possible values. We are now dealing with a mechanical system (characterized by 
given equations of motion) whose motion depends on the values of the 2 p parameters P, Q. 
Just as one can represent a curve infinitely many times, each time with a different value of a 
parameter, so we can represent our mechanical system infinitely often, so that we obtain 
infinitely many mechanical systems, all of the same nature and subject to the same 
equations of motion, but with different initial conditions. Among this infinite number, or 
family, of mechanical systems, we are given certain ones for which the initial values of the 
coordinates and momenta are specified within infinitesimally close l im its, e.g., 


24 


^Pi mJuc. 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 




(43) 


P i and P [ + dP\ } P 2 and P 2 + dP 2 • • • and + dP^ 
Qi and Q { + dQ h Q 2 and Q 2 + dQ 2 • • • Qn and Q „ + dQ M . 

After these systems have moved for the same time t, according to their equations of motion, 
the coordinates and momenta will lie between the li mits 


(pi and pi + dp 1, p 2 and p 2 + dp 2 • • • p h and p M + dp M 

(44) < 

Igi and <71 + dqi, q 2 and q 2 + d</ 2 • • • and q„ + dq», 

Our problem is to express the product 

(45) dp\dp 2 • • • dp„dqidq 2 • • • 

in terms of the product 

(46) dPidP 2 • • • dPpdQidQi • • • 

We know that we can express the q as functions of the p, P, and t. We can therefore 
introduce the variables p and P instead of p and q in the differential expressions (45). The 
time t is considered a constant. Thence follows next, according to the well-known theorem 
of Jacobi on the so-called functional determinants : 



where 


( dp\dp 2 • • • dp»dq\dq 2 • • • dq» = 
Ddp\dp 2 • • • dp ll dP\dP 2 • • • 


i 


24 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



100 • • • 0, 0 • • • 

010 '• • • 0, 0 • • • 




dq\ dq 2 
dP\ dP 2 


dq\ dq 2 
000 — » — 
dP\ dP 2 


dqi dq 2 
dPi dPi 


dqi dq 2 
dP 2 dP 2 


Likewise, we can also introduce the variables p and P in the expression (46) by expressing 
the Q as functions of the P, p, and t, whereby we then obtain: 



where 



dPidPi • ■ ■ dPfdQidQi ■ • ■ dQ f = 
MPidPi ■ ■ ■ dP^dpidpi ■ ■ • dp f , 



dQi dQi 
dpi dpi 

dQi dQi 

dpi dpi 


The paitial derivatives in the functional determinant 1) are to be understood in the same 
sense as the quantities previously denoted by a bar; the q are considered to be functions of 
the p, P, and t. Similarly for the paitial derivatives in the functional determinant A, in which 
the Q are to be considered as functions of the same variables p, P, and t. However, we can 
apply Equations (42), and since a determinant does not change its value when one 
permutes the horizontal and vertical rows, and conversely, we have 


24 


P&i+uc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 







• I 


dg t dq 2 

dP i ’ dPt 

(51) A = dqi dq 2 = (-1 YD. 

dP 2 dP 2 


Since only the magnitude and not the sign is important, it follows from Equations (47), 
(49), and (51) that 



which is the desired relation. Indeed, we obtain in general the correct sign if we take 
account of the changes of sign resulting from the changes in the orders of differentials in 
going from Equation (47) to Equation (49). 

Suppose one introduces, in place of 2/r arbitrary variables Jtq, x 2 , ... , v 2 „ in some 
differential expression, 2/r other variables 2 1 . f 2 , ... ,d; 2 ^ which are related to the former set 
by the following equations : 

£l = ^2 — ^M+2 ’ “ ^2u> £ji+1 — Xl ‘ “ Xu) 

then it follows from the theorem on functional determinants that: 

dx\dxi • • • dx2n = ©d(• • • dfa, 

where 


7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 




dh dh 
dxi dx\ 



% % 
^2 


000 • • • 100 • • • 
000 • • • 010 • • • 


100 • • • 000 • • • 
010 • • • 000 • • • 


Now since permutation of two horizontal rows changes the sign of the determinant, we 
have 


0 = (- 1 )' 


100 ■ • • 

010 •• • 



If one sets 

^1 = Pi) Xi = Pi • 2!u+l — PXft+i — Pi • • • , 

then 

h = P\ t it m Pi • • • &+i = Pit fc»+2 ■ Pi • • *) 

hence 


dpidpz • • • dprfPidPi • • • dPn 
= {-\ydP\dPi • • • dP^dpidpt • • • dp^f 

and it follows from (47) that 

dpidpi • • • dpndqidqt • • • 

= (- \yDdP\dPi • • • dP^dpidpt • • • dp„ 


24 


Ma£4cjvi(i£icaZ 


hence, according to Equation (51), 







dp\dpi • • • dp^dqidqt • • • dq^ 

= MPidPi • • • dP^dpidpi • • • dp M , 

which, in conjunction with Equation (49), gives Equation (52) with the correct sign. 


27. On the introduction of new variables in a product of differentials. 


Equation (52) is the fundamental equation for the following. Before I proceed to its 
application, I shall mention a difficulty that often arises in the theory of definite integrals, 
and is not always completely clarified. 

I consider the most general case. Let there be given n arbitrary functions 2 1 . 2?, ••• > 
of then independent variablesjq, x 2 , ...,x n , the functions being single-valued and 
continuous in a specified region. Conversely, let thex be single-valued continuous 
functions of the If we set 


ah 

5^2 

c 1 

5Xi 

dxi 

dXi 

ah 

dh 

ah 

6 X 2 

dXi 

5X2 

ah 

ah 

ah 

az„ 

az„ 

ax. 


then the differentials are related by the equation 



The meaning of this equation is perfectly clear if is only a function of .iq, 2 2 is only a 
function of x 2 , etc. If then only X| changes by dx\ and all the other 2 remain constant, then 
only 2 i will change by df \ , and all the other 2 will remain constant. Likewise a definite 
increment d^ 2 °f ^2 will correspond to a definite increment dx 2 of x 2 , and so forth. 
Equation (53) will then give the relation between the increments of x and the increments of 
£ 


24 


aV^lc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




If A'| runs through all its possible values between .iq and x | + dx |, while x 2 has a constant 
value somewhere between Aq and x 2 +dx 2 , and l ik ewise all the other a: have constant 
values, then in general not only but also all the other <; will change at the same time. 
Likewise, in general all the t, will change when x 2 runs through all values between x 2 and 
x 2 +dx 2 , while all the other a: remain constant; and each 2 will experience in general a 
completely different increment in the second case. We have therefore to consider n different 
increments of none of them is equal to the quantity denoted by in Equation (53). 
Neither does one obtain Equation (53) by assuming that d ^ means the largest increase that 
can experience when each variation of a | between x | and Aq +dx\ is combined with 
each variation of Aq between Aq and x 2 +dx 2 , and each such pair of values of x [ and Aq is 
combined with each variation of Aq between Aq and x 2 +dx 3, and so forth. 

In order to present clearly the meaning of Equation (53) in the general case, we must 
examine the matter more closely. This equation in general has a meaning only when it 
refers to the transformation of a definite integral which is to be extended over a certain set 
of values of all the x, to another integral in which the variables 2, replace the x. We shall use 
the following notation. Let the value of each of the variables x be given; the corresponding 
values of all the £ are thereby determined. We call them the values of £ corresponding to 
the given x. A region G of values of the x means the aggregate of the set of values of these 
variables bounded in the following way: we first include all values of Aq that lie between 
two arbitrary given li mits and j-j. Those values of Aq that lie between these l im its are to 

be associated with all values of the second variable x 2 that he between arbitrary given l im its 
X® and jd, where however and jd can be continuous functions of the values of A'| that 

are to be associated with the value ofAq. Likewise, each pair of values of.vj and Aq 
satisfying the above conditions will be associated with ah values of Aq that lie between r: 

* V 

and , where q-® and can be continuous functions of x | andAq, and so forth. 2 It is 
then well known what one means by the definite integral 



Xi • • • x n )dxidx 2 • • • dx n 


extended over the entire region G. This region of values is then said to be of in finitesimal 
extent with respect to ah n dimensions —or briefly, n-fold infinitesimal—when the 
difference - jr® is infinitesimal, and also the difference jd _ ^.0 j s infinitesimal for all 

values of Aq, the difference q-* ~ .p® is infinitesimal for all pairs of values of Aq and x 2 , and 

so forth. When n = 2, Aq andAq can be represented as the coordinates of a point in the 
plane; each region of values then corresponds to a bounded pail of the surface in the plane; 
for n = 3, each region of values can be represented by a bounded volume in space. 

Each set of values of the x that lies in the region G corresponds to a set of values of the 
£. The region g of the £, which corresponds to the region G of the x, means the aggregate 
of all sets of values of the £ that correspond to all sets of values of the x lying in the region 


24 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 





G. 

According to the way we have formulated our definitions, Jacobi’s theorem on 
functional determinants can be expressed in the following completely unambiguous way. 

Let there be given an arbitrary single-valued continuous function of the independent 
variables q, x 2 ,... , x n . We denote it by/iq. x 2 ,... , x n ). If we express therein q, x 2 , ..., x n 
in terms of F 2 ,..., £ n , then the functional, x 2> •••> x n) transformed to F (^, $ 2 ,..., f n ) 
so that we have identically 

f{x i, x 2 • • • x n ) = F({i, (2 * • • &»)• 

However, it is by no means the case that 

* • * f(x l, Xi • • • Xn)dX\dX2 • • 'dx n 

= J J ’ * * {2 ’ * * 1^2 * * ‘ 

when the former integral is extended over an arbitrary region G of the x, and the latter over 
the corresponding region g of the A If we again denote the functional determinant 

dh flf, 

dll dli 

dh dfc 
di2 dx 2 


by D. then the definite integral extended over the region G, 

• • -}(x h a: 2 • • • x n )dx\dxi • • • cfx„, 

is always equal to the definite integral extended over the corresponding region g: 3 




7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 





If G is infinitesimal, then, if the values of £ in question are continuous functions of the x, 
the region g is also infinitesimal, and the values of the functions / and F, as well as the 
functional determinant, will be considered constant throughout the region. Since the values 
of the two functions are the same, one can divide through by these values and it follows 
that : 4 



Indeed, Kirchhoff writes the equation in this form. 5 It is customary to write (as we did in 
the previous paragraph) simply 

1 

— dfadh • • • dt n = dx\dxi • • • dx n . 


Here dx\ dxj ... dx n means strictly the /z-t'old integral of this quantity over an arbitrary n-fold 
infinitesimal region G, and d^yd^ ■■■ dc, n means the n-fold integral of the latter quantity 
over the corresponding region g. Since the theorem will only be applied to the calculation 
of definite integrals extended over a finite region, and these can always be decomposed into 
an infinite number of integrals extended over infinitesimal regions, one always obtains the 
correct result if he writes the equations as follows : 

1 

— dkdh • • • dk = dx\dx 2 • • • dx n 

D 

I, {:•••£»)= }(x 1, Ij • • • *„), 

hence 

1 

F(( i, (i ■ ■ • •••#„= f(x u Xi ■ ■ • xjdxidxi ■ ■ ■ dx„ 


24 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


and hence finally 




The first of these equations has the following meaning. Each n-fold definite integral 
extended over all .x; can be decomposed into infinitely many integrals over n-fold 
infinitesimal regions. If one wishes to introduce the T as new variables of integration, then 
in each of the latter, and hence also in the entire region of integration, he has to replace the 
product dxydx 2 ... dx n by 



§28. Application to the formulas of §26. 

If one wishes to use these more correct expressions in §26, then, instead of saying “for a 
certain system the initial values of the coordinates and momenta he between 

Pi and Pi + dP\ • • • Q M and Q M + 

he must say instead, “each initial value lies in the 2/./-fold in finitesimal region 



Instead of saying “then at time t the values he between /q and p\ +dp |, ... , q u and q^+dq ,” 
he must use the corresponding expression, “they he in the corresponding region 



Here the integration over the entire appropriate region is indicated by a single integral sign 
for the sake of brevity. The region g corresponding to the region G includes all 
combinations of values that the variables assume after the time t (considered constant), if 
they initiahy have a set of values lying inside the region G. Ah the conclusions of the 
preceding section will then remain vahd, except that in place of the simple product of 


25 


Pi£^ie 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



differentials there will always occur the integral of this product of differentials over a region 
infinitesimal on all sides. Equation (52) then mns, in this more precise formulation: 



One therefore sees that the conclusion is not in the least changed, except that one has an 
integral sign in front of each differential expression, expressing the integration over a 
corresponding infinitesimal region. 

If an example is needed, one can think of the x as the spatial polar coordinates r, 6, <p 
and the £ as the rectangular coordinates x, y, z of a point. The region of values for which x, 
y, z he between 


x and x + dx ) y mdy + dy, z and z + dz 


is determined by a parallelepiped. We shall assign different pairs of values to the variables v 
and cp, corresponding to all points lying within this parallelepiped. The limits r and r+dr, 
between which r must he for all points in the parallelepiped, will by no means be the same 
for all these pairs of values. In the equation 


dx dy dz 
dr dr dr 


dxdydz 


dx dy 
dd’ dd 


dz 

dd 


drddd<p = r 2 sin ddrdddy, 


dx 

d<p 


dy dz 
d<p d<p 


which is not vahd if one understands by dr the greatest difference of the values of r for 
points lying inside the parallelepiped, which of these possible values of dr is meant? The 
same problem arises for dv and dcp. The equation has the fohowing meaning: the definite 
integral 


25 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




extended over an arbitrary triply infinitesimal region, has the same value as the integral 



r 2 sin Mrdtidy, 


extended over the corresponding region; in particular, both are equal to the volume filled by 
all the points of the region, so that it would obviously be completely wrong to set 


ffjMyk-jff 


drddd<p 


if the two integrals are extended over corresponding regions. 

The special examples that have been worked out to clarify the meaning of the 
mechanical equations (52) and (55) will only be briefly discussed here. 6 A material point 
with mass 1 moves in the abscissa direction under the influence of a constant force, which 
l ik ewise has the abscissa direction, and imparts to it the acceleration j. The variables called 
v at the beginning of this section will now be the initial abscissa X and the initial velocity U 
of the material point; the £ will be the abscissa x and velocity u after a fixed time t has 
elapsed. We have therefore 


7 1 2 

(56) x = X + Ut-\ - ) u = U yt. 

2 

Since we now have only two variables, we can represent their initial values as well as their 
values at time t by points in the plane, whose abscissas are equal to the abscissas, and 
whose ordinates are equal to the velocities, of the material point. All points of a rectangle 
with sides dX and dU represent a double infinitesimal region of x, i.e., they represent all 
possible material points for which the coordinates and velocities initially he between the 
l im its 


X and X + dX and U and U + dU. 

The region g of the £ corresponding to this region G contains the coordinates x and 
velocities u that all these material points have after a fixed time t has elapsed. According to 
Equation (56), u is simply larger than U by a constant jt. On the other hand, the difference 
x-X is greater the larger U is. One sees easily from this that the region g is an oblique- 
angled parallelogram, whose base is equal to clX, and whose height is equal to dU; it 


25 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



therefore has the same area as the rectangle G = dXdU, as it must according to Equation 
(52). 


29. Second proof of Liouville’s theorem. 


We shall now give a second proof of Equation (52) or (55), in which, instead of going 
directly from time zero to time t, we first go from time t to an infinitesimally close time t+dt. 
However, we shall somewhat generalize the theorem at the same time, in that we shall not 
assume that our independent variable (denoted by s) is necessarily the time; we shall leave 
it unspecified, though for purposes of illustration we can still imagine that time is the 
independent variable. The arbitrary dependent variables sq, s 2 , ..., s n will be determined as 
functions of the independent variable s for the following differential equations: 


<J l 6$2 Q 2 <T n 

6 $ a 6 $ <j 5 $ a 


The a will be given explicitly as functions of 5, sq, s 2 , ... , s n . Since we wish to reserve the 
letter d for another kind of increment, we have denoted the increment of the independent 
variable by 8s, and the corresponding increments of the dependent variables by 8s \, 8s 2 , ... 
, 8s n . 

For a system of material points, 8s would be identified with the increment of the time, 
St. By 8s |, 8s 2 - ... , 8s n we mean the increments 8x q, Sy |, ... of the coordinates as well as 
the increments 8u\, 8v \, ... of the velocity components during time Si. For example, 8x q = 

Ui8t. 

The values of the dependent variables sq, s 2 , ... , s n will be determined by their 
corresponding initial values at a definite s, e.g., s = 0\ 

(58) 5,, S, • • • 


and by the differential equations (57), given once for all times, as single-valued functions of 
the independent variable s. 

We can now keep in mind all the values of the dependent variables that correspond to 
all possible values of the independent variable s, for given initial values. We wish to call the 
set of all these values a series of values. This corresponds to the entire course of motion of a 
mechanical system stalling from a specified initial state. 

In the particular series of values that starts from the initial values (58), the dependent 
variables have the values 

(59) ®1) $2 * ' * 

for a specified value of s, and for an infinitesimally different value ,v+ 8s they have the 
values 


25 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



(60) $/ = Si + 5sj, si = S 2 -f • • • s n ' = s„ + 6s n . 

We call (59) the values of the dependent variables “corresponding to the initial values (58) 
after s.” The values (60) will similarly be called the values of the dependent variables 
corresponding to the in itial values (58) after s+Ss. According to the differential equations 
(57), the values (59) and (60) are related by the equations 

<7 1 O’2 <7n 

(61) sl = Si + — Ss, si = 82 + — 5s • • • si = S» + — 6s, 

(j (j a 


where the values (59) of the dependent variables and the corresponding values of the 
independent variable are to be substituted in the given functions 0 \. og ,... , ff n . 

Now we shall go even further and imagine all possible series of values that can arise 
from all possible initial states. Of all these series of values, however, we consider only 
those for which the initial values lie between the li mits 


S\ and S\ dS\ } $2 and $2 4 " d$2 • • • S n and S n *f dS n 

or he in some otherwise bounded n-fold infinitesimal region G, 7 in which the values (58) 
also lie. Those values of the dependent variables to which ah the initial values lying in G 
“correspond after s” form again an n-fold in finitesimal region, which will be the region g. 

On the other hand, we shall denote byg' the region that includes ah values of the 
dependent variables that “correspond after .v+r5.v” to all the initial values lying in g. The 
integral of the product ds \ dsj ... ds n of the differentials of ah dependent variables, extended 
over the entire region g, will be denoted simply by 



dsidsi • • • ds n , 


while the same integral extended over the region g' will be denoted by 



These integral signs therefore indicate an integration over all series of values that originate 
in the infinitesimal region G. Then according to Equation (54): 





ds\ds<i • • • ds n , 


25 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



where D again means the functional determinant 


ds( 

dsi 

d&i 

ds\ 

dsl 

dsi 

- ; 

— • • • 

dS2 

• • • 

ds 2 

III! 


In forming the partial derivatives in this functional determinant, we should consider s to be 
constant as well as ,y+<& and Ss, since s has the same value for all series of values over 
which we shall integrate, as does Ss. Hence it follows from Equation (61) that 

ds{ 5s /da\ <ji da\ ds/ 5s /da\ a\ d<r\ 

— = 1 + --, — = -(-, etc. 

ds a \ds i a ds i/ dSi a \5S2 a ds\f 

If one ignores the terms multiplied by higher powers of the infinitesimal quantity Ss, then 
he obtains 


where 


5 s/da da i da n s 

o = i + --+—+-)- 

a \ds d$\ ds n > 


Ss/da a i da 

-(—I-h 

a \ds a dSi 
St 8a t a 

= i+- = ~~’ 

r a a t 


a n da 
a ds n / 




C hs/da da i 

dCn\~ 

(63) 

II 

+ 

+ 

i 

i 

— 



a \ds ds i 

dsj J 


The prime always means that the value corresponds to .v+<&, while the initial values are 


25 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 





those given in Equation (58). Hence one can write Equation (62) in the form: 



Similarly, just as we go from 5 to s+ris, we can go from s+<& to s+26s, and so forth, and 
also from s - Ss to 5 . We shall denote all values corresponding to s+25s, starting from the 
initial values (58), by two primes. 

Let g" be the region that includes all values of the dependent variables corresponding to 
initial values lying in G, after s+26s, and let 



be the integral of the product of differentials of all dependent variables over the region g". 
Then one finds, in the same way that was used to obtain Equation (64), that 



Since a similar equation holds for all preceding and following increments of s, one has in 
general: 



Here cr 0 and r 0 denote the values of a and r for ,v = 0; \clS | clS 2 ... dS n is the integral of the 
product of the differentials of all dependent variables extended over the region G. 

One sees at once that Equation (55) is that special case of Equation (65) which one 
obtains when s means the time and sq, s 2 , ..., s n are the generalized coordinates p\, p 2 , ... , 
p„ and momenta c/\, q 2 ,... , q„ of an arbitrary mechanical system. If in particular, as in §25, 
L and V are the kinetic and potential energies of the mechanical systems, and if one sets 
L+V = E, then the Lagrange equations for the mechanical system run as follows : 8 


25 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



( 66 ) 


dpi dE dqi dE 

dt dqi dt dpi 

The symbol cl has the same meaning that 5 had previously. We have to specialize our 
previous formulas to the case n = 2/./, <j= 1, s = t, 

dE 

Si = Pi, a,- = — for 1 ^ i ^ p, 
dqi 

dE 

Si = ?i, fi =-for /x + 1 i i g 2it. 

dpt 

Hence 

da da\ da n 

—|---= 0, r = const. 

ds ds\ ds n 

and Equation (65) goes over directly into Equation (55). 

Arguments completely analogous to those of this section were first made by Liouville, 9 
then by Jacobi 10 (by the latter in his lectures on dynamics, for the purpose of deriving the 
theorem of the last multiplier). They were first applied to statistical considerations on the 
temporal course of motion of a system, and a family of simultaneously existing systems, by 
the author of this book and then by Maxwell. 11 

§30. Jacobi’s theorem of the last multiplier. 

Since we have the required equations directly at hand, we shall derive the theorem of 
the last multiplier, though to be sure it is not otherwise very closely related to our subject. 
We denote by 

(Pi (s, Si, s 2 • • • s n ) = const., i = 1, 2 • • • n 

the n integrals of the differential equations (57). The initial values (58) should correspond to 
the values aq, a 2 ,... , a n of the constants of integration, so that therefore 

(67) *(0, Mi •••&)= «& t = 1,2 • • • n. 

All the initial values of the dependent variables that lie in G (see last section) will 


25 





correspond to certain values of the constants of integration a, which again form an n-fold 
infinitesimal region, which we shall call the region A. Let 



be the integral of the products of the differentials of the constants of integration, extended 
over the entire region. On the other hand, as in the preceding section we shall denote by sq, 
sq, ... , s n the values of the dependent variables that correspond to the initial values (58) 
“after the value s of the independent variable.” Hence 

(68) $1,82 •••$») = a„ i = 1, 2 • • • n, 


where the a have the same values as in Equation (67). Likewise as in the preceding section, 
we denote by g the region foimed from all values of the dependent variables that 
correspond to all initial values lying in G after the value s of the independent variable, and 
by 



d$idsi • • • ds n 


the integral of the product of differentials of the dependent variables extended over g, while 



dSndSn ■■■dS 


n 


is the corresponding integral over G. Since the a are related to the S by Equation (67) and 
to sq,..., s n by Equations (68), and in the latter s is to be considered constant, then one has: 



da\d(h • 


ddn ~ ^ 


dSidSi 




dsidsi • • • d$ n , 


25 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


where 




dip\ dpi 
3si ds\ 
d(f\ d<p2 
ds« dso 


and A 0 is the value of A for s = 0. Hence, according to Equation (65), 

Ar A 0 r 0 


a (To 

Since A 0 , r 0 , and <r 0 are expressions that depend only on the initial values of the dependent 
variables—or, if one wishes, on the constants of integration a —but not on the values of the 
s, then likewise C depends only on these quantities. 

We now assume that we already know all the integrals up to the one cp\ = a The 
equation 





dsidst • - 'ds* 


holds for each value of s. We imagine that s has an arbitrary constant value, and introduce 
into both definite integrals on the right- and left-hand sides the variables ,V|, aj, ... , a n — 
which, since s is considered as a given constant, are unique functions both of a | a 2 , ... , a n 
and of V|, s 2 ,... , s n . We thus obtain: 



• • • da 


n) 


259 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


where in 




• • • 


dpt d<pi 
ds 2 dSi 



d<p 2 d<pi 

dSi dSi 


s and .v | are always to be considered constant during the partial differentiation. In the 
integral on the left-hand side of Equation (69) one must set: 

fyi(s, *i, a 2 , a 3 • • • a„) 
da i = dsi' -- 

d 8 i 


Since the region of integration is n-fold infinitesimal, the last factor can come out in front of 
the integration sign and one obtains, on dividing through by \ds\ dcijda^ ... da n : 

«i, a 2 , a 3 • • • a n ) A a 

(70) ■■ --- = — = C — • 

dS\ Ai Air 

However, if all the integrals up to </q are known, and are used, in the last of the differential 
equations to be integrated, 

(71) 5si = is - 

a 

to express the quantities .s 2 , 53 , ... , s n in terms of s, ,S| and the constants a 2 a 2 , ... , a n , then 
the expression (70) is the integrating factor of this last differential equation. On multiplying 
by this factor, its left-hand side is transformed to 

Si, a 2 , a 3 • • • a n ) 

-5si 

ds\ 

and hence the right-hand side must be transformed to 


26 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




dipi(s } Si, 02, a 3 • • • a n ) 

-6s 

ds 

This is Jacobi’s theorem of the last multiplier. Since C depends only on the integration 
constants, lik ewise <r/A 1 r is an integrating factor of the differential equation (71). 

a is given. A, can be calculated if all the integrals up to <p\ are known, r is of course in 
general unknown; still, it can often be found by accident, as for example in the case of 
mechanical problems, where it reduces to a constant. 

If the equations of motion (66) of a material system do not explicitly contain the time, 
then they also have the form (57) after one has el im inated the differential of the time 
variable ; s is now one of the coordinates, say p\. Then 

dE dE dE 

a = —) o i = — • • • <J n =- 

dq { dqi 

and the equation 


do do i do n 

—|-h * 1 • H- 

ds ds i ds n 



from which it follows that r = const., always holds. Hence one can find directly the 
integrating factor of the differential equation, which expresses the differential of the last 
coordinate in terms of the others and the momenta, if the other coordinates and the 
momenta have already been found as functions of the constants of integration and the two 
last coordinates. In most applications that Jacobi makes of the principle of the last 
multiplier, the general equations are applied in this way. 


§31. Introduction of the energy differential. 

Before we pass to the special applications to gas theory, we shall develop still one more 
general theorem. 

We return to the infinite family of equivalent mechanical systems already considered in 
§26. The state of each system will again be determined by the variables introduced in §25. 
As before, letL be the kinetic and V the potential energy, and let E = L+V be the total 
energy of one of the systems. We assume that the system is a so-called conservative one— 
i.c., E remains constant during the entire motion for each system. We must therefore 
exclude dissipative forces like viscosity, internal resistance, etc.; we must require that only 
internal forces may be present in each system, or, if external forces are present, they must 
be produced by fixed masses that do not change with time. The force should in general 


26 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



depend only on position, so that V is a function (and indeed a single-valued function) only 
of the coordinates p ^,... ,p„. 

The values 

(72) Pi, p t • • • P„ 3i • • • % 

which the coordinates and momenta assume at time t, when initially (at time zero) they 
have the values 


(73) P i, Pi • • • Qi • • • Qn 

we call the values corresponding to the initial values. The energy E of the system is also 
determined by the initial values (73), and this will similarly be called the value of the 
energy corresponding to the initial values. Since the system is conservative, the energy has, 
for a particular system at each arbitrary later time t, the same value E as at the initial time. 

We shall consider next all systems that stall from initial values filling some 2/i-fold 
infinitesimal region enclosing the values (73). The region filled by the values of the 
coordinates and momenta of all these systems after a definite time t will be called the region 
g. The integral of the product of differentials of the coordinates and momenta, extended 
over G, we denote by 

(74) f dPi • • ■ dQ„ 


and the same integral extended over the region g is denoted by 



Then, according to Equation (55), 



In each of these integrals we can replace one of the differentials, e.g., the differential of the 
first momentum c/\, by the differential of the energy E. Here we have to consider that all the 
coordinates and all the other momenta are constants. We obtain therefore 

dE 

dE = — dqu 

dqi 


2d 


P«.7ie 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



where, in the partial differentiation, the above-mentioned quantities (and of course the time) 
are to be regarded as constant. Now we have: 


dE 

dV 

dL 

— = 

--L —. 

dq\ 

dqi 



Since V is a function only of the coordinates, the first term vanishes immediately; 

1 9 

furthermore, it is well known that if we express the time-derivative by a prime, then 


Therefore 


and 


Likewise, 




dE = p{dqi. 


dE = PldQ, 


where p { represents the value of the time derivative of p \ at the initial time. Substitution 
of this value into Equation (76) yields: 





dP i • • • dP^dQi • • • dQ^dE. 


This equation is valid, whatever may be the region over which the integration is 
extended, provided only that it is 2/r-fold infinitesimal, and that g is the region 
corresponding to G. We can therefore choose the region G such that for all values of the 


26 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



other variables the energy lies between the same limits E and E+dE, while the other 
variables, namely 



the coordinates p h • • •, 
and the momenta g 2 , • • •, 


lie in some arbitrary (2/r - l)-fold in finitesimal region G\, which includes the values 

(79) Pi, P 2 • * • Pp, Qi • • • Qn 


One of the momenta, Qy, is omitted, since it is already determined by the values of the 
variables (78) and the energy. 

For all systems satisfying these initial conditions, the energy will he between the same 
limits after time t; the (2// - l)-fold infinitesimal region, which will be filled by the values 
that the variables (78) have for this system, will be called the region g]_. It encloses, of 
course, the values of the coordinates and momenta corresponding to the initial values (79) 
after time t. If one chooses the region in this way, then he sees that dE comes out in front of 
the integral sign on both sides of Equation (77), so that this equation can be divided 
through by dE, whereby one obtains: 





dP\ • • • dPp • • • dQi • • • dQn> 


Here the integral on the left is to be extended over g |, and that on the right over G j, 
while E is constant. Equation (80) therefore has the following meaning : we consider many 
systems, for all of which the energy has the same value, while the values of the variables 
(78) lie initially in the (2// - l)-fold infinitesimal region G \, and the missing momentum 
variable c/y is determined by E. For all these systems, the energy will have the same value E 
after time t, but the region filled by the values of the variables (78) after time t will be 
denoted by gj and will be the region corresponding to G 1 after time t. Equation (80) 
always holds then, if one extends the integral on the right over G\, and that on the left over 
8l- 


32. Ergoden.* 

We now imagine again an enormously large number of mechanical systems, all of 


26 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



which have the same properties described earlier. The total energy E will have the same 
value for all of them. On the other hand, the initial values of the coordinates and momenta 
will have different values for different systems. Let 


}(p i, Vi • • • p f , 9t • • • t)dp t • • • dp^ dq, 

be the number of systems for which, at time I, the variables (78) he between the limits 

Pi and pi + dpi • • • p M and p M + dp M , </ 2 and 52 + * * • 

and + dq„ 

while of course qy is determined by the assumed value of the energy. The number of 
systems for which the values of the variables (78) fill a (2// - l)-fold infinitesimal region #| 
enclosing the value 

(81) Pi • • • Pp, qt ■ • ■ a*. 


is therefore, at time t, 




where the integration is to be extended over the region gy. 

Instead of saying that the values of the variables (78) lie within the region gy for a 
certain system, we shall often use the expression: this system has the phase pq. We can 
therefore say also : the expression (82) gives the number of systems that have phase pq at 
time t. 

The region within which, for all systems that have the phase pq at time t, the values of 
the variables (78) he at time zero, shah be the region G\. Since includes the values (81), 
Gy will of course include the initial values of the variables 

(83) Pi • • • l\, Qi • • • 


corresponding to the values (81). Instead of saying that the values of the variables lie in Gy 
for a system, we shall use the expression: the system has the phase PQ. By analogy with 
the notation used in Equation (82), the integral of the product of differentials of the 
variables (78) extended over G | shah be denoted by 



26 


“Pul+lc- 



Since t can have any arbitrary value in Equation (82), 


(84) /(P, • • • P„, Q, ■ ■ • Qn, 0) f dP,•• • dP„d<?2 •••(«)„ 

will be the number of systems that initially have phase PQ. Since these are the same 
systems as the ones that have phase pq at time t, (82) and (84) must be equal to each other; 
whence, taking account of Equation (80), it follows that: 

(85) pi'/(pi • • • p», 92 ■ • • 9 », t) = Pi/(Pi • • ■ P„, Qi - • • Q„ 0). 

The distribution of states among the systems will be called a stationary one if the 
number of systems having any arbitrary phase pq does not change with time. Since the 
number of systems that have phase pq at time t is given by the expression (82), one can 
express the condition that the distribution of states be stationary by saying that for any 
arbitrary values of the variables and for an arbitrary region g | the value of the expression 
(82) is completely independent of time, as long as gj and the values of the variables (78) 
remain the same. Thus if one equates the value of (82) at time zero to its value at some 
other timet, he can divide by the integral overgj, and the condition that the state 
distribution be stationary takes the form 

(86) /(pi • • • p„, 92 • • • 9>„ 0 = /(pi • • • p„, 92' •' % 0 ,) 


in which the variables p, q can have any arbitrary values but must be the same on both 
sides. Therefore one can also denote them by the corresponding capital letters, so that 
Equation (86) takes the foim: 


(87) /(Pi • • • P„, & • • • Q„ t ) = /(Pi ■ • • P„ Qi • • ■ Qn, 0). 

Using the last equation, Equation (85) becomes 13 


P,7(P>, P 2 ■ 


• Pn, Qi ' • ' Qn, t) = Pl7(Pl, P2 • • • P», 92 • * • % <)• 


Since the function f no longer contains the time, it is better to omit t from the function sign 
and to write : 


Pi ■ • • K Qi--- Qn) = 

= Pl7(Pl, P2 • • • P», 92 • • • 9»)- 


Here, Py,P 2 , ... . P u , Qi, ... ,Q^ are completely arbitrary initial values;pj, p 2 > ••• > Pm 


26 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



> <7u are the values of the coordinates and momenta that a system would acquire, 
stalling from these initial values, after an arbitrary time t. 

Thus if we imagine a system S, stalling from some initial values of the coordinates and 
momenta, then in the course of its motion the coordinates and momenta will take various 
different values. The coordinates and momenta are therefore functions of the initial values 
and of the time. But in general there will be certain functions of the coordinates and 
momenta (known as invariants) that have constant values during the entire motion: for 
example, for a free system these would include the velocity components of the center of 
gravity, and the components of the total angular momentum. Now suppose that we 


substitute into the expression ©//(Dj p 2 


* * > ? 2 , • * * , q») 

first the initial values and then the values of the coordinates and momenta at later times. In 
order that the distribution be stationary, it is necessary and sufficient that the value of p.7 
remain unchanged—or in other words, P.7 should contain only those functions of the 


coordinates and momenta that remain constant throughout the entire motion of a system and 
depend only on the initial values, but not on the elapsed time. Thus P.7 should be a 


function only of the invariants. 

The simplest case of a stationary state distribution is obtained by setting 


Pl7(P.) P2, • • ‘ , Pc, ?2, • ' 



equal to a constant; then 



is the number of systems for which the variables (78) he in the region over which the 
integration is to be extended. I once allowed myself to call the distribution of states among 
an infinite number of systems described by this formula an ergodic one. 


§33. Concept of the momentoid. 

The state distribution mentioned at the conclusion of the preceding section will be 
considered further in the following, and indeed we shall introduce other variables in place 
of the momenta. 

The kinetic energy L of a system is a homogeneous quadratic function of the momenta; 
therefore 


2 2 

2 L - duqi + 022*72 * * * + 2ai2<7i</2 • • *, 

where in general the coefficients a are functions of the generalized coordinates p. As is well 
known, a linear substitution of the form 


26 





(90) 


?1 = ^ 12^*2 * ’ * bl/p 

qi = 621^1 + ^22^2 * * * h/n 


[?M ~ bnl?l "I” ^n2^2 * ' ' 

can always be found, for which one obtains 

2 2 2 

2 L = aifi -f ajfj -f • • • a M r M . 

The exceptional cases where L cannot be brought into this form can never occur in 
mechanical systems, and none of the coefficients a (which in general of course are 
functions of the coordinates) can be zero or negative, since if they were the kinetic energy 
would be zero or negative for some motions of the system. By multiplying all the r by the 
same factor (which may also be a function of the coordinates) one can make the 
determinant of the b equal to 1. In the following we shall denote by r the quantities that 
have already been multiplied by such a factor. Of course they can conversely be expressed 
linearly in terms of the q. I have proposed to call them the momentoids corresponding to the 
coordinates p. 

We shall imagine a /./-fold in fin itesimal region H marked off in the q, and in the integral 
over this region 



by means of Equations (90) we introduce the r in place of the q as variables of integration. 
We consider the p constant. Since the determinant of the b is equal to 1, it follows that 





dridr 2 • • • dr M , 


where the latter integral is to be extended over the region of the r corresponding to the 
region H —i.e., over that region which includes all combinations of values of the r that (by 
Eqs. [90]) correspond to all combinations of the values of the q contained in the region H. 

We shall now introduce, in the integral on the right-hand side of Equation (76), the r 
instead of the q as integration variables. This integral becomes, according to Equation (91), 


26 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




• • • 




The latter integral is to be extended over the region corresponding to the region of 
integration of the former (previously called g). 

Now we shall introduce in this equation (just as we did in the derivation of Equations 
(77) and (80) from (76)) the integration variable E on the left-hand side instead of c/\ and 
on the right-hand side instead of /q. Since 

dE dL 1 

dry dry otyry 

if follows that 

— f dpi ■ dp^dqi • ■ • dq„dE =— f dp t ■ ■ ■ dp f dr 2 ■ ■ ■ dr„dE. 

p{ J CtlhJ 


Just as in deriving Equation (80) from (77), we can now choose the region in such a 
way that, for all possible values of the other variables, E lies between the same limits E and 
E+clE. Then we can divide through by dE, and we find that, for constant E, 


1 

Vl 








If we substitute this in Equation (89), we find that for an ergodic distribution of states the 
number of systems for which the variables 

(92) pi • • • p M) U ■ ■ ■ r„ 

lie in an arbitrary (2/r - l)-fold infinitesimal region surrounding this value is equal to 

C r 

(93) — I dpi • • • dpjlr 2 • • • 

ctyhJ 


where the integration is to be extended over this region. 

The demarcation of this region is arbitrary. In the following, we shall specify it in the 
simplest way possible so that the variables (92) will lie between the li mits 


26 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



(94) pi and pi + dpi, p 2 and p 2 + dp 2 • • • p M and p M + dp M 

(95) r 2 and r 2 + dr 2i r 3 and r 3 + dr 3 • • • r M and r„ + dr M . 


The number of systems for which these conditions are satisfied is, according to (93), 

c 

(96) dN = — dpidp 2 • • * dp M dr 2 • • • dr M . 

d\r\ 

If we denote the product of the differentials dp\dp 2 ••• dp^ by drr, and the product 
dr k+ 1 dr k+ 2 ... dr■ by dk, then 



is the number of systems for which the coordinates he between the limits (94) and r u is 
between 

(98) r M and r M + dr M 

while the other r can have all possible values consistent with the equation of kinetic energy. 
The number of systems that are subject to the condition that their coordinates lie between 
the limits (94) while their momenta are subject to no other condition than the constancy of 
total energy is 



The total number of all systems is 




dirdpi 

afi 


where, everywhere that a product of several differentials is expressed by a single 


27 . 


IPuJim*. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



differential sign, the integration over all values of these differentials is likewise expressed 
by a single integral sign. 

§34. Expression for the probability; average values. 

The expressions 1. dN/N; 2. clNy/N; and 3. dN 2 /N are the definitions of the following 
probabilities: 1. that for a system, the coordinates and momentoids lie between the l im its 
(94) and (95) ; 2. that the coordinates he between the li mits (94) and the momentoid r u he 
between the l im its (98); 3. that the coordinates he between the limits (94). 

For all systems whose coordinates and momenta he between the limits (94) and (95), the 
kinetic energy 1. «ir? corresponding to the first momentoid is the same. (The number of 

such systems is given by Eq. [96].) The mean value of this quantity for ah systems whose 
coordinates remain subject to the conditions (94) is therefore 







i 


where the integral sign expresses simply an integration over ah possible values of the 
momentoids. The mean value of f° r systems is in general 



The mean value of the potential function V for all systems, however, is 


27 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(103) 



The integration over the momentoids can easily be performed as follows. If we let A and a 
be constants, then one finds by the substitution 


r = 



the following equation : 




B and T denote the well-known Euler [beta and gamma] functions. 
We next use this formula to calculate the integral 


2 7 


ipufLC- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



We denote the quantity 



2 2 2 

a*+l r *+l «H2 r *+2 

E — V -- • • — 

2 2 2 

by A], and the quantity E — V by A u . Then 


n 




2 


hence 



The momentoid r 2 takes its most extreme possible values when r| = 0, in which case 
j» 2 = - \ 2 .1 u '■ The integration over r 2 is therefore to be taken between these 
limits. If one performs this integration using Equation (104), he finds: 


271 


Kuluc- 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



J*= - 


2\* /2 

(*v 


2 r fi ) r (? +1 


«2 


K 3 

r [ —i— 
2 2 


■/* 


/ 2 + 1/2 

2 dp 2 


2\«/2 


i r It) r (i +1 




K 3 

r(- + - 

2 2 


X 


M. 


+^A,ic / ajr A ./2+1/J 

_ dr> - 

-v'2^43/03 \ ^ / 


If one also performs the integration overr 3 according to Equation (104), then it follows 
that: 


(105) \ 


J. = 


2 V' 1 




2 2 

■■ • ■ ■ 

uj aj 



X 


dp41 __ U,-—) dr 4 . 


V2A4/a4 \ 


From this result we can find the integral of (97) by leaving out the last differential, 
performing the other integrations exactly, as we have already done in the expression for J K , 
and then setting K = - 1. Then it follows that 


27 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




If one denotes the last expression by j, then the mean value of in all systems 

for which the coordinates he between the l im its (94) is 


<*/[ 

2 


vU »l a » ct/n 






Evaluation of the integral yields 

Of* 

2 



A, _ E - V 


If one allows k to be arbitrary in Equation (105) and performs ah the integrations, then it 
follows that: 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 




By means of the last two formulas the integrations over the r in all the previous 
expressions can be written down immediately, and dN \, dNj, and will be 

calculated in closed form. To perform the integrations over the p, a knowledge of the 
potential function V would of course be required. One obtains, for example, for the 
probability that, for a system that satisfies the conditions (94), r u lies between r u and 
f/j+dfjj, the value 



If one sets = X> then 



hence the probability that, for a system satisfying the conditions (94), r„ is positive and 


\(XpT* ik hes between x and x+dx, is: 


27 


^ufuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 







(A, - x )^- !),s dx 

2A ( 7 2m 7* 


Since for negative r f/ an equal value of is equally probable, the probability that 

iaA lies between x and x+dx for either positive or negative r LI is equal to 




(A, - dx 
y/x 


( m - 2)/2 


Here r u may be any arbitrary momentoid. If /,/ is very large, and one sets A u = /rf, then the 
above expression approaches the li mit 



dx 

e -*m ___ . 

y/2^x 


From the general formulas one finds, furthermore: 


(109) 


ot\T? a\J\ E - V 

2 2J-i n u 


in agreement with Equation (105a). Since the same holds of course for the pail of the 
kinetic energy corresponding to the other momentoids, it follows that: 


2 


( 110 ) 


<* 1>1 Ot\Ti 


! 




2 


2 


Thus however the limits (94) may be chosen, the following theorem will always hold in the 
case of our assumed (ergodic) distribution of states: we pick out of all systems those for 


2 7 




which the coordinates lie between the limits (94). We denote by the kinetic energy 

corresponding to some one momentoid, and calculate the average of its values for all 
specified systems at some time t. This average always comes out to be the same for all 
times and all values of the index i. It is equal to the //th pail of the energy E - V, which has 
the form of a kinetic energy in this case. 

The integration over the coordinates can of course only be indicated formally, and one 
finds for the mean value of f° r all systems, for all values of the index i, 



Of course this equality of the mean values of the kinetic energy corresponding to each 
momentoid has only been proved for the assumed (ergodic) distribution of states. This 
distribution is certainly a stationary one. In general there can and will be other stationary 
distributions for which this theorem does not hold. 

In the special case that V is a homogeneous quadratic function of the coordinates, as L is 
of the momenta, the integration over coordinates can be performed by the same method as 
that used for the momenta. Then one obtains from Equation (103) 

E 

(Ilia) 7 = 

2 

if one determines the additive constant in the potential in such a way that V vanishes when 
all the material points are at their rest positions. 

Before I proceed to the application of these theorems to the theory of gases with 
polyatomic molecules, I will first adduce a completely general argument which is irrelevant 
from a mathematical viewpoint, but calls on experimental evidence; it may perhaps justify 
the supposition that the significance of these theorems is not restricted to the theory of 
polyatomic gas molecules. 

§35. General relationship to temperature equilibrium. 

We now consider an arbitrary warm body as a mechanical system obeying the laws we 
have deduced up to now—in other words, as a system of atoms, or molecules, or rather 
some kind of constituents whose positions are determined by generalized coordinates. 


2 7 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Experience shows that whenever a body has the same thermal energy and is subjected 
to the same external conditions, it eventually comes to the same state, no matter what its 
initial state may have been. In the sense of the mechanical view of nature, it thus happens 
that only certain average values—the mean kinetic energy of a molecule in a finite pail of 
the body, the momentum that a molecule transports on the average through a finite surface 
in a finite time, and so forth—are accessible to observation. However, these average values 
are the same in by far the greatest number of possible states. We call each state that has this 
particular average value a probable state. 

Thus if the initial state is not a probable state, the body will coot] pass over to a probable 
state if the external conditions remain fixed, and it will persist in this state during further 
observations, so that although its state changes progressively and occasionally (within a 
very long time period exceeding all possibility of observation) it will indeed deviate 
considerably from a probable state, nevertheless it gives the appearance of having attained a 
stationary final state, since all observable mean values remain fixed. 

The mathematically most complete method would be to take account of the initial 
conditions from which a given warm body happened to evolve to a particular thermal state, 
which then persists for a long time. However, since the mean values will always be the 
same no matter what the initial state may have been, we can also obtain the same mean 
values if we imagine that instead of a single warm body an infinite number are present, 
which are completely independent of each other and, each having the same heat content 
and the same external conditions, have stalled from all possible initial states. We thus obtain 
the correct average values if we consider, instead of a single mechanical system, an infinite 
number of equivalent systems, which stalled from arbitrary different initial conditions. Now 
these mean values must be the same at all times, as is certainly the case if the average state 
of the aggregate of all systems remains stationary, and the state that we consider should not 
be an individual singular state, but rather all possible states must be included. 

These conditions are satisfied if we imagine infinitely many mechanical systems, among 
which there is initially a state distribution such as the one we called ergodic in §32. We saw 
there that this state distribution is stationary, and that it includes all possible states consistent 
with the given kinetic energy. 

There is therefore a certain probability that the mean values found in §34 are valid not 
only for the aggregate of systems but also for the stationary final state of each individual 
warm body, and that in particular in this case the equality of the mean kinetic energy 
corresponding to each momentoid is the condition of temperature equilibrium between the 
different parts of the warm body. That the condition of temperature equilibrium of warm 
bodies has a very simple mechanical meaning independent of their initial state will thereby 
be made probable, in that compression, expansion, displacement, etc. of the individual parts 
does not affect this equilibrium. 

If we substitute for our general system a system foimed from two different gases 
separated by a solid heat-conducting dividing wall (which is clearly a special case of the 
general system considered earlier) then we can interpret one of the r as the velocity 
component of a molecule multiplied by its mass. According to Equation (110) the mean 
kinetic energy of the center of gravity of a molecule must be equal for both gases, whence 


2 7 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Avogadro’s law follows. 

This mean kinetic energy must be equal to the average kinetic energy corresponding to 
an arbitrary momentoid which determines the molecular motion of any body in thermal 
equilibrium with the gas. Hence, if we use a perfect gas as thermomet-ric substance, the 
increment of kinetic energy corresponding to each such momentoid must be equal to the 
temperature increment multiplied by a constant that is the same for all momentoids. The 
heat present in the form of kinetic energy of molecular motion in any such body would 
therefore be equal to the product of the absolute temperature and the number of 
momentoids determining the molecular motion, multiplied by a constant that is the same for 
all bodies and all temperatures. 

If we substitute for one of the mechanical systems a pure gas with compound molecules, 
which is again a special case, then it follows that for each molecule the mean kinetic energy 
of the center of gravity must be equal to three times the mean kinetic energy corresponding 
to any one of the momentoids determining the internal motion of the molecules. We shall 
derive this theorem (insofar as it concerns gases) in another way in the following sections. 

We can assign six of the momentoids r of a system subjected only to internal forces to 
the three components of total momentum and the three components of total angular 
momentum, referred to three perpendicular axes. For ergodic systems, the mean kinetic 
energy corresponding to each of these is equal to that for any other momentoid, and hence 
is vanishingly small when the system consists of many atoms. Our considerations are 
therefore relevant to the case of nonrotating bodies at rest, subject to internal forces only. 

Just as we have restricted ourselves in §32 to systems in which the energy has the same 
value, we can still further restrict ourselves to systems in which other quantities that are 
constant during the entire motion of a system have the same values, for example the 
velocity components of the center of gravity or the components of total angular momentum, 
as long as the system is subject only to internal forces. One then has to introduce the 
differentials of these quantities in place of the differentials of momenta, just as we 
introduced the energy differential in §31. One thus obtains other stationary state 
distributions which are not ergodic. The corresponding theorems are not necessarily of no 
mechanical interest; however, we shall not go into them here, since we shall not need them 
for the sequel. 14 


* The reader accustomed to modern notation should note that Boltz-mann uses p for position and q 
for momentum, not the other way around. 

1 Jacobi, Vorlesung. iib. Dynamik, 19th lecture, Equation 4, p. 146. 

* For references see the footnotes for §29. 

2 Exceptions to the continuity must be limited to individual points. 

3 Naturally we have similarly 


2a 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 




where 


JJ * ’ 1 F(th $2 * • • £n)$l<fe • • • d£ n 

* JJ * * * /(*!, Xi • • • Xn)D’dlidXt ' ' • din 

jj •••/(*>, »•• • *.)<teirfx* • • -<te. 

= JJ • • • F(£i, £2 • • • |»)A*dficff 2 • • • dU 

JJ • • • /(*1, 12 • • • In) Y <M*2 • • • din 

* JJ 1 * * £2 * ' ' tn)dhdh • • • d£„, 


9ii foj 

dfo dfa 


All the integrals over x are to be extended over an arbitrary region G, and those over £ are to be 
extended over the corresponding region g. 

4 Or 



• • • dxidxi • • • dx n . 


5 Kirchhoff, Vorles. iiber Theorie d. Wanne (Teubner, 1894), p. 143. 

6 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 74,508 (1876); Bryan, Phil. Mag. [5] 39,531 (1895). 

7 The meaning of this expression was discussed in §27. 

8 Jacobi, Vorlesungen iiber Dynamite, 9th lecture, p. 71, Eq. (8). Thomson and Tait, Treatise on 
Natural Philosophy, new edition, Vol. I, Part I, p. 307, Art. 319; German edition, p. 284. Rausenberger, 
Mechanik (Leipzig, 1888), Vol. I, p. 200. 

9 Liouville, J. de Math. 3,348 (1838). 

10 Jacobi, Vorlesungen iiber Dynamik, p. 93. 

11 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 63,397,679 (1871), 58,517 (1868). Maxwell, “On Boltzmann’s theorem,” 


2a 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ ~Ph-y-&XjcS- 




Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 12,547 (1879), Scientific Papers 2,713. 

12 Jacobi, Vorlesungen iiberDynamik, 9th lecture, p. 70, Eq. (4). 

* This word is left untranslated since the English equivalent, “microcanonical ensemble,” had not yet 
come into use when Boltzmann wrote this book. (See Gibbs, Elementary Principles in Statistical 
Mechanics [New York, 1902], chap, x.) Ergoden should not be confused with “ergodic systems,” i.e., 
hypothetical mechanical systems that have the (impossible) property that their coordinates and momenta 
eventually take on every value consistent with their fixed total energy. Boltzmann never used the word 
Ergoden for such systems, but “ergodic” came to be applied to them following the discussion published 
by P. and T. Ehrenfest in the Encyklopadie der mathematischen Wissenschaften (1911). Although the 
Ehrenfests made a valuable contribution by their critical analysis of the foundations of gas theory, they 
unfortunately misrepresented the opinions and even the terminology of Boltzmann and Maxwell. 
Boltzmann did discuss ergodic systems without calling them that (Wien. Ber. 63, 679 [1871], J. r. ang. 
Math. 100,201 [1887]), but he did not make the foundations of gas theory depend on their existence, nor 
did he even make a clear distinction between going through every point on the energy surface, and going 
infinitely close to every point. Ergoden were first introduced explicitly in 1884 (Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 
90, 231 [1884]; J. r. ang. Math. 98, 68 [1885]) although both Maxwell and Boltzmann had previously 
used the same device in making calculations. Boltzmann used the word “isodic” for the systems that we 
now call ergodic. Their impossibility was proved independently by Plancherel and Rosenthal, Ann. 
Physik [4] 42,796,1061 (1913). 

13 This (or the equivalent Eq. [88]) is a necessary condition that the distribution be stationary; it is 
also sufficient, since from it and Eq. (85) one can derive Eq. (87) for any P. Q, or Eq. (86) for any p, q; 
and these latter two equations are the mathematical expression of the fact that the distribution is 
stationary. 

14 Cf. Boltzmann, Wien Ber. 63, 704 (1871). Maxwell, Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 12, 561 (1878), 
Scientific Papers 2,730. 


2a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



CHAPTER IV 


Gases with compound molecules. 

§36. Special treatment of compound molecules. 

We shall now return to the general equations of §26, which are based on no hypotheses 
other than those from which the principles of mechanics are derived. We apply them to the 
following special case : a gas is found in a container enclosed on all sides by elastic walls. 
The molecules themselves need not all be of the same kind; thus we do not exclude the 
case of a mixture of several gases. 

Each molecule will be considered as a mechanical system, as defined in §25. In gas 
theory, it is usually assumed that the centers of any two molecules are, on the average, so 
far apart that the time during which a molecule interacts with another one is small compared 
to the time during which it is subject to no such interaction. However, we shall not exclude 
here the possibility that two or more molecules may interact for a longer time, as would 
happen in the case of partially dissociated gases, as long as the number of molecules 
simultaneously interacting at one place is very small compared to the total number of 
molecules in the container. One always must conceive of only small individual groups of 
molecules interacting with each other, whose distance from all other molecules is very large 
compared to their spheres of action. Consequently each molecule will traverse a very long 
path between successive interactions, so that the frequencies of different kinds of co ll isions 
can be calculated by probability theory. 

The position of a molecule of a certain kind, which we shall call the first, as well as the 
relative positions of its constituents, will be determined by p generalized coordinates. 

Pi, P2 • ’ * Pm- 

We call these coordinates, and the corresponding momenta q 2 ,... , q LI , 

the variables (112). 

The corresponding momentoids will be /q, r 2 ,... , r. r 

Three of the coordinates will determine the absolute position of some point in the 
molecule, for example its center of gravity. These will be the three coordinates p\, p 2 , and 
p 3 . In order to have a definite representation, we assume that they are the rectangular 
coordinates of the center of gravity of the molecule in question. The rotation of the 
molecule about its center of gravity, and the relative positions of its constituents, are 
therefore determined by the other coordinates. 

If there is no external force, each place within the container is equivalent. Hence all 
possible values of the three coordinates p\, p 2 , and p 3 are equally probable. 


2a 


~*Puii.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



However, in order to make the problem as general as possible, we shall not exclude the 
presence of external forces. Then, aside from the forces between the molecules and the wall 
of the container, we still have three other kinds of forces: 1. the internal forces of a 
molecule, i.e., the intramolecular forces which act between different parts of the same 
molecule; 2. external forces, for example gravity, exerted from outside the container on the 
molecules of the body; 3. the interaction force which acts between two, or eventually more 
than two, different molecules, if these come unusually near each other. 

The force function of the first two kinds of force should depend only on the coordinates 
of the molecules concerned; the force function of the third kind of force will depend on the 
coordinates of all the interacting molecules. We assume that the external forces vary very 
slowly from point to point inside the container, so that we can decompose this interior 
region into volume elements dp \ dpjdp^ with the following property: although each such 
volume element always contains a large number of molecules of each kind, the external 
force on a molecule does not change appreciably as it moves around inside this volume 
element. Just as, when there are no external forces at all, all places inside the container are 
equivalent, so in this case all places inside each such volume element are equivalent. 

§37. Application of Kirchhoffs method to gases with compound molecules. 

At the initial time (which we again call time zero) let the number of molecules of the 
first kind whose centers of gravity are found in any parallelepiped dP \ dP^dP^, for which 
the values of the variables 

( 113 ) Pi • • • p„ qi • • • q, 

lie between the li mits 

Pi and Pi + dPi • • • and + dQ> 

and which are not interacting with any other molecules be: 

Aie~ 2 hE 'dP\ • • • dQn . 

Here A j is a constant that is different for the different kinds of molecules, while h is a 
constant that has the same value for all kinds of molecules. Let Ey be the value of the sum 
of the kinetic energy of a molecule and the potential energy of the intramolecular and 
external forces acting on the molecule at the initial time. The negative partial derivatives of 
the potential energy function with respect to the coordinates give the components of the 
force, so that E | represents the total energy of a molecule, whose value remains constant as 
long as the molecule does not interact with others. 

The number of molecules of the first kind not interacting with others, for which the 
variables (112) (defined in the previous section) initially lie in a 2/r-fold in finitesimal region 
G that includes the value 


2a 


IPuJia*. 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



Pi, Pf • • P n Qu Qi ■ • • Q„ 


(114) 

is therefore 



dN i = A\e~ 2hEl 


i 



where the integration is to be extended over the region G. The center of gravity should 
have enough room to move around in G so that, although all variables are confined within 
very narrow limits, the expression (115) is still a very large number. 

When a molecule of the first kind moves under the influence of internal and external 
forces, without interacting with other molecules, and the variables (112) stall from the 
initial values (114), then after time t they will have the values 

(116) Pi,P 2 •••«„. 

These will be the actual values of these variables, whereas (112) only gives the names of 
the variables. Let e j be the value of the total energy at time t, so that according to the 
conservation of energy principle 

(117) fi = E\. 

If, furthermore, all molecules for which the values of the variables (112) initially fill the 
region G move without interacting with other molecules, then the values of these variables 
after time t will fill a region which we call the region g. It includes of course the values 
(116). 

If there were no interaction between the molecules at all, then the molecules whose 
variables he in G at time zero must be the same ones whose variables lie in g at time t. If we 
denote the number of the latter by dn\, then dn | would be equal to the expression (115), 
hence 


dn\ = A\e ~ 2hE » 

But according to Equation (55), 

j iPi'-dQ, 


JV. 

-/*■ 


dQr 

■ ■ dq„ 


where the latter integration is to be extended over the region g, corresponding after time t to 
the region G. Taking account of this fact, and of Equation (117), one finds: 


2a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




dn\ = Aie~ 2ht[ 




This expression differs from (115) only in that the values of the variables (116) appear in 
places of the values (114), e 1 in place of Ey and g in place of G. However, since Equation 
(115) should be valid for any values of the variables and any regions enclosing them, (118) 
must also represent the number of molecules of the first kind for which the values of the 
variables (112) were initially in g. Hence the number of molecules of the first kind for 
which the values of the variables (112) he in g has not changed during this time. Since, 
finally, the region G and hence also the region g are chosen completely arbitrarily, this must 
hold for any arbitrary region. In other words, the number of molecules for which the 
variables (112) lie in any arbitrary region does not change during an arbitrary time 1. The 
distribution of states remains stationary, as long as only the intramolecular motion is 
considered. 


38. On the possibility that the states of a very large number of molecules can 
actually lie within very narrow limits. 


We have assumed up to now that the regions G and g are very narrowly bounded, and 
yet at the same time we have assumed that the values of the variables for a very large 
number of molecules lie within these regions. If there are no external forces, this involves 
no difficulty. For then all points within the entire gas, when chosen as the position of the 
center of gravity of a molecule, are equivalent. The region 



dP\dPidP%, 


within which the center of gravity of a molecule lies does not then need to be infinitesimal, 
but rather it can be chosen arbitrarily large, since indeed we may set it equal to the entire 
volume of the container, and this can be chosen arbitrarily large. It is only the region within 
which the other variables /; 4 , ... , q, t are enclosed—which we call symbolically the region 
G/T—which must be (2/r - 3)-fold infinitesimal. 

We have therefore two quantities, one of which (namely the region T) can be chosen 
arbitrarily large, whereas the other (G/T) has to be made very small; and there is no relation 
between the size of these two regions. Indeed, the differential dp^ ... dq LI expresses the fact 
that we can choose G/T to be as small as we wish. However, for any particular such 
choice, we can choose T so large than a large number of molecules will always lie in G. 

However, if external forces are present, then there is an upper l im it to the size of the 
region E In particular, this region must be chosen so small that the external force can be 
considered constant inside it. Then G and g are to be considered 2/r-fold very small; and the 
condition that the number of molecules for which the values of the variables he within one 


28. 


% J u3uc- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



of these regions must be very large can be satisfied only if the number of molecules in unit 
volume is infinite in the mathematical sense. Hence the satisfaction of the above conditions 
in this case remains merely an ideal; yet we still expect agreement with experience, for the 
following reasons. 

In the molecular theory we assume that the laws of the phenomena found in nature do 
not essentially deviate from the l im its that they would approach in the case of an infinite 
number of infinitesimally small molecules. This assumption was already made in Part I, for 
reasons given in §6. It is indispensable for any application of the in finitesimal calculus to 
molecular theory; indeed, without it, our model which strictly deals always with a large 
finite number, would not be applicable to apparently continuous quantities. This 
assumption will seem best justified to those who have carefully considered experiments for 
the direct proof of the atomic constitution of matter. Even in the smallest neighborhood of 
the tiniest particles suspended in a gas, the number of molecules is already so large that it 
seems futile to hope for any observable deviation, even in a very small time, from the l im its 
that the phenomena would approach in the case of an infinite number of molecules. 

If we accept this assumption, then we should also obtain agreement with experience by 
calculating the l im it that the laws of the phenomena would approach in the case of an 
infinitely increasing number and decreasing size of the molecules. In calculating the latter 
l im it, we again have in fact two quantities, which can independently be made arbitrarily 
small: the size of the volume element, and the dimensions of the molecules. For any given 
choice of the former, we can always choose the latter so small that each volume element 
still contains very many molecules, whose properties are closely defined within the given 
narrow li mits. 

If, with Kirchhoff, one interprets the expressions (115) and (118) as simply statements 
of probabilities, then one can allow them to be fractions or even very small quantities; yet 
one thereby loses their perspicuousness. We shall come back to this point at the end of the 
book (§92). 

§39. Treatment of collisions of two molecules. 

Up to now we have not considered the interactions of two molecules, and we still have 
to seek the conditions under which the initial distribution of states will not be altered by 
collisions. For this purpose we must seek the probability of the occurrence of groups of 
several molecules. We shall first restrict ourselves to the case that the simultaneous 
interaction of more than two molecules occurs so extraordinarily seldom that it is 
completely negligible. We can then limit ourselves to the consideration of molecule pairs. 

The number of molecules of the first kind for which the variables (112) initially he in the 
region G enclosing the values (114), when none of the molecules are assumed to interact 
with each other, will again be given by Equation (115). 

Similarly the coordinates and momenta that determine the position and state of a 
molecule belonging to another type (called the second) will be denoted by 


2a 


l ? lc . 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




Pm+1j Ph-2 * * ' P/H-'j 9l * ' ‘ ?<*+•'• 



We shall ignore other kinds of molecules for the present. Nevertheless, the extension of our 
results to simultaneous interactions of several molecules does not offer any difficulty, 
though the expressions would become more complicated. 

The number of molecules of the second kind for which the variables (119) initially he in 
a region H enclosing the values 

( 120 ) P t+l ■ ■ • <? M+ , 


and of which none are assumed to interact with other molecules, is equal to 



where the integration is to he extended over the region H. A 2 is a constant. £ 2 is the total 
energy of the molecules of the second kind considered. 

The centers of gravity of all these molecules of both kinds shall lie within a space in 
which the external force can be considered constant, and will be completely randomly 
distributed. Thus in the probability calculation we can treat as completely independent the 
two events, that for a molecule of the first kind the variables he in the region G, and that for 
a molecule of the second kind they he in the region H. Hence the number of molecule pairs 
for which one molecule belongs to the first kind and has its variables in G, while the other 
belongs to the second kind and has its variables in G, is the product of the two expressions 
(115) and (121): 




A 1 A 2 e-** < * I+B * ) 




dQ^dP^i • ’ * dQn^-v 


We shall express the integration by a single integral sign, and we call the entire region of 
integration the region J, comprising the aggregate of G and H. 

Expressions similar to (122) wih of course hold when both molecules belong to the 
same kind. 

The orders of magnitude of the various regions are to be chosen very different. When no 
external force acts, the region 


r 



dPxdPidP^ 


within which the center of gravity of the first molecule lies will be chosen equal to the 
entire interior space of the container enclosing the gas—in other words, arbitrarily large. 


2a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Then P + 1 means the difference of the v-coordinates of the centers of gravity of the two 
molecules, and similarly P jU+ 2 and P /J+ 3 are the differences of the corresponding y- and z- 
coordinates. The validity of Equation (121) is not hereby affected, since in that equation 
Pfj+l, Pju+2’ P/j+3 were simply the coordinates of the center of gravity of a molecule of the 
second kind, for which any place in space is equally probable. With this extension of the 
region T, Equation (115), namely 


dN 1 = A ,r 2 ‘ £ ' dti 


/ 



gives the number of molecules of the first kind in the entire container, for which the 
variables (113) he in the (2/j - 3)-fold infinitesimal region \dP^ ... dQ ' To each of these 
molecules corresponds a volume element, similarly situated with respect to its center of 
gravity, 


dPp +1 dP n+ydP 

the number of these volume elements is therefore equal to the number dN\ given by 
Equation (115), and their total volume is equal to dN | ]]]dP p + 1 dP^ + 2 dP u + 3 • 

The total number of molecules of the second kind lying in all these volume elements for 
which the other variables he in the region 

J* dP m+4 ’ * * dQ^ 

is therefore, according to Equation (121), 

f dP „ + 1 • • • dQ H „ 




However, this is equal to the number dN\ 2 of molecule pairs for which all variables he in 
the region/, which agrees with Equation (122). This formula, which we derived earlier 
from the law of probability of combinations of several events, is therefore obtained again 
by a simple enumeration. 

If external forces act, then the region 



dPidP^Pi 


2a 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



must be chosen so small that the external force does not change noticeably therein; on the 
other hand, it must be larger than the entire space that the spheres of action of two 
interacting molecules occupy, so that it contains an enormous number of molecule pairs, for 
which the variables lie in the region J. 

The region for the center of gravity of the two molecules must however be considered 
infinitesimal compared to T. 

If all regions are infinitesimal, and there is only a finite number of molecules in unit 
volume, then of course it is impossible for a large number of molecules to have the values 
of their variables in this region, defined by mathematically infinitesimal narrow limits. We 
therefore set ourselves the problem of finding the limiting laws of the phenomena for an 
infinite number of molecules in unit volume, in the presence of external forces, and then 
assume that the actual phenomena will not noticeably deviate from these li mits. 

By Pu+\- Pjj+7- P/. 1 + 3 we mean, instead of the coordinates of the center of gravity of the 
second molecule, the differences of the coordinates of the centers of gravity of the two 
molecules. As remarked before, this change does not affect the validity of Equation (121). 
Then, just as earlier in the absence of external forces, we have to calculate the number 
dN \ 2> for which one again obtains the result (122). 

Since we are at present ignoring the case where more than two molecules interact 
simultaneously, we have to consider only all molecule pairs that are initially interacting. We 
first consider a pair in which one molecule belongs to the first kind and the other to the 
second. The number of such pairs initially interacting, for which the positions and velocities 
lie in a 2(/i+v)-fold in fin itesimal region J, will be given by the expression 



dN'n = 





This region J will include certain given values of the variables (112) and (119), which we 
call as before P\ ... and Bu+i ••• Q +v , and as before we call these the values (114) and 
(120), although of course they do not agree numerically with the values thus denoted 
earlier, since now there is an interaction where there was none before. In Equation (123) 
the integration is to be extended over the region J. T is the value of the potential function of 
the interaction force—i.e., the interaction that occurs during this time between the 
constituents of the two molecules. The additive constant in ¥ is to be chosen such that this 
function vanishes for all distances of the molecules at which there is no interaction. We 
denote by p^+\, p u+ 2 - and p u+3 the differences of the centers of gravity of the two 
molecules. 

For any molecule pair considered, the position of the center of gravity of the first 
molecule will be equally likely to be at any point within a pail of the volume of the 
container, as long as this pail is so small that the external forces can be considered constant 
within it. 


40. Proof that the distribution of states assumed in §37 will not be changed 


29 


PtthLe 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



by collisions. 


The formula (123) is to be considered as the most general one, which also includes 
(122), since if the two molecules are not interacting initially, T = 0 and the region J 
decomposes into two separate regions G and H, so that (123) reduces to (122). 

A formula similar to (123) will likewise hold if the two interacting molecules belong to 
the same kind. 

We now allow an arbitrary time t to elapse, which however should be so short that one 
may neglect the possibility that a molecule interacts more than once with another one 
during this time. 

If, for a pair of un li ke molecules, the position of the first is initially (114) and the 
position of the second is (120), then after a time t has elapsed, these same variables will 
have the values 



Pi • ■ ■ % P*+1 • • • <?*+'• 


The corresponding values of the total energy (excluding the interaction energy) will be 
denoted by e | for the first molecule, and e 2 for the second. The value of the interaction 
potential function is v|/. The values (124) are of course again numerically different from the 
values (116) and (119) although they are denoted by the same letters. 

The region filled by the values of the variables characterizing the state of the two 
molecules at time t, when they originally filled the region /, will be called the region i. 

We can consider the aggregate of the two molecules as one mechanical system, for 
which therefore the equation analogous to Equation (55) holds, so that one has 



Jdpr- ■ dq M+ , = J 



where the second integral is to be extended over the region /, and the first over the 
corresponding region i. The validity of this equation is independent of whether the 
molecules are interacting either initially or at time t. It is also valid if the molecules never 
interact during t, in which case each of the two regions J and i decomposes into two 
separate regions, the former into G and H, the latter into g and h. Furthermore, in general, 
according to the principle of conservation of energy, 

(126) E\ + £2 + ¥ = €1 + 62 + V 


The latter equation also holds independently of whether an interaction takes place or not, 
since if there is no interaction the potential function of the interaction force simply vanishes. 

The number of molecule pairs for which the values of the variables determining the 
positions and states initially fill the region / is given in general by the expression (123). 
This expression reduces, when one takes account of Equations (125) and (126), to 


29 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




dn n = AiAtf~ 2h{tlHi +' l ' ) 




where the integration is to be extended over the region i corresponding to the region J. 

However, the molecule pairs for which the values of the variables fill the region J at 
time t are identical with those for which these values fill the region i at time t. Equation 
(127) therefore gives also the number of the latter type of molecule pair. The calculation of 
the number of molecule pairs for which the values of the variables initially fill the region i 
can again be performed with the generally valid formula (123). One simply has to replace 
Ey, E 2 , T and/ by gj, e 2 > 4 and i. One thereby obtains again just the expression (127), 
regardless of whether there is any interaction at time zero or at time 1 or within this interval. 
However, since the region /, and hence also the region i determined by /, are completely 
arbitrary, we see that for an arbitrarily chosen region the number of molecule pairs for 
which the values of the variables lie within the region is the same at the initial time and at 
time 1. The state distribution therefore remains stationary when one takes account of 
collisions. 

One sees at once that he can apply completely analogous considerations to molecule 
pairs in which both molecules are of the same kind ; and that the same considerations can 
be extended to the case where more than two kinds of gas are present in the container. 

Up to now we have chosen the time t so small that we could ignore molecules that 
interacted with others twice during this time. But, since we saw that exactly the same 
distribution of states holds at time t as at time zero, the same method of reasoning can be 
applied again to another time interval of length t, over and over again. One therefore sees 
that the state distribution must remain stationary. Also, our assumption that in calculating 
the probability of a particular kind of encounter of two molecules, the two events that the 
two molecules are found in certain states can be considered independent, must also be true 
at all later times. For, according to our assumptions, each molecule moves past a very large 
number of molecules between successive interactions, so that the state of the gas at the 
place where the molecule experiences one interaction is completely independent of the state 
of the gas at the place of its previous interaction, and is determined only by the laws of 
probability. Naturally one has to remember that laws of probability are just that. The 
possibility of fluctuations hardly comes into consideration; yet when the number of 
molecules is finite, the probability of a fluctuation, while very small, is not zero; it can 
actually be calculated numerically in any particular case by the laws of probability, and it 
vanishes only for the limiting case of an infinite number of molecules. 


§41. Generalizations. 

We have still imposed a restriction on ourselves by the assumption that the case when 
more than two molecules interact plays no role. However, one perceives that this restriction 
was made only in order to simplify the proof, whose validity is completely independent of 
it. Likewise, just as we have discussed the probability of occurrence of certain molecule 


29 . 


“PiLh-d. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



pairs, we can also try to calculate the probability of occurrence of groups of three and more 
molecules, and it will be found that such interactions of three or more molecules do not 
change the law that the state distribution represented by a formula similar to (123) is a 
stationary one. Also, the effect of the wall (not previously mentioned) cannot disturb the 
stationary character of this state distribution, in the case where the molecules rebound 
directly from it as if it were another identical gas. Any other assumed property of the wall 
would of course require new calculations. Yet it is manifest that even then, if the container 
is large enough, its effect would not extend into the interior. 

Of course we have not yet proved that the state distribution expressed by Equation (123) 
is the only possible stationary one under all circumstances. Indeed such a general proof 
cannot be given, since in fact there are other special state distributions which can lik ewise 
be stationary. Such cases would for example, be encountered if all the gas molecules 
consisted of material points that all originally move in a plane or in a straight line, and the 
wall is everywhere perpendicular to this plane or line. But these are special distributions in 
which all variables take only a relatively small number of their possible values, whereas 
Equation (123) provides a distribution for which all variables take all their possible values. 

It appears scarcely conceivable that there could be any other distributions which are 
stationary and for which all variables can run through all their possible values. In addition, 
there is a complete analogy between the state distribution represented by Equation (123) 
and that for a gas of monatomic molecules. This analogy has a definite foundation. 

Just as in the game of Lotto, any particular quintuple is not a hair less probable than the 
quintuple 12345; the latter is distinguished from the others only by having a definite 
sequential property lacking in the others. Likewise, the most probable state distribution has 
this property only because it shares the same observable average value with by far the 
greatest number of equally possible state distributions. 1 Hence that state distribution is the 
most probable which, without altering this mean value, allows the greatest number of 
permutations of the individual values among the individual molecules. I have already 
shown in Pari I, §6, how the mathematical condition for this property leads to Maxwell’s 
distribution in the case of monatomic gas molecules. Without going into that further, I will 
remark that the validity of the considerations established there is in no way l im ited to the 
case of monatomic molecules; on the contrary, similar’ considerations can also be used in 
the case of compound molecules. In this case the momentoids corresponding to the 
generalized coordinates play exactly the same role that was played by the velocity 
components of the center of gravity in the case of monatomic molecules; the potential 
function of the internal and external forces plays the same role as was played earlier by the 
potential of the external forces alone, so that we obtain Equation (123) directly as a 
generalization of the formulas found in Part I. 

That the formula (123) is the only one corresponding to thermal equilibrium, we shall 
try to make probable on several grounds in Chapter VII; we shall also give a direct proof in 
one of the simplest special cases. At this point, however, in order not to exhaust ourselves 
by too long a sojourn with abstract matters, we shall be content with the arguments here 
advanced in favor of Equation (123), and draw from it the most important consequences. 


293 _ 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



42. Mean value of the kinetic energy corresponding to a momentoid. 


We shall next consider a mixture of several gases, none of which is considered to be 
partly dissociated. At any time the number of molecules interacting with each other will be 
vanishingly small compared to the rest, and it is therefore permitted to take account of only 
the noninteracting molecules in calculating average values. 

If we introduce instead of the momenta q±, r/ 2 , ..., q, t the corresponding momentoids r 1? 
r 2 , ... , r LI , then the number of molecules for which the coordinates and momentoids lie in 
any region K enclosing the values 



Pi, P 2 • • • p„ ri • • • r„ 


is given by the expression 






which is valid for any kind of gas in the container, since the determinant for the 
transformation from the variables q to the variables r is equal to 1. The constant h must 
have the same value for all gases present in the same container. The constant A, however, 
can have a different value for each kind of gas. e is the sum of the kinetic energy and the 
potential energy of intramolecular and external forces of a molecule; the potential function 
will be called V. 

For the kinetic energy of a molecule one has, as we saw, the expression 

2 2 2 2 

L = K«in + aft • • • <W = J L or » 

where we again denote by the first term the pail of the kinetic energy corresponding to the 
first momentoid. 

If we choose the region K in the simplest way—i.e., so that it includes all combinations 
of values for which the coordinates he between the li mits 


(130) Pi and pi + rfpi • • • p„ and p M + 

and the momentoids between the limits 

(131) T\ and + dri • • • r M and 

—then 

dn = i4r A(2r+Zar2) dpidp2 * • • dr M . 


29 . 


iRetfte, Ma£4cjvi(i£icaZ 


( 132 ) 



This is the number of molecules of any particular kind for which the values of the variables 
are enclosed between the li mits (130) and (131). 

The mean value of the pari: 1 q ^ corresponding to the momentoid r t has for arbitrary 
i the value 




2 -M2V+ lar*) 

a»r<e api • • • ar M 


> 



-W+Sar*) 

e 



where the single integral sign indicates an integration over all possible values of the 
differentials. 

If one integrates over r, in both numerator and denominator, then he can bring outside 
the r t integral in both cases a factor not depending on r- t . These factors cancel in numerator 
and denominator. The integral over r ( - in the numerator is 



2 

2 



while that in the denominator is 


2 f e-* oiri dr;. 


In order to find the limits of integration, we recall that for the velocity p' each coordinate 
may go through all values from -oo to + oo. The r are linear functions of the p' and can 
therefore run through all values from -oo to +oo likewise. These are therefore the l im its of 
integration for r- t , and one obtains 



as can be seen by integrating by parts in the first integral, or by calculating both integrals 
using Equation (39), §7 of Pari I. One can now put the factor ~fi in front of all the integral 
signs in the numerator, and the factor 2 in the denominator. The expressions multiplying 
these factors are the same in both numerator and denominator, so one can cancel them and 
obtain : 


29 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



( 134 ) 


_ M 

L = — 
4 h 


1 _ 
— a,rf 
2 


1 

4 h 


T means the average value of the total kinetic energy of a molecule of the kind considered. 
Hence the kinetic energy corresponding to each momentoid has the same value on the 
average, and indeed this value is equal for all kinds of gas, since h has the same value for 
all kinds of gas. Similarly, as in Part I, §19, this theorem can also be extended to gases that 
are in theimal equilibrium with each other by means of a heat-conducting partition. 

Since we have everywhere integrated over each p and r independently, and in general 
we have always considered the p as independent variables, we have continually assumed 
that there is no relation between the generalized coordinates /q, p 2 , .... /?„. p is therefore the 
number of independent variables required to determine the absolute position of all 
constituents of a molecule in space, as well as their positions relative to each other. One 
calls p the number of degrees of freedom of the molecule, conceived as a mechanical 
system. 

One can always choose three of the r to be the three velocity components of the center 
of gravity of a molecule in the three coordinate directions, since the total kinetic energy of a 
system is always the sum of the kinetic energies of the motion of the center of gravity and 
of the motion relative to the center of gravity.- The product of half the total mass of a 
molecule and the mean square of one of these velocity components of its center of gravity- 
is then the mean kinetic energy corresponding to this momentoid; according to Equation 
(134), it has the value }- for each of the coordinate directions. The sum of the three 

average kinetic energies for the three coordinate directions is however equal to the product 
of half the total mass of the molecule and the mean square velocity of its center of gravity. 
This latter product we shall call the mean kinetic energy of the motion of the center of 
gravity, or of the progressive motion of the molecule, and denote it by Therefore 



.3 _ _ 

S = —> S:L = 2:n. 
4 h 


The mean kinetic energy of the motion of the center of gravity of a molecule is therefore 
the same for any gases in theimal equilibrium with each other. From this there follows, as 
we saw in §7 of Part I, the Boyle-Charles-Avogadro law, which therefore appears to have 
a kinetic foundation for gases with compound molecules as well. 1 

§43. The ratio of specific heats, k . 

We shall now assume for a moment that only one kind of gas is present in the container, 
and that the external forces can be ignored, so that the intramolecular and intermolecular 
interaction forces, and the opposing pressure of the wall of the container against the gas, are 


29 


Pi£h;e 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the only forces that need be considered. 

As in Pail I, § 8 , we denote by CIQ 2 the amount of heat used to raise the kinetic energy of 
motion of the centers of gravity of the molecules, and by clQ^ the heat used to increase the 
kinetic and potential energy of the intramolecular motion, when the gas experiences a 
temperature increase dT. The ratio dQ^ldQ 2 will be denoted by as in Pail I, § 8 . The heat 
will always be measured in mechanical units. 

The quantity clQ 3 can be decomposed naturally into two parts: a part dQ$, which is used 
to increase the kinetic energy of intramolecular motion, and a part clQ g, which is used to 
increase the value of the potential function of the force acting between the constituents of a 
molecule (intramolecular force). 

We have denoted by £ the mean kinetic energy of the motion of the center of gravity of 
a molecule. If n is the total number of molecules in the gas, then the total kinetic energy of 
the progressive motion of the molecules is nS ; hence dQ 3 — ndS Since we have 

denoted by the total mean kinetic energy of a molecule, then £_^ is the mean 

kinetic energy of intramolecular motion of a molecule. The kinetic energy of the 
intramolecular motion of all molecules in the gas is therefore — S) or ’ according to 

Equation (135), (p /*•$ — J whence it follows that 



If we denote the average value of the potential for a molecule by y, then 

(137) dQ, = ndV. 

The latter quantity cannot be calculated unless we make some special assumption about 
V. We shall therefore simply set 


dQt = edQi 

in order not to restrict the degree of generality, and we then obtain: 

dQ e + dQ e n 

dQ 1 3 

The ratio of specific heats of the gas k will therefore be, according to Equation (56) of § 8 , 
Pail I, 



29 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(138) 


2 


k= 1 +- 

M + 3e 

§44. Value of k for special cases. 

If the molecules are single material points, then they have no other motion besides the 
motion of the center of gravity; hence e = 0. To determine their position in space, three 
rectangular coordinates are sufficient; hence /./ = 3, k = 1 ^ . 

Now suppose that the molecules are smooth undeformable elastic bodies; then no 
variation of the potential of the intramolecular force is permitted; hence e = 0. 

If each molecule is constructed absolutely symmetrically with respect to its center of 
gravity—or, still more generally, if it has the form of a sphere whose center of gravity 
coincides with its midpoint—then indeed each molecule can make arbitrary rotations 
around an arbitrary axis passing through its midpoints; but the velocity of this rotation 
cannot be altered in any way by collisions between molecules. If all molecules were 
initially not rotating, then they would remain so for all time. On the other hand, if they were 
initially rotating, then each molecule would retain its rotation independently of all the 
others, although this rotation would exert no observable action. 

Of the variables determining the position of a molecule, only the three coordinates of the 
center of gravity come into consideration for collisions, and one has again 4 

n = 3, k = If. 

It is otherwise when the molecules are absolutely smooth undeformable elastic bodies 
that have either the foim of solids of revolution differing from the spherical form, or the 
form of spheres in which the center of gravity does not coincide with the midpoint. In the 
former case, it will be assumed that either their mass is completely symmetrically arranged 
around the axis of rotation, or this axis is at least a principal axis of inertia, that the center of 
gravity lies on it, and that the moment of inertia of the molecule with respect to each line 
passing through the center of gravity perpendicular to the axis of rotation is the same. If the 
bodies are spheres with eccentric centers of gravity, the moments of inertia of the molecule 
with respect to any line through the center of gravity perpendicular to the line connecting 
the center of gravity and the midpoints must be the same. Then, only the rotation about the 
axis of rotation will be without effect on the collisions. All other rotations will be changed 
by collisions, so that their kinetic energy must be in theimal equilibrium with the kinetic 
energy of progressive motion. 

Five variables are now needed to determine the position of a molecule in space: the 
three coordinates of its center of gravity and two angles determining the position of its axis 
of rotation in space. Hence/r = 5 and since & is again zero, one has k = 1.4.* If the 
molecules are absolutely flat undeformable bodies, not constructed by either of the above 
methods, then their rotation about all possible axes will be modified by collisions. Then, to 


29 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



determine the position of a molecule, three angles determining the total rotation around the 
center of gravity are necessary as well as the three coordinates of its center of gravity, and 
one gets 


M = 6, k = If 


§45. Comparison with experiment. 

It is remarkable that for mercury vapor—whose molecules have long been considered 
monatomic on chemical grounds— according to the researches of Kundt and Warburg,* k 
is in fact very nearly equal to the value obtained for simple molecules, If. Also for helium, 
neon, argon, metargon [xenon], and krypton, Ramsay found almost the same value of k. t 
The limited chemical activity of these gases is l ik ewise consistent with their being 
monatomic. 

For many gases with very simply constructed compound molecules (possibly for all 
those for which a variation of a with temperature has not yet been verified) observation 
gives values of k that lie very near to the two other ones that we found, 1.4 and ^ 

Of course the problem is still far from being solved. For many gases, n has yet smaller 
values; moreover, Wiillner found that often—and indeed just for these latter gases —k 
varies strongly with temperature.]: Our theory predicts that k should vary with temperature 
as soon as the potential of the intramolecular forces, V, becomes important; yet it is easy to 
see that much remains to be done on the theory of specific heats. 

If the molecules are spheres filled with mass symmetrically around their midpoints, then 
of course there is no possibility that they can be set into rotation by collisions, nor that any 
initial rotation can be lost. Nevertheless it is improbable that such molecules would remain 
rotationless throughout all eternity, or that they would always preserve the same amount of 
rotation. It seems more likely that they possess this property only to a very close 
approximation, so that their rotational state does not noticeably change during the time in 
which the specific heat is determined, even though over a long period of time rotation will 
be equilibrated with other molecular motions, so slowly that such energy exchanges escape 
our observation. 

Similarly one can assume that in gases for which n = 1.4, the constituents of the 
molecule are by no means connected together as absolutely undeformable bodies, but rather 
that this connection is so intimate that during the time of observation these constituents do 
not move noticeably with respect to each other, and later on their thermal equilibrium with 
the progressive motion is established so slowly that this process is not accessible to 
observation. In any case, for air at temperatures where noticeable heat begins to be radiated, 
it is found that in addition to the five variables determining the state of a molecule, another 
one begins to participate in the thermal equilibrium during the time of observation, so that k 
varies with temperature and becomes smaller than 1.4; the same must be tine for all other 
gases. 

Naturally, because of the obscurity of the nature of all molecular processes, all 


2 QQ 


IRuJuc- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ PA.ylic.1 



hypotheses about them must be expressed with the greatest caution. The hypotheses 
proposed here would be con fir med experimentally if it were to be shown that, for any gas 
for which tz varies with temperature, observations extended over a longer period of time 
give a smaller value of k than those of shorter duration. 

In spite of the appearance of a potential function for intramolecular forces, k remains 
independent of temperature in the case that the constituents of the molecule have fixed rest 
positions relative to each other, and that the force acting on them when they move away 
from these rest positions is a linear function of the distance. If then X is the number of 
variables on which the relative positions of the constituents of a molecule depend, the 
coordinates can always be chosen such that the potential function takes the form: 

Kte + + • • • to). 

The quantity i&P should then be the intramolecular potential energy corresponding to 
the coordinate pj. Its mean value can be calculated just as we calculated the mean value of 
the quantity above, and one obtains likewise the value JL for each i. Hence 

7 = v/ih, 5:7 = 3:X. 

Since these equations are completely similar to Equations (135), then 5 

dQi = JXdQj, hence e = JX, 

2 

K = 1+ - 

M + X 

As an example we consider a molecule consisting of two simple material points, or of 
two absolutely smooth spheres filled with mass distributed completely symmetrically 
around their midpoints. These should exert no force on each other at a certain distance, but 
at greater distances they attract and at smaller distances they repel each other, the force 
being proportional to the change of distance in both cases. Then this distance is the only 
coordinate determining the relative positions, hence X = 1 . 

Five other coordinates are needed to determine the absolute position in space. The total 
number p of the p, or the number of degrees of freedom, is then six, and therefore 

If = 1.2857 

Treatment of further special cases would not be difficult, but it seems to me to be 
superfluous as long as more comprehensive experimental data are not available. 


3Q 


iPu+LC- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 


46. Other mean values. 



In the previous sections we have calculated the average kinetic energy for a momentoid 
obtained by averaging over all values for all molecules of a certain kind in the container. 
This mean value does not change if we impose at the same time restrictions on one or more 
of the coordinates, for example when we take only those values of all molecules of this 
kind whose centers of gravity he within an arbitrarily small rcgion jjjc /P \ dP^dP^'. the 
temperature is the same everywhere in the gas. This theorem, which is self-evident in the 
absence of external forces, also holds if external forces of any kind are present. 

Nor does this mean value change when we include in the averaging only those 
molecules for which some other coordinates are restricted to lie within some arbitrary/ li mits. 
The mean value in question will again be given by Equation (133); except that the 
integration is to be extended not over all values of the coordinates but only over the 
specified region, which is of course the same in both numerator and denominator. Then just 
as in §42 the entire factor independent of the integration over dr t comes out in front of the 
integral sign, and after performing the integration over dr t in both numerator and 

denominator, one can divide through by this factor, so that one obtains again the value — 

4 h 

for the integral. 

If the a are constant then, as Equation (132) shows, the relative probability that the 
value of any momentoid lies between any l im its whatever and that it lies between any other 
l im its is completely independent of the position of the molecule in space, and of the relative 
positions of its constituents. We shall call this theorem, which we shall use later, the S- 
theorem. It refers to the case where the r are quantities proportional to the velocity 
components of material points or the angular velocities of a rigid body around its principal 
moments of inertia. 

For those kinds of gas to which Equation (129) pertains, one finds the numberin' of 
molecules for which the values of the coordinates lie between the limits (130), when the 
values of the momenta are not subjected to any restrictive conditions, by integrating 
Equation (129) over all the r from - oo to + oo. One obtains in this way 


Air* 1 * 

(139) dn' - - e~ nv dpidp 2 • • • dp^. 

/i m/2 \/^i«2 • * • 

The mean value ^ of the potential function is jVdn'/jdn', where the integrations are to be 
extended over all possible values of the coordinates. 

The number of molecules for which the coordinates he in any one /./-fold infinitesimal 
region is then in the same ratio to the number of molecules for which they are in a lik ewise 
p-fold in finitesimal region F' without any restriction on the values of the momenta, as 


3Q 


^Pi l * lc - 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 







where the letters without primes indicate the values for the region F, and those with primes 
indicate those for F'\ the first integral is over the former region, and the second one over the 
latter region. 

When there are no intramolecular and external forces, and the molecules consist purely 
of simple material points, then this is the ratio of the product of the volumes of all volume 
elements available to the material points in the region F, to the analogous product for the 
region F’. Then the exponentials are equal to 1, so that 



\(x{<x{ * * * 


is always equal to the ratio of these products of volume elements. 


47. Treatment of directly interacting molecules. 


In the last section we always proceeded from Equation (129) —i.e., we assumed that the 
interaction of two molecules lasts so short a time that we can ignore molecules that are 
momentarily interacting with others when calculating average values. Yet the theorems 
developed in this and the preceding sections are also valid for interacting molecules. For 
example, we consider all pairs of un lik e molecules for which the coordinates of the two 
molecules he within any (ju + v)-fold infinitesimal region, without any restriction on the 
momentoids. If no external forces act, then the region available for the center of gravity of 
one of the molecules can be extended over the entire interior of the container. If we 
integrate over ah the r in Equation (127) (in which we have previously substituted the r in 
place of the q) we find the following expression for the number of these molecule pairs: 


dN = AAr 1 ™*** 




Here V is the potential of intramolecular and external forces for the first molecule, and is 
the potential for the second molecule, ip is the potential of the force of interaction. The sum 


3Q 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



pertains to all the momentoids of both molecules. The p integrals are to be extended over all 
coordinates of both molecules, in the region D. while the r integrals are over all possible 
values of these variables from - oo to + oo. The evaluation of the integral over the r gives 




T ( M+0/2 i 4 i 4i e -2/t ( V+7i+^) 

ftO'+'J/Vai • • • ty +r 




One can now calculate the mean value of the kinetic energy f° r one °f the 

momentoids, for all molecules of the first kind in those pairs whose total number is denoted 

by clN. This again comes out to be —. I will not write out the explicit formula from which 

4ft 

this follows, since it is completely analogous to the corresponding formulas developed in 

§42 for single molecules. For all these molecule pairs, the mean kinetic energy of the 

3 

motion of the center of gravity of each molecule pair is again equal to —. 

4 ft 

I will only derive one more theorem, which we will need in the theory of dissociation of 
gases. We shall consider, besides the region D , another arbitrary (p + v)-fold infinitesimal 
region D' for the coordinates of the two molecules, and denote with primes all the values of 
the variables pertaining to this second region, so that now the p' are not time derivatives but 
are other values of the p. 

The number of pairs of unl ik e molecules for which the variables he in the region D, 
without any restriction on the values of the momentoids, is (according to Eq. [141]): 


dN 1 = 


AA^' 2 


h^'Wal ■ ■ ■ <*„'+* 


Therefore 


(142) 


dN 1 V«i • • • «*, J dpi ■ ■ • dp;+, 


MKW+nf dp{ 


f 

J dvt • • • dvL 


dpn+*• 


dN e -u(v+vi+i) y'a' ... a > +y rdpi'-- dp^y 


/ 


This formula and Equation (140) are nothing but generalizations—remarkable for their 
simplicity and symmetry—of Equation (167), Part I, i.e., the completely trivial formula for 
the barometric measurement of height, according to which the numbers of molecules found 
in unit volume at different heights z behave like 

g-2 hmgt — Q-gtlrT 


30 


~*Puii.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Since this formula permits one to calculate the pressure of the saturated vapor and the law 
of dissociation (cf. §60 and §§62-73) it must be regarded as one of the fundamental 
formulas of gas theory. 

If, other things being equal, the molecule pairs exert no forces on each other, either in D 
or D', then one has the same expression as before for the quotient dN'/dN, except that he 
has to set ip = xfJ = 0. If it is possible to compute the ratio dN'/dN for this latter ease, then 
one can obtain the corresponding value when there is some interaction by multiplying it by 
Likewise, if there is no interaction in D either time, and there is an interaction in 
D' one time but not the other, then one should multiply by e - 1 ' . One can also call dN'/dN 
the relative probability of the two events, that for a molecule pair the values of the variables 
lie in the region I)' or the region D. 

A similar theorem holds, as can easily be shown, for the interaction of more than two 
molecules. The relative probability of two configurations is times larger when 

interactions occur than when they are absent, where ip and iff are the values of the 
potentials of the interaction for the two configurations. 


1 The criterion for equal possibility is provided by Liouville’s theorem. 

2 Cf. Boltzmann, Vorlesungen iiberdie Principe der Mechanik, Part I, §64, p. 208. 

3 We shall think of a particular given solid or liquid as an aggregate of n material points, which 
therefore have 3 n degrees of freedom, perhaps just the 3n rectangular coordinates. If it is surrounded by 
a larger gas mass, then it can be considered in certain respects as a single gas molecule, and the law found 
in the text can be applied to it. The total kinetic energy is therefore 3n/4/z. If the temperature is increased 
in such a way that 1/4/? increases by d(U4h), then the total heat, measured in mechanical units, that must 
be supplied to raise the mean kinetic energy isdQ, = 3nd(\/4h). This heat, per unit of mass and 
temperature increment, is what Clausius calls the true specific heat. It is invariable in all states and forms 
of aggregation. It would be the total specific heat if the body were a gas dissociated into its atoms. For 
all bodies it is proportional to the number of atoms in the body. The total specific heat is also 
proportional to this number (Dulong-Petit law of chemical elements, or Neumann’s law for 
compounds) if the heat increment dQ , used to perform internal work is in a constant ratio to that used to 
increase the kinetic energy, dQ ,. This is always the case if the internal forces acting on each atom are 
proportional to its distance from its rest position, or still more generally if they are linear functions of its 
coordinate variations. Then the force function V is a homogeneous quadratic function of the 
coordinates, just as the kinetic energy L is such a function of the momenta. The integrations in the 
formula for can then be performed in the same way used to obtain Equation (134), and one finds dQf = 
dQj. (Cf. Eq. [111a] at the end of §45.) The total heat capacity is then twice the true monatomic gas 
value. The assumed law of action of internal molecular forces holds approximately for most solid 
bodies. For such bodies, whose heat capacity is smaller than half that predicted by the Dulong-Petit law 
(e.g., diamond) one must assume that the motions related to certain parameters come into equilibrium 
with the others so slowly that they do not contribute to the specific heats determined by experiment. (Cf. 
§35. For the case that the molecule makes approximately pendulum-like motions, see Boltzmann, Wien. 
Ber.53, 219 [1866]; 56, 68b (1867); 63, 731 (1871); Richarz, Ann. Physik [3] 48, 708 [1893]; 
Staigmuller, Ann. Physik [3] 65,670 [ 1898].) 

4 In general, one obtains in these two cases all the formulas developed in Part I for monatomic 
molecules directly from Equation (118), whether external forces are absent (§7) or present (§19). These 
formulas are therefore only special cases of (118). 

* This explanation of the anomalous specific heats of diatomic gases was first proposed by 
Boltzmann in December 1876 (Wien. Ber. 74,553 [1877]), and independently in April 1877 by R. H. M. 


30 : 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




Bosanquet (Phil. Mag. 15] 3,271 [1877]). 

* Kundt and Warburg, Ann. Physik [2] 157,353 (1876). 

t Ramsay, C. R. Paris 120, 1049 (1895). Ramsay and Collie, Proc. R. S. London 60, 206 (1896). 
Rayleigh and Ramsay, Phil. Trans. 186 , 187 (1896). Ramsay and Travers, Proc. R. S. London 63, 405 
(1898). 

t A. Wullner, Ann. Physik [3] 4 , 321 (1878). 

5 Cf. Staigmtiller, Ann. Physik [3] 65 , 655 (1898) and footnote 2, §42. 


3Q 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



CHAPTER V 


Derivation of van der Waal’s equation by means of the virial concept. 

§48. Specification of the point at which van der Waals’ mode of reasoning 
requires improvement. 

In deriving van der Waals’ equation in Chapter I, we followed the method that he 
himself first used, which is characterized by the greatest simplicity and perspicuousness. It 
was already remarked (footnote 1, §7) that it is perhaps not completely free of objection. 

The first assumption subject to doubt is the one that we made in §3 and also later on: 
that in the entire container, as well as in the cylinder lying near the boundary of the space— 
which we called there the cylinder y—each volume element is equally probable as a 
position for the midpoint of a molecule, regardless of its distance from another molecule. 

If there are no forces except the collision forces, the correctness of this assumption 
follows directly from Equation (140) , in which V is then constant, so that it therefore 
predicts that the average number of molecules will be the same in each equal volume 
element. 

On the other hand, the van der Waals cohesion force will produce a denser arrangement 
of the molecules in the interior of the fluid than in the immediate neighborhood of the wall. 
Van der Waals did not take account of this effect, either in deriving the expression for 
collisions at the wall or in calculating the dependence of the term a/v 2 on the density of the 
gas. In both cases, however, correct treatment of the volume elements at the boundary is 
essential; the quantities being calculated vanish more strongly as the number of particles at 
the surface becomes small compared to those inside. Thus one cannot, as with the formulas 
of this chapter, improve the accuracy of the results arbitrarily by making the volume large 
compared to the surface. 

Van der Waals calculated the correction to the Boyle-Charles law due to the finite 
extension of the rigid core of the molecule, as was explained in Chapter I, just as if the 
cohesion force were not present. He then calculated the additional term in the external 
pressure due to the cohesion forces as if the molecules were vanishingly small. Since the 
validity of this procedure might be doubted, we shall give a second deduction of the van 
der Waals formula from the theory of the virial (to which van der Waals has l ik ewise 
already related it) against which this objection cannot be made. This second derivation 
shows that van der Waals’ conclusion is completely correct. Yet we cannot of course 
obtain by the exact method precisely the reciprocal of v - b which occurs in van der Waals’ 
equation, which van der Waals himself has called inexact; on the contrary we obtain an 
infinite series in powers of b/v. 

§49. More general concept of the virial. 


3(1 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ ~Ph-y-&XjcS- 



The concept of the virial was introduced into gas theory by Clausius.* Let there be 
given an arbitrary number of material points. Let in be the mass of one point, and let . 17 ,, 
> 7 j, zj v Cj v uj v v h , W/ } be its rectangular coordinates, its velocity, and its velocity components 
along the coordinate axes, respectively, at some time !. Let %, (h be the components of 
the total force acting on this material point at the same time. The force should have the 
property that all the material points can move under its influence for an arbitrarily/ long time, 
without any of their coordinates or velocity components increasing without bound. The 
initial conditions should be such that this can actually be true. No matter how long a time of 
motion may be chosen, the absolute value of any coordinate or velocity component must 
remain smaller than a fixed finite quantity, which has the value E for the coordinates and 
the value e for the velocity components. Such motions—of which all molecular motions 
giving rise to thermal phenomena in a body of finite extent are clearly examples—we shall 
call stationary. 

Now let G be the value of any quantity at a particular time t; then we shall call the 
quantity 


1 

T 



Gdt = G 


the time average of G during the time of motion r. 

By virtue of the equations of motion of mechanics, we have : 

duh 

m h — = fc. 

dt 


Hence 


U 2 

— {m k XhUh) = m h u k + Xkh- 
dt 

If one multiplies this equation by dt, integrates over an arbitrary time (from 0 to r) and 
finally divides by r, then it follows that: 

— - — r x 0 0 

m h ul + xfa = — (i»u» - x k u k ), 

T 

where the values at time r are characterized by the upper index r, and the values at time 
zero by the upper index 0. By value of the stationary character of the motion 


3(1 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




is smaller than 2m h E e . If one allows the time of the entire motion, r, to increase beyond 
any l im it, then 2m h E e remains finite; hence the expression 2m h EJx approaches zero. If 
one takes the mean value for a sufficiently long time, then : 


m h ui + Xkh = 0. 


Similar equations are obtained for all coordinate directions and all material points. If one 
adds them all up, it follows that: 


(143) Y1 nihCff + ^(x*{a + + Zhth) = 0. 


1 Y 2 


is the kinetic energy L of the system. The expression 


Yh (®*{* y^h + thin) 


Clausius calls the virial of the forces acting on the system. Therefore the above equation 
says that twice the time average of the kinetic energy is equal to the negative time average 
of the virial of the system during a very long time. 

We now assume that between any two material points m^ and m^, whose distance is r hk , 
a force fhk( r hk) acts > n !hc direction of r hk , which we call the internal force. It has a positive 
sign when it is repulsive, and a negative sign when it is attractive. Moreover, on each 
material point m/ 2 an external force acts, which results from causes lying outside the system 
and whose components along the coordinate directions we denote by X h , Y jv and Z h . Then: 

X\ - X2 X\~ Xi 

{l = XlH-/l2^12) H- fu{ r n) + * • •• 

T 12 ^ 13 

One sees easily 1 that then Equation (143) becomes: 

(144) 2L 4* Yj ( x t$h "I" y^Yh + ZkZh) + Y1 Y1 r Mcfhk(Thk) = 0. 


The first addend is twice the time average of the kinetic energy of the entire system. The 
second is the external virial, and the third the internal virial. The two virials will be denoted 
by W a and W- r so that Equation (144) reduces to 

(145) 21 + W„ + IF i = 0. 


50. Virial of the external pressure acting on a gas. 


3Q 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



We consider as a special case a gas in equilibrium, whose molecules, just as explained 
in Chapter I, behave according to van der Waals’ assumptions. Let the gas be enclosed in 
any container of volume V; it consists of n similar - molecules of mass m and diameter a, and 
the mean square velocity of a molecule is q1 . Then: 

( 146 ) 2 L = Yj m h c l ~ nmc2 * 

There are no external forces other than the pressure on the container, whose intensity on 
unit surface will be p. The container has the form of a parallelepiped of edges a, /?, y, of 
which three adjacent ones will be chosen as the x, y, and z axes. The two lateral surfaces 
having the same surface area /3y will have abscissas zero and a respectively. The pressure 
forces pf3y and - pfiy respectively will act on these surfaces, in the direction of the positive 
abscissa axis. For these two lateral surfaces together the sum X has the value - pocfdy 
= —pV. Since the equality holds also for the two other coordinate directions, we have for the 
entire gas: 


( x hXh + yhYh + hZh) - - 3pF. 

Since the pressure does not change with time, this is also the mean value of the same 
quantity; hence it is the external virial W a . 

The same equation can easily be derived for a container of any shape. Let dto be a 
surface element of the projection to of the surface of the container on the yz plane, and K be 
the cylinder erected on dto, perpendicular to it and extended to infinity on both sides. This 
cylinder cuts from the container surface a series of surface elements c/0 1 , d0 2 , . . . whose 
abscissas are jtq, x 2 , • • • and whose normals drawn into the interior of the gas are N\ , N 2 , ■ ■ 
. The x component of the pressure force acting on c/0| is: 

j)do\ cos (N ix) = pdu. 

The same x component has, for the surface element d0 2 , the value 

pdo cos ( N2X) = - pdui 

and so forth. The sum Y. extends over all surface elements lying within the cyhnder K. 
and therefore has the value: 

- pdo)(xo - X\ + X\ - Xi + • • •). 

The factor of the quantity - p is just the volume cut out by the cyhnder from the interior of 
the container. The sum YxhXp extended over the entire gas, is found by integrating this 
expression over all surface elements da) of the entire projection to, whereby one obtains the 
product of the total volume V of the gas and the quantity —p. Since the same considerations 


3Q 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



are applicable also to the y and z axes, it follows that: 

(147) Yj i x hXh + VhYh + ZhZh) = - 3pV = W a . 

§51. Probability of finding the centers of two molecules at a given distance. 

The internal virial will consist of two parts, of which the first, W'i , arises from the 
forces acting during the collision of two molecules, and the second, wy, from the 
attractive force assumed by van der Waals. 

In order to find Wl we denote (as earlier) by a the diameter of a molecule, and call a 
sphere of radius a circumscribed around a molecule its covering sphere, so that the volume 
of the covering sphere is eight times as large as the volume of the molecule itself. The 
midpoint of a second molecule cannot come closer to the midpoint of our molecule than a 
distance cr, and we shall first calculate the probability that the center of a particular 
molecule is at a distance between a and a+S (where 6 is infinitesimally small compared to 
cr) from one of the other molecules. In order to have a precise name we call this other 
molecule the remaining molecule. 

In order to have a concept of probability as free from objection as possible, we imagine 
that the same gas is present infinitely many times (N times) in identical containers at 
different positions in space. Our specified molecule will in general be in a different place in 
each of these N gases. Of all the N gases, let the remaining molecule in iV) gases be in very 
nearly the same place relative to the container. N\ is then very small compared to N, but it 
should still always be a very large number. The influence of the wall on the interior can in 
any case be made small by making the container large, and in the interior the van der Waals 
cohesion forces acting on a molecule from all directions will cancel out. Hence, according 
to Equation (140) , all positions in the container will be equally probable for the center of 
the specified molecule in all these N\ gases. Let N 2 be the number of gases in which the 
center of the specified molecule is at a distance between a and a+S from the remaining 
molecule. Then the ratio of N\ to N 2 will be the same as the ratio of the total space 
available to the center of the specified molecule in one of the N \ gases to the space in 
which this center must be found in order that its distance from the center of one of the 
remaining molecules may he between a and a+S. The latter space we shall call the 
favorable space. 

Since in ah N\ gases the center of each of the remaining molecules has a given position, 
and since the center of the specified molecule cannot come nearer to it than the distance a , 
we obtain the available space for the center of the specified molecule in one of these gases 
by subtracting from the total volume V of the gas the volume of the covering spheres of all 
remaining molecules, viz., the quantity 


4ir(n - 1 )<t 3 

r =- 

3 


31 . 


IRuJix*. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




Since we can neglect unity compared to n, the total space available for the center of the 
specified molecule in one of the N\ gases is 



4m<r s 

V - 

3 


The negative term is the total volume of all covering spheres contained in the volume V, 
or eight times the volume of the molecules in the volume V. It should be small compared to 
V, and we denote the degree of its smallness compared to V as “smallness of the first 
order.” In order to find the favorable space, we construct around the center of each of the 
remaining molecules a spherical shell, which is enclosed between two spherical surfaces 
concentric with the molecule itself, with radii equal to o and cr+S respectively. The sum of 
the volumes of all these spherical shells is the favorable space. One finds for it the 
contribution 


A = 4tt( n - l)<r 2 5, 


for which we can also write 


A = 4 ima 2 6. 

As a first approximation we can ignore the negative term in (148) and hence the ratio of 
the favorable space to the available space is 

4irnj J 6/F. 

Therefore in 

4im<rWi$/F 

of our Ni gases, the center of the specified molecule finds itself at a distance between a and 
cr+6 from the remaining molecule. However, since the state of our A^ gases can still be 
chosen completely arbitrarily, the same holds also for all A gases. In ArcncrNSIV of these, 
the center of the specified molecule will have this property. Since the same holds for all 
other molecules, in all A gases there will be a total of 

4 

molecules whose centers are at a distance from the center of any other molecule that lies 
between a and o+S. Hence in each gas, 

4 mnW/V 


31 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



molecules will satisfy this condition, and the number of molecule pairs in a gas for which 
the distance of centers lies between a and a+5 is 


( 149 ) 2mVS/V. 

If one wishes to take account also of terms of next higher order, then he should not only 
substitute (148) for V, but also introduce a correction in the numerator. A was the total 
volume of all spherical shells of thickness 5, which we had constructed around the centers 
of all the remaining molecules. Not all of these should be counted as favorable volumes. In 
particular, the covering spheres of two molecules can partially overlap. Then one part of 
such a spherical shell lies within the covering sphere of another molecule, so that it is not 
available as a location for the center of the specified molecule, and must be subtracted from 
the favorable space A. Strictly speaking the circumstance that two covering spheres can 
interpenetrate should be taken account of in the calculation of the space T that we have 
subtracted from V, in order to find the available space; but one sees at once that we would 
have thereby obtained a term that is a second-order infinitesimal compared to V. Hence as 
long as we are only taking account of first-order infinitesimals, this term can be ignored. 
The quantity 51a is supposed to be of higher order than a 2 IV. Hence all terms containing 
5 2 can be neglected—i.e., cases where two or more spherical shells of thickness 6 
interpenetrate—and neither the simultaneous interpenetration of three covering spheres nor 
the interaction of three molecules need be included. 

We shall now calculate the correction to the quantity A. The covering spheres of two 
molecules will overlap when the distance between their centers lies between a and 2a. Let 
r be a length somewhere between these li mits. Then, by analogy with Equation (149) , the 
number of molecule pairs in a gas whose centers have a seoaration between r and r+dr is 
eaual to: 


v = 2im 2 r 2 dr/V. 

By the covering sphere we mean a spherical surface of radius a around the center of the 
molecule. Since a<r<2a, the covering spheres of all these v molecule pairs will overlap, 
and indeed an easy calculation shows that for each such pair, the part of the surface of a 
covering sphere that lies within the second one is equal to n ail a - r). There is also a 
spherical shell of thickness 6 surrounding the entire covering sphere. The part of this 
spherical shell that lies inside the covering sphere of the other molecule, and is therefore not 
available as a location for the center of the specified molecule, therefore has the volume: 
Ti ail a - r)5. An equal part of the spherical shell pertaining to the other molecule lies 
within the covering sphere of the first molecule, and hence is likewise not available. 
Therefore one has to subtract a total volume In ai l a - r)5 from the two spherical shells of 
the molecule pair because that volume is not available to the center of the specified 
molecule. For all v pairs the space 


31 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



4?r 2 

— n\ 76(2(7 - r)r 2 dr 

V 


is to be subtracted. Since r can take all values between a and 2 a, the total volume to be 
subtracted from all spherical shells is equal to : 


4j 2 r 2a llir 2 nV6 

— n 2 ah I (2(7 - r)r 2 dr -- 

V J a 37 

The total volume of all spherical shells in a gas would be A = 4nncr 2 8. Hence the 
favorable volume remaining is 

/ 11 m'\ 

4 t no ! $ [1 -]. 

V 12 V ) 


The quotient of this quantity divided by the total available volume, 


V 




) 


—which, since we ignore terms of second order, can be written 


4im<r 2 6 / 
—( i+ 



—gives the probabihty that the center of the specified molecule is at a distance between a 
and a + 8 from another molecule. The further conclusions remain as before. The last 
expression, multiplied by in, provides at an arbitrarily chosen instant of time the number 
of molecule pairs in a gas for which the centers of the two molecules have a distance 
between a and o+S. The number of these molecule pairs is therefore: 



2m 2 <j 2 & / 5*n<7 3 \ 

v ( 1 + w)- 


The number of molecules from which these pairs are formed is of course twice as large. 

§52. Contribution to the virial resulting from the finite extension of the 


31 . 


jPuJix*. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



molecules. 


We can determine the average virial in different ways. The simplest way is to make use 
of Equation (142) in §47. We replace the elasticity of the molecule by a repulsive force J{r) 
which is a function of the distance of centers, r, which vanishes for r > a and increases 
beyond all l im its as soon as r becomes smaller than a. From now on we shall denote by r a 
distance slightly less than cr. If the repulsion first began at distances a little less than r, then 
the number of molecule pairs for which the distance of centers lay between r and r + 6 
would, according to Equation (150), be equal to: 

ImVh / 

— ( 1+ 



Sxnr 3 ^ 

~mr 


where we can replace a by r in Equation (150) since the latter is only infinitesimally 
different from the former. We still have to calculate how the number of pairs will be 
decreased by the repulsive force. If in Equation (142) one replaces the p by the rectangular 
coordinates of the molecule centers, then he finds that the number of systems for which 
these he in a certain volume c/0 1 , d0 2 , ... is proportional to e~ 2l ‘ vo r/0 1 c/0 2 . . ., where V 0 is 
the potential energy function whose negative derivative with respect to a coordinate is the 
force acting to increase that coordinate. For our molecule pair, V 0 is j usl a function of r, and 
indeed it is equal to the negative integral of J{r)dr. As soon as the distance of centers of two 
molecules is equal to or greater than a, the repulsion stops, and the potential energy then 
has the same value that it has at infinity, which we denote by F( qo). The value of the 
potential at r is denoted by F(r). 

The probability that the distance of centers of two molecules lies between r and r+S, in 
the absence of ah repulsive forces, is to the probability that it lies between the same limits, 
when repulsive forces are present, as 

g-2W(oo).g-2W(r) 


and for the number of molecule pairs for which the distance of centers is between r and r+S 
one finds instead of (151) the expression 



2 im 2 r 2 5 / 

— 1 



gJH [/(«•)-? (r)] 


F 0 = F(r) = 



31 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 


Since 



therefore 



f(r)dr. 


Since moreover S in Equation (152) represents an infinitesimal increase of r, we can denote 
it by dr following general usage, and Equation (152) then becomes 



2 jn 2 r 2 dr 

V 




g-2 hf T f(r)dr 


If we multiply this expression by the virial rf( r) of the molecule pair in question, and 
integrate over all colliding molecules, we obtain the total virial Wi arising from the 

forces acting during collisions. Therefore if tr - e is the smallest permitted distance of 
approach of two molecules when they impinge on each other with an enormous velocity, 
then one obtains: 




r 3 /(r)dre~ 2 ^ /(r)dr . 


Since r is always infinitesimally different from <r, it can always be replaced by a if it does 
not occur as an argument of the function/, so that it then comes out in front of the integral 
sign : 




5 thv\ r s 


—ihf r f (r)dr 


The last integral can easily be computed if one introduces the new variable 


X = 



which is equal to zero at the upper l im it and to infinity at the lower; indeed it is equal to the 
kinetic energy with which a molecule must approach a molecule at rest, if their centers are 
to approach to a distance <y - e; hence, on introducing this new variable, we have 


31 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




I 


“ 1 

e~ Ux dx = — 
2h 



3 


since, according to §42, i is the mean kinetic energy! ^^2 corresponding to a 

momentoid, and each of the components of the total velocity c represents a momentoid. 
(Cf. also Pail I, Eq. [44] .) If, as in Equation (20), we substitute 


b = 2'7r<r 3 /3m, 

then it follows that 

_ b l 56\ 

(154) W[ = mm 2 — (1 + — 

v \ 8?v 


where v = V/nrn is the specific volume. 


53. Virial of the van der Waals cohesion force. 


The virial due to the attractive force is found without difficulty by using the hypothesis 
about the nature of the interaction made in §2. If p is the density of the gas, and d 0 and d a) 
are two volume elements separated by a distance r, at which the molecules attract with a 
force F(r) and hence repel with a force - F(r), then pclO/m and pclco/m are the numbers of 
molecules in those volume elements, and 


m 2 

is the virial of the molecules contained in the two volume elements. 

- — do [ durF{r) 
m 2 J 




is therefore the total virial of the molecules in c/ () interacting with all the others. Since there 
is a noticeable contribution only for molecules at molecular distances, 


1 

m 2 



31 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



has the same value for all volume elements c/ () in the interior of the gas. Since this value 
depends only on the nature of the function F, it must be a constant peculiar to the 
substance, and we denote it by 3a. The total virial wy is found by integrating over all 
volume elements c/0, whereby we obtain the total volume V. The contribution of the 
molecules lying very near to the surface is infinitesimal. Hence 

(155) W" = 3 pW. 

The substitution Wi=w- +wy , with the values (154) and (155) for W! 
and wy as well as the values (146) and (147) in the virial equation (145), gives 
therefore: 


_/ b bb\ 

nmc } ( 1 H -1-) - 3aty = 3»7. 

\ v 8i>7 


According to Equation (21) we now set c J = 3rT Furthermore, V/nm = v = 1/p, so that 
the above equation becomes 




rT ( b bb\ 
—( 1 H-f- —) 

i' \ v 8rv 


9 9 

If one neglects quantities of order b /v , the right-hand side is identical with the 
expression rTKv - b) found by van der Waals. But there is already a discrepancy in the 
terms of order b tv . Van der Waals himself noted that his equation cannot be valid for 
arbitrary v, since it predicts that the pressure becomes infinite at v = b, whereas actually the 
pressure does not become infinite until v is much smaller than b. 


§54. Alternatives to van der Waals’ formulas. 

Our present considerations teach us that the expression for the pressure given by van der 
Waals does not agree with the theoretical one for small values of v, as soon as one takes 
account of terms of order/? 2 A’ 2 . Since the theoretical determination of terms of still higher 
order would be extraordinarily difficult,* one can try to replace van der Waals’ equation by 
one that agrees with theory at least as far as terms of order A 2 /v 2 . We saw, moreover, that 
one can also determine theoretically the smallest permitted value of v, for which the 
pressure becomes infinite. It is (cf. §6), since for approximately this value of v the 

molecules are as densely packed as possible, and any further decrease of v must make the 
molecules interpenetrate. One can therefore construct an equation of state for which p 
becomes infinite at this value of v. 

In order to depart as little as possible from the form of van der Waals’ equation, we shall 


31. 


^Pu+Lc. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




write the equation of state in the following form, where x, y, and z are numbers to be 
chosen suitably : 



a\ ( yb zb\ 

p + —)(v - xb) = rT[\+ — + — ). 

V \ V V 2 


We then have the advantage that for given p and T we obtain a third degree equation for 
v. If we set y = 1 -x, Z = $ — X-, then for small values of b/v the terms of order b~/v~ 
agree with those found theoretically. If we set 



1 2 7 

x = — > hence y = — > z = — > 
3 3 24 


then the condition that/? becomes infinite for y = is also satisfied. Since all our 

considerations are only approximate, it would perhaps be more rational not just to choose 
these values for x, y, and z, but rather to assign to them values that yield the best possible 
agreement with observations. 

If one does not wish to add any factors to rT in the numerator, then a quadratic function 
of b/v in the denominator, such as a law of the form 



rT / xb 
— 1 + - + 


V \ V 



would hardly be very advisable; for then p, if it is to become infinite at all, and if it is also to 
be correct to first order in b/v, would have to become infinite for a value of v that is greater 
than or equal to ^ 5 

The latter occurs if one sets 





It would be better to set 


a rT 

(158a) p + — =-- 

V 2 v - w 


and to choose for e a transcendental or algebraic function of higher degree, which is nearly 


31 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



equal to 1 for large v, and for \) = is nearly equal to J, and also agrees as well as 
possible with experimental data. I owe Equation (158a) to an oral communication of van 
der Waals (cf. also the work of Kamerlingh-Onnes cited in footnote 1, §60). Moreover, van 
der Waals has given us such a valuable tool that it would cost us much trouble to obtain by 
the subtlest deliberations a formula that would really be any more useful than the one that 
van der Waals found by inspiration, as it were. 

A more general way to bring the original van der Waals formula into better agreement 
with experience would consist in treating the expressions a/v~ and v - b in it as empirically 
chosen functions of volume and temperature instead of constants, or, quite generally, to 
seek in place of a/v 2 and v - b the functions best fitting the observations. Of course these 
functions must be chosen so that the theorems on critical quantities and on liquefaction do 
not come out qualitatively different. Clausius and Sarrau have modified the van der Waals 
formula in this way.* Even though they have been guided by theoretical ideas (Clausius 
especially seems to have in mind taking account of the combination of molecules into larger 
complexes), their equations have more the character of empirical approximations, which I 
will not go into further, although I would not wish to disparage their practical usefulness. 

§55. Virial for any arbitrary law of repulsion of the molecules. 

By means of Equation (153) we can also calculate by the same method the quantity 
Wi for the case where the molecules do not behave like elastic spheres, but rather like 
material points that exert an arbitrary central repulsive force /O') on each other during 
collisions. Since the time during which two colliding molecules act on each other can then 
no longer be neglected, the method by which we derived Equation (150) from (149) is no 
longer correct; however, the latter formula is still correct as a first approximation. 

The number of pairs of molecules whose distance lies between r and r+dr is therefore 
2mr rdr/v y as soon as no force acts at the distance r. The modification of this number by 
the action of repulsive forces was previously found according to the general formula (142). 
This formula remains applicable here, and hence as soon as there is a repulsive force at the 
distance r, the number of pairs of molecules at a distance between r and r+dr is 
(corresponding to Eq. [153]) equal to: 

2 im 2 r 2 dr r 

r g-2 hj r f(r)dr 

V 

Each such molecule pair provides a contribution rf( r) to the virial wi . The sum of all 
these contributions is therefore 

2m 2 

(159) WI = — 

v 



31 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



where C, is the closest allowed distance of approach of two molecules, and a is the distance 
at which they cease to interact. However, one can integrate from zero to infinity instead of 
from ( to a, since for r<( the exponential factor is zero, while for r>a,J(r)=0. 

If one sets /( r) = K/r^ as in Chapter HI of Part I, then of course the present assumptions 
are not strictly satisfied, since properly speaking all molecules are continually repelling each 
other; but this repulsion decreases so rapidly with increasing distance that the deviations 
thereby produced in our formulas are probably completely insignificant. Hence we obtain: 




We shall introduce the distance of closest approach of two molecules if one were held fixed 
and the other approached it with a velocity whose square is equal to the mean square 
velocity of a molecule (cf. Pail I, §24). However, we shall denote this distance here by a 
instead of s. Then : 


K/2mc 2 = \hK = <r 4 . 

Hence 



4imVmc 2 4/2 /** 

U" b 


If one imagines that the van der Waals attractive force is present, and brings it into the 
calculation as before, then on substituting all values into Equation (145) he obtains the 
following equation for unit mass of the gas: 


where* 




a 



b = 4ima 3 



However, o is no longer constant now, but instead is inversely proportional to the fourth 
root of the absolute temperature. Hence the numerical coefficient b has become 
temperature-dependent. In particular, b is inversely proportional to the ^ power of the 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



absolute temperature, since a is inversely proportional to the fourth root of the temperature. 

§56. The principle of Lorentz’s method. 

We have previously derived the internal virial from Equation (154) by means of 
Equation (142) for the case where the gas molecules behave like elastic spheres. One can 
also do the same thing in another way without using the latter formula, as was first shown 
by H. A. Lorentz.f By definition, 



r}(r)dt, 


where the sum is to be extended over all pairs of molecules that collide during a very long 
time. Since the state is stationary we can choose unit time t = l instead of a very long time 1. 
If we integrate each term of the sum, it follows that: 



where the sum is to be extended over all pairs of molecules that collide during unit time. 
However, the relative motion of the molecules takes place just as if one of them were at rest 
and the other had half its mass. If, in this relative motion, the first molecule is imagined to 
move toward the second one (which is at rest) with relative velocity g, then the component 
of g perpendicular to the line of centers of the molecules does not change. The component 
7 in the direction of the line of centers will be exactly reversed by the force fij), however. 
Hence, for each collision: 



m 

= — • 2y = my. 
2 



is however equal to 



since r is always approximately equal to cr during the collision. If one substitutes this into 
Equation (160), it follows that: 

(161) W!=m< r 'E 7 , 


where the sum is to be extended over all pairs of molecules that collide in unit time. 


^Pi mJuc. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



In order to calculate this sum, we shall first ask how many molecules in the gas collide 
in a particular way during a very short time dt. If the molecules are to collide during dt, then 
their centers must already be at a distance only slightly larger than a at the beginning of the 
interval <r/t. According to Equation (150) , at any arbitrary time and therefore also at the 
beginning of the interval dt there are 


2irnV/35/F 


pairs of molecules whose centers have a distance between o and a+S, where 




bma 3 



and v is the specific volume. These molecule pairs consist of 



4i7iV/Jj 

V 


molecules. Each of these molecules lies so close to another one that the distance of their 
centers lies between a and cr+S. 

Here we must invoke, not indeed Equation (142) in particular, but rather a probability 
law, in that we assume that, in the space where the molecules whose number is given by 
Equation (163) find themselves, there is the same average distribution of molecules, and 
among these the same distribution of states, as in the entire gas. This follows directly from 
the “5-theorem” of §46. Then, out of those molecules whose number is given by Equation 
(163), 

(164) 4imV — ip(c)dc 

have a velocity between c and c+dc, if, as in Equation (8), qXc)dc is the probability that the 
velocity of a molecule lies between these limits, so that of all n gas molecules, ncp(c)dc 
have a velocity lying between these li mits. Then, as we saw in Pail I (cf. also Eq. [8] , Pail 

II): 



The expression (164) therefore gives the number of molecules that have a velocity 


322 _ 


f ^LLfLc. 7fca^4e«toiZc.a/ 



between c and c+dc at the beginning of dt, and whose centers have a distance between a 
and cr+S from any other molecule. Now we shall consider, out of all these molecules, only 
those for which the velocity of the other molecule lies between c' and c'+dc', and the 
direction of this velocity forms an angle between e and e+r/e with that of the velocity of 
the first molecule. Since the other molecules have a Maxwellian velocity distribution, 
regardless of the state of the molecules near them, and any direction in space is equally 
probable for their velocities, we must—in order to find the number of those molecules 
which we have picked out from all the molecules whose number is given by (164)— 
multiply the latter expression by 


The product 



^(c')dc' sin ( At. 

08 

An = 2m 2 <r 2 — <p(c)<p(c’) sin e AcAc'At , 


therefore gives the number of pairs of molecules for which the velocity of one molecule 
(which we call the c-molecule) is between c and c+dc, that of the other molecule (the d- 
molecule) is between d and c'+clc ', the angle of the directions of their velocities is between 
e and e+t/e, and the centers of the molecules are at a distance between a and <7+<5 at the 
beginning of the time interval dt. 

If we draw around the center of each c-molecule a spherical shell bounded by two 
concentric spherical surfaces, the inner surface having radius o and the outer surface 
having radius a+6 , then (166) gives the number of molecules whose centers lie in one of 
these spherical shells at the beginning of the interval dt, and for which the velocity lies 
between, d and c'+dc' and forms an angle between e and e+c/e with the velocity of the c- 
molecule. 

§57. Number of collisions. 

Each c'-molecule lies very near to a c-molecule. In order to find how many will actually 
collide during an in finitesimal time interval dt, we imagine that all the c-molecules are at 
rest, while each c'-molecule moves with velocity 

(167) g = yjc 2 + c' 2 - 2cc' cos <p 

relative to the c-molecule near it, so that during time dt it moves a distance gdt in the 
direction of the relative velocity g. 

Furthermore, we again imagine that there is a sphere K of radius cr around the center of 
each c-molecule. From the center of each of these spheres we draw a line G which has the 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



direction of the relative velocity of that c'-molecule which is in the neighborhood of the c- 
molecule in question. We extend the line G through the opposite side, and draw all radii of 
each of the if-spheres that form an angle between d and j?+r/z?with the extension. The end¬ 
point of all these radii will form a zone on the surface of each of the ^-spheres whose 
surface area is 2n <r sin Odd. From each point of each of these zones we draw a line 
whose length is gdt and whose direction is opposite to the direction of the relative velocity 
of the c'-molecule. All the lines drawn from the points on a zone fill a ring-like space of 
volume 2 rrcrg sin d cos ddddt, and one easily sees that all c'-molecules whose centers he 
within this ring-like space at the beginning of dt (whose number we call dv) will collide 
with the c-molecule in their neighborhood in such a way that the angle between the line 
drawn from the center of the c'-molecule to the center of the c-molecule and the relative 
velocity of c' with respect to c lies between & and d+dd. However, the ratio of dv to the 
number d/j (given by Eq. [166] ) is the same as the ratio of the volume 'Irvrg sin & cos 
ddddt of one of the ringlike spaces in which the centers of the dv molecules must be found, 
to the volume 4re <r S of one of the spherical shells in which the centers of the c/p molecules 
are found; whence one obtains: 

2t< 7 2 sin tdt 

dv = —n 2 j3sinr?cos^(c)v?(c')- dcdc'dddt. 

V 2 

If we divide by dt, we find the following expression for the number of pairs of molecules 
that collide in unit time in such a way that before the collision the velocities are between the 
l im its (c, c+dc ) and (c', c'+c/c') respectively, the angle between the velocities is between e 
and e+c/e, and the angle between the line of centers and the relative velocity is between d 
and d+dd. 


27 t<j 2 sin (dt 

(168) d\[ CC ’ t d =-n 2 0 sin d cos %(cV(c')- dcdc'dd. 

V 2 

If we divide the expression (168) by mp(c)dc, then we obtain the number of co ll isions 
experienced by an individual c-molecule with c'-molecules subject to the above conditions. 
If we integrate over d from zero to ~ rr, over e from 0 to jt, and over c' from 0 to oo, we 
obtain the total number Tt c of collisions experienced per second by a molecule moving 
with velocity c. We can call the expression 


(169) 


0< 


= J*wJ 


*g sin e dt 
2 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the mean value of all relative velocities of a molecule moving with velocity c, with respect 
to all other possible velocities. Hence 


n c 


7T(7^lj9_ 



If one substitutes in (169) the value (165) for the function <p and the value (167) for g, then 
he finds, as we already saw in Pail I, §9, 


__ /m l h l f" . C r smtde _ 

g c = 4y — J c ,2 dc'r kc ' J —-— y/c 2 +c' 2 -2cc' cos t 



2hmc 2 + 1 
c^hm 



Since cp(c)dc is the probability that the velocity of a molecule is between c and c+dc, 
and therefore is also the fraction of the time during which its velocity lies between these 
l im its in the entire course of its motion during a long period of time, the total number of 
collisions that an arbitrary molecule experiences on the averaee during: unit time is eaual to 



where 


a 



8mh C ” , / , 2hmc i + 1 f c ' km , 

— I c 2 e~ hmc dc + —==- r* dx 

r J o \ cVhm J o 


is the mean value of the relative velocities of all possible molecule pairs in the gas. We have 
performed a similar integration in Part I, §9; if we do this one in the same way, we obtain: 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i .Ze l 



I = <V2 = 


2V5 

y/xhm 


The mean relative velocity is therefore just as large as if the two molecules each moved 
with their average velocity in perpendicular directions. This theorem is also valid if the two 
molecules are of different kinds. If one substitutes the value found for g into the equation 
following (169), he obtains: 


j 2r 

~y m 


58. More exact value of the mean free path. Calculation of W' according to 
Lorentz’s method. 


Since the mean free path is \ = c/n> it follows moreover that 

V 

X = —-1 

V2?r a 2 nft 


or, on substituting this value (162) for [3 and expanding in powers of blv. 



This is therefore the value of the mean free path, one order of magnitude more exact (with 
respect to blv) than that given in Part I, § 10. 

We can now easily find the mean virial of all forces acting in collisions from Equations 
(161) and (168). For each of the collisions whose number is given by Equation (168) , the 
component 7 of the relative velocity g in the direction of the line of centers has the value 7 
= g cos 9: each of these collisions contributes therefore the term mag cos d to the sum 
(161). If one multiplies this by the expression (168), then he finds the contribution of all 
these co ll isions to the sum (161). If one then integrates over all possible values, he obtains 
finally the total contribution to the sum, and hence, according to Equation (161) , the 
quantity W! . Finally, however, one must divide by 2, since otherwise he would have 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



counted each collision twice—once when the velocity of one molecule lies between c and 
c+clc and then again when the velocity of the other molecule lies between c and c+dc. 
Hence: 


laWmfi r rl2 

W! =- sin t? cos 2 

27 J 0 


X 



sin e de. 


If one substitutes for g the value (167) and recalls that: 



then he obtains the value already found, 



1 


I. 


x 


c'V(c')dc' 



Wj = 2wdn 2 mcy/3V. 


The corrected value (171) for the mean free path was first given by Clausius. 1 The 
additional term of order b/v in the Boyle-Charles law was first calculated by the foregoing 
method by H. A. Lorentz; the additional teim of order b /v was calculated by Jager and 
van der Waals; 4 the value found by Jager agrees with the one calculated here, but the one 
found by van der Waals does not.* 


§59. More exact calculation of the space available for the center of a 
molecule. 

Let there be present, in a container of volume V, a total of n similar molecules, which 
we consider as spheres of diameter a. Then we can find the space available for the center 
of another molecule introduced into the container, given the positions of all n molecules, by 
subtracting from the total volume V the space occupied by the n molecules: T = 
47nur’/3=2Gb (cf. Eq. [148] ). As before, m is the mass of a molecule, mn = G is the total 
mass of the gas, and 


We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ lPl±y. i .Ze l 



2tt(t 3 

6 = — 

3m 

as in Equation (20) is half the sum of the covering spheres of all molecules found in unit 
mass of the gas. Here the term of order T~/V , corresponding to the effect of 
interpenetration of the covering spheres of two molecules, is omitted. We shall now 
calculate this term, although we shall still leave out terms of order Y IV . 

Let Z be the sum of the volumes of all those parts of the covering spheres of molecules 
that he within the covering spheres of any other molecule, so that we have to set: 

(172) D = V - 2Gb + Z. 


The case that the covering spheres of two molecules overlap occurs each time that their 
centers have a distance between cf and 2 a. Let x be such a distance. The covering spheres 
are spheres of radius a, which are concentric with the molecule in question. If the centers 
of two molecules are at a distance x, then the total space that belongs simultaneously to the 
covering spheres of both molecules has the form of two spherical sections of height o - x/2. 
Such a spherical section has a volume 


K = IT 




2a* ah X*\ 

.1 2~ + 24/' 


We shall construct, for each molecule, a concentric spherical shell of inner radius x and 
outer radius x+clx. The sum of the volumes of these spherical shells, 4rnixrdx, has the same 
ratio to the total volume V of the gas that the number dn x of molecules whose centers are at 
a distance between x and x+dx from another one has to the total number n of molecules. 
Therefore : 


4 rnWdx 


Here terms of order Ydn x iV have been omitted, but one can easily convince himself that in 
the final result these would only give terms of order T 3 /V 3 . 

The number of pairs of molecules for which the distance of centers lies between x and 
x+dx is i dn x . Since, for each such molecule pair, two spherical sections of volume K he 
within the covering spheres, ah these molecule pairs provide a contribution Kdn z to Z, and 
we find the quantity Z itself by integrating these contributions from x = a to x = 2 a. One 
obtains in this way 




We 7fca^4e«toi2ea/ “Pity. i .Ze l 







T*nV 

T~ 


17 W 

16 ~T' 


17 (W 

(173) Z) = F — 2G6 H— — • 

16 V 


60 . 


Calculation of the pressure of the saturated vapor from the laws of 
probability. 1 


Now let the liquid and vapor phase of a substance be in contact with each other at a 
particular temperature T. The total mass of the liquid pail will be Gt, and its total volume 
Vf the mass of the vapor pail will be G ? , and it fills the total volume V„, so that vy = VJGf ., 
v g = VJG g are the specific volumes or reciprocals of the densities pj and p g of the liquid 
and the vapor. 

If one now introduces a molecule into the space in which the two phases are present, 
then according to Equation (173) the space available for this molecule within the liquid is 


17 Gib- 

K/-2C/6 + -—, 
16 V, 


while the space in the vapor is 


V, - 2 G,b + - 


17 G,V 


16 7. 


The ratio of these volumes would be—if the van der Waals cohesion force did not exist— 
the ratio of the probabilities that, for given positions of all other molecules, the last one lay 
within the liquid or the vapor. This ratio is (on account of the action of the van der Waals 
cohesion force) to be multiplied by e~ 2h ^: c~ 2lr, ‘^, where ipf and ip g are the values of the 
potential of the van der Waals cohesion force for a molecule that finds itself in the liquid or 
the vapor, respectively. If one determines the constant so that ip = 0 for infinite separation, 
then - ipf is the work needed to bring a molecule of mass m, under the action of the van der 
Waals cohesion force, out of the interior of the liquid and remove it to a large distance. In 
§24 we found the expression 2 mapf= 2ma/iy for this work, while apj- was the total work of 
separation for all molecules in unit mass. Likewise, 

- = 2map 0 = 2 ma/v 0 . 


Wte, 7fca^4e«taizc.a/ TRk.y l i .Zc. 1 



Taking account of the van der Waals force, we find that the ratio of the probability that the 
last molecule is in the liquid to the probability that it is in the gas is: 


17 GV\ / 17 G 2 b\ 

V, -2 G,b + -]: V, - 2 G„b +- 

16 V,} \ 16 v, ) 


In the equihbrium state this must also be equal to the ratio of m to n g , or, if one multiphes m 
and n„ by m, equal to GJG„. If one writes out the proportion, he obtains immediately 


v, 


17 b 2 



i 17 b\ 

[ vi - 2b H-1 e 4 '" M| «/»i, 

\ 16 !;// 


Now according to Equations (21) and (135) 2 (cf. also Part I, Eq. [44] ), 2 h = llmrT, if r is 
the gas constant of the vapor at high temperature and low density. If one takes the 
logarithms, expands in powers of b and retains terms of order b , then 







l--2b 


v 0 


2 a 


L v f 






Naturally this formula can hardly be expected to give more than qualitative agreement, 
since the assumption that b is small compared to v is incorrect for liquids. 

If we introduce the Celsius temperature t, consider pj to be constant and large compared 
to p g , and assume that the vapor obeys the Boyle-Charles law, i.e., pv g = rT, then there 
follows from Equation (174) an equation of the form 

1 

_ ftUe+Dl) 

A + Bt 



—an equation that has some practical usefulness, though with a somewhat different 
meaning of the constants A, B , C, and D. 

We can also calculate the pressure of the saturated vapor from the condition found in 
§16, that the two shaded areas of Figure 2 of that section must be equal. In this figure, the 
abscissa OJ\ is the specific volume ry of the liquid, the abscissa OG \ is the specific volume 
v g of the vapor, while the ordinates J\J = G | G are equal to the corresponding saturation 


33 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



pressure. The equality of the shaded areas requires that the rectangle JJ \ G | GJ = p(v g - ry) 
must be equal to the surface area fl'pdv , which is bounded above by the curve JCHDG, 

below by the abscissa axis, and on the left and right by the ordinates J\J and G | G. One 
therefore obtains: 



If one starts from the van der Waals equation 

rT a 

(177) P- -- 

v - 0 V 2 

as a basis, then it follows on performing the integration that: 

Vg “ b / 1 

(178) p{v g - vj) = rTl -- + a — 

Vf-b \v g 

T and the constants a , b, and r are to be considered as given. 
v g follow from Equation (178) and the two conditions: that vj- is the smallest and v g the 
largest root of Equation (177) . If one again takes for the vapor the Boyle-Charles law pv g 
= rT , neglecting b and vy compared to v g , and p g compared to pj (the latter is considered to 
be a linear function of the temperature), then he obtains for the saturation pressure an 
expression of the form (175) again; yet Equation (178) by no means agrees exactly with 
Equation (174). 

This would not be expected, since Equation (177) is only provisory, and is not an exact 
consequence of the conditions of the problem. 

On the contrary, one must obtain precisely Equation (174) if he uses instead of Equation 
(177) the equation 



The three unknowns p, vy, and 



1 b 5b 
p = rT[ — + — + — 
v v 2 8y 3 / 


a 

V 2 


which, on neglecting the terms containing powers of b higher than the second, exactly 
satisfies the conditions of the problem. 

In fact, it then follows from (176), on performing the integration, that 


33 , 


Uuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




Since now v g as well as Vf must satisfy Equation (179) , one can calculate pv g by 
substituting v = v g m this equation, and pvj- by setting v = Vf. Subtraction of the two values 
yields 



which, together with Equation (180) yields exactly Equation (174). 

§61. Calculation of the entropy of a gas satisfying van der Waals’ 
assumptions, using the calculus of probabilities. 

I will now indicate briefly how one can calculate, according to the principles developed 
in Part I, §§8 and 19, the entropy of a gas for which the space fi ll ed by the molecules is not 
vanishingly small compared to the entire volume of the gas, and in which also the van der 
Waals cohesion force acts. The van der Waals cohesion force does not change the velocity 
distribution among the molecules, but only causes them to draw closer together. Like 
gravity, it has no direct influence on the entropy, so that the dependence of the entropy on 
the temperature for such a gas will be obtained just as in the sections cited for an ideal gas; 
in the present case only a correction for the finite size of the molecules is needed. 

The expression found in Part I, §8, for the entropy—which we shall call S in the 
following—can easily be put in the form 1 

S = RMin = RMl(v n T 3 " n ). 

If M is the mass of a hydrogen atom, then R is the gas constant of dissociated hydrogen, 
hence it is twice the gas constant of ordinary hydrogen. The exponent of T must be 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



3 n 3 n 

— (1 + 0) instead of — 
2 2 


when internal motions take place in the molecule, for which the variation of the sum of 
mean kinetic energy and potential energy stands in a constant ratio f}\ 1 to the mean 
progressive kinetic energy. Ifis a function of temperature, then 


3 n 



dT 

~T 


must take the place of lT inl2 . 

S is the entropy per unit mass, so that n is the number of molecules in unit mass; v is the 
volume of unit mass. 

If one interprets S as a probability expression, then the quantity v n occurring therein has 
the following meaning: it represents the ratio of the probability that all n molecules are 
simultaneously in volume v, to the probability of some standard configuration, for example 
one in which the first molecule is in a definite space of volume 1, the second in a 
completely different space of volume 1, and so forth. This quantity is the only one that is 
changed when we take into account the extension of the molecules, and indeed there 
occurs in its place the probability W of the simultaneous occurrence of the following events: 
the first molecule is found in v, and also the second, third, fourth, etc. are also found there 
(not, as in §60, simply the probability that one additional molecule is found in v). 

The entire volume v is available for the center of the first molecule. The ratio of the 
probability that it is there to the probability that it is in the given space of volume 1 is thus v. 
In calculating the probability that the center of the second molecule is simultaneously in the 
space v, we have to subtract the volume of the covering sphere of the first molecule, 
iira* =■ from v. If there are already v molecules in the space v, then the space available 
for the center of a (v+l)th molecule is, according to Equation (173) : 



17M 2 

v - 2 mb +- 

lb 


This expression is therefore equal also to the ratio of the probability that the (v+l)th 
molecule finds itself in the space v to the probability that it finds itself in another space of 
volume v completely separate from the other space. Hence the product 



- 2 mb + 


\7vWW 


lb 


33 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



represents the ratio of the following probabilities: the probability that all n molecules 
simultaneously are in the space v, and the probability that each of them lies in a separate 
space of volume unity. 2 This expression has to occur in S instead of v”, when we take 
account of the finite extension of the molecules. Therefore the entropy of unit mass is 


r3n C dT / 17 

S = m — I (1 + 0) — + £l(»-2nm6 + — 

12 J T £J \ 16 


17 vW 


V 


Here r is the gas constant of our substance in states that are sufficiently similar to the ideal 
gas state, so that rm = RM. 

If one expands the logarithm in powers of b and neglects, as usual, powers of b higher 
than the second, it follows that: 


f3n r dT rz? / 17 

(i+» T + 

Since moreover we assume that n is large compared to 1, we can set: 

/ 17 vVb 2 \ 2 mb 15 vWb 2 

l[v - 2 mb H-) = Iv - 

16 v ) v 16y 2 


17 


so that we obtain, since nm = 1, 


r3 n r dT b 


6 56 s 


16d 2 J 


Since the partial derivative of TS with respect to v at constant temperature is equal to the 
pressure due to molecular collisions alone, we find for this pressure, in agreement with the 
earlier result, the value 


/ 1 b 5iA 

\ V V 2 8 dv ' 

The calculation of terms with higher powers of b in this expression can be done most easily 
by the same method, taking account of these terms in the expressions for S and IT . 3 

If the molecules are not spherical, but behave like solid bodies, then the probability that 
the center of the (v+l)’th molecule lies in the volume v is still given by an expression of the 



33 , 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



form 


v 2 m 2 


v k m k 


v - C\vm - c 2 


• • • “ Ck 


M 1 


We assume that the series development yields 


(182) 


l[ v - C\vm • • • - c* 


v k m k 




= Iv - 


26 \vm 


36 2 ^ 2 m 2 


v 1 


tr -1 / v 

(k + l)6*j>*m* 

■ - ■ ■ ■ i ■. • • • 

kv k 


then 


S 


r3n r dT 

HrJ «+# 


T 

2bim 


r-n+1 / 

+ £ (to- 

r-0 \ V 


k +1 6jt^m fc 
k v k 


r 3 r dT 


^ 6i 6 2 6* 

t; 2y 2 to* 


Hence the pressure due simply to molecular collisions will be 

w>.*(L + h.... + ±.. 

dv \ v v 2 v Hl 

and the total external pressure acting on the gas will be : 

/1 6i 6 2 6* \ a 

(183) p = rT (- + - +--- 

\v v 2 v* y* +l / v 2 


33 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



If we substitute this into the equation 


vk 


-»/) = p*, 

J »/ 


then we obtain, as a condition that vapor and liquid can coexist: 


P(v„ ~ v,) = rT 


1 1 

I--M-- 


L v, 


vi 


k/l 1, 

T T + T)'" 


k \v 


; »/ 

which, on repeated apphcation of Equation (183), can also be written : 



( 184 ) 



v B 


1 1 


L v, 


h v f 


36 2 /1 1 


2 \vl 


v 


/ 



In agreement with this, one now obtains by the same method by which we previously 
obtained Equation (174) the following condition for equilibrium of liquid and vapor: 



= Z ( Vn - C\ ~ 


which, taking account of Equation (182), again yields Equation (184). 

The following additions to Chapter I, which van der Waals communicated orally to me 
after that chapter was printed, may be inserted here. 

1. He never explicitly made the assumption, explained in §2, that the attractive force of 


33 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the molecules decreases so slowly with increasing distance that it is constant at distances 
large compared to the average separation of two neighboring molecules; and he believes 
such a force law to be improbable. Nevertheless I cannot obtain an exact foundation for his 
equation of state without this assumption. 

2. If one conceives the bounding curve JKG of the two-phase region (Fig. 3, §17) to be 
a parabola or circular arc in the immediate neighborhood of the point K, then he sees that 
JN will be more nearly equal to NK, the closer N is to K, if N remains continually on the 
line KK \. Hence if a substance has exactly the critical volume, and is heated at constant 
volume, then at the moment when the meniscus vanishes, the volume of the liquid part will 
be exactly equal to the volume of the vapor part. On the other hand, if the volume differs 
slightly from the critical volume, then the meniscus always moves progressively a great 
distance from the middle of the tube containing the substance, before it vanishes. 

According to the experiments of Kuenen,* gravity plays an important role in causing 
deviations from the theoretical behavior. 


* R. Clausius, Sitzber. Niederrhein Ges. (Bonn) 114 (1870), reprinted in Ann. Physik [2] 141, 124 
(1870). For further references see S. G. Brush, Amer. J. Phys. 29,593 (1961), footnote 14. 

1 The simplest way is to calculate the virial of the force acting between any two material points, as 
well as that of the external force, separately, and then to recall that the virial of several forces is the sum 
of the virials of the forces taken individually, since the Cj, are contained linearly in the expression 
for the virial. 

* For the coefficient of b 3 /v 3 (known as the fourth virial coefficient) see Boltzmann, Verslagen 
Acad. Wet. Amsterdam [4] 7, 477 (1899); P. Ehrenfest, Wien. Ber. 112, 1107 (1903); H. Happel, Ann. 
Physik [4] 21, 342 (1906); R. Majumdar, Bull. Calcutta Math. Soc. 21, 107 (1929). The fifth virial 
coefficient was estimated by the Monte Carlo method by M. N. and A. W. Rosenblueth, J. Chem. Phys. 
22, 881 (1954). A more accurate value will probably be available very soon. Modern methods for 
calculating such coefficients are reviewed by G. E. Uhlenbeck and G. W. Ford in Studies in Statistical 
Mechanics, Vol. I (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1962), and J. E. Mayer ,Handbuch der Physik, XII, 73 
(Berlin: Springer, 1958). From the recent work of Groeneveld, Phys. Letters 3,50 (1962), it appears that 
even if one could calculate all the coefficients in the virial series for the pressure, he would not thereby 
gain much information about the equation of state at high densities, since the radius of convergence of 
the series is rather small. 

* Clausius, Ann. Physik [3] 9, 337 (1880); Sarrau, C. R. Paris 101, 941 (1885). See Partington, 
Treatise on Physical Chemistry (London, 1949), Vol. I, pp. 660-729. 

* f e~ x *dx = ir(i) 

Jo 

t H. A. Lorentz, Ann. Physik [3] 12,127,660(1881). 

2 Clausius ,Kinetische Gastheorie, Vol. 3 of Mechanische Wdnnetheorie (Vieweg, 1889-1891), p. 
65. 

3 Lorentz, Ann. Physik [3] 12,127,660(1881). 

* Jager, Wien. Ber. 105 ,15 (16 Jan. 1896). 

4 Van der Waals, Verslagen Acad. Wet. Amsterdam [4] 5,150 (31 October 1896). 

* Van der Waals later accepted the Boltzmann-Jager value as correct, after his son (J. D. van der 
Waals, Jr.) showed that the method used in ref. 4 was incorrect. For references to this dispute see Brush, 
Am. J. Phys. 29,593 (1961), esp. footnotes 31-41. 

5 The same problem has been treated by Kamerlingh-Onnes, Arch. Neerl. 30, §7, p. 128 (1881). 


33 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




6 In particular, ^ = £ mc *. 

7 In Part I, §8, n is the number of molecules in unit volume; hence Qn is the total number of 
molecules of a gas in volume Q, which we have denoted here by n. 

s Naturally terms of order £> 3 are omitted, and it should also be recalled that v is large compared to 1 
in all terms except those that are vanishingly small. 

9 The expression found here for S would not of course be found comparable with that given in §21 
for the entropy, since the calculation of the latter assumed the exact validity of the van der Waals 
equation. However, we find exactly the same expression for the entropy when in Eq. (38) of §21, from 
which one finds 


fdQ 

J T 

we substitute instead of Eq. (22) 


V 



the equation of state 




which forms the basis of our present calculations. 

* See J. P. Kuenen, Comm. Phys. Lab., Leiden, No. 17 (1895), and other works cited therein. 


33 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



CHAPTER VI 


Theory of dissociation. 

§62. Mechanical picture of the chemical affinity of monovalent similar atoms. 

I have once previously treated the problem of the dissociation of gases, on the basis of 
the most general possible assumptions, which of course I had to specialize at the end. 1 
Since here I prefer perspicuousness to generality, I shall make special assumptions that are 
as simple as possible. The reader must not misunderstand the following and perhaps believe 
that I hold the opinion that chemical attraction acts precisely according to the laws of the 
force assumed here. These laws are rather to be considered the simplest, most perspicuous 
possible picture of forces which have a certain similarity to chemical forces, and hence in 
the present case can be substituted for them with a certain degree of approximation. 

I will first consider the simplest case of dissociation, for which the dissociation of iodine 
vapor can serve as a prototype. At not too high temperatures, all molecules consist of two 
iodine atoms; as the temperature increases, however, more and more molecules decompose 
into single atoms. We explain the existence of molecules composed of two atoms (the 
double atom) by an attractive force acting between the atoms, which we call chemical 
attraction. The facts of chemical valence make it probable that the chemical attraction is by 
no means simply a function of the distance of centers of the atoms; on the contrary it must 
be associated with a relatively small region on the surface of the atom. Moreover, it is only 
with the latter assumption, and not the former, that one can obtain a picture of gas 
dissociation corresponding to reality. 

Both for the sake of simplicity of calculation, and because of the monovalency of 
iodine, we assume that the chemical attraction exerted on one iodine atom by another is 
effective only in a space small compared to the size of the atom, which we shall call the 
sensitive region. This region will lie on the external surface of the atom and will be firmly 
connected to it. The line drawn from the center of the atom to a particular point of the 
sensitive region (e.g., its midpoint, or its center of gravity in the purely geometrical sense) 
we call the axis of this atom. Only when two atoms are situated so that their sensitive 
regions are in contact, or partly overlap, will there be a chemical attraction between them. 
We then say that they are chemically bound to each other. They can touch each other at 
any other place on the surface without chemical attraction occurring. The sensitive region 
shall be such a 


33 . 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 




Fig. 4 

small part of the entire surface of the atom that the possibility that the sensitive regions of 
three atoms can be in contact, or partly overlapping, is completely excluded. For the 
following calculation it is not necessary to assume that the atoms have the form of spheres. 
Since this is the simplest assumption, however, we shall make it. Let ff be the diameter of 
the spherical atom. 

We consider a particular atom; let it be represented by the circle M of Figure 4. Let A be 
its center. The shaded region a will be the sensitive region. We need not immediately 
exclude the case that this lies partly inside the atom, but we draw it as if it were completely 
outside, as one must naturally assume if one imagines the atom to be completely 
impenetrable. If a second atom M\ is chemically bound to the first, then the sensitive region 
/3 of the second atom must partially overlap the space a, or at least touch it. We shall again 
construct the covering sphere of the first atom (a sphere of center A and radius a), which is 
indicated in the figure by the circle D. We construct on the surface of the covering sphere 
D a space (the critical space, the shaded space to in the figure) with the property that the 
sensitive regions a and /3 can never overlap or touch each other unless the center B of the 
second atom lies in this critical space to or on its boundary. The converse is not true. If the 
center B of the second atom lies in the critical space to, then that atom can still be rotated in 
such a way that the sensitive regions a and /? are widely separated from each other. 

In order to define precisely the position that the second atom must have relative to the 
first if the two are to be chemically bound, we shall next construct in the critical space to a 
volume element cl to. At the same time, to will be the total volume of the critical space. 
Further, we shall imagine that a concentric sphere of radius 1 is rigidly connected to the 
first atom; this sphere is indicated by the circle E Figure 4. If the second atom is chemically 
bound to the first, then the axis of the second atom must not make too great an angle with 
the line BA, since otherwise the sensitive regions a and /? would separate from each other. 
The line drawn from the point A parallel to and in the same direction as the axis of the 
second atom should strike the spherical surface £ in a point which we shall always call the 
point A. Since the sphere E is rigidly connected to the first atom, the position of the axis of 
the second atom relative to the first is completely determined by this point A, and we can 
now construct, for each volume element dto of the critical space, a surface section A on the 


34 


IRuJig. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



spherical surface E with the following property. If A lies within or on the boundary of the 
surface section A, then, as soon as the center of the second atom lies within or on the 
boundary of the volume element cla>, the two sensitive regions a and /? will interpenetrate 
or touch each other. But as soon as A lies outside A, the two sensitive regions fi and /? will 
likewise he outside each other. This surface section A will of course in general be of a 
different size according to the position of the volume element da> within the critical space to, 
and also will have a different position on the sphere E. Now if the center of the second 
atom lies within or on the boundary of any volume element dco of the critical space, and A 
lies within or on the boundary of a surface element c/A of that area A which corresponds to 
the volume element dto, then the second atom will be chemically bound to the first—i.e., 
the two atoms will actively attract each other. The work needed to bring them from this 
position to a distance at which they no longer interact noticeably with each other will be 
denoted by /. This quantity can in general be different according to the position of the 
volume element dto within the critical space, and also according to the position of c/A on the 
corresponding surface A. 

§63. Probability of chemical binding of an atom with a similar one. 

Now suppose that a identical atoms are present in a container of volume V at a pressure 
p and absolute temperature T. Let the mass of an atom be m | and that of all atoms am j = 
G. We pick out one of the atoms. The others we call again the remaining atoms. For a 
moment we imagine that the gas is present in infinitely many (N) equivalent but spatially 
separated containers at the same temperature and pressure. In each of these N gases, let n | 
of the remaining atoms not be bound to the other remaining atoms, while 2 n 2 of the 
remaining atoms are bound to another one, so that they form /z 2 double atoms. We now 
ask, in how many of the N gases will the specified atom be chemically bound to one of the 
other atoms, and in how many will this not be the case. 

We consider first only one of the N gases. Since we have excluded chemical binding of 
three atoms, the specified atom, if it is bound at all, can only be united with one of the 
not otherwise bound atoms of this gas. 

We therefore draw, as in Figure 4, the covering sphere and the concentric sphere E of 
radius 1 for each of these atoms; on each of these covering spheres will be found 
somewhere the critical space to. In each of the critical spaces corresponding to all ri\ atoms, 
we draw the volume element dto, which has exactly the same position relative to the atom 
in question as the element dto of Figure 4 with respect to the atom drawn there, and on each 
spherical surface E we draw a surface element c/A, which l ik ewise has the same position 
relative to the atom in question as has that surface element c/A in Figure 4. If the center of 
the specified atom now finds itself in any one of the volume elements dto, and moreover the 
point A is in the surface element c/A of the surface A (or its boundary) corresponding 
thereto, then it is chemically bound to another atom, and indeed is at a completely 
determined position relative to another atom, so that the quantity denoted by % has a definite 
value. 

If that attractive force which we call the chemical attraction were not present, then the 


34 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



probability that the center of the specified molecule is in one of the volume elements doj 
would be in the same ratio to the probability w that it is in the arbitrary space Q in the gas— 
which is neither a part of the covering sphere of a remaining atom, nor contains one of the 
spaces oj —as n | cla/.Q. The space Q is, according to what has been said, constructed so that 
the center of the specified atom can be in each point of it without being chemically bound. 
The probability wo that not only does the center of the specified molecule lie in one of the 
volume elements d<o but also the point A lies within the surface element dX would, in the 
absence of chemical forces, be in the same proportion to w | as d/:Art, so that therefore 

d\ nidu) 

w 2 = - id 

4?r ft 

As a result of chemical attraction, this probability will be increased by a factor e 2hx , 
according to Equation (142); hence in the presence of chemical attraction, the probability is 

d\ riidoj 

wl = e 2hx - w. 

4j ft 


In order to include all possible positions at which the specified atom is bound to any one of 
the«[ remaining individual atoms, we must integrate this expression over all volume 
elements doj of the entire critical space to, and for each such volume element, over all 
surface elements dX of the surface X corresponding to the volume element d<o concerned; 
whereby we obtain for the probability that the specified atom is chemically bound at all, the 
expression 

71 io) C C dwd\ 

— —e 2 **. 

ft J J 4?r 


f C dud\ 

JJ 

then 


(185) w 3 = 

If we put 

(186) k = 



Wi = niwk/il. 


Here w is the probability that the center of the specified molecule lies in an arbitrary/ 
space Q not containing the covering sphere or critical space of any of the remaining atoms. 
We now have to calculate the probability that the specified molecule in the gas 


34 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



considered is not chemically bound. The latter circumstance will always occur if its center 
is found in the space free of the covering spheres of all remaining atoms and of the critical 
spaces of the ri\ atoms. The sum of those critical spaces is n | aj, and the total space filled by 
covering sphere is, as in §59, equal to Gb. Since the total volume of the gas is V, the space 
free of covering spheres and critical spaces is V - Gb - n | <u 1 The probability, w 4 , that the 
center of the specified atom is found in this space is in the same ratio to the probability that 
it is in as the volumes of the corresponding spaces, since the latter space is only an 
arbitrary part cut out of the former. Therefore : 

W\ = w{V - Gb - ftiu>)/& 

The specified atom is also not chemically bound when its center is in a volume element 
of a critical space but the point A does not he on the corresponding surface A, since then it 
is rotated so that the sensitive areas do not overlap. For the probability of this latter event 
one finds, by analogy with Equation (185), the expression 

dwd\ i 

- ) 

4t 

where, however, for each volume clement cloj, dk \ means an element of the spherical 
surface E that does not lie on the surface A corresponding to da>. Again one is to integrate 
over ah surface elements that satisfy this condition and over all volume elements dco. The 
exponential is now omitted, of course, since in none of the positions now considered does 
the attractive force act. In each of the A gases, therefore, the total probability that the 
specified atom is not chemically bound is: 

( C C dwd\ A w 

V - Gb - Thu + ni J J ——j— • 

The three quantities Gb, ri \ to, and n | Wdcod/JAn are completely independent of the 
chemical attractive forces. The first represents the deviation from the Boyle-Charles law 
considered by van der Waals, due to the finite extension of the molecules. Since the critical 
space is very small compared to the covering sphere, the second and third of the above 
three quantities are small compared to the first. We shall neglect all three quantities 
compared to V, since we shall calculate the dissociation of a gas that otherwise has the 
same properties as an ideal gas, so that the deviations from the Boyle-Charles law from 
causes other than dissociation can be neglected. By the same token we can also forget all 
terms added to the expression in parentheses in Equation (189) in the search for greater 
accuracy. Hence Equation (189) reduces to 



34 


‘Pu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Vw 

(190) w* = - 

ft 

On the other hand, we may not consider the quantity k (given by Eq. [186] ) to be small 
compared to V, since on account of the great intensity of chemical forces the exponential 
has a very large value. Noticeable dissociation occurs only when the exponential e 2hx is of 
the same order of magnitude as N/n | oj, and hence/: and V are of the same order of 
magnitude. From Equations (187) and (190) it follows that 

w 6 :w 3 = V:njk. 

If we now return to the N identical gases, and assume that in Nt, of them the specified 
atom is chemically bound, and in N (l it is not bound, then we have also: 

Nt'.Ni = Wi'.Wi = V\njc. 

Since we could just as well have specified any other atom, this must also be the ratio of the 
number of unbound atoms, ri \ to the number of bound ones, 2n 2 , in the equilibrium state. 
Therefore 

ni:2n 2 = V:nik } 

hence 

(191) n\k = 2 n 2 V. 


64. Dependence of the degree of dissociation on pressure. 


In determining the two numbers nj and n 2 , we have of course imagined that one 
molecule, which we called the specified one, is excluded. However, since these numbers 
are very large compared to 1, Equation (191) is also valid when n | means the total number 
of all unbound atoms (simple molecules) in the gas, and rz 2 means the number of all double 
atoms (compound molecules). Since a is the total number of all molecules in the gas, one 
has moreover n 1 +2n 2 = a. Whence it follows that: 




T 2 Va 
4fc 2 + k 


We denote by G the total mass of gas, and by the mass of one atom, so that a = 
G!m\. a!G\ = 1/m| is the number of dissociated and chemically bound atoms together in 


34 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



unit mass. We again denote by v=V/G the specific volume, i.e., the volume of unit mass of 
the partially dissociated gas at the given temperature and pressure, and by q = n \ la the 
degree of dissociation, i.e., the ratio of the number of chemically unbound (dissociated) 
atoms to the total number of atoms. Finally we set 


(193) 


K 


k l r r 
mi miJ J 


e n * 


dud\ 
4 7T 


Then the above equation reduces to : 


(194) 


q = ~m + 


4 K t + K 


For the sake of orientation, we make the following remark: if two single atoms happen to 
collide in such a way that their sensitive regions interpenetrate, then because of the 
smallness of these regions and the large relative velocities of the atoms, which are 
accelerated by the chemical forces, the time during which the sensitive regions overlap will 
in most cases be small compared to the average time between successive collisions of a 
molecule. The energy of the double atom is so large that the two atoms can separate from 
each other again. (We refer to this case as virtual chemical binding.) 

The number of these virtually bound atoms is in any case vanishingly small compared to 
a, since they always remain together only a very short time. They can therefore make only 
a vanishingly small contribution to n 2 , when n 2 is not very small compared to a. Only 
when the kinetic energy of the motion of the centers of gravity of the atoms is transformed 
into internal energy of the atoms (e.g., rotation around their axis, or internal motion) can 
there be, in the case when the atoms are not solid spheres, a somewhat longer interaction. 
(First kind of proper chemical binding.) On the other hand, if a third single atom or double 
atom intervenes while the sensitive regions of the other twx) atoms are overlapping, the 
energy can be lowered so much that it no longer suffices to separate the two atoms again, 
so that they must remain together, at least until another collision occurs. (Second kind of 
proper chemical binding.) In all cases where our calculation gives the result that the number 
of double atoms, n 2 , is not vanishingly small compared to a, numerous double atoms must 
remain united with each other for long times. The principal advantage of our general 
formula is just that it permits us to calculate the number of chemically bound atom pairs 
without having to take special account of the processes of creation and dissolution of these 
pairs. In any case, out of the n 2 double atoms found by calculation—in case this number is 
not very small—all except a vanishingly small number are united with each other for a 
longer time, so that they are to be considered molecules in the sense of gas theory. 

To calculate the pressure we must therefore proceed as if we had a mixture of two 
gases. The molecule of one of these gases is a single atom, while the molecule of the other 
is a pair of two atoms. The total pressure of any arbitrary gas mixture is: 


34 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



p = — (nimic* + n 2 m 2 <^ • • •), 

where m ., m 2 , ... are the masses, and . . . the mean square velocities of the 

of, 02 

centers of gravity of the various kinds of molecules. ri\ is the total number of gas molecules 
of the first kind, n 2 that of the second kind, and so forth (cf. Pail I, §2, Eq. [8] ). Moreover, 
if M is the mass of a molecule of the normal gas and C 2 its mean square velocity at the 
same temperature T; p/ } = m h !M is the atomic weight of one of the other gases, if the 
molecular weight of the noimal gas is set equal to 1 ; then: 

m\c\ = m 2 Cj = • • • = MC 2 = 3 MRT = 3/2 h, 

hence 

MRT 

(195) p = —~ (ni + n 2 + • • •)• 


In our special case, 


2 n 2 = a - n h n 3 = n 4 • • • = 0, 

hence 



a + n\ 

2V 


ami M 

MRT = (l + q) - RT 

2F mi ' 


therefore, since v = V/am \, 




If one substitutes the value (194) for q here, then the pressure p is obtained as a function of 
the specific volume v and the temperature T. K is still a function of temperature, which will 
be discussed later. In fact, direct observation gives the relation between p, v, and T. The 
chemist is usually accustomed to state the degree of dissociation q as a function of p and T, 
however. One can accomplish this by writing Equation (191) in the form: 


34 


f J zLfLG. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ ~Ph-y-&XjcS- 




Multiplication of this equation by Equation (196) yields 



If one substitutes this value into Equation (196), he obtains v as a function of p, T, and K. 

§65. Dependence of the degree of dissociation on temperature. 

There remains still the discussion of the quantity K. If we substitute in Equation (193) 
for h its value ~ MRT, it follows that: 

1 r r du)d\ 

(198) if = - - eXlMRT > 

m\J J 4 t 

which in any case is only a function of temperature. At constant temperature, K is therefore 
a constant, and Equations (194), (196), and (197) give directly the relation between p and 
v, as well as the dependence of the quantity q on p and v, in which is involved only one 
new constant K which has to be determined. 

Since Equation (198) contains the temperature under the integral sign, the dependence 
of the quantity K on temperature cannot immediately be given in a simple manner. One 
must instead make some assumption about the dependence of the function / on the amount 
of overlapping of the two sensitive regions. In order not to lose ourselves in vague 
hypotheses, we shall discuss only the simplest of all assumptions: that % always has a 
constant value when the two atoms are chemically bound at all, i.e., as soon as the two 
sensitive regions overlap at all, no matter how much. This would be the case when, at the 
instant when the sensitive regions touch, there occurs a strong attraction, equal at all points 
on the surfaces of these regions. But this attraction at once drops off to zero as soon as the 


34 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



sensitive regions penetrate further into each other, y would then be the constant work of 
separation of the two chemically bound atoms, or, conversely, the work done in chemical 
binding by the chemical attractive forces. 

If all the a/G atoms present in unit mass of the gas are initially unbound, and 
subsequently combine to form a/2G double atoms, then the amount ayJlG of work would 
thereby be done; therefore A = ayllG is the total binding (or also dissociation) heat of unit 
mass of the gas, measured in mechanical units, and one has: 



x 

2GA 

(199) 

X = 2GA/a, 

— = 

MRT 

aMRT 


1 

C C dud\ 

(200) 

J( - e 2/uA IRT_ 

)J 17 

rriv 


2Ajui 


In chemistry one calls the mass 2/r 1 “one molecule.” Therefore 2p| A is the heat of 
dissociation of “one molecule.” 

One can easily see that y may not be more than at most logarithmically infinite for any 
configuration of the atoms, since the probability of that configuration would otherwise be 
an infinity of ordered and would thus be so large that the atoms could never separate. 
Whatever^ may be as a function of the positions of the atoms, one will not obtain a 
qualitatively different result by replacing y by its mean value for all positions, whereby he 
would again arrive at Equation (200) . This equation must certainly therefore provide an 
approximation to reality in the general case. 

In the case where y is constant, no intramolecular work will be done by the relative 
motion of the chemically bound atoms, as long as they remain bound. The mean kinetic 
energy however is always the same at a given temperature, whether the atoms are 
chemically bound or not; hence equal increments of mean kinetic energy correspond to 
equal increments of temperature, and the specific heat is independent of whether the atoms 
are chemically bound or not, as long as y is constant. Of course we mean here the specific 
heat before the beginning or after the end of the dissociation; in case the degree of 
dissociation changes, the heat of dissociation is not included in the specific heat. 

We shall now introduce for brevity the notation 



34 


IPuJix*. 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 




where X is the surface section on the sphere E. which the point X may not leave without 
breaking the chemical bond, when the center B of the second atom lies within da> in Figure 
4; then it follows from Equations (197), (200), (201), (202), and (203) that 



If q is given experimentally as a function of p and T, then the two constants a and j can 
be determined from this formula. From a there follows at once from Equation (201) the 
heat of dissociation—or, if one prefers, the heat of combination A of unit mass of the gas. 
From 7 , one can determine the quantity/? by means of Equation (203) . According to 
Equation (202) this quantity has a significant molecular meaning. For each volume element 
da) of the critical space belonging to an atom, the point A must he on a certain surface 
section X of the spherical surface E. in order that chemical binding can occur. We shall now 
count not ah of the volume of each volume element da> of a critical space, rather only the 
fraction of it which is obtained on multiplying the volume element by XIAtt. We call this 
fraction of the total volume element the reduced volume. \Xd<olArc is then the sum of the 
reduced volumes of all volume elements of the critical space belonging to an atom; we call 
it simply the reduced volume of the critical space. 

We shah now use an abbreviated manner of speaking. Instead of saying that the center 
of the second atom lies in the volume element doj and simultaneously the point A lies on 
the corresponding surface X, we say simply that the second atom lies in the reduced volume 
element dco. Instead of saying that it lies in some reduced volume element of the critical 
space, we say simply that it lies somewhere in the reduced critical space. 

Since finally 1/m | is the total number of atoms in unit mass, fi is the sum of the reduced 
volumes of all critical spaces which belong to all the atoms in unit mass. If one wishes to 
make a definite assumption about the form of the sensitive region, then he can calculate 
therefrom the form of the surface section X corresponding to each volume element dto of 
the critical space, and hence not only the reduced volume but also the absolute volume of 
all the critical spaces belonging to all atoms in unit mass. But we shall not go into this in 
more detail here. 

If one substitutes the expression (204) into Equation (196) , then he can express the 
specific volume v as a function of the pressure p, the temperature T, the gas constant Rip | 
of the dissociated gas, and the two constants a and 7 . If one prefers to express p as a 
function of v and T, then he can substitute the expression (194) for q into Equation (196) , 
after setting K = fde a/T (according to Eq. [220]). 


34 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



66. Numerical calculations. 


A very short numerical calculation will be inserted here. I have analyzed 1 the 
experiments of Deville and Troost 2 and of Naumann 3 on the dissociation of hyponitrous 
acid, and that of Meier and Crafts 4 on the dissociation of iodine vapor, according to 
Equation (204). The constants there called a and b are related to the ones here called a and 
7 as follows: 

1 

a = W10, 7 = —} 

a 

where l means the natural logarithm. I found that—denoting the quantities pertaining to 
hyponitrous acid by the index u, and those to iodine vapor by the index j —that: 

a u = 1970270—, b u = 3080.1°C., 

1°C. 

a, = 2-617 — , b, = 6300.1°C., 

1°C. 

whence follows: 

1°C 

a„ = 3080.no.1°C.. ?» =——> 

1970270p u 

i»c 

«,• = 6.300. no. ra, ?,=—— • 

2-617py 

p u is the average pressure used by Deville and Troost in their experiments on the 
dissociation of hyponitrous acid (about 755.5 mm of mercury) ; p: is that used in the 
experiments of Meier and Crafts on the dissociation of iodine vapor (728 mm). According 
to Equation (201) , the heat of dissociation of a molecule (in the chemical, macroscopic 
sense) is 

n = 2/i i A = aR. 




This formula is based on mechanical units for heat. If one uses theimal units, it is necessaiy 
to multiply by the appropriate conversion factor J. The heat of dissociation of a chemical 
molecule in thermal units is therefore 



P = aRJ. 



We shall use grams, centimeters, and seconds as units for the mechanical quantities. A 
weight of 430 kilograms raised one meter produces one k il ocalorie. Hence 



cal 

J = - 

430 gr • 100 cm G 


Here G = 981 cm/sec 2 is the acceleration of gravity, and “cal” means a gram-calorie. The 
value of the gas constant r for air is found by substituting the following values in the 
equation of state pv = rT for air: 


T =the absolute temperature 273° corresponding to melting ice, 


1033 gr-G 

p = the pressure of one atmosphere=- 

cm 2 

1000 cm 3 
V ~ 1.293 gr 


For a molecule of air, p 0 is about 28.9 when one sets H = 1, H 2 = 2. Since R = rp, we 
have for monatomic hydrogen: 



28.9 1033 gr G 1000 cm’ G-cm 

R = ---= 84570- 

273° cm* 1.293 gr 1°C 


Finally it follows that 


(208) 


RJ = 


28.9 1033 gr G 1000 cm 1 


cal 


273° cm’ 1.293 gr 430grd00cmG 
cal 


= 1.967 


gr. 1°C. 


35 




Hence one obtains for hyponitrous acid : 



(209) 


CgJ 

P„ = aJU = 13920 — • 

gr 


On dividing by the molecular weight 2/jj = 92 of hyponitrous acid (N 2 O 4 ), one obtains for 
the heat of dissociation of one gram of it the value 


C£ll 

(210) D„ = 151.3 — > 

gr 

which is in good agreement with the direct determination of the heat of dissociation of 
hyponitrous acid by Berthelot and Ogier . 5 
For iodine vapor it follows that: 


cfll crI 

(211) Pj = 28530 — 1 D, = 112.5- 

gr gr 

According to Equations (202) and (203), the sum of the reduced critical spaces of all 
atoms in unit mass is 


1 

(212) 0 = — fir 

2/xi 

Now we have 

1°C. 

7 “ “ 1970270p„ ' 

p u corresponds to a column of mercury of 755.5 mm height. Hence 6 



1033grC 755.5 1027grG 

■ — — ■ ■ • - ■■ ■ — i. T—' ■■ ■ 

cm 2 760 cm 2 


35 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Hence 



1 G cm 1°C. cm* cm 3 

(214) A, = - 84570—-- =- 

92 1°C. 1970270 1027 gr G 2200000 gr 

This value is three times as small as the one I found previously, 1 due to the fact that there I 
made the improbable assumption that the four oxygen atoms can be arbitrarily exchanged 
during the uniting and separation of two NCb groups, whereas here I consider such groups 
to be undecomposable, playing exactly the same role as atoms. 

For iodine vapor I found 1 


1°C. 

2.617 pj 

The experiment was done likewise under atmospheric pressure (728 mm of mercury on the 
average). Furthermore, the molecular weight 2/r 1 of iodine is equal to 253.6. Substitution of 
these values yields 



cm 3 



Neither for hyponitrous acid nor for iodine vapor is the value of van der Waals’ constant 
b known, so that one cannot calculate the space filled by the molecules from the van der 
Waals equation. This would also give only the order of magnitude since it treats the 
molecules as nearly undefoimable spheres, and makes various other simplifications which 
can influence the result. There remains finally Loschmidt’s method of estimation.* We shall 
set the density of liquid hyponitrous acid equal to 1.5, and that of solid iodine equal to 5, 
corresponding to temperatures below that of melting ice. At these temperatures the vapor 
pressure of both substances is very small; for iodine it is of course much smaller than for 
hyponitrous acid. But we can leave this out of consideration here, since we only want a 
rough order-of-magnitude estimation. We assume completely arbitrarily that in these two 
substances two thirds of the total space is filled up by the molecules. Then the space fi ll ed 
by a gram of molecules of hyponitrous acid would be 0.44 cm 3 /gr; the sum of the volumes 
of the covering spheres of these molecules is eight times as large, viz., 3.55 cnrVgr. For 
iodine, the same quantities have the values 0.133 cm 3 /gr and 1.07 cm 3 /gr. Therefore, for 
hyponitrous acid the reduced critical space of an N0 2 group, considered as one atom, is 
only about one 8-millionth pail of the covering sphere, whereas for iodine it is an eighth or 
a ninth pail of the covering spheres. The small dis-sociability of iodine is therefore 
predominantly due to the relative size of the critical space compared to the covering sphere, 
whereas the difference in the heats of dissociation per gram of the substances is relatively 
small. Iodine vapor would therefore be about as easily dissociated as hyponitrous acid 


35 


~*Puii.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



when the former is diluted a mi ll ionfold. 


67. Mechanical picture of the affinity of two dissimilar monovalent atoms. 


We consider a second simple example. Two kinds of atoms are present in a space V at 
temperature T and total pressure p. There are a \ of the first kind and a 2 of the second kind. 
Let the mass of an atom of the first kind be m\, and that of an atom of the second kind be 
m 2 . Two atoms of the first kind can be combined into a molecule (double atom of the first 
kind), likewise two atoms of the second kind (double atom of the second kind). For each of 
these bonds, exactly the same rules as those established in the preceding section will hold. 
We shall denote all quantities pertaining to double atoms of the first kind by an index 1, and 
those to double atoms of the second kind by an index 2 . But in addition, chemical binding 
of an atom of the first kind to one of the second kind, forming what we shall call a mixed 
molecule, shall be possible. Similar laws will hold for these bonds, and we shall denote the 
corresponding quantities by two indices, 1 and 2 . 

In the equilibrium state the following will be present in our gas: first, n | single atoms of 
the first kind, and n 2 single atoms of the second kind; second, ri\ \ double atoms of the first 
kind and n 22 double atoms of the second kind; third, « 12 mixed molecules. Chemical 
combination of more than two atoms will be excluded. The atoms of the first kind shall be 
impenetrable spheres of diameter cf \. We shall call a sphere of radius (J\ around the center 
of such an atom its covering sphere. To it will be attached the critical space co | for the 
interaction with a similar atom; da>i denotes the volume element of this critical space. If the 
center of another atom of the first kind does not lie within uq, it is not chemically bound to 
the first atom. If its center is within dceq, then chemical binding takes place only if it is in 
the reduced volume da>\ —i.e., when the point A 1 lies within a certain surface section A\ of 
the spherical surface E concentric with the first atom. Let dk\ be an element of the surface 
A |. As before, A | is the point of intersection of a line drawn from the center of the first 
atom parallel to the axis of the second, with the spherical surface E. Finally, is again the 
work performed when the two atoms come from a great distance to those positions where 
the center of the second lies within c/oq and the point A j lies within dk j. 

If one picks out an atom of the first kind, then he can assume that, of the remaining 
atoms of the first kind, there will always be n \ which are bound neither to an atom of the 
second kind nor to another remaining atom of the first kind. If the specified atom forms a 
double atom of the first kind, then it can only be bound to one of these ri\ atoms of the first 
kind, since we exclude tri-atomic molecules. The probability of this event is to the 
probability that it remains single as kpip..V, where 





do)\d\i 

4 tt 


This can be found just as in the previous section. The ratio of these two probabilities must 
however be equal to the ratio 2 n 1 1 :n |, whence 


35 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



( 217 ) = 2Vn n - 

Likewise one finds for the atoms of the second kind the equation 

( 218 ) k 2 nl = 2Vrin 


where all quantities have a similar meaning. Therefore : 



We still have to discuss the formation of mixed molecules. Since we assumed that the 
atoms of the first kind are impenetrable spheres of diameter a and those of the second 
kind are impenetrable spheres of diameter <r 2 , we shall consequently assume that the 
minimum distance of separation of two un lik e atoms is i (o'] -J- (j^)- We construct a 
sphere of radius i (q- j (j%) around the center of an atom of the first kind, and call it the 

covering sphere of this atom with respect to an atom of the second kind. On the surfaces of 
both kinds of atoms there will be sensitive regions with the property that attraction takes 
place only when these regions touch or partly overlap. It seems most probable that the 
sensitive region for interaction with atoms of a different kind is the same as that for 
interaction with atoms of the same kind; but this assumption is not strictly necessary. In any 
case, we can just as before construct a critical space attached to the covering sphere of an 
atom of the first kind with respect to an atom of the second kind, and call it uq 2 . For each 
volume element dco ^ 2 of this critical space we can construct a surface A 12 on the unit 
sphere E concentric with the covering sphere, such that when the center of the second atom 
lies within <r/a> 12 , the two atoms attract only when, as before, a certain point A 12 lies within 
some surface clement r/A| 2 of the surface A12 —when the atom is in the reduced volume 
element <r/(u 12 , in other words. In this case X\ 2 ' s the work of separation. 

We again pick out some atom of the second kind. In order that it be a single atom, it 
should have all but a vanishingly small pail of the total volume V available to it. If on the 
other hand it is in a mixed molecule, then its center must he within some volume element 
da>i2 of the critical space belonging to one of the n | unbound atoms of the first kind, and 
the point A 12 should lie in some surface element c //.| 2 of the corresponding surface /. | 2 . 
The probability that its center lies in a certain volume element doj\ 2 and the point A 12 lies 
in a certain surface element d/.\j is, to the probability that for an arbitrary configuration of 
its axis its center lies within V, as: 


g2*Xll 


rfoi>12</Al2 

-:F 

4t 


35 


“PiL+LC- 



The probability that the specified atom is bound in a mixed molecule at all is, to the 
probability that it is a single atom, as 


fll 




Therefore one obtains, on setting again 





g2*Xli 


d(j) 12C?Xi2 

4ir 


the proportion 


n 2 :rii 2 = V:n { k n) 


hence 

( 221 ) Vn u = knUirii. 

§68. Dissociation of a molecule into two heterogeneous atoms. 

We first consider the special case that k\ and kj are so small compared to k 12 and ^ n \ 
respectively that the number of double atoms of the first and second kinds is completely 
negligible. The gas then consists only of three kinds of molecules: single atoms of the first 
and second kinds, and mixed molecules. 

We specialize further to the case that there is no surplus of single atoms of either kind— 
i.e., the number of single atoms of the first kind is exactly equal to the number of single 
atoms of the second kind. Then we set: 

(ji z= q 2 = a. 


We have: 


7l\ — 71% — d ~ 7l\%. 

We again call the quotient q = (a- n^ta the degree of dissociation, so that it follows from 
Equation (221) that 


akuq* = F(1 - q). 


35 


Pi£^lc 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 


Furthermore, one has from Equation (195) 



V 


(1 + ?)• 


MRTa 
V 

Hence 

MRT 

«’ = — (l-? 2 )- 

k u p 

We again assume that is constant; then 

1 

—;— X12 = A12 

mi + m 2 

is the heat of dissociation of the original unit mass consisting purely of mixed molecules. 
Further: 


ft 12 = e (H+H2) b\21RT 



\ndwn 

47T 


pi l is the atomic weight of a gas consisting of single atoms of the first kind, referred to H \ = 
1, H 2 = 2. pi 2 has a similar meaning for the second kind of gas. The quantity in the 
exponent, (pi\+pt 2 )A 1 2 = n, is the heat of dissociation (measured in mechanical units) of a 
molecule of the undissociated substance in the chemical or macroscopic sense, whose mass 
(the chemical molecular weight) is pi \ +pt 2 . If we set 

(mi *f M2)Ai2 f Xl 2 rfwi2 

R J 4tt 

*12 

7 = -; 

MR 


then we find again 


35 







1 



y\ 2 is the reduced critical space of an atom of the first kind with respect to its interaction 
with an atom of the second kind. y \2 would be the sum of all reduced critical spaces which 
correspond to all the atoms contained in unit mass of the first kind of gas. /\IM, on the 
other hand, is the sum of all critical spaces that correspond to all atoms of the first kind of 
gas contained in a molecule (in the chemical sense)—i.e., in the mass niy/M of the first kind 
of gas, which is chemically equivalent to unit mass of the noimal substance. 

If one gas is present in excess, then Equation (221) yields 


(221a) 

(222) «i2 




V 

-Mis) = —« 1 ! 

M2 



Since n 12 can neither be larger than a 1 nor huger than a 2 , the root must be taken with the 
negative sign. If a \ were very large, then the other factor a 2 -n \ 2 on the left-hand side of 
Equation (221a) must be very small, hence n 12 must be nearly equal to a 2 , which also 
follows from Equation (222) if one considers a \ to be large compared to a 2 . As the number 
of atoms of the first kind increases, more and more atoms of the second kind will be bound 
to them, until finally all atoms of the second kind will be chemically bound, which agrees 
with the law of mass action of Guldberg and Waage. 


§69. Dissociation of hydrogen iodide gas. 

We now consider the other extreme special case of the general case heated in §67. 
Again let = n 2 = a , but now let Via be vanishingly small compared to k \, k 2 , and k 12 , so 
that the number of single atoms of the two kinds is vanishingly small. This would be the 
case, for example, when HI dissociates into I 2 and H 2 . We then obtain, on squaring 

Equation (221) , = ^ 12 ^ 1^2 ^ we su ^ sl ' lulc values of 7 ^ and 7 ^ from 

Equations (217) and (218), then it follows that: 


35 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(223) 


2 4&12 

ni2 = —-ttnn 2 2. 

k\K2 

If one denotes again by q—{a-n \ 2 )/« the degree of dissociation then: 

aq 

flu = n n~r' 

2 


Hence it follows from Equation (223), after extracting the square root, that: 



If one again assumes that / is constant in the entire reduced critical space, and denotes 
the reduced critical space for the interaction of two atoms of the first kind with each other, 
of two atoms of the second kind with each other, and of one atom of the first kind with one 
of the second, by K\, k 2 , and /q 2 , respectively, then according to Equations (216), (219), 
and (220): 


ku 

y/kiki 


K 12 

VW2 


gfc(2xil-Xl-Xl) 


— - g (2xi»—XI—X*) HMRT' 

V* 1«2 


On forming two HI molecules from an I 2 and an H 2 molecule, the heat 2'/\ 2 - y_\ - will 
be liberated. 


1 

2(mi + m 2 ) 


(2xi2 - Xi “ X 2 ) 


359 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



is therefore the heat A which is liberated on forming unit mass of HI from ordinary iodine 
and hydrogen gases. Hence 


ki2 K12 

... . - ... e (m+n)(MRT) 

yj k\Jc2 Vwt 

n =2(//| +// 2 )A is of course the heat of formation of two HI molecules in the chemical sense 
from a molecule of ordinary iodine vapor and a molecule of ordinary hydrogen gas. 

At very high temperatures, q approaches the l im it 

1 


*12 

\/*l*2 

From the experiments of Lemoine 1 one calculates for this l im it the value however, 
this may not be completely reliable, on account of a possible false chemical equilibrium. 
The reduced critical space for the interaction of an iodine atom with a hydrogen atom 
would then be only about one third of the geometric mean of the reduced critical spaces for 
the interactions of two iodine and two hydrogen atoms respectively with each other. 

§70. Dissociation of water vapor. 

We shall now briefly consider a special case, namely the dissociation of two water 
vapor molecules ( 2 H 2 O) into two hydrogen molecules (2H 2 ) and one oxygen molecule 
(O 2 ). In a volume V at temperature T and pressure p, there will strictly be present all 
possible molecules that can be formed by combining hydrogen and oxygen atoms. Let: n 10 , 
n 0l , n 2 Q, n 02 , «n and n 2 i molecules of the forms H, O, H 2 , 0 2 , HO, and H 2 0 be present. 
We denote by k 2 q, kq 2 , k\ 1 and k 2 \ the reduced critical spaces for the combination of two 
hydrogen atoms, two oxygen atoms, one oxygen atom and one hydrogen atom into the 
group HO, and such a group with another hydrogen atom into water vapor, respectively. 
Furthermore, we denote by / 2 q, / 02 , \, and % 21 the amounts of heat liberated in forming 

the corresponding compounds, so that: 

2xn *f 2x2i - 2x20 ~ X 02 

is the heat of formation of two water vapor molecules from two hydrogen molecules and 
one oxygen molecule. Each of the / shall be constant in the corresponding critical space. 

We next pick out a hydrogen atom. It is paired in a molecule of the form HO when it 
finds itself in the reduced critical space | of one of the n 0 i oxygen atoms. The probability 



36 


A^«.6.e 7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



that it is single is, to the probability that it forms a group HO, as 


FUnnoiC 2 ** 11 . 

This however is at the same time equal to the ratio n\Q.n\ t, whence it follows that: 

nnF = ftoiftio*ne 2xl1 . 

If one compares the probability that the specified hydrogen atom remains single with the 
probability that it is united with an HO molecule into H 2 0, it follows likewise that: 

ft 2 \V = ftionn^ie 2 ^ 21 . 

hence : 

( 224 ) ft 2 iF 2 = ft 10^01*21* 

The probability that the specified hydrogen atom remains single is, to the probability that 
it is united with one of the remaining hydrogen atoms in an H 2 molecule, as 

Finland** 111 . 

This however is again the ratio of the number n \ q of single hydrogen atoms to the number 
2/z 2 q of those bound to another hydrogen atom. Hence: 

0 \T 2 2hX20 

^ft 2 0 ' — ft 10*200 

and likewise : 



2 2 Axo 2 
= ftoi*O 20 


Hence, and from Equation (224), it follows that: 

2 2 

220 * 21*11 

(225) n 2! = n 20 n 02 -e*M**ti+*xu-**i*-*ot), 

F kI/m 

We assume that there are originally a water molecules. Of these let « 21 remain 
undissociated, so that a - zz 2 i are dissociated and indeed are exclusively in molecules of the 
forms H 2 and 0 2 . The quotient g = (a - n 2 \)/a shall again be called the degree of 
dissociation. 

Since, out of the a - n 2 \ water molecules, a - n 2 \ hydrogen molecules and 


7fca^4e«taiZc.a/ 



2 21 ) oxygen molecules would be formed, we have: 


n 2 o = a <7> ^02 = faq, n 2i - a( 1 - q). 


2 ^ 2 i+ 2 ^ii -2y, 0 - y (p is the heat liberated when two water vapor molecules form two 
hydrogen molecules and one oxygen molecule. If we denote the heat produced when unit 
mass of water is formed from the usual explosive gas by A, then: 


2x2i + 2xn — 2x20 — X02 

2 ( 2 mi + m 2 ) 

If one sets 


2(2/ii + ju 2 )A 8x2iKn 

(226) -= a, -= 7 , 

R 2(2wi + miltyt 0 2 

then: 

(227) (1 -q) t = q'-e‘' T . 

V 

Furtheimore, according to Equation (195) 

MRT ( q\ RT 

(228) p = (ri2o + fto2 + ^ 21 ) ; = (1 + —-) —-- 

\ \ 2 / f(2/ii n<>) 


If one ehminates q, then he obtains the relation between p, v, and T. On the other hand, if 
one eliminates v, then he obtains for the dependence of the degree of dissociation on 
pressure and temperature the following equation: 


9 


(l -?) 2 1 + t 


RT 


2 / (2*ii + m)p 



The equation between q, p, and v would be obtained by eliminating T from Equations 
(227) and (228). 

In order to take account of the bivalence of the oxygen atom, one can assume that two 
equivalent sensitive regions he on its surface. The critical space for the formation of HO 


36 


“PiLh-d. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




from H and O would then be twice as large as that for the formation of H 2 0 from HO and 
H. But then the sensitive regions would not have to he directly vis a vis ; or else they must 
be able to move on the surface of the molecule, in order to make possible double bonding 
of two oxygen atoms. One would obtain a phenomenon at least partly similar to bivalence 
by assuming that the critical region of an oxygen atom is not completely covered by the 
covering sphere of a single oxygen or hydrogen atom chemically bound to it, so that there 
is still room for the chemical binding of another atom. I certainly am not very hopeful that a 
more precise formulation of these speculations can be established at the present time; yet 
perhaps I may be allowed to adduce here the statement of a great scientist, that these 
general mechanical models will aid more than hinder the knowledge of the facts of 
chemistry. 

§71. General theory of dissociation. 

We shall now make some remarks on the most general case of dissociation. Let there be 
given arbitrarily many atoms of arbitrarily many different kinds. A molecule which contains 
a | atoms of the first, b\ atoms of the second, c\ atoms of the third kind, and so forth, will 
be denoted symbolically by (a | b \ c | • • •)• The aggregate of C| molecules of the form 
(rqZqcq ■ ■ ■), C 2 molecules of form (a 2 Z? 2 c 2 • • •)> C 3 molecules of form (a 3 Z? 3 c 3 • • •) and so 
forth can be transformed into r | molecules • • •), T 2 molecules ((Xsfh 72 ' ' 0 . T 3 

molecules (a 3 /?373 • • •) and so forth. Since both aggregates must contain the same atoms, 
we have the following equations 

(CiOi + ^202 + * * • = T\a\ + ^<*2 + • • • I 
(229) < 

\Cxbi ■+■ cy>2 4* * * * = ri/?i ■+• r^j + * * * 

We now assume that all possible combinations of our atoms are present in the gas, even if 
only in small amounts. We denote by Hiqq... the number of single atoms of the first kind, 
by n 2 oo-•• the number of double atoms of the first kind, and so forth. Likewise, let /z () | • 

be the number of single atoms, n 02 o- • • the number of double atoms of the first kind, etc.; let 
tti 10 - • • he the number of molecules consisting of one atom of the first kind and one of the 
second, and so forth. For simplicity we ignore isomers. A double atom of the first kind can 
be formed only when the center of an atom of the first kind lies within the reduced critical 
space of another atom of the first kind. Hence, if k 2 qq... is this reduced critical space, and 
X 200 .. • is the heat of bonding of a double atom of the first kind, then it follows from the 
principles of our theory that 

»ioo...:2njoo... = F: nioo • • .**00 • • .c 2A ** 0# *". 

Likewise it follows that 

Tlioo • • •' 3/1200* •• =: F*.71200 • • ./C 300 • • .e 2 ^* 00 ’ ‘', 


36 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



where X300--- ' s the heat of bonding of a molecule consisting of three atoms of the first 
kind, formed from a single and a double atom of the first kind. X300--- ' s the reduced 
critical space for this bonding which is available for the single atom in the neighborhood of 
the double atom. From the two ratios it follows that: 

3 -2 / 2Wioo • • • 

7&300-.. = 7lioo*><r *300•••6 , 

where K 30 O ... is one sixth of the product of the reduced critical spaces * 200 -•• and 

*300...; 1 P 300 ... = X too ■ • ■ + X200- • • 1S th e heat of bonding of three single atoms of the first 
kind into a molecule. Continuing in this line of reasoning, one finds easily that 

*1 1—Oj f 2Affli00 ,, « 

W<n00‘• • ^100* *•' *flj00 ,,t ^ j 

where K^qo • • >' s the product of all the reduced critical spaces, divided by a\, and ip ai 0 o.. 

. is the heat of bonding of a\ atoms of the first kind with each other. 

Each such molecule will have a definite reduced critical space n a 10 . . . for the 
annexation of an atom of the second kind. Let iq. . . be the heat of formation of a 
molecule consisting of a | atoms of the first and one atom of the second kind, from its 
atoms. Then 


»oio-..:n 0l io... = 7:n a ,oo...K ( > 1 io...d*V ) -A M -) 

If one attaches still more atoms of the second and third kinds, and so forth, then it follows 
finally that 


°1 *>1 ci 

ftatficx • • • “ WlOO • • •WOIO • • ^001 • • • 


7 


1 —fli——cj— • 


• / 2 /i^OibjC| • • • 

*ai 6 ici> • .6 } 


where ^> ai £ c .. is the heat of formation of the molecule (a \ b \ c | • • •) from its atoms, and 
K a l&jc* • • * ' s the product of all the critical spaces, divided by ci\ \by !q!... 

Completely analogous expressions follow of course for n aibiC2 ..., n a ^ 7| ..., 

and so forth. Then’s that have a single one, and otherwise all zero indices, can be 
el im inated by taking account of Equations (229), whence one obtains: 



c 1 c 2 Tx r 2 

^ a l^l c l' • * ’ * * ^ a l&l7l * ’ '' • X 

y lC ~ lT Ke 2 ^ C ^ a[hl ' ‘ ■ +C ^02&2 , “ + " '~ T ^a\Pl - r ^a 2 jV * • 




K, 


jC2 

<* 2^2 



. is the quotient in which occur all the 


reduced critical spaces of the compounds (ci\b\ ■ ■ •), {ajbi • • •), each with its appropriate C 


36. 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



r r p p 

as exponent, and all the factorials (oq!) 1 (J3 ]!) 1 • • • (a 2 !) 2 (a!) 2 • • • in the numerator, and 
the critical spaces of the compounds (yx\P\ ■ ■ •), {<^ 2 fi 2 ' ' 0 raised to the powers r 1; T 2 , • • • 
as well as the factorials (aq!) Cl (£q!) C| • • • (a 2 l) Cl • • • in the denominator, r| ■ ■ • + 

F 2 ipctnfh. ■ ■ ■ ~ C\ ria,/,, is the heat of reaction which would be liberated if C| 

molecules (ci\b\ ■ ■ •), C 2 molecules (a 2 b 2 • • •) and so forth were changed into r| 
molecules (xx\f J >\ ■ ■ •), r 2 molecules (a 2 /L ■ ■ •) etc. Furthermore, 

2C = Ci -f C2 "f * • • f 2r = Ti -(“ F2 ”h • • •. 

We shall now denote by m a ^ b ^ ... the mass of a molecule (a\b\ ■ ■ ■) in the gas-theoretic 
sense, and by ju a b ... the mass of a molecule of this substance in the macroscopic sense, 
i.e. the quotient m a b .../M. One molecule (yx\b | • • •) in the macroscopic sense therefore 
contains 1/M gas-theoretic molecules. Likewise, in the aggregate of C 1 macroscopic 
molecules (oq/q • • •), C 2 macroscopic molecules (a 2 b 2 ■ ■ •) etc. there are in all C\/M gas- 
theoretic molecules (a\b\ ■ ■ •), C 2 /M gas-theoretic molecules (a 2 b 2 ■ ■ •), etc. Therefore 

~~~ • • + ^2^0262* •• ’j” ' ' 

M 

- r -•••] = n 


is the heat which would be liberated if this reaction took place withCj, C 2 , • • • 
macroscopic molecules and Tj, T 2 , • • • macroscopic molecules of the specified kinds. 
Hence one can also write Equation (230) as follows: 



Ci c 2 r 1 r, ic-zr. n /rt 

^Olil • • •^'fl2&2 ' * * * * ' • • •'^'CljBi • • • ' ' ' r K 6 


This equation holds for any possible reaction. We now consider a special case: only one 
kind of reaction is possible in the gas. Let there be initially a times C | (gas-theoretic) 
molecules of type (aq/q • • •), likewise a times C 2 molecules of type (a 2 b 2 • • •) and so 
forth, and no molecules of types (xx\fi\ ■ ■ ■), (a 2 /ri • • •) etc. At the pressure p and 
temperature T let there be only (a - b) x C| molecules of type (ci\b\ ■ ■ •), (a -b) x C 2 of 
type (a 2 b 2 • • •) etc., and b x Tj molecules of type (aq/?! • • ■), b x T 2 of type (a 2 ^3 • • •) 
etc. present in equilibrium. Then b/a = q is the degree of dissoication. Furthermore, 

n«,t, • • • = 0(1 - q)C h n aib) • * ■ = a(l - q)C t • • •, 
n aiSl • • ■ = aqTi, • • • = aqTi • • • . 

Hence Equation (231) takes the form: 


36 


Pu.6.e 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



• • • 


„Ci„c t , ,zc / 0\zr-zc zr t x r, 

Ci Ct • • • (1 - q) =(-) q Vi Ti 


ne 


n irt 


The mass of gas present is a[Cpn axh ^ ... + C^jn a ^^ 
volume of unit mass then 


]. If we again denote by v the 


V = 


a[Cim ai b r " + Ctfriaiiy.. + • • • 


and we shall set 


Ti r, 

vTiTt 


7 = 


C^C£ J • • • [Cim ai 6 r .. + Ctfriaiby.. + • • • ] 


zr-zc 


Then the above equation becomes 

(232) (1 - j)*c = 7i)JC-ir 9 jr e n/«r. 


This equation gives the dependence of the degree of dissociation on the temperature and 
specific volume, j and (if the heat of reaction is not otherwise known) U/R are constants to 
be determined from experiment. 

If one wishes to introduce the total pressure p instead of v, then he obtains according to 
Equation (195) 







MRT 

~V~ 


= [(1 - «)2 C + 

= [(1 - ?) 2 C + 


. aM 

qlT]—RT 

V 


«sr] 


RT 


* * * ” 1 ” • ■) 


Since C\p a ^^ . . . + C 2 q a9 / ;i ... + ••• is the molecular weight of the undissociated 
substance, this agrees with the Boyle-Charles-Avogadro law for q = 0, and gives, when q 
is different from zero, the deviations from this law due to dissociation. 

If one e li minates from this and from Equation (232) the quantity q, then he obtains again 


36 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the relation between/?, v, and T; if one eliminates v from the same equations, then he 
obtains the degree of dissociation q as a function of p and T. 

More general formulas would follow from the assumption that an atom of the first kind 
can be bound to one of the second, and then this complex can be bonded to another atom 
of the first kind, although the atoms of the first kind cannot be bonded to each other alone 
(isomerism). 

All these formulas agree with experience, as far as present observations go. 

§72. Relation of this theory to that of Gibbs. 

Gibbs 11 has deduced essentially the same formula from the general principles of 
thermodynamics, without referring to the dynamics of molecules. Yet one should not forget 
that his deduction is based on the assumption that in a dissociating gas all the constituents 
are present independently as individual gases, and energy, entropy, pressure, etc. are simply 
additive. This hypothesis is completely clear from the molecular-theory standpoint, since 
these different molecules are actually present separate from each other; and in many places 
it seems evident that Gibbs has these molecular-theoretic concepts continuously in mind, 
even if he does not make use of the equations of molecular mechanics. 

On the other hand, if one takes the modem viewpoint, which has been most sharply 
advocated by Mach 12 and Ostwald, 13 that in chemical binding something completely new 
is created in place of the constituents, then it has no meaning to assume for example that 
during the dissociation of water vapor, one has present simultaneously water vapor, 
hydrogen, and oxygen. On the contrary, one must say that at low temperature there is only 
water vapor; at intermediate temperature some new substance is present, which finally 
becomes oxhydrogen gas [Knallgas] at very high temperatures. 

The assumption that at these intermediate temperatures the energy and entropy of water 
vapor and oxhydrogen gas are additive loses any sense; without this assumption, however, 
the basic equations of dissociation can be derived neither from the first and second laws of 
thermodynamics nor from any energetic principles whatever. One can only consider them 
as empirically given. 

There is no question that for the calculation of natural processes the mere equations, 
without their foundation, are sufficient; likewise, empirically confirmed equations have a 
higher degree of certainty than the hypotheses used in deriving them. But on the other 
hand, it appears to me that the mechanical basis is necessary to illustrate the abstract 
equations, in the same way that geometrical constructions illuminate algebraic relations. 
Just as the latter are not made superfluous by mere algebra, so I believe that one cannot 
completely dispense with the intuitive representation of the laws valid for the action of 
macroscopic masses provided by molecular dynamics, even if he doubts the possibility of 
knowledge of the latter, or indeed the existence of the molecules. A clear understanding is 
just as important for knowledge as the establishment of results by laws and formulas. 

It should still be mentioned that we have discussed here only the simplest relations 
which would give rise to the so-called theoretical dissociation equilibrium. A deeper 
investigation into molecular mechanics can also account for the phenomena which one 


36 


A^u.6.e 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



denotes as false chemical equilibrum. 14 The pertinent facts are as follows. At room 
temperature, oxhydrogen gas as well as water vapor can exist for an arbitrarily long time, 
without one being transformed into the other. All the molecules are bound so strongly that 
in the time of observation no dissociation or reaction of any observable amount of the 
substance is possible. Of course in a time infinite in the mathematical sense the reaction 
would take place.* 

The phenomena of false chemical equilibria are completely analogous to the phenomena 
of supercooling and superheating that we have discussed in §15, and have exactly the same 
basis. 


73. The sensitive region is uniformly distributed around the entire atom. 


We shall now, for comparison, consider the simplest case of dissociation on the basis of 
another mechanical picture, which is actually a special case of the one earlier considered. 
There are present again equivalent atoms, a in number, with diameter cr. What we called 
the sensitive region shall now no longer be limited to a small pail of the surface of the 
molecule, but rather shall be uniformly distributed over the entire molecule. The sensitive 
region therefore has the foim of a spherical shell concentric with the molecule, whose inner 
radius is \ <j, and whose outer radius is i(cr-f-5)> where S is small compared to cr. 
Whenever the sensitive regions of two molecules touch or overlap, they will be chemically 
bound. The heat of separation, measured in mechanical units, will be equal to a constant, y, 
for all these positions. 

The covering sphere is then a sphere of radius cr concentric with the molecule. The 
critical space, which coincides with the reduced critical space, is a spherical shell which lies 
between the surface of the covering sphere and a concentric spherical surface of radius cr + 
5. Each time the center of a second atom lies within this critical space, it is chemically 
bound to the first one, and the heat of separation is a constant equal to y. 

Let there be present ri\ simple and n 2 double atoms, so that 

nr.2n 2 = V'Ami<r 2 k nx f 


where V is the total volume of the gas. Hence 



no 2imj(7 2 5 

— -- 

»! V 


The centers of two atoms united in a double atom will be at a distance approximately 
equal to a. Of the critical space 4ncr~S of each of the two atoms, the pail 3 tt cr 8 lies 
outside the covering sphere of the second atom, and the pail re a 8 lies inside it. The center 
of a third atom can lie only inside the former pail, which we therefore call “free.” The total 

'y 

“free critical space” of the two atoms has therefore the volume 6 n a 8. However it is to be 


36 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



noted that a small zone exists where the critical spaces of the two atoms overlap, so that for 

'y 

each double atom there is a narrow ringlike space of volume 2 rcaS~ which we call “the 
critical ring” belonging to both critical spaces. In calculating the volume of the total free 
critical space one should properly subtract twice the volume of the critical ring from 6 Tea 8. 
However this effect can be ignored since the volume of the critical ring vanishes compared 
to the free critical space. The space available for a third atom to be united with the double 
atom, thus forming a triple atom, consists therefore of two parts: first, the free critical space 
of the double atom, and second, the critical ring of the double atom. In the former case the 
work of separation of the third atom from the double atom is y, while in the latter case it is 
2y. If we denote by n 2 the number of triple atoms, then according to the principles of our 
theory we obtain the ratio: 

7ii‘.3ft3 = V '.n2($To 2 te nx + 2 toW**), 


hence 



rii 2irAi8 

— =- e n * + 

n t V 


2ira«ii 2 

- e Ux . 

37 


Comparison of this formula with Equation (233) shows at once that in any case (n 2 /n 2 ) 
must be greater than (n 2 /n \). A state of dissociation in which there are many double atoms 
but very few triple atoms would therefore be impossible in this case, where the critical 
space is uniformly spread over the entire sphere of action. 

Indeed there is still more. We can write the right-hand side of Equation (233) in the 
form: 


2irrei<j' 1 S 

- e u *. 

V <r 

Now 4 jt72j cr/3 is the space filled by the covering spheres of n \ single atoms, while V is the 
total space occupied by the gas. Hence 2 Tender IV is in any case a very small quantity. 
Hence if n 2 is not already very small compared to n 2 , so that the gas is almost completely 
dissociated, then e 2lr/ - ■ 81a must be very large, hence also in Equation (234) the second 
term is very large compared to the first. But the first term is equal to n 2 ln |. Therefore n 2 /n 2 
must be very large compared to n 2 /n |. 

Therefore as soon as an appreciable number of single atoms have combined into double 
atoms, most of the latter must also combine into triple atoms. A pairing of most atoms into 
double atoms, such as we find in the best known gases, is therefore possible only if the 
critical space covers a relatively small part of the surface of the covering sphere of each 
atom. 

In the present case, where the critical space is uniformly distributed over the entire 


3d 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



surface of the covering sphere, as soon as the atoms begin to combine at all, they will prefer 
to foim aggregates containing a larger number of atoms. Something lik e liquefaction of a 
gas would then occur. Unfortunately, except for the case where n 2 is small compared to n |, 
further calculations encounter difficulties that can scarcely be overcome, so that it remains 
undecided whether one can obtain under this assumption laws of liquefaction similar to 
those provided by the van der Waals equation, which we derived from a hypothesis directly 
opposed to the present one; for there we proceeded from the assumption that the attraction 
of the molecules extends to distances large compared to the distances of the centers of two 
neighboring atoms, but here we assume that the attractive region of an atom is small 
compared to the space occupied by the atom. 

The author of this book once hied to make a mechanical model of the properties of gas 
molecules in the following way. 15 Consider them as material points (single atoms) of mass 
m and mean square velocity gf. At distances greater than or equal to (cr+e) they do not 

interact with each other, nor do they interact at distances less than or equal to a. In the 
intervening region they exert an enormous attraction on each other, so that their kinetic 
energy increases by y, as they pass from the distance rt+e to the distance o. e is assumed 
to be small compared to cf. 

Let (j) = be a sphere of radius a, let n \ be the number of single atoms in the 

volume v, n 2 the number of double atoms— i.e., those for which the distance of centers is 
smaller than a. Then one finds, as earlier, 

712 Wl« TliW 

— — - glhx = -g3x/mcJ 

Tii 2v 2v 

If for example (as for ordinary air) ri \ ojIv were equal to about 1/1000, and moreover 
mC* = pc then n 2 could be rather small compared to n |; moreover, two atoms would be 
significantly deflected in encounters, so that on the whole the characteristics of a gas would 
be preserved. But at an absolute temperature ten times as large, the deflection of the 
molecules from the rectilinear paths due to encounters would be so slight that the system 
would scarcely show the properties of a gas any longer. At an absolute temperature ten 
times smaller, however, n 2 would be much larger than n \ and as before there would occur 
a coalescence of larger complexes of atoms in their spheres of attraction, and thus a 
liquefaction. 

Hence although a mechanical system may show the characteristics of a gas at one 
temperature, it might still be unusable as a mechanical model at all temperatures. The same 
is probably true of the other model proposed by the author in the same place, based on an 
attractive force inversely proportional to the fifth power of the distance. If this law held up 
to zero distance of separation, then all the atoms would coalesce. If the interaction stopped 
at a certain small distance, then above a certain temperature the deflection by co ll isions 
would also be very small. A mechanical model based only on attractive forces, without 
elastic repulsive forces in collisions, agreeing with all experimental facts for the gaseous 


37. 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



and liquid states of aggregation, has not yet been found. 

1 Boltzmann, Wien. Ber. 88 , 861 (18 October 1883); 105,701 (1896); Ann. Physik [3] 22 , 39 (1884). 

2 In order to exclude the possibility of chemical binding of three atoms, it is therefore necessary and 
sufficient that, if two atoms are chemically bound, the critical space oj of the first always lies completely 
within the covering sphere of the second—i.e., that no point of the critical space has a distance from 
another point of the same space that is equal to or greater than er. 

3 The case that two covering spheres or one covering sphere and a critical space overlap is neglected, 
since it gives only a very small quantity of higher order. 

4 Wien. Ber. 88,891,895 (1883). 

5 C. R. Paris 64 , 237 (1867); 86 , 332, 1395 (1878); Jahresber. f. Chem., 177 (1867); Naumann, 
Thermochemie, pp. 115-128. 

6 Ber. d. deutsch. chem. Ges. 11,2045 (1878); Jahresber. f. Chem., 120 (1878). 

7 Ber. d. deutsch. chem. Ges. 13 , 851 (1880). 

8 C. R. Paris 94,916 (1882). Ann. chim. phys. [5] 30,382-400 (1883). 

9 If one writes for R the expression pOp/qPqTq, where /./q, Pq, po and 7b refer to an arbitrary gas, e.g., 
air at 0°C. under normal atmospheric pressure, then it follows that 

yy h 

2p 0 7 T o p mi 

and one can use directly the value found for yp, without needing to know that of p. 

* J. Loschmidt, Wien. Ber. 52,395 (1865). 

10 Ann. Chim. Phys. [5] 12,145 (1877); cf. also Hautefeuille, C. R. Paris 64,608,704 (1867). 

11 Conn. Acad. Trans. 3, 108 (1875); Am. J. Sci. 18, 277 (1879); German translation, 
Thermodynamischen Studien (Leipzig: Engelmann, 1892); cf. also van der Waals, Verslagen Acad. Wet. 
Amsterdam 15,199 (1880); Planck, Ann. Phys. [3] 30,562 (1887), 31,189 (1887), 32,462 (1887). 

12 Popularwissenschaftliche Vorlesungen (Barth, 1896), Vorl. XI. Die Okonomische Natur der phys. 
Forschung, p. 219. 

13 Die Ueberwindung des wissenschaftlichtl. Materialismus. Verh. Ges. Naturf. 1,5,6 (1895). 

14 Pelabon, Doctordiss. d. Univ. Bordeaux (Paris: Hermann, 1898). 

* The fact that hydrogen and oxygen can be mixed without chemical combination at ordinary 
temperatures was advanced as one of the objections to the equipartition theorem by Crum Brown and 
others. Nature 32,352,533 (1885). 

15 Wien. Ber. 89 (2) 714 (1884). 



37. 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



CHAPTER VII 


Supplements to the laws of thermal equilibrium in gases with 

compound molecules. 

§74. Definition of the quantity H, which measures the probabilities of states. 

We have given (Pail I, §3) a proof that the Maxwell velocity distribution for gases of 
monatomic molecules satisfies the conditions which the stationary state must fulfill; then 
(Pail I, §5) we showed, using the assumption that the molecules move among each other so 
randomly that the laws of probability can be applied, that it is the only one which satisfies 
these conditions. Hence, provided that this assumption is correct, it is the only one which 
can remain stationary in the gas. 

Now, in Part II, we have proved that the general distribution of states represented by 
Equation (118), page 316, satisfies the conditions which one finds for a stationary 
distribution of states in a gas with compound molecules. The complete proof that it is the 
only one satisfying these conditions has not yet been given in complete generality. Yet it is 
possible to carry out this proof in the cases that are the simplest and of the greatest practical 
importance, to the same extent as for gases with monatomic molecules. Hence in the 
following I shall carry through in general those steps of the proof for which this is possible, 
and then add the others at least for some special cases. 

Let there be present in a container a gas consisting of identical compound molecules, or 
a mixture of several different kinds of such cases. They shall have the properties of ideal 
gases, i.e., the sphere of action of a molecule shall be vanishingly small compared to the 
mean distance of two neighboring molecules. Let x, y, z be the rectangular coordinates, and 

(235) u , v , w 

be the velocity components of the center of gravity of a molecule of the first kind; let p \ ■ ■ ■ 
p v be the generalized coordinates which determine the relative positions of the constituents 
of such a molecule with respect to three coordinate axes passing through its center of 
gravity, whose directions in space are fixed; and let q | • • • q v be the corresponding 
momenta. 

The inclusion of external forces would not qualitatively increase the difficulties, but 
would make the formulas still more complicated. We therefore exclude them, and assume 
moreover that the mixing ratio and the distribution of states among the molecules is the 
same in all parts of the container whose volume is so large that they contain many 
molecules. Let 

(236) fi(u, v, w, pi • • • q„ t)du ■ • - dq. 


37 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



be the number of molecules of the first kind in unit volume, for which at time t the variables 
(235), as well as the variables 

(237) Pi • • * Pr, <h • • • q, 

lie between the li mits 

(238) u and u + du f v and v + dv, w and w + dw 

(239) pi and pi -f dpi • • • g„ and g, + dq v . 

For the sake of brevity we omit the variables from the function symbol, and set 



where l means the natural logarithm, and the integration is to be extended over all possible 
values of the variables. 

Since fydudvdwdpi ■ ■ ■ dq v is the number of molecules for which at time t the variables 
(235) and (237) satisfy the conditions (238) and (239), one obtains the value which the 
quantity 77) has at any arbitrary time in the following way: substitute in the function lf\ the 
value which the variables (235) and (237) for each molecule of the first kind in the gas 
have at this time, and add up all the values found for the function //) in this way. We shall 
therefore also set 

(241) ff, = S/i 

where the sum is over all molecules of the first kind in the gas at time 1 . Similarly we define 
H 2 for the second kind of gas, H 2 for the third kind, and so forth, and set 

(242) E x + Ht + H, + • • • = H. 

Between the quantity H and the probability of the corresponding state of the gas there 
exists a relation completely analogous to the one described in Pari I, §6. But we will not go 
into this here, since we are intentionally putting aside everything which does not lead 
directly to our goal. 

§75. Change of the quantity H through intramolecular motion. 

We seek first the change experienced by H as a result of the internal motions of the 
molecules, leaving out collisions completely. Since each kind of molecule is then 
completely independent of the other kinds of molecules, it is sufficient to consider only the 


373_ 


“Pu+Lc. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



first kind. The effect of the wall will also be ignored. This is permissible when the container 
is so large that the thermal equilibrium in the interior is completely independent of the 
special processes at the wall, or also if each molecule, when it is reflected at the wall, 
experiences no change in its state of motion aside from the change in the direction of 
velocity of its center of gravity. Thus for simplicity one imagines the repulsive force at the 
wall to be such that it acts in the same way on all constituents of an individual molecule, 
just as, for example, gravity acts in the same way on all parts of a body. 

For those molecules for which at time t the variables (237) lie between the li mits (239), 
the variables at some earlier time, the time zero, lie between the li mits 

(243) Pi and Pi + dPi ■ ■ • Q, and Q, + dQ,. 

We shall always use the abbreviations mentioned in §28 for the regions within which the 
values of the variables lie. The values of u, v, w experience no change with time. 

The expression which we obtain when we substitute in the function/j the value zero for 
t and the values 

(244) Pi---Q, 

for pi ■ ■ ■ q v , we denote by F \. Then 

(245) FidudvdwdPi • • • dQ, 

is the number of molecules for which at time zero the values of the variables (235) and 
(237) he between the l im its (238) and (243). Since these are the same molecules as those 
for which these variables he between the l im its (238) and (239) at time t, and since the 
number of the latter molecules is 



one has: 

(246) FidudvdwdPi • • • dQ, = fidudvdwdpi • • • dq„ 

According to Equation (52), however, 

dpi • • • dq, = dP i • • • dQ y . 

hence it fohows that F j =f\ and 

(247) IFi = Ifi. 


37. 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Furthermore, let 



H{ = ZFJFi 


be the value of the function H\ at time zero. The molecules for which the variables (235) 
and (237) he between the limits (238) and (239) at time / provide a contribution 



to the sum H\ = E./i (f\ • same molecules, these variables lie between the li mits (238) and 
(243) at time zero. Therefore the same molecules provide the contribution 

(249) F\lFidudvdwdPi • • • dQ v . 

to According to Equations (246) and (247), the expressions (248) and (249) are equal 
to each other. The same molecules therefore provide exactly the same addends to the sum 
Hy as to the sum H{ Since this holds in general for ah molecules at all times, it is clear 
that Hy and hence also H are not changed at all by the intramolecular motion. The latter 
follows since the same arguments hold for each other kind of molecule. 

§76. Characterization of the first special case considered. 

Although the change of H by collisions cannot yet be calculated in general for ideal 
gases with compound molecules, we shall treat here a special case in which this calculation 
takes an especially simple form. 

We consider, as in the two preceding sections, a mixture of any ideal gases with any 
compound molecules. In each molecule of each kind of gas there is always only one atom 
that can exert a force on an atom of any other molecule, of the same or a different kind; and 
the interaction of two such atoms of two different molecules is always the same as that of 
two completely elastic negligibly deformable spheres. Hence the interaction of two 
molecules always lasts so short a time that during this time the relative positions of the 
constituents of the two molecules-and l ik ewise the velocities and directions of velocity of 
all other atoms except for the ones that collide-change only by an infinitesimal amount. 

We shall now calculate the change experienced by H during an infinitesimal time dt as a 
result of the collision of a molecule of the first kind with one of the second kind. We have 
characterized the state of a molecule of the first kind by the variables (235) and (237), and 
its absolute position in space by the coordinates x, y, z of its center of gravity. We shall now 
retain the variables (237), but instead of the variables (235) we introduce the velocity 
components 

(250) u\, v h Wi 

of that atom which collides with an atom of another molecule, and which we shall call the 
atom A j. The other atom with which it collides we shall callA 2 . The absolute position of 


37 


^PiOuc. 



the molecule of the first kind in space we determine by the coordinates jtq, yj z\ of the 
center of the atom A ^ Since the variables (237) give the differences between the velocities 
of all the atoms and the velocity of the center of gravity, and therefore also the quantities U\ 
-u,vi~ v, a>i - a>, we see that when the variables (237) are kept constant, 

du\ = du, dvi = dv, dw\ = dw. 

Hence 

(251) fiduidv\dwidpi • • • dq v 

is the number of molecules for which the variables (237) and (250) he between the l im its 
(239)and 

(252) Mi and Mi + du h v\ and V\ + dv i, Wi and W\ + dw h 

It makes no difference here whether one introduces u \, v\, <l>\ in /) instead of u, v, w, or 
keeps the old variables. 

We denote the coordinates of the center of atom A 2 of the second molecule by xj, >’ 2 , Z 2 , 
and its velocity components by 

(253) «!, t’2, w 2 

and the other generahzed coordinates and momenta needed to determine the state of the 
second molecule by 

(254) P 1.+1 • • • pp.\.p' f 

Then by analogy with the expression (251), the number of molecules of the second kind for 
which the variables (253) and (254) lie between the l im its 

(255) u 2 and u 2 + du h v 2 and v t + dv 2 , w 2 and w 2 + dw 2 , 

(256) p, + i and p,+i + dp (+1 • • • q, +> . and + dq,+,’ 

will be denoted by 

(257) f?duidvidwidp,+i • • • dq f + f ' 

Fohowing the method of Pail I, §3, we can find the number of molecule pairs in which the 
first molecule belongs to the first kind and the second to the second kind, and which 
interact in time dt in such a way that atom A | of the first molecule collides with atom A 2 of 
the second, and that at the instant of collision the following conditions are satisfied. The 


37 


^ufuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



variables (250), (237), (253), and (254) shall lie between the limits (252), (239), (255), and 
(256), and the line of centers of the two atoms A | and A 2 shall be parallel to one of the lines 
lying within an infinitely narrow cone dk. All cases of interaction of two molecules which 
take place during the time clt in such a way that all these conditions are satisfied, we call the 
specified co ll isions. 

If a is the sum of the radii of the two atoms A | and A 2 , g their relative velocity, and the 
latter forms, with the line of centers of the colliding atoms at the instant of collision, an 
angle whose cosine is e, then one finds by the method in the section cited, for the number 
of specified co ll isions: 

(258) dN = <j 2 f\figtdu\dv\dw\du 2 dv?<lwi<l])i • • • dq,+ t >d\dt. 

§77. Form of Liouville’s theorem in the special case considered. 

Since the collisions take place instantaneously, the values of the variables (237) and 
(254) do not change during collisions. Also, g, e, and the velocity components 6 , >h ( °f the 
common center of gravity of Aj and A 2 have the same values after the collision as before 
(cf. Part I, §4). Only the values of U \ v 1 oj\ , n 2 , v 2 , to 2 will be changed. The values of these 
quantities after the collision will be denoted by the corresponding capital letters; and for 
given values of g and e, the values of the variables u \ , iq oj\ , u 2 , v 2 , o) 2 , when they he 
between the l im its (252) and (255) before the collision, will lie afterwards between the 
l im its 

(259) Ui and U, + dU h F, and F, + dV h IF, and IF, + dW h 

(260) Vi and U 2 + dU 2 , V 2 and F, + dV 2 , 1F 2 and 1F 2 + dW h 

It can then easily be shown from Equation (52)—or even more generally by very simple 
means, as in Pail I, §4—that then 

(261) du\dvidwiduidv^lw2 = dU \dV \dW \dU idV idW ^ 

or 


^ dU 2 dF, dJF, dU t 5F 2 dW 2 

£ +-= i 

dU\ dv\ dW\ dU2 dVi dWi 

(Previously the letters A, //, C were used instead of u, v, w, and primed letters were used 
instead of capital letters.) 

The proof given in Part I, §4 contains an error, which was pointed out to me by C. H. 
Wind 1 and later by M. Segel in Kasan. Therefore I will give this proof again here using a 


37 






method free of error. 

We introduce instead of u 2 , v 2 , w 2 the components 7, //, C of the velocity of the center of 
gravity common to A j and A 2 , if one were to consider these two atoms as one mechanical 
system. If m\ and 7719 are their masses, then 


m\U\ + m 2 u 2 

mi + m 2 


with two similar equations for the other two coordinate directions. From these equations it 
follows that, if one leaves the variables U\, vj vtq unchanged and only introduces £, 77 , C for 
U 2 , V 2 , w 2 , then 


(262) duidvidwiduidv2dw2 


'mi + mi 


m 2 


3 

du\dv\dw\d(dlrjd(. 


In the expression on the right-hand side we introduce now instead of u\, vj, vtq the 
variables U \, V\, W \, while we leave f, 77 , C unchanged. It is evident geomehically from 
Figure 2, page 39 of Pail I that if the position of the center of gravity remains fixed, the 
endpoint of the line which represents in magnitude and direction the velocity of the first 
atom before the collision describes a volume element, which is congruent to the volume 
element described by the endpoint of that line which represents the velocity of the same 
atom after the collision. Hence 


(263) duidv\dwid^drjd( = dU \dV \dW id&rjdf;. 

Now we introduce for £ 77 , C the variables U 2 , V 2 , W 2 , leaving UV\ W\ unchanged. 
Since again we have the equation 


miUi + mtUi 

i = T 

mi + m 2 

with two similar equations for the other two coordinate directions, it follows that 


''mi + m 2 \ 3 


m 2 


dUidVidWidfadt = dVidVidWidUjVrfWi. 


From this and Equations (262) and (263) there follows at once the Equation (261) which 
was to be proved. 

Since the case considered in Part I, §4, is the special case of the one discussed here in 


37 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



which aside from the atoms A j and A 2 there are no other atoms in the molecules, we see 
that our foimer proof has now been completed. 


78. Change of the quantity H as a consequence of collisions. 


In §76 we have called a certain kind of collision the specified kind. It is that kind which 
takes place between a molecule of the first kind and a molecule of the second kind during 
time dt, in such a way that at the instant of the beginning of the interaction, the variables 
(250), (237), (253), and (254) lie between the limits (252), (239), (255), and (256), and that 
the line of centers of the colliding atoms is, at the instant of collision, parallel to one of the 
lines within a given infinitesimal cone dh. For the same collisions, at the instant of the end 
of the interaction, the variables (237) and (254) he between the same li mits, but the 
variables (250) and (253) he between the li mits (259) and (260). Moreover, g, e, and dk 
will not be changed during the co ll ision. 

We now denote as opposite colhsions those cohisions which take place during time dt in 
such a way that at the beginning the variables (250) and (253) he between the l im its (259) 
and (260) and the other variables he between the same li mits as in the case of the specified 
colhsions. 

For opposite colhsions, in order that they can occur at all, the initial relative positions of 
the two molecules must be changed so that the second molecule appears displaced relative 
to the first by a distance which is exactly equal and oppositely directed to the hne of centers 
drawn from atom A j to atom A 2 . For opposite colhsions, conversely, the variables (250) 
and (253) wih he between the l im its (252) and (255) at the end of the interaction. 

We now calculate the change experienced by the sum denoted in §74 by H (see Eqs. 
[241] and [242]) during the time dt, through the combined effects of specified and opposite 
colhsions. Each of the former colhsions will decrease by one the number of molecules of 
the first kind for which the variables (250) and (237) he between the li mits (252) and (239), 
and hence decrease Hi by lf \. Likewise, the number of molecules of the second kind for 
which the variables (253) and (254) he between the l im its (255) and (256), wih decrease by 
one, and hence H 2 wih decrease by lf 2 . On the other hand, the same cohision wih increase 
by one the number of molecules of the first kind for which the variables (250) and (237) he 
between the li mits (259) and (239), and will increase by one the number of molecules of 
the first kind for which the variables (253) and (254) he between the li mits (260) and (256). 
Hence H\ increases by IF j and H 2 by IF 2 , if we write for brevity F\ and F 2 for/|( U\ V\ 
W | p| • • • q v , t) and/ 2 (C/ 2 , V 2 , W 2 , p v +1 • • • d v + v ’, 0- The number of specified cohisions is 
given by Equation (258); hence ah the specified colhsions will increase H by 



(IF 1 + lF t - Ifi - IfiWgffifi 
X dudvidwidudvdwdpi • • • dq H ,>d\dt. 


Conversely, each of the opposite colhsions decreases by one the number of molecules of 


37 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



the first kind for which the variables (250) and (237) lie between the l im its (259) and (239) 
; while the number of molecules for which the same variables lie between the limits (252) 
and (239) increases by one. Likewise, the number of molecules of the second kind for 
which the variables (253) and (254) he between the li mits (260) and (256) will decrease by 
one, and those for which the same variables lie between the limits (255) and (256) will 
increase by one. Hence H\ increases by If\-IF\ as a result of opposite collisions, while H 2 
increases by lf 2 - IF 2 , so that H increases by lf\+ lf 2 - IF j - IF 2 . 

The total number of opposite collisions in time dl. by analogy with Equation (258), is: 

G 2 geFiF2dU\dV\dW\dU4V^W2fivi • • • dq v + v ’d\dt, 

or, by Equation (261), 

G^eFiFiduidvidwiduidvidWidpi • • 'dq v + v >d\dt } 

so that ah the opposite collisions increase H by 

(//. + lh ~ IF i ~ lFt)-< Wi 

X duidvidwidudi'du'tdpi • • • dq, + ,’d\dt 


(Remember that g, e, and dk are unchanged by the collisions.) If one compares this with 
the expression (264), then he sees that, combining together the specified and the opposite 
collisions, the quantity H experiences the increment 



X du\dvidwidutdv4widpi ■ ■ ■ dq, + ,’d\dt. 


The value of the latter expression is essentially negative. If one integrates over all possible 
values of all the differentials except dt, and divides by 2 (since otherwise each co ll ision 
would be counted twice, once as a specified collision and again as an opposite collision), 
he obtains the total increment of FI during time dl. This is therefore also an essentially 
negative quantity, provided there is any noticeable change of H at all. Since the same holds 
for all other kinds of molecules, and similarly for collisions of different molecules of the 
same kind with each other, we have proved that in this special case the value of H can only 
decrease as a result of co ll isions. 

For the stationary state, a continual decrease of H is forbidden, so that for such states the 
expression (265) must in general vanish. Therefore the equation 

(266) /i/i - FiFi = 0 


must hold for all kinds of molecules, with similar equations for collisions of molecules of 


3 a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the same kind with each other. 


§79. Most general characterization of the collision of two molecules.* 

We shall now pass from the special kind of interaction discussed in §76 to the most 
general case. 

We denote by s the distance of the centers of gravity of a molecule of the first and a 
molecule of the second kind, and we assume that if s is greater than a certain constant b, no 
perceptible interaction takes place between the two molecules. A sphere of radius b, whose 
center is the center of gravity of a molecule of the first kind, will be called for short the 
domain of the molecule in question. Hence we can also say: as soon as the center of gravity 
of a molecule of the second kind lies outside the domain of a molecule of the first kind, no 
noticeable interaction takes place between the two molecules. Any process whereby the 
center of gravity of one of the foimer molecules penetrates the domain of the latter will be 
called a co ll ision. 

Of course it is possible that even if the center of a molecule of the first kind does 
penetrate the domain of a molecule of the second kind, it goes out again without any 
perceptible interaction having occurred, so that the collision does not perceptibly modify 
the motion of either colliding molecule. But most of the collisions will in fact produce a 
significant modification of the motion of the two molecules. 

Just as in §§75-78, the positions of the constituents relative to the center of gravity, the 
rotations around the center of gravity, and the velocities of the parts of a molecule of the 
first kind will be characterized by the variables (250) and (237), and for a molecule of the 
second kind by the variables (253) and (254). n 1 iq nq will now be the velocity 
components of the center of gravity of a molecule of the first kind, and /q, v 2> w 2 those of a 
molecule of the second kind. 

We shall call a configuration of the two molecules a critical constellation when the 
distance of centers is equal to b. We consider critical constellations which satisfy the 
following conditions: for the first molecule the variables (250) and (237) lie between the 
limits (252) and (239), for the second molecule the variables (253) and (254) he between 
the limits (255) and (256). Finally, the direction of the line of centers shah be parallel to 
some line lying within an in fin itesimal cone of aperture dk. The set of these conditions we 
shall call: 


the conditions (267). 

When the center of gravity of the second molecule is moving into the domain of the first 
molecule, the critical constellation represents the beginning of a process of interaction of the 
two molecules (a collision in the wider sense of the word), and it is then called an initial 
constellation. If, on the other hand, the second molecule is leaving the domain of the first at 
this instant, it represents the end of a collision (final constellation). Critical constellations for 
which the distance of centers of the two molecules attains its minimum at that moment can 
be ignored, since they represent at the same time the beginning and end of a collision that 


3 a 


'§^uJix*. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



has no effect on the motion of the molecules. 

We denote two constellations as opposite, when the coordinates have the same value in 
both, while the velocity components have equal magnitude and opposite sign. We denote 
two critical constellations as corresponding to each other, when the coordinates (237) of the 
first and (254) of the second molecule and likewise all velocity components have the same 
magnitude and sign for both collisions, whereas the coordinates of the center of gravity of 
one molecule with respect to a coordinate axis parallel to a fixed axis drawn through the 
center of gravity of the other have the same value but opposite signs. The constellation 
corresponding to any given constellation can therefore be constructed by leaving the first 
molecule fixed and displacing the second molecule-without changing the configuration and 
velocities of its constituents-by an amount 2b in the direction of the line drawn from its 
center of gravity to the center of gravity of the first molecule. In other words, one 
interchanges the positions of the centers of the two molecules without changing their state, 
and without rotating them. 

The following is now immediately clear: if we imagine collected together all the initial 
constellations and look for all the opposite constellations for each of them, then we obtain 
all the final constellations, and conversely. Likewise we obtain all the final constellations if 
we look for all the corresponding initial constellations, and the converse again holds. 


80. Application of Liouville’s theorem to collisions of the most general kind. 


Now, as before, let the number of molecules of the first kind in the gas, for which at 
time t the variables (250) and (237) lie between the li mits (252) and (239), be given by the 
expression (251). Likewise, let the number of molecules of the second kind, for which at 
time t the variables (253) and (254) lie between the li mits (255) and (256), be given by the 
expression (257). If we write the abbreviations 


for 


du )i and 


du\dvidwidj)i • • • dq v and • • • dq , +r » 


then 

(267a) dN = fiftduidw^kdKdt 

is the number of collisions that take place during time dt in such a way that their initial 
constellation is a critical constellation determined by the conditions (267). Here k is the 
component of the velocity of the center of gravity of the second molecule relative to that of 
the first, in the direction of the line of centers at the beginning of the collision. For the 
critical constellations with which all these collisions end, the variables (250) and (237) for 
the first molecules shall he between the l im its (259) and (243); the variables (253) and 


3 a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ ~Ph-y-&XjcS- 



(254) for the other molecule shall lie between the l im its (260) and 


(268) P Hl and P, +l + dP H i • • • Q,+,’ and Q, + ,< + dQ, + ,' 

and the line of centers of the molecules shall be parallel to a line lying within a cone of 
aperture dA. The set of these conditions we call 

the conditions (269). 

We again abbreviate the more complicated, though more precise, terminology of §27. 
We write c/O | and r/fE for 

dUidVtdWidPi ■■■dQ, and iUJVJWJP+i • • • dQ n ,. 

and let K be the component of the relative velocity of the centers of gravity of the two 
molecules at the end of the collision in the direction of the line of centers at this instant. 

Finally, we denote as before the difference of coordinates of the centers of gravity of the 
two molecules (drawn from the first) for the initial constellation by X, //, (, and for the final 
constellation by S, H, Z. Then Liouville’s theorem (Eq. [52]) applied to this case mns as 
follows: 

(270) d^di}d^d(j}\(ht)2 = d'ZdHdZdttidti*. 

We now replace £, //, C and S, H, Z by polar coordinates, setting: 

£ = $ cos i?, t) = s sin # cos v, f = s sin sin <p, 

E = S cos ©, H = S sin 0 cos 4>, Z = S sin 0 sin 

Equation (270) then becomes: 

(271) s 2 sin Msddd<pdo)idw 2 = S 2 sin QdSd8d^d^l\d^ 

sin &d&dcp and sin 0r/0r/d> are the apertures of the cones within which the lines of centers 
lie before and after the collision. Since we are denoting the apertures of these cones as 
before by dk and dA, we have therefore: 

sin MMp = d\ and sin 0d0d$ = dA. 

We shall also introduce for ds and dS the time differential dt. Let g be the relative 
velocity of the two centers of gravity, and let 5 be the line connecting the two centers of 
gravity before the collision; then the direction cosines of these two lines will be 


3 a 


~*Puii.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Uj -1*1 Vi-Vi 10: -101 . i 11 f 

-, -, - and —, —, — • 

g g g s s s 

The component of relative velocity in the direction of the line s is: 

fc = — [(« 2 - t*i){ + (0: - »i)ij + (l0: - 10,)f], 

S 

The corresponding value of this component of relative velocity after the colhsion will be 
denoted by K. Therefore we have 

ds = kdt, dS = Kdt. 

On substituting all these values and recalling that s = b at the beginning as well as the end 
of the colhsion, Equation (270) takes the form: 

b 2 kd\dtdwidu)i - b 2 Kd\dtdttid% 

where dt has the same value on the right and left sides of the equation, since t is always 
considered constant in Liouvihe’s theorem. If we divide the last equation by b 2 dt, it follows 
that: 

( 272 ) kdkdaidu 2 = KdkdQidtii. 

We shall now keep in mind ah the final constellations of those collisions whose number 
was denoted by dN in Equation (267a). Furthermore, we construct the constellations 
corresponding to these, and denote by dN' the number of collisions that occur during time 
dt such that they begin with the corresponding constellations in the manner described. Then 

( 273 ) dN' = FiFiVKdUidildMt, 

where F j and F 2 are abbreviations for 

/i(t/1, Fi, W\, P\ • • • Q, t t) and JiiUi, V 2, W2, P r +i • • • Qr+»', t) 

and one has in general dN =dN', if Equation (266) is satisfied for all collisions. Now in 
each of the dN collisions of a molecule of the first kind, a state in which the variables (250) 
and (237) he between the limits (252) and (239) is replaced by one in which these variables 
lie between the limits (259) and (243). Conversely, in each of the dN' of a molecule of the 
first kind, the latter state is replaced by the former; similarly for the second kind of molecule 
and for ah other collisions. Hence it follows that the distribution of states is not changed by 


3 a 


lc, 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



the collisions when Equation (266) is satisfied, and it is easily proved that this equation is in 
fact satisfied by the formula (115), so that we have given a second proof that the 
distribution of states represented by this formula satisfies the conditions which must be 
satisfied by a stationary distribution of states. In order to prove, insofar as this is at all 
possible, that it is the only one which satisfies these conditions, we shall again calculate the 
change of the quantity H. 

§81. Method of calculation with finite differences. 

In the following we shall need an abstraction which may appear surprising to many, but 
which must seem natural tc anyone who clearly understands that the entire symbolism of 
the differential and integral calculus is meaningless unless one proceeds first by considering 
large finite numbers. 

We shall assume that the molecule can have only a finite number of states, which we 
denote by the series 1, 2, 3, and so forth; any arbitrary state can be denoted by 1, any other 
state by 2, etc. The present representation is related to that of a continuous series of states in 
such a way that one always considers as being the same all states which fill a region such 
that they correspond according to Liouville’s theorem. Let (a, b) express symbolically a 
critical constellation of two molecules which have the states a and b\ let (b, a) express the 
corresponding, and ( -a, -b) the opposite constellation. 

A collision which begins with the constellation (a, b ) and ends with the constellation (c, 
d) shall be denoted by 



Let w a be the number of molecules in unit volume that have the state a; vv/ ; , etc. have 
similar meanings. Let 


C°c,i-W a -W h 

be the number of collisions in the gas that begin with the constellation (a, b ) and end with 
the constellation (c, d); then if dw a means the increment experienced by w a as a result of 
collisions during time dt, then 

^Ca,iW t Wy 2Cp ( g1ZJ 0 W) n> 

dt 

where the sums are to be extended over all possible values of the quantities x, y, z., n, p, q. 
Now suppose that all the expressions for 



3 a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



dwi dw 2 
dt dt 

have been written out, and set 

E = W\{lW\ - 1) + W 2 {lw 2 — 1) + • • • , 

Denote by dE the increment of E during time clt as a result of collisions, and substitute in 

dE dw\ dw 2 

— = —Iwy H- lw 2 + 

dt dt dt 

the above values of 

dwi dw 2 

- ) -; • • • ; 

dt dt 

l means the natural logarithm. The co ll ision 



in which 1, 2, 3, 4 can be any states, (2, 1) and (3, 4) any critical constellations, provides in 
the expression for dw j, as well as in that for dwj, the term 

- Ci,iW { w 2 . 

However, to the expressions for 

dwz dwi 

— and — 
dt dt 

it contributes a positive term. All these terms contribute to dE/dt the sum 

2,1 

Ci'iWiWiilWi + Iwt - hi - lw 2 ). 


3 a 


^ufuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


The corresponding co ll ision 




-i.e., that one which has as initial constellation the same constellation (4, 3) which 
corresponds to the final constellation (3, 4) of the previously considered collision- 
contributes to 

dwz dv)i 

— and — 
dt dt 

the term 

ft'* 

C 6l wm, 

and to 

dwi dwt 

— and — 
dt dt 


again two equal positive terms. 

In the same way one can continue with the co ll ision 



which corresponds to the co ll ision 



> 


and so forth. 

Since we only have a finite number of states, we must eventually arrive at a co ll ision 


/k, k - 1 

w ,y 


which corresponds to one of the previous ones, and it can be proved that the first co ll ision 


3 a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



for which this occurs must correspond to the co ll ision 



For if it corresponded, for example, to the co ll ision 

6, 5\ 

7, 8/’ 


then (x, y ) and (6, 5) must be corresponding collisions, therefore {x, y ) and (5, 6) would be 
identical, and two collisions, one beginning with ( k , k - 1), and the other with (4, 3) would 
lead to the same final constellation. But then the initial constellation ( -5, -6) would lead to 
the final constellation (-4, -3) as well as to the final constellation ( -k, -k+ 1). Hence the 
latter two constellations must be identical, hence 



must be identical to 



and for the same reason 


'k - 2, k - 3\ (2, 1' 

must be identical to 
k - 1, k ) \3, 4/ 


Therefore the cycle must have already been closed previously. 

Equation (272) means, in our present notation, that the coefficients 

a.b d,e 

C' d and Cij 


must be equal to each other, since we have collected together all states for which the 
variables fill a region that is equal according to Liouville’s theorem, and called them a 
single state. Hence it follows that one can arrange all the terms contained in clE/clt in a cycle 
of the form: 


, 2 . 1 . 


+W k -iW k {lWi+lWi - lw k . 1 - lw k )}. 


3 a 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



If one denotes the expression in square brackets by IX and sets w | w 2 = oc, W 3 W 4 = /?,•• 
•, then: 

(274) X = ■ • • oT a . 

Among the numbers a, /?, 7, • • •, there must be at least one, for example 7, which is not 
larger than its two neighbors [ J > and 6; then 

(275) X = 

where 

Y = • * • CL 0 ~ a 

has exactly the same foim as X but lacks one term. 

The factor of Y in Equation (275) is equal to 1 if either 7 = /? or 7= 6, but otherwise it is 
always less than 1. If one applies the same considerations to Y again and again, then he can 
finally reduce X to a product of fractions each of which is less than or equal to 1; they 
cannot all be equal to 1 unless all the quantities a, /3, j ■■ ■ are equal to each other. 

Hence the quantity E —whose time derivative reduces to dH/dt on passing to 
infinitesimals-can only decrease or remain constant as a result of collisions; and it can 
remain constant only if for all co ll isions 


the equation 



w a w b = W c Wd 


is satisfied. Since for the stationary state E cannot decrease any further, the equation 

w a w b = W c Wd 

must be satisfied for all possible collisions in the stationary state, and on passage to 
in fin itesimals this is identical with Equation (266). 


§82. Integral expression for the most general change of H by collisions. 

If one wishes to avoid the transition from a finite number of states to an infinite number, 
but at the same time make use of differentials, he may use the method outlined here. As in 


3 a 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Pail I, §18, and Pail n, §75-78, one finds 





where the single integral denotes an integration over the differentials contained in da>i, and 
the triple integral denotes integration over all the differentials contained in da>\ dojjdA. 
d[f\ lf\ d(i)\ means the change experienced by this integral merely as a consequence of the 
collisions of molecules of the first and second kinds. The change due to intramolecular 
motion is zero. The other quantities have the same meaning as in the preceding sections. 
We imagine that for each collision the corresponding one has been constructed, whose 
initial constellation therefore corresponds to the final constellation of the first one. We 
denote by f { / and j.1' the values which the functions fi and /2 la kc when one substitutes 
therein the variables characterizing the state of both molecules at the end of this second 
collision; furthermore, we shall once again construct the collision corresponding to this 
second collision, and denote by f''' and f/, '' the function values that arise on 

substituting the values of the variables characterizing the final states of the two molecules 
for this latter collision, and so forth. 

Then the quantity (d/dl)\f\ c an be brought into the form: 



b 2 gdoiidaid^[S\Si(lP 1 + IFt — (A — Ifi) + 
+W(!/r + If" - IF 1 - IFf) + 

,+!i'n'(ifi"+in:' -iw -ifn+■■■ 


If one sets again 


/ 1/2 - F\Fi - P, j\ ji - 7 etc., 

then the expression in square brackets in (277) will be the natural logarithm of 

(278) p°-l>ylHSr-l . . . 

This quantity has exactly the same foim as the expression (274), except that now the 
cycle of quantities a, j3, y ■■ ■ is in general not finite. Nevertheless, if one proceeds far 
enough along this series, he will eventually come to a term whose base is again very nearly 


39 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



equal to a, so that the difference between (278) and an expression terminated at this point 
can be made arbitrarily small. As soon as the motion of two molecules is not changed by a 
collision, then it can of course happen that one of the quantities a, /?, 7 • • • is equal to its 
neighbor. However, as long as we do not choose b to be so large that this is the case for 
most of the collisions, then most of these quantities will be completely different from their 
neighbors, so that most of the fractions being multiplied in the expression (278) will be 
smaller than 1; the same is true of the factors of Y in (275). Hence clH/clt will be negative, 
and can be zero only when the condition (266) is satisfied for all collisions. 

§83. Detailed specification of the case now to be considered. 

We have shown in the preceding sections that, for thermal equilibrium in ideal gases 
with any kind of compound molecules, Equation (266) must be satisfied for all collisions of 
like or unlike molecules. In carrying out the proofs we have excluded external forces, yet 
the proofs can still be performed when external forces are permitted. One sees immediately, 
moreover, that Equation (266) will be satisfied as soon as the distribution of states is 
determined by the formula (118). 

However, the proof that this distribution is the only possible one apparently cannot be 
carried out in complete generality, so that one still has to provide a proof in each special 
case. Naturally we shall have to leave all these different special cases to monographs; we 
can only treat here a rather small number of examples. 

The simplest of these is the following special case. Let there be a mixture of any ideal 
gases on which no external forces act. The atoms of the different molecules shall be held 
together by arbitrary conservative forces, for which the Lagrange equations hold. The 
interaction of two different molecules proceeds as if one atom from each molecule collided 
with the other in the same way as elastic, negligibly deformable spheres. 

On account of the negligible deformability, during such a collision neither the position 
of the colliding atom nor the positions and velocities of the other atoms will change. But 
since every direction in space is equally probable for the velocity of an individual atom 
before the collision, one can calculate the probabilities of various kinds of collisions just as 
in Part I, §3. 

For the sake of generality we consider a collision in which the two interacting molecules 
are of different kinds, and call these the first and second kinds of gas. The same statements 
will still be valid when both molecules are actually of the same kind. 

§84. Solution of the equation valid for each collision. 

A particular atom of mass m \ belonging to the first molecule collides with a particular 
atom of mass m 2 belonging to the second molecule. We call atoms equivalent to the first 
atom the in | -atoms, and all the atoms equivalent to the second atom the m 2 - atoms. Let c\ 
and c 2 be the velocities of the two colliding atoms just before the collision, and y\ and j 2 
the velocities just after the collision. The values of c\ and c 2 are completely arbitrary, y. 


39 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



can take any value lying between the l im its zero and 




m<$\ 

mi 


but 72 must, according to the conservation of energy, be equal to 


1 Wl 2 2 

C2 H-(Ci ~ Yl) 

m 2 


since because of the shortness of the duration of the collision, the energy of the molecules 
does not change noticeably. 

The number of those m 1 -atoms in the entire gas for which the three components of 
velocity of their center in the three coordinate directions he between the limits 

(280) u\ and U\ + du h Vi and v\ + do i, W\ and W\ + dw\ 

while ah other variables determining the state of motion of the molecules can have any 
possible values, we denote by 


f(c\)duidv\dwi 

Since there is no preferred direction in space for the velocity of this atom, the coefficient of 
the product of differentials is clearly a function only of c\, and hence will be called /| (c\). 
Similarly the number of m 2 -atoms whose velocity components he between the li mits 

(281 u 2 and u 2 + du 2) v 2 and v 2 + dv 2) w 2 and w 2 + dw 2 

will be denoted by 


f 2 (c 2 )du 2 dv 2 dw 2 . 

For this colhsion, Equation (266) reduces to 


(282) /i(ci)/ 2 (c 2 ) - /i(yi)/2 c 2 + — (ci - Yi) j. 

Since this equation must be satisfied for ah possible values of the variables which fulfill 
the condition of conservation of energy, it fohows that, as a simple calculation shows (cf. 
also Part I, §7), 


39 . 


“PiLh-d. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



/i(ci) = 4ie-*”‘ c ‘‘, }i(c t ) = 4 2 e- ta,c > 1 . 

These formulas, together with the condition that all directions of space are equally 
probable for the velocities, completely determine the probability of the various velocity 
components. If all the atoms of all the molecules can collide with each other, then h must 
have the same value for all. Hence the mean kinetic energy is the same for all atoms, and, 
as can easily be proved from the equivalence of all directions of velocity, the mean kinetic 
energy of progressive motion of the center of gravity is the same for all molecules, and is 
equal to the mean kinetic energy of an atom. The coefficients A | andA 2 are constants; 
however, they would depend on the other variables determining the state of the molecules 
and the limits assumed for these variables, if all values were not allowed for these variables 
but only values lying between given l im its. 

A special case of the one considered is that of diatomic molecules whose atoms are solid 
spheres connected with rods so that they form a solid system like the so-called gymnastic 
dumbbells. 3 If the connecting rods were considered to be elastic, then the atoms could 
perform radial vibrations back and forth. However, we can go to the limiting case where 
the deformability of the rod becomes zero, hence the amplitude of these vibrations is so 
small that, just like the rotation around the line connecting the centers of the atoms, they do 
not come into thermal equilibrum with the other motions in the time of observation. 

The result then agrees completely with that obtained earlier, where we found the value 
1.4 for the ratio of specific heats. 

Another special case is a molecule consisting of three or more spheres rigidly bound 
together. We then have the case for which we previously obtained the value J for the 
ratio of specific heats. One could treat this case extensively without much difficulty, finding 
the probability of various combinations of values of the coordinates as before. We shall not 
discuss these cases further, but instead give an example of the method of treating more 
difficult cases. 

§85. Only the atoms of a single type collide with each other. 

Let there be given an ideal gas, all of whose molecules are the same. Each molecule 
consists of two different atoms of masses m \ and m 2 (to be called the atoms of the first and 
second kinds). The two atoms of a molecule shall behave, with respect to their 
intramolecular motion, l ik e material points concentrated at the centers of the atoms, exerting 
on each other a force in the direction of their connecting line, which is a function of their 
distance. The intramolecular motion will therefore be ordinary central motion. 4 The 
interaction of two different molecules is as follows: the two atoms of the first kind collide 
l ik e negligibly deform-able elastic spheres, but there is no interaction between atoms of the 
second kind, or between an atom of the first kind and an atom of the second kind.* 

On applying the same arguments as before, we obtain for the atoms of the first kind an 
equation analogous to Equation (282), from which it follows that: 


393 _ 


fPii+uc. Ma£4cjvi(i£icaZ 



(283) /i(ci) = ic-*”’ 1 ''’. 

As before, U \, v 1; w | are the velocity components for an atom of the first kind; 
f\ (c | )du | dv i dw | is the number of atoms of the first kind for which a \, v\, and vv ] he 
between the l im its (280) ; A can still depend on the l im its imposed on the states of the 
molecule. 

However, the same method of reasoning cannot be applied to the atoms of the second 
kind, since they never collide with atoms of other molecules. We must therefore introduce 
the probability of orbits and phases of motion of the central motion. 

§86. Determination of the probability of a particular kind of central motion. 

We have already denoted by c\ and c 2 the absolute velocities of the first and second 
atoms at any time. Let p be the distance of centers of the two atoms at the same time; let ci\ 
and a 2 be the angles formed by the directions of c\ and C 2 with the line drawn from the first 
to the second atom; finally, let /3 be the angle between the two planes passing through the 
line p, one with the same direction as c \, the other with the same direction as C 2 . 

The total energy of the molecule is 




2 2 
WiCi mfa 
T 


2 


2 


+ ^(p), 


where cp is the potential function of the central force. Twice the angular velocity of m 2 
relative to m\ in the orbital plane is: 

(285) K = pVcJ sin 2 ai + c] sin 2 a 2 - 2cic 2 sin ai sin a 2 cos ft 


the velocity of the center of gravity of the molecule, multiplied by in | +m 2 , is 

(286) G =v / mJc{+m|c 2 + 2 mim 2 CiC 2 (cos <*i cos a 2 +sin sin a 2 cos ft 


and its component perpendicular to the orbital plane is 

CiC 2 sin a\ sin a 2 sin 0 


(287) H = 


y/c\ sin 2 ai + c\ sin 2 a 2 - 2 cjC 2 sin a\ sin a 2 cos 0 


The number of molecules in unit volume for which K. L, G, H lie between the l im its 


39 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


KmAK + dK, L and L + dL, G&uAG + dG, 

H and H + dH 

will be denoted by 

M.K, L, G, H)dKdLdGdH. 

The number of molecules for which p lies between p and p+c/p is 

dp C pl dp dp 

Q-dKdLdGdH- = MKdLdG dH - • 
a J v u 

Here 

dp f pl dp 
cr = —: I — 
dt J Po a 

is the time elapsed from the perigee to the apogee, and is therefore a given function of K, L. 
G, and H; 


V = $: 



dp 


is therefore a given function of these four quantities. We li mit ourselves to those molecules 
for which, first, the line of apses of the path forms with a line in the orbital plane parallel to 
a fixed plane an angle between e and e+r/e; second, the two planes through the velocity of 
the center of gravity noimal to the orbital plane and parallel to a fixed line T foim an angle 
between oj and oj+cIoj; and third, the velocity direction of the center of gravity lies within a 
cone of specified direction and in fin itesimal aperture d'k. Then we have to multiply by 
d&dwdX\\6Tr. The number of molecules in the gas satisfying all these conditions is 
therefore 


1 

(288) ^- dKdLdGdH dpdtdudX. 

16tt 3 o- 

If we denote by g and g+dg, h and li+dh, k and k+dk the limits between which the velocity 
components of the center of gravity of these molecules relative to fixed rectangular 
coordinate axes lie, then 


39 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



G 2 dGd\ = dgdhdk. 

Now keep g, h, and k fixed, and construct through the center of the first atom a rectangular 
coordinate system whose z-axis has the direction of G. Denote the coordinates and velocity 
components of the second atom relative to this system by x 3 , y 3 , z 3 , « 3 , v 3 , w 3 , and 
transform these six variables into K, L , H, p, e, For this purpose we construct through 
the center of the second atom a second coordinate system, with respect to which the 
coordinates and velocity components of the second atom shall be called x 4 , y 4 , z 4 , w 4 , v 4 , 
w 4 . The 2-axis of the second system shall be perpendicular to the orbital plane, and the x- 
axis shall lie in its intersection line with the old xy plane. Then 

H = 6 sint>, 

where 90°-j?is the angle between the two z-axes; hence, since G is constant, 

dH = GcostWtf. 

Finally, we denote the angle between the two x-axes by co, since it differs from the angle 
previously so denoted only by an amount which we always now consider constant. We 
find: 


Z{ = x 3 cost?sinw + y% cos t? cos w + z 3 sin t? 

W\ = u% cos t? sin w + v% cos t? cos w + w> 3 sin t?, 

both of which expressions must vanish, since the x 4 y 4 plane is the orbital plane. By means 
of these two equations, keeping x 3 , y 3 , « 3 and v 3 constant, one can introduce 3. to in place 
of z 3 , w 3 , and find 

cost? 

dzdwi = (jjiUi - XiVi) - dddw. 

sin 8 t? 

Now furthermore 

Xi = x% cos w - y% sin w 
t /4 sin t? = Xi sin o> + V* cos w 

and similar equations follow for w 4 , v 4 . Hence it follows that 

yiUi - x&s = sint?(t/ 4 W4 - xm) = K sin# 


39 


Auntie 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



and for constant &. to, 


dx4y\ sin d = dx4Vz } du4v 4 sin d = du4v 3 , 

hence 

dx4y4z4u4v4wz = K cos ddx4y4u4v4$dw. 

Now we denote by a and r the velocity components of the motion of the second atom 
relative to the first in the direction of p and perpendicular thereto, as before; then, for 
constant x 4 and y 4 , 

dadr = du4vi 

K — pr, L = L„ + — —■— -(a 2 + r J ) + 

2(mi t W 2 ) 

dKdL = - apdadr, 

rrii + mi 

where L„ is the energy of motion of the center of gravity, now considered constant. Finally, 
if if) is the angle between p and the last line of apses, 

14 = PCOS(e + f), y t = + 

where ip is a function of p, K, and L. But the last two are now constant, hence 

pdpdt = dx4y\‘ 

Collecting all these together, we see that: 

mi + rri2 K 

dx4y4z4u4v4ws = - dKdLdHdpdwde 

and one sees at once that, if x, y, z are the coordinates of the second atom with respect to a 
coordinate system going through the center of the first atom, whose axes are parallel to the 
originally chosen completely arbitrary coordinate axes, then lik ewise 



39 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



mi + m 2 K 

dxdydzdu 2 dv 2 dw 2 =- dKdLdHdpdwde. 

mim 2 a 


If we introduce this into the expression (288) and recall that for constant « 2 , v 2 , we have 


3 

mi 

dgdhdk =- duidvidw t 

(mi + m 2 ) 3 

then we find 


(289) 


1 


mim 2 ¥ 

— dxdydzduidi'idwidu 2 dv2dw2 


167t 3 (mi + m 2 ) 4 KG 2 


as the number of molecules in unit volume for which the variables jc • • • w 2 lie between x 
and x+dx ■ ■ ■ w 2 and w 2 +<iw 2 . We shall set this number equal to 



F = Be~ h (mici 2 -Hn2cj 2 +2t? (p)) 


According to Equation (283), on the one hand B can be only a function of c 2 , p, and a 2 , 
while on the other hand according to Equation (289) it can be only a function of K , L, G, 
and H. B must therefore be a function of these latter variables which is completely 
independent of the values of cq, oq and [3, and is merely a function of c 2 , p, and a 2 . If we 
therefore set B =j{K, L , G, H) then this function must be completely independent ofcq, 
aq, and / 3 when one substitutes for K, L, G, H the values (284) to (287). Since this must 
hold for all values of c 2 , p, and a 2 , we shall first set c 2 = 0; then 

me 2 

K = pc sin a, L = -b p(p), G = me, H = 0, 

2 

therefore 


2 

/ . mci 

B = /( pcisinai, — + ^(p), wwJi, 

Since this must be independent of c\ and a\ K cannot occur at all in f and L and G can 
occur only in the combination 2 mL - G . The latter can be seen at once by substituting in/, 
instead of the two variables L and G, 2 mL - G and G. We obtain therefore 



39 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



B = }(2mL - G\ H) 

and inserting the general values (284) to (287) 

/ 2 

B = /( wii(mi - m 2 )ci + 2m^(p) 

- 2 mim 2 CiC 2 (cos ai cos a 2 + sin a i sin a 2 cos 0), 

2 2,2 ,2 .2 
C 1 C 2 sin aisin a 2 sin 0 \ 

c\ sin 2 ai + c\ sin 2 a 2 - 2ciC 2 sin ai sin a 2 cos 0/ 

This must be completely independent ofcq, aq, and/?. One sees at once that then both 
quantities under the function sign must be completely independent of each other, and hence 
B must be a constant. But then Equation (290) becomes in fact just a special case of (118). 

Another special case, whose treatment involves no particular difficulty, would be 
molecules which are arbitrary solid bodies, either having the form of solids of revolution or 
not. However, I fear that I have already spent too much time on complicated calculations 
for special cases, and I will therefore leave the rest of these special problems for doctoral 
dissertations. 

§87. Characterization of our assumption about the initial state. 

When a gas is enclosed in a rigid container, and initially one part of it has a visible 
motion with respect to the rest, then it soon comes to rest as a consequence of viscosity. 
When two kinds of gas are initially unmixed, but in contact with each other, then they mix, 
even if the lighter one was originally on top. In general, when a gas or a system of several 
kinds of gas has initially some improbable state, then it passes to the most probable state 
under the given external conditions, and remains there during all observable later times. In 
order to prove that this is a necessary consequence of the kinetic theory of gases, we used 
the quantity H defined and discussed in this chapter. We proved that it continually 
decreases as a result of the motion of the gas molecules among each other. The one¬ 
sidedness of this process is clearly not based on the equations of motion of the molecules. 
For these do not change when the time changes its sign. This one-sidedness rather lies 
uniquely and solely in the initial conditions. 

This is not to be understood in the sense that for each experiment one must specially 
assume just certain initial conditions and not the opposite ones which are l ik ewise possible; 
rather it is sufficient to have a uniform basic assumption about the initial properties of the 
mechanical picture of the world, from which it then follows with logical necessity that, 
when bodies are always interacting, they must always be found in the correct initial 


399 


KU-H.C- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


conditions. In particular, our theory does not require that each time when bodies are 
interacting, the initial state of the system they form must be distinguished by a special 
property (ordered or improbable) which relatively few states of the same mechanical system 
would have under the external mechanical conditions in question. Hereby the fact is 
clarified that this system takes in the course of time states which do not have these 
properties, and which one calls disordered. Since by far most of the states of the system are 
disordered, one calls the latter the probable states. 

The ordered initial states are not related to the disordered ones in the way that a definite 
state is to the opposite state (arising from the mere reversal of the directions of all 
velocities), but rather the state opposite to each ordered state is again an ordered state. 

The self-regulating most probable state—which we call the Maxwell velocity 
distribution since Maxwell first found its mathematical expression in a special case—is not 
some kind of special singular state which is contrasted to infinitely many more non- 
Maxwellian distributions. Rather it is, on the contrary, characterized by the fact that by far 
the largest number of possible states have the characteristic properties of the Maxwell 
distribution, and compared to this number, the number of possible velocity distributions 
which significantly deviate from the Maxwellian is vanishingly small. The criterion of 
equal possibility or equal probability is provided by Liouville’s theorem. 

In order to explain the fact that the calculations based on this assumption correspond to 
actually observable processes, one must assume that an enormously complicated 
mechanical system represents a good picture of the world, and that all or at least most of the 
parts of it surrounding us are initially in a very ordered—therefore very improbable—state. 
When this is the case, then whenever two or more small parts of it come into interaction 
with each other, the system formed by these parts is also initially in an ordered state, and 
when left to itself it rapidly proceeds to the disordered most probable state. 

§88. On the return of a system to a former state. 

We make the following remarks: 1. It is by no means the sign of the time which 
constitutes the characteristic difference between an ordered and a disordered state. If, in the 
“initial states” of the mechanical picture of the world, one reverses the directions of all 
velocities, without changing their magnitudes or the positions of the parts of the system; if, 
as it were, one follows the states of the system backwards in time, then he would likewise 
first have an improbable state, and then reach ever more probable states. Only in those 
periods of time during which the system passes from a very improbable initial state to a 
more probable later state do the states change in the positive time direction differently than 
in the negative. 

2. The transition from an ordered to a disordered state is only extremely improbable. 
Also, the reverse transition has a definite calculable (though inconceivably small) 
probability, which approaches zero only in the limiting case when the number of molecules 
is infinite. The fact that a closed system of a finite number of molecules, when it is initially 
in an ordered state and then goes over to a disordered state, finally after an inconceivably 
long time must again return to the ordered state,* is therefore not a refutation but rather 


4ft 


aV^lc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



indeed a confirmation of our theory. One should not however imagine that two gases in a 
4^ titer container, initially unmixed, will mix, then again after a few days separate, then 

mix again, and so forth. On the contrary, one finds by the same principles which I used 5 for 

1 o 10 

a similar calculation that not until after a time enormously long compared to 10 years 
will there be any noticeable unmixing of the gases. One may recognize that this is 
practically equivalent to never , if one recalls that in this length of time, according to the 
laws of probability, there will have been many years in which every inhabitant of a large 
country committed suicide, purely by accident, on the same day, or every building burned 
down at the same time—yet the insurance companies get along quite well by ignoring the 
possibility of such events. If a much smaller probability than this is not practically 
equivalent to impossibility, then no one can be sure that today will be followed by a night 
and then a day. 

We have looked mainly at processes in gases and have calculated the function H for this 
case. Yet the laws of probability that govern atomic motion in the solid and liquid states are 
clearly not qualitatively different in this respect from those for gases, so that the calculation 
of the function H corresponding to the entropy would not be more difficult in principle, 
although to be sure it would involve greater mathematical difficulties. 

§89. Relation to the second law of thermodynamics. 

If therefore we conceive of the world as an enormously large mechanical system 
composed of an enormously large number of atoms, which stalls from a completely ordered 
initial state, and even at present is still in a substantially ordered state, then we obtain 
consequences which actually agree with the observed facts; although this conception 
involves, from a purely theoretical—I might say philosophical—standpoint, certain new 
aspects which contradict general themodynamics based on a purely phe-nomenological 
viewpoint. General thermodynamics proceeds from the fact that, as far as we can tell from 
our experience up to now, all natural processes are irreversible. Hence according to the 
principles of phenomenology, the general thermodynamics of the second law is formulated 
in such a way that the unconditional irreversibility of all natural processes is asserted as a 
so-called axiom, just as general physics based on a purely phenomenological standpoint 
asserts the unconditional divisibility of matter without limit as an axiom. 

Just as the differential equations of elasticity theory and hydrodynamics based on this 
latter axiom will always remain the basis of the phenomenological description of a large 
group of natural phenomena, since they provide the simplest approximate expression of the 
facts, so likewise will the formulas of general thermodynamics. No one who has fallen in 
love with the molecular theory will approve of its being given up completely. But the 
opposite extreme, the dogma of a self-sufficient phenomenology, is also to be avoided. 

Just as the differential equations represent simply a mathematical method for calculation, 
whose clear meaning can only be understood by the use of models which employ a large 
finite number of elements, 6 so lik ewise general thermodynamics (without prejudice to its 
unshakable importance) also requires the cultivation of mechanical models representing it, 


40 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 




in order to deepen our knowledge of nature-not in spite of, but rather precisely because 
these models do not always cover the same ground as general thermodynamics, but instead 
offer a glimpse of a new viewpoint. Thus general thermodynamics holds fast to the 
invariable irreversibility of all natural processes. It assumes a function (the entropy) whose 
value can only change in one direction—for example, can only increase—through any 
occurrence in nature. Thus it distinguishes any later state of the world from any earlier state 
by its larger value of the entropy. The difference of the entropy from its maximum value— 
which is the goal [Treibende] of all natural processes—will always decrease. In spite of the 
invariance of the total energy, its transformability will therefore become ever smaller, 
natural events will become ever more dull and uninteresting, and any return to a previous 
value of the entropy is excluded.* 

One cannot assert that this consequence contradicts our experience, for indeed it seems 
to be a plausible extrapolation of our present knowledge of the world. Yet, with all due 
recognition to the caution which must be observed in going beyond the direct 
consequences of experience, it must be granted that these consequences are hardly 
satisfactory, and the discovery of a satisfactory way of avoiding them would be very 
desirable, whether one may imagine time as infinite or as a closed cycle. In any case, we 
would rather consider the unique directionality of time given to us by experience as a mere 
illusion arising from our specially restricted viewpoint. 

§90. Application to the universe. 

Is the apparent irreversibility of all known natural processes consistent with the idea that 
all natural events are possible without restriction? Is the apparent unidirectionality of time 
consistent with the infinite extent or cyclic nature of time? He who tries to answer these 
questions in the affirmative sense must use as a model of the world a system whose 
temporal variation is determined by equations in which the positive and negative directions 
of time are equivalent, and by means of which the appearance of irreversibility over long 
periods of time is explicable by some special assumption. But this is precisely what 
happens in the atomic view of the world. 

One can think of the world as a mechanical system of an enormously large number of 
constituents, and of an immensely long period of time, so that the dimensions of that pail 
containing our own “fixed stars” are minute compared to the extension of the universe; and 
times that we call eons are likewise minute compared to such a period. Then in the 
universe, which is in thermal equilibrium throughout and therefore dead, there will occur 
here and there relatively small regions of the same size as our galaxy (we call them single 
worlds) which, during the relative short time of eons, fluctuate noticeably from thermal 
equilibrium, and indeed the state probability in such cases will be equally likely to increase 
or decrease. For the universe, the two directions of time are indistinguishable, just as in 
space there is no up or down. However, just as at a particular place on the earth’s surface 
we call “down” the direction toward the center of the earth, so will a living being in a 
particular time interval of such a single world distinguish the direction of time toward the 
less probable state from the opposite direction (the former toward the past, the latter toward 


4Q 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



the future). By virtue of this terminology, such small isolated regions of the universe will 
always find themselves “initially” in an improbable state. This method seems to me to be 
the only way in which one can understand the second law—the heat death of each single 
world—without a unidirectional change of the entire universe from a definite initial state to 
a final state. 

Obviously no one would consider such speculations as important discoveries or even— 
as did the ancient philosophers—as the highest purpose of science. However it is doubtful 
that one should despise them as completely idle. Who knows whether they may not 
broaden the horizon of our circle of ideas, and by stimulating thought, advance the 
understanding of the facts of experience? 

That in nature the transition from a probable to an improbable state does not take place 
as often as the converse, can be explained by assuming a very improbable initial state of the 
entire universe surrounding us, in consequence of which an arbitrary system of interacting 
bodies will in general find itself initially in an improbable state. However, one may object 
that here and there a transition from a probable to an improbable state must occur and 
occasionally be observed. To this the cosmolog-ical considerations just presented give an 
answer. From the numerical data on the inconceivably great rareness of transition from a 
probable to a less probable state in observable dimensions during an observable time, we 
see that such a process within what we have called an individual world—in particular, our 
individual world—is so unlikely that its observability is excluded. 

In the entire universe, the aggregate of all individual worlds, there will however in fact 

occur processes going in the opposite direction. But the beings who observe such processes 

will simply reckon time as proceeding from the less probable to the more probable states, 

and it will never be discovered whether they reckon time differently from us, since they are 

1 o 10 

separated from us by eons of time and spatial distances 10 times the distance of Sirius- 
and moreover their language has no relation to ours.* 

Very well, you may smile at this; but you must admit that the model of the world 
developed here is at least a possible one, free of inner contradiction, and also a useful one, 
since it provides us with many new viewpoints. It also gives an incentive, not only to 
speculation, but also to experiments (for example on the l im it of divisibility, the size of the 
sphere of action, and the resulting deviations from the equations of hydrodynamics, 
diffusion, and heat conduction) which are not stimulated by any other theory. 

§91. Application of the probability calculus in molecular physics. 

Doubts have been expressed as to the permissibility of the applications made of the 
probability calculus to this subject. Since however the probability calculus has been verified 
in so many special cases, I see no reason why it should not also be applied to natural 
processes of a more general kind. The applicability of the probability calculus to the 
molecular motion in gases cannot of course be rigorously deduced from the differential 
equations for the motion of the molecules. It follows rather from the great number of the 
gas molecules and the length of their paths, by virtue of which the properties of the position 


4Q 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




in the gas where a molecule undergoes a collision are completely independent of the place 
where it collided the previous time. This independence is of course attained only for a finite 
number of gas molecules during an arbitrarily long time. For a finite number of molecules 
in a rigid container with completely smooth walls it is never completely exact, so that the 
Maxwell velocity distribution cannot hold throughout all time. 7 

In practice, however, the walls are continually undergoing perturbations, which will 
destroy the periodicity resulting from the finite number of molecules. In any case, the 
applicability of probability theory to gas theory is not refuted but rather is confirmed by the 
periodicity of motion of a finite closed system in the course of eons of time, and since it 
leads to a model of the world which not only agrees with experience but also stimulates 
speculations and experiments, it should be retained in gas theory. 

Moreover we see that the probability calculus plays yet another role in physics. The 
calculation of errors by Gauss’s famous method is confirmed in purely physical processes, 
l ik e the calculation of insurance premiums for statistical ones. We have to thank the laws of 
probability for the fact that in an orchestra the sounds regularly reinforce each other in 
unison rather than cancelling out by interference; and the same laws also clarify the nature 
of unpolarized light. Since today it is popular to look forward to the time when our view of 
nature will have been completely changed, I will mention the possibility that the 
fundamental equations for the motion of individual molecules will turn out to be only 
approximate formulas which give average values, resulting according to the probability 
calculus from the interactions of many independent moving entities forming the 
surrounding medium—as for example in meteorology the laws are valid only for average 
values obtained by long series of observations using the probability calculus. These entities 
must of course be so numerous and must act so rapidly that the correct average values are 
attained in mil li onths of a second. 

§92. Derivation of thermal equilibrium by reversal of the time direction. 

These considerations are connected with the method of derivation of Equation (266) 
which was first indicated by Maxwell 8 and further developed by Planck. 9 We imagine a 
mixture of arbitrarily many ideal gases having any properties desired, enclosed by fixed 
solid walls, which we will call our mechanical system. The positions of all the parts of a 
molecule of one kind of gas, which we call the first, will be specified by /./ coordinates p \, 
P 2 ■ ■ ■ p„, that of a molecule of another kind (the second) by v coordinates p +1 , p^+2 ■ ■ ■ 
Pu+v The corresponding momenta will be r/j q 2 ■ ■ ■ r/ t(+ ,,. 

We assume that, with the exception of a few singular states, all initial states pass 
gradually to probable states, in which the system then remains for a time long compared to 
the time during which it had an improbable state. For all probable states, the mean values of 
the various quantities in each small region shall be equal, even though the individual 
molecules are distributed over many different states in different ways. 

We mean by 


40: 


IpuJix*. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



(290a) /(p i, p 2 • ■ • q^dpidpt ■ ■ -dq„ 

the probability that for a molecule of the first kind the variables 

(291) Pi, Pi • • • q, 

lie between the li mits 

(292) pi and pi + dp h p 2 and p 2 + dpi • • • and q? + 

and we define it as follows: we consider our system during a long time T, during which it is 
continually in probable states. The ratio of the sum of all time intervals during which the 
variables (291) for some molecules of the first kind lie within the limits (292), to the total 
time T multiplied by the number of molecules of the first kind, is then the definition of the 
probability that the variables (291) for a molecule of the first kind lie between the l im its 
(292). 

The time T may include times during which the system has an improbable state, since 
these are very rare anyway. Only singular states that continually deviate from probable 
states must be excluded. If, during a short time, the variables (291) for 2 or 3 molecules of 
the first kind simultaneously lie between the limits (292), then these time intervals are to be 
counted doubly or triply in the sum. 

Similarly let 

(293) / 2 (Pm+ i) Pm+ 2 ’ ’ ‘ ^p+JdpM+idp/i+i • • • dq^+v 

be the probability that for a molecule of the second kind the variables 

(294) Pm+i, P >+j • • • U > 

lie between the li mits 



p,+i and p „ + 1 • • • + dp f+2 , p, + » and 
Pm+! “f dpf .+2 ■' * q^+n and "I dq^t 


Now let the li mits (292) and (293) be chosen so that the two molecules are not 
interacting but will soon be. We shall call the type of interaction which comes about in this 
way a co ll ision with property A. Then (cf. Eq. [123]) 

(296) /i(pi • • • qMVr+i ■ • ■ q^r)dpi • • • dq t+ , 

is the probability that for a molecule pair 10 the variables (291) and (294) lie between the 
limits (292) and (295), which we call the probability of a collision with property A, for 


40 


“‘Puh.c- 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



brevity. 

From the instant when the variables (291) and (294) of a molecule pair (consisting of 
molecule B of the first kind and molecule C of the second kind) first fall within the l im its 
(292) and (295), let there elapse a certain time L which is longer than the time during which 
two molecules interact in any co ll ision. The values of the variables (291) and (294) for 
molecules B and C will lie, at the end of time t, between the li mits 

(297) Pi and Pi + dPi • ■ ■ Q.+, and Q, + , + dQ^,. 

Now at the end of the time denoted above by T we reverse the directions of the 
velocities of all the constituents of all the molecules, without changing the magnitude of 
these velocities or the positions of the constituents. The system will then pass through the 
same sequence of states in the opposite order, which we shall call the inverse process, in 
contrast to the originally considered variation of states during time T, which we call the 
direct process. 

During the inverse process, it will just as often happen that the variables (291) and (294) 
lie between the li mits 



P i and Pi + dP\ • • • and P^ v + dP M+ „ 

, Qi and ~ Qi “ dQi • • • — Qn+ t , and Qn+y ~ dQn+t 


as during the direct process it happened that they lay between the l im its (292) and (295). 

We next assume that in our system two states in which all the coordinates and all 
magnitudes of the velocities are the same, but the directions of the latter are opposite, are 
equally probable. We shall call this assumption A. It is obviously true when the molecules 
are simple material points or solid bodies of arbitrary shape, and in many other cases. 
However, in certain cases it needs to be proved. 

Therefore in the inverse process the variables will lie between the l im its (297) as many 
times as they he between the li mits (292) and (295) in the direct process. But the inverse 
process l ik ewise consists of a very long sequence of states in which the variables can 
assume many different values. These states therefore cannot consist exclusively or 
predominantly of singular states, but rather for the most pail they must be probable states. 
Hence the various mean values must be the same for the inverse process as for the direct 
process, and the probability that for a molecule pair the values of the variables lie between 
the limits (297) must be given by the expression similar to (296): 

/i(Pi • • • Qp)fi{Pp+i - • • Q»+*)dP i • • • dQt+i 

which according to the aforesaid must be equal to the expression (296). But according to 
Liouvihe’s theorem, 


40 


aV^lc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



dpi * • * d(}n+p — dP i dQn+ V) 

hence one obtains finally the equation 

(299) /i(r, • • • qMP >+1 • • • U>) =/i(Pi • • • QMK+> • • • <U) 

whereby Equation (266) is proved for all kinds of possible co ll isions. 

§93. Proof for a cyclic series of a finite number of states. 

If one does not wish to make assumption A, which in fact is by no means obvious in all 
cases, then the proof, as in §81, must be carried out by means of recurrent cycles. For the 
sake of simplicity we assume that all molecules are of the same kind, and we consider the 
series of collisions 



The notation is the same as that of §81. The probability of the first of these collisions is 

C 3f 4?«2, 

that of the next is 

etc. 


Now by virtue of Liouville’s theorem, 




If we denote the common value of all these coefficients by C, then the probabilities of the 
different collisions in (300) are: 


CwiWi, CwWi, Cw^Wi • • • , Cw a -\W a . 

Now suppose we reverse the entire process of variation of states of our system in the way 
described above. We must again obtain a stationary distribution of states. Hence the 
probability of any particular collision must be the same in the reversed sequence of states as 
in the original one. Now in the reversed sequence, the probability of the last collision in the 


40 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



series (300) is Cwqw 2 , that of the next to last is Cw a _\ w a , and so forth. Therefore we must 
have 


W\W 2 = Wa-lW a = W a ^W a -2 ■ • • = W^W 4 

Since these equations must hold for all collisions, Equation (266) is again proved. 

I believe that I have here developed in extenso the idea indicated by Maxwell 11 in the 
passage beginning with the words, “This is therefore a possible foim of the final 
distribution of velocities; it is also the only form.” 

1 Wien. Ber. 106 (2A) 21 (1897). 

2 Mun. Ber. 22,347 (1892); Phil. Mag. [5] 35,166 (1893). 

* For more detailed discussion see R. C. Tolman, The Principles of Statistical Mechanics (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1938) Chap. V. 

3 Cf. Ramsay, Les gaz de Vatmosphere (Paris: Carre, 1898), p. 172. 

4 Boltzmann, Vorlesungen iiberdie Principe derMechanik, §§20-24. 

* This model is somewhat similar to one proposed by Lord Kelvin (Proc. R. S. London 50, 79 
[ 1891 ]) as a test case for which the equipartition theorem was alleged to be violated. Kelvin’s model was 
a system of "molecules” each of which consisted of a globule enclosed in a hollow spherical shell; thus 
the globule can interact with its own shell, but not with any other globule or shell. Kelvin had proposed 
similar models for vibratory molecules imbedded in the lumeniferous ether, and he doubted whether the 
globules could equilibrate their energy when they did not interact directly. P. G. Tait had also asserted 
that a necessary condition for equipartition is the possibility of collisions between all parts of the system 
(Trans. R. S. Edinburgh, 33 , 65 [1886]). Boltzmann’s considerations in §§85-86 are also relevant to 
subsequent studies based on the Bohr model of the atom, in which one might like to know whether 
nuclei could equilibrate their energy if they could not interact directly but only through their coupling 
to the orbital electrons. See also the discussion at the British Association meeting, reported in Nature 32 , 
533-535 (1885). 

* H. Poincare, Acta Math. 13,67 (1890); E. Zermelo, Ann. Phys. [3] 57,485 (1896). 

5 Ann. Phys. [3] 57,783 (1896). 

6 Boltzmann, Die Unentbehrlichkeit der Atomistik i.d. Naturwissen-schaft. Wien. Ber. 105 (2) 907 
(1896); Ann. Phys. [3] 60 , 231 (1897). Ueber die Frage nach der Existenz der Vorgange in der 
unbelebten Natur, Wien. Ber. 106 (2) 83 (1897). 

* W. Thomson (Lord Kelvin), On a universal tendency in nature to the dissipation of mechanical 
energy, Proc. R. S. Edinburgh 3,139 (1852), and later papers by many authors, too numerous to cite. For 
the generalized "dissipation of energy” version of the second law, see F. O. Koenig, On the history of 
science and of the second law of thermodynamics, p. 57 in Men and Moments in the History of Science, 
ed. FI. M. Evans (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1959), and other articles cited therein. 

* For further discussion see FI. Reichenbach, The Direction of Time (Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press, 1956). 

1 Of the relevant literature, I cite only: Loschmidt, Ueber den Zustand des Warmegleichgewichts 
eines Systems von Korpern mit Rucksicht auf die Schwere, Wien. Ber. 73 , 139 (1876). Boltzmann, 
Wien. Ber. 75 (2) 67 (1877); 76 , 373 (1878); 78 , 740 (1878). Wien. Aim. 1886; Nature 51 , 413 (1895). 
Vorlesungen iiber Gastheorie , Part I, §6. Ann. Phys. [3] 57 , 773 (1896); 60 , 392 (1897). Math. Ann. 50 , 
325 (1898). Burbury, Nature 51 , 78 (1894). Bryan, Am. J. Math. 19 , 283 (1897). Zermelo, Ann. Phys. 
[3] 57 , 485 (1896); 59 , 793 (1896). [See also: P. and T. Ehrenfest, The Conceptual Foundations of the 
Statistical Approach in Mechanics (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1959) (translated from Enc. Math. 
Wiss. 4, 2, II, [Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1911]). D. ter Haar, Elements of Statistical Mechanics (New 


4Q 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



York: Rinehart, 1954), Appendix I; R. Dugas, La Theorie Physique au sens de Boltzmann (Neuchatel- 
Suisse: Griffon, 1959) -tr.] 

8 Maxwell, Phil. Mag. [4] 35 , 187 (1868); Scientific Papers, Vol. 2, p. 45. 

9 Planck, Mun. Ber. 24 , 391 (1894); Ann. Phys. [3] 55 , 220 (1895). 

10 When we speak of a molecule pair, we shall always in the following mean a pair consisting of a 
molecule of the first kind and a molecule of the second kind. 

11 Maxwell, Phil. Mag. [4] 35 , 187 (1868); Scientific Papers, Vol. 2, p. 45. 


4(1 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Details of the works cited in the text and in the Translator’s Introduction and notes are 
given here, together with other papers by Boltzmann on the kinetic theory, and a few 
biographical articles about him. In most cases the style of abbreviation of journal titles is 
close enough to the standard style to be easily recognizable; see for example the Royal 
Society Catalogue of Scientific Literature. “Wien. Ber.” means Sitzungsberichte der 
kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Klasse Ha. The journal Annalen der 
Physik was edited by Poggendorff from 1824 to 1876, by Wiedeman from 1877 to 1899, 
and by Drude from 1900 to 1928, hence the common abbreviations “Pogg. Ann.,” “Wied. 
Ann.,” and “Drude’s Ann.”; we have used instead the abbreviations Ann. Physik [2], [3], 
[4] respectively, for the sake of consistency with the modem style. “C. R. Paris” means 
Comptes Rendus hebdomadaires des Seances de V Academie cles Sciences, Paris. The 
places where a work was cited in the text are indicated at the end of each reference by (I, 
§6) meaning Part I, Section 6, etc.; TI means Translator’s Introduction and F means 
Foreword. 

Alder, B. J., and Wainwright, T. E. 

Phase transition for ahard sphere system. J. Chem. Phys. 27,1208 (1957). 

(II, §6) 

Studies in molecular dynamics. I. General method. II. Behavior of a small number of elastic spheres. J. 
Chem. Phys. 31,459 (1959); 33, 1439 (1960). 

(II, §6) 

Phase transition in elastic disks. Phys. Rev. 127,359 (1962). 

(II, §6) 

Aliotta, A. 

La reazione idealistica contro la scienza. Palermo, Casa Editrice “Optima,” 1912. English 
translation by Agnes McCaskill: The Idealistic Reaction against Science. London, Macmillan, 
1914. 

(TI; II, F) 

Benndorff, H. 

Weiterfuhrung der Annaherungsrechnung in der Maxwell’schen Gastheorie. Wien. Ber. 105, 646 
(1896). 

(I, §17) 

Bernoulli, D. 

Hydrodynamica. Argentorati, 1738. 

A translation of the derivation of the gas law (Sectio Decima) is given by Magie, A Source Book 
in Physics, New York, 1935, and also by Newman, The World of Mathematics, New York, 1956, 
Vol. 2, p. 11 A. German translation by P. du Bois-Reymond in Ann. Physik [2] 107,490 (1859). 

(TI) 

Berthelot, M., and Ogier. 

Sur la chaleur specifique du gaz hypoazotique. C. R. Paris 94,916 (1882); Bull. Soc. Chim. Paris 37, 
434 (1882); Ann. Chim. Phys. [5] 30,382 (1883). 

(H, §66) 

Bogolyubov, N. N., and Sanochkin, Yu. V. 

Ludwig Boltzmann. (Address delivered 5 September 1956 at the session of the Department of 
Physico-mathematical Sciences of the USSR Academy of Sciences dedicated to the 50th 


41 . 


IPuJix*. 7fca^4e«taL2c.a/ 



anniversary of the death of Ludwig Boltzmann.) Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk61, 7 (1957); translation 
AEC-tr-3971, P- 7 (U. S. National Science Foundation). 

(TI) 


Boltzmann, L. 

Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen (edited by F. Hasenohrl). Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1909, 3 vols. 
(Hereafter cited as "Abh.”) 

Populdre Schriften. Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1905. (Hereafter cited as “Schr”) 

Uber die mechanische Bedeutung des zweiten Hauptsatzes der Warmetheorie. Wien. Ber. 53, 195 
(1866); Wien. Anz. 3,36 (1866); Abh. 1,9. 


(n, §42) 

liber die Anzahl der Atome in den Gasmolektilen und die innere Arbeit in Gasen. Wien. Ber. 56,682 


(1867); Wien. Anz. 4,235 (1867); Abh. 1,34. 


(II, §42) 

Studien liber das Gleichgewicht der lebendigen Kraft zwischen bewegten materiellen Punkten. 
Wien. Ber. 58,517 (1868); Wien. Anz. 5,196 (1868); Abh. 1,49. 


(h, §29) 

Lehre von den Gasen und Dampfen. Fortschritte der Physik 26,470 (1870). 

Boiling-points of organic bodies. Phil. Mag. [4] 42,393 (1871); Abh. 1,199. 

Zur Prioritat der Auffindung der Beziehung zwischen dem zweiten Hauptsatze der mechanischen 
Warmetheorie und dem Prinzip der kleinsten Wirkung. Ann. Physik [2] 143,211 (1871); Abh. 1, 
228. 

liber das Warmegleichgewicht zwischen mehratomigen Gasmolekulen. Wien. Ber. 63, 397 (1871); 
Wien. Anz. 8,46 (1871); Abh. 1,237. 


(II, §29) 

Einige allgemeine Satze iiber Warmegleichgewicht. Wien. Ber. 63, 679 (1871); Wien. Anz. 8, 55 
(1871); Abh. 1,259. 

(TI; E, §29,32,35) 

Analytischer Beweis des zweiten Hauptsatzes der mechanischen Warmetheorie aus den Satzen liber 
das Gleichgewicht der lebendigen Kraft. Wien. Ber. 63, 712 (1871); Wien. Anz. 8, 92 (1871); 
Abh. 1,288. 

(h, §42) 

liber das Wirkungsgesetz der Molekularkrafte. Wien. Ber. 66,213 (1872); Wien. Anz. 9, 134 
(1872); Abh. 1,309. 

(I, §12) 

Weitere Studien iiber das Warmegleichgewicht unter Gasmolekulen. Wien. Ber. 66,275 (1872); 
Wien. Anz. 9,23 (1872); Abh. 1,316. 

(TI; I, §5,23) 

liber das Warmegleichgewicht von Gasen, auf welche aussere Krafte wirken. Wien. Ber. 72, 427 
(1875); Wien. Anz. 12,174 (1875); Phil. Mag. [4] 50,495 (1875); Abh. 2,1. 

Bemerkungen iiber Warmeleitung der Gase. Wien. Ber. 72,458 (1876); Wien. Anz. 12, 174 (1875); 

Ann. Physik [2] 157,457 (1876); Phil. Mag. [4] 50,495 (1875); Abh. 2,31. 
liber die Aufstellung und Integration der Gleichungen, welche die Molecularbewegung in Gasen 
bestimmen. Wien. Ber. 74,503 (1876); Wien. Anz. 13,204 (1876); Abh. 2,55. 

(H, §28) 

liber die Natur der Gasmoleciile. Wien. Ber. 74, 553 (1877); Ann. Physik [2] 160,175 (1877); 
Wien. Anz. 13,204 (1876); Phil. Mag. [5] 3,320(1877). 

(I, §19, 44) 


41 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Bemerkungen iiber einige Probleme der mechanischen Warmetheorie. Wien. Ber. 75,62 (1877); 
Wien. Anz. 14 , 9 (1877); Abh. 2 , 112. 

(D, §91) 

Uber die Beziehung zwischen dem zweiten Hauptsatze der mechanischen Warmetheorie und der 
Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, respective den Satzen iiber das Warmegleichgewicht. Wien. Ber. 
76,373 (1877); Wien. Anz. 14 , 196 (1877); Ann. Physik Beibl.3, 166 (1879); Phil. Mag. [5] 6, 
236(1878); Abh. 2,164. 

(I, §6; n, §91) 

liber die Beziehung der Diffusionsphanomene zum zweiten Hauptsatze der mechanischen 
Warmetheorie. Wien. Ber. 78 , 733 (1878); Wien. Anz. 15 , 115, 177 (1878); Phil. Mag. [5] 6 , 236 
(1878); Abh. 2,289. 

(D, §91) 

Weitere Bemerkungen iiber einige Probleme der mechanischen Warmetheorie. Wien. Ber. 78, 7 
(1879); Wien. Anz. 15,115 (1878); Abh. 2,250. 

(I, §3) 

Erwiderung auf die Notiz des Herrn. O. E. Meyer: “Ueber eine veranderte Form usw.” Ann. Physik 
[3] 11,529(1880); Abh. 2,358. 

Zur Theorie der Gasreibung. Wien. Ber. 81 , 117 (1880); 84 , 40, 1230 (1882); Wien. Anz. 17 , 11, 
213 (1880); 18 , 148(1881); Abh. 2,388,431,523. 

(I, §11) 

liber einige das Warmegleichgewicht betreffende Satze. Wien. Ber. 84 , 136 (1881); Wien. Anz. 18 , 
148(1881); Abh. 2,572. 

Referat iiber die Abhandlung von J. C. Maxwell “Uber Boltzmann's Theorem betreffend die 
mittlere Verteilung der lebendigen Kraft in einem System materiellen Punkte.” Ann. Physik 
Beibl. 5 , 403 (1881); Phil. Mag. [5] 14 , 299 (1882); Abh. 2 , 582. 

Zu K. Strecker’s Abhandlungen: Die specifische Warme der gasformigen zweiatomigen 
Verbindungen von Chlor, Brom, Jod u.s.w. Ann. Physik [3] 18,309 (1883); Abh. 3 , 64. 
liber die Arbeitsquantum, welches bei chemischen Verbindungen gewonnen werden kann. Wien. 
Ber. 88 , 861 (1883); Ann. Physik [3] 22 , 39 (1884); Wien Anz. 20 , 204 (1883); Abh. 3 , 66. 

(II, §62,66) 

liber die Moglichkeit der Begriindung einer kinetischen Gastheorie auf anziehende Krafte allein. 
Wien. Ber. 89, 714 (1884); Ann. Physik [3] 24, 37 (1885); Exner’s Repertorium 21, 1 (1885); 
Wien. Anz. 21,100 (1884); Abh. 3,101. 

(I, §12,21; H, §73) 

liber die Eingenschaften monocyclischer und anderer damit verwandter Systeme. J. r. ang. Math. 98 , 
68 (1885); Wien. Ber. 90 , 231 (1884); Wien. Anz. 21 , 153,171 (1884); Abh. 3 , 122. 

(TI; E, §32) 

Der zweite Hauptsatze der mechanische Warmetheorie. Almanach K. Akad. Wiss. Wien 36, 225 
(1886); Schr. 25. 

(D, §91) 

Neuer Beweis eines von Helmholtz aufgestellten Theorems betreffend die Eigenschaften 
monocyclischer Systeme. Gottingen Nachr. 209 (1886); Abh. 3,176. 
liber die zum theoretischen Beweise des Avogadroschen Gesetzes erforderlichen Voraussetzungen. 
Wien. Ber. 94, 613 (1887); Phil. Mag. [5] 23, 305 (1887); Wien. Anz. 23, 174 (1886); Abh. 3, 
225. (There is an appendix that appears only in the English version in Phil. Mag., reprinted in 
Abh. 3,255.) 

a, §4) 

liber die mechanischen Analogien des zweiten Hauptsatzes der Thermodynamik. J. r. ang. Math. 


41 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



100,201 (1887); Abh. 3,258. 


(TI) 

Uber einige Fragen der kinetischen Gastheorie. Wien. Ber. 96, 891 (1888); Phil. Mag. [5] 25, 81 
(1888); Wien. Anz. 24,228 (1887); Abh. 3,293. 

(I, §10) 

Neuer Beweis zweier Satze liber das Warmegleichgewicht unter mehratomigen Gasmolekiilen. 

Wien. Ber. 95,153 (1887); Wien. Anz. 24,25 (1887); Abh. 4,272. 

Gustav Robert Kirchhoff: Festrede zur Feier des 301. Griindungstages der Karl-Franzens- 
Universitdt zu Graz. Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1888; Schr. 51. 
liber das Gleichgewicht der lebenden Kraft zwisehen progressiver und Rotations-Bewegung bei 
Gasmolekiilen. Berlin Ber. 1395 (1888); Abh. 3,366. 

Ill Teil der Studien iiber Gleichgewicht der lebendigen Kraft. Mun. Ber. 22,329 (1892); Phil. Mag. 
[5] 35,153(1893). 

(TI; E, §78) 

liber die Bestimmung der absoluten Temperatur. Mun. Ber. 23,321 (1894). Ann. Physik [3] 53, 948 
(1894); Abh. 3,490. 

(n, § 10 ) 

liber die Methoden der theoretischen Physik. (From the Catalogue of the Mathematical Exhibition 
held by the Association of German Mathematicians at Munich, 1893.) Phil. Mag. [5] 36, 37 
(1893); Proc. Phys. Soc. London 12,336 (1894); Schr. 1. 

On the application of the determinantal relation to the kinetic theory of polyatomic gases. Brit. 
Assoc. Rept. 64,102 (1894); Abh. 3,520. 

On Maxwell’s method of deriving the equations of hydrodynamics from the kinetic theory of gases. 
Brit. Assoc. Rept. 64,579 (1894); Abh. 3,526. 

Uber den Beweis des Maxwellschen Geschwindigkeitsverteilungsgesetzes unter Gasmolekiilen. 
Mun. Ber. 24, 207 (1894); Ann. Physik [3] 53, 955 (1894); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 1, 96 (1895); 
Abh. 3,528. 

On certain questions of the theory of gases. Nature 51,413,581 (1895). 

(TI; I, F,§6;H, §91) 

Nochmals das Maxwell’sche Verteilungsgesetz der Geschwindigkeiten. Mun. Ber. 25, 25 (1896); 

Ann. Physik [3] 55,223 (1895); Abh. 3,532. 

On the minimum theorem in the theory of gases. Nature 52,221 (1895); Abh. 3,546. 

Uber die Berechnung der Abweichungen der Gase vom Boyle-Charles’schen Gesetz und der 
Dissoziation derselben. Wien. Ber. 105,695 (1896); Abh. 3,547. 

(H, §58) 

Ein Wort der Mathematik an der Energetik. Ann. Physik [3] 57, 39 (1896); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 
2,72 (1896); Schr. 104. 

(I, § 1) 

Sur la theorie des gaz. C. R. Paris 122,1173, 1314 (1896); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 2, 398 (1896); 
Abh. 3,564,566. 

Zur Energetik. Ann. Physik [3] 58,595 (1896); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 3,122 (1897); Schr. 137. 

(I, § 1) 

(Letter to P. G. Tail) Proc. R. S. Edinburgh 21, 123 (1896); Tait’s Scientific Papers, Cambridge 
University Press, Vol. 2, p. 431 (1900). 

Entgegnung auf die Warmetheoretischen Betrachtungen des Hrn. E. Zermelo. Ann. Physik [3] 57, 
773 (1896); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 2,245 (1896); Abh. 3,567. 

(II, §88,91) 


41 . 


“*Pi mJuc. 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Vorlesungen iiber Gastheorie. Leipzig, J. A. Barth; Part 1,1896; Part II, 1898. Reprinted 1910-1912. 
French translation by A. Gallotti and H. Benard, with an introduction and notes by M. Brillouin: 
Legons sur la theorie des gaz, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1902 and 1905. Russian translation, edited 
with introduction and notes by B. I. Davydov: JleKttHH no Teopnn ra30B. MocKBa, 
rOCyflApCTBEHHOE H3flATEJlCTBO TEXHHKO-TEopETHUECKOH JlHTEpATypbl, 1956. 

liber einen mechanischen Satz Poincare’s. Wien. Ber. 106, 12 (1897); Wien. Anz. 34, 3 (1897); 

Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 3,350 (1897); Abh. 3,587. 

Vorlesungen iiber die Principe der Mechanik. Leipzig, J. A. Barth; Vol. I, 1897; Vol. II, 1904: Vol. 
Ill, 1920. 

(II, §42,85) 

liber die Unentbehrlichkeit der Atomistik in der Naturwissenschaft. Wien. Ber. 105, 907 (1896); 
Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 3,90(1897); Schr. 141. 

(I, §1; n, §89) 

Zu Hrn. Zermelo’s Abhandlung “Ueber die mechanische Erklarung irreversibler Vorgange.” Ann. 
Physik [3] 60,392,776 (1897); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 3,211 (1897); Abh. 3,579. 

(D, §91) 

Ueber die Frage nach der objectiven Existenz der Vorgange in der unbelebten Natur. Wien. Ber. 
106,83 (1897); Schr. 162. 

(I, §1; n, §89) 

Ueber einige meiner bekannten Abhandlungen iiber Gastheorie und deren Verhaltnis zu derselben. 
Jahresb. deutsch. Mathematiker-Vereinigung 6, 130 (1899); published as a separate by F. C. W. 
Vogel, Leipzig, 1897. Abh 3,598. 

Nochmals liber die Atomistik. Ann. Physik [3] 61, 790 (1897); Schr. 158. 

(I, § 1) 

Ueber die kinetische Ableitung der Formeln fur den Druck des gesattigen Dampfes, fur den 
Dissociationsgrad von Gasen und fur die Entropie eines das van der Waals’sche Gesetz 
befolgenden Gases. Verhandl. Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Aerzte, Th. 2, Halite 1, p. 
74(1898); Abh. 3,642. 

(D, §61) 

Sur le rapport des deux chaleurs specifiques des gaz. C. R. Paris 127, 1009 (1898); Abh. 3,645. 

Zur Energetik. Verhandl. Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Aerzte, Th. 2, Halfte 1, P- 65 
(1898). 

(I, § 1) 

liber die sogennante H-curve. Math. Ann. 50, 325 (1898); Abh. 3, 629. 

(D, §91) 

(with H. Mache) Ueber eine Modification der van der Waals’schen Zustandsgleichung. Ann. Physik 
[3] 68, 350 (1899); Wien. Anz. 36, 87 (1899); Abh. 3, 651. 

(with H. Mache) Uber die Bedeutung der Constante /; des van der Waals’schen Gesetzes. Trans. 
Cambridge Phil. Soc. 18,91 (1900); Abh. 3,654. 

Ueber die Zustandsgleichung v. d. Waals’. Verslagen Acad. Wet. Amsterdam [4] 7, 477 (1899); 
Proc. Sect. Sci. Amsterdam 1,398 (1899); Abh. 3,658. 

(H, §49) 

liber die Entwicklung der Methoden der theoretischen Physik in neuer Zeit. Verhandl. Gesellschaft 
deutscher Naturforscher und Aerzte, Th. 1, P- 99 (1899); Jahresb. deutsch. Mathematiker- 
Vereinigung 8,71 (1900); The Monist 11,226 (1901); Schr. 198. 

(I, § 1) 

Festrede, gehalten am 5. November 1899 anlasslich der Enthullung des Denkmals des 
Universitatsprofessors Dr. Joseph Loschmidt; Gedenkrede auf Joseph Loschmidt gehalten am 29. 


41 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Oktober 1895 in der Chemisch-Physikalischen Gesellschaft in Wien. Physik. Zeits. 1, 169, 180, 
254,264 (1900); Schr. 228. 

Uber die Grundprinzipien und Grundgleichungen der Mechanik, I (Lecture at Clark University, 
1899), Schr. 253; English translation “Theories as representations” in Philosophy of Science, New 
York, Meridian Books, 1960. 

Notiz irber die Formel fur den Drucke der Gase. Recueil de Travaux offerts par les Auteurs a H. A. 

Lorentz, Arch. Neerl. [2] 5,76(1900); Abh. 3,671. 

Uber die Prinzipien der Mechanik. I. Antritts-Vorlesung, gehalten im November 1900; II. Antritts- 
Vorlesung, gehalten in Wien im Oktober 1902; Schr. 308. 

Uber statistische Mechanik. Vortrag gehalten beim wissenschaftlichen Kongress in St. Louis, 1904. 
Schr. 345. 

(with J. Nabl) Kinetische Theorie der Materie. Encyklopadie der mathematischen Wissenschaften, 5: 
1, Art. V 8. Leipzig, B. G. Teubner, 1905. 

Boltzmann, L.: see also Bryan, G. H. 

Bosanquet, R. H. M. 

Notes on the theory of sound. Phil. Mag. [5] 3,271 (1877). 

(B, §44) 

Boyle, R. 

The Works of the Honourable Robert Boyle. Revised edition by Thomas Birch, London, 1772, 6 
vols. (Cited as “Works”.) 

New Experiments physico-mechanical, touching the spring of the air, and its effects; made, for the 
most part, in a newpneumatical engine, Oxford, 1660. Works 1,1. 

(TI) 

A Defence of the doctrine touching the spring and weight of the air, proposed by Mr. R. Boyle in his 
new physico-mechanical experiments; against the objections of Francisais Linus. Wherewith the 
objector’s funicular hypothesis is also examined. Oxford, 1662. Works 1,118. 

(TI) 

Broda, E. 

Ludwig Boltzmann: Mensch, Pliysiker, Philosoph. Berlin, Deut-scher Verlag der Wissenschaften, 
1955. 

(TI) 

Brown, A. Cmm 

Difficulties connected with the dynamical theory of gases. Nature 32,352 (1885). 

(II, §72,85) 

Brush, S. G. 

The development of the kinetic theory of gases. I. Herapath. II. Waterston. III. Clausius. IV. 
Maxwell. Annals of Science 13, 188,273 (1957); 14, 185,243 (1958). 

(TI) 

John James Waterston and the kinetic theory of gases. American Scientist 49, 202 (1961). 

(TI) 

Development of the kinetic theory of gases. V. The equation of state. Amer. J. Phys. 29, 593 (1961). 

(TI; II, §6,49, 58) 

Development of the kinetic theory of gases. VI. Viscosity. Amer. J. Phys. 30,269 (1962). 

(TI; I, §9) 

Theories of liquid viscosity. Chem. Revs. 62,513 (1962). 

(I, §23) 

Bryan, G. H. 

Researches related to the connection of the second law with dynamical principles. Brit. Assoc. Rept. 
61,85 (1891). 


41 . 


“‘Puh.c- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



(I, §6) 


The laws of distribution of energy and their limitations. Brit. Assoc. Rept. 64,64 (1894). 

(with L. Boltzmann) liber die mechanische Analogic des Warmegleichgewichtes zweier sich 
beriihrender Korper. Wien. Ber. 103,1125 (1894); Proc. Phys. Soc. 13,485 (1895); Nature 51, 
454 (1895); Boltzmann's WissenschaftlicheAbhandlungen 3,510. 

(I, §19) 

Prof. Boltzmann and the kinetic theory of gases. Nature 51,31 (1894). 

(I> F) 

The kinetic theory of gases. Nature 51,152,176,319,52,244 (1894-5). 

(I,F) 

On MaxwelPs law of partition of energy. Nature 51,262 (1895). 

(I. F) 

Note on a simple graphic illustration of the determinantal relation of dynamics. Phil. Mag. [5] 39, 
531 (1895); Proc. Phys. Soc. London 13,481 (1895). 

(h, §28) 

The assumptions in Boltzmann’s minimum theorem. Nature 52,29 (1895). 

(I, §6) 

Obituary of Boltzmann. Nature 74,569 (1906). 

Obituary notice of Boltzmann. Proc. Roy. Soc. A80, xi (1908). 

Burbury, S. FI. 

Boltzmann’s minimum function. Nature 51,78,320,52,104 (1894-1895). 

(I, §3; H, §91) 

The kinetic theory of gases. Nature 51, 175,52, 316 (1894-1895). 

(I. F) 

Cams, P. 

Ludwig Boltzmann; an obituary. The Open Court 20,759 (1906). 

Chapman, S. 

On the law of distribution of molecular velocities, and on the theory of viscosity and thermal 
conduction, in a non-uniform simple monatomic gas. Phil. Trans. A216,279 (1916); Phys. Abstr. 
19,290(1916). 


(TI; I, §14) 

On the kinetic theory of a gas. Part II, a composite monatomic gas, diffusion, viscosity, and thermal 
conduction. Phil. Trans. A217,115 (1907); Phys. Abstr. 20,408 (1917). 


(TI; I, §14) 


(with F. W. Dootson) Note on thermal diffusion. Phil. Mag. [6] 33,248 (1917). 

(I, §14) 

On certain integrals occurring in the kinetic theory of gases. Mem. Proc. Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. 
66,No. 1 (1922). 


(I, §21,24) 


(with T. G. Cowling) The Mathematical Theory of Non-Uniform Gases. London, Cambridge 
University Press, 1939; second ed. 1952. 


(I, §14) 


Clausius, R. 

Abhandlungen iiber die mechanische Warmetheorie. Braunschweig, F. Vieweg, 1864 and 1867; 
second edition, Vols. I and II, 1879; Vol. Ill ,Die Kinetische Theorie der Gase, 1889-91. Third 
edition, Vol. I, 1887. (Hereafter cited as “Abh.”) English translations (not including Vol. Ill) by 
T. A. Hirst, with an introduction by J. Tyndall : The Mechanical Theory of Heat, London, J. Van 
Voorst, 1867; and by W. R. Browne, same title, London, Macmillan, 1879. 


41 , 


jMcifte, 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(I, § 1, 14; H, §16, 58) 

Ueber die Art der Bewegung, welche wir Warme nennen. Ann. Physik [2] 100,353 (1857); Ann. 
Chim. Phys. [3] 50, 497 (1857); Phil. Mag. [4] 14, 108 (1857); Z. Math. Phys.2, 170 (1857); 
Arch. Sci. Phys. (Geneve) 36,293 (1857); Nuovo Cimento 6,435 (1857); Abh. 3,1. 

(TI) 

Ueber die mittlere Lange der Wege, welche bei der Molecularbewegung gasformiger Korper von 
den einzelnen Moleculen zuriickgelegt werden, nebst einigen anderen Bemerkungen liber die 
mechanischen Warmetheorie. Ann. Physik [2] 105,239 (1858); Phil. Mag. [4] 17, 81 (1859); 
Arch. Sci. Phys. (Geneve) 4, 341 (1859); Abh. 3,46. 

(I, §9) 

On the dynamical theory of gases. Phil. Mag. [4] 19,434 (1860). 

(I, §9) 

Ueber die Warmeleitung gasformiger Korper. Ann. Physik [2] 115, 1 (1862); Phil. Mag. [4] 23,417, 
512 (1862); Presse Sci. deux Mondes 24 (1862) (2); Arch. Sci. Phys. (Geneve) 16, 134 (1862); Z. 
gesammten Naturwiss. (Berlin) 20,216 (1862); Abh. 3,105. 

(I, §14) 

Ueber einen auf die Warme an wendbaren mechanischen Satz. Sitzber. Niederrhein Ges. (Bonn) 114 
(1870); Ann. Physik [2] 141, 124 (1870); Carl's Repertorium 6, 197 (1870); Phil. Mag. [4] 40, 
122 (1870); Z. Math. Phys. 17, 82 (1872). 

(TI; E, §49) 

Ueber das Verhalten der Kohlensaure in Bezug auf Druck, Volumen, und Temperatur. Ann. Physik 
[3] 9, 337 (1880); Phil. Mag. [5] 9, 393 (1880); Ann. Chim. [4] 30, 358 (1883); Abh. 3, 184. 

Oh §54) 

Ueber einige neue Untersuchungen fiber die mittlere Weglange der Gasmoleciile. Ann. Physik [3] 
10,92(1880); Abh. 3,204. 


(I, §14) 


Crookes, W. 

On the action of heat on gravitating masses. Proc. R. S. London 22,37 (1874); Phil. Trans. 164, 501 
(1874); Chem. News 29,1 (1874), 31, 1,11,23,33,43,53 (1875). 


(I, § 1 ) 

Culverwell, E. P. 

Note on Boltzmann’s kinetic theory of gases, and on Sir W. Thomson’s address to Section A, British 
Association, 1884. Phil. Mag. [5] 30,95 (1890). 

(I, §6) 

Dr. Watson's proof of Boltzmann’s theorem on permanence of distributions. Nature 50,617(1894). 

(I. F) 

The kinetic theory of gases. Nature 51, 78 (1894). 

(I. F) 

Boltzmann’s minimum theorem. Nature 51, 105,246, 52, 149 (1894-1895). 

(I. F) 

Prof. Boltzmann’s letter on the kinetic theory of gases. Nature 51, 581 (1895). 

(I, F, §6) 

Davydov, B. I. 

A great physicist (on the 50th anniversary of Ludwig Boltzmann's death). Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 61, 17 
(1957); translation AEC-tr-3971, p. 20 (U. S. National Science Foundation). 

Deville: see Saint-Claire Deville. 

Dugas, R. 

La Theorie Physique au sens de Boltzmann et ses prolongements modemes. Neuchatel-Suisse, 


41 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Editions du Griffon, 1959. 

(TI; I, §1; n, §91) 

Duhem, P. M. M. 

La Theorie Physique, son objet et sa structure. Paris, Chevalier et Riviera, 1906; second edition, 
1914; third edition, 1933; English translation: The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, 
Princeton University Press, 1954. 

(II, F) 

Traile d’energetique; ou, De Thermodynamique Generate. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1911. 

(I,§1) 

Ehrenfest, P. 

Collected Scientific Papers. Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1959 (hereafter cited as “Papers”). 

Zur Berechnung der Volumkorrektion in der Zustandsgleichung von van der Waals. Wien. Ber. 112, 
1107 (1903); Papers, 77. 

(B, §54) 

Ludwig Boltzmann. Math.-Naturw. Blatter 3 (1906); Papers, 131. 

(with T. Ehrenfest) Begriffliche Grundlagen der statistischen Auffassung in der Mechanik. 
Encyklopadie der mathematischen Wissenschaften, Vol. 4, Part 32; Leipzig, B. G. Teubner, 1911. 
Papers, 213. French translation by E. Borel , Encyclopedie des Sciences Mathematiques, 4:1:1, 
Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1915 (with a supplement by Borel). English translation by M. J. 
Moravcsik, with a new preface by T. Ehrenfest: The Conceptual Foundations of the Statistical 
Approach in Mechanics, Cornell University Press, 1959. 

(TI; II, §32,91) 

Enskog, D. 

Kinetische Theorie der Vorgdnge in mdssig verdiinnten Gasen. (Inaugural Dissertation.) Uppsala, 
Almqvist and Wiksell, 1917. 

(TI; I, §14) 

Euler, L. 

Tentamen explicationis phaenomenorum aeris. Comm. Acad. Sci. Imp. Petropol. 2,347 (1727). [See 
R. Hooykaas, Arch. Int. d’Hist. Sci. 2,180 (1948).] 

(TI) 

Fitzgerald, G. F. 

Scientific Writings of the late George Francis Fitzgerald. Dublin, Hodges, Figgis, 1902 (cited as 
“Writings”). 

On the mechanical theory of Crookes’s force. Sci. Trans. Royal Dublin Soc. 1,57 (1878); Phil. Mag. 
[5] 7,15 (1879); Writings, 18. 

(I, §14) 

The kinetic theory of gases. Nature 51,221 (1895); Writings, 321. 

(I. F) 

Flamm, L. 

Die Personlichkeit Boltzmanns. Wiener Chem.-Zeitung 47,28 (1944). 

In memory of Ludwig Boltzmann. Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 61, 3 (1957) ; translation AEC-tr-3971, p. 3 
(U. S. National Science Foundation). 

Fiichtbauer, C., and Hoffmann, W. 

Uber Maximalintensitat, Dampfung und wahre Intensitatsver-teilung von Serienlinien in 
Absorption. Ann. Physik [4] 43,96 (1914). 

(I, §9) 

Gay-Lussac, L. J. 

Premier essai pour determiner les variations de temperature qu'eprouvent les gaz en changeant de 
densite, et considerations sur leur capacite pour le calorique. Mem. Phys. Chim. Soc. d’Arcueil 


41 . 


IPsjJixl. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(Paris) 1, 180 (1807); J. f. Chem. und Physik (Gehlen) 6, 392 (1808); Ann. Physik 30, 249 (1808). 

(II, §D 

Gibbs, J. W. 

The Scientific Papers of J. Willard Gibbs. London and New York, Longmans, Green, 1906. Second 
edition: The Collected Works of J. Willard Gibbs, 1928 (cited as "Works”). Reprinted by Yale 
University Press, 1948, and by Dover, New York, 1960. 

On the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances. Trans. Conn. Acad. 3, 108, 343 (1875); Amer. J. 
Sci. 16,441 (1878); Works 1,55. German translation by W. Ostwald, Thermodynamische Studien, 
Leipzig, Engelmann, 1892. French translation by G. Matisse, L ’Equilibre des substances 
heterogenes, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1919. 

(II, F, §72) 

Elementary principles in statistical mechanics, developed with especial reference to the rational 
foundation of thermodynamics. New York, Scribner, 1902; Works 2,1. German translation by E. 
Zermelo: Elementare Grundlagen der statistische Mechanik, entwickelt besonders im Hinblick 
auf eine rationelle Begrundung der Thermodynamik, Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1905. French 
translation by F. Cosserot and J. Rossignol, with an introduction by M. Brillouin: Principes 
elementaires de mecanique statistique, developpes plus particulierement en vue d’obtenir une 
base rationelle de la thermodynamique, Paris, J. Hermann, 1926. Russian translation by K. V. 
NikoPskogo: OcHOBHbie npHHipmbi ctAthcthucckoh MexannKH, H3JiaraeMbie co cneitnanHbiM 
npHMeHeHtteM k pannonaubHOMy onocHOBanuio TepxiounnaMUKH, MocKBa, orna, roc. hsu.-bo 
T exHHKO—TcopcTHnecKOH jiHTepaTypbi, 1946. 

(TI; E, §32) 

Groeneveld, J. 

Two theorems on classical many-particle systems. Physics Letters 3,50 (1962). 

(h, §54) 

ter Haar, D. 

Elements of Statistical Mechanics, New York, Rinehart, 1954. 

(TI; H, §91) 

Foundations of statistical mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 27,289 (1955). 

(TI) 

Happel, H. 

Zur Theorie und Prufung der Zustandsgleichung. Ann. Physik [4] 21, 342 (1906). 

(n, §54) 

Hautefeuille, P. 

Action de la chaleur sur Tacide iodhydrique. C. R. Paris 64, 608 (1867); Bull. Soc. Chim. Paris 7, 
203(1867). 

(H, §69) 

Sur quelques reactions inverses. C. R. Paris 64,704 (1867); Bull. Soc. Chim. Paris 7,200 (1867). 

(H, §69) 

Heine, E. 

Handbuch der Kugelfunctionen, Theorie und Anwendungen. Berlin, G. Reimer, 1861; second 
edition, 1878-1881. 

(I, §22) 

Helm, G. 

Die Lehre von der Energie historisch-kritisch entwickelt. Leipzig, A. Felix, 1887. 

(I, § 1) 

Grundzuge der mathematischen Chemie; Ener getik der chemischen Ersclieinungen. Leipzig, W. 
Engelmann, 1894. English translation by J. Livingston and R. Morgan, The Principles of 
Mathematical Chemistry: The Energetics of Chemical Phenomena, New York, Wiley, 1897. 


41 . 


ipfffte, 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(I, §1) 

Zur Energetik. Ann. Physik [3] 57,646 (1896). 

(I, § 1) 

Die Energetik nach ihrer geschichtlichen Entwickelung. Leipzig, Veit, 1898. 

(I, § 1 ) 

Herapath, J. 

A mathematical inquiry into the causes, laws and principal phenomena of heat, gases, gravitation, 
etc. Ann. Phil. [2] 1,273,340,401 (1821). 

(TI) 

Tables of temperature, and a mathematical development of the causes and laws of phaenomena 
which have been adduced in support of hypotheses of 'Calorific capacity,’ ‘Latent heat,’ etc. Ann. 
Phil. [2] 2, 50, 89,201,257,363,435, 19, 16 (1821). 

(TI) 

Mathematical Physics. London, Whittaker, 1847. 

(TI) 

Hertz, H. 

Die Prinzipien der Mechanik. Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1894. English translation by D. E. Jones and J. T. 
Whalley, The Principles of Mechanics, London, Macmillan, 1899; reprinted by Dover, New 
York, 1956, with a new introduction by R. S. Cohen. 

(I, §1) 

Him, G.-A. 

Recherches experimentales sur la relation qui existe entre la resistance de Pair et sa temperature. 
Consequences physiques et philosophiques qui decoulent de ces experiences. Mem. Acad. Roy. 
Sci. Belgique 43 (1881); Ann. Chim. Phys. [6] 7, 289 (1886); also published as a separate by 
Gauthier-Villars, Paris. 

(II, F) 

La cinetique modem et le dynamisme de l’avenir. Reponse a diverse critiques faites par M. Clausius 
aux conclusions [des] travaux precedents. Recherches experimentales et analytiques sur les lois de 
l’ecoulement et du choc des gaz en fonction de la temperature. Mem. Acad. Roy. Sci. Belgique 46 
(1886). 

(II, F) 

Reflexions relatives a la note precedente de M. Ladislas Natanson. C. R. Paris 107, 166 (1888). 

(II, F) 

Hirschfelder, J. O., Curtiss, C. F., and Bird, R. B. 

Molecular Theory of Gases and Liquids. New York, Wiley, 1954. 

(I, §12) 

Holtsmark, J. 

Ueber die Verbreiterung von Spektrallinien. Ann. Physik [4] 58,577 (1919); Phys. Zeits. 20, 162 
(1919). 

(I, §9) 

Jacobi, K. G. J. 

Vorlesungen iiber Dynamik. (Gehalten an der Universitat zu Konigsberg im Wintersemester 1842- 
1843 und nach einem von C. W. Borchardt ausgearbeiteten Hefte hrsg. von A. Clebsch.) Berlin, G. 
Reimer, 1866. Second edition, 1884 (as Supplementband, Gesammelte Werke). 

(R, §25,29,31) 

Jager, G. 

Uber die kinetische Theorie der inneren Reibung der Fliissigkeiten. Wien. Ber. 102, 253 (1893). 

(I, §14) 

Die Gasdruckformel mit Beriicksichtigung des Molecularvolumens. Wien. Ber. 105, 15 (1896). 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(n, §58) 

Uber den Einfluss des Molecularvolumens auf die mittlere Weglange der Gasmolekeln. Wien. Ber. 
105,97(1896). 


(I, §1) 

liber den Einfluss des Molecularvolumens auf innere Reibung der Gase. Wien. Ber. 108,447 
(1899); 109,74 (1900). 


(I, §14) 

Zur kinetischen Theorie der inneren Reibung der Gase. Wien. Ber. 127, 849 (1918); Phys. Abstr. 23, 
40(1920). 

(I, §14) 

Jaffe, G. 

Recollections of three great laboratories. J. Chem. Educ. 29, 230 (1952). 

(TI) 

Jeans, J. H. 

The persistence of molecular velocities in the kinetic theory of gases. Phil. Mag. [6] 8,700 (1904). 

(I, §14) 

The Dynamical Theory of Gases. Cambridge University Press, 1904; second edition, 1916; third 
edition, 1921; fourth edition, 1925, reprinted by Dover, New York, 1954. 

(I, §14) 

Joule, J. P. 

The Scientific Papers of James Prescott Joule. London, The Physical Society, 1884. (Cited as 
“Papers.”) 

On the changes of temperature produced by the rarefaction and condensation of air. Phil. Mag. [3] 
26, 369 (1845); Proc. R. S. London 5, 517 (1844); Ann. Chim.35, 118 (1852); Papers, 171. 
German translation by J. W. Spengel: Das mechanische Warme-equivalent. Gesammelte 
Abhandlungen, Braunschweig, F. Vieweg, 1872. 

(II, §1) 

Some remarks on heat, and the constitution of elastic fluids. Mem. Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. 9, 107 
(1851) (read 1848); Phil. Mag. [4] 14, 211 (1857) (reprint with corrections); Ann. Chim. [3] 50, 
381 (1857); Arch. Sci. Phys. (Geneve) 36, 349 (1857); Papers, 290; Amer. J. Phys. 17, 63 (1949). 

(TI) 

(with W. Thomson) On the thermal effects of fluids in motion. Phil. Trans. 144, 321 (1854), 152, 
579 (1862); Kelvin’s Mathematical and Physical Papers , Cambridge University Press, Vol. I, p. 
333 (1882). Joint Scientific Papers of James Prescott Joule , London, The Physical Society, 1887, 
p. 247,342. 

(II, §1) 

Kamerlingh Onnes, H. 

Theorie Generale de l'etat fluide. Arch. Neerl. 30, 101 (1897). 

(h, §60) 

Kelvin, W. Thomson (Lord) 

Mathematical and Physical Papers. Cambridge University Press, 1882-1911. Second edition. 
(Cited as “Papers.”) 

On a universal tendency in nature to the dissipation of mechanical energy. Phil. Mag. [4] 4, 304 
(1852); Proc. R. S. Edinburgh 3,139 (1857); Papers 1,511. 

(h, §89) 

(with P. G. Tait) Treatise on Natural Philosophy, Vol. I. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1867. Second 
edition (1 vol. in 2 parts), Cambridge University Press, 1879, 1883. Reprinted by Dover, New 
York, 1962, as Principles of Mechanics and Dynamics. German translation by H. Helmholtz and 
G. Wertheim: Handbuch der theoretischen Physik, Braunschweig, F. Vieweg, 1871,1874. 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(n, § 29 ) 

The size of atoms. Nature 1, 551 (1870); Amer. J. Sci. 50, 38 (1870); Proc. Manchester Lit. Phil. 
Soc. 9, 136 (1870); Les Mondes 22, 701 (1870); 27, 616 (1872); Ann. Chem. Pharm. 157, (1871 ); 
Rev. Sci. [2] 2, 896 (1872 )] Treatise on Natural Philosophy, second edition, Part II, p. 495; 
Papers, second edition, 5,289 (1911). 

(I, §12) 

On some test cases for the Maxwell-Boltzmann doctrine regarding distribution of energy. Proc. R. S. 
London 50, 79 (1891); Nature 44, 355 (1891); Papers 4, 484. 

Kennard, E. H. 

Kinetic theory of gases with an introduction to statistical mechanics. New York, McGraw-Hill, 
1938. 

Kirchhoff, G. R. 

Vorlesungen iiber mathematische Physik. Leipzig, B. G. Teubner. I. Mechanik. (1874). 

(TI; I, §1) 

IV. Vorlesungen iiber die Theorie der Warme (1894). 

(I, F, §3, 14, 17,20,23,24) 

Knudsen, M. 

Kinetic Theory of Gases. London, Methuen, 1934. 

Koenig, F. O. 

On the history of science and of the second law of thermodynamics. Men and Moments in the 
History of Science (ed. H. M. Evans), Seattle, University of Washington Press, 1959, p. 57. 

(H, §89) 

Kronig, A. 

Grundziige einer Theorie der Gase. Ann. Physik [2] 99, 315 (1856); L'Institut24, 408 (1856); 
Chem. Cent. 725 (1856); Arch. Sci. Phys. 33,137 (1856); Ann. Chim. [3] 50,491 (1857); Nuovo 
Cimento 6,435 (1857). 

Kuenen, J. P. 

On the influence of gravitation on the critical phenomena of simple substances and of mixtures. 
Comm. Phys. Lab., Leiden, No. 17 (1895). 

(D, §61) 

Kundt, A., and Warburg, E. 

Ueber Reibung and Warmeleitung verdiinnten Gase. Ann. Physik [2] 155,337, 525,156,177 
(1875); Phil. Mag. [4] 50, 53 (1875). Monatsber. Akad. Berlin 160 (1875). 

(I, §1,12,13) 

Ueber die specifische Warme des Quecksilbergases. Ber. Chem. Ges. Berlin 8, 945 (1875); Ann. 
Physik [2] 157,353(1876). 

(I,§8,H,§45) 

Kutta, M. W. 

Zur Theorie des Stefan’schen Calorimeters. Ann. Physik [3] 54, 104(1895). 

(I, §13) 

Laplace, P. S. (Marquis de) 

Traite de mecanique celeste, Paris, J. B. M. Duprat, 1798-1825, 5 vols. Supplement au x c Livre: Sur 
Faction capillaire. Livre xll: De T attraction et de la repulsion des spheres et des lois l’equilibre et 
du mouvement des fluids elastiques. Reprinted in Oeuvres Completes, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 
1878-1912, Vols. 1-5. 

(TI; E, §23) 

Larmor, J. 

The kinetic theory of gases. Nature 51,152 (1894). 

(I, §6) 


422 


Ma£4cjvi(i£ieaZ 



Lemoine, G. 

Equilibreschimiques entre l’hydrogene et l'iode gazeux. Ann. Chim. Phys. [5] 12,145 (1877). 

(n, §69) 

Lenin, V. I. 

MaTepHaJIH3M H 9MnH p HOK|“)HTHUH i\ 1 ; KpHTHneCKHC 3aMeTKH 06 ohhoh peaKunonHOH c()hjtococ|ihh. 
Moscow, Izdanie “Zveno,” 1909; second edition, Gos. Izd.-vo, 1920. English translation by A. 
Fineberg: (based on second edition). Materialism and Empirio-Criticism: Critical Comments on a 
Reactionary’ Philosophy. Moscow, Cooperative Pub. Soc. of Foreign Workers in the USSR, 1937; 
reprinted by Foreign Languages Pub. House, Moscow, 1947. (Also many other editions.) 

(TI; II, F) 

Liouville, J. 

Note sur la theorie de la variation des constantes arbitrages. J. de Math. 3,342 (1838). 

(H, §29) 

Loeb, L. 

Kinetic Theory of Gases. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1922; second edition, 1934. 

(I, §1,14) 

Lorentz, H. A. 

Collected Papers. The Hague, M. Nijhoff, 1934-1939. (Cited as “Papers”) 

Abhandlungen iiber theoretische Physik. Leipzig, B. G. Teubner, 1907. (Cited as “Abh.”) 

Uber die Anwendung des Satzes vom Virial in der kinetischen Theorie der Gase. Ann. Physik [3] 
12, 127,660 (1881): Papers 6,40; Abh. 1 14. 

(II, §56,58) 

liber das Gleichgewicht der lebendigen Kraft unter Gasmolekulen. Wien. Ber. 95, 115 (1887) ; 
Papers 6,74; Abh. 124. 

(I, §5) 

Ludwig Boltzmann (Gedachtnisrede, gehalten in der Sitzung der Deutschen Physikalischen 
Gesellschaft, 17 May 1907). Ver-handl. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 9,206 (1907). 

Loschmidt, J. 

Zur Grosse der Luftmolecule. Wien. Ber. 52, 395 (1865); Wien. Anz. 2, 162 (1865); Z. Math. Phys. 
10,511 (1865). 

(I, §12; H, §66) 

Experimental-Untersuchungen iiber die Diffusion von Gasen ohne porose Scheidewande. Wien. 
Ber. 61,367,62,468(1870). 

(I, §13,24) 

liber den Zustand des Warmegleichgewichtes eines Systems von Korpern mit Rucksicht auf die 
Schwerkraft. Wien. Ber. 73, 128,366 (1876); 75, 287, 76, 209 (1877). 

(TI; I, §6; H, §91) 

Mach, E. 

Die Geschichte und die Wurzel des Satzes von der Erhaltung der Arbeit. (Vortrag gehalten in der k. 
bohm. Ges. der Wiss. am 15 Nov. 1871) Prague, Calve, 1872. English translation, by P. E. B. 
Jourdain, History and Root of the Principle of Conser\>ation of Energy, Chicago, Open Court, 
1911. 

(TI; II, F) 

On the principle of the conservation of energy. ("In part a re-elaboration” of the above treatise.) The 
Monist5, 167 (1894); reprinted in Popular Scientific Lectures, Chicago, Open Court, 1894; fifth 
edition, 1943; Popular-wissenschaftliche Vorlesungen, Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1897; fourth edition 
1910. 

(II, F) 

Die okonomische Natur der physikalischen Forschung (Vortrag). Wien. Almanach 293 (1882); also 


“‘Piiiuc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



published as a separate by Gerald’s Sohn, Wien. The Open Court 8, 4263, 4271 (1894); Popular 
Scientific Lectures, fifth edition, p. 186. 

(II, F, §72) 

Die Prinzipien der Warmelehre, historisch-kritisch entwickelt. Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1896; second 
edition, 1900. 

(h, F, §1) 

Majumdar, R. 

Equation of state. Bull. Calcutta Math. Soc. 21,107 (1929). 

(h, §54) 

Maxwell, J. C. 

The Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell. Cambridge University Press, 1890; reprinted by 
Flermann, Paris, 1927, and by Dover, New York, 1952. (Cited as “Papers.”) 

Illustrations of the dynamical theory of gases. I. On the motions and collisions of perfectly elastic 
spheres. II. On the process of diffusion of two or more kinds of moving particles among one 
another. III. On the collision of perfectly elastic bodies of any form. Phil. Mag. [4] 19,19,20, 21, 
33 (1860); Brit. Assoc. Rept. 29 (2) 9 (1859); Athenaeum, p. 468 (Oct. 8, 1859); L’Institut 364 
(1859); Papers 1,377. 

(TI; I, §9,14) 


Viscosity or internal friction of air and other gases. Phil. Trans. 156,249 (1866); Proc. R. S. London 
15,14 (1867); Papers 2,1. 

(I, §12) 

On the dynamical theory of gases. Phil. Trans. 157,49 (1867); Proc. R. S. London 15,146 (1867) 
(read May 1,1866); Phil. Mag. [4] 32,390 (1866); 35,129,185 (1868); Papers 2,26. 

(TI; I, § 12,17, 20,21,22,23, 24; h, §92, 93) 
A discourse on molecules. Nature 8,437 (1873); Phil. Mag. [4] 46,453 (1873); LesMondes 32, 311, 
409 (1873); Pharmaceut. J. 4,404,492,511 (1874); Papers 2,361. 

(I, §12) 

On the dynamical evidence of the molecular constitution of bodies (lecture). Nature 11, 357, 374 
(1875); J. Chem. Soc. 13,493 (1875); Gazz. Chim. Ital. 5,190 (1875); Papers 2,418. 

(n, § 16) 

On stresses in rarified gases arising from inequalities of temperature. Phil. Trans. 170,231 (1880); 
Proc. R. S. London 27,304 (1878); Papers 2,681. 


(I, §1, 14, 22,23) 

On Boltzmann’s theorem on the average distribution of energy in a system of material points. Trans. 
Cambridge Phil. Soc. 12, 547 (1879); Phil. Mag. [5] 14,299 (1882); Ann. Physik Beibl.5, 403 
(1881); Papers 2,713. 

Mayer, J. R. 

Bemerkungen liber die Krafte der unbelebten Natur. Ann. Chem. Pharm. 42,233 (1842); Phil. Mag. 
[4] 24, 371 (1862); Isis 13, 27, 35 (1929) ; Die Mechanik der Wdnne in gesammelten Schriften, 
Stuttgart, J. G. Cotta, 1867; third edition, 1893. 

(TI; II, F) 

Meier, F., and Crafts, J. M. 

Sur la densite de vapeur de l’iode. Bull. Soc. Chim. Paris 33,501,550; 34,2 (1880); Arch. Sci. Phys. 
(Geneve) 4, 132 (1880); Amer. Chem. J. 2, 108 (1880); C. R. Paris 92, 39 (1881); Ber. deutsch. 
chem. Ges. 13,851 (1880). 


Mendoza, E. 

A sketch for a history of the kinetic theory of gases. Physics Today, 14,36 (March 1961). 


(H, §66) 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



(TI) 

The surprising history of the kinetic theory of gases. Memoirs Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. (in press). 

(TI) 

Meyer, L. 

Ueber die Molecularvolumina chemische Verbindungen. Ann. Chem. Pharm. 5 (Suppl.) 129 (1867). 

(I, §12) 

Meyer, O. E. 

Ueber die innere Reibung der Gase. Ann. Physik [2] 148,203 (1873). 

(I, §12) 

Die kinetische Theorie der Gase, in elementarer Darstellung mit mathematischen Zusatzen. Breslau, 
Maruschke und Berendt, 1877; second edition, 1899. English translation by R. E. Baynes: The 
Kinetic Theory of Gases, London, Longmans, Green, 1899. 

(I, F, §12,13,14) 

Nagaoka, H. 

On two constants A \ and A 2 in the kinetic theory of gases. Nature 69,79 (1903). 

(I, §21,24) 

Natanson, L. 

O znaczeniu kinetycznem funkcyi dysypacyjnej [On the kinetic interpretation of the dissipation 
function]. Rozprawy Spraw. Pos. Wyd. Mat.-Prz. Akad. Urn. Krakow 9, 171 (1895); C. R. Paris 
117,539 (1893); Bull. Acad. Sci. Cracovie 348 (1893); Phil. Mag. [5] 39, 455 (1895); Z. phys. 
Chem. 13,437 (1894); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 1,6 (1895). 

(I, §24) 

O energii kinetycznej ruchu ciepla i o funckcyi dysypacyjnej odpowiedniej [On the kinetic energy 
of the motion of heat and the corresponding dissipation function]. Rozprawy Spraw. Pos. Wyd. 
Mat.-Prz. Akad. Urn. Krakow 7, 273 (1895); Bull. Acad. Sci. Cracovie 2,295 (1894); Phil. Mag. 
[5] 39,501 (1895); Z. Phys. Chem. 16,289 (1895); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 1,267 (1895). 

(I, §24) 

Nature (anonymous correspondent) 

Discussion on the kinetic theory of gases, British Association meeting. Nature 32, 533 (1885). 
[Remarks of Crum Brown, Liveing, W. Thomson, J. J. Thomson, Hicks, Reynolds, Dixon.] 

(n, §72) 

Naumann, A. 

Grundriss der Thennochemie, oder Der Lehre von den Beziehung zwischen Wanne und chemischen 
Erscheinungen vom Standpunkt der mechanischen Wdnnetheorie dargestellt. Braunschweig, F. 
Vieweg, 1869. 

(II, §66) 

Ueber Dichte und Zersetzung des Dampfs der Untersalpetersaure unterhalb ihres Siedepunkts bei 
verschiedenen Druck. Ber. deutsch. chem. Ges. 11, 2045 (1878); Jahresb. Fortschr. Chem. 120 
(1878). 

(H, §66) 

Newton, I. 

Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, London, 1687. Prop, xlx. Theorem xIV, Section V, 
Book II. For an English translation, see for example Florian Cajori’s revision of Andrew Motte's 
translation of 1729: Sir Isaac Newton ’ s Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy and his 
System of the World, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1946, p. 290-292. 

(TI) 

Ostwald. W. 

Abhandlungen und Vortrage allgemeinen Inhaltes (1887—1903). Leipzig, Veit, 1904 (cited as 
“Abh.”). 


425 


jMkffte, Ma£4cjvi(i£ieaZ 



Fortschritte der physikalischen Chemie in den letzten Jahren (Vortrag, gehalten in der vereinigten 
Abteilung fur Physik und Chemie der 64. Versammlung Deutscher Naturforscher und Aerzte zu 
Flalle am 24 Sept. 1891) Abh. 34. 

(II, F) 

Die Ueberwindung des wissenschaftlichen Materialismus. Verhandl. Ges. Deutscher Naturforscher 
und Aerzte (Leipzig), Th. l,p. 155 (1895); Abh. 220. Science Progress 4, 419 (1896). 

(I, §1; n, §72) 

Studien zur Energetik. Berichte Verh. k. Sachsischen Ges. Wiss. (Leipzig) Math.-Phys. Classe, 43, 
271 (1891), 44, 211 (1892). 


(L § 1) 

Zur Energetik. Ann. Physik [3] 58,154 (1896). 

(I, § 1 ) 

Individuality and Immortality. (Ingersoll Lecture, Flarvard) Boston, Houghton, Mifflin, 1906. 

(I, §1) 

Energetische Grundlagen der Kulturwissenschaft. Leipzig, Klink-hardt, 1909. French translation by 
E. Philippi: Les Fondements energetiques de la science de la civilisation. Paris, V. Giard et E. 
Briere, 1910. 


(I, § 1) 


Grundriss der allgemeinen Chemie. Leipzig, Engelmann, fourth edition, 1909, Vorbericht. English 
translation by W. W. Taylor: Outlines of General Chemistry, London, Macmillan, 1912. 

(TI) 

Die Fordenmg des Tages. Leipzig, Akademische Verlagsgesell-schaft m. b. H., 1910. 

(I, § 1) 

Monistische Sonntagspredigten. Leipzig, Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, m. b. H., 1911. 


(I, § 1) 


Die energetische Imperativ. Leipzig, Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft m. b. H., 1912. 


(I, § 1) 


Die Energie. Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1912. 

Die Philosophie der Werte. Leipzig, A. Kroner, 1913. 


(I. § 1) 
(I. § 1) 


Partington, J. R. 

An Advanced Treatise on Physical Chemistry. Vol. I. Fundamental Principles. The Properties of 
Gases. London, Longmans, Green, 1949. 


(h, §54) 


Pearson, K. 

The Grammar of Science. London, Block, 1892; second edition, 1900; third edition, 1911. 

(II, F) 

Pelabon, H. 

Sur la dissociation de Vacide selenhydride (Theses presentees a la Faculte des Sciences de Bordeaux, 
pour obtenir le grade de docteur es sciences physiques). Paris, Hermann, 1898. Mem. Soc. Sci. 
Bordeaux 3,141 (1899). 


(n, §72) 

Plancherel, M. 

Beweis der Unmoglichkeit ergodischer mechanischer Systeme. Ann. Physik [4] 42, 1061 (1913). 
Translation UCRL Trans. 874 (L) (Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Livermore, California). 

(R, §32) 

Planck, M. 

Physikalische Abhandlungen und Vortrage. Braunschweig, F. Vie weg, 1958 (cited as “Abh.”). 
Ueber das Princip der Vermehrung der Entropie. Ann. Physik [3] 30, 562, 31, 189, 32, 462 (1887); 


lu-iLe 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ “Pity. i .Zc. 1 



44, 385 (1891); Abh. 1, 196,217,232,382. 

(n, §72) 

Allgemeines zur neueren Entwickelung der Warmetheorie. (Vortrag, gehalten in der vereinigten 
Sitzung der Abt. fur Physik und Chemie der 64. Versammlung der Gesellschaft deutscher 
Naturforscher und Aerzte in Halle am 24 Sept. 1891). Z. phys. Chem. 8,647 (1891); Abh. 1,372. 

(I, § 1) 

Ueber den Beweis des MaxwelPschen Geschwindigkeitsvertheilungsgesetzes unter Gasmolekiilen. 
Mun. Ber. 24, 391 (1895); Ann. Physik [3] 55,220 (1895); Abh. 1,442. 

(I, §6) 

Gegen die neuere Energetik. Ann. Physik [3] 57, 72 (1896); Proc. Phys. Soc. Abstr. 2, 68 (1896); 
Abh. 1,459. 

(I, §1) 

Zur Theorie des Gesetzes der Energieverteilung im Normalspektrum. Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 2, 
237(1900); Abh. 1,698. 

(TI) 

Uber das Gesetz der Energieverteilung im Normalspektrum. Ann. Physik [4] 4, 553 (1901); Abh. 1, 
717. 


(TI) 

liber die Elementarquanta der Materie und der Elektrizitat. Ann. Physik [4] 4, 564 (1901) ; Abh. 1, 
728. 


(TI) 

Poincare, H. 

Oeuvres. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1951-54. 

Sur le probleme des trois corps et les equations de la dynamique. Acta Math. 13, 1 (1890); Oeuvres 
7,262. 

(TI; E, §88) 

Thermodynamique. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1892. German translation by J. Blondin: 
Thermodynamik, Berlin, J. Springer, 1893. 

(I, F; II, F) 

Poincare’s “Thermodynamics.” Nature 45, 414,485 (1892). 

(I, F; II, F) 

Sur une objection a la theorie cinetique des gaz. C. R. Paris 116, 1017 (1893); Oeuvres 10, 240. 

(I, §20, 23) 

Poisson, S. D. 

Sur la chaleur des gaz et des vapeurs. Ann. Chim. 23, 337 (1823): Ann. Physik 76, 269 (1824); 
English translation with notes by J. Herapath, Phil. Mag. 62,328 (1823). 

(TI; I, §20) 

Memoire sur la theorie du son. Nouv. Bull. Sci. Soc. Philomat. Paris 1, 19 (1807); J. Ecole Polyt. 
(Paris) 7,14 e Cah., 319 (1808). 


Nouvelle Theorie de l ’action capillaire. Paris, Bachelier, 1831. 

Theorie mathematique de la chaleur. Paris, Bachelier, 1835. 

Ramsay, W. 

Sur l’argon et Thelium. C. R. Paris 120,1049 (1895). 

Helium, a gaseous constituent of certain minerais. Proc. R. S. London 58, 81 (1895). 


(TI) 

(TI: E, §23) 
(TI) 

(R, §45) 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(I, §8) 


(with J. N. Collie) The homogeneity of helium and argon. Proc. R. S. London 60,206 (1896). 

(D, §45) 

The Gases of the atmosphere; the History of their discovery. London, Macmillan and Co., Ltd., 1896; 
second edition, 1902; third edition, 1905; fourth edition, 1915. French translation: Les gaz de 
Tatmosphere, Paris, Carre, 1898. 

(II, F, §84) 

(with M. W. Travers) On a new constituent of atmospheric air. Proc. R. S. London 63,405 (1898). 

(R, §45) 

(with M. W. Travers) On the companions of argon. Proc. R S London 63,437 (1898). 

(II, F) 

(with M. W. Travers) The homogeneity of helium. Proc. R. S. London 62,316 (1898). 

(II, F) 

The newly discovered elements; and their relation to the kinetic theory of gases. Mem. Proc. 
Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc. 43, No. 4 (1900) (read March 28,1899). 

(I, §8; II, F) 

Ramsay, W.: see also Rayleigh 
Rausenberger, O. 

Lehrbuch der analytischen Mechanik. Leipzig, B. G. Teubner, 1888; second edition, 1893. 

(h, §29) 

Rayleigh, J. W. Strutt (Lord) 

Scientific Papers. Cambridge University Press, 1899-1920. (Cited as “Papers.”) 

Some general theorems relating to vibrations. Proc. London Math. Soc. 4, 357 (1873); Papers 1, 
170. 

(I, §24) 

On the flow of viscous liquids, especially in two dimensions. Phil. Mag. [5] 36,354 (1893). 

(I, §24) 

(with W. Ramsay) Argon, a new constituent of the atmosphere. Phil. Trans. 186,187 (1896); 
Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, Washington, 1896, Vol. 29, Art. 4; Papers 4,130. 

(I, §8; H, §45) 

On the viscosity of argon as affected by temperature. Proc. R. S. London 66, 68 (1900); Papers 4, 
452. 

(I, §14) 

Address to the Royal Society [including obituary of Boltzmann]. Proc. R. S. London 79A, 1 (1907). 
Reichenbach, H. 

The Direction of Time. Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press, 1956. 

(TI; E, §90) 

Rey, A. 

La Theorie de la Physique chez les Physiciens contemporains. Paris, F. Alcan, 197; second edition, 
1927. 

(I, § 1) 

Reynolds, O. 

On the forces caused by evaporation from, and condensation at, a surface. Proc. R. S. London 22, 
401 (1874); Chem. News 30,11 (1874). 

(I, § 1) 

On certain dimensional properties of matter in the gaseous state. I. Experimental researches on 
thermal transpiration of gases through porous plates, and on the laws of transpiration and 
impulsion, including an experimental proof that a gas is not a continuous plenum. II. On an 
extension of the dynamical theory of gas which includes the stresses, tangential and normal. 


IPu+lc- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



caused by a varying condition of the gas, and affords an explanation of the phenomena of 
transpiration and impulsion. Proc. R. S. London 28, 304 (1879); Phil. Trans. 170,727 (1880); 
Nature 19,435 (1879). 

(I, §14) 

Richarz, F. 

Ueber das Gesetz von Dulong und Petit. Ann. Physik [3] 48, 708 (1893). 

(n, §42) 

Rosenblueth, M. N., and Rosenblueth, A. W. 

Further results on Monte Carlo equations of state. J. Chem. Phys. 22,881 (1954). 

(D, §54) 

Rosenthal, A. 

Beweis der Unmoglichkeit ergodischer Gassysteme. Ann. Physik [4] 42, 796 (1913). Translation 
UCRL Trans. 873(L) (Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Livermore, California). 

(R, §32) 

Royal Society of London 

Catalogue of Scientific Papers. (1) 1800-1863; (2) 1864-1873; (3) 1874-1883; (4) 1884-1900. 
London, Eyre and Spottiswoode, Clay and Sons, Cambridge University Press, 1867-1925. 

(II, §D 

Sageret, J. 

La vague mystique. Henri Poincare—Energetisme (W. Ostwald)— Neo-thomisme (P. Duhem)— 
Bergsonisme—Pragmatisme— Emile Boutroux. Paris, E. Flammarion, 1920. 

(I, §1) 

Saint-Claire Deville, E. H., and Troost, L. 

Sur le coefficient de dilatation et la densite de vapeur de Tackle hypoazotique. C. R. Paris 64, 237 
(1867); Jahresb. Fortschr. Chem. 177 (1867). 

(n, §66) 

Sarrau, E. 

Sur la compressibility des fluides. C. R. Paris 101,941 (1885). 

(n, §54) 

Schlomilch, O. x. 

Compendium der hoheren Analysis. Braunschweig, F. Vie weg, 1874. 

(I, §6) 

Schuster, A. 

On the nature of the force producing the motion of a body exposed to rays of heat and light. Proc. R. 
S. London 24, 391 (1876); Phil. Trans. 166,715 (1877); Phil. Mag. [5] 2, 313 (1876); Nature 13, 
458(1876). 

(I, § 1 ) 

Smoluchowski, M. v. 

Pisma Marjana Smoluchowski ego. Drukarnia Uniwersytetu Jagiellonskiego, Krakowie, 1924 (cited 
as “Pisma”) 

Ueber den Temperatursprung bei Warmeleitung in Gasen. Wien. Ber. 107, 304 (1898), 108, 5 
(1899); Pisma 1,113,199. 

(II, F) 

O sredniej swobodnej drodze czqsteczek gazu i o jej zwiazku teorjq. dyfuzji. [On the mean path 
traversed by the molecules in a gas, and its relation to the theory of diffusion.] Rozprawy Spraw. 
Pos. Wyd. Mat.-Prz. Akad. Urn. Krakow A46,129 (1906); Bull. Acad. Sci. Cracovie 202 (1906); 
Pisma 1,468,479. 

(I, §14) 

Sommerfeld, A. 


^Puli-C- 7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Das Werk Boltzmanns. Wiener Chem.-Zeitung 47 , 25 (1944). 

(TI) 

Staigmiiller, H. 

Beitrage zur kinetischen Theorie mehratomiger Gase. Ann. Physik [3] 65 , 655 (1898); Phys. Abstr. 
1,696(1898). 

Ok §45) 

Versuch einer theoretischen Ableitung der Constanten des Ge-setzes von Dulong und Petit. Ann. 
Physik [3] 65,670(1898). 

(B, §42) 

Stallo, J. B. 

The Concepts and Theories of Modem Physics. New York, Apple-ton, 1882. German translation by 

H. Kleinpeter, with a preface by E. Mach: Die Begriffen und Theorien der modemen Physik, 
Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1901. (For further information see S. Drake, “J. B. Stallo and the critique of 
classical physics,” in Men and Moments in the History of Science, (ed. H. M. Evans) Seattle, 
University of Washington Press, 1959, p. 22). 

(II, F) 

Stankevitsch, B. W. 

Zur dynamischen Gastheorie. Ann. Physik [3] 29,153 (1886). 

(I, §4) 

Stefan, J. 

Untersuchungen iiber die Warmeleitung in Gasen. Wien. Ber. 65 , 45 (1872); 72 , 69 (1876); Wien. 
Anz.9, 42 (1872), 12 , 131 (1875); Carl’s Repertorium8, 138 (1872); J. Chem. Soc. 25 , 591 
(1872), 30 (2) 37 (1876); Chem. Cent. 3 , (177 (1872), 6 , 529 (1875). 

(I, §13) 

Uber die dynamische Theorie der Diffusion der Gase. Wien. Ber. 65,323 (1872). 

(I, §12,14) 

Ueber die Beziehung zwischen den Theorien der Capillaritat und der Verdampfung. Wien. Ber. 94 , 
4 (1886); Ann. Physik [3] 29 , 655 (1886). 

(h, §24) 

Stoney, G. J. 

The internal motions of gases compared with the motions of waves of light. Phil. Mag. [4] 36 , 132 
(1868). 

(I, §12) 

On Crookes’s radiometer. Phil. Mag. [5] 1,177,305 (1876); Nature 13,420(1876). 

(I, §14) 

On the mechanical theory of Crookes’s (or polarization) stress in gases. Sci. Trans. Roy. Sci. Dublin 

I, 39 (1877); Phil. Mag. [5] 6,401 (1878). 

(I, §14) 

Curious consequences of a well-known dynamical theorem. Sci. Proc. Roy. Dublin Soc. 5, 448 
(1887); Phil. Mag. [5] 23,544 (1887). 

(I, §6) 

Sutherland, W. 

Thermal transpiration and radiometer motion. Phil. Mag. [5] 42,373,476 (1896), 44,52 (1897). 

(I, §14) 

Tait, P. G. 

Scientific Papers. Cambridge University Press, 1898-1900. (Cited as “Papers”). 

On the foundations of the kinetic theory of gases. Trans. R. S. Edinburgh 33 , 65 (1886); Phil. Mag. 
[5] 21 , 343 (1886); Papers 2 , 124. 


43 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



(I, § 10,14; n, §85) 

On the foundations of the kinetic theory of gases. II. Trans. R. S. Edinburgh 33, 251 (1887); Phil. 
Mag. [5] 23,141,433 (1887); Papers 2,153. 

(I, §11,14) 

On some questions in the kinetic theory of gases. Reply to Prof. Boltzmann. Phil. Mag. [5] 25 , 172 
(1888). 

(I, §14) 

On the mean free path, and the average number of collisions per particle per second in a group of 
equal spheres. Proc. R. S. Edinburgh 15 , 225 (1889). 

(I, §14) 


On the foundations of the kinetic theory of gases. III. Trans. R. S. Edinburgh 35, 1029 (1890) (read 
1888); Papers 2 , 179. 

(I, §14) 

Thomson, W.: see Kelvin 

Tolman, R. C. 

The principles of statistical mechanics. Oxford University Press, 1938. 

(I, §4; E, §79) 

Troost, L. J. 

Sur les densites de vapeur. C. R. Paris 86 , 331,1395 (1878); J. de Pharm. 28 , 293 (1878). 

(R, §66) 

Uhlenbeck, G. E., and Ford, G. W. 

The theory of linear graphs with applications to the theory of the virial development of the 
properties of gases. Studies in Statistical Mechanics, Vol. I, Part B (ed. J. de Boer and G. E. 
Uhlenbeck), Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1962. 

(h, §54) 

van der Waals, J. D. 

Over de continuiteit van den gas- en vloeistof toestand. Dissertation, Leiden, 1873. German 
translation: Ueber den Uebergangs-Zustand zwischen Gas und Flussigkeit, Leiden, A. W. 
Sijthoff, 1873. Second edition, with additions, translated by F. Roth: Die Continuiteit des 
Gasfonnigen und Flussigen Zustandes, Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1881. English translation by R. 
Threlfall and J. F. Adair, in Physical Memoirs, Vol. I, Part 3, London, Taylor and Francis (for the 
Physical Society), 1890. 

(TI; I, §12; II, §1) 

Over het betrekkelijk aantal botsingen, dat een molekuul ondergaat, wanneer het zich beweegt door 
bewegende molekulen of door molekulen, die men onderstelt stil te staan; alsmede over den 
invloed van de admetingen der molekulen volgens de richting der relative beweging op het aantal 
dier botsingen. [On the relative number of collisions experienced by a molecule as it moves 
through a medium of molecules in motion or a medium of molecules assumed at rest; and on the 
influence which the dimensions of the molecules in the direction of relative motion exert on the 
number of collisions.] Verslagen Akad. Wet. Amsterdam [2] 10 , 321 (1876); Arch. Neerl. 12 , 
201,217(1877). 

(II, §D 

De betrekking tusschen spanning, volumen en temperatur bij dissociatie. [On the pressure-volume- 
temperature relation in the case of dissociation.] Verslagen Akad. Wet. Amsterdam [2] 15 , 199 
(1880). 

(H, §72) 

Eene bijdrage tot de kennis der toestandsvergelijking. [A contribution to the knowledge of the 
equation of state.] Verslagen Akad. Wet. Amsterdam [4] 5 , 150 (1896). 

De verandering van de grootheid b der toestandsvergelijking als quasi-verkleining van het molekul. 


43 , 


mJuc. 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



[The variation of the quantity b in the equation of state, considered as an apparent diminution of 
the molecule.] Festschrift Ludwig Boltzmann gewidmet zum sechzigsten Geburtstage 20. Februar 
1904, Leipzig, J. A. Barth, 1904, p. 305. 

(D, §9) 

Eenige merkwaardige betrekkingen, hetzij exacte of approximatieve, bij verschillende stoffen 
[Some remarkable relations, either exact or approximate, for different substances.] Verslagen 
Akad. Wet. Amsterdam [4] 21,800 (1912); Proc. Sect. Sci. Amsterdam 15,903 (1913). 

(II, §9) 

Wald, F. 

Die Energie und ihre Entwerthung. Studien iiber den zweiten Haupt-satz der mechanischen 
Warmetheorie. Leipzig, Engelmann, 1889. 

(II, F) 

Ward, J. 

Naturalism and Agnosticism. New York, Macmillan, 1899. 

(II, F) 

Waterston, J. J. 

On the physics of media that are composed of free and perfectly elastic molecules in a state of 
motion. Phil. Trans. 183A, 5 (1893) (read March 5,1846); Proc. R. S. London 5, 604 (1846). The 
Collected Scientific Papers of John James Water son (ed. with biography by J. S. Haldane), 
Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd, 1928, p. 207. 

(TI) 

Watson, H. W. 

Boltzmann’s minimum theorem. Nature 51,105 (1894). 

(I, §6) 

Wind, C. H. 

Uber den dem Liouville’schen Satze entsprechenden Satz der Gastheorie. Wien. Ber. 106,21 
(1897). 

Woodmff, A. E. 

Action at a distance in nineteenth-century electrodynamics. Isis 53,439 (1962). 

(I, §1) 

Wiillner, A. 

Ueber die Abhangigkeit der specifischen Warme der Gase bei constantem Volumen von der 
Temperatur und die Warmeleitungsfahigkeit der Gase. Ann. Physik [3] 4 , 321 (1878). 

(h, §45) 

Wroblewski, Z. F. 

Sur la densite de Fair atmospherique et de ses composants, et sur le volume atomique de l’oxygene 
et de l'azote. C. R. Paris 102,1010 (1886). 

(I, §12) 

Zermelo, E. 

Ueber einen Satze der Dynamik und die mechanische Warmetheorie. Ann. Physik [3] 57, 485 
(1896). 

(TI; II, §88,91) 

Ueber mechanische Erklarungen irreversibler Vorgange. Eine Antwort auf Hrn. Boltzmann's 
“Entgegnung.” Ann. Physik [3] 59,793 (1896). 

(TI; H, §91) 


43 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



INDEX 

(Bibliographic references are not included except where they have not been cited in text, Translator’s 
Introduction, or notes.) 

Adiabatic equation of state, 160,197 
Adiabatic state-variation, 258, 262 
Aerostatics, 141-146 
Aether. See ether 

Affinity, chemical: of similar atoms, 376ff; of dissimilar atoms, 393ff 
Aichi, K., collision integrals, 170n, 204n 
Alder, B. J„ 227n 

Aliotta, A., 215n; Boltzmann's view of atomism, 14 
Amontons, G., statement of “Gay-Lussac’s Law,” 5 
Angle of deflection, 165 
Anschaulich (perspicuous), 15, 376,407 
Apses, line of, 120,438 
Argon, 72,216 

Atomic models, 1, 10, 13, 16,26,28,97, 168, 217ff, 272, 377ff, 402 
Atomism, 13ff, 27f, 62, 215n, 318,406f, 445 
Atoms, size of. See Molecular parameters. 

Avogadro’s Law, 272, 311. See also Boyle- 

Benndorff, H., 13 In, 216 
Bernoulli, D., theory of gases, 7 
Bernstein, H. T., 79n 

Berthelot, M„ dissociation experiments, 391 

Billiard ball model, 7 

Binding. See Bond, chemical 

Bird, R. B„ 96n 

Bogolyubov, N. N., 14n 

Bohr model of the atom, 436n 

Boiling-delay, 251 

Boltzmann, L.: contributions to physics, 1; ergodic hypothesis, 10-12, 297n; fourth virial coefficient, 
354n; H-theorem, 9, 52n; Lectures on Gas Theory, 1,2, 13, 21 f, 215; life and works, see Bibliography 
under Bogolyubov, Broda, Cams, Davydov, Dugas, Ehrenfest, Flamm, Lorentz, Rayleigh, and 
Sommerfeld; Liouville's theorem, 290; opinions on atomism, 14ff, 24n, 26, 215f; references to his 
publications, 22n, 24n, 40n, 46n, 52n, 58n, 59n, 86n, 95n, 97,143n, 145n, 187n, 235n, 285n, 297n, 
312n, 329n, 33 In, 376n, 389n, 391,392,410,420n, 436n, 444,445n, 449n, 455ff; specific heats of 
diatomic gases, 333n; suicide, 17; transport equation, 110-123, 191 ff; transport theory, 8 
Bond, chemical, 377ff, 393ff; virtual, 383; proper, 384 
Bosanquet, R. H. M., specific heats of diatomic gases, 333n 
Boscovich, R., atomic theory, 15 
Boyle, R., on air pressure, 4ff 

Boyle - [Towneley] - Charles - [Gay-Lussac]-Avogadro Law, 62-68, 217, 330,406 

British Association meetings, 22,436,473 

Broda, E„ 15 

Brown, C., 408n, 473 

Brownian motion, 15, 17 

Brush, S. G., history of kinetic theory, 4n, 79n, 227n, 342n, 365n; viscosity, 188n 


43 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Bryan, G. H.„ 22n, 58n, 66, 285n; model for equilibrium of two bodies, 143-145; spectroscopy, 16 
Burbury, S. H., 22n, 449n; assumption on molecular disorder, 40; spectroscopy, 16 


Calorimetry, 26Iff 

Cantor, G., theory of point sets and infinite classes, 11 
Capillarity, 10, 229n, 25 In, 265ff 
Camot, S., caloric theory, 7 
Cams, P., 462 

Central motion, 161 ff, 437ff 

Chapman, S., collision integrals, 170n, 204n; thermal diffusion, 3, 109n; transport theory, 9,109n, 264n 
Charles, J. A. C., statement of "Gay-Lussac’s Law,” 5. See also Boyle- 
Chemical forces, 376 
Clapeyron, E„ caloric theory, 7 

Clausius, R., 252n; entropy theorem, 135; equation of state, 356; general vs. special theory of heat, 23; 

heat conduction, 107; mean free path, 8, 79n, 83f, 90, 105, 365; virial theorem, 10, 342 
Coexistence of two phases, 250-256, 374f. 

Collie, J. N.,334n 

Collisions, 3, 36ff, 110, 114ff, 161 ff, 178ff, 221,319ff, 416ff, 433ff, 45 Iff; corresponding, 428; cycles of, 
453; direct, 199, 127; effect on distribution of states, 323ff, 426; effect on rotations, 333f; generalized 
description, 422f; inverse, 119, 121, 127; number of, 75ff, 93, 115ff, 222, 228n, 361 ff, 417; opposite, 
46ff, 420f; transitions between discrete states, 427ff; unlike molecules, 209 
Compressibility, 235, 257 
Condensation, 218, 253f; of liquid to gas, 259 
Conservation of energy. See Energy 
Constellations, 423ff, 427 
Continuity of states, 246, 256ff 
Corresponding states principle, 239 
Cosmology, 446ff 

Covering spheres, 222ff, 230, 346, 349, 366, 377f, 393 
Cowling, T. G„ 109n 

Crafts, J. M., dissociation experiments, 389 
Critical phenomena, 260f 

Critical space (for chemical binding), 378ff, 393ff, 408ff; reduced, 388, 391,400,403 

Critical temperature, etc., 236-238 

Crookes, W., radiometer, 25n 

Culverwell, E. P., 22n, 58n 

Curtiss, C. F., 96n 

Davy, H., rejection of kinetic theory, 6, 7 
Davydov. B. I., 14n, 463 
Degrees of freedom, 261 
Density, variation of, 228n 
Descartes, R., theory of vortices, 6 
Descriptive theories, 27, 187f, 407,444 
Determinants, 275ff, 288 

Deville, Saint-Claire, dissociation experiments, 389 
Diffusion, 8, 100-109,201-211,441 
Diffusion, thermal. See Thermal diffusion 
Dissertations, doctoral, 2,441 
Dissipation functions, 200 


43 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Dissociation, 3, 376-411; effect on pressure, 406; heat of, 386, 389ff, 396 
Distance between two molecules, probability distribution for, 364ff 

Distribution of states, 112ff, 298ff, 326; effect of collisions, 116ff, 323ff, 426; ergodic, 300, 302, 308f, 

311. See also Maxwell, J. C., Velocity distribution; Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution 
Dixon, 473 

Domain of a molecule, 422 
Dootson, F. W., thermal diffusion, 109n 
Drake, S., Stallo bibliography, 478 
Dugas, R., 15, 24n, 449n 
Duhem, P., 215n; Energetics, 13,24n 
Dulong-Petit law, 330n 

Ehrenfest, P. and T., 449n; ergodic hypothesis, 297n; fourth virial coefficient, 354n 
Electrical conduction, 87, 91-92, 95,102 

Empirio-criticism. See Descriptive theories; Energetics; Lenin; Mach 
Energetics, 13,14, 23,24n, 200, 215n, 407. See also Descriptive theories 
Energy: conservation of, 7f; dissipation of, 201,446n; differential, 294-297, 302 
Ensembles, 12,274f, 294ff, 297n, 31 Of 

Enskog, D.: thermal diffusion, 3, 109n; transport theory, 9, 109n, 264n 

Entropy, 3, 9, 72, 74f, 131,133n, 134n, 146f, 215,445; in non-equilibrium state, 197-201; of non-ideal 
gas, 370-374 

Equation of state, 1, 10, 226, 353; at high densities, 354f; van der Waals’, 229ff, 341 f 
Equilibrium: false chemical, 408; of gases with compound molecules, 412ff; of intramolecular motions, 
335,435; of a mechanical system, 31 Off, 330n; of two bodies, 143-145, 230f, 311; of two phases, 248ff 
Equipartition, 10, 66-68, 230f, 308f, 330,408n, 436n 
Ergodic hypothesis and Ergoclen, 10-12, 83n, 297n 
Ether, 6, 13,436n; ether-shells, 209 
Euler, L., theory of gases, 6 
Evaporation: delay, 249f; of gas to liquid, 259 
Expansion into a vacuum, 218, 262 

Favorable space, 346f, 349 

Finite differences, finite number of states, 427ff 

Fitzgerald, G. F., 22n, 107n 

Flamm, L., 465 

Forces: between atoms, 3, 5f, 29, 97, 110, 168, 217f, 330n, 411; between molecules, 338ff; between unlike 
atoms, 208ff; external, 141 ff, 314, 344,433; virial of, 346, 356f 
Forces, inverse fifth power, 3, 97, 161-211,219,411; simplification resulting from, 168; virial of, 357 
Ford, G. W., virial coefficients, 354n 
Fiichtbauer, C., collisions and spectral line width, 82n 

Galilei, G., mechanical view of nature, 4 
Gas, definition, 256f 

Gay-Lussac, L. J.: relation between gas pressure and temperature, 5; experiments on expansion into 
vacuum, 218, 262. See also Boyle- 
Gegenbauer, 178n 

Generalized coordinates, 271-274, 289,412 

Gibbs, J. W.: dissociation, 406f; entropy theorem, 135, 215; statistical mechanics, 12, 297n 
Goethe, J. W. von, couplet from Faust , 21 
Grad, H„ 21 On 

Gravity effects, 375. See also Aerostatics 


43 . 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Groeneveld, J., convergence of virial series, 354n 
Guldberg, C. M., mass action law, 397 


H: in gases with compound molecules, 412ff; in solids and liquids, 444; interpretation of, 74f; meaning 
of, 55ff, 73-75,147 
//-curve, 59 

//-theorem, 1,9,41,50ff, 131-135,421,430f 
Haar, D. ter, 449n; H-theorem and ergodic theorem, 4 
Haldane, J. S., Waterston biography, 481 
Happel, H., fourth virial coefficient, 354n 
Hautefeuille, P., 399n 

Heat: added to a gas, 68ff, 261ff, 33If; as molecular motion, 7f, 23; mechanical equivalent, 8, 390 
Heat conduction, 8, 98-100, 109n, 182ff; dissipation function for, 200; ‘effect on entropy, 198ff; pressure- 
differences due to, 189-191; rarefied gases, 216 
Heine, E., 177n 
Helium, 72, 334 
Helm, G., Energetics, 13, 24n 
Herapath, J., theory of gases, 7 

Hertz, H. 22, 27; mechanics, 26; philosophy of science, 16 
Hicks, 473 
Him, G., 215n 
Hirschfelder, J. O., 215n 

Hoffmann, W., collisions and spectral line width, 82n 
Holtsmark, J., spectral line width theory, 82n 
Hooke, R., evidence for “Boyle’s law,” 5 
Hooykaas, R., on Euler’s gas theory, 464 
Hydrodynamics, 7f, 62, 147-160, 176,188,205 
Hydrogen iodide, 398ff 
Hyponitrous acid, 389ff 

Infinite number ofmolecules as an assumption in gas theory, 318, 321 f 

Infinite classes, 11,297n 

Initial state, assumptions about, 441 

Integrals, transformation of variables in, 278ff, 29 If 

Intramolecular motions, 68ff, 261,27 If, 327ff, 334ff, 371, 387,435ff 

Iodine, 376ff, 389ff 

Irreversibility, 1,2, 9,442ff 

Irreversible phase changes, 249ff 

Isobars, 257f 

Isodic systems, 297n 

Isopycnic changes of state, 259f 

Isotherms, geometric discussion of, 240-256 

Jacobi, K. G. J., 274n, 289n, 295n; functional deteiminants, 275, 280; last multiplier, 290-293 

Jager, G., 105n; third virial coefficient, 365 

Jaffe, G., Boltzmann and Ostwald, 14n 

Jeans, J. H„ 105n 

Joule, J. P., Herapath’s theory, 8 

Joule-Thomson experiment, 97, 218 


43 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 


Kac, M„ 2 



Kamerlingh Onnes, H., 355, 367n 

Kelvin, William Thomson, Lord, 289n, 445n, 473; molecular diameter, 95; molecular model, 436n; 

temperature scale, 234. See also Joule-Thomson experiment 
Kennard, E. H., 25n, 107n 

Kinetic theory: attacks on, 13, 215f; history, 4-11, 16 

Kirchhoff, G.: Lectures on kinetic theory, 13, 21, 107n, 131, 150, 152n, 185n, 190, 282; Lectures on 
Mechanics, 13, 28; method applied to compound molecules, 315ff; on theories, 28 
Knudsen, M., 107n 

Koenig, F. O., history of thermodynamics, 446n 
Kronig, A., theory of gases, 8 
Krypton, 334 

Kuenen, J. P., effect of gravity, 375 

Kundt, A.; heat conductivity, 99; specific heat, 72, 334; transport in rarefied gases, 25; viscosity, 93, 96 
Kutta, M. W., lOOn 

Lagrange equations, 289,433 

Laplace, P. S., Marquis de: caloric theory, 7; capillarity, 10, 229n, 265 
Larmor, J., 58n 

Last multiplier (Jacobi’s theorem) 290-293 
Lavoisier, A., caloric theory, 7 
Lemoine, G., dissociation experiments, 399 
Lenin, V., materialism, 13, 14, 215n 
Liouville, J., 290 

LiouvihVs theorem, 274ff, 285ff, 290, 326n, 417f, 424f, 427,443,452f 
Liquefaction, 218 

Liquids, 220; definition, 256f; heat of vaporization 263; specific heat, 330n 

Lissajous figure, 11 

Liveing, 473 

Loeb, L. B., 25n, 107n 

Lorentz, H. A.: calculation of virial, 358f, 365; H-theorem, 50; spectral lines, 82n 
Loschmidt, J.: diffusion, 103, 205ff; molecular parameters, 94, 264, 392; reversibility paradox, 9, 58-59, 
448n 

Mach, E., 218n; chemical binding, 407; criticism of mechanics and atomism. 13, 215n 
Mache, H., 460 

Majumdar, R„ fourth virial coefficient, 354n 
Mariotte, E., rediscovery of “Boyle's law” 5 
Mass action, law of, 397 
Materialism, 13 

Maxwell, J. C: collision integrals, 170, 204; diffusion 152; electromagnetic theory, 22, 25, 26; ergodic 
hypothesis, 10, 297n; general state distribution, 312n; heat conduction, 107,152, 187n; Liouville 
theorem, 290; mean free path, 79n, 91; molecular diameters, 95; molecular forces, 97, 168f; notation, 
131; relaxation time, 173; rule of equal areas, 252; spherical functions, 177; theory ofrarefied gases, 
25, 177, 189-191; transport theory, 8f, 150, 168ff; velocity distribution, 9, 36ff, 49ff, 56, 60, 63ff, 
135-140, 159, 172, 183,224,434,436,442,448,450,453; viscosity, 5, 8, 93, 96, 152, 188n 
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, 141-146, 315f, 319ff, 327ff, 337, 339, 351 
Maxwellian molecules. See Forces, inverse fifth power. 

Mayer, J. E., 21 On 

Mayer, J. R.: conservation of energy, 8; concept of heat as molecular motion unnecessary, 23, 215n 
Mean free path. See Path 


43 . 


'PilU.cl 7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



Mechanical view of nature, 4, 310,442 
Mechanics, principles of general, 271-312 
Meier, F., dissociation experiments, 389 
Mendoza, E., history of kinetic theory, 4 
Meniscus, 25 In, 260 
Mercury vapor, specific heat, 334 
Meyer, L., molecular diameter, 95 

Meyer, O. E.: diffusion, 108; heat conduction, 107; Kinetische Theorie, 21,96n, lOOn, 109; transport 
theory, 8, 105; viscosity, 93 
Millikan oil-drop experiment, 15 
Moivre-Stirling formula for n!, 57 
Molar-ordered and molar-disordered, 40,42 
Molecular models, 3 Off, 332f, 376ff,410f, 435ff 
Molecular parameters, 15, 94-95, 264, 392 
Molecular-disordered state, 40ff, 58, 60, 61n, 83n, 134n, 319f, 442 
Molecules, compound, 313-340. See also Intramolecular motion 
Momentoids, 300ff, 314, 326ff, 338, 352 

Nabl, J., 460 

Nagaoka, H„ collision integrals, 170n, 204n 

Natanson, L., dissipation function for heat conduction, 200 

Naumann, A., dissociation experiments, 389 

Navier-Stokes equations, 8, 176 

Neon,216, 334 

Neumann's Law, 330n 

Newton, I.: mechanical view of nature, 4; theory of gases, 6 
Niven, W. D., mean free path, 79n 

Ogier, dissociation experiments, 391 
Opposite collisions. See Collisions 

Ostwald, W.: chemical binding, 407; debate with Boltzmann, 14; Energetics, 13f, 24n, 215n 

Pair distribution function, 346ff 
Partington, J. R., 356n 
Pascal, B., air pressure, 4 
Passage, 116 

Path, mean free, 8,41,76n, 78n, 79n, 83ff, 90f, 364 
Pearson, K., 215n 
Pelabon, H., 408n 

Phase (of a mechanical system), 298 
Phase transitions, 218, 227n 
Phenomenology. See Descriptive theories 
Plancherel, M., impossibility of ergodic systems, 297n 

Planck, M., 406n; Energetics, 24n; quantum theory, 12; velocity distribution derived from reversibility, 
59f, 450 

Poincare, H.: heat conduction, 187n; hydrodynamic equations, 156n; recurrence paradox, 9,443n; 
Thermodynamique, 22, 215n 

Poisson, S. D.: caloric theory, 7; capillarity, 10, 229n, 265; equation of state, 160, 197 
Positivism. See Descriptive theories 

Pressure: as a dimension in physics, 5; effect on dissociation, 383ff, 406; effect of wall, 229n; of a gas, 
30-35,220f, 226, 374; of a gas mixture, 35, 384; inequalities due to heat flow, 189-191; internal. 


43 , 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 



220f, 262f; negative, 250; reduced, 239; of saturated vapor, 367ff;virialof, 344 
Probability theory, 55ff, 74, 325,444,448f 

Quantum mechanics, 2ff, 12,427ff, 449 

R (Gas constant), 67f, 231,390 
Radiometer, 25, 107,191 

Ramsay, W., 435n; specific heat of rare gases, 72,216, 334 
Rarefied gases, 2, 15,25,62, 107,216 
Rausenberger, O., 389n 

Rayleigh, J. W. Strutt, Lord, 72n, 109n, 334n; dissipation function of viscosity, 200 

Recurrence paradox, 9,41,443 

Reduced pressure-volume-temperature units, 239 

Reichenbach, H., Direction of Time, 3,448n 

Relaxation time 172f, 177ff, 206 

Repulsive forces. See Forces 

Reversibility paradox, 9, 58f, 443 

Rey, A., 24n 

Reynolds, O., 473; radiometer, 25n, 107n 
Richarz, F., 33 In 

Rosenblueth, M. N., and A. W., fifth virial coefficient, 354 
Rosenthal, A., impossibility of ergodic systems, 297n 
Rotation of molecules, 332ff 
Rowlinson, J. S., 21 On 

S-theorem, 337, 360 
Sagaret, A., 24n 

Salisbury, Lord, nature is a mystery, 15f 

Sanochkin, Yu. V., 14n 

Sarrau, E., equation of state, 356 

Schlomilch, O. X., Moivre-Stirling formula for n !, 57 

Schuster, A., radiometer, 25n 

Segel, M„ 418 

Sensitive region of an atom, 377f, 408ff 
Set theory, 11 

Smoluchowski, M. v., 105n; heat conduction, 216 
Solids, atomic model for, 29, 330n 
Sommerfeld, A., Boltzmann-Ostwald debate, 14 

Specific heats, 71, 187, 262, 330n, 387; ratio of, 2,10, 71,99, 215, 262, 331-336,435; variation with 
temperature, 334 
Spectral line width, 82n 
Spherical functions, 177ff 
Stable and unstable states, 246-248 
Staigmiiller, FI., 33 In, 335n 
Stallo, J. B., 215n 
Stankevitsch, B. W„ 46n 
States of a molecule, discrete, 427ff 
Stationary motion, 342 

Stefan, J.: capillarity, 270; diffusion, 108; effect of temperature on molecular diameter, 97; heat 
conduction, 99 

Stirling formula. See Moivre-Stirling 


43 . 


7fca^4e«toi2c.a/ 



Stoney, G. J., 58n, 107n; molecular diameter, 95 
Supercooling and superheating, 248-250 
Surface, effect of, 251,267f, 325, 341 
Sutherland, W., 107n 

Tait, P. G., 16, 289n; equipartition, 436n; mean free path, 85f; transport theory, 8, 90, 105, 109 
Tanukadate, T., collision integrals, 170n, 204n 

Temperature: definition using ideal gas, 230, 311; effect on dissociation, 385ff, 405; Kelvin scale, 234; 
reduced, 239 

Thermal diffusion, 3,109n 
Thermodynamics, 13, 23,444f 
Thomson, J. J., 473 
Thomson, W., See Kelvin 
Time, direction of, 3,443ff 

Time-derivatives of sums over all molecules in a region, 123-131 

Tolman, R. C: collisions, 422n; opposite collisions, 43n 

Torricelli, E., on air pressure, 4 

Towneley, R„ discovery of “Boyle’s Law,” 4 

Transformation of variables, 275-285, 301; infinitesimal, 285ff 

Transport theory, 1,8, 9, 87-135, 147-211 

Travers, M. W., 216n, 334n 

Troost, L. J., dissociation experiments, 389 

Uhlenbeck, G. E., virial coefficients, 354n 
Umkehreinwand. See Reversibility paradox 
Undercooling, 248f 
Um model for molecular statistics, 55f 

Valence, 376,402 
Vapor, definition of, 25 6f 
Vaporization, heat of, 263,268 
Velocity distribution. See Maxwell 

Virial: effect of finite size of molecules, 350ff; theorem, 10, 342ff; of van der Waals cohesion force, 352ff 
Virial coefficients, 10, 233n, 354n 

Viscosity, 5, 8, 92f, 96f, 109n, 175ff, 185,201,264,441; bulk viscosity, 176n, 188n; dissipation function, 
200; effect on entropy, 198ff; temperature dependence, 176 
Volume, reduced, 239 

Waage, P., mass action law, 397 

Waals, J. D. van der, 406n; assump, tions about forces, 217ff, 220-227, 265, 341,375; cohesion force, 218, 
220, 228, 261,341,352, 367, 370; on critical phenomena, 375; on density-variation of b, 233n; 
equation of state, 229ff, 353f, 392; modified equation of state, 355; molecular diameter, 95; reduced 
units, 239; third virial coefficient, 365; theory of liquid and gaseous states, 10, 217-270 
Waals, J. D. van der, Jr., 365n 
Wainwright, T. E., 227n 
Wald, F., 215n 
Waldmann, L., 21 On 

Warburg, E.: heat conduction, 99; specific heat, 72, 334; transport in rarefied gases, 25; viscosity, 93,96 

Ward, J.,215n 

Water vapor, 399ff, 407 

Waterston, J. J., theory of gases, 8 


44 


jMftfte, Ma£4cjvi(i£Z<iaZ P/ityJxcJ. 



Watson, H. W„ 58n 

Weber, W., electrical theory, 26 

Wiederkehreinwand. See Recurrence paradox 

Wind, C.H., 418 

Winkelmann, lOOn 

Woodruff, A. E., 26n 

Wroblewski, Z. F.: urges Boltzmann to write textbook, 21; density of liquid nitrogen, 95 
Wiillner, A., 334n 

Xenon,334 

Zermelo, E., recurrence paradox, 9,443n, 449n 


44 


7fca^4e«ta£2c.a/ 



44 


7fca^4e«tai2c.a/ 




