Ancient tales of strange otherworldly
creatures. There was a time when giants
were upon the earth. Sumerianss were
living with their gods, the
Anunnaki. Legends of gods who came from
the heavens to create mankind.
They were in a sense extraterrestrials.
They walked the earth. They ruled
people.
And clay tablets revealing an
extraterrestrial agenda.
potentially they kind of upgraded the
human race and used them as sort of a
slave species.
Did alien visitors really changed the
course of humanity in the distant past?
Our ancestors received help and that
help came from nowhere else but up
there. Millions of people around the
world believe we have been visited in
the past by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were
true? Did ancient aliens really help to
shape our
history? And if so, might the proof be
found when we examine the Anunnaki
connection.
[Music]
Iraq. April 10th,
2003. United States forces make their
way to the capital city of
Baghdad. Just 3 weeks after the launch
of Operation Iraqi
Freedom, American troops attempt to
create and maintain order. But looters
fill the streets, ransacking museums and
destroying thousands of ancient
artifacts.
Lutters forced their way in to the
National
Museum and stole all kinds of artifacts,
including musical instruments and
ununiform tablets that told the history
of ancient Sumeriia going back 6,000
years or
more. The genealogies and histories of
the gods were there and stories of the
flood. But now, many of these texts are
missing from us.
Now, it wasn't just people off the
streets smashing a window and taking an
artifact. There were people wearing
earpieces, a very coordinated event,
penetrating double locked doors, and
stealing instruments and jewelry and all
kinds of artifacts that date back
thousands of years all the way back to
the cradle of our civilization.
But why would militants destroy such
precious objects of the ancient
world? Was it really just a consequence
of war? Or a deliberate attempt to
obliterate forbidden knowledge of the
past? Perhaps answers can be found by
taking a closer look at the origins of
these priceless lost
treasures. According to
archaeologists, many of the lost Iraqi
artifacts dated back to the time of the
Samrians, an ancient civilization that
most researchers believe is the oldest
in all of
Mesopotamia. Mesopotamia means between
rivers in Greek, referring to the Tigris
and Euphrates rivers in what is today
known as Iraq.
There were four main kingdoms in
Mesopotamia. Sumer was the oldest one
followed by the kingdom of Akad begun by
Sargon the first. Um after that you have
Babylonia and
Assyria. And even though languages
changed and people changed to some
degree, the culture that was established
by the Samrians really continued
throughout the lifetime of Mesopotamia.
Ancient Samaria in southern Mesopotamia
is often cited as the most ancient
civilization, even the first
civilization. It goes back to
approximately 3,000 to 4,000 BC. And
here we see writing in the form of
Kaoform tablets on clay and on stone.
The Samrians were the ones who invented
the kapoform writing system. The word
kioform means wedge-shaped. It refers to
a system of writing whereby scribes
would take a wedge-shaped stylus and
impress signs on wet clay tablets. Those
tablets could later be fired and
hardened and preserve what was ever
written on them.
Deciphering these cunioform tablets was
next to impossible until a key discovery
of thousands of tablets at an Assyrian
palace in March of
1843. This new abundance of cunioform
inscriptions provided some of the first
tangible evidence of an ancient kingdom
that had been believed to exist
thousands of years ago.
A French scientist named Paul Emil
Ba found this gigantic underground area
in northern Iraq in
Corsabad. Opened up this incredible room
filled with statues of gods and kings,
all kinds of wonderful
treasures and many written inscriptions
all over the walls in the ancient
Samrian Kia form.
Within 10 years, archaeologists had also
discovered the ruins of the legendary
Samrian capital city of Er, home of the
biblical figure
Abraham. At the site, scientists
unearthed the great ziggurat of a step
pyramid-shaped structure that was the
administrative center of the city.
as well as cunoiform tablets and tombs
adorned in
gold. So here they had found this
legendary capital of the Samrians with
its goldclad tombs and uniform tablets,
something that they thought was simply a
myth until the actual discovery of it
proving that it was indeed historical
fact.
When we look at the ancient Sumerian
civilization, we attribute them with
over 100 of the firsts for a modern
society. Things like agriculture,
science, medicine, mathematics,
kingship, laws, courts, judges, schools.
Literally, all of this shows up in
Sumerian times 6,000 years ago, right
out of the Stone
[Music]
Age, according to mainstream
researchers. her was sacked by their
waring neighbors, the Elummites, nearly
2,000 years
BC. But some researchers believe the
Cunapform texts reveal something much
more than evidence of an ancient race.
They point to descriptions of a group of
divine beings called the Anunnaki, the
so-called princely offspring of God, who
according to the Samrians descended from
the sky.
The religious system of Mesopotamia was
polytheism, which means that they
worshiped hundreds of different gods,
both male and female, often depicted in
human
form, having personalities very much
like people do. And um these gods were
arranged in a kind of political
hierarchy that in many ways mimic the
political systems of Mesopotamia itself.
And what this means is that you had the
high gods uh the heavenly gods and you
also had lesser gods who inhabited earth
and the underworld. Now according to the
Samrian text the heavenly gods, the
Anunnaki were the supreme deities, the
higher
deities. The Anunnaki are among the most
mysterious and powerful beings of myth
and sacred tradition. The Samrians
described them as humanoid but
non-physical spirit beings who had the
capability of morphing or phasing into
human form. They came to earth on a
special mission to bring wisdom and also
to mine certain materials from the earth
plane itself.
In ununiform texts, the Anunnaki are
described in great
detail, including how they lived for
hundreds of years. They had tremendous
knowledge and power uh over the entire
world. They knew
everything. They had knowledge of all of
the sciences and arts.
Where they got this knowledge and where
they came from is a complete mystery to
archaeologists. And you have to ask
yourself, were they in fact
[Music]
extraterrestrials? Might the strange
gods described in the cunioform texts
really have existed? And if so, might
they have been extraterrestrial beings?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the
answer is a profound yes. And for proof,
they point to an ancient legend also
found written on clay tablets. A legend
that tells of the creation of man by
ancient creatures who came from the sky.
Nineveh, Iraq,
1849. A treasure trove of ancient
cunioform texts is
uncovered, detailing accounts of the
creation of Earth, man, and the lives of
the
gods. In 1849, Austin Henry Leard made
an archaeological expedition to a city
of Nineveh, a city that's mentioned in
the Bible. And in his excavations, he
discovered the palace of Snackre who's
well known from the Bible. This really
galvanized the interest of the
world. Well, 3 years after this, his
assistant found the palace of his
grandson Asher Banipal on the opposite
side of the mount. Now, in both cases,
they found archives and together the
archives form about 20 to 30,000
tablets.
Recorded on seven of the tablets is the
Babylonian creation myth called the
enuma
elish. Enuma elish was probably composed
in the 11th century BC but almost
certainly this story goes back to much
earlier periods.
The tablets tell of a god named Marduk,
who took blood from the god Kingu and
mixed it with clay in order to create
the earth's first
humans. When the Anunnaki create the
model man, that person gets picked up as
a story in the Bible and he's called
Adam. What I find interesting is that
the Bible left out some of the most
important details and cut the story
short. So the Sumerian tablets, the
Mesopotamian tablets have the more
detailed
[Music]
versions. According to mainstream
scholars, the Enuma Elish is simply an
example of an ancient creation
myth. But ancient astronaut theorists
believe that the epic story is not
fiction, but based on fact.
Anunnaki is a term that means from
heaven to earth they
came. So the knowledge that came out
from Nineveh is a complete look of a
civilization that sprung up out of
nowhere. Many of the tablets that were
unearthed in Nineveh describe nuances
into the actual mindset of the gods.
These Anunnaki and they describe being
flesh and blood beings just like us.
The Anunnaki themselves were physical
beings that came here in giant
spaceships that our ancestors thought
were some type of divine
apparitions. Our ancestors, especially
the Samrians, received help. And that
help came from nowhere
else but up
there. According to ancient astronaut
theorists, the Enuma Alish vividly
describes not mythic gods but other
worldly beings, alien visitors who
possessed a highly advanced knowledge of
genetics.
The Anunnaki began to figure out how
they could create a docil worker. So
they took genes from a female homminid
and after many many trials they figured
out that they could blend genes together
and create the perfect
being. In a sense what these tablets are
really talking about is a genetic
engineering and the changing of the DNA
within human beings.
Clearly something happened where we went
from nothing to all of a sudden coming
up with the most incredible of thought
models. So the question then is how was
it done? And according to the ancient
alien theory, our ancestors were given
intelligence by a deliberate change of
our DNA by space travelers who came here
thousands of years
ago. Is it possible that the Anunnaki
created the human race using their own
DNA?
According to ancient astronaut
theorists, startling evidence can be
found in the numerous similarities
between the Babylonian myths and the
Judeo-Christian
Bible and most notably in writings from
another ancient cunapform tablet known
as the Samrian King
list. The Samrian King list was found on
a tablet in ancient Mesopotamia and
dates to somewhere around 2100 BC.
The list contains names of 140
kings. What's most interesting about
this list is that the deities have
enormously long lives. One king, for
example, ruled for 36,000
years. And you have to wonder, how could
people have lived that long? But yet, we
have the same thing in the Bible.
Methuselah and Noah lived to be 8 or 900
years old, which seems so fantastic to
us. One explanation for why Noah and
Methuselah could live so long is that
it's possible that they themselves were
star seeds or seated by perhaps the
Anunnaki and contained their
extraterrestrial genes that prolonged
their lives.
And so clearly we can do one of two
things. pretend that this is all myth,
that this doesn't exist. Or take what
our ancestors gave us at face value and
then we're confronted with the
possibility that we are indeed talking
about incredible extraterrestrial beings
whose lifespan might have been normal
for their whereabouts, but definitely
were extraordinary for planet Earth.
Is it possible that the Samrian kings
lived and ruled for hundreds, even
thousands of years? And if so, could
these so-called ancient kings have been
our extraterrestrial
ancestors? Alien beings who created man
using their own DNA?
There are those who believe that
question was already answered more than
35 years ago.
New York City
[Music]
1976. Author and researcher Zechariah
Sitchin publishes his book the 12th
planet introducing his revolutionary
interpretation of the Anunnaki deities.
After studying Samrian cunioform tablets
for 30 years, he asserts that these
so-called Samrian gods were in fact
extraterrestrials that landed on Earth
in Mesopotamia more than 450,000 years
ago.
According to Sitchin's translations, the
Anunnaki both created human beings and
also had a part in mankind's downfall
when a great flood nearly destroyed all
life on Earth. But
why? What was the purpose of the
Anunnaki's earthly
visitations? And why did they create the
creature known as man?
Zechariah Sitchin wrote a number of
well-received books on the ananarchy
which he believed were basically
extraterrestrial entities from a planet
called Nibiru which he quite
controversially believed actually exists
in our solar
system. His theory was they upgraded the
human race and used them as sort of a
slave species.
Sitchin understood based on his
interpretation of the tablets that the
mission had to do with the failing
atmosphere around the planet Nuru and
that when they came they came to mine
gold.
The Anunnaki had damaged their
atmosphere and by using gold they found
that they could patch these atmospheric
holes becomes the story of our humanity.
The Anunnaki literally came to Earth to
mine the
gold. And when realizing it was such a
toil to do so, created us as a worker
race to do that for
him. Zechariah Sitchin's hypothesis that
the Anunnaki came to Earth to mine gold
and then created humans to perform the
task was both bold and controversial.
Needless to say, it was not embraced by
mainstream scholars. But many ancient
astronaut theorists believe that
Sitchin's interpretation of the tablets
is not only correct, but also provides
compelling evidence that the Anunnaki
created mankind.
What if the whole Anunnaki story is a
global story of a non-human intelligence
that was manipulating genes all over the
planet that it wasn't just gold, it was
a planetary base.
The Anunnaki said that they came from
the Nibiru. And they believe that Nibiru
is a star, a gate, and a crossing
place, opening up the possibility that
the Anunnaki are actually traveling the
stars through stargates and
wormholes. Do the descriptions of Nibiru
actually offer proof of the Anunnaki's
extraterrestrial origins?
And if so, might similar tales of other
worldly beings descending from the sky,
not only in Mesopotamia, but throughout
the world, provide further evidence that
an advanced celestial race came to Earth
in the distant
past. Perhaps the answers can be found
in the mysterious remains of an ancient
Sumerian queen.
[Music]
1927 southeast
Iraq. During advanced excavations at the
ancient Mesopotamian city
of British archaeologist Leonard Woolly
discovers the remains of Queen
Puabi. According to reports, the queen
is found with an unusually large skull
similar to that possessed by some
Egyptian pharaohs and mummies in
Peru. For many ancient astronaut
theorists, the queen's skull provides
further evidence of mankind's
extraterrestrial origins.
The description of the queen was highly
unusual, a head that was huge.
She was not a normal human. She may not
have been full-on anaki. She could have
been a hybrid.
There is an effort underway to try to
get genetic analysis of the
bones. There are characteristics that
elude to Anunnaki genes.
This is what the Anunnaki supposedly
look like with these cone head type
skulls. So we would naturally think that
she is one of the original Anunnaki or
certainly a extraterrestrial human
hybrid. What's of interest of Queen
Puabi is that she's a first dynasty
queen andor
priestess. So the fact that she's first
dynasty means that she's very close to
the reign of the Anunnaki. This puts her
in a very unique position because she
really holds a key. She might be the
evidence to suggest whether or not the
ancient Anunnaki were physically real
and that specifically the Anunnaki
interbred. But if the unusual skulls
found in Mesopotamia and elsewhere are
really evidence of the Anunnaki's reign
on Earth, might the legends about them
descending from the sky also be true?
And if so, might the same be said for
other legends that describe similar
beings found in ancient texts all over
the
[Music]
world.
Angels, the flying serpents of Central
America, the star people of the
Anastasia. The notion that other worldly
beings came to earth from the heavens is
one of the most common themes in ancient
mythology and
religion. Could the stories really have
a basis in truth? If we go back and look
into ancient
history, we find stories that sound
very, very similar. They're sort of all
powerful, magical, superior entities and
they come from above.
When you go into mythology, when you go
into the star people tales, when you go
into the
Anunnaki, it is the sameness, the
similarity around the planet that makes
you say something has to be responsible
for the same dreams, the same mythology,
the same idea that life came from the
stars.
All across the world, we find stories of
other worldly or extraterrestrial beings
coming to Earth and influencing
humanity. This raises a question. Are
there different races of beings coming
from the stars and influencing all these
cultures? Or is it possible that in fact
it's one race of beings, the Anunnaki,
who influenced all of these cultures and
they told the story of the same
beings? Do worldwide legends of
so-called gods really helped to prove
that ancient man was actually in contact
with extraterrestrial beings?
And if so, is it possible that religious
tales of other worldly beings
interbreeding with humans support the
notion that the stories of the Anunnaki
are based on historical
fact? According to some researchers, the
answers may lie in the Hebrew Bible
story of the Nephilim. The Nephilim are
mentioned in the sixth chapter of
Genesis where we have the uh the sons of
the gods meeting with the the daughters
of men and producing therefore
superhuman
folk. The Nephilim are described in some
translations as being giants.
The relationship between the Anunnaki
and the Nephilim is really a story of
two cultures but are related. The
Anunnaki was the godcast who created
primordial men to enslave them. While
the Nephilim were the offspring of those
who came down and intermingled with
humans.
Now, these beings could be giant in
stature, but we're also told that the
Nephilim possessed extraordinary
supernatural knowledge that they shared
with certain portions of
humanity. In Greek mythology, Zeus, the
ruler of the gods, is said to have
fathered two hybrid
sons, Hercules and Perseus, both with
earthly women. And the apocryphal book
of Enoch describes beings known as the
watchers, angels who fell from heaven
and procreated with
humans. Could these tales actually have
their origins in the ancient stories of
the Anunnaki? The story of the Anunnaki
might seem like something right out of
sci-fi, but when we compare the fact
that every culture around the world,
from the Hindus to the Greeks, the
Romans, Egyptians, Mayas, all around the
world, we have a similar description of
these beings coming to earth from the
heavens having offspring that were then
one half divine, one half
human. But if legends of gods, angels,
and giants coming to Earth and breeding
with human females are to be believed,
might there need to be some
evidence? Ancient astronaut theorists
say the answer is yes, and believe that
evidence exists in the countless
depictions of the Anunnaki as winged
giant creatures. Evidence found all
throughout the region, formerly known as
Mesopotamia.
the Anunnaki. We can also see them on
different carvings or in cylinder seals
where they are depicted as having wings.
Sometimes they have faces like birds
with beaks, but they are also very
humanlike giant beings with muscular
bodies wearing things that look like
wrist
watches. Now, is this an exact replica
of what people
saw? Clearly, the evidence that we have
here in the Sumerian culture of wall
descriptions, the artwork, the esoteric
cuneaform script, they went to great
lengths to record this very momentous
information. We have to start to look at
this in a fresh new light and stop
thinking of it as just mythology.
Looking into the Samrian accounts, what
we're finding is that the Anunnaki are
described as special. Their aged spans
are far longer than anything a human
being can have. And afterwards, whether
they disappeared into complete oblivion
or whether they somehow remained here on
planet Earth remains a question mark.
Might the similar images and
descriptions of gods who descended from
the heavens to rule on earth be
something of a smoking gun? Proof that
the Anunnaki were actual beings who came
to Earth from another
world? But if so, why has very little
evidence of their time on Earth
survived? Why are they virtually
forgotten?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe that
the answers can be found in the ancient
stories of a great
flood. Sherupak, South Central Iraq,
1931.
While digging at this ancient Samrian
city, archaeologists find what they
believe to be sedimentary evidence of
flooding from approximately 2900
BC. According to accounts in the Samrian
king list, King Zeusra was the last
Samrian ruler before a great flood on
Earth.
Excavations of the great city of
Shurupac began in
1931. And it was from these excavations
that they began putting together the
story of King
Zasudra. At the city of Shurupac, we
find sediment deposits that appear to
show a flood that occurred in around
2900 BC.
This is one link that shows that the
biblical flood may in fact be genuine
and a way in which we can ultimately
prove that to be
true. Many ancient cultures have a story
of the flood which is intriguing.
The fact that the Mesopotamians had a
story of a flood is not surprising
because uh Mesopotamian history is
fraught with stories of trying to
contain the tigers in Euphrates and make
them usable for agriculture. Until they
built the canal system, there were
regular floods that wiped out
cities. It appears that the story of
Noah's ark may not be an original Hebrew
story. In the Samrian text, we find a
much older story of Zasudra, who also
survived the flood, who constructed an
ark and was able to save part of his
family as well. Is this merely
coincidence or does it suggest that in
fact the biblical tale is based upon the
Samrian original?
The similarities have caused many to
suggest that perhaps the biblical
account is drawn in some sense from the
Mesopotamian
account. My feeling is that most
certainly the biblical writers adapted
it for their own theological
reasons. In the biblical account, the
rationale for the flood is human
sinfulness.
And so what the biblical writer has done
is used the flood account in order to
provide a theological rationale for why
the flood took
place. According to ancient Samrian
legend, the great flood was not a
natural event, but was directed by the
god Enlil, who had grown tired of the
noise of humans.
The Anunnaki who came to Earth
essentially had two leaders. Enlil who
was the legal legitimate son of Anu the
king on the planet Niburu and his halfb
brotherther Enki who was actually the
firstborn. They were in charge of the
Earth
contingent. Procreation was out of
control and Enlil gets enraged. He
decides he's going to eliminate all the
humans and created what we know as
Noah's
flood. Enl thought that humans should be
erased. They were too troublesome. And
Inky, like Prometheus in the Greeks,
took the side of the humans and said,
"No, they should be
preserved."
According to legend, Enki warned King
Zeasudra to build a boat so that he
might be saved from the great flood just
as Noah was directed to build an ark in
the stories of the Hebrew
Bible. Could both stories have their
origins in historical
fact at other cities? We have evidence
of floods, major floods. People have
associated this with the story of Noah's
flood and there are flood stories in
other cultures. So I think we have a
trend here where over and over people
have doubted the myths, have doubted the
legends, but in fact with more research
we find that they have a genuine basis.
[Music]
Could the similarities of these two
tales be attributed to mere coincidence?
Or might the story of Noah be directly
based on the story of a displeased
Anunnaki god? A god who was bent on
destroying the hybrid creatures that
inhabited the
earth. Enki, the Anunnaki god, told the
Samrian king
Zeasudra that there was going to be uh
this flood, the same flood of the Bible,
and that he needed to build a craft. we
would say today a boat to escape it.
However, it's quite possible that the
craft that he made to escape this flood
was actually a spaceship and that he
went into space in order to escape the
flood and into orbit around our planet.
If there's one thing that unites ancient
cultures all across the world is that
pretty much each and every one of them
have flood mythologies attached to them.
Delujis, great floods, you know, just
swamping and covering the entire planet
wiping out whole races of people. In
most cultures, this is put down to the
work of the gods or a god displeased
with the human race.
[Music]
Now, of course, today, you know, many
people place that in a UFO context.
Other people place it in a religious
context, but many researchers sort of
view biblical accounts and stories as
having a basis in fact, but of
extraterrestrial
origins. Both the Bible and specifically
the ancient Samrian accounts make it
clear that the flood was something which
the gods
created. The gods made this flood
happen. And so what we're seeing in the
ancient accounts is basically an
interaction between the Anunnaki on the
one hand and our ancestors on the other
hand. The Anunnaki basically make sure
that we as a species will survive
because sections of the Anunnaki were
intent on destroying everything on this
planet. Is it possible that the Anunnaki
were responsible for causing what has
been called the great flood?
And did the flood destroy virtually all
evidence of the Anunnaki's time on
Earth? Perhaps the answer can be found
not here on Earth, but on another
planet, more than 34 million miles away.
[Music]
Gale Crater,
Mars. August 6th,
2012. The Curiosity lands on the Martian
surface to evaluate the suitability of
the planet for human
exploration. The one-ton rover will find
signs of surface
water, a key element for sustaining
life. I think one of the very
fascinating things from a biology point
of view
is let's say Mars for a period in its
history was similar enough to Earth that
life could start to evolve. You could
ask the question how far did it make
it? What happened historically on Mars?
When did it start to say lose an
atmosphere? When was it not able to
sustain it anymore? And we could learn a
lot about the processes on Earth that
were successful. I think comparing it to
how far, if at all, did life get on Mars
and where did it
fail? But is it possible, as some
ancient astronaut theorists believe,
that Curiosity's mission may also reveal
evidence that the mysterious beings
known as the Anunnaki also once
inhabited Mars?
Zachariah Sitchin theorized that the
Anunnaki were coming from uh this planet
Nibiru and that Mars was a like a way
station for them to come from Nibberu to
Mars and then to
Earth. So you would think that if this
is the case that on Mars we would find
some kind of traces of this Anunnaki
civilization there. Are we going to find
pyramids, giant
dolmans, huge constructions on Mars just
like we have here on Earth? I suspect we
will.
If an extraterrestrial presence on Mars
can be
found, might a global awareness of our
own Anunnaki ancestry also be
possible? According to author and
Samrian researcher Zachariah Sitchin,
Nibiru, the home of the Anunnaki, is on
an elliptical path that brings the
planet into our orbit every
3,450
years. And the next visit is projected
to be in the year 2900.
Zachchariah wrote in the book of the end
of days about some of the prophecy of
the return. Next time the bureau comes
around, there should be another
appearance of
Anunnaki. Some of the Anunnaki may be
really excited and happy to see what
developed and what we have
become. Some may be upset that we've
gone too
far. Maybe we've overstepped our
bounds. They may pass judgment on us and
it could be good or it could be bad.
The ancient Egyptians spoke of the duat
which was basically the crossing between
this and another
world and Nibberu was the Samrian
equivalent of
that and it is a real which exists both
in this
space but also somewhere else. It is
basically a bridge a territory whereby
human beings can go from here in life on
earth to the realm of the gods.
According to Sitchin's interpretation of
the Samrian
texts, Nibiru also played a major role
in the cataclysmic creation of
Earth and the asteroid belt between Mars
and
Jupiter. If true, might a similar change
be in store the next time we come in
contact with the
Anunnaki? Human reunions with the
Anunnaki whenever they take place almost
always result in the same thing. The
stimulation of human evolution. The
Anunnaki enter into human culture and
consciousness bringing wisdom,
knowledge, and often technology. So when
we see a mass return of the Anunnaki
based upon the past, we can expect that
we will once again see new technology,
new wisdom and new ideas being seated
into human
consciousness. When we look at the story
of the Anunnaki and their involvement in
the Sumerian culture, we have to
understand that this is potentially a
legacy of information in looking at
humanity's record to interpret where we
really do come from.
There is one common denominator in all
of these stories of extraterrestrials
visiting us in a remote past and that is
their promise of a
return. How can we prepare for this
return of those extraterrestrials in the
future? It's very simple. Accept the
idea that we are not alone in the
universe. Number one. And number two,
that they were here in the
past, they will return in the future,
and that hey, it's
okay. Is it possible, as ancient
astronaut theorists argue, that the
human race was
jumparted or perhaps even genetically
created by extraterrestrial beings in
the remote past?
Might this really be the missing piece
in Darwin's theory of human
evolution? And does the notion of an
extraterrestrial presence on Earth also
help to reconcile the supposed conflict
between science and
religion? Perhaps such a profound notion
is why the museums in Iraq were looted
and ransacked. Because the truth may be
too disturbing to
contemplate. A mysterious cloth bearing
a divine image. It represents the
supernatural transformation of a
human. Gold hats worn by strange
mystical beings.
The wearing of a golden hat would tend
to amplify the signal that you were
getting from higher up beings and
powerful stones believed to have other
worldly origins.
It is said that every wish was granted.
Could these mysterious objects simply be
the targets of human
imagination? Or are they evidence of
something even more profound? We have to
wonder if possibly all of these metallic
books aren't part of some
extraterrestrial
library. Millions of people around the
world believe we have been visited in
the past by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were
true? Did ancient aliens really help to
shape our history? And if so, might the
evidence be found in the world's most
mysterious relics?
[Music]
The White House. February 11th, 2013.
President Barack Obama presents a Medal
of Honor to Army Staff Sergeant Clinton
Romaché for his courageous actions
during the deadly battle of Kamesh in
Afghanistan. These 53 Americans were
surrounded by more than 300 Taliban
fighters. If you seek a measure of that
day, you need to look no further than
the medals and ribbons that grace their
chests.
This tradition of honoring brave
soldiers by decorating their chest with
medals dates back to at least the 2n
century BC when the ancient Roman
military use sculpted discs of metal to
reward superior acts of service. But
why? What is it about the properties of
metal that make them chosen objects of
adornment and commemoration?
The tradition of adoring people with
metal really goes back thousands of
years. In the case of the Bible, we have
stories about how the priests actually
had to wear certain medals before they
were able to enter the holy of holies
and make contact with the
divine. Today we are confronted with
symbolism. Our heroes are given pins and
medals because somehow we set them apart
as great people who somehow have
superseded the human race. But in the
past, this was to be taken
literally. Do certain metals actually
enhance mankind's ability to connect
with divine or some would say
extraterrestrial forces? And is this the
reason why gold, platinum, and silver
jewelry along with other metal
adornments and relics have been so
prized throughout human
history? Definitely the belief is that
we hold the relic there because the
relic is a link either to a deity or to
something magical.
Relics can be any number of things.
pieces of wood, bits of statues,
literally anything can be a relic if it
has been kind of invested with a divine
power. And that means you have a piece
of the god and therefore a piece of the
god's power with you.
It seems to have always been the case
with human beings that they've wanted to
possess items which they thought were uh
either from the
gods to do with the gods or in some way
associated with the
[Music]
gods. Berlin, Germany, 1996.
[Music]
The Museum of Prehistory and Early
History acquires a glittering artifact
from an anonymous Swiss collector. A
tall cone-shaped hat crafted from a thin
sheet of pure gold and embellished with
dozens of sun and moon symbols.
It is one of four that have been
unearthed at various sites throughout
Europe and is believed by historians to
date back as far as 1,000
BC. What is so important about them is
that they indicate that there was a
common culture. The images on them
represent astronomy, the study of the
stars. They also have complicated
mathematical implications suggesting a
level of philosophical development
that's very advanced for what we thought
was available at that
time. German researchers carefully
studied the symbols on the golden hat
and concluded they represent a complex
mathematical
table, one that can accurately calculate
the long-term cycles of the sun and the
moon.
But how could such ancient people have
been able to make such advanced and
highly sophisticated astronomical
predictions? The suggestion is that they
belong to what might be referred to as
oracles. People that could fall into an
altered state and prophesize, could come
up with statements relating to the
future or other worldly situations.
Though most mainstream scholars believe
these mysterious hats were worn by king
priests during religious ceremonies,
ancient astronaut theorists have another
even more astounding theory.
The golden hats are kind of interesting
because if gold is something that
actually enhances your connection with
energies and higher up celestial beings,
then the wearing of a golden hat,
especially in a conicle shape, would
tend to amplify the signal that you were
getting from on high.
So, it seems to me that ancient cultures
logically would build them yet connected
with the gods who had perhaps left them
behind and gone back to their celestial
birthplace. In the case of the golden
hats, what we're seeing there is that
all of this technology seems to have
been part of a larger framework whereby
once again it seems this is a
civilization which made contact with the
gods.
But we just don't know who would have
made these or why. And they're so
incredibly unusual and tall. Perhaps the
extraterrestrial gods were wearing some
kind of conical hat like
this. Could the so-called king priests
of the ancient past have been
otherworldly visitors
utilizing metal's unique properties?
If so, might additional evidence be
found of other ancient peoples using
metal relics for advanced, even
metaphysical
purposes. Kerbet Kuman, Israel, 1952.
[Music]
Hidden deep in a cave on the desert
cliffs, archaeologists discover a
mysterious 2,000-year-old manuscript
written on a sheet of
copper known as the Copper Scroll. This
mysterious relic was found at the same
site as the ancient religious writings
known as the Dead Sea Scrolls.
All the Dead Sea scrolls that have been
found were written on either uh leather
or papyrus. The copper scroll is the
only one made of copper. So, you got to
keep in mind copper was valuable and to
hammer out a whole scroll would take a
lot of time and a lot of technique. So,
it has to be very important.
Scholars examining the language on the
copper scroll agree it is unlike
anything found in other texts of the
period. The script that's on it is is a
little different. But it's not just in
Hebrew. It's in or Aramaic. It also has
Greek uh letters on it. So it's quite
peculiar. Thing that makes the Copper
Scroll so fascinating is that it
mentions hidden treasures.
The copper scroll lists 64 locations in
Jerusalem and around that area that
buried treasure is
located. Maybe the key is in the 64th
location. It says there's another copper
scroll that will help explain the rest
of
it. Because we haven't found the
treasure yet. I somehow suspect there
could be another code within this
treasure map. A code within a
code. What is the origin of the
mysterious copper scroll? And what is
its true
purpose? Mainstream scholars and
archaeologists have been puzzled by
these questions for more than half a
century.
Maybe the copper scroll is missing a
piece. Many times with treasure maps,
you need a second piece in order to
complete the entire map. So, who knows
if there's a piece
missing. It seems to be an
oddball artifact. And it's written in
metal. And you have now the stories of
other ancient books supposedly written
in sheets of gold. Joseph Smith Jr. who
began the the Mormon church, he claimed
also to have been shown goldplated
books. So we have to wonder if possibly
all of these metallic books written in
copper or gold plates aren't part of
some extraterrestrial library.
Could the mysterious copper scroll have
extraterrestrial
origins? And is the fact that it is made
of copper evidence of a connection
between metal objects and other worldly
beings?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
believe further proof can be found by
examining the similarly strange
properties attributed to other
mysterious relics found all over the
world. Bulgaria's Black Sea coast July
2010. Here in the ruins of a medieval
church on St. Ivan Island, six small
human bone fragments are discovered
inside a marble
sarcophagus. Through radioarbon dating
and DNA testing of one knuckle bone,
scientists conclude that the bones are
from the first century AD.
But what is even more incredible is the
belief by many that the bones are
actually those of St. John the
Baptist. In Christianity, John the
Baptist is specifically important
because he is known as the forerunner,
the precursor, the one who comes before
the Messiah.
And in the stories of John the Baptist,
he becomes extremely important for
Christians because he announces that a
greater Messiah is coming after him. And
the legends around John's bones were
always legends of extreme power. John
was a
prophet. Now on tour in churches
throughout Bulgaria, tens of thousands
of the faithful come to visit, pray, and
even worship these tiny bone fragments.
But why?
What is it about ancient bones, even
those thought to have belonged to a
saint, that compel people to come and
visit
them? Could it be they possess some
mystical or other worldly
power? The idea of saints, bones, and
relics having power is something that
goes back to the very early days of
Christianity. And certainly in the
latter part of the dark ages and the
Middle Ages, they became very big
business. If you had saints relics in
your church or in your cathedral, you
could bring in a lot of pilgrims who
would also bring in a lot of
donations. There was a strong belief by
the nobility and the royalty that the
bones of these saints actually did
contain some kind of
power. Humans always want to worship
their celebrities, their kings. Whatever
was linked with mysteries, humans
worshiped it. So in antiquity it entered
already into
altars. When a high priest died part of
his body, part of his bones was
sometimes separated, brought to
different countries and everyone
worshiped the bone in an altar. That
still happen in
Christianity. Kushinagar, India, 483 BC.
Sedarta Gautama, the great spiritual
teacher upon whom Buddhism is founded,
dies. According to legend, after Buddha
was cremated, several small pieces of
his body remained intact and were
retrieved from the
ashes. After his cremation, the ashes
were fought over by a lot of his
disciples and finally they resolved the
problem by dividing um them into eight
different parts. When the Buddha's ashes
were divided and there's a claim that
there's a tooth found there, it was
considered as very valuable.
Right away when the tooth was given to a
king, the relic, the tooth relic itself
became associated with the power of
kingship. And it is believed that the
king who possesses the tooth would be
able to rule properly and there would be
peace and prosperity in his kingdom.
Could such a tiny but tangible relic
from the mouth of the dead Buddha really
have such power? is a physical link to a
holy and venerated leader. Really a
means of connecting to the afterlife and
even more profoundly some divine life
force. The worship of relics actually is
as old as the Buddhist religion itself
and many other religions too.
The Buddha himself approves of the
worship of relics because he believes
that his followers need something very
concrete to remind them of his presence
and his
teachings. The relics are supposed to be
actually the essence of the saints. So
in a way the relics are the saints
themselves. So they have the powers of
the saints.
The importance here is why is it that
objects like this can gain such an
incredible spiritual
value and quite clearly it's to do with
the the psychology of the importance of
of individuals like the Buddha who are
seen to be
personifications of God or the gods
themselves and that just to own this or
to have some part of it imbuss you with
the same power as the gods himself.
[Music]
So you have to wonder just why these
relics are so important. We give them
power, these bones and these teeth. But
what they are, at least in a scientific
manner, is a piece of DNA from the
Buddha
himself. I think they knew that in a far
future, the gods, the extraterrestrials
would return again.
And some of these gods may have said to
one of his darlings on the planet earth,
if we find your body, your cells are
still existing. Then we are able to
reconstruct your
[Music]
body, cloning dead saints using DNA from
their relics. Could this incredible
notion be one of the reasons why bone
fragments and other human remains have
been so prized throughout the
centuries? And might this now very real
scientific possibility be connected to
ancient religious notions of rebirth and
resurrection? Perhaps the answers can be
found in another mysterious relic that
some believe depicts the greatest
religious figure of all time.
The Cathedral of Turin, Northern
Italy. Here lies the sacred relic known
as the Shroud of
Turin. A large piece of linen, which
when photographed bears the eerie image
of what appears to be a crucified man.
The Shroud of Turn is a piece of ancient
linen cloth measures about 14 ft long by
3 and 1/2 ft wide. And what's so
important about this cloth is there's a
very faint imprint of a human being on
the cloth who appears to have been
crucified which matches the biblical
descriptions of Jesus Christ. So many
believe that this shroud, this relic is
the actual burial cloth of Jesus Christ
and bears the wounds of crucifixion.
The Shroud of Turin has such a
fascinating history. And the question
is, is it
authentic? Those who are against it say,
"No, this could easily have been a
fake and a body would never have left
such an image and so on. The chemicals
of an imbal such a thing." But the
people who say that are not able to
explain how the figure did get there.
It's not painted. It doesn't seem to be
a pigment that's applied to the cloth.
The shroud has been
studied actually by some of the top
scientists and researchers in the world.
And with all the scientific knowledge
and equipment, we still do not know how
the image of the shroud was produced.
And this is what I think continues to
fascinate us about it. Regardless of
what you believe, whether you are a
Christian and a believer and believe
that this is the image of the
resurrected Christ or if you just
believe that there is some other
extraordinary metaphysical event that
causes this, you have to be fascinated
by the fact that this extraordinary
relic could not have been created by any
means that in the 21st century we can
identify. Could the Shroud of Turin
really be a divine relic? Tangible
evidence of the existence of an almighty
power? In 2011, Italian scientists were
able to prove that the Shroud of Turin
was created by a supernatural flash of
light, an unearly flash of light. In my
opinion, the shroud of Turin is proof
that Jesus transformed himself into a
being of light and projected himself
through the Shroud of
Turin. Does the Shroud of Turin actually
contain an image of the crucified
Jesus? Or could this sacred object be
something else?
Might it in fact be evidence of an
incredibly advanced otherworldly
technology? Perhaps the answer can be
found by examining another even more
perplexing ancient
artifact. One found on a land known as
the Emerald Isle.
[Music]
Southern
Ireland. Here, approximately 5 miles
northwest of the small city of Cork,
lies the Blney
Castle. Built more than 500 years ago.
This nearly 90 foot tall fortress houses
the world famous Blney Stone, a relic
that more than 300,000 people come to
kiss each year.
It is not in a convenient location. It's
in the castle wall high up on the
outside. So to kiss it, you've got to
dangle over or sneak around so that
you're really at some peril of falling a
very great distance.
According to legend, it grants whoever
kisses it the power to speak in an
articulate and uh charismatic way and to
flatter and blandish in any
circumstance.
Here you have a stone that has been
kissed and revered by probably millions
of people. Blney is the gift of gav. And
so the idea is that somehow kissing this
stone gives you the ability to talk
better or to somehow amplify your verbal
prowess.
Composed of a single block of blue
stone, the same material used at
Stonehenge, this stone relic's magical
powers are widely renowned.
But could a stone really have such
power? One that could actually affect an
individual's power of
speech. And the story is in the 15th
century, Cormick McCarthy had a court
case coming up and he was concerned
about this and called upon the goddess
Cleana, the queen of the banshees to
help him find the right words and
present a good case. She did. She said,
"Listen, on your way to court, kiss the
first stone you see and and you'll be
eloquent. You'll find the words." And he
did this. He went to court. He was very
persuasive and won his case. On his way
home, he picked up that rock and carried
it back and had his workman fashioned it
into a stone and set it into the wall of
his castle where it is still to be
found.
When you look at Irish mythology as a
whole, it starts to become pretty
obvious that these people such as Clea
were not ordinary earthborn humans, but
were in fact most likely
extraterrestrial humans who came to the
earth and shared their technology. And
Blney being the gift of Gab, the gift of
talking more eloquently is something
that may have been impregnated into the
stone by an extraterrestrial technology
using energetic means that we're not now
aware
of. Is it possible, as ancient astronaut
theorists suggest, that the Blney stone
is actually evidence of some ancient and
other worldly power?
technology that helps to prove that
ancient man was in direct contact with
highly developed beings from another
part of the
galaxy. If so, might the character known
in Irish folklore as the goddess Cleona
actually have been a celestial
traveler? Perhaps more clues can be
found by investigating another
mysterious stone relic located just 160
m away.
County Meath
[Music]
Ireland. On top of this mound known as
the Hill of Tara lies the Lee of Fall or
Stone of
Destiny. One of four magical treasures
said to have been brought to Ireland by
mythical deities called the Tuaha de
Dan. The Leopal was a stone that was
considered magical.
All of the kings of Ireland up until the
fifth century of the common era were
said to have been crowned on this. It
seemed to know who the true king was.
They say if the true king put his feet
up on it, it would roar with
delight. It also had the power to give
strength to the leader to help him
solidify his rule and in some cases to
heal if that was necessary.
To mainstream scientists and
archaeologists, this stone relic
represents nothing more than the
coronation stone of Ireland's ancient
kings. But according to Irish mythology,
the hill of Tara was also a sacred
dwelling place for the gods. The hill of
Tara is a mound. And like many mounds in
Ireland, like many of these shei mounds,
it is allegedly the entrance to the
realm of the shei or these other worldly
people, the word she means both the
people themselves, the other worldly
people and the mounds in which they are
said to dwell. And the hill of Tara is
allegedly an entrance to the other
world.
The hill of Tara is considered the
sacred center of Ireland. The kings
ruled from there for many centuries in
ancient and in early history. And this
was considered a sacred portal to
another dimension to the other world. So
it had more than the authority of
kingship. It had the authority of the
supernatural.
In Irish mythology, the Tuatha Danon
were gods who had magical powers.
They arrived from the lands of the west,
these mythical lands of the gods. They
were said to come in these dark clouds,
which then landed in the mountains of
Ireland. And when they came, there were
three nights and three days of darkness.
So, you have to ask yourself what kind
of power they had. And were they some
kind of celestial visitors arriving in
UFOs?
Maybe the extraterrestrials found a way
to help society make advancements,
including the selection of a virtuous
leader. It's entirely possible that this
stone is not just something that was
coming out of a mythology that the Leaf
fall was an engineered device that those
leaders were able to be assessed by the
stone and even maybe see into their
destiny, see into their future.
Might the Leah fall, a stone relic
imbued with power like the Blney Stone,
really be evidence of highly advanced
knowledge brought to mankind by the
so-called
gods? And do these sacred objects
provide proof of ancient man's
extraterrestrial connections?
Perhaps the answers can be found by
examining strange and unusual relics
fallen from the
sky. Valley of the Kings, Egypt,
November
1922. Archaeologist Howard Carter
discovers King Tuten's tomb containing a
treasure trove of artifacts.
Among them is King Tut's magnificent
breastplate with a yellow jewel as its
centerpiece. A jewel created as the
result of a meteorite
impact. In Egyptian culture, there was a
fascination with Libyan desert
glass. And while it's not actually a
meteorite, Libyan desert glass is the
product of a meteorite impact.
Millions of years ago, an enormous
meteorite crashed into what is today the
Egyptian
desert. And the heat and pressure of
that impact melted the sand in the
desert forming a beautiful yellow impact
glass and it crystallizes the sand. It
formed glass and you get these wonderful
almost like jewel stones and they
clearly imagine these stones to be
celestial to have been created by the
impact of a
star and therefore they were given
cosmic meaning.
[Music]
Humans have long had a fascination with
meteorites and have fashioned many tools
and spiritual objects from them. But
why?
There are many magical stories of
meteors, meteorites, and meteor showers.
Escilis in Prometheus Unbound talks
about an angry Zeus throwing rocks down
at the earth. In the Aniad, Virgil
speaks of meteors. He describes a meteor
shower as indicating Troy is about to
fall. Such folk beliefs about meteors,
shooting stars, meteorites were common
in the ancient world where clearly a
piece of stone from the heavens is
worshiped as a divine
item. The reason why they were so
important was because they inherently
had the power of the gods in them
because they were already forged in the
universe and they descended from the
sky.
Meteoric gemstones like Libyan desert
glass have been venerated throughout
history. But one particularly mysterious
green gemstone could be the most
sought-after relic of all time.
Mulivite is the name given to a green
impact glass of extraordinary beauty and
rarity that's only found in one small
region of the Czech Republic. It's very
old. Metaphysically, Mulivite creates
this strange pulsating energy field that
amplifies human thoughts or intention.
If you're a loving or compassionate
person, it will amplify that. or it can
bring chaos if your thoughts and energy
and emotions are
[Music]
chaotic. According to some legends, the
Holy Grail, the cup from which Jesus and
his apostles drank during the last
supper, was carved from a green gemstone
that had fallen to earth from the
heavens.
It is said that there was discord in the
heavens involving Lucifer and a stone
dropped. It was a stone that at one time
had been the center of Lucifer's crown
when he was an important angel. It
dropped to
earth. It was then a piece of heaven on
earth and had great power and was
greatly venerated. It was carved into
the Holy Grail, which was not made of
metal, but of this beautiful emerald, a
precious stone from
heaven. Could the green gemstone that
supposedly fell from Lucifer's crown,
have been made not of emerald, but of
mulivite? Perhaps more evidence can be
found in the legends of another sacred
stone that fell from the sky more than
4,000 m away.
Yumu Lang Palace, southern
Tibet. Here, according to legend, the
28th king, Lattorii Nansen, obtains a
magical jewel called Cintammani. It is
said to be one of four revered relics
that fell from the sky in a chest.
The Cintmani stone is a fascinating myth
that could well have meteorite
associations. It describes a jewel
that's meant to have enormous properties
that it can bestow upon its owner. And
there are legends that some of the
greatest warriors and leaders in all of
history, including King Solomon, owned
this jewel that it was passed from one
great ruler or leader to another.
In both Hindu and Buddhist tradition, um
there are stories relating to a
so-called wishing jewel. And it wielded
great power. It had a connection between
this world and the next that it could be
used to interact not just with other
worlds but the center of the universe
itself.
It is said that whoever possessed the
cintmani stone was able to control
destiny that every wish was granted. Now
a stone or an object which is able to
change reality truly that is something
which is a piece of technology and how
our ancestors got this is a gigantic
question mark which fortunately our
ancestors have answered for us. Their
answer is that this came from the sky,
that it was given to us by the gods and
that it played a role in this exchange
between us and the divine.
Could the legends of the cintmani stone
be based on fact? If so, might this
other worldly stone, as well as other
sacred and mysterious relics, help forge
a connection between mankind and
extraterrestrial forces?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
believe the ultimate proof can be found
in one of the most sacred objects in the
world. Mecca, Saudi
Arabia, 50 mi from the Red Sea, this is
Islam's holiest city.
It was here in 2000 BC that Muslims
believe the prophet Abraham built the
Cabba, a cube-shaped structure that
draws millions of pilgrims each
year. But just what is it about this
building that is so sacred? And why do
so many people line up to touch it?
[Music]
On the eastern side of the Cabba is a
meteorite stone which is embedded in the
corner of the
Cabba. According to Muslim belief, this
meteorite stone was sent from heaven to
Adam and
Eve. And that stone was used to build
the first
temple. And this really makes Mecca the
most holy place to Muslims.
Muhammad himself threw out all of the
other gods, deities, and
statues, but he retained the
one strange thing that was there, the
black stone, the extraterrestrial object
that's still worshiped today at Mecca.
So you have to wonder why
Muhammad specifically chose that object
as part of his religion that would
remain as part of the Muslim faith. It
would have to be some memory of an
extraterrestrial
event. Might the Black Stone of Mecca
and other sacred relics really possess
great power?
Could they be gateways not only to
ancient knowledge, but to other worlds
and even other
dimensions? Perhaps the answer can be
found by examining what many believe to
be the most sacred and powerful of all
the Earth's mysterious relics, the cross
of Jesus Christ.
Jerusalem, the church of the holy
sepiler. According to some researchers,
this sacred site is the place where the
crucified Jesus was buried. And after 3
days, rose from the
dead. And it was near here in 326 AD
that the remains of a relic thought to
be Jesus's cross were discovered by a
Roman
empress. Empress Helena was the mother
of the emperor Constantine and she was
an early convert to
Christianity. According to legend, she
journeyed to the Holy Land to found a
number of churches there. And when she
was there, she was drawn to the the hill
of Calvary where Jesus was allegedly
executed. And she had the pagan temple
which she found there torn down. And in
the rubble of that temple, she allegedly
discovered the true cross, the cross
where Jesus was crucified.
She found three crosses. Well, Christ
was uh crucified with two thieves. So,
three crosses might be the right
artifacts. But to test them, she brought
a woman with terminal disease, very near
death. To touch the crosses, she touched
the first two crosses, and her condition
was unchanged. When she touched the
third cross, she was miraculously
healed. And Helena declared that to be
the true cross upon which Christ
died. The true cross, it's sacred.
Sacred to many, many, many
people. And people collect these or like
to say that they they may have pieces of
this cross because it brings them closer
to the one they love or their Lord and
Savior. Call it what you will.
Literally, hundreds of Christian
churches lay claim to the fact that they
have pieces of the actual cross that
Jesus died on.
Like many relics or pieces of saints
bodies, the true cross where Jesus was
crucified was believed to have all kinds
of miraculous powers, including healing
powers and the power to grant um
salvation. So if you were to touch or
own a relic of the true cross, a piece
of the true cross, some of that power
that Christ had would transfer itself to
you through the power of touch.
It's a fascinating thought that relics
like the true cross could contain some
divine energy that will heal people and
even perhaps raise them from the
dead. So, is it possible that they're
some kind of
extraterrestrial artifacts with some
kind of power in them that we don't
understand? Could fragments of Jesus's
cross, like other ancient stones and
relics, really have harnessed strange
extraterrestrial
energy? Could legends concerning
mysterious healing powers really be
true?
It's very human for people to want to
possess, whether it's a piece of cloth,
a stone, a follicle of hair, to possess
an object that means something to them,
an object that can perhaps help them in
their life. Could these relics assist us
in invoking other worldly power? I think
we need to be open. We need to be open
to that possibility. Clearly, our
ancestors thought so.
Well, ancient relics were very important
to many different ancient cultures um
just as they still are today to
religions. And the reason for this is
that it was believed that they were
access points to other worldly
environments wherein the gods, the
spirits, the immortals
dwelt. Throughout history, we find that
some of our most powerful figures, our
most powerful leaders have gone on relic
quests. They're looking for the Holy
Grail, the Spear of
Destiny, the key of life. And the belief
is that if we can acquire these relics,
we will acquire powers beyond human
comprehension. Powers that originally
came from the gods that will make us
more godlike if we can get our hands on
them.
the Radic tradition, these tooth from a
deity, the bone from a saint, all of
these aspects really tie in that somehow
this deity, this saint is able to link
us mere mortals to the realm of the
divine, sacred
bones, golden
hats, and fragments of sacred objects
thought to possess healing
properties. Is it possible that these
ancient and mysterious relics help to
prove that
extraterrestrials not only visited Earth
in the ancient
past, but remain strangely connected to
us throughout space and time.
Perhaps the truth of mankind's origins
has been right before our eyes for
hundreds and thousands of years in
fabric, metal, and stone, and in the DNA
of holy saints and martyrs who someday,
thanks to modern science, may even rise
again.
Megalithic structures in the middle of
the ocean. Legends state that the stones
were actually flown from one part of the
island to another.
Terrifying creatures. There are stories
about giants killing people and taking
over things and mysterious events on the
open sea. How can an island just
disappear? Are the stories of lost
civilizations and unreachable
paradises simply the product of
imaginative seafarers? Or could there be
remote locations all over the world that
are secret bases or
extraterrestrials? There have been
sightings on the aisle of man going back
centuries of what are described as fiery
wheels in the sky. They're in the middle
of the ocean. There's just nothing
that's supposed to be there. And yet
there's activity being reported there.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings. What if it
were
true? Did ancient aliens really help to
shape our
history? And if so, might we find proof
by exploring the world's forbidden
islands?
[Music]
March
1963, 75 mi off the coast of Puerto
Rico, while training in anti-ubmarine
maneuvers, the United States Navy's
fleet, led by the USS Wasp aircraft
carrier, detects an unknown sonar target
moving in the nearby waters.
For 4 days, the fleet tracked the
unknown object, recording its speed at
more than 150 knots or 170
mph. There is nothing in any naval
inventory anywhere in the world that can
approach anything remotely that speed.
Not then, not now. Moreover, the object
descended to a depth of something like
27,000 ft. Again, another impossibility.
The pressures down there are vastly too
much. They would crush any vessel that
went down that
deep. That time, the technology that we
had, the best that we could do
underwater was about 45 knots and a
maximum depth of about 3,000 ft.
For the last 100, 200 years, there have
been many, many accounts of objects that
have been seen
underwater. But exactly what they are,
we still do not
know. There's been a tremendous surge of
UFO sightings in Puerto Rico since the
early 1990s.
And for many of the Puerto Rican
witnesses, they're absolutely convinced
that there's some sort of massive
futuristic installation deep below
Puerto Rico under the ocean
bed. Is it possible that aliens have
bases here on Earth, hidden deep
underwater, and off the coasts of
islands? Could this explain why so many
islands around the world have stories of
unexplained sightings of objects both
overhead and beneath the
sea? Isolated islands would be a perfect
location for say extraterrestrial beings
to make their base of operations. Radar
could spot any kind of craft in orbit
very quickly.
However, if you had your base underwater
near an
island, a lot more difficult to be
discovered. Islands are essentially
mountains that are mostly
underwater. What they are in essence is
energetic upwellings of the energy of
the earth pushing higher and higher and
higher. Logically, these types of
locations would be very attractive to
visitors from another world, especially
visitors that would be looking for an
ideal place to set up a base or a
landing spot or simply a place where
they could draw some of the Earth's
energy.
The Illusian
Islands, just off the Alaskan coast,
this chain of more than 100 small
islands extends west
for,00 separating the Bearing Sea from
the Pacific
Ocean. Here in the summer of
1945, 14 crew members of the United
States Army Transport Delaroth reported
seeing what they believed to be a large
UFO emerge from the waters near the
island of Adac.
It's reported that a round object that
appeared dark um against the setting sun
at the
time actually rose up vertically into
the air and then circled the boat two or
possibly three times and was visible for
about 7 or 8 minutes before it
vanished. Something that comes out of
the water, circles around, and then
takes off like that, uh that's well
beyond anything we're supposed to have.
And they're in the middle of the ocean.
That's the important thing to remember
here. There's just nothing nothing
that's supposed to be there. And yet,
there's activity being reported
there. UFO sightings around the Illutian
Islands continue to this day. But
why is it perhaps more than mere
coincidence that the native people known
as the elutes believe this is the exact
spot where their ancestors first
descended from the
skies? The alutes believe they descended
from a creature that had come from the
sky. Dog actually had fallen to the
island of Unnak and had had two pups
with paws.
But the children that came from those
two were perfect humans. So by way of
this descent from the heavens and by way
of animal form, we get the Illusian
people. I find it intriguing that the
elute's origin story has something to do
with them having arrived from the sky
essentially saying that they have been
seated. So the fact that to this day
that area of the world is considered a
hot spot for
UFOs is not
coincidence. There have been rumors that
there is an underground alien or UFO
base in the Illusian Islands. The
question is could a base really exist
there? And the answer is yeah.
There's plenty of places, nullles,
atalls,
volcanoes, where if hollowed out, they
would pretty much make ideal bases for
UFOs to use to come and go as they
please and to investigate that area.
Could there really be a connection
between the high number of UFO sightings
and the elutes origin
story? Ancient astronaut theorists say
yes. And as evidence, they point to the
fact that similar legends exist on other
remote
islands, islands that have also had
reports of
[Music]
UFOs. 5,000 miles to the east of the
Illutian Islands, nestled in the Irish
Sea, lies the Isisle of Man.
According to legend, the aisle of man
was founded by a mystical race of Kelts,
the Toaha
Dayan, who possessed magical
powers. Banished from heaven for their
sorcery and advanced knowledge, they
descended on Ireland in a cloud of mist.
It said that at the end of their time
they just sort of
vanished left behind their ghosts quite
literally and these are remembered in
folklore of the aisle of man as the
little
people. The so-called little people are
believed by the locals to be able to put
humans under a magical spell.
A spell in which all awareness of space
and time is lost.
Kidnapping human beings is one of the
chief activities of the little people.
And the whole point of these stories is
that the humans tend to come back from
the other
realm, often finding that hundreds of
years have passed.
And this sounds really, really similar
to what people experience sometimes
during alien abduction
events where a ship will show up, the
very small aliens will come out, they'll
find themselves paralyzed, they'll have
missing time
experiences. There's reason to believe
that the little people may have in fact
been extraterrestrials, the same grays
as we describe them, that perform the
same types of magical enchantment on
people that they abduct
today.
Could the legends of the little people
and the ancestral Toaha Danan actually
be describing otherworldly beings that
came to Earth in the distant
past? And if so, might these legends be
connected to modern-day UFO sightings
over the aisle of man?
[Music]
Locals claim that these UFO sightings
have been reported for
centuries. And for ancient astronaut
theorists, the most compelling sighting
of all is a 2500year-old report of a
fiery wheel with three spokes descending
from the
heavens.
According to legend on the aisle of man,
some fishermen were washed ashore during
a terrible storm. Suddenly, this
three-spoked craft came out of the
clouds,
terrified. There have been sightings on
the aisle of man going back centuries of
what are described as wheels or fiery
wheels in the sky. Now, these
descriptions are almost identical to the
description of the wheel of Ezekiel in
the Bible.
According to Ezekiel chapter 1, the
prophet saw a flying object described as
four wheels within a wheel. An account
that ancient astronaut theorists say is
not of an angel, but of an
extraterrestrial
spacecraft. Biblical scholars have very
much struggled with the description of
Ezekiel's wheel, seeing wheels within
wheels. The idea that a cherub was
standing next to each wheel, it's very
clear that he's describing some type of
device. Ezekiel describes wheels within
a wheel and eyes of different animals,
and they're all gleaming like bronze and
metal. So, what is really described
here? It reads much more like an
encounter with some type of an
extraterrestrial craft that was
misinterpreted as some type of a divine
[Music]
event. So you have to think really that
is of man was some kind of island that
was chosen by the extraterrestrials.
This was one of their bases. They would
land their UFOs there. And in fact,
legends about UFOs and extraterrestrials
continue on the island even to this
day. Could these islands actually
contain alien base camps as ancient
astronaut theorists
contend? And might these powerful
locations reveal important knowledge for
mankind?
Perhaps clues can be found in another
mysterious Pacific island chain 9200
miles to the southeast. An area rumored
to be
inhabited by
giants. The Solomon
Islands 800 m east of Papa New Guinea.
This group of nearly 1,000 is covers
11,000 square miles.
Though first discovered in 1568 by
Spanish
explorers, many people identify this
area with World War II due to the fierce
fighting that occurred between the
Japanese and Americans on the largest
island
here, Guadal Canal.
in a campaign that lasted over 6 months.
A total of 41 warships were sunk and
over 30,000 men died either in battle or
from disease. The Americans and
Japanese, they left behind a lot of the
remnants of the war. Ships that was sank
for instance and then on land you have
leftovers of tanks and a lot of
ammunitions as well. There was a place
close to where I went to school called
Hell's Point and it's full of live
ammunitions.
But Guadal Canal is also infamous for
something else. The countless local
legends of
giants. There are mysterous legends all
over the Solomons.
Actually, a lot of the stories in Gual
Canal tend to talk about giants, the
relationship between people and
giants. Giants are often portrayed in
different ways. Sometimes they are
benevolent giants. They help people.
They look after
people. But there are stories about
giants killing people and taking over
things.
So, Giant is a major character in a lot
of the Gu Canal
stories. There are legends and stories
that go way back that suggest that
giants actually still live on the
Solomon Islands. Some say they're kind
of hairy beast sachquat like kind of
beings. Others say they're more humanoid
and some say they even relate and kind
of mate with the human
population.
According to local legends, those giants
were able to travel the entire length of
the island without seeing the light of
day by utilizing subterranean
tunnels. People talk about it that
giants actually do exist. They existed
in the past. Today with all kinds of
developments that taking
place, they shift further into the
mountains.
They really do exist. It's not just a
mythology to scare children.
According to one report, in
1998, workers during a gold mining
operation witnessed what they believe is
proof of the existence of the giants of
Guadal Canal when one of their
bulldozers broke down.
The workers say they removed the
10-tonon blade from the machine to make
overnight repairs. And when they
returned to the dig site the next
morning, they were shocked by what they
found. The blade itself had been moved
quite a distance. And they found
footprints of giants in the mud.
So they could only assume that these
famous giants of the Solomon Islands had
been there and moved the bulldozer
blade.
Could Guadal Canal really be home to
giants? If so, what are they and where
did they come from?
In the book Solomon Islands Mysteries,
author Marius Byron, a retired
helicopter engineer who lived on the
Solomon Islands for many years
interviewing locals, unveils a
groundbreaking theory. The Australian
author Boy Ron believed that incidents
of the giants that he had been told
about by the natives were related to UFO
activity. And from what he could put
together, there was some kind of UFO
base deep in the mountains of central
Guadada Canal and it involved these
giants. And at the same time, there was
some kind of underwater UFO base there
as well.
Eyewitness accounts of UFOs have been
documented on the Solomon Islands for
years. And mysteriously, details reveal
that the UFOs seem to rise out of the
surrounding ocean where warships sank in
World War
II and vanish into a remote mountain
lake on the island.
People often talk about seeing light not
only in the sky but in the ocean as
well. That you see lights in the ocean
and then you see lights flying past uh
overhead as well and sometimes crashing
into the
ocean like a plane crashing.
There have been sightings of flying
saucers appearing over the
wreckage flying into and out of
mountains and volcanoes in the
area. So, the whole area is really
pretty
interesting. There have been reports
that objects, strange lights, actually
rise up out of the waters into the air
and move about for a period of time and
then disappear.
And often this is either witnessed from
the beach or is experienced at close
hand by fishermen. And it is said that
sometimes these objects come so close
that the fisherman can actually feel the
heat as they pass.
There was a lot of local people who had
said yes for many years we've seen these
these types of things happening.
There are numerous accounts of
abductions, people who disappear after
coming into contact with these
UFOs, never to be seen
again. Could there be a connection
between the legends of the giants of
Guadal Canal and the numerous UFO
sightings that have been reported here
over the years?
And might this be evidence that Guadal
Canal really is the site of an
underwater alien
base? Some ancient astronaut theorists
believe the answers can be found by
examining stories other strange
creatures said to inhabit the island.
Creatures like the Adaro.
The Adaro are frightening looking
creatures, half fish, half man. They
were said to have come from the sun by
way of rainbows. They could be
dangerous. They could shoot poisonous
flying fish at you. So the notion of
some creature that was of danger and
mythological qualities coming from far
away seems alive and well in the Solomon
Islands. Chu Chua is a story that a lot
of people on Gual know about that these
are actually human beings but at certain
time they take different forms.
These are energies that can shapeshift
into any form. These are not just
stories for entertainment or for scaring
the children. These fears are
[Music]
great. You have to wonder if these
famous giants of the Solomon Islands and
these weird beings were in fact
extraterrestrials that were there to
protect these secret bases.
Is it possible that the stories of
giants, sea monsters, and other strange
beings on Guadal Canal are really
accounts of
extraterrestrials who appear as
frightening creatures in order to scare
off anyone who might discover their
secret alien
bases. The Solomon Islands is right on
what we've called the Ring of Fire. A
lot of volcanic activity, a lot of
tectonic and geo activity. So, there's a
lot of energy there.
One theory would simply be that if these
other beings, whatever they are, wanted
access to a good source of energy, that
might be a very good place to go.
Could the stories from the Illusian
Islands, the aisle of man, and the
Solomon Islands be evidence that there
are alien bases located beneath our
seas?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
point to an island on the other side of
the world that has archaeologists
mystified even to this
[Music]
day. The island of
Pompei more than 2500 miles southwest of
Hawaii.
Completely isolated in the Pacific
Ocean, this Micronesian landmass is home
to just 34,000 people, mainly farmers
and
fishermen. But there is one area of the
island that is completely
uninhabited. The lost city of Nan Madal.
The native islanders believe this
ancient site is
cursed and it is also home to some of
the most mysterious archaeological ruins
in the
world. Built on a coral reef just off
the eastern coast of Pompei and
sprawling more than 200 acres, Nan Madal
consists of 92 smaller man-made islands
connected by
canals.
According to historians, this ancient
city, often called the Venice of the
Pacific, was the capital of the Saur
Dynasty that ruled from about 500 to
1628 AD.
This ancient city housed the Sodalures,
the kings of that time.
So it has their houses, it has feasting
areas, it has tombs. So there's a whole
number of areas that each of these
eyelets
supported. Most archaeologists agree
that construction of these artificial
islands began sometime in the 13th
century.
Each has been formed with columnar
basaltt a black rock that forms when
basaltic lava from a volcano cools in
the form of columns.
There are a number of colometer basaltt
outflows across Pompei
itself and we know of several of these
outcrops that were used to mine the
basalt. They were then transported to
the area of Namudal and then placed to
create these small islands.
But how did the native people living
here 800 years ago manage to build 92
eyelets out of giant basaltt columns?
Researchers estimate that each stone log
used to construct the megalithic
structures weighs between 5 to 50 tons,
stacked to form walls as high as 25 ft
tall and 17 ft thick. Archaeologists
believe that it was an undertaking that
most likely would have required all
25,000 island inhabitants to complete.
Around the ruins of Namadal are many
canals which researchers and
archaeologists say were the routes taken
by boats to move these basel columns
across and around the island to
construct the huge megalithic
site. Mainstream scholars insist native
people built non-madal using ropes,
rollers and
rafts. But attempts to prove this theory
have failed.
So, if you add up all of the stone logs,
you have a weight of
750,000 or so metric tons. That's a
lot. If you were to move maybe 2,000
tons a year, you might be able to get it
built over about three centuries.
We're talking about a major massive
effort here. The kind of effort that you
would see in the construction of the
pyramids in
[Music]
Egypt. But could there be another
explanation for how these ancient people
were able to move such massive rocks
miles across the island and into place
in the ocean without the help of modern
machinery? According to local legends,
the ancient builders used a much more
profound method of construction and
advanced anti-gravitational technology
that ancient astronaut theorists believe
may explain many of the world's
mysterious megalithic sites.
Some legends state that the stones were
actually flown from one part of the
island to another or levitated some way
to get them up to such high areas of the
main construction.
This is very reminiscent of what
researchers call auditive levitation,
which was a technique of raising heavy
stones by matching the sound frequency
of
matter, rendering it weightless and
moving it into
place. The people themselves who still
to this day live there in Pompei say
that this place was not built by us.
It's been here before we
arrived. And they themselves say that
bassalt blocks were moved as if by ghost
hand. That is why the natives call Nan
Madal also the city of ghosts.
Although no written records on the
island's history exist, its spoken myths
and legends have survived through
generations. According to the natives,
Nan Madal has been plagued by a curse
for centuries, and anyone who explores
the ruins will perish.
[Music]
The local islanders believe that the
city of Nanodal is cursed and they say
they see lights moving throughout the
city at night and they believe that if
they spend the night there, they'll
[Music]
die. When the Europeans came to colonize
Micronia in the early 20th century, they
were advised of the non-Madal and its
alleged
spell. In April of 1907, the German
governor Victor Berg disregarded these
warnings and not only explored the
island ruins, but even opened a tomb of
the ancient
rulers. Locals say Governor Berg was
haunted by strange sounds that night and
the next morning mysteriously died.
The local legend said that if you messed
with this site in any way, it was cursed
and in fact there would be a terrible
price to pay for it. And it appears that
Victor Berg lost his life because of
this
curse. Official records indicate the
governor died April 30th, 1907 due to
sunstroke and heat exhaustion while
surveying the
ruins. But the natives maintain that his
untimely death was a result of the
curse and proof that otherworldly powers
guard the mystical island
city. Might the local legends of
supernatural forces at work on the
islands actually be true? And if so,
just who or what is haunting these
mysterious islands?
Ancient astronaut theorists claim the
strongest evidence that an advanced race
of extraterrestrials helped to build
non-madal is not the megalithic rock
structures but what may lie beneath
them. Nanmidal is a huge city and most
of it is above water but parts of it are
underwater and the islanders say that
there is a second city there
called this is the city of the gods and
it's an even deeper
water. You have to wonder if there isn't
some kind of underwater UFO base even
today. If the local legends are true,
could Nan Madal really be the remnants
of an ancient alien
base? One that exists not only above
ground, but also extends down into the
sea. And might this explain why the
natives of Pompei have left this part of
the island uninhabited for nearly 400
years? There are those who believe the
answers can be found by examining
islands that have suddenly and
mysteriously
vanished. The Pacific Ocean. October
2012.
Scientists aboard a research ship
between Australia and New Calonia set a
course for 19° south latitude and 160°
east longitude, the location of Sandy
[Music]
Island. But when they arrive, they make
a shocking discovery. The island is not
there.
Digital scientific databases have shown
Sandy Island to be 15 m long and 3 m
wide, approximately the size of
Manhattan. Small islands sometimes
disappear due to rising ocean
levels. But the researchers find no
evidence of a sunken land mass, just
ocean waters 4600 ft deep.
Sandy Island is a island of great
mystery. It literally disappeared.
According to early eyewitness accounts,
including those by Captain Cook in the
1700s, this island clearly existed. And
it makes you wonder, how can an island
just
disappear? Was it there to begin with?
Absolutely, it was. There's eyewitness
accounts of it.
Captain James Cook was the first to
establish Sandy Island on a map back in
1774. And in fact, the island still
appeared even on modern satellite maps
up until
2013 when it was finally removed based
on the findings of the University of
Sydney. But how could an island that has
appeared on maps for over 230
years suddenly
disappear? There are a number of
accounts um within folklore and legend
of mythical islands. For instance, the
Antillis and others with which appeared
on ancient maps and yet which don't
exist today.
So, did they once exist? Do they exist
only at certain times? We could be
dealing with a phenomena whereby these
islands disappear at certain times and
then
reappear. Although, is that something
that's natural? Is this something to do
with geology? Or is this something to do
with something more
supernatural? This is obviously a
mystery which remains to be solved.
When the University of Sydney findings
were first revealed, many scientists
insisted that the researchers must have
been looking in the wrong place,
pointing to the fact that satellites had
recorded temperatures in this location
consistent with the presence of
land. Scientists would later claim that
this anomaly was due to errors in the
data
sets. But how could the temperature
data, the satellite images, and numerous
other maps dating back to the 18th
century all be an
[Music]
error? It's possible that these islands
actually do exist, but they're somehow
being cloaked by whoever might be using
the
islands. For instance, extraterrestrial
visitors could very easily create a
light bending type of device, which
could make it appear that an island that
was once there is no longer there.
There are other stories of islands that
appear and disappear and that sometimes
there's a mist around them. There are
stories like this around the Samoan
Islands. So, you have to wonder if
extraterrestrials have some kind of
super technology that allows them to
cloak islands and make them appear and
disappear. It boggles the mind that such
a technology would exist, and yet it
appears to be.
So, could extraterrestrials really be
using advanced cloaking technology to
hide Sandy
Island? Some ancient astronaut theorists
believe there may be an even more
incredible explanation behind the
disappearance of Sandy Island.
things like Sandy Island that somehow
was located and then when they went to
go look for it is gone. It's very
possible that these aren't islands but
are some technological device coming up
to the surface or landing for a little
while and going
away. In ancient Greek mythology, we
have these stories of the asteria, of
the falling stars that would fall into
the
water, but they wouldn't sink. They
could in fact travel from place to
place, floating islands so to
speak. So what if in this particular
case we have a similar story? Is that
really what is
happening? Is it possible that these
phantom islands that appear and
disappear are really elaborate alien
outposts? And could the
extraterrestrials that use them still be
here on Earth waiting to be discovered?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
suggest that further evidence can be
found by examining another island that
mysteriously
disappeared. An island that was said to
be home to other worldly beings.
The North Atlantic
Ocean, 200 miles west of
Ireland, lie open waters expanding as
far as the eye can
see. But according to 14th century
Mediterranean map makers, this exact
spot marks the location of an island
known as High Brazil.
For more than 600 years, sailors across
the world have searched for this
so-called Phantom Island believed to
contain an Edenlike
[Music]
paradise. Lore has it that the island
couldn't be seen except once every 7
years when it could be seen but not
reached.
Hyperrazil allegedly appeared and
disappeared behind the mists. It could
never definitively be found, although
the its puditive location is marked on
some of these early
maps. High Brazil was first mapped by
the Italian Mayorcan cgrapher Angelino
Dealorto in
1325 who described the island as being a
strikingly round form.
Over a century later, in
1497, Italian explorer John Kat also
reported reaching high
Brazil. And in
1674, Captain John Nisbet of Ireland,
reportedly brought back silver and gold
from the island that he claimed to have
received from an old mysterious man.
Strangely, he and his men also said that
High Brazil was inhabited by what they
called giant black
rabbits. Other explorers of the time
returned from the island with similarly
bizarre stories and accounts of
beautiful glowing
people. High Brazil is imagined in Irish
lore to be the place that the Irish gods
came from. On the island of high Brazil,
the gods had a luxurious life. They were
able to develop an advanced
civilization. In
1684, one of the first Irish historians,
Rodrik of Ollleerti, wrote about high
Brazil in his book, a choreographical
description of West or
earct. In it, he refers to the island as
enchanted and writes that it is a land
kept hidden by the special ordinance of
God.
Like a lot of other mythologies such as
Atlantis, High Brazil was thought to be
the source of
civilization, especially in Ireland and
England and other areas such as that.
It's thought that high Brazil still
exists under the sea and that
periodically when the conditions are
right, it'll
surface. According to legend, the
mysterious land was last seen in 1872 by
author TJ Westerrop and his
crew, who saw the island appear and then
vanish.
If high Brazil is an actual land, very
possibly it could be that at one time on
planet Earth, there was a superior
technology, a civilization that had
progress that far surpassed even our own
today. And these people originated from
the
stars. They are the people that the
human race descended from. and uh
locations such as High Brazil is this
homeland of these
creatures. Is it possible that the
mythical island of High Brazil not only
exists but is actually a high techch
alien
base? And if so, might there be others
located all over the world?
You find so many accounts of beings
coming and going from the stars at these
locations. You find mysterious
disappearances. You find other
supernatural events taking place at
these islands. And it makes you wonder
if they're in fact being used by
advanced extraterrestrial races, as
portals, as gateways, even as stopover
places, maybe even refueling stations in
a way, as places that are known
throughout the cosmos.
Might aliens have been visiting these
remote, relatively uninhabited locations
for thousands of
years, using them as secret
hideouts, landing spots, or energetic
refueling
stations. Could there be
extraterrestrial bases on hidden islands
even now?
And when the truth behind these
forbidden islands is
revealed, will we finally come face to
face with our celestial
ancestors. A
biblical with incredible powers.
The power to
harm, the power to
kill, even the power to talk to
God. The Ark of the Covenant. It's the
ultimate high technology device of its
day. People were terrified of this great
and awesome
ark. Wherever it showed up, people would
all of a sudden die.
But is this mysterious gold chest truly
of divine
origin? Or might its powers come from
some even more otherworldly source? It's
a type of super weapon that was being
controlled or guided from an
extraterrestrial.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings. What if it
were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history? And if so, might the proof
be found inside the Ark of the Covenant.
[Music]
The West Bank. July
2013. 10 miles north of the Israeli
settlement aided.
Archaeologists unearthed clay pots,
stoves, and a portion of a wall dating
back to around 1300
BC. But the most mundane of their
findings here may also be the most
significant. Holes carved into the solid
rock
ground. Based on the location and the
date of the artifacts, they believe
these holes may have once held the
wooden beams used to support the
tabernacle at
Shiloh. If true, it is the first
physical evidence ever discovered of the
ancient sanctuary built to house what is
perhaps the most mysterious religious
relic in the
world, the Ark of the Covenant.
The story of the Ark of the Covenant is
one of the most fascinating and
unexplored stories of the
Bible. The Ark of the Covenant had some
very mysterious powers.
The Ark of the Covenant was what took me
out of mainstream journalism. I began to
wonder what what could this thing have
been?
Reproductions of the Ark of the Covenant
can be found in churches, synagogues,
and Masonic temples throughout the
world. It has even been featured in
popular
culture. But just what is the Ark of the
[Music]
Covenant? Mount Si, the 15th century
BC. According to the Bible's book of
Exodus, after the Israelites were
released from Egypt, God summoned Moses
to the peak of this holy
mountain and gave him two stone tablets
carved with the Ten Commandments.
He also gave him specific instructions
for building the ark of the covenant
was the box that was constructed to
contain the two tablets of the ten
commandments which were irradiated with
divine power because they had been
touched by the finger of
[Music]
God. The covenant itself was a contract
between God uh and the Israelites. I
will be your God and protect you
provided you keep my
commandments. Israel's end of the deal
then was going to be kept in the box
which is the ark
itself. But the ark of the covenant
didn't only carry the ten
commandments. It was also said to be the
throne of God himself.
In the book of Exodus in the 25th
chapter, the verse is very clear. God
says to Moses, "Asuli
[Music]
mikdashanti, have them make me a holy
place and I, God, I will dwell among
them." And wherever the ark went, that
power of God went with
them. The ark is built in a reflection
of what's called a heavenly ark.
It was built 2 1/2 cubits by 1 1/2
cubits by 1 and 1/2
cubits. So the ark would have been
somewhere in the ballpark of about a 3x5
ft rectangular box.
It was going to be covered with gold on
the outside and the inside and was to
have two gold rings at each of the four
corners and it was carried with poles
that were run through the rings and the
orders were that uh the poles should
never be removed from the rings and the
lid was to be made out of gold and on
each end of the lid were to be uh
cherubim or guardian angels basically
with wings.
[Music]
But why was it so important that the ark
be constructed to such exact
specifications? And why would God, a
spiritual being, require a physical
throne here on
earth? Perhaps there is an answer in the
Bible's description of Moses after he
returned from Mount Si.
After Moses came down from Mount Si, he
was glowing. The Bible says that he had
to wear a scarf over his
face. I am fascinated with the idea that
Moses all of a sudden his appearance
changed. And so the idea that Moses all
of a sudden looked different, we have to
ask ourselves why.
Just what did Moses encounter on Mount
Si? Was it
God or was it someone or something
else? God is clearly an entity not of
this
earth and by definition therefore
extraterrestrial. Where does he come
from?
We must recognize that when the ancients
are speaking about God, there is no
other term that we can use to describe
these experiences other than
extraterrestrial. After the ark was
built and the Ten Commandments placed
within it, the Israelites carried it
with them on their 40-year exodus
through the desert.
The ark of the covenant was considered
powerful because it was the meeting
place of God and
humanity. And so it had to be carried on
poles so that it could be conveyed
without being
touched. Certain people were allowed to
carry it and those people were ordained
priests. Aaron, Moses' brother, and his
sons were certainly priests. It was a
prestigious job, but you had to know
what you were doing.
Now, the ark would be covered while
they're carrying it with a cloth so that
they really couldn't see what they were
carrying. And they were given strict
orders that they should not lift up the
cloth and look at the ark and try to see
it.
But why was the ark considered so
dangerous that it couldn't be touched or
even looked at? According to the Old
Testament accounts, the Ark of the
Covenant was not only a powerful device
on its own. It also housed a number of
other important religious
relics. In addition to the Ten
Commandments, it held Aaron's rod, the
staff that could miraculously turn into
a
serpent. It also held a jar of mana, an
edible starch, which reportedly came
from the sky.
[Music]
What we begin to realize is that the ark
of the covenant was a sort of toolkit.
And once this toolkit was assembled, we
have the fully functioning ark of the
covenant. The ark went before them in
the wilderness and made sure the place
where the children of Israel were to go
would be safe and able to provide for
them in the desert. If anybody's been to
the Sinai desert, you could hardly
imagine 2 to three million people having
any kind of substance in a
desert. So therefore, what the ark must
have
accomplished was
profound. The ark of the covenant was
said to have protected and provided for
the Israelites during the Exodus. But
how? What we can read in the Bible is
that they were sustained by something
called mana. And the big question is
where did this mana come from? Well, two
engineers by the name of Rodney Dale and
George Cissoon in the
1970s proposed that the Ark of the
Covenant was nothing else but a
container in which to store what they
referred to as the mana
machine. The mana machine was a
nuclear-driven device that dispensed
food or mana to the Israelites.
[Music]
The Ark of the Covenant is such a
mystery. It could actually create food
supposedly. The the mana that they were
eating, it's like some kind of
uh super engineering duplicating energy
machine.
We have a concise description of it in
the ancient Jewish text of the Zohar
which is a part of the Cabala where they
describe the ancient of days. But in
reality the ancient of days is a
mistransation. The correct translation
is the transportable one with the
tanks. Since when is God transportable
and why does he need tanks? So in the
Zuhar we have concise descriptions not
of God but some type of a
machine. Did the Ark of the Covenant
really house a machine that provided
food to the Israelites during their 40
years in the
desert? According to ancient astronaut
theorists and many religious scholars,
the answer is
yes. But that wasn't the only power. the
ark
possessed. For as the ark could sustain
life, it could also destroy
[Music]
it. The Jordan
River, a 200-mile border separating the
present-day kingdom of Jordan from
Israel and the West Bank.
[Music]
In,400 BC, this waterway represented one
of the final obstacles to the wandering
Israelites long- aaited entrance into
the promised
land. The Ark of the Covenant comes into
its own when Joshua was given the task
of leading Israel across the Jordan
River. And the story is that the ark of
the covenant would go first and be
carried into the Jordan
River. The water would stop
flowing. Some energy came forth from the
ark causing the waters to literally stop
and ascend and therefore creating dry
land for the entire children of Israel
to pass on off into the Holy Land.
But if this biblical story is true, what
kind of power could the Ark of the
Covenant have possessed that would cause
a raging river to stand still?
What if the people who wrote these
stories were simply reporting on what
they were actually
seeing? If that's true, then the Ark of
the Covenant clearly represents a
technology that is more advanced than
anything we have now.
If you want to part water, maybe a good
way to do it would be with high-speed
winds. If you blow enough air, you can
get the water out of the way and you can
actually maybe even form those two walls
of water. There's some kind of
technology that they're using and it's
so that they can accomplish their goals
and continue on their journey and
they're able to use this
extraterrestrial technology to do
it.
According to the Bible's book of Joshua,
the Ark of the Covenant once again
proved a powerful ally. When the
Israelites arrived on the western banks
of the Jordan River, set on conquering
the seemingly impenetrable walled city
of
Jericho. The reputation of the
Israelites preceded them. People were
terrified. They have heard the rumors of
the power of this great and awesome ark.
They now come to the city of Jericho.
The people were commanded by God, march
around the city walls.
They march around the city once on the
first day. The next day, they do the
very same thing. The third, fourth,
fifth, and sixth day, it's the same
thing. On the seventh day, they march
around and then they blow the trumpets
and all the people
shout between the marching of the
feet, the salving of the ram's horns,
the chauffear, and with some power not
described from the ark, it enabled the
big stone mighty walls of the city of
Jericho to somehow be vibrated with a
earthquake type force which caused them
to collapse.
When I hear that they had to walk around
Jericho seven times and then the
trumpets were the ones that allowed for
those walls to crumble. One would have
to ask yourselves, was there something
else to
it? Knocking something down like a wall
with pressure is not inconceivable.
So you could imagine trying to do this.
Now when you look at things, think of
standard examples that we
[Music]
experience. When the space shuttle
lands, we get the sonic boom and you can
feel it rattling the walls and you can
actually hear
it. That's far
away. Imagine getting a sonic boom
closer to the object. You might be able
to do significant damage to the
wall.
Could the Israelites actually have
witnessed an advanced technology beyond
even our own modern
capabilities? A machine that could
instantly part waters and bring down
stone walls.
Some ancient astronaut theorists believe
the best evidence that the Ark of the
Covenant may have held alien technology
can be found by studying events that
took place 300 years after the sacking
of Jericho when the ark was
stolen. According to the book of Samuel,
when the Israelites went to battle with
the mighty Philistine army around 1100
BC, they brought out the ark of the
covenant to aid them once
again. But God had not given them
instructions to do so.
[Applause]
Angered by their presumption that they
could use the ark as a weapon without
his orders, he awarded victory to the
Philistines who captured it as a
trophy. The Bible records very strange
things then started to
happen. Death, sickness broke out
amongst the
Philistines. Now, in ancient times, they
had no understanding of energy or what
we would maybe consider something
similar to a radioactive sickness.
They considered this to be displeasure
of the god. They place the ark next to a
statue of one of their gods,
Deegon. And they leave and when they
come back, they see that Deeon's head
has been
decapitated and his hands have been
taken
off. So they say, "We got to get rid of
this thing."
And so they loaded the Ark of the
Covenant on a cart and sent it off in
the direction of an Israeli village
called Beth
Sheimish. That of course everyone ran up
to look at the
ark. And as a result, the Bible says 70
men died when they looked at the ark.
For those who have been fans of Raiders
of the Lost Ark and remember the last
scene when India is shouting, "Don't
look, don't look, don't
look." That's where that story comes
from.
The Old Testament contains numerous
other examples of the ark's devastating
powers and ultimately depicts it as a
deadly device capable of striking down
anyone who does not follow God's rules.
When Aaron, who was the high priest, his
two sons approached to give an offering,
it stated that literally two beams of
fire came forth from the ark and went up
their nostrils and burnt them from the
inside, leaving their entire outsides
intact.
beams of
fire burning people from
inside. Why would an instrument of God
contain such deadly
powers? If the Ark of the Covenant was
truly divine, why would it strike down
two people who were simply trying to
make an
offering? Wherever it showed up, people
would all of a sudden die.
In my opinion, it was a storage
container that housed some type of a
nuclear
device. And having a nuclear device in
the hands of a technologically primitive
society would result in people dying
left and
right. Naturally, people would refer to
that as the wrath of God, when in
reality, it's nothing else but the wrath
of atomic
power. Is it possible, as ancient
astronaut theorists suggest, that the
Ark of the Covenant actually contained a
nuclear
device? One that was brought to Earth,
not by God, but by visitors from another
planet. It's possible that the Ark of
the Covenant is some type of super
weapon that was being controlled or
guided from an
extraterrestri. Was the Ark of the
Covenant actually a sophisticated high-
techch device that was so advanced that
the ancient Israelites were unable to
control it?
Perhaps. But of all the arks alleged
powers, there was one that was the most
incredible. Its ability to communicate
directly with God.
[Music]
Petra,
Jordan. At the summit of Jabul Harun, a
small white dome marks the tomb of
Aaron, the brother of
Moses. According to the Hebrew Bible,
Aaron was chosen by God to be the first
high priest of the Israelites, a title
that came with enormous responsibility.
Aaron, Moses's brother, served as priest
of the people. And then following Aaron,
the line of the priests followed his
genealogy. They were the ones designated
to carry the
ark and they were the ones permitted to
come close to it in
worship. The attire of the priests was
beautiful, but it was also there for
their protection.
They had to wear a miter. They wore a
breastplate. They had to wear a long
robe. They had to keep certain areas of
the body protected. The head, the lungs,
the heart, the genital
area. The high priest would have to have
these on to approach the ark. And when
he approached the ark, he had to have a
rope tied around his leg. Why?
So if and when something ever went wrong
and the ark struck him or he
died, no one would be allowed to go into
retrieve his body cuz they would suffer
the same
[Music]
fate. On top of the ark were the figures
of two angels. And it was said in the
Bible that God's presence came to rest
in the tiny space between them. That was
the place where heaven and earth
touched.
The space between the angels on the lid
of the ark was known as the mercy
seat, upon which the image of God would
allegedly sit when communicating with a
Levite
priest. But did the Israelites really
witness an other worldly presence
between the two angels?
And if so, was it literally the image of
God or something
else? Based on the numerous accounts of
the ark's awesome power, some ancient
astronaut theorists have proposed that
it may have been an electrical
capacitor, a device used for storing and
transmitting energy.
Some of the stories that have come out
of history about the ark of the covenant
that it erupted in sparks and flames and
people would touch it and die instantly
or that it leveled cities. And many
people have theorized that this is some
type of actual large energy capacitor.
Capacitor is exactly the right word to
use. It relies on static electricity.
It's the simplest device. You just need
two conductors with an insulator between
them. You've got the outer gold, a very
nice conductor. And then if you open
this up and look to the inside, you'll
see a second electrode. So what that's
going to look like, okay, you have the
outer side of your
ark. That's going to say charge
positive. Then you have your inner wall
of the ark coated in gold. And then you
have an insulator in between. That's
just the wood you make the ark out of.
Now what you got to do is get negative
charges here on the inner side. And the
question is, how do I get my positive
and negative charges onto my ark? This
is where the cherabs come in. You have
one sitting on top here that's attached
to the outer side, and you can put
charge on it and get your positive
charge. The other cherub is going to be
sitting here. It won't be connected to
the outer layer, but it'll come in from
a rod and connect to the inner side. And
this is where we'll put our negative
charge. So, what that looks like over
here at the ark is this chair will not
actually be attached to the outer
conductor. There'll be an insulator
there and then it can have a rod that
goes through and attaches to the inner
conductor. Now, the Israelites claim to
have actually been able to see the
presence of God between the two cherubs,
a representation of God. Now, if they
weren't actually seeing a representation
of God, could this arc of energy have
been some type of other energy device
that they were seeing?
So when we're thinking about the
Israelites seeing the image of God
between the two cherub wings, one of the
things to keep in mind, I think, is how
the image of God was often described. We
have smoke, fire. It's very rarely an
actual like visual picture of a person.
And so if you picture what arcs of
electricity will be doing, there'll
probably be a little bit of smoke. Um
there will be the really bright light.
There'll be a crackling noise. That
could certainly be something that would
be interpreted as an image of God.
Is it possible that accounts of God's
presence at top the ark were actually
describing electrical
discharge? And if so, might someone or
something have been sending electrical
signals through the Ark of the Covenant
to communicate with the Israelites?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe such
a notion is not only possible but all
the more
plausible given the biblical
descriptions of a device known as the
breastplate of
judgment. According to the book of
Exodus, it was worn by the priests when
entering the tabernacle and was adorned
with 12 sacred gemstones called the
stones of fire, which represented the 12
tribes of
Israel. And according to detailed
accounts from sacred texts known as the
Talmud, these gemstones played an
important role when communicating with
God through the ark.
Somehow there would be a pulsating sound
emanating from on top of the
cherubam. And these pulsating
high-pitched sounds would cause
vibration in the stones on his
breastplate. The stones would actually
start to light up.
[Music]
There seems to be a very complex but
very specific code happening
here that God is communicating
through. It was like some
extraterrestrial Morris code that was
being received from the Ark of the
Covenant. Jerusalem 995
BC. Nearly a century after the
Philistines returned the ark to Judah,
King David transports it to the capital
city with plans to build an enormous
temple in order to house it.
It's Solomon, David's son, who built the
temple of Jerusalem and installed the
ark in the inner sanctum, the Holy of
Holies.
Once installed in the temple in 955 BC,
the mysterious ark continued to serve
the Israelites for another three and a
half
centuries until
suddenly it vanishes from
history. Book of Kings describes the
destruction of the city of Jerusalem
says nothing about the ark.
It disappears from the literary history
in the same way that it disappeared from
material
history. But what happened to it? Was it
stolen,
destroyed, or was it deliberately
hidden? There are those who believe they
know the answer and that not only does
the ark still
exist, but they are
confident it will return.
Mount Sooqi,
Japan. Every year, Shinto worshippers
ascend this mountain 6,000 m from the
Jewish Holy
Land. They carry an elaborate goldclad
chest that, like the Ark of the
Covenant, is believed to contain the
Spirit of God.
scholars in Japan look at uh the Old
Testament, they also look at the kind of
mythical foundational texts of Japan
like the Kojiki and see certain
similarities and they like to think that
these similarities are not just
coincidences but actually suggest
ancient connections.
Part of this theory is that these lost
tribes of Israel brought the ark to
Japan and it ended up at a sacred peak,
Mount Surugi, and it lays hidden in the
limestone caves underneath
it. Could the Ark of the Covenant really
be hidden in Japan?
And might this explain why Shinta
worshippers perform a ritual that's
eerily reminiscent of the ancient
Israelites carrying the ark through the
[Music]
desert? One Japanese historian named
Takani Masanori was so confident that
the Ark of the Covenant was hidden in
Mount Sugi, he actually performed
excavations of the mountain in the
1930s.
Excavations were started in 1936 on the
peak or near the peak of Mount
Serugi and this research went on for
some decades and then it was all shut
down and the area is now a national
park. So further research is banned for
environmental reasons so we won't
know. The Ark of the Covenant has not
been found in Japan but the legend
continues.
Is it possible that a lost tribe of
Israel made their way thousands of miles
across the Asian continent and brought
the ark to
Japan? It is just one theory out of
many.
Some biblical scholars suggest that
Israel's high priests, anticipating the
destruction of the city, stashed the ark
deep in a cave under Jerusalem's Temple
Mount for
protection. It is also believed that
centuries later, the ark was discovered
in its hiding place and was taken away
to safety by a group known as the
Knights Templar.
The Knights Templar were monks who were
trained to fight as soldiers in the Holy
Land during the
Crusade from the 1100s up until the
1300s. They discovered a great treasure.
They themselves describe it as a great
biblical treasure.
There are certainly legends throughout
Europe and specifically France of where
the Ark of the Covenant ended up. Some
say it was buried beneath Shark
Cathedral in the crypt. Some say it was
buried in the Languidok region near Ren
Chatau. And we know that the Nazis
excavated in depth in these mountains
looking for the Ark of the Covenant.
But some believe the ark's journey
didn't end in France and that eventually
it was taken even further to the north.
There's been a rumor for years that the
Templar treasure was actually taken
through France by the Templars. And the
story goes that it was then taken to
Rosland Chapel in Scotland for
safekeeping. Could the Ark of the
Covenant still be hidden somewhere in
Rosland
Chapel? Or might it have been, as some
ancient astronaut theorists suggest,
taken far away to North
America, where it was hidden deep
underground and still lies
buried, perhaps. But there are those who
believe that the ark isn't hidden at
[Music]
all. They claim its whereabouts have
been well known and well guarded for
hundreds of years.
Oxum, Ethiopia. The church of St. Mary
of
Zion. A solitary monk who is not allowed
to leave the grounds, is charged with
guarding the church's holiest
relic. It is a job he has devoted his
life to, and one he will keep until his
death.
There's a cathedral there called the
Cathedral of St. Mary of
Zion. And I started talking to the monk
who guarded the chapel and and he told
me that lying in that chapel was the
true the original Ark of the
Covenant. Now, at first it seemed to me
like an incredibly tall story. But as I
began to look into it, I realized that
there was something to the Ethiopian
claim. For example, why was there an
ancient Jewish population in Ethiopia?
It was like they were frozen in amber
from an earlier time and and and caught
in Ethiopia. And I got to know a
succession of three different guardians
of the ark. Once appointed as guardian,
they have a very short lifespan. They
die very quickly. And one of them in
particular was pointed the issue of his
eyes to me and the way that the
cataracts were creeping over his eyes.
And I said, "What is causing that?" And
he said, "It's the ark of the covenant
that's causing that."
He said, "The ark is a thing of
fire." And there was such truth and
power in his words that I began to feel
very strongly that the Ethiopians could
indeed have this object.
Could the Ark of the Covenant really
reside in a church in
Ethiopia? in a location so publicly
known and so modestly
protected? If so, why has there been no
proof? Is it an elaborate
hoax? Or is there perhaps another
reason? And could that reason be based
on one of the other audacious theories
concerning the ark that there are more
than one of them?
[Music]
The Torah speaks that there are actually
two arks. There was one ark which was
built by Moses when he first came down
from Mount Si and only later do we find
in the book of Exodus was the
commandment given for a ark to be built
by Betala. That was the ark that stayed
in the tabernacle.
If the ark really was a technological
device, as ancient astronaut theorists
believe, might there really have been
more than one of
them? And if so, might the various myths
and legends about the ark and its
whereabouts all be plausible? Perhaps.
But whether there is one ark or many,
two other important questions remain.
What was the ark's true
purpose? and what would happen if it
ever
returned. The Dome of the Rock,
[Music]
Jerusalem. This Islamic shrine sits a
top the Temple Mount, once the site of
King Solomon's temple and the last known
location of the Ark of the Covenant.
In
1981, a small team of Israeli workmen
secretly tunnneled under this hotly
disputed
site. Rabbi Yehuda Gets, the preeminent
rabbi of the Western Wall, supervised
the highly prohibited and politically
inflammatory excavation.
There's a pretty big problem with this
because that is the number one sacred
site for the Muslims as well. And these
men believed strongly enough that the
Ark of the Covenant had been located
there, that they were willing to take
such great risks to try to locate the
Ark of the Covenant themselves.
When Arabs on the mount heard noises
from the sistern below, they confronted
the work
crew in what became a dramatic
subterranean
standoff. Police separated the two sides
and ordered the tunnel to be
resealed. To his dying day, Rabbi Gats
believed he was just 40 ft away from
finding the original Ark of the
Covenant.
But could such an audacious claim be
true? Might the ark really still be
located where it was thousands of years
ago at the site of the Jews most sacred
temple, one of the holiest places on
Earth? For ancient astronaut theorists,
the answer may very well be
yes. And for proof, they point to
reports of strange sightings over the
mount in recent years.
In 2011, there was a very sensational
UFO sighting over the Dome of the Rock
in
Jerusalem. Many will call it a fraud.
Many will say it was not real. But it
was witnessed that a ball of light came
down over the temple mount
and just hovered
there and then all of a sudden a
pulsating light went out from it. Poof.
Whoa. And then they send it back up.
Some speculate that this UFO sighting
may have been energizing Ark of the
Covenant, which is still there in
[Music]
Jerusalem. Could it be a mere
coincidence that the UFO sightings
occurred over this particular
site? Or could it be, as some ancient
astronaut theorists claim, merely the
first in a series of events concerning
the ark that are in fact the fulfillment
of an ancient
prophecy? There's a very interesting
prophecy in the book of Zechariah that
states that there's going to be a
tremendous earthquake in Jerusalem. The
Mount of Olives is to split.
It is said that this earthquake is to be
caused by some type of a sonic
vibration created from under the earth
and that the powers from under the earth
are then going to arise out of this
chasm with the
ark. This was then considered to be a
the return of the
ark and b the famous of course coming of
the messiah.
All three of the big three religions
have prophecies about the endtime
arrival of a messianic
figure. And what we're told is that
angels will help bring the Ark of the
Covenant back to
Earth. Could the light seen over the
Temple Mount indicate that some sort of
extraterrestrial reactivation of the ark
was taking place? And if so, might we be
close to finally rediscovering this
ancient relic and finding the source of
its incredible
power? If that device were ever to be
found, then that will forever change the
course of human
history. Because if we look at our past,
it already has changed the course of
human history.
If the art could be found and if it
could be
retrieved, the possibility exists that
its technology could be understood and
exploited and possibly even used to
reconnect with whoever created it if
they were in fact extraterrestrial
beings. And the reality is we might have
a direct phone line to the ETSs.
We as a culture, as a species, we seem
to use most of our technology for war.
And so it would be like giving a
three-year-old a loaded
gun. We can barely deal with the
technology that we have now. So maybe
it's good that for now it's
hidden. Could the Ark of the Covenant,
perhaps the most coveted of the world's
lost relics, really be the ultimate
proof of an ancient extraterrestrial
encounter? If so, what was it? A
sophisticated
weapon, a communication
device, a nuclear power
source, or was it something else
entirely? Something beyond our
comprehension? And if it is found, will
it lead to mankind's
destruction or to a reunion with our
alien ancestors?
One thing is certain. The search for the
ark will continue. And there are those
who believe it will be found much sooner
than we think.