For people who don't actually understand
this concept about how light influences
our metabolism, do you mind going into
the details of how this actually works?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I think we have to step on
the gas pedal uh a little bit because in
your introduction, you've laid the case
out pretty nice, especially with Nick
Jol's uh podcast. I gave him kind of
what I would call breaking the glass
idea. But let's go back to the GOE and
understand what the GOE really was. The
GOE was a planet 4.6 billion years ago
all the way up until Cambrian explosion
about 600 million years ago where most
of the chemistry on the planet was
dirty. Okay? And when I mean dirty,
&gt;&gt; it was filled
um with lots of bad things in the in the
atmosphere and there was also lots of
nasty things in the ocean. Now from
first principles thinking because you
know no humans were alive back at this
time we know a lot of information from
geology from uh the tectonic plates and
things like that. But what were the key
things that had to happen that you can
actually still see today? If you like
live in Germany or Poland or UK you can
go outside right now and take a look and
notice the water there is a little bit
green. If you come here to El Salvador
and see the Pacific Ocean right here,
you notice the water is blue. What's the
difference? The amount of iron that's
present in the water. That's what makes
it green and that's makes this blue.
Okay, so this is a clue to the black
swan mitochondriac.
Um, what happened to life back when we
had dirty chemistry in the GOE? What was
the key thing that changed the mix? And
it turns out it wasn't food, my friend.
It wasn't endo symbiosis.
It was actually the co-evolution
of melanin and melatonin that began 3.8
billion years ago. So, one of the things
that very few people have asked me,
you're probably the first one that
started the podcast right in the right
spot, the go.
So what were the four key dirty metals
that we had to get rid of? Most people
who followed my work know uh they've
heard the many things about melanin
absorbs all frequencies of
electromagnetic radiation. Well, why
would that have been a good thing in
evolution at that time? Well, 4.6
billion years to 3.8 billion years, the
atmosphere wasn't developed. It was
filled mostly with methane and nitrogen
and a lot of other nasty things. So much
more uh light, terrestrial light came
through. So it was a pretty harsh
environment kind of like you see on Mars
today. Although not kind of like Mars,
it's just on a relative basis. So that
was the stimulus for the early melons,
not the melons that we use, the ones
that bacteria and archa use to begin to
start.
And then life had to figure out a way to
navigate uh biology with light, dark,
and temperature. And that's where also
melatonin starts to come up. So they
co-evolve.
&gt;&gt; But here's the real key story. I done
podcast with I think uh John Gerki and u
and Alexis Cowan and they wanted to
focus in on melanin splitting water
uh and all that jazz and I explained to
people in other podcasts that this not
wasn't crazy talk either. Why? Because
now in 1986 we have this problem in
Chernobyl where we have a nuclear power
plant explode and everybody in 1986 I
was alive at that time you probably
weren't but one of the things that the
scientist on TV told us that no life
will be able to go back there for a
thousand years because of the radiation
and lo and behold literally 25 years
later all the animals are back in
Chernobyl. the humans aren't because
they believe some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know,
kind of like the food gurus do. Um, that
life can't find away with EMF. And if
you know anything about the GOE, the
amount of radiation that we had at this
time was off the charts. So,
&gt;&gt; what else does melanin do? It protects
from radiation. So, what magically
happens? Little mushrooms that are
ukariots. Remember, they're not
bacteria. They're not archa. They're
kind of like us, but very old in
evolutionary times. filled with melanin
are taking the gamma radiation from
Chernobyl and turning it into energy.
It's called radiosynthesis.
Okay, radiosynthesis is a a precursor to
photosynthesis.
Okay, so then you got to ask yourself
the next question. Okay, now we know
melanin does all these amazing things.
Here's the number one thing that gets
back to why uh you didn't like me at one
point. The same reason Rob Wolf doesn't
like me. The same reason Sean Baker
doesn't like me because they don't know
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about evolution. Okay, what
else does melanin do? It absorbs metals.
It keelates metals. So guess what else
it does? It cleans dirty environments.
So life at this time was truly about
biochemistry and what happens in that
time. What are the the four key metals
that melanin deals with? There's really
a fifth one, but we'll talk about that
later. Why it's important?
Iron, copper, maganese, and malibdinum.
Okay, for those of you who are pulling
out the periodic table right now, the
chemical symbols are Fe, Cu, MN, and M
O. Okay, they all do different things.
But it turns out sunlight quantizes
melanin to absorb these metals in a very
specific fashion. And remember back in
the GOE, what do we know from Nick
Lane's work and Bill Miller's work that
life bacteria and archae at this time
3.8 billion years ago is simple because
it only can use glycolysis. We call that
today warber metabolism. Okay. There's
no TCA cycle yet. There's no ura cycle.
Do you know why? Because belanin has to
do its job cleaning the environment of
all these metals. And then what
magically happens? Iron gets controlled
so that we form iron sulfur cores in
every single uh cytochrome. Okay. Then
magically you guys know something
happens. Oh, bacteria and archa come
together in endo symbiosis. A lady named
Lim Margulus came up with this idea.
Even her own husband, who is Carl Sean,
thought she was crazy. Most of her
friends thought she was crazy. Turns out
she was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] right. Um, and then what
magically happens? Biochemistry no
longer is really important because that
event in evolutionary history which
happens about a billion billion and a
half years ago [clears throat] turns the
ignition switch on to optical
biofotonics.
Now let me explain to you how it
happens. Once iron is made, copper is
the second one. What is copper a
co-actor for? Copper is a co-actor to
create not only melanin but it's also a
co-actor for the hem protein that
cytochrome 4 called cytochrome c
oxidase. What is cytochrome c oxidase
funly do?
&gt;&gt; It makes dutium depleted water. So what
is that? That is the cleanest water on
the planet. In other words, we went from
dirty filthy water. Now we're able to
have water brought inside the cell that
is so spectacularly clean of dutarium.
It becomes a huge dialectric medium that
surrounds all our proteins which in 1941
Albert Szent-Györgyi told us hey it's kind
of funny but everything DNA codes for
looks like a semiconductor because of
its electronic structure. And then other
people came out in the ' 60s7s and ' 80s
and started to say you know it's kind of
funny water when light hits it becomes
also a semiconductor. So these are like
two semiconductors together. Now what's
the third thing that happens?
The third thing happens is maganese MN.
It forms a specific chemical in the GOE
called maganese SOD super oxide
dismutase. Where is that? It's a very
special super oxide that only works
inside the matrix of the mitochondria.
&gt;&gt; And do you know why it's there? Because
it gets rid of super oxide. What do what
is super oxide? Super oxide is a free
radical. For those people in the
audience who don't know what a free
radical is, it has one unpaired
electron. But here's the most important
part because I said something
provocative and controversial a little
while ago that at the Cambrian explosion
between endo symbiosis we went from
chemistry abiotic to biotic chemistry
and then all of a sudden an ignition
switch turns on and life seems to be
able to make light from itself. Now that
sounds really crazy. It sounds kind of
like when a cosmologist talks about the
big bang that everything came from
nothing. But it turns out the same story
is present in biology. No one seems to
understand
that this is a big black hole in
Darwin's theory.
&gt;&gt; Imagine a tablet that doesn't blast
artificial blue light into your eyes,
disrupt your sleep, or sabotage your
health, but actually uses sunlight to
power the display. If you've been
listening to this podcast, you already
know how damaging constant artificial
blue light can be on your circadian
rhythm, your sleep, and your overall
health. That's why I love my Paper 7
tablet by Harborino. It's definitely one
of the most interesting devices I've
used in a while. The Paper 7 tablet uses
something called an RLCD display, which
means there is no backlight and
essentially no blue light. Instead, it
reflects ambient light just like paper.
So, the brighter your environment, the
better the screen looks. And unlike e-
in devices which are slow and stuck in
black and white, this gives you full
color, a smooth 60 Hz refresh rate, and
the ability to run all of your favorite
apps. It also comes with 8 GB of RAM for
smooth performance. A 7.8 in display
that's perfect for both reading and
productivity. And at only 240 g, it's
easy to carry around anywhere. The
battery life holds up really well, too.
You're getting around 10 hours of active
use and up to 12 days on standby. so
you're not constantly thinking about
charging it. For me personally, I like
to use it a lot for writing,
researching, and preparing for my
podcasts. Basically, all of my
administrative work. And the best part
is I can do all of that outdoors in
natural light. So, I can actually
support my biology while I work instead
of fighting against it. And because the
screen gets brighter in brighter
environments, it's incredibly easy on
the eyes even in direct sunlight. I've
also noticed that it naturally improves
my nighttime habits because indoors,
especially at night, the screen isn't
overly bright or stimulating since it
uses your environment to power the
display. So, it kind of guides you
towards better sleep hygiene and
healthier circadian rhythms without even
trying. At the end of the day,
technology isn't going anywhere. So, the
goal is to find tools that work with our
biology, not against it. And this is
definitely one of those devices. You
definitely want to hurry up and grab
yours today as they are extremely
popular and run out of stock really
fast. The link will be in the
description below alongside with a 15%
discount code.
&gt;&gt; No one to this day, especially the
neodyarwinist, can figure out why in the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the Cambrian explosion shows up in
the fossil record that we have 32
filyla, things are growing like crazy
and prior to that all we had was two
single cell organisms, bacteria and
archa. But yet when we get bacteria and
archae to come together all of a sudden
something magical happens. And what am I
trying to explain to you? Maganese
sod was the key to the story. Why?
Because it controls free radical
signaling in the matrix.
Okay. Now you have to know some other
key parts.
Where in our mitochondria after endo
symbiosis
does metabolism meet the electron chain?
It happens at cytochrome 2. Okay. And it
turns out maganese sod protects
that cytochrome from massive RO. Now
what do we know about Fritz Pop and what
do we know about uh Van Wick? become in
the story the 1960s7s and ' 80s and what
did they tell us to make free radicals
either oxygen or nitrogen based you have
to have oxygen nitrogen or ROS or RNS
otherwise you can't make light
so guess what when you look back to the
GOE and you go so melanin was using
sunlight to figure out how much
maganesees
to put in SOD
So you could make free radicals so that
you can make light. That light was ultra
weak biopotons. Okay. Now let's go to
the fourth metal since I'm going through
this process for you. Malibdinum. That's
a metal that not too many people know
about. The people who really read my
work from 15 or 20 years ago will look
back on the jackcruz.com
site and find this really interesting
blog post that talked about something
peculiar about the mitochondria
that in mammals. Remember now we're
talking post Cambrian. We're talking way
far down the path. When did mammals
come? Just so everybody's clear. 280
million years ago. Even when the
dinosaurs were here, but they were
little. And now we're the end result of
that. We have this very unique feature
on our inner mitochondrial membrane
where all this fancy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that I'm
trying to teach you about happened. Do
you know it's the only membrane in us
that has no DHA?
Do you know why? It kept bacterial
lineage. And guess what bacteria used to
do in dirty chemistry times of the GOE?
It used to use metals as its terminal
electron acceptor. And it turns out
malibdinum is one of those metals. So
guess what malibdinum was. It is a
remnant of our goe lineage. That's how I
was able to figure out why in God's
green earth or evolution's green earth
we would put leptin below our skin to be
an energy accountant. And then I started
to think about it and I said, "Well,
it's pretty simple. The sun is what has
to determine the stochastics of these
metals so that we can transform energy
from light and then inform things inside
our body. What are those things? That's
the colony of mitochondria that we got
from endo symbiosis.
So when [cough and clears throat] I
looked at what malibdumin was doing, it
basically allowed really fast electron
tunneling. Well, guess what happens at
cytochrome 2 and three? Really fast
electron tunneling. your blue light
blockers, they're a scam. No, seriously.
Use this RGB test on the screen to see
if your red lens blue light blocking
glasses actually work. If you can see
any of the green or blue light on the
screen, that means your blue light
blocking glasses are not protecting your
melatonin. Most people know about the
harms of artificial blue light. And so,
people go and buy blue light blocking
glasses thinking that all blue light
blocking glasses are created equally.
Unfortunately, they're not. And I'm
specifically referring to the red lens
blue light blocking glasses for the
evening because one of the biggest game
changers anyone can do for their health
is to block artificial blue light,
especially after sunset. You see, if
your red lens blue light blocking
glasses allow blue and green light
through, your eyes will still be picking
up that signal. So, your brain will
basically think that it's still daytime.
We know that sunlight is important, but
the absence of artificial blue light and
blue light in general after sunset is a
biological necessity. And a good pair of
blue light blocking glasses in this
modern world filled with artificial blue
light is an absolute non-negotiable. So
if you want to experience better sleep,
mood, and energy levels, you need to be
optimizing your circadian rhythms, and
that is by respecting the light and dark
cycles. This is why I use and trust Viva
rays. Their threein-one blue light
blocking glasses give you full-time
protection from artificial blue light.
You basically get three pairs of blue
light blocking glasses for the price of
one. So, if you wish to explore the blue
light blocking glasses, which I just
talked about, head over to the
description below and make sure to use
the promo code attached to get a nice
discount on your entire order.
&gt;&gt; And I was kind of amazed. So, then I
looked for something even more
interesting. I said, well, since Van
Wick and since Pop told us that dirty
chemistry involved nitrogen and all
these atoms, there should be another
remnant, a lineage, a vestage of the GOE
in us. And guess what I found? There is
vitamin A and vitamin D. Why? Don't you
find it interesting that also on the
inner mitochondrial membrane there's a
vitamin D receptor. So everybody knows
that the sun can't penetrate our body.
So why would God or evolution put the
vitamin D receptor on the inner
mitochondrial membrane? Then I thought
about it [cough] and I thought about
where it was located
and I said, "Wow, it's right before
cytochrome cioidase where we make
water." And then
&gt;&gt; what did we find out in another uh Nobel
Prize 1992 to 1998? We found out that
cytochrome 4 CCO that is uses copper as
a co-actor also is inhibited by nitric
oxide. I was like, well, god damn,
that's kind of interesting, too.
So that means we have a break for
electron chain transport before that.
And what's the other interesting
finding? The other part of sunlight near
infrared light actually unbinds nitric
oxide from cytochrome 4. So I'm going
okay I'm looking at all these
thermodynamic givens and I'm beginning
to realize I'm seeing a story not of
postcambrian earth of go earth and the
remnants and the vestages are still
present on the inner mitochondrial
membrane. Then I began to put things
together really really quickly to get
back to that vitamin A and vitamin D
story. I wrote uh a blog, I think it was
in the brain gut series a long time ago
about this peculiar thing about vitamin
D and vitamin A. Do you know what the
peculiar thing is? They have no nitrogen
in them. They're pure hydrocarbons. What
does that sound like to you? These are
two chemicals that have no nitrogen. Do
you know why that would be the case from
a bioysics standpoint?
Because if you have nitrogen in it, I
already told you the answer. Van Wick
and Pop told us you would make aarent
light from it.
&gt;&gt; So that's why we don't use it. That's
the reason why vitamin D and vitamin A
have no nitrogen in them. And it began
then to make sense that this this whole
scheme of a mitochondria had to be
controlled from the surface. Now, let me
use again common sense third grade
things for you. And this will really
probably make you upset of why you
formerly didn't like me and why the
carnivore meattheads still don't like
me. But I'm going to point out something
very simple to you. First question is
melanin on our skin. The answer is yes.
Second question, how do we make vitamin
D? We make it from our skin. Cholesterol
then goes inside to the kidney and liver
gets to the active form. Right? So now
we know how vitamin D gets to the inner
mitochondrial membrane. But that's two
systems outside in. Remember we haven't
talked about food yet, have we?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Third system I told you about nitric
oxide that it inhibits ATP production at
cytochrome 4. How do you make it? UVA
light. UVA light outside in mates nitric
oxide. It goes to the terminal CCO
inhibits it. Okay. How do we turn this
back on? Near infrared light. Where's
that come from? Oh, the sun. In fact,
it's the most dominant part of the sun,
43% of the solar spectrum. So, I just
gave you four different ways that the
outside changes all the biochemistry on
the inside. And what is food in this
whole story? That ties to something that
comes after radiosynthesis in the G in
the GOE. That's called photosynthesis,
which happens 50 million years before we
get mitochondrial respiration.
So that means food is an [clears throat]
electromagnetic barcode that gets fed
into this whole system that was built
way before food was. So you tell me how
food is proximal
to this story. When you understand the
evolutionary biology of what really
happened in the Archan world before the
GOE, then in the GOE, then in the
precamrian time, Cambrian explosion, and
now you're a postcamrian ukariat.
When you begin to see the totality of
this blueprint and understand the wiring
diagram, it is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] beyond me how you
think food controls you. In fact, the
engines are controlled by the leptin
Milano corn pathway. And then you begin
to realize, well, God or evolution is
the most amazing,
you know, biophysicist. Why? Because she
was smart enough to put leptin right
below our skin. What hits our skin, my
friend?
&gt;&gt; Sunlight. What's in our skin? Melanin.
&gt;&gt; Melanin.
&gt;&gt; What did we do?
&gt;&gt; Right. What did we do? postcambrian
primates. We were the one primate that
sucked everything inside and we became
even more complex than who we are
related to.
And that story I laid out in a really
big podcast with Rick Rubin and Uberman.
To this day, Uberman still doesn't know
what I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] told him. Okay? And I I'm
not going to tell you that this story
isn't complicated, but it's the most
interesting story in the world. Why?
Because it's the story of us. It's the
story of life. It's the story, like I
like to tell people, when you go to the
Systeine Chapel and you see the two
fingers on the center panel, it's the
story in between that white plaster.
Okay? In Genesis, what did it say? Let
there be light. You know what the
problem with God is? He didn't tell you
the recipe. But what am I trying to
explain to you right now? The recipe is
the recipe begins with melanin as a
light wand stochastically picked certain
metals out to build a mitochondrial
engine. When the two domains of life
came together and endo symbiosis when
you understand that and you understand
it really well all of a sudden many of
the problems that we have in centralized
healthcare in Maha in the world get
easier to solve. The official community
of the FitnessWisdom Podcast is over on
patreon.com/fitnesswisdom
podcast. This is a space where you can
get to connect with a like-minded
community and tribe. Get ad free
episodes of the show. Submit your
questions, guests, and topics that you
would like to see on the show. Read my
latest health optimization protocols and
blogs. Get my guided workouts and
mobility routines and a good discount on
my group and one-on-one coaching
programs. The link is in the description
below. I look forward to connecting with
you. That was a fantastic breakdown.
Thank you so much. And I think it's so
important for people to actually realize
how biopysics govern biochemistry. This
is such a fundamental mind shift and an
understanding that where you eat your
food is more important than the food
that you eat. Of course the food that
you eat is important but the environment
where you eat your food how that's going
to impact your metabolism and your
metabolic health and all of these things
which we are seeing today all the issues
the metabolic diseases that we are
witnessing today are because of
circadian rhythm disruption you know
artificial blue light after sunset and
any time of the day really non-native
EMFs all of the all of this non-native
radiation is very foreign to our body
and it's stressing our body out all of
the time. This is a small section from
the full podcast conversation.