[Music]
Welcome to Logical After
Dark. Yeah, it's going to be exciting.
Uh Sean Carroll is our next speaker. Uh
his questions, the talent he would want
instantly to have at his at his
availability. Uh to either be a
fantastic poker player or a fantastic
bass player. Um maybe at the same time.
I think that'd be great. Uh, the thing
he would save out of his house. I
thought this was really interesting. An
early edition book of poems by Bodilair,
which is illustrated by
Rodan. Yeah, the guy that fought
Godzilla. That
guy.
Um, ninjas versus pirates. This is our
second vote for ninjas because he said
ninjas are invisible. It's fantastic.
And uh pie pie versus cake. He said
there's no contest. The best pie versus
the best cake. Pie wins every time.
Pecan preferably. So um the big picture
on the origins of life, meaning and the
universe itself. Please welcome Sean
Carol. Thank you, George. Thank you,
everyone. Thanks to all the organizers
for having me out here. uh when I'm
invited to a keynote speech of some
sort, of course, the first question one
asks oneself is how many people said no
before they invited me. But I'm very
glad that it worked out this way. And of
course, it's always great to see on a
Saturday night in Los Angeles, your idea
of the best possible thing to do is to
hear a talk
about science and cosmology. Now, I know
that given the title, there are certain
automatic reactions. The title of the
talk is the title of a book that I've
recently written, the big picture on the
origins of life, meaning in the universe
itself. I want to start by saying I'm I
do not know what the origin of the
universe is, what the origin of life was
or what the meaning of life is. That is
not what I'm here to tell you. There's a
long venerable tradition of physicists.
I'm a physicist. Physicists like,
especially after a certain age, to look
around the intellectual landscape and
see other fields of inquiry that are not
physics and go, I could do
that better than they can. I'm a
physicist. How hard can it be? This is
not what I'm here to do. I am not going
to give you definitive final answers
about any of these things. But I do
think that there is a common vocabulary,
a common ground in which we can discuss
these various issues. And that's really
what I'm here to talk about. So I want
to start with a simple question that is
uh related to physics but one that also
is related to our everyday lives. We
want something to move or we want to
think about motion. How motion works in
the universe. What are the properties
that motion has? This is exactly the
kind of mind-bogglingly boring question
that you would be asking in an
introductory physics class. Imagine you
were asking this in introductory physics
class 2500 years ago. So you don't know
modern physics, okay? You're Aristotle.
You're trying to think about how motion
works. So I'm actually going to do an
experiment. We're going to use the
empirical scientific method here in real
time. I feel like Faraday giving the
lectures in uh the Royal Institution. So
here you have an object. I don't know if
you can see the object. The object is a
bottle of water. I'm putting it on a
surface. I'm going to look at the object
and see whether it
moves. Nope, it didn't move. We could
wait longer, but it still wouldn't move.
Now, I'm going to see what happens when
I push
it. There you go. It moved. That's not
very Thank
you. Once again, professional physicist.
Don't, you know, think you could do this
at home. But I want you to notice two
things. Number one, it moved when I
pushed it. And number two, it stopped
moving when I stopped pushing it. This
these are not illusions. This is the
real behavior of physical stuff in the
universe. So Aristotle says, "I know
what's going on. Motion is an unnatural
state of being. There are natural ways
for things in the universe to be places
that things want to be in forms of
motion that places and things want to
have. And if you just let something go
and don't disturb it, it will just sit
there. It will not move. Motion requires
an impetus, a mover. Something needs to
be pushing it." This illustration stolen
from the internet. The dog is not
actually moving the car. You see the dog
there, right? If you look very closely,
there's a dog driving the car. But the
point of the picture is if you want your
car to move, you have to cause it to
move somehow. So Aristotle goes from
this and he's not wrong, right? We did
the experiment. It's true. When I stop
pushing, it stops moving. He's not
wrong. Aristotle gets a whole physics
and even a metaphysics out of this. Not
only does motion require a mover, but
you can go from that to say, well,
there's lots of things moving in the
universe. Every one of them requires a
mover. There's for every effect in the
universe, Aristotle says, there is a
cause. He develops an elaborate
metaphysics of different kinds of causes
and effects. And he says, I don't
believe that there are infinite chains
of causes. So, there has to be a first
cause, an unmoved mover, and that's God.
So he proves the existence of God. There
you go. This is part he's there was a
mistake in that proof which I'll get to
in a second. We've made progress. But
for a long time this was a tradition,
right? This was a in the philosophy
literature this idea that the world how
the world works is a story of causes and
effects. Aristotle as we said uh had
this idea that there were causes and
effects. And sometimes this is phrased
in terms of purposes. There's reasons
why things exist, reasons why things
happen. And this was elevated to a
principle called the principle of
sufficient reason. The principle of
sufficient reason is literally the
bumper sticker you see that says
everything happens for a reason. Okay,
there's a technical way of saying it
that linenets uh the guy on the right
said Spinosa is in the middle. All three
of these philosophers promagated this
principle and the way that Linus put it
was the sake for which something happens
is the final cause. Sorry, the principle
sufficient reason is nothing is without
a ground or reason why it is. All right,
everything happens for a reason. Now,
you might have thought that the ultimate
purpose, given the illustration we have
here, is that philosophers should have
ever more elaborate
hairstyles up to the point where there
was clearly some artificial enhancement
by the time of
linen. But it turns out that the
tradition did not continue all the way.
And this is something where we
physicists haven't spread the word very
effectively. But this is not the way the
world works. The world does not work as
a system of causes and effects. You can
still hear most people on the street if
you ask them are there causes and
effects in the world. Are they
fundamental? Are they irreducible and
like really part of the fundamental
nature of reality? They would say yes.
Those people are not right. I mean the
people who would answer you would say
yes. Many people would look at you
weird. Some philosophers have tried to
spread the word. Here's Bertrand
Russell, famous uh hero for atheists and
skeptics. and he's not listening, but go
ahead. Uh Russell tried to spread the
word that cause and effect is not part
of the fundamental architecture of
reality. We've been taught that by
modern physics. So he says the law of
causality, I believe, like much that
passes muster among philosophers, is a
relic of a bygone age. Surviving like
the monarchy, he just couldn't help
himself, right? Even even when he's
talking about metaphysics, he needs to
dig the monarchy.
only because it is erroneously supposed
to do no harm. Okay? So, I'm not telling
you that causes and effects don't exist.
I'm not telling you they're illusions.
I'm telling you they're not fundamental.
They're not built into, and I'll explain
what exactly what I mean by this.
They're not built into the deepest, most
comprehensive, most fundamental
vocabulary we have for talking about the
world. And
yet, the bottle of water stops moving
when I stop pushing it. Right? So the
task of this talk is to reconcile those
two facts about the world. On the one
hand you have the deepest level that we
now know of describing the fundamental
nature of reality. There are no causes
and effects as Birdie told us. But in
the manifest world in the world we live
in the world we see in Aristotle's
vision of the world he was not wrong.
You do need to push things to get them
moving. How do you reconcile those? So a
philosopher Wilfred Sers proposed two
terms to describe these different ways
of looking at the world. The manifest
image and the scientific image. The
manifest image is the world we live in.
The world of our everyday experience.
What we see in front of us. The
scientific image is the deeper way of
talking about reality that is revealed
to us by scientific investigation. And
unsurprisingly in retrospect, not only
do we learn things by doing science, but
we realize that the best way of talking
about the world at the deepest level
uses a completely different vocabulary,
a completely different set of concepts
than the manifest image that we use in
our everyday lives. So in the manifest
image, you have the flow of time as
being fundamental. In the scientific
image, you don't. In the manifest image,
there's this idea of causes and effects.
the principle of sufficient reason. In
the scientific image, that's nowhere to
be found. Life and consciousness and
thinking in the mind are somehow
fundamentally different in the manifest
image. But science says that's not true.
Things like purpose, meaning, and
morality are objectively given from
somebody or something in the manifest
image. Science says once again, it's a
little bit more subjective than that.
It's very subjective in this slide
because uh the font got cut off. So, it
just says purpose, meaning, and morality
are I mean, that's not what it's
supposed to say. It's supposed I forget.
I'm I'm going to translate it. Really?
Oh, personal. Also, the universe has
moved. Personal. The universe tends to
do that. For every event, there is a
universe. All
right. Should never let people put my
slides on their computers. Okay. All
right. So the purpose of my talk, if you
believe the purposes exist in the
manifest image in which we're
experiencing right now in front of us,
the purpose of my talk is to help
explain how we reconcile these images of
the world. And it's an incomplete story.
There's still a bunch of work to be
done. I think that there's very very
good reasons to think that our manifest
image is utterly compatible with the
scientific image once we dig into it
carefully enough. So the story goes back
uh many years. The event that I like to
point to is a 1,00 AD, 10,00 years ago,
the Islamic Golden Age, a Persian
thinker named Immancina, whose name was
sometimes romanized to Avisenna. Uh,
this is a picture of him. Uh, it's not a
photograph, but it's a engraving. And
Ibans Cena, as a modern theoretical
physicist, Ibans Cena to someone like me
is enormously annoying.
And the reason why he's annoying is
because he was not a professional
physicist. He was a doctor. Health and
biology at the time, you know, thousand
AD were his pre uh that's what he cared
about. That's what he mostly wrote books
about. On the weekends and in his spare
time, he invented fundamental new laws
of physics. Okay. Very annoying to me as
a modern professional
physicist. One of the points that he
made was what we now call conservation
of momentum. It wasn't exactly in a
modern vocabulary. You can debate
whether it really counts as conservation
momentum in the modern sense, but it was
a crucial step along the way because
what even Cena mentioned was that really
the reason why the bottle of water stops
moving isn't because of the fundamental
nature of motion. It's because there's a
force that is acting on it by the stool
that it's sitting on. And he made the
point that if you thought there was such
a thing as the vacuum as empty space,
which he didn't think. It was a thought
experiment. But he said if there were
empty space, if there's some something
moving in empty space, it would move
forever at the same speed without
anything pushing it. These days we build
stuff like that, right? This is a
spacecraft. This is Voyager uh flying
through interstellar space and it just
moves at a constant rate. And of course
people like Galileo and Newton codified
these kinds of ideas into what we call
the classical mechanics, the modern
precursor of modern physics. So that's
on the one hand a very specific physical
principle that is very useful to
physicists because we can use it to
torture undergraduates when they take
their physics course in college. Incline
planes, frictionless surfaces, all that
stuff. But on the other hand, it's not
just a little principle. It is a
fundamental difference in how we think
about the world. It is not just trading
one equation for another is trading the
set of concepts that we rely on for a
completely different set of concepts. If
things can just keep moving by
themselves. If the thing that happens
naturally is that something that is
moving just keeps moving, then you pull
the rug rug out from underneath the idea
that that thing needed a mover. that
thing needed something pushing it. If
the world, the universe can just keep
moving by itself, then the whole
argument for the unmoved mover or the
first cause begins to go away. It became
a little more obvious uh in the hands of
Pierre Simone Lelass circa of the year
1800. Now, Lelass didn't invent
classical mechanics. That was Newton who
did that uh long before Lelass. But
Lelass arguably was the first person to
really
internalize the lessons, the
implications of classical Newtonian
mechanics. So think about this
experiment on the left hand side. These
are billiard balls scattering off of
each other and these are physicist
billyard balls. So there is no noise, no
friction, nothing like that. They can
just go their own way with conserving
momentum. And Lelass says, 'Look,
ordinarily were you to give this as a
problem to a firstear physics student
and you say, "Here are these billyard
balls. They're coming in with a certain
velocity at a certain distance and
angle. What happens to them?" It's what
we call an initial value problem in
physics. You give me what they are
doing. I will tell you what they're
going to do in the future. But what
appla says if you dig into the equations
that Isaac Newton has handed down to us,
you don't need to give us the
information about the billyard balls at
the start. You could tell me what the
billyard balls were doing at the end of
that experiment. The Newtonian laws of
physics are 100% reversible. The
information contained in what the balls
were doing at the end of the experiment
is enough to wind the clock backwards
and tell you where they came from.
Indeed, the information you need to say
what this physical system is doing is
absolutely equally there at every moment
of time. This is something that modern
physicists call conservation of
information. So, Iben Cena and his
friends handed down to us conservation
of momentum. Llas is pointing out
there's a much more profound idea
underneath this. The world is fixed by
the data that exists in the world at any
one moment in time that completely
determines both the past and the future.
What that means is that the way of
thinking about how the world works isn't
a story of of progress toward a future
goal. It's not
teological. All the information is there
at every single moment. What that means
is that the laws of physics are not
something that says this then this then
this then this in some direction of time
rather they are a pattern. So think
about the numbers, the integers on the
real number line down there at the
bottom. Minus one, 0 + 1 + 2 + 3. You
understand that if I give you a number
seven, you can tell me the number to the
left of it and the number to the right
of it. Six and eight, right? But no one
says, "Oh, six is the cause of seven
coming into existence." That's just not
how it works. There's a pattern that
relates the different numbers to each
other. Lelass's point is that physics
works that way. The universe works that
way. There's no cause that relates what
happens at one moment to another.
There's just a pattern given to us by
some equations, the laws of physics. He
even envisioned uh a vast intellect
which we now call Lelas's demon that
could know everything in the universe at
any one moment. And he says to that
demon, he said to that vast intellect,
he was an atheist. He didn't believe in
demons. He said the past and future
would be as immediately knowable as the
present moment. Now you might say well
we know better than lelass in terms of
what the laws of physics actually are
right we've moved beyond particles
bumping into each other in this simple
way and that's true here are the current
laws of
physics this is the dramatic claim that
I want to make the laws of physics
underlying our everyday lives are
completely known to us right now this is
a claim that lelass could not have made
and I want to emphasize that every word
in that sentence is important you can't
throw away one of the words and then
complain that the sentence is no longer
true. That would be correct. All the
words matter. So what do I mean by this?
I mean in your body there are atoms.
There are particles, right? Physicists
know how to describe what atoms are.
Here's the cartoon version of an atom.
There's quantum mechanics involved. It's
more complicated than this, but this is
the a fairly accurate representation of
what the ingredients are. We know that
atoms have a nucleus in the middle, an
electron going around. The nucleus of an
atom consists of protons and neutrons,
two different kinds of particles. And in
turn, those protons and neutrons are
made of quarks, up quarks and down
quarks. So roughly speaking, there's
three kinds of particles that are
relevant. There's a fourth, a nutrino
that can be created by certain subatomic
processes. So really four particles and
all of the interactions between these
particles come down to four different
kinds of forces. The electromagnetic
force is what holds the electron to the
nucleus. The strong nuclear force holds
those quarks together inside the protons
and neutrons. The weak nuclear force
converts up quarks and down quarks to
each other and spits off nutrinos in the
process. And gravity pulls everything to
everything else. That's it. Four forces
and four particles. In the background,
there is a Higs field pervading all of
space. If you poke the Higs field, it
starts vibrating and you see a little
particle called the Higs Bzon. We first
successfully did that in
2012. Big news. Uh in Geneva, the Large
Hydron Collider, we discovered the Higs
Bzon. There are other particles that
exist that we know about, but they're
just heavier cousins of these particles.
So there's not only an electron, there's
also a muon and a tow. There's not only
an up quark, there's a charm quark and a
top quark, etc. All those heavier
particles, if you made one right here,
it would decay away in an instant. It
would make these particles. So the claim
is you and I are made of these
particles. That's the easy part of the
claim. The hard part, there's two hard
parts. Number one, these are all the
particles we're made of. There is no
particles that are not on this picture
that exist and play an important role
inside you. Number two, we know what
these particles do. We know the laws. We
know the rules. We know the equations
that they obey. And no future physics
experiment is going to say that we need
a modification of those rules to explain
what happens inside you and me. The laws
of physics underlying our everyday lives
are completely known. And the everyday
lives there is crucially important
because there's obviously an enormous
amount of physics that we don't know. We
don't know what dark matter is. We don't
know what happens inside a black hole or
at the big bang. We don't know what
happens when complicated collections of
particles come together to make
complicated molecules or biological
cells or political systems for that
matter. So there's various higher levels
of description we don't understand.
That's why the underlying is important
here. The laws of physics underlying our
everyday lives are completely known.
Now, part of the purpose of a meeting
like this is what we call skepticism.
So, you shouldn't believe me. You
probably don't believe me. I'm going to
give you a tiny little bit of evidence
that this claim is actually true. The
first bit of evidence is mostly
rhetorical because you see a picture
like this, it doesn't look very
impressive. You're like, I could have
drawn that. My kid could have drawn
that. It's just a cartoon. I'm not going
to believe your physical theory unless
you show me the equations behind it.
Well, here you are. This is the
equation. This is what Nobel laurate
Frank Wilch has dubbed the core theory
of modern physics. It consists of two
parts. It is general relativity, Albert
Einstein's theory of gravity, and the
standard model of particle physics. You
may have heard, depending on what street
corners you hang out on, that gravity
and quantum mechanics don't get along
very well. But actually, that's an
exaggeration. The more careful statement
is we do not have the complete and once
and for all final theory of quantum
gravity. But as long as you restrict
yourselves once again to our everyday
lives to a certain regimes of energies
and speeds, we have a perfectly good
theory of quantum gravity. If you want
to explain the earth moving around the
sun or the moon moving around the earth
or SpaceX launching things into space
and landing them using quantum gravity,
you can do that. We have the right
theory. So my claim is that this
equation governs what is happening in
this room right now and no future
discovery in physics will change the
fact that this equation suffices to do
exactly
that. You notice that if you look
closely I'm not, you know, I'm not going
to go into all the details. You can ask
questions about the eyes and the pluses
and the minuses. Um the equation is our
modern version of what Lelass's demon
would have in mind. Lelass's demon had
Newton's equations in its mind and it
would say given the universe right now
what happens next. This is the modern
quantum field theory version of that.
You give me the quantum state of the
universe right now. This is the equation
that tells you what happens next. It is
not
teological. It is not moral. It does not
care what you do. It does not judge you.
There is no goal or purpose towards
which it strives. There's no causes and
effects in this equation. It's just a
pattern just like 6 7 8 9 10. Now you
might object a slightly more
sophisticated version of the previous
objection is okay you have equations but
I don't believe that your equations are
truly fundamental unless they can fit on
a
t-shirt. So I prove to you that that can
happen. Once again an experimental
demonstration. You can buy the t-shirts
on my website. I don't make any money.
There you go. Okay. The real objection
you should have is even if you're
scientifically uh open-minded and you
think that physics is more or less on
the right track and you believe in atoms
and so
forth, you're trained by your skeptical
upbringing to say, "But surely there
could be future experiments that lead us
to change our theories." Right? Now, on
the one hand, strictly speaking, yes, of
course, because that is always true.
Science doesn't prove things. You never
reach a point in our confidence in
empirical statements given to us by
science where it's 100%. Because that
would mean that no new data could ever
change your mind and that would be bad.
But you do reach a point where it is a
waste of time to worry about the
prospect that your mind will be changed.
And I'm going to try to make the case
that that's the case for the core
theory. And the reason why so I'm really
trying to say something very very
specific about the form of this
particular physical theory. It's not
just that it fits the data we have right
now, but this particular kind of theory
builds into
itself its own limits of applicability.
Not only do we know what the theory
says, we know how far we can extend it
before it should fail. Let me just give
you one slides worth of argument in
favor of this. There's a feature of
quantum field theory called crossing
symmetry. And I'm going to explain to
you what this means. This picture we
have here is called a Fineman diagram.
My claim to fame in the physics
community is that I sit at the desk that
Richard Fineman used to sit at at
Caltech.
Yes. Thank you. The rule is that
Fineman's old desk goes to the most
senior theoretical physicist at Caltech
who is not senior enough to get a brand
new desk when they
arrive. That's me.
And the Fineman diagram is perhaps one
of his most famous um contributions to
physics. What what the diagrams do is
tell us not only what can happen to
elementary particles, but they give us a
way of calculating the likelihood, the
probability that this kind of thing is
going to happen. So what you do is you
read from left to right. Time flows from
left to right. The picture on the left
imagines that there's some kind of new
particle that you haven't yet detected
in red. and there's some kind of
ordinary particle, an electron or a
proton. Okay, you hypothesize maybe
there's a new particle, maybe there's a
zilbot particle that is really, really
important for human consciousness. It
plays a role in how our brain works and
brings to life qualia and human
experience. And you physicists with your
narrow-minded materialistic perspective
haven't discovered it yet, but we're
going to trust quantum field theory to
describe what it would do. Okay? So if
that were true, then there would have to
be an interaction between this new
particle and the old particles. If you
have a bunch of new particles that you
invent that don't even interact with us
at all, then who cares? They might
exist, but they don't affect our
everyday lives. Indeed, there are such
particles. Dark matter is exactly such a
particle. We believe there are dark
matter particles in the universe. Most
of the mass of the universe by energy is
dark matter. We believe that there are
probably millions or billions of dark
matter particles flying through this
room right now and we don't care because
they go right through. They do not
interact with us. To affect our everyday
lives in any way, this new particle
would have to interact substantially
with the particles that we know are in
us like electrons, protons, and
neutrons. So imagine there's some new
interaction. There's a new particle that
interacts. Hypothesize that crossing
symmetry part of the Fineman diagram. uh
technology says that if this diagram
exists and you can calculate how
important it is, you can rotate the
diagram by 90 degrees, you get another
diagram that also exists and is just as
important, is just as probable, just as
likely. So you rotate our diagram by 90
degrees clockwise and what you get is
two ordinary particles coming in
annihilating and producing two of these
new particles.
In other words, it is built into the
fundamental features of quantum field
theory that if there exist new particles
that could interact with the existing
particles in your brain, then we could
make them. All we have to do is take the
particles that we already know about and
smash them together and see what they
make. This is the favorite leisure time
activity of experimental particle
physicists, smashing together particles,
seeing what comes out. That's how we
discovered the Higs boson. We have
smashed together every kind of particle
you can imagine. We've smashed together
electrons, posetrons, neutrons, protons,
the whole bit. And we've cataloged
everything that has come out. Nothing
that has come out of what we've looked
at can possibly play any role in our
everyday lives. Either they're too heavy
and therefore you can't make them or
they just disappear in a zepptocond. The
lifetime of a Higs Bzon, for example, is
one zepptoc. that is a very short period
of
time. So the point is not just that we
haven't yet found anything in physics
that could play an important role in
your brain. The point is that we have
very strong reason to believe in the
fundamental principles of quantum field
theory. It is really the only way of
reconciling the principles of quantum
mechanics with relativity. And if you
believe in quantum field theory at all,
then quantum field the field field
theory tells you that had there been any
new particles or forces that could have
affected your everyday life, we would
have seen them already. And we have not
seen them already. So whatever
unanswered questions there are about the
manifest image, about the lives that we
lead, about our psychology and biology
and so forth, and there are many
unanswered questions. We are not going
to answer them by appealing to new laws
of fundamental physics. The core theory
is still going to have to be the basis
of whatever explanations we come up
with. And that process of coming up with
such explanations involves this idea
called emergence. The relationship
between the microscopic theory, the
foundational comprehensive theory at the
bottom, which these days we would say is
to the best of our knowledge the core
theory. There could be something
underneath it. That's fine. But there's
also something on top of it. The many
different layers of macroscopic emerging
reality. It's the macroscopic world that
is populated by tables and chairs,
people and planets. The microscopic
world is populated by particles and
forces and wave functions. And emergence
matches what happens at one layer to
what happens at the other. So there's
many different ways of talking about the
world. There's one world, the natural
world, but there are many different ways
of talking about it. And not only are
the actual vocabulary words different,
but the fundamental conceptual
frameworks are different. So if you look
at the microscopic world over there,
again, it's as Lelass said, there are
patterns of nature. They're differential
equations that tell us what happened.
There's conservation of information.
It's a wholly different story in the
macroscopic world of the manifest image.
There's a difference between past and
future. There is cause and effect. It is
true that I need to push the bottle to
keep it moving. There are reasons why
things happen in the macroscopic world.
So, how do we connect these different
levels? That's the difficult part. The
that equation I showed you, the core
theory equation, that's the easy part.
Okay, this is the hard part. That's why
we're not done with it yet. So, let me
give you a little bit of a clue. So, the
rest of the talk is much less firmly
founded in the sense that now I'm I'm
the the easy part of science is that
equation I showed you for the core
theory. That's very rigorous and very
established. And the higher up we go in
layers of emergence, the less we
understand and the more conjectural we
have to be. So I can't make an airtight
case from now on. I'll try to make a
plausibility case that the world we see
is completely compatible with this
story. And it begins with the arrow of
time with the fact that even though it
is nowhere to be found in the
fundamental equations of physics, there
is manifestly a difference between the
past and the future in our everyday
lives. The there's many different ways
in which this difference manifests
itself. For example, you remember what
happened yesterday. You don't remember I
hope you don't remember what will happen
tomorrow. Okay? There's a difference in
your causal powers to affect the world.
Again, in the macroscopic everyday
world, you can choose right now to get
up and leave. You can say, "This is a
boring talk. I don't like it. I'm going
to walk out." You have that ability. You
cannot choose right now to not have come
to the talk. Right? You have a different
access to the future and the past
somehow. In basic physical terms, we
talk about entropy increasing. Entropy
being a measure of disorderliness,
disorganization of the universe. Entropy
goes goes up as time goes on. You start
with orderly things like an unbroken egg
and you can break the egg. That's easy.
You can scramble it. putting the egg
back together much much harder and will
never happen all by itself. So the
physicist's idea of the origin of time
asymmetry in all of its different
manifestations is what we call the
second law of thermodynamics. The first
law is boring. It says energy is
conserved. Second law very interesting.
It says that entropy increases in
isolated systems as time goes on. Now
again this difference between past and
future is not built into that equation
that I showed you. It is nowhere to be
found in the fundamental laws of
physics. There has to be something about
the macroscopic world that gives us this
difference between past and future. What
could it be? Well, the answer is that
the arrow of time is very much like the
arrow of space. You might not think that
there is an arrow of space. But if I
were to let go of this, I could have
predicted. I should have predicted. It's
more impressive when you predict the
future before it happens. But I predict
that when I let this go, it will fall
down and not up. There you go.
Science. Thank you. Now, you know,
that's clearly an arrow. That's clearly
a difference between up and down in our
everyday world right here. Right? But no
one goes around writing books about the
arrow of space as if it's some big
mysterious thing. You know why? It's not
the fundamental laws of physics. It's
because we live in the vicinity of an
influential object, the Earth, right?
It's the Earth's gravitational field
that pulls the bottle down. If you were
out there in space, if you were an
astronaut, you let the bottle go, it
would just it wouldn't move, right?
There'd be no difference between up and
down. There's no arrow of space out in
the middle of in between the planets
where there's no gravitational
field. The modern viewpoint is that the
arrow of time is exactly the same way.
Just as the arrow of space can be traced
to the fact that we live in the vicinity
of an influ in influential object, the
earth, the arrow of time can be traced
to the fact that we live in the
aftermath of an influential event, the
big bang. 13.8 billion years ago, the
universe was hot, dense, and smooth. You
go through the equations, you figure out
that's very low entropy. The early
universe started with an extraordinarily
orderly state. If you want to know why,
I can't tell you that. That's a whole
different book, a whole different talk.
We don't know why. We have ideas, but
it's a fact. It's an empirical fact that
our universe started near the Big Bang
in a very, very, very special state for
some reason. The universe is like a
little windup toy that was all wound up
and ever since then has been puttering
along, winding down. The not just the
last 14 billion years but many many
billions of years toward the future we
believe will be a story of increasing
disorderliness increasing entropy of the
universe. That's why there's a
difference between the past and the
future because there is a boundary
condition in the past. Aristotle and his
friends got it exactly wrong. They
thought that the world was teological
headed towards some future goal. The
future is completely irrelevant to the
universe. The universe is unbalanced in
time not because of the of the future
but because of the past. It started in a
special state is ecological not
teological. So let me just give you one
tiny example of how that works. It's
easy to say I can break eggs and not
unbreak them. It's harder to explain
cause and effect or memories but you can
do it. The reason why you can remember
yesterday but not tomorrow is because
the entropy of the universe was lower
yesterday. Why was it lower yesterday?
The entropy of the universe because it
was even lower the day before yesterday.
And the reason why that is because it
was even lower and it goes all the way
back to the big bang. So let's explain
what I mean by that. It's why you
remember yesterday because the entropy
was lower. And it has nothing to do with
the intricate specific mechanisms of the
human memory system. This picture right
here, an egg broken on the sidewalk.
When physicists start talking about
entropy, they like talking about broken
eggs. Broken eggs and mixing cream into
coffee. That's going to come on on the
slide or two. This is a memory. I claim
that this egg stands in for what you
mean by a memory. What do I mean by
that? I mean, if you walked down the
street and you see a broken egg, you
could ask yourself, "Well, I wonder what
the future of the egg will hold." You're
in a contemplative mood. And there's
many possibilities, right? The egg could
uh just sit there and fester. A dog
could come by and and eat it. It could
wash away. Someone could clean up.
There's many different open
possibilities about the future as far as
you know. But if you thought to
yourself, I wonder what the past of the
egg held. If you're on your toes, you
can say with a pretty high degree of
confidence, I bet there was an unbroken
egg that somebody dropped. Right? This
is very, very
likely. What gives you that such
stronger hold on the past given that
current information? It's not the
fundamental laws of physics. You have
some data, some information about the
universe. There's an egg sitting on the
sidewalk. If all you knew was that
equation of the core theory or Newton's
laws or anything like that and you ask
yourself given that information what
would the past of the egg hold and what
would the future of the egg hold there
would be just as many possibilities for
the past or the
future. But there clearly are not in the
real world. And the reason why is
because ever since you were a kid you
secretly knew that the big bang had a
low
entropy that there was a low entropy
boundary condition that breaks the
symmetry between past and future. And
therefore when you reconstruct the
history of the egg
now in the future you don't know what's
going on but in the past you know it had
to start in this low entropy condition
and that picks out certain plausible
histories in between the big bang and
today given the existence of the egg on
the floor and the existence of the big
bang. It was highly likely that that egg
came from an unbroken egg. And all of
your memories, all of your artifacts,
all the fossils in the geological
record, all of your differences in the
your your knowledge of the past and
future are ultimately traced to this
fact, which is great. Full employment
for theorists, physicists, philosophers,
chemists, understanding how entropy
increases. If you once again hang around
the wrong uh circles, you might know
that this makes some people sad. the
fact that entropy is increasing the
world is just getting more and more
disorderly that's a little bit
depressing or if it's a little bit more
focused some people say look I'm not
disorderly I mean occasionally I don't
clean my room but still like as a as a
physical system of atoms I am very very
exquisitely organized you can't randomly
rearrange the atoms in me and make it
just as good so if the universe's
history is just one of increasing
disorder how does something so
intricately ordered as a human being
come to be. And there's a naive version
of this and a sophisticated version of
this. The naive version says entropy
increases. The entropy of our biosphere
has gone down. Therefore, it's
incompatible with the laws of physics.
We know that's nonsense. The second law
of thermodynamics says that the entropy
of closed isolated systems goes down and
the biosphere is not in any sense a
closed isolated system. But there is a
more sophisticated version that says,
okay, fine. The earth is not a closed
system. It is allowed for entropy to go
down here on Earth, but it doesn't
explain to me why complex structures
really did come into existence. Maybe
it's allowed by the laws of physics, but
why did it actually happen? And that's a
very interesting story and it comes down
to the fact that there's a big
difference between entropy and
complexity. There is a naive casual
notion that low entropy systems are
organized. Sorry, I should say the other
way around. Organized systems, complex
systems are low entropy and messy
systems are high entropy. Therefore, you
think, well, as entropy increases,
complexity goes down. But that's just
not thinking about what you mean very
much. I'd like to give this example of
cream mixing into coffee. Okay, the
standard example of entropy increasing.
All the creams on the top, all the
coffees on the bottom. You mix them
together, they get mixed up. That's
easy. The arrow of time at work. You're
not going to be able to unmix them. put
your spoon in there and try your best.
You're not going to separate the cream
from the coffee. Okay, entropy has gone
up. But think about the simplicity
versus complexity here in that first
picture with all the cream on top, all
the coffee on the bottom. That's a very
simple picture. If you want the
mathematical manifestation of this
mathematically, there's something called
the commar of complexity. It's basically
how long you have to keep talking to
describe the system.
Okay, on the left, you don't have to
keep talking very long. All the creams
on the top, all the coffeey's on the
bottom. It's very simple. But also far
on the right, you don't have to talk for
very long. They're all mixed together.
It's still very simple. It's in the
middle where the cream and coffee are
mixing together, where there's tendrils
of one mixing with the other one, where
there's little fractal patterns and
turbulence, that's when it's complex.
Literally, if you took a picture of this
on your iPhone and you looked at the
file size of your image, the image in
the middle would be bigger than the one
on the left and right because there's
less simplicity. There's more complexity
there. It turns out this is a very
common feature of the evolution of
closed systems. When you start in a
system that is very very low entropy,
it's often very simple. It will evolve
inevitably to higher entropy. And it's
in between that complexity first comes
and then goes away. It's not just that
the existence of complex structures here
on Earth is compatible with the fact
that entropy is increasing. It's because
entropy is increasing that this is
allowed to happen. The existence of
complex structures like like us is
allowed by the fact that we live in a
highly out of equilibrium environment
where entropy is increasing. It's not
just cups of coffee. The universe is
like this. Here's the evolution of the
universe in five simple slides. They
always tell you about the past. They
never tell you about the future. They
tell you about the evolution of the
universe. So on the left, that's a
photograph of the universe one second
after the Big Bang. It's not really a
photograph. It's a white rectangle that
I made in PowerPoint. But if you were
there one second after the Big Bang, the
universe would be hot, dense, smooth,
and glowing very, very brightly. It
would look white in every direction.
Okay? As time goes on, entropy
increases. And how that manifests itself
is first that structure forms. That
second image a few hundred thousand
years after the Big Bang is an actual
photograph. That's the leftover
radiation from the Big Bang, the cosmic
microwave background. And you see
there's differences in temperature from
place to place because there's
differences in density. Gravity works to
increase the contrast knob of the
universe, pulling things together when
they're overdense and moving them apart
when they're under dense. So in the
middle you get today this beautifully
complex universe. Planets, stars,
galaxies, a very lumpy inhomogeneous
universe. But we know the universe is
expanding and we think it's going to
expand forever. So those stars are going
to burn out. those stars are going to
fall into black holes. The fourth
picture is a picture of a black hole.
And Stephven Hawking in the 1970s told
us that even black holes don't last
forever. They just evaporate away. So if
you wait long enough, approximately 10
to the 100 years after today, the last
black hole will have evaporated and the
universe will be nothing but empty
space. Okay? It's not rebalance your
stock portfolio kind of information. And
it's a very long-term fact about the
universe. But that's the best current
model that we have of cosmology. You see
what's happening on the left. Low
entropy but very very simple. On the
right high entropy but again simple. The
complexity of the universe comes in
between. Now all right if you're with me
so far you're saying okay I used to
worry that the increase of entropy meant
that life shouldn't arise. Now you've
convinced me that complexity can arise.
But why did it actually arise? How did
it actually happen? How did life itself
actually come to be? And the answer, you
know, is that uh we have no idea. Well,
not no idea. We have very little idea.
We have some ideas. We don't know which
of ideas are right. I learned a lot
about this. I started learning about
this on an airplane. I was taking a
flight. I was going to give a talk at a
conference and uh as I often do, I'm
reading physics papers on the flight,
right? And as a professional
cosmologist, it often happens that I'm
talking to people in the real world and
they realize I'm a professional
cosmologist and they would like to
explain to me their theory of the
universe.
Okay. I usually try to not listen to
that explanation, but you're on an
airplane. You're no, you know. So, I'm
sitting there on the airplane. I'm
reading my physics papers. Actually, I
was reading about statistical mechanics
and the origin of life. The guy sitting
next to me on the plane like looks over.
He goes, "Oh, yeah. I've read those
papers. I know about that." that and he
says in fact I can tell you the purpose
of
life. I'm like okay how long is this
like going to be exactly? But then I
asked him I said okay you know we have a
long time what is the purpose of life
and he says the purpose of life is to
hydrogenate carbon
dioxide. Now as it turns out I was
sitting next to Dr. Michael Russell from
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory one of the
world's experts in the origin of
life and he does indeed have a theory.
He is a leader of one of the camps in
the origin of life debate called the
metabolism first camp. And this is this
is what he meant by that story. He says
in the early days of the earth there
were environments where in the terms
I've been using so far the entropy was
very low. In particular there was a lot
of carbon locked up in the form of
carbon dioxide. Okay. It turns out you
go through the math if you have a lot of
water and a lot lot of carbon dioxide
that is a low entropy chemical state
compared to taking the hydrogen away
from the water giving it to the carbon
and making methane hydrogenating the
carbon dioxide. So in principle that
carbon dioxide wants to become methane.
It wants to become hydrogenated. The
problem is the point of this graph on
the left is supposed to show you that
even though it is higher entropy to be
methane, all the steps along the way are
lower entropy. So there's no simple path
that takes you from carbon dioxide to
methane, lowering the entropy along the
way. What there are, wait for it, are
complex paths, complex systems of
chemical reactions that can work
together to release the entropy pent up
in that carbon dioxide. And Michael
Russell's theory is that that is why
life began as a complex network of
chemical reactions that was driven by
the desire to increase entropy. And
because he's a professional geologist,
he actually proposed the existence of a
very, very specific kind of geological
formation, what is now called a warm
alkaline thermal vent underneath the
ocean. And he said, if these existed and
lasted for long enough, they'd be the
perfect environment for life to begin.
And as every scientist always wishes
happens in their lifetime, after he made
the prediction, it was shown to be true.
They found exactly the kind of
geological formation he predicted. This
is the lost city formation underneath
the Atlantic Ocean. There could be many,
many more like that. We don't know
whether this is any relationship to how
life actually began, but it's a
plausible theory for why it might have
started. And it reminds us that the
origin of life isn't antithetical to the
fact that entropy increases. It might
have been because entropy is increasing.
We know that right now that's what life
is. If you believe in the core theory,
if you believe that we're made of all
these particles, life is not a
substance. You know, we used to people,
some people used to think in the 1800s
that life was a thing. Life was a fluid,
a force that would move in and out of
you and when you died, it left you. We
now know that life is a process. It is
like a chemical reaction, like the
burning of a candle. And when people ask
you, well, where does your energy go
when you die? You say, well, where does
your energy go when you shut down your
laptop? It's still there. It's just not
doing the same thing that it was doing
before. Here on Earth, I told you that
we are not a closed system. The sun,
what good is the sun to us here on
Earth? And you might say, well, the sun
gives us energy. And that's true, but we
give the same amount of energy back to
the universe. We get energy in the form
of solar radiation. We radiate away the
same exact amount. Sorry, we used to
radiate the same exact amount.
We now radiate away slightly less due to
greenhouse gases, but that's again a
different talk. The difference is that
we get visible light and we radiate
infrared. For every one photon of energy
we get from the sun, we radiate 20
photons back to the universe with on
average 12th of the energy each. And
that means 20 times the
entropy. The biosphere of the earth is
very organized and low entropy. But it
is an entropy generating machine. You
photosynthesize, you make plants, you
make glucose, you make ATP, you chew
your cud, you write books, you go to
conferences, and then you radiate all of
this higher entropy stuff back into the
universe. That's what we are. We are
little creatures, little configurations
of particles from the core theory that
increase the entropy of the universe.
Okay, the final question that people
have, they're like, "All right, good.
You've totally convinced me that life is
just a bunch of chemical processes.
That's never happened by the way, but uh
it could over over the years happen. But
they say, "What about consciousness?
What about like I have a feeling inside
me that you were never going to explain
using your fancy math." Okay. And again,
just like life or the universe, we don't
have the final answers here. And
consciousness is arguably the hardest
problem. It's very complex. It is
exactly if you believed in a purely
naturalistic physicalistic universe.
Human consciousness is exactly the last
thing you would expect us to explain
because it's the hardest most
complicated phenomenon there is. What we
might be able to do is sketch out some
of the steps along the way. Here is a
famous system. This is a model
biological systems C elegance the
nematode the flatworm which is a
wonderful thing because you can download
an app called open worm. Okay. What does
this do? Well, we know that in our
brains there are neurons. We think that
the neurons have a lot to do with how we
think and how we have memories and
things like that. The problem is the
human brain has something like 85
billion neurons and an enormous number
of connections between them. The the
whole map of all the connections between
the neurons is called the conneto and we
would like as one of our big ticket
neuroscientific projects to map out the
human conneto. Meanwhile, we map out the
conneto of the the nematode. That's a
lot easier. The poor nematode has 302
neurons. Okay, that we can do. In fact,
we have done it. And this is what you
can see on open worm. You can see every
single neuron in the neatode and how
it's connected to all the other neurons.
That is not enough to let us read the
mind of the nematode. But we can start
asking questions. So there's a paper
that came out. It's conjectural. I don't
know how believable it is. There's a
paper that came out that says we have
figured out the role of one of these
neurons in the 302. The role of this
neuron is to distinguish the flat worm
from not the
flatworm. This neuron is the one that
goes like the the little neatode is
moving around. It's like it sees
something. Is that dirt or is that water
or is that just my tail? Okay, that's
the job of this
neuron. Not that hard to imagine that
functionality evolving in purely
physical naturalistic terms. Also, if
you're willing to use your imagination a
little bit, not that hard to imagine,
that was the first step towards
self-awareness, the first step towards
representing your own self as part of
your mental construct of the world. Ah,
that's me. That's not me. Okay, it's a
very tiny step, but perhaps a step along
the way. Here's another step, millions
of years later. Again, completely
conjectural, but Malcolm Maccgyver uh a
neuro engineer at
Northwestern studies fish and in
particular he studies how fish view the
world and he had for better or for worse
he had a philosophical training as an
undergraduate. So he thinks about the
big picture here and he says you know
the thing about fish is they have eyes
but they can't see very far because
they're underwater. The attenuation
length of light in water is tens of
meters. Even when things are very clear
you can't see very far. You're a fish
swimming at meters per second and you
see something, you only have seconds to
react. The evolutionary pressure is to
see something and instantly say, you
know, friendly, fearful, is it food?
What should I do? Okay, but he says at
some point the first fish started
crawling onto land, right? This is Tik
Tok who craw crawled onto land. And once
you're on to land, your evolutionary
pressures change. In air, the
attenuation length is essentially
infinite. You can see the moon, right?
You can see for kilometers, you can see
things coming far away. So he says the
hypothesis is there's a new evolutionary
pressure because there's a new strategy
that evolves. Develop the capacity to
think about different hypothetical
strategies before acting on them.
So he says, "When you crawl up onto
land, it pays to develop an imagination.
What modern psychologists call mental
time travel. The ability to project
yourself into situations that have not
yet happened. And they are currently
there's a new paper coming out like this
week or next week. He made a prediction
for how eyeballs evolved on the basis of
this theory. It seems to be true. Again,
we don't know whether this was an
important step in the development of
consciousness, but you can see how it
might be. The point is not that we
understand what consciousness is or
where it came from, but we don't see any
barriers to eventually understanding.
What we do know is that the brain is
made of the particles of particle
physics. The brain is made out of
electrons and protons and neutrons, up
quarks and down quarks held together by
those forces, right? And they assemble
themselves into atoms and molecules and
neurons. I can give you evidence for
this. You don't need evidence for this.
You're probably pretty convinced already
that there are atoms and and particles
in your brain even though you've never
seen them, right? So, here's evidence.
Uh, this is this is my brain. This is
not to scale the picture on the right
there, but this is a view of my brain
using MEG, magneto and sephilography.
Right? So, this is in David PPP's lab at
NYU. They put you in a big machine. They
make you think something. He made me
think by by playing some beeps and boops
and my brain would go, "Ha, yes, that's
a sound or no, it's not." Okay, what
does it mean when I say my brain goes?
It means that there's a signal, a
thought going in my brain. And if you're
a physicalist, you believe that that
means that there are chemical
electrochemical signals moving along the
neurons and hopping from neuron to
neuron. Charged particles in motion. Any
physicist will tell you when a charged
particle starts moving, it creates a
magnetic field. So if you think that a
thought in your brain is a manifestation
of particles moving in your neurons,
then you make a prediction that a
magnetic field should pop into existence
in your head when you think a thought.
And that's a magnetic field. That's a
map of it. Quadripolar magnetic field
that pops into existence in my head when
I heard this sound. Okay, just a couple
of millimeters outside my skull. The
little magnetic field caused by my
electrons moving. It's very exciting to
me as a physicist that this actually
works. these equations that we have. So
no one denies that there are particles
obeying the laws of physics in your
brain. The question is is there
something else to it? Do we need more
than that? So famously this guy on the
left Renee Decart in the grand hair
tradition of philosophers uh thought
there was something more than just the
brain that there was an immaterial soul.
He was a dualist. We talk about
cartisian dualism. There is the body
which is physical and has a location.
And he says there's also the mind which
is immaterial that is not even part of
the physical world at all. And back then
it was hard to get a tenur position back
then in the 1600s. You wanted to be nice
to wealthy people. So the woman in the
middle who was not nearly as famous as
Daycart but should be. This is Princess
Elizabeth of
Bohemia. Uh she would have been a famous
mathematician or scientist but she was
female at the time. Fortunately for her,
she was a princess. So that gives her at
least some opportunities. Namely, that
the people who were famous philosophers
would kiss up to you because they want
the princesses to be on their side. So
Daycart sent his works to Elizabeth and
said, you know, your majesty, I don't
know what the formal uh salutation was.
Please read my works. To his surprise,
she wrote back saying, you know, I've
read your books and you know, frankly, I
think you could have done better.
The thing that she was most skeptical
about was this idea that there was a
mindbody dualism. That you could
describe a human being as a physical
body located in space, but the mind is
this ephemeral non-material non-located
thing. And she had a very pointed
criticism. She said, "If that's true,
how can this mind with no location in
space possibly influence our bodies that
certainly do? How can it push around our
hands moving up and down? How can my
immaterial spirits say raise your hand
now? So Daycart tried to come up with an
answer and that's the drawing he made
over here on the right. They they had
started peeling people apart and looking
inside. They knew that the brain was
bicameal. There were two hemispheres.
But Daycart was convinced there was only
one soul. So he pinpointed the one part
of the brain that looked like there was
only one part of it and that was the
pineal gland. So that little teardrop
shaped thing there, it's the pineal
gland. And Daycart says, "This is it.
This is the radio receiver that gets
signals from the immaterial soul and
tells our mind what to do." Nobody
believed him even then. And Princess
Elizabeth was quite
unconvinced. Today, the version, the
translation of Princess Elizabeth's
critique in modern language is, "We have
an
equation that says what the particles in
your brain are going to do. You tell me
here's a particle, here is its
surroundings in terms of here's the
electromagnetic fields and the
gravitational field and so forth. This
equation says exactly what it's going to
do. If you think there is more to what's
happening in your brain than the laws of
physics, that means you think this
equation is wrong. You think this
equation is violated by the behavior of
particles in your brain. Tell me how.
And no one has ever told us how. doesn't
mean it's not possible. That is the
challenge you would have to overcome if
you wanted to be a modern-day cartisian
dualist. All right. So, I'm wrapping up
almost almost there. Um the story the
label that I give to this way of
thinking in the book is called poetic
naturalism. Naturalism is the idea
there's only one world, the natural
world. The world we learn about through
scientific investigation. Poetic means
but there are many different ways of
talking about the world. And in this
sort of scientific presentation I've
been giving you so far from physics to
biology to psychology and so forth, you
can see how the different ways of
talking would fit together and be
compatible with each other. The story
extends with some
modifications to things like meaning and
morality and purpose. These are also
ways of talking, ways of talking that
are not fixed in the same way as our
scientific descriptions are. And I like
this motto by Muriel Rookheiser who was
a poet but she was not an anti-science
poet. She was actually a big fan of
science. She wrote a wonderful biography
of Hoseiah Willard Gibbs the famous
American chemist and she says the
universe is made of stories not of
atoms. Now she knows perfectly well the
universe is made of atoms. Okay. The
point she's making is but we bring the
universe to life by choosing to talk
about it in different ways. If you meet
a person for the first time, if you're
on a blind date, you're sitting across
from someone, they say, "Tell me about
yourself. You don't start by listing
every one of your atoms." Okay? Unless
you're a Caltech undergraduate, they
would totally do that. But most people
talk about themselves at a different
level of description. That's what brings
our immediate universe to life. That's
part of the good news. That's good news
number one. Here's the bad news. We're
all going to
die. If you believe this story, if you
believe that life is not a substance,
that consciousness is not separate from
physical matter, then you believe that
our existence here on Earth is
temporary. We are temporary organisms
just like your laptop or a candle flame
that will eventually stop. So, this is a
wonderful graph just to drive the point
home. This is a graph made uh I forget
where this comes from. Well, there's a
citation down here, but these are
biologists who study scaling laws. So in
this particular example, they've plotted
life expectancy and heart rate. And
there's a hidden connection in there
with the mass, the body weight of the
animal. It turns out that if you're
larger, you live longer, but your heart
beats slower. And it turns out that they
exactly cancel. That along this line,
you see that all the there's a pretty
good fit here for all the different
mammals that are studied. And on this
line, that represents one and a half
billion heartbeats per lifespan. Whether
you're a little tiny mouse or a big blue
whale, roughly speaking, one and a half
billion heartbeats. Now, human beings
are special because we have Obamacare,
etc. So, temporarily,
so in a state of nature, maybe we would
live for 354 years. That that was the
typical life expectancy. But now, we've
improved to maybe twice that. Okay, you
can do the math. Twice one and a half
billion is three billion heartbeats.
That's the human lifespan. And it's only
statistical. It's only an average. Don't
go home and say, "I told you not to
exercise because your heart would beat
faster." That's not how it works. It's
just an average. The point though is
that expressing the human lifespan in
heartbeats is good because on the one
hand, that's a good number of
heartbeats, right? Three billion, not
bad. That's a lot, but it's not an
infinite amount. And heartbeats are
going by. You've squandered thousands of
heartbeats since I started talking.
Okay. So, the fact that we get three
billion of them and the fact that there
is no overarching theological purpose to
the universe makes us think about every
one of those heartbeats makes us take
our own purposes and reasons for living
and focus them on every single little
bit of our lives. To me, different
people react differently. To me, the
fact that our lives are temporary and
ephemeral and there isn't anything
afterward doesn't drain life of meaning
and purpose. It's it focuses and
enhances the fact that life is the thing
that has meaning and purpose. Okay, the
final slide, the final piece of good
news. This is both good news and bad
news. This is a picture of the
universe. This is the the Hubble ultra
deep field. This is the picture you
would get, the photograph you would
take. You go out on a clear dark night.
You take your camera, you point it at a
empty random spot on the sky, okay? And
you click the shutter and if your camera
is attached to the Hubble Space
Telescope, you would get this picture.
You would see that even though it is
empty, if you look closely enough, the
night sky is alive with galaxies. Okay,
this every one of those galaxies is on
average the size of our Milky Way. So
there's a 100 billion stars in an
average galaxy out there. There's two
trillion galaxies in the observable
universe. Undoubtedly, in one of those
stars, along one of those blotches,
which is just a galaxy, there's a
conference going on and someone showing
a picture of
us. The point of this, there's two
points. Number one is that we are very
tiny. Okay? It is very difficult to look
at a picture like this, think about it
seriously, and come away with the idea
like, "Oh, I know why the universe
exists. It's so that I could exist. It's
hard to maintain that point of view
because we're very tiny. We're really
not that important as far as the un
universe is concerned. On the other
hand, we took this picture, right? We
little human beings with only three
billion heartbeats each doing science
seriously for only a few hundred years.
We used our brains, our ability to
represent ourselves in the world around
us and to think about it in abstract
terms and we developed knowledge in
science and engineering and technology
and we used that to do this really hard
thing of putting a telescope in the sky
even though it's no good in terms of
winning a war or curing cancer or
building a better TV set just because we
wanted to see what was out there. We did
that. We human beings, we have developed
the capacity to do that. We have a short
period of life here on Earth to do great
things, but the evidence is that we're
capable of doing it if that's the choice
we make. Thank you very much.
[Applause]
Perfect. Sean Carroll, folks. Sean
Carroll. Excellent.
[Music]