Alan Rich: Mr. Gould, in your relatively brief career as a pianist, you have created, or
had created for you, a public image that is probably as diverse, varied and
interesting in more ways, than probably any important musician in the present
time. I don't think I have to spell out what I mean by this, but I'd like to hear
some of your thoughts on this matter. Do you feel that this is a necessity for
the career of an artist these days? Do you think it's been a advantage to you
or a hindrance to you, or just how do you feel about it? GG: Well I think it's been an
immense advantage, but I have to qualify that immediately before everyone gets
the wrong impression, by saying that I really didn't have very much to do with
the cultivation of this. AR: I suspected as much. I think all of us do, really. GG: The
idea that one has to represent a certain way of doing things or
a certain special field of endeavour in North America, particularly, the idea that
one has to be a specialist in order to survive in a very competitive
business, can really only be promoted by this kind of image which easily allows
you to be typed as something somewhat original, if you like, but most of the
components of this image, I think, have largely become falsified, simply by
an almost incredible exaggeration, which I've enjoyed immensely. It doesn't offend
me in the slightest, and I get quite a kick out of it in fact.
And it certainly sells records. AR: I'm sure it does, but I still imagine it
must come as quite a surprise to you to find that there are thousands of people
who have at least a passing interest in music, who know a tremendous amount about
you, without probably having ever heard a note that you've played. I suppose
that could be true, but it doesn't really worry me terribly, because I have, I think,
only in the first few months in which this publicity was being directed pretty
widely at a mass audience in the time when the Goldberg Variations was first
released as a recording. I tended to be in those days a little bit
self-conscious about this, and in fact I think I began to wonder whether or not I
really had to attempt to do something to live up to this, but I never did, and all
that has come out of it since has been really greatly to my advantage without,
I think, really having any detrimental effect at all. I don't think
there's been really a bad thing either for myself or for an audience. It seems
to me that if on the strength of a certain amount of notoriety
I had attempted to seduce an audience by compromise of musical taste, of program or
something, this would have been rather reprehensible, but I didn't do this, and
I think the strongest argument is that if it helped build up a
certain amount of box-office in some cities, and if these people were then exposed
to music which they might otherwise not have been attracted to hear, then it was
a very good thing. AR: Well I think you're perfectly right, especially when you
realise that your first great success was with a piece as unapproachable and
as frightening for so many people as the Goldberg Variations. I mean, I'm sure that
a great number of people feel much more warmly toward the Goldberg Variations
from having bought the recording, either because of the picture on the front, or
because of what's on the back of the record, which is quite fascinating, or
what is inside the jacket, which is most fascinating of all of course, who
probably under ordinary circumstances would have shied away from a piece of
Bach lasting some 45 to 50 minutes, consisting of nothing but variations on
a very simple theme, and this has been very important. But
are you saying now that you would advise this kind of publicity for any young
performer? GG: Well you see, I don't think it's a question of advising it. I don't
think it can be willfully brought about. AR: But this is a great danger, you know. People
will say, "well this is how Glenn Gould is". GG: Yes, well the point is, you see, that
I have never in my life had a publicity agent, and I've never had any direct
contact with people who were responsible for this sort of publicity, either. It
happened in a chain of circumstances which are too long to relate now, but it
happened all within a very few weeks at the time when I was recording the
Goldberg Variations, and by some rather accidental circumstances. It could have, I
think, had that session been one or two weeks later or earlier, it could have
never happened at all. Yet the the chain of circumstances were so
incredibly fortunate for me, that I don't think that this could have been brought
about by anything else than sheer accident, which really accounted for it.
Therefore I don't think that one can really strive for this sort of thing
because if - first of all if you do strive for it,
it inevitably takes on a sort of falsehood anyway. AR: Yeah, well this
can be a very great danger. Let's get on to the subject of the Goldberg
Variations. Now this recording has probably been more hotly discussed and
probably won more ardent devotees and more equally ardent detractors than any
recording of as hard-to-approach a piece of music that's ever come out. Are you
still of the same mind about the Goldberg Variations as you - as a whole or in
detail - as you were when you recorded it? GG: I'm getting a little bit older in
that I think in almost all music my tempi are getting a little bit slower.
This is about the only musical change that has gone on, and what it
implies, I think, possibly an approach of slightly greater breadth now than then. I
was at that time, which was 1955, I was very much in a
let's get the show on the road and get through with it sort of mood. I felt that to
linger unduly over anything would be to take away from a sort of overall
unity of things, and this was one phase of trying to accomplish a
kind of emotional unity of a work, which has always been something that I've
attempted to do in playing piano. In part it was brought about by a
reaction, I think, against so much piano playing which I had heard, and in fact
part of the way in which I myself was taught, which was the...in the school of
the Romantic pianists of the Cortot - Schnabel tradition. I don't put the two
of them together, but elements of both were there in the way I was taught, and
for a time influenced me very much. And when I began to study the Goldberg
Variations, which was much earlier than I recorded it, it was perhaps around 1950, in
my mid-teens, this was a work which I learned entirely on my own. I had never
really had a lesson with anyone on it, and in fact, it was one of the first works
that I did learn entirely without recourse to my teacher at that time, and it
was a work which I made up my mind about relatively surely, much more so and much
more decidedly than what was the case with most works in my repertoire at that
time. And therefore I think it's a work that I probably have changed less about
in the last few years than most others. AR: And yet you do say you've changed some.
GG: Well I've changed some. The only thing I would say is possibly that the
tempi of some variations is a little slower than it was then, but on the other
hand I've never recorded it again, and in recording one has to allow for certain
acoustical phenomena in the the sound of the work, that one has to adapt speed
and so on to the fact that there is no acoustical grandeur about a recording
as there can be in a concert hall. One cannot count on a lingering tonal shape
as one can in a concert hall, so consequently very often it happens
that tempi are slightly faster. And I don't know that this is just therefore
something applicable only for the Goldberg. AR: Yeah but what I'm driving at is
this: here is a recording which you made four years ago, which represents in
some details... what I'm driving at now is a general feeling of
you as an artist about recording: the fact that a certain of state of mind on
a particular day or a particular phase in your career is made terribly
permanent through a recording, and people who go to hear you today judge you by
this permanency of what exists from four or five years ago. Do you feel that this
is a bad thing, a good thing? What can be done about it? GG: Well, I enjoy recording
more than any other phase of making music, and the reason I enjoy it is
exactly because of this permanency, really. First of all, it provides a
certain challenge to know that something is going to be able to be
heard exactly in that form five years from now. Therefore one has to stand
behind the product with something better than a 90 day guarantee, and for this
reason, I spend really much more time before a recording session thinking
about the music (this is a dreadful admission) than I do for a whole series
of concerts. In fact it's about the only time I really do any serious practicing, but I
enjoy it very much because it seems to me that by using all of the
facilities of making a recording, of the possibilities of tape and so on, one can
really come closer to re-creation than in any other interpretive activity at
any rate, and hence I don't really mind if my total feeling about a work has
changed, even radically. I don't object to this
still being in existence. I don't have any recordings that I would like to
withdraw. There are some that I'm not at all happy about, but not that I would like to
withdraw because it seemed to be, at the time, quite valid and that's quite
enough for me. AR: When you're amassing an outlook on a piece of music, perhaps a
new piece that you're adding to your repertory, do you spend very much time
with recordings of other pianists? GG: Well, I try to do it afterwards. I try to listen
to what the competition has been doing, only after I've really decided what I want
to do myself. I enjoy listening to other people's recordings very much. In fact,
during my teens, in studying Beethoven particularly, I had the Sonata Society
collections of Schnabel, which, well, which were biblical to me, really, and these
influenced me a great deal. So much so that that I can remember when I was 13 or 14,
playing a Beethoven sonata in a concert someplace (I don't remember which one now), the
record was taken away from me by my teacher, who found that all of the
exaggerated fermatae of Schnabel were being added to by just one slightly longer
apostrophe of my own, and all of the rushes of Schnabel were slightly speeded up too, and
these things, which were really quite incidental to to the major things that he had
to say about the music, which were really rather small eccentricities of his piano
style, were being taken so seriously by me that it was becoming a rather
dangerous exposure. So this was withdrawn, but ever since then recordings have
always been a great influence to me, really.
But now, certainly less so, and only after I've rather made up my mind myself.
AR: You mentioned Schnabel and Cortot as being two influences, perhaps positive,
perhaps negative, in your early years. Who are some of the other pianists that you
were drawn to... GG: Well, as I said, I didn't mean to bracket Schnabel and Cortot.
I was tremendously influenced, and very moved, by Schnabel's playing, especially
of Beethoven and Schubert. I was never either influenced or moved by Cortot. In
fact I disliked his playing ever since I can remember first hearing it on some
old 78s: chamber music as well as solo playing. I think I disliked it
defensively as much as anything. My own training on the piano was largely
the responsibility of one teacher, who was a Latin from Chile, and his personal style
of playing was very much that of the school of Paris 1910, I would say, in which
the pedal was given much more work than it can really accommodate, and the
conceptions of phrasing were extraordinarily whimsical, and
without, it seemed to me in many cases, without rational approach. He was
nevertheless a very fine teacher and a very fine pianist, but I came to dislike
what this style of piano playing represented, and especially disliked the
fact that, in the piano particularly, the traditions of orchestral playing, the
rhythmic consciousness, particularly, was being lost almost altogether, and
this is only now I think beginning to change in piano playing. People are
beginning to be conscious of the continuing propulsion of rhythm, of a
kind of harmony of rhythm, which was ignored completely towards the end of
the last century, or at least the beginning of this century, from what one
can gather from documentary recordings of even composers playing. It seemed
to me that this lack of unity in music, the
inability to see things in logical perspective was the greatest deficiency
of most of the celebrated pianists of that time, and it was something that
began to disturb me more and more, and so, with a complete reaction to this,
there was a time when I really played only music of the 18th century, and in
fact, this was only balanced a little later by playing a great deal of
music of the 20th century, and for many of the same reasons. And for
many years the 19th century I ignored entirely, not because I didn't like it. I
really think it was more of a defense mechanism than anything else. AR: Well
certainly it would seem that your your particular attitude toward Bach, at least
as it comes off records, represents as strong a break from the kind of playing
that you described as anything could be. Did you go through any soul-searching
about this matter of Bach on the piano? GG: I don't think I ever really had to go
through any soul-searching, because it was always the music which was the greatest
joy for me to play, not just on the piano. But I really began my public career as
an organist. In fact my debut on the organ in concert was when I was about 12 years
old, and that was before I'd made a debut as a pianist, and the only things I ever
really played on the organ were Bach and Handel and a few earlier things of
course, and a little bit of 20th century music. And I think it was playing
the organ, and especially the tactile sensation of playing the organ, that
gave me an approach to Bach on the piano, which really didn't demand any great
soul-searching in relation to the piano, it was simply transferring a style of
playing from one instrument to another. And as I was playing, of course, both
instruments simultaneously, or at least studying them simultaneously, this
didn't seem terribly difficult to do. It didn't involve the same problems as
going from an electric typewriter to a standard model usually does, or suddenly
getting your first car with power steering, because the two things
were in the blood simultaneously and it was just
a question of an approach which related largely to tactile sensations of
one kind. By that I mean that on the organ, if you are going to deliberate a
certain method of - or two alternate methods - contrasting methods of producing
a certain phrase, obviously nothing that you do short of the registering of an
effect on various plateaus of sound, nothing that you do in forms of gradual
gradations is going to produce anything except a sort of romantic smudge, and
therefore the whole effect of clarity of line, of detached sound, has got to be
achieved by a lifting of the finger after the note has been struck, and not an
attack on the note before it has been struck. And this was the method of
playing which of course I learned on the organ, and which I simply transferred to
the piano. A method which involved minimal movement of the fingers, really, and
which... I'm sorry to to reduce this all to something so physical, but this is really
what it was. And a method which began by by starting at the key rather than above
it, and which no amount of excessive force could be brought to bear on the
piano, or could morally be brought to bear on the piano.
AR: Well, this answers a question that I've always had in my mind. When I
mentioned the problem of Bach on the piano, of course I'm thinking of it in
terms of the puristic approach that regards this as music for the
harpsichord, and that anything else is just sacrilege, and I've always noted - felt
myself, that your playing of Bach on the piano, as opposed to a great number of
other people, doesn't seem to take into a concern with correlating
with harpsichord sound. In other words, it's a sound that fills out
the resources of the piano without using the piano as a kind of
an apology. I don't know whether I make myself clear. GG: Well, I think you do and I'm
very pleased that this is the impression that you get. Actually I love the harpsichord
very much. I don't play it at any time when I have to play the piano
within a period of two weeks, because it ruins me. This is a much more
dangerous switch than playing the organ. The action - it can produce wild effects
on the muscles and the coordination of them, but actually the concession
that I make I think to harpsichord effect is by playing a great deal of
Bach in concert and almost all of it on recording with the soft pedal down, which
is simply that of making the tone slightly thinner of course, and in fact I
did fool around with the idea some years ago of doing an album of Bach on a
tack hammer piano that they had at the Columbia studio especially for Rosemary
Clooney jazz sessions. It was the most delicious sound - you can't imagine. I spent one
whole morning playing this piano - everything from Tudor music to
Mozart, and it was absolutely marvellous, but they wouldn't indulge me, they
thought it was much too whimsical. AR: You say that you more or less sidetrack the 19th
century when talking a little while ago about your repertory, and yet a great deal
of the music from the 20th century that you've become known for - such pieces as the
Berg Sonata that you played in Berkeley a few weeks ago, certainly seem
quite far removed from the 18th century aesthetic, I mean here...GG: This is perfectly true, and I
think that this is another thing that takes a little bit of qualifying because
when I said - the 19th century after all to people such as my piano teacher
and most other people of 50 years ago - whose training was 50 years ago, I
mean, the 19th century on the piano meant well of course Chopin, it meant Schumann,
meant perhaps Mendelssohn, and Liszt certainly, and it didn't really mean the music of
the central German tradition which was gradually - or
Viennese tradition rather - which was gradually becoming entirely an
orchestral tradition. It certainly didn't mean Richard Strauss. It meant Max Reger
only insofar as he wrote some rather unhappy little fughettas, and
impromptus and so on, and all of these people largely ignored the
piano because they were - the synthesis of the symphonic drama and the lied was
occupying them so entirely that the piano just didn't seem an adequate
vehicle at this time. And I think this is of course one of the great pities in
piano repertoire that people such as Mahler and Richard Strauss, with the
exception of the early Burleske and the left hand piece, never
wrote either for the piano as a soloist or for the piano as an orchestral
instrument with orchestra. Because if any one with his particular
colouristic thinking could have written for the piano, it would have been Mahler.
He would have been a superb piano writer, and this to me is a great tragedy. Now, as far as my
own enthusiasms are concerned about the 19th century, I always have played a lot
of Brahms, though only the concertos recently, but I play a lot of the
chamber music and so on, and I've always loved Brahms very much. And in the later
19th century and the early 20th century, the two composers who at one time - at
just the the years in which one would expect it - in my 18th or 19th year, I
think that everyone in their 19th year has a period when the greatest, most
moving work of all time is Ein Heldenleben. I had this period for at
least six months when I had to listen to Mengelberg's Ein Heldenleben at
least every second day, or I couldn't live. At the same time I had to read
Thomas Mann's Tonio Kröger, which was a self-identification too.
And when I discovered music such as the Berg Sonata, which you mentioned, this
of course fit in beautifully with this whole aesthetic, and it seemed to be
the closest representation in keyboard literature of this sort of overwhelming
orchestral sound that was so terribly impressive to me, in which I could sort
of bury myself in, with all sorts of undisturbed neurotic
feelings. And when this was a little better
assimilated, I began to discover Schoenberg and subsequently Webern and other
composers of that tradition. And of course by that time I had also
discovered that Berg himself, who by this time, incidentally, was the one
who meant the least to me of the Viennese school - Berg himself was doing much
more than simply building sort of gigantic edifices in a sort of
romantically baroque way, with this enormous amount of chromatic
ornamentation. But this ornamentation was indeed not ornamentation: that these
chromatic procedures were a question of of motivic homogeneity which he was
looking for, and this of course....AR: Your performance of the Berg Sonata is the quietest and uh most restrained...GG: And this of
course was in relation to the fact that by this time it was the
development of the the centres of
motivic coherence in a work in Schoenberg and in Webern which were beginning to
fascinate me. This was the mathematical aspect, certainly not
exclusively. I am beginning to sound academic, but it was the the mathematical
cohesion of this music that was fascinating me, and hence my approach to
Berg changed too. But anyway, this is a long way from the question. All
of this music, as you pointed out quite rightly, does certainly relate to the
tradition of the nineteenth century, but, too, I think, the symphonic tradition
rather more than to the the piano tradition as such. AR: Do you play Webern? Have you played...
GG: Well, yes. There's only the Variations to play, and I do play
them, and played quite a bit of his chamber music with singers and various
instrumentalists. AR: What about the new crowd? Have you looked at the Boulez Sonatas? GG: Yes,
yes. To me Boulez is a little bit like
playing a 78 record at 33 - I mean 33 at 78. There's just no other way to describe
it. I find that all of the procedures of Webern are simply speeded up in Boulez,
and slightly mystified, for no particular aesthetic purpose. I have
a feeling that that Boulez would be quite incapable of writing one of the...
for instance... let me change the order of this sentence. Webern spent a great
deal of time messing about double canons and so on, as in the first moment of his
Op. 21 Symphony, and with Webern I'm also slightly
suspicious that were this double canon required to be written in C major, and to
produce cadential impact at two or three points along the way, Webern probably
could not have done it. And if this sounds like heresy, I think it's true,
because actually I found an unpublished work of his some years ago
his quintet - Piano Quintet, which is in C major, and which, after the the seventh bar, is
immediately in trouble because he is so terribly concerned with the bass
progression (I can't remember what it is) but the bass progression being the
inversion of another motive in I think the viola, who is accompanying the piano for
the first three or four bars - that's when I goes [sings] or something,
isn't it? And the bass is going [sings] and this of course produces a cadence after
the eighth bar which which instead of being strong is the weakest known to
tonal thinking man. It is a sort of Schumann-esque apologetic or an escape
cadence with the augmented sixth over the dominant - the G and D sharp, and
this completely weak, completely without a sense of... I think not without a sense
of harmonic foundation, but with so disinterested an attitude toward
the power of romantic harmonic language that Webern, of course, within two more
works had escaped into atonalism, where he found a much happier state of
mind. But now, getting to Boulez, it seems to me that all of the
composers of this school: all of those who look to Webern rather than
looking to Schoenberg - instead of trying to see Webern I think possibly as
one possibility of the offshoot of Schoenberg, implying that Schoenberg had
many more possibilities than have yet been exploited (which I think is the case),
that all these people who look to Webern rather than Schoenberg and who, like
Boulez, write articles such as 'Schoenberg est mort' to express their
credo, are really missing the main chance, because I'm convinced that
Webern, for all of his importance, is going to be thought of sometime in the future
as a rather acoustically precious composer (and I don't mean to be
insulting in that) as someone who was interested in dynamics of sound, in a
kind of primitive dynamics of sound, in the same way that, let us say, Beethoven
of the Coriolanus Overture was - in the black and white-ness
of sound, and I think this is going to be the main contribution of Webern:
a kind of simplifying, or if you like, strengthening, of the atonal harmonic
language. I think that in this sense Webern tried to vitalise the
interval combinations which came to hand: the sevenths, the seconds, which are the
same thing, and to try and give them a kind of relative impact on
interval combinations superimposed harmonically. Something that
Schoenberg was less interested in doing, not...certainly was just as capable of
doing, but was less interested in doing, because his textures were much larger,
they're much grander, much thicker, and related much more unashamedly to
Romantic movement of chords, which, without giving the
triad sovereignty, allowed it to move in and out of fourth chords and
augmented fourth chords and this sort of thing, or whole tone chords, and have a
relative dissonance approach, whereas Webern picked most of his tone rows to
coincide with this harmonic approach, and most of his tone rows involved alternate
seconds and thirds, mostly minor seconds and major thirds, and therefore the
superpositions [?] that Webern is going to achieve always
include the the seventh, which wasn't, of course, the case in Schoenberg's tone
rows at all. These were achieved entirely differently, and for different reasons.
But I think that people like Boulez,
for all of the ingenuity that they may have, and certainly for all the abilities
of propagandising themselves that they do have, have missed, or are at least so
far missing, the main chance, because I feel that there is a great deal more in
Schoenberg, if indeed music does have to move in a line out of something, and
if one is going to have a school of something, then I think the person to
look to is still Schoenberg and not Webern. I can see that there
are many fashionable weaknesses in Schoenberg the wonderful... you
remember that wonderful not condemnation, but acute criticism in Mann's Doctor
Faustus, when the narrator says to Adrian Leverkühn, the hero, who was supposed to
have been more or less modelled after Schoenberg - I don't remember - I can't
quote it but something to the efffect... AR: To Schoenberg's great displeasure. GG: Yes
indeed, and I... but I can remember that, with great accuracy, Mann puts into the
mouth of the narrator words to the effect of "Adrian, whatever the vitality
of your motivic line, whatever the energy of your harmony, you remain rooted
rhythmically in German four-squareness." Now this is quite true and - I
mean it's true of Schoenberg, certainly, and I think that Schoenberg did so
because it was simply too much to ask of any one person that the three
musical dimensions are going to move away from known ground
simultaneously: if two are, then the third remained, and for very good reason.
Now it seems to me entirely possible that to make a combination
of Schoenberg and Webern, it should be possible to construct a language on
which the - let us... the sort of plateaus of Webern, the projection
in distance of Webern, the...which is really I think the main contribution
he had: the alternate pianos, mezzo fortes,
fortissimos, all of these which really represent a sort of spherical approach. I
mean, it is a question of distance in space almost, of entry coming from
the immediate present to the distant past. It's almost a question of
trying to organise in musical sound levels of presentation which represent
distance, represent horizon, and (what's the opposite of horizon?), whatever
it is, immediate to one - the greatest possible proximity, and in Schoenberg
this is not there. I mean the whole approach of Schoenberg to music is
a much more orthodoxly symphonic one, of everything being in the present tense.
I think it would be entirely possible to in some way see the
possibility of relating the adventures of Schoenberg in line: the extension
of the Wagnerian line in Schoenberg, and the incredible richness of his
dodecaphonic harmony, with this kind of splitting of the rhythmic atoms
that Webern contributed. AR: Do you feel that this is being done by anyone today?
What about Dallapiccola or what about some of the American Schoenberg pupils
like [Leon] Kirchner? GG: I don't feel it's being done by anyone
whose work I'm familiar with. I must say that I don't know much of Dallapiccola's
work, and that's, I know, a person that I should get to know better. I knew
things which were in some prominence a few years ago: The Prisoner and so on, but I
don't know any of his recent work at all. I don't feel that this particular
thing is being done, and I don't even know if it's possible to do
it. I just think it is, and it seems to me that it is indeed missing the
main chance to have, as so many of these people have done today, to have
deliberately tried to misunderstand Schoenberg, I think. What makes me
very unhappy about a lot of the younger composers today, some of whom had better
remain nameless, is that a lot of them, whether admitting or not the
greatness of Schoenberg (most of them do, of course - they really can't deny it. It's
like denying your grandfather), have managed, in part at least, to free
themselves of the greatest contribution of Schoenberg, which was his ability
to relate motivic coherence and unity and vitality of motivic structure
to both tonal and non tonal idiom, and it seems to me that that to deny the
greatness of Schoenberg in his early years, for instance, in the years of the
two chamber symphonies and Peleas und Melisande, and the first two
string quartets, is to really weaken the best part of their argument that
Schoenberg indeed was the father of all this, because it was in this
tremendous preoccupation with a disciplinary structure, which tonality
provided for him at that time, and which in fact in an entirely different - in a
much more laboratory way, he came back to in the 1940s... AR: The Piano Concerto? GG: Yes,
the Piano Concerto, the Ode to Napoleon, and the organ Variations, this sort of thing,
and this was much more of a kind of laboratory culture that he set
up in his later years, and much less, I think, successful, simply because
it didn't have that same emotional stimulus to beat down almost, but not
quite, the barriers of something that was providing an immense challenge,
but at the same time a book-end discipline for what he wanted to do as
it did in 1905. AR: We've bridged a kind of gap here between Glenn Gould the
pianist, and I think it's about time we
brought into the picture Glenn Gould the composer, because certainly what you say
has a tremendous validity, and indicates that you've done a great deal of
thinking this out, and since you have spent a fair amount of time composing,
how do you feel that this all relates to your own future in this field, or do you
plan a future in this field? GG: Well, I only hope I have a future in this field. I would like to
have a future in this field, because it's the the one musical endeavour that really
has always fascinated me, and in fact it is the thing that I hope will occupy
the last half of my life - composition, I mean. At the present time and the
relation here is that however
awkward it is to put it into words, I am simply playing the piano at the present
time, and will continue to do so, I expect, for the next few years, in order that by
the time I've reached 35, I can retire and be done with it, and afford
to indulge myself in composition, at which I don't ever expect to make any
money. Well, I've written very few things. The last five years, I have only written
three works with a couple of unfinished ones, and previous to that in my teens, I
wrote only a couple of twelve-tone works. This was at a time when I was
discovering Schoenberg, and they were very much Schoenberg of the 1930s, of
the sort of neoclassic....AR: Third Quartet? GG: Third Quartet, yes, Third Quartet, the
Septet, you know, this kind of stuff. But they weren't very good because I wasn't
really terribly at ease with writing twelve-tone music myself, and I began
to find that the reason that I wasn't at ease with it was that I was either unwilling or
unable - I think unable is probably more accurate - to allow the logic of
twelve-tone if it has a logic, to find its own forms. I was always bending this
thing into fugues and into Sonata- Allegros, and into all sorts of
canonical structures much more related to the tonal entrance
identification of canonic structures than Webern's canons were, for
instance, which were real twelve-tone canons, which allowed an
inner logic of a 12 tone row to dictate a certain form of entrance - a
certain form of rejoinder, and mine didn't do this, and they were much
more arbitrarily conceived. I don't mean technically awkwardly conceived, I
think they were really rather good, but they had always this problem that
they really were building... not allowing the 12 tone-ness, excuse me, of
the work to build its own form. They were simply bending it into a
form which I knew more instinctively, and which came easier, in a way. Now, then I
began to find that it was the form itself which attracted me greater, more
and more...excuse me... more dearly than the material that I was
bending into it, and so for a couple of years I wrote nothing at all, and then
when I was about 20 - 21 I guess, I started to work on a String Quartet, which
occupied me for the next three years, and which ended up being a 35-minute work in
one movement, which was really a sort of tremendously bloated Sonata-Allegro,
with a coda that's alone over 300 bars long, and this work in some ways
synthesised this state of mind because it allowed me to develop a pretty minute
semantic cell of four notes, and extend the influence of this
interval group into every theme of the work, in the same way that, and I
must say, much influenced by Schoenberg's first quartet, except that mine was not
really four movements in one as his is, it was really just one movement in which
the development section was a fugue, a full scale fugue, and this
work, of course, was in a tonal idiom, as well as quite as conservative as
anything written in 1890, and it could have been
written by almost anyone of this period, but it certainly was someplace between, I
should say, early Richard Strauss, with occasional suggestions of the voice
leading of Cesar Frank, which weren't ever apparent to me at the time,
curiously enough, but are now, and this is odd, because he never influenced me at all
in any more conscious way [?]. Well, the quartet occupied me for about three
years, and since that time I've written just a sonata for clarinet and piano, which
I'm now rewriting because I'm not at all happy with it. The piano part sounds
like a string quartet, and some cadenzas for the C major Beethoven
concerto. And all of these things are written in much the same style. AR: Since we
do have this quartet of yours kicking around in the KPFA library, and indeed it
has already been played, I have to ask you now, are you more or less disowning
this work? Would you rather it be forgotten? GG: Oh no, not at all. It's my
proudest achievement. No, no, not at all. AR: I must say the response when we've played it has
been quite enthusiastic GG: Well, I'm terribly glad to hear that. No, no, I
didn't mean to imply that at all. I simply meant to indicate that I am in
composition, a sort of transient at the moment, because I'm not at all sure that
I can continue writing in this way - that is that I want to. At the same time I'm
not sure there's anything else I want to do either. The attraction of bending
the disciplines of - or rather slightly molding the disciplines of the Sonata
form of the of the classical structure and enlarging them to fit in with the
sort of project I had in mind and at the same time allowing me to indulge the
greatest amount of contrapuntal elaboration - it was this much more than
the effect of the late 19th century idiom per se that attracted me,
and therefore it may be that I will suddenly decide to try doing the
same thing in the sort of academic contrapuntal style of Mozart of the C
major symphony. I have absolutely no home base
idiomatically, and this worries me, or rather I'm trying to prevent it from
worrying me for the moment, because I've got other thing on my mind, but it nevertheless
does worry me. AR: No, I think it's rather good. I think that a much greater
danger would be a person who chooses a home base so solidly and proclaims
himself so much part of it, that either he finds himself paralysed by
inability to go further in his chosen idiom or.... let's see now, how was I going
to end that sentence? Or he becomes terribly self-conscious and
continues to use it long after the idiom has stopped meaning anything for him. GG: Yes, yes. But
pardon me for interrupting. I just thought of one thing. The the unanswered question here
is of course whether or not it was largely a kind of academic challenge
that prompted me to do this, because that's really what we've been saying in
a more polite way, and this remains the question. AR: Well, I would hate
to have to... GG: I didn't ask for the answer. AR: No, no, I can't answer it of
course. You're the only one that can. All I mean to say is that I don't want my
possession of this record to be a kind of blackmail GG: No. AR: so any time you'd
rather I didn't have it, I'll be glad to return it to you. What about Canada in general
as a creative country? I think that we all agree that there's been a great deal
stirring up there in the last - well, since the war - do you have anything in general
to say? GG: Well, there has indeed been a great deal of stirring. I think that, of course,
the most potent force in the musical life of Canada is the fact that we do
have, along the lines of European nations, national radio and television, which is
something either unknown or entirely misunderstood in this country, largely.
And I find this in my own case that it was the fact of which meant most to my
musical development, because during my student years and my late teens, I really
did no solo playing in concert whatsoever, because I was still in school
and so on, and all of the activities that I took part in musically: a lot of
chamber music and a lot of exploration of new repertoire, were largely the
promotion of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. And a little later on
television as well as on radio. And some very exciting things we used to be able
to do. I don't mean that we no longer can do them, but I just I haven't been there
as much to have time lately. But this was a tremendous advantage, and a terrific
help in my career and in many ways it was something which influenced
very much my approach to music because the... This is sidetracking a bit, but I must add
that the microphone in this way, became a friend rather than an enemy, and I was most
at home when I was alone in the studio with a microphone, and this of course
conditioned my approach to making recordings which we talked about a while back. AR: Well, I
was thinking more about composition in Canada.
I see the names of Canadian composers, I heard a great deal of Canadian music
played at Vancouver this summer although I must say not as much as I would have liked to
hear. Are there - is there a 12-tone school in Canada for example? Are there
composers...? GG: Well, there are a lot of twelve-tone composers. There is not what I would
call a twelve-tone school, any more than I think that it could be claimed for
this country because these people don't really belong to the school of, you know?
They all work in very different ways. There's a very interesting twelve-tone
composer living in Montreal whose name is Istvan Anhalt, as in Köthen (Anhalt),
and in Montreal his works are known a little bit. They're heard occasionally
on the CBC. He's almost never played in Toronto for reasons that are best known
to Torontonians, and the same thing happens to be the case, unfortunately, in
Canada very often, that there are many fine composers who become provincial
celebrities of a kind, and whose domain remains entirely that of one city.
And this can be of course accentuated by the
fact that in Montreal there's a French language network of the CBC which
doesn't produce English language programs and vice-versa. But this is an
important composer, I think, and a very adventurous one actually, and a few
years ago when I saw some of his work, it suggested to me that while it wasn't
particularly palatable stuff in what I would assume to be an
audience sense, it had the same kind of rather brusque uncompromising integrity
that, in a different idiom altogether, Roger Sessions represents, for
instance, in this country. And I think this is an important composer. There are
not too many of them, however, in Canada. There is a very intelligent composer in
Vancouver, Barbara Pentland, who has written some quite solid things.
There's an interesting composer in Toronto whose name is Harry Somers, who I
feel is very uneven. He is possibly the most celebrated of the younger composers
in Canada: certainly the one who perhaps gets most performances.
He's written very prolifically - I think much too prolifically - and is, I think,
undoubtedly the composer with the wildest and yet most fascinating
imaginative power of any composer in Canada. Have you heard his music? AR: I have,
as a matter of fact. We have someone in Berkeley, Gene Gash, who knew Somers in
Paris, and brought some of his music to KPFA for a studio concert one time.
What about an audience up there? I know that - I got the
impression from my visits to Canada that there is a strong national feeling up
there: a strong feeling of Canadian art, Canadian literature, Canadian music. Does
this indicate that audiences are drawn to Canadian composers? GG: Oh I
don't think so. You know, it's too easy to confuse the enthusiasm of
probably a relatively small group of people
you met in Canada with the attitude of the country in general. AR: Well, it seems just as easy to confuse it here.
GG: A few years ago someone took a poll, and this was before - this was not
before the advent of television, but it was certainly in the early years of
television, I think it was about 1954 - someone took a poll of radio listening
habits in Canada on Wednesday evenings. Now Wednesday evenings are sort of
sacred in Canada, because the CBC has an institution called CBC Wednesday Night,
which is a sort of once weekly third programme such as the BBC had, and on which
one can hear everything from unabridged García Lorca to Schoenberg, Webern
even, or something of this kind, and it's pretty heady stuff. But
anyway, they took a poll of listening habits in Canada on radio, and it proved
that exactly four percent of Canadians who were listening to the radio, were
listening to CBC Wednesday Night, and the other 96% of radio listeners were
listening to - AR: American? GG: well, and Canadian independent stations, yes. So I
think this certainly would indicate that there is not any great enthusiasm for
native arts in Canada. There is beginning to be for a native
literature, that's quite true. It's in a much sounder state than the music, I
should think. AR: Well, I imagine that Canada is probably very much the same as this
country. What we constantly need in the States here, is for some other - preferably
some other country - to tell us how good our performers are. I'm sure that
then - well the celebrated case of Van Cliburn comes most immediately to mind, and I
imagine that your own case is again somewhat characteristic, or am I wrong -
that it takes....GG:  Yes it does. That's quite true. AR: it takes a spread in an
American magazine or something of that sort. Well, are there any final thoughts that
you'd like to leave us with about any of your various activities? What, for
example, may we look for on records in the next few
months? GG: Well, the next record which will be released around Christmas time is the
third Beethoven concerto with Bernstein, and during the winter there will be
another Bach album released, which I recorded recently: first and second
Partitas and the Italian Concerto, and in January I'm recording the fourth
Beethoven concerto with the Philadelphia Orchestra, and so that will then make
four of the five by next year. We have the set. And I think that's about all
in recordings. AR: What about Mozart? He's come in and
out of the conversation. You do play some Mozart, I know, and I for one would be
extremely interested in having on record some of your ideas on Mozart. GG: Well, I'd
like to make an album of Mozart concerti. As you know, in any large recording
company there's always the problem of trying not to compete with the
repertoire which one of your colleagues is doing, and of course Mr.
Serkin has done a tremendous amount of Mozart recording of the
concertos especially, and done them in exactly the way I would like to do them:
that is without conductor, with chamber orchestra, or at least most of
them have been done that way, and this is also what I want to try with the Mozart
concerti. And so... AR: Conducting them  yourself? GG: No, not even conducting them at all. Just having a
very competent concertmaster and trying to have as relaxed and informal an
approach to the concerti as is possible. Well anyway, he did this with his
orchestra up in Marlborough Connecticut and no - Vermont - thank you - and I'd like to do
much the same thing with some of the concertos, and also some of the same ones
that he did, so I think that I have to wait a couple of years for this, and then do it. AR: Well I
for one will be waiting along with you. GG: Thank you. A great pleasure. AR: Thanks very much. [captions edited by Bruce Cross]