Ever since my journey into non-jewism,
I'm puzzled by this line from the poet
Roomie. You're not a drop in the ocean,
but the ocean and a drop.
This paradox that we are both the whole
universe and at the same time an
infantessimally small drop located in
space and time is something I can ponder
on daily in a philosophical way. But
what would the world's mostsighted
neuroscientist have to say about it?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. When I was born, I didn't have any
notion of me and you know I didn't I
didn't have any notion of mother from my
point of view. This was just some
oceanic universe. So how on earth then
do you conceive of a boundary that is
intimately porous?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And glues you to the soup
&gt;&gt; of which you are a part but also at the
same time distinct.
Biology cannot tell us how from the
primordial soup cells emerged. And
neuroscience cannot tell us how from
brainselves
emerged. But what if there is a
principle that can at least describe
both of these mysteries in a
mathematical accurate way? The trick is
um you effectively um use statistics or
probability theory to define the minimal
conditions that allow for a statistical
separation, a veil. Uh something that is
shared between the observed and the
observer, but is not the observed or the
observer. We need a physics of
observation. You could glorify that and
say a physics of sentience. And that's
the role of the Markoff blanket.
Carl Fristen is famous for the free
energy principle, a mathematical way to
describe what living systems do within
their boundary. And that boundary,
whether it's a cell or a conscious
being, is mathematically described as a
markoff blanket.
Though I was highly interested in all of
this, I was specifically interested in
his metaphysics. Space and time as we
talk about them and read about them at
school or in physics books are just
stories. So the notion that you are you
the the minimal selfhood or in fact the
selfhood itself is just another story
under the free energy principle.
I'm certainly not a maternity
principle is that there cannot be a
fully um measurable world. If there was,
you would be part of that world and by
the principle of unitarity, you would
not exist.
&gt;&gt; I'm just curious, how is that in your
theory? If the mark of blackets gets
bigger, can there be mark of blankets
within the mark of blankets? And are
there selves within a bigger self?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; A very warm welcome to the Asencia
Foundation's YouTube channel. I have the
pleasure and honor of sitting in the
study of Professor Carl Fristen. Thank
you very much for having us here in the
first place. It's wonderful to be here.
&gt;&gt; Oh, thank you for coming. It's my
pleasure to be here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And in in the very room where um I
think you made tremendous contributions
to the field of neuroscience, you're a
professor of neuroscience at University
College Lond London. And just to name
some of the the the neuroscience jargon
of the things you invented, the the
statistical parametric mapping,
voxalbased morphometry, dynamic causal
modeling, these are all fundamental
innovations in the field of
neuroscience. But in particular, you're
known for the free energy principle.
sort of opening question I have for you
and we briefly discussed it before we
sat down is is this idea that many
people in thinking about the mind and
brain have still have the idea that we
perceive the world somehow as it is and
only when there's something wrong with
our brains um we make mistakes and we
see a different world because there
seems to be consensus reality that's the
same for all of us so somehow we think
that we see the world as it is and your
work makes very clear that that's not
the case and it brings us back in sense
to this old uh idea of Plato being in a
cave in a sense right we have to do with
the mirror images of the world and we
cannot see the world directly
um I was just curious how you said see
that sort of that that met metaphysical
shift that has happened in neuroscience
because I think it has happened during
your career or was already happening but
very nice to hear your reflections on
that sort of that that metaphysical
shift
&gt;&gt; well I think it's nice you start with
Plato so I often when asked you know
what how would you describe the free
energy principle. I said there's a high
road and a low road. If you want the
physicist road and I suspect we will be
talking uh about the high road entailed
by a a physics of sentience, physics of
sentient behavior. Um the low road
though would I think begin with Plato
and it would um and I mention that
because in a sense the free energy
principle is just the denument of a long
story a story that you could trace
through Kant Helm Holtz um great
psychological thinkers of the 20th
century people like um Horus Barlow um
Richard Gregory um perception is
hypothesis testing for example analysis
by synthesis through to innovation s in
machine learning. Um indeed people like
Jeffrey Hinton and Peter Diane built a
Helmholds machine and you know the
fundaments and the principles that
underride that kind of artificial
intelligence or at least machine
learning um are I think a testament or
the success of those kinds of
applications I think are a testament
that that's the right track. So
sometimes people like Anneil Seth and
Andy Clark sort of draw a distinction
which I think you're speaking to
between this inside out view of the
brain where the brain is a constructive
organ. It's it's our percepts, our
constructs, their fantasies, hypotheses,
models, illusions, you know, of a
certain kind that are brought to the
table in order to explain the sensorium.
So this view of the brain as a
effectively a statistical organ, you can
cast this kind of observation, this kind
of measurement or sampling the world as
inference. So we can think of the of the
brain and in fact one could generalize
this to lots and lots of things but the
particularly you and me and our brains
as statistical organs that are in the
job of finding the best explanation for
the sensory data at hand. So this
somewhat contrasts with a 20th century
view which would be more the sort of
outside in that somehow we extract
information about some metaphysical
reality out there and make sense of it.
That's not I think the 21st century view
and I would argue it was not the 19th
century view. So you know from my point
of view um things are just steering a
steady course over the centuries. very
interesting and you mentioned the
helmolds. I think that's a nice sort of
point to to start historically because
he was the first to sort of or one of
the first to to to make the point that
it cannot be that we mirror the world in
our in our brains. I mean even optically
that was new to me in researching all of
this and also said it to Anel Seth in
the interview that just the optics of
the lenses in our eye are not that good
sort of just rendering optically the
world we see and so it has to be this
generative model but he he was the first
to come up with that right the helmold's
machine and then but it didn't enter
neuroscience that early right I think it
first sort of his ideas were sort of
adopted in in sort of in neur or in
cybernetics or I mean just nice to to
sketch his his idea of of the Helold's
machine and what it was.
&gt;&gt; Right. Well, now that's interesting you
bring up cybernetics um which has a very
similar flavor but clearly from a a
different technology and a different
kind of science. Um so I think um
Helmholtz's gift was this notion of
unconscious inference that you know we
perceive you have to have it on the
inside before it is seen or measured or
observed. So it's something that has to
be there in our brain before you can
recognize something or classify
something. One could argue that his
ideas with some nuance themselves
inherited from canian thinking who
himself you could be traced all the way
back to uh back back to Plato. Um so
in the neuroscience I think at the turn
of this century um there are two things
that changed. Um there was a recognition
that we are situated, you know, we are
situated in many senses. Our brains are
embodied. Our um brains and our bodies
are situated in a particular
environment. And you get into these um
arguments of inactivism, the importance
of being an entity in a world and how
you couple to or probably more
accurately how one measures or observes
and samples the world. But specifically
addressing the question that if you're a
sensemaking machine of this constructive
kind,
then you have to make sense of some
data. But you are in charge of gathering
that data. So we now get this wonderful
circular causality that you're making
sense of data that you are actively
soliciting from the world by querying
the world should it be there
&gt;&gt; through your sensory organs. So that
inactivist or pragmatic turn at the 21st
c century accompanied um a a return to
or a realization that you know Helm
Holtzin like ideas were probably on the
right track and then we kept the
predictive processing sort of promoted
very much by people like Andy Kark in uh
in philosophy and nowadays um I don't
think many people would argue with the
observation that 90% of cognitive neur
Neuroscience certainly is now pursued
under the rubric or with a commitment to
a predictive coding, predictive
processing uh flavor or understanding of
how we work which is increasingly now um
accountable to this inactivist you know
the the actions you what motivates our
behavior you know what are intentions
what is agency um all speaking to the
fact it's not just about sensemaking
in the spirit of unconscious inference,
but very much depends upon the way that
we actively sample the world. And just
to bring that to closure,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; that that was that was um I think Helm
Holtz's um move. So I've been told I'm a
transcendental idealist. I have no idea
what that means and no one will tell me.
Perhaps you will.
&gt;&gt; I'll try if I can. That's so I I presume
that was Count's position. But I I think
what Helmholds did was to take that and
say yes fine, but we also have to think
about an engagement and action upon the
world. So many of sort of um Helm
Holtz's contribution you considering the
facts of perception were actually about
active vision and active sensing.
&gt;&gt; You know, one could subsume that under
active inference. nowadays one
application of the uh the free energy
principle. So I think that that raises
interesting questions because if you are
um and I'm going to ask you to define it
in a second a transcendental idealist
um and you do not permit the uh the
existence of some metaphysics what is it
you are sampling
&gt;&gt; um the the notion of transcendental
idealism comes from Kant um who would
say there is a world out there it's not
that we live in sort of a a a illusion
or whatever there is a real which you
would call the numon that the ding an I
think it's in German but then the only
uh how it appears to us is phenomenal
it's how we perceive it the phenomenon
and that bridge is somehow
unbridgeidgeable for us uh it's
impossible to know the numon directly um
and so we have to do with the phenomena
and me personally I'm curious to hear
your thoughts here it brings me back to
sort of the first thing Deart said that
Um I know therefore I am. You could say
I I I feel therefore I am or I perceive
a world therefore I am. Um and stay with
that. And that next category I want to
introduce a rest extanza which is a new
metaphysical category. Something that
sits there independent of me thinking me
feeling me sensing is a philosophical
leap that analytic under sort of
analytic idealism you'd say you are not
justified to make that leap or you
cannot make that leap. And then it says,
why not stay as long as possible with
that first assumption that the only
thing I know is is the world as it
appears to me and then try to best guess
of what it truly is. And if you can do
that without introducing a new category.
So if you can say perhaps uh the world
itself consists of mental states or
there is a mind of the universe and it
somehow splits off it dissociates and in
in your theory that would be it forms
mark of blankets which are not something
uh real so to speak. It's a statistical
object, right? It's a mathematical
object, a doing of nature. So, but now
we're deep in philosophy and I'm talking
a lot here, but I'm I'm very curious
what your thoughts are here because I
see a very interesting overlap between
your thinking and I know you're not a
philosopher and agreed sort of you told
me I'm not a philosopher, but it's just
sharing my view and happy to hear what
you think.
&gt;&gt; Well, that was very useful.
I learned I learned a little bit more
about transcendental idealism and some
other good words.
&gt;&gt; Um, and you said you said a lot of very
fundamentally important things there and
so my mind is racing trying to um sort
of pick up on some of the key points.
Um,
well let's go over to daycart. I think
therefore I am. Um, I would put it
another way nowadays. I am therefore I
think. Um so thinking uh read as
inference or sense making possibly
decision-m
&gt;&gt; would be I think a natural consequence
of just being.
&gt;&gt; Um so as soon as you identify
um something
say the self as existing that puts a bit
of pressure on disambiguating
self from non-self. So immediately we
have a partition. So I I think the sort
of the um you know the distinction
between the inside and the outside or
the uh was it the numinal and the
phenomenal.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um I think that's actually quite you
have to have that
because if you don't you don't have a
physics of an inherently relational sort
and in the absence of that I don't think
there would be physics and I'm now
reading physics
&gt;&gt; as observation. So physics just is
measurement. Making an inference,
finding the right story that explains
some measurement, some observation, some
some technical sensorium if you like. Um
so if all physics is measurement, then
that I think introduces a fundamental
distinction between the observed and the
observer, the self and the non-self. Um
so I think the deep question then is how
do we relate the self the observer to
the observed and vice versa. What is the
relationship between the numinal and the
phenomenal that is the issue at hand
&gt;&gt; absolutely because yeah it's a nice
bridge maybe to your free energy
principle if I were to mirror the world
as it is. So let's say it wasn't a a a
measurement that that gives me an
outcome but I can truly see it as it is.
I would have to mirror all information
which would be like thermodynamically
an an unbounded entropy right or what
would happen and and because that's
that's the starting point that we cannot
do that right so we have to sort of
reduce free energy
&gt;&gt; yes I mean you could even apply one of
Dennit's strange inversions here you
know if you could if you were coupled
directly to the world and the world was
directly coupled to you there would be
no way of distinguishing or
disambiguating you from the world. So
you wouldn't exist. You'd succumb to the
principle of unitarity.
There wouldn't be a you. There wouldn't
be a self. So yeah, in a sense that's
what I was trying to imply by the
importance, the notion of some thing,
some self that is differentiable from
the universe should it exist, in which
it is immersed. you don't have to induce
um or appeal to something outside the
self and and you know then you you you
would um recourse to 20th century
physics in terms of closed systems. So a
closed system is just something that is
closed. you don't have to worry. There
is no nothing beyond the system at hand.
And from that you would um then derive
all the you know things like the free
energy principle but applied to systems
that um have an equilibrium solution and
you'll get the kind of physics and the
kind of statistical mechanics that you
did at school because that's not the
name of the game in the 21st century.
The name of the game 21st century is to
talk about things that are not closed.
They are open. They are open to
something. Um but they are not something
else. So they are distinguished by a
boundary. In my world that would be a
Markoff blanket. So now we're dealing
with the physics of open systems.
Technically we're talking about
self-organization
to non-equilibrium steady states um
suitably defined. Um uh um
it is likely that we will never actually
attain these but over a short period of
time there will be characteristic states
that the self or the thing in question
attains um in the sense that it is
recognizable as that kind of thing by
revisiting states that it was once in.
So immediately you now have a
mathematical image of a particular
construct that defines existence and
this is um a construct that you will
find underneath all of physics. So
I think one useful way of of just
thinking about um the natural sciences
in in terms of the different kinds of
physics that you might use to tell your
stories at different scales of
observation. So on the one hand we have
the physics of the very small and this
would be quantum mechanics. Then we have
the physics of lots of very small things
and this will be statistical mechanics.
And if we just drill down on one thing
in a an ensemble of neighbors then that
would be stochastic mechanics. And then
we move up a scale in fact many scales
to very big things. And then we get
classical mechanics that would also
include general relativity for example.
Um so what's unique about all of these
things? One thing is that they can all
be derived from a simple description of
any universe in terms of a random
dynamical system. So the random part
infers or implies that you'll have you
have to deal with probability
distributions. So they can all be
articulated in terms of density
probability density dynamics and one
example of that of course is quantum
mechanics where you effectively take the
square root of the probability of
something being in a particular state
and that's your probability amplitude
and you can you know either take path
integral or other approaches to derive
scrroniger's wave equations and and you
know all of quantum electronamics for
example or you can look at the
probability distributions of ensembles
and then you It's statistical mechanics.
What happens when things get very very
big though? Well, the randomness is
averaged away. So it looks as if it's
much less stochcastic and you could and
the um the kind of dynamics that you get
now becomes much more um predictable and
deterministic and ultimately you'll get
lrangei mechanics and classic and
classical mechanics that include the the
behavior of all say massive bodies where
you can talk about mass but the kind of
matter just coming back to your
interesting your dismiss dismissal of
matter
which I loved. Um you know the kind of
the mass that you find in lrangeian
mechanics has got nothing to do with the
mass in quantum mechanics. You know
these are completely different stories.
Um and I think um but one thing which
unites them is that they can all be
written down as evolutions of
probability distributions.
So what's missing from all of these
physics? Well, they don't consider one
thing, one system in relation to another
system with the exception now, you know,
of things like relational quantum
mechanics for example.
&gt;&gt; What happens when you make that
distinction? Well, first of all, you
have to put in place um a definition of
how you would separate the observer from
the observed, for example. And just
using that language tells you
immediately now we need a we need a
mechanics. We need a physics of
observation. You could glorify that and
say a physics of sentience. And that's
the role of the Markoff blanket.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And then what comes out of that is
another kind of mechanics, a fourth
mechanics which inherits from exactly
the same maths as quantum mechanics,
statistical mechanics and classical
mechanics. There's no magic here.
exactly the same commitments, exactly
the same first principles underneath it.
But now it's a mechanics of something in
relation to something else. Um, and that
now you can interpret in terms of this
basin mechanics as inference, as
measurement, as sense making, as
unconscious inference. If you want to go
right back to uh to Helmouths, you don't
have to um but you can certainly tell
quite a tight rigorous story and then
apply that story to understanding
&gt;&gt; things you know things at different
scales from sort of um protozoa through
to people through to populations. Um the
point here being that in separating the
observer from the observed and writing
down the physics of the observer without
imagining some you know magical observer
u writing down the relationship of the
physics of the observer to the observed.
You now have a um you you now have a
mechanics of
systems that are engaged and open and in
reciprocal interaction with their world.
And now you can talk about a distinction
between the phenomenal and the numinal.
Um yeah, because you've you've now got a
mechanics, a physics that makes that
distinction. the the the essence I'm I'm
I'm very much getting and we see this
sort of what they call sort of uh the
sort of the the we've interviewed Marcus
Müller a physicist who who's very much
uh very much working on this how to
model the observer in observerhood ideas
like like that and then it's really
about what will I see next that's the
question and how to predict that and you
cannot do that you don't know know all
the previous states so it is sort of it
has to do with with Beijian update of
your beliefs in then but then sort of
rendered quantum mechanically. Um but
that still a bit abstract. I was
thinking if we would bring this back to
what people know let's say sort of one
of the boundaries
uh our universe drew was first life the
first cell right it's a boundary for the
first time it's an inside and outside
from the the soup of of the chemical
soup. we now have sort of a very dense
soup with just all the right sort of
proteins in place with a boundary that
can start working
um that in is a physical boundary which
we can measure from from from our
perspective but it's also um and then I
but please correct me if I'm wrong your
your theory the free energy principle is
then about the mathematics of that
process right it's about the the
mechanism the mathemat mathematical
mechanism of what's happening there that
a bacterium has to form an image of the
world to move away from acid towards
oxygen or sugar or whatever. um it has
to do that and and so your theory is not
about what the bacterium is or what sort
of the protein but it's about the
mechanism the mathematics of that right
and then very first principles it's
about physics of that
&gt;&gt; so is it a physics of life then I'm
thinking I'm here my talk myself talking
is it a physics of life in a sense
&gt;&gt; yes I think so yes that's actually the
uh title of a journal where I enjoy
publishing most of my interesting work
um yeah I I can't resist this picking up
on this notion of the primordial soup um
and coming back to your your observation
before. What would it be like if we if
we were
direct in direct contact with the world?
If we could see everything, we would be
part of that soup. So, you know, the
very emergence of something in a soup,
the very emergence of some um pattern in
in the spirit of sort of Mike Leven's
work or um a pattern, a touring pattern
in in the spirit of um um touring and
his relationship with sort of early
cyberneticists, the very emergence of
the boundary is definitional of the
thing. So what the free energy principle
says well look if there is something
then it has to possess a boundary. What
is the nature of that boundary? Well the
nature of that boundary speaks exactly
to your lovely description of of
transcendental idealism. It is that you
cannot be in direct contact with the
outside otherwise you will be part of
the soup. So how on earth then do you
conceive of a boundary that is
intimately porous?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. and glues you to the soup um of
which you are a part but also at the
same time distinct. Um the trick is um
you effectively um use again statistics
or probability theory, information
theory, whatever you want to call it um
to define the minimal conditions that
allow for a statistical separation, a
veil. Uh something that is shared
between the observed and the observer
but is not the observed or the observer.
And this can be read in many ways. this
um um you we've mentioned Markoff
blankets as a statistical object uh due
to um uh Judea pearl um people like
Chris Chris Fields um a friend of mine
would conceive of this from the point of
view of quantum information theory as a
holographic screen I think the key thing
is there has to exist
some separation between the observer and
the observed and if that exists
and both sides including the boundary or
the markoff blanket uh exist over time
then they are they have an attracting
set technically it's called a pullback
attractor
&gt;&gt; the very existence of the boundary the
separation the distinction between the
observed and the uh the observer means
that the dynamics have to follow certain
rules and they're not magical rules
they're really really simple rules
which you know you you you uh you
profess to being an expert in in many
things but not not not a physicist um um
but you will have done at some point um
the principle of least action Hamilton's
principle so the free energy principle
it just is a principle of least action
but it is applied under the special
constraint that you can separate the
observer from the observed or the thing
from everything else or the self from uh
from others
uh or the your non-self. Um and and what
emerges from the principle of least
action applied in this special context
of the separation uh is this basic
mechanics which now licenses you to put
a sort of a tedology or a story on this
dynamics this mechanics technically a
sort of um well it is exactly a gradient
flow on the self-information which I
think is very sweet because we've got
self back there again um and the self
information is the thing that on average
is called the entropy. Um so we're
always trying to well it'll look as if
the dynamics of both the inside and the
outside and the separating states, the
blanket states, the boundary states,
they look as if they're always trying to
minimize self information. So what does
that mean? Well, it means something
absolutely trivial, almost tological. It
just means it'll look as if they're
flowing towards the states that they
most likely occupy.
So this is exactly the same tortology
that you'll find in evolutionary
thinking. It's just a description of
what how the dynamics of anything have
to behave if they have this attracting
set. They will always be attracted to
their characteristic states. So it'll
look as if they are their dynamics are
such that they are flowing up
probability gradients where the
probability gradients just describe the
most likely states of affairs or the the
most likely states that you'd find this
kind of thing this natural kind of of
thing and that's all it is. That's
that's the principle of least action is
a free energy principle. It's to
logical. uh is this all a a difficult
but accurate because that's because
that's your it's a first principal
theory and it's new so it it is hard to
understand exactly for that reason but
is this all to say that I'm just see how
we can bring it back to a bit more
understandable sort of notions for for
our audience but say we go back to the
bacterium that wants to sort of navigate
the world and um so it has to have a
boundary it has to model that world and
it wants um
for for yeah I I thought please please
correct me if I'm wrong I was thinking
well because the free energy principle
what what puzzled me with the term is
sort of just the word free energy right
because I think you heard hear this a
lot right this this question why why is
it called free energy and I'll give you
sort of what I in thinking about what I
thought in a sort of Shannon information
sense um information means sort of uh
lots of information is also high entropy
like a noisy picture is hard with with
lots of det details is hard to compress
right for for our camera. So we'll see
larger file sizes. So it's more
information, it's more energy and um
whereas thermodynamically free energy if
I can get free energy as a system that
sounds like a good thing. Who wouldn't
want free energy? Right? That's what
people will understand. So that's when
you then say you reduce organisms want
to reduce free energy you a bit puzzled.
But in the Shannon sense that this is
what I'm thinking. You don't want the
world to confront you with surprises
that are a lot of information to take in
a model. If something totally weird
happens in this room, I have to remodel
and will sort of just cost me a lot of
energy and and I want you to be just
sitting there and having this
conversation and sort of predict what
the your answer will be to this question
I just posed to you. Is that a way so
this this does that help sort of that
Shannon sort of interpretation of of
information energy and how we want to
reduce it?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I'm just admir admiring your your
masterful attempt in bringing back down
to things that are Yes. Yeah. I
apologize. I I got
&gt;&gt; I think there there are people in our
audience who really appreciate it but
also people who just a bit more like me
trying to sort of in indeed grasp it but
&gt;&gt; right
&gt;&gt; um so perhaps then just to rehearse what
you've just said and to join the dots.
So this self-information just is
surprise. Um so and the free energy is
just uh a what's called a bound
approximation to the surprise.
&gt;&gt; So all of this um when we talk about the
path of least action, we're just talking
about that things that persist in the
sense that they maintain their
self-organization and particularly their
interface with the world or their
boundary
&gt;&gt; look as if they are constantly trying to
avoid surprises. That's all they're
doing. Yeah. Um and it can be no other
way and the surprise here has many
different sort of mathematical
interpretations
&gt;&gt; because yeah just because that's very
important I think just because we said
earlier if you would let all the
surprise in entropy would go up and you
would go back to soup.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Check. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Yeah. So that's that's one
really important observation. So we're
just talking about you know what a
physiologist would know is homeostasis.
We're just,
&gt;&gt; you know, I if uh if we exist and we um
are defined by our um boundaries and our
blankets and just a nod to the fact that
there are blankets and blankets of
blankets. So it's not just one blanket.
It's delicately structured blankets
within blankets within blankets. Um but
if they persist in time then um that is
just a statement that they we have not
dissolved into the soup. Technically um
we have um resisted the dissipation the
random fluctuations in this random
dynamical system that is the universe
from which all the other mechanics
inherit.
&gt;&gt; Um and that just is a statement from a
point of view of physiology of
homeostasis that you know I keep things
like my temperature many embodied
aspects of my being within viable
bounds. Simonessists might have referred
to this as essential variables. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that's exactly the same as saying that I
possess these characteristic states. It
looks as if I'm attracted to my
homoistic set points. Um, it looks as if
also um I am trying to avoid surprising,
traumatic, aversive, unfamiliar um
situations. It also, this is the
interesting twist here, mathematically
if you just think about um what is
surprise? Well, it's just the
implausibility of being in a particular
state.
&gt;&gt; So, what we're saying is things that
have characteristic states that they are
most likely to be found in will look as
if they're avoiding
implausible states that they're unlikely
to be found in. So, this is the
tortology I was trying to get at. So one
way of saying that something exists in
terms of possessing some characteristic
states or an attracting set that
inherits from the the dynamics that the
basic mechanics affords um can also be
described as avoiding surprises. You see
this is one of the sort of tedologies
and the stories you can put on this
really fundamental
um aspect of self-organization. But the
nice twist which brings us to the
philosophy uh part of it um is that the
the implausibility
the negative implausibility
is just the logarithm or some sort of
monotonic um function of the probability
that I will receive this impression from
my world given me as a model of that
world given the kind of thing that I am
in statistics that's known as basian
model evidence it's simply this is a
good model because under this model if I
generated some data the probability that
the data I actually receive is very very
high it explains it fits this data so
that's called model evidence
&gt;&gt; so in avoiding in it if I it looks as if
I avoid surprises by minimizing my
self-information from an information
theoretic point of view. I can equally
well say well this is just um the same
as gathering evidence for my model of
the world. So I can tell a story about
self-evidencing which of course is what
Jakobi uh tells. So all of these
different perspectives are on exactly
the same physical fundament. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And that at the end of the day that
physical fundament is is almost
tological. Uh so
&gt;&gt; yeah, I think I I like that about your
theory and and then of course what I
also understood and that and that's why
it seems so complex but but in thinking
about I could make sense not of the the
the the all the mathematics but the fact
that um you're optimizing for something
you cannot know so that you have that
difficulty right because you don't know
what surprise is so you also don't know
what that that sort of level of surprise
is there an optimal level of surprise
you just don't want any of it all I've
seen if you draw the talk you you're
optimizing for something you cannot
know. So you want a sort of an algorithm
that helps you out, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And this relates back to Fineman. I all
find this so fascinating. I just don't
fully understand it. But it relates back
work to physicist Fineman, right? And is
sort of the the path electrons take and
what he discovered.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; But but only if you can keep it simple
for audience. I don't want to get too
deep into the rabbit hole, but
&gt;&gt; Well, there's so many wonderful rabbit
holes here. Uh well let me just try and
cover a few of them because you because
it would be a great shame just to uh not
not celebrate some of your observations.
First of all the free energy of the free
energy principle is exactly due to Fman.
It is exactly the same free energy that
he devised uh to solve um certain path
integral problems in quantum
electronamics. Um and the the way I
phrase it like that is that um we can
think of a physics of life as really the
solution to a path through different
states of being. Um and that solution is
a uh you know a least action or most
maximum efficiency, minimum surprise,
minimum prediction error, maximum model
evidence. Uh they're all different ways
of describing exactly the same thing. So
you know it is all down to fman uh you
know certainly the pathological
formulation of of the of the free energy
principle um what the other things you
so many things
&gt;&gt; yeah you're so you're optimized for
something you cannot
&gt;&gt; optimization that's yeah that's a really
crucial thing there is so the gift of
fman
um so I just want to make the
fundamental point um existence it does
not need to be read as optimization
But if you just look at economics,
machine learning, um even statistics,
it's all cast as optimizing something.
What? And that's a really deep question.
Certainly if you're a machine learning,
this is the value function selection
problem. No one knows or some people
think they know, but and then they
prescribe their their reward. Uh this is
a behaviorist uh sort of the legacy of
behaviorism that you see in current um
deep reinforcement learning. But it's
all a nonsense. You as you say, no one
knows. Uh because optimization, you have
to think where does optimization get
into the game. Why do you need you won't
find optimization in quantum mechanics?
You don't find it in statistical
mechanics. What's statistical mechanics
optimizing?
You know, what's quantum mechanics opt?
So the reason I sort of ask that
question is that you can convert a
description of self-organization
into something that looks like an
optimization problem. And that's exactly
what Fman did. So what he wanted to do
was to work out the probability
distribution to describe the
distribution of paths that small
particles could take you in his world.
&gt;&gt; Um but couldn't do it. It's intractable.
It's an impossible uh problem. So what
he did was induce a what's called a
variational bound which is the
variational free energy which can be
computed which approximates this
solution
&gt;&gt; and in so doing um was able and a bound
simply means that something is always
bigger than something else. Um so by
minimizing the bound he could then
evaluate what he couldn't actually
calculate which was underneath that
bound just by minimizing it. So he
turned an impossible marginalization or
uh integration problem. We don't need to
know what that is. It's just not an
optimization problem into an
optimization problem by inducing the
free energy which tells you that the
universal objective function is the
variational free energy. So then it's a
question of working out well what is the
variational free energy? Well, it's just
an upper bound on the surprise or or the
surprise which just means that you
&gt;&gt; you cannot sort of know exactly where it
is, but you try to minimize get as close
as Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And of course, the way that you phrase
your one of your other questions about,
you know, to be surprised, I have to
know what I expected. To know what I
expected means I have to have a model
that can predict something.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So this um this you know almost
writes a narrative where it is necessary
to think about us as modelers of our
world and this now brings us right back
to cybernetics for example which was you
know say 20 years after after Helm Holtz
um and one I think well there are two
sort of laws that came from that era
which I think are very pertinent to this
discussion. One is a good regulator
theorem and one is the law of inquisite
variety. So the good regulator theorem
is is just basically the notion that any
agent any observer immersed in a
controlled environment has to be a model
of that environment. And you know
nowadays we read that as a generative
model that can generate predictions
about the consequences of action. And
the law of requisite variety is just
said Jess effectively says there has to
be a sufficient number or equal or
number of degrees of freedom on the
inside say in my brain as there are
things that I can act upon or control in
the numinal in in in in the outside. So
these I think you know um are useful
concepts that sort of um uh shake hands
with cybernetic notions of being in a
world in this sort of inactive and
controllable sense.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think the the the fact that
we a bit back to that philosophical
notion that we sort of confuse sort of
our our our phenomenological experience
of the world with the world as it truly
is is because it's so so super accurate
but in a sort of healthy health but sort
of like in many brains uh do their job
so good that we're not very often
confronted with anomalies. Um but what
fascinated me and how you came up with
the free energy principle is that you
started out as a psychiatrist at the bed
of of patients who had sort of
schizophrenia and that sort of triggered
your fascination right if I'm if I'm not
mistaken. So I'm just curious maybe you
have a story for us of one of these
patients because there we would see in
schizophrenia you see like world models
that are not accurate but people keep
updating them and and somehow
reinforcing false models of the world.
Is that a way to put it?
Maybe just nice for you to share with us
maybe a story of of that period in your
life and what fascinated you about it.
&gt;&gt; Um yeah well you false models I think is
a really important concept there but to
answer your question
&gt;&gt; it's a bit normative language there.
It's a not accurate. I don't but but
anyhow
&gt;&gt; I think it's very accurate and it's
certainly a sort of um a theme in um
computational psychiatry. Uh, so just to
preempt the any stories that I I might
have. Um,
&gt;&gt; before we continue with the
conversation, I want to tell you about
the sponsor of this video, Consensus, an
AI powered science search engine that
lets you search over 220 million
peer-reviewed papers with direct links
to the studies. For instance, if I ask,
is the consensus in neuroscience that we
do not see reality as it is? In its pro
mode, consensus immediately surveys
hundreds of studies and presents me with
a consensus meter where you can see that
indeed the majority in neuroscience
points to the fact that we do not
perceive reality as it is. In preparing
podcasts like these, consensus is a
great tool to get fast insight in
someone's work. For instance, when
researching Carl Fristen, I get a great
overview of all his scientific
publications. For instance, this
landmark paper on the free energy
principle. And this makes consensus
stand out in comparison to other LLMs.
It is a scientifically rigorous research
assistant unclouded by social media,
blog post or other pseudo scientific
sources. Consensus can be used for free,
but if you want access to the pro
features, you can click on the link in
our description to get a oneweek free
trial and a 30% discount on the first
year thereafter.
I do want to make an ethics statement.
The Assencia Foundation is editorially
completely independent and we only
accept sponsorships that align with our
mission and scientific standards. Now
back to the conversation.
&gt;&gt; Um, you know, if if if just being in the
world is effectively to be an observer
in the world gathering evidence for your
model of the world by minimizing your
surprise.
And if you can describe this process as
inference,
then that means any failures to interact
with the world or to be in the world and
in particular a pro-social world that
involves other things like me, you other
people um can be read as false
inference. Um so this false modeling or
false inference notion I think is
absolutely central to understanding
suffering to understanding um well let
me give you an example. Um at school we
are taught that there are two kinds of
false inference. There's type one errors
basically inferring something is there
when it is not.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And this would be a perfectly apt
description of hallucinations and
delusions. But we can also make type two
errors inferring something is not there
when it is. And of course this is um the
kind of false inference that you would
find in neglect syndromes.
dissociative syndromes in the old days
what we call hysterical syndromes. So
nearly every psychiatric and a you know
a good sway of neurological disorders
can be understood in terms of false
inference and um with a little bit of
poetic license I think that is exactly
false modeling. So you know I I I think
I you know you could talk about aarent
inference and uh you know and nuances on
that but I think false inference you
know speaks exactly to the sort of the
kinds of errors you would make when
you're doing statistical inference with
t tests and the like
&gt;&gt; but the the personal story um
you're absolutely right that I have a
sort of bilateral career uh so I always
wanted to be a mathematical psychologist
but um that sort of um changed into
being a theoretical neurobiologist and a
computational scientist. So
computational neuroscience wasn't
invented when I was a youngster. Uh but
I certainly chose a career that enabled
me to pursue um the most interesting
thing in the universe which of course is
me and you uh our brains. um and ended
up as a psychiatrist. um a very
formative part of my life. um
specifically spending a year or so in a
therapeutic community, sort of living on
site in a community um with lots of
chronic patients who had schizophrenia
largely um you know
a a time of um my career well I won't
tell any stories uh um I don't think
that would be uh would be um in terms of
um
&gt;&gt; respect for patients in terms of respect
of course understand um but there were
some wonderful occasions and awful
occasions uh you know in terms of
containing uh you know some some of the
um psychotic episodes and acting out but
lots of lovely occasions what the the
ones that I best remember was um a
commitment to group therapy so you don't
normally do group therapy with people
with schizophrenia but we
uh every nearly every day we'd have
these enormous groups. Um and in those
days you're allowed to smoke. Uh that
that was that helps.
&gt;&gt; That that certainly help. Well, also it
was a really interesting mechanism for
communication um within the group. So
who would light up? Who would offer
somebody else the light or offer
somebody else a cigarette?
So it was it was always um interpreted
as a form of sort of um oral
nourishment.
um um and and some mischievous
interpreters uh sort of regarded as oral
masturbation at some point. So smoking
was quite a central theme in those days.
Um but I do remember uh
some of the beautiful things that you
can get from false inference. Um and I'm
using false inference here in the sense
that we are all subject to false
inference and we can talk about
illusions later on as which is
necessarily the case because inference
is never truth pointing. It's only
inference to the best explanation.
&gt;&gt; So if you do believe there is some
metaphysical numinal then everything is
false. It can't be any other way. And
there are good mathematical reasons why
that has to be the case. In the sense
that the if you consider now physics and
measurement and being and thinking in
the sense of day can't I think therefore
I am. Um and if we come back to that I
am therefore I think if I exist then I h
I I have um I can be described as
inferring to the best explanation. So
the best explanation is not the truth.
The best explanation is mathematically
you mentioned entropy before. So the the
entropy um that is uh maximized in
minimizing the free energy is not the
entropy of our interactions with the
world. It's the entropies of our
measurement or our belief, our
illusions, our explanations, our
stories. And we're always trying to
maximize that to keep our options open.
And you can find this in things like
James's uh maximum entropy principle.
You can also find it in things like
Okam's principle. If you you'll see this
everywhere. You also find it in terms of
um compression arguments, commod
complexity. Um so you're always trying
to find in the words of Einstein uh an
explanation such that you keep things as
simple as possible but no simpler. So
you're always trying to minimize the
complexity of your uh of your um of your
accurate story illusion,
&gt;&gt; false inference. Um that best explains
this sensory input.
&gt;&gt; So yeah, so we're optimizing that
balance between accuracy and complexity.
I like that sort of that I saw. Yeah,
that's it. Right.
&gt;&gt; But strange things can happen there,
right? I mean what fascinated me talking
about what you say how how schizophrenic
patients sort of have false inferences I
read somewhere in your I don't know if
you read about it but I read that there
are instances where
uh they make the right inference and
healthy normal brains make the wrong one
that fascinated me for instance isn't
that with the the hollow mask example
where we sort of just see it
&gt;&gt; we have a false model of the world which
is sort of an outward facing face So
it's it's sort of curved inward and you
keep seeing it wrong. We can share the
the image on our screen and we'll put a
link down. Um this is so fascinating to
me because I read that some people with
schizophrenia
don't have that. They see it right.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; What's happening there?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. That's a brilliant observation.
Yeah. So uh and it speaks to a lot of
things that we we've already mentioned.
Um, so the hollow mask illusion I think
is a wonderful illustration of our
susceptibility to false inference.
Finding the simplest explanation for
this pattern of visual input. And of
course the simplest explanation is not
that the face is inverted. It is a face
and we cannot cognitively penetrate
that. You can't unsee this this false
inference, this illusurary inference,
this sensemaking simply because it's the
simplest explanation for this particular
pattern because you've never conceived
of in the sense of Helmho an inverted
hollow face. You've never you you have
it on the inside to interpret it. And
that's another way of saying that the
simplest explanation for what you're
seeing is actually a face that is
illuminated in the normal way that you
have grown up in terms of experiencing
things. Uh and so illusions on that view
are um wonderful tools for
psychophysicists and experimentalists um
to probe our prior beliefs, our biases
that um bely or reveal the prior beliefs
that we bring to the table. I use pry
beliefs here in the sort of basin
setting just as sort of technically you
can carve up your gent model into your
sort of likelihood part. What's the
probability that these data would be
observed
if this state of affairs was true and
then I have a prior belief about this
state of affairs and of course 99% of of
your being in the world and learning an
experience is to build the right kinds
of prize that provide the simplest
explanation for what's going on. So that
another instance there is no truth
pointing. It's always inferenced with
the best explanation and that's I repeat
beautifully illustrated by by illusions.
But here's the key point. You're
absolutely right. There are certain
people who are resistant to these
illusions. if they um can suspend their
prior beliefs
&gt;&gt; and become more accurate in terms of
reporting the actual causes that the
experimental knows is true of their
sensory impressions. So, and and indeed
people with schizophrenia are
notoriously resistant to these illusory
phenomena. So, what does that tell you?
Well, it tells you that they're putting
more balance on the accuracy
&gt;&gt; than the complexity.
From the point of view of the sort of um
decomposing generative model into a
prior and a likelihood, it tells you
that they're affording too much in my
world this would be precision or
confidence or credence to the likelihood
relative to the prior.
And that sort of suggests that the
primary eeology, the primary cause of
this sort of false inference is due not
to what you're seeing of the sense
making, but the the precision or the
credence or the confidence ascribed to
sensory evidence relative to your prior
beliefs.
And you know the perhaps the poster
child um psychiatric condition that best
exemplifies this would be severe autism.
You know imagine what it would be like
that you could never ignore anything
that you always compelled to assign a
certain salience a credence a precision
to all your sensory um sensations. You'd
be glued to the sensorium. You'd be
fascinated with the details. You never
build a sort of coherent narrative where
you could have these illusionary
abstractions, uh, simpler explanations,
you and I
without being aware of it.
&gt;&gt; And you're going to avoid
anything you can't explain because you
have to explain everything. So, you're
going to try and make the world as
predictable as possible. You're going to
avoid too much stimulation. You're going
to engage in self stimulation called
self stimming to make the world as
predictable as possible simply because
you have to explain everything
&gt;&gt; accurately
&gt;&gt; accurately.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Because you can't ignore it. Yeah.
You and I
&gt;&gt; and you cannot accurately explain
complexity. If you completely accurately
want to explain complexity then you have
the a big problem sort of in what we
relating to sort of then your free
energy is like through the roof right.
Uh so therefore you avoid certain
complexities.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And we always have to navigate
complexity with a certain threshold of
accuracy or we have to sort of be and
then that's that's that's the human
condition under the free energy
principle.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Absolutely. And and it all rests
upon the relative um I repeat
mathematically it's precision or
negative entropy. Um it's um um
but you can think of it as sort of you
know the credibility or the confidence
per perhaps is to make this a bit
concrete and more accessible. So Andy
Clark tells a very good story you know
one mechanics one sort of formalism of
of of this sense making um and illusion
building but the right kind of the best
illusions you know inference to the best
illusion um is um predictive coding. And
in predictive coding um one reads the
self-information surprise all the
negative model evidence as a prediction
error. So you can just think of the
brain generating
predictions of what it would sense if it
had got the right story at hand. If it
if it had arrived at the best guess that
completely or to a certain extent uh
explains accurately this sensory input.
Now the how would you score the surprise
that you want to minimize? Well, you
just subtract the predictions from the
sensations that is just the prediction
error and then you use the prediction
error to adjust your explanation for the
world. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Until the prediction error is
eliminated. So if I can predict in the
sense or not eliminate but certainly
reduce so they can't reduce it any
further. So you could also describe this
self-organization uh this
self-evidencing under the free energy
the basis mechanics as basically
minimizing prediction error. But there's
a problem here
that prediction error could come from
many many different sources. It could be
a sort of visual prediction error. It
could be an auditory prediction error.
It could be from my own. It could be
from my body. And furthermore, there are
prediction errors and prediction errors
and prediction errors in a sort of deep
generative model with this hierarchical
form. So the there's a problem here that
I have to weight the prediction errors
in order to give them a selective
advantage in updating my beliefs
technically basing belief updating.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So the way that Andy Clark
explains this is that you know if I get
some information some sensor information
this is like news but what is the
newsworthy part?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well it's that which I didn't predict.
It is the prediction error which is
newsworthy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So we don't watch the 10:00 news on the
television or on our um mobile device to
hear things that we could predict. Yeah.
we only we basically seek out the
prediction errors to resolve and update
our beliefs.
&gt;&gt; Um so now you have to choose which of
these newsworthy bits of information
name the prediction errors that score
the surprise that we're trying to
minimize
um uh according to how um how precise
you think they are. So basically you're
turning the volume up on certain sources
of information. you're attending say to
your visual modality or you're choosing
um CBN as your news source in America as
opposed to Fox or your auditory
modality. So you have to choose what to
attend to effectively. So in
psychologist it would be attention. Uh
mathematically it's this assigning the
right precision. physiologically it's um
mediated by exactly those brain
chemicals neurotransmitters
that we change when we give psychiatric
drugs for example or indeed take
psychedelics. So there's a you know
there's a lovely convergence
mechanistically from the sort of the
psychology the basian mechanics and the
neuropharmacology
um and you know in terms of all focusing
on who do we listen to um so a simple
example of this would be you know if I
go into a dark room say a hotel room
that I've never been in before and the
lights don't work
then I know that
the visual prediction errors are not
going to convey very much information.
They're going to be ambiguous and
imprecise. So, I'm going to downweight
those because they're not newsworthy.
&gt;&gt; And I'm going to in a complimentary way
increase the precision or attention
afforded um palpation of sensory input
or indeed I might listen very carefully
if I can hear a clock or I can hear a
radio. what what there's so much here.
Um it's still I think but we can also we
will we will share links and help sort
of people understand it because it's I
think it's so so fascinating to
understand all of this um
in yeah one idea just this we we
sometimes we are storytellers we're
making this story and it also has to do
with meaning making so for instance um I
was just hearing you talk I was thinking
is the free energy principle in a sense
also a mathematics of conspiracy
theories and I hereby Just what I mean
is that people have false beliefs about
a complex world and we don't like
complexity. We don't like sort of the
the people who are sort of doing stuff
in the world we don't like to be sort of
people who intended it to be good and
that there is not a single actor on
which we can plot sort of all the evil
in the world but we're somehow part of
it all. That's tremendously complex to
just understand our our world and
geopolitics. But we do like uh we but we
want to be we want to have an accurate
explanation somehow what's happening
from a meaning-making perspective and
then you end up of course with with
conspiracy ideas that are that don't
handle the complexity but are accurate
in your world because you have now a
story. So it's just that is an idea I
had when hearing you talk. It it's the
same mechanism in a sense, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. But that that thought
I think sort of takes us into a really
interesting world cuz at the moment
we've just been talking about the
observer and the observed. But when the
observed is herself an observer, we we
now enter a really interesting uh um
what is the mechanics of um um exchange
between things that are sufficiently
complicated and sufficiently evolved and
sufficiently big literally in terms of
their their scale
&gt;&gt; that they can both be regarded as making
inferences or self-evidencing about each
other. M
&gt;&gt; so now my world is now constituted by
things like me
&gt;&gt; and that affords this really interesting
opportunity. So if I'm in the game of
self-evidencing gathering evidence or I
should say from the point of view of the
free energy principle it looks as if um
so you know this is a story you can tell
about the basic mechanics so it looks as
if I'm in the game of gathering evidence
for my model of my lived world or my
sensed world. um then um I now am in the
game of inference the best explanation
about you what causes you what best
explain so it's the simplest but
accurate explanation of everything that
you generate in terms of communication
in terms of um all the cues that you
offer me auditory and visual uh or on
social media
one way of doing that is to make the
simplifying assumption that you are like
me because if you're like me and I can
infer that you're the same natural kind
as me then I can explain your behavior
in terms of the intentions that I had
that would explain the same behavior in
me.
&gt;&gt; So I now I've got sort of a ready baked
theory of mind.
&gt;&gt; But it only works if you're like me. M.
&gt;&gt; So all I have to do is to rifle around,
identify things like me that share the
same generative model, the same common
ground, the same narrative, the same
world view
&gt;&gt; and then engage with those people
because that renders the world much more
predictable and surprise minimizing. And
if we all do it together, the argument
is exactly symmetrical. So now we can
minimize our joint free energy together
just by converging on the same world
model, the same conspiracy theory, the
same theology, the same ideology, uh the
same language. If we all converge upon
the same one that becomes now the uh the
joint mechanism or an expression of
basic mechanics in this special
situation that you've got lots of
observers all observing all observing
each other and you know
&gt;&gt; fascinating but this this makes sort of
your your your theory. So we can draw
the ma the mark of blanket on sort of a
whole group in society that has a a way
of of group think that that you can
mathematically draw a boundary around
yes that group
&gt;&gt; and some I personally haven't but I have
young colleagues who have absolutely
done that but but notice what you've
just done though if that boundary is
impervious
&gt;&gt; you've now created a closed system
&gt;&gt; yeah my apologies
&gt;&gt; no problem
&gt;&gt; you've created a closed system um so
we're now back to 20th century physics
and everything will converge on a on a
an equilibrium uh which will be sort of
the echo chamber and nothing will
change.
&gt;&gt; But of course that if it's a Markoff
blanket it's porous. So now you get this
sort of um interesting situation where
there's a tendency of the inroup within
this sort of um meta markoff blanket
that surrounds this particular group. um
um where there's a tendency for
everybody to converge upon the same
narrative, the same world view, the
same, you know, the same generative
model. And yet they are trying to infer
or look as if they're trying to infer as
a group the out group or the collections
of outgroups in which you know with
which the So there's there's necessarily
a scale invariance or a scale freess. is
this kind of um group formation
&gt;&gt; because if there wasn't you would
actually have a closed system that was
isolated from the rest of the universe
and that can't happen. We're always in a
particular context. So they're going to
be groups of groups of groups of groups
at increasing scales where within each
one within each group everything is
trying to if you like um reassure itself
that they got the right world view but
at the same time trying to accommodate
the larger context in which they're
operating. Um so some really interesting
um
I'm not sure there are any analytic
solutions I mean mathematical analytic
solutions um as opposed to philosophical
um but you can certainly sort of search
for numerical do numerical studies and
just look at the you know the kind of um
patterns of group formation that emerge
under
&gt;&gt; um sometimes described as epistemic
communities. community would be an
ensemble of observers
&gt;&gt; that are all trying to minimize their
surprise through this epistemic
foraging. Acting in a way to minimize
prediction errors in the future by
seeking information but doing so in a
way that they um they're
imbuing certain people with an epistemic
trust because just because those people
are like them or those institutions are
like them. And then you get the
emergence of um interesting dynamics. Um
I'm not sure whether you want to use
this piece but I I
&gt;&gt; No, please continue. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The one one one sort of particular
solution which which always catches my
eye is when you simulate this kind of um
active inference in an ensemble or
population context. is that one steady
state or non-equilibrium steady state
solution which can be likened to an
evolutionary steady state or um stable
state um is a 50/50 split
and certainly in the past decade of me
politics watching you see this time and
time again that the only stable solution
by which I mean if one group is too
small it will be absorbed into the other
group because everybody's trying to seek
the inroup and if everybody's doing that
there'll just be one ingroup
Um, so this 50/50 spit is the only
stable solution. Um, where you've got
both the reassurance of being on your
inroup, but you've also got the
epistemic allure, the sort of novelty,
the sensation seeking by looking out
there to to the out groupoup. You can
you can laugh at, you know, I won't
mention, you know, uh, you can laugh you
can laugh at the others um or not laugh.
So you see this time and time. You
remember Brexit in the UK? It was
exactly 50 51 52 48 Trump versus Biden
independence debates. Wherever you look,
whether it's Montreal or whether it's
Scotland, it's always 50/50 cuz that's
the only stable solution in terms of the
joint free energy minimizing process
where there is a markoff blanket between
the blues and the reds, whatever they
may might mean.
So fascinating. The one question I have
is um I've been sort of trying to get my
head around integrated information
theory which I like for the fact that
exactly as yours theory it's able to
draw a boundary to just not be sort of
loosely saying this is conscious and and
and and to not have sort of just best
guessing around consciousness where
whereas IIT says no we can sort of have
mathematically when we calculate the
fire of a system we can see exactly for
instance what neurons are involved with
consciousness and and which aren't which
I think is very good for science because
then you can make accurate predictions.
So I like that. But under integrated
information also as in your theory it
can uh scale up so to say if the the the
fi is is of a bigger system then I would
sort of cease if we keep we have an
interconnection between our brains as
Christoff Ko explains this to me right
and it we keep on making connections to
our neurons there will be a moment when
that sort of collective integrated
information will be higher than the ones
now sitting here and we will become sort
of a group mind or that's that's what
the theory points to or predicts under I
that also involves that I somehow cease
to exist as an as an conscious unit.
Whereas I'm just curious how is that in
your theory? If the mark of blankets
gets bigger, can there be mark of
blankets within the mark of blankets and
there are there selves within a bigger
self?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; Well, let's let's um dwell on I
integrated information.
&gt;&gt; I'm curious what your thoughts are on on
IT. Well, I I should confess so Julia
Tinelli was one of my best friends when
I worked um with Jerry Adelman in
America at the inception of uh IIT and
related ideas. Um and Kristoff is
also you know a value colleague. So
fantastic. So you
I have a personal investment in in sort
of um
respecting IIT and I think I can easily
respect it from the point of view of um
a much simpler kind of maths. Well
possibly not simpler but certainly from
my point of view more classical
understandable um uh kind of maths or a
first principle account which I would
contrast with the aximatic account of
IIT. So although I've heard Julius say
it is a principled approach, it's not.
It's an aximatic approach. It's it
starts off with axiatic assumptions and
then builds from there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Whereas a fi principle is a first
principle account. It there are no
assumptions. Everything is emergent from
the starting point which is just there
exists a random dynamical system. But
the end points of the analysis I think
bear remarkable similarities. Just sorry
to interrupt you but when you say you
don't have axioms wouldn't your action
be that there is that nature creates the
first mark of blank of blanket or how do
how to account for the fact that mark of
blankets exists
&gt;&gt; well how the free energy principle is
not an explanation for why markoff
blankets exist. The free energy
principle is a description
&gt;&gt; what they do
&gt;&gt; of
&gt;&gt; um of things that are are defined in
terms of markoff blankets. So this is um
&gt;&gt; but I would then say that's your aim
that those things exist that have mark
of blanket. Isn't that then your axiom?
&gt;&gt; No, not really. No. Um
I think the reason I I hesitate to agree
um I usually like to agree but in this
is I know I think I I think there's
there's a lot of heavy lifting to be
done um beyond the free energy principle
or perhaps within the free energy
principle to explain why it is the case
that Markoff blankets do emerge. So why
did this single cell first emerge from
the primordial soup?
&gt;&gt; Of course yeah we don't biology cannot
tell us.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean this is exactly the kind of
sort of question that everybody's trying
to answer including people like Mike
Leven from a biological perspective
through to people like um um Steven
Wolfrum you know
you know um this is an outstanding
question and I think that's a notion of
the emergence of a Markoff blanket
&gt;&gt; um in within the primordial soup and
then the emergence of Markoff blankets
and markoff blankets where you get these
multisellular organizations that's an
important concept
because you need that multisellular
blankets of blankets of blankets to have
these deep hierarchal structures in
order to have the kind of sense making
and and the basic mechanics that we were
talking about uh previously. Um you can
certainly apply the free principle to a
single cell or a thermostat but it's a
little bit trivial. um it becomes much
more interesting when we talk about big
things that have this sort of um scale
invariant structure with nested markoff
blankets and of course we're talking
about populations of interaction inter
interactions in other minds which is the
sort of highest level of this sort of um
um sort of
&gt;&gt; inter interactive inference or inter
subjectivity um or um measurements of
others um yeah so IIT um does you know
So um so yeah so the free energy
principle does not say it is the case
that a markoff blanket will emerge from
a primordial soup. What it says is
should something exist it has to behave
like this.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And you know you may ask is that useful?
um not in and of itself because you
could say um um natural selection, you
know, evolutionary theory,
um is a very powerful theory, but it
doesn't tell you at all why I speak
English or why you have two eyes,
&gt;&gt; you know. So um in itself the free
engine principle doesn't really get gets
you as far as a law of least action in
Newtonian mechanics. Um so um you have
to apply it.
So the free energy principle only
becomes useful when you apply it and
when you apply you get bas mechanics
active inference and everything
&gt;&gt; but sort of that that notion of selfhood
sort of being inside a blank in a a mark
of blanket modeling the world um it can
scale up to larger ensemblas with those
individual market blankets still
existing. So we consist of trillions of
cells those have marker blankets and
there's a mark of blanket that is Hans
and they exist simultaneously and I
think I I think that's interesting and
it's also in line with Michael Leven's
work also sees these these things as
scaling whereas IT
uh looks at the integration of all of
that and then sees a single unit. So
there that you do defer from IIT.
&gt;&gt; I see right okay yeah good point. Um
so the point of contact I was going to
um foreground was your the information
partitions that you need to define fi.
&gt;&gt; Um and in a sense you know it is not
surprising that that calculus is
required in order to elaborate an
information theoretic account of um
consciousness. um uh in the same way
that you you use you the starting point
in the free engine principle is the
markoff blanket a partition into
observed versus um unobserved. For me
though uh where IIT ceases to become um
interesting um is that there is the the
the there is no distinction between the
observed and the observer. Um, so the
the information that IIIT talks about is
not information about the thing on the
other side of the blanket or the
partition. It's just the information
that a thermodynamicist or a brain
imager would would measure. It's the
it's the entropy or the thermodynamics
of that partition in and of itself.
Whereas the fian principle the
information that you're talking about
that is represented on the inside is
about the outside that is the essence of
observation is of essence of measurement
um so there are distinctions um in
relation to your comment your
&gt;&gt; but this is very interesting point I'm
trying to uh understand this I think it
the the the key here is also to to make
clear for everyone watching that,
correct me if I'm wrong, that that the
free energy principle is not a theory of
consciousness per se, right? It's a
theory of of of how um agents or selves
have to model the world. So, to me, it's
much more it's about cognition and
intelligence. Um because the the the
phenomenal consciousness the what it is
like to beness of something what it is
like to be inside a mark of blanket
which is sort of the feeling and the
qualia what how how it's called and and
integrated information is about that
starts with phenomenal consciousness and
that's a different departure point I'd
say.
&gt;&gt; Yes. So, but I'm curious to to if you
would agree if when I say your theory is
not a theory of consciousness and then
also of course how how it does or does
not relate to consciousness. Is it a
theory that cannot say anything
meaningful about consciousness that that
because does not cover consciousness or
does it relate to phenomenal
consciousness? I'm super curious what
you what your position is here.
&gt;&gt; Right. Um you're absolutely right. The
FEP well first of all the FE is not a
theory. It's a principle. Sorry. Um and
that's technically important because in
physics a principle you have to apply
it. So you don't falsify it or marvel at
it or shout at it. You just apply it or
you don't. Uh whereas IIIT is a theory
which may or may not be wrong and it's
you know um it's subject it's a
hypothesis
is not a hypothesis. It's just a
mathematical tool that you would apply.
&gt;&gt; Um and as such it certainly is not a
theory of uh consciousness. Um is it a
principle that could be applied to
consciousness research? Possibly.
&gt;&gt; Uh and people try and people are trying
it. So interestingly um
&gt;&gt; I'm currently engaged in the Dneumont
the last year of a Templeton um um
funded adversary research um uh
collaboration pitching active inference
against IIT. So Julio's a theory lead on
the IT and I'm um the theory lead on the
active inference side. Great. Um and in
order to do that because you know one
has to be adversarial um you don't you
know I'm not sure that's the right way
to do it but that was our brief. Um so
we had to pick something that sort of um
could be seen as an application of the
free energy principle namely active
inference.
um that dis uh disambiguated it or or
made it distinct from in an adversarial
sense IIT and the the thing that was
eventually emerged was action.
&gt;&gt; So um it was um possibly um best
summarized
actually somewhat in relation to what I
was trying to um get across when talking
about the difference between Helm Holtz
and Kant. Um that to see is to look.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You know to hear is to listen.
There is no passive inside out
registration quality of experience. The
quality of experience and the phmonology
rests in this application of the free
energy principle
&gt;&gt; which may the application may or may not
be you know a correct theory. Um then um
you have to um be an agent. You have to
be an agent that is actively soliciting
this kind of information from the
sensorium.
And it doesn't have to be on the
outside. You can do that on the inside
through this attention-like mechanism
we're talking about before. Remember,
we're talking about assigning precision
or a newsworthiness to certain sources
of prediction errors. This is a very
inactive um as um you know capability
which not everything has. So a
thermostat wouldn't have this. You could
argue that to a certain extent even
single cellled organisms would have
although you could argue that catalytic
interactions and enzymes do this in a in
a certain way. But you know in terms of
consciousness research of the kind that
we're talking about qualitative
experience um then what that suggests is
that um you have to have a natural kind
with a deep generative model that can
see that that can act on itself. So deep
layers of or levels of a generative
model can make sense of the computations
of layers that intervene between the
deepest and the uh the sensory level or
or the sensorium. What would that look
like? Well, it would just look like
exactly what was saying before in terms
of um turning the knobs by assigning
greater or lesser precision to various
um belief updating dynamics um various
sense making procedures say like
predictive coding. So this would be like
action on the inside um it and you know
the very way that psychologists talk
about this this capacity in terms of
attentional selection and notice
selection is doing something. So we've
gone beyond transcendental idealism in
terms of sensemaking and illusions.
We're now in the world of you are in
charge of your sense making. So we got
this this sort of you know all the the
difference between seeing and looking is
that look is a verb. Um so but this also
applies to internal mechanisms internal
actions. The reason I'm and this is what
basically um this adversarial reason.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. New York is more about doing
versus it is more about being.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But that's a nice distinction, a
very clear distinction to make. I'm
curious what happens when sort of um
we assume our behavior not to be sort of
in in a minimal state of doing closing
my eyes, sensory deprivation, these sort
of experiments, right? Or for instance,
psychedelics. So you lie down and okay,
very very often there's music involved,
but say you don't do that. and the the
experiences people then have what what
what can the free energy principle say
about these experiments because it seems
to be uh so that's self action you would
call that action upon yourself because
the model then doesn't have input so
then but the model has to keep going on
sort of it keeps on reducing free energy
but there's not anything coming in so
what what's happening
&gt;&gt; right so there are two great answers to
that because I know we can also talk
about psychedelics and
&gt;&gt; yeah of course that's nice to talk about
&gt;&gt; but the just but the So um if there's
nothing coming in, how can you minimize
free energy?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Now the answer will be
about 20 minutes ago when we said that
evidence is equal to accuracy minus
complexity.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So in the absence of any thing coming
in, in the absence of any sensory
information, say for example when we're
asleep,
&gt;&gt; Yeah. and we shut down all our sensory
organs and indeed our aector organs then
there can be no accuracy because
accuracy is an attribute of the sensory
evidence or the sensory input but
there's still the complexity.
&gt;&gt; So that means that we can um with gay
abandon reduce the complexity of our
generative models while sleeping. put
that another way, in fact inverted
perhaps the fact that we sleep and the
fact that there is so much selective in
an evolutionary sense selective pressure
for sleeping.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Is that this affords the opportunity to
minimize the complexity of our models
again coming back to Einstein keep
everything as simple as possible but no
simpler. So to get the right balance
between accuracy and complexity requires
us to discard overly complicated, overly
complex, overly expressive or over
parameterized generative models while we
sleep. So we're now fit for purpose the
next day and we don't start to overfitit
our data. I should just say that just
intuitively, why is it bad not to
minimize complexity or why is it good to
keep things as simple as possible? Um if
you're if you just think about fitting
data
um say um you know in a statistics sense
or indeed a machine learning sense if
your model is too complex it's got too
many degrees of freedom coming back to
the law of requisite variety. If it's
got too many degrees of freedom you're
going to fit noise. This is known as
overfitting and it's devastating you
practically when you're building uh
transformer architectures for example or
uh you know um any kind of generative AI
&gt;&gt; then if you don't try to minimize your
complexity in the right way you will
overfit and you'll never generalize it
just won't work.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So this complexity minimization is
really very really very important and
that's probably why we take ourselves
offline just to rehearse and one could
argue in fact people do that dreaming is
this kind of rehearsal the fundaments of
the causal cause effect structure that
our generative models entail
uh such that we can remove the redundant
overly expressive parts of it literally
removing the signapses the associations
in our brain that embody those
associations I mentioned that discuss
also in a completely different strand of
work Julio Tenoni has a synaptic
homeostasis hypothesis which fits
beautifully uh you know with this view
&gt;&gt; so that's you know there's still a lot
of measurement and inference and self
self-evidencing that can go on in the
absence of sensory data um and just
think about the way we work we have to
take our ourselves offline
&gt;&gt; yeah we have moments of introspection
&gt;&gt; and and if I may but this is very
speculative and I don't sort of want to
want to sort of you don't have to commit
to any sort of weird esoteric uh
phenomena that I want to sort of just
share with you but I'm only curious if
the free energy principle would in
principle be permissive to the idea and
I'm talking about sort of just the
phenomena uh for psychedelic states
where people do have to I've had that
myself that you it's interesting I do
think I had a sort of a very high degree
of complexity with low accuracy but a
complexity I have never seen before like
like Van Go painting be pure beauty but
but not accurate
um astonishing to experience. Um other
people sense that they can sort of
connect to a a a mind at large or or
this a spirit world spirit entities
whether we grant any of those sort of an
antic status of being real. What
interests me is when we think in terms
of a marovian blanket, um we can think
of it sort of in a very physical sense,
my my my brain, my sensory input. But
could it be that sort of that this whole
free energy way of thinking could also
apply here that somehow a a boundary
gets more porous and and and
we process the world differently and it
might even tell us something uh num
numinologically. So what truly exists
out there? What what are your thoughts
here without sort of asking of you to
commit to any of these?
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm very happy to commit. I mean
there are there are people you know
asking themselves exactly that question.
People like Robin Kart Harris. Yeah. and
his colleagues and also to a certain
extent those um philosophers um I'm
thinking here people like Thomas
Metsinger who make it who have you know
a certain take on quality of experience
in terms of the phenomenal
phenomenological aspects in terms of
transparency versus opacity. uh um you
can I think link all these all these
notions together um using exactly what
we were talking about before in terms of
the your false modeling in um say people
who were subject to hallucinations and
delusions
&gt;&gt; um it's the balance of the precision the
credence afforded to the sensorium
relative to your prior beliefs. So
imagine what it would be like now um to
induce in yourself a kind of autistic
state by taking a drug that chemically
dissolves the precision of your pry
beliefs thereby relatively enhancing the
precision of all your sensory inputs
particularly the visual input. Okay.
Check. So it it so I'm reducing the
precision of my model. Um which makes
that new input has to be sort of needs
more attention because I cannot assume
that it's right. So I have to look
closer. Is this microphone indeed? What?
Yeah. So you're resetting that.
&gt;&gt; Well, it ceases to become a microphone
because that your microphone is a really
high level deep illusion. It's it's like
matter. you know it's use a useful story
you can tell yourself and indeed I
telling myself that it is a microphone
it has all sorts of functionality but if
you're if you've dissolved this kind of
your narrative in your head so when I
talk about deep or prior I I have in
mind your centrifugal hierarchy with
increasing abstraction and um scale uh
the the representations
um as you ascend into the higher
hierarchy get deeper and deeper. So
things become sort of much more
elemental and short-lived as you get to
to the periphery because the deeper
layers are assimilating gathering
together finding simple stories that
explain a myriad uh trying to compress
things into a microphone but this is not
a microphone. I like that the fact that
you're saying the word, sorry to
interrupt, but it's just it's f it fires
me up that you use the word uh compress
because also an analogy I thought of
when uh for this in preparation of this
conversation is sort of the zip file in
computer. People know we can zip images
&gt;&gt; and so microphone is an extremely
efficient zip file in my head that tells
me this is a microphone.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But if you would unzip it, there's no
microphone or it's something completely
&gt;&gt; precisely. Yeah, that's a a great point.
There's so many ways we can take this,
but let's just pursue that because that
I think that's a really important and
fundamental observation and
interestingly um goes right back to the
inception of predictive coding. So if
you remember we were talking before
about predictive coding being one
implementation of the free energy
principle under certain assumptions
about the kind of generative models that
um are being used.
Predictive coding started in the 1950s
as a way of compressing sound files.
&gt;&gt; So there's a deep mathematical link
between compression and complexity
minimization and free energy
minimization really really deep. And
that um there's a parallel story that
comes uh via um salom induction from
commity
&gt;&gt; uh and minimum description lengths and
minimum message lengths right through to
universal computation. So it's exactly
the same story
&gt;&gt; that the best inference to the best
explanation or the most efficient way of
compressing or communicating involves
minimizing redundancy. Um that is
basically compressing something into its
simplest form but not too compressed. So
again keep everything as simple as
possible no simpler. Um, and it's
exactly that balance between the
complexity and the accuracy and this,
you know, so sound file compression. And
indeed, I had an email exchange with
Mike Leaven a few weeks ago where he was
going to use um the capacity to zip
compress his files in order to measure
the complexity of the representation.
It's a really powerful uh way of
measuring the complexity part of of the
variational free energy. Um
so in the context of um the you
compressing this all the information
generated probably visually by your
microphone into the version of a
microphone. So that compression is no
longer available to you because you've
dissolved by reducing the precision
through neurochemical means through
taking say psilocybin. Yeah. which is a
5HT1A node a particular uh receptor
partial agonist or agonist um that
basically resolves the precision the
excitability uh the the um uh the
credence afforded to these highlevel
deep iconic kinds of representation
which basically frees up and emphasizes
the more elemental one. So this is not a
microphone anymore. It's now an ensemble
of objects and each object itself has
some remarkable features and there is uh
you know a flat surface here that's
reflecting some curious ad mixture of
red and and finer and finer detail. So
you don't perceive the microphone, you
perceive the elemental constructs that
you would otherwise assemble into a
microphone.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And I think that's when you you saw Van
Go dissolving into elemental. It must
have been and it's it's exactly what you
say on lower doses when stuff don't when
it does not completely dissolve to me
has been sort of the more pleasant
experience because I can sometimes
notice that I have a rigid way of
thinking and then low lower doses won't
sort of get you through van go but it
will sort of you uh let you reappreciate
sort of the environment around you
because in thinking about this a bit
more normatively and I'm curious how
this worked for you also on a personal
level um what is sort of that ideal sort
of uh uh uh uh model making um not to be
too rigid and be porous enough that
level of being porous. what's what's the
the the the ideal level if we can even
talk about sort of what ideal is because
it's normative and we're talking about
just what but I'm curious here
&gt;&gt; well I mean it's a really important
question when it comes to simulating
this indeed using the free energy
principle in application to simulate
phenology for example there is a field
of computational phenomenology or
neuroimmonology
um but the answer to your question is
that the balance of the precision that
we've been talking about the balance
between the accuracy and the complexity
or the prize and the sensory the
likelihood part of our generative model
itself has to minimize free energy
itself has to minimize um surprisal or
maximize model evidence. Um so it
depends very much upon the um the
quality of the data that you are able to
solicit from the environment. So I'll
have a very different kind of precision
waiting or um configurational reliance
upon prior beliefs versus um sampling
the environment if I'm in an environment
that is unpredictable and imprecise.
&gt;&gt; We could come back to the dark hotel
room in which I have never been before.
But you can imagine yourself in a dark
city, a city outside walking on the on
the pavement uh in the dark in a city
where you've never been before. You've
heard some awful stories about things.
Um there, you know, there there are drug
dealers near the station and you don't
know whether you're near the station or
not. So this world um is imprecise from
your point of view.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So um the normal deep abstracted
microphone stories you tell yourself do
not apply. So now you're going to attend
to the details. You're going to be
deting. you're going to be on guard,
vigilant, attending to all the elemental
information that you can and try and
make as much sense. So, it's going to be
very very context dependent. But there
is a there is an optimal solution if you
allow optimality to apply to the free
energy bound on um your on just the
evidence or the likelihood that you're
in this state given the kind of thing
that you are.
But you can interfere with that balance
by ingesting certain drugs and you could
you'd say that you know certainly that's
an interesting um question to ask when
it comes to addictive pain but
psychedelics are not addictive in that
sense. So, but they do have this
remarkable capacity to rebalance usually
in the auditory and primarily the visual
modality um this this sort of balance
between these deeply held convictions
and prior constructs that we bring to
the table to infer and summarize and
compress our understanding of the world.
But what I want to ask you now,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; what's the deepest most abstract
microphone like construct that we use to
explain our lived world?
&gt;&gt; So the deepest
like our whole world, the deepest model
of our world.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And what's right at the top?
What's right at the center of these
models? It's a trick question, but I but
I know exactly what the answer that I
want.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I'm I'm going to give I'm probably
not understanding fully correctly, but
let's say that my if my microphone
reduces sort of the the true complexity
in the world to sort of a single thing I
can grasp and think it must be I'd say
my best guess on a universal level would
be something like God or the mind at
large a single uh uh cause of everything
that sort of that I can then sort of if
I unzip it I get sort of you know I get
to this world that that would be I think
my my answer to your question,
&gt;&gt; right? So implicit in that um that was
interesting. Um
so in an a Freudian oceanic sense, you
gave me the example the the answer that
I was groping for which is that the the
story uh that you are a self. The story
that you are you
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So you are you and you're part of some
cosmos and part of you. So you use the
word I about four times in answering
that question. Okay. You're you're still
a psychiatrist
listening carefully.
&gt;&gt; I am indeed. Um so the reason I I
suggest that so that you are you are
part of something but implicit in you
are part of some uh you know uh
something uh of this um um
omnipotent or oceanic or unitary aspect
um presupposes that you are a thing. So
the notion that you are you the the
minimal selfhood or in fact the selfhood
itself is just another story under the
free energy principle.
&gt;&gt; So if you dissolve that what would
happen now there is no self.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So now you have an explanation for
non-dual states.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So that sort of feeling that pe you know
if you're a very experienced meditator
you can actually aspire to with
meditative practice. But also sometimes
the depersonalization
which is actually you know um in my
experience quite terrifying if you take
too much of of these certainly
psychedelics
um the notion that you are no longer you
or there isn't a you um um c can be
revealed through dissolving these higher
level um or the precision afforded these
very very high level explanations. 's
best guesses about the you know the
causes of a sensorium which I'm assuming
is my sensorium. I'm assuming this is my
body and it is me that's doing the
experiencing.
&gt;&gt; So but that that can go away. Uh you
know um we don't often experience that
clearly.
&gt;&gt; Have you if I may ask have you had
&gt;&gt; I've had a similar but not quite as
distressing as I've seen in in in
psychiatric patients who have de you
know episodes of depersonalization. Um,
on the other hand, I also, you know,
this is not necessarily a bad thing. You
don't have to suffer. It doesn't have to
be frightening. Um, or you could, you
know, again, you have to ask yourself,
how can you be frightened if if you're
if you're not you? Um,
&gt;&gt; and there's no one to be frightened.
&gt;&gt; Precisely. Um,
so, uh, but I'm really sort of speaking
to this from your in response to your
question about consciousness. you know,
if you're talking about selfawareness
um and um self as part of your
generative model, then I think you can
usefully apply the free energy principle
to ask questions. Well, what does that
mean? You know, what kind of generative
model would you need in order to have a
story a m a microphone story? So the
microphone the concept of a microphone
is just a story you use to explain this
particular pattern of sensory inputs in
a really useful way that uh immediately
brings to the table all the affordances
that are associated with a microphone.
um the same argument though is me you
know that I am just you know another
explanation like the microphone which I
learned and brought to the table and I
didn't arrive with it you know when I
was born I didn't have any notion of me
and you know I didn't I didn't have any
notion of mother from my point of view
this was just some oceanic universe uh
where you know I was nourished or um I
learned that you know my needs were
being met and it took me you months,
well, days, months, weeks to work out
that mother was separate from me and
that mother had intentions.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; That weren't always a direct response of
what I could sense myself doing. Well,
where did myself come from? Well, if
mother is a thing in her own right, then
perhaps I am a thing in in my own right.
And slowly you start to develop a sense
of self which you don't necessarily
always attain. So if you got severe
autism, you might never actually get
&gt;&gt; that theory of mind that rests upon um
this this aspect of self-modeling. But
you can revert back to these and some
people like to do this, you know, and
certainly people like Thomas Minger
think that things like um the nondual
aspect of minimally experiences
are are hold the key to an understanding
of consciousness. If you can get strip
consciousness right back so there isn't
even a self there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; then that might tell you quite a lot
about the nature of consciousness and
you know
&gt;&gt; and would you agree that that what then
remains if if all models are gone my
experience has has been sort of in in
some of these states that a a lucid
awareness let's use the word awareness
here remains that is actually exactly
the same awareness I have right now but
it just lacks all these models of
selfhood which was like profoundly
strange to experience but it helped me
to distinguish between that awareness
and sort of the contents of that
awareness the the the qualia that keep
changing and but to see that as a sort
of a constant then thinking back in my
life only in very infant stage I cannot
cannot go back to that state of
awareness remembering the state of
awareness as a baby I cannot go back so
far but the as far as I can go back that
awareness has more or less been the
constant or the same which makes me that
makes me an idealist by saying, "Okay, I
I suppose that is fundamental." And your
theory to me is a brilliant mathematical
way to to describe the the the the
doings that happen within consciousness,
the the mechanisms at play in in these
models that model the the contents of
that
the contents of perception that that
present themselves to my awareness. What
What are your thoughts here?
&gt;&gt; Would you agree to what I just just
described as awareness of being a ground
so to speak?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah, I think you're very lucky to
be able to experience that awareness
without the content. I have
&gt;&gt; It's not a daily thing. It's a heart.
Yeah. And
&gt;&gt; and for what I know, I think people
aspire to that through years and years
of meditative practice to try and induce
that. So you
&gt;&gt; it has been on substances mainly.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I see. You should tell you should
tell my meditator colleagues. They
probably know.
&gt;&gt; It's the shortcut. It's the the Yeah.
But but please continue. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh so yeah. Um,
and you know, I I was um struck by your
I can't get back that far you to to
those um I keep using the sort of um and
I'm sure I'm using it wrongly sort of
oceanic Freudian sort of you know when
you first arrive into the world when
you're not even you um
&gt;&gt; well that makes perfect sense because
remember from the from a hellhium point
of view unconscious inference point of
view if you don't have the machinery
you're not ever going to be able to
remember
you can't perceive it. So just be able
to perceive the world as um being um
something that is um con you are
constituted of uh you know is a
remarkable capacity which I repeat you
know may may take a long time uh to
develop um and then you were talking
about the the sort of the the continuity
I think that's really interesting
&gt;&gt; that is sort of more or less the same
thing that sort of as if the the the um
say the model is of the generative model
is sort of just giving me a a screen
perception. It's given me a dashboard
and and we we've been talking now a long
time about sort of how that works and
it's it's absolutely fascinating. But
there still seems to be a a a and I call
that let's call that this awareness that
perceives that that screen of perception
that has always been the same and is
sort of will always be the same. That's
that's how I see it.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. Mark out as a very high level
life form I would imagine.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But but um Yeah. But it's also
something you can more or less um yeah
this is what non-dual teachers of course
teach in sort of like that you can
arrive at that analytically. I say this
mainly analytically. It's not like
something I but if I but in thinking
about I I I am able to experience it
more often. But I'm curious here because
we're touching on something that I think
many people might misperceive your
theory because you could say that um
let's frame it like in a totally
different way. Would you say that the
free energy principle is matter doing
all of this and then it produces somehow
phenomenal consciousness? Because that
would be like the physicalist story.
Then then that would be like the
physicalist framing of your theory. Just
I start with the big bang and I have
I've just all the physics we know and
the free energy principle then starts
just describing what cells do. But it
still cannot solve the hard problem of
consciousness and somehow consciousness
emerge. But that doesn't seem to me what
the free energy principle is about.
&gt;&gt; No, I think you're right. Again, you
you'd have to think very carefully about
how you would apply the free energy
principle to the hard problem. Um and
you can do that and and and we can talk
about the ways of doing that. Um that
that sort of notion um that it is me
watching a screen that is unfolding um I
think it's really interesting. um
certainly from a purely um technical
non-filosophical u position um that um
speaks to something which I think may be
peculiar
to things that um can be attributed
consciousness and I'm denying pansychism
here as you know a plausible story um
and that is agency
um and if you just ask what it is to be
an agent
It is something that has a natural kind
that is sufficiently large that it can
now entertain a generative model of the
consequences of its actions. And I just
slip in sufficiently large because of
course we know our actions if our
actions are part of our markoff blanket.
But that's not the case if I've got a
deep generative model and some you know
very deep markoff blanket right in the
middle is a long long way away from the
actual muscles um that I'm using to act.
&gt;&gt; So now the action becomes technically a
random variable
&gt;&gt; which means it has to be inferred.
&gt;&gt; So now I'm in the game of planning my
actions. I'm now an intentional agent.
I'm an agent that has intentions because
I'm now rolling out into the future to
evaluate the consequences of my actions
under my generative model. So what does
that mean? Well, it means something
quite profound. It means that you've got
a generative model that is freed from
the species present or the or the
current moment.
&gt;&gt; It means you've got a model that is
future pointing. So it's no longer
unlike a virus or a thermostat tied to
the immediate. Now you've got
representations of yourself in the
future. And of course if you've got
representation of yourself in the
future, you've also got a representation
of yourself in the past. You as agent
and it's only your agency. It's not my
agency or something else's agent. It's
me, my future. And it goes it's a path
into the future and therefore a path
that comes from the past. So
mathematically
if you're this natural kind then you
must have some basian mechanics that
speaks to this continuity over time and
that equips you with the notion of an
invariance over time there is a past
there is a future not everything can
have that so you know it is quite quite
so I just wanted to pick up on this
quite important
&gt;&gt; but you're also sort of deriving sort of
the flow of time here and and and the
the mystery of time from the free energy
bin which I think is is fascinating.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, you should speak to Chris
Fields about this who insists that any
plausible um explanation has to be
background free and what he means is if
you start app or Donald Hoffman is also
telling us very sim similar story.
&gt;&gt; Um so and I would completely concur with
these positions you know space and time
as we talk about them and read about
them at school or in physics books are
just stories. They are they are just
microphones. They're just you know uh
things we bring to the table that
provide a simple explanation for our
lived world which would go away if
things moved around in relation to each
other close to the speed of light that
the the notion of time and space that we
currently have would dissolve. It's a
good it's a good story for our lived
world um not necessarily all lived
worlds.
&gt;&gt; Um
&gt;&gt; so yeah uh is time part of that? I think
it is. And you know I think we come back
to where we started which is relational
view of time. How do you measure time?
Well, how do you observe time? And the
only way you can observe time is by um
the
&gt;&gt; belief updating of something else that
is an observer. So how quickly
technically their information rate your
um the movement on a statistical
manifold per unit of clock time or how
many how many different belief
configurations do do they go through for
every one belief update that you do. And
then you've got this notion now that
there are going to be all sorts of time
perceptions in a deep generative model
because every level is looking down the
level below thinking, "Oh, you've
changed your mind three times, you know,
before I changed my mind once." And then
&gt;&gt; this is a species presence. Yeah,
indeed. It's fascinating. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So that was Yeah. Almost time, but there
was something um I got
&gt;&gt; Sorry to interrupt you, which is
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, we, you know, we keep
missing all these wonderful rabbit holes
cuz we keep going down.
&gt;&gt; You were talking about Donald Hoffman
and that you you
&gt;&gt; There is no Yeah, there is no there is
no spaceime or background free
explanations. It has to be the case. Um,
I would certainly agree with that. We're
we're talking about agency um and agency
necessarily requiring a generative model
that um that had this sort of temporal
persistence aspect.
&gt;&gt; But there's an interesting tortology
here because remember at the beginning I
said that the generative model is an
explanation for things that possess
characteristic states
and those characteristic states define a
pullback attractor. But the pullback
attractor is just defined in terms of
things that endure during time. So it
could if you are modeling your if you
are modeling yourself
&gt;&gt; as something that persists in time you
couldn't do it any other way. So to put
it another way if on the view of the
could regulator theorem you come to
model you as part of your controllable
world because now in this hierarchal
context there are bits of you that can
be controlled.
um then by definition you have to have a
model of yourself that persists in time
because that is the kind of thing you
are by definition to exist. So there's
another deep tortology here. It couldn't
be any other way. Uh so that sort of
sense of persistence over time is just
part of the story.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. What fascinates me that if if we
take phenomenology
so my experience of sitting here my
experience of seeing the world as sort
of the only given that I can be sure of
that that that that is that the the
experience me experience that is whether
uh it's an illusion or whether that
still is an experience so that's that's
me sort of like a ground axum of
existence so to speak and we know from
first principles your theory that we do
not uh see the world as it is. We cannot
see the world as it is. The combination
of those two ideas
uh
at least seems to false falsify or just
give materialism a very hard time
because how can I sort of say anything
about that outside world and I just told
you that I that my first aim is that I
experienced the world. I do not matter
is already already a a a zip file. The
idea it's it's it's a model already. Um
and in the whole predictive coding and
neuroscience, it seems to be that there
are many people uh who who seem to miss
this point that if predictive coding and
active inference if you apply it to
itself, you also have to say that itself
is a model. So the model is a model. So
I'm trapped in this model making and the
only thing I'm sure of is that that
there is is is a me experiencing all of
this. Well, that in philosophy is called
sort of idealism. But this I think is a
cultural baggage we have of like a
couple hundred years of science and
physicalism that people still uh think
that this is compatible with
materialism. But I'm so so curious on
your thoughts because I do think you are
also perceived as a materialist by by
many many people. if I if I'm not
mistaken. But um
&gt;&gt; well, you would probably be in a better
position to know than I would.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, at least that's sort of the
perception. If I'm just doing my
research online, people perceive it as a
sort of a a materialist way of of
looking at the world. I guess because
you start with mathematics and just and
as if you you reduce the human to sort
of mathematics and and and I think
people associate that with materialism.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Although it is a particular kind of
mathematics, it's it's you know a
mechanics of belief updating um which is
not um a component of things like
quantum mechanics or classical mechanics
or indeed integrated information theory.
It's a very particular kind of um
mathematics that lives in an information
geometry where this geometry is beliefs
about something else. So we come right
back to the original distinction between
the numinal and the phenomenal.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um so you know there's something unique
about the free principle which you won't
find anywhere else. But in I'm tempted
to ask you to tell me what materialist
is, but I I I'll pretend I'm not naive
and assume it's the um position that
there exists some physical world out
there um
&gt;&gt; that can be fully captured in quantities
that we can measure and and that can be
fully captured in in quantities. So the
the whereas our experience of the world
is qualitative, right? We do not uh um
it's it's this philos I mean the yeah
maybe that's a nice one you might have
heard of that that I think it's Mary in
a black and white room so say I I I'm in
a black and Mary's in a black and white
room and she literally knows learns
everything there is to learn about color
the the the wavelengths the the
everything uh of all colors if she then
exits the the black and white room
having lived there all her life into a
world of color will she learn something
new about the world? Materialism would
basically say no because everything
there is we can fully measure in in
these quantities. But of course
intuitively many people say of course
because the experience of of of color
the qualitative experience of color is
something completely different than the
third person perspection the description
of color. Um, and and if I say that's my
definition of of materialism, which I
think in philosophy is sort of the the
the definition of it, then I think it's
just a naive position considering
um my my my
experience of the world combined with
what science is now telling me. So
active inference but also quantum
mechanics that we cannot sort of draw
this distinction between the quantities
I observe and me and my observerhood.
&gt;&gt; Right? Do you you still follow because
I'm also I'm not a philosopher. This I'm
I'm just very deep deeply researching
all of this.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um well that makes you a philosopher or
at least a natural scientist.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; So that no I'm certainly not a
materialist. Um Mary in that instance
would certainly not perceive color. Um
she should could certainly learn how to
perceive color if she was sufficiently
young and neuroplastic. So coming back
to Helmholds, you cannot see, experience
anything unless it's already on the
inside. But how does it get on the
inside? You have to engage with the
world across your Markoff blanket. And
it take years uh before Mary saw color,
which has got nothing to do with her
epistemic science book reading of the
nature of color. Um and then your
statement that the world is fully
observable. Measurable. There is a
metaphysical world that can be fully
measured.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. in quantities that we can
manipulate and and that physics
describes
&gt;&gt; then I am not a materialist. No, the
whole point of the free energy principle
is that there cannot be a fully um
measurable world. If there was you would
be part of that world and by the
principle of unitarity you would not
exist as distinct from that world. So uh
if the fullness aspect of materialism um
is center stage then I'm certainly not
not a materialist. On the other hand, um
the maths that you would use to derive
the free energy principle, which could
actually be thought of as a uh or you
could apply to materialism in and of
itself if you wanted to, um does um rest
upon the notion that there does exist um
something that is not self. That's the
the observed does exist. Yeah. And and
you can actually sort of um
analytically, mathematically and also
numerically um emulate um
self-evidencing and sense making in a
way without even talking about the basic
mechanics. Um and in that setting um
which is effectively tedology free um
you what one arrives at is something
called synchronization of generalized
synchronization or synchronization of
chaos between the inside and the
outside. So that you can from a purely
dynamical systems perspective say that
the free energy minimizing solution just
is when we've established um a mutual
entrainment in a generalized synchrony I
repeat synchronization of chaos because
we're dealing with random dynamical
systems
&gt;&gt; um that are certainly for life forms uh
chaotic in virtue of the um the um
technically the solenoidal flow or the
the bio rhythms and the and the you
cycles of life cycles, reproduction and
and the like. Um so the you know the the
the the um if materialism just means
that there is some cause effect
structure of a probabilistic sort that
is not uniquely owned by the observer or
the self that I am a materialist because
I have to have a mathematical image of
the observed the outside the world. Um
so with that
&gt;&gt; that's more like soypism I even say for
in I mean idism would not deny an
objective reality out there. It's just
not physical in the sense of only
consisting of
&gt;&gt; quantities that we can measure and and
and and thereby having fully captured
reality by the measuring of those
quantities.
It wouldn't deny because under idealism
&gt;&gt; and idealist maybe nice to just bridge
the sort of the what people better
understand would be like of course the
ancient traditions that would start off
in eastern non-dualism with a one that
is uh not matter but more or not more
but it's it's it's mind it's sort of the
the mind or the nothingness I mean it
can also be nothingness and out of which
um
different selves emerge, right? and on
on all sorts of different levels from
gods to humans. And then in in such a
world tour cosmology um to me is
interesting not for literally believing
those stories but it gives me a model of
understanding our universe as a oneness
that somehow by dissociating itself or
or creating blankets.
I don't know it I I I don't know how but
it it somehow seems to be doing that and
why does it do that sort of the whole
game of it all is this model making and
that there in lies the beauty but now
I'm I'm leaving science and and
venturing into s even more like a
poetry of it all in a sense I'm I'm just
curious how that works for you also
because I yeah there's actually a nice
bridge I read um you on William James
that that you um when William James of
course wrote like more poetically in a
sense about consciousness and when he
said uh I quote you just funny to
reflect with you on it um when I hear
attention is taking possession by the ma
the mind in clear and vivid form so this
is sort of like not accurate description
of what what happens um when talking
about attention or awareness and and you
then say I think no it's not attention
is simply the process of optimizing
precision during hierarchical
inference. So I like that because that's
sort of the mathematician that's the
mathematician in you wanting to be be
accurate um in relation to something to
to William James here. But I'm curious
about sort of the more poetic call
Fristristen when when pondering um
looking outside. Um what are your more
poetic notions of sort of the free
energy principle and and the meaning of
life even?
&gt;&gt; Um sorry for my lengthy questions by the
way. I just
&gt;&gt; I mean one answer to that is that for me
um maths is the highest form of poetry.
Um so you know I find beauty in the
maths in the simplicity of course which
it brings us back to the complexity
minimization the right kinds of stories
the right narratives the right calculus
&gt;&gt; has to have that uh mixture of
simplicity and accuracy in a sense the a
kind of oneness that you you you were
alluding to um so my my poetry is in the
mouth I'm afraid
&gt;&gt; beautiful
um
&gt;&gt; I wish I could read that poetry better I
I should have sort of studied
Well, I think re well it's an
interesting way to phrase that because
of course reading um now speaks of the
hermeneutics problem of understanding
the meaning of the maths in relation to
other constructs. And I think that's
largely what our conversation has been
about.
&gt;&gt; That's interesting. Yeah, you're right.
You're right. It's it's um
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you would agree that
mathematics is what what is about
syntax. It's about a structure of
reality and and and and and I'm much
more about the semantics what what all
of this means.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And of course we've talked at
length try to unpack the semantics for
for for our viewers. Yeah. And you're
about the syntax. So yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um but you know and that also speaks to
a point that was covert in one of your
previous questions that the free energy
principle is itself just a story. I
think that's absolutely right.
&gt;&gt; Um very much like um natural selection
or evolution. Um the freni principle
sort of conforms to its own principles
in a sense in the in that it provides a
simple but accurate account of
everything.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Of the data available to us. Um
and you know in the same way that sort
of you know evolution has itself evolved
or evolutionary theory in terms of
neodyarism sort of um modern day
synthesis. uh your evolution has
evolved. The free energy principle is
just your a um a principle that can be
applied to itself. It just is meant to
provide a beautiful and simple in my
world poetic description of what people
know basically. Well, people are not
materialists in the sense that you
describe know already or have known
since Plato. Uh so, uh that's certainly
true. Um there was something you said
which I just wanted to pick up on there.
Um
&gt;&gt; and the meaning the meaning of life.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um and um
so
you're under under the free energy
principle you your meaning really
inherits from the notion of
self-evidencing. So now I'm being
poetic. So I'm I'm pretending to be um
in specifically Yakob Howi who sort of
you know has been one of the key people
promoting the sort of self-evidencing
aspect. So you know one can read active
inference under the free energy
principle as self-evidencing. So what
does that mean? Well, it means that I am
um just here gathering evidence for my
model of my world. And crucially,
because my model has this central notion
of me in it, it's also a self model. So,
I'm gathering evidence for my model of
me in my world.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Which just means what would it look
like? What what what would I um so what
what am I trying to optimize? What am I
trying to um do? Um, I am trying to
optimize the evidence. I'm trying to
minimize the surprise. I'm trying to
optimize the evidence for my model. So,
what does what kind of thing does that
make me? It makes me into a curious
creature.
&gt;&gt; It makes me into something that wants to
understand my world.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It describes what uh you are doing now.
Why are you doing what you are doing
now? You are just trying to resolve
uncertainty. You're on an exploration.
You're an explorer in a particular
intellectual and philosophical domain.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You're not doing this to keep your
temperature at 37.2°
centigrade or get chocolate or money.
You're doing it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Cuz you're seeking meaning.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's so true. Thank you for that
beautiful reflection because like an
hour ago when you asked me about sort of
the highest model and I said God and you
you you accurately said but I heard a
lot of me, you know, when I I was
talking about God that
It has a lot to do with me understanding
myself. So what I hear hear you saying
that it is about sort of selfdoing and
it's about sort of better understanding
of self and that somehow our universe
goes through the process of of doing
that via market blankets and and and and
models but that
&gt;&gt; and that we do together.
&gt;&gt; A lot of this is co-constructed. A lot
of this yeah rests upon the shoulders of
giants and communication. So this is not
um sort of well it is not something that
I I would do or could do uh in isolation
if I was on Mars by myself. It's
something that can only happen in this
sort of
&gt;&gt; of course of course and I like also that
beauty in in your theory that the free
energy principle is is a theory of self
but it's also a theory of selves and how
they interact and that's what we see in
Michael Leven's work and that all to me
is just very beautiful and fascinating
and um thank you so so much for this
wonderful conversation Carl. I really
enjoyed it.
&gt;&gt; My pleasure. Thank you. I enjoyed it as
well.
&gt;&gt; I'm happy to hear that. Yeah. Thank you
so much. And thank you very much for
watching this video. We will uh put
links to uh Carl Fristen's work below in
the description. And if you have
questions, please uh leave them in the
comment section. And we see you in one
of our next videos. Thank you.