- Good afternoon, everybody.
My name is Tom Bancroft.
I'm Director of the Berkeley Center
for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs here at Georgetown.
And I'm delighted to welcome you to this year's
Berkeley Center lecture with Jurgen Habermas
on the topic, Myth and Ritual.
Thank you all for coming.
This is, it's quite a crowd.
The result of one email,
and a lot of word of mouth.
It's the kind of event we like to run.
Just a word before we get started
about the center, and about the lecture.
The Berkeley Center has been around, now,
five and a half years.
We're part of a university wide effort
to advance the interdisciplinary study of religion
and promote inter religious understanding.
Through teaching, research, and outreach,
at the center we explore religious and ethical questions
as they intersect with global challenges
of democracy, development, and interfaith dialogue.
The Berkeley Center's lectures are an opportunity
to extend that dialogue,
to bring a global thought leader to campus
to deepen that conversation with us,
and thus far as some of you may know,
we've had Tariq Ramadan address Islam and the West,
Charles Taylor explore secularization,
and Hans Joas investigate human rights and the sacred.
This year, through the diplomacy and engagement
of my friend and colleague Jose Casanova,
we're delighted to have Jurgen Habermas with us.
And before I introduce President DeGioia
who will introduce Professor Habermas,
just a note on format.
We've planned plenty of time
after the lecture for discussion,
and you will have noticed the index cards on your seats.
The colors don't mean anything.
Those are cards for questions.
We've also distributed some pencils.
If you have formulated a question,
we'd ask you to write it on the card, pass it to the aisle.
About halfway through the lecture,
we'll have folks collect that first batch of questions.
And then when Professor Habermas
has finished his formal remarks,
there'll be another round to collect those questions
and I'll sift through those cards
and help to moderate the Q and A on that basis.
It's now my pleasure to introduce President DeGioia.
Doctor John J. DeGioia, as many of you know,
is the 48th president of Georgetown University,
a post he has held since 2001,
and before that he served more than two decades
in a range of other leadership positions at the university.
Over the past decade under
President Delegation's leadership,
Georgetown has emerged as a global force in higher education
and as an innovator to link up our core mission
of teaching and research with service to the wider world.
Examples include our campus in Doha, Qatar,
our outreach to China,
and partnership with the Archbishop of Canterbury's
Muslim-Christian dialogue, Building Bridges.
President DeGioia addresses broader
issues in higher education
as chair of the board of directors of Campus Compact
and of the forum for the future of higher education.
He also serves as a member of the board of directors
for the National Association of Independent Colleges
and Universities,
and the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities.
Ladies and gentlemen, please join me
in welcoming President Jack DeGioia.
(audience applauding)
- Thanks very much.
Thanks very much, Tom.
Thank you for all that you do,
and thank you to the Berkeley Center for hosting this event,
which as you said is part of an ongoing lecture series
that has included such distinguished participants
as Charles Taylor, and Hans Joas, and Tariq Ramadan.
Welcome everyone, it's a pleasure
to have this opportunity to be with you this afternoon.
Tonight, to offer his lecture on myth and ritual,
we are privileged to have with us one of the leading
intellectuals of our age, professor Jurgen Habermas,
a preeminent thinker on modernity, enlightenment reason,
and the public sphere.
He continues to provide new insights
on a wide range of philosophical questions
and critical social issues.
Called by the late Richard Rorty
the leading systematic philosopher of our time,
he is best known in the anglophone world for publications
like The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere,
The Theory of Communicative Action,
and Between Facts and Norms.
Born in 1929 in Dusseldorf, a student in post-war
Germany, and regarded as a member
of the Frankfurt School,
his career has balanced deep philosophical investigations
with an effort to apply these studies
to the sociopolitical dynamics of the day.
He received his PhD in 1954 from Bonn University,
writing his dissertation on Friedrich Shelling,
a contemporary of Hegel in the German Idealism movement,
and a few years later he began working
as an assistant to Theodor Adorno
at the Institute for Social Research in Frankfurt in 1959.
He left the institute, and returned in 1964
as professor of philosophy and sociology.
Over the course of the next three decades,
his investigations included a conference on the Vietnam War,
with Herbert Marcuse,
and research into philosophy
of language in the 1960s and early 1970s.
In the 1980's as a professor of the faculty of philosophy
at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University in Frankfurt.
His work focused on a critique
of postmodernism and neoconservativism.
He was one of the key figures in
the dispute among historians in the 1980s,
which raised fundamental questions
about the political and ethical responsibilities
of historians in postwar Germany.
And throughout the decade, he continued
to address considerations of moral theory and ethics
with essays on human values, and what he has called
post metaphysical thinking.
Profoundly interested in the practice of philosophy,
Thomas McCarthy, a now retired professor
of humanities and philosophy at Northwestern University
explains the range and depth of his contributions
to social thought, "Habermas has been able
to go into discussions in political theory,
in sociology, in psychology, in legal theory,
and a dozen different disciplines,
and become one of the dominant voices in each one."
In more recent years, his work has sought
to more deeply understand the position
of religion in modernity.
Considering the rise of secular, liberal states with certain
kinds of religious participation, particularly in the West,
he recognizes the, quote, "indispensable potentials
for meaning that are preserved
in religious language, potentials that philosophy
has not yet fully exhausted."
As part of this growing attention
to the post secular, as he has called it,
professor Habermas has engaged in dialogue
with representatives of the Catholic church.
For example, in a conversation with then Cardinal Ratzinger,
Pope Benedict the sixteenth, which was published
as The Dialectics of Secularization in 2007.
And in a similar effort, he brought together
a group of four Jesuits who met with him in Munich
to produce the 2007 publication,
An Awareness of What is Missing,
Faith and Reason in a Post Secular Age.
This work of seeking to better understand
the nature of religion in our contemporary culture
resinates deeply with our campus community
in our own efforts to explore, and to live,
the tensions between faith and reason.
The motto of our university, Utraque Unum,
taken from St. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians,
and meaning Both into One,
speaks to this very challenge,
and to the resources that our Jesuit heritage provides.
It is a great privileged, it's an honor for me,
to have this opportunity to welcome Professor Habermas
to our campus this evening.
I look forward to his insights, and to the discussion
that they will generate on this campus.
Now, please join me in welcoming Professor Jurgen Habermas.
(audience applauding)
(both men talking)
- Thank you.
(audience applauding)
- Yeah.
Mister President, for this adventure.
Thank you for this warm reception.
I'm glad to be here once more
at your conference.
I am a bit intimidated, this has the appearance
of something more ceremonial,
but I can assure you I have only a normal paper to present.
(audience laughing)
So, when we speak today as sociologists or anthropologists
of religion, we employ an inclusive concept
that in comparisons, all possible conceptions of faith,
and practices which involve a confrontation
with extraordinary forces of salvation and disaster.
The Californian Brujo and the Native American medicine men
command the same interest as the Old Testament prophets
or the Chinese wise men.
When we speak of religion as lay persons, however,
we have in mind first and foremost,
the major world religions that Maximilian once studied,
with the utmost respect,
to what he called the axial age.
During the comparatively short period
from around 800 to 300 Before Christ,
independent cognitive revolutions occurred
that gave rise to those strong religious doctrines
and metaphysical world views,
that remain influential to this day.
There is no need to assess that in the United States,
and particularly in this merry place.
Since the mass re-emergence of religion
out of mythical narratives,
and magical practices.
Religion in the sense of a founded doctrine
can be traced back to the teachings of historical versions,
Zoroastrianism, I rarely use the term, but,
(audience laughing)
in Iran, Monotheism in Israel, Confucianism, Taoism,
in China, Buddhism in India, and even Platonism,
which the philosophy at that time left,
and in the current at the fullness,
and never later on gained some more sacrificial practices.
Myths and legends assume the guise of canonized doctrines
that left an imprint on international organizations.
Holy books represent the course along which flows
the dogmatic deliberation of sophisticated traditions,
and the influential organization of
locally diffused religious communities botanized
advancements drew attention to the side effect
that these technologies and religions weren't used,
emerged at approximately the same time period
with the intention,
he introduced this intention.
Was the intention of opposing.
A flu venous image of the simultaneous arrangements
of the major Arabian civilizations
and Venetians too.
The youhoo's say it's fixation on Jerusalem in essence.
The purpose and the revolutionary break
in the mode of thinking should not misled.
Thus however, in adopting a one sided intellectualism
view of religious and metaphysical world views.
This cognitive wasteful towards nonconsenting perspectives
toward law of universalism
and new conceptions of new salvation's and redemption's.
Justice.
Not many major achievements,
but this can change too.
They may link the letter of practices
and thus reserve the archaic unity of miss and literal,
by, of course, conforming to
those on a higher level of reflection.
Those learned in a cult formed the sacred complex.
Without the rules, the worship, and ceremonies,
religion would not have been able
to summon the assertiveness during
the first three or four centuries
over against secular sort after the present day.
More generations relish the nations reserve
that connection to an iconic, archaic experience
to which all other cultural endless and sickness
have lost access during the process of organization.
In an attempt to localize this experience
a feeling was a second.
Over the course of human development
and to identify it's core meaning
I would like to explore the original
relation that we missed initial.
And personally its a culmination
of development theories in Anthropology,
lastly to the conjecture.
That literal practices may have constituted
the reworking of the very final religion experience
of a blank, in the mode of communication
and in the associated forms of social life.
Now let me say in advance
that the purpose of this lecture
is to develop a hypothesis for which
I can invest better some initial plausibility.
If we want to, in a sense, I mean,
may I ask you this?
I know that you needing the signs from me,
but the the micro works alright,
you can hear me?
Okay.
Now if you want to, in a sense, a sacred complex
we must call upon anthropological observations
of modern time in society' that prevent their best interest
from other forms of life
ascending back as you know
to the elevenths, or tens and elevenths millennial.
In the more recent literary testimonies
in archeological remains was a major
earliest realizations that we've encountered.
Already, a remodeling of an older find of this record.
So processing in literary elaboration
of the prehistoric store took place during
the period from, around three thousand Before Christ.
In the context of state organized societies
posted by an emerging historical consciousness
and of course in response
to the interest of ruling dynasties.
However, the origins of the sacred complex
extend much further, okay,
than even the unique experience
the oldest of findings discovered in Australia.
The great influence to Catholic religion,
estimated to be 50 thousand years old.
Where as the first in ferial by homo sapiens
in circa 100 years old.
I mean, very well known facts,
but I mean just to remember
the time perspective we have to keep in mind.
From this period, around 1,000, 100 thousand,
of this period also made the oldest discoveries
of color production in jewelry.
The indestructible material of these findings,
archeological findings, however,
reminds us that even more ancient mythical stories
and ritual actions expressed in the more
effort of a man and media of speech, song
and dance must have disappeared without trace.
Hence there are those of the speculations
that the secret complex has earlier origins
reaching back beyond the archeological findings
into the period of he illusion of homo sapiens.
Mythical Methodists often plus or minus
to understanding rights.
They often recuperate in the medium
of a fully developed language, a meaning.
That I've already expressed for performative
in visible visions and images
that is in the proper representational
form of music, dance, pantomime, and monumentalizing.
Methodists can only appear to seek out a prior meaning
of ritual behavior warning of calamity
and invoking probation voices.
Rights most of most hope
with prizes looking at natural and social disasters,
I mean, immense epidemics or enemy things
and in them being functions critical for survival.
So hopeful the insufficient harvest
escalation of his sense on and so on.
The unmistakably archaic character of ritual practices
and effect and they need to be translated
raise aggression of whether the developments
of rites and this occur simultaneously
with the emergence of homo sapiens
and his ability to speak.
Or whether his initial behavior
essentially is farther back than the evolutionary slide show
of early development of ordinary language
that is of a grammatical,
grammatical language with a propositional structure
that we today speak it.
To my knowledge,
the controversy over the biology issue
that began in the early 19th century
has yet to find a decisive answer.
The pliant negative form of this explains why they are
inherently suited
to providing reports and explanations
and such to the cognitive purpose
of processing observations from coping
with some contingencies of to not.
Since negatives provide the dimensions to form
for organizing these first events into a whole,
we regard them primarily in the aspect of representation,
we interpret rights contrast primarily under
the performative aspect of the execution and repetition
of precisely standardized and repetitive actions here.
The semantic contents remain implicit
in spite of the pronounces expressive character
of the symbols and the images employed.
Ritual practices are essentially symbolic actions
that display in iconic not yet op positionally
differentiated level of communication.
However,
just imposing missing rights
as if they were fulfilling either cognitive
or expressive functions does not do any justice
to the sacred dynamic vault of mythical world news.
In it's the manners we may missed
there is force as we know greatly
emphasizes the cognitive achievement
of complex plus indign itory systems
and he uses intellectual curiosity
as a motive for such a systematization
of empirical knowledge.
That in the process of me counting
the many narratives to each other.
Jointly connecting them, position them simultaneously
reassure themselves of their collective identity.
It's world news,
I admit it's hard to say to the collectivity,
on which most reflects it's social structures
and represents the collectivity is an integral component
of the natural environment
because mythical Methodist's not only process observations
and something about the visible world,
but also reflect the psychodynamics
of coping with risks arising within the core
of layers of which leading on this itself.
So we say to rites, myths, is not just a statement,
but an actions.
The base of new idea, made famous by Jean Frazier,
according to which the ritual slaying of the old king
sustains the seasonal cycle of the occasion
and the return the of the spring
is just one, one of the best known example
of the known relation the mythical narrative
and it's innatement.
We need to keep those things in view
timing and solve all disclosing power of mythical language
on missionary response to advancements
investigations for light goes hand in hand
with reenacting with a bionically, recurring performance
of the missed.
Now this is only an introductory reminder of
when news, I do however to conceive
a ritual behavior as a mere accompaniment of myth.
From the perspective of complacency
and that's now the perspective I take.
Ritual behavior links to an earlier stage
of symbolic expression compared to mythical negatives.
The media of commune dance and song
mainly in pantomime, running pending usually
causing offsets, mass emblems, counts of arms
ornaments and so on.
The myth, iconic representations or imitations
that do not defend any further asphyxiation
in a processed language.
If we are looking for the original meaning,
there's a sacred complex might have it
for the participants themselves.
We must not form loose form pointing
to the meaning which is encapsulated
in the rites themselves.
I never asked a native speaker
do we say rites or reest?
- [Woman] Rites.
- Rites. Rites yes.
Thank you.
You see I am normally not lecturing on rites, I mean.
(audience laughter)
When they're using the anthropological series
developed over the last century,
I find it striking that most of the
explanations of rights already pre disposed.
Mythically articulated and narrative accessible
with just people like specific spirits and wants.
I mean, there's already pre disposes,
some negative representation.
This whole story explanation of rites
is a stem for influence to favor
our super human forces by magical means.
And mind you the elementary
or more elementary ventures of gift giving
and exchange already satisfy when you have there
or mass at most.
And more informative because these vacancies in a sense
express their own meaning.
They establish relations of diversity
between kinship folks
and thereby reinforce social relations
of certain value on or any rate of known violence.
The synchronicity founded and renewed
through exchange of gifts forges a
social bond between persons of no potential reverence.
This idea brings us closer, I suppose,
to the sphenic meaning of ritual behavior.
As you know we've been talking, I think,
from a sociological point of view still,
the most important in depth analysis, area.
I mean he had a, as I learned by reading,
and apology in immense influence so out essentially.
Now he understood rites as an different,
influential practice that systemized
to create on a social loop.
It was the first to assign an ensensic meaning
to ritual practices.
One that is in hue, in event, that's my point,
which is anything of any negative explanation.
Strictly speaking he explores the meaning
of ritual practices for who's name of use
namely to serve colonization of society
and the generation of the binding force
of abnormal expectations.
And the second point is of interest
for me in the following.
On the one hand existing social structures
are supposed to be reflected in rites,
on the other, in performing the ritual
self representation of society's
and then must offer a collectivity,
as opposed to rituals themselves.
Often their identity are thereby endowed
in the personal social relations with conformity force.
I would also like to recall another classical theory
namely den of anarch Von Guin en
his well known theories of initiation rites.
Labeled under an important supplement
that those anthropologists designed
regulate the condition for one thing or to the next
whether at first or at a special to dite to
or marriages of villagers.
It's especially informative.
On the same page is in words,
in stable conditions the initiation
which represents a profound change in identity
for the individual involved.
Each stage is a symbolic test
and to subsequent social labors.
The new moment introduced by Von Guinea
is a condition through a stage of segregation
from the community during which
the family based membership is in suspense.
The social existence is fire stemmed profanity
than this until resurrecting act of re integration
by being accepted into a new status.
This in familiar stage of segregation
of being cast out into a social no mans land,
induces extreme experiences of the spaceless ness
of an existence.
By being thrust into the helplessness
and isolation of the segregated individual
relying in itself and on it's self alone
becomes aware that it depends entirely
on the support of a social network.
For the hypothesis I want to suggest,
I think my view from a generalization of this experience.
Assimilated experience of complete exclusion
not only in bias, in the individual,
an awareness of a specific change in social role,
enhance of the social structure,
and dynamics of the particular society
into which the novice is initiated.
This situation confronts them with the experience
implicit in the socialization process
in any socialization process as such.
The other lesson, for instance,
cannot secure his identity by infringing
to his former status.
As a child the inability exceptionally experience
that he can recover and reaffirm himself
as a regenerated self only through self renunciation.
Now, I come to my hypothesis,
I would like to recognize the final genetic clue
into the final genetic assumption
that the sacred complex reflects,
in it's initial phases,
the mastering of the problem that arises
once the evolution of primates
crosses the threshold to a new level of
symbolically mediated communication and interaction.
The old idea,
I'm now turning to,
the theories of the origin of human communications.
The old theory, idea,
that the medical language originated
in national communication.
I know, for instance, that's the late 18th century,
has acquired a surprising technicality
in the most recent research.
Furthermore, it seems,
what's his name Shawn Steen was a long foreknown
VTA's on the scene
and now the tide has turned, as very often,
and now the development of our disciplines
and if Von Suites as old as I am,
this teaches oneself modesty
and enforces fundamentalism so I am not sure
that what I have to say will not, poof.
Well, I mean, nevertheless,
I mean I try to argue for it
and we will see, in the discussion, how it works.
Now, it seems flawed of me to assume
that the form of symbolically mediated communication
reveals a family interrelation with
communication, and all in all,
an ordinary social correlation
and the kind of communication that is specialized
in dealing with the extraordinary.
To share form of lunatic behavior
in iconic representation suggests a comparison
between everyday and ritual communication.
Most mediated by symbolic gestures,
but how should you understand the division of labor.
When we inform the communication,
one of which has it's origin in contacts
of intelligent corporation.
Whereas the other time it's covered from everyday functions.
The research in anthropology provides clues
supporting the conjecture that rites
are in response to the specific fragility
of a form of social life
that only emerges with a new form of
symbolically mediated communication.
But in order to identify and explain
the problem to which rites could have
represented a solution,
we must first make clear what constitutes
the evolutionary innovation of the use of
ritualistic symbols.
Which is conceived as consequential steps
towards communication in a fully
developed grammatical language.
According to the term conception,
the occasion and selection regulate, as you know,
putting in a national adaptation of
species specific gene pools to change
environmental conditions.
That does a misconception of natural history.
With the evolution of a species that learns to speak
this genetic mechanism of natural evolution
is superseded by the ever genetic mechanism
of cumulative and accelerating cultural learning processes.
These cultural learning abilities are in gifted
to a cognitive advance,
not only in death but depending
on a cognitive advance that is clearly found
at the cognitive and social cognitive transition
from signer behavior to the use of symbols now
in the literal sense.
The ability to advance signers to con specifics
might be observed among primates.
The innovation then conducts a lessy vocal use of
symbols that carry the same meaning
with different users.
What is new, is a communicative generation
of a public space that is objectively feared
symbolic meanings.
In contrast of our closest and highest intelligent relatives
chimpanzees, do not seem to be able to break out
of their shell of their self differential view point
steered by interests of ones own.
I am here anyway relying on the research
in the knight Institute Anthropology in Liepshit.
And it's step out of, to put it, metaphorically,
egocentrism of the said enclosed crime
and consciousness into the public domain
of Avalon in terms it is "in common"
that there's some idea of developments
of the transition to a new symbolically
mediated form of interaction.
What sits the resting communication apart
is a specific social cognitive achievement
that enables participants to communicate
with one another and now something.
This in a nut shell,
this capability is in a nutshell
what separates homo sapiens from it's cousins.
Relatives, this requires,
now this ability requires homo sapien
can find a new life,
requires the connection of two types
of intentional relations.
The horizontal relation between first and second persons,
who most importantly take the perspective of the other
and the vertical relations established by
an intentional attitude of each participant
taunts and objectified something in the role.
In order to jointly attend to and perceive
the same working in the world,
which is at the same time,
sort of off the features of an evil sentient environment.
Participants must generate an inter subjective relation
to one another and take each other's perspective.
Thus developing,
this is in a nut shelL what Tom Marcelo
put in children comparing with jeopardizes,
thus developing a social perspective
of common attention to and perception of an object.
Interestingly, this combination
an independent nation of two different
types of intentions,
does not happen and that's my point here,
without an intervening physical element.
A disec and nematic gesture.
The physical element has a catalytic function
for the fusion of those different types of intentions
among at least two different persons.
The mediating, physical movement
subsequently acquires an subjectively shared
meaning only of course,
when the gesture becomes associated in
a conventional way with those share intentions.
The fusion of it is of course has helped
to bring them out.
I mean, the intervention of the gesture
is playing this catalytic role of
fusing two kinds of intentions
which are specifically,
namely the objectifying attitude towards
something in the world and the neutral perspective taking.
Which has to become integrated
without which no use of an associate meaning
with the possible.
Thus mastering of a grammatical language
is not yet required for the user symbols
to carry the same meaning with different participants.
However, even simple gestures
must be used in such a way
that first celestial purpose an optional
perspective of the other,
gives rites to interpersonal relations,
and secondly let's the community
communicate an intention directed
towards a second person is first considered
in the inter subjectively shared intention to heighten it
to something in the world.
Now Michael Tomazello, whom I mentioned already
in his collaborators have pulled through
ingenious experiments engaging human children
and young chimpanzees.
No not only young, 70's.
Then inter subjectively shared intentions toward
something in the objective world
as a human monopoly, as we know today.
Japanese rites for ordinary intelligent animals
who have the ability to act intelligently
to understand the practical intentions around us
and even to know practical differences.
You know,
even half a century ago nobody would have assumed
that they are doubtlessness in all these capacities.
The siding cognitive difference
between the ways in which chimpanzees
and human beings can communicate with each other
resides in the fact that these
primates use their impressive capabilities
exclusively in a self differential
sort of say, strategic manner,
to manipulate con specifics
in honor to reunite their own objectives.
They cannot cooperate in such a way
that several con specifics coordinate
the actions with the aim of accomplishing
a shared objective as for instances require
to hunt big game.
This observation does not imply, of course,
that chimpanzees did not develop a very much
emotionally regulated social life,
but at the conscious level on originality
influencing the con specifics.
They act like an operative orientation.
Life within the bowl is regulated
by evolutionary order mechanisms.
If you offer the innovative features
and I'm now going to develop the hypothesis
in more detail.
In view of the innovative putting together
the two lines of reflection I have presented
in view of the innovative features
of human communication retro
that can be an astute and very communication.
They too constitute a neume tic
form of communication that is nice
to share learned of symbolic meanings.
I mean, Tom Marcelo only in his extremital force
analyze..
...cooperative interaction.
That means positive interactive
forms of interaction in a literal mind.
Now I ask you to compare,
ritual behavior with this behavior
analyzed by Tom Marcelo.
Let's make motions of hands,
different mobilities of iconic representation
become fused with one another.
Which would behavioral difference
from other iconic representations.
However, for it's peculiar separation
of character rites to not refer,
to jointly identify options in the world.
Even though this representative function
is precisely what constitutes
the novelty of a visual communication.
Whereas, the resonate movements and gestures
in the whole express shared intentions,
spur the participants of mutual perspective thinking
and trigger another subject and shared experience
that serves all so to say of the
tyrannic structure I mentioned for the user symbols.
Points or appears to point into the void,
not into the world.
We have the impression of a lack of influence
as long as we assume that what is experienced
and intended and communicated about
is an object or state of affairs in the world.
The reverent of this unworldly,
self enclosed communication is nothing palpable,
but instead sinuated in another dimension.
So there's an option to which ritual behavior is a response.
Do not arise from the objective world,
but from within the social worlds.
From a final genetic point of view
which world communication is a response
to specific challenges of a cultural form a life
which emerges with the new level of
symbolically mediated corporation.
An obvious consequence of this evolutionary step
is living in a community, communicatively shared world.
This means first, a challenge of a cognitive kind
when there is activity often too inter subjectively
incompetent in terms of events
placed within a jointly objectified world.
The human mind is exposed to an
overwhelming amount of information
that needs to be processed.
The known must be integrated into
conflicts that are already familiar.
However, the entry into the fumbling world
of symbolic forms is not just a cognitive challenge.
The shift to symbolically mediate it in our actions
not only constitutes a socialization of intelligence,
but also leads a socialization of motivations.
The transition from interactions
triggered by signals among non specifics,
to put it simply.
To the most of symbolically mediated interactions
among all members.
Cause for a revolution in the mode of
how social behavior is coordinated.
The cognitive challenge goes hand in hand
with a simple dynamic challenge
in the course of the revolution in
the individuals relations to the social environment.
The individual consciousness succumbs
to the piece of treasure of simultaneous
socialization and immunization.
That's a fever of sort shows what it means
was the first really to organize.
On the one hand the almost coordinating actions
forcing feasingly on communicative action
in hands on the shoulders of the individuals themselves.
On the other hand the individuals
become a way of effect that the
reproduction of their own life depends essentially
on social cooperation and uncollective service solution.
It's this dependence on the shared objective mind,
so to say this objective mind also
depends on where of the self is an individual mind.
Thus, the individual must have encountered
the complex social organism simultaneously
is exact of an overwhelming force
and yet is upon us of a redemptive force.
Yet, protects and guarantees survival and security.
From the perspective of the individual
the power of the collectivity must be at once.
Resist it and upheld.
That paradoxical experience of being suspended
without the form and with the sway
of the collectivity
and yet having to accomplish ones own life individually.
Is dipping into the reproduction of our form of life
and into the other genetic development of each individual.
If found, by the way, a literally echo
in all source description of the social construct
as an act of individual self evaluation
and simultaneous self assignment to society.
I mean, what's all in con fluid as a reductic al way
of forgetting social life,
or the quality in this case,
but my stance is on the paradoxical nature of this.
Now this figure of sort is instructive
and so far as a social construct
refers to a layer of basic norms that
bring about a legitimate settlement
of the conflict that we the individual in the community
and this is relevant in our context.
The obliging force of norms of action
goes beyond to we normality of credentions.
I mean, in wouldn't have been sufficient
just to learn how to corporate
my hands as mediation of symbols.
It wouldn't explain the obliging force
of social norms.
If we now asked for the original source
of this kind of strong normality.
Yet, finds motives for acting
we must not be on the communicative use of language
in profane areas in social corelation.
Instead ritual behavior often the same
as a plausible candidate for generating
a normative force of socializing down time.
I think that ritual practices,
on the aspects of the generation of social solidarity
in of itself, immunization of society.
Ours manages to illuminate the connection
between both these aspects to life's
let the reverence to something in this world
can be explained by the fact
that late process a self differential theme.
Namely a tension and in a way it's resourceful
and in cleansing in the process of social integration
in the evolution of our species.
This fraction can be traced back
to the condition from the pre existing,
to the existing level of communication.
When the socialization of intelligence goes
hand in hand with an invigoration socialization
of cooperating subjects.
In any form of a community there is a tension
between competing and yet complimentary imperatives
yes of the self preservation of individuals
amongst them and that is the survival
of the collectivity in one another.
Potentially self preservation and solidarity
calls for an unknowing, balancing,
and is relief on it's master one and for all.
Whom the specific normality of an
institutionalized order,
which imposes and distributes obligations for everybody.
In view of the precarious balance
which is continuing in need of a new stabilization.
That kind of way on the normality
springs from a solidarity that has always been,
more obviously even still, is a scarce resource.
And rites can be understood as known social practices
where there solidarity originated
in the early periods of social evolution.
Every destabilization of the delicate
internal mounds of society summoned,
some would say, in practice in the being
in which the individual amendments reassure themselves
of their dependence on the powerful connectivity.
This kind of reassurance had to assume
a self differential form
because the reverent is not something
visible in the world to which one can point it's finger.
Now, at the end.
If we perceive of the ritual regeneration
of social solidarity as an answer to the disturbance
in the precarious balance of social integration
an explanation also suggests itself
for the emergence of the sacred complex.
Hence, for the subsequent as I assume,
connection between this and ritual.
This in the first instance were series of cognitive function
of an incantation of the world
and our place within it.
This is why they are not immune
to cognitive dissonances.
Then of course my collation was mundane knowledge
and gets better in everyday, coping with the contingencies
of the natural evolution environment.
Therefore, a linkage between mythical Methodist's
and ritual practices in such a way
that the mythical contents are staged
and enacted everywhere was certainly
functional for civilization.
Channeling the ways for ritual practices,
must have had an immunizing evening,
but given the fundamentally irreconcilable
conflict between the functions
of rendering the world intelligible
and of confirming a collective identity.
This linkage could have nothing more than a
postponing effect.
At any rate, viewing the actual age
I am returning to the beginning of the lecture.
The major run editions undermine
the foundations of this by superseding
magical sort and abolishing or in the case of Christianity
inverting sacrificial practices.
And in the meantime this religious, metaphysical sort
has had in turn to make its peace
with those that knowledge claims institutionalized
science and proclaims to legitimacy
of a secularized state of growing.
On the other hand, ritual practice has survived
all the way in an organized and very much organized
and religious conditions have preserved
their regality in their symbiosis
with their in surgical practices of the
wildlife religious communities.
Their members can even lay claim to a privilege.
Religious communities, in performing their count
have preserved the access to an experience
and to a source of solidarity.
From which the unbelieving since in offense
and nobility are excluded.
The rejuvenating presence of religion
as a contemporary formation of mind,
pleasure in society raises not only questions for
sociology and anthropology,
but for the geography as well.
And from this perspective I would have had
to give a different lecture namely
that would have been a dialogue
on eye level between a secularist form of geography
and to the rheologist interpreters of
what they get from and on what they depend.
Namely the beliefs of their vital religious communities.
Thank you.
(applause)
- Please stand there.
Sir, I have a microphone.
Thank you very much,
for that wide ranging talk.
You've touched on a whole range of topics
in the span of history.
You've cut across disciplines.
Perhaps not surprisingly,
a lot of the questions that have come in so far
relate to what your thesis might imply
about our world today.
Where we are secularization.
The world of ritual and our contemporary context,
but I want to start with one question that
does link back to your argument directly.
You argue that ritual is a response,
not to the objective world,
but to the fragility of the social world.
What about explanations that focus on the natural world?
Such as the experience of death and natural disasters.
- This is not...
Yeah it's in a way a natural event,
but this, as we experience it,
survives in us or the person that knows
they will die soon.
And I am old.
This is a social experience,
which must have been interrupting social life
from the very beginning as soon
as the time consciousness gets that far.
That it reaches beyond the present moments
and then I think that the really interrupting
a shocking event,
which there still is.
Fix.
Fix, yeah?
The balance of social integration
and that's the same as semblance of
natural events that certain.
So they say the survival of the community,
then there is something that is in need of rebalancing.
I mean I can fool rituals,
that's nothing new I mean as a response
to the disturbance of a kind of fragile
social integration which is always in need of rebalancing,
but which comes, so to say, the consciousness
of the collectivity specifically when
they're snacks from in their own or from within.
- Thank you.
Maybe one more question on your historical argument
before we get to some of the more contemporary issues.
- Is there no objection from anthropologists, I mean.
- You've got a lot of questions here,
a lot of objections.
- I would like from them.
- You can make up your own question as well.
(laughter)
Let's see.
Can you comment on the importance of sacred places,
sacred space and our understanding of the
intra section of myth and ritual.
Is this part of what gives religion
or ritual it's sacred power.
- Space?
- Space.
- Yes, yes, yes.
I mean, now if we all know.
When we now enter a church that has been secularized
I mean, something is missing yeah?
I mean, even for me and I'm more or less secular mind.
I mean everybody has theory into the situation I suppose.
I mean what is sacred space means.
And this is one of the arguments
for maintaining the the differentiation
between the sacred and the profane.
If sometimes, or very often,
even a physical limit that one would guess turn fast
changes consciousness and mood, yeah.
But I have nothing special to say on it.
- okay, okay.
Alright moving toward the host of questions
that address more contemporary concerns.
Drawing on your argument,
can you offer further implications of your hypothesis
for a contemporary world.
How essential are rites for shared meaning today?
If not from religion are there other potential
sources for solidarity and shared meaning
in our modern world.
There's a quick question for you to answer.
- Yeah.
This is more a question about motivations,
I mean, I'm dealing with such a topic at all, yeah.
On the one hand,
I maintain that we have good reasons to exist
on secular sources for justifying the principles
of the constitutions our forms of societies.
For constituting equality.
I don't think that it is not necessary
to take recourse to religious sources
for justifying the principles that can be
led back to either popular sovereignty or to human rites.
These are the two now at least independent
of social ology now secular sources for justification.
This is one thing.
I am not maintaining all of morality
is in need of religious sources.
On the other hand,
it depends on of course, conservation.
It can be other ways.
Controversial and limitations
and over all interpretations of the most
amazing events that are
forming challenges
in our present situation.
It depends on those larger interpretations
of whether you think that...
To put it simply modernity can reproduce itself
on of it's own sources.
It is separative, subjective freedom,
ethical freedom, there's a subconsciousness
reflective at fault to all our connections
and universal dimensionalities.
To put it simply.
I mean I am a silent defender of our
enlightenment heritage.
It's depends on such an overall limitation
of relevant conditions whether you think
that we are in a situation
facing certain challenges will
appeal to our model, corporate model, secular principles.
Are sufficient in order to regenerate
imbalanced social situations
and I shouldn't have to tell you what that means.
I mean living in a society where you have a catch.
In the finite political arena,
which is much more biblical what heaven we knew before.
I mean it's an indication of symbolic of integration
and there I have some doubts,
cautiously, which I didn't have for several years before.
Looking into the kind of social movements
from which I won't expect a shift
in the range of values
that are self evidently accepted in a given society.
Obviously there should be a certain shift
and a sociable historically that's how religions move.
That's how religions get out.
Particularly the socialist movements.
If I might remind you,
in the United States in your as well.
Generally in the West these atheistic movements,
they're all on motivation ally.
If you look into the fans homes
on the most living people go on lenient sources.
I hope your question.
I don't like to be misquoted.
It is an open question whether
we can still expect this kind of social movements.
Which I think are necessary in order to
shift our basic values system.
Whether these social movements will work
without religious motivations.
I am not sure, but I admit I have my doubts. Yeah.
- Alright well maybe I'll read two questions now
that touched on the points that you just made.
One is from a friend of yours, Norman Bervaughn,
who's over here in the audience.
Is there still a use for the idea of political religion?
And the second relates more directly to the issue of
who's social movements
and in this case the issue of ideal ology.
How does your treatment of myth and ritual
shed light on the concept of ideal ology
and somehow inform your work on political modernity?
How are ideal ologies linked to rituals,
trials, protests, maybe new social movements,
in our contemporary world?
- That's from Norm?
- Norman was the first one.
Just the big one on political religion
and then there was a specific question about ideology.
Political religion, is there still use for the concept
in light of your thesis?
And then the question of how your argument relates
to ideal ology in the contemporary world.
- In my last I was relying on my friend Norm
and then he explained it in terms of
social ology and religion that socialists movements.
The view on the myth syncing utility
of the notion of political nomination.
- Well the question here we can speculate
as to what it means.
Is how does your treatment of myth and ritual
shed light on the concept of ideology?
A bunch of good questions here
are how do we translate your insights about
myth ritual and their link back into religion.
Into a contemporary secular content.
- Now in the first place
I am no longer a real sociologist
otherwise I would share this confused notion of ritual.
I have a very narrowly, defined conception of ritual.
Like not unreasonable,
it refers only to what this is facing
and encountering and mastering forces of
conservation and calamity.
This totally liquified notions
that everything is a ritual.
I don't think there is any use for it,
but this is only a climate.
Now in this narrow sense,
we have only one domain where we can,
as far as I can see,
have a discussion internationalism.
Is nationalism which is, in 19th century nationalism
unfortunates not only 19th century nationalism.
I mean.
(laughter)
...was highly ritualized.
And we have still these ritual symbols.
If you see this inauguration of the president
and so on and so on.
It depends.
On the standing of at least longevity.
Whether a constitution is still an astute as we want it.
Or not?
I mean there are a lot on television,
american play the rituals overtones.
And I don't think there's nothing wrong with it,
until makes a case on a religious specification.
Then the limit.
That means every institution that legislate
or have made it.
Which they have to justify full sentences.
In a generally accessible language
as soon as they use religious arguments
we are no longer living in a political society
with a civilized society, no.
And so nationalism, yeah,
I mean,
there's a certain elephant,
but after '89, and after '76 and '89 18 yeah.
If it really counts to country, I mean,
conflicting religions
and conflicting ideological parties.
We must refer to an old that stood on its own feet.
I mean I don't know how much...
- So let's try to think about the distinction
of religious arguments in the public's point of view,
viewed by candidates running for office.
Going on religious traditions.
There's nothing wrong with that.
It's when state power,
state authorities describe and justify
court decisions on legislature.
Did you have to draw on non religious arguments?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I don't know whether I'd consider action.
I mean of course when you think of ideal ology,
I mean,
that's a segregation.
I mean any kind of argument,
any kind of slow, can be used
for ideological reasons.
No, as far as I can see.
It matches conception of ideal ology.
Less implications
because look into the economy
and sections of our national newspapers
and least if we are still important.
Make everything unfair.
Everybody doesn't need to recognize ideology
and honor to make a simple statement
about the problems we face when
reference runs out of places.
- Well unfortunately we've run out of time
for this formal part of the program.
You covered a lot of ground in your talk
from pre history's to ancient history
and you could see a lot of the questions
really build on the contemporary situation.
There were a lot of leads on your argument.
We look forward to seeing how the argument develops
we're delighted that you presented it here in Georgetown.
And in closing I'd like to thank all of you for coming.
I'd like to thank the staff at the Berkeley Center
and office of the president.
And ask you to help me in thanking professor Jabernaus.
(applause)