This is the Fitness Wisdom Podcast.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Jack Cruz.
&gt;&gt; Hello.
&gt;&gt; Hello. Thank you so much for coming on
the Fitness Wisdom Podcast. It's such a
pleasure and an honor to have you on the
show. How are you today?
&gt;&gt; Good.
&gt;&gt; Fantastic. So I would like to start off
with u with an apology because you know
a while back on uh on Twitter on X I I
remember I made a comment on uh on one
of your posts because you u you posted
this one article or this this famous
paper which talks about how light
influences our metabolism and it
contributes to diabetes manifestation.
And I remember at the time I was very,
you know, um, bought into the carnivore
communities and I was sold many
halftruths, right? And also in
university as for myself, I I have a
nutrition degree and they didn't teach
us anything about the impact of light on
our metabolism. Anyway, a couple of
years later, you know, you did this uh
great episode with Nick Jones on the
Mind and Matter podcast about the great
oxygenation event and that was that
really really blew my mind and you
really opened my eyes to how actually
our environment shapes our metabolism.
Not only the environment like the
presence or absence of oxygen, but also
how sunlight impacts our metabolic
health. And you know, now I have a way
greater understanding about metabolism.
And I I want to thank you for that and I
want to apologize for
basically disrespecting your work at the
time thinking that you know it's all
about nutrition. It's all about avoiding
carbs. And I now I would say that you
know like what you say on many different
podcasts how basically you can eat what
you want as long as you're outside. And
I would absolutely agree with you on
that especially if you eat the right
times of the day if you're in the right
environment because I've tested this on
myself. I've done many
self-experimentations over time and I've
noticed that you know how when I'm
outside I notice that I feel a thousand
times better and I feel that my blood
sugar is way better regulated as well.
So um for people who don't actually
understand this concept about how light
influences our metabolism, do you mind
going into the details of how this
actually works?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I think we have to step on
the gas pedal uh a little bit because in
your introduction, you've laid the case
out pretty nice, especially with Nick
Jol's uh podcast. I gave him kind of
what I would call breaking the glass
idea, but let's go back to the GOE and
understand what the GOE really was. The
GOE was a planet 4.6 6 billion years ago
all the way up until Cambraine explosion
about 600 million years ago where most
of the chemistry on the planet was
dirty. Okay? And when I mean dirty, it
was filled
um with lots of bad things in the in the
atmosphere and there was also lots of
nasty things in the ocean. Now from
first principles thinking because you
know no humans were alive back at this
time. We know a lot of information from
geology from uh the tectonic plates and
things like that. But what were the key
things that had to happen that you can
actually still see today? If you like
live in Germany or Poland or UK, you can
go outside right now and take a look and
notice the water there is a little bit
green. If you come here to El Salvador
and see the Pacific Ocean right here,
you notice the water is blue. What's the
difference? The amount of iron that's
present in the water. That's what makes
it
&gt;&gt; green and that's makes this blue. Okay.
So, this is a clue to the black swan
mitochondriac.
Um, what happened to life back when we
had dirty chemistry in the GOE? What was
the key thing that changed the mix? And
it turns out it wasn't food, my friend.
It wasn't endo symbiosis.
It was actually the co-evolution
of melanin and melatonin that began 3.8
billion years ago. So, one of the things
that very few people have asked me,
you're probably the first one that
started the podcast right in the right
spot, the GOE.
So what were the four key dirty metals
that we had to get rid of? Most people
who followed my work know uh they've
heard the many things about melanin
absorbs all frequencies of
electromagnetic radiation. Well, why
would that have been a good thing in
evolution at that time? Well, 4.6
billion years to 3.8 billion years, the
atmosphere wasn't developed. It was
filled mostly with methane and nitrogen
and a lot of other nasty things. So much
more uh light, terrestrial light came
through. So it was a pretty harsh
environment kind of like you see on Mars
today. Although not kind of like Mars,
it's just on a relative basis. So that
was the stimulus for the early melons,
not the melons that we use, the ones
that bacteria and archa use to begin to
start.
And then life had to figure out a way to
navigate uh biology with light, dark,
and temperature. And that's where also
melatonin starts to come up. So they
co-evolve.
But here's the real key story. I done
podcast with I think uh John Jerki and
um and Alexis Cowan and they wanted to
focus in on melanin splitting water
uh and all that jazz. And I explained to
people in other podcasts that this not
wasn't crazy talk either. Why? Because
now in 1986 we have this problem in
Chernobyl where we have a nuclear power
plant explode and everybody in 1986 I
was alive at that time you probably
weren't but one of the things that the
scientist on TV told us that no life
will be able to go back there for a
thousand years because of the radiation
and lo and behold literally 25 years
later all the animals are back in
Chernobyl. the humans aren't because
they believe some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you know,
kind of like the food gurus do.
&gt;&gt; Guys, if you haven't already, smash that
subscribe button and the like button.
Now, back to the show.
&gt;&gt; Um, that life can't find away with EMF.
And if you know anything about the GOE,
the amount of radiation that we had at
this time was off the charts. So,
&gt;&gt; what else does melanin do? It protects
from radiation. So, what magically
happens? Little mushrooms that are
ukariots. Remember, they're not
bacteria. They're not archa. They're
kind of like us but very old in
evolutionary times filled with melanin
are taking the gamma radiation from
Chernobyl and turning it into energy.
It's called radiosynthesis.
&gt;&gt; Okay, radiosynthesis is a a precursor to
photosynthesis.
Okay, so then you got to ask yourself
the next question. Okay, now we know
melanin does all these amazing things.
Here's the number one thing that gets
back to why uh you didn't like me at one
point. The same reason Rob Wolf doesn't
like me. The same reason Sean Baker
doesn't like me because they don't know
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about evolution. Okay, what
else does melanin do? It absorbs metals.
It keelates metals. So guess what else
it does? It cleans dirty environments.
So life at this time was truly about
biochemistry and what happens in that
time. What are the the four key metals
that melanin deals with? There's really
a fifth one, but we'll talk about that
later. Why it's important?
Iron, copper, maganese, and malibdinum.
Okay, for those of you who are pulling
out the periodic table right now, the
chemical symbols are Fe, Cu, MN, and M
O. Okay, they all do different things,
but it turns out sunlight quantizes
melanin to absorb these metals in a very
specific fashion. And remember back in
the GOE, what do we know from Nick
Lane's work and Bill Miller's work that
life bacteria and archae at this time
3.8 billion years ago is simple because
it only can use glycolysis. We call that
today war metabolism. Okay, there's no
TCA cycle yet. There's no ura cycle. Do
you know why? Because belanin has to do
its job cleaning the environment of all
these metals and then what magically
happens iron gets controlled so that we
form iron sulfur cores in every single
uh cytochrome. Okay. Then magically you
guys know something happens. Oh bacteria
and archa come together in endo
symbiosis. A lady named Lim Margulus
came up with this idea. Even her own
husband, who is Carl Sean, thought she
was crazy. Most of her friends thought
she was crazy. Turns out she was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
right. Um, and then what magically
happens? Biochemistry no longer is
really important because that event in
evolutionary history, which happens
about a billion billion and a half years
ago,
turns the ignition switch on to optical
biofotonics.
Now, let me explain to you how it
happens. Imagine spiking your blood
sugar without eating cake, elevating
cortisol, your stress hormone, without
being stressed, and suppressing your
body's most powerful sleep antioxidant
and regeneration hormone, which is your
melatonin. This is why I make sure to
wear my yellow daytime blue light
blocking glasses every time where I
spend time indoors under artificial
lights and in front of screens to
protect my eyes from oxidative stress
and my entire body. And if I'm going to
be exposed to artificial blue light,
especially after sunset, I'm going to
wear my red lens blue light blocking
glasses to support my melatonin
production and release. So, if you want
to protect your energy levels, sleep,
and biology from artificial blue light,
head over to the description and you
will find all of the links with a
massive discount on my favorite blue
light blocking glasses.
&gt;&gt; Once iron is made, copper is the second
one. What is copper a co-actor for?
Copper is a co-actor to create not only
melanin but it's also a co-actor for the
hem protein that cytochrome 4 called
cytochrome c oxidase. What is cytochrome
c oxidase funly do?
&gt;&gt; It makes dutium depleted water. So what
is that? That is the cleanest water on
the planet. In other words, we went from
dirty filthy water. Now we're able to
have water brought inside the cell that
is so spectacularly clean of dutarium.
It becomes a huge dialectric medium that
surrounds all our proteins which in 1941
Albert St. Georgie told us hey it's kind
of funny but everything DNA codes for
looks like a semiconductor because of
its electronic structure. And then other
people came out in the 60s7s and ' 80s
and started to say you know it's kind of
funny water when light hits it becomes
also a semiconductor. So these are like
two semiconductors together. Now what's
the third thing that happens?
The third thing happens is mag m mag m
mag m mag m mag m mag m mag m mag m maganganese mn. It forms a
specific chemical in the goe called
maganganese SOD super oxide dismutase.
Where is that? It's a very special super
oxide that only works inside the matrix
of the mitochondria.
&gt;&gt; And do you know why it's there? Because
it gets rid of super oxide. What do what
is super oxide? Super oxide is a free
radical. For those people in the
audience who don't know what a free
radical is, it has one unpaired
electron. But here's the most important
part because I said something
provocative and controversial a little
while ago that at the Cambrian explosion
between endo symbiosis we went from
chemistry abiotic to biotic chemistry
and then all of a sudden an ignition
switch turns on and life seems to be
able to make light from itself. Now that
sounds really crazy. It sounds kind of
like when a cosmologist talks about the
big bang that everything came from
nothing.
&gt;&gt; But it turns out the same story is
present in biology. No one seems to
understand
that this is a big black hole in
Darwin's theory. Okay? No one to this
day, especially the neodyarwinists, can
figure out why in the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the Cambrian
explosion shows up in the fossil record
that we have 32 filyla. Things are
growing like crazy. And prior to that
all we had was two single cell organisms
bacteria and archa. But yet when we get
bacteria and archa come together all of
a sudden something magical happens. And
what am I trying to explain to you?
Maganesees
sod was the key to the story. Why?
Because it controls free radical
signaling in the matrix.
Okay. Now you have to know some other
key parts.
Where in our mitochondria after endo
symbiosis
does metabolism meet the electron chain?
It happens at cytochrome 2. Okay. And it
turns out maganese sod protects
that cytochrome from massive RO. Now
what do we know about Fritz Pop and what
do we know about uh Van Wick? They come
in the story 1960s7s and 80s. And what
did they tell us? To make free radicals,
either oxygen or nitrogen based, you
have to have oxygen, nitrogen, or ROS or
RNS. Otherwise, you can't make light.
So guess what? When you look back to the
GOE and you go, so melanin was using
sunlight to figure out how much
maganesees
to put in SOD so you could make free
radicals so that you can make light.
That light was ultra weak biopotons.
Okay, now let's go to the fourth metal
since I'm going through this process for
you. Malibdinum. That's a metal that not
too many people know about. But people
who really read my work from 15 or 20
years ago will look back on the
jackruz.com
site and find this really interesting
blog post that talked about something
peculiar about the mitochondria
that in mammals. Remember now we're
talking postcambrian. We're talking way
far down the path. When did mammals
come? Just so everybody's clear. 280
million years ago. Even when the
dinosaurs were here, but they were
little. And now we're the end result of
that. We have this very unique feature
on our inner mitochondrial membrane
where all this fancy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that I'm
trying to teach you about happened. Do
you know it's the only membrane in us
that has no DHA?
Do you know why? It kept bacterial
lineage. And guess what bacteria used to
do in dirty chemistry times of the GOE?
It used to use metals as its terminal
electronic receptor. And it turns out
malibdinum is one of those metals. So
guess what malibdinum was. It is a
remnant of our goe lineage. That's how I
was able to figure out why in God's
green earth or evolution's green earth
we would put leptin below our skin to be
an energy accountant. And then I started
to think about it and I said, "Well,
it's pretty simple. The sun is what has
to determine the stochastics of these
metals so that we can transform energy
from light and then inform things inside
our body. What are those things? That's
the colony of mitochondria that we got
from endo symbiosis.
So when I looked at what malibdumin was
doing, it basically allowed really fast
electron tunneling. Well, guess what
happens at cytochrome 2 and three?
Really fast electron tunneling. And I
was kind of amazed. So then I looked for
something even more interesting. I said,
"Well, since Van Wick and since Pop told
us that dirty chemistry involved
nitrogen and all these atoms, there
should be another remnant, a lineage, a
vestage of the GOE in us." And guess
what I found? There is vitamin A and
vitamin D. Why? Don't you find it
interesting that also on the inner
mitochondrial membrane there's a vitamin
D receptor. So everybody knows that the
sun can't penetrate our body. So why
would God or evolution put the vitamin D
receptor on the inner mitochondrial
membrane? Then I thought about it and I
thought about where it was located
and I said wow it's right before
cytochrome oxidase where we make water.
And then
&gt;&gt; what did we find out in another uh Nobel
Prize 1992 to 1998? We found out that
cytochrome 4 CCO that is uses copper as
a co-actor also is inhibited by nitric
oxide. I was like well god damn that's
kind of interesting too.
So that means we have a break for
electron chain transport before that.
And what's the other interesting
finding? The other part of sunlight,
near infrared light, actually unbinds
nitric oxide from cytochrome 4. So I'm
going, okay, I'm looking at all these
thermodynamic givens, and I'm beginning
to realize I'm seeing a story not of
postcambrian earth, of go earth, and the
remnants and the vestages are still
present on the inner mitochondrial
membrane. Then I began to put things
together really really quickly to get
back to that vitamin A and vitamin D
story. I wrote uh a blog, I think it was
in the brain gut series a long time ago
about this peculiar thing about vitamin
D and vitamin A. Do you know what the
peculiar thing is? They have no nitrogen
in them. They're pure hydrocarbons. What
does that sound like to you? These are
two chemicals that have no nitrogen. Do
you know why that would be the case from
a bioysics standpoint?
Because if you have nitrogen in it, I
already told you the answer. Van Wick
and Pop told us you would make a light
from it.
&gt;&gt; So that's why we don't use it. That's
the reason why vitamin D and vitamin A
have no nitrogen in them. And it began
then to make sense that this this whole
scheme of a mitochondria had to be
controlled from the surface. Now, let me
use again common sense third grade
things for you. And this will really
probably make you upset of why
[clears throat] you formerly didn't like
me and why the carnivore meattheads
still don't like me. But I'm going to
point out something very simple to you.
First question, is melanin on our skin?
The answer is yes. Second question, how
do we make vitamin D? We make it from
our skin. Cholesterol then goes inside
to the kidney and liver gets to the
active form. Right? So now we know how
vitamin D gets to the inner
mitochondrial membrane. But that's two
systems outside in. Remember we haven't
talked about food yet, have we?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Third system. I told you about nitric
oxide that it inhibits ATP production at
cytochrome 4. How do you make it? UVA
light. UVA light outside in mates nitric
oxide. It goes to the terminal CCO
inhibits it. Okay. How do we turn this
back on? Near infrared light. Where's
that come from? Oh, the sun. In fact,
it's the most dominant part of the sun,
43% of the solar spectrum. So, I just
gave you four different ways that the
outside changes all the biochemistry on
the inside. And what is food in this
whole story? That ties to something that
comes after radiosynthesis in the G in
the GOE. That's called photosynthesis,
which happens 50 million years before we
get mitochondria respiration.
So that means food is an [clears throat]
electromagnetic barcode that gets fed
into this whole system that was built
way before food was. So you tell me how
food is proximal
to this story. When you understand the
evolutionary biology of what really
happened in the Archan world before the
GOE, then in the GOE, then in the
precamrian time, Cambrian explosion, and
now you're a postcamrian ukariat.
When you begin to see the totality of
this blueprint and understand the wiring
diagram, it is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] beyond me how you
think food controls you. In fact, the
engines are controlled by the leptin
milano corn pathway. And then you begin
to realize, well, God or evolution is
the most amazing,
you know, biopysicist. Why? Because she
was smart enough to put leptin right
below our skin. What hits our skin, my
friend?
&gt;&gt; Sunlight. What's in our skin? Melanin.
&gt;&gt; Melanin.
&gt;&gt; What did we do? Right. What did we do?
postcambrian primates. We were the one
primate that sucked everything inside
and we became even more complex than who
we are related to.
And that story I laid out in a really
big podcast with Rick Rubin and Uberman.
To this day, Uberman still doesn't know
what I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] told him. Okay? And I I'm
not going to tell you that this story
isn't complicated, but it's the most
interesting story in the world. Why?
Because it's the story of us. It's the
story of life. It's the story, like I
like to tell people, when you go to the
Syine Chapel and you see the two fingers
on the center panel, it's the story in
between that white plaster. Okay? In
Genesis, what did it say? Let there be
light. You know what the problem with
God is? He didn't tell you the recipe.
But what am I trying to explain to you
right now? The recipe is the recipe
begins with melanin as a light wand
stochastically picked certain metals out
to build a mitochondrial engine when the
two domains of life came together and
endo symbiosis. And when you understand
that and you understand it really well,
all of a sudden many of the problems
that we have in centralized healthcare,
in Maha, in the world get easier to
solve. Based on my research, this is the
best chilit in the world. Here's why you
need to know about chilagit. Chilajit is
a herb mineral substance made from the
decomposition of plants and bacteria.
This process taking place over thousands
of years. It's harvested from the Alai
and the Himalayan mountains. Think of it
as a hyperconentrated plant matter that
is made by mother nature over thousands
of years. In many cultures and
traditions, it's known as the destroyer
of weakness. Let me tell you why.
Gilagit is loaded with ionic minerals
which are the most biompatible with our
human body. It also has a very high
concentration of fulvic acid. This
fulvic acid allows those minerals to get
into the cell and do their work.
Minerals are absolutely essential for
all processes of the body from having
good energy levels, enhanced cognitive
function, hormone optimization and so
much more. You name it. This is why I
use chilagit on a daily basis because it
works on a foundational level on a
mitochondrial level. And we know that we
need healthy mitochondria in order to
produce cellular energy. Something very
important to mention is the quality of
chilit. The one I use has been tested
for heavy metals and impurities ensuring
the highest quality shilit. So if you
want to experience this incredible
ancient substance and find the one that
I use on a daily basis, head over to the
description below and use the promo code
attached to get a discount on your
entire order.
&gt;&gt; That was [clears throat] a fantastic
breakdown. Thank you so much. And I
think it's so important for people to
actually realize how biopysics govern
biochemistry. This is such a fundamental
mind shift and an understanding that
where you eat your food is more
important than the food that you eat. Of
course the food that you eat is
important but the environment where you
eat your food how that's going to impact
your metabolism and your metabolic
health and all of these things which we
are seeing today all the issues the
metabolic diseases that we are
witnessing today are because of
circadian rhythm disruption you know
artificial blue light after sunset and
any time of the day really non-native
EMFs all of the all of this non-native
radiation is very foreign to our body
and it's stressing our body out all of
the time and I hope that at some point
like you mentioned that eventually the
human species will evolve to a point
where we will have adaptic mechanisms to
tolerate this non-native EMF. I hope but
I'm not sure if we're going to manage to
do that before many consequences begin
to show up. Maybe maybe it is happening
already. Do you have any thoughts on
that? Yeah. I mean, and as part of my
thesis, if you read it, you already have
some of those compensatory mechanisms
present and you don't realize it. So,
let's uh go back 15 years when I wrote
my book. What's the name of the book?
&gt;&gt; Paleo RX. What does that mean?
&gt;&gt; There's something above paleo and
carnivore that we should think about.
What is that? DHA. What What else didn't
we talk about that much in the beginning
wiring diagram? I told you there's
something unique about the Imm that it
has no DHA in it. But you want to know
the other interesting thing? DHA is in
every single other membrane in the human
body. And and it turns out in our brain,
we have more of it than any other place.
Also turns out what houses the leptin
melano pathway in the eye to the
hypothalamus where the leptin receptor
is has more DHA in it than anything
else. So guess what DHA also is?
It is
like a biohysical Faraday cage in a
sense because it protects us from EMF.
How does it do that? It does it a lot of
different ways, but the number one way
uses the TCA cycle to create mileelin.
Everybody knows the story about children
that their brains are much more
sensitive to EMF. So that shouldn't be a
shock. But what else do you know about
children? and their brains aren't fully
mileinated till 25 years old. Well,
maybe there's a story there that we're
forgetting. This is the reason why
children have this issue with
technology. Then there's another
evolutionary, how shall we say,
uniqueness to DHA that everyone forgets.
DHA is the only lipid on Earth, and
remember if you believe evolution, this
is a big statement. It's the only lipid
on Earth that's never been changed in
600 million years.
Why is it that DHA is that special?
Okay, I'm going to tell you the reason
why. A guy that taught me as a resident,
this will show you how. He's still alive
today. His name is Nicholas Bazison. His
research found that DHA is unlike any
other polyunsaturated fat for one
reason. when it breaks down it creates
things called um neuroprotectins,
resolins, moresins and something else
which is called elvinoids or doc
doenoids.
These are chemicals that are highly
anti-inflammatory
not inflammatory like the people like to
tell you about seed oils. So, it's a
polyunsaturated fat that is extremely
unusual.
&gt;&gt; And Nicholas Bison
did dedicated his whole life to studying
the eyes of mammals because that's where
he is. He's in the department of
opthalmology and neurosurgery at LSU. He
uh taught me that the reason we don't
get damage from uh sunlight is because
of the system that's built in the eye.
Because when we have photo oxidation in
the eye, the system is designed, DHA is
designed to get rid of the inflammation
really fast. Do a hard stop for a minute
and go, "Wait a minute. Doesn't that
sound a little bit like children who are
getting digital baby sat with an iPad or
an iPhone? Maybe they can't have this
protection like the eye has. Maybe if we
can figure out how to fix this problem
sooner, maybe we can avoid children
being digital baby sat until their
brain's fully mileinated. And then maybe
people won't be born with
electroensitivity. And could this be the
reason why uh certain people are
electroensitive because they don't have
enough DHA within their central and
peripheral nervous system? Well, turns
out all those things are true. And the
thing is, people don't understand the
basics because of the question that you
asked me in the beginning, Jack. I was
very interested what you had to say to
Nick Jomes about the GOE. Well, if you
want to know the truth, most of the
people out there, whether they're
decentralized, centralized, or food
gurus, don't know [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about the GOE.
They don't understand how life really
came together and what it's really
doing. And it turns out what happens on
our surface determines what's going on
on the inside. Okay? And when you take
all these little peculiarities and put
them all together, you begin to see a
different side of biology and you go,
"Now I begin to understand why all the
PhDs and centralized biology
They're all beginning to learn a little
bit about leptin. Why? Because what is
the key pathway? It's called the leptin
melanoortin pathway. And when you be
begin to realize that leptin and melanin
are linked really almost for 4 billion
years, but melanin is by far the oldest
evolutionary. Leptin comes later when
life becomes more complex.
And when you begin to understand that
leptin also has an absorption and
admission spectra and it doesn't fit the
sun, then you have to ask the big
question. Why did a PhD researcher who
did his thesis test leptin and find that
it has 220 nanometer absorption spectrum
when the sun doesn't make that light?
Well, what did I say to Yuberman and
Rick Rubin? Maybe the light of the sun
isn't why it was built. Maybe it's the
light from inside of us that we create
from free radical signals.
&gt;&gt; And it was kind of a mic drop moment,
but guess what? It was lost on both of
them. Why? Because they don't know about
the work of Fritz Pop and they clearly
don't know about Van Wick. And if you
remember how provocative I was to
Huberman, I had to explain to him the
1927
study by Alexander Gerwitch on onion
roots because he didn't understand that
mitosis can't happen without UV light.
And we've known about midogenic
radiation since that time. But the funny
thing is all the people in Uberman's
world, which are these neuroscientists,
they still don't understand UV light is
the big key. Well, let's do another hard
stop. Andreas, what translates melanin
from pomsy? UV light. What makes nitric
oxide? UV light. UV.
&gt;&gt; What makes vitamin D?
&gt;&gt; UV light.
&gt;&gt; Oh, we're starting to see a trend again.
So, what has Rockefeller Centralized
Medicine wanted to block since 1911
flexer report? UV light. Let's make the
sun toxic. Why? Because they know what
I'm trying to teach you. Because if you
use UV light, you don't need drugs.
Got it? It's that simple. And they've
done a good job. Why? Because one time,
not that long ago, you thought I was a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Well, I still may be an
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] but I'm pretty smart. And I'm
laying the case out to you right now.
Why you've been lied to for your whole
life by people who are really smart, but
not smart enough to ask the right
questions. All of which began pre and
post go because that's where your
mitochondria was made.
&gt;&gt; Your skin is not just a barrier. It's a
living organ. Anything that you put on
it gets absorbed into your lymphatic
system and your bloodstream. You see,
skin health is a reflection of your
internal health. This is why I make sure
to only use non-toxic skincare products.
This is why I love Fat Skin, a non-toxic
allnatural skincare brand made to work
with your skin, not against it. Every
ingredient has a purpose to nourish,
protect, and support your skin the way
that nature intended. My personal two
favorites are the copper peptide salve
and quantum blue solar powered skinare.
Triric copper peptides are known for
their skin repair and renewal
properties, while methyline blue is
known for its very potent antioxidant
and protective properties against
oxidative stress. So, if you want to
check out the allnatural, non-toxic
skincare that I love to use on a daily
basis, go to the description below and
use the promo code attached to get a
nice discount on your entire order.
Facts. Absolute facts. Do you think that
u the reason why they are manipulating
the weather right now beyond beyond like
uh psychological control? Do you think
it's because it blocks out the short
wavelengths of light, you know, UV and
blue blue light, and therefore, you
know, minimizes our ability to produce
melanin? I mean, I know I can still get
melanin or produce melanin in the
summertime here in Cypress where I live,
even with the chemtrails. But do you
think that that's purposeful in order
for us to, you know, not actually
benefit from the UV light?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, because what happens when
you geoengineer? Let's let's be you
should put geoengineering sunglasses and
sunscreen and clothes all in the same
category. What does it effectively do?
It ruins melanin so that you lose
control of those four metal atoms. What
happens? That means you can't use the
TCA or ura cycle. So, you have to
default to a Warberg metabolism. Well,
just remember what I told you. You're a
postcamrian highly uh uh specialized
mammal that's got a Ferrari engine in
its head. Do you think your Ferrari
engine wants to work on a Warberg
metabolism? There's only two places in
our body that work on a Warberg GOE
metabolism. You know what they are? Our
eyes, our retina, and cerolei cells.
Those are the those are the two big
areas that constantly use a Warberg
metabolism. Why? Because they're
nonprololiferative
and it's simple. And metabolism when you
use Warberg is really fast. That's what
you need when you're transducing light
information, which is exactly what the
gonads are doing too for the same reason
in men and women. They're all basically
optical light sensors. So when you
understand that, that's great. But when
you look at the human brain, remember it
gets 20% of cardiac output. This tells
you something different. The human brain
can't live off of Warberg metabolism.
That's what cognitive haze functionally
is. It needs to use the TCA and ura
cycle. So when you see the post that I'm
so provocative about posting when I make
fun of the carnivore guys, and it's one
of the guys that's blocked me on
Twitter. I give him credit for even
though he blocked me, he still kept
looking at the things that I kept saying
is a guy named Henrik. I think his
Twitter handle is HTW. I don't know cuz
I haven't seen it. But in 2021, he
posted a picture of a paper that said,
"Jesus Christ, Jack Cruz is right. If
you don't see AM sunlight, you can't use
the TCA or ura cycle." It's like, oh,
magic. So, this is the reason why the
story exists. Why? Because of the story
I told you in the GOE, you use the TCA
cycle. You have to renovate your heem
proteins. What's your hem proteins? All
the cytochromes, right? Cuz they're all
iron based. But what's the key one? CCO.
And I told you already CCO as a co-actor
uses copper. Well, what do you need to
make that thing work perfectly? You need
melanin on the surface to control that
program. So that's the reason why the
sun becomes really important. And it
turns out you can do a lot of things
wrong. If you want to know the reason
why Paul Saladino wrote a carnivore book
and then all of a sudden said, "I'm
moving to Costa Rica to eat pineapples."
I just gave you the reason why. It's
also the reason why I don't make fun of
Paul Saladino. He still has no idea why
he found what he found. But I just
explained to you, you know, and guys
like Biolain want to tell everybody
that, you know, Paul Saladino is a crook
and he's stolen from. I mean, you could
say that. I look at it like this. This
is a a guy who's a psychiatrist who
thought he was smart and found out he
wasn't as smart as he thought. He went
through the same process that you did.
You said, "Ah, I thought it was all
about staying away from carbohydrates
and eating fat and protein." And you're
like, "Fuck, it's not." And now you know
why it's not. Now I just gave you
probably the blueprint to truly
understand why the go was the crucible
for postcambrian animals.
Because as those animals radiated, we're
one of them. We have very special needs.
We we cannot tolerate pseudo hypoxia. We
cannot tolerate hypoxia. We cannot
tolerate any changes of the spectrum
that mess with this leptin melano cord
pathway because when we do, what
happens? Places where we have
mitochondrial density go boom. And
that's what maha has seen. This is the
reason why I tell people, you know, I
used to argue with a lot of the stupid
vegans about DHA. And I told them, you
know, you guys always talk [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about
polyunsaturated fats. But here's the
funny thing. Every single study you see
on DHA, no matter what organ it is, the
more DHA you eat, the more healthy you
are. And no one can explain it. Well, I
just explained it to you. I told you why
it happens.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And it turns out these inflammatory
I should say anti-inflammatory chemicals
made from the breakdown products of DHA
protect us. Why? Because they all create
light to actually help us adapt. And
that light inside us actually stimulates
us u to get better. And this is this is
one of the things where cosmology and
and biology meet. So, if you give me a
little bit of time, I'm going to explain
something to you cuz I already gave you
the four pathways. How the outside fix
the inside. So, I want you to understand
that physics is the fundamental part of
biology, not biology.
&gt;&gt; So, if you understand a star, the star
that we're talking about, the sun, the
star goes through a process where it
burns its fuel sources through the
periodic table. It goes from hydrogen
and it stops in our star, especially
G-Class star, stops at iron. Here's the
funny part. I think everybody out there
who listen to this podcast know that a
star blows up. That's what a supernova
is. But they don't know actually the
mechanism of how it happens. So when we
get to atomic number 26 and we're
burning iron.
Iron is a Dshell transition element. Has
a lot of Dshells. When it gets
pressurized in the star, it emits
microwaves. The microwaves come back,
blow the star up. So just think about
this. The process in a star creates its
own explosion. And then when the
supernova blows up, it creates planets
like Earth. It creates all the atoms on
the periodic table that we can begin
this whole process over again about
dirty chemistry.
&gt;&gt; And then we figure out how to do it. I
want you to think about the processes
that you know about in the body that
you've learned about apoptosis,
autophagy, and ferrooptosis.
Doesn't feroptosis sound a lot like what
happens in a star? And what did I tell
you are the key uh quantum tunneling uh
issues for electrons in mitochondria?
They're cytochrome proteins. They're
made with iron and sulfur. And what do
we know? Like every functional [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
out there knows that iron is a bad
member. Like when feritin goes up, every
everybody knows that it's a marker that
something's going on. But you know what
it tells you? It's a marker that tells
you that your skin is too pale. And this
will also be a shocker to
&gt;&gt; this is again tied to this thesis. How
do I know somebody has a problem with
melanin when they come to see me? The
obvious way is I tell them you're pale
as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] But you know what that also
tells me? What is a co-actor to making
the three melanins that that humans
have? Copper. What controls copper? UV
light. What controls that? Melanin. So
when you understand that on this planet
especially people from northern you know
parts they have things called gingers.
Why do we have gingers? Because most of
them are filled with you and fe melanin.
Well it turns out that that melanin has
different effects than neuromelon that's
our head. Most people know the
neuromelanin that's at the substantia
niger is as dark as dark can be. It
doesn't look ginger at all. So what has
happened in the primate tree, especially
in humans, we have now specialized our
melanins to do specific things with
those four metals
&gt;&gt; that are really important in sculpting
our mitochondria. Might this be the
reason why Doug Wallace has found that
we have all these different hlet types?
I'm going to tell you the answer is yes.
So guess what? The story never stops
building. You have to keep looking to
see how it goes. And the interesting
thing, even if you are a ginger from, I
don't know, say top of the UK in
Scotland, it doesn't mean that you can't
act like a tightly coupled hletype from
Nairobi, Kenya. The thing is you have to
understand the system in you like the
solar callus which I've written in blogs
about solar callus teaches you how to
get melaner skin. I'm one of those
people that come from the 59th latitude
but I live at the 13th latitude and I
sit out in the sun all day. I was out
here yesterday doing podcast and
consults.
And do I get blisters on my shoulder
from the sun?
No, I don't. Now, if you would have
talked to me when I grew up in New York
City in the summer, yeah, I got
blisters. I got sunburn and all that.
But now that doesn't happen. Why?
Because I understand that people who are
gingers have a special kind of melanin
that doesn't do a good job in photo
protection. You have to upgrade it. And
you can upgraded when you stay in the
sun. You have that biology in you. Why?
Because if you know anything from the
GOE, what what did the GOE start with?
zero oxygen and went all the way up to
21%. So what does that mean? We have a
gradation of change. And it turns out
that gradation of change, if you want
neuromelanin, the blackest melon that's
in your brain, you have to have
oxygenation that's spectacular.
&gt;&gt; Turns out fel and melanin doesn't need
as much of that oxygen.
&gt;&gt; So what do you know about higher
latitudes? Well, oxygenation changes. So
that is the reason why if you think
about the cover of my book the epip
paleo prescription when I tell you about
I read the monk who sold this ferrari I
said there's something unique about UV
light and oxygen that goes together well
I just explained it to you right here
again that's the reason why humans get
those three different versions of
melanin and that sculpts their their
mitochondria and the mitochondria create
upes and what's the the title of Van
Wick's book light sculpting life. The
story is right there. So, in other
words, I'm giving you the recipe of what
they told you in Genesis. Let there be
light. Now, you're beginning to see how
light really works in us. It's amazing.
It's absolutely amazing when you see it.
It's the biggest story never told
because people don't like to do the
heavy work of thinking. They would
rather just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] eat a steak and tell
you if you do this, you'll be fine.
Well, that's not going to work for
somebody who has cystic fibrosis, okay?
It's not going to work
&gt;&gt; for somebody that has dysotonomia and
hyperhydrosis. It's not going to work
for somebody who's got a GBM. Okay? And
as far as I'm concerned, centralized
medicine has a duty to all the patients,
not the ones that are just partially
healthy or fully healthy. All the
patients, even if the ones are sick as
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] who took jabs and now have turbo
cancers. We need to do our best.
&gt;&gt; Everybody knows about vitamin C, but
have you ever heard about vitamin G? I'm
talking about grounding. We know that
oxygen is important for our survival.
But what if I told you that grounding is
just as foundational for our health?
Your body is literally a battery and
needs to be recharged every single day.
Modern life depletes it. Fatigue,
insomnia, brain fog, and restlessness.
These all sound like a charge deficiency
to me. You see, grounding is not
optional. It's foundational. This is why
I make sure to get my bare feet on the
ground every single day. And to ensure
that I stay grounded 24/7 like our
ancestors did, I use my favorite
grounding sheet as I sleep to keep me
connected to the earth at all times.
Check out my favorite grounding mats and
sheets that I use on a daily basis by
heading over to the description below
and make sure to use the promo code
attached to get a massive discount on
your entire order. Yes, absolutely.
That's why we're having this
conversation, Uncle Jack, because it's
so important for people to realize this.
And you just literally blew my mind
there where you explained how the
different latitudes and the oxygen
level, how that determines the different
uh melanin uh different types of melanin
on the skin. And makes total sense that
okay, on the equator, people are the
darkest, you know, and then higher up,
higher latitude, you know, people are
the whitest or they have the most ginger
or the different type of melanin. So
that's just like truly mind-blowing. So
I really appreciate that breakdown. Do
you want to explain to the audience how
I kind of know this already, but mainly
for the for the audience, how does blue
light actually contribute to diabetes
manifestation? Cuz I don't think that
people actually realize that you can
raise your blood sugar without eating
cake.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, the first thing
[clears throat] you have to know, this
story is complex, but I'll try to make
it simple. We'll start with the new
stuff. this lady who I don't like named
Nora Vocal did a very interesting study
that everybody can look at in 2011. She
took uh cell phones and put it up to the
side of the head and what did she
publish that you can find that when you
have non-native EMF which a cell phone
makes which is mostly RF and microwaves
back at those times it raises your blood
sugar up and it also raises insulin. So,
you got to do a hard stop and go, if
you're a food person, wait a minute.
Electromagnetism in different parts of
the non-aterrestrial spectrum can raise
blood sugar. Why is that? Okay. Well,
the simple answer is is I already
answered it for you. Because it turns
off the TCA and you reycle and pushes
you to warberg metabolism. In other
words, you are back in the GOE. That's
effectively what happens. So, can you
compensate for it? Well, do you have the
melanin in your body? Most people these
days don't. Why? because blue light
destroys melanin. Okay,
&gt;&gt; so let me explain to you how the wiring
diagram really works in humans in the
leptin melanoordin pathway. We have
pomcy which is a gene chromosome 2.
Inside that gene is alpha MSH that makes
melanin. But there's another chromophore
in there called melanopsin. Melanopsin
is the blue light detector. That is
important because the leptin melanoortin
pathway goes directly to the SCN which
is the master clock. It also goes
directly to a the relay for the frontal
loes called the habenial nucleus.
There's no synapses. That's what it
means when I say direct.
This [clears throat] pathway is loaded
with melanopsin like you can't believe.
It's got blue light everywhere. Why?
Because evolution built us to tell day
and night using using melanopsin. Okay,
that's one of the things. What do you
need to know about all the options?
Doesn't matter which one we talk about.
All of them have a weak covealent bond
to vitamin A. Remember I told you that
key story about vitamin A? It has no
nitrogen. But what do we use vitamin A
for? Skin and brain come from the same
tissue. Norctoerm. So the skin quantum
chemical is vitamin D also no nitrogen.
It comes from cholesterol and deoxy
cholesterol goes to you know 25
dihydroxy vitamin D goes to the kidney
and liver and turns into 125. That's the
story of vitamin D in the skin. The
story of vitamin A though is tied to the
opsin. So this weak covealent bond when
light hits it vitamin A gets liberated
in the eye. The roadopsson system is
designed with Bison's loop to take all
that inflammatory stuff and put it back
together in a recycling path. The eye is
amazing. It's able to do it really well.
Here's the problem. Blue light and
sunlight is always protected by red and
purple and green and orange and all
that. But blue light from our devices
doesn't have that protection scheme. So
what does that mean? That melanopsin is
heavily stimulated. So, it disentangles
the vitamin A. And what does the vitamin
A do? It goes and destroys things that
are in cell membranes. Remember I told
you that all the membranes in us are
made of DHA and they're made of other
chemicals.
Well, that destroys them and it creates
reactions. Those reactions make free
radicals. The free radicals destroy
mitochondria. So, it destroys melatonin
because melatonin is made in the
mitochondria. It also destroys the
membranes and that leads to dialectric
collapse. What does that mean in
English? It means that we no longer can
tell the signals from the sun through
this leptin melanocorn pathway and
things destroy. Now for the diabetic
what does this mean on your inner
mitochondrial membrane if you listen to
the first I don't know 30 minutes of
this podcast I explained to you that we
have four cytochromes terminal electron
acceptors after CCO in the beginning
it's NAD that's the first cytochrome and
that's where carbohydrates come in
number two is where fats and proteins
come in number three is just where the
tunneling goes number four is where you
make water and where nitric oxide acts
and here's how it works when
[clears throat] you have vitamin A as is
a wrecking ball. All of a sudden, it
destroys the inner mitochondrial
membrane. What does that mean? Oxygen
can no longer pull the electrons from
food. So, what happens? They get a
backup. You get a reverse electron flow
from cytochrome 2 into cytochrome one.
What does that do? Raises the free
radical signal tremendously. Where is
superoxide pulse made? Now, cytochrome
one, NAD, NADH, cytochrome 2, which is
FADH. What happens when that free
radical is made? Remember I told you
that maganese SOD is right there that
protects the matrix that gets destroyed
because there's too many free radicals.
We can't offset the issue. So
effectively electron tunneling is broken
when that happens.
&gt;&gt; Uh you effectively have a brown out in
mitochondria. What is the the the how
shall we say the ignition switch to get
rid of these mitochondria? Usually it's
apoptosis autophagy that's also broken.
Why? Because melatonin made in the
mitochondria controls those two
processes. When that happens, iron gets
released from the iron sulfur cores and
it creates feroptosis
&gt;&gt; which is what diabetesly is. And what is
the stimulus that allows for
mitochondrial biogenesis? It's very
simple. It's called in the biochemist
vernacular that's citrate synthes which
is the first step in the TCA cycle. But
what does that stimulate? A chemical
called PGC1 alpha. Guess what? Both of
those are broken. So diabetics can never
photo repair themselves because of this
process. What allows them to gain
control, get rid of the blue light and
get melanin back in their body. So what
happens when this process happens in the
inner mitochondrial membrane?
They lose the effect of copper both on
CCO. This is the reason why they don't
have any water. Why diabetics have all
the famous problems with water, why they
pee, they have polyora,
&gt;&gt; poly dipsia.
&gt;&gt; And what's the the other big effect is
that copper is also a co-actor to make
melanin. So most diabetics, type one and
type two are white as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] They they
they're not really good. And it's also
the reason why you see all the slides
that I show that there's a big U curve
and when you go down to the equator, we
have the least amount of diabetics. But
when we go high latitude north and
south, that's where the diabetics live.
Now you should understand why
&gt;&gt; because melanin you need to fixing
diabetes, not food. Now does it help
that you avoid carbohydrates because of
the destruction of the wiring diagram I
just told you? Yes, of course. But
that's the simple smooth brain uh idea.
That's what most of the food gurus will
teach you. You will never fix type one
or type two diabetics until you get them
back in the sun. Why? Yes.
&gt;&gt; Because you have to control those four
atoms.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Connect with the like-minded community.
Get ad free episodes. Submit your
burning desired questions to the guests
of the show. Suggest topics and guests
that you would love to see on the show.
Get access to my programs, protocols,
and blogs, as well as exclusive
discounts on my one-on-one coaching
programs. get access to the Fitness
Wisdom podcast community starting from
just $2 a month. The link is in the
description. I look forward to seeing
you in there. Incredible. Absolutely
incredible. Yeah, you just blew my mind
there. And you know, understanding that
when the mitochondria get destroyed and
now the body can't process that energy
basically that we're putting in, it's
just literally accumulating in our
bloodstream. So the blood sugar is
rising, rising, rising. You know, we've
got no processing centers, energy
factories to process all of the energy
that we're putting in. So it's just
accumulating.
&gt;&gt; Let me let me just tell you that's not
totally true. I think you missed a key
point here. When this happens, you can't
use TCA in your rea. You can't use PPP.
Uh you have a problem with
gluconogenesis. But one thing you don't
have a problem with is Warberg
metabolism. Remember what that is?
That's GOE.
&gt;&gt; What's the advantage of using sugar for
diabetics? In other words, there's a big
benefit. That's the reason why nature
built us this way. This is when we're
simple.
&gt;&gt; Glucose metabolism through glycolysis is
very fast. So you may have uh stripped
out energy, but you can make it really
fast when you use glucose that works if
you're a bacteria. But when you're a
human post Cambrian, you know, that has
a Ferrari engine in head,
&gt;&gt; it's non bueno. So the real problem is
to truly understand diabetes,
it is a huge strain on a very complex
system. Okay?
&gt;&gt; And you can't make new you can't make
new mitochondria. But if you take uh the
ability away uh for diabetics
to use this endogenous old system, it's
a huge problem. The interesting thing
that some of these new fangled guys are
doing right now, I forget the guy's
name. I think it was Scott Zimmerman
because I did a podcast with him with
Alexis, you know, he wanted to make he
wants to make this whole big thing about
uh the lights, you know, that he's
making and this and that. When I told
him, look, you can make all the lights
you want, but sunlight is the best light
for the reasons I told you. The light
bulbs that people make are not going to
make melanin. Okay?
&gt;&gt; Of course. So when you understand what
I'm trying to say to you, and this is
really important, the key mix for most
diabetics is they have to get in the sun
so that they can make near infrared
light. Because what does the near
infrared light do? It unbinds nitric
oxide, which is being made
at record levels to destroy their fourth
cytochrome. Near infrared light slows
all that process down. The number one
food that diabetics need to eat is
seafood for the same reason I told you
before because the DHA is highly
protective when you have this ROS
destruction going on because of the
short circuit in the inner mitochondrial
membrane. But the key thing is if you
can give a diabetic control of those
four atoms, guess what happens?
&gt;&gt; They can slow down the ROS and RNS
signaling in the mitochondria.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Then they can get electron
tunneling through two and three. Soon as
that happens, they become able to
replace the old engines. In other words,
then they can start using TCA and ura
cycle. And then guess what happens? This
is what Zimmerman really found in his
paper that when you put people in sun,
blood sugar goes down by 30%. So to me,
you would have thought that people would
have asked this question more
frequently. There's like a lot of young
guys like you that have done podcasts
with me like and the guy I'm thinking
the most of is Jonathan Jerki. I don't
think he's really understood truly what
that that paper meant. And people assume
that polarized light from say an a red
LED panel is equivalent to the sun. It's
not. You want to know if they would have
done that same study on people in the
sun? I'll tell you what I did.
&gt;&gt; This was 25 years ago. I put diabetics
in the sun. I got their blood sugars
down by 100%.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I could reverse hemoglobin A1C way
faster in sunlight than I could ever do
with a red light panel. So, what did
that tell me? I realized that
terrestrial sunlight with UV in it not
only has the near infrared light, but it
also has the light that stimulates
melanin. And that's when I put two and
two together. I said, you know what?
This is the reason why type two
diabetics tend to be pale and fat. But
this is also the reason why type 1
diabetics tend to be skinny and pale.
And I started to think about the
difference between skinny and fat
diabetics. And I realized what the issue
was. There was a partial fix in some of
those metals that were controlled by
melanin in terms of how many pathways
they could use. And I realized that the
obesity part of the story was the
problem in the hypothalammus that the
the the the energy thermostat like how
they feel the energy flow in their body
was changed.
&gt;&gt; Um and then I started to think about you
know the number one place on the planet
right now like in 2026
where do we have the largest collection
of diabetics on earth? Okay. It's in an
unusual place. It's in in India and it's
in a place where people have eat a
vegetarian diet for 5,000 years.
&gt;&gt; Diabetes wasn't a big problem then, but
it's a huge problem now. We create more
diabetics in India than we do in the
United States and Europe combined every
year. And it's like crazy when you think
about it. And when I started to realize
these people had melanin in them, they
used to go out in the sun and do all
their yoga and everything else. I
started to realize what the problem was
when you eat a vegetarian or vegan diet.
What's the problem? Malibdinum and
copper have a paradox. If you don't have
control of copper, you can't have
control of malibdinum. And that's when I
started to look at foods very carefully
that are in a a vegetarian diet and I
realized they're very high in
malibdinum. So if you have no copper and
you have all this malibdinum and you
don't get chronic sun, why? Because now
Indians are westernized. are not going
out in the sun like they used to. Even
though they have melanin in their skin,
so they're losing the chronic light
stimulus. And then when I thought about
what Google and Facebook did about 20
years ago, they moved all their data
centers to the areas where the where
these Indians have lived for 5,000 years
and they brought more non-native EMF
then the cell phones from Motorola came
and Qualcomm. And then I realized that's
why in the last 25 years we've created
the biggest amount of diabetics on the
problem. Why? because they have too much
molly to copper. And Molly to copper is
exactly the reason why so many vegans
have diabetes and they don't realize it
because these two metals these two
metals are bad. And what did I tell you
about the key with copper? If you have
too much molly, you have no copper. You
can't run cytochrome c oxidase and you
can't make melanin. And that's a key.
And when you see that then I began to
realize well this is the reason why all
the Indians are skinny type 2 diabetics
and all the Americans and Europeans are
fat type 2 diabetics because of those
issues. Also remember that there's a
latitude difference. You know the
southern part of India where like
Bangalore is 20 20 south I mean 20 north
and that's not true anywhere in Europe.
I mean Europe ends really 33 down at the
top of the med. United States, we we're
a little fortunate. We have parts that
get down uh to 20 and 24, you know, in
Key West and Hawaii, but the problem is
Hawaii was loaded with EMF for the same
reason that happened with the Indians,
except our military.
&gt;&gt; And then why is Key West not a great
place? For the same reason, because we
put all this military radar there to
protect uh South Florida from Cuba and
Castro. And I started to think about
these issues and how they link because
you remember this this story when you
understand it you're going to see
different zip codes have different
issues and you have to be able to put
the zip codes together and understand
why melanin was built this way because
in the GOE we had an earth that was very
very how you say variable at that time
from 4.6 billion years to 3.8 In 8
billion years, the Earth was a nasty, it
was like a Chernobyl experiment. And
this is before any of these chemicals
were made. And when the chemicals were
made, uh, it began to allow more complex
chemistry to happen, the complex
chemistry then led to the ability of
having optical signaling. And it turns
out since we're built with optical
signaling, if you do anything to affect
the optical signaling in us, that's
where a disease like diabetes comes
from.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Yeah. So, it's like a signaling
issue and the fact that people are
literally destroying these signaling
pathways due to their uh tech habits as
well. And since we are we are on this
discussion of EMFs and blue light, I
think it comes back to uh an addiction
issue, right? where everybody now is
hooked on their screens, but even if
people try to get rid of their um their
bad tech habits, they still keep coming
back. I know that you know this very
well that and I'm I'm sure that people
would find this absolutely fascinating
if you broke down uh the mechanism of
why actually people can't get off their
screens.
&gt;&gt; Well, that one is a lot more physics,
but I can give you a good jump start. I
have a slide that's in many of my blogs
that I took from Alexander W about the
amino acids in our body [clears throat]
that are photoactive with light
specifically UV light. Most of them are
aromatic amino acids.
So what are those aromatic amino acids
for the non-scientists? Tyrrosine,
felanolene,
uh tryptophan and histadine. Okay, four
of them. All your key chemicals that
we've talked about in this podcast are
made from those amino acids. So let's
talk about the one you really want to
talk about which is dopamine. Dopamine
can be made from uh tyrrosine and
fennylan.
It absorbs UV light between 200 and 400
nanometers to do this. The enzyme called
tyrannise
which is very related to making melanin
as well requires huge oxygenation and
copper as a co-actor to make this
process. So when you understand when
melanin breaks down, when you look at
this slide, what's the next chemical it
breaks down to? L-dopa. What's the one
before that? T3 and T4, thyroid
hormones. So you begin to go, wait a
minute.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; So we make we make a chain of chemicals
that's just like the chain that comes
through the eye when you go from your
retina through your hypothalammus where
your pituitary is, then into your brain.
When you look at the top part of that
slide, you go, "God, that's the whole le
leptin melano pathway right in a
straight shot." And it turns out
that chain goes backwards when you have
pseudo hypoxia. So, how do we break
dopamine down? Well, remember there's
something very unique about amino acids
on Earth that very few people talk
about. I just started talking about it
um because of all the stuff that I'm
bringing to light about MK Ultra. What
is the ultimate thing that people found
about MK Ultra in the military that we
have something called par violation in
uh nature? And I'll explain to you. It's
the weak nuclear force. I'll give you a
quick primer so it doesn't make your
head melt. The interesting thing is when
we're at cosmological levels, the weak
force and the electromagnetic force,
they are very symmetric. In other words,
they act the same. Turns out when
temperature drops, the weak nuclear
force changes. It's no longer symmetric.
That symmetry breaking thing is called
par violation. What does that mean? It
means when things cool down, we got a
homocorality
for proteins. What does that mean? means
we favor one type of an antimer more
than another. So in biology, what is the
thing we're left with? We tend to use
uh one specific stereoisomer of
tyrrosine and felon to make things.
Well, it turns out when you use blue
light, it actually changes the kyality
of tyrrosine. So if you have the wrong
stereoisomer in this pathway, you still
make the same chemical, but it doesn't
work. So that is actually how you can
control someone's dopamine level. And
when the military found this out, they
said, "Well, let's just use
electromagnetic radiation to do it." And
what did they start using? They started
using screens. And in the ear, because
we also have melanin in the air, they
started to use uh microwaves. That's
what Allan Fry worked on. And that's the
directed energy weapons that you just
saw us use with Maduro in Venezuela.
People think this is all hocus pocus,
but I tell people it's not conspiracy
theory when you have patents associated
with this thing. And that's one of the
things that I brought out to people.
There's very few people on the planet
that know the science as well as I do.
But basically what the military has
figured out if we can change the
homocorality of the aromatic amino acids
that get incorporated into your
mitochondria that you may make dopamine
but the dopamine is not functional.
Okay? M
&gt;&gt; uh and that's a real problem and when
you understand that it makes people more
controllable why because their dopamine
level to that leptin melano pathway is
read as normal as abnormal it's low and
how do you get depression depression is
low normal dopamine what does that mean
that goes to that pathway melanoortin
pathway habenular nucleus which is the
relay center for the frontal loes
frontal loes do what emotions and also
planning and behavior that's how they
[clears throat] can control your
behavior that's A very interesting way
of doing it. But remember, blue light
also does all the other things I told
you about. It destroys melatonin. So
when you destroy melatonin, you can't
fix the problem the military gave you.
Why? Because you can't make new
mitochistosis.
So effectively, you become locked in. So
that's where it gets back to that 2500
year old story is Plato's allegory of
the cave. You become a slave in the
cave. you don't want to go out in the
sun and you say, "Put my handcuffs on."
And if you're the people like me who go
out in the sun, you're like, "Wait a
minute. I'm able to make new
mitochondria to get rid of all these
things.
Why do you want to stay in a cave?" And
it becomes very, very difficult for
people like me to explain to people like
your former self why food and exercise
isn't the be all end all and light is.
And when you actually hear this story
that we've talked about for the last
hour and 20 minutes, you go, "This is
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] incredible that these people
actually figured this out through the
process of MK Ultra." And that's really
what happened. And now you begin to
understand why all technology is always
blue lit. There's no there's no computer
made with the exception of Anen's
computer um that's not blue lit.
And then [clears throat]
you begin to understand why Obama and
Biden want to get rid of incandescent
bulbs and make LED bulbs. And they tell
you, "Oh, it's because we'll save
electricity." I tell everybody in the
world when I do a podcast, tell me, "Did
your electric bill go down when you
started using LEDs?" The answer is no.
So that's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] story. So now you
know what they do.
They bring the point source of the
radiation in that controls you closer to
you. That's the inverse square law.
Okay, we're back to physics. There's
your effect. So, it's not hard to
understand when you're willing to put
the work in to to to see it. And for
people that tell me that this is
conspiracy theory, these are lazy
people. These are people that don't
think they're smoothers. I have no time
for people
&gt;&gt; uh who are like that. I want to deal
with the savages that are interested
kind of like what you did. What you told
me in the beginning that you took Uncle
Jack and said he's full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You
didn't like me. This that and the other
thing. Then you started to examine what
I said and you're like, you know, this
is kind of interesting. No one else is
talking about this but this guy and he's
very forceful about what he does. He's a
provocator and he makes you read [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
that you wouldn't read. And when you
find that you string enough of this
together, you go, I can't find any holes
in what he's telling me. Just remember
the story of melanin is now being used
by NASA to protect astronauts in the
ISS. Okay, don't forget that. What else
are they doing?
When they found out about Chernobyl and
people started to look at that and
radiosynthesis was a real answer,
the problem is no one has gone back and
realized that radiosynthesis is more
ancient than photosynthesis. It's been
on the planet for 4 billion years. So if
you don't think, remember what I said to
you, does nature make mistakes? And what
did he say? Yes. And I said, "No." What
I'm telling you in this podcast is
everything began with melanin and
melatonin.
And that really got sculpted by the
crucible of the go. What was the key
thing in the go? Cyanobacteria in the
ocean started to make DHA.
That allowed them to make oxygen. Oxygen
went from zero to 21%. And I just told
you in this podcast how that whole
process is codified in the inner
mitochondrial membrane through those
four atoms through why DHA has never
been changed. Why the VDR receptor is in
the middle of the freaking Imm that's a
bacterial origin story.
Why vitamin D and vitamin A have no
nitrogen in them because that's dirty
chemistry that would affect with optics.
And what really drove the Cambrian
explosion was we moved from biochemistry
to actually electronic optical
signaling. That's the real reason life
became complex. That's what Nick Lane
has been trying to figure out for 20
years. And I got to be honest with you,
I'm a little tired waiting for him.
&gt;&gt; I think it's fantastic that you are
sharing this information with the with
the world. It's so important for people
to understand. Then you know every
nutrition argument is literally flawed
without taking into consideration our
environment and you know where we are
actually conducting the experiments
right like literally every single
experiment that's being done in modern
research and science right now is is
under artificial blue light and close to
non-native EMFs and how does that
actually change the outcomes you know
the of the of the studies as well and as
well of our biology we throughout this
entire episode you've explained How
literally biopysics governs biochemistry
and there are layers to this layers to
health that how we actually need to
address our environment first before we
start adding in things like nutrition
and exercise and supplements and stuff
like that. Those are things that are
after fixing their foundation. And this
is something that I say to people all
the time that you know if you don't fix
the lights that you are under all the
time you'll never truly be healthy. I
used to be one of those people. You know
I used to exercise a lot. I used to eat
right or I used to think that I was
eating right and I used to sleep eight
hours but I wasn't sleeping at the
correct times of the day just because I
thought I got eight hours I was thinking
oh yeah it's you know it's good enough
and uh yeah I still felt like crap right
so eventually I discovered your work
actually back in 2018
or 19 because my partner Tina she was
having some autoimmune type of uh
symptoms and we we literally tried
everything right and then I heard you on
uh Dr. Perry Nicholson's podcast, Stop
Chasing Pain, and you were talking about
the importance of light and uh and how
that's like literally the missing piece.
And I I'd never heard that before, and
that literally blew my mind. Right. So,
the first thing that I did was I went
out and I bought some blue light
blocking glasses. I started changing the
light bulbs in the house, bought a red
light therapy panel, but I didn't
embrace nature straight away because I
was looking for the easy fix, right? But
it wasn't until I truly embraced nature,
sunrise, sunset, being outside more,
embracing the cold, honoring darkness
after sunset, doing all these things,
that's actually when my health truly
started transforming. And also my
partner Tina, she got rid of all of her
autoimmune symptoms. So basically, she
doesn't even feel like she has anything.
It's pretty much like reversed. So this
information that you are providing is so
so important because it's addressing
basically metabolism at the foundational
level and how the body is actually
operating and regenerating and healing
and detoxifying itself. I don't think
people actually realize that all
anti-cancer properties, all regeneration
properties are under circadian control.
And I've had many incredible guests on
the podcast who have talked about this,
but many people who are unaware about
circadian rhythms and who are hooked on
blue light devices and they are just a
modern human and they live life as it's
given to them now in this modern world.
Unfortunately, disease manifestation is
inevitable in my opinion. Right?
[clears throat]
&gt;&gt; It is if you don't understand truly what
photo repair is. The bioysics of photo
repair is complex. Circadian biology is
a big part of that. But you have to
understand the two key frequencies of
light that control it are 380 nmter UVA
light and near infrared light for the
reasons that I mentioned to you already
in the podcast. Uh because this
optimizes
uh the mitochondrial biogenesis. Um
that's the bare minimum. Let me be very
clear about that because I always show
the photo repair slide like on Twitter,
LinkedIn, Facebook, and also my Patreon
blogs, but I don't think people really
understand that slide really well. It
doesn't mean that there's no use for the
other parts of the UV spectrum for the
reasons I mentioned to you earlier. I
the big thing that is uh an issue. I was
just in a spaces yesterday with Martin
Peard and his wife Nosha Nurogen who's
she's a biohysicist, he's a biochemist.
His big problem is the same problem Nick
Lane has, the same problem that Michael
Leaven has.
&gt;&gt; They start their PhD inside the
mitochondria and they think the
mitochondria is the be all end all. I
made the point to him yesterday in the
spaces what I made to you earlier. I
said, let's do a a step back. If
everything in the matrix was a problem
and you think lactate and pyuvate are
the key to this bioelectric problem, why
is it that the retina and cerolei cells
use warberg metabolism? So right away,
what did I just do? I got rid of guys
like Sig Freed who are wrong. I get rid
of guys like Lustig who are wrong.
That's just the simple lowanging fruit.
But then I said to Martin what I said to
you earlier, I gave him four pathways
that start outside in. I said, "These
pathways control the inside." And I
said, "You know, I gave a talk in 2018
in Vermont that said in time it will be
shown that what happens at the surface
is more important than the biochemistry
below." In this podcast, I've laid that
out for you in detail. Everything I've
told you today is not new to me. I've
been saying this for 20 years. You know
what the problem is? The problem is
people need to understand how my work
connects all these different angles. How
biochemistry and biohysics control it.
What I'm saying effectively to you and
to all my critics is biochemistry is
downstream of bioysics. Bioysics is by
far the most important part.
&gt;&gt; It doesn't mean biochemistry is not
important. It doesn't mean that food's
important. It's just not proximal to the
story that I'm laying out here. So, if
you focus in on the downstream, how are
you ever going to fix the original
problem? That's the point.
&gt;&gt; And when you understand that, I guess
100,000 foot view, you go, "Okay, well,
maybe he's not that crazy. Maybe he's
seen something before and he's pointing
out to us.
&gt;&gt; It's true what he's saying. You don't
make nitric oxide to inhibit you know
the four cytochrome unless you have UV
light. That's how it happens. Nobel
Prize was given for 1998. You don't make
everybody knows you don't make vitamin D
without UV light. That's different than
380 light. It's the light that's about
312 to 320. So I don't want you to think
there's no need for that. And then you
know the other thing I told you, you
don't make melanin from pomsy without UV
light. UV light is the stimulus that
causes the translation of melanin. And
then when you think about leptin and you
put that slide up that I always put up
that it acts at 220. Well [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's
even below sunlight. Where's that light
coming from? Could it be that we make
that light from the photoactive
chemicals that come from this downstream
effect which is ROS? Well, guess what?
I'm no longer the one only saying it.
Pop and Van Wick have proven it. Like
this is not like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] conspiracy,
dude. This is hardcore science that's in
journals and has been sitting there in
front of us. But you know what the
problem is? Nobody wants to sit down and
do the hard thing of thinking. Why did
evolution or God build us this way? And
then when you think, damn, leptin's
right below our skin. This is crazy.
Another outside in story. You start to
go and you go, "Wait a minute, but
Lepton's 220. We don't ever get 220. How
does this work?" And I'm gonna tell you
when you sit down and see it all for
yourself, you go, "This is amazing."
When you realize how it all works is so
that I don't have to teach rhinoceros, a
horse, or a dog how to live its life.
This is the reason why God and evolution
built us this way. Just go outside, live
in the environment you live, whatever
gross you eat, you'll be fine. You don't
have to worry worry about it because
everything in metabolis is quantized to
leptin and and melanin. That's it. And
you know, if I tell you that story in
the beginning and you're a food girl,
you think I'm [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crazy. But when
you actually examine what I'm saying,
you go, "Wow." Because this is the
reason why my blogs are so detailed.
Why? I want all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] bastards out
there that tell me I'm wrong, come
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] prove it to me. Because I got
news for you. I've been working on this
for 25 years. And
if I'm wrong, I got a lot of good
company like Einstein, Phamman, whoever
won the damn Nobel Prize in 98 for
nitric oxide. Um there's a lot of people
even E= MC². I mean technically not to
believe that biopysics is really
happening means Gerwitch is wrong.
There's so many people are wrong. And I
have to be honest with you, I don't
think these people are wrong. I think
that centralized medicine and
specifically biochemists have absolutely
poisoned the well of the truth. And
that's why I always tell people PhDs,
they know a lot about a little. To
discover what I've discussed with you
here in the hour and a half, you have to
know a lot about a lot of different
things and then you have to be wise
enough to make sense of it. And what I
try to tell my friends when they ask me
how I figured this out, I always come
back to something I learned about as a
young boy when I was interested a lot in
Einstein's work. He solved something
that's very similar to what we're
talking about today.
Two guys, Herz and Helm Holtz, did
studies in 1870s through 1900 and they
found this thing in physics called the
ultraviolet catastrophe. Nobody could
figure out what the thing was. Even the
best physicist of the day like uh Max
Plank, nobody could figure it out. So
here Einstein is in college, you know,
he wasn't very successful, but he was
sitting there at the burn patent office
and what did he do? He wrote down the
thermodynamic gibbons of the ultraviolet
catastrophe and he looked at the
thermodynamic gibbons. He goes, "How do
these things all fit together?" And what
happens in his miracle year, one of his
four papers, it's called the
photoelectric effect. Now, people like
to believe that everything should be
simple that you could explain to a third
grader. That's like AAM's razor. And I
always tell people when they say to me,
there's no way this could be right,
Jack. I said, well, tell me, what is
AAM's razor? Parimonious about the
photoelectric effect that it only works
with UV light. In other words, red light
doesn't have anything to do with it.
Orange light doesn't have anything to do
with it. But Einstein was able to figure
out in 1905
that based on the work of Helmolds and
Herz, this is the only thing that makes
sense and he wrote the paper. Here's the
ironic thing. Einstein never did an
experiment. Okay, the United States
hires a guy named George Milikin I think
in 1920 21 to prove Einstein wrong. What
does Milikin wind up doing? He winds up
proving Einstein was right. He does all
the experiments that prove that the
photoelectric effect explains the
ultraviolet catastrophe. And then what
happens in science? They give Milicanin
the Nobel Prize before Einstein. If that
doesn't define the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] psychoticness
of centralized science, I don't think
anything else will because we penalize
people for thinking. And that's the
reason why physics in the beginning of
the 20th century was held back for
almost 40 or 50 years. I would tell you
the same thing is going on in biology
right now. That's what I'm trying to
explain to you. But I also think the
same thing's going on in physics right
now. When you think about relativity and
quantum mechanics because what's the
what's the new version of the the 21st
century ultraviolet catastrophe? They
can't figure out how gravity works.
and they can't figure out why relativity
and quantum mechanics can't resolve this
problem. And I've actually thought about
that problem. I'm I'm more interested in
that problem right now than the stuff
that I talked to you today cuz I think I
know what the answer is. But I know that
I'm going to have to spend another 20
years doing the same thing that I did
with this melanin mitochondria story.
And to be honest with you, those that's
the things that I like to spend my times
thinking about when I'm out here.
But I think the stuff that we talked
about today as a doctor I had 40 years
of seeing my patients fall apart
and I believe that is actually the same
thing that Einstein did in the patent
office where he saw these thermodynamic
events and he had to make sense of it. I
had to see a lot of sick patients to
really figure out what was wrong with
them. And then when I figured it out and
came up with the leptin prescription and
I started to see all these people get
better that couldn't get better. kind of
like your girlfriend.
I was stunned cuz I didn't believe it
either. I said, "We've got everything
backwards because we keep looking inside
out when the story is outside in." And
when you think about it like that, then
you then you start to realize nature was
a wise uh theoretical biologist when she
put leptin underneath the skin
uh in us. And when you realize that
almost every single animal on this
planet, no matter if it's GOE or not,
has melanin in its surface and the most
complex ones tend to have more melanin
inside than on the surface. Doing very
specific things, you know, like the some
of the things that you asked me about
about uh dopamine. I mean, most people
know that Parkinson's disease is tied to
neuromelanin destruction in the
substantia.
Um, and that story uh is not solved even
to this day in centralized medicine. I'm
a brain surgeon. I know a lot about
this. I've done a lot of these surgeries
to try to help people out. And what are
the surgeries all tied to? Putting a a
hole in your head, putting a wire down
there to put a DC electric card in
there. Well, that's exactly what melanin
does. And
&gt;&gt; it's amazing to me that we don't think
about that. We would rather spend, I
don't know, $100,000 doing this fancy
operation to put a wire in someone's
head than instead of telling them, "How
about you clean up your environment, get
melanin on the outside so you can suck
it on the inside and you can fix your
own substantion."
&gt;&gt; But it turns out people in New Jersey,
New York, people in Finland, they don't
want to do that. They would rather have
a hole drilled in your head and, you
know, put a device in there to improve
the situation. And and functionally when
you have the device in there long
enough, it actually doesn't work either.
It's better than the drugs, but it's
still not better than how nature built
us.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. Wow. Fantastic
breakdown. Would you say that uh
artificial blue light then and
non-native EMFs contributes to brain
damage?
&gt;&gt; It's the cause of brain damage, most of
it. And um I think it's the number one
cause of all diseases. I think if you
really wanted me to break it down, I
used to believe that blue light was the
big issue, but I think I would put
polarized light on top. That's all the
light that's man-made. I'd put blue
light second because there are some
versions of blue light that are not
damaging. I And you know, I I've said
this to people before. Um fire was the
first um non-native EMF light. Why
people don't realize that fire is
partially polarized and we even have
evolutionary proof that that light is
enough to change us. Why? That's how
Neanderthalss lost 125 gra uh grams of
brain and we became took over for them.
So their brain shrunk and us showed up.
But the real the real true part of this
story uh that links to this Neanderthal
story that people don't like to hear,
people think all these new diseases,
they call them Neolithic diseases,
that's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] too. Why? Because all
you have to do is go to Europe, I should
say, go to Egypt and look at the King
Tut exhibit and you'll see the mummies
in the ground who lived inside with the
fire versus the Anubians that were
buried on the side of the Sphinx. The
Inubians were perfect humans. Perfect
skulls, perfect dentition,
thick outer and inner table of their
bones. These were the guys that built
the pyramid in the shin. They were they
were as healthy as healthy could be. We
can tell from their fossils. And yet,
when we x-ray King Tut and all the
pharaohs, they have all the diseases
that we have. Remember, there was no
power grid then. So, what does that tell
you? How really important light is. And
that light, fire light, is only
partially polarized. So why did I tell
you that I put polarized light above
that? Because probably in the last 10
years, I realized that I was doing my
tribe a disservice.
Even fire light from candles disrupts
melatonin. It's not very much, but it
does it. And if it does it, that means
it can start this process of unraveling,
you know, the evolution of what happened
on the inner mitochondrial membrane. And
I think people need to know that it's
the same reason why I don't do affiliate
marketing for red light guys. Why? Yeah,
it's good. It's better than the the LED
lights. But remember, most of the red
lights you have, they're all polarized.
So, are you really doing yourself?
&gt;&gt; The answer is no. So, why do you always
see on Twitter when people ask me what's
the best red light? I always put sun is
Tina. What does Tina stand for? There no
alternative, right? Hopefully now you
understand why I say this because of
this story that I gave you for the last
hour and a half. And no, I'm not going
to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sell you a half truth. I'm
going to tell you the hardcore truth and
I don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] if you like it or
not
&gt;&gt; because the bottom line is I didn't make
the rules. Nature or God did. I'm just
interested in really understanding it so
that I can help my patients and my tribe
reverse diseases that are killing them
and costing them a lot of money.
&gt;&gt; Yep. And your work is so important, Dr.
Jack, and and never stop. Keep going
because it's absolutely life-changing.
And you've helped so many people around
the world to actually transform their
health by using the power of nature. not
pills, not supplements, not not some
like special protocols, but teaching
people how to be the lion again.
Teaching people how to be the animal
that they're supposed to be, right? Just
to to embrace their environment and
extreme cases requires extreme measures,
right? That's why when you say to people
if they're really sick and they live in
the UK, you tell them to move to the
equator. Obviously, the sun in the UK is
probably not going to save them in that
situation, right? Because it's not
strong enough. Again, that inverse
square law and then that intensity that
we talked about previously, moving
closer to the equator is going to be way
beneficial.
&gt;&gt; To make it simple though, for people to
understand, people that live high
latitude now with non-native EMF and
polarized light, basically what that
did, you just sent a signal to your
mitochondria that you're a bacteria in
the GOE. So, when you want to know why
your immune system doesn't work, your
brain doesn't work, you basically can
only work on a Warberg metabolism
everywhere. And if you do it long
enough, that's how you wind up with
ankcoenesis and things like that. You
have to understand you need to use when
you're a postcambrian mammal that's
highly specialized,
you must use the TCA and your RIA cycle.
You still are going to use Warberg, you
know, to do different things in you like
eyesight and your germ line, but what
you need to understand is that you have
to fix the system. So when like your
girlfriend had all the autoimmune
conditions, the way I want you to think
about it from this point forward, your
girlfriend's insides were like the go.
She needed something to clean the
chemistry to get her back to optics.
What was that UV light? That's the big
problem with people who have autoimmune
condition. I don't care which one it is.
You got to have
&gt;&gt; about 250 to about 400 nmter light. You
get that light all the time. You can
clean up any autoimmune condition you
have. Now, you do have to know how to do
the solar callus and this and that and
photo repair, but it's not really that
hard once you learn that. It's just like
people will not change their behavior
until they know why they're doing what
they're doing. But the key is once
you're able to do that, then you can
start to learn all this stuff and
realize why you're doing it. It this
isn't going to be for everybody because
a lot of people don't like to think, you
know, that's why they like Twitter. They
they think I can teach them quantum
physics in a couple of tweets and I
can't. You know, it's just not the way
that it works. You know, when you think
about what I had to do, it took me
almost 50 years to go through this
process to see probably hundreds,
probably thousands of people get sick
and die and live and reverse diseases
before I woke up. I tell everybody I was
as stupid as Shawn Baker was, stupid as
Paul Saladino, stupid as Peter Atia,
stupid as Yubberman prior to 40 years
old. I would recommend the same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
they did. Well, from 40 years old to
now, 25 years later, no. Sorry. Now, I
want to punch all them in the mouth with
facts. The real thing. And you know
what? I don't care about changing them.
I don't care about changing other
doctors. Right now, I realize the most
effective thing after doing this for 25
years is to go straight to the end user,
the patient, because there's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
doctor inside you.
&gt;&gt; And all you have to do is make sure
there's no middleman. You get in nature
just like the wild animals do. Become a
wild human. Become the Anubians that
build the pyramids, the shrinks. And
guess what happens? You don't need Peter
Ailla. You don't need to pay him
$250,000.
You don't need Chris Cresser. You don't
need Rob Wolf. You don't need any of
them. You don't need any of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Dave
Asprey supplements or his vibration
plate or whatever the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] new thing
he's selling. Okay? The bottom line is
we were built two to three million years
ago to subsist without Gold's gym, to
subsist without processed foods, to
subsist and survive and thrive without
all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that you guys waste
your money on. And guess what? That 1%
of the population that's out there,
those are my people. Those are the
people that I want to teach. I want to
teach them to be wilded humans again
that know how to clean the dirty
chemistry
that the modern world is building that
mimics what happened in the GOE. Once
you do that,
you become unfuckable with. You become a
savage. You you become
a person that other people are drawn to
because they know you're authentic and
you're not bullshitting people. And
there's nothing that aggravates me more
than people who [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] lie to you for
some incentive. I'm sorry. That that
just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] rubs me the wrong way. It
just does. And I think I have a duty. I
took the duty when I went to medical
school to do no harm. And I know that I
harmed a lot of people before I was 40
years old. And my duty now is to do
podcasts like this and teach [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
people what I've learned. And if it
comes across on the podcast that I'm mad
as hell, you're damn right I'm mad as
hell because a lot of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] people
lied to me. And I thought I was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
smart. And you know what this process
taught me? I wasn't that [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] smart.
And this is the reason why. I don't
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] trust anybody. I question
everything. And the reason why is
because when you believe [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you
have to put a lot of energy back in the
equation to figure out the truth. It's
going on in politics now. It's going on
in money. And it's certainly going on in
centralized medicine. And I believe if I
can get people healthy so that they can
think, they'll be able to f figure out
the politics and the money thing on
their own. The for me the most important
thing for the savage is get their
ability back to think
&gt;&gt; to not survive or thrive. That's the
key.
&gt;&gt; 100%. Absolutely. I was going to ask you
actually um a question about you know
BTC, Bitcoin and uh wealth and and how
health and wealth are tied but do you
have any time on your hands left?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I got a little bit of time before
I got to go see a patient.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. So, yeah, that was my last
question that you know tying it all
together about lack of trust, you know,
lack of trust with our governments, with
our monetary system. How are how is
health and wealth actually tied and why
should people actually care about
Bitcoin? This is obviously not uh
financial advice.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean it's pretty simple. The
most valuable asset on the on the planet
is what we spend the first hour and 40
minutes discussing. It's time. If you
don't have time, you don't have
anything. So, when you understand that
Bitcoin allows you to take time and
value and take it across, you know,
space time, which is what happens, that
means all the work that you did for 60
years of your life. If you're able to
put in an asset that nobody can debase,
nobody can steal from, there's no
middleman trying to get your money, then
you able to do things. So, for example,
Andrea, Andreas, if your girlfriend had
this ability, say she had money and I
said, "Look, you need to go to the
tropics to fix yourself. It's going to
take three to four years to do." If you
had Bitcoin, this would be simple for
you to do. Most of the people in the
world now, they only have maybe one
check. Some people don't even have that
anymore. Why? Because governments all
across the world, including the United
States, are debasing money. What is
debasing money a nickname for? It's
inflation. What is inflation? Inflation
is time theft.
&gt;&gt; Okay? It's it's absolutely time theft.
And when you understand that, that
Bitcoin puts time back in your bank
account, then you begin to go, okay, so
this is why Jack is telling me that
health and wealth are fundamentally
linked. Because if we have good money,
it allows us to buy good health because
we can go to environments where we can
get melanin, where we can get UVA light,
where we can get near infrared light,
and we're not stuck in a cubicle
somewhere in [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Oslo or Barcelona
or New York City that makes us sick.
Because what's the easiest way to
control us? Anybody who's sick knows
that being sick is a re not only really
expensive because you're tethered to the
centralized medical system, but then
you're going to be tethered to
pharmaceuticals. You're going to be
tethered to this to that. You're going
to think you need your doctors. Like,
you become Plato's allegory in the cave.
And then, can you go out and thrive? Can
you come out here and go, you know,
surfing with me in that ocean right
there? Can you come out here and have a
mango off the tree? Can you come out
here and push some of the big tires in
the front yard over and uh you sit down
and have a discussion with me about all
the recent Epstein files released? Can
we talk about what really happened in
COVID? What Kevin McCirin and Philip
Buckold? No, you can't do that. Why? Cuz
you're sick as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You can't do
anything. You're laying in a bed. You
can barely move. You have fibromyalgia.
You can't think. you have breast cancer
and you cry that you need my help when
you can't even help yourself. Well, my
goal is to teach people if I give you
time back, make sure you use that time
wisely. And the best way for you to do
that, even if you don't need the money,
is remember you have another generation
behind it. Some of those people are
going to have to be saved. If you
understand what
evolution and God are all about, it's
about survival of the wisest, not
survival of the fittest. And that means
we need to have a new generation to
propagate down the road. Okay? Life
always finds a way. And right now,
governments are doing things to us that
are trying to taper the Ponzi scheme and
take us out. That's really what this
podcast was all about. How did the
government turn the modern world into
the modern GOE? and how do we stay away
from that issue? That's really what the
podcast was about. So, when you asked me
the last question about how health and
wealth are linked, if you didn't think
about it before you asked me that
question, then I think you need Jack
Cruz's teachings more than you can
imagine because it tells me your brain's
not really working well. And I want your
brain to work well. I want you to
understand that your brain is the
penultimate Ferrari postcambrian engine
that absolutely needs the TCA and ura
cycle to work. And when you give it that
opportunity by doing all the things that
we talked about, you will become a
wilded human once again and humanity
will begin to thrive. Um, right now I
think the elites, the global elites, the
globalists, the transhumanist
technologist,
they are actively trying to push this
back to the GOE. So we go back to
medievalism and feudalism. And if you
understand that idea from a 100,000 foot
view, then you'll understand why I do
the things that I do. I push back on
them all the time. And I I want to teach
people even after I'm dead
that they can be a savage. Like I'm
sitting in my backyard right now under a
bamboo tree and over here a tropical
tree. I didn't plant these trees.
Somebody 50 years ago did.
I'm getting the benefit of them right
now. I think what I'm saying to you is
some of the things that we talked about
in this podcast. It's like me planting a
seed that eventually will become a tree
for your family. I'll be dead, but your
son, your daughter, your grandchildren,
they will get the benefit of this. Why?
So that we can keep fighting the evil in
this world that's trying to push us back
to the GOE. And just remember, they're
not going to stop. The bankers and the
transhumanist technologist, they don't
care about us. We have to care about us.
And the way we do that, it's by putting
more time back in our bank accounts.
That that aggravates them more than
anything you can imagine. that we are
not oil subjects to their centralized
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Um, I want you to be a
decentralized savage. And I told you for
an hour and a half how you do that in
decentralized medicine, Bitcoin allows
you to do it in money. You link those
two together,
you become unstoppable. You become a
savage. You become unfuckable with
&gt;&gt; I love that. Thank you so much for all
of your work, Dr. Jack Cruz. You know,
it's so important in the world. You're
absolutely changing lives and I can't
wait to actually publish this episode to
my audience. And where can people find
you and connect with you if they wish to
do so?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, every every place on social media
is Dr. Jack Cruz. There's a lot of fakes
out there, but the name is never
changed. [cough]
Probably the the work that you can see
without being a member. Twitter, if you
decide you want to be a patron, only
costs five bucks a month to read all the
blogs that I write. Um, it's uh
patreon.comdrjack
cruz. I do a lot of free things on
LinkedIn. You can follow me on LinkedIn.
I think there's over 250 articles there.
Just published one today.
What else? Uh, I don't use Facebook as
much because I don't like meta. I don't
like uh the globalist transhumanist
there. But I do post one link a day.
It's usually to give my savages a
lesson. I don't know if they follow it
or not, but that's usually what I do. I
think Twitter is probably the place I
have the most engagement, but I think
that's going to change because Elon Musk
is finally caught up to uh the fact that
I don't really like him that much
because he's one of the transhumanist
technologists that
&gt;&gt; satellites and Neuralink to eventually
try to control us through the DoD and
the Department of Defense and DARPA. But
uh I would imagine when that happens
then I'll eventually go to Noster. I
don't use Nostra too much now. I do have
a Nostra account, but I don't use it
because it's really hard to get a lot of
my information over there, but I I would
assume that's going to change down the
road. I think the best way is my
website, drcruz.com.
The website you have to sign up for. If
you put any disease in a search box on
my site, you'll come up with an answer.
It's free. You don't have to pay for
anything on that site. I just require
that you sign up. Why? Because it keeps
a lot of the bots out. That's the reason
why the sign up exists. And then um if
you want feedback from me, you want more
of my time, then become a member. Best
way is gold member on my site. You'll
get interactions with me. You can talk
to me at least once a month because I do
Q&amp;As's. The Q&amp;As's last anywhere from
two to six hours depending on how good
or bad the questions are. And um then if
you really want me and you want me to be
your doctor, then you got to hire me.
Uh, bring your Bitcoin wallet. It's
going to cost you.
&gt;&gt; Fantastic, Dr. Jack. Thank you so much.
I will make sure to put all the links in
the description below so people can find
you and I would absolutely love to do it
again in the future. I know that there
is so much more that we can dive into
and talk about and please stay on the
line when I end the call,
&gt;&gt; okay?
&gt;&gt; If you guys enjoy the topics and guests
I bring on the show, I would really
appreciate it if you left me a fivestar
review on Spotify and subscribe to
Fitness Wisdom Podcast on YouTube as
well. This helps to spread the knowledge
and wisdom with the world. Until next
time.