Dr. Gilman, the one in the middle. Um,
he is an ordained rabbi. He is an
ordained rabbi through the Jewish
Theological Seminary. Um, while he is
now a professor of Jewish philosophy.
Throughout his distinguished career as a
rabbi and an academic, Dr. Gilman has
been known as both a prominent figure in
the conservative movement and an
intellectual iconoclast. I will leave it
to him to tell us more about our
evening's guests. Please join me in
welcoming Dr. Neil Gilman. Thank you
very much.
Thank you and welcome to you all. Uh let
me first outline the procedures for this
evening.
Uh there will be two initial
presentations
of 15 minutes each. Um
the first by Mr. Hitchens, the second by
Rabbi Vote.
This will be followed by two 10-minute
rebuttals in the same order. Uh which
will then in turn be followed by two
fiveinut rebuttals.
This should leave at the end
approximately 30 minutes for questions
from the floor which will be screened by
the Y staff and passed on to me and I
will read them and present them to our
two speakers.
Christopher Hitchens
has written prolifically for periodicals
including The Nation, The London Review
of Books,
Harper's The Los Angeles Times Book
Review Slate, The New York Review of
Books, Newsweek International, The Times
Literary Supplement, and The Washington
Post. He is a contributing editor to
Vanity Fair. He is also the author of
more than 10 books including Why Orwell
Matters, The Trial of Hen Henry
Kissinger, Letters to a Young
Contrarian, and most recently, The
Portable Atheist, and God is Not Great.
Rabbi Schmully Bayak is host of the
Rabbi Shmuli Bateak show on the Oprah
and Friends XM satellite radio network.
He has been named a finalist for
Brandeise University's new Charles R.
Bronman visiting chair in Jewish
communal innovation.
That competition will be uh determined
within the next few weeks. He is the
founder and chairman of this world. Um
the Jewish value network
the whole world
worked.
That's what they wrote. That's fine.
Okay.
And just released his 19th book, The
Broken American Male.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's my pleasure
to present Christopher Hitchens.
[Applause]
Shalom.
Thank you very much for coming, ladies
and gentlemen. Thank you, Rabbi, for a
very generous introduction. Um, I don't
know how I'm going to fill up 15
minutes. Uh, after all, the burden of
proof is not with me.
Uh, but
I can probably make a
that that is going to take some time
making the case. Um, but I think I can
probably make a fist of it. Um, I prefer
to argue and I do in my book that the
belief in a supreme being or creator is
actually a penicious belief that does a
great moral and intellectual damage to
our poorly evolved primate species. And
I'm hoping that we will in the course of
this evening get to the point about the
ill effect of religion. But I'm not
going to duck the obligation imposed
upon me by the motion before us, which
is to give the reasons uh why we're so
lucky uh as to be furnished with so
little evidence for such a horrible
proposition.
Um
and falsity after all is is a
subdivision of peniciousness.
Uh
religion however does stand having
started in that projorative manner does
in a way stand to our credit. Uh we are
after all imperfectly evolved primate
mammals though we are and aware of our
kinship with other such creatures. We do
have the gift of pattern seeking in our
minds and we will pursue this gift often
at our own expense but a great hazard
and often with great ingenuity. Um that
has a plus side and a minus side. It
often means very often means you'll have
observed it in your own lives and those
of others uh that we prefer junk
explanation to no explanation at all or
a conspiracy theory to no theory and
religion takes its place in our
evolution in this precise manner. It's
the first and worst explanation we came
up with. It's what we it's the best we
could do when we didn't know we lived on
a cooling planet with big fishes in its
crust. When we didn't know there were
microorganisms that had power over us,
we didn't have dominion over them. To
the contrary, when we didn't know we
lived on a spherical planet, we didn't
know we revolved around other spherical
bodies. Everything was terrifying, new,
mysterious, uh, and often lethal. Um, it
was our first attempt at philosophy in
that way. First attempt at cosmology,
first attempt at geography, biology, all
the rest of it. a hopeless attempt
belonging to the balling, fearful,
ignorant childhood of our species, but
very necessary and it possesses still
the advantage of having come first. The
terrible advantage over the mind and
over learning that it possesses is its
originality. And the history of human
emancipation is the struggle to get away
from this terrifying, foolish, ignorant
uh first try. Um, and I can see that we
have still some distance to travel, but
we have made a start
now.
Um, you can argue it because it's still
here. We know we know a little bit. Of
course, we don't now think that the
Aztecs were really on to something. We
don't think that all faith-based is
better than none. We don't think you
need to wrench a living heart out of a
chest cavity to make the sun come up
every day. Um, we've been through the
list of gods. It's in my uh edited
collection, the portable atheist. Mean
actually drew up a list of very nearly
10,000 gods that used to be worshiped
and aren't anymore. As my friend Richard
Dawkins says, everyone's an atheist.
Nobody believes in the sun god Rah
anymore. Nobody believes in Capetal
anymore. Nobody believes in Juno and
Venus anymore. Um, you're all atheists
as far as that's concerned. Do you look
with pity on those who support or ever
did such cults? All we say is make it
consistent. Just go one god more and
you're nearly there. Um
Peter Dere puts it Peter Dere who poor
guy brilliant novelist and and great
great essaist who poor guy was brought
up Dutch reformed in Illinois says in
his wonderful discussion of religion
slouching towards Kalamazoo it's called
I recommend it. Um people used to be
poly polytheistic. Uh they believed in
many many many gods. Then for some
reason they decided to narrow it down to
one. They're getting nearer to the true
figure all the time.
Uh this is the struggle I want to invite
you to join. Ladies and gentlemen, at
the the easiest way I think to clear
your mind of such remaining illusions as
you may possess or labor under is the
following. um the great words of Llas,
the first person to develop what's
called the Aurory, a model of how the
cosmos and the universe would look uh as
if it was viewed for the first time from
the outside, the circulation of the
heavenly bodies and the planets. And he
showed it to the emperor Napoleon, who
wanted to know how this great genius,
the only rival to Newton in his time,
Llas, had managed this. And he
demonstrated to the emperor how it
worked. And the emperor said, "But
there's no god in this uh machine." and
Lelass says, "Well, it works very well,
your highness, without that assumption."
Um, not just science, but our own other
reflections have told us that there is
nothing remaining to be explained that
could only be explained by the existence
of a supreme being, creator, or first
cause. The universe and our lives too
all operate exactly as you would expect
them to if there was no such thing. Why
does the delusion persist? Well, we
might get to that. I think it has a lot
to do with wishing. Um, and not wishing
only for desirable things either, such
as the survival of death. Uh, but also
wishing for things that are less
desirable, such as the triumph of uh,
ourselves over others with God on our
side, having made a special covenant
with, say, just one tribe in Bronze Age
Palestine. The most reactionary idea
probably ever invented by the religious.
Um, but you'll see analogies of it
everywhere God is discussed. or the need
for a for a a terror a terrifying
supreme dictator. Um nature is said to
have said that God is dead. Freud is
said to have said that God is dad. Um
others others clearly believe that we
would be better off. In fact, we
wouldn't have we wouldn't have any ideas
of our own if we couldn't submit to a
celestial totalitarianism, a final
unanswerable authority uh in the
heavens. This is wishing but of a very
unpleasant kind. shows again how poorly
we have evolved ourselves from the
fearful uh primate and mamalian species
that first crawled out of the mire. Now
there are global and cosmic uh versions
of this. I have time I think for a few
minutes remaining to deal with them uh
with them both. Start with the cosmic.
Why not? Um
there are four I think it's 4,000
billion observable galaxies now. Anyone
who claims to know a lot about all of
these has sources of information denied
to me. But we know a little bit about
them and a lot more than we used to do.
And Edwin Hubble noticed rather famously
a few decades ago that they're all
moving away from each other rather
rapidly. It's what called the red light
problem or observation very rapidly
indeed in fact. Um
now this has very important implications
because it was thought until 9 years ago
that because of gravitational factors
that rate of expansion would surely by
now be slowing. They'd still be
expanding moving away from each other
fast but less fast all the time. No, the
rate is going up. The speed is is
increasing. Uh Lawrence Krauss has a
wonderful piece in the upcoming
scientific American on this absolutely
crucial point. It means that within
measurable time there will be no signs
left in the observable universe that the
big bang ever occurred at all.
Everything will have disappeared out of
sight. There'll be no markers uh nothing
to take observations from. I mentioned
this because it's often said that how
can um how can uh something come out of
nothing? It's the clever clever question
every religious demagogue and
businessman always begins by asking you.
Well, we know we've got a bit of
something in this universe and we know
nothingness is coming. So, some design,
huh? Nothingness is not just innate
programmed. It's the next big thing. And
we at least had some somethingness. As
if to make assurance doubly sure, the
Andromeda galaxy is headed directly
directly in collision course with our
own measurably. It's already filling.
The sky can be seen with the naked eye.
In 5 billion years, which is to say
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] soon, ladies and gentlemen,
it's on us. And if it hasn't happened
before, then our son goes into a red
giant, then a red dwarf. We become a
crisp. Um, that'll be nothingness
programmed instead of somethingness.
Some design, huh? Well, let's move then,
while you ponder that, to the tiny
suburb in which we actually do know we
live. This little corner, just our solar
system. Every other rock in our solar
system is completely inhospitable to
life. either too hot or too cold as is
most of our planet which as we know have
good cause to know is on a knife edge of
climatic survival as we speak. We we
could become extincted at any moment. In
fact, when we still lived on the
savannah of Africa, the the environment
to which we were adapted and have fled,
but where we still betray the scars of
our lowly origin by the coat of fur we
grow in the womb and then shed by the
appendix, by our terrible dentition, and
by many other things. Our adrenal glands
are too big, our prefrontal loes are too
small. We're not the finest primates
that could have evolved. um very it's
estimated by the people who've done the
DNA work on this that we were down as a
species to less than a few thousand
because of climatic events and and other
uh nightmares and catastrophes before
the decision was made to abandon the
savannah and seek cooler uh territory.
We could very easily have joined the
99.9% of every other species that has
ever been in existence on this tiny
planet and become extinct that close.
What are we flattering ourselves about?
What is so great about our anthropic
principle that we should attribute this
to a design or a designer? Some design,
huh? And some designer, too. Who but a
surf wants it to be true? Who but
someone who doesn't like to do their own
thinking wants or needs this to be true
in the face of all, not just some, but
all of the available evidence before us.
I've put it like this. It's the only
hypothesis of my own that I've ever come
up with. It's a version of um on this
point anyway, it's a version of Joseph
Shrimp's um
hypothesis about creative destruction as
the energy of capitalism. um in order to
believe in sorry not in a a deistic god
in other words a creator a first cause
an imponderable starter which of course
only leads you to an infinite regression
because how could there be a starter who
wasn't himself started or herself begun
who created the god who made the creator
who invented the inventor who designed
the designer any fool can see the
fallacy appearing right over the
shoulder of this but suppose it's not
just a theistic question but um excuse
me, a theistic question, but a theistic
one. A God who answers prayers. A God
who intervenes. A God who didn't just
start this, but cares how it winds up.
Who cares what you do to your private
parts
or to those of your children and insists
on them being mutilated? Who knows what
you should eat and what day of the week?
Who knows with which gender you may or
may not uh recreate yourself
or be recreational with and so forth.
The deist has all their work still ahead
of them to prove that there is such a a
being. Here's what you'd have to believe
to be a theist
already shown the absurdity of deism. I
hope to be a theist you'd have to
believe this. How long do you think
ladies and gentlemen I have three
minutes sh I hope need them all.
How long do you think the human species
as a distinct homo sapiens has been on
the um planet?
Anyone want to shout a guess? Okay.
Well, Richard Dawkins thinks uh 250,000.
Yes. Quarter of a million. That's
considered to be on the high end.
Francis Collins has become a friend of
mine, a very very devout Christian who
uh as you will know sequenced the human
genome project and did did the final
report on the the the full out discovery
of that
unravelment which showed us our kinship
with other creatures and indeed with
other non-creatures, other forms of
vegetation
um and junk um that that's in our
undoubtedly proves us to be part of the
creational soup. He thinks
um minimum 100,000. He's not quite sure
if it's uh 250,000. All right, I only
need 100,000.
100,000 years since we dared to separate
from became separate from the Cromagnons
and the Neanderthalss as as our own
species, Homo sapiens.
Here's what you have to believe to be a
theist. For 100,000 years, humanity is
born.
Pro perhaps 25% of it dies in childirth
or very shortly afterwards. Life
expectancy, I don't know, 25 for a very
long time. Infant mortality
extraordinary after after childirth
deaths. I mean, um, killed by
microorganisms we didn't know existed.
uh by earthquakes that we thought were
portents, by storms that we didn't know
came from our climate system, by other
events that arise from being born onto a
cooling planet with deep cracks in its
crust, faults in its crust.
Then man-made things, turf wars, fights
over women, fights over territory, over
food. So very, very slow, gradual,
exponential upward progress. We might we
might like to think pretty slow. Um, and
but at least we can claim out of our own
self-respect man-made
for and for the first 96,000 years of
this experience, heaven watches with
folded arms.
Us go through this with indifference,
without pity, and then around 4,000
years ago decides, gee, it's time to
intervene.
And the best way of doing that would
probably be in Bronze Age Middle East
making appearances to stupified
illiterate peasants
which could later be passed on. The news
would get to China after about a
thousand years of that.
That's what you have to believe. Aren't
you glad you can't be made to believe
that? Aren't you glad there's no
theocracy anymore within range of you
that can make you believe that? Do you
know what it's like living in countries
where you can be made to believe it? Do
you know what the penalties are for not
believing it? They're just exactly
congruent with the stupidity of the
belief itself. We would be better off,
ladies and gentlemen, if we grew out of
it. We would be better off if we grown
if we grown out of it a long time ago.
I've only had 15 minutes to show its
falsity. The rest of the evening, I
hope, can be devoted to its wickedness,
but the falsity is part of the
wickedness, too. And thanks for hearing
me out. Thank you.
[Music]
I don't have enough.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
After hearing that speech, I am so
depressed.
God almighty. If the Andromeda galaxy
doesn't finish me off and Christopher
Hitchen doesn't,
how many other threats will
Christopher Hitchens book God is not
great? Made a lot of money for him even
though atheism is a nonprofit
organization.
I hope someone caught that.
And I am a fan of Christopher Hitchens
work. This is our second debate. But my
friends, I am profoundly disappointed
with this work. It is his weakest book
yet.
In it, he is guilty of the same colossal
close-mindedness of which he accuses
religion. The book is filled with
logical inconsistencies, factual
inaccuracies, and blatant untruths.
In a nutshell, Christopher Hitchens is a
secular fundamentalist fanatic.
He falls prey to mankind's most base
instinct, namely hatred. He hates
religion. He even hates God, which is
difficult since he doesn't exist. And
most importantly, he hates hope.
Like Richard Dawkins, who I have debated
at Oxford University on several
occasions, Hitchens is a scientific
reductionist, reducing humans to not but
vapid animals, semi-iterate primates,
halfthinking apes. His book lacks joy.
It lacks humor. It is a profoundly
depressing tone about the decrepit
nature of human existence. The book that
I've launched tonight, The Broken
American Mail, available at the fine
bookstores everywhere,
is the direct result
of this shattered vision. Human beings
are bereft of any real cosmic purpose.
All they can do in life is revert to
hunter gatherers, gathering money during
the day so they can hunt women at night.
In in so doing, they fulfill their
genetic role of being not but sperm
donors. Jack Nicholson expressed it best
in that great Bible of American
literature, People magazine of December
21st, 2007. He said, "When it comes to
love, we men have more in common with a
male dog than we do with a woman." Oh,
this may be male chauvinism, but it's
science, baby.
Hence, my friends, Christopher Hitchens
does not believe in any kind of heroes
or human greatness. Of Martin Luther
King in his book, he writes, quote, he
was a mamal like the rest of us,
probably plagiarized his doctoral
dissertation, had a notorious fondness
for booze and for women, a good deal
younger than his wife. Mahatma Gandhi is
someone who would have caused millions
of Indians to starve, and had we
listened to him, we'd be we'd be
worshiping cows. The Dalai Lama makes a
claim that he's a hereditary king.
and dissenting sex within his faith are
persecuted. Of course, Mother Teresa
bears the greatest brunt of his fury,
he says of Mother Teresa, she was a
friend of poverty, a fanatic, a
fundamentalist, and a fraud.
But tell us what you really think,
Christopher. My friends, religion has a
vastly different vision and a vastly
different take. Yes, a man is a creature
like any other, but he is born with a
spiritual capacity to transcend instinct
and to choose goodness, to rise above
his animal nature and become godly.
What to Hitchens is a failure that
humans occasionally succumb to their
nature is to us glory. When they choose
inspiration over indulgence, they
triumph over instinct. Hitchens is
right. Human beings in terms of DNA are
98% exactly like primates. But in that
2%
in that 2% lies human consciousness and
therefore human conscience, human
transcendence
and therefore human choice, human
soulfulness, soulfulness and therefore
the indomitable human spirit. A
watermelon is also 98% water just like a
jellyfish is but they are hardly alike.
I'm not eating any jelly jellyfish
anytime soon and I cannot accept that we
are nothing but thinking primates.
To give you an idea of the degree of
blindness that you're hearing tonight, I
want to just choose a few examples of
this loathing of religion that has made
a great scholar become positively
ignorant.
He says that the Torah lacks compassion
on page 99. quote the pitiles teachings
of Moses who never mentions human
solidarity and compassion at all. Even
school children knew know Leviticus
19:18 with the greatest statement of
human solidarity in the history of the
world. You must love your fellow man as
yourself.
He attacks circumcision a few moments
ago in his book. He calls it religious
barbarism. Quote, "It is a mutilation of
a powerless infant with the aim of
ruining his future sex life.
as an authority on the subject.
No, not because I have eight children,
but I wrote kosher sex. What a shame
that Christopher Hitchens doesn't read
the New York Times. He would have
discovered, I'm sure you remember, it
was a front page story. December 14th,
2006, quote, "Circumcision appears to
reduce a man's risk of contracting AIDS
by 50%." In fact, the two largest AIDS
charities on Earth, quote, are
considering paying for circumcisions in
high-risisk countries. So, these great
charities are going to inflict this
barbarism
in order to save people's lives. But
this is the really fun part.
Because he sees religion as primitive,
he says that the most annoying and the
most unfortunate of all Jewish holidays
is Kaneka. He calls it an absolutely
tragic day in human history.
Now, this is funny. Parenthetically, he
says, I love this. The Jews borrowed
shamelessly from Christians in the
pathetic hope of celebration that
coincides with Christmas. Surely he
knows that the Mcabes live 300 years
before the birth of Jesus. But we'll
ignore that for a moment. What I love
what he says about Kaneka is it's a
primitive holiday where Jews reject
science and Hellenism for their
primitive beliefs. Listen to this. The
Jews felt the pull exerted by Athens.
They chose the superstition mandated by
the Torah. Let's see what enlightenment
the Jews fought against during Kaneka.
The great Oxford historian who was a
friend of mine, Martin Goodman, says
that Antiochus IV, the the villain of
Kaneka, was quote called a barbarian and
madman by his own people. If you look up
in Wikipedia, just Google it. Antiochus
IV put Jerusalem's inhabitants to death
in the most cruel way. He insisted on
slaughtering a pig in the temple. And
when the Jews refused to eat it, quote,
he cut off their hands and feet, burned
them on the altar, scalped them, and
this is the Greek enlightenment that the
Jews should not have resisted.
Christopher, you supported the invasion
of Iraq because you said that Saddam
Hussein was a tyrant who didn't deserve
to slaughter his people, but you decry
the Jews for standing up against their
own brutal oppressors.
But my friends, it's really the values
of those Greco Romans that the Jews
rejected.
These great enlightened values that
Christopher Hitchens decries usually
religiously and for rejecting
those great values like the people of
Sparta, the Greeks who used to inspect
newsborn infants and if they were found
to be weakly, they would cast them from
mount mount teatos. The Romans of course
would inspect grown adults and if they
were mentally infirmed, they would be
thrown from the Tarpian rock.
Don't think I'm being unfair in citing
ancient tenistic values against
religious ones. No less an authority
than Francis Crick, the Nobel
Prizewinning scientist who mapped the
DNA molecule,
suggested
that birth in our time, come two days
after parturation, so that a baby could
be examined for defects and if found to
be sufficiently deletious, could be
removed with impunity since it has not
yet been born.
He also suggested that we declare death
at the age of 80 when people are no
longer useful.
Professor Bentley Glass said good and
evil should have a scientific
evolutionary connotation. They should be
divorced from their traditional
connotation and they should be they
should conote what is good and bad for
the species. So a child with t-axs would
be eliminated. In fact, Hitchens himself
something that sounds quite frightening.
Page 221 of his book. A very large
number of pregnancies are aborted, he's
speaking about miscarriages, because of
mal formation. Sad though this is, it is
probably less miserable an outcome than
the vast number of deformed or idiot
children who would otherwise have been
born or whose brief lives would have
been a torment to themselves and others.
I therefore challenge my august
colleague to explain why then should we
not euthanize down syndrome children.
They are a burden to their parents.
They can contribute nothing to the
society. They are the idiot children of
whom even our own Supreme Court Justice
Oliver Wendel Holmes said famously,
"Three generations of idiots are enough
when so many states here in America used
to
sterilize the mentally handicapped."
What was wrong with that? In fact, let
me give you two quotations and I would
like you to tell me who you think they
are from. Number one,
in nature, there is no pity for the
lesser creatures when they are destroyed
so that the fittest may survive. Going
against nature brings ruin to man. It is
only Jewish impedence to demand that we
overcome nature. Listen to this very
similar quote. The more civilized
so-called Caucasian races, the white
people have beaten the Turkish hollow in
the struggle for existence.
The white people decimated the dark
people. Looking at the world at no
distant date, what an endless number of
the lower races will have been
eliminated by the higher civilized
races. First quotation was from a
politician. His name was Adolf Hitler.
The second quotation was from a
scientist. His name was Charles Darwin.
Evolutionary theory, as I intend to
demonstrate in the second part of this
debate, is based on the survival of the
fittest. It is not good for the species
or for the human race to sustain people
who are weaker. Charity is a religious
concept, pure and simple. That's why you
heard such a depressing presentation.
There is no hope. Life has no amber.
There is nothing that glows.
In fact, Sir Arthur Keith, the greatest
British evolutionist of the World War II
period, said, quote, "To see
evolutionary measures being applied
vigorously, one must turn to Germany of
1942." We see Hitler devoutly convinced
that evolution produces the only real
basis for a national policy. The means
he adopted was organized slaughter to
secure the German race. They needed more
space. They needed more food. You kill
the weaker ones to protect the stronger
ones. The German furer, as I have
consistently maintained, wrote Sir
Arthur Keith, is an evolutionist and
seeks to make the practice of Germany
conform to evolution. And here you have
why Christopher Hitchens attacks the Ten
Commandments. You know, this is amazing
because he says about the Ten
Commandments, listen to this. However
little one thinks of the Jewish
tradition, it is surely insulting to the
people of Moses to imagine they had come
this far under the impression that
murder, adultery, theft, and perjury
were permissible.
[Applause]
But he misses the entire point. God
didn't bring the Jews to the foot of
Mount Si to tell them not to kill. God
brought them to the foot of Mount Si so
they would understand that do not murder
is God's law. Not now, not ever. There
is no excuse. This is why genocide is
perpetrated by nations who have man-made
laws. There were laws against murder in
the Ot in Ottoman Turkey. There were
laws against murder in Nazi Germany.
There were laws against murder in
Cambodia with the Kame Rouge. But they
were human laws and subject to human
tampering. That's why the Ten
Commandments have preserved the morality
of a nation who even when they were
turned into soap and lambshades during
the Holocaust, never blew up a German
school bus because we live by that
edict. Do not murder. My friends, open
your eyes and see what I see. As as
Rabbi Akiba famously said,
just as the garment testifies to the
weaver, the door to the carpenter, the
house to the builder, so the entire
world testifies to God's
to God the creator.
In this book, which I published as a
result of my debates with Richard
Dawkins at Oxford, 13 years, this is 13
years old. I have about another minute.
And surely science has found far greater
wonders since then. If the Earth were
closer or further from the sun by just a
little bit, the heat or cold would it
generated would make life impossible. If
the Earth were not tilted on its axis 23
degrees, huge mountains of ice would
pile up from the water vapor of the
oceans. The Earth revolves at a speed of
a thousand miles per hour. If it were to
revolve at just 100 miles per hour,
night and day would increase 10 times in
duration. Plants would be scorched in
the day. seedlings would be frozen at
night. If the moon were a bit closer to
the earth, the tide would flood all
lands, including the high mountains. If
the oceans were deeper, carbon dioxide
and oxygen would be absorbed and no
plants could exist. If the atmosphere
were thinner, millions of meteors, which
are burned up in the air, would fall to
the earth and cause limitless
devastation. While most substances
contract when they freeze, water
miraculously expands by 11th of its
volume. This makes ice load on the top
and it allows the fish to survive. Till
today, the cause of this expansion
perplexes scientists.
Two weeks ago, the New York Times
magazine wrote January 13, 2008, "The
moral sense is an innate part of being
human. We are born with innate morality.
It is not acquired. A list of human
universals collected by anthropologist
Donald Brown includes moral concepts,
including a distinguish between right
and wrong, empathy, fairness,
admiration, generosity, shame. These are
all
character traits which are antithetical
to evolution, which are about ensuring
that your genes survive. Finally, my
friends, listen to this.
The little embryo,
that little baby that will have to grow
up in a world of hope, hearing so much
about how we're the only forlorn rock
without any any life surrounding us.
It's born with 10,000 taste buds in its
mouth. Some 12 trillion nerve endings
will form in the baby's nose to help it
detect fragrances of odors in the air.
More than 100,000 nerve cells will be
devoted to reacting to Beethoven
symphony. The piano has 240 strings, but
a baby's ear will have 240,000 hearing
units. those 10,000 spokes. By the way,
the million nerve endings of the optical
nerves of the eye which connects with
the brain and somehow grows from two
different directions and meets one
million nerve endings is so vast that if
were it mapped the entire world's
telephone cable system would be only a
small fraction of it. A small fraction
it has no designer at all according to
Christopher Hitchens. Since I have to
end, let me just tell you, of course,
science says that these this phenomenal
complexity came about through genetic
mutation and natural selection. When I
come back, we'll explore whether that is
the case or whether such vast
complexity,
such vast complexity could never have
come about spontaneously
and whether those who believe
it did are guilty of cognitive
dissonance, afraid of a truth so great
that they're forced to deny it.
[Applause]
Well, um, as some of you already know,
never buy crackling from a mo.
the the rabbi is in the uplift business
say Metier as uh was once said and um he
thinks it's a point against me that some
of the conclusions I draw are not such
as to make one happy. I'm unus to
arguing in this style. Um, I will simply
point out that that's what I'm expected
to do in a debate that's organized along
these lines against someone who thinks
that evolution by means of natural
selection, which is a hypothesis, a
theory which if tested always works,
which allows us to sequence the DNA of
the influenza virus so that the next
time it comes, unlike 1919, it won't
kill us all because we know of its
kinship. ship with ourselves as we know
we ourselves evolved from sightless
bacteria because we have the computer
models by which the eye was evolved in
40 different ways at least among
different species. So there's nothing
left to argue with except
with people or about except with people
like Rabbi Bertik and uh Governor
Huckabe of uh who
who head as he is of what I would
describe as a nonossemitic
uh Christian organization
believes that Adam and Eve were real and
indeed quite recent people. my
experience, there's nothing to be done
with points like this except to
underline them.
Um,
Governor Huckabe, in fact, doesn't even
know what he doesn't believe. When when
putting up his chubby hand to say he was
among those in the room who didn't
believe in the theory of evolution, he
said, "No, I don't believe that I'm
descended from a monkey." Well, as you
know, the theory of evolution does not
demand that you believe anything
remotely like that. It points to a
common ancestry between other primates
and and and ourselves. If we were
descended from monkeys, we'd probably
look quite a lot like Governor Huckabe.
Now, the I just have spent a second on
the taunt about being a fundamentalist.
To be a fundamentalist is to insist that
something can be advanced on faith alone
and without evidence. I will submit
myself to your fair-mindedness, ladies
and gentlemen, and ask if anything I
said to you or am saying now requires
that of you. That you take an act of
faith or leap of faith as if it were an
ethical thing to do or that you take one
at all for anything I say. Of course, I
don't. There's nothing in common between
me and any other faith-based person of
any kind. It's a one of the last ditch
arguments that our foes, the foes of
science and science education and the
theory of evolution by natural selection
as the explanation for our presence here
uh have had to come up with in their
desperation. Hatred, yes, I plead guilty
to that. One of the many things I don't
like about Christianity is that it tells
me to love my enemies. I don't do that
and I don't want you doing it for me
either. Um,
go love your own enemies. Uh, don't be
loving mine. I'll get on with the
business of destroying, isolating, and
combating the enemies of civilization.
I don't need any uh
and I don't need any any sickly advice
from Nazareth from the man who after all
the Old Testament horrors that we know
about uh none of them included the
punishment of hell. There's no hell in
the Old Testament. to the credit of the
Jewish people actually when when when
God and Moses have done with enjoining
genocide on you, which by the way they
do according to those books. I don't
know where which books the rabbis has
been reading, but he might want to tell
you what what happened to the
Amalachites. Where are the Midianites?
Uh happened to all these people. We know
what we were told to do to them. Um
so glad to think that those books are
fictional. Uh because if they were true,
we would all be be spattered with the
blood of others to please uh uh hideous
authority. Um but no punishment once
he's done with you. Once the earth is
closed over you, that's it. There's no
torture of the dead. Not till gentle
Jesus meek and mild. Do you get that?
My same point about the overrated
figures of Dr. King and uh Mahatma
Gandhi. Um it's a it's a very bad thing.
It seems to me that especially among in
white liberal society, the plaster saint
of Martin Luther King has become
iconographic. Uh it's led to two bad
consequences that I can think of. one uh
the great black secularists and
socialists and trade union leaders, some
of whom spoke at this very podium,
Bayard Rustin, a Philip Randolph and the
others, the people who actually
organized the March on Washington with
their white friends, secular friends
like Victor Ruther of the United
Automobile Workers, the people who
actually put this great movement of
liberation onto the streets are
airbrushed from history. White people
get are given deliberately the
impression well black folks sure like
their preachers and their pullpit men.
Um, and as a result, anyone who can
claim to be a preacher, a fraud, a
demagogue, a crook, uh, like Al Sharpton
or Jesse Jackson is automatically
awarded the right to represent black
America. This is not progress. Very
well. I hope you understand me. That's
not Dr. It's not Dr. King's fault.
It's that is not Dr. King's fault that
as I say in my book, but it is the fault
of those who make a cult out of him and
who who dare to say that without
religious permission, we wouldn't know
how to demand equal rights for our
African-American brothers and sisters.
Well, excuse me, we don't need religious
permission for that. And the case for it
had been made by uh the secular left
long before Dr. King started preaching.
And that's precisely why he was always
attacked in his lifetime for having
communist and socialist and Marxist
friends, which he did, who had done most
of the spade work. So let's again be
very clear what we're talking about. I'm
sorry. I do not believe the Dalai Lama's
claim either to be a hereditary king or
a hereditary god. And I think anyone who
does believe it is a fool. And there
hasn't been even the pretense of an
election in the Tibetan exile community
that he's now been leading for more than
almost half a century in Damsilla in
India. It is still run as an absolute
desperatism. People who like that sort
of thing like that sort of thing. Um to
the more to the purpose and you'll let
me know Mr. chairman when I've coming to
the I have rather a crazy salad of um
slanders to respond to and I don't want
to miss any of them out. Um
if you want to saw off the end of your
penis, you're welcome.
Um you're not to do it to a child who
hasn't uh asked for it. Same with the
genitals of a little girl. If she thinks
later on she'd be better off without
them, let her take or have taken to her
a sharp instrument. If it proves that
it's good for AIDS, which it might well
be, I've heard it's been been said that
it's good for cervical cancer, let it be
decided by the grown-up. It is not
right. It is not moral. It is in fact
wicked to submit children to mutilation
of their genitalia or to anyone without
their consent.
Do you understand that it's if that this
elementary point only needs to be made
because of wickedness enjoined by
religion? The rabbi here is a fairly
humane guy. He wouldn't, if he didn't
think God was involved, ever consider
mutilating the genitals of a child. But
because it's a covenant with God,
anything can be done. Now, don't you
see? You laugh, but you should be
crying.
I said crying.
Okay, suit yourself.
Now, I'm not here to defend Zeus or Juno
or Aphroditi. I said I I listed them in
the in the list of barbaric and
forgotten gods. The Jews who celebrate
Hanukkah, which by the way, I think you
will have to agree, only became promoted
in the United States among Jews, it's a
relatively minor holiday because of its
nearness to Christmas Day. The Jews who
particularly care about that holiday are
not arguing against the worship of Zeus.
They're arguing against, as the rabbi
perfectly well knows, the idea of the
Apicurus,
what in Orthodox Judaism is known as the
heretic, the unbeliever. uh the
Apicurus, the follower of Epicurus.
Epicurus and Lucriccius were the secular
Hellenists, the ones who discovered that
the world was made of atoms and that the
gods, if they exist, do not concern
themselves with human affairs because
among other things, they avoid
unnecessary pain. Now, there's a
discovery that's worth having. And the
Jews want you to turn away. The Orthodox
Jews want you to turn away from the
unbelievable scholarship and originality
and humanism of Epicurus and Lucriccius
to look at a candle. Hey, look, goggle
at this. It burned an extra day or two.
Or is it eight?
This is what retards human intelligence
and human civilization. Now, of course,
you may I'll close on this because I
don't want to trespass on your time or
or the rabbis. Um, of course, you can be
an atheist and you can be a genoc, you
can be a fascist, you can be a
Stalinist, you can be a nihilist, you
can be a satist. Ep atheism, unbelief,
the repudiation of the supernatural is
not a necessary uh excuse me, it's not a
sufficient um condition, not a
sufficient condition for for wisdom or
for enlightenment. Uh but it is um and I
say it joylessly, humilously, uh
gloomily, pessimistically, it is a
necessary one. Thanks.
[Applause]
My objection
to the current religious secular debate
is that for so many centuries
Christopher Hitchens is right. Religion
had a very closed mind. Who has the
closed mind now?
Who uses character assassination to
portray anyone who has certain beliefs
that they try to root in logic as
close-minded, unscarly?
The gist of my argument is that
Christopher Hitchens, who is one of
America's most talented writers, has
become so fanatical in his hatred of
religion that he just invents things to
decry it. For example, he can make fun
of the fact that I'm I don't believe in
evolution. Although I never even said
that. I believe in evolutionary
development as the Torah itself says six
days of creation, the mineral was
followed by the vegetable, then the
animal, then the intellectual. The
question is whether this is guided. The
question is whether mathematic
mathematical possibilities allows for
this. But before I even get to that,
here's an example of just pure invention
in order to make religion Jews, the
state of Israel look bad. Listen to
this. He's writing about the greatest
scientists of the 20th century saying
don't be impressed that Einstein
believed in God because uh he didn't
believe in the God that we believe in.
He was a deist and quote offered the
first presidency of the state of Israel.
Einstein declined because of his many
coms about the way Zionism was tending.
That is pure utter fabrication.
First of all, Einstein was offered the
second presidency. The first president
was Whitesman. He was offered it in
1952. He died three years later. The
Princeton Review says he he turned it
down quote because he had neither the
desire nor the energy to run a country.
He was a scientist. New York's son in an
essay about the subject. He politely and
sensibly declined on the grounds that it
would interfere with the scientific
work. He loved Israel. He was one of the
great Zionists of the 20th century.
Anything to portray religion in a
negative light
as far as as far as the great
complexity.
Well, you continually you continually
invent in your book. Uh I'll get to that
in a moment. You'll have to just be
patient as I dissect it. Um, my friends,
most people today accept evolutionary
principles without being knowledgeable
of them. I actually studied them and
debated some of the world's greatest
evolutionary biologists from Richard
Dawkins for debates. John Mc Maynard
Smith, professor of evolutionary
biology, University of Sussex, the
world's greatest, he was the world's
greatest living evolutionist at the
time. To for evolution to work, you need
two things. You need genetic mutation
and you need natural selection. Now
genetic mutation means that when DNA
replicates, it introduces through a
mistake in copying itself a new feature
that is not existent in the parental
type. So for that to happen, you need
mutation to be to do two things. Number
one, they have to be very common because
you have great complexity in the world.
Number two, they have to be beneficial.
Let's see what the world's greatest
scientists say about mutation. Because
remember, Darwin knew nothing about
mutation. Darwin believed in adaptation
and he based it on the Lamarian theory
of acquired characteristics that
preceded him. Here is what earns what HJ
Mueller the world's foremost expert on
mutation Nobel Prize winner says quote
mutations are of random nature
accordingly the vast majority certainly
well over 99% are harmful
uh Nobel Prize winner Erns Meyer these
are all evol evolutionists most of them
are atheists it is a considerable strain
on one's credul to assume that finally
balanced systems such as certain sense
organs could be improved by random
mutations will the eye get better if it
makes a mistake in its replication
In fact, the author of the mystery of
hereditary of heredity concludes, listen
to this, the vast majority of mutants in
any organism are so detrimental as to
believe that it is impossible for them
to lead to complexity. These are people
who all believe in evolution. Now,
Julian Huxley from the most important of
all evolutionary families wrote the
following. We should clearly have to
breed to get a horse. says a million
strains a thousand squared to get two
favorable mutations
up to a thousand to the millionth power
to produce a horse. Now listen to this.
A thousand to the millionth power to
produce a horse, which isn't even as
complex as a human brain, becomes one
with three million zeros written after
it. That would take three volumes of 500
pages just to print. No one would bet on
anything so improbable happening. And
yet, tada, it has happened. That's how
he ends the quote. Now, how could an
evolutionist say on the one hand,
mutation is destructive? I mean, if
you're born with a third arm, you're not
really doing that well. I assure you,
even though it seems that you've gone
forward, you've gone backward. So, how
could this theory, and again, I'm not
denying evolution. I'm saying evolution
needs a guiding parent because the
numbers are impossible. How could we
believe that things just a horse one to
the three millionth power five 1500
pages to write the number? Would this
ever happened? So here's how a Harvard
professor answers it. The important
point is that since the origin of life
belongs in the category of at least once
phenomena, time is on its side. However
impossible we regard this event, given
enough time, it will almost certainly
happen at least once. Time is in fact
the hero of the plot. I love this part.
Listen carefully. Given so much time,
the impossible becomes possible, the
possible probable, the probable
virtually certain. One has to only wait
because time itself performs miracles.
Do you get it? I believe in a three-word
entity called God. Christopher Hitchens
believes in a forward entity called
time. The essence of evolutionary
theory, which is undeniable, is if you
give enough time, this is all going to
happen. My friends, when I was young,
and I'm not a scientist, I remember, and
you remember, they told us the world was
four billion years old. Then they said
it was 8 billion. Now it went up to 16.
Soon it'll be 20, 30. Soon they'll give
it a trillion years. Now, why? Because
the more we discover the complexity of
life and the impossibility of any of
this stuff evolving, the more the more
time we need. Let me tell you something.
You can give this forever. Forever.
something that that that you that
something that mathematically has 300
million zeros after it is never going to
happen. I don't care if you have
forever. That's why, as Christopher
Hitchens said, it didn't happen all the
other planets. If he's right and I'm
wrong, why did life happen only here? We
have 16 billion years. There's natural
selection there. There's genetic
mutation there. Why didn't it happen
there? One place. Oh, he'll tell you
that we haven't yet found it. Well, we
have all of these. He's seen the galaxy
Andromeda. It's not there. Let me tell
you.
I'm not the only person who doesn't
believe in evolution without guidance.
And let me be clear about that. The
greatest scientist
uh he passed away a few years ago, but I
met up at Oxford from Harvard. Steven
Jay Gould. He didn't believe in
evolution. He believed in punctuated
equilibrium. I saw him debate Richard
Dawkins. He destroyed evolution. And
he's an atheist. He said that the fossil
record does not reflect evolution. Sir
Fred Hoy said that because there are
trillions of mutations that would have
to take place and none of those
organisms would have survived because
the possibility of a genetic mutation is
99.9 negative, detrimental and lethal to
the organism. So Hoy said you would have
to find trillions of destroyed
organisms. They don't exist. In fact, it
was Darwin himself who said that the
greatest objection to his theory because
let's remember the origin of species
published in 1863 was not a tome about
the origin of life. It was a theory to
explain the fossil record. But the
problem was that there were missing
transitional links. So what so what he
said was I'd like to give you the exact
quote. Darwin said that the imperfection
of the fossil record comes entirely to
the fact that we have not yet dug
sufficiently in 1863. That would make
sense. But my friends, we've now dug up
the whole world. We're looking for oil.
We're looking for diamonds. We've dug up
everywhere. We've barely found them. So
Steven J. Gould, as Christopher Hitchens
well knows, doesn't believe in evolution
or didn't. He argued for punctuated
equilibrium. Great great leaps, which
explains the dir of fossils. To still be
an evolutionist today, you have to have
faith. There is no evidence. The
transitional links barely exist.
That's why when I when Dawkins who again
friend of mine I debated him when he
debated Stephen Jay Gould he had nothing
to say what evidence where are these
trillions and trillions and trillions of
transitional links remember you need
billions of mutations to go from to go
from a single cell amieba to the eye and
yet amazingly
which would give us
an untold number of fail failed
transitional steps and they don't exist.
You know what's interesting to me as
well? Christopher Hitchens, just give me
30 seconds here. Christopher Hitchens
says that the eye is not impressive.
Everything about him is the eye is
nothing and there's no complexity. And
what are you talking about? The organism
is so ill-formed. This he says that the
eye is quote uh the ineptitude of
design. Page 82. He even says the
anatomy of the eye in fact shows
anything but intelligence. It is built
upside down and backwards. Well, Charles
Darwin didn't think so. I'm glad you
don't like your eyes, but um Darwin
said, quote, I became sick when I
thought of how the complexity of the eye
could have evolved. He then said,
Charles Darwin, to suppose that the eye
could have been formed by natural
selection seems, I freely confess,
absurd in the highest possible degree.
Then Christopher Hitchen says that the
that he says, why have we agreed so
easily to call this exploded old non-
theory the theory of intelligent design
by its cunningly chosen new disguise of
intelligent design? There's nothing
intelligent about it. Let me therefore
conclude with the words of Isaac Azimov,
the greatest science fiction writer of
the 20th century, in man there is a
three-pound brain which as far as we
know is the most complex and orderly
arrangement of matter in the universe. I
mean, God almighty, all you need to do
to prove the existence of God and how
intelligent the design of our universe
is is to see how smart Christopher
Hitchens is.
[Applause]
We'll sit for the third.
We'll sit. We'll sit for the third. You
want to sit? Yeah.
Well, if I can't be a wreck, I'd at
least rather be upstanding.
I have to sit for this. He says I got to
sit. Okay, we agreed. All right. Um,
there was a terrible moment. Um I think
it was when Lawrence Krauss was talking
about the Andromeda galaxy when and it's
heading towards us when someone got up
and said to him, "Doctor, did you say
it's was going to collide with our
galaxy 5 billion years or 5 million?"
And Lawrence said 5 billion. The guy
said that's a huge relief.
I thought you said 5 million there for a
second. Um
now on the fabrication point, I can't
sit still or stand still if I was
standing um and be accused of that. Um
the argument about Einstein, the state
of Israel has nothing to do with
national with religion at all. Um there
may have been a religious element in his
opposition to a Jewish state. He was for
a state for Jews but not for a Jewish
state. A distinction that a lot of
people have forgotten. The same
distinction that was made by Stone Judah
Magnus and others often in debates under
this roof. As a as a matter of fact, I
don't know how much influence that had
on his uh decision to reject the the
offer from Benorian who at one point
said to his cabinet, "What are we going
to do if he says yes?" Um, but I would
be very surprised if there was nothing
to do with it. At any rate, it has no
bearing whatever on the fact that
Einstein believed only in spinners as
God. In other words, not as Rabbi Schuli
would have you believe in God as an
intervening or supervising or caring
force, but as the only the one Spiner
identified, the pantheistic one. These
distinctions are I think important and
worth stressing.
Um
on the on the claim that Steven Jay
Ghoul did not believe in evolution, I
really do not know where to begin. I
think the best thing to do would be to
read any chapter of any of his books.
And and in fact, I think the
I might I might indeed recommend I might
I might indeed recommend the one where
he has a very famous very celebrated
disagreement with with Richard Dawkins
on the question not of whether evolution
occurred because nobody
denies that that it occurred. We know
it's in the record of molecular biology
and it's in the fossil record. There's a
lot of argument about how and there is a
certain amount of argument about the
punctuations and a lot of those gaps
only just now being filled in only just
now we're discovering intermediate
species the partly vertebrate yet um
amphibian and for example a very very
important one recently in uh northern
Canada it's in um Gul's book on the
Burgess shale that the most sobering
point is made a point that even I as a
materialist find rather shaking um I
don't by the way deny things because
they don't cheer me up it's not my
attitude to evidence. But I would like
to think too that, you know, I was a
little bit more than the primate that I
so self so self so self so self so self
so evidently am
in in in Steven Jay Ghoul's account of
the burgess shale which I think is his
best book is the is the most beautiful
the most finished and the most polished
of his books he says there's a there's a
cambrian vertebrate a little creature
called peculiar grass that has the
beginnings of a backbone it could have
got washed out in one of the great
subsequent dyings out it could have done
if it had human beings would never have
appeared. This is the first we can find
of a vertebrate. It could very easily
have gone, but it didn't. And as a
result, we're here having this
conversation. You can say that's
miraculous if you like. You can say that
only God would have uh thought of such a
thing.
But and that's the way you'd think if
that's the way you thought. Um because
there will always be people who will
say, "Oh, well, we used not to think
about these fossils. We thought that was
all nonsense." Um, it was argued until
fairly recently by the godly, God put
the bones in the rocks to test our
faith.
At least we don't deny they're there.
They're just there as a test. Now you
have animatronic dinosaurs playing with
animatronic children in the creation
museum. It just opened in Ohio.
Um, and there are those who say we
didn't used to think about that the big
bang could possibly be true. In fact,
the big bang itself is a term like Tory,
like suffragette, like impressionist and
other terms originally um evolved as a
term of abuse, as a term of mockery.
It's then adopted by its exponents. Big
bang was what Fred Hy used to say to try
and dismiss the idea. He said, "Some
people think it all began with the Big
Bang." Now, we know there was a time
when everything was inside something
about the size of a baseball that's now
4,000 billion galaxies. And what my
daughter wants to know is what was
outside the baseball and I don't know
but we know that much. People say oh
well nothing so amazing could have
happened without God. So um there's a
name for this kind of argument a very
old uh and important name. It also comes
largely from uh work at Oxford
University though it's actually
attributable
uh largely to Sakal PA. It's called
unfalsifiability.
It's an argument you can't beat because
it isn't an argument. If you say, "Well,
now I see how complex everything is. It
would have to be God who was
responsible." There's no there's no way
I can disprove that. There's no way I
can falsify it. And unfalsifiability
counterintuitively is quite rightly
considered to be a test not of the
strength of an argument, but of its
extreme weakness. In fact, of its
non-existence as an argument. Now I
didn't I left un unanswered a point
about social Darwinism and if I could
have okay um
it it it was in fact at the Scopes trial
the contention of William Jennings Brian
not just that evolution had not occurred
but that it shouldn't have occurred
because it would mean that only the
fittest would survive. Now, we don't
want that to be true. And we we can
actually take steps to make sure as
humans that it isn't absolutely the only
rule of existence, but it when the rabbi
quite misrepresented what I say about
abortion, I was talking about how nature
aborts so many uh unborn children, not
how humans do or should or might have
to, but how nature takes care of it. And
I said, because when we were on the
savannah and sharing the territory and
diminishing in size as a tribe ourselves
and having to bear live young in an
environment full of predators, probably
if we bore eight or nine children, some
of them sickly with loling heads and
diarrhea, we wouldn't be able to pick
them up and carry them and run away fast
enough. It's a fact. because it's a
fact, because it's unpleasant, and
because as Darwin says, it betrays has
with it, as everything about us does,
the the lowly stamp of our original
origin doesn't mean it isn't. So, so the
beginning of wisdom, I would say, is the
recognition of what science has been
able to teach us. And neither to deny
that, as the rabbi does in one tone of
voice, or to claim that it shows how
clever God is, uh, with another tone.
Make up your mind. You can't have it
both ways. And actually, you're wrong
twice. Thanks.
[Applause]
I don't care how much you dislike
religion and I don't care how much how
false you believe the faith in God is.
You can't invent facts to sustain your
argument. You can't be unscientific when
you complain that religion is
unscientific. That's the whole problem
with this book. It's the problem with
everything you've heard tonight. It's
the problem with the utter distortions
that we continue to hear.
You said that your attack about
Einstein, which you didn't respond to
because you clearly in invented out of
whole cloth this idea that he didn't
want to be president because he's said
it's not about religion. What about
this? Speaking about Dr. Goldstein
Christopher Hitchens writes while
serving as a physician in the Israeli
army, he had announced that he would not
treat non-Jewish patients such as
Israeli Arabs on the Sabbath. As it
happens, he was obeying rabbitic law and
declining to do this, as many Israeli
religious courts have confirmed. I
challenge Mr. Hitchens to name a single
Jewish court in the entire world that
would ever rule that a non-Jew should
not be treated on the Sabbath.
In fact, if he names it, I will buy a
100 copies of his book and I will give
it to talking about a mainstream just a
regular Jewish court. I will give a 100
copies of his book to my religious
friends, but if he fails, I challenge
him to buy a 100 copies of my book
or let's make that a thousand.
Not only does the Talmud obligate us to
treat nonJews on the Sabbath, in fact uh
Noah Feldman, my dear friend who the
road scholar at Oxford who debated me on
this subject, he famously wrote about
the debate in the Talmud, how there was
a steering within the Talmud that maybe
you shouldn't. And this was because the
non-Jews they were talking about were
Roman centurions. That's when the Talmud
was written. These were horrible troops
that persecuted Jews. But even then they
said that you have to. It's a law in
Judaism. the court would be stripped of
its authority in a moment and be
declared racist. In fact, Christopher
Hitchens, who portrays Jews throughout
this book as being close-minded racist,
he attacks Israel nonstop based on
non-existent evidence. He doesn't even
know Judaism, which he should study it
before he writes about it. I mean, I
didn't just get up and talk about
evolution. I tried to study the text.
I'm not a great scientist, but I debated
leading scientists and I prepared for
those debates. You should prepare if
you're going to write about this of us
43 do not despise any man the rabbis
declared quote even a gentile who
studies God's law is equal to the high
priest 200 years ago a non-Jew equal to
the high priest to us on 13 the
righteous of all nations have a share in
the world to come non-Jews go to heaven
ton of yuraban nine I call upon heaven
and earth as witnesses any individual
whether gentile or Jew man or woman
servant or maid can bring the divine
presence upon himself in accordance with
his deeds that is a slander against Jews
Jews to say that any Jewish court would
say that non-Jews should not be treated
and the state of Israel treats every
single Arab and Palestinian even when
terrorists are the ones who are brought
to the hospitals.
Um
the possibility of the human eye
evolving has been has been um
equated to monkeys randomly hitting the
keys on a typewriter typing
Shakespeare's hand. We've heard this not
once but four quadrillion times. Now
again he said that that uh
uh Steven Jul believed in evolution. He
believed in punctuate equilibrium. Ev
evolution means to slowly evolve with
great time. He believed in these vast
quantum leaps.
Read the books. See who's telling the
truth. He did not believe in slow
evolution. Dawkins is one of the last
people who still believes it. Fred H
oily, one of the smartest British
scientists, mathematicians of the 20th
century, famously wrote, "Life cannot
have a random beginning. Troops of
monkeys thundering away at random
typewriters could not produce the works
of Shakespeare. But listen, why? For the
pract for the practical reason that the
whole observable universe is not large
enough to contain the waste paper
baskets required for the deposition of
the wrong attempts." You just heard
Christopher Hitchens say, "We're
beginning to find the transitional
links." God almighty, we're only
beginning. Do you realize how many
trillions of these links have to exist?
Where are they? We have found oil. We
have found gold. We have found diamonds.
The they should be here on the desk.
They should be here in my notes.
Um finally, finally, finally this whole
thing about values, my friends, you
remember sadly that I spoke about um
Francis Quick before, his partner James
Watson who uh who mapped uh the double
helix um DNA molecule. You remember that
tragically, sadly, in October 14th,
2007, he told the London Times that he's
inherently gloomy about the prospect for
Africa because all our policies are
based on the idea that blacks and whites
are of equal intelligence. But the but
the evidence says that's not the case.
He was just echoing what Thomas Huxley,
the famous Darwinian bulldog, the
greatest progenitor of revolution in
history, said, quote, "No rational man,
cognizant of the facts, believes that
the average negro is the equal, still
less the superior of the white man." To
his dying day, Charles Darwin himself
believed that blacks were the missing
link between whites and apes. Now, that
doesn't mean that every evolutionist is
a racist. God forbid. Christopher
Hitchens, Christopher Hitchens is at the
forefront of defending human life around
the world. And he's a phenomenal hero.
But it does mean that when he goes out
to save human life, it's not because of
evolutionary ethics. It's because of
religion that declared this the infinite
sanctity of life. My point before
quoting him about about uh miscarriages
was not that he would ever argue for
euthanizing infants. It's rather the
fact that he doesn't argue for that in
acknowledging that these down syndrome
babies are nothing but a burden and can
contribute not and they're a burden to
everyone around them. They will suck out
their parents' resources. I have to stop
you. Okay. He it's because he observes
the ten commandments that says do not
murder. It's our values he's embraced.
We have,
ladies and gentlemen, we have a number
of questions. We have a number of
questions from the floor. Uh, and we
have uh a number of questions that
arrived to us from around the country.
And um, one of them from Cincinnati,
Ohio. Um, was precisely the question
that uh, were I permitted to engage the
debaters would have wanted to ask
myself. So I ask uh our two presenters
uh I ask uh Christopher Hitchens first
and then Rabbi Vote second in two or
three minutes. Sorry that's about all
you have. Question is is it possible to
talk about does God exist without asking
when you use the word God what do you
mean?
Very good. Um but it won't have escaped
your attention rabbi or the audience. I
think that I was asked uh to answer a
direct challenge by the rabbi a moment
ago and I won't have it said that I
didn't on the matter of whether Israeli
court ever ruled that uh Dr. Bar
Goldstein was right and you could refuse
to help a non-Jew on the Shabbat. I
refer you to u my great mentor in
spinners of studies Dr. Israel Shahak S
h a h a k uh his book the Jewish
religion and his attitude to non-Jews.
He's the very brave professor of
chemistry at the Hebrew University who
brought that case and lost it in the
high court in Jerusalem and a very
celebrated write up of the topic in
Harets. I would of course never make
such a suggest excuse me and the
rabbitical courts also. He lost he lost
the whole case. Very important. Look it
up. The book is easily found. is
published by Pluto Press. Also, if you
look up the history as told by him and
his colleague Dr. Norton Mesovki of Dr.
Barrett Goldstein, you will discover
things that make will make you glad that
as I said in a talk which you can also
look up at the Spartus Institute, Jewish
University in Chicago recently uh very
glad that it seems that Jews have a gene
for atheism. Um
the great Jew the great Jewish
contribution has always been to humanism
and to human solidarity. uh and is that
and not the not the wailings and
bleetings to an empty skyle the
distinguished now can we talk about to
the topic well the question of the
question of I'm sorry I could hardly let
such a challenge go in all decency now I
can do the arrest very quickly it's
called the onlogical argument it says
that if you can name the idea of a god
surely there must be something existent
or real at any rate that you are talking
about um it's not the teapot that
Bertrren Russell postulates orbiting the
sun. To talk about it is to postulate
it. Well, this of course is a very is a
piece of uh circular reasoning, but I
hope I helped to clarify it in my
opening statement by saying there's
every difference between being a deist
and a theist. Science and reason cannot
disprove the existence of a first cause
or a creator. They cannot do that. Um we
can only say that everything works
without that assumption and there is no
evidence on the other side of the case.
This seems to ask to license unbelief uh
to the theistic argument of a god who
actually is interested in answering
prayers, cares who you marry, who you go
to bed with, what you eat, who's which
side wins in a war, and so forth. We say
this is human propaganda of
self-evidently man-made, and the
so-called miraculous evidence for it has
been repeatedly and conclusively
falsified and disproved.
[Applause]
You know, I must be one of those uh
half-thinking primates or half
intelligent primates that Christopher
Hitchen speaks of because it strains
credul. Did the rest of you just hear
a great writer say that the Israeli
Supreme Court respected throughout the
world throughout the world for its
fairness, judiciousness, rule that you
cannot help a non save a non-Jewish life
on the Sabbath. It's not even a
religious court. It's always attacked
for being the most secular court. The
religious people don't like that court.
The rabbitical court. The rabbitical
court. You said the high court. I said
the Yeah, high rabbitical court. No, you
said high court. Maybe the rabbitical
court. Okay. Well, then let me just say
if you're wrong, if you're now going
back and saying, "Okay, fair enough. How
could you write that?" Wait, wait. You
Wait, wait, wait. Let me finish. Let me
finish. Let me finish. Let me finish.
You be very careful, sir. You have the
book in front of you, even though I
bought it. You be very careful, sir.
Where's the footnote? When you write
something in a book that a Jewish court
will not treat a non-Jewish like, don't
you think you ought to cite a footnote?
I gave you I gave I've given Gentlemen,
please, this is this is now Wait a
minute. A second ago, you mentioned the
term character assassination. Be careful
your character doesn't commit suicide in
front of everyone in this room.
That's gave I gave careful chapter name,
author, and book citations, knowing that
I'm televised, willing to stand up for
what I said. Don't you try and miss me
in front of everybody
even dumber than you do now. Okay, I
want to repeat.
Okay,
Rabbi, wait. I I want to I want to
repeat. Okay, I go to ask. Can we talk
about God, please? Okay. Well, I just go
that we heard tonight that a high
rabbitical court said you cannot save a
non-Jewish life on the Sabbath. That is
absolutely false and we will look it up.
We'll have to look it up after the
debate. 100 books writing on it. That's
why he can cite the court. He cites the
book, but I want to hear the court. 100
books writing on it. Not true. But be
there as a back to this. Rabbi Ba, I'll
be there. Is it possible to talk about
does God exist without asking?
When you use the word God, what do you
mean? When I use the word God, I I use
it to connote the supreme moral
authority. He who said that murder is
wrong and that life is of infinite
value, which is why life to us is so
precious. Which is why in this great
country in the United States, we do take
over take care of our elderly. It's the
reason why we don't accept the Kavorians
of this world who want to put people to
death once they believe that their life
is riddled with too much pain. I have
sat with teenagers who wanted to kill
themselves thinking that their life was
riddled with so much pain. My job at
that moment was to be reminded that life
is of infinite value. When I speak of
God, obviously when an evolutionist
speaks of God, he he thinks of a myth.
But as I stated earlier, my contention
is that evolution, which I accept with a
a designer watching its uh slow
ascendancy,
evolution believes that time is God.
that if you give anything enough time,
you will have miracles. That's just a
euphemism. Time becomes a euphemism for
God. The average secular evolutionist
like Christopher Hitchens believes that
given enough time, anything can happen.
Which, by the way, utterly undermines
everything he said earlier about the the
hopelessness of our situation and
galaxies that are going to destroy us
because God willing, time will save us.
And and no doubt it will come to our to
our to our salvation. I should say that
the reason why people like Hitler so
hated religion because he always
identified religion as his greatest
enemy like from Martin Borman's table
talk the heaviest blow that ever struck
humanity was Christianity we have no
sort of use for a fair fairy tale
invented by Jews is because Hitler did
not seek to destroy the Jews he sought
to impose a new value system on the
world a racial value system which is the
natural
outgrowth of evol of a belief in
evolutionary films and strata and
different races. The Bible establishes
that we are all one race. We are all
equally created in the image of God. It
does not in any way mean that an
evolutionist is a racist. God forbid. It
means that when he or she is not, it's
because they accept the validity of the
ten commandments. As I said earlier and
as and as many philosophers warn
against, you cannot have cut flower
ethics. Hitchens would like to take the
beautiful values we get from religion,
charity, generosity, goodness, faith,
hope, etc., all those things that keep
us going, all those things that have
made someone like Barack Obama so
popular in the United States. And he
would like to say that we can have it
without religion. It's like taking
flowers, cutting them from their bed,
their fertile soil, and believing
they're going to last. Put them in a
vase and they'll die. Rabbi Mel, can I
interrupt you, please? Um,
I have to
when my students
when I speak to my students about God, I
invariably tell them if anybody should
say to you, uh, do you believe in God?
The only appropriate answer to that
question is, tell me what you mean by
God. And I'll tell you if I believe in
that God or not. So, we are back to this
question.
Is this uh a New Yorker cartoon kind of
god that sits in the sky in clouds, an
old man wrapped in a talit and a kafan?
Um is it a spinogistic god that we're
talking about? Um is it a god of the
Jewish naturalist Morai Kaplan, the
power that makes for salvation? Um is it
is it a uh a myadian god knowledge
knowing itself? What is your image?
to say more about this. What I want him
to say more and then I want you to think
you're in a minority on that point. I
mean I thought we both answered that
question to the best of his ability. I
did not.
Sorry I did not hear an answer. I did
not hear an answer. Rabbi Ba for me for
me God is he who fills the infinite
expanse of space. It is he who is the
origin of life. It is he who is the
absolute moral authority deter to
determine what is right and what is
wrong. God is he who hears my prayer
when I cry out in moments of distress.
God is he who looks after the helpless
and God is he who I am sometimes very
angry at for failing to look after the
helpless. The essence of Judaism is the
word Israel. He who wrestles with God.
God is also he with wh with whom I have
a relationship. I have a right to
challenge God. Rabbi, you asked for
this. You asked for this.
I asked for this. Fine. If I ask for it,
I will then interrupt it. And um you
asked for white noise. You asked for
white noise and he got it. Uhhuh.
[Applause]
I will then address a question to Mr.
Hitchens.
Um though the burden of proof is on the
faithful for the existence of God. Do
you believe there is a discovery that
can cause a paradigm shift? Maybe
advances in neuroscience.
Well, all the evidence so far is the
other way. I mean the the uh the the the
heavens get emptier if you like all the
time. Uh I think the
uh the unraveling of the DNA uh string
is probably the most most conclusive
recent thing. It shows us both that
racism which I'm where Rabbi Sh and I at
least agree um and creationism alike um
illusions. We are part of the natural
order. We're not a specially created
species. We have no no unique privilege.
uh we we we are o only too aware that
Darwin was right on the point of the
stamp of our lowly origins. It's best to
begin I think from that realistic
understanding because um uh bleak though
it may be at least it's realistic. It
doesn't mean that we have to live
without irony doesn't mean we have to
live without humor. Doesn't mean we have
to live without solidarity or any of the
other things that make life a bearable
and b possible. Um you may or may not
have noticed that Rabbi Bier has been
contradicting himself directly all
evening. He began by saying that our
good qualities, our heroic and noble and
gentle and generous qualities are innate
in us. He's quite right in saying that.
Yes, they are innate in us or in most of
us, those who aren't psycho or
sociopathic.
That's that is precisely the point.
Religion borrows its morality from us,
not we from religion. God is man-made.
And I can um I I can very briefly
underline this point and make it not
just an assertion on my part by putting
it in the form of a dialectical
question. Name me if you can a a noble
action performed or a noble thought
uttered by a believer in God that could
not be uttered by a non-believer. Right?
I've I've issued this challenge in
innumerable places and uh uh spaces. Now
I've not yet had a response. I await
one. Uh there's another question that
goes with it. a corollery question. Uh,
name a wicked action performed or a
wicked thing said by someone purely
because of their religious faith. You
don't even have to blink before you've
thought of one. I rest my case.
Thank you. Um,
one final question for Rabbi Bak.
Rabbi, why did God play favorites and
make the Jews the chosen people?
Well, clearly because Christopher
Hitchens likes us so much. Um,
in fact, um,
this is one of the most misunderstood
concepts in all of Judaism. It is one
that Christopher Hitchens not only
misunderstands but
destructively misprays in his book. God
never played favorites with the Jews.
The word chosen or goyat have made you a
light to the nations is never a noun. It
is a verb. It conotes an activity. You
are chosen by God to spread the light of
God and the laws of God to all the
inhabitants of the earth. To tell them
how they too are God's children. To tell
them how they too matter, how they too
are loved by God. That is why Judaism
always insists on not converting people
to our faith because you do not upgrade
when you become a Jew. We are the only
nation on earth that exists on the
non-copyright to truth held by our
religion. Christopher Hitchens actually
uses the concept of chosenness to sadly
justify anti-semitism. Quote, page 250,
by claiming to be chosen in a special
exclusive covenant with the Almighty,
the Jews invited hatred and suspicion
and advinced their own form of racism.
So we're hated because we told the world
that we're chosen. Well, my friends, the
British sort of think they're chosen. I
lived there for 11 years. They sing a
song called Rule Bratannia. Bratana
rules the world. No one hated the
British for that. I believe it's the
waves. Hold on. Rules the waves.
Waves. They they never really they never
really took the British and sort of gas
them or anything like that. Um the the
the the Japanese have a rising sun on
their flag because they believe that
they are the land of the rising sun. The
sun rises for them. I don't see that
there's any particular hatred of the
Japanese for that belief. Um, Marcus
Garvey, I just filmed a television show
in Jamaica with my family. Marcus Garvey
founded Black Power in the 1920s with
the famous motto, black is beautiful. I
didn't see people segregating blacks
because of that belief. On the contrary,
they were hated well before it. They
were hated for no reason at all. To say
that Jews are hated for anti-semit for
for a claim to choseness is to justify
the most pernitious hatred in the
history of the world. Okay, but let's go
back to the liturggical formulation. And
as I said, And as I said, God never
chose us
and never played favorites. It was not
that you are sufficient to now make
everybody like you, get everybody to
emulate you because your path is the
only correct path. Going as far back as
900 years, the great Jewish philosopher
Myandes, who is considered the greatest
Jewish mind of all time, said that
Christianity serves a godly purpose as
does Islam. He he respected and admired
Islam. He said the Jews could even pray
in mosques because they don't worship
any kind of image or any kind of icon.
So God never chose the Jews as a form of
favoritism. He gave us this incredible
mission. One might even say that it's a
humbling motif rather than something
that breeds arrogance. It means that we
if we ever think for a moment that we're
it end God made us the means to other
ends to make sure that we spread the
knowledge of God. I I I should say that,
you know, I I believe that we have to
keep all these conversations
decent and ethical and moral. And one of
my major points throughout the night is
I don't care that Christopher Hitchens
is an atheist. He has every right to be.
And I respect all my atheist friends and
most people who know me know that
probably most of my friends are
atheists. My problem is when you distort
when you because I spend my time
primarily among secular people. But when
you distort and invent and when you make
statements like a claim to choseness
breeds anti-semitism. No, the Jews were
the Jews should not be blamed for the
hatred shown to them. We should never
blame a victim. It's not a woman who
dresses in a suggestive way that leads
her to being raped. God forbid. It is
hatred that leads to those things. And
that's why God said in the Ten
Commandments that we cannot kill, we
cannot steal. We have to live by a moral
code. And finally, it's the reason why
in the most moral and affirm greatest
moral affirmation in the history of the
world, God says in Genesis 2, he created
every human being regardless of
religion, creed, color, or faith or
non-faith in his indelible image. And um
as a final note, I assume you mean his
literally. No, I don't mean it literally
because God has no gender. Thank you.
Thank you, Rabbi Baut. Thank you, Mr.
Hitchens. Thank you all.
Well, no. But maybe they've heard enough
of us. Maybe they've heard enough of us.
Well, then just
just I I should hate to leave it like
that. And I um since um he's been so
generous as to claim so many atheists
among his friends, I should say that um
some of my worst enemies are Jews
and certainly those who didn't get the
news again rather discrepantly
delivered. Either God did or did not
make a covenant with the Jewish people.
I think of course you're right in saying
that he didn't because there's no such
person and the events described in those
books never took place. Um, Israeli
archaeology has conclusively shown that
the books of Moses are are are falsetent
propaganda. It's a jolly good thing
because otherwise there would have been
a covenant that said you can kill
everyone in Canaan and take your
property as long as you keep your
covenant with me and as long as you mark
it in your flesh. Now don't go saying
that that was not part of that fictional
religion while it was strong. And I ask
again, what happened to the Amalachites?
What happened to to the Midianites? if
this fiction is all that it is. Um,
it was actually Lord Alfred Douglas who
I think said in a famous nasty little
poem, "How odd of God to choose the
Jews."
To whom someone in Oxford replied, "Not
odd of God. The goyam annoy him."
But I will say that those who flirt
those who flirt with this those who
flirt with this kind of uh specialness I
mean it's true that every nation almost
every nation has a feeling that it's
specially uh favored by the divine not a
covenant at Mount Si exactly a location
that's yet to be discovered but let's
say Jonavar or indeed rule Britannia a
song that when I lived in England I
refused to sing precisely because as
most of my friends would decline
precisely because it did express a
concept of racial and national
superiority. And to say that it didn't
earn English and British people dislike
that we we are we're simply victims
blaming ourselves if people don't like
us for shouting about our supremacy is
absurd and self-pittitying. How could
you compare dislike of the British
anti-semitism? I didn't. This is absurd.
I didn't big boy. You did. Absurd. This
is absurd. How could you compare the
Ladies and gentlemen? Ladies and
gentlemen, who made the comparison?
No, no, no, no, no.
You know, well, if the Kipper fits, why
don't you just wear it? Well, now I
should be allowed to respond to what you
said about the Amalachites and the
Hittites. Well, I have a um
I'm sorry. No, it's okay. I I I should
be allow I should be allowed to respond
to this. You know, my friends, I haven't
got my trousers off. I lived I lived in
Britain. I lived in Britain for 11 years
and uh it's a country that I came to
love and admire. I had the great honor
of being the rabbi at Oxford University
and I befriended people like Richard
Dawkins who became a dear friend and
in England till today the statesman who
is most respected is Winston Churchill.
I think that's fair to say statistically
popularity. He ordered the
indiscriminate bombing of Dresden,
Hamburgg. These cities were obliterated
three months before the war ended. In
Dresden, 250,000 died. In Hamburg,
330,000 died. There were cyclones
created by the firebombs, winds 200
miles an hour from the from the fires.
Uh four months later, Harry S. Truman,
who was in voted our second most popular
president of the 20th century, ordered
the indiscriminate nuclear destruction
of Hiroshima Nagasaki. That this did not
mean that these were immoral men.
Franklin Dela Roosevelt was voted the
most popular, the most effective of the
20th century presidents. He participated
in many of those decisions for the
indiscriminate slaughter of civilians,
including men, women, and children. Rab
with God. I'm sorry. I'm I'm answering
his thing about the Hittites. It's just
that they felt that certain war measures
sometimes call for very very extreme
measures that are that in any other
context would be immoral. Judaism would
never today allow the murder of
Hittites, Amalachites. In fact,
Christopher Hitchens said it was only
done in the context of war at the time.
And God specifically forbade it forever
thereafter. In the same way, we would
never bomb a German city today or use a
nuclear bomb against against uh another
nation. You know that you know, well, I
don't think we would. If you believe the
United States would nuke someone, then
so be it. I don't believe we would. Um,
I should tell I should tell you I should
tell you that I should tell you that
Christopher Hitchens writes in his book
that rabbis debate whether the
Palestinians are today the Amalachites
and that is why they ought to be uh and
debate that they should be expelled
again. Name a single mainstream rabbi.
There's always fringes and to the extent
to which fringes are kept on the fringe,
they could never ever define the
mainstream. Name any mainstream rabbi
that would ever say that. In fact, every
Orthodox Jew or anyone who's
knowledgeable of the Torah here will
know that we are not to that a malik is
a concept that we have no capacity to
identify according to the Torah itself.
We don't know who they are. It's an
ethereal concept. So much so that when
when when
the when the when the Jews of Kevron
when when Baroo Goldstein killed the
Palestinians
who were at prayer in their mosque then
the very next morning Chief Rabbi
Jonathan Sax was living in England
called it an abomination as did
virtually every other rabbi. My house
was firebombed that night at Oxford.
Till today the police don't don't know
by how. Thank God a uh uh a Spanish um
opair who lived with us saved our
children's lives by putting it out. My
wife and I were out. It was a Saturday
night. It was a night after Purum if you
recall. I still got up to I called a
press conference and I said that what
Barack Goldstein did to those
Palestinians who are our brothers who
are equally God's children is the
highest disgrace that Judaism and
Orthodox jury has faced in my lifetime.
So let's never say that this is
justified. And that's why I mean with
all due respect in my own op my my own
opinion if you're going to write a book
and it's a very you're you're a great
scholar and I love your writing most of
the time and if you're going to say that
rabbis say this and this court said that
I really believe there ought to be a
footnote or a name till today and you're
still not quoting a name you're quoting
a book about something etc. There is no
such thing as a high Jewish court in you
would talk perhap you would take perhaps
the name of Rabbi Oadia Yosef the head
of the National Religious Party very
much sought after Israeli politician
good night um and also the um
thank you and I direct you again I
direct you again to I direct you again
to Dr. Israel Shahaka essay, the
significance of Barrett Goldstein. From
now on, I'm sorry I can only be polite
to someone who has a receipt and a book.
Thanks for coming. Thank you.
100 books. 100 books. And he puts