Joe Rogan podcast. Check it out. The Joe
Rogan Experience. Train by day. Joe
Rogan podcast by night. All day.
No. No.
I'm too vain. That's exactly right. I
look back and I think, "Oh, that those
headphones are pushing up my hair."
Isn't that sad? Shave your head. That's
sad. You never look back if you do.
Yeah. Yeah. Oh, it's the greatest thing
in the world. It's freedom. I have a I
have a big dent here from when a
meteorite landed on me when I was a kid.
A meteorite? Oh, funny story. I've got
plenty of cuts on my head. I got them
all over the place. Well, you're looking
pretty unscarred. Oh, the back of my
head. I have uh one when I was a little
kid. It's pretty big. That uh these one
of these cranes that lifts up sewer
pipes. Those big concrete pipes. Bang me
off the back of the head. Yeah. Oh,
yeah. That's not good. Grayed out. Went
to the hospital. Were you a different
person before that experience? I don't
know. I You have to talk to my mom. I
was always a little wild. This could be
of autobiographical significance here.
Oh, there's definitely a lot of head
trauma. Were you knocked out
personality? No. No. I stayed conscious,
but I got close. That's the big
predictor. I got gray. Everything I
grayed out that I came back to. I didn't
completely go unconscious. So, uh Jamie
went golfing this weekend with OJ
Simpson's golf clubs. Uh oh. Not not
with OJ. He's not here. Exercise. I
think that that would be the next step.
Jamie bought OJ Simpson's golf clubs
after he This is like a childhood dream.
No, they were just for sale. I saw them
for sale. I said, "Why not?" They came
in. I wanted some big grips. Yeah. A
couple of our friends. What did uh Shane
get? Shane got a bunch of stuff. I
talked him into buying some stuff. Yeah.
He got like scarfves and ties. He bought
a bunch of ties, I think. Scarfves, too.
Okay. He bought a trophy. A trophy and a
Bill Clinton signed photo. And he spent
thousands of dollars. What was this? Was
this some sort of OJ Simpson auction?
Sounds like an estate sale. Yeah. Yeah.
I see. You know, he's dead now, so you
can get his stuff right for nothing.
Pennies on the dollar. Well, it's I
mean, only people like Jamie and J are
dumb enough to buy. It's like it's like
for a goof. It's one of those things
like you're either getting it for a goof
or you're a very dark person. Yeah.
Right. Right. Right. I wouldn't want to
own it even for a goof. Like if I found
a OJ played pool, I wouldn't want his
clue his queue. There was there cues?
No, there wasn't. There was a weird
notebook that Robert Kardashian had like
handwritten stuff to him. Blood
splatter. I was like, whoa, that might
be interesting. But it's taking a
vicious turn, Joe, already. Yeah, that's
a dark story. It is. Yeah. Yeah. And you
only know the surface of it. Well, it's
dark in both ways. It's also dark and
planted evidence. You know, there was
blood at the scene of the CL the crime
that had preservative in it. Allegedly,
supposedly, according to Robert
Kardashian, and according to, I believe
the forensic scientists when they
analyzed it, it matched OJ's blood, but
they had to draw blood from OJ in order
to determine whether or not it was his
blood that was at the scene of the
crime. And some of the blood found at
the scene of the crime had that
preservative in it that they use. They
were sloppy in the 90s, you know,
compared to now. Well, there was no DNA
evidence back then. You know, people
were cops were there. There's always
going to be a certain percentage of cops
that just want to convict somebody
regardless of the evidence. And if
there's, you know, in their mind, if
they believe someone's guilty, they'll
do whatever they they can, including
planting evidence. I guess at least
that's allegedly. I don't not that I
don't think he did it. I definitely
think he did it. But I also think the
cops planted evidence, which is probably
at least partially why he got off, you
know. I think the big reason why he got
off was Rodney King. Right. Right. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. Have you gone into the
whole George Floyd story at all? Have
you ever like looked at like what they
actually did to him for It's a
combination of things. Like what the cop
did was horrible, but also he was dying.
Mhm. You know, like most people probably
like if they did that to you, you
probably would have lived. You know,
that guy had an enlarged car. He was
up. But that cop did lean on his
neck, which is always interesting to see
people try to minimize that, you know.
I'm I'm always like, you got to be able
to just say what it is. Well, a
situation can be ugly in a multitude of
ways. Yes. Right. That's when things get
well. That's when it's very difficult to
pick your moral pathway forward. All
your choices are not good. Yes. Which is
oftentimes the case when it comes to
conflicts, right? Yes. Conflicts are
very complicated and there and people
want it to be binary. They want there to
be a good guy and a bad guy and that's
often times not really the case. Well,
it's hard hard to organize yourself for
combat unless you are quite convinced
that you're the good guy. So, there's a
default to that dichotomy that's a
necessary part of well, even standing
your own ground, right? because
otherwise you get demoralized. And so I
suppose people well when they're
threatened they default to a simple
narrative and because that's you can't
defend yourself in some ways. It's it's
very hard to defend yourself especially
physically or militarily without a
pretty cut and dried narrative. Well,
especially like military operatives, you
know, you have to have a very your your
life and the people that you're with,
their life depends on you not having any
confusion about whether or not it's
morally correct to be doing what you're
doing. That's why they like to break it
down to kill bad dudes. You know, kill
bad dudes, right? Real simple. Let's go.
They tell us what to do, we do it, which
is what you want to stay alive, you want
your teammates to stay alive, that's
what you have to do. Yeah. Well, you
never know when doubt will cause a
fraction of a second difference in
reaction time. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
That's always the thing with physical
altercations with people, too. You know,
often times people get sucked into these
things where they're not sure whether to
act or not act, and that's when they get
in trouble, right? You know, right?
That's probably true in life. You don't
want to oversimplify things, too. But
once you've made a decision, well,
that's when it's necessary to put doubts
behind you because otherwise you just
act in half measures. Yeah. And often
times you have to have done the wrong
thing before like like failed to act or
hesitated to act and it cost you and
then you have to learn that lesson. It's
very difficult to like know that without
experiencing mistakes, you know, you
have to you have to have failed to act
and then realize, oh, I should have done
something there. Yeah. Well, that's I
think that's partly too one of the
things that I often faced in my clinical
practice and with the students that I
mentored was this confusion about
acting. I don't know what to do. So,
what should I do? Well, nothing. I'll
wait around until I figure out what to
do. It's like no, you should put
together a bad plan and you should
implement it because even if you fail in
the implementation, you'll gather
information and then you can rectify the
plan. And
so staying in that malaise until you
know what to do makes you get older and
more miserable and you gather no
information along the way. A bad plan is
a good idea. best. You know, any plan is
better than none. That's a good rule of
thumb. And a bad
plan, a bad plan can be incrementally
improved. Yeah. Right. With experience.
Right. He who hesitates is lost. Yeah.
Yeah. That's really difficult for young
people. I think more so today than ever
at any time in history because the
distractions are so many and they're so
engrossing. You know, if you get out of
high school, you don't know what to do,
and then you start playing video games
and you're on social media, a day can
slip by like that. Yeah. A day becomes a
week, becomes a month, becomes a year,
and before you know it, you're 30 and
you haven't done And that's really
common. That's really common today. And
I don't think we can ignore those
factors, the factors of just engrossing
distractions. Yeah. Well, in the
algorithms optimized for short-term
attention. Mhm. So, you know, it's a
weird thing a because you could imagine
that you would want a machine that
offers you what you want, right? Because
you want ads that are targeted to you
because you want to see a bunch of ads
that aren't relevant to you now and then
because maybe you'll learn something and
content. Well, why not have a machine
shovel the same sort of things that you
are interested in at you? That's a kind
of curation. The problem comes and we
haven't figured this out at all
technically and probably not
psychologically. The problem comes in
time frame, right? Because there's a big
difference between what you might be
interested in if you were diligently
striving towards a long-term goal that
required conscientiousness and what's
going to attract your attention right
now, this moment. And the thing about
the algorithms is that they maximize for
short-term attention. And that's a so
basically they're ma they're actually
optimizing for hedonism. Yeah. And and
and then you might say, well, so what?
Because you're getting what you want.
Well, the problem with short-term
impulsive hedenism is it doesn't play
out well over any reasonable time span.
Yeah. So that's why you have to mature,
which is painful and annoying, but
absolutely necessary and much better
than the alternative. The alternative is
exactly what that's Peter Pan, right?
Yeah. 30-year-old. I still haven't grown
up. And yeah, I'm a little past my uh
shelf life now, too. I think people are
afraid of losing fun. They think that
when you grow up, you lose fun. But it's
silly. It's not true. You can grow up
and still have fun. You know, you just
have to you have to have discipline and
prioritize your time. Like, well, that's
why Christ says to people that they have
to become as little children, not stay,
right? You have to rediscover that,
right? Rediscover the joy of it. Yeah.
But also, well, kids are good for that,
too, aren't they? Because they teach you
that again. You look at the world
through eyes of memory by the time
you're an adult. So, the world loses its
freshness. That's part of the world
loses its freshness because you see your
memories instead of the world. And then
kids come along and you think, "Oh, oh
yeah, that's really actually quite
interesting." And they're so compelled
by everything because their perceptions
are so fresh that they share that with
you and that can help reawaken
that spirit of childhood play, let's
say. I've been thinking a lot about play
in the last year or so. Yeah. Well, I
spent a lot of time trying
to take apart the causes of like truly
pathological degeneration, right? on the
sadistic side, on the criminal side, on
the totalitarian side, very curious
about tyranny.
And I I I it was very difficult for me
to conceptualize the opposite of that as
cleanly as I could characterize its
presence. Like what's the opposite of
tyranny? It's not freedom, by the way.
It's certainly not anarchctic freedom.
It's not hedonistic freedom.
Benevolence. I think it's play. Play. I
think it's play. Right. Yeah. Well, that
makes sense. Well, the the developmental
psychologist Jean Pia, one of the things
he pointed out was
that play, so let's say play is the
foundation of micro community, right?
When you're a little kid, you you play a
game with another kid and then if that
works well, you inhabit a little diatic
community. You're both in it together.
And then if it really works, you
replicate that across time and that
gives you a friend. But there's play is
a very interesting it's very interesting
psychologically and psychobbiologically
because it has to be entered
involuntarily. You can't force someone
to play and it's
also motivationally fragile.
So mammals have a play circuit and it
can be disrupted by pretty much any
other motivational or emotional circuit.
So the circumstances have to be set up
properly. like the walled garden, you
know that idea. The walled garden is a
place that play can take place like
eternally so to speak. And and because
it has to be undertaken voluntarily,
it's the opposite of tyranny. And I like
my wife and I have really started to
apply this in our marriage more
consciously. you know, once once I'd
figured out this relationship because
I've been lecturing to people for a long
time about how to conduct themselves in
life so they don't become a tyrant or a
handmaidaden to the tyrants, right? A
silent handmaiden to the tyrants, let's
say. And aiming at play, you know, when
we walked in here today, one of the
things we said was, "Let's have some
fun." You know, and I've been thinking
this this morning, too, about what
attitude I should take coming in to talk
to you. And there isn't a better
attitude. There isn't a better attitude
than
play. And so, and I think it is because
it's the
antithesis. It's the antithesis of
tyranny in particular. And then you were
talked more about mature play. And
that's that good. You know, that also
makes sense. This is the issue with the
idea that adulthood isn't any fun. It's
like, well, do you want to play a simple
game or do you want to play a really
sophisticated game really well? Now, you
that's going to require some discipline
and some training and some maturation,
but the payoff is much higher. That's
good way to conceptualize marriage. The
highs are higher when you're successful.
Well, and and also the the people who
have the most sex now are religious
married couples. Really? Yeah. I know.
Isn't that funny? Which religion? like,
"Yeah, good good question, Joe. Good
question." Well, I guess in the West
that would obviously be Christianity.
But but but it's an but it's an
interesting case example of the sorts of
things we're talking about because you
can imagine at the dawn of the sexual
revolution when the birth control pill
became prevalent that the last
hypothesis anyone would have possibly
generated was that the cascading
consequences of that over 50 years would
be well radical increase in pornography
use because sex has been made less
dangerous by the pill and that the
people who are having the most sex would
be religious married couples. Right. But
is that true? Because like pornography
essentially was very difficult to
acquire before the birth control pill
was invented. True. True. You used to
have to go somewhere to get the
pornography. Isn't part of the excess
use of pornography just the access is so
instantaneous now? Oh, definitely. But
you could imagine too that you might
have hypothesized that if the birth
control pill took the threat out of sex
that pornography would be less
necessary, but that didn't seem to work
out, right? So it's certainly the
availability is Yeah. We would never
know though because the the the birth
control was when was it
1960 something? That's really when it
started somewhere around. Yeah. When it
started to to to ramp up, let's say.
It's so crazy because it completely
changed the the dynamic. women could
have sex for recreation with people that
they didn't even know and not have any
consequences in terms of like having to
carry that person's child. Whereas that
was always a giant fear. If you're a
woman in the back of your head, every
time you have sex, you possibly could be
taking care of a child for the next 18
plus years. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that every
time. Right. took this thing. This is a
consequential thing where with a guy,
it's like you have this biological
imperative to spread your seed, but
you're not thinking about making babies,
right? You're thinking about sexual
activity. When a guy's having sex, he's
not thinking, "I can't wait to make a
baby." You're just thinking, "Boy, sex
is going to be great. I'm excited. Oh,
boy, that's fun." You're not thinking,
"I'm making a kid." Because that would
make you hesitant. And nature is not
interested in hesitation. Nature is
like, "No, no, no, no, no, no. Let's
just make you dumb as for about 20
minutes and focus on one goal." So, why
did you get
married? Well, I love my wife. She
wanted to get married. We had a a child.
It seemed like a good thing to do. It's
like at a certain point in
time, making a baby is more of a
commitment than getting married. You
made a life, you know, like the
commitment of getting married seemed
Right. Right. Of course. But it's also
But why did you stay committed then
before the marriage once you had a
child? I just said I do. I love her.
It's a thing to do. It's
a life and raising a child became
everything. It it becomes it becomes a
very different thing, right? I think I
have a lot of friends who don't have
kids and I don't I'm not the type of
person that thinks everyone should have
a kid. You know, I know a lot of people
with kids that do say that. I don't
think everyone should have a kid. I
think you should do whatever you want. I
don't know how your brain works. I
assume your brain works along similar
lines with me. But there's a thing that
happens when you Scary thought, Joel.
Well, similar lines. Similar. I think we
all share similar similar
lines. There's an empathy that comes
from having a child that's so different
and an understanding that we are all
babies that grew up. We all start off as
these bundles of potential and genetics
and then we're influenced by so many
different things or so many different
factors. But I used to think of people
as being grown up all the time. And then
when I had kids, I was
like, we're all just babies. We're all
just babies that have just been alive
for a long time. You know, everyone
started out as a baby. And it just
profoundly changed the way I interact
with people. The amount of compassion I
have for people, the amount of charity
that I have for people, the charitable
way in which I think about them when
they do something or they say something,
I give people the benefit of the doubt
way more. And Dave Chappelle said this
to me once at the comedy store and it
was very profound. He said, "Having
children didn't just change the amount
of love I have. It changed my capacity
for
love." And I was like, "Oo, that's it.
You just nailed it. You just nailed it."
You know, cuz
there's Well, there's private moments
when you talk to people about their
children, about having children, and
what that's like. It's a very
psychedelic experience. That would be
another reason why the family with
children is the foundation of the
community. Has to be the foundation of
the community. I mean, it's kind of
obvious from a biological perspective.
Let's say no children, no community. But
there's no reason to assume that you
wouldn't get radically better at
something with necessity and practice.
And if you're practicing loving your
infant and your child, well, why
wouldn't that generalize? Why would that
capacity develop? I want it's not like a
practice. It's like an
overwhelming desire that comes about
like the love you have for your your
child is like it's not like anything
else. It's very different. It's very My
friend Jim Brewer said this once. He
said uh when I had a child, that's when
I really understood murder. I really
understood like my capacity to defend my
child is like I never understood like
how could somebody kill somebody before?
story was like, "Oh, now I get it. Now I
get it." And you know that's real too.
And that's also tribal, right? So it's
not just your child. It's the child of
everyone around you in your ch in your
tribe. And then you think that you're
being invaded by an oncoming tribe. And
genetics and history dictates you have
to be insanely ruthless to fight off
that tribe. There's no other way for
survival, which is really wild, right?
Because those people have that same
feeling towards their children. It's
like that sting line. If the Russians
love their children, too. This episode
is brought to you by Paleo Valley. Are
you looking for a great tasting snack
that is absolutely proteinpacked? Paleo
Valley's meat sticks are what you're
after. Made with 100% grass-fed beef,
pasture-raised chicken, pork, and
venison. Paleo Valley meat sticks come
in nine delicious flavors, including
original, jalapeno, and maple bacon. And
unlike most meat snacks on the market,
Paleo Valleys are naturally fermented
with zero preservatives, ensuring that
you get a gut friendly, flavorful snack
and that has a shelf life of one year
and even longer if refrigerated. They're
also free from gluten, grains, soy,
refined sugar, dairy, GMOs, and
pesticides. Plus, they're sourced from
small regenerative American family
farms, making them not only good for
you, but also great for the planet.
Whether you're following a carnivore,
keto, or paleo diet, Paleo Valley meat
sticks are the perfect protein snack for
you. With over 35 million sold and a
60-day 100% money back guarantee, Paleo
Valley stands by their quality. Visit
paleo
valley.com/rogan and use the promo code
roan to get 20% off your first order. So
that that that love that you talk about
with regard to your wife, you know, I I
I'd asked I asked you a little bit about
that. It's
like I've talked to people who have they
can't understand how someone could be
with the same woman indefinitely. Let's
say these are people who usually haven't
been able to establish that within their
own life. And of course the price you
pay assuming it's a price for forgoing
all others is that well that that that's
exactly it. It's a major sacrifice. And
so what do you think what role do you
think that love plays? Like how do you
conceptualize the relationship between
that love that you described and that
willingness to stay in a permanent
relationship and
that and the willingness also to not
pursue any other women? H how do you how
do you understand how does that make
itself manifest in your life? I mean I I
presume that you I'm I presume that you
know you had opportunities of all sorts.
I presume you do as well
in principle. I suppose they don't seem
to come to me professor type character.
Back in the day guys like you would be
banging their grad students. Not guys
like you but guys in your position.
Wasn't that always a thing? This is
fascinating aspect of they seem to shut
that off pretty much at the beginning.
Well, they they seem to have completely
stopped that. Like if you go back to
Fineman and Oppenheimer and famous
famous scientists were notoriously
playboys, which is really interesting
because it's like these wild innovative
people were essentially like
intellectual rock stars, right? And then
somehow or another that just got
stopped. Like if you were a professor in
the 1960s, like the the girls would be
wooing the professor. They would be
excited. These 22-year-old graduate
students would be so excited to be
talking to this like incredibly famous
intellectual
and they
all, you know, were ladies men. Like
Fineman was like famous for chasing
skirts. That was like part of the thing.
He does a lot of math and chases skirts,
you know.
that is a a giant distraction to people
that are trying to get things done in
life. Um, and it's also a distraction
from your own personal development, I
think. I think you could be with the
wrong person and want to be with other
people and that makes sense. But really
what that is is you should not be with
that person anymore, which is
unfortunately the case. Like there's a
lot of guys who wind up with really hot
women who are out of their mind
and a lot of women who wind up with
really hot men who are not what they
thought they were going to be, you know?
And if you find yourself in this
situation where you're this with this
pathological person and you're trying to
make it work and you realize at a
certain point in time like I'm not going
to make it work like this is you have to
be able to just like jump ship. That's
why people are hesitant to get married.
That's what what really dangerous about
marriage. It's not like being with one
person you really love being with. Like
I really love being with my wife. She's
fun. Like we go we have date nights all
the time. We have a lot of fun, you
know? We really do. It's enjoyable.
How did you decide to set up date
nights? How did you go about that? I
mean, I know that's personal, but and I
don't want all the gory details. Let's
say I know it's really simple. We just
enjoy hanging out together. We have a
lot of laughs. And so we just said like
it's kind of important because I'm so
busy that we schedule time
that's just unavoidable like like this
is what we're doing. We're going to do
this and then we do it with Tammy too.
Yeah. We've done that for like 30 years.
I think most most married couples will
tell you that that's important. Most
married couples tell you that that's
that's kind of the secret. And it's the
secret is like it's also the best thing
as well as being the secret. Yeah. It's
fun. It's fun. Like if the person that
you're with is fun. That's the real
problem is is that sometimes people just
they pick people that are hot. That's
it. You know, hot and willing and nice
enough. Nice enough to be around. Then
you deal with all the other crazy
nonsense. And you're you're setting
yourself up with I've had many friends
ruin their lives and then they
go through divorces. And you've said
this best that one of the things that
women are very good at is reputation
destruction. I have seen that happen. So
imagine you are legally entangled with
someone who at one point in time you
loved intimately and now that person is
trying to destroy every aspect of your
life and you have to pay for their
lawyers. So you have to pay for the
general of the army that's trying to
destroy your kingdom. And I've seen this
happen to many of my friends and that is
why people are afraid of marriage.
That's why people are afraid of
commitment because the disastrous
implications of like what can happen if
it goes sideways like what can happen if
you wind up hating each other and what
can happen if you just lie to yourself
and you trick you
like well some of the hesit hesitation
that I had um for getting married is
most of my friends that got married when
I was young all went through horrible
divorces when I was on news radio Dave
Foley Steven Root and um Phil Hartman
were all going through it. All going
through it in different levels of
psychosis. Obviously, Phil Hartman's
being the worst cuz his wife shot him
when he was leaving her. By the way, he
decided to leave her and he had tried to
leave her a few times and she shot him
in his sleep and then she shot herself.
Is a horrible, horrible story. But
Steven Root went through it and they,
you know, they'd confide in me. I'd be
like, "Oh, Jesus Christ.
the amount of money these women were
trying to get from them when they knew
that they couldn't afford this. So, one
of the dirty tricks that will happen uh
with uh divorce lawyers, with um people
that are on sitcoms is when you get on a
sitcom, if you're an actor and you get
on a sitcom, it is the most stable job,
the greatest job in show business for a
lot of them because you're going to get
a steady check. You're gonna do 24,
maybe 26 episodes a year. You're making
more money than you've ever made in your
whole life. But then you get divorced.
So what happens is it gets set up where
your ex-wife wants a percentage of what
you're making at this very unrealistic
level where you're never going to
achieve this again. And for Dave Foley,
it was so bad that at one point in time,
I don't believe he was allowed to go
back to Canada. I don't know if that's
changed, but the the judge literally
told him when he told the judge like, "I
don't have that kind of money anymore. I
don't have the potential for earning." I
was on a hit sitcom, like not even a hit
sitcom, but I was on a sitcom on NBC,
paid a lot of money, and that was the
only time I made that kind of money. The
judge said to him, "Your obligation to
pay has no relation to your ability to
pay."
That's Canadian judges for you. Just
insane. And you know he those are words
you never those are words you never want
to hear even once in your life. I love
him. So I was going through this pain
not like he was but just like oh my god
oh my god. So these three people that I
was very close to. And then most of the
other people that I knew you know I knew
so many people. Fortunately my mother
and my stepfather have a great
relationship and they have for a long
time. So I had that modeled like they
were always very close and they didn't
fight which is really nice. It was
really nice to have that as a model you
know like that where I realized okay
it's not everybody's not at each other's
throats all the time and some people
actually do enjoy spending time
together. you know, Tammy and I on on
the tour, she started
to introduce me um two years ago and to
talk about some of the things we're
doing uh in the family, some of our
family business, talk about Peterson
Academy, talk about essay and so she'd
go out on the stage and was that the
first time she had ever gone on stage in
front of you do enormous crowds. Yeah.
Well, so so first of all, she did that
and then we replaced the the business
discussion because we were just doing an
update about the family, you know, and
so she'd do that. We replaced that with
ads and then she started to talk. She
she'd talked about the rules, say in 12
rules for life or some of the religious
things I've been dealing with lately.
And she'd relate that to something in
her own life. And then she does the Q&amp;A
at the end of the lecture. And and part
of that was just she was along with me.
And part of that was Michaela was
introducing me for a while and then had
to go back to her work. And so we
slotted Tammy in because it seemed like
a good business decision. But one of the
things we figured out very quickly that
was really a shock to us was
that people really liked especially the
Q&amp;As's when because what people will
offer their questions electronically on
this platform called Slido which is a
very good platform for such things and
then Tammy would they could upvote the
questions and then Tammy would sort them
and ask me questions kind of from the
top down that were thematically relevant
to the lecture that I had given.
But we found very quickly that people
really liked that because they hadn't
seen a couple engage in civilized
discussion ever. Seriously, like it was
really out there. It was really
shocking, Joe. Like, you know, I was
shocked when I first started touring by
how demoralized people were. Like that
really that was really striking and
painful to see that on such a mass
scale. And then also to see how little
encouragement it took to have a really
major effect. I mean there's a positive
aspect to that too, but there's also a
tragic aspect. It's like you mean you
just need to have some encouragement and
that was enough and you never got that
like even once. That's rough when you
see that in thousands of people, right?
And it was the same thing. We found it
was the same thing with regards to
seeing a functional couple at least even
that model because you know Tammy asks
me questions and she thinks about the
questions and then sometimes she
comments but not that much but she
actually listens to the answers and she
wants to hear the answer and so and that
dynamic is being played out on stage and
people found that very heartening and
well that shows you well you said you
know yourself and this is why I brought
it up because you had the example from
your from your stepfather and your mom
of this long-term relationship that
worked. I mean, how the hell do you
orient yourself if you you haven't seen
that anywhere, right? You and then you
you consider relationships just like all
the bad ones and like you're going to be
burdened and locked into that. Did you
ever see that video where Alec Baldwin
and his wife are on the camp on uh red
carpet and they're being interviewed and
they're asking them questions and the
wife starts talking and Alex chimes in
about something and she said, "You're
not talking. I'm talking. When I'm
talking, you're not talking on camera."
And you watch this, you're like, "Yo,
that's what everyone's scared of, right?
That's what
every tyranny the tyranny of being
trapped in a relationship like that.
It's like
and sometimes one person is so
overbearing that the other person just
sort of submits to it, right? And then
you're just like, I don't even want to I
don't want to fight. I don't want to
deal with this. I don't want to deal
with this. And so then you're just
trapped and this person's insulting you
and humiliating you publicly. That was
the case with Phil Hartman. I got to see
that. We would uh all go like we went to
a party once and I remember she was
talking about exboyfriends that she
loves pickup trucks because her
ex-boyfriends had pickup trucks and they
would climb into the back of these
pickup trucks and I was like what the
But she was doing it on purpose to
like make him squirm and make him
uncomfortable. And she would say things
like talk about how he's old. Oh, he's
old. He doesn't, you know, he doesn't
like to do any. It was just it was just
public humiliation in front of friends
where you're in this like arena where
you he can't say anything. He can't just
go what the are you talking about?
Like why are you talking to me like
that? Like why are we doing this? He
can't do that because he's public and
he's out with us. Maybe he should do it
anyways. Probably should do it anyways.
Yeah. we're all out and you know Phil
was all about like appearances, how
things one of the things that he was
afraid of with getting married was that
he was just starting to break into films
and a lot of the films that he was doing
were very like familyfriendly films and
it was it helped that he was a family
man you know if he was right so he had
he had an act he had to sustain too he
had an image right and this was critical
in Hollywood like they had ideas of who
you were okay you're a family man. Okay.
Good, good, good. And you're the So, if
you have this radical change in your
life where no longer you a family man,
and if you want to be honest about it
and you want to say, I I was in a toxic
relationship and some of it was me and
some of it was her and this is what
happened. Like, whoa, now you're opening
up the world to this big can of worms.
Better to keep that can sealed. Yeah.
Well, it's generally better not to have
your your fights in public. And it's
certainly better. You know, I've been
I've been thinking about this
commandment to honor your mother and
father. And I've been thinking about
what that means. I read this book called
Angelus Ashes by Frank McCort. And Frank
had a really alcoholic father. Like like
an Irish alcoholic father back in the
40s. Oh yeah. He drank every scent the
family had. And they they lived in
terrible poverty and his sister died and
like it was rough. But he said his
father was often sober in the morning
and and he established a relationship
with like good morning sober father and
kind of put alcoholic drunken nighttime
father in a different bin and he could
he could get the benefit of having a
father in consequence of that. And that
honoring that's also something that you
want to do within a marriage, right?
Because your wife is your friend and
your lover, but she's also your wife and
and you're her husband. And that means
that a part of keeping that marriage
working is honor. And part of the honor
is that you don't do that sort of thing
in public, right?
Humiliate fight. Well, that's also in
some ways independent. In a way, it's
independent of who your wife or husband
is. It's like, you know, you could
imagine two people fighting in public
and one of them or both of them really
deserving to have that fight as people.
But then to keep the marriage intact,
you have to remember, well, this is my
wife. She's not just my friend. She's
not just someone I know. She's my wife.
And we shouldn't be doing primate
dominance hierarchy maneuvering in
public. We shouldn't be competing for
power because that's going to destroy
the marriage. Yeah. And so that's that
that's that's part of that honoring I
think is to to remember the role and to
keep it well sacred is really
sacrosanked. Here's another one. Don't
ever insult each other even though you
want to like you you want to like be
mean sometimes like people get mean to
you, you want to be mean back. I don't
do that with my friends so I don't do
that with anyone else. I don't want to
do that. That's why I don't do it
online. I don't get involved in these
like hissy pissy fits online,
particularly on Twitter. I just don't
think the prime place for such things.
That's all it is. First of all, again,
as someone who looks at everyone like a
child or like a baby, I I don't I'm not
angry that people do that. I understand
the appeal of it. If I was 15 and
Twitter was around, I would be tweeting
at every celebrity saying,
"You're a loser. Jump in front of a
bus." I would say things just to try to
get a reaction out of them. I think a
lot of kids do. Um I think a lot of
people don't feel like they have a voice
and one way to be heard is to be
insulting and one way to hurt is to be
negative. If you look at
the majority of discourse on social
media in regards to hot button issues,
it's disrespectful. It's contentious.
It's shitty and insulting. And I've
decided like over time in my life to not
do that. I don't want to do that. I'm
not interested. I'm not interested in
that. I'm not interested in that kind of
conflict. Like I see real conflict all
the time as a an MMA commentator. You
know, I see the most violent legal
conflict other than war all the time.
It's a that's conflict. That's like real
conflict and resolution and you know
purposeful agreed upon
conflict like regular like back and
forth and sol. Wouldn't it be better to
figure out what you agree and disagree
on and why and and talk? Like why can't
we all figure out how to do that? That
should be a discipline you learn at an
early age. Most of the issues that
people have, if the person comes at you
insulting and aggressive, either that
person is ignorant or they're playing a
game, okay? And the game is to get your
emotions up, to get you reactive and to
be reacting to them instead of acting.
The game is like if someone's
hyperaggressive in a fight, the game is
to put you on the defensive so that they
don't like the best defense is a good
offense. You learn that early on in
fighting. So you learn that you can be
very offensive and then the person never
has a chance to get their game going.
That's the case with conversations too.
So this is like there's a gamesmanship
to this kind of communication where it's
not just communicating. It's
communicating but it's essentially
intellectual oneupsmanship and sparring.
You're sparring. You're scoring points.
You're trying to dunk on each
other. And I get that. I've done that
before. I've engaged in it. It's never
satisfying. It always feels gross. Even
if you win, it's gross. Like I've said
this before, like even like publicly
things that I've I felt like I had to do
like the Carlos Menia conflict that I
had way back in 2007 where accused him
of stealing material and it became this
viral video and then a bunch of other
comedians jumped in and we all agreed
there was a real problem. It was a real
problem because he was very famous and
he was being protected by these agencies
who were profiting off of him being
famous and they didn't want that train
to stop. I still to this day wonder if I
would ever do that again because the
negativity that came my way from people
that were fans of his was so it's so
overwhelming if you're paying attention
to it's like what did I open up like gh
even though I knew it was necessary like
what and that is also why people are
negative because they want they want to
stop you from engaging in conflict
that's going to hurt them you know so
they try to hurt you as much as possible
so you're like hesitant to do it I don't
want to wait into those waters
It's dangerous, filled with sharks. Um,
well, you could imagine maybe I think
and I think this is worth delving into
in some depth. You could imagine that
there
are there's various ways of attaining
status, renown,
reputation. Status isn't exactly the
right word because reputation is better
because you can have a reputation that
you deserve, right? And so people do
work for reputation and all things
considered that's a good thing. Earned
reputation. Earned reputation. Earned
reputation. Earn truly unique where they
Jordan that guy that's a unique human
being and that's a real reputation.
Right. Right. Okay. That's what people
want. Right. Right. And and it's also
there isn't anything more valuable that
you can have than that. Not even close.
This is why by the way this is very
cool. Uh it's a bit of an aside, but it
makes it's worth bringing up. In the
gospels, Christ tells people to store up
treasure in heaven where it doesn't
rust, where the thieves can't steal it.
That's reputational treasure, right? So
if you So the idea is that if you
conduct yourself
impeccably, you'll develop a storehouse
of reputation that will withstand all
catastrophe. M nothing can it nothing
there's no place you can put your wealth
that's more effective than that it's the
least violatable place and that's right
it's it's right right and so but the
problem is and this is a really tricky
problem and you're touching on it is
that the reputation game can be gamed
okay so when your reputation rise rises
your serotonin levels rise and that
makes you less sensitive to negative
emotion and more sensitive to positive
emotion So that's a really good deal.
And what that also means is that there's
a high psychological benefit to status
increase, reputational increase, and a
real cost to reputational decrease.
That's partly why people don't like
losing face for example because their
emotions disregulate. Okay. So now the
best way to play that game is to
establish a genuine reputation. And the
best way to do that, you've done this by
the way. I figured out this year on my
lectures that I'm always trying to
answer a question on stage. So that's a
quest and I'm bringing the audience
along on a quest and it's a real quest
because I'm actually trying to figure
something out and I do that in real time
and that's a very different game. That's
a very different conversational game
than the status battle game. Right?
Because I could come on here. I don't
know if it would work, but I could come
on here and I could try to show that I
was smarter than Joe Rogan. Now, I've
watched you and that's a very difficult
thing to pull off. But hypothetically,
that could be my aim and I could play
gotcha questions and I could lead you
into the problem. The problem is that
wouldn't work because I'm willing to
accept that you're smarter than me.
First of all, like I talk to a lot of
people that are smarter than me and I
like it. It's enjoyable. I don't ever
feel uncomfortable talking to people
that are smarter than me. I want to know
some things that they can tell me on
certain thing. I want to educate myself.
I want to be I want to see how their
mind works. I want to be blown away. I
don't want to compete with them
intellectually. There's times in my life
where I would have fallen into that
trap. I think
it's Well, I think that's also what's
made you popular and a force for good is
that you are on a quest and that quest
the consequence of that quest if
undertaken properly is reputational
enhancement. And people who can't or
won't do that, they default to power
games. And the part of the And that's a
very that's that's the default to power.
But it's worsened with social media.
Absolutely. Because if you're if if if
you meet someone and they're playing a
power game with you, you can just decide
not to have anything to do with them
anymore or you can put a stop to it if
you need to. But on social media, you
can't because they're distant from you.
And they're often also anonymous. And so
they can play power games to enhance
their reputational status falsely with
no consequences. And the social media is
rife with that. And it's really a
problem. Like I think that
virtualization has enabled the
psychopaths. Without a doubt. Yeah.
Well, without a doubt. That's a terrible
thing because the psychopathic types,
they're always the death of everything.
Like I'm seeing this come up on the
right now. So imagine imagine this. I've
been working on a new a new theory of
political psychopathology and I like it
quite a lot. Is this where the term the
woke right comes in? Yeah. Well, Lindsay
is pointing at that, but he hasn't got
he hasn't got the diagnosis exactly
right. He So it isn't woke. That's not
the issue. It's not exactly one level.
What they're talking about is like
similar types of behavior. He is talking
about that. Yeah. No point. woke just
lets you clarify in your head. Oh, it's
like that. Yeah. But the problem is it's
like Antifa. Yeah. Ex. Absolutely. But
the problem is is that that argument is
predicated on the claim that the ideas
are the problem. Like the woke ideas,
for example, on the right or the left.
But that's not the problem. The problem
is that four to 5% of the population
something like that
is cluster B that's the DSM5 terms
histrionic narcissistic antisocial
psychopathic or they have and they have
dark tetrad traits they're machavelian
they're sadistic that's about 4% okay so
the question is how do these people
maneuver and the answer is they go to
where the power is and they adopt those
ideas and they put themselves even on
the forefront of that. But the ideas are
completely irrelevant. All they're doing
is they're the Pharisees. They're the
modern version of the Pharisees. They're
the people who use God's name in vain,
right? Is they proclaim moral virtue.
Doesn't matter whether it's right or
left or Christian or Jewish or Islam.
They invade the idea space and then they
use that those ideas as false weapons to
advance their narcissistic advantage.
Yes. And so then you have the problem
and the right's going to face this more
and more particularly because the left
had to face it when they were in powers.
Yes. How do you identify the
psychopathic parasites 4% of the
population who are clothed in your
clothing and waving your flags but who
are who are only in it for narcissistic
benefit. You know the people who studied
the dark triad. These were people who
originally studied psychopaths and they
moved into ordinary personality so to
speak on the fringes. They showed that
the noncriminal psychopaths, so the
fringe cases are machavelian. They use
their language to manipulate. They're
narcissistic. They want
unearned reputation. That's what a
narcissist wants. And they're
psychopathic, which makes them predators
or parasites. Okay, that's pretty bad,
those three things. But they had to
expand the nomenclature after a while
because they found that they were also
sadistic, which implied that if you're
Machavelian and narcissistic and
psychopathic, you develop a sufficiently
bad view of your fellow man that their
undeserved pain is a source of pleasure
to you. And that's that's what's being
enabled online. Yes. See, because we've
evolved real specific mechanisms to keep
such things under control in
face-to-face interaction. Lack of
anonymity, for example, within a
community. Psychopaths in the real
world, they wander. They have to move
from place to place because people who
figure out who they are and they're held
responsible. They're particularly held
responsible by men. But online, they
escape from that. They escape from that
protective they escape from that con
system of constraints and they have free
reign and they can find other people
like them very rapidly and they can gang
together and so this is like I can
really see this starting to happen on
the right like I've been tracking
psychopathic behavior on the right for
probably four years something like that
especially on the anti-semitic side
because that's really where it reared
its head first and why is that there's
Nothing more annoying than a successful
minority.
Right. Now, that's part of it. I I'm
going to here. I might as well get
myself in trouble right away, too. Yeah,
for sure. Well, this is a very real
subject. Well, so yeah, it's a Yeah,
it's a real terrible subject. It's
interesting because if you don't
criticize it enough, you're compromised.
If you if you criticize, you know, it's
like when it comes to anti-semitism,
like it's one of those things where you
can't
separate a a it's a religion and it's
also a race and it's also a government.
That's where things get weird. Right.
Right. And and then there's also the
concept of intelligence agencies and
compromise that also gets attached to
it. the manipulation of world markets
and money and there's a lot to unpack.
And then there's regular Jewish people
have nothing to do with that. Well, the
Jews too are they're very successful.
Yeah. And so what you would expect from
a purely statistical point of view is
you'd expect them to be over represented
at the extreme. They're also a walled
garden, right? Meaning meaning it's very
difficult to join. They don't proitize.
They don't try to get you to join. And
they're all very tightly knit. They call
themselves the clan. They're all like
locked in the, you know, Jewish clan.
Not not KKK. The problem with that term
has been compromised by the K cuc clan,
you know, but I mean it as terms of
tribe, community. Yeah. Community.
They're very tight-knit in that regard.
You know, they stick together. And if
you understand the history obviously of
Nazi Germany and of persecution in
Eastern Europe, like Yeah. You have to.
Yeah. Of course. Yeah. Well, all these
complex things are multi-dimensional. I
mean, you're you're I I watched your
whole conversation with Douglas and I
thought you guys did a very credible
job, all three of you, of navigating
unbelievably choppy waters. So, that's
the first thing I'd like to say because
one of the things I was trying to figure
out when I was watching that is do I
think I could have done a better job of
than of any of you? And I certainly
didn't walk away from it with that idea
in mind. But then underneath all that, I
thought there's really a there's a
really unbelievably tricky problem here.
And I think that's why it's made it it
it poked up into well, you also set that
conversation up, but it it poked up and
made itself manifest in that
conversation. And the issue is how do
you identify the psychopathic
pretenders? And it's even worse now. And
and then make a barrier right now. The
right was calling for the left to do
that for decades and they didn't and
they couldn't. And the left is not good
at drawing barriers, partly
temperamentally. The right is somewhat
better, but there's no shortage of
monstrosity there.
And and so then the question is how do
you how do you draw the line? And that's
kind of what I was because I've been
watching these right-wing, they're not
right-wing, these psychopathic types
manipulate the edge of the conservative
movement for their own gain. And a lot
of that's cloaked in anti-semitic guys.
There's plenty of anti-semitism on the
left, too, by the way. So, it's not
unique to the right, but particularly
now. Yes. Yes. Yes. Particularly now.
And so, you know, you've let your
curiosity guide you. Your curiosity and
your desire for knowledge, this quest,
you've you've let that guide you as a
podcaster. And I'm, by the way, I'm
trying to work through exactly the same
sort of thing. Um, how do you
know given your rap radical increase in
stature over the last 10 years? How do
you
know when your curiosity and even your
skepticism about the fact that things
aren't the way that people say they are?
Because that's certainly been
demonstrated in the last 10 years. How
do you how should anyone decide what
guard rails to put up? Like what do you
look for? Do you do do you have a a
conceptual system worked out for that?
Like in what what do you mean in what
way? Well, how do I look for in terms of
people to talk to? Yeah. Yeah. Because
you have this insanely immense platform
and you're inviting people onto it and
you know, you said to Douglas and I know
this to be true that you're not really
thinking about the outcome exactly.
You're thinking about this is an
interesting person to talk to and I'd
like to go on that quest. But then you
have the additional conundrum. We're
trying to work this out in the Daily
Wire side of things too. Not to say that
that's exactly the same situation. It's
like once you gain in reach and
authority
then how do you know
that? How do you take great care that
the people you're talking to
aren't what would you say?
eliciting or feeding a subculture. Yeah,
that's right. That that hasn't got the
proper aims.
Like I guess the legacy media probably
worked that out by having people
mediators, right, and guests. And that
was also back when we could rely on the
structures of authority in some sense
to filter. And now we're in this helter
skelter world where everything is the
legacy media is the worst at that now.
Yeah, I know. They're the worst at that
which is fascinating. You know, it
really is. It's really fascinating when
you lose faith in uh a New York Times
piece, you know, it's like you you go
like, "Well, this is I know
this is I know what they're doing. I
know they're just this is editorial
bullshit." And that didn't used to be
the case, I don't think. No, they
didn't. But then I go back to like what
I learned about the Woodward, Bernstein,
Nixon thing at Watergate that was all
essentially an intelligence operation.
Have you ever looked into that? Bill
Murray on the podcast and Bill Murray
said one of the wildest things. He read
the first five pages of Bob Bob
Woodward's biography on John Belalushi,
Wired. He read the first five pages like
he goes, "Oh my god, they framed Nixon."
Oh, really? Wow. Isn't that crazy? Yeah.
Nothing. What they wrote about my friend
was so not true. It was so wildly off.
He said John Belalushi was a
lightweight. John Belalooi should have a
couple of drinks and he'd be up.
He wasn't like a big partyier. That time
he did that speedball. Probably the only
time he ever did it in his life. But
Woodward had him painted as this
maniacal off the rails just drug addled
monster. And he knew that to not be
true. He was very close to Belushi for a
long time. And so he was like, "Oh my
god, they framed Nixon." Then when I
told him the whole story, you know, what
Tucker Carlson had told me about
Woodward being an intelligence asset and
then that was his first job ever as a
journalist was Watergate and that
there's FBI guys that were involved in
it and the breakin and the whole thing
was tried they tried to get Nixon out of
there. The most popular president in the
history of the country in terms of the
vote and they were successful. They got
him out of there and it's
probably or likely because Nixon was
very concerned with who killed Kennedy
and he wanted to find out and he wanted
to get that information out and
apparently he had been talking about it.
I know who did it and he was, you know,
he didn't want it happening to him
obviously and he knew it could. If
you're a president, you know, a couple
of guys ago, you know,
just most one of the most popular
presidents, at least postumously popular
presidents, I know he's very polarizing
while he was in office, but was shot in
the head in the middle of Dallas. And
you think that the government might have
had something to do with it? Like that
could that could with your head
obviously, you know? Yeah. Well, there
and there's many things like that. I
mean, you saw the government website
that came up two days ago about CO. Yes.
Okay. Wild.
Wild to see that. That's for sure. What
are you supposed to do with that? All
the things that have would have gotten
you fired if you were a professor and
you said them four years ago, you would
have 100% got fired for espousing any of
these ideas that turned out to be true.
You would have gotten kicked off of
YouTube. you would have gotten, you
know, there was a lot there was a lot
going on there, you know, which is like
I feel so fortunate that right at the
height of COVID was also when I had gone
over to Spotify. Spotify is a Swedish
company. They're it's different. They're
different. They don't they're much more
rational and they're not overwhelmed by
this identity politics and they
they aren't overwhelmed by our weird
political binary system of good guy bad
guy depending on which side you're on.
And they were like like what are you
talking about? Like this is we don't we
don't censor our rappers. Also didn't
lock down. Yes, they didn't lock down.
They were also like we don't censor our
rappers. Like we don't tell like the rap
lyrics, some of my favorite rap lyrics
are horrendous, but it's just like my d
my favorite movies are Tarantino movies.
The dialogue is horrendous. It doesn't
mean that these are horrendous people
that are putting together this.
Tarantino is a wonderful guy. He's fun
to be around. He's great. I've had
dinner with him, brought him to the
comedy club. He's great. He's not a bad
person, but he is an artist and he's
creating this thing. And this thing is
gonna show you aspects of humanity that
you know to be true but are horrific.
It's the same with rap lyrics. It's the
same with a lot of things. And Spotify's
position was we're not censoring. That's
not what we're in the business of like
promoting art. Like we sell art and
we're not interested in censoring art
essentially. And turns out luckily we
were all right. We were all correct, you
know, and now the government shows it on
their website, which is crazy.
Have you seen it, Jamie? Yeah. Pull it
up because it's bananas. And look at
this lab leak. I know. I know. I know.
By the way, um,
you know, I I know that he would bring
up the vaccines when he was on his
rallies and people would boo when he was
on the campaign trail. People would boo.
And I I think he was like confused by
that. I think he's a little
I don't want to say he's out of touch,
but there's too many things for him to
be thinking about for him to be paying
attention to what people really think
about the vaccines and vaccine injuries
and mandates and just the
psychological warfare that was played on
the American people. You remember that
very famous White House post that they
made? For the vaccinated, you've done
your job. But for the unvaccinated,
you're looking forward to a winter of
severe illness and death and the
hospitals that you will overwhelm. Like
that was the White House telling you
something when it was in omnicron by
that point, which was like a cold. Like
it was crazy. The deaths had dropped off
radically. But they were so in bed with
the pharmaceutical companies that they
were like, "You got to do it. You got to
get vaccinated. If you don't, you're
you're looking forward to death and
severe illness. Like, imagine this is
you're not basing this on real
statistics. You're not basing this on
science. You're just basing this on this
control, this fear element that you're
trying to impose upon people. So, okay.
So, that's that's an interesting point
there, too, that issue of control and
fear. You know, I started this I I was
part of a group that started this
organization in the UK called the
Alliance for Responsible Citizenship. We
had our second convention in November,
which went very nicely, by the way. So,
you're doing like a positive counter to
the World Economic. Yeah. Well, we have
some rules and one rule is you don't use
force or fear, right? Use invitation.
So, can I tell you a story about that?
Please do. Please do. Okay. So, I've
been touring about this new book of
mine, right? We We Who Wrestle with God,
and it's uh I've been lecturing about
lots of the things I know, but I've been
using biblical stories mostly to provide
an analytical frame because that's what
stories do. They provide a frame. And
there's a great story in the continuing
Exodus story, the story of Moses and the
Israelites where Moses has led the his
people away from the tyrant and away
from their own slavery because there's a
dynamic in that story between those two
things. No tyrants without slaves or you
might say no tyrants without willing
slaves. And so the Israelites have to
get away from the tyrant, but then it's
across the Red Sea of chaos and blood
and into the desert for 40 years. You
don't escape from the tyrant if you're a
slave without paying a price and maybe
for three generations. It's rough. So
Moses is trying to get these people to
stop being slaves and to take
responsibility. So they don't need a
tyrant. And so he's kind of got there
and they're on the edge of the promised
land, right?
And so they're almost at the end of
their voyage and uh they run out of
water. They're still in the desert. They
run out of water and they get all whiny
and about the fact that they had
to go across the desert and that it was
way better under the tyrant and that
Moses is nothing but a corrupt patriarch
and he's only power mad and they fment
some rebellion and anyways it's it's a
pretty ugly situation. And the
Israelites go to Moses and they say,
"Look, we're really starving. We're
we're thirsting for water. We're going
to die. Do you think you can have a chat
with God? See if he'll do something
about this. And God tells
Moses to go to some rocks in the desert
and to ask them to bring water
forth. And so he goes with his people to
these rocks and instead of asking, he
takes this staff of his. The staff is a
really important thing. It's like your
staff if you have an organization. Same
derivation, but it's also the magic wand
of Gandalf. It's the flag you plant in
new territory. It's the tree of life.
It's the living tradition that has uh a
spirit inside it and that's a serpent
and that's the serpent that's eats all
the serpents of the Egyptian tyrants
magic magicians. That's the staff. It's
his rod of his authority. And he instead
of asking the rocks, he hits them twice
with the with the staff. So he forces
them. And God tells him that in
consequence of that, number one, he's
going to die and number two, he's not
going to get to the promised land.
Right. Right. Right. So there's this
insistence. It's really interesting.
Well, it's it's a crucial insistence,
and it's very important in this time, I
think, to to understand what this means.
So Moses is a leader. He's the
archetypal leader, and he realizes his
responsibility in the encounter with the
burning bush, which is something that
attracts his attention, that he takes
with great seriousness. And that
transforms him. And so then he becomes
the leader who stands up against the
tyrant and frees the slaves and takes
them through chaos into the desert. And
his temptation as leader is to use
force. So when he's a young man, for
example, he kills a Egyptian aristocrat
who was tormenting a Hebrew slave and
that's why he has to leave Egypt. He's
tempted by power because he's a leader.
And then at the end, even though he's
done all these things, he's he's been an
upstanding man and done gone beyond his
call of duty and he's right at the point
where he attains victory, right, to
enter the promised land. And he uses
force once when God tells him to use
invitation, to use his words, the logos,
to use words, to use invitation. And
that's enough so that he's he's dead. So
is his brother Aaron. That's his
political arm. And he doesn't enter the
promised land. And then in the gospels
of course Christ foregoes power
altogether. The temptation in the desert
one of the three temptations is the
temptation for use of power. So one of
the things that maybe we could conclude
from all this given the context of what
you said is that you can tell the
tyrants they use fear and compulsion and
they don't use invitation. So one of the
rules we put together for ark was
invitation only play. We're going to do
this playfully. Yeah. And we're not
going to use force or fear ever. You
have to use invitation. And so I I don't
know what you think about that is a
distinguish imagine it's a
distinguishing it's the distinguishing
characteristic between the wannabe
tyrants and the true leaders. The true
leaders say here's an offer. Would you
accept this of your own free will? And
the tyrants say the apocalypse is coming
and everything and we we are allowed to
do everything to forestall it. Right.
Right. including control you and
everything that you do. That's the
problem. Yeah. Right. And that's how
they get people to fall in line. They
fall in line through fear. Yeah. Well,
fear and force. It's like also, you
know, you have to do this because the
apocalypse is looming, which is always
in a way true. Always. There's always
Well, there's always an apocalypse of
one form or another looming. The
question is, what do you do about it?
And terrifying people anywhere in the
world right now, right? You you might be
experiencing the apocalypse right now if
you live in Gaza. Yeah. You might be
experiencing the apocalypse right now if
you're in Yemen, if you're a Houthi,
right?
The the end of the world is always
coming,
right? And for you, for me, for Yeah.
Right. So So you can always look into
the future and conjure up an apocalyptic
scenario. And maybe even that in itself
isn't a sin, although I think it is.
There's another. But if you yet then
turn to fear and compulsion as your
means of governance, then you're a
tyrant. I don't care what your excuse
is. It has to be invitational. That's
when it gets scary when you see
governments telling people that they
have to fall in line or these are
horrible consequences for you not
agreeing to what we're saying. Yeah.
Yeah. And then if you don't do this,
you're a part of the problem. Right.
Exactly. Well, and if the apocalypse
that's generated in that way is of
sufficient magnitude, there's no limit
to the amount of power that can be
exerted because obviously the rationale
is there. They have to do it, right?
Like this is the rationale to stop
Trump, right? You're trying to stop
Hitler. Right. Right. Well, no matter
what circumstair,
use whatever. Use whatever. This is one
of the things that worries me about
Canada at the moment. Now, I know when
we talked a couple of weeks ago, I
expressed my concern about what was
happening in Canada. Doesn't look good.
Well, I read Carney's book, Values. I
read it twice and I understood it. And
Carney says in that book, well, he says
he's he's an advocate of centralized
planning, ESG. He was a huge
ESG advocate. He organized many large
corporations to go down this um central
planning governance route because the
market wasn't pricing everything
properly. And so central planners had to
step in and Black Rockck and Vanguard
and places like that were big parts of
that. Don't know if they were directly
affected by Carney, but it's the same
thing. and they've stepped away from
that and he's a big DEI advocate and
he's also a net zero advocate and Carney
says in his book this is a good example
of this and I think also a good example
of this kind of narcissism that we
talked about earlier
um every single financial decision that
every individual or organization makes
has to prioritize decarbonization above
all else or else and there will be many
he doesn't say casualties but he implies
that there'll be many there'll be many
who pay a price along the way, but it's
necessary, you know, cuz you can't make
an omelette without breaking a few eggs.
And then he says 75% of the world's
fossil fuels have to stay in the ground.
And this is who Canadians are seriously
thinking about electing, right? Why does
he say the fossil fuels have to stay in
the ground? Too much carbon. Yeah. You
know the real problem with that is the
same problem with the COVID narrative is
that they don't allow any disscent. They
don't allow any data that conflicts with
the narrative and they don't want to
look at any
possible like both of them are
complicated. They're not similar in a
lot but there are because they're
topdown tyrannical tools using fear and
compulsion.
So they didn't in during the co times
nobody wanted to look at any alternative
treatments. They didn't want to look
at health metabolic health. They didn't
want to look at any factors other than
vaccination and compliance with carbon.
No one wants to look at I'm sure you saw
that Washington Post study of the last
was it 50 million years the graph that
shows uh the temperature of Earth. Have
you seen it? we're in a cooling period.
And that was always what I mean during
the 1970s, Leonard Nemoy when he had
that in search of show, one of the
things that they covered was that we are
at the verge of an ice age and how
terrifying an ice age is. Yeah. Well,
the the conclusion you draw about
climate and carbon dioxide is entirely
dependent on where you put the origin
point of your graph. So if you go back
150 years ago, carbon dioxide has
increased. If you go back 500 million
years ago, which is quite a lot longer,
we're in a drought, like a serious
carbon dioxide drought, right? And also
carbon dioxide is the fuel of plants.
Yes, they it turns out that they like
it. Well, you know, the glo you know the
global greening data. Well, when Yeah.
Say it so people know it. Well, you
know, one of the things I learned as a
scientist was that there's usually an
explanation or two that accounts for a
phenomenon so completely that almost
everything else is noise. Like the Maha
movement, make America healthy again.
The fundamental issue is insulin
resistance. Like that's the fundamental
plague of say North America. And
everything else is noise. It's not
unimportant noise, but insulin
resistance is the major contributor. On
the climate side, when I look at the
data, the thing that leaps out for me is
greening. It's like the planet is 20%
greener than it was 30 years ago. Okay,
20%. This is NASA data. I'm not
inventing this. Okay. And then the next
you think, oh, 20%.
If 20% of the plants had vanished, you'd
be sure we'd heard about that. Yes.
Okay. So and agricultural outputs got up
13%. Now whether all that additional
carbon dioxide is a function of human
activity that's still debatable doesn't
matter. There is an association between
the carbon dioxide re rise and the plant
propagation. Okay. It's it's it's even
more particular than that because a lot
of the greening has occurred in semierid
areas. So areas around deserts and the
reason for that is that if there's more
carbon dioxide, the plants can close
their breathing pores more and they
don't lose water. And so not only is
there 20% more vegetation, which is a
lot. I think it's twice the area of the
United States that's greened. That's a
lot of green. And where our agricultural
production is more effective. And the
places that have greened were the very
places that the deserts were supposed to
expand into. And so, right, because
they've greened, they've shrunk, not
grown. Now, you know, you could say,
well, that rate of change has its
problems. And, you know, rates of change
have their problems. But I don't see
another data point that's anywhere near
as stunning as that. I think it's a
really important point what you said
that if we lost 20% of the plants,
people would be freaking out. Oh my god.
Well, and rightly so. rightly so, but
yet it's not even discussed because
again it's one of those things that
invades the narrative, right? It's one
of those pesky facts, those pesky truths
that gets in the way of the thing that
you're saying, well, the apocalypse is
coming. Yeah. Well, that's the thing
about the narrative is like, okay, so
now we talked about the psychopaths who
manipulate belief systems for their own
advantage, right? The people who use
God's name in vain, the Pharisees who
want to dress in religious clothing and
obtain status and consequence, they're
Christ's number one enemies in the
gospels. By the way, those people,
they're the ones who conspire to crucify
him, right? The religious pretenders.
So, this has been going on for a very
long period of time.
So the climate apocalypse narrative is
perfectly situated to what would you say
to to serve the perspect to serve the
purposes of the narcissists, the
Mcavelians, the the psychopaths and the
sadists because it's a infinitely
expanding existential threat that can be
used as an excuse for anything. Yes.
Right. And it also provides a perfect
cloak for any amount of power
maneuvering. It's like I want to make
your
showerheads put out a needle spray so
that you're cold all the time while you
have a shower while you're doing
something you do every day that could
otherwise be highly enjoyable. Why do I
get to invade your life to that degree?
Well, because the planet's at stake,
Joe. And who are you to privilege your
shower comfort something that trivial
over the fate of the entire planet?
Well, you can use that argument at every
single level. You know, Trump came out
with this executive statement just a few
days ago about showerheads. And
everybody kind of laughed about that.
And I thought, no, he has an eye for
petty tyranny, right? For petty tyranny.
And there there's very little that's
more petty than Well, I think the
showerhead example is a perfect one.
Yeah. And then you also think, look, if
they're willing to control your life at
that level of detail, what are they not
willing to control? It's like you're
concerned about my showerheads like
we're out of water, which we're not at
all. So, what won't you control? So, you
think, well, the psychopaths are edge
cases. They'll move wherever the power
is. They find a narrative that can be
used to strike fear in the hearts of
people and to justify compulsion. They
ally themselves with that belief claim
and then they ratchet themselves up
status hierarchies without any
reputational validity riding on that
edge of fear and power. Right. Right. I
wrote an article, it hasn't been
published yet in the Telegraph because I
got hell a lot after one of our
podcasts. You may know this, but the
climate change stuff. That's right. The
whole bloody transcript was sent to the
college as an indication that I was out
of my wheelhouse, you know, and maybe I
stepped a bit out of my wheelhouse when
we had that discussion cuz I'm not a
climate scientist, whatever the hell
that is, by the way, because you have to
know a lot to be a climate scientist and
an economist on top of that. So, today
I'm talking about something that's a lot
more psychological. The climate
apocalypse narrative is a social
contagion that's driven by power mad
psychopaths who are hellbent on using
fear and compulsion to make sure
everyone steps in line so that they can
continue with their acquisition of
undeserved power. It's also effective
enough that the people that are
underneath the power comply and do the
job of the man for the man. Yeah. Well,
that's the advantage of using fear and
compulsion, right? It's like well I have
to go along with this because my leaders
who had built up a certain degree of
credibility are telling me that you know
the apocalypse is nigh and who am I to
well first of all question because god
there's a hard thing to figure out you
know what's the global effect of human
activity on the climate for the next
hundred years. Well good luck figuring
that out. But this is why making it more
psychological this time. It's like the
climate fluctuates and for complex
reasons, but that doesn't mean that you
get to look a 100 years into the future
and you get to conjure up an apocalyptic
narrative and you get to say, "We're the
only people that can save you and you
get to say you have to change every
single thing you do in your life and
prioritize our concern above all else,
including even the well-being of your
own children or the economic future of
the Africans, for example, who don't get
to use fossil fuels, right? You don't
get to do that. You don't get to do that
using fear and compulsion. Not only
that, it's being done by people who have
been wrong about everything every step
of the way. Every step of the way. Yeah.
Well, then they just play a slight of
hand game there, though. Okay, we got we
got the time frame wrong, Joe. It's not
20 years. But it's not even 40 years.
It's not even just climate change. It's
basically everything. Public health,
agriculture, you name it. Yeah.
Everything. Yeah. Well, that's every
single thing. The water supply sets us
back into this conundrum that you and
Douglas and Dave were addressing. It's
like
okay two conundrums like three how do
you pursue your interest in a landscape
that's been shorn of reliable expert
input right who do you rely on okay if
you don't know who to rely on like um
how do you keep the bloody psychopaths
at bay you know and the conspiracy
theorist mongers and the people who
aren't trying to discover the truth but
who are using the conspiratorial edge
let's say yeah the gropers for that
matter, right? These are people who are
clear clearly playing power games for
their own benefit and they're spinning
up these conspiratorial narratives and
riding on them and occupying them in
this this parasitical manner. There's
going to be a huge this is a huge
problem already on the right-wing side.
I don't you know I don't even know what
the hell that is anymore because I don't
know what the left is and I don't know
what the right is but we need to claim
the center.
Yeah. Well, that's also what we're
trying to do with ARC. It's like, what
is the center, right? The center is a
kind of where we can all meet up. Well,
and I think that's that's doable. Well,
let's specify it even more. Okay. The
center is a place you'd go if you were
invited,
right? Right. Exactly. Well, and that
also ties back into this idea of play,
you know, like PJ figured this out when
he was watching little kids. So, if a
little boy wants to play house with a
little girl, which is generally a good
idea. If you want to play house with a
woman at some point in your life, you
better get that right. It's a very
serious game. What's the first rule? She
has to want to
play, right? What's the second rule? You
have to play with her in a manner that
makes her want to play with you again.
Right? I I've been thinking about this a
lot in terms of u what constitutes
objective standards of morality. You
know how Sam Harris Sam Harris was
obsessed with malevolence and he wanted
to ground morality in objective science
because he thought that would give us
like a firm standing place but he went
down the wrong scientific rabbit hole. I
think I think if you understand this
relationship with play and iteration
then you have the core of morality. So
so and PG by the way this is part of
what would you say this is the larger
this is the philosophical edge of his
theory. This is actually what he was
trying to accomplish. How do you decide
if an arrangement is good versus bad or
good versus evil? Well, PJ went to
children to find that out. It's like,
okay, you want to set up a game. Why?
Well, game is the first social. It's the
foundation of social interaction, right?
Play a game with one other pe people,
one other person, and then maybe you can
play a game with a bunch of people. And
then you can play a game with one person
or a bunch of people across a long
period of time. And then you could do it
in a way that improves. Okay. So now, so
what are the rules? If you're a little
boy, she has to want to play. And then
you have to play with her in a way so
that she wants to play with you again.
If you do that, then you have a friend
and that iterates. Now, so you can
imagine that there's a structure of
voluntary play that's really quite
stringent, but this is what you do on
your podcast. Seriously. And that's why
it's so attractive to people, you know,
when that's the core of what you might
call objective morality. It's like
there's there's a very limited number of
ways to play to offer a game that
someone else wants to play and then
there's a very limited number of ways to
play that game so that they want to keep
playing with you and then you could if
you add that con additional constraint
of improvement across the games. You've
got the straight narrow path, right?
Then it's marked by we're really trying
to do this at Ark.
We want to offer a vision that
people want to accept or or even
thrilled to accept because that's even
better, right? A game that you'd be
thrilled to play. So, one of the things
we're doing on the energy side, I'm
going to an event with Alex Epstein here
in two days. Talk to energy executives
about this. You know, well, what kind of
world do you want to see? Well, how
about a world where there's so much
energy that poor people can afford it?
How'd that be for a vision? Like, have
you got a problem with that? Well, poor
people can't have energy because that'll
destroy the planet. It's like, no, poor
people can't have that energy because
you'd have to let go of the game that
you're playing as a narcissistic
psychopath that's elevating your status
inappropriately, and you're perfectly
willing to sacrifice the world's poor to
continue your grip on power. How about
that for a psychological interpretation,
right? And how about this as an
alternative? Why don't we do everything
we can to drive energy costs down to the
lowest degree? that's sustainable like
in a market economy and make energy
available to everyone so that we
eradicate absolute poverty. Why wouldn't
the left line up again around that?
Because the left hypothetically serves
the poor. It's like nothing serves the
poor better than an ethos first. We got
to get that right because we're also
interested in getting the story right.
But after that on the material side,
there's nothing more important. Can I
stop you for a second there? I don't
think people on the left are getting
that message. I don't think they're
hearing that this is exactly what third
world countries need is a reliable
source of energy and industry to elevate
themselves out of poverty. They're not
they're not getting that. But it's not
the problem of the people that are on
the left like the the general general
followers. Well, it might be the it
might be a problem that's facilitated by
the psychopathic fringe types. Like
look, I think it's not offered to them
is my point. Yeah. The question is why
not and the reason is like this is part
of the you talked to Lombberg
right to Bejorn and Bejorn's pretty good
on this or very good on this I should
say. Yes. You know to give him credit
and he would like to see a world where
and he's part of ARC. He'd like to see a
world where we make energy abundance a
top priority. It's probably the only way
you're going to pull third world
countries out of dire poverty. Well,
it's also, as far as I can tell, the
only way that you pull them out of
environmental catastrophe, right?
Because if you want to produce an
environmental catastrophe, a true
environmental catastrophe, how about a
three or fouryear famine so that
everyone there kills all the animals,
for example, or dies, right? So, we also
know that if you get people above $5,000
a year GDP, then they start paying
attention to long-term environmental
sustainability because they don't have
to scrabble around in the dirt for their
next meal. So, then we could say, well,
how about we have a future of
um sufficient abundance so that no one
is deprived of energy or or opportunity
for their children, right? Well, that
sounds that sounds like an invitation.
Now, if you hate people and you think
the industrial enterprise is a stain on
the planet and that we're viruses or
cancer on the planet, then you're going
to have a problem with that. But my
sense too is that if we had enough
energy, we could make all the deserts
bloom. I was watching a video on
pollution in
India about the amount of uh garbage
that gets thrown in rivers in India and
it was
staggering just staggering to watch that
somehow or another through because the
population is so large and there's so
many poor people and there's a lack of
hope whatever it is they just they're
just throwing their garbage in the
rivers and the rivers are just overwhelm
whelmed with if there's ever like a
symbol of thing people that have been
led the wrong way like bad leadership,
bad planning, bad bad underlying story,
everything. That's it. When you look in
your river and it's all you see is water
bottles. All you see is floating
plastic. That's the whole river. And you
know that if you get in that water,
you're going to get sick. And yet no one
looks at it as number one priority. Like
what do you always say? Clean your room.
Make your bed. Like right. Yeah. What
what's going on? Like well and you want
to incentivize people to pay attention
to their local environment. And you do
that in part by ensuring that they're
not living so close to the edge of
catastrophe that they can only think
about today. Right. And if you start
from the mindset that can I tell you
another story? Sure. Okay. You tell me
all the stories. You don't have to ask
questions. All right. This is a really
cool story. This is how to set the world
right this story.
So I've been traveling around lecturing
about my book and I wrote a chapter on
Abraham in that book and Abraham is the
father of in principle Islam,
Christianity and Judaism, right? He's
the father of nations. That's how the
story
goes.
So when God God comes to Abraham in a
very particular way, it's one of the
ways God is characterized in the Old
Testament. So this is like a definition
of God, right? It's not a testament to
God. It's a definition of what God is.
Okay. So
Abraham, he doesn't hear anything about
God till he's like 70. And he's already
living in privileged paradise because
his father and his mother are rich. And
so he doesn't have to lift a finger. If
life is about having your needs met,
Abraham's got it covered. And so he
lives like a satiated infant till he's
70. And then a voice comes to him and it
says, "You are required by the God of
your ancestors to leave your zone of
comfort, to leave the wealth of your
father, to leave your nation, to leave
your language, to go out into the world
and have your terrible
adventure.
And if you do that, so now imagine
that's the call to adventure. If you do
that, these things will happen. This is
the covenant that God makes to the
Abrahamic people. It's so cool. I just
talked to Brett Weinstein about this
from an evolutionary biological
perspective on the road because I wanted
him to evaluate the story I'm going to
tell you from an evolutionary
perspective. So God God is the voice
that says to Abraham, if you follow the
call of adventure, you'll be a blessing
to
yourself. So that's the meaning of life,
right? To have the adventure. You'll do
this in a way blessing to yourself.
Yeah. Yeah. Because the adventure is
compelling. Responsible romantic
adventure is the most compelling
pathway, right? And if it's intense
enough, it justifies the suffering,
right? It's a reason to it's a reason to
get up in the morning even if you're in
pain. Okay? Then he says there's ne
another thing that'll happen too, which
is that your name will become known
among your people for valid reasons. So
that's that genuine reputation that we
talked about. So if you follow the
pattern of adventure properly, you'll be
a blessing to yourself and your name
will become known among your people for
valid reasons. So that's a good
deal. You'll do this in a way that will
maximize the probability that you'll
establish something of permanence or
even eternal permanence. So Abraham is
offered if he accepts the call and makes
the proper sacrifices along the way, God
says your descendants will be will
outnumber the stars. So he establishes
the pattern of fatherhood that best
propagates down the generations which is
the same as following the pathway of
adventure. Then he says you'll do this
in a way that will make sure no one can
stand before you. Right? So that if you
adhere to that adventurous spirit and
you propagate it, all the enemies will
all enemies will either be converted
into friends or flee before you. And
then you'll do it in a way that brings
abundance to everyone.
And so, so now, this is the question I'd
asked Brett. So, imagine this. So,
imagine that we have an instinct in us
or divine voice. I don't care which of
those you use. An instinct within us
that calls us to develop, right? That
puts us on the edge. And that's not the
same as looking for infantile satiation
or the gratification of our needs. It's
genuinely this call to expand yourself
and to be on the edge and to develop.
that if you did that to follow that
instinct then you'd be a blessing to
yourself. Your name would become known
among your people. You'd establish
something of permanent significance. No
one could stand before you and it would
bring abundance to everyone. Right? And
then in the Abrahamic story what happens
is that as Abraham accepts that goes out
in the world and then he has a series of
adventures each of which requires a more
complete
sacrifice because as you develop under
the influence of this call what you're
required to do is
to live more carefully in accordance
with your expanding domain of
opportunity and that's the pathway
forward. So I asked Brett about that
because this is different than the
selfish gene idea, right? It's like
there's an instinct within us that calls
us to develop that pulls us out into the
world. And if we follow it religiously
and we make the proper sacrifices along
the way, then those five things will
happen around us. And that speaks of a
concordance which has to be there. has
to be there between the spirit that
develops us and the and the pathway that
brings maximal benefit to the natural
and the social world. And I can't see
how that can be the case. If we're
adapted to the world, that has to be the
case, right? It has to be that if we
follow the instinct that would best put
us together psychologically, this quest,
this adventure, that would also be the
spirit that set the world in order,
right? and that spirit that whole thing
that's what's defined as God in that in
that particular story right that
resonates well I can't see the
alternative is preposterous right the
alternative is
that we don't have an instinct to
develop like and you know that's wrong
you just have to watch children and you
know that's wrong you just have to watch
yourself and the curiosity that you have
and the desire for novelty and for
learning you know that's there that's
what you followed to make this So
definitely and so the alternative is
that instinct doesn't exist. Well,
that's a stupid theory. Or what brings
you into the world is done at the
expense of other people in a way that
won't enhance your reputation, in a way
that has nothing to do with anything
permanent. Right? Then it would be sort
of you against the world. That would be
like a power orientation. You can get
your way in the world, but you have to
manipulate. You have to lie. You have to
use compulsion. You have to use fear.
You can't just rely on the quest, say,
or your adventure. And I think you can.
I think you can. I think you better or
else. There's that, too. It's
interesting because you're talking about
tyrants, right? And you're talking about
people of extreme power and how that
corrupts. And in that case, there's a
large percentage of those people that
are violating all those things that you
said cuz they do manipulate and they do
rely on fear. Well, you know,
Nietze was an advocate of the will to
power, right? So, you can imagine that
there's a variety of potential
motivating forces and one would be
hydonic pleasure. That's the golden calf
worshippers, by the way. So, that's just
short-term hedonism. And that doesn't
work. And by work, I mean it doesn't
iterate socially. It's like if it's all
about you and what some whim in you
wants now, first of all, that's not
going to serve you well tomorrow. And I
don't want to be anywhere near you. Like
you're an over you're literally an
overgrown 2-year-old and that gets
pretty ugly by the time you're 40. So
the whole golden calf thing, no, that's
just off the table. But isn't it kind of
celebrated amongst certain high
achievers particularly in the business
world like that hedonistic sociopathic
drive to constantly get more numbers on
the ledger. Yeah. Well, I don't I don't
know if that's exactly he is good.
That's Wall Street, right? That's
Michael Douglas, right? Greed is good.
Yeah. Well, okay. Let's delve into that
for a minute. Okay. So,
I'm not advocating for I know you're
not. I know you're not.
You can turn to hedonism. You can fall
into
nihilism. You can turn to hedenism. Or
you can turn to power. Okay? This
Abrahamic covenant, it's different than
power. It's adventure. That's it's
romantic adventure. Actually, that's not
the only definition of God in the Old
Testament, by the way. There's something
deeper than than that that it refers to.
So, those are the options. Now you said
don't the achievers you know who are
stacking up numbers it's like they found
a way forward to attain status but they
but they've fixated on on they fixated
on an element that shouldn't be
fundamental they're not trying to store
up the treasure in heaven they're trying
to store up the treasure on earth and
that's better than not doing it see this
is another thing we need to understand
because I've spent a lot of time for
example trying to figure out why people
are attracted to Andrew Tate
And I I know why they're attracted to
Andrew Tate. They'd rather be Andrew
Tate than an
incel. And they're right. Right. It's
best to give the devil his due. Like if
you had to choose
between being kind of flabby and
unhealthy and resentful and in your
basement looking at
pornography, hating women because all of
them reject you all the time and you
deserve it. And you're ineffectual. and
the future looks pretty damn gloomy. And
then you see Andrew Tate who's tough and
hyper masculine in an almost manner
that's almost a parody and wealthy and
famous and apparently has women as at
his disposal with a fair bit of stress
on the idea of disposal. You'd think,
well, I'd much rather be him than me.
That's the incorporation of the shadow
from the union perspective. It's like,
yeah, it's right. And you think about
the number of men that are in cells.
The thing about men also, if um they get
rejected a lot, they associate women
with pain. Yeah. And then they get angry
at those women because those women
caused them pain. Like it's just very
simple equation, of course. And that's
that's how you get a man hater or excuse
me, that's how you get a woman hater.
And the same could be said for that's
how you get a man hater, right? You
associate men with rejection and and
cruelty and they're all that way. Young
men in particular are more likely to be
rejected. Young women may have
difficulty finding the ideal man, but
they don't face the same degree of
universal rejection. So, it's hard on
young men. Well, they're not the
pursuers, right, as much the young women
aren't. Right. Right. Well, and and
women are the gatekeepers fundamentally
of sex. So, that's their that's their
essential power. That's also the power
of chastity. And that's the scary thing
about acquiring wealth is that wealth
allows you to bypass the genetic social
hierarchy. Yeah. I talked to I talked to
Russell Brand about this a lot. You
know, women threw themselves at
him. How'd that work out for him? Not
great. You know, it threw him into great
spiritual confusion. It it was empty and
hollow. And that's worth knowing. You
see, because you might say to the people
who are interested in the shadow figures
and tape plays that role, the master of
women, let's say, why not do that?
Because you need an answer to that if
it's certainly when it's better than
being lonely, isolated, bitter, and
ineffectual. That's for sure. Well, it's
because
you don't confuse a stepping stone with
the pinnacle. That's why there's way
more beyond
that. I mean, you're a tough guy. You
went through your
disciplinary processes on the physical
side in particular, the intellectual
side, too, I might
add. You know, you've got what Tate has
to offer, but you're what? You're
respectable. Why?
Why? I have a different completely
different background than him first of
all and
also my feeling in
life
is whenever you can be nice. That's like
a general guy. You mean nice or good? I
mean both. Okay. Nice as well.
Um I get the posturing. I get how it
would be attractive to young men. I get
it. If I was a young man, I would
certainly be drawn to him and I was to
many fighters and I accepted a lot of
personality flaws and people that I
admired as fighters because they were
very successful at doing this one
insanely difficult thing. Right. Right.
And often
times that requires a certain amount of
narcissism. It requires a certain amount
of internal
focus. Ironically enough, not at the
championship level. Ironically enough,
it gets you close, but it doesn't get
you to be the king. The kings are almost
precisely universally disciplined,
focused, and generally kind. They're
some of the nicest people, the best at
the most difficult thing athletically to
do. And the most difficult you're you're
conquering
other wrote about this in the book of
five rings. You you you must have
balance in everything in life. If you
have imbalance, you can get pretty far
because you're so specialized, right?
You're so driven, but you will fall prey
to the to the balanced man. Yeah. Well,
that that's exactly that's exactly my
point. You you will also recognize
characteristics in him that you envy and
that you wish you had yourself. Like if
you're a narcissist and a sociopath, you
know you are and you can't really be
proud of yourself. You can't you don't
you don't have the benefit of the
positive feedback that you get from true
kindness to others. You don't have that.
You also know that your reputation is
founded on sand. And one of the way to
rationalize that is well everyone does
that. Everyone's like that. Yeah. But
then you don't trust or like anyone,
right? And then you're really alone.
That that's for sure. You're really
alone. And then if you do achieve
success, it's hollow because you you
realize like so you know you just
outlined there the the progression that
Carl Jung identified as characteristic
of individuation, right? When with with
the second thing that you said. So
imagine that you
start you start an incel, right? You're
ineffectual and you're rejected as a
young man. Now there are exceptions, but
let's just play that out as the the
unhappy majority. Okay? And now you look
for a shadow figure to sharpen you up,
to toughen you up, and to make you
strive at least along one dimension,
right? And so then you do that. Well,
then the next thing that happens in the
union stage progression is for a man,
it's integration of thema, which is the
feminine part. And it's integration.
It's not replacement. It's like, oh,
well, then you discover the utility of
empathy and compassion and kindness and
mercy and care. while still being able
to deal out justice, let's say. And so
then you bridge that gap and then that
integration you just said even among
fighters, that's what puts them in the
highest place, right? That's right.
That's right. So, but it's hard for the
people, it's hard for those who are
completely disaffected and also quite
angry about it. You know, the people who
are interested in the pathway that Tate
offers, they're not so unhappy that he's
hard on women because they're pretty mad
at women. And so, you know, if it's the
or me, then I'll pick me, right?
You know, right. Exactly. Exactly.
Exactly. And so, and it it it is very
crucial to get this progression correct
because
monster is better than wimp. Right.
Right. But the question is what's better
than monster?
And so it's very interesting that you
made those comments on the fighting side
because you wouldn't necessarily think
that it would be true in that world as
well. Well, one of the best examples is
your countryman, George St. Pierre, one
of the greatest of all time. One of the
nicest guys I've ever met. And if you
didn't know that that that he was one of
the greatest fighters of all time, you
would never guess it. You would never
guess it talking to him. He's curious.
He's interesting. He's intelligent. He's
very well read. He has a he's always
interested in different things. He's
constantly searching for new
information. And as a martial artist,
he is still on a quest of improvement
even though he's retired from competing.
Always trains. He's constantly training.
A quest for new information. Okay. So,
let me let me tell you a story about
that, please. All right.
So, this is the story that comes up at
the beginning of Moses when he turns
into a leader. So it's about how you
turn into a leader. Okay. So he's
already killed a man and he's left Egypt
because of it. So now he's in this land
called Midian and he goes there and he
chases some ruffians away from a well
for these two girls who are drawing
water. And they go and tell their father
and he says to them, "Bring this young
man home to have dinner." So he does.
And then he gets married to them. Then
he becomes a shepherd. And this is
crucial because the shepherd's an image
that runs through the biblical corpus,
right? Well, shepherds at that time
lived by themselves in the wilderness on
their wits and they kept the wolves and
the lions at bay with primitive weapons.
So these were tough guys and they cared
for the most vulnerable. So a shepherd
is an image of optimized ordinary
masculinity. You can take care of
yourself, you can keep the monsters at
bay, and you attend to the most
vulnerable. So Moses has got that. He's
a shepherd. He's a successful shepherd.
And now he's out there one day wandering
around Mount Si and Mount Si or Mount
Horeb. That's the place where heaven and
earth touch. So that's where the
messengers of the divine descend to
earth. And so he's out there and
something attracts his attention. Makes
him curious. That's the burning bush.
It's not a forest fire. It's not
something you can't ignore. It's
something alive because that's a bush. A
tree is a symbol of life. And it's
burning because things that are alive
burn, right? That's metabolism and an
intensification of that, like a
psychedelic intensification of that.
That's what the burning bush is. And
that's what glimmers to Moses. And he
steps off the beaten track, right? To
investigate what drives his curiosity.
And so then he goes off the beaten track
and he starts
to delve deeply into the mysteries of
the burning bush. And at some point he
realizes he's on sacred ground. He takes
off his shoes. That's a symbol of
willingness to transform identity
because shoes signify identity, right?
They're part of your costume, your
working man's costume. And so then he
continues to commune with the burning
bush. He gets deeper and deeper into
something. He makes himself a specialist
by following what compels him and
delving deeply into it. And when he gets
deep enough into it to the bottom, the
voice of eternity speaks to him and
says, "You're now no longer who you
were. You're now a leader. You have to
go back to your people. You have to
stand up against the tyrant. You have to
tell the slaves that they need to leave
their tyranny and their slavery and
serve me in the wilderness. And you have
to do that now." And Moses says, "I
can't because I can't speak. I'm slow of
tongue." And God says
basically, "That's your problem. And
with me on your side, we can sort that
out. And don't you have a brother,
Aaron, and can't he speak?" It's like,
"Bring him along for the ride." And so
that's when Moses becomes a leader,
right? And so that's the pattern. It's
like ordinary masculinity. Those are the
dwarves that Snow White serves before
she meets the prince, by the way, the
ordinary masculine, right? So, but and
that and those dwarves protect her from
the evil queen that wants to suppress
her by feeding her a poisoned apple. So,
Snow White has to learn to serve the
ordinary man before she can find a
prince. Yeah. Something Disney missed
completely in the last story. So,
so what's the pattern? Well, you
discipline yourself so you become a
shepherd and then you follow what
compels you off the path. Then you take
it seriously and get to the bottom of it
and then that transforms you and thus
transformed you can face the tyrant. You
can specify the promised land properly
and you can lead the
slaves across chaos and blood. That's
the Red Sea and then through the desert,
right? And so you said, you know, you
said two things. You said that the good
fighters have learned to integrate their
civilized side otherwise they don't get
to be great and that they continue the
pathway of self-improvement. Right? They
continue to pursue what's calling to
them. That's another definition of God
in the Old Testament by the way. What
calls to
you? That's the burning bush. The spirit
of the burning bush is what entices you,
what grabs your interest, what attracts
your curiosity. And that's identical.
The biblical claim is that's the same
thing as the spirit of adventure. It's
the same thing that speaks to Noah. Noah
is a good man. And a voice comes to him
and says, "All hell's about to break
loose." And he believes his intuition
because he's a good man and can rely on
himself. So he makes the ark, right? And
he brings his family aboard and culture
and nature and reestablishes humanity.
That's the pathway of the leader, too.
What is your take on there's a
university in Jerusalem that had this
theory that the burning bush was the
acacia bush and the acacia bush is rich
in DMT. Well, I think look look I think
that hallucinogens strip memory from
perception. So you see the world in all
its blazing glory. Hus Huxley figured
that out in with the doors of
perception. That's really what that is
apparently what psychedelics do
psychopharmarmacologically.
They mimic they mimic a high stress
condition and they strip memory from
perception so that you can return to the
source and revitalize your perceptions.
Right? So the probability that there's
some overlap between that and the
burning bush is high. It's high, so to
speak. High. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So
I'll tell you I'll I'll tell you one
more thing, one more story, okay? If
that's all right with you. So something
else I figured out that I tried on
Brett. So imagine you could take the
hedenistic path, you could take the
power
path, you could take the nihilistic
path. Okay? And then you might say,
well, that's the only three
options. That's kind of what the
postmodernists believe. That's kind of
what the nihilists and the
postmodernists, the nichians believe.
Power, hedonism, nihilism, those are
your options. There's no uniting
narrative above that. Okay?
So in the story of Cain and
Abel, two patterns are laid out that are
different than that. One is Cain's
pattern. One's Abel's pattern. So these
are the first two people that are that
live in in the world, right? Because
Adam and Eve are made by God. You can
they're in paradise or were Cain and
Abel are the first two
people. So Abel brings his best to the
table.
So he takes the best animal in his flock
and he takes the best cut and the best
part of the cut and he offers that to
God. So he bring literally brings his
best to the table. That's what he
sacrifices. And Cain doesn't. So Cain's
sacrifices are rejected by God and God
tells him, "If you brought your best to
the table, you'd be accepted." And Cain
gets bitter and resentful
and invites temptation in to possess
him. So that spirit of resentment
possesses him and then he becomes
murderous. He kills his brother and his
descendants become genocidal and then
you have the flood. And so that pattern
of sacrifice is established right at the
beginning of the biblical text. Abel
versus Cain. Abel brings the best to the
table and that satisfies God. So one
question God actually asks Cain this
when Cain complains says if you wouldn't
you be accepted if you were doing your
best. So that's a question of conscience
right if you're in extreme misery and
your life is hollow and empty and you're
bitter and resentful it's like you
bringing your best to the table because
the the covenant proclaims that if you
did you'd be accepted. Yeah. So clearly.
Okay. So now the question is what
constitutes now you know you have to
sacrifice. So sacrifice becomes the
foundation of the state. Not power, not
hedenism, it's sacrifice. And then that
motif is played out through the whole
Bible. And that's what culminates in the
New Testament, right? Total sacrifice as
the foundation of the community. That's
right. And like I don't know how to what
sense to make out of the metaphysics of
the religious realm, you know, because
that's beyond me and everyone. The
world's a strange place and we could
leave it at that. But the idea
that see Christ is the exemplar of
voluntary self-sacrifice, right? Won't
turn to power, won't deviate from his
course, faces the worst of all possible
deaths, descends to hell itself. That's
the pattern of life lived with no
reserve. And that's the foundation of
the free state. That's right. I tried
that on Brett.
He told me when we first met on the tour
that he felt that the biblical
narratives were anacronistic. You know,
that they were written in a time that
was no longer relevant to us. But
he decided by the end of our three days
together that if you got to the core of
the message, it's alive, right? That's
the living spirit inside the bush, you
might say. And that it's So, here's even
the weirder thing. So imagine it's
pretty obvious that Christ is a symbol
of voluntary self-sacrifice, right? I
don't think that doesn't really come as
a shock to anyone. But the weird thing
is, you know, we put that symbol at the
center of our churches and at the
centers of our towns for 2,000 years,
not really knowing why. And the reason
is is that voluntary self-sacrifice is
the foundation of the integrated psyche
and the stable, productive, and abundant
community.
And that's right. It's right. And
so, well, it's been exciting to have the
opportunity over the last nine months to
go talk to people about that because
I've talked to
about 150,000 people, I guess, public
lectures. That to me is one of the most
fascinating aspects of Christianity.
Regardless of whether or not you
think logically these things took place,
logically these stories are an a
completely accurate depiction of exactly
how if you follow the principles, it's
incredibly
beneficial to your spiritual life as a
person. Like you will Well, that's a
kind of interesting proof, isn't it?
Because it means that there's truth in
it. Well, there's certainly there's
certainly the spirit that makes what
would you say? The spirit of truth that
makes life more abundant. That's exactly
right. And these are weird stories
because the way they're true is very
sophisticated. They're true
always. That's different than a story
about the past. Like the truest story is
always happening. The story of Moses is
exactly like that. like the pattern of
leadership development that's embedded
in the Exodus story. That is how leaders
develop if they're real leaders and the
p their temptation is power. But that's
not their motivation. That's their
temptation. Right? That's a very
important distinction. And that's always
the case with leaders. And if they fall
prey to the temptation of power, no
matter what their accomplishments,
they're not going to complete the task.
Right? And so there's a cool element at
the end of that story too. You know,
when Moses, just before Moses dies, he
picks a scout from each tribe, 12
tribes, and he sends them to Canaan,
which is the future. That's a good way
of thinking about it. It's the potential
place we could reside where everything
was worked out, the land of milk and
honey. He sends 12 scouts there. And 10
of them come back and
say, they tell a fear story. say it's
it's insurmountable the challenges that
lie ahead of us. There's no way we can
master this. We should have never
crossed the desert. We should have
stayed under the thumbs of the tyrants.
We should have never tried to be
anything more than slaves because now
we're doomed. And two of
them say, "No, if we maintain our
upward orientation and our covenant,
nothing can stand in our way. We can
make the deserts bloom." Moses dies.
those two scouts and so do all the
Israelites who are convinced by the
unfaithful scouts. And the scouts die
and the two people who go on
to the promised land are Caleb and
Joshua. And they lead the Israelites,
the faithful Israelites into the
promised land. Those are the people who
have the courage to confront the future
in a faithful
and what would you say? Faithful,
hopeful, and courageous manner. They are
the inheritors of the future. Caleb,
Joshua, Joshua's name is the same as
Christ's name. It's the same name.
That's not fluke, right? That's one of
those echoes or precursors to the story.
There's there's an ethos that leads you
into the premise promised land. And
what's the ethos? The spirit of
voluntary
self-sacrifice. You know, you give up
something for a social relationship. Of
course, you give up being primary,
right? They you do the same thing at the
social level. And when you do that, it
integrates you and it sets the world
straight. And that's built into the
biblical story. It's right at its core.
So, pause that thought. I'm going to use
the restroom. We'll come back. Yep.
We're back.
So, it's great fun to explain these
things to people on the tour because it
it sorts them out. Well, it's very
fascinating. Yeah, that's for sure. And
the fact that these stories have existed
for so long is so interesting, you know,
that's that's where it gets really
weird. Yeah. Well, they've they've
they've adapted to the contours of our
memory and our imagination. Yeah. So,
you find them compelling and they stick
to your memory. So, I'm going to tell
you what else I'm up to. Okay. What are
you up to? Well, the first thing I want
to do is thank you.
So, we launched Peterson Academy in
September and we talked about it and
it's been a stunning success. We have
40,000 students. That's amazing. We
think we're the most rapidly
capitalized. We're one of the most
rapidly capitalized companies ever,
especially with our degree of investment
because we run a lean show. We have
great professors. We have a great social
media site. We had to kick 10 people off
it. We have 15,000 active users. 10
people were dragging it sideways. What
were they doing? They were they were
causing trouble. Joe causing trouble.
Well, or immature or or out for or
didn't know how to conduct themselves or
that's all it took. And now everyone is
sharing ideas and and Mick, my my
daughter and her husband, they keep a
close eye on this. That's great.
We're we have secured funding to the
point where
we are dropping the price from 599 to
3.99 a year as of today. Right? So that
should make it accessible to a lot more
people. And we're even more convinced
than we were that this has to be the
future of higher education. So when we
were doing our due diligence for the
fundraising, we discovered that 40% of
courses at university are now online and
we've investigated some of those
courses. Many of them are PowerPoint
presentations and that's all. And so
that's the university experience for
full tuition and we literally have the
best professors in the world and
unmatched production quality. So, and
we're filling in the social element,
too, because we want people to be able
to meet. The social media platform does
that. It's very positive platform. We've
already had our first couple announce
themselves, which was quite fun. And
we're going to do inerson events, our
our first plan. We're going to do a
cruise. Can I ask you this? Yeah.
What
has what has your journey been like to
go from relative obscurity as a
professor in
Toronto to becoming this person who you
are now sort of a worldwide educator
outside of the standard system of
academia but
also subject to intense international
scrutiny.
um character distortions um
complete
complete volunt like what what they've
done to change your positions on like
you are probably the most intentionally
misrepresented person I know
intentionally misrepresented we see you
see it with a lot of other people too
but with you it's uh it's ve it's
it's it's malicious you know I've seen
But yet you have
this desire inside of
you to spread information and to educate
and learn and learn. I'm learning on the
stage. What has it been like? Cuz you
How old were you when I first met you?
It was like 2015, right? Somewhere
around 10 years ago. 53. Yeah. You were
just un you were just
encountering notoriety just encountering
attention and and what what all the
trappings that come with that. What has
that been like like navigating that?
It's very unusual for a person who
becomes world famous,
you know, at 50 for ideas. Yes. Yeah.
Yeah. That's for sure. Um well
first I mean it was exhilarating and
painful to begin with. It was
exhilarating because I knew the ideas
that I was teaching at Harvard and at
the uft were revolutionary. I could
never believe I never could get over the
fact that they allowed me to teach like
it was just a but the students loved my
courses and I was very diligent you know
so I I stayed in my traces so to speak
and I wasn't a revolutionary for the
sake of revolutionary argumentation and
I was teaching about totalitarianism and
great evil and so it was hard to make a
moral case against me and no one was
really inclined to you know they were
happy with my teaching so and as were
the students and I had a clinical
practice which was quite extensive
But then when I
first started to lecture much more
broadly, we rented a theater and I did a
series on Genesis. That was the first
foray out into the public space and it
sold out. Well, that was when I started
to encounter pain, I would say, at a
crowd level. And that was rough, Joe,
because I'm pretty good at getting
people to open up to me right away. I
mean, I learned that as a clinician, you
know, and to have thousands of people do
that, that's pretty rough. Now, it was
good. It was a good thing, like all
things considered, because people would
tell me how miserable they were, how
discouraged, and how sidelined and often
how bitter, how addicted, how
imprisoned. Rough stories. And then tell
me how much they had improved. But that
was also there was a tragic element to
that because it it didn't take that
much, you know, to tap them into the
right orientation. And so there was
sadness in that to see all these people
who were
demoralized, thousands of them, and then
to
see how that could be rectified and yet
hadn't been. That was rough. I'd really
I'm sure that was what there's many
things that made me sick. I had a
pre-existing condition that was
autoimmune, but seeing all that that was
pretty
rough.
But knowing that it was possible to
rectify it, well, that's there's nothing
better than that. Like, you know,
wherever I go now, it's so
interesting. Wherever I go now, I'm
among friends. It's very strange. And I
have security people and they keep an
eye on me. And all the interactions I
have with people are positive. And I
always take time for people, you know,
because well, if
they're they've been positively impacted
by something that I've read or said and
they're trying to get their lives
together, it's like, how about we
encourage that, right? Because more of
that would be real good. And if we had
enough of that, then more of that would
be real good and real necessary. Yeah.
And so, and good for everyone, too. Hey,
absolutely. Well, that's that abundance.
It's like you got your act together.
Great. That'll be real good for you. Be
great for your girlfriend. Be great for
your kids. Be great for your community.
Absolutely. And it's Well, you know, the
Christian ethos, the emphasis is
redemption, one soul at a time. Well,
I'm a psychologist. You know, that's
what I think. One person at a time
because everyone's connected way more
intensely than we think. Yeah. And so
there's no such thing as a trivial
person. And there's no such thing as a
trivial sin or a trivial accomplishment
for that matter. And so and I know that.
I know that. I studied totalitarianism
for a long time. I know how it comes
about. It comes about when everyone lies
about everything all the time. And the
way you stop that is by not lying. And
that's how it stops. So what's it like?
painful and insanely exhilarating at the
same time. And you know, the balance has
shifted over the years to the
exhilaration once I got on top of it,
once I got my health under control,
which required pretty stringent
discipline. Like I I eat steak and when
I deviate from that, things start to
fall apart around me pretty quick. Isn't
it crazy that that alone is polarizing?
You're eating all the steak. You're
contributing to the downfall of
civilization. You're destroying the
environment. Don't you know that cows
are the number one producer
of I know we got to stop eating meat,
Jordan. We eat too much meat and that's
why the world's Meanwhile, China's
opening up coal plants every week. It's
hilarious. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well,
that's just another Okay, so it's also
surreal and that's one element. The diet
thing just alone, that just alone is
surreal. I mean, my daughter was so sick
and now she's great. Isn't it crazy?
It's It's crazy. Well, my wife is on
this carnivore diet, too. And like, it's
been unbelievably good for her. It's
been It's unbelievably good for almost
everybody in the room. That's what's
really nuts. Well, it's it's it's it's
crazy for the mind. That's Oh, yeah.
Well, your brain likes to run on
ketones, as it turns out. Yeah, it
really does. I felt when I, you know,
I've done it back and forth, but when
I'm on it strictly, you know, like when
I go back to it, one of the things that
I notice immediately is I have like an
extra gear intellectually. My brain
works stamina. Yeah. More stamina. We're
going to run a study and IQ test people.
Really? Yeah. Because my sus we don't
know, but yeah. Uh um there's two
studies planned. One on one group will
be people with immunological disorders
try carnivore, keto, and no ordinary
diet. random assignment, but we're also
going to give them personality and IQ
tests. You should do it with this with
junk food. That I'd be fascinated to see
people pre like go the the the right way
first and then try junk food, you know,
sort of like it'd be good to do an abbab
design. That's that is what was that
superersize me? Yeah. Yeah. That
documentary. Yeah. Where the guy just
Well, it's clear it's absolutely crystal
clear that we eat too many
carbohydrates. Like the food pyramid is
upside down. Yes. Clearly. And then on
top of that, environmental pollutants
and all the other issues that we have
with additives. And this is to me is one
of the more exciting things about this
current administration is the make
America healthy again movement. And you
know, eliminate fluoride from the water,
eliminate all these I think there's a
new list of ingredients that most of
them are banned in Europe and a lot of
other places and are legal in America.
It's insanity and it doesn't make any
sense. And and often times the arguments
don't even make sense as to why they
continue to produce it because they
produce the same products for Canada for
instance where Canada has better laws
when it comes to the additives. So the
they produce the ones in Canada where
they don't have the the negative
dangerous additives and yet they still
make this argument that to force them to
stop doing that in America will cause
great economic harm. It's like, well,
it's clearly clearly the case that we
have an obesity,
diabetes, and mental health epidemic.
And the probability that all of those
are associated
with insulin resistance and imunological
reaction seems to me to be probably
herbicides and pesticides. Yeah. Well,
well, there there's a
cascading there's a cascade of
differential effects. Undoubtedly, some
people are more sensitive to those
things as well. I was watching a
documentary that I I sent to Jamie about
uh China and one of the you know China
innovates at such a level like such a
fascinating level that um you know
because they're integrated with the
government which I'm not I'm not saying
is a good thing but because of that sort
of unlimited growth because the growth
is designed for the state like
everyone's all involved in it. Um, one
of the things they're doing is
integrating rice farms with crayfish
farms. So, they figured out a way to
stop using herbicides and pesticides and
instead farm these two things together.
So, they have the rice and then they
have the crayfish. The crayfish feed off
the excess material from the rice but
also keep the water nitrogen and
carbonri.
And so the rice is more nutrientrich and
so soil is more nutrient-rich. And then
they're bringing in fish and crabs as
well. So they're harvesting all of these
different things that people eat along
with the rice all in together and
they've created you just sort of the
like what they've done with regenerative
agriculture like white oaks pastures and
you know Polyface Farms and different
regenerative agriculture establishments
in America. But they're doing it with
rice to avoid using herbicides and
pesticides. And well, hopefully the new
administration under Kennedy will be
able to figure out how to prioritize
these things so some of them happen. I
my concern I suppose it's not my
concern. A concern is that they'll try
to do too many things at once, you know,
and that's why I focused when we talked
earlier today about insulin resistance.
Well, there's so much to try to change.
Well, that's it. And you you can't
change it all. Like that's there's going
to be resistance on all fronts, but but
one person at a time as you're saying
like when you when you have this message
and you talk to people about things that
you've done that have made you
healthier, that message resonates and
then one person at a time tries that
their friends join in and the next thing
you know you've got a large percentage
of healthy people that are listening to
you which is I've seen that again in at
the shows like one of the things that's
also have changed across the years is
that the proportion of people who are in
trouble at my shows is decreasing. And
partly that's because many of the guys
who come
um generally with their wife and often
with a child have put themselves
together and and then they're happy
about that and they tell me the story.
And so that's great. like there there's
nothing better than traveling all around
the world and having people come up to
you and say that they weren't doing so
well and that their lives are way better
now and thank you. Yes, that's a good
deal. That's a great deal. That's a good
deal. Those are my favorite stories that
I hear from people that listen to the
podcast. They're like, I've listened to
the podcast. I lost 60 pounds. I started
working out every day. I'm I'm much
healthier. I'm drinking a lot of water.
I'm taking electrolytes and vitamins and
and just my mental health has improved
because of the daily exercise. I'm a
different person. I'm on the right path.
Yeah. Well, it's so so that's very
interesting too that the fact that
that's actually you said those are the
best stories that you can hear. I love
those stories. Well, it shows you
something about non-hedanistic
motivation. It's like imagine what you
could have if you could have anything
you wanted. Well, maybe you know your
imagination would drift first to the
hedenistic side or maybe the power side
for that matter. It's like, "No, how
about you can wander around anywhere in
the world, some isolated field with a
castle on it in Serbia, and people that
you've never seen will come up to you
and say, "I was having a pretty damn
dismal time of it, all things
considered, and I listened to what you
wrote and said, and in consequence, I
put my life together, and their wife is
standing beside them going, "Yeah, he's
really in a lot better shape. Thank you
a lot." It's like, yeah, no, those those
are great. That's a good deal. That's a
great deal. Yeah. So, so when you ask
what it's like, well, it's like a lot of
that. Yeah. You know, and and do you
feel a burden? Do you feel like a sense
of responsibility that is at times
overwhelming because of this
responsibility that you have? I think I
felt more for a good while the pain of
it. It wasn't the responsibility.
Well, well, the intense connection you
have to these people that are Well, the
responsibility I the responsibility
makes you careful,
you know. How careful are you? Pretty.
Yeah. Yeah. Why? Cuz you have a
responsibility. Yeah. Yeah. But that's
okay. Yeah. Well, that's part of that
additional sacrifice. Like it seems
natural to me.
Okay. What What do you mean?
um that with you know the the concept
with great power comes great
responsibility. It just seems normal,
right? Well, it has to be the case,
right? I mean, as your field of
opportunity expands, yeah, if your field
of responsibility doesn't expand, you'll
collapse and you pay a higher price for
stupidity at larger scales of
opportunity. Yes. Obviously. Obviously.
And so, get your act together and and
you know, and and is that a burden?
Voluntarily undertaking responsibility
isn't a burden. It's an opportunity.
Right? That doesn't mean it's it is it's
not easy. But easy like I don't need I
don't know what easy is. What's easy?
Pointless misery. That's not easy.
Right. Like you have life with no
meaning is one of the hardest things.
Absolutely. Right. So, I guess the
reason you pick up your cross and walk
uphill is because that's the best thing
you can do all things considered. I
mean, that's why Christ says that his
burden is light. That his yoke is light.
It's like, huh? You're supposed to take
up your cross and walk
uphill towards death and hell, let's
say. But that's light. Okay. Why?
Because because there's no better
pathway than voluntarily undertaking
responsibility. M well definitely that's
psychologically impeccable statement
like there's no difference statistically
speaking between thinking about yourself
and being miserable. It's
self-consciousness.
They're the same thing. Right. Right.
Right. Right. Which is a giant problem
with social media. Right. Terrible
problem. Accelerant to misery. Yeah.
Yeah. It's an Sure. As soon as you're
focused on you, the narrow you, now
you're self-conscious. You stumble on
stage. You can't play your musical
instrument. You can't ride a bike. You
can't box. Right? You're not in the
flow. Why? Cuz you're not serving the
right thing. Like when I go on stage, I
remember first of all, I have music at
the beginning of my shows. I've got a
great musician. What are you playing? Uh
well, I I don't play it. It's uh um I
have a musician from Cambridge. Yeah.
Yeah. And my son sometimes plays for us,
which is really fun. So, it's not songs.
It's just music. Well, Julian, when
Julian plays, he plays he plays um his
he plays country music on a guitar and a
couple of his own his own uh
compositions. So, it's been fun to have
him along when because he's quite good
at it. And so, that's really that's
really great. But the
music the the the Dave, the guy who
plays for me, he um he starts out plays
classical gas. He's kind of like a
one-man band. plays classical guitar,
but he's he's got electronic instruments
around him, and he can fill up the
theater or the stadium. He likes playing
in stadiums. And he ends with Inception
on electric guitar, which is pretty
hardcore rock all things considered. and
it gets everybody focused, you know, and
then when I'm lecturing, I have a
question and I know that's a quest and
it's real because I pick something
important that I would like the answer
to and then I explore that with the
audience and I'm not self-conscious. And
the reason for that is it's not about
me. It's
about trying to answer the question and
even more importantly trying to get the
damn question right to begin with.
Right? Because you got to get the
question right, man. That's the crucial
issue. Then the words come to you that
what did I figure out? The spirit of
your aim is what answers your prayers.
Here's a brutal idea for you. Right.
Right. Right. So if you want to defeat
your wife, the spirit of power will tell
you what to say. Right. Yeah. Right. Is
right, man. Right. There's a terrifying
thing to know. So if you aim upward high
enough, then the spirit of upward
aim reveals itself to you in words.
That's right. In words and intent. And
that's exactly right. So So it's great.
Like it's a lot.
You know, you know that it's a lot.
Yeah. I had a different journey though.
My journey was like a slow drip of fame,
which I think was very healthy. It's a
good way to do it so you could adjust to
it. Yeah. Well, you also you also mostly
escaped from reputation savaging, right?
I mean, you've had I'm not saying
completely cuz people have gone after
you, but I got a real flurry of of early
hate around Bill C16, which I was 100%
right about. But it was you were a
lightning rod. You were the patriarchy.
You were the the one to point to that
was going to reinforce these established
norms that are not supportive of the
minimalized
and marginalized communities, right? You
were you were cruelty, right? You were
the cruel white man. What did what did
uh that guy call you? Mean mean white
man. White man. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Which is by the way you've already
lost when you when that's you're
throwing poratives out there like that
in a debate. Like that's the thing that
I was talking about like when someone
tries to establish
insults and get you on your back. It's
offense. It's offense to put you in a
defensive position so that you cannot do
your best. Yeah. Well, it's also to pull
the rug out from underneath you so you
collapse your reputation permanently and
that redowns to the person's credit.
Also, it's to establish a narrative to
the audience that's listening to you.
Now, you have to look at this person
under this light because I've I've done
so eloquently described him as this
thing. Yeah. And then he will be
defensive about that because he doesn't
I am not and then you look even more
like that thing. Yeah. Yeah, it's a very
underhanded way of of progressing, which
is luckily I I don't like that. Not only
do I not like that, I don't think that's
necessary. I don't think it's necessary
as the person doing it. I certainly
don't think it's necessary to respond to
that. I don't think it does anyone any
good. I don't think it's good for
society as a whole, and it's definitely
not good for exploring ideas. I wonder
what you do with the psychopaths. But
it's also you're trying to win. Yeah.
Versus trying to express your
perspective with as much clarity and as
much thought as possible. You're trying
to do your very best
to examine these things from a selfless
perspective to from a truly objective
perspective. Well, it's a truly it's a
truly quest perspective, I think. Right.
So, it's it's not exactly objective.
It's more like because you don't have
access to that. But what you can say is
I'm I'm genuinely puzzled about this.
Yes. And I would genuinely like to
search for the answer. Right. Right.
Wouldn't it be ideal if you were having
a debate where someone said something
that you agreed with and you're like,
"Wow, he's got a really good point." And
you instead of refuting that person,
exploring that with them, which is one
of the reasons I don't like debates. I
don't like debates. like conversations
because in conversations if you don't
have a a predetermined
narrative that you want to enforce with
instead you have your thoughts you have
your ideas and you're not married to
them and these are just thoughts and you
put them out there and then you can
encounter a very unique human being who
has a way of describing and thinking
about things that will open your mind to
new possibilities which is what we all
should strive for, right? We should all
strive to be
to be illuminated to to to learn from
new things, but yet we close those off
because that is a a point that your
enemy is trying to score. Well, you want
to give them Well, it's also because
people people aren't really very
well-versed in how to do this. You know,
it's like so so one of the huge
advantages of your podcast and of the
podcast world in general, I would say,
is that you model how to do that, you
know, it's like and there's a there's an
there's an intense religious ethos under
that. So, okay, so what does it mean?
You start without pride in humility.
It's like, what the hell do I know,
right? Or or maybe more precisely,
there's probably some things I could
still learn that would be beneficial.
Okay?
You note your interest in a topic and
your desire to know more. So that's the
quest element. It's like you're after
something, right? You don't know what it
is, but but it's more development. It's
more wisdom. It's more information,
right? And you're not sure where it's
going to be. Okay. So now you you're the
sort of person who could learn and that
has something to learn and now you have
a quest in mind. Okay. So now that's
that's the frame for your actions. Well,
if you if you're talking to someone
who's also doing that, well, then those
are the words that come. Yeah. Right.
And and they come they come in a
compelling way to you and to the
participant and in a way that's
compelling enough so that they compel
other people. That's the Holy Spirit, by
the way. That's that phenomenon from a
religious perspective. That's exactly
what it is, right? Because that's like
you sit before the talk and rehearse
what words you're going to say. They
just appear, right? No, I never do. I
don't think I should. No, I don't. Well,
sometimes it's a problem because you
breach subjects that you weren't really
prepared to talk about and you might not
have a fully formed idea about it. Yeah.
You, you know, you're not exact, oh, if
I thought about that, what would I have
said differently? You know, yeah, but
you kind of have to find that out along
the way. Yes. Right. You know, and that
way you're, you know, you have a right
to stumble over your own ignorance. For
sure. How the hell do you know it's
there before you reveal it? Well, not
only that, I don't think the audience
truly trusts you unless they feel
authenticity in
that that quest as it were, that that
desire to try to understand like what
what is it that you believe and why do
you believe what you believe and where
did you come to these conclusions? How
what what journey did you go on? What
what ideas did you dismiss? What ideas
were holding you back? What ideas did
you realize were just a personal
weakness that you were protecting
yourself from reality?
Pro protecting yourself from the reality
of bad choices and past mistakes. What
what are you doing to to stop that from
entering into your current state of
mind, you know, and and that that kind
of thinking people can mirror and they
can listen to you talk about these
things and say, I do that. Okay, I got
to stop doing that. Okay, this is what
this is how I can this is how I can
clarify the way I view things and this
is why I'm tripping myself up because
I'm I keep trying to win conversations.
I keep trying to be right all the time
which is impossible especially. That's
right. It's a way it's a it's elevating
your status in the conversation as a
consequence of abstract victory instead
of ab instead of increasing your wisdom
and enhancing your reputation as a
sojourer towards the truth. Yes. And
this is especially difficult for young
people because you don't have enough
life experience to have made these
mistakes and corrected them and learned
and grown and and have the humility to
recognize that process. Right. Instead,
you see other people that are successful
or whatever it is and you want that
right now. Yes. And that and that's
wrong, too, because you don't want that
right now. You want to learn how to have
that so that when you want to win the
lottery, but you don't. No. No.
Definitely not. You don't. Right.
Because everybody wants to win the
lottery, but that's one of the worst
things that can happen to you. Mhm.
Well, and what do young people have um
they can listen and they can ask
questions. Mhm. Right. And you know they
say when the student is ready, the
teacher will come. Well, how how does
that play out in the world? Well, if you
admit to your ignorance and you ask
genuine stupid questions, you will
rapidly encounter people who are more
than happy to share their wisdom with
you. Like people love having mentees,
right? They like to be able to share
their wisdom and their experience.
Unfortunately, even if they don't have
it, that's where it becomes a problem.
The false prophet. Yeah. Well, that's
right. Well, that's a problem. The false
guru. Yeah. Right. The people that don't
have the answers to their own lives, so
they try to give other people answers to
their lives. Yeah. Well, that's also the
psychopath problem is that, you know,
what about the people who are feigning
competence, right? Yeah. Right. Well,
that's a real problem. Yeah. It's a real
problem. That's that's that's that's a
it's a deadly problem and it's massively
elevated on social media. Yes. Yeah.
Well, it used to be a gigantic problem
in martial arts, the fake martial
artists. There was a lot of them. Sure.
Yeah. Any g any that's the that's the
eternal parasite problem. Mhm. Yes.
Yeah. So,
so organisms build up a storehouse of
value, a carcass, let's say, like a
whale carcass for example,
and inevitably the parasites move in to
invade it inevitably. And that's
so consistent a pattern that sex evolved
to stop it. How so? Well, parasites can
reproduce faster than their hosts
because they're
simpler. And so they can swarm the host
quite rapidly, especially if the host
clones itself because the host then
stays identical physiologically across
the generations. So the parasites can
optimize to colonize the host and that's
the end of it. If you reproduce
sexually, you mix your genes up 50. You
you pay a price. you lose 50% of your
genetic specific genetic heritage, but
the advantage is you stay ahead of the
parasites. So sex evolved to outwit the
parasites. And a huge part of what we're
seeing around us, and this is probably a
consequence at the low lowest level,
base level, we've had a phenomenal boom
in wealth since World War II.
Phenomenal. We stored wealth everywhere,
like in Harvard at a 53 billion um
endowment. Well, the parasites found the
wealth everywhere. Yeah. And they've
invaded like mad. That's a great
example. Parasites in academia are a
great example. What you're talking about
unearned legacy media. Yes. Science has
science has been invaded that way. The
political this is a major problem, you
know, and so how do you protect yourself
against the parasitical exploiters?
Well, you could recognize parasitical
behavior, right? when everything gets
chocked off to racism and white
supremacy, when they start using these
pjorives, they start throwing those
around for everything, you know, that's
that's one of the ways you recognize
you're like, "Oh, you're a parasite.
You're not really doing science. You're
not really doing academics. You really
one of the hallmarks of of
identification from the clinical
literature for the cluster B types." And
so they're they have a parasitical
element, histrionic, narcissistic,
psychopathic, criminal, right? That's
cluster B. They use false claims of
victimization to manipulate. Yes. And so
this is a particularly pernitious
pathway because they parasitize empathy,
right? And the left is unbelievably
susceptible to that because the left is
full of empathic people. And so those
who parasitize empathy have a field day
on the left. Right. Right. Because the
left is generally thought to be more
educated, more compassionate, kinder,
looking out for marginalized people.
That's part of the ethics of the the
ethic is pretty straightforward.
Anything that cries is a baby. It's
like, no, some things that cry are
monsters. Oo. Right. Right. Well, let
let's take the case of Nicola Sturgeon,
the the Scottish prime minister, the
previous Scottish prime
minister. Any man who wants to can be a
woman. It's like, okay, any
man. You mean any man, do you? Yeah. Uh,
have you encountered the nightmare men?
Oh, they don't exist. They're all
victims. Yeah. You just bloody well wait
till you encounter one. You'll change
your story very rapidly. And for the for
the naive and sheltered empaths of the
radical left, they're either
psychopaths, so they're wolves in sheep
clothing, or they're people so that are
so naive that the the uh what would you
say, Red Riding Hood's grandmother can
definitely have his way with them. Yes,
that's literally something that I use as
an example in my Netflix special. I said
that I I think there are people that
feel like they're trapped in in a
woman's body. And then there's also
people that are out of their
mind. They're crazy. And that all
throughout history, but but what I
pointed out all throughout history when
you wanted to make like a killer in a
movie scarier, you put them in a dress
like Norman Bates and Psycho, Silence of
the Lambs, and I used the Big Bad Wolf.
I'm like, it's literally a wolf dressed
up like a woman. Like that's literally
what it is. and they've somehow or
another completely abandoned this one
aspect of masculinity that's one of the
more terrifying is the predatory
pervert and they've given the predatory
pervert a privileged position. Right.
Right. And
that's sin by the way. One of the
craziest things about it is they've
completely
abandoned the idea of the pedophile and
then the monster and the sexual pervert
and the attacker, the assaulter, the
person who all when you give a guy, you
say all you have to do is say you're a
woman. Now you have access to whatever
women's spaces all the women's spaces.
You could victimize them, you could
fight them, you could beat them in
sports, you could dominate them in all
games. It's bizarre. bizarre that no
one's caught on to that. And that's the
that's for sure that's the weirder
that's the more cultlike and even you
could say religious aspect of leftist
thinking. It's a it's an original sin.
Eve clutches the serpent to her breast.
It's like that's a serpent. It's poison.
You don't get to love it. Right. Right.
It's a monster. Right. Right. It's a guy
wearing a dress with an erection in the
women's room. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Or or
worse. Yeah. or worse. Or worse or a lot
worse. Yeah. Well, right. And and you
know, there there are no shortage of
naive people who've never really
encountered a monster and have no
imagination for it. And but there's also
people that are willing to justify the
monster's behavior because the monster
is a part of a protected class now.
Yeah. Well, that's part of that.
The cluster B types use proclamation of
victimization to parasetize. That's part
of their clinical pathology. And they're
poor me. I get to do anything. And
they're so common. Yeah, that's what's
really crazy. And why is it that
academia is overwhelmed by people like
this? Is it because it's it's vulnerable
to to parasites? Sure, why not? It was a
storehouse of unguarded value,
you know, without any religious
principles. Well, also, yeah, there's
that, too. And and with and and with no
real gatekeepers,
right? So, like the parasite problem is
a very deep problem.
So, so I can even maybe I can even give
you an example of that. This is a hard
one, but I'll
try. In the Pinocchio movie, this this
also happens in Jonah, the story of
Jonah. Remember, Jeppetto ends up in a
whale. It's like, what the hell? There's
no explanation for that in the story.
It's like he's out looking for Pinocchio
and now he's in a whale. Well, a whale
is a giant
carcass, right? And so, when something
dies, its spirit, what would you say?
Its spirit is then in embedded in a
carcass. That's a good way of thinking
about it. That's why Pinocchio has to go
into the belly of the whale to free
Japetto and finish his transformation is
that when things deteriorate, right, you
have these carcasses lying around with
their dead spirits. The spirit of what
gave rise to them is still inside there.
And the job is to go into the carcass
and to revitalize the spirit that
produced it and not to parasetize it.
Right. Boy, I don't know how you got
that out of Pinocchio and the whale.
Well, I try to follow you on this one.
I'm like, wow. Jeppetto ends up
languishing in the whale. Right. Right.
So, imagine that there's a spirit in the
universities that gave rise to these
great great storehouses of value and
that spirit has disintegrated and now
it's inside the the storehouse. That's a
good way of thinking about it's inside
the storehouse. Your job as someone who
wants to become real is to go into the
storehouses of value that have been
bequeathed to us by the past and to
discover and revitalize the spirit that
gave rise to them, not to parasetize
them. And when they parasitize, they
strip them to their bones and there's
nothing left. And they do it obviously,
right? There's plagiarism. There's all
these different and and all that stuff.
False scientific papers. Yes. And all
that stuff all that gets swept under the
rug because the people that are doing it
are part of the protected class. Yeah.
So they protect the parasites like this
is my lamprey. Like don't Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. This is my baby. Like the woman
from Harvard. They fired her but they
gave her an equal paying job. It could
also be Joe and might as well get in
trouble for this too. Let's go.
Well, because women are more
agreeable. They're le more prone to
manipulation by psychopaths because
their primary ethos
is is nurturing. Yeah. For a naive
woman, every victim is a
baby. It's like fine, 90% of them are
victims. You could even say that about
criminals. You go to a run-of-the-mill
prison and there's going to be people in
there and you heard their lives. You
think, "Oh my god, no wonder." Right.
And then there's another core group
that's like, "Oh, I see. I see who you
are. You're you're
uh if I saw one if I saw inside your
skull for five seconds, I'd have
post-traumatic stress disorder. I never
recover." Right. Those people don't
exist. It's like, "Oh, ho." Yeah. Oh,
yes. They exist. Yeah. They exist. Yeah.
Yeah. And they're and they're very good
at crying like infants.
Yeah. Right. And then the mothers, the
naive mothers come flooding out. The
women, the women dominated the
universities from the 1960s onward. It's
like
in come the parasites and they're
enabled. And what are they enabled by?
Fascinating things to me is when
parasites are confronted and they laugh.
Like one of the the things about
academic parasites when you challenge
their beliefs,
you that's contempt. You don't you don't
know what you're talking about. I saw
this with the anti-semitism on campus
thing when women were these women were
confronted by these statements like
death to the Jews on campus and whether
or not this this is hate speech. And I
saw it with uh I believe it was Josh
Howley was uh the woman was he was
saying some women can give birth and and
some some men can give birth as well
like some men have period like this this
kind of like and with I guess you're
you're this line of questioning is very
transphobic and opens people up to
violence with a with a laugh with a
laugh and a smile a diminishing of your
position by mockery contempt. Yeah. when
what they're saying doesn't make any
sense to anybody rational, but
they are so they're so embedded in this
system that they really believe that
they have the kind of control over
Congress that they have over their
classmates there. This is like standard
behavior for them mocking and dismissing
other ideas that are counter to theirs.
Right. Well, and and there's plenty of
reward for that disseminated in the
universities. Yes. Right. And so that's
part of their How do you fix that with
Peterson Academy? No, I'm dead serious.
Look, it's not like I'm thrilled about
the fact that Harvard is having a war
with Donald Trump. And I'm less thrilled
with the fact that I hope Donald Trump
wins. I worked at Harvard. It was a
great place. I'm not happy at all that
these institutions have become what
they've become. And if I could see a way
forward to revitalizing them, then but
what are you going to do? Like the
administration took over the
universities and and parasitized the
tuition fees and the tax dollars. Then
the woke mob parasitized the
administration and here we are. And what
are you going to do about that? All
these tenur professors who are
progressive and they're way less
progressive than the administrators. You
going to fix that?
How how even in principle I don't see it
how what so what we decided to do we've
been working on this for 10 years is
like well what do universities do well
they they educate they offer lectures
they allow they have a place where
people can congregate they help people
mature they explain the world they
encourage people to aim up they teach
people to write my son runs this essay
app we're trying to teach kids to Right.
We're integrating that with Peterson
Academy so they can learn to think like
that's our that's our solution. Yeah. Um
will it work? The world's pretty dynamic
place. It's working real well at the
moment, you know, and well, people need
some sort of an alternative to that
system. If you recognize what that
system is, especially if you're
participating in it and you you're
you're opposed to all of it and you're
trapped in it and it is a a it's vital
to your success that you accept some of
it. How else can you get through? How
how can you get this degree and maintain
some level of sovereignty over your mind
and your ideas? Like it's it's a
horrible trap. And I've met a lot of
people that I think are very rational,
reasonable people that get at least some
of that stuck in their head. Oh yeah. Oh
yeah. Well, when we we did some research
trying to see what predicted politically
correct authoritarianism was the last
piece of research I did before my
research lab, you know, ceased to be a
viable entity, let's say. um what
predicted so politically correct
authoritarianism was that like
hypercompassionate leftism but conjoined
with willingness to use force to put the
doctrines forward force and fear. So
it's tyrannical compassion that's
exactly that. What are the predictors?
Low verbal intelligence. That's the
first one. Second one was being female.
The third one was having a feminine
temperament. The fourth one was ever
having taken even one politically
correct course. Wow. Yeah. Right. And so
I've thought that through for a long
time. It's like, well, what's what's the
female um relationship? Because that's
that's a crucial one. The the female
dominated disciplines are the most woke
by far. Why? So I think it's because of
that basic ethos of compassion. All who
cry are babies. Well, look, that's the
right default for women. Yeah. You know,
like wise women, my wife is one of these
women. She was a very good mother. She
never thought adult men were babies.
Like one of the things that's quite
striking about my wife is that if you're
a useless man, she doesn't feel sorry
for you. You're not a baby. Now, she's
really good at taking care of babies.
And so, she got to be she's she's
discriminating in her
empathy. And we're in a situation now
where people think that indiscriminate
empathy is a virtue. That's Eve's sin.
See, see, Eve, literally, Eve wants to
put the feminine ethos at the top of the
hierarchy of value that replaces God,
right? And that causes the fall. And
then Adam, he's such a cuck that that's
exactly it is that he goes along with
her. He doesn't stand up and tell her
that maybe she shouldn't be listening to
poisonous serpents. He doesn't. He he
consumes with her what she delivers so
that she'll be his friend because you
know how useful men like that are. And
then when the fall happens, he complains
to God that he made that God made Eve
and cursed him with her. That's the
story. So it's not it's not just women.
It's and we we got to get this straight.
Women with their drive towards
indiscriminate compassion so that even
the serpents are their children. It's
men too who won't say they always say
yes dear whatever whatever you want yes
weak men weak men weak men who enable
the who don't help the women set
boundaries now you got to do that as a
man you know like when you have a when
you and your wife have a baby for the
first nine months every time the baby
cries it's right right you respond to a
baby's cries as if it's right 100% of
the time because human infants are so
dependent and utterly unable to fend for
themselves. So that sets up a very
powerful feminine dynamic. It's like if
it cries, take care of it. Okay? So what
are the men for? It's like if it
cries, take care of it. Accept that.
That's a false cry. And you see that
with kids. They'll start playing with
that by the time they're nine or 10
months old, right? Yes. Of course. And
so you differentiate. It's like, oh no,
that's not a baby. That's a snake. Well,
are you sure it's not a baby? It's like,
nope. Nope. Snake for sure. Snake.
Poisonous snake, in fact. Right. Well,
I'm feeling pretty sorry for it. It's
like, save your compassion for the truly
needy and leave the snakes to me, right?
And Adam doesn't do that. Is it a
function of a society that's almost I
don't want to say too successful and
empathetic and there's too much
abundance that you have more of this
crying look um no but you have more
parasitical behavior right why
everyone's got pretty comfortable
because we've been in a high trust
society for a long time it's like oh
everybody's trustworthy it's like no a
few people in a few countries are
trustworthy most of the time and that's
really hard. Right. Right. And there's
stringent
preconditions. Right. So, everyone's
trustworthy and now there's all these
piles of wealth flying around
everywhere. It's like parasite dream,
especially when it's unguarded. Yeah.
And so, it's enabled by the women and
unguarded by the men. And both are at
fault, right? And that you see that in
the Genesis account, too. It's like Eve
clutches the serpent to her breast, but
Adam fails to help her distinguish.
plenty of these parasitic men as well.
Oh yeah, there well they're the worst.
There's they're the worst men cry victim
and look for sympathy from women. That
was there was a famous mass murder no a
serial killer who did that. The the
lawyer very Bundy Ted Bundy. You know
what his trick was? He had a VW if I
remember correctly. He had a cast that
he could take on and off. So he put his
hood up. Maybe it wasn't a VW. Put his
hood up because his car didn't work. And
he did it around places where he knew
there were young women. And then he
enticed them to stop because, well, poor
Ted because he's crippled and his car
doesn't work. And then and then well and
then the woman learned very painfully
the difference between a monster and a
baby,
right? Brutal. He was a bad guy. There
are some bad people. And a fair number
of them like to dress in women's
clothing, let's say.
Yeah. Yeah. That's really uncomfortable
uncomfortable for people if they have
this idea that's embedded in their
consciousness about what's going on to
accept that reality. Of of course it's
in fact accepting that when that reality
is thrust upon you unawares you develop
post-traumatic stress disorder. Right?
Because it's naive people who encounter
malevolence develop PTSD.
That's the pathway. Yeah. Yeah. So, if
you want to make your children
susceptible to PTSD, like all these kids
that are triggered by everything, make
them extremely
naive and then let them encounter
malevolence, right? Because you're
supposed to teach them to handle
serpents, right? Right. To identify them
and handle them. And that means they
have to learn about the nature of the
world and the girls to differentiate
between snakes and babies. Yeah. Right.
Right. And babies and men.
And the man who worms his way into your
dreams because he's he's a dependent
infant. He's a snake and and and your
sympathy is wasted on him. Yes, there
certainly are. Man, I tell you those
riots that used to gather around me, you
know, when bas that was mostly 2017
before I stopped speaking at
universities mostly. Um the women were
pretty bad. harpy city, man. And this
self-righteous feminine toxic compassion
just screeching at the top of its lungs.
But the men that were with them, oh my
god, I didn't even I didn't want to be
within three feet of them. You know,
it's like, I'll be your friend. Yeah.
You know, you see those people on the
net talking to children. I'll be your
friend. When your family abandons you,
I'm here for you. You know, they don't
understand. Not like me. We could be
closer than anybody has been with
you. That just barely scrapes the
surface of awful. Like awful is a long
long ways down. Yeah. So, so part of
what's happened in the universities and
you know it's a terrible thing to say.
Well, they there's a lot of things.
Storehouse of wealth,
radical increase in the number of
students
served, radical feminization of the
institutions and weakness on the part of
the men who should have been guardian of
the gates. All of that. And is it
repable? I don't think so. Jesus. I
think once the parasites once the
parasites have the corpse, what are you
going to do? How are you going to rev
you're going to bring Lazarus back from
the dead? You know, I don't think so. I
think it's time for something new. You
need academic dewormer. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, that's what critical
thinking was supposed to be, Joe. So,
you think it needs
to So, something needs to be emerge like
your academy as an alternative. Well,
the thing is it already is emerging,
right? Because the universities you of
course they're going to do this as they
spiral downward. They're going to turn
to cost cutting. Well, they're not going
to cut the administration obviously
because they make the decisions about
who's going to be cut. So, they're going
to turn to lowcost alternatives to
having courses. And so, they're already
doing that. Let's put our courses
online. Well, fair enough. Except
they're terrible. They're terrible.
We got the best professors and the best
production quality. And so, and you've
designed it for online versus just
having%,
right? We have a plan mapped out. You
know, we'll have a full the full
equivalent of a
four-year distribution of courses. We'll
have that within, we think, two years,
something like that. Four new courses a
month. At the moment, we're putting out
32 hours of original content a month.
It's
very well people can go look. It looks
great and that's because it's great.
Michaela and her husband,
they're unbelievably picky about the
professors and about everything. They
watch the social media, they watch the
look, they watch the images, they watch
the ads. You know, we're trying to make
do everything 100% and then we're trying
to make it as inexpensive as possible.
Soon we're raising money because we want
to translate it into multiple languages
because wouldn't it be lovely to offer
that to the developing world? Sure. With
free market economics instead of Marxist
economics so that people could learn to
be entrepreneurs. That'd be great for
Africa, especially if we could get
energy prices down. Then maybe everybody
could be rich and and not just
materially rich, right? Because that's
not enough. If you're materially rich
and you're spiritually poor, your money
just serves to destroy you and fast. So
that's not wealth, right? And Yeah.
Right. You know that. You've met people
that that that's happened, too. Oh,
yeah. A lot. Money is not the cure for
poverty. No, you're naive if you think
that. No, it's not the cure for happy
for being discontent either. But it does
offer you freedom if you use it
correctly. And that opportunity and
opportunity. So it give you some relief
from stress which can give you some kind
of happiness but it's not the goal. No.
No. Well, it has to be put in it has to
be put in an ethical framework or it'll
just look money is opportunity. That's a
way of thinking about it. And if you're
going to the devil and you have money,
you just go to the devil faster. I saw
that lots of times in my clinical
practice. And you know, maybe if you're
aim if you're aiming upward, then money
can be a force multiplier. And it can be
you know you can make a good you can you
can establish a solid institution
that's provides mentorship and
opportunity for people and actually
that's more that's the most fun to do
that. It's by far the most fun to do
that to make something of genuine value.
Why wouldn't you do that? Only if you
were cynical and and unable you why not
make something that works. That's a
that's much more entertaining all things
considered. And so, and we're trying to
do this with ARC and it's going real
well. You know, and you were very
helpful there, too. You know, that
podcast that we did, there were lots of
reasons that the climate apocalypse
narrative has been falling radically
apart, but that podcast that you and I
did was definitely one of them. You
know, and I've interviewed a lot of good
scientists who they're not climate
skeptics, you know, that's a stupid
term. And Lombberg's a good example of
that. It's like climate denier is right
up there with vaccines. That's such a
manipulative phrase. Yeah. It's like,
"Oh, you're like the Nazis who object to
Jews being baked." That's your argument,
is it? Really? That's your argument, you
scum rat. You're You're going to use
that as a moral lever. That's your level
of ethos. That's your argumentation.
You're going to take the worst slur you
can possibly imagine, and you're going
to use it to devastate someone's
reputation publicly because you don't
have a leg to stand on because you're
the kind of tyrant who uses fear to
monger power. That's you. There's a
psychological interpretation of the
climate apocalypse scandal and it's if
it and it's killing it's it's it's it's
destroying Germany. It's destroying the
UK.
Didn't Germany like didn't they shut
down a bunch of their nuclear plants?
Yeah. Yeah. And they replaced them with
league night coal, right? The dirtiest
burning coal. So they're in a situation
where they pollute more for more
unstable energy that's delivered by
tyrants. Well, well outsourcing their
industry to China, it's a very bad idea,
right? Who's building coal plants at a
rate that is so fast that everything the
West does to ameliate carbon is utterly
irrelevant. Utterly irrelevant. Yeah.
And that's an uncomfortable truth that
these these climate cultists just don't
they don't address. You you they they
won't even entertain any information
contrary to the narrative. They won't
even let it in. Of course not because it
upsets the game. Not only that, most of
the people that are involved in the game
don't even understand the game. They
they don't even understand what what's
really not just at stake, but the actual
facts that they're arguing for. Well,
Carney's a good example of this in
Canada to return to that. Yeah, you
know, is he going to win?
It seems like he's the polls certainly
indicate that. Yeah. And maybe with a
majority government and I can see why.
Like Canadians were accustomed to having
everything go pretty well and we could
be morally superior to you Americans
because that was also fun. And we'll
never and we'll never forgo that
opportunity and Trump has provided it in
spades in the last month. So, we look at
Carney and we don't pay any attention to
politics and we certainly don't read his
goddamn book. And so, we see someone who
looks like a banker from the 1990s when
everything was just fine in Canada and
Canadians were just as rich as Americans
and the whole country was stable and
peaceful and we think, well, you know,
we kind of made a mistake on Justin and
turned out he was a little incompetent,
a little narcissistic and uh maybe we
shouldn't have voted for him just
because he legalized marijuana because
that's actually what brought him into
power the first time. And so, we kind of
made a mistake. Now look, we've learned
and we're not going to be fooled by
narcissistic pretenders. And Mark Carney
used to be governor of Bank of England,
you know, and that's pretty good. That's
a pretty good resume. And it certainly
looks like
that. And yet he believes that 75% of
the fossil fuels in the world should be
left in the ground and that there's no
there's nothing that should guide your
purchasing decision by force other than
decarbonization. But it seemed to me, at
least from aer observer from afar, that
Pierre was gaining steam and it looked
like he was going to win. Oh, and they
seem to have taken the two things. Well,
two things happened. Trudeau resigned.
Oh, yeah. The Liberals were headed for
extinction. It was going to be the worst
defeat of a governing party in Canada
ever. They might have lost their
official party status. So, it was they
were done. Well, they pivoted, brought
in Carney, who'd been advising Trudeau.
He's put himself up as an outsider, a a
competent outsider, a lot of private
private experience in the in the private
domain, you know, a steady hand at the
helm. It's like you were Trudeau's
economic adviser for 10
years. 10 years. And there's going to be
more of the same under you. And now
you're pretending to be an industrialist
even though you're one of the leaders,
the world's leading authorities on DEI,
ESG, and net zero. That's Mark Carney.
All you have to do is read his book,
which people don't, of course, because
it's a book. You know, first three
chapters will do the trick. Well, now
either he's decided that every single
thing he ever believed was wrong right
to the core, and hasn't apologized or
let anyone know that, and now he's
actually Mr. industry, which is how he's
presenting himself to Canadians,
or or he believes what he's always
believed. Or he's a wolf wearing
grandma's dress. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
He's a benevolent wolf. Well, that's
that's why the wolf wears grandma's
dress, isn't it? It's like there's no
one nicer than me. So, how does can
Canada correct course?
Well, people either correct course by
waking up or by experiencing severe
pain. And it looks to me like we've
chosen the severe pain route. You know,
um we already make 60 cents. We already
produce 60 cents to every dollar you
Americans produce, even though we were
at parody 10 years
ago. And so
after four more years of Carney, we
could easily have that down to 50
cents. Spiraling housing prices, a lot
of social instability in Canada,
especially since after October 7th. Do
you think that that's all my Jewish
friends in Toronto are terrified. Yeah,
that's not fun. I don't like seeing
that. No, that's No, it's awful. It's
awful. And all those psychopaths who've
been parading around their moral virtue
since October 7th. They're plenty
emboldened. Plenty. Yeah, plenty. And
know I'll give you a little example of
Canada. So we had the English leadership
debate week ago and uh the powers that
be um who organized the debate the
legacy media types with CBC radically
involved couldn't figure out how to
exclude rebel media you know that
right-wing news kind of tabloidy news
group from Canada Ezra Levant who's been
buzzing about for 10 years causing
trouble like a like a right-wing tabloid
um journalist which is what he is well
they didn't want him in uh press scrum
for the leaders after the debate. So
they canled
it. They cancelled the journalists
interviews of the four leading
contenders for prime minister in Canada
because some right-wing tabloid
journalists, they've had a newspaper or
a media empire for 10 years. I don't
care what you think of it. It's not the
point. The point is they
cancelled they canled the journalist
scrum after the English language debate.
That's so and no one complained that.
But that doesn't even make sense. Like
if you're in if you're a presidential
candidate and you're encount or prime
minister candidate and you're
encountering someone that has an
opposing perspective, you should have
really good answers. That's it. Oh,
look, if you're if your guy's leading,
why ask questions? That's the legacy
media in Canada. It's the CBC, right?
It's state funded, right? Right to the
core. 1.4 bill. Think about this, Joe.
This is our bloody state media. It's so
funny. $1.4 billion in direct government
subsidy and $600 million in federal
advertising per year. $2 billion. Go to
the CBC website on YouTube. You look at
their last 20 videos. I'll guarantee
that not a single one of them has more
than 200
views. Right? Which means the people who
made the video clips didn't watch
them. Right? For that's what you get for
$2 billion. Now everyone in Canada who's
older than
55 watches legacy media media and and
polyv said he defund the CBC. So you can
imagine they're not exactly covering him
in a positive way. I watched the debate
where he kept getting talked over. Yeah.
Yeah. Jag meat singh. Fascinating. He's
such fun with his pink turban. He's such
a fashion icon. Luckily, he's going to
lose his own seat and his part is going
to be devastated. That's the socialists.
They're going to be devastated so badly
that they won't have official party
status. But it's incredible to watch
that in Canada where I've always thought
at least your discourse is much more
polite.
Yeah. Was
Yeah. Yeah. We've got a lot of there's a
lot of mopping up to do in Canada. Well,
in our the country and
and you know the man who started the
Reform Party in Canada, so that was the
populist end of the Conservative
movement 20 years ago, maybe a little
longer, eventually reunited with the
Conservatives. Ernest Manning or Preston
Manning, son of an Alberta premier. He
was premier of Alberta for like 40
years. He wrote an article in the Globe
and Mail, which was the it's the
Canadian liberal establishment
newspaper. And I mean liberal by the
classic, you know, old school small L
liberal centrist sort of newspaper
saying that Manitoba, Alberta, and
Saskatchewan should have an immediate
constitutional convention immediately on
Carney's ascension to the throne. And
Quebec doesn't want pipelines traversing
its territory. And Quebec, one of the I
don't know if you noticed this, but one
of the participants in the debate was a
Canadian separatist. We literally have a
Canadian federal
party,
federal, localized in Quebec, whose
stated intent is to break up the
country. Hasn't that always been the
case with Quebec, though? For a good
while, it was provincial, right? I mean,
they had a provincial party, like a
state party, right? Okay, fair enough.
Have your state separatist party. It's
for your state. Oh, no. We want to have
a national party. We want to be
represented in the House of Commons as
separatists. Yeah. So the country is in
It's very sad and I was hoping they
could be the 51st state. Yeah. Well
then, well that's what h so two things
back to that. That was the big one.
Carney Carney showed up just in the nick
of time to save the burning damsel from
the train tracks or whatever the hell it
is. And the rhetoric and then Trump he
just timed it so badly and he didn't
know. He didn't know what what it would
do. He didn't know. But that's also
How do you not know that people
have national pride? Yeah. He He knew
that, but he didn't know what the
electoral consequences would be. He
didn't know that that would shift them
to the liberals so radically. And he's
going to pay for that because
once Carney is elected, if that happens,
Trump will not have a more seasoned
enemy in the West. boy. Right. Carney is
very well connected. Very. Especially in
Europe and the UK. Very well. So, and
and Europe and the UK is a mess.
Yeah, you might say that. Oh, that's for
sure. We've highlighted all the arrests
in the UK over social media posts and
most people have no idea. Constantine
Kissing is great with explaining all
that to people. It's so funny when he
compares it to Russia and he says how
many people got arrested in Russia. How
many think got people you got think got
arrested in the UK and most people are
oh none right? No 4,000 like what? Yeah.
Oh yeah. It's unbelievable. There's
videos of the internet. You just see
this everywhere. So they've implemented
these 20 mph speed limits everywhere.
And so 20 m hour. Yeah. Yeah. Because
Joe, that's a bike. You don't really
need a car. Like what are you doing
that's so important that you need a car?
Like if I have to go to a climate
meeting, well, I get a car. But the
peasants, they don't really need cars.
They don't need heat either. Not Not
that much heat. Maybe they can stop
grandma from freezing. One of the
fascinating things about Bernie Sanders
and his anti- oligarch tour is they're
doing it on private jets.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So, we
were in the UK not long ago for this art
conference and uh we rented a
truck and whenever it went over 20 miles
an hour, it beeped at you just like seat
belt thing beeped. Oh god. And then if
you if you go more than 2 miles an hour
of the speed limit and you get caught,
then that knocks onethird of your
license off. If you do that three times,
you don't have a license for a year.
Beep beep beep beep. Climate climate
knocking. Climate knocking.
Yeah. Yeah. You can tell tyrants, Joe.
They they use fear and and uh compulsion
and they hate comedians and cars,
right? There's tyrant checklist. Hates
cars, check. No sense of humor, check.
Uses fear, check. Uses force, check.
Yeah. Psychopath.
Right.
I hate to end this on a bleak note, but
let's end it on a positive note. Okay.
Okay. So, what's positive? Um, young
people are flocking back to churches
across the
West and more to the conservative
churches.
And the only thing we have to buttress
us into the future against the Islamists
and the Marxists and the nihilists and
the hedenists
is our return to our core traditions.
Without that, we're done. And so that's
happening and in big numbers. And so
that's really quite something. Um, the
back has been broken of the climate
apocalypse narrative. There's plenty of
mopping up to do, but half the people
know that there's something rotten in
the state of Denmark and that that
particular apocalypse is probably not
worth giving up all your freedoms for.
Um, we've seen a lot of progress on the
ark front like a lot of the things that
we've been putting forward. the better
story. So that's a return
to the foundations of Western
civilization that made our our society
the sort of place that dispossessed
people will go to voluntarily. Right?
There's lots of people who are starting
to understand that that's seriously
worth preserving. Right? Energy
executives are waking up, as far as I
can see, to the fact that they could
help the world's poor in a serious way.
And if they want to moralize, that would
be a if they want to act morally, that
would be a good place to start. There's
lots of people who are working to
produce abundance. Your country, the US,
you guys are unbelievably good at that.
Way better than any other country in the
world.
And you generally deliver in times of
crisis and you might just do that again.
And so, and then I would say underneath
all that, you know, you said you you're
pretty happy to encourage people. You're
very happy when you hear that your show
has been helpful to people.
And there's lots of people who are
consciously trying to aim up and more
and more of them all the time. And if
enough of enough of enough people do
that, we won't need to learn through
pain. And we can bring abundance
everywhere in the world.
and we can make the next 50
years an unparalleled success. And we
need we need the faith and courage of
Joshua and Caleb to do that. Of course,
the future is full of giants and
disasters. But if we aim up and we speak
the words of truth that make good order
out of chaos,
then anything's
possible. So, all right.
Beautiful. Always enjoy this. Always
enjoy our conversations. I appreciate
you very much. I appreciate our
friendship. It's been great knowing you
all these years and watching this crazy
journey that you've been on. I'm glad
you're doing great. Yeah, Joe. Same
thing for you, man. Like, thanks a lot.
And thanks for your help with Peterson
Academy, too. My pleasure. Very helpful.
All right. Much appreciated.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]