Oh, hello everybody. Uh, today I have a
very special guest, Dr. Jack Cruz. Uh,
for those that don't know, Dr. Jack Cruz
is a brilliant doctor. His ideologies
and ideas around light, uh, hacking your
environment for better health and uh,
his whole work is so amazing and
interesting. And I do suggest for
anybody that does not know who Dr. J
Cruz is to go and look him up, watch all
of his podcasts and uh materials. He has
a forum and websites. So, Dr. J Cruz,
thank you for being part of this
interview.
&gt;&gt; No problem.
&gt;&gt; All right. So, the first questions will
be about genetics. Genetics is a topic
that fascinates me and my viewers. So,
I'd like to ask you about it. Dr. Jac
Cruz, you are a very intelligent man.
You have a very high cognitive ability.
Do you think that, for example, parents
that want to have children, can they do
things to make sure that their child
will have at least average or above
average cognitive uh abilities? Are
there things they can do or is it purely
genetics and there's nothing they can
change about it?
&gt;&gt; Um, very interesting question to start
with. Um, I would tell you that your
question carries some cognitive biases
in it that you you seem to carry and
probably 99% of other people seem to uh
also carry um because you view genetics
as the beall endall of the lens uh of
what life is. And I would tell you that
you have to understand that I don't look
at that. So to be very I I don't want to
say controversial, but I do want to
point out something that the guys that
that founded uh DNA, which were Watson
and Crick and Rosalyn Franklin, even
though she wasn't credited with her, she
was probably the more important person.
Um, one of the interesting things you
know that James Watson was cancelled
about this very question that you
brought up. He uh spoke very candidly at
one point about his assessment regarding
uh the black white difference in IQ and
his conclusion was that uh this was the
part of the story and he believed that
it was shared by the majority of the
specialists. you know when he said this
in the mid 1990s this was right when the
human genome project was coming out but
the implications of what the human
genome project found were not really
wellnown what happened to Watson he was
probably um if you think about it from
cultural standpoint he was probably the
first OG uh molecular biologist that was
canceled by cancel culture because of
this issue and I think uh if you look at
his history and his legacy that he
wanted to live long enough so that he
could have his remarks vindicated, you
know, so that he uh would not be looked
unfavorably as his last act of science
going out tied, you know, to the
question you brought up. Now, the
interesting part of the story for me,
this is where I blow your cognitive bias
up and I introduce you to the other
partner of DNA, Francis Crick, in 1999.
um when I was already finished with my
training, he made a a really interesting
comment that was really tied to the
human genome project, but it dealt with
the organ that I'm an expert in as a
neurosurgeon. He believed that the the
next requirement for the brain was to be
able to find out uh how true firing
worked in more types of neurons, you
know, both in an on and off and rapid
manner in in an animal that's alive,
specifically us. And he made the comment
in 1999, I think it was in Nature
magazine in a comment that he believed
that the ideal signal would be light.
Now remember, light is not a genetic
phenomenon, is it? It's an epigenetic.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right. And then he made the comment in
1999 that he said, I think this seems
rather far-fetched based on what
conventional centralized science was at
that time. But he believed that it was
conceivable that molecular biologists
would have to eventually engineer a cell
uh that could be sensitive to light to
see if it in fact happened. Literally
not even three four years after he made
the comment um we had uh scientists
actually starting to find out about
optico genetics where actually light
does change fiber type. So my answer to
your question is there's no question
that parents can do things but it's not
a genetic issue it's an epigenetic
issue. And what does that mean for this
discussion that we're going to go down?
Probably it means that the nuclear
genome is a lens for light and that
light comes from the mitochondrial
genome. That's the genome we need to be
talking about. That's the genome that we
haven't spent any time talking about
since the human genome project. In fact,
I'm going to tell you since Watson and
Crick. Why? Because fundamentally no one
understands what Crick really said in
1999 that is light that controls
everything in us. And when you talk
about IQ whether you want to believe IQ
is a function of the brain or as I
believe it's a function of light water
and magnetism as it operates within the
neural circuitry. uh because I believe
IQ is fundamentally tied to how quantum
coherent uh those things are in you.
They are modifiable just like all
epigenetic things are. But anybody who
spends their time thinking that it's the
nuclear DNA or RNA. To be quite frank
with you, I don't want to have a
discussion with them because I think the
science of epigenetics has already blown
that idea out of the water. And I think
Crick was far smarter than Watson was.
And I think the fact that science
cancelled Watson and has nothing to say
about Crick or Rosalyn Franklin leaves
the door wide open for guys like me and
Robert Becker. Uh, and I think the
ongoing battle right now with me is
between me, Michael Leaven, and some of
the the young quantum biologists
&gt;&gt; who I vehemently push back uh about some
of the work that's being done in their
labs. Why? because I don't think it goes
far enough. And to answer your question,
I think the only way we answer it is we
are going to have to find out what the
effect of light is on IQ. And one thing
that we do know when you put the human
brain in around natural light, it reacts
much better. It makes more connections
and it appears to be wiser and smarter.
So
&gt;&gt; those metrics are tied to IQ. Now, is IQ
the beall end all? No. But I have
famously said, and I think you probably
know this since you probably listen to a
lot of my interviews, the Watson and
Crick idea is that is neodyarwinism
where survival of the fittest is is the
option. I believe the science of
epigenetics and your question pulls back
the wizard. And this is why I say
I believe it's no longer survival of the
fittest. I believe it's survival of the
wisest. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So
again, definitively parents can change
it. But guess what? If you want to fix
your children, you have to fix your germ
cells where your children come from
first. And if you don't do that work,
you have no hope of creating wisdom in
children, which is truly the artificial
intelligence that we all should be
paying attention to.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So the things that parents can do
to fix their children could be basically
living closer to nature and in sync with
the cycles of nature in sync with the
temperature with the light. Uh is this
what
&gt;&gt; remember? Yeah. The three things that
control the circadian mechanism in all
life. It's not just us. The three
domains of life which are procariats,
archa and ukariats all respond to the
same thing. They just have more
primitive or less feedback loops to
control it.
&gt;&gt; It's light, water, and magnetism. So
what are the three key issues? Why is
life fully decentralized?
Light doesn't control it totally.
Darkness is also part and then
temperature is those are the three
things that the circadian clock
mechanism pays attention to especially
for photo repair but also um to optimize
you know systems and you know we've had
we've had this argument that goes way
back even before Watson and Crick you
know and I would tell you to really get
to the essence if this is what your
tribe wants to understand I think they
all need to read Schroinger's book in
1944 which is pre uh Watson and Crick
science and he asked a simple question
what is life and Schroinger um you know
argued uh from a physics perspective but
remember he didn't have any of how shall
I say the cognitive bias that we just
talked about about Watson and Crick and
he made some very interesting statements
in that book now he didn't have the
science
to add like the muscles, the ligaments
to the skeleton argument that he put
there. But his central question in that
book was how does life achieve
uh the living state at a physical level
and what principles govern it? You know,
to the best of our ability to understand
so that it can persist and evolve. And
when [snorts] you actually think about
that issue, you have to break life down
into three parts. the beginning probably
which we we would call birth and the
origin of order and then I think the the
middle part of life which is the journey
of mitochondrial sculpting and then
probably the most interesting part that
nobody tends to talk about is the omega
which is light at death and the release
of order back into the environment
uh to return entropy from from which it
came. And when you understand
uh that light is the fundamental driver
but it can't work without the other
pieces and parts in the gearbox so to
speak. Then you begin to understand that
uh life is complex. But what drives the
complexity is life cannot happen unless
you have supreme control of the atomic
molecular
uh organization of atoms in in crystals
that are in cells. And that was what
actually Schroinger talked about in the
book. Even in 1944 he thought that life
had to be an aperiodic crystal. And most
people in biology didn't know what he
meant at that time. But remember he was
one of the original uh physicists who
played a role in developing quantum
mechanics even though he did not all the
time believe you know the things that he
was helped you know u not only
discovering but also proving and and
this is what one one of the most amazing
things about science is that you can
have brilliant scientists who find new
things out but they don't even
understand what they just found out. And
that's
&gt;&gt; an interesting part of Schroinger's
work. But I would also tell you I think
I'm very mindful in my own work. Could I
be making the same mistake that
Schroinger made in the 1944 book? I
believe it's possible. Some of the the
speculations that I've put out into the
world in the last 20 years,
&gt;&gt; I don't I don't have any illusions that
some of them may prove to be true. But I
will tell you this, I'm very confident
in telling you that
the key for the nuclear genome and the
mitochondrial genome is they act as
lenses. There are two different lenses
just like you have a lens in the eye.
The first part is the cornea. The second
part is actually the lens. And what do
they do? They focus the light so that
the light can do something that we don't
anticipate. And you have to have both of
them working. The other way I like to
describe it to give you another analogy
is use computers. Um, everybody knows
you have a hardware computer. Is the
computer functional without software?
The answer is no. So you think about the
epiggenome or light like the software.
You think about the nuclear genome like
the computer. So right now we have a
focus in centralized medicine that it's
all about the computer and very little
about the software. And that is the
reason why I'm very confident that in
the next 50 to 100 years, you're going
to find out that the output of the
software is the single most important
thing for the nuclear genome. And it
turns out what's the major output. I
think when you look from centralized
biology, you open up a biochemistry
book, you realize that we take nutrients
in and we basically turn it into water
and CO2. But there's another thing that
quantum biology started to find in 1960s
through today that uh metabolism makes
uh ultra weak biophotons. In other
words, we make light. And it turns out
the light that we make inside is far
more important than even the sun that
shines above us. But here's the crazy
part. You can't make the light inside of
you without the sun coming on you. So
this means that the environment just as
I answered your first question, I told
you and you correctly understood what I
said because you said, "Jack, is it as
simple as we need to tell parents that
they need to re reconnect with nature
before they have a children so that they
can optimally epigenetically program the
stem cells in their testicles and their
ovaries before they have children?" The
answer is yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But more people will do that they have
to understand the process that you and I
are beginning to talk about like what is
the process of the organization of life
at its genesis. Um you you know many
people you'll talk to have many ideas
about this. You know the the religious
people will look to text. Some people
will look at the the roof of the cyine
chapel and say, "I'd like to see this
through Michelangelo's eyes." And me, of
course, I like to be provocative. I tell
everybody, go to the cyine chapel. And
if you want to find out where bioysics
is, it's between the finger of Adam and
God in the center panel of the Sistine
Chapel. That small little white piece of
plaster where the fingers don't touch,
that's where quantum biology is. All of
life is between those two fingers. And
what have I told you before about what
Crick said? He told molecular biologists
in 1999. I think the type of light that
our cells admit is going to turn out to
be the biggest story, you know, in the
in the next chapter of what centralized
science finds. And that's precisely what
I'm telling you today.
&gt;&gt; I agree with you. uh because the
majority the vast majority of people in
the centralized medicine world or even
some decentralized medicine world they
all believe that uh genetics are the
most important factor and there is
nothing people can do like parents there
is nothing they can do to uh maybe make
sure that their children do not have uh
cognitive disabilities but I disagree on
that because
&gt;&gt; yeah but I think the reason for That is
because the centralized paradigm
is set in place by corporations tied to
big farmer who want you to believe that
because what do they create sales
funnels you know for their products.
&gt;&gt; So never get to the truth because if you
never get to the truth
&gt;&gt; you basically be a customer for them the
rest of your life. And if you don't
&gt;&gt; you know guys your age right now 50%
worldwide are infertile. Now when you
understand that you go wait a minute
that that doesn't sound really good and
it turns out most of the modern
technocracy is why people are infertile.
Most of it is tied to the light that we
use to communicate. Uh that is not well
accepted by the centralized paradigm but
it's not accepted for one reason because
if the you actually went down the rabbit
hole and saw it uh you would understand
why fertility clinics are packed why
people are doing IVF. And when you
really take it out to the end degree, I
mean, you think about some of the thing
like the transhumanist like Elon Musk
are saying right now on Twitter. He's
saying we need to have replacement costs
for humans and we don't in many
countries. And he's correct. But the
real question is why? And he doesn't
want you even to get to the Y thing
because if you do, you won't buy Tesla
cars. You certainly won't support
SpaceX. Yes. because everything that he
supports actually is tied to the
transhumanist technocracy that you know
him, Peter Teal and you know many of the
people tied to Epstein and Israel and
the United States uh especially in
intelligence agencies they have fostered
you know since the 1950s and this is the
reason why most economies have been
retoled towards technocracy. What we
need to do is we need to let people
understand that I believe you can still
use technology and still have fertility.
But we have to be smarter what we do.
And the only way we can be smarter and
have more intelligence about this is
that you have to understand the
decentralized process of actually how
life really forms and exists. And to me
that answer is wholly tied to quantum
biology. I mean if you don't understand
the quantum biology then you have no
hope of fixing the biggest problems that
people are trying to fix you know like
in maja or in um longevity or things
like that. I think we are so far off the
mark uh because we're looking under the
wrong stones. But I also think it's done
by design. And the cool thing about the
world that we live in now since we're
connected through a decentralized app
like the uh internet is that we can have
discussions like this where you can
critically analyze what I'm saying,
compare it to what the transhumanist and
the tech guys are saying and then
compare it to centralized science and
then understand that many of the people
in centralized science are actually
controlled by the people who are in the
technocracy. And when you understand
that, you go, "Okay, so can I believe
everything I'm hearing here and maybe
this guy who's a neurosurgeon who sounds
crazy when I listen to a lot of his
tweets or this and that,
is there some truth to what he's saying?
And why is he saying what he's saying?
And I think when you give due diligence
to both centralized and decentralized
process thinking using first principal
thinking, I'd be honest with you, I
think that's the biggest first step to
improving IQ of children because their
parents are stupid [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] That's the
truth.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I agree with you.
you your message is [clears throat]
absolutely
important for I'd say humanity as a
whole and that's the reason why I wanted
to have you on this interview. I wanted
to spread your message especially to a
audience because most of my audience are
younger people but they never get this
message. They are addicted to technology
chronically online and they never they
are never outside and it's it's a big
issue. Following up on the question
about genetics, I would also like to ask
you about bone structure. Uh do you
think it is tied to genetics and
nutrition or to something else? What's
your opinion about uh bone structure,
molecularusions and physical
degeneration?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think uh that's also a pretty
complicated question, but I would tell
you I would take you back to a 1951 and
52 paper uh written by Alan Turing. Alan
Turring uh proposed a mathematical basis
for morphagenesis.
Uh I believe he described what nature is
doing. But do I believe that it's light,
water, and magnetism that truly sets
morphology? Yeah. And I think the reason
why I'm pretty hardcore about that is
because of what um uh Robert Obecker
found in his work on regeneration in the
1950s and60s. We now know that when you
change photobioelectric signals into,
you know, a petri dish of cells, we can
change the morphology. And the
interesting thing is it's not just tied
um to cells in a petri dish. We can
actually change what organs look like
when we change photobielectric
signaling. Uh we know that from Becker's
work, but we also even know it from
Leven's work. Now, um, but we also have
evidence, uh, from the geological
record. There's a guy named, um, Peter
Anger who has done some pretty famous
things with primate skulls and human
skulls. And he found back when humans
were less involved with the technocracy,
and we're talking about, you know, the
people that built the pyramids, the
Nubian people who were found buried next
to the Great Sphinx. When their skulls
were pulled up, the morphology of their
skulls were perfect. The outer and inner
cortex of their skulls were absolutely
perfect. Then we can compare that to the
Egyptian pharaohs who were the elite
class.
&gt;&gt; They have all the diseases that modern
man has. And what did they do?
&gt;&gt; They lived a life
&gt;&gt; outside of nature inside the the temples
being weighted on foot. And when you
actually see that, you begin to
understand that the story of morphology
also is the story that I brought to you
about IQ. That it actually is the
connection to nature, the connection and
the quantum coherence that's required u
to make morphologic decisions and do I
think morphology has a lot to do with
evolutionary biology? Yeah, I I think it
has a tremendous amount to do it. But do
I also think that's modifiable by
epigenetic factors? No question about
it.
&gt;&gt; Uh I I started to believe that
skull especially skull and the bone
structure of the human beings are mainly
may be modified and degenerated because
of food. After that I saw
&gt;&gt; cat I don't believe that at all. I can
tell you where the idea started. It
started with Western Price.
&gt;&gt; Western A Price. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Remember he was a dentist.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know, in the early 20th century and
you know, people know that I used to be
a dentist. I did a pretty famous uh talk
to the Western A Price Foundation in
Vermont in 20 2016 where I basically
told them that if Western A Price was
alive today and he read my work, he
would be a mitochondriac and he wouldn't
be following Sally Fallon's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
science that food controls these things.
And one of the points that I made to
them there is that the basis of the
entire food web is photosynthesis. It's
light. It's not what you think. And then
the the I think the big thing that
really uh stunned them all. I said, "I
want you to go pick up Western A Price's
book and look at every page. Do you know
what you see? You see people that lived
outside. They ate outside. They lived
outside. There was no electric power
grid in any of his pictures." But you
want to know something? Price didn't
realize that he focused on the things
that he understood and that's what
modern humans do too. That's why you
have the belief you have that you
believe that food can modify morphology.
I'm not going to tell you that it's
impossible. I mean, let's face it, we
all know that we can get creatinism in
humans if they're missing, you know, key
things around the T3 uh hormone. But we
also know that T3 is predominantly
generated. What's the kinetic prompt?
It's sunlight. It's not, you know, the
food that's in there. But we have the
belief that food is that kinetic prompt
and it's not. Uh it turns out they have
to work in unison. But when you look at
a hierarchy, what's most important? It's
always light.
&gt;&gt; Light
&gt;&gt; because the reason why you have no food
without light. That's the that's the
fact of photosynthesis that no one in
the Western A Price Foundation can
refute. In fact, anybody who tries to
refute it now, you're looked at as a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] because it's true. But I pointed
this out first to the paleo guys, then
the carnivore guys, and then the Western
A price guys. And ever since that time,
those guys keep having their food fights
and looking like a bunch of idiots
instead of understanding what I've been
trying to say from the beginning, that
photosynthesis predated mitochondrial
biology. And these are two systems that
are completely congruent. I always make
the analogy that it's like a spider on a
mirror. When you see that photosynthesis
is completely reversed by mitochondrial
biology, you got to start asking
yourself some questions. Why did nature
choose to do this? Why why was light the
kinetic prompt to get cells cells to do
things that they needed to do? Because
this is fundamentally the question
you've asked me again. And see, I'd like
to take all your precepts, your
centralized ideas, and take them apart
piece by piece using first principle
thinking. Why? Because when you begin to
see my perspective, whether you agree
with me or not is immaterial, you begin
to understand why I say light is the
first kinetic prompt to morphagenesis.
And I think if you read Turing's paper
in 51 and 52, he actually is saying the
same thing that mathematics determines
how this happens. is when you understand
that mathematics can never explain
nature but it describes it. He's
basically describing exactly what ultra
weak bofotons do um inside of cells to
get them to go from a state of chaos to
organization.
And what determines that the science
that's quantum mechanics now we're back
at Shrewinger. We're back at Einstein.
We're back at 4. Notice that we're not
back at the Kreb cycle. We're not back
at the ura cycle. We're not back at the
biochemistry book. Why? Because
biochemistry is not a fundamental
science. Physics is.
&gt;&gt; If we want to get to the truth, we have
to do the same as you do and look first
principle, look at the source and yeah,
actually I started to really get
interested with your work when I visited
northern African countries and their
food was basically very nutrition
deficient. But these people they live
more than 100 years and the thing that
they do is not about food. They eat
lentils and bread and all types of
nutritionally deficient food.
&gt;&gt; Hey, all the thing that the carnivore
guys tell you is bad for you. But yet,
why can people in Africa get away with
it? Well, guess what?
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Now, you know, you you just proved my
point.
&gt;&gt; That's the greater point that I'm trying
to make to people is that light is the
kinetic prompt that
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; starts life. And I I will take this
remember what we said earlier about you
know the genesis of life. What you've
just described is a fractal. And I want
you to think about it this way because I
think this will be a very unique way to
frame the current discussion around
food. Let's think about the alpha moment
of conception. What do we know from
first principles to be true right now?
Well, there's a burst of biophotons
ultra weak photon emissions. That's what
uppes are. And that marks the genesis of
life. And you know early embryionic
development in humans those studies have
shown that when a sperm meets an egg
zinc sparks the trigger of calcium waves
and that is accompanied by bofoton
emissions that start kickstart
mitochondrial redux activity. So where
do most of the biophotons are made in a
cell? It turns out it's the mitochondria
where metabolism occurs. So the first
light is that light kinetic prompt that
I talked about from the two cells coming
together when they release energy to
start the process. And it turns out that
light is done to get cells out of their
stem cell slumber, you know, in the male
testicle or the female ovary. And
remember, the egg is formed when the
baby is actually inside the mother but
really in the grandmother. So this egg
has been around a really long time. And
it turns out it's a seed of photons that
initiates the decentralized synthesis of
life. So when you actually think about
that, then you take the next step that
we learn from the alpha moment of
conception. Mitochondria are the
cellular powerhouses. I don't think
anybody in centralized science would
argue that. But what does it do? It
tells us that mitochondria begin to
sculpt energy. They use ATP, which also
is a centralized idea, uh to create some
order. And what is produced? I told you
the end part of mitochondrial metabolism
from foods whether it's lentils crappy
food you know pro uh uh fake food in the
United States or good food you know in
European places the end is it makes CO2
and water and it turns out the water
mitochondria make is very special it's
dutarium depleted water and it's made it
cytochrome cioxidase
and how does this all tie back to
Schroer's book we seem to feed on
negative negative entropy from light and
oxygen. That's exactly what Schroinger
actually proposed in his book. But he
was not able to figure that out. Why?
Because literally the KB cycle wasn't
even, you know, figured out in 1944.
So in my decentralized thesis, which you
said you've read about and you've heard
on many podcasts,
this tells you that my belief I align
when photosynthesis first began on
Earth. When do we know that is? It's
during the great oxygenation event.
That's a period on Earth's history, 2.4
billion years, where life evolved to
harness light and oxygen, creating order
from chaos. And it used mitochondria to
do it. And it turns out what's the
emission? The emission was biopoton
emission. It was light again, which
mimics what you see in photosynthesis,
which mimics what I just told you
happens at the alpha moment of
conception. In other words, you're
seeing nature's fractal over and over
and over again. And it turns out that UP
emission being light actually answers
Schroinger's initial question. It
answers Western A Price's initial
question. The problem is it doesn't
satisfy what you've been taught. doesn't
satisfy most of the people that will
listen to this podcast what they've been
taught either. I know because I like you
learned the same thing. Remember I was a
product of the centralized system. You
can't can't go be a doctor in the United
States without learning all these
things. But here's the beautiful thing
about the human brain. You can take
something
uh for granted and it can become part of
your cognitive bias or the frontal loes
in humans. They give you the benefit of
taking something that you don't believe
and thinking about it in a more deep
fashion
&gt;&gt; than someone else thought about it. And
you know, I I told you my Eureka moment
with Western A Price wasn't that big. I
mean, I looked through the book just
like you did. And instead of reading all
his beliefs in the words, I kept looking
at the pictures and I'm like, what do I
see here that's different than the
modern world today? Everybody was
outside. Everybody was, you know,
breaking bread and eating things and,
you know, your your comment as, you
know, a kid that knows a lot about
Africa. You're like, "Yeah, we eat [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
over here." But guess what? We don't
suffer from poor longevity. We have
super centinarians here, too. So then
you have to ask yourself the question,
if you know that you have super
centinarians that eat like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] then is
food really the driver? Wasn't a Price
really telling you the truth? And then
when you answer that question for
yourself, the next question I need you
to look at, what was the original first
principle idea? It's light. It comes
back to light. It always does. And then
then you have to say, okay, well, how
does light do this? That that to me, if
you want to know the truth, that is the
coolest question that science needs to
study, but they don't. You know, physics
tends to study it when it turns to
stars, but we don't study it when it
comes to mitochondria. And that is the
reason why, going back to your first
question, I have such a huge problem
with my government spending so much
money in the NIH on nuclear DNA. Why?
Because to get to the light story, you
have to understand the mitochondria. You
have to understand its 37 genes. You
have to understand the 11 that form the
inner mitochondrial membrane. That's the
story of where biofotons come from. And
why did nature build it this way? It's
very simple.
In the great oxygenation event, what was
the key factor? Oxygen. We were anoxic.
For the first two domains of life, we
had no oxygen. Okay? That's the reason
why we have anorobic bacteria because
remember bacteria and archa were the
first two domains. We don't come until
650 million years ago. Okay? And we came
because the first two domains joined
together in endo symbiosis. Okay? So
when you think about two domains that
can't handle oxygen, but they spent 2.4
billion years in an oxygen that had
three variables, varying UV light,
varying oxygenation, and varying
temperature. That's what happens in the
great oxygenation event. So it turns out
you need to look for evidence of why
that matters in us. And the funny thing
is you're going to find the oxygenation
story is buried in hem proteins. It's
buried in melanin. But here's the big
one. Uh hypoxia induced factor one
alpha. Do you know that links directly
to the circadian mechanism of men in the
peer genes pier one and pier two. So
when you start to see this, you go,
"Wait a minute. Maybe this story that we
learned in centralized biology, this
none of none of this stuff in biology is
fundamental. Everything is actually tied
to the physics. And we need to start to
understand really what mother nature was
doing in evolution. She was actually
playing with physics to to build a
chemistry set in order to create
negative entropy so that we could do the
things we do. And maybe the most
important part of the story begins in
the 2.4 billion years before
photosynthesis,
before mitochondrial respiration.
Because how can you hope to understand
photosynthesis or mitochondrial
respiration if you don't know what came
before it?
Yeah, you have you have to think about
what came before because that's the
origin story of mammals and human
beings.
&gt;&gt; You got it. And see, that's the reason
why I brought the question to you. I'm
not trying to be an [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with you.
I'm trying to be provocative so that you
and your audience think about what I
said about the alpha conception moment
because we know that we're ukariots and
we also know the way bacteria and archa
divide is radically different than we do
it but you have to understand when you
understand where we come from
you begin to ask these questions because
they're all first principle based
questions and what does first principle
really mean
&gt;&gt; do I need to have a randomized control
trial proof prove to you what I said.
No. Why? Because we already know it
exists. For so, for example, people that
will listen to this, they'll be they may
be shocked to say, I didn't know that
mitochondria make light. I had no idea.
Now that it makes light, then you say to
yourself, okay, and this is
axiomatically true and it's been proven
since 1927,
but yet you don't know anything about
it. Then you got to ask yourself, okay,
why is that? And then once you figure
that out, then you go, okay, so what
does it do? Let's think about this. What
does it do? Well, that's the question
right now that should have been asked
for the last 120 years. But you know who
buried that? Rockefeller medicine.
Centralized medical don't want you to
know that because they want you to
believe take the drug, not use nature.
Like they want you not to explain
&gt;&gt; what you found in your people in
Northern Africa. They can eat [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] on a
shingle, but yet still live longer than
most people in the Western world.
&gt;&gt; And even if it's not everybody that does
this,
&gt;&gt; the fact that anybody lives that long
tells you you need to answer the
question. That means there's something
about these people
&gt;&gt; that is. And here's the crazy thing. We
have the same effect in New York City.
There's a a guy named Near Barzeli, um a
Jewish guy. He's at Albert Einstein and
he did the most amazing study and it
flies in the face of a lot of modern
science. You know that all the guys that
are longevity experts in the US, they
tell you that you eat good, you
exercise, you live long, right? You
know, there's [clears throat] no study
&gt;&gt; that actually proves that.
&gt;&gt; That's just
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And then what does Nearly find? He finds
out that the largest group of super
centinarians in the United States
&gt;&gt; that that's what he studies 477. Do you
know what they all have in common?
&gt;&gt; Most of them are overweight. Many of
them have diabetes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; They have BMIs above 30. So let me ask
you a question because I know you're a
young man. No matter where you live,
&gt;&gt; when you see people above the age of 75,
do they look like Michelangelos's David
or do they
&gt;&gt; No. No. They have a lot of fat most of
the time. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Now, let's do another hard stop.
Let's go back to the fractal that we
talked about earlier. You have two eyes
in your head. I know you're not a dumb
guy. When a baby comes out of the
mother's vagina, does the baby talk?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; No. Is the baby fat?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Does the baby have an immature brain?
Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, he has an immature brain yet.
&gt;&gt; So, guess what? Might it be that the
baby uses the fat to build the brain
postnatally? And might it be the fractal
that you're seeing? As we get old, we're
reversing the same project is as the
brain gets older.
&gt;&gt; Maybe you need more fat to fix the brain
because that's exactly happened in the
first six years of life.
&gt;&gt; Might that be something that's
important? Is that what Neo Barsai is
finding? And why is David Sinclair and
Aubry Degra blocking us from that
information? Could it be that they're
being funded by the people who are enemy
of the people? And it turns out when you
look deep enough, you find out it's the
same people, the Rockefellers, the
Rothschilds in the banking cartel who
don't want you to understand what you
found out already from looking at your
people. They eat lentils, figs, rice,
all the things that everybody tells me
they shouldn't eat. Yet,
&gt;&gt; they look pretty good. They they're able
to live to 80, 90, 100 years old. So
getting back to your original questions,
IQ, morphology, skeletal issues, all of
them are controlled not by the things
you believe by the epigenetics that are
there. And the better job you do
connecting with nature. My belief is is
the longer life, healthy life that you
can do without touching my profession.
My grandfather, for example, when I look
at his picture, he had a very wide jaw.
His food, the food that he ate was
basically whatever they they could get.
Figs, as you said, raw milk, whatever
they could get, but it was not anything
special.
The food was not the issue. The issue
was that he was outside most of the
time. My father was less outside most of
the time because he was studying. My
grandfather did not study, but my father
had a narrower skull. And then there is
me and I have like the narrowest skull
between the three of us, which is
generation after generation. And for
people that did not figure this out yet,
I'd say, you know, look at your
grandfathers, people that live very long
life, and you could ask them these
questions. And yeah, if you ask them,
they it's not about food. It's mostly
about lifestyle and and being connected
to nature. So, it completely makes
sense.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I think it makes sense. It It just
isn't what we're taught. And you have to
you have to bring your children up
questioning authority, questioning the
things that are dominant paradigm. So,
that's what I do. That's why I'm agent
provocator. Why? I know that the food
gurus don't like what I say. I know the
biochemists hate what I say because it
destroys their beliefs and it destroys
their sales funnels. I don't care about
that. I'm not in this business
&gt;&gt; for sales funnels. You know what? I'm in
the business of is to see guys like you
come on a podcast and tell people,
"Yeah, my people eat shit." And guess
what? They do. Okay. That's the same
story I told about the guy that won all
the gold medals from Jamaica, right? He
he told everybody on TV after he won the
gold medals. They asked him, "What did
you eat?" He goes, "Yeah, I trained and
I ate Chicken McNuggets." And they
couldn't believe it when he said it, you
know. Or the better one, you know, cuz I
like to hit all these Michael Phelps.
Now they ask him, they found out that he
was smoking weed, you know, when he was
training and he won all the gold medals.
So you got to start to ask yourself,
hey, what is it that we all believe that
keeps blocking us from nature's truth?
And what I would tell you and what I
hope the audience is getting from our
conversation is that I want you to be a
really keen observer of of animals and
nature because you look at animals in
nature,
&gt;&gt; you can see
that us, we are zoo animals. We are not
like the animals. And when you
understand
&gt;&gt; how we're not like the animals and see
all the mistakes we make, then you begin
to understand why we sculpt different
morphology, why we sculpt different IQ,
why there's such a wide range in the
human race of people with all these
different traits. Why? Because we all
make mistakes breaking nature's laws.
And we do it in different ways. Like the
zip code that you're in, the zip code I
am, we do it differently. But this
actually is what determines the
variation of what we see, the traits
that we see. So this whole idea about
Darwinism and neodyarwinism that the
gene was the most important thing is
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And look, there's even a book
out now that's challenging that. I
always post it on Twitter all the time.
It's time that we need to stop blaming
genes for anything. It's the truth. I
mean, we we have known literally for 120
years that mitochondria are the key. And
and when you really parse it out like
the continent that you were just talking
about, Africa, I ask this question all
the time. I even asked this question to
Michael Leven and never got a
fundamental answer because he tells
everybody EMF doesn't have any role in
biology. I said well tell me how do we
get mitochondrial holetypes because
mitochondrial holetypes are paying
attention to the EMF changes in Africa,
in the United States, in Europe, in
Australia, even in Antarctica. And when
you understand that those hlet types got
sculpted by the changes in the zip code,
what is it paying attention to? It's
paying attention to light dark cycles.
And you know that the light s uh cycle
say in Algeria is different than the
light cycle in Cape Town. The light
cycle in in Peru is different than the
one in El Salvador. It's certainly
different than the United States and and
Northern Europe. And you start to go,
wow,
this story is is actually timestamped
into our biology in our mitochondrial
haplletype. Notice I didn't say the
nuclear hletype because there is none.
Turns out it's the mitochondria that has
this hletype variation. And why is that
the case? Because it's the thing that
makes the most light in us. And that's
what sculpts the genome. The genome is
then just a lens. That's all it is.
I see for all people watching I really
suggest you to rewatch this podcast so
to understand most of the points Dr.
Jack Cruz is making. Uh so coming to my
next questions. So compared to when my
circadian rhythm was bad because it was
very bad. I used to wake up at 6 p.m.
and sleep very late in the morning not
even at night. It was completely upside
down. And the reason was because of
technology addiction and the blue light
exposure, excessive blue light exposure.
So the thing that I I noticed most
improved was that I feel much better and
I have a better p perception of time. I
have a better perception of time
throughout the day and months and I feel
like I'm actually spending my time very
well and uh my time is longer. I don't
know how to explain that but I mean
could you actually is there a link
between time perception and circadian
biology and the way we age and as time
speeds?
&gt;&gt; Of course. I mean everybody again who
listens to this this podcast will
probably smile when I'm giving you the
analogy. It's probably not a good one
for you where you are, but I I'll I'll
just say you think about a holiday that
like children look forward to in the
United States is Christmas, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes. It's it seems like for children
Christmas never comes takes forever.
&gt;&gt; For adults they feel like it comes right
away because they have to buy more stuff
and it's that perception is really crazy
and you always see children say are we
there yet? Are we there? It's like time
for them has been dilated. Um why is
that? Well it's because they have more
water in their system. Why don't human
adults have that? When a baby is born,
90% water. When you're my age, you're
about 50 55% water. Turns out, what's
the interaction between light and water?
Light turns water into an
electromagnetic capacitor. Now, remember
all the circadian clock genes that you
talked about? Uh those genes are
surrounded by water. They're also uh
linked to the light. So, let's just take
one of the clock chains out that you've
probably heard about. It's called
cryptochrome. C R Y. Uh what affects it
tremendously? Infrared A light. Now I
know you know that because it it uh
turns on and regenerates hem proteins in
your body. So what do hem proteins do
fundamentally? One of the hem proteins
in your inner mitochondrial membrane is
called cytochrome coxidase. It makes
water and it makes that duter depleted
water. You think that has anything to do
with how effective the cryptocrome gene
works? Oh, you damn right it does. Then
let's talk about the other side of the
equation like from uh the biochemistry
stuff that that you had talked about
earlier. People know about NAD positive.
They also know about ATP. People know
NAD is the beginning part of the the
mitochondrial membrane and ATP is made
at the end. Well, what do those two
things funnel down to? They funnel down
to something in biochemistry called
thempk pathway. You don't have to
remember all this, but do you know what
it also does? It actually increases the
periodicity of the CRY
gene as well. So in other words, you
just I just described to you three
different ways that the CRY gene is
affected by light. So you increase the
periodicity. What did I tell you earlier
about pier one and pier two? What what
links to that?
This is the most amazing part of the
story. That's the uh hypoxia inducible
factor one alpha. So if you have the
inappropriate amount of oxygen in your
system, the periodicity of those two
clock genes are off. Then what's the
real big one? The big one that you
probably heard about is mTor. MTOR is
kind of looked at like a garbage bail
where all the epigenetic findings seem
to fall down uh indirectly. You know the
these are things that are like tied to
gluconioenesis, mitochondrial
biogenesis, oxidative phosphorilation
from the TCA cycle, amino acid turnover,
lipogenesis, bile acid synthesis, all
the things that you guys know. And then
what is mtor effectively doing? It's
measuring metabolic flux. Why is it
doing that? To create up signals. So
it's looking for change in glucose,
change in ATP, change in AM, change in
oxygen, change in gluccocorticoids,
change in catakolamines, everything. So
how does it really act? MTOR sends
signals to both NAD and Cert. And you
know where it feeds back to the two
major circadian clock genes, clock and
be one. So what does it do? It makes
your clock tick more accurately. So the
question you asked me, Jack, when I live
more in nature, I seem to have a better
appreciation of time than say some of
the older people that are around me that
don't do the things that I do. So what
did I just describe to you? Because
you're tapped to nature and you're
getting UVA light which is 380 nmter
light which stimulates mTor and you get
infrared a light you just got the light
that actually makes the clock in you run
better more accurately. So when you have
a clock that runs better, more
accurately, you have an experience that
you have more time.
&gt;&gt; And that's the reason you have the
perception that you have more time. And
that's also the reason that your
grandfather has the perception that he
feels like holidays come too fast or he
has to pay his employees too quick cuz
two weeks comes all the time. And you
know, it's kind of a funny thing when
you point out to people that every
single circadian clock gene in humans is
surrounded by dutium water. So when you
have less water, that's why time
perception changes. And this is the
reason why children have a different
perception. But the really interesting
point you brought up is you're not a
baby and you're not an old man. But you
have noticed that when you've been more
connected with nature, you feel like you
have a better relationship with time. I
think you just proved my point that you
can modify your perception of reality
when you begin to understand how the the
timing, oxygen levels, and light tie to
how you perceive time. And what I just
described to you also is another
counterintuitive thing,
&gt;&gt; something that Albert Einstein was
popped for. He fundamentally told
everybody that time is not a real thing.
Well, didn't I just tell you how we
create time? Notice that it wasn't it
was from what? Oxygen, light, and clock
genes. And you start to go, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; this this is actually goes straight back
to physics. Why? Because what does
physics say? Quantum mechanics. What
what did Newton tell us 500 years ago?
Newton told us that time is absolute,
right?
&gt;&gt; What did Einstein tell us in 1905?
It's relative. Everything is relative.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, what does that mean? That means if
something is relative that means
something actually has to control it.
&gt;&gt; What controls it?
&gt;&gt; Light, darkness and temperature. That's
why circadian clock mechanism is that
important. So what did I just do for
you? I brought you to the circle of
life, didn't I? I just showed you
something that you may not have ever
understood, but what I did is use first
principle thinking to take you back to
put it all together so you can see it
for yourself from the 100,000 foot view
and go, "Wow." Like, this is something
that I can actually use in my life. So,
when Jack talks about going to see the
sunrise, what is he telling me? He wants
me to go make sure that I'm always
getting UVA and infrared A light so that
I can reset the default settings that I
came out of the vagina with. In other
words, make my clock really tick
properly so that I can do the things
that I need to do not only to build my
brain but also keep my morphology to
keep my health to keep my health span to
live a long life so I can be 90, 100, 10
years old even if I eat lentils, rice
and figs because you can do that.
&gt;&gt; You absolutely can do that. We know from
first principles that you can do that.
The key is understanding how to do that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, completely makes sense actually.
Yes. And people that again watch this
video, they could try it themselves
compared to when you were in and you you
could not go outside. You felt like time
was passing super fast because the
routine was there and you also were not
connected to nature. You were not seeing
the sunrise. You not what? You're not
getting no no sun at all.
&gt;&gt; And who controlled all that?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Of course, the globalists and Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, they kept you away from being in
nature. And what were they trying to do?
See, in other words, you just proved my
point in another way. See, what we're
doing here
&gt;&gt; is we're giving people the fractals.
There's a reason why Dr. Fouchy kept you
off the beach, kept you in your house,
wouldn't let you talk to other people.
Why? because they were looking to unwind
all these things in you so they could
control you to make you an economic
slave.
&gt;&gt; That is the goal of the globalists. That
is the goal of big pharma. That is the
goal of the bankers globally. They want
to take us back to way the world was
1,000 years ago in medieval even when
medievalism and feudalism and was
imperialism. And you know your your
continent has been destroyed by this
idea of British imperialism, by French
imperialism, by Dutch imperialism.
&gt;&gt; They want to go back to that system. And
that is the whole point of understanding
why you really need to be a first
principal thinker and ask me some of the
questions you did because I believe the
only way we unravel this whole thing is
to actually improve people's wisdom and
their IQ to improve people's morphology
&gt;&gt; so they can fight back against what
these people are trying to do. And I
don't think people see how all these
things connect. Like I I been to some
Bitcoin conferences in Prague and I told
people about health and wealth and how
they're fundamentally tied together. And
I will tell you my opinion
this conversation that you and I have
had over probably the last hour is
probably the best example that I can
point to that I've done that proves that
to be axiomatically true and I gave you
the science fully behind it and why it
happens. But for you, this has been an
exploration. And I want to talk about
the biology, Jack. I want to talk about
this. But realize what you just did. You
brought the physics in the biologic
discussion straight to the modern
current events. And that's a good thing.
That's not a bad thing. Hopefully that
will wake a lot of people up and say
maybe I need to start questioning
everything they tell us to do because
maybe everything they tell us to do is
for their benefit, not for ours. Yes.
And we brought it up already and we'll
continue talking about it because I
wanted to ask you actually question
about
so
I actually did not get
so this part has to be censored
unfortunately. If we discuss it it's
going to get the whole channel deleted
and censored. I will put the whole part
in my Patreon. You can just get behind
the pay wall, get the visitor tier. It's
very cheap, like five bucks. Uh, I'm
sorry for everyone, but you know, we
cannot discuss this on YouTube
especially, which will get the whole
channel deleted. You think people read
into my tweets sometimes and they they
say that, but I think that's because
they're not members. They're not reading
my work. They're not what I'm telling
people. And I think um unfortunately I
would like to unccloak everything that
I'm doing. But if I did, I would
probably run into a lot of problems both
with politicians and also
&gt;&gt; state medical boards kind of like Mary
Tali Bond did. And at this point, I
could care less about the state medical
boards because I'm effectively
done with medicine anyway. I'm I'm not
planning on going back anymore. I did my
duty to figure out what was going on. I
told the world what I found. Um, and I
did that in podcast. I told everybody,
uh, I tried to do the best I could with
the politicians in the United States.
And I'll be honest with you, um, not
that I trusted them, but they let us all
down. They caused it. They allowed it to
go on, and they're not punishing the
people that did it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You're basically talking about uh,
Kennedy. Yeah. Well, not only Kennedy,
but I will tell you, I had a lot of hope
that Trump was going to unleash. But
&gt;&gt; when Trump put in an AG, attorney
general, and uh his chief of staff, who
both work for
&gt;&gt; and both are in big pharma, I knew right
away, forget it, man. The casino deck is
stacked. Bobby Kennedy is not going to
be able to do anything because this was
like they're pouring concrete right
around Bobby Kennedy.
&gt;&gt; What can he do? He can't do anything.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, you can't do anything. But thank
you very much for your time and your
work is absolutely amazing. I will put
all the links of your Patreon and every
single uh social that you have, Twitter
as well. Thank you very much for the
work you're doing for humanity. Thank
you very much, Dr. Jeff.
&gt;&gt; No problem. And thanks thanks for this
uh podcast. I actually really enjoyed
this one. It was probably one of my
favorite ones I've done.
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much.