Hello everyone. Welcome to the Mindscape
podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll.
Quantum mechanics, one of our favorite
topics here at Mindscape, continues to
be in this weird situation where it's a
wonderful theory that fits all the data.
Uh we can do spectacularly good
calculations,
compare them against experiment, achieve
agreement to many significant figures,
and yet it is very very easy to ask
questions about quantum mechanics that
we don't know the answer to. Not just
what would happen questions, but what
does the theory say questions. And so we
have the whole subdiscipline of
foundations of quantum mechanics trying
to figure out what the true theory is
behind the successful quantum mechanical
predictions. And as many of you know
there are different approaches here.
Ordinarily in quantum mechanics you have
a wave function. And then the first
question you ask is does the wave
function represent reality or is it
merely epistemic? Is it merely something
about our ability to make predictions
about things? But then if you do think
that the wave function represents
reality, then you still have choices. Is
it the sole representative of reality or
are there hidden variables or something
like that? And if it is the sole
representative of reality, does it
always obey the famous Schroinger
equation in which case you get the many
worlds theory or does it sometimes
change stochastically uh at different
moments depending on what model you
have? Then you have objective collapse
models of various sorts. And all of
these theories are truly different
theories. They're not different
interpretations of quantum mechanics.
They potentially have different
experimental consequences. In some
cases, we know clearly what those
different experimental predictions are.
In other cases, we're less sure. But
still, we don't have a consensus that
one of these approaches is on the right
track. And therefore, it's useful, very,
very important, in fact, I would say, to
develop entirely new alternatives to
these famous models of quantum mechanics
because who knows, maybe we just need to
be shaken out of our dogmatic slumbers
and then we'll find the right answer.
Today's guest, Jacob Barandis, is a
physicist and philosopher at Harvard
University and he has a proposal for a
brand new way of thinking about quantum
mechanics. When I say brand new, it's,
you know, brand new is always a
questionable thing in science or
academia because everyone always has
predecessors. So, Jacob's idea of
quantum mechanics lives in a tradition
of what is called stochastic models of
quantum mechanics. There have been some
stochastic models of quantum mechanics,
but he has a different one. Okay? So,
his particular approach is distinct from
anything that's been tried before. And
I'll tell you the basic idea of it now
because spoiler alert, this podcast is
very long. It takes us a while to get to
what Jacob is actually proposing in his
new theory because we spent a lot of
time preparing groundwork for
understanding the issues in quantum
mechanics more generally. So I'm going
to tell you the basic idea and then
you'll see it fleshed out in the
discussion. The basic idea is that you
don't have a wave function. That's the
biggest thing about um this particular
approach which is known as indivisible
stochastic quantum mechanics. you really
just do have if for electrons for
example you have point particles and
they have locations but rather than
following some deterministic
trajectories those point particles move
stochastically according to some rules
okay and so all you can do is predict a
probability of seeing them the rules are
complicated I don't think we really told
you exactly what the rules were or even
I don't know if it the it's known what
the rules are supposed to be in the most
general cases but um one cru crucial
feature of the rules is that they don't
depend just on the state of the particle
at any one time. This is in
contradiction to the entire leloian
paradigm that has ruled all of physics
since the time of Isaac Newton. The idea
that you know the state of the world at
one moment in time, you can predict what
happens next. In quantum mechanics, you
can predict what happens next with a
certain probability if what you're
predicting are measurement outcomes. But
still the state at one moment in time is
enough to predict what that probability
is. Here in Jacob's approach, it is not
enough. You need to know something about
the past history of what the particles
were doing. This is where it gets a
little vague to me and you can judge for
yourself from the discussion whether
it's compelling or not. But I'm all in
favor of trying new wild things because
you know that's where you make a
breakthrough by even if every individual
new wild thing is very very unlikely to
be true if you try enough of them you
really might make a breakthrough and
that'll be very important. Despite the
length of the podcast we didn't get to
talk about everything. Uh one thing
after finishing Jacob emailed me and
said you know we really should mention
Bell's theorem Bell inequalities. You
know, John Bell proved these famous
inequalities that are purported to show
that a local theory cannot reproduce
successfully the predictions of quantum
mechanics. Um, therefore, you need
something in a hidden variable approach.
You would need something like uh bomb
theory, de Bruy bomb theory, which has
non-local interactions between the
particles and therefore can completely
um recover the ordinary predictions of
quantum mechanics. Jacob's theory is
local in space. But this non-Marovian
property, the idea that uh the past is
required to tell you what is going to
happen in the future is a kind of
non-locality in time. Anyway, long story
short, Bell's theorem is fine. Bell's
theorem is completely uh if you believe
the setup at all, completely satisfied
by this approach. Indeed, as far as
Jacob can tell, um there is no
prediction of conventional quantum
mechanics that is different in his
approach. is just a different underlying
ontology. Again, which I'm all in favor
of. I don't care if you make all the
same predictions because by proposing a
different underlying ontology, um you
open up new ways to move forward into
better understandings of the world
because we have a lot of open questions.
Now, you know, again, full disclosure, I
am entirely unconvinced by this
approach. I think that the many worlds
approach is fine. So, one of the things
we're going to do in the conversation is
Jacob will have a chance to explain why
he doesn't think Many Worlds is fine.
And as usual, in the best mindscape
tradition, you, the audience members,
get to decide what you think is fine and
not. With that, let's go.
[Music]
Jacob Arendis, welcome to the Mindscape
podcast.
&gt;&gt; It's wonderful to be here. Real
privilege.
&gt;&gt; You say that now, but we disagree about
quantum mechanics. This is a a big deal.
But I think that, you know, I've had
people on here before that I disagree
with about quantum mechanics. I think
I've had more people talking about
quantum mechanics, who I've disagreed
with, than people I've agreed with. So,
you're walking in a very welltrodd path.
So, but we're going to pretend for the
moment that the listeners have not
listened to me and David Albert and Tim
Mlin, engineer Ismael talk about quantum
mechanics at great length. What is the
big deal about quantum mechanics? Why is
it that physicists and philosophers
don't just understand it? Isn't it been
around for hundred years?
&gt;&gt; Uh, well, that's a really good question.
So, I guess before I start, I I want to
gush a little bit about you in
particular. So, I I think uh you know,
your listeners by this point, you know,
they've they've listened to your amazing
interviews with brilliant, interesting,
creative people. Um and they've, I
think, also, you know, listened to your
uh Ask Me Anything Things. They've
they've seen your solo they've listened
to your solo um uh podcast episodes. So
they know that in addition to being an
incredible communicator of science um
that you're also a fantastic scientist
and um and and I can say just a couple
of anecdotes before we get started with
the rest of of the discussion. Um so you
know this but uh I use your textbook on
general relativity for my graduate level
general relativity class. Uh and it is a
masterwork of textbooks. There are a lot
of textbooks now on on the market for
general relativity. Um but but I still
think it's the best. And um and also I
had the incredible good fortune of
working with you recently um on a thesis
committee for an astronomy PhD student,
the brilliant and amazing Chris Shaloo.
&gt;&gt; Um and just getting a chance to see you
up close in action doing science was
amazing. So, I I just I think it's
important that everybody who listens to
this podcast knows that when they when
they listen to you, they're not just
listening to somebody who's fantastic at
communicating science, but they're
listening to like a fantastic scientist.
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much, Jacob. That's very
nice. And the the listeners do get
tickled when I have guests who are fans
of the podcast. They like, you know,
they're like, "Oh, so they're we're all
in the same club, you know, we're all,
you know, we're all just thinking about
these big ideas." So, that's great to
hear.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, now to get back to get back to
quantum mechanics. Um here here is how I
I would I would answer your question.
Uh the the origin of of quantum
mechanics is a little bit hard to pin
down. A lot of people um uh pick the
year 1900 when uh Planck introduced his
quantum hypothesis. At the time Planck
was trying to understand how to combine
uh two theories electromagnetism. This
is uh our our you know classical theory
of electric fields and charges and
electric forces and magnetic fields bar
magnets you know that whole whole story
electromagnets
um with uh thermodynamics which was um
thermodynamics at the time this is a
theory of um uh work and energy useful
work entropy
um uh heat engines refrigerators
basically the science of how we take uh
heat around us and convert it into
useful energy and the limitations we run
into when we try to do that. Um by this
point um you know various important
people like Boltzman and uh Maxwell uh
had begun to uh construct what we call
an inter theoretic reduction an
explanation of thermodynamics in terms
of more basic ingredients the
statistical behavior of more fundamental
things. When sorry when you say we call
it that, you mean philosophers call it
that because
&gt;&gt; philosophers. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Put in both camps. I know
&gt;&gt; that's fine. Um I think of you Sean as
as a scientist and a philosopher. Um
&gt;&gt; absolutely.
&gt;&gt; So yes, I I include you in the
&gt;&gt; You and I are two of the very few people
who are kind of literally have
appointments in both physics and
philosophy departments.
&gt;&gt; That's that's right. Yeah. Yeah. So um
but you know uh uh Plunk ran into some
problems. um he he uh had had trouble
getting his theoretical predictions to
fit with experimental data. Um there was
experimental data about a certain kind
of a plot, a graph um that showed uh how
bright or how intense radiation was
coming out of these heated systems um as
a function of uh the color or frequency
of the radiation coming out of them. uh
and there were experiments people had
experimentally determined what this
looked like and he was trying to explain
it theoretically from first principles
and he was having a lot of trouble. Um,
and to make a long story short, um, he
was able to get a theoretical, uh,
prediction that matched the experimental
results, uh, by hypothesizing
that you could only activate or excite,
uh, a given frequency of radiation in
certain discrete chunks, uh, quantized
chunks. And these became the quanta of
his quantum hypothesis. And this is uh
where quantum theory gets its name and
initiates um the story of quantum
theory. This is 1900. Um and then over a
period of time from 1900 uh into the
1920s
physicists and and philosophers and
honestly physicists who were also
philosophers because uh at that time uh
people were thoroughly trained in both.
I encourage um listeners who are
interested in learning more about that
to read an article by Don Howard um uh
called Einstein's philosophy. I believe
that's what it's called about how
Einstein was thoroughly trained in
philosophy. He read Kant's three
critiques by the time he was 16. There
was mandatory coursework at the
university where he where he became a
physicist. Everybody had to learn uh
philosophy. Um he ran a philosophy uh
study group uh reading reading club um
and he was uh deeply versed in many of
the the philosophical thinkers um both
before his time and of his time as were
many of his colleagues. Many of the
people who gave us quantum theory and
general relativity um were were
thoroughly trained in philosophy
alongside physics and you could see this
in their dialogues.
Uh you know but so in this in this
period physicists and philosophers were
trying to uh put together um a picture
of the world and a set of laws that
would give an empirically adequate
meaning um capable of of accounting for
and making the right experimental
predictions. um and they ran into a lot
of trouble. This period from 1900 to
early 1920s is is often called by
historians of physics the time of the
old quantum theory. Um old quantum in
theory all capital O capital Q capital
T. Uh and in in this period people had
this idea that that the world picture
was basically classical looking. You had
particles, you had fields. um and they
were trying to come up with rules with
laws that you could combine with this
roughly classical looking picture to get
the right predictions. And so you have
something like you know in the in the
teens the 19s you had the bore model of
the atom. And this is the the model that
um people often still think of when they
think of of the atom with particles,
electrons, charged particles going
around the center of the of the atom
around the positively charged nucleus in
something like circular orbits. Uh but
of course we know that when you know
electrons transition from one orbit to
another they emit radiation in these
discrete amounts. Uh again in quantized
amounts they they emit quantized
radiation. Um, and so the picture that
he had that that people worked with and
that I think some people still think of
is that you have these nice orbits. Uh,
but there's some kind of rule that
particles can only jump between these
orbits in discrete amounts. Um, that
picture worked reasonably well for
making uh predictions about the pattern
of radiation we get from hydrogen atoms,
but it didn't work so well for other
kinds of atoms. And people did try to
improve the model. They tried to
introduce other kinds of orbit shapes,
but it this just didn't work very well.
Um there were a lot of other confounding
examples. So by the beginning of the
20s, you have this collection of
huristic formulas, approximate rules, um
and
no real consistent coherent theory. Um
by the early 1920 this is like 1923 24
people like Wulf gang pi pi of the pi
exclusion principle right this famous
idea that certain kinds of particles
firmians of which electrons are example
cannot be in the same quantum state this
is responsible for the stability of
matter for the solidity of matter very
important wolf king powi and of course
he did many other important theoretical
things um bore was already beginning to
toy with with similar thoughts um a as
famously was Heisenberg They began to
question whether uh you should begin
from a classical picture of the world or
really any picture of the world at all.
&gt;&gt; Maybe we should abandon classical
physical pictures. Um in in philosophy
sometimes we refer to the the physical
picture of what the world really is as
the ontology, right? This is the
ontology of the theory. Basically
abandon the ontology. And if you read
one of the most famous papers in the
history of physics, Heisenberg's 1925
paper introducing what shortly
thereafter was called matrix mechanics.
This paper was a breakthrough paper. It
presented in some ways the first modern
version of quantum theory. And the paper
begins with a set of statements that any
philosopher of science would regard as
initiating a philosophical shift in
paradigm paradigm shift where he just
says explicitly we should abandon trying
to think of these pictures and we should
develop a mathematical formalism that
just connects things we observe with
other things we observe. So this is a
very deliberate move that he makes and
it opens the door to our modern theory
of quantum theory. A theory of extremely
abstract mathematics. The mathematics in
general terms is not extremely advanced.
Um a college student um you know doing a
math major certainly well before the
graduate level would be able to
understand the mathematics that we use
in quantum theory. It's just that the
mathematics is very abstract and the
connection to things that are physical
the connection to ontology is murky or
not there at all. Um
so this this was an important shift. The
idea was to give up classical ontology
and embrace a purely
new radical paradigm for how to think
about laws and and and and pictures. Um
Heisenberg didn't really present an
ontology in this paper but shortly after
Schroinger came along um and introduced
another way to get the same predictions.
Originally Shortinger called this
undulatory mechanics like undulations
like waves going up and down. I think
it's a fantastic game. We should go
back. It's great. Um but eventually it
became known as wave mechanics.
Shortinger introduced his wave function
which was not present in Heisenberg's
work. Uh and the wave function satisfied
differential equations which physicists
really like as a way to formulate laws.
Um and then what developed after that
was a picture an ontology in which you
have like a wave function an abstract
mathematical thing that undulates or
oscillates um and it's got laws
dynamical rules that it obeys and all of
these look distinctly non-class.
Shortly after that, Max Bourne uh came
along and introduced his famous Bourne
rule, which was a formula for taking
wave functions and computing
probabilities of getting certain
measurement outcomes. Um, and this rule
does not look like it comes out of
ordinary classical probability theory.
We have to take these abstract
mathematical ingredients and then we
push them through this very abstract
formula and out comes a probability of
getting a certain kind of a measurement
outcome. But it's not, you know, in when
chocoliers make chocolate, you know,
sometimes they'll say that they make it
from beans to bars, right? From getting
them off the tree. This is not classical
probability from beans to bars. this
this is some other distinct kind of way
of getting probability that seems to be
non-class and then probability comes
out.
&gt;&gt; So what you get out of this
&gt;&gt; let me just let me just poke at that
because the phrase classical probability
I'm never quite sure what that means. I
mean we have
professor Cole Mogorov gave us some
rules for what probabilities are the
numbers between zero and one they add up
to one etc etc is are those not obeyed
by quantum probabilities? Uh good
question. I just as an interesting
historical note, Kaggorov published his
treatis aximatizing probability in 1933
which is after all the textbooks came
out by Dak and Vonoyman establishing.
Interestingly, probability theory is is
uh less classical than quantum mechanics
in the sense that it was formalized
after qu. Okay. So, what I mean by this
is uh classical probability I mean
ordinary probability in the sense that
we uh attach probabilities to um uh to
events to propositions and then we um
manipulate probabilities using a set of
rules. Uh and these rules it kind of
depends on exactly what formalism of
probability you're using. If you're a
frequentist, if you're a basian, but
roughly speaking, if you want to take a
basian point of view, we have a
formalism for taking uh probabilities we
assign to propositions and uh plugging
them into formulas and then getting new
probabilities for propositions. And so
this is sort of this is what I mean when
I talk about the ordinary classical
probability formalism. And in quantum
theory, we we can't do that. we at some
point we have to introduce these
abstract mathematical ingredients in
between or at various places that don't
look like ordinary probability. I can
give an even more concrete example of
this. In ordinary classical probability
um we imagine we have some collection of
propositions.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Which is just a set of possible
statements. And when we assign
probabilities to them, we're generally
assuming that those statements are
mutually exclusive. One of them is true,
the others are not. And collectively
they exhaust all the possibilities. Once
you assign probabilities to all of them
and add up all the probabilities you get
100%. Um and then we take that set of
possibilities that's called a sample
space. And then all of the propositions
the more general coarse grained higher
level approximate things we might want
to say about it are all rooted in this
set of more fine grained mutually
exclusive exhaustive possibilities.
And all that stuff is going to give you
in fancy language we say a commutive
algebra of random variables. We have a
bunch of quantities that you can add
together. You can multiply them. They
obey the usual rules of addition and
multiplication. Um and in quantum theory
we just don't have that. Famously in
quantum theory if you ask a certain
question about a system like is the
system spin up or spin down and then you
interact with the system in such a way
that you get an answer we call that a
measurement
and then you ask a different question
about a system like is it spinning left
or right and you interact with the
system and get that answer and measure
it you might think okay I now have two
answers but if you go back and try to
measure the first property again you
might get a totally different answer.
There's a certain non-commutativity of
certain kinds of observable questions. I
know in that example you might say,
well, of course, I mean, if the thing is
up and down, it couldn't be left and
right. And maybe what I did was I messed
it up in some way. But there are certain
observables that you might think you
can, you know, figure out one of them
and then figure out the other and it
shouldn't disturb the first. But in for
every quantum system we know of, there
are always obser observables, things we
might want to know about it that fail to
have this property, failed to have this
ability to to ask the questions in any
order. And that non-commutivity is an
inherently non-class property.
&gt;&gt; So I don't want to I don't want to dwell
on this too much, but it's, you know,
it's important to me and I know that
we're going to get into the weeds later,
but uh can't you just equally well say
that these observable properties don't
exist? They're not the things that you
assign classical probabilities to. What
what has changed is not the use of
classical probability but what you
assign probabilities too. I
&gt;&gt; I agree with you. Uh in principle that's
a way out of this. And when you start
looking at um everian approaches to
quantum theory, you begin to make moves
like this where instead of attaching
probabilities to uh uh physical
processes happening out in the world, we
attach probabilities to what we will
see. what what our experience will be
where we will be in some branching uh
universe in some branching universal
wave function. So there is the
possibility you could shift the story
and bring back something that looks more
like ordinary probability theory in in
some ways the kind of probability that
that's used in many worlds or everian
type quantum theory are are are kind of
bringing back the old way of thinking
about probability but just assigning
them to different kinds of things. But
this was not how people were thinking
about quantum theory in the 1920s and
30s. They just saw a complete break from
the way we usually do probability theory
in some fundamental ways. So maybe the
right thing to say um again I want to
get back to you still haven't answered
the very first question I asked because
I haven't given you a chance to but okay
um there's a whole bunch of things that
sort of come together to have a package
of how we think about physics and what
you're saying is something has to go and
you know one way of saying what has to
go is your notion of probability theory
and maybe other things as well but what
we all agree on is something has to
radically shift from the classical view
to the quantum view.
&gt;&gt; That's right. That's right. Um, in the
1900s up until the early 20s, as I said,
physicists could not find uh a way to
get the right experimental predictions
with the kinds of thinking that they
were used to from classical physics.
Something had to give.
&gt;&gt; Now, you can think of a physical theory
in very broad terms as having three
components. One component is uh the
stuff the moving parts the more or less
physical ingredients.
&gt;&gt; Um in philosophy speak we might roughly
call this the ontology. What we're
saying is there according to the theory
in physics speak we call that the
kinematics. Kinematics is the
description of the moving parts the
basic ingredients. The next component is
the rules for those ingredients. How
those ingredients are supposed to
change. what what could happen to them
and how to make predictions about what
they'll do. We call those in in in
philosophy that's the nomological part
the nomology but in physics we call that
the dynamics or the laws the dynamical
laws the basic rules for how these
ingredients move around. Um and then the
third component is how we assign
probabilities to things in theory. Uh
the probabilistic side. Now in a
deterministic theory where you know
exactly how things begin. You might not
need probabilities but in a way you kind
of do cuz zeros and probability of zero
and one is like saying things definitely
happen or definitely don't happen. So
you can think of those as all as as as
as uh subsumed into this larger idea of
thinking about probability theory. And
the probability side you could think of
as broadly speaking you know what we
know about the system our belief uh our
credence you know our belief about
whether certain things about things are
true um and maybe also a part that's the
chancy side or things just happening in
some uh chancy way. Philosophers like to
call this aliatory probabilities as
compared with credence or subjective
probability. But in some way we have
probabilities also in our theory. Um,
and we have a classical way we think
about those three ingredients.
Classically,
the kinematics, the moving parts are
going to be arrangements of things in
something like physical space. They'll
be particle arrangements or they'll be
patterns of fields in space or something
like that. Um
on the dynamical side in classical
physics usually we imagine we have
something like an equation that takes
the uh arrangement or configuration or
state suitably defined and then we can
use this to project forward to figure
out what the system is going to do. or
in broader terms we can uh put
constraints in some uh larger sense on
on how the system can behave. Um and uh
and often those rules take the form of
equations that take us from any one
moment to sort of the next infinitely
next moment. Uh and in calculus speak we
call that a differential equation. Um
and and then the third component
probability is ordinary probability. As
I've as I've explained, we have a set of
possibilities. We assign probability
numbers to it. And then we use
probability formulas to update our
probabilities. So those are the three
ingredients. And by the end of uh by the
beginning of the 1920s and certainly
after 1925, 1926, I think there was just
a consensus that we had to give up all
three of those things. All three of
those things had to be thrown out. You
went from the classical world to the
quantum world. Uh and and and that's it.
um quantum the the idea of those three
things didn't get thrown out but what we
were using in classical physics for each
of them had to be replaced by a quantum
thing.
&gt;&gt; Correct. More precisely more precisely
said. Excellent. Yes. We didn't get rid
of the idea we had these three things
but we replaced them with uh with with
um uh quantum versions of those things.
We couldn't think about those three
things using the classical paradigm
anymore. Um and I already mentioned you
know these innovations right? So on the
ontology side to the extent we had one
it was wave functions it was some kind
of mathematical thing a wave function uh
a quantum state in some broad sense um
in some abstract kind of mathematical
space uh and today that space usually we
call it Hbert space um on the dynamical
side we replaced the uh equations that
we we were familiar with classical
physics Newton's second law force equals
mass time acceleration the Maxwell
equations
um that that describe how electric and
magnetic fields change with time. We
replace those with um a dynamical rule
called unitary time evolution which in
in the simplest cases is an equation
named after Shortinger called the
Shortinger equation which just tells us
if you know the quantum state at one
time this equation will tell you moment
to moment what it will look like at
later times. That's the Shortinger
equation. Um and then the probability
side is given by the measurement axioms
and the borne rule and these complicated
rules for how we take these abstract
ingredients and generate probabilities.
So this just seemed like a radical
departure from how we thought about
kinematics, dynamics and probability
from before the beginning of modern
quantum theory. This is formalized by
1930 in Paul Dak's book um principles of
quantum mechanics. Uh I won't tell you
how old he was when he wrote that book
because it would make everybody really
really depressed. He was very very very
young. Um and then John Vonoyman
followed up two years later um with in
the English translation mathematical
foundations of quantum mechanics. But
they basically told the same story. John
vonan told it in a much more
mathematically rigorous way. Um they
unified the matrix mechanics of
Heisenberg with the wave mechanics of
Shortinger. Both of those were seen to
be manifestations of a deeper structure.
There is an abstract kind of space. It's
not like physical space. It's called
Hilbert space. Quantum states are these
mathematical
uh things that live in this abstract
Hilbert space. These mathematical
quantum states change with time
according to unitary evolution or the
Shinger equation. And then there's a
prescription, a set of rules, the
measurement axioms for taking those
mathematical ingredients and generating
predictions of what we will see when we
do measurements. In particular, they
tell us probabilities for measurement
outcomes. And so by 1932, you're
basically done. And again, remarkably,
this is a year before Kaggorov publishes
his aximization of classical probability
theory. So it's kind of an amazing um
circumstance. Um and and then you know,
but this picture was so radically
different from what people had thought
about before. Uh and and not only was
the picture radically different at the
level of ontology, like are we saying
that what physically exists is a quantum
state in an abstract Hilbert space? Um
but also the the measurement axioms
were difficult to I mean you just took
them on as axioms.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; they worked really well, extremely well.
Um those axioms
basically underly how we calculate
things in the standard model of particle
physics today. The standard model the
our best theory of um uh the
interactions of elementary particles and
fields today. Uh and they give
predictions that are correct to gosh
Sean what's the latest what's the
longest number of decimal places that we
have predictions?
&gt;&gt; It's double digits right like you know
it's it's more than 10 dec decimal
places. So, it's very good.
&gt;&gt; In the high energy theory area here at
Harvard, there's a glass uh door that
has um I believe if I'm remembering
correctly, it's the gyroagnetic ratio of
the electron. It's the theoretical
prediction and the experimental
prediction and they agree to many many
decimal places. Um so, you look at that
and you just say what else could we
possibly need? We have this theory. It
makes all the predictions. This is
fantastic.
There are other historical reasons why
people shifted toward a more pragmatic
attitude, a more practical-minded
attitude toward quantum theory. Um, you
know, around the end of of World War II,
the center of gravity of physics moves
from uh Europe to the United States. Um,
there's a lot more money that goes into
physics or the amount of funding
increases dramatically. Um, there's a
real emphasis on getting concrete
results and there's also just rapid
progress. I mean, the amount of progress
that was made in uh all areas of
physics, but but including what you
might call high energy physics, short
distance physics, I'm a little nervous
of calling it fundamental physics
because I don't want to offend anybody
who thinks that that that other kinds of
physics are also fundamental, but a
certain kind of physics um um makes a
tremendous amount of progress. We're
discovering particles left and right. Uh
and Nobel prizes are being handed out
all the time.
And uh and I just think there was this
attitude that spending time trying to go
back and re-evaluate the foundations of
this theory
um was was a waste of time. It was a
waste of time. It was misguided. And
that evolved from thinking it was a
waste of time to actually becoming a
serious um threat to one's career.
Um, the history of 20th century physics
uh tells a pretty sad story of people
making very important contributions
to physics to applications of physics
often motivated by trying to probe the
foundations of quantum theory and
suffering significant career
ramifications.
Um, so people talk about uh, EPR. We
people have heard of Einstein, Podilski,
and Rosen and Entanglement and all that
stuff. And and and Einstein certainly
did fine career-wise. We're not worried
about Einstein's career. His career was
great.
&gt;&gt; Um, but but other people began to
revisit some of those questions in the
years that followed. uh the first I I
think really significant I mean there a
lot of smaller examples but the first I
think really significant example after
uh the days of entanglement and the
debates between Einstein and Shortinger
is David Bow. So David Bow uh was at
Princeton and he was a theoretical
physicist.
He wrote a book called Quantum theory.
It's a book that's available now. Dover
produces an edition of it. He he
published it in 1951. Uh and most of it
is a a very nice but relatively
conventional treatment of quantum theory
as was understood at that time.
But near the end of the book, he decides
to do something that you're not supposed
to do. He decides he he wants to present
a a better, more complete, more
transparent analysis of the measurement
process rather than just treat it as a
bunch of axioms.
when you do a measurement I don't know
what a measurement is then this magical
thing happens probabilities come out the
quantum state suddenly you know
collapses to lock in the results what's
really going on there he wanted to pres
present a pedagogical more foundational
picture of what was going on and again
this was frowned upon but he did it um
and he laid out the process he he put in
a a a quantum system an object that was
to be measured he put in a device that
was to measure it. And then he studied
how they interacted according to the
other rules of quantum theory, not the
measurement axioms, but the more
fundamental rules, the Hilbert space
rules, Schroinger evolution to see what
would happen. And he got these weird
entangled quantum states. And then he
had this amazing uh um approach. He
called it, this is section 22.8, the
destruction of interference in the
process of measurement. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And he he he he showed that you got
these branches that came out at the end
of this interaction between a measuring
device and the system. You went from a
weird superp position of the system to
be measured and a measuring device
before the measurement. They combined.
They evolved. And now you got these
branches. In one branch, the measuring
device obtained one result. And the
system in some sense had a quantum state
that corresponded to just that result.
And then there was another branch. On
this next branch, the measuring device
had a different result and the system it
was studying was in a quantum state
corresponding to that result. And then
there was a third branch and a fourth
branch. They were branches and at each
branch you had what looked like a story,
a definite almost classical looking
story for how the measurement should
have unfolded. But you had all these
branches. And what he was able to show
was that the branches stopped talking to
each other. Once you get a big measuring
device involved, there wasn't any
interference between the branches. They
began behaving a lot like distinct
classical realities. And this is in uh
that book. I recommend uh that if
viewers are interested that you you buy
a copy of it. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um uh it's it's a beautiful um
exposition. Um and
today we call this destruction of
interference and this emergence of
branches uh when a big enough system
gets involved in the story we call that
decoherence.
Um and decoherence was later developed
by a number of other people. Uh deator Z
did further work on it in the 70s. Uh
and more people did work on it going
into the 70s ' 80s and '90s. Um but uh
you know far from getting uh accolades
for introducing this pivotal idea um
Bow's career took some rather
unfortunate turns. He found himself
exiled uh to Brazil and unable to return
to the United States. Um now there were
other reasons for this. There were also
political reasons that I'm not going to
get into but but certainly you know he
he wasn't handed a Nobel Prize for
discovering you know for laying out the
story of decoherence. And this is a huge
shame. Decoherence is a pivotal idea in
how we make sense of quantum theory
today. Not just philosophically or
foundationally, but you can't pick up a
research article from an atomic physics
laboratory or a quantum computing uh
research group or quantum information or
high energy theory or condensed matter.
any area of physics that deals
extensively with quantum theory without
reading about decoherence decoherence
time scales shielding our systems from
decoherence um people you know worry why
can't we make a quantum computer today
one of the problems is it's very
difficult to protect your systems from
this decoherence process
um I I think in some sense this means
that all of these uh um practicing you
know contemporary physicists should be
paying royalties to poor bone B or at
least to the field of foundations and
philosophy of physics. Now
I think some people would look at Bow
and say well no this counts as physics.
He was a physicist
but he was doing physics in a mode that
is instantly recognizable to people who
work in philosophy of physics. He was
taking um
theories. He was probing their
structure. He was trying to improve the
way we made sense of them and in so
doing he made a major contribution to
how we think about physics.
&gt;&gt; Do you know if that part of Bow's book
was any influence on Hugh Everett?
Um, to my knowledge,
no. I don't think I'm not sure that it
was.
&gt;&gt; Who was also at Princeton at
approximately the same time?
&gt;&gt; He he was I mean the book was 51. Uh,
Everett was at Princeton in the mid-50s.
55 I think is when he started there. I
don't know if Bone was still there at
the time.
&gt;&gt; But yeah,
&gt;&gt; he well did he because his he published
his dissertation in 57. He was certainly
working on the unpublished version.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. There's some overlap. You're
probably right. Yeah. Um I I'm I'm not a
historian and I don't know the detailed
history here. I don't know what um what
to what degree they over overlapped. Um
but uh that's an excellent question and
one that that uh uh I'll definitely go
and look at. We should we should look
&gt;&gt; because certainly the story does sound
familiar to an Everettian. Right. But
then B ends up going in a very different
direction because Einstein nudged him.
&gt;&gt; Correct. Yeah. Yeah. So, so Bow was very
pleased with this and he explained this
to Einstein uh who was obviously still
in Princeton at the time. Um Einstein
lived until 1955. So Einstein was there.
Um and Bow came away from that
conversation with Einstein um no longer
convinced he had solved the problem.
Uh and and the next year Bow introduced
his hidden variables approach to quantum
theory where the quantum state was a
pilot wave that guided the particles
around. But I should say that
decoherence didn't go away.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; Um Bow published two papers. Um the
first of which laid out the the outline
of this new approach and the second
paper went deep into the measurement
process. And to get the measurement
process to work in bow mechanics, you
still need decoherence.
Um now the argument I would make to
anyone who says
all we need to explain quantum theory
and solve the measurement problem is
decoherence is just look at boom.
Arguably Bow understood decoherence. I
think it's safe to say being the person
who came up with the idea and laid it
out so beautifully. You can again read
his his book. Um I I I I would wager a
guess. I mean sure not everyone who
discovers something fully understands
it. That's true. Historically we have
examples. It doesn't always happen. But
but in this case he seemed to have a
very good understanding of what was
going on and he didn't think it was
enough to resolve the measurement
problem. And I think that's telling.
&gt;&gt; So I I do worry that we're not going to
get to the juicy stuff. So, I want to
accelerate our velocity here. Could you
could you just give us a brief overview
because we've already mentioned Bow and
Everett and these are two of the leading
contenders for a true theory of the
foundations of quantum mechanics. Could
you explain why they're different?
&gt;&gt; Um, right. Right. So, in in Everett's,
so in in in Bow's approach, uh, we we
have the quantum state. It does this
funny branching, but in addition to the
wave function, there are uh particles.
There are localized particles moving
around in space and they're guided by
the wave function. Um, and they're
guided so that they arrive at uh
destinations
uh according to the rules and
predictions and probabilities from
quantum theory. This sounds very
gerrymandered like he he just kind of
carefully like engineered his pilot wave
to do this but it actually comes out
rather beautifully when you're working
with systems of fixed numbers of
finitely many non-relativistic
particles. You take the shortinger
equation you sort of decompose it into
into parts and the parts tell a very
natural story in a language that's very
similar to what's called the Hamilton
Jacobe formulation of classical physics
which he knew. Um and in that story you
see what looks like a pilot wave guiding
things around. So it's actually a really
um at least for these this limited class
of systems a really elegant picture.
Uh essentially what Everett did was drop
the particles just drop them. Uh and
actually so although um so you asked
about whether Everett knew about Bow's
work on decoherence that I'm not sure
about but Everett certainly knew about
Bow's work because in um Everett's
unpublished long form dissertation which
uh he he finished in 1956 you could find
it uh online just Google 1956 Everett uh
long form dissertation um which by the
way is 137 pages
&gt;&gt; 137 very important number physics.
&gt;&gt; My cookie.
&gt;&gt; Um, when I teach my philosophy of
quantum mechanics class, it's it's it's
course number 137. That's an homage both
to Everett and also to the inverse fine
structure constant.
Um, Everett talks about Bow's theory in
detail uh in that um in that thesis
comparing and contrasting with his
approach. I don't think he talks about
Bow's analysis of decoherence though.
That's where I'm not 100% sure. But he
certainly knew of Bow's work. That's
that's true.
Um so Everett drops the particles uh in
in a an attempt to simplify the theory,
simplify the axioms, make very clear
when I say simple simplify simplify the
axioms, make the assumptions simpler uh
and just try to build a sensible uh
formulation of quantum theory that is
empirically adequate, makes the right
predictions, agrees with the
experimental predictions that we're
making um uh but is doesn't have these
extra ingredients in the axioms um that
that Bow's theory did.
&gt;&gt; And you don't believe either one of
them.
&gt;&gt; That's right. At least not now. Not now.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; Um believes I went through I went
through uh um a bomb phase when I first
read Bow's papers. They are very
compelling and very beautiful. you can
see why Bow was uh you know thought he
discovered something so important. Um I
think the papers are a little bit
difficult to appreciate um for for
people who haven't yet learned about the
Hamilton Jacobe formulation of classical
physics which is you know
&gt;&gt; many many it goes back to the 1800s I
mean it's it's it's but it's something
that people knew. Shortinger used it to
build uh the Schroinger equation. It was
well known to physicists uh back then.
We don't teach it at the elementary
level so much to physicists anymore,
although some physics students will
learn it if they take an advanced course
in classical mechanics. Um, so when you
read that paper and you're familiar with
this formalism, it seems incredibly
natural. It just looks like it just
looks like someone took the Hamilton
Jacobe formulation and just added an
extra force in it and now you've got
quantum mechanics and it just seems like
oh my gosh, this is such a beautiful
picture. Um,
and so of course my next question was
great. Let's see how this applies to
more general kinds of quantum systems.
Let's see if it applies to discrete
quantum systems. Uh, systems where the
moving parts are like discrete things.
We use these kinds of quantum systems to
model what goes on inside of a quantum
computer. Um, or in a ferroagnet, you
know, like a permanent magnet, like a
bar magnet. How does it apply to quantum
fields? So field theory, this is where
we imagine uh moving parts that are
spread out over all of space where
there's roughly speaking a different
moving part at every point in space. Um
and you also have to contend in those
theories with the rules of special
relativity from Einstein and that makes
things much more complicated. And so I
just jumped in and I'm like great, let's
see how this works. And I I could not
see how to make it work. I couldn't see
how to make it work.
&gt;&gt; It's not just you
&gt;&gt; and it's not just me. And so I began
reading the literature on this. And let
me just say that although I don't agree
with um some of the other approaches to
quantum foundations that exist, you
can't read the work of these people and
not be blown away by their creativity,
their intellect, their ingenuity. Um I
am in awe of the work that they've done.
And I think you just have to read their
work to see. and and even though I don't
necessarily agree with the conclusions
they draw, there's a lot that you can
take from their analyses, you know, and
this is really the the the beauty of
what I call philosophical physics, which
is doing physics using the tools of
analytic philosophy. Um, sometimes these
tools let us make progress in a very
direct way on physical problems and
sometimes you get physical results as
spin-offs.
&gt;&gt; And so the spin-offs of a lot of this
stuff, I think, is is really remarkable.
But so people worked on trying to make
versions of bowi mechanics that would um
give a good elegant description of
systems where you had to follow the
rules of relativity systems with fields
in them. And here uh I I'm thinking of
um uh uh people like uh Ward Stroa um
Shelley Goldstein
um uh and and a collection of people who
who've worked on on bone bone theories
um um since then. There's like a lot of
people and I don't want to miss names.
I'm afraid if I don't mention names,
people are going to feel like I'm
leaving them out. But but but once you
you like look up those names, you you'll
learn about people like Nino Zangi and
Rody Tamula and Debt Left Dur. Um and uh
so I'm I'm I'm going to leave out names
here, but but I I I assure you it's not
because of any disrespect. Um so I I I
read their papers because I couldn't
figure out how to do it. And I read
their papers and and I you know the
models they constructed were really
really really complicated. they were
really complicated. Um uh I guess Bell
also worked on um uh on this as well. Uh
beables for quantum field theory I think
was was the paper where he tried to
contend with this. This is John Stewart
Bell the Bell of the Bell Bell's theorem
who played a very important role in in
quantum foundations as well. Um, and you
know, you could get some things that
sort of looked like they kind of worked
for very simple quantum field theories
in some situations,
but I couldn't see how to get them to
work for interacting quantum field
theories, quantum field theories that
had uh firmians in them. These are the
quantum fields that underly electrons.
They're very weird, these quantum
fields. Um
and in the end you got these sort of
complicated ad mixtures of pilot wave
dynamics and stochastic dynamics which
we'll come back to. So the beautiful
deterministic picture of the bomb
approach gave way to a prediction where
the laws were chancy now. Um, and the
rules seemed now kind of gerrymandered,
kind of ad hoc, like we knew the
predictions we needed and now we were
just going to reverse engineer the rules
of these bombian generalizations of
quantum theory um to agree with those
rules. I keep saying bone by the way but
de Bruy Louis de Bruy
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; had
&gt;&gt; introduced um a primordial version of
this pilot wave approach and b did bow
didn't know it initially but but
eventually after bone published papers
they connected and so some people call
this the de bruy bomb formulation
instead of bow's theory or bowing
mechanics
&gt;&gt; so these pilot wave theories these
hidden variable theories they work very
well if you have a bunch of spinless
particles moving non-relativistically
once you try to include modern physics
relativistic quantum field theory they
both get a lot uglier and it's not even
clear that they work at all. So, one
recognizes why you might be skeptical.
But why in the world would you be
skeptical of ever which is just so
obviously the truth?
&gt;&gt; I should also just mention that um on
that point of can these models work at
all. Uh David Wallace who is a
philosopher of physics
&gt;&gt; at Pittsburgh.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Um, and uh, I mean, when
when I talk to physicists about what
philosophers of physics uh, can do and
and how extraordinary they can be, I I
often point them to David Wallace
because he's just incredible. Um, he
wrote a paper and gave a bunch of talks
called the sky is blue, why quantum
theory um, the interpretation of quantum
theory is not underdetermined. uh you
know in which he argues basically your
point that it's not merely that the
bombian models the de bow models haven't
worked very well or very inelegant but
that they they don't succeed at
um important but relatively elementary
tasks like explaining why the sky is
blue that comes from scattering it's a
relativistic interaction between uh uh
light and charged particles in the
atmosphere and you know his attitude is
it's been
you could argue 100 years since De
Bruyne first introduced the hidden
variables pilot wave approach 70 years
set more than 70 years since Bome did
and the fact that this approach has not
yet been able to accommodate um this
very important kind of of of problem uh
is is a serious issue. So so yeah, I
think it's more than just a question of
elegance. I think there's a practical
problem here. Now, I'm not going to rule
out that it's possible at all. Uh people
are ingenious and maybe someone will
listen to this or not listen to this,
but come along and come up with a way to
get bombing mechanics to work. Um and if
that happens, that would be very
exciting. U but but let me just say that
by the end of my uh foray into bow
mechanics, I just felt like it just it
was too hard and it wasn't working. Um
and I I wanted to try something else.
And then I became an Everettian.
&gt;&gt; Did you? Okay, good.
&gt;&gt; Yes. I I spent a period of time as
neverian and I had the exact same
experience. I
&gt;&gt; You're very ecumenical.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Well, I I I I I I hope it's it's an
aspiration we you know but um whether
whether any of us has achieved it is is
a different question. Um
but but so I I encountered uh Everett in
quantum theory. Um I read Everett's uh
paper. I mean I was reading all these
papers. Boom's paper. I was reading it
while I was in grad school pretending to
be a physicist.
But really I was interested in in in
philosophy and in the foundations of
physics, foundations of quantum
mechanics. So I I read um Everett's
original uh published version of his
dissertation. I didn't encounter the
long form unpublished version until many
years later and I feel very bad about
that because it is one of the most
brilliant uh pieces of work in physics
and in philosophy of science. Uh it is
an extraordinary phil philosophical work
filled with amazing ideas and arguments.
um and I wish I'd seen it earlier. Uh so
I encountered um Everett's uh approach.
Of course, like anyone interested in
science, I had heard of the many worlds
interpretation. Um there's a cartoon
version of the many worlds
interpretation. Oh, that's the
interpretation where every time you make
a decision, the world splits into a
world where it happens this way and a
world where happens that way.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know, there's a cartoon version that
is not very much like the the actual
version. Um but I so I had this cartoon
version in my head. I I you know seen
people mention it a few times as I was
coming up in physics but I began to
engage with literature and um I found
Everett's uh thesis very compelling the
published version very compelling. He
tells this anecdote um that shows up a
lot in um in treatments of Everett's
work. this anecdote about about
Capernacus and about whether the sun
goes around Earth or whether it's Earth
turning. Um he he he and when this is
brought up, it's it's to get across the
idea. Yes, I know it looks like the
sun's going around the Earth,
but what would it look like if Earth
were in fact turning? Wouldn't it look
the same? Yeah. You know, and so if you
have a problem with worlds splitting, if
you think that somehow is not how things
look, his response is, well, what would
it look like if worlds were splitting,
you know, would it really look any
different? Um, he and so this is in in
that in that published version. He it's
also in a letter that he wrote in
correspondence with Bryce Dit, a
theoretical physicist
&gt;&gt; who was quite skeptical of the Everett
approach. This letter, his
correspondence is 1957. Bryce Ditright
right wrote him a letter saying, "I I
sir, I simply don't split." And Everett
responded, "Well, how would you know if
you did, right? What would the world
look like if you did?" And eventually
Bryce Dit went from being a skeptic to
being one of the strongest proponents of
the interpretation. And by 1970, he
wrote an article in Physics Today, the
trade magazine for physics uh in which
he uh presented this interpretation to
the wider physics community. So um
Everett certainly won one uh a very
important convert to the cause.
Um, yeah. So, I I found the whole thing
very compelling for a variety of reasons
and and and I think I was an Everettian
longer than I was a Bomian. Um, and I
got into arguments with people about why
Everettian quantum theory was correct
and why all you needed was decoherence.
Um,
and and you know, I got push back from
people. I had arguments with people. I
was still pretty new to to to thinking
philosophically about science and I was
learning how to construct uh rigorous
philosophical arguments which by the way
they don't teach you in physics grad
school.
&gt;&gt; Um that's a very important skill that
takes a lot of time to hone and
definitely still a work in progress for
me but it's it's one thing you have to
to work on if you want to do philosophy.
&gt;&gt; So I began to to try to hone this this
uh this this picture
and I had a couple of pivotal moments.
Um Ned Hall, another guest I know that
was on your on your podcast, is a
professor here in philosophy at Harvard.
Um and we had uh um some arguments about
the foundations of quantum theory. And
he invited me to give a guest lecture in
his philosophy of quantum theory class.
And so I was forced to sit down and do
the thing that we're always that we
philosophers of physics are always
asking physicists to do. Oh, quantum
theory is fine. It's got no problems.
well, sit down and write out a detailed
argument filling in all the gaps to
explain exactly how this works. And so I
was forced to do this exercise. Um, and
I found it very difficult. And when I
went into his class, the students had
very tough questions for me that I had
difficulty answering. Um,
so you know, there's that. There's other
interactions I had. Uh, um, Neimar Khani
Hamemed taught a class at Harvard. um uh
I guess this was second year in grad
school for me was on quantum mechanics
and spacetime and he presented a certain
kind of argument that was motiv
motivated by Sydney Coleman's lecture
quantum mechanics in your face about how
to get um quantum mechanics to work with
a sort of everian picture.
&gt;&gt; Um and you know I spent months trying to
make that fit together and I couldn't
make the lecture work. I spoke to Nema
not long ago and he doesn't remember
this and and and you know maybe I
misinterpreted what he was saying. it's
entirely possible. It's certainly not
his view now. Um, but at the time, for
whatever reason, I thought this was his
his view of how quantum theory worked. I
couldn't make it work. Um, and so I had
to grapple with the Ever approach and I
began reading more papers. I went from
Everett's papers to more modern papers
on on Everett and quantum theory. Um, I
read the work of people like David
Wallace. Um I read uh um papers um I
read books uh arguments for and against
the ever approach and I started to have
doubts. Um so I remember I I had some
difficulty with David Deutsche's paper
from 1999 um on decision theoretic
derivations of the Borne rule in quantum
theory. Um these sorts of arguments were
expanded later uh by David Wallace uh in
some papers and eventually in his
textbook the emergent multiverse which
was published in 2012
and you know by this point I was getting
a little worried because the arguments
were getting longer and longer and more
and more technical. Uh David so Hugh
Hugh Everett his argument for
probability in many worlds is basically
one page. David Deutsche's argument is
15 pages and the mathematics is much
more intricate. Uh and David Wallace's
is 83 pages and and the ma and although
I'm not sure I mean it depends exactly
on where you put the initial point and
the final point. It's arguable that it
actually starts earlier in the book but
I'm trying to be like when he actually
said I'm going to start proving the
theorem. Um and the mathematics is very
very complicated. Um, for anyone who's
curious about what the mathematics of
that proof looks like, um, go out and
buy his book. You should buy it because
like Everett's long- form dissertation,
it is also one of the most incredible
works of philosophy of science and
physics that I think has ever been
written. Um, when you read the book, you
are immediately struck by how brilliant
David Wallace is. I mean, it's just an
incredible book. anytime a student comes
to me and says they want to work on
quantum foundations, I always recommend
that they buy his book and that they
read it. Uh and and so far, you know,
they they buy it. So, you know, I'm
sending uh revenue David's way, I guess,
but for very good reason. Um but I
recommend that that people actually buy
the book and try to get through the
argument. You'll see it is very very
very complicated and this makes me
extremely nervous. Um, the concern that
people expressed about trying to get
probability out of the many worlds
picture is that it runs into logical
circularity where you're trying to
derive something that we should see
probabilities come out without assuming
the thing to be derived at the
beginning. That's cheating. Now, I know
that one could argue what one person
calls logical circularity, another
person calls beautiful uh
self-consistency.
&gt;&gt; Consistency, of course. Right.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Exactly. But um but at least
for me, I was very nervous because if
you make a proof very long and very
complicated, the odds increase that
you're somewhere going to slip in an
assumption that you're trying to prove
at the end. So what what these proofs
are trying to get is the Bourne rule, a
specific formula for how you take the
quantum state and how you take certain
mathematical ingredients called
operators and you put them together and
then you apply a certain mathematical
operation to them and what comes out is
the probability that a measurement will
have a certain kind of value. That's the
Borne rule. Um
you don't want to assume anything.
You want to be very careful about your
assumptions as you go, right? You don't
want to assume the born rule when you
begin. You don't want to make certain
assumptions. They're difficult to
justify. You want to start with
assumptions. We call these premises um
in your argument that are reasonable
and that ultimately produce this
results. That's how a theorem works. You
begin with certain premises and you get
some conclusion.
Uh, and I just got really nervous
reading reading that proof and I I went
I went through it and what also struck
me was
that although
one of the selling points of the Ever
approach going back to Everett's
original uh dissertation is that it is
axiomatically so simple whatever it says
in his dissertation is he just wants to
keep the quantum state and Shortinger
evolution and then stop and not anything
else. What struck me is that you do have
to add a lot of other axioms and
premises to get the theorem to work. And
I made a list of these. I went through
the book and this is another um uh task
I give to students who are interested in
uh quantum foundations is to read um any
of the proofs the Deutsch proof David
Wallace's proof and keep a running list
of every extra assumption every premise
the richness axioms the rationality
axioms assumptions about the connection
that an individual should have to many
copies of themselves um assumptions
about how freewilled agents are allowed
to make uh to to apply operations in an
agential way. Um uh certain assumptions
about the structure of the Hilbert
space. Um
you know there's a whole list of these
things. I'm not even listing all of
them. And
and also that and this is one that Tim
Odlin uh has brought up the idea that
distinct possibilities should correspond
to orthogonal or perpendicular uh
directions in Hilbert space to begin
with. Tim Mollin's like, "Well, why
can't you why can't you, you know, uh,
consider a blend of those two things as
a distinct possibility?" Tim Mlin in his
review of, I think it was of David
Wallace's book asked, "If someone says,
do you want to go the left path or the
right path?"
And if you were to say, "Well, I could
choose either of them. Could I choose to
sort of take both paths?" And if the
person says, "Sure, you could do that,
too." You might consider that a distinct
possibility. If someone said, you know,
you have to pay $5 to take the left path
or $7 to take the right path, and you
said, well, how much would it cost me to
take both? And the person said, $20.
Right? That seems to be a distinct thing
you could choose to do. Um, and there
there are further assumptions that that
in the years since, I've realized
they're sort of implicit behind this.
And I began to develop this sense that
it it falls prey to a what I now call
the stone soup problem. I can make a
fantastic soup. The story goes, "All I
need is stones and water." This is based
on an old folktale. You know, really,
you can? Yeah. Yeah, I can do it. And,
you know, I'll start making the soup.
I'll make the soup. Oh, it's it it
already tastes delicious. But, you know,
if I had just a little bit of seasoning,
it would be even better. Okay, great.
Oh, actually, if I had some carrots,
just just a few carrots. Oh, even
better. You know, it's practically done,
but you know, if I had some meat, it
would be even better. And and so on and
so on and so on. And by the end, people
like, "Wow, can you believe it? This
amazing soup and and only from water and
stones." You just get this sense by the
end that this is what is what you have
and the extra assumptions you need. It's
not that I have any problem in principle
with making assumptions or having
premises or um or or even assumptions
that are you know metaphysical in
nature. I mean we need metaphysics to
get out of bed in the morning. I mean
you you need something um it's just that
when you have to make a lot of them
and a lot of them are difficult to
justify if you don't already believe
them. For example,
you have to believe that if I uh don't
have a unique future version of myself,
but instead in the future there are an
uncountable number of copies of myself,
then I should value their experiences
the way I would value the experiences of
one copy of myself. You know, David
Wallace says this explicitly in the
book. It's one of the assumptions he
takes. I don't know how to justify that.
You either believe it or you don't. And
you have to stack so many of these I
call them speculative metaphysical
hypotheses SMH's on top of each other
and each one reduces my basian credence
my my my belief in the theory that by
the end I just felt like
this was a problem and I should say this
was initially what got me worried about
the effort approach there were other
things too and since then I now have I
think not negative arguments but more
positive arguments for why I think that
there are issues there and the final
thing I'll just say is that I developed
a different approach to quantum theory.
&gt;&gt; Oh, very good way there. That's what I
was
&gt;&gt; The best thing to do. Yeah, exactly. Is
do something new.
&gt;&gt; Put your money where your mouth is.
Absolutely. And so, uh, I I I want you
to explain your new approach. My
impression is that, uh, it's it's not
just a tweak. It's a pretty radical
different starting point. Like, you
don't even believe in wave functions.
&gt;&gt; Right. That's right. That's right.
&gt;&gt; Oh my goodness.
&gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. Yes. Heresy. I'm a
renegade. Call me renegade if you want.
Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I'm a rebel. Um yeah. Um Yeah. So
&gt;&gt; why don't why don't we why don't we like
&gt;&gt; do the very short version of what the
theory says and then we'll back up and
sort of say okay why is it that way etc.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
When we look around the world we see
objects and the objects do things they
behave in various ways.
uh and that behavior sometimes looks
very predictable. We can say exactly
where things end up and sometimes the
behavior looks less predictable, looks
more chancy. We see coins flipping in a
way that looks kind of chancy. Weather
looks chancy. We see objects doing
things out in the world separate from
us.
And the natural question is can we
extend in broad outlines that picture
down to the micro scale? Is there a
sensible way to extend it down to the
micro scale and still have an
empirically adequate description of
quantum theory?
That's one way to think about this.
Another way to think about this is go
back to 1923-24
and suggest that the people working on
the development of quantum theory were
maybe thinking too narrowly about what
laws could be like. Maybe if they
imagined a more general kind of law,
they could retain the classical
kinematics, the classical looking
picture of reality of the stuff, not of,
you know, the physical objects. Um maybe
particles, maybe fields, maybe something
else, but something that's that, you
know, arrangements of things and
classical notions of probability, but
they just needed um a new set of laws, a
new kind of laws that were unknown at
the time. Um, and so one way to view
this project is while there's been a lot
of time since then, people have gone in
many different directions about what
laws could be like, there are now
available to us the kinds of laws that
when married to classical kinematics and
classical probability appear to give you
an empirically adequate description. So
maybe we were hasty in throwing away the
classical looking ontology. Um,
&gt;&gt; so the con a quantum person would say
what ex you know well a realist about
quantum theory we're not even going to
bother with the epistemic people but
right uh they would say okay what exists
is the wave function of the electron but
when you measure it
&gt;&gt; you see just an electron and there
that's the fundamental mystery here and
you're saying no what exists is the
electron but it behaves differently than
you think
&gt;&gt; that's exactly right yeah so notice I've
in the story I've gone back to 2324
192324 this is before shortinger
introduced the wave function
So the argument here is that you could
have bypassed the introduction of the
wave function and developed an
empirically adequate description here.
There is no wave function in any
fundamental sense. There's just stuff
the moving parts whatever it may be. We
don't know what it is. Maybe we have to
wait to find a fundamental theory of
nature, a unified theory or something
like that. I'm not I'm going to be very
modest here and not claim I know what
the true fundamental ontology is. But um
we have some moving parts and the laws
these more general laws
act directly on those moving parts and
carry them to the places where
experiments say they're supposed to go
with the right probabilities. That's it.
With no fundamental role played by the
wave function as a middle manager.
&gt;&gt; So what are these laws? How do they do
all this magic that uh convinced us to
introduce wave functions back in the
day?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So by the 20s there was already a
theory of stochcastic processes. So the
word stochcastic.
So stochcastic is a is a subcategory of
probability. We use probability for many
things. Stochastic is a a more narrow
notion of probability. We use the word
stochastic when we're talking about um I
mentioned aliatory probabilities.
Probabilities of chancy things happening
rolling a dieice throwing a coin. Um uh
it we we apply them to dynamical
things that change but they change in a
way that we assign probabilities to
throwing uh um darts at a dart board for
example shooting arrows and and shooting
arrows is where the word stocastic comes
from. Stokose I think is arrow in in in
Greek. Um
so we call these stochastic things and
there were already some theories where
the laws were stocastic. famously one of
Einstein's greatest discoveries
uh um you know one of his his greatest
breakthroughs was uh using brownie in
motion to give um uh strong empirical
evidence for the existence and nature of
atoms um and brownie in motion is an
example of a stochastic process
particular kind of stochastic process a
very simple kind of stochastic process
um it's a stochcastic process where the
probabilities you assign to a chancy
thing happening depend only on the state
or configuration of the system in the
present. You know the state in the
present and then you can predict what is
going to happen. In this case, not
determinately,
not deterministically, not definitively,
but probabilistically. And this mirrors
the way that our fundamental laws of
physics up until that point had been
phrased. Newton's second law, F= ma, you
know the position and velocity of your
particle. you can predict where it's
going to go. It doesn't matter where it
was. As long as you know the position
and velocity at one time, you can
predict the future. The Maxwell
equations, the equations that describe
electric and magnetic fields, have a
similar property. General relativity is
actually an interesting interesting
case. It's it's not 100% clear that in
all circumstances for all kinds of
spaceimes, we have um uh a theory quite
like that. uh for some some very nice
spacetimes we can phrase uh Einstein's
theory of general relativity the basic
equations as describing that kind of uh
evolution. It's actually not entirely
clear that that is always the way to
think about Einstein's theory and I'll
come back to that because that actually
may be important but for many of the
theories we had up until up until then
and certainly we didn't have general
relativity in 1905 when Einstein was
doing brown motion the idea was this is
how laws worked you specify what's
happening in the present the laws tell
you what happens next this is called the
marov assumption marov m a r k ov named
after the Russian mathematician marov
uh And
it's baked into how we think about laws
of physics. It gives very simple laws
usually. Um and we've been very spoiled
because the marov assumption has served
us incredibly well for centuries.
Um it's telling that whether you think
of Brownie in motion or you think about
the rules of textbook orthodox standard
quantum mechanics we got from uh Paul
Drack and Vonoyman John Vonoyman that
those rules are also marovian. The
shortinger equation is marovian. You
give me the quantum state at one time
and it tells you what it'll be in the
future. The measurement predictions the
borne rule is marovian. tell me
information about the present and then I
can generate the probability predictions
from that. Um
now it's not that we have never
encountered physical systems whose
behavior is not marovian.
We have although a detailed analysis of
that came much much later. It's just
that fundamental laws appeared to be
marov. That was the the paradigm we were
working in.
Um,
and
so by the time Everett is writing his
long- form dissertation, this is in
1956,
he's already aware of efforts
uh at the time by Fritzbop and Imray
Fenes. He doesn't mention Fenes, he
mentions Bop. Um,
there's apparently also there's also a
Fritzbop who's a physicist today who's
not the Fritzbop from from that time. So
if you look up Fritz Bop and you're
like, "Wow, he's still alive after a
hundred years." It's a different
Fritzbop. Um
but uh but the bop of the 1940s, as
Everett describes, was already working
on on trying to marry a more or less
classic looking picture of particles
with stochastic probabilistic laws
directly acting on them. And Everett
actually says this is an interesting
program. He says he wonders where it's
going to go. He says he thinks it's
still more complicated than than his
approach, the theory of the universal
wave function, what we now call the
Everett or many worlds approach. Um he
says it's more complicated, but he says
he says, you know, but there's no
fundamental reason to to prefer a
deterministic picture like Everett's
ever saying this over a probabilistic
picture. He says what his objection is
is the standard picture where sometimes
you have a deterministic picture when no
one's looking at the system and
sometimes you have this observer
dependent probabilistic picture. He says
that is untenable to him. You should
find a way to do it one way or the
other. Everett chose the deterministic
way and he just pointed out that Bob had
was trying this other way. Everett
called it the stochastic process
interpretation of quantum theory in his
thesis. So Everett was aware of this
approach.
Um people worked on these kinds of
approaches for decades
from BOP and then Fenes. You then have
the most famous uh version of this
approach uh by Edward Nelson from the
1960s to the 1980s. And so this approach
is now broadly called Nelsonian
stochcastic mechanics.
&gt;&gt; So sorry the the approach combines the
idea that there is no wave function.
There's an electron and it moves around,
but it moves around in an intrinsically
stochastic way.
&gt;&gt; Correct.
&gt;&gt; With the idea that the way it moves
around is not simply determined by its
current state, but by in principle its
entire past history.
&gt;&gt; Oh. Oh. So, let me get clear. All of
these approaches assume the Marov
assumption. Okay, that's what I'm trying
to get clear.
&gt;&gt; All of them assume the Marco assumption.
They all talked about the moving parts,
the particles moving around according to
laws that just take the present state of
the system and then tell you
probabilistically what it's going to do.
Um, so that was the structure of these
rules. They were all built on things
like Brownie in motion. Physicists are
very familiar with Brownian motion. If
you talk to some physicists like me when
I was first learning about stochastic
processes and you'd mention a
stochcastic process, I would immediately
go to, oh, you mean something like
Brownie in motion or a marov chain as we
call a discrete version of, you know,
marov evolution, a marov system to the
point of which I almost regarded
stochastic and marov as synonymous as I
think some people maybe also do. So
these approaches that had existed up
through the 1980s were based on trying
to uh get the moving parts to behave in
the empirically correct way
by using laws that were marovian. Um and
when you say that there was no wave
function, this is actually a little bit
of a subtle question.
You have to actually solve the
shortinger equation for these things and
then take the shortinger equation and
then plug it into a second set of
stochastic differential equations. these
very complicated equations and these
equations are are um they've got forward
in time evolving parts and backward in
time evolving parts. Uh they're very
complicated and difficult to justify on
first principles. It kind of looks like
someone took the predictions of standard
quantum mechanics and again reverse
engineered some set of differential
equations
that would give you the same results. So
it has the same kind of feeling that I
ran into when I was thinking about
bowing mechanics. Um trying to apply
bulian mechanics to more general kinds
of systems that it just felt like you
were starting with the answer and
working backward and ending up with very
very complicated rules that seem
difficult to justify on their own
merits.
Now I should be clear. I didn't know
about any of this. I didn't know about
BOP or Fenes or Nelson. I I I was not
familiar with stochastic approaches to
quantum in any detail. I think I'd heard
of Nelson's name. He was the one person
I heard of, but I I had not carefully
assessed his work before.
Um and certainly I I I didn't think that
there was any possibility that an
approach like that could be viable. um
certainly for the time I was in
undergrad and for grad school and even
when I began thinking about quantum
foundations. Yeah, I had basically
arrived at a place where I thought maybe
there was just no way to find a picture
that worked in quantum theory that maybe
this was a case where rather than so we
talk about how given any inevitably
finite amount of experimental data there
are always infinitely many theories that
will fit it. This is called the
underdetermination of theory by data.
And so you need to appeal to some other
kinds of criteria like which theory is
the simplest, which one is the most
predictive and so forth. You have to
apply to other things in order to in
order to to pin it down. And then once
you've specified a theory, arguably you
could have an underdetermination of
interpretation by theory. So one theory
may have many ways to interpret it. My
worry was that we had here a case where
the theory overdetermined the
interpretation. The theory was so
intricate, the quantum theory, textbook
quantum theory was so complicated and
intricate and so difficult that there
was no interpretation that would fully
work at all. And I found this
distressing as someone who has realist
inclinations. I believe there's a real
world out there.
Um I mean at some basic level if
measuring A
and then B and then A again can change
the result you got for A.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And wouldn't have changed the
result if you had not measured B that
really makes you feel like there's
something out there you're pushing on.
There's some world out there somehow. So
it I but I I basically you know felt
like maybe there was just something that
would work. I I tried a variety of
proposals for a while. While I worked on
the modal interpretations which are not
widely known um although in some sense
they're being rediscovered I think in
the high energy theory community
um I I got interested in uh sea star
algebraic approaches to quantum theory
and maybe they could provide a window in
how to think about the foundations of
quantum theory but to be honest I wasn't
very satisfied with any of these
approaches I regarded them more as
exploratory exercises and not something
I would I would uh uh you know put real
credence in being okay. This is I think
the direction that that really we need
to go. Um so this the story is fast
forward to 2022. I'm trying to prepare
for a class. And by the way, I should
say that um in my opinion, teaching is
to doing research what standup is to
being a comedian,
&gt;&gt; right? You you really need to be
reformulating your ideas and presenting
them to to new eyes over and over again
uh in order to keep fresh and to keep
connected and and to be creative. So I
think teaching is incredibly valuable.
Many of um my research ideas have their
roots in classes I was trying to teach.
Um I think David Hilbert, the famous
mathematician, always taught a new class
every semester on a new topic and this
was how he kept I mean you can do that
if you're David Hilbert. Maybe that
could do that but but this is this is
his trick to to you know mastering so
many different fields. Um, so I was
trying to teach a class and I was trying
to find a better way to explain quantum
theory to students and I ended up
stumbling into a stochastic approach to
quantum theory. That's the short story.
Uh, and I was trying to formulate
uh a way to represent stochastic
processes, classical stoastic processes,
in a way that would make them look more
like quantum theory.
And my my my plan was to just bring the
two theories close enough together so
that I could
more or less justify most of the
ingredients of quantum theory
and then pinpoint more precisely for the
students what assumption we need to give
up or modify to get quantum theory. So
wouldn't seem quite as ad hoc as just
listing the austere direct funs.
And then remarkably what happened was I
just got quantum theory. there was no
gap and I didn't understand what had
happened. How could quantum theory be a
stochcastic process, especially one that
was as simple as the one I was working
with? I didn't need to jerrymander all
the laws. Um, and
after some effort to understand what had
happened, I discovered that I'd
inadvertently given up the Marov
assumption.
&gt;&gt; And then I immediately plumbed the
research literature. Surely someone else
tried to do this. Someone else said,
"Let's try non-Marovian laws. See if we
can get quantum theory out of them." And
it was basically metaphorically speaking
at least crickets. There was basically
no serious effort to try to formulate
quantum theory
um with a more or less classical
uh notion of probability and classical
notion of of of physical ingredients of
the ontology of the kinematics but with
laws that were not marovian.
&gt;&gt; To be to be very clear uh that's a huge
giving up, right? I mean, you're saying
that what the particle does next is not
predictable even probabilistically from
what its current state is. You need to
know everything in its past for maybe 14
billion years.
&gt;&gt; Um, so that's a good a good a good
question. How much about the past do you
have to know? Um, these non-marovian
processes are somewhat new.
So one view about a non-Marovian
process, I'm going to simplify things as
much as I can here is
you want to predict what the system is
going to do. So you need to know
something about its past. But if you
want to make a better prediction, you
have to know more details about its past
at more past moments. And if you want to
make an even better prediction, you need
to know even more details about its
past. And in principle to make an
idealized prediction you need to know
every detail about its entire past like
from just just at the present all the
way to the arbitrary past.
&gt;&gt; Um and you could you could look at
something like this and say this is
going to be nonpredictive.
Right? In quantum field theory, we have
models where we call them
non-normalizable theories where for a
long time people thought, well, these
are theories where you have to know an
infinite amount of information about the
laws to make any predictions, so they're
just not useful.
But there was a really important
development. People realized
uh that you actually didn't need to know
all of those details. You could make
systematically better and better
predictions without knowing all the
details. And this is this is part of
what led rise to what we now call
effective field theory. Treating quantum
field theories as as tools for making
predictions that don't have to be
perfect. Um that's not quite what
happened here. Um but you you could look
at a a non-Marovian physical theory
nonovian laws and say these are not
predictive. I need to know an infinite
amount of information about everything.
The laws are infinitely complicated. How
could I predict anything? Um, I either
should either assume the laws are
fundamentally marov and I don't need to
know the past at all or maybe they're a
little bit non-marovian. I need to know
like maybe the infinitismly next
previous moment. And in some sense,
Newtonian mechanics is like this. You
have to know position and velocity.
That's equivalent to knowing position
now and position like infinitely in the
past. And then with those two uh data
points, you can figure out the future.
But that's not so bad. We as I said we
can reformulate that as what basically
looks like a marov process by just
taking the velocity and including it in
what we call the state of the system. So
you could you could think of uh um you
all of these as as ways of getting
around this problem. the laws are
fundamentally marovian or they're a
little bit non-Marovian or maybe they're
just not marovian
but then let's approximate them as
marovian because we can't possibly uh
write down laws so complicated and you
know when you deal with non-fundamental
systems
uh I'm nervous but use the word
fundamental again but let's just call it
systems where there's some notion of
emergence going on so systems in biology
systems in neuroscience psychology um
social sciences uh um environmental
systems.
We imagine that these systems are
non-Marovian effectively that there are
details in the present that we can't
capture because we can't fine grain or
or zoom into the present so accurately
that we can figure out everything going
on. There's some details written into
the fine details of the present moment
that are recording the past. And because
we can't see those, we have to treat the
past like it matters. Um, and so in
principle, if we can't know exactly what
the present is, we should be keeping
track of the past in some way to make
predictions.
Um, and you know, when people use these
models, they often make approximations.
&gt;&gt; Sure,
&gt;&gt; they assume, let's just pretend it's
marov. Let's pretend we could ignore the
past. This doesn't always work. I cannot
treat your brain as a as a marov
process. your memory does matter.
Although I guess we're all becoming more
Marovian as time goes by, sadly
um but
uh in the sense that we're aging, not in
the sense that we have less memory, but
that's what I meant, right? Uh we do
have more memory as we get older, but
eventually eventually we start to lose
our memory. Um
so those are basically approaches that
were available.
What I happened upon in 2022 was a
different way to formulate the laws of a
non-Marovian system.
It turns out that you can in fact
specify just a few simple rules
and it doesn't pin down a fully realized
exact
complete historybased
non-Marovian process.
It defines a collection of distinct such
non-Marovian processes each one of which
to borrow language from my colleague
Alex Mihan University of Wisconsin
philosophy calls realizers
given a single
one of these new processes that that I
stumbled on in 2022
there are many ways to realize it to
fill in all the details assign detailed
laws to all the detailed histories
any such way to assign laws to all the
deal histories is called one
non-marovian realizer.
And the model that introduced didn't
single out one of them. It's what we
would call an equivalence class of
realizers. Each realizer is infinitely
complicated, but the laws that define
one of my models, those laws are very
simple.
Um, and I guess you know this there's a
spirit of this idea that one finds
throughout physics, right? Right? When
we talk about uh a thermodynamic system
and we assign it a macro state, a coarse
grained state, we assign it a few simple
properties and we know that we're really
describing a very large number of
different mic microates, different
fundamental possibilities
in some spiritual way. This is a little
bit like that. You specify a couple of
simple rules and then you have all these
different ways in principle could be
realized. A model where you're
specifying just a few of these simple
rules
turns out to fail to have a certain kind
of property that we take for granted in
other physical theories.
This is the property that if I want to
describe how a system will evolve in
time from an initial time to a final
time, my laws are sufficiently rich that
I can describe how the system will
evolve from the initial time to any
choice of intermediate time in between.
And then I can ask you know my model I
can I can ask okay my model says the
state will be such and such and then I
can take that state and then my laws are
rich enough that they can tell me how to
how the system will evolve from that
intermediate state to the final state.
In other words I can take any interval
of time from an initial to a final time
and I can divide it up I can divide it
into smaller intervals of time and my
laws will be rich enough they'll tell me
how to get from any one moment to any
other. That property is lost in these
models. So these models are indivisible
and that is what I called them. And then
I looked in the literature
not just for non-marovian approaches to
quantum theory but also had anyone
played around with indivisible
stochcastic models and it turned out
that
the term did show up in the literature.
In a pre-print article by Simon Mills
and Kevin Modi who work in quantum
information
they have a beautiful review article.
It's open access. It's PRX physical
review X. people can go and they can
it's either PRX or PRX quantum I don't
remember which it is but you can look it
up Simon Mills MLZ and Kevin Modi MODI
uh and they have an a wonderful uh um
review paper a review article on
stochastic processes in classical
physics and stochcastic processes in
quantum physics they mean something a
little different by stochastic processes
in quantum physics they mean assume the
whole Hilbert space all the mathematics
and then just kind of use kind of
analogies with the classical case but
apply them to the Hilbert space
ingredients. That is not what I was
doing. I was trying to get quantum
theory out of applying stochastic
processes to classical ingredients.
But in their in the first part of their
review where they're going over how
classical stoastic processes work in
like figure six in a throwaway remark,
they say you could imagine having an
indivisible stochastic process. It would
fail to have this divisibility property.
And they used the capital Greek letter
gamma, which is also the symbol I had
been using. So my immediate impulse was,
"Oh my gosh, I've been scooped. They're
using the same symbol. They're using the
same name for exactly the same kind of
property." And so I I eventually reached
out to both of them after I had, you
know, probed this work and and um did
some work to show that you you are able
to get an empirically adequate
description of quantum theory from these
systems. I I contacted them. Um and it
was lovely speaking to them. They're
lovely people. They hadn't thought about
using a process like this applied to
classical probability, classical
ingredients, and getting quantum theory
out. They just they just sort of
mentioned it. They didn't really push it
to see how far it would go. Um, but
that's what I mean when I say that these
laws weren't available in the 1920s.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; Right. Um I did independently develop
the idea but but you know I was also
thinking about stochastic processes a
lot and you know I'd read a lot of you
know papers on them by this point and so
clearly the idea was the ideas were now
available in a way that they just
weren't in the 1920s. We didn't really
have a you know a comprehensive theory
of classical stoastic processes I think
until the 1960s something like that.
This is decades after quantum theory is
is calcified. So there's a good reason
to think that this couldn't have been
done back then. Although it would be
interesting to wonder if there had been
if someone if if Simon Mills and Cavin
Mod had lived in 1910 how the history of
quantum theory would have gone.
&gt;&gt; So I'm trying to understand the ontology
of your theory. Is there an actual
definite although impossible to
deterministically predict trajectory of
the electron over time at every moment
of time? Uh uh well there's not a
trajectory at a moment but across
moments yes
&gt;&gt; at every moment of time there is
&gt;&gt; in other words yes if you ask is the
electron somewhere some specific place
at every moment in time the answer is
yes and the totality of all those
locations is a trajectory
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; and from knowing where and it's
configurations not momenta
&gt;&gt; correct so we make a distinction in in
physics um I know you you know this Sean
but but for everyone listening um by
configurations we mean the most
rudimentary way to talk about
arrangements of a system. So for
particles, that's just where they're
located. For fields, it's just how
intense they are, which way they're
pointing. Um, when you include
velocities as well or momenta as well.
You talk about both the position and the
velocity of a particle. Now, you're not
talking about configurations anymore.
You're talking about we use the word
state for them. States's a little bit
ambiguous. Sometimes we use the word
phase, space, point, or something like
that. But here, I mean the most
rudimentary thing, just the locations of
the particles. But I want to make clear
I don't know the particles are
fundamental. I don't know what the
fundamental ontology is. So if you're
modeling particles yes then on the the
on a theory where you're modeling
particles then the theory says that each
particle has a location at every moment.
&gt;&gt; Are the trajectories smooth?
&gt;&gt; Uh no in general they are not smooth.
&gt;&gt; Are they continuous?
&gt;&gt; In general they're nowhere continuous.
No.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So they can literally the electron
does not necessarily travel in between
point A and B in time even if those
events are as close together in time as
you want.
&gt;&gt; Uh that's correct. Yes. Um now it's not
that we have no control over what's
going on. There are laws for an
indivisible schastic process. They're
very very simple. Um, what you get out
of the theory is an ability to to say
what is the probability at any moment in
time of what configuration your system
is in. Not the probability of what
measurement you'll get. That's later on.
That's empirical. That's a prediction of
the theory and that's what textbook
quantum theory gives you.
this new approach, this indivisible
approach to quantum theory, the
indivisible theory, indivisible quantum
theory, whatever you want to call it.
Um, it says you can talk about the
probability that the system is in some
configuration. If you're talking about
particles, the probability they are in a
particular arrangement at every moment
in time and they are in only one of
those arrangements at any given moment
in time. You can also
uh uh talk about the probability
for the particles to be in other
arrangements
given what arrangement that they were in
at particular moments in time.
&gt;&gt; Um these are called conditional
probabilities and the theory gives a
rudimentary set of conditional
probabilities. So you do have some laws,
but that's basically all you have.
And so that's not enough to give you
trajectories that are guaranteed to be
everywhere continuous.
Um, for particles that is a little
weird. For fields, it's a little bit
less weird. The idea that a particle can
jump from one place to another is a
little weird. But the idea that fields
like isolated, we call them degrees of
freedom, but isolated intensities at
various points could be fluctuating in
some way, it doesn't quite seem as weird
to me. And maybe this picture is a
little more amendable to a field view,
but only, you know, because of our
intuitions. I don't think there's any
fundamental reason you couldn't think of
particles this way. But so there is some
structure. Not everything is possible,
but yes, for elementary particles, you'd
expect to see that sort of jumping
behavior. Importantly, as systems get
bigger and bigger in a sense of putting
together more and more and more
particles, the weird discontinuous
behavior of the particles begins to look
on larger scales like continuous motion.
Um, and eventually you get into the
regime of meoscopic, middle scale, and
eventually macroscopic, more or less
human scale physics in which you have
what we call collective degrees of
freedom. So you've taken all the
individual like moving parts and you're
thinking of them now as sort of holes as
big you know systems people rocks
mountains uh coins dice stars planets
and at that scale those objects will
move along more or less continuous
trajectories in some cases probabilistic
and you can show that when they're
probabilistic they they'll now
essentially be marovian apart from you
know the usual approximations we you
know If you know if you're doing the
brain you know it's not going to look
marovian but at some you know at some
level you begin to get back the kinds of
stocastic processes we're familiar with
in classical physics and in the simplest
cases you get deterministic behavior
like Newton's laws. So if I know the
state of the particle as a point in
configuration space, a point in uh in
ordinary threedimensional space right
now,
&gt;&gt; but my dynamics are non marovian. Uh is
it true that in principle I would need
to know its entire past trajectory to
predict what's going to do next?
&gt;&gt; Oh, that's a very good question. If you
know the location of the particle,
uh that's an interesting Well, so when
you ask when if you know, what do you
mean? Do you mean that you have done
some kind of measurement to determine
where it is or you have like a god's eye
view of the world and you can just know
where the particle is?
&gt;&gt; Let's be God for the moment.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. Well, it's a bit
blasphemous, but okay. Let's let's play
the game.
&gt;&gt; I haven't been struck down yet.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Yeah. Um, so if you have a a
God's eye view, then yes, you would have
to know something about the past of the
particle. The question is how much would
you have to know about the past um in
order to predict? Okay, then the
question is what are you predicting? if
you want to. So, so I need to step back
for a second. Um, in this picture, you
can presume that the particle in fact
has some trajectory that we don't know,
but maybe God knows. God, from a God's
eye view, there's some particular
trajectory. Now, from God's God's eye
view, there's no need for laws at all.
God just looks down at the fabric of
space and time and all the particles or
fields or whatever in it and just see,
okay, as God, I can just see the whole
trajectory. I don't need quantum theory.
I don't need uh laws of physics. I don't
need probabilities. I don't need any of
that stuff.
Uh
so this is why it's tricky to talk about
about the god's eye view because now
we're assuming that we have like a
demigod who doesn't know the whole
trajectory but nonetheless can know
where it is at one moment but no more in
a way that we regular humans can't. Um I
guess if you're a demigod in this sense,
you have some access to this secret
information but not the whole
trajectory. um then uh in order to
predict what it's going to do um you
have to incorporate information about
the last so-called division event. So
what is a division event? Um when
uh when you model an indivisible
process,
you begin with some time. You call it
the initial time and you get a bunch of
conditional probabilities
of the form given that the system is in
this configuration at the initial time.
Here is the probability it will be in
that configuration at some other time
that you can choose. And the time you
choose, the target time is completely
adjustable. There's no discreetness of
time. Time is continuous. Um, and if you
want to think in cosmic scales, you
could take the initial time, I guess, to
be the beginning of the universe or
something. I don't know. I'm not sure if
the universe had to begin with one of
these things. Who knows? As systems
interact with other systems, though,
as uh measuring devices come in, but you
don't need measuring devices. Even
relatively simple systems could come and
interact with your system or an
environment or whatever. As systems
interact with each other, what you find
is that um when you treat the
probabilistic behavior of these systems
using ordinary probability theory,
and you allow the system in question,
the particle in this case,
to uh interact with some other system,
call it the environment or doesn't have
to be a big environment, could be even
just an individual particle, it's fine.
um in such a way that the other system
gets a reading develops a dependence on
the configuration of the system it was
looking at and then you classically
marginalize classical marginalization
is just ordinary probability speak for
summing over the possibilities of the
other system. What you find is the
system you had the the subject system
the system you were looking at the
system that that was you were studying
develops a new conditioning event a new
point at which you can condition. Um at
these moments the indivisible evolution
the laws that cannot be divided over
time at that at moments like those they
can be divided. You can evolve the
system to such a moment division event
you can stop the evolution there the
system has revealed its configuration in
some way to the rest of the universe
even to one other small system in the
universe.
And then the laws of your system are
rich enough to tell you how to condition
from that moment to the future.
&gt;&gt; Is it basically a measurement as we
think of it casually?
&gt;&gt; Um, it's decoherence.
&gt;&gt; Decoherence. Okay.
&gt;&gt; You can show that what looks like
decoherence in the usual Hilbert space
picture is just the generation of a
division event in this picture. But of
course, the metaphysics is very
different. We're not making branches.
But you can literally map the
mathematics of decoherence directly to
the mathematics of the generation of a
division event. But the answer to the
question, what do I need to know given
the current state of the particle to be
able to predict what its future will be
is the entire trajectory between now and
the last division event.
&gt;&gt; You need to know its configuration of
the last division event.
&gt;&gt; You don't need to know the trajectory in
between.
&gt;&gt; You don't need to know the detailed
trajectory. Yes. If you want to predict,
okay, if you want to predict, okay, now
let me let me back up. If your goal is
to predict what you will see in an
experiment, if you were to measure the
location of the particle in the future,
then you only need to know what it was
doing at its last division event. But
actually, even then,
you could actually get away with knowing
less. And I can tell you a little bit
what that means, but but certainly one
one view is certainly if you knew what
its configuration was at at a previous
division event or at the initial event,
then you would have the resources. The
theory would have laws that would tell
you what you would see like what what
probabilities you assign to experiments
done in the future. Now if your question
is what information do we need to be
able to assign a probability to it
simply being in a particular
configuration actually that's that's
still the same. Um the way the theory
works is if you know its configuration
at the last division event and you know
the laws which are given to you by the
theory then you can say what the
probability what what probability it
will have of being in any particular
configuration at any other time at any
later time. what you're not what you
don't have is uh probabilities for the
detailed trajectory. For that, you would
need to pick one of the infinitely many
different realizers. Um in other words,
there's some things that this theory
will predict.
If you're a demigod and you know the
configuration of the particle uh I'm
sorry if you've done a measurement and
you know
if there's a division event and the
configuration of the system is specified
at that last division event then the
laws of the theory are rich enough to
tell you the probabilities with which it
will be in whatever configuration you
ask about at other times. If you want to
know the detailed path it will take or
you want to assign detailed
probabilities to the detailed paths it
could take then you're asking for more
laws than the indivisible process gives
you.
&gt;&gt; That's okay. I don't want to
&gt;&gt; and those additional laws would
correspond to some particular
non-marovian realizer of the process.
&gt;&gt; How objectively well- definfined are
division events?
&gt;&gt; Uh division events are as objectively
well- definfined as decoherent branches.
So, not vary.
&gt;&gt; Um, well, it depends on the system. For
a small system in contact with a pretty
big environment, you're going to get
really sharply defined division events,
but there will be some error. And this
means that all the laws that you the
effective laws you would use to describe
the system are going to have error terms
in them.
&gt;&gt; But you have to pick out a divi a
separation or factorization of system
and environment. For example,
&gt;&gt; uh that's that's true. Yeah. So the idea
is that you know you want to model let's
say five particles you've got five
particles sub apparatus
you would pick uh obviously one system
is the five particles um if the
particles are interacting with the atoms
in the room you take your environment of
the atoms in the room if you wanted to
pick only half the atoms in the room you
could do that that would give you
basically the same answer um you know
they're going to be tiny tiny
discrepancies between those choices that
means that all the laws you use will
have extreme extremely small
discrepancies in them. But you know
given how incredibly sharp decoherence
is, I mean the the degree to which you
so one way to characterize how sharp a
division event is and now this is going
to get a little bit in the weeds but um
when we write down a quantum state and
the quantum state evolves into some
blend or superposition,
[Music]
there's not a unique way to represent
that superposition. But if you decided
to
single out some particular feature of
the system like it's position let's say
you want to focus on position then once
you fixed position is the thing you want
to single out you can talk about what
that superp position looks like as a
superposition of different possible
positions roughly speaking
then you can talk about the degree to
which the terms and that superposition
interfere with each other these are
called coherences there's also a way to
formulate this in terms of off diagonal
entries of density matrices, but I'm not
going to talk about that. We have a
precise way to calculate
how significant the sizes of those
interference or those coherence
coherences are. And when a system
undergoes decoherence by an appreciably
big environment and it doesn't need to
be that big. I mean the cosmic microwave
background is significant enough for you
know uh uh particles of dust in in the
in you know floating in nearly empty
space. Um when there's a a significant
enough environment
again going back to you know the early
days of decoherence those coherences uh
reduce to an extremely small number.
they become exponentially small in time
and also exponentially small in the
number of moving parts of degrees of
freedom of the environment. Um, and so
you get within
tiny fractions of a second. I mean, for
a dust particle floating in the
universe, it's like 10 to the negative
40 seconds, some incredibly small amount
of time. I may be somewhat off, but but
they're numbers of that scale. Those
those coherences are suppressed almost
to zero. They're basically in
undetectable.
Uh,
and that's how precisely defined a
division event is. So if I have a single
spin that is in a superp position of
spin up and spin down. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; If I entangle it with one more spin,
&gt;&gt; is that a division event?
&gt;&gt; Um spin is a little bit of a tricky
thing. Spin is a little bit of a tricky
thing.
&gt;&gt; Replace it with a position of a
particle. I mean a two.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. We I can come back to why
spin is tricky in a little bit if you'd
like. Um because this gets into a
distinction between beables and
emergables which we can talk about. But
yeah, we can pick something else. You
said position. So one particle
interacting with another particle's
position,
&gt;&gt; one particle that is in a superp
position of two different positions,
&gt;&gt; right, and interacts with with another
particle
&gt;&gt; becomes entangled with another two-state
system.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So um no, I think it in I
have to I mean I haven't done every
conceivable calculation one could do,
but in this particular case, I'm pretty
sure that you don't get a robust
division event in this circumstance. You
need more than just one particle.
&gt;&gt; If there were 12 particles, what about
that?
&gt;&gt; Um the more particles you have, the
better you get. Well, actually, no,
actually, no, let me take that back. I
did this calculation. I forgot I
actually did this calculation. Um, so
here's a concrete realization of your
question. Let's do the double slit
experiment. This is a concrete
realization of exactly this question.
Suppose that we uh send a particle
toward a wall with two small holes in
it.
We imagine some of the time the particle
will not succeed in getting to the
holes, but but every once in a while
maybe it goes to the holes. Um, and then
far away on the other side of this wall,
there is a detection screen where
particles can land. And when they land,
they they stick or they set off a light
or they get registered in some memory
system or something like that. They they
they leave a mark in some sense.
And we imagine sending particles in one
at a time, one particle after another,
many many particles, always one at a
time. And over time, um, we're going to
get some distribution or pattern of
dots, a histogram of dots on the
detection screen.
Uh, now the question is, can we predict
what that distribution of dots will look
like? If we're sending small pebbles
through the screen,
the prediction is that we'll get
we'll get a distribution that's kind of
centered in between or the part of the
detection screen that's kind of in the
middle of the detection screen, right?
And then as you go sort of farther out
from the middle of the detection screen,
they get more and more sparse. There's
some sense in which that distribution is
a blend of two distributions. It's the
distribution you would have got if you
only had one hole
blended with the distribution you would
have got if you'd only had the other
hole. Right. And and I I have your your
your book by the way next to me.
Something deeply hidden. I recommend it
to everybody. If you haven't read Sean's
book, it's absolutely amazing. Something
deeply hidden. I strongly endorse it.
&gt;&gt; Appreciate you here. So
&gt;&gt; say what? Yeah. Sean, you should get
your book. Um and you cover that. I I
reread it before we had this discussion.
But so um it's that good. Yes, I
actually read it. It's that good. Um
so you cover the double slit experiment
in in in in the book.
If you send
quantum mechanical particles
um photons or when this was actually
experimentally done I think it wasn't
even experimentally done until like the
60s or 70s actual electrons and one at a
time you do not get that classical
distribution. you get a very funnyl
looking distribution with kind of peaks
and valleys. Certain places where there
are lots of dots and certain places
where there are very few or no dots. And
when you do this experiment like 10,000
times, you get this band structure. You
get these bands, these sort of uh
depending on how you've set up the
experiment, it may look like a a line of
bands. It may look like uh concentric
circles, but it the Now, to be clear,
you don't see the bands on any one run
of the experiment. Every run of the
experiment, you see one dot. It's just
that over many many runs of the
experiment the dots build up this
particular pattern which is very
&gt;&gt; very weird. Um although this particular
experiment was not done with electrons
until sometime after it it was
understood well before what the
theoretical prediction from quantum
mechanics should be. Um for example
Heisenberg talks about this in his book
physics and philosophy.
&gt;&gt; He talks specifically about this this
experiment. Um,
and uh, and this experiment is very
weird because if you if you wonder,
gosh, I wonder which hole the electron
is going through. Maybe every time the
electron goes through this experiment, I
will simply look with my eyes and see
which hole it's going through. Well,
what does it mean to look with your
eyes? You have to scatter some particle
off the electron to do something in
order to get something to get into your
eyes. Or if you have some device, you
have to somehow have the device interact
with the electron. But whatever you try
to interact the electron in the
slightest,
most sensitive, least disturbing way you
could possibly imagine, just enough so
you can figure out definitively which
hole it goes through in every run of the
experiment. And when you do this, the
interference pattern marketkedly
changes. It almost completely goes away.
It turns out there's a little bit of a
residual effect if the screen is very
far away because after you've measured
the electron, it will go back to being a
little bit quantum mechanical on its way
to the screen. And so you get a little
bit of of weirdness, but not nearly as
much as you did before. Um, and so you
might go, okay, well, let me imagine
doing this with the most rudimentary
system I could imagine. Let me imagine
not putting a person or a complicated
measuring device,
but just the simplest quantum mechanical
system you could imagine, a single
quantum bit or cubit
right near the holes. And the cubit can
either be on or off. It's a binary
switch, a quantum binary switch. If you
think of it classically, quantum
mechanically can sort of be blends of
those, but classically it's like on or
off. And you program it so that it's
definitely off and it stays off if the
particle goes down through the lower
slit, but it switches to on if it goes
to the upper slit. So you might think
this is
the most you know rudimentary way you
could possibly because then what you do
is after the particle lands you go and
you look at the the cubit and if it was
off you know that the thing particle
must have gone through the the lower
hole and if if it's on it must have gone
through the upper hole in each one of
the experiment but this is enough to to
ruin the interference pattern. This is
enough to actually ruin the interference
pattern. So um so decoherence has
happened and it's happened through an
interaction of the particle with the
simplest possible kind of uh uh kind
kind of cubit system. Now
I think a natural question to ask is
what could possibly be going on here?
One view is that well this kind of looks
like
waves.
I mean you don't see a wave in the
experiment. What you see is dots, but
the pattern of dots kind of looks like
the pattern you might imagine
if waves were going through the slits.
There was an experiment done centuries
ago by Thomas Young, the Young double
slit experiment that was supposed to uh
established that light was really a
wave. And and there you're sending real
waves of light or light rays or whatever
to the slits. I guess they didn't know
they were waves yet. The point was to
show they were waves. But you you shine
a light at these at these slits and the
other side you just see bands, right?
And you're not seeing dots, you see
bands. And so you think that light
really is a wave, a wave moving in 3D
space, really moving through the holes.
That sort of picture is a little weird
in the quantum case. And the reason why
you know it's weird immediately is
because if you decided to send two
particles into the experiment instead of
one,
the pattern you'd get would look very
odd.
Because the pattern you get actually
looks like the projection down to 3D
space of a wave pattern in
six-dimensional space. And the reason is
that when you send two particles in at a
time to the extent that we use something
like Schroinger's waves to describe the
particles, the waves live not in
physical space.
The waves live in configuration space.
This is distinct from Hilbert space.
It's the space of possible classical
arrangements of the particles. And for
two particles, each of which has three
position coordinates,
this configuration space has six
coordinates. So it's a sixdimensional
space.
And now this does not look like the
young double slit experiment anymore.
And if you send three particles or five
or eight particles through the
experiment, you really need to treat the
wave as living in I guess in the eight
particle case 24dimensional space. And
then I don't really know where the holes
are or what you know. So this is one
view is that when you send one particle
in the particles wave shortinger wave is
like going through both holes but once
you've got more than one particle in the
system and the waves live in three
ndimensional space if you've got n
particles I don't even know that you can
talk about the waves going through
holes. I don't even know what that means
anymore. So I just I think this picture
is I mean we we we tell this picture to
intro students. It's in the first
chapter of volume three of Fman's
lectures on quantum mechanics. But I
think this picture is actually very
misleading. You get an intuitive picture
only in very simple cases and beyond
that it's not intuitive at all at least
to me. But coming back to your question,
we do get decoherence even though we had
only one cubit involved. And so one view
of this is that there is a shortinger
wave evolving in some sense and the
cubit has produced decoherence
uh in a many worlds view and then
there's a world in which the particle
goes through one slit and a world in
which it goes to the other slit. In a
bombian view uh the particle only goes
through one slit but the pilot wave
guiding the particle kind of goes
through two. But this actually depends a
little bit on whether you're the sort of
bowman who thinks pilot waves are
physical objects or whether you're the
kind who think that they're just
expression of laws. So it's a little bit
murky. Uh textbook quantum theory says
that the cubit um well it's still
complicated. Textbook quantum theory
says there's deherence but no
measurement yet because the cubid
doesn't count as an observer. The
measurement only happens once the
particle hits the detection screen and
the decoherence has changed what kind of
measurement will happen when it hits the
detection screen. What does this look
like in the indivisible stochastic
approach?
When you send your electrons in one at a
time into this apparatus,
you know the initial configuration of
the electron as it was being sent. I
mean do an experiment. To do a good
experiment, you need to set up careful
initial conditions. That's how we set up
an experiment.
Uh
and then the electron does not get read
by anything. It doesn't interact in in
any way that mutually exchanges
information. It doesn't reveal its
configuration to any other systems
through the experiment until it reaches
the detection screen when it does.
And what that means is that this is not
a marov process. So if the idea is well
let's just ask how the electron will
evolve as it goes from its initial
emission point to the walls
and then once we get to the walls we can
ask was it in the upper hole or was it
in the lower hole. Suppose it suppose
it's in the upper hole then we can we
have laws that will tell us how it will
evolve after that or suppose it was in
the lower hole. We have laws that evolve
it after that.
If we do that, we get more or less the
pattern you see in the classical case.
No bands, no waves, no obvious
interference. But notice this entails a
division. The laws you're assuming
divided at the walls. It entails
something like a marov assumption.
This marov assumption is not baked into
the fundamental laws of probability
theory. It's a physical dynamical
assumption that the dynamical behavior
of this process, the laws that govern
how it will behave, have this feature
that I can evolve the system from the
initial time to an intermediate moment,
any intermediate moment of my choosing.
Ask okay well given it could be in this
configuration or that one. And then
given either of those two
configurations, the laws will then tell
me how it will evolve after that. That's
a divisible process. At least it's
divisible at the walls. If you do not
assume the process is divisible, if you
simply drop that assumption, you will
generically get an interference pattern
on the other side.
This does the particle is always in one
location. It's never in both holes.
Uh but nonetheless, without making that
division assumption, the generic
prediction is there will be an
interference pattern at the other side.
And the simplest interference pattern
looks a lot like the interference
pattern we get in quantum mechanics. If
you put a cubit near the holes and the
cubit interacts with the electron as
it's going through the holes, then you
can just show that what look like
decoherence in the standard quantum
formalism looks in this picture with
just classical probabilities. It looks
like a division event and the behavior
of the electron.
uh the the laws describing the electron
just look like the electron is um uh you
know uh uh that you can evol the laws
now give you laws that take you from the
walls to the screen. Now you have a
divisible process of the kind that would
agree with the classical prediction.
&gt;&gt; So it sounds like the division events
play a crucial role in the formulation
of your theory.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, they play a crucial role. That's
that's right. And I should say by the
way that if the cubit is not perfect, if
the cubit is imperfect, if the cubit
kind of doesn't always
deterministically, because here we're
assuming the cubit very
deterministically goes one way or the
other. If we assume that the cubit is
not perfect, you won't get a good
division event. And the worse the cubit
does, the less reliable it is, um
eventually if it's really not reliable
at all, you just don't get a division
event at all.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So that that worries me. division of
events are very important for the
formulation of your theory but
&gt;&gt; there can be a spectrum of possibilities
in between having one and not having
one.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I I agree completely with that. Um
now the question is what are the uh
ramifications of this imprecision? Um,
one of the things that worried me about
the ever approach, separate from the
problem of probability was that the
worlds in the Ever approach, the
branches, um, had a similar kind of of
of of
fuzziness to them. The fuzziness argu
arguably becomes negligibly small once
the branches are macroscopic enough, uh,
once the interference effects are small
enough, but there's always some
fuzziness. And this really really
worried me. Um, in this picture, the
fuzziness is only a fuzziness in the
laws.
It's not that the electron on a model
where you're taking electrons to be
fundamental, which of course may not be
nature, but if your model is one in
which the electrons are fundamental
particles, what is not fuzzy is that the
electron is always in one and only one
place.
Um, that's not fuzzy. What's a little
bit fuzzy is the laws that we use to
describe the electron. But having
effective laws that are not exactly
correct, that's as old as dirt in
physics. Every effective field theory we
use in physics is a theory where the
laws are only so accurate. We don't
assume the laws are exactly perfect. So,
I'm willing to bite the bullet on that
and say that the laws for a quantum
system in this picture like an electron
are um never going to be exactly
precise, but they will be extremely
sharp in many real world scenarios and
we'll be able to make definitive
predictions about the behavior. There
does seem to be a difference between
saying that laws are only approximately
correct like Newtonian gravity in the
solar system versus saying laws are not
precisely defined which Newtonian
gravity is. It's just not correct.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's a bit tricky, right?
Because if if you say for example that I
want to describe the behavior of the
planets in the solar system on Newtonian
gravity, okay, let's not worry about
general relativity. That makes things
complicated. Um that's actually really
hard to do because in principle I have
to worry about all the other objects in
the universe like realistically now they
give tiny effects right I mean now again
we we're assuming a very flatfooted
Newtonian gravitational scheme in which
there's no time delay of gravitational
effects there's instantaneous action at
a distance so you know the star betal
juice is instantly affecting you know
but but this is just for for sake of of
of of argument in principle you need to
know where Betal Juice is, you need to
know where the stars in the farthest
part of the galaxy are. Uh to get an
exact set of laws for the behavior of
Earth's motion around the sun.
&gt;&gt; Oh, no. Sorry. That's I that's just not
right. I have the exact laws. To get the
exact prediction from those laws, I need
to know the exact configuration of an
amount of stuff.
&gt;&gt; Ah, I see. Okay. So, you're making a
principal distinction between what the
law is. The law is of the form given two
masses, Newtonian gravity specifies a
law of the form G m1 m2 over r^2.
&gt;&gt; And I just don't know all of the things
contributing to that. Um yeah, I I
completely bite that bullet. I mean my
attitude about this is so you could
think of it in in two ways. One way is
to think about the law as a principle
and the other is to think about the law
as a specific set of dynamics for a
certain system. If you're if you by law
what you mean is the principle that
Newtonian gravity is Newton's constant g
* mass 1 * mass 2 r^ 2 I agree that's an
exact law that's an exact law and it's
just a question of applying it but if
you consider earth as just some physical
system in the world and you want to
model that physical system earth alone
you need to write down a differential
equation for earth's behavior and that
differential equation is inherently
going to be imprecise because we can't
take into account all of the effects
what I'm describing cribing is somewhat
like that. Um,
one way to think about it is so so I I
would say um what I'm describing is is a
little bit like that but a little bit
not like that. For maybe the whole
universe the whole you know the whole
universe there is some exact indivisible
process that's unfolding
uh and that's some exact law. Uh maybe
there are some truly isolated systems
floating in the universe, not dark
matter, but dark dark matter that really
is not interacting with anything and and
you know maybe those systems are
evolving according to some exact
indivisible stoastic process that we
don't know about. Um but realistic
subsystems of the universe uh don't have
precisely defined laws at like literally
100% precision although their laws may
be defined to some very very high degree
of precision. What I will simply say to
you though is
I agree this is a very interesting
property of laws.
What about an everettian quantum theory?
&gt;&gt; The shortinger equation is the only law
that's as definite as I can get. But
who's Schroinger equation?
&gt;&gt; The Schroinger equation with the
Hamiltonian of the universe.
&gt;&gt; Of the universe. Good. So at the scale
of the whole universe, I agree. Um the
the claim here is that in place of
saying we have the Schroinger equation
for the whole universe evolving
unitarily in some quantum state, some
universal state vector, some universal
wave function. Instead, the entire
universe is some uh indivisible
stochastic process. It's the universe is
going through some sequence of
configurations and those configurations
are exactly described by one of these
indivis indivisible stochastic
processes. Once we start looking at
subsystems of the universe and trying to
figure out what their behavior is, what
their laws are, we're going to start
incurring approximations. And the same
is true if we start trying to uh uh
write down uh quantum mechanical
dynamical laws for subsystems of an
everian universe. I I don't quite
understand that because if the system is
the whole universe, there can't be any
division events. It can't become
entangled with anything.
&gt;&gt; Oh, that's true. At the level of the
whole universe, there will not be
division events. That's right. Just like
at the level of the whole universe in
the Ever approach, um you're not getting
environmental decoherence either.
&gt;&gt; What is the data I need to predict what
the universe is going to do? So in um
evian quantum theory we need to begin
with some initial quantum state and that
initial quantum state evolves according
to the shortage equation. In the
indivisible approach we begin with some
initial conditioning event and then from
that initial conditioning event the
universe evolves exactly according to
indivisible process. Now that
indivisible process is not going to be
particularly prospicuous. it's not going
to be particularly informative any more
than the universal evolution of the
universal wave function is until you
start asking what are the subsystems of
the universe and asking what are their
effective laws. Um, I'm usually not
interested in the unitary evolution of
the entire universe and the effort
approach. And the effort approach I'm
still interested in understanding what a
particular object on my desk is going to
do, what what will happen a particular
tabletop experiment, what a planet will
do, what uh a quantum mechanical
particle will do. Um and for that I'm
using effective
you know versions of you know I I'm I've
done some kind of work to go from the
exact shortinger evolution of the whole
universe down to um these individual
systems. I'll also push back a little
bit um on the notion that we uh
necessarily can be sure we have uh a
universe described by unitary time
evolution. Um our observable universe as
as we all know is not a closed system.
Uh
you know stuff is you know we can only
see so far into the universe but we
think that that there's no boundary.
Things can can you know can there are
things we think that are outside of our
universe and maybe things are entering
or leaving. I don't know. Um, it's
possible that there's some appropriately
defined
uh megaverse or maybe you could call it
the universe, the the whole universe,
not the observable universe, but
everything that is some unitarily
evolving quantum system. That's
possible. Uh, it's also possible it's
not true. I mean, there are a couple of
reasons to be nervous about this. One is
it would require a pretty wild
extrapolation of the sortinger equation
from where we know that it works. We
have strong evidence of the sortinger
equation for basically microscopic
systems and some very carefully
controlled messoscopic systems at low
temperatures. Um but certainly systems
that are not bigger than a person. And
we're extrapolating that equation not
just to the observable universe but to
whatever
larger total universe there is. And
importantly we're also neglecting uh
general relativity. We're neglecting
gravity which we think is an important
consideration when you're talking about
cosmic scales. So I'm not 100% sure that
there is a meaningful well- definfined
universal wave function. And this was
and this brings back this is was another
concern I had about the effort approach.
I I I worry that the ever approach
depended sensitively on something that
we can't possibly ever know or at least
there's no good reason to think we'll
ever know. So I have on one of my desks
I have a Russian doll uh a nested doll.
Um and and I think this is a nice
metaphor. Uh you know nested doll is one
of these dolls where it the doll opens
up and then inside there's a smaller
doll and then it opens up and inside
there's a smaller doll and so on and so
on. There's kind of a reverse open doll
for our universe. We begin with tiny
quantum mechanical systems that are in
some cases easy to isolate from
environmental effects and they evolve
pretty much unarily although never
perfectly but pretty much unarily as the
systems get bigger and bigger and warmer
and warmer. They deviate ever more from
unitary evolution because of
environmental interactions. They become
what we call open systems. We have to
use open quantum system dynamics to
describe them. And these do not look
like the shortinger equation. There's
effective equations we use for these
kinds of things. Um I won't go into the
technical details but if people are
interested you can look up the GKLS
equation or Lindblottian evolution. Um
which themselves entail lots of
approximations as you consider bigger
and bigger and bigger systems. Uh the
systems get farther and farther from
unitary evolution and they evolve well
classically. I mean that classical
physics is the world that we first
encountered before quantum theory
because that's the what the behavior of
big systems looks like. Systems get uh
more and more classical because they're
just exposed to more environmental
degrees of freedom. Uh and this as best
I can tell just proceeds as you get to
bigger and bigger scales. Once you start
talking about regions of space the size
of a galaxy, this thing has hopelessly
many interactions with the environment
uh and is hopelessly far away from
anything like unitary evolution. So you
imagine you just have this sort of
concentric set of Russian dolls, right?
They just keep getting uh you bigger and
bigger sort of uh your scope increases
in layers and layers as you consider
more and more of the universe.
And there's just this assumption.
There's just this assumption that at
some point this stops and suddenly
everything is unitary again.
And that would be when you reach the
whole universe in some sense
appropriately defined.
And I'm just skeptical that we have good
reason to think that that is true. Um uh
certainly if you want to be a naive
scientific
inductioner, I'm not sure that you got
to use naive scientific induction. would
say yeah something like that um you
would say you know the bigger I take my
scope to be the farther and farther away
from unitary evolution it is so my
prediction is that
you know you know in the limit in which
the scope becomes infinitely big I'm
just infinitely far away from unitary
evolution to say that at the end of this
suddenly things snap back into unitary
evolution that makes me nervous and to
the extent that you need that sort of
assumption to get the effort approach to
work
Yeah, I'm I'm I'm I'm a little nervous
about that. It could be and it also
could be that you can formulate the ever
approach where you don't need that
assumption. I want to make very clear I
don't necessarily think you need it,
although I do think it would complicate
what the ever approach looks like.
&gt;&gt; Let me ask two questions to follow up,
both of which are sort of in the general
idea of making this kind of approach
safe for quantum field theory. Yeah. uh
you know one is and I I've had this sort
of mild disagreement with bomians uh
that that they have this idea going back
to de Bruy that there are waves and
particles and that's why quantum
mechanics sometimes looks like waves
sometimes look like particles and in the
case of quantum electronamics
in standard quantum theory which is not
bombian you just take the electric field
the electromagnetic field you quantize
it and the particles pop out. You don't
put extra particles in. You get fox
base, you get photons, the the whole
story. So the ontology is fields, but
there's a well-defined set of things
that say here's why it looks like
particles in certain circumstances.
What's your ontology going to be? Is it
going to be fields or is it going to be
particles? Because for electromagnetism,
neither one of those seems to be quite
the whole story.
&gt;&gt; Uh that's a very good question. So I
think um one view that one gets out of
the ever approach is we've done it.
We've found the fundamental ontology of
nature. It's quantum states in Hilbert
spaces and now we just need to you know
figure out prospicuous meaning uh you
know uh conceptually transparent ways of
you know figuring out how to think about
or or describe that fundamental
ontology. Um, my view is, um, oh, I I
don't want, well, I was going to say
more modest, but I don't want to I don't
want to make a a moral judgment about
this, but but in some sense
philosophically modest. I don't know
what the fundamental is yet. I don't
think we have a right to claim we know
what it is at this point. Um, so the
ontology you plug into your indivisible
stochastic model uh depends on what kind
of a system you're trying to model. Just
like we would do it classically. If
classically you want to model particles
then particles you use the kinematics of
particles and you find laws to describe
the particles. If you want to describe
uh if you want to model a system of
scalar fields or the Maxwell
electromagnetic fields um you you you
you would take the model to have the
kinematics appropriate to fields and you
need laws appropriate to fields. There's
not one particular ontology uh an uber
ontology that is the ontology of
everything because we don't know what it
is yet. You have a model or a theory and
on that theory it comes with some
particular theory dependent choice of
ontology, some particular theory
dependent choice of how to make sense of
probability and some theory dependent
choice on how to make sense of uh of of
laws and and more too. In a little while
hopefully we'll talk about causation
which I've been thinking a lot about and
I think there's some some interesting
things to say about that too. Um so uh
if you ask what do I think vontology is?
Is it particles or fields or something
else? I I don't know.
We pick a model. We pick a theory. We
want the theory to be empirically
adequate. We want to make the right
predictions and we pick a theory that
comes with a particular ontology so that
together with that ontology and the laws
and the probabilities we get as good a
set of predictions as we can. If you
want to make predictions that are of the
kind we make with a standard model,
predictions that are accurate to 12
decimal places,
the model you're going to want to use is
a model in which if you were to do this
with indivisible stochcastic process, it
would be a model in which your ontology
is fields and particles
uh in that picture would be emergent
features that show up. So, we didn't
talk about emergables, but there are um
features of an indivisible stocastic
process that you can go out and measure
and you're measuring something that's
really there. If you're taking your
ontology to be act if particles really
are what you're taking your ontology to
be on the given model you're working
with, then when you measure where a
particle is, you're revealing where it
actually is. If you're taking for your
model the ontology to be field
configurations and you measure how
intense a field is at a certain spot,
you're really revealing what that
intensity is or at least there's some
direct connection between what the field
is doing and what your your experiment
is. And then there are other features
you might want to measure. There are
other properties you might want to
measure about the system. And those
properties might not be directly
connected to those fundamental
ingredients. There are theorems
famously a theorem by Bell and Koshan
and Specker in the 1960s. It's now
called the Koshan Specker theorem or the
Bell Koshian specker theorem that says
it cannot be the case that every
observable feature you want to measure
is fundamentally there waiting to be
revealed. At least some of them have to
emerge in some sense through some
interaction between the system being
measured and the measuring device. And
so particles
on a model that when with the ontology
is fields if on the model the ontology
is fields particles are emergent
features. If you want to measure how
many particles there are you will do a
particular kind of measurement and
you'll get a particular number and that
number will give you some quantized
value. But that value is not revealing
how many particles were there uh
according to that model. It's just a
probabilistic prediction that is
ultimately rooted in the behavior of the
fields.
&gt;&gt; So I guess so in the conventional view I
have an ontology of fields and I can be
very specific about saying under certain
circumstances I will observe discrete
packets of energy which I interpret as
particles. And are you saying that the
same thing happens in your theory if you
start with a field ontology?
&gt;&gt; Um repeat your question again. In the
ordinary way of doing things in quantum
field theory, I start with a field
ontology. I quantize it. There are
certain very clearly definable
experimental circumstances under which
what I detect are individual packets of
energy that I interpret as particles.
Are you saying that in your theory if
you start with a field ontology, you
will also detect particle-like packets
of energy under the right circumstances
or is this a difference between your
approach and the convention?
&gt;&gt; Oh, no, no, no, no. uh you you the the
the former statement you made is
correct. It makes the same empirical
prediction as standard quantum field
theory. In fact, it's hard to come up
with examples of how this picture makes
any different predictions from standard
quantum mechanics. Um
&gt;&gt; I guess I just don't see where the
particles are coming from if I start
with a field ontology and I don't
quantize.
&gt;&gt; Um so
your that point about quantize is an
interesting statement. In standard
quantum theory to quantize is to take
some classical looking ontology and to
replace the classical variables in some
sense with abstract mathematical things
called operators on a Hilbert space
obeying certain kinds of rules called
computation rel there's a whole there's
a whole system of how we do this
quantization recipe. Um and the
quantization recipe is not a fundamental
statement about what nature is doing.
Nature isn't classical and then it just
decides sometimes to quantize and become
quantum mechanical. Presumably nature is
quantum mechanical the whole way
through. And we're just using
quantization as a heruristic as a trial
and error method for for starting with a
classical description of some system
which we know is only approximate and
guessing the truer or more fundamental
theory for the system. That guessing
process of guessing the more fundamental
version that's what you mean when you
say quantization.
um quantization in this indivisible
picture is quite different. We start
with a classical ontology and we don't
make the ontology non-class. Instead, we
just don't we just pick different
dynamics. The dynamics are going to be
of this new more non-marovian sort of
indivisible form. One advantage here is
this makes it a little easy to imagine
describing hybrid classical quantum
systems in a similar formalism. So it
may make it easier for example to have
some big system that we're pretending is
classical interacting with some quantum
system because now we can do it all in
one formalism. We don't need the whole
operator picture. The particle question
though is um it's a it's a question of
what we see when we do an experiment. If
I take a quantum field
and I model some kind of measuring
device and I model the two of them as
one giant quantum system.
Uh and by quantum system here what I
mean is now I model the whole thing with
some set of indivisible stochastic laws
and I allow this overall system to
evolve according to those laws. What I
will find is that the measuring device,
if it was tuned to measure this thing we
call particle number, will arrive at
some integer value at the end.
And if I repeat this experiment many
times with many identically prepared
setups, I'll find that the probability
distribution of those integer values the
measuring device finds is in accord with
the same B rule type predictions I would
have gotten from the quantum field
theory. So in this picture, there aren't
really particles.
The particles are emergent things that
show up on measuring devices.
And I think that's not such a a striking
thing. I mean, when I first learned
quantum field theory, I was told that
particles were emergent things. Now, now
that we take quantum fields to be
fundamental, you're not supposed to
think of particles as really their own
independent level of reality. They're
emergent.
That's kind of what I'm saying. Also,
although I think that this is a somewhat
more transparent way of saying it,
arguably,
&gt;&gt; I mean, it does seem like a little bit
of a miracle to me that you get exactly
the same predictions as conventional
quantum theory.
&gt;&gt; It is a miracle. It's amazing. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; some people call it a miracle and some
people call it beautiful
self-consistency.
&gt;&gt; Right. I'm not going to say whether
that's a a compliment or a a hidden
critique, but the So, the one last
question then is I don't understand how
you get the stability of matter In this
theory, if I'm doing chemistry, y
&gt;&gt; I take wave functions really seriously.
Wave I have an electron. It's not
located at a point. Its electric field
is not spread around that electron at a
point. Um, but I have a wave function. I
solve for the value electric field I
would measure. Everything works great. I
can calculate energy levels. And you
have particles. And how in the world are
you going to get the orbitals to look
just like ordinary non-realistic quantum
mechanics if you really don't have
waves, you have particles?
&gt;&gt; Um, I mean the answer is that once
systems start to get very complicated,
&gt;&gt; not very complicated. I mean a hydrogen
molecule.
&gt;&gt; Oh. Oh, a single hydrogen molecule.
Sure. Sure. Sure. Um so uh
well and then you know for models that
are as simple as a hydrogen molecule
what happens is you you put the
particles in you write down the
appropriate indivisible stochastic laws.
They're relatively simple to define. I
can if I mean you can if you want to get
into the technical weeds again I I'm not
100% sure how how technical you'd like
me to be here but there's a fairly not
very okay. Well, let me just say that
classically we have a procedure for how
we do this. Um, classically we propose
what's called a Hamiltonian. And the
Hamiltonian we have it's a particular
kind of a mathematical thing that
contains the laws in it or we can use
lrangeian but usually we use a
Hamiltonian. And then there's this uh
this set of rules where we go from this
Hamiltonian function to the laws to the
dynamical equations that say how the
system is going to work. Um, and this is
known as the Hamiltonian formulation of
classical physics. The laws are called
the Hamiltonian equations of motion. Um,
you can look it up. They fit on a
t-shirt. It's not so complicated.
There's a similar um procedure. If you
want to specify the laws of a quantum
system,
uh, in the traditional way, you specify
a Hamiltonian. You evolve the system
through shortinger evolution and then
you have to use the measurement axioms.
Or if you're an Everettian, you make
some argument about the system branching
or something like that. and then you you
try to get probabilities out or
whatever. Um in this approach you
specify Hamiltonian and what the
Hamiltonian does is it tells you what
all of the indivisible stochastic laws
are
and the Hamiltonian you use is the same
Hamiltonian you use in standard quantum
mechanics. You just literally take the
Hamiltonian you would have used and you
just just plug it into this different
like algorithm and out comes a set of
indivisible schastic laws and then when
you let those indivisible laws evolve
the system the system will in every
experimental way show the same behavior.
It's just you get an empirically
adequate picture of what happens. Now
what's going on under the hood? If
you're modeling the hydrogen atom as a
as a fixed non-dnamical center, a
proton, and you treat it as if it
doesn't move, as we usually do in
undergraduate textbooks, and you model
the electron as, you know, point
particle, then what you've got is a
point particle moving around, and the
precise way it moves around is going to
be complicated, and the theory is not
going to tell you definitively exactly
which path it will take as it moves
around. But the theory will give you the
indivisible stochcastic laws will give
you a set of laws that describe its
behavior in somewhat sparse terms and
those laws will be sufficient so that if
you interact with the hydrogen atom or
the hydrogen atom is interacting with
other atoms or it's part of some bigger
solid or something like that you'll just
get the same observable behavior you
would have gotten otherwise.
&gt;&gt; But remember I'm not asking about the
hydrogen atom. I'm asking about the
hydrogen molecule.
&gt;&gt; Oh the molecule. I'm sorry. Let me let
me explain why I care. the hydrogen
molecule I can do exactly what you said.
I can treat you know protons as very
heavy. I solve the Schroinger equation
for two electrons moving in this
background and I get an answer and the
answer is stationary. It doesn't evolve
over time, right? Because it's a wave
that is settled down into its minimum
configuration.
&gt;&gt; You're telling me I actually have two
electrons that are moving around.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. and their electric fields are
moving around, but real world be
&gt;&gt; molecules don't jiggle.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, you got to be a little careful
here. There's a bit of a mixture going
on between quantum and classical
physics. So, um you can't pretend the
electrons are quantum mechanical and
then treat their electric fields
classically and say, well, the electrons
are moving around their electric fields
are moving around. The whole thing is
some giant quantum process. The question
is
&gt;&gt; um how will it behave? We can't just
say, well, the electrons are jiggling
around.
&gt;&gt; I'm trying to talk your language.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, of course. Of course, of course.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You have particles and electric fields.
&gt;&gt; That that that's right. Yeah. So, what
you end up having is, you know, from
this this picture um so in standard
quantum mechanics, you have the wave
function. The wave function is some kind
of stationary state, which means that it
has a definite energy and it doesn't at
the level of the quantum state appear to
be changing except for trivial phases or
whatever that don't matter. Um, in this
picture, the wave function is not a
physical object.
Uh, the physical objects, if you're
modeling particles, are the particles.
The particles are zipping around and
they're zipping around in dynamic
equilibrium.
And their dynamic equilibrium as an
equilibrium looks effectively
stationary.
We can still, now I should make very
clear here, and I I probably should say
this at the beginning. I'm not saying
don't use Hilbert spaces and wave
functions,
right? If you want to model a classical
Newtonian system, you could use forces
and write down all the masses and
accelerations and velocities. But for a
very complicated Newtonian system,
you're probably going to want to use one
of these analytical mechanical methods
like Hamiltonian mechanics or maybe even
Hamilton Jacobe theory. In Hamilton
Jacobe theory, we have all these weird
mathematical constructs evolving and
moving around. found in Hamilton Kobe
theory there's this function that obeys
a partial differential equation which
inspired both bow and shinger um to
develop you know their particular
formulations of quantum theory um but we
don't think that the Hamilton Jacobe
function is like a physical object even
though sometimes it's very simple
simpler than the moving around particles
that um that we're trying to describe
I'm saying that the wave functions and
Hilbert space uh pertinances the
mathematical ingredients that usually
use in quantum theory play a similar
kind of a role. They're often very
convenient to use. If you want to make
predictions as quickly and and easily as
possible, you probably want to formulate
things using wave functions. You
probably want to treat observers as
axiomatic primitives, not worry about
the details of the measurement process.
Just treat measurements as just these
perfect events. Use basically the tools
of standard quantum theory and make all
your predictions and you can make them
really fast that way. Trying to predict
the behavior of a uh polyatomic molecule
directly using indivisibleic laws is
going to be a painful exercise.
&gt;&gt; The the hydrogen molecule really
&gt;&gt; for once well no for for two particles.
No, I don't think it's it's going to be
complicated for two particles. I mean um
the dynamic I mean you'll be able to get
you know dynamic equilibrium. You'll be
able to predict what the wave function
would look like if you decided to write
it down. But once you start talking
about very complicated quantum systems,
I'm talking about tabletop condensed
matter experiments where you've got
arrays of large numbers of particles and
you want to talk about, you know, the
the appropriate way to describe, you
know, at at some point you're going to
want to just use standard quantum
mechanics for stuff.
&gt;&gt; That's fine, but I want to talk about
the hydrogen molecule. Why doesn't it
jiggle?
&gt;&gt; So, the particles are jiggling.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But what is that? I mean they're
jiggling in a way that leads to a
stationary probability distribution over
time. So
&gt;&gt; but physically they're jiggling. That
that sounds different than being
stationary. Why isn't it radiating?
&gt;&gt; Okay, so the distribution of their
behavior is stationary. Their precise
individual motion is not knowable, not
emphically accessible.
&gt;&gt; It exists. Why it's not radiating? Well,
why would it radiate, Sean?
&gt;&gt; It's accelerated charges. I've taught
that they radiate.
&gt;&gt; According to what theory?
&gt;&gt; You tell me. I'm asking about your
theory. Why don't they radiate?
&gt;&gt; Right. So, in classical electronamics
where you have, you know, uh you can
imagine you've got uh charged point-like
particles following deter, you know,
determinable trajectories. Well, they're
going in some path. And you can you can
write down what the path is. And if the
path uh has acceleration and if if the
path involves speeding up or slowing
down or moving in curved paths or going
in circles or whatever then the
classical theory of Maxwell is going to
predict that these things will emit
radiation. Um electromagnetic radiation
this is a prediction of the theory. you
run into some uh subtleties with self
forces and stuff in classical
electromagnetism all these famous
problems but more or less that's kind of
the picture that you get from classical
electronamics
um if you want to start treating
particles quantum mechanically you
cannot help yourself to classical
electronamics so the prediction that uh
jiggling charged particles are going to
radiate is simply not available if you
want to ask whether they'll radiate now
what you need to do is uh combine your
um uh your two electron system, your
hydrogen molecule with two electrons.
You're going to want to combine it with
um the quantized electromagnetic fields.
The the you combine it with QED. You can
imagine that in addition to these two
particles there is uh a huge set of more
or less localized
variables degrees of freedom
representing the intensity of the or the
directions of the electric field at all
points in space.
And now you're going to want to ask okay
uh once we've done this and we model the
whole thing with the appropriate
Hamiltonian or lrangeian for charged
particles
source charged particles coupled to the
electromagnetic field treated as a
field. Um will this combined model
predict that
measurements of energy are going to find
distant measurements of energy are going
to find that energy is being propagated
out of the system. Uh and the answer is
well we know what the answer is if you
try to model this whole thing including
QED including the the electromagnetic
field um there's just equivalence
between this model and the predictions
you would get from standard quantum
theory. Standard quantum theory says
that you do not get uh electromagnetic
waves in these sorts of pictures. So
you're just going to get the same
prediction out of this model. If you're
careful to model the entire system and
include all the ingredients,
you're going to get there's just an
isomeorphism. You're going to get the
same predictions that you would have
gotten from standard quantum mechanics.
&gt;&gt; But in the conventional case, I have an
intuition.
&gt;&gt; There is a wave. I solve an equation for
it. it settles into its minimum energy
state.
&gt;&gt; In your in your view, I I I'm missing
the intuition. I'm hoping that you can
provide it for us. You have a bunch of
things jiggling around.
&gt;&gt; Why does it look like it's not jiggling?
&gt;&gt; So, Sean, I'm going to reveal something
to you that I've revealed before.
&gt;&gt; Uh I came into this world without a lot
of intuition.
And uh you can certainly ask my uh uh
elementary school teachers or my parents
about this or my siblings or really
anyone who knew me. Um and this was a
hindrance for a significant portion of
my life. Um but once I started getting
into uh physics and in particular
foundations and philosophy of physics um
I found that this lack of intuition is
in some cases an asset.
I think, you know, when we're trying to
navigate around the social world of
human beings, the social, economic,
political world, having really good
intuition is incredibly helpful. Take it
from me as someone who's had to learn
the hard way. Um, but when you're trying
to contend with the behavior of
elementary particles and quantum fields
far removed from human experience,
uh, I don't know that our intuitions are
the best guide for how to think about
these things. Sean, it's absolutely true
that if I could come up with some
picture of reality
that uh agreed with the rules of quantum
theory, that met the
previously mentioned potential
overdetermination problem, managed to be
a world picture that was consistent with
the rules of quantum theory. I'd love it
if that picture were intuitive in every
way.
Um,
I don't think we're going to get that
intuitive picture. It's possible someone
will come along and find one. It's been
a hundred years since matrix mechanics.
Um, by the way, do you know where the
word matrix comes from?
&gt;&gt; I don't.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Interesting. So, I didn't know for
a long time, but I was curious. The root
word, the root of matrix, what's the
root without the X?
uh mother mater
&gt;&gt; mother right what do matrices have to do
with mothers so when James Joseph
Sylvester introduced the term matrix in
1850 1851
he was trying to um find a convenient
way to generate determinants
determinants for the listener are used
for many things in his particular case
he was trying to find um he was using
determinance to determine which kinds of
equations could be solved uniquely. Had
solutions, didn't have solutions, had
unique solutions, didn't have unique
solutions. And he realized that if you
arranged a bunch of numbers that show up
in those equations in an array,
then there was a very simple procedure
for getting the determinants out. And he
says in the paper, it's like we're
pulling the determinants out like we're
pulling off offspring out of out of a
womb.
And so we called the he used the word
matrix which is apparently Latin for
womb.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And and huge spoiler alert for anyone
who has still not seen the matrix
in in 26 years. But part of me wonders
if the Wakowskis
happened upon this etmology and this
&gt;&gt; I'm happy to take the fact that they did
not
&gt;&gt; because it's a rather remarkable
coincidence
if you think about what happens in the
movie which I won't reveal any more
detail. Fair enough.
&gt;&gt; Um so but the point is like we haven't
developed an intuitive what I would
regard as an intuitive picture. Boommy
mechanics is very unintuitive. The many
worlds picture whatever its strengths is
not very intuitive. Um, and this picture
is also not very intuitive. Um, but
given the many difficulties I've had
trying to make sense of the other
approaches thus far, difficulties that
might be improved, I don't know, but
thus far haven't been improved. Um, this
approach met my minimal list of
requirements. The first was empirical
adequacy. That is absolutely a
requirement. It must get the
predictions, the experimental
predictions correct. The second is it
shouldn't deliver ambiguous predictions
in certain inprincipal situations. And
Vner's friend is a good example.
Viewers, listeners can can look up what
Vigner's friend is, but it's it's an
example where the textbook axioms kind
of don't know what to do because you've
got two observers. You're not sure
whether one of them does a measurement
or not. So, you shouldn't get ambiguous
predictions. Um the third is that it
should at least in schematic terms maybe
not in all the gory details but in
schematic terms it should be able to to
let us tell a kind of picture of how the
macroscopic world is emergent from a
micro world. When we talk about fluid
water being emergent from water
molecules. This is kind of the paradigm
for how this is supposed to work. At one
level you see little water molecules if
you want to model them more or less
classically as little marbles or small
rocks or something bouncing around. And
then you zoom out, you zoom out and zoom
out and their behavior begins to look
more and more like a fluid and you can
see the emergence as you sort of zoom
out bigger and bigger scales. You can
find YouTube videos where they show you
this.
Um there may be situations in which
emergence is much harder to to model.
But at least in broad schematic terms we
can say that you know the behavior of a
human being generated by our brains is
emergent from the interactions of our
neurons the behaviors of our neurons
some story where there is some kind of
physical substrate the the microscopic
or underlying or whatever physical stuff
there is and some broad outline for how
macroscopic behavior or objects are
supposed to arise from them. So uh the
third requirement is that that we at
least in schematic terms be able to to
talk that way. Uh and then the final
requirement is that we don't have an
endless list of uh extra empirical you
speculative metaphysical hypotheses
extra empirical assumptions a stone soup
problem. Basically an epic list of
additional things we keep having to add
in order to get the thing to work. Um
empirical adequacy though is is the most
important thing. And um this
approach
looks like so far it's hitting the
empirical adequacy requirement which
which I take to be a good thing. Bowing
mechanics at this point doesn't meet it
because it can't describe the kinds of
real world systems that we use. Um some
of the problems of the ever approach
including the probability problem make
me nervous about whether the ever
approach is ultimately empirically
adequate. Although I know there's work
continuing on that. Um the ambiguity
question is resolved on some approaches
the ever approach uh and the bomb
approach and basically approaches that
do not propose a fundamental collapse of
the wave function. You know they will
tell you what will happen and my
approach does that as well. So those all
meet that mark whereas um traditional
textbook approaches or the Copenhagen
approach are a little bit ambiguous
about those things.
Being able to tell a story at least
schematically about how the macroscopic
world emerges is very important. Um the
bomb theory in in principle sort of lets
you do that at least in the models where
it works. Uh Copenhagen does not. The
Copenhagen interpretation does not and
Hugh Everett was one of the most
articulate explainers of why. He said
the copenig interpretation assumes the
classical world at the beginning and
rules out on principle the idea we could
derive what the classical world is like
from the quantum world and he regarded
that as a serious problem. I agree with
effort on that. Um and then the final
thing is avoiding a list of just a long
list of speculative metaphysical
hypotheses which um I'm trying to do. I
I think my approach does it. Um the
effort approach this is one other area
where I get very worried about it. Now,
there are other aesthetic considerations
one could have, but I take these four to
be dealreaker requirements. And if
someone comes along with a more
intuitive approach that hits those four
um benchmarks, I would be the most
thrilled person in the world, especially
if it's me.
But even if it's not, I would just like
to know the answer.
&gt;&gt; Is there uh for audience members who
want to dive even deeper, is there
something they should read?
&gt;&gt; Uh not yet.
&gt;&gt; Okay, we're getting there. here this
well this work is showing up in
journals. I mean it you know we just got
it just got a publication um not not
long ago
&gt;&gt; um
&gt;&gt; uh in a really beautiful journal run by
David Wallace uh currently run by David
Wallace called Philosophy of Physics.
It's an open access journal that was
created by the philosophy of physics
community. Um and it's really just a
remarkable project. I mean, uh, so many
people in the community had their hands
in building up this journal. It's only
been in existence a few years, and it's
really just just spectacular. And and I
give credit to a lot of people involved,
but especially David Wallace, who's, you
know, it wasn't enough that he had to be
like a great physicist and philosopher
of physics. He also had to be like a
really great leader and a great journal
editor. Like,
I'm sure he's bad at something. I I'll
figure out what it is. maybe you know
but
um anyway so huge huge credit to the
people who were responsible for that. So
this this just showed up in a
publication in that journal um and there
are more publications on the way. There
is not yet um because this is all still
pretty new. I mean this project is just
a couple years old.
&gt;&gt; There's still a lot of work to be done.
&gt;&gt; Um which is which is also good. I mean,
it's not often that in a subject as old
as quantum foundations, you open up a
completely new leaf uh in in in our like
notebook, right? A a brand new sheet of
paper uh waiting to be filled in. Um
this is a different approach from all
the approaches that have existed before.
What can we do with non-marovianity and
indivisible processes in quantum
physics, but also beyond? Because now
you can read the approach the other way.
You can say well if there's this
correspondence between quantum systems
and a large class of non-arovian systems
um maybe this means that if I'm trying
to handle some non-arovian system some
real world not not microscopic
macroscopic some ordinary everyday life
I'm trying to model some complicated
system there's no h bars this is not a
quantum system in any real in any
practical sense
but if I can represent it using the
tools of quantum theory then we can use
all the mathematics we've developed over
the past 100 plus years for quantum
theory and apply them to these new kinds
of systems. We can apply the
reormalization group. We can apply
effective field theory. We can apply uh
you know all stationary phase all kinds
of clever things to new kinds of
systems. So there's a lot of work to be
done. But also what this means is it's
too new for there to be uh a a a
readable accessible popular level
description of this approach. You can go
look up some of the other conversations
I've had that are online. Um uh and I I
give a big shout out to some people I've
I've spoken to before. I did a whole
bunch of uh interviews with Kurt J.
Mungle. Um I know I think you were on
Kurt J. Mongle's podcast also, right? Uh
I remember that episode. Um uh so um
anyway, so it and and just Google Google
and you'll find all these these these
these things, but no, there's not a an
accessible readable reference yet. One
of the one of my long-term projects is
to follow in your footsteps, Sean,
and and write uh a popular book. Um
but you make it look much easier than it
is.
&gt;&gt; Oh, it is. Yeah, that's don't be fooled.
Right now, I'm trying to finish one. So,
yes, I'm I'm not feeling that it's easy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, so there's a couple of other
items. I don't know if there's any way
to get them into into this conversation,
but there are some So, in addition to
hopefully making more sense of quantum
theory and and hopefully generating new
applications for things outside of
quantum theory, um, I wanted to come
back to this question about general
relativity again. So general relativity
in certain kinds of situations behaves
like a marov process.
If you have a very nice kind of universe
where space and time join together into
a certain kind of manifold. We call it
globally hyperbolic but it's a manifold
in which we can really think of the
universe being slicable up into moments.
and the moments moment to moment can be
connected together to make the whole
universe then in this situation we can
formulate Einstein's equation the
Einstein field equation as something
like uh the kind of differential
equations we've seen before where we can
take initial information and we can
predict what's going to happen but
there's no guarantee there's no
fundamental reason we know of at this
point why spacetimes have to be nice in
this way and in the general case the
unseen field equation doesn't really
operate like those other equations.
And my suspicion is that this is
connected with the difficulties in
developing a theory of quantum gravity.
Now, there are other difficulties as
well. Um, and I don't have time to go
into them all now, but my suspicion is
that
the reason we don't yet have a fully
probabilistic version of general
relativity.
So not general relativity with small
noisy you know tiny corrections but like
a fully probabilistic generalization
where we replace the nfield equation
with genuinely probabilistic laws in in
a fully general way. The reason we
haven't done that is because um is
because of this non-Marovianity.
Um
the kinds of probabilistic systems that
we have a lot of experience with are
marovian. And if general relativity is
not like that, it's going to resist that
kind of effort.
My suspicion is that if we could develop
something like a fully realized
probabilistic generalization of general
relativity, then although it might not
be quantum gravity,
but who knows, we don't have it yet, it
might at least be a very important
stepping stone to developing a theory of
quantum gravity. And there are some
people trying to generalize general
relativity in a fully probabilistic way,
but those efforts are at this point very
rudimentary. And so I would just say is
this project has sensitized me to the
importance of taking problems one at a
time. Before we jump to quantum gravity,
maybe we should start with probability
gravity and try to see if we can make
gravity a probabilistic theory. Um, so
these are all potential directions and
and and future things I'm thinking
about. The final thing I'll just say is
there are philosophical consequences to
all of this as well.
This is a theory in which the laws take
a new kind of form.
And when you've got physical theories
with new kinds of laws, you can go back
and revisit old questions.
One of the deepest questions in
philosophy of science and metaphysics is
what is causation? What are causal
influences? Uh, I know you had Judea
Pearl on your podcast um, a little while
ago and
&gt;&gt; we've developed we humans, scientists,
not but but but scientists, the royal we
&gt;&gt; scientists uh, and statistical modelers
have developed a really amazing
framework for characterizing and using
statistical models with causal
ingredients
to describe
real world uh systems, situations,
scenarios. We use causal modeling in
medical testing. We use causal modeling
all over the place.
Um but when Pearl was on your show and
you asked him, so does this picture that
has been developed, does this tell us
what causation is fundamentally? Like
what really is it? And his answer was he
didn't think there was causation
fundamentally. He thought it was just an
emergent artifact.
Um, and I think the example he gave was
in F= ma, there's no directionality,
right? Force equals mass. It the equal
sign just goes in both directions.
There's no sense in which one thing
causes another so much as that things
are simply connected by laws in a
non-causal way.
Well, that may be fine as far as it goes
if your theory is Newtonian mechanics.
But if you have a new theory, a theory
in which the laws take a qualitatively
different form,
you can go back and revisit those kinds
of questions. Now,
one way that we cash out causal
relationships and causal modeling is
through conditional probabilities. Well,
the laws in this indivisible approach to
quantum theory are conditional
probabilities.
So, now you might ask
maybe we can is it possible could we try
to ground or develop a theory of
microfysical causation rooted in the
laws of a theory like this? And that's
one of the more philosophical or
metaphysical directions I'm also
thinking a lot about these days.
&gt;&gt; It's good to know that we're not running
out of uh questions to ask or or things
to worry about. So, Jacob Arendes,
thanks so much for being on the
Mindscape podcast. You've given us a lot
to think about.
&gt;&gt; It's really an absolute delight. And I
guess the last thing about you, Sean,
I'll say I want to say one more thing
about you. So, um, it's possible that I
I said this, now I'm forgetting it
because it's been at the end of the
interview, but, um,
having someone like you
who is a phenomenal scientist and also,
by the way, a very good philosopher
and an amazing communicator out there
making the case for the work that
we're doing in Foundations and
Philosophy, and physics, the work that
you're doing and the rest of us are
doing that you're writing articles in
the New York Times. By the way, I have
my students in my philosophy of quantum
theory class read your New York Times
stuff, right? You know, the fact that
you're out there making this case to to
to the public to people with money who
could in principle provide funding to
for this work, which gets almost no
funding comparatively speaking to
anything else. Um, is and you're doing
it so well. You know that I've told you
this many times before. or every time I
see you, I practically tell you this,
but I my level of gratitude toward you,
the gratitude that we should all have in
this field toward you is bottomless. So,
um, thank you so much for all that you
do and I
&gt;&gt; Well, thank you very much for those nice
words. I mean, not everyone agrees that
my, uh, uh, interventions in these
fields are actually good things. So, I'm
glad that some of us think that there
should be more focus, uh, attention on
these things and hopefully this podcast
will be part of it. So, thanks very much
for appearing. You're you're very
welcome. Lovely to talk to you. Hope
we'll talk soon.
[Music]