What Sean said is, "I, Sean Carroll, am
not that interested in labeling things
as pseudocience." No, Sean, how dare you
cast shade and dispersions of the kind
that I wouldn't seek to cast on you, but
I will now. After the noise died down, I
sat down with Eric for a conversation
about all of this, his theory of
geometric unity, what does it all mean,
and why do so many people misunderstand
or misrepresent what it's all about? How
can we test it in the lab and in space?
And will geometric unity kill off string
theory once and for all? Eric Weinstein,
welcome back to the Into the Impossible
podcast. Live and in person. Well, not
live, but we're in person. Good to see
you. But we're live. We are live. Yeah,
we are. It's been about two years since
you were in that very seat. podcast
seating has changed a little bit but
coming off a uh 1 hour plus seminar with
you speaking about geometric unity to a
wrapped audience of string theorists,
cosmologists, particle physicists and
fresh men and women. What did you think
of it? I like UCSD, excuse me, um crowd.
When you heard about the DESI results
and um the cognizante call it DESI, we
never we never read out the acronym. We
always say the acronyms if it's well I I
have to be careful because I'm married
to an Indian woman uh and the word for
country in Hindi is des
uh they refer to themselves as when you
heard about this news I mean obviously
this is not something you posted
retrodicted and put in just before our
talk right so this is must been
something that from the 1980s right so
this must have been something that
you've been thinking about for quite
some time so how how did you react when
you heard the news now we should say in
that seat last week was the
spokesperson, former spokesperson Desi,
still leader of the project, uh, Kyle
Hansen at University of Utah, the
running utes or the uting utes,
something like that. Anyway, and he told
me, well, look, this is a tantalizing
hint, but so was dark energy when it was
first kind of encountered, so we should
not, you know, immediately jump to
conclusions that cosmological constant
is dead and and so forth. But what was
your as a human, as a man, Eric, what
was your reaction? Look, I don't think
that it the results could fall apart.
you could have systemic error and I
wouldn't change my tune. Einstein was
already dissatisfied with the term that
he introduced because it's preposterous.
It's a ridiculous term
and it sits there because it's the only
thing that we think can go in that slot
without sort of entering a check kiting
problem where you have to introduce new
fields uh and then you create more debt
that you have to pay off later. So if
you don't want to get into that problem,
you have to accept it's some constant
that falls out of the heavens
exaggeratedly tiny level multiplying the
metric because the metric is itself u
annihilated by its own its own
derivative operator. And so because of a
product rule in calculus, it has to be
lambda some constant times little gu
metric. and
that technically can sort of accommodate
dark energy, but it's preposterous. So
assume that the experimental result fell
apart. I'd be in the same place I was in
the 80s. This is not going to hold. This
is completely artificial. Einstein was
correct. And if he had the courage of
his convictions, I think what he would
have done is to recognize
that the entire Einstein field equations
cannot live on in this fashion where
you've got one term that's perfect and
two terms that are
unggainainely to say the least and
preposterous to say more. You know, we
were talking in particular about a piece
of geometric unity that's supposed to
cover the dark energy. And I think that
with new tenative results from deesi,
people are more willing to listen to the
idea that this is a pretty serious
challenge
to integrate experimental evidence
potentially with geometric perfection of
Einstein's
setting for general relativity.
And so if you think about the idea that
the Einstein tensor capital g mu new
sits in this equation with these two
other terms one of which is the dark
energy term which is the cosmological
constant lambda times little gmu the
so-called space-time metric and that
being equal to some constant times the
stress energy tensor. only one of those
three terms has this quality of seeming
geometric perfection to it. So all of
the attributes that are associated with
that beautiful capital G mu newu term of
Einstein's curvature
have to in some sense be carried over to
the other terms because they're set
equal right so if if you take the stress
energy tensor to zero you basically have
to say that if the curvature term in
general relativity has a property like
being divergence free that is being
annihilated by some differential
operator then the dark energy term has
to have the same property and we just
don't have essentially any choice in
what that term can be given Einstein's
setting of working over the space of all
potential space-time metrics. Now to the
uh proverbial uh the implications of the
dark energy changing is are astonishing
if indeed it's true. There are many
things that can happen. The cosmological
constant can slowly change sort of
asmtoically changing to some value. It
could get bigger. It could get smaller,
right? It changes. It's not going to be
a constant. It won't be a constant,
right? So, the dark energy term will
evolve. Can't evolve. We parameterize it
by these two terms, omega or wa.
Those are both the equations of state
which govern the existence and the the
net effect of the scale factor on
distance. How the scale factor has
evolved over distance or red shift its
proxy. We call it proxy.
So one of the implications of a
cosmological constant was potentially
the heat death of the universe when
entropy would sort of evaluate to zero
and u and we would be in this cold
sterile baron environment where perhaps
only photons and black holes might
persist and maybe not even them. Now
things are different. We could have a
much more exciting future uh awaiting
us. The big rip, the big crunch. Uh
these these are now back in play whereas
before they weren't. So, how about just
getting out of general relativity
because it's enough already. How do how
do you mean? Let me make an analogy that
I made in the talk. Many people don't
realize that there is no leaning tower
of Pisa. They all lean. There's more
than one. Yeah. Well, the the problem is
what do you make of the fact that when
you when you put towers in the soil of
Pisa that it's in this uh I don't know,
silty silty sedimentary unstable Arno
River basin, whatever it is, they all
lean. And in fact, the leaning tower of
Pisa, as we call it, isn't even the one
that's leaning the most. What I believe
is that um
once you understand that many towers in
Pisan, you realize that it's nothing to
do with the towers, it's about the soil.
And the soil of general relativity is
terrible. It's this space infinite
dimensional space of what we would call
pseudo Romanian metrics
and it has this very simple action on it
that is a a function that tells us how
good or bad any of these things are how
advantaged or disadvantaged desirable
undesirable uh any particular choice of
the world would be and it generates this
Einstein curvature tensor which we love
and it struggles to generate anything to
pair it with. So my claim is you're
doing general relativity in the wrong
place and you took a mathematician
Einstein which he was regarded as a
mathematician in his lifetime u because
he was very mathematical compared to
physicists of his day and you venerated
him to the point that he no longer feels
like a colleague right it's like if one
of your friends from high school became
the pope right or the president yeah
well no the president you can think all
right that's still you could still be
badly behaved, but you know, if uh if
Freddy Fastfingers became the Pope, Mhm.
you wouldn't know how to hang out with
him anymore. Speaking of the Pope, rest
in peace, Francis. Um we have here a
finger puppet of another prisoner. In
fact, Galileo Galile, if you're if
you're listening on the Into the
Impossible Network, um, I'm holding up
my favorite finger puppet of my hero,
Galileo Gala, an Italian of some renown,
who also created our first foray into
relativity and also had some of the
first interactions, dangerous as they
were, with the Pope that ended him up in
a literal prison. Why is the
gravitational potential well of what
you've called Einstein's prison? Yeah.
Why is it so much more deep, robust, and
in inescapable than than was good old
Galant? I'm glad you asked that
question. By the way, Einstein never
made it into Bohemian Rap City, so you
have to assume that maybe it was worth
it. And you and I visited his prison.
That's right. Where he was under house
arrest in Florence. Thank you for taking
me there. Um, what I would say is the
problem is the following. Imagine you go
to a seminar in theoretical physics. It
might begin with the following world
words. I'd like to thank everybody for
coming. Let us assume uh that X1 comma 3
is a space-time manifold.
As soon as you've said that, the game is
already over. You can't do physics at
the deepest level after you've said
those words. In my opinion, the problem
is Einstein baked in this assumption of
a space-time metric at such a
fundamental level that we can't actually
do anything about it after the fact.
Explain what a metric is for those that
Sure. A metric I want you to picture a
4x4 matrix of numbers. And if I flip
about the diagonal that goes from the
northwest to the southeast,
I need that matrix of numbers to be the
same. So in other words, I can choose
the diagonal however I like. But then
I'm only allowed to choose the upper
triangle above it and that will now
determine the the lower triangle below
it. But these are not a real object.
These are mathematical matrices, but
they're sort of real objects in a way.
The four down the middle, the four
numbers down the middle of that 4x4
matrix, roughly speaking, correspond
to four rulers. Three of those rulers
are measuring in the x, y, and z
directions. So that makes good sense to
us. And you can calibrate them however
you like. Uh so if you want a larger
number, in essence, uh you're making
that ruler larger. the the fourth number
is in some sense a time ruler. And so
that's in a certain sense calibrating a
watch.
And then if you think about the
remaining
elements of that 4x4 matrix, you're
really dealing with six numbers that
have to do with six protractors. So that
is protractor measuring the angle
between X and Y, between X and Z,
between Y and Z. So those are three
protractors that we probably feel more
comfortable with. But then there are
these weird three extra numbers which
measure the angle between time and the x
direction, time in the y direction, and
time in the z direction. So that's four
rulers down the diagonal of the matrix.
Three of them are regular rulers. One of
them is a time ruler or a watch that are
being calibrated. And the remaining six
numbers are three regular protractors
measuring an angle of space with space
and then three bizarre protractors that
measure the angle of time with X, time
with Y, and time with Z. So those 10
numbers chosen at every point is a
calibration of a set of instruments
measuring length and angle in a
generalized sense. and we choose them so
that we can at any point in space and
time make measurements. That is the
cardinal sin in my opinion of general
relativity is is that you cannot
quantize in any meaningful sense the
space-time manifold the way people would
have imagined it because so much depends
on this structure. So, it's a little bit
like building the Empire State Building
and then realizing that you forgot to
drive piles or shore up the bedrock or
do anything like that. It's a little bit
late in the game once the skyscraper is
built to realize you probably should
have laid the foundation. And I think
that that's Einstein's great sin, if you
will, is that he built this unbelievable
building in the wrong place without
doing the foundational work properly.
And now we're locked in. So, if you'll
do me the indulgence of passing, that
white circle behind us is a fabric of
spaceime. That's a membrane, which we
will play out the little game of
measurement that you just discussed. So,
if you'll hold that uh up or hold it
horizontally, rather I have no idea,
Brian, what we're doing. I don't have an
idea. So, I've got a mass. I've got a
ruler. Here's a ruler. Okay. So, this if
you're watching, if you're listening,
you're missing. You really should be
watching as well. So, we've got this
ball and it dense and it indents the
plane. And we have a ruler and we can
have a watch too that measures it. I
thought that this was the paradigm that
displays how we actually traveling
through spaceime reinvisioning gravity
not as a force but as a curvature on
this higher dimensional manifold. You
can put this back. Thank you for the
demonstration. Thank you. I'm an
experimental physicist so you know I
love to do demonstrations. What what is
wrong with that? I mean I thought that
was the towering achievement. I mean he
was t as you pointed out in your talk
times man of the millennium of the
century. Really? But the millennium
really I am the biggest Einstein fan.
So, this is not a knock against I'm not
trying to diminish the accomplishment.
I'm trying to say that partially what
just happened is that he built the most
beautiful buildings in the wrong place.
Now, what do we do?
So, I would like to move them
somewhere else. Is part of the danger
that it led to and gave us uh you know,
inextricably things like string theory
which we've spoken about. No, no, no,
no. It's what's the sin? What is the
what is the sin? Spacetime is a corpse.
It's not a dynamic thing. It's you
you've frozen time. You've frozen space.
You you're saying this is what happened.
And in a certain sense, it's not a
dynamic and inviting playground
for an indefinite future. What are the
broader societal implications though? I
mean, is this just a squabble amongst
amongst academicians? And come on,
Brian. No, of course not. Explain it.
Even people who don't know any physics
at all
will say, "Well, you can't go faster
than the speed of light." That sounds
like faster than light travel. It's the
modern day equivalent of a perpetual
motion machine. It's just immediately
gets rejected from the patent office.
Well, and as a result, uh, something
that's four light years away, uh, like
Alpha Centuri is pretty uninviting as a
destination given that it would take, I
don't know, 100,000 years going as fast
as man has ever gone to go four light
years. So, you just think about, you
know, recorded history for a few
thousand years and try to imagine doing
that on a ship. It means that we are
completely stranded. Uh as Agnu Bainson
once said uh one of the funders of the
golden age of relativity, the stars are
too high. We've heard a lot of talk more
than ever about you know the the
benefits and the and the desire to get
to places in our solar system to inhabit
Mars. Obviously, we've we've heard about
that non-stop, incessantly from Elon
Musk, who I've talked to very briefly on
this podcast last year, uh, but not
really in engendering the kind of
conversation on a technical level
because his mother was on the phone and
she didn't want to have him answer too
many difficult physics questions. But
the obsession that we have with going to
our near this nearest rock to us is that
also like Einstein type of prison that
it is too close to us than the star. The
the the planets are are too low. It took
me a while to understand why Elon is not
he's got this thing about at Astra and
he wants to go to the stars and he wants
to start by going to Mars and there's no
plausible way to level chemical rocketry
up to becoming a path to the stars and
there's no allocation to physics. So you
with a very very very rich man at this
impossible level you can measure
something about his belief structure and
his desires that the allocation to
physics proper appears to be close to if
not identically zero.
And I think what this is in my opinion
um involves the fact that he finds Mars
to be energizing as an engineering
project and he finds the stars to be
innovating as a science project. Is it
driven by some venal concerns? He
happens to have a satellite launching
company and uh you know people always
say this about Elon and I don't know
Elon
but that's not the vibe I get. You know,
at some point I remember somebody
informed him, "Today, you became the
world's richest man." And he said
something like, "Huh, interesting. Okay,
back to work."
And
my belief is is that the opportunity
cost for him of not
doing something remarkable is so high
that he just wants to do remarkable
things.
I just I think I've gotten really bored
of taking everyone and turning them into
a money machine. Obviously, money
matters to him because money is what
gives him freedom to do things.
But to constantly have to listen to
somebody say, "Well, Trump is only doing
this for money. Elon is only doing this
for money. All Peter Teal cares about is
money. Mark Andre is focused on money.
Putin is about money. you know,
Netanyahu, the Qatari uh connection to
Hamas, it's all about money.
Yeah, that's not true. That's not how
the world works. That's how we console
our It's like a security blanket that
you hold so that you have an explanation
for everybody's actions and why you're
not rich. You have a uh sour grapes. Uh
no, I think that people, you know,
general, it's better to have more money
than less. The key question is if you've
ever met somebody who's who can always
make more money because they know how to
make money. Sometimes they get trapped
on this treadmill where they can't
afford to get off because if they were
to take a week off, they can calculate
what the cost of it would be. Now, you
may not want to go here, but then we can
always remove the segment, but our
mutual friend or mutual guest at least
Sam Harris on my podcast a year ago, his
first and presumably last appearance.
Uh, and it was a three-hour
conversation. I think we got enough out
of each other. But he essentially hinted
that uh Trump is the se only the second
most dangerous person on earth and that
actually Elon is is more dangerous. And
just last week he said similar thing on
his own podcast on waking up uh making
sense. I always forget two two different
words. Jiren's both like heating. He
said something to the effect again that
Elon is the most pathological
effectively called him a sociopath. the
most he called him the most dangerous
person on earth with you know Trump
being only the possible second exception
something to that effect when you hear
these things again if you want to
discuss it if not we don't have to why
that level of appropriate from somebody
who is otherwise I don't want to get
into so I'm going to decline to get into
the value judgment okay but I will say
if you wanted to turn it into a
different style of question I would be
willing to play with yeah please help
yourself these are very capable people
who've settled next to the levers of
power and are interested in pulling them
and trying to do things. So, in terms of
good or bad, I'm not very interested in
having that conversation for reasons.
It's not that I don't form private
judgments, but I I found that the online
world is not where I choose to share my
my normative judgments as much.
The these are very dangerous people and
they're very dangerous people because
they can do a lot.
The people you're referring to are who
exactly? Trump. Trump and Elon,
RFK Jr.,
Jay Badacharia.
These are people who are sitting right
next to the lovers of power
who I think are inclined to action. Now,
I will point out that you can do you can
be incredibly dangerous by sitting next
to the levers of power and doing
nothing.
So, where are we? I don't really know,
but nobody does. We can pivot to
something that I found very fascinating,
which is your talk at Ark, which
occurred a couple weeks ago. And I
thought you went very deep into certain
things, but I wish that you had gone
deeper into I'm willing to talk about
that, but here's here's my frustration.
What happens when you give a talk on
theories of everything and people want
to talk about have you had any good
sushi recently? It's implicitly
a statement
that the talk did not go well. And I
don't think that's what's going on at
all. I just gave a talk on dark energy.
I think it was one of maybe your first
in a long time in a university in the
United States at least. Yeah. Well, I
gave one at the University of Chicago a
while back. Um, but yeah, it is. And I
think the answer, and I'm just going to
be horrible about this. This is a
physics e podcast. You're a physicist.
We're at a top university. I just gave a
talk on dark energy.
Why do we want to talk about Sam Harris?
I I I know Sam. He's a good friend. I
think Elon does all sorts of amazing
things, including rockets that might go
to Mars. Might he might terraform Mars.
Trump is doing all sorts of things to re
reorder the world.
But by asking these questions and and
this happened at lunch too. So you know
you say here's why there are three
generations of matter.
There really two responses to that if
you're a physicist. One is wait a minute
did did you just say what I thought you
just said
or I don't believe it. You know, the the
chicken is really good today is not one
of those. So, every time that we get
into these questions, I have this
feeling of, yeah, have you ever Googled
yourself and thought, "Wow, I'm more
famous than I remember." Till you
realize your address, your relatives,
and even your favorite pizza order are
now all online. Yeah, you've been data
brokered. Data brokers are corporations
that harvest your personal information,
phone numbers, home addresses, emails,
and sell it the same way my kids sell
Pokemon cards to anyone who will pay
them money and has bad intentions. Your
political views, your job title, your
net worth. It's all for sale. It
shouldn't be easier to find your Zillow
listing than your latest paper on the
archive. But it is. That's why I started
using Delete Me back in 2023, long
before they were sponsor of the show.
Since then, they've scanned hundreds of
data broker sites and removed my
personal address, my phone number, and
many, many other pieces of sensitive
personal information. They even send me
a privacy report so I can see exactly
where it's been erased. It's so
satisfying. It's like the opposite of a
Google Scholar profile. You don't want
your personal information cited
thousands of times. You want it cited
zero times. Since I started using Delete
Me, I sleep better, which as an
astronomer is a good thing, cuz I want
to spend my nights behind a telescope,
not painstakingly trying to remove my
data myself. Leave it to the pros. And
yes, I got the family plan. If some
creep is buying my data, they shouldn't
get my kids thrown in as part of the
bundle. Go to joindeleteme.com/keing
and use code keing for 20% off. Click
the link down below for more info.
That's joindeme.com/keing.
Promo code keing. Protect yourself,
protect your data, protect your family,
and reclaim your privacy. Thanks again
to Delete Me for sponsoring this video.
Your privacy deserves a fighting chance.
The fact of the matter is it's not all I
talk about. You know as well as I do
that I spoke to Douglas Murray this
morning. He's not a physicist. Uh we
talked about culture. No, I know with
you, too. But you are a man of many
opinions. And so I want to talk I will
come back on the Into the Impossible
podcast if it's now. Yes. No, but I'll
come back next week if you like to talk
about other things. I'm happy to drive
down. I just drove down from LA to talk
about dark energy and I want to talk
about dark energy. I think I'm tired of
doing physics this way.
If I'm going to say something like here
is the formula for the dark energy.
I don't think I want to talk about
is Lenny Suskin losing his hair. All
right. Well, in that case, we can have a
short podcast or we can talk in detail.
We could have we could have a long
podcast about dark energy, but it has to
be at a level that the audience is I
can't let the audience be totally swept
up in uh G4, you know, XX to the 4th and
fiber bundles and pullbacks and and
double covers and it's not I want to
talk to that's why I asked you what are
the implications for an ordinary person.
What what what are we going to talk
about? I don't want to talk about the
implications of the ordinary person.
Somehow the ordinary person
very often has bought the elegant
universe. Do they know string theory? I
don't think they do. I don't think they
know what a kabi yao manifold is. I
don't think that they understand what
what is meant by you know tiny vibrating
loops of string. I don't think they know
what Schroinger's cat is or what an
iggon function or an igen value is. I
don't think they know what a Hilbert
space is. But we've we've lured them out
into pseudo physics space
and they're completely conversant in
entanglement of all things. They know
about the double slit experiment. Now,
do they really know about the double
slit experiment? I don't think so. If it
has quantum healing properties, they
might. Okay. So my my my claim is we're
on this weird
agreement with our audience that we've
given them a tiny number of ideas. We
hit them over and over again and those
people become pseudoconversent in
quantum entanglement, quantum computing,
quantum cryptography.
They talk about quantum non-stop. They
have no idea what the quantum is because
we don't actually talk about the
quantum.
And as a result of this,
when you try to say something else,
people have a very strong sense of,
well, we can't talk about that because
people don't know uh what an elliptic
operator is. Well, if we talked about
the AIA Singer index theorem as much as
we talk about some guy named Schroinger
who had a cat,
I I don't ever want to hear about this
cat again in my life.
I don't want to hear about the double
slit experiment ad nauseium. We barely
aware of Areronoff bomb effect. I got to
talk to Yakir Erinoff on a Zoom call, a
guy who figured out in 1959, Brian. Now,
there's some prior art, but in 1959, he
figured out together with David Ball
that there was some sort of non-local
thing happening that was entirely
classical, but could only be detected by
a quantum mechanical interference
pattern, and that we didn't understand
electromagnetism.
that should be as or more famous than
Schroinger's cat.
Well, to get it to that level, we have
to explain what is a potential, what is
a holenomi, what is I mean, you're
welcome to do it. I've heard you talk
about it briefly, but my problem with
the way that these things discussions
come about. I think the original sin was
Hawkings. Hawking sold the public that
they could get a glimpse into reality,
uh, which was providing nothing of the
sort. and he sold them a real bill of
goods that string theory was the final
theory of everything and that once we
understood string theory not physics we
would see quote the mind of God that's
the last three letter words of his book
to the extent that anyone's ever read or
understood it he took for granted that
things like inflation took place we have
no proof of that he did a lot of things
tricks he called them well you just make
time an imaginary number it's just a
trick don't worry about it and then the
rest of the book is about the hawking
hardle theorem right so which is
complete mathematically on you know
beautiful mathematics but completely
physically untested and unfounded. So my
my problem is when you talk to a general
person I believe by the way and I've
made this controversial statement before
that I believe scientists have a a moral
obligation to explain things to the
public who pay our salaries and part of
the reason yes I do want to talk to you
about non-physics things because we're
living in an age in which the
implications of not paying those dues to
the public are coming back to bite us
squarely in the ass and some of those
have to I'm happy to talk about the
funding situation for science that's
something that I care about what is yes
academia in general but my my here's my
point and I'm going be clear about it. I
think I've done my last podcast where I
say yes, I have some ideas about why
there are three generations of firmianic
matter. I think I can say something
about why uh the dark energy is not a
cosmological constant. And when I say
these things, it can't be Yeah, that's
very interesting. I noticed you're
wearing a new jacket today. Is that
Brooks Brothers? like that thing
basically is a dig.
So if you want to talk about non-physics
things, I want to talk about non-physics
things with you. But I do want to know
why are we not
I I gave a formula for dark energy. You
gave an interpretation of how dark
energy can arise as I read it. explain
how you gave a formula in the context of
GR in the context of the Freeman
equations as we teach our students we
have an equation we have two equations
what there's two Freedman equations one
is for the first derivative of the scale
factor and one is for the second der we
cannot measure the scale factor so we
use proxies to detect to determine what
the should we say what the Freriedman
equations are please do actually you
should I don't know the best way of
saying this to your audience because I
don't think a lot of them will know this
stuff but if you have something like a
herald's trumpet
So you have a very long tube that flares
progressively and then very violently at
the end. Right? In a certain sense,
that's a two-dimensional model,
the surface of that of a
four-dimensional
structure that would be analogous to
this sort of standard cosmological
model. That is the axis along the
trumpet. So going from the mouthpiece to
the flared bell at the end, think of
that as timelike.
And think of the radius of the
cross-sectional circles as being the
scale factor. So effectively, the idea
is I've got a round symmetry, which is
the various cross-sections where the
circumference or the radius changes as a
function of how far I am towards the
bell of the trumpet. That extra
symmetrical
assumption is what goes into these basic
cosmological models. And this is the
weird origin of this. The universe is
expanding. And then every smart person
thinks into what? And the answer is it's
not into what. What they really mean is
that the circumference of the
crosssections
is getting bigger in the metric that is
measuring the size of the
cross-sections.
That is what's going on. It's not
getting it's not expanding.
You've you you've assumed that there's
an axis that is akin to going the length
of the trumpet. You assume that there's
a not not a circle in the case of a
trumpet but an entire three-dimensional
sphere that that is the two-dimensional
sphere that we have like the surface of
a beach ball but a one-dimensional
higher analog and that thing greatly
simplifies the Einstein field equations
because the only parameter that matters
is how big is the radius given that I've
determined that it has to have spherical
symmetry. So you're using symmetry to
get rid of a lot of the possibilities in
Einstein's equation. You're saying the
only thing that matters is the size of
the cross-section. Okay, that is
certainly not how we teach the
Freriedman equations. We teach it from
an observable perspective. So I'll
explain how an astronomer does it. So we
used to take these plates. This is an
actual 60-year-old plate. So be careful
with it. Taken by Margaret Burbage of
renowned astronomy uh fame, who was uh
her husband used to occupy this very
office that we're in now. And you would
lay down slits on top of it and they
would make defraction not not unlike the
uh two double slit experiment but with
photons and they would uh demonstrate
the red shift. My apologies to cat
lovers over there. Actually according to
our mutual friend Sean Carol it doesn't
say he never said the cat was alive or
dead apparently. Really? Yeah something
about that. Anyways so the observables
that we see we again we we would love to
be able to measure the scale factor. We
cannot do that. We have proxies that
measure the scale factor. Uh things like
the luminosity of objects, their red
shift uh that they appear at and other
things uh the angular diameter that
standard rulers and standard candles etc
will obtain. And there's new things as
well. And interestingly enough, each one
of those can sample the rate of change
of the scale factor, the rate of change
of the rate of change of the scale
factor. And just like we have a
velocity, acceleration, you know what
you call the the third derivative of
position. Do you know what that's
called? Don't say it. Say it. Jerk. What
you call me? I actually had my students
doing that the other day. They called me
a jerk and they I let them get away with
it. And so we have uh actually
apparently we can measure cosmic jerk,
which is not me according to most
people. Um so we have these proxies that
measure it and that tells us all the
observations tell us with a handful of
five exceptions the universe appears as
if all these galaxies like this guy here
NGC 6437 are moving away from us via the
Doppler shift which is towards the red
not towards the blue and the implication
is that the universe is getting bigger
the coordinate distance if you have a
ruler that's expanding along with the
universe that's not changing that we
call the co-moving distance and things
like desi or the eventual Simons's
observatory and and Hubble space
telescope. They sample the red shift
distribution at different red shifts.
The this the exciting discovery of the
last few years is not the measurement of
the Hubble constant which proves there's
no doubt the universe is expanding again
not into what it's between what right
it's the surface can we just say it my
way and then you tell me if you don't
like it okay that the successive
crosssections the three-dimensional
cross-sections of pure space at
different instance of time have metrics
on them that indicate that the
distances uh as measured in each
cross-section are getting long larger as
the time uh develops. That's right. So
that such that when we observe light
from a galaxy or from a supernova or
from a barrier acoustic oscillation
which is what Desi's measuring, we are
not seeing it as it is right now. We're
seeing it as it was when that light was
emitted, propagated along light cones as
light does. And then uh we can actually
translate that back to the physical
separation at the time of the emission
or the physical separation today which
called the proper distance. We have
different proxies for those. Then we
plug those into again the uh this this
red shift distance relationship. And the
startling thing is not that the people
seem to disagree that the universe is
expanding. There are people that say
that. But that the rate derived from
different measurements is in violent
disagreement at the greater than 5 sigma
level greater than the level that desi
currently excludes lambda being a
cosmological dark energy being
cosmological constant which is only 4.2
sigma. So and just as an aside so a
physicist you know there's a joke like
we invite you down by the way I I love
hearing this side. Okay so you wanted to
go deep. Let's go deep. Okay fine. So um
thank you. Um that makes one person uh
in the audience. Uh but that's okay.
We're not doing it for for ratings and
numbers. Uh the the point is this
measurement is has to be typically we
say one in five sigma is is sort five
sigma result is you know evidence almost
you know beyond a reasonable doubt
because in a statistical normal
distribution that only happens once in a
million assuming that there isn't either
systematic errors or a systematic error
or a bizarre chance where and I tell my
students the actual hard part of being a
scientist is not making the measurement.
assessing how ignorant you are of what
you've measured. Very nice. So in the
case of of Desi, they're able to exclude
a region of the universe parameter space
that describes the Freeman equations,
which includes lambda cosmological term.
They exclude that at 4.2 sigma, which is
more like one in 60,000 chance of
happening by by random chance if
everything's Gaussian distributed, which
you know, they actually believe it's
quite close to that. Okay. So now we
have these tensions. We have these
anxieties and I've said frequently that
I want to hire a psychologist for the
field to alleviate our anxieties and our
frustrations. But there's the Hubble
tension. We're look sorry, we're looking
to get anxious, right? Because that's
exciting, right? All right. As as
Leonard Cohen said, you know, the cracks
are how the light gets in. There's a
crack in everything. But when you hear
these observables, do you think I'm just
curious because I've never really
understood the mathematical approach
that you what's your attitude towards
these data like when you look at it? I
don't know. And that's one of the
reasons why I'm I'm really keen to talk
to you and your department. Look, the
magic of physics and I'm not trained as
a physicist. I'm a mathematician. But
the magic of physics is that it's the
most beautiful
and the cleanest theory you could
possibly have mixed in with the most
infection, dirt, grit, everything
everything irregular about the universe.
Yeah. So, I have like these two favorite
waves on planet Earth. One of which, I'm
going to butcher the name in Tahiti is
Chopo. Okay.
And it is glassy perfection. You just
can't believe anything is this regular
and powerful. And it Yeah, it looks like
some it was waiting for some Japanese
woodcut artist to paint it or who knows
whatever. And the other wave that I love
is the ship's bluff wave in Tasmania,
which has an an underground seafloor
that creates waves within waves within
waves, like ledges and things. It's like
a skate park in the wave every time it
goes. And they're the opposite ends of
beauty. And so I think about physics as
the marriage of chopo and chip sterns.
The most beautiful pristine stuff and
the most dirt you can possibly imagine.
And
what I see in this potential result is
Einstein was divided.
Einstein knew that his curvature tensor
was perfect and he knew that the
cosmological constant was an
embarrassment
and he had no love for the stress energy
tensor when he said that my equation is
like a mansion one wing of which is made
of fine marble the other is made of
cheap wood. So you've got fine marble
greatest blender fine marble plus
greatest blunder equals cheap wood. This
is a call to rescue Einstein to say
we've been afraid
to
to question and sorry but you locked in
the the problem was the house made of
the wing made of fine marble because we
couldn't move that we couldn't touch
that we couldn't go underneath the
foundations nobody wanted to crack it
nobody wants to destroy it everybody
loves it they like testing it and say oh
Einstein still tests beautifully,
okay, but it's preventing everything
else from moving along with it. And I
think that that's what's going on with
the dark energy. So my claim is assume
that that the desi result evaporates. I
will not change my opinion that the
cosmological constant has to go.
Einstein, I think, knew that it had to
go. But the problem is it's connected in
a complex to these other two terms. Is
there the danger of you know what I call
the Nancy Carrian problem which we one
out of a thousand Nancy Carrian showing
our age. I love it. I know one out of a
thousand of our audience will
understand. So she was abused by Tanya
Harding. I think she was uh commission
and conversely. Yeah. I think Tanya
Harding was the only woman to land a
triple axle. Yeah. in competition and
because she wasn't as refined, there's a
sense that uh in figure skating we
prioritize the princess rather than
fully appreciate the athleticism. So I
think that Tanya Harding was just like a
dastardly just a bad force in the world.
And I think that that's real, but I also
think that it came from somewhere super
interesting. I I love the fact that when
they made the movie uh about it called I
Tanya, they got a very horrendous,
hideous, even hideous woman to play
Tanya Harding. Do you know who that was?
Margot Robbie. They got Margot Robbie to
play Tanya. Is this this woman who's
mid? Mid. Yes. According to some, she's
mid. The only thing I know about Margot
Robbie is is that there was a there was
a a meme. Margot Robbie is mid. Mid,
right? Yeah. On what planet? I don't
know. She's second only to our wives and
beauty, right? But but if you look, they
did a survey once and they said, you
know, who's the most handsome man alive?
And you know, we weren't eligible at the
time. Uh so they took they took Brad
Pitt and he won most handsome man alive.
And then if you do a funny thing, you
you take an image of Brad Pitt and you
split it down the middle and you reflect
it across, you know, the left to the
right and he comes out grotesque,
hideous, disgusting. And and yet I was
always told, oh, symmetry, super
symmetry, even fearful symmetry, fearful
symmetry, the fear, you know, the
tiger's eye. Isn't it true that that
it's where these things break down? Not
the beauty, not the perfection, not the,
you know, uh, Nancy Carrianesque nature
of things. But that's really what's
interesting. In other words, it would be
less interesting if the cosmological
constant were constant than if it's
finally tuned or rolling down to an
eventual value which it will disappear.
Right? In other words, you're saying the
cos there's no doubt there's a there's a
dark energy component. Now, there's not
a constant. Maybe it's a constant, maybe
it's not.
Do you doubt that the universe possesses
currently a dark energy component? I
mean, we have no 20 sigma compon no.
Why? Look, I'm giving a formula for dark
energy. Right. Okay. The key question is
we what? Why now? Why here? Why? Like
Nancy asked, I didn't ask the question
that she asked. Why now? Why do we live
in an era where the dark energy is a
value that happens to be that exact
amount to make the universe also
spatially flat? Those two things should
be completely unrelated. And yet they
are. Why? I don't even understand the
question. Let me tell you why. Okay. My
claim is you have two separate problems.
You have like a cosmological constant
problem and you have a flatness problem.
Wouldn't it be better to have one
problem rather than two? I would vote
for that. Okay. Yeah. So now the idea is
if you've got some sort of a field that
has to equal another field and the field
hap one of these two fields happens to
be very close to zero. The flatness
problem. The only thing that's available
to counterbalance it is a field that
should be allowed to move.
So when you set two things equal and you
say one of them is fixed then you've got
a real problem right because now the
idea is that the universe is very very
close to being flat yes where we are y
and you have this question of and if the
cosmological constant
is constant then it has to be very very
small and there's no reason to think
that it should be and that's the worst
prediction in all of physics supposedly
right okay that's not real what
it is is it's a field with what's called
a vacuum expectation value and you can
lure it higher or lower depending upon
what the field on the other side the
curvature field is.
So imagine that two things are allowed
to both move and they're set equal to
each other. You depress one of these
things you'll end up depressing the
other. The flatness has always been
traditionally linked to inflation sort
of establishing initial conditions
anthropics anthrop okay so let's go
there actually we we both know very many
people who traffic in what's called
intelligent design have talked about
fine-tuning from an a designer
perspective we've talked about this in
this very room I don't want to talk
about that again but the fact is in that
chair a month ago sat Fred Adams who's
an eminent cosmologist particle
astrophysicist from Michigan he was very
adamant that there's actually not that
much finetuning. There's actually not
that much anthropomorphis
arguments that we could use anthropic
arguments. Uh it's actually less than
the tuning of a of a tuning fork, which
to our ear sounds very precisely tuned,
but actually it could be a percent, 1%.
Or tuning a radio. Remember radios, you
know, nowadays tuning in YouTube, we
don't do that so much, but remember
radios, you got to tune it, you got to
get it within a couple of kilohertz of a
megahertz bassband frequency, right?
They're talking parts in a million,
maybe something like that. Um but now
the finetuning that he claims necessary
to explain things like the cos no these
are these are very rough. They're 3% 4%
finetuning. He doesn't consider it
fine-tuning at all. So does that have
impact on the the the need or the
statement that you repeated that the
cosmological constant is the worst
problem in all of physics. But I
repeated it because it's a trope. No, I
know. I know. I My feeling about it is
that in general we repeat too much stuff
that we've heard and we do it at
nauseium and that that we become large
language models ourselves as scientists
when we do it and then you don't even
realize it. You may know what the real
truth is but your students don't. And
two generations later they can't even
think. And that's a really serious
problem. So in my opinion um people want
to immediately take whatever our current
model is and ask about themselves and
their lives. And I think this is
terrible.
I think this is incredibly narcissistic.
First question about science should not
be what does it do for humanity? How
does this make a difference to the man
in the street? It's like, you know what?
The man in the street lies in his bed
thinking about his brief time on Earth
and wondering if there's a purpose to it
all just as much as everybody else. And
the man in the street deserves to know.
We're not here to solve your free will
question. We're not here yet to tell you
whether God exists or what quantum uh
measurement means. We're at an earlier
stage. We're finding some stuff out and
we've got preliminary results. And if
you base your notion of free will or
God's love or whatever on some sort of
purpose or or ien value spectrum,
that's a mistake. Stop making it about
you. It's not about you.
Ultimately, the things that I care about
and I think about in this domain
are not about life. Now, it may be that
life can only contemplate them in
certain regions. And so that that's a
place where you're not being
narcissistic. You're saying, "Look,
maybe nobody lives in the middle of a
black hole because it's too violent and
therefore there is no science being done
there." That makes good sense to me. I
heard on Joe Rogan that actually the
universe is inside of a black hole
recently. I didn't know that. I didn't
catch that episode. You understand what
I'm getting at is that we we've I I'm
tired of pandering to taxpayers. I'm
not. But we have different masters,
shall we say? Well, my feeling is is
that I'm not receiving money from
taxpayers. You are. Yeah. And I'm saying
the taxpayers can can take a hike. No, I
know you've talked about Seal Team Six
and we need the we need to give them the
guns and butter and support and cocaine
and lawyers. Um, but you said you did
you do Warren Zeon and Milton Friedman
at the same time? At the same time. Send
lawyers guns and butter. Exactly. I made
an amalgam. I made you mentioned
something along the way just a minute
ago, but you also mentioned it at the
end of your talk. Okay. You talked about
LLM. You kind of gave the, you know,
gave the Bill Gatesian or or, you know,
kind of um uh I don't know, Andrew Yang
or physicist days are numbered perhaps,
but but I want to push back with my
requisite love and respect. No, no, no.
I hate what you do. I don't believe No,
no. If you have something to say, don't
hide behind being the devil's advocate.
I don't think LLMs are going to take
your job. They might take my job. No, I
don't think they're going to take my job
either. I think they're going to augment
it. I think they're going to give me
superhuman powers that I never had
before. My students are going to have
superhuman powers to be exact. But I
want to take it back to your friend and
mine, Einstein. So, here he is. You know
what he said was his happiest thought,
right? What titillated him more than
any? He said titilated me that if this
happened, it would experience no
gravitational force. He said if in freef
fall, an observer, freely falling
observer experiences no gravitational
force. I was convinced it was going to
be about Hedi Lamar. No, it wasn't about
Hedi. was about uh maybe his cousin, one
of his other cousins. Okay. Uh we'll
keep it clean. How can an LLM have a
happy thought? How can it visualize the
visceral sensation that every one of us
knows as I just said that as you go over
a roller coaster's crest or you uh jump
over a speed bump going too fast as I
sometimes do? That visceral feeling in
the pit of your stomach that you have no
gravitational force field. How isn't how
is chat GPT 7.0 O going to in intuitit
what that feels like and then know that
it titilates it. What what are we going
to do? Blow a capacitor and and and you
know feed it some extra tokens and and
by the way we train these language. I
think we've imprisoned ourselves. Let me
let me take a step back. I had this
conversation with um Terry Sinowski
who's one of the partners with Hinton
and and and Yan Lun and many other
people. I said there's a there's a
concept of lock in. you know about this
that that there are certain things that
are locked in because of technical
choices, technical debt is a relative
concept. Uh for instance, they say the
altitude of the the Hubble Space
Telescope was only able to take the
Hubble deep field because of the width
of a horse's ass. Have you heard this
before? No. Okay. So, the height that a
rocket gets to is proportional to the
cross-sectional air area of the booster
rocket that launches it. The booster
rockets for the space shuttle were made
which launched the Hubble Space
Telescope and its repair missions which
is why I mentioned the Hubble deep
field. They were made in Morton Thiacol
in Utah and they were launched from Cape
Canaveral. You had to get those boosters
from Utah to Cape Canaveral. There's no
way that you couldn't fly them. You had
to take them by rail. Now rail rail
width of a standard gauge railroad track
was set by roads which go back to the
Roman Empire. the standard width of a of
a of a two chariot a two-horsedrawn
driven chariot and that width is the
horse's ass times two. Okay, so the
eventual altitude the cross-sectional
area is dependence on that is based on
the width that someone chose for the
standard gauge theory gauge of a
railroad 2,100 years ago. Is this what
you think about when I don't visit for 2
years? This is what happens. This is why
you got to come. We got to have more uh
more of those King's Gambit drinks like
we had last night. So there's a lock in.
I think we've been locked in by the
marriage of chat GPT or the LLMs rather
and GPUs. The GPUs were started for for
fast, you know, for playing GTA 6 or,
you know, Minecraft or whatever. And LMS
were started to, you know, basically
compete uh, you know, tokens, you know,
given tokens. There's no physics in
that. They're they're solving matrix
equations and they're vectorzing
problems in a large multi-dimensional
almost infinite dimensional vector
space, right? That's how we're getting
uh weight functions that then train
neural networks and then we train them
on human interest data. There's nowhere
in that you're going to get physics out
unless that physics of the theory of
everything is lurking within there. So
remember my claim is that we're not
going to get I don't I'm trying to even
understand this point. Okay, this is
might be too too too advanced. Okay,
my claim is that physicists job security
is maintained or at least LLMs aren't
going to take it away. some other type
of of AI may take our job. Doge may take
your job away. Doge? No, I think I'm I'm
safe for now. I' I've got the Simons
Foundation as as Okay, but not your job,
but somebody else's your competitor's
job. You You should be back Doge there.
Everybody else is going to disappear.
Keep going. That's right. How do you
think I got to where I am? The literal
Doge. I mean, Galet was with the literal
Doge 2000 400 years ago. Anyway, my
point is that we are locked in because
of the success of Nvidia plus chat GPT.
Yeah, there's almost no chance that some
successor type of AI chip plus model I
don't know what what it would be
topological neural network whatever it
would be that that can supplant anything
because if if you stipulate that we're
it's so successful it's a victim of its
own success Nvidia is the big one of the
biggest companies on earth chat GPT is
running away with with the 97 93% of all
LLM and and um and GPT type request
where is the physics type of AI, a
physics-based AI, physics based AI
that's going to create new physics of
the kind that Einstein did when he
visualized the Gdankan experiment of
freef fall. I am so confused by this
question. So maybe we'll just start
maybe I should do it again. Yeah. Okay.
Okay. So here's what I'm trying to
understand. Mhm. Are you saying somehow
that you don't think LLMs are going to
be able to push the physics frontier? I
don't think that they're going to
surpass Yes. I I would say that I
disagree. Okay.
What evidence do you have that they
would be able to do that? They haven't
solved any uh initio new problems.
They've actually been able to be quite
good at visualizing smoke and and
turbulence and things like that. I think
that if people have left really good
ideas in the literature or somewhere
that can be in ingested into the corpus
that that's used to train these things.
you could find out that the people who
are being ignored by the physics
profession
are understood
by the LLMs. And so if you think about
what what Jared Diamond did in Guns,
Germs, and Steel, he weirdly didn't seem
to do any original research, and it was
entirely original.
He took things that weren't known to all
fit together and he came up with an
entire line of attack that I don't think
was really heard of before. If an LLM
has never read Shakespeare
and you say, uh, I realize it's my
wife's birthday in two days. Could you
write me a poem comparing her to a
summer's day? The LLM will take a stab
at it. Sure, it's good for and we'll
think, okay, what has anybody ever said
about comparing a a beloved woman to a
summer's day?
I think that you will find that in part
because this era has been so unethical
in physics
that the LLM stand to do much better
than they would in an ethical era. I'm
shocked to hear you say that, Eric. Say
more. I'm shocked to hear you say that.
First of all, there's some sort of
landscape in which these things evolve.
These these LLMs will crawl. They will
crawl. You're absolutely right. They
will crawl and they will dwell in
certain, shall we say, potential valley
minima. Right. Right. Where where will
those be? They will be where the
orthodox scientific output is where the
published peer-reviewed scientific
literature takes them. they will not go
to I get an email a week from somebody
so much so that I've now established an
office hours type thing where I have
Brian Keating I professor Kading I have
obtained a new cosmological theory a
theory of entropy a theory of everything
a theory whatever it is and I get so
many of those and by the way I don't
want to waste your time professor
they're very solicitous and and
wonderful people but I so I didn't want
to waste your time I checked violent I
checked it with okay well luckily I
haven't had that encounter yet um okay
I'm sorry to hear that Well, people some
people are very very they're very very
friendly. You you have you're the only
one who will understand my theory and
then it becomes wow if I can't even
trust you I've lost faith in humanity or
you're only doing this to steal my work.
So to preempt that I often get the
following which I am appreciative of.
I've run this through chat GPT. I've run
this through uh deep research on
manness. I've run this through Gemini
2.5 experimental with deep research
whatever and it can find no flaws in
this logic. I related the one of you
know very brilliant gentleman he
actually came here and visited me and we
talked for a little bit and I said I
don't have time to evaluate your
theories and and unless you I'm an
experimental physicist by the way I I do
observations so unless you can make a
prediction of the CMBB's power spectrum
or you can make a prediction about you
know some cosmological observable
degrees of freedom that I have access to
with my telescope I'm useless to you and
they might not want to hear that but I
will tell them that. Um so first of all
this is done to indicate two things.
It's either going to gravitate to the
high quality or the high quantity. These
crawlers, these these net crawlers or
whatever you want to call them that are
going to crawl the scientific literature
looking for the unsung Einstein's
going to genius. Okay. They're they're
going to ingest everything. How will
they weight it? They have to weight it.
There's no they have to put a metric on
it as you would say, right? How do they
weight you versus Lenny Suskin versus
the guy that sends me the theory? Brian,
you're putting too much structure on it.
Okay. They simply ingest things that are
out here.
If you start asking a question like let
me give an example.
In general we are very careful about
saying that a symmetry a set of
symmetries
um should be what we would say of a
definite killing form. It should have a
definite killing form. Now since you
mentioned the violent people can you
explain what killing means in this
context? killing was Wilhelm killing I
believe.
Irish physicist or something, right?
Germanhelm. I I think if it has an
indefinite killing form, you're in some
trouble. But it's not like the
literature doesn't consider indefinite
killing forms. So if somebody for
example says I'm interested in removing
the restriction to definite killing
forms and exploring the following ideas
even if the weight of the evidence
is that we should only be looking at
symmetries with definite killing forms.
You can change the weights in your
prompt
so that the LLM will disregard the usual
caution
about taking on things that might
challenge unitarity which is you know
the loss of probability that probability
should remain one in total or that
things should be causal and shouldn't
null energy condition. Exactly. So you
have all these things that can go wrong
and in a minority of the literature
people consider indefinite symmetries.
You can change the weights by asking a
prompt saying I'm not interested in
taking on the usual for the moment
suspend those sets of assumptions. I
want to explore the consequences. The
LLMs will help. So I I I think that
you're wrong. I think that the fact is
that the LLMs
won't be able to do that much if the
field is actually digesting what people
say. But I heard Lenny Suskin do this
thing which is that he said Peter
White's mathematics
are bad
and it hurt my soul. Peter White has
written one of the best books on the
mathematics of quantum theory. Nobody
knew he had this book in him. Nobody
knew he could do this. At least I
didn't. And I've been friends with him
for years. And to hear Lenny Suskin, who
is not as good of a mathematician as
Peter White,
slight Peter White. And then when I
started to say something about Lenny
Suskin, you in fact say, "Well, Eric is
causing these problems with Lenny
Suskin." Well, here's my I said, "This
is what Lenny's done. Okay, he's not a
physicist about my point that I'm going
to make is I don't hear almost any of
you guys
taking Lenny Suskin to task.
He's a very outspoken negative force in
our field. I thought you didn't want to
go here, but I'm happy that you're that
you
say that the LLMs are going to allow you
to get around Lenny Suskin. They're not
going to enhance it based on his six
books, his feshbach professor, his
national academy stature, his many many
acolyte students that site his papers
and so forth and published literature
versus you who have an h index much
lower. I think zero. I'm trying for No,
I'm trying for zero. You're I want to
have an H index of zero, right? You
already have an H index of one. No, it's
impossible to have an H index of zero.
Oh, is that right? Yeah. It's the number
of papers that have at least H
citations. So that you've cited yourself
gives you at least one citation. So your
H index is at least one. Well, I don't
I've tried not to publish anything. No,
I'm not kidding. I know. I can't stand
the way the way your field operates.
Your field is operating in a circular
fashion. What I would say about Lenny is
those three books, the the theoretical
minimum, is it three, is it four? Pretty
good. Pretty terrific, don't you think?
Yeah. I love them. Do I think Lenny's
done interesting things saying things
about cork confinement? I do. Do I think
that Lenny Suskin uh has interesting
things to say about black holes? Sure.
What I am trying to say is Lenny Suskin
says a lot of negative things about his
colleagues. And if you turn that lens on
Lenny Suskin, that ant will fry under
that magnifying glass. How does that
advance physics though? I mean, no, I'm
telling I'm telling you, you've got
malign influences at the top of the
field who throw fear, uncertainty, and
and doubt at everybody who is not towing
the line. That's ridiculous to to be 40
years in, 41 years into the string
revolutions and to be going on with the
only game in town. It was very funny to
watch Lenny Suskin say this thing which
is we have got to go back to the origins
to the fundamental assumptions of string
theory. I'm like you've got to be
kidding. But real string theory has
never been tried. Real string theory has
never been tried. This is the LLMs are
going to allow people to go around
this chorus of people who say the same
things in lock step
but okay I want to move on but I do want
to say I'm not as confident as you which
is surprising because I think I I am
more representative of the orthodox of
physics. You will often say I'm not a
physicist of yourself and I will say I
am not a theorist and you will you will
say you physicists don't take him to
task. It's a very different thing to
take him to. You podcaster, you Brian
the podcast, you Brian the experimental.
I think the entertainer is going to do
the work that theorists are supposed to
be doing. In other words, I didn't have
any problem with Lenny and company
promoting their work. You start coming
after other people having other ideas
with this only game in town nonsense and
that breaks the contract. You're
failing. you are failing with more
resources, more time, more
encouragement, more puff pieces than
anybody else. And you look at like the
online debunking community.
Bunch of All the Redditors, you
know, are basically trying to figure out
how to come down with Ed and Lenny and
Andy and Kuman. And you're just thinking
like, look, this is not science.
Science is about failure. When things
fail, it's information. The fact that we
didn't find super partners when we
turned on the LHC and there was all of
these claims that now you're going to
see gluey nose and squirs and all this
stuff. Great piece of information that
tells you that those people who were so
confident
are wrong and then you want to find out
well what did they learn? Gordon Kaine
is a perfect example of this very very
striden about what's true and what's
going to happen. And then when it
doesn't happen there isn't enough of boy
was I wrong. And one of the things that
I loved about Lenny on Curt's program
was Lenny admitting that he was talking
about things he didn't know anything
about. And part of that is alternatives.
What do you say to people say, "Well,
Eric, you just are hurt that he when
asked about you had no idea who you
were, even though he knows who I am. We
both know who you are. Both we know that
Lenny knows who you are." If I were to
look on my phone and I were to say um
I remember coordinating a meeting with
you uh you and your son and Lenny from a
few years back you were interested in in
having conversations with him and I
think maybe you did or is co or
whatever. So it's not a personal
vendetta as you say you're you're you're
upset on Peter White's behalf. No, I'm
saying something else. Lenny is a
canankerous fun rac
gruff gruff ethnic York everything.
I'm down for that. You go after Peter
White, you go after Garrett Lesey, you
go after me. You go after everybody else
and then you say you only want we have
to go back to the beginning of our
assumptions and you're like yes, yes, 40
years in the making. Go ahead and say it
of string theory. And I'm thinking no no
you don't get to do that. You ruin too
many lives. You ruin too many careers.
You the these things have consequences.
Who gets health care? Who has a pension?
Who has security to be able to say who
gets to train more students? No, you
failed. You lost. It's over. You're in
your mid80s. Ed Whitten is going to turn
74 this year. Retired forcibly from the
IAS, which has a retirement age. You
don't get to say, "I have no idea who
that is about Eric Weinstein." when I
can tell you the exact date when I last
talked to Lenny. This is preposterous.
And I think that partially what I'm
trying to say is we can't allow physics
to venture 100% into pretend land where
unicorns and fairies and you know Chris
Kringle at the North Pole making up. Can
we entertain people like you did and
spent so much of your time with Terren
Howard for example? What about him?
Well, when you are in interacting with
people that are not in the mainstream to
denigrate what they do uh is seen as
gatekeeping. I've heard Sorry, sorry,
sorry. What are we talking about here?
Uh there's two there's two ends to this
electromagnetic spectrum of collegiality
as I see what we're talking about in
this little What did I do with Terrence?
No, no, no. You engaged with Terrence.
And Joe Rogan, a friend of mine, asked
me, will you sit with Terrence? Now, he
misportrayed that saying, "You wanted to
come on with Terren, which it wasn't
true, but he wanted me to come on
because he had started this thing." Why
did he do that, by the way? It's curious
to me. Why did Joe misrepresent the ask
that he made? I mean, he doesn't have
trouble getting guests, right? Look, I
don't think it was sinister. I think
what he wanted is he wanted a debate. I
didn't want to have a debate, right? He
wanted a peer review. I didn't want to
do a peer review. He wanted a
collaboration. I didn't want to do a
collaboration. I didn't need to come on
and do a Terren Howard episode. In fact,
I wasn't going to do a Terren Howard
episode unless I could find something
that was really worthwhile in what
Terrence was doing. And the two people
who convinced me more than Joe were Rick
Rubin, the music producer, and Neil
Degrasse Tyson. So Neil deGrasse Tyson
gave a perfect perfect back of the hand
to Terrence Howard where he just sat
there you know in his uh you know
Terrence I'm just giving you a peer
review and the two things that you know
became clear to me is first of all Neil
does not understand a lot about platonic
solids because he didn't know where all
of these objects were coming from and
you know these are important important
uh concepts including convex polotopes
in dimension four which we need to talk
more about because there are six solids
rather than just five. There's a new one
called the 24 cell that's super
interesting. There you go. And then Rick
Rubin said, you know, this this line I I
wake up, he's like, why can't you
explain physics like Terren Howard? And
I just that blew my mind because
whatever Terrence is doing, he's not
getting the proper respect for good
things that he's doing from the Neil
Degrass Tyson's and he's getting this
credulous buyin from the Rick Rubin. And
Terrence and I, by the way, are fine. I
mean, we're we're we're in discussion
about things and we disagree and I tell
him I don't think there's a lot in your
claims of physics or math and you he's
fine with it. He's he has thick enough
skin and some sorry some days yes, some
days no. But Terrence and I so far we've
dealt okay with it. What I would say is
I was the one who said 108 which is the
angle in in of an interior angle to a
regular uh pentagon is not 109.47 47 if
I recall correctly, which is the angle
between two vertices inside of a
tetrahedrin as seen from the center of
mass. Terrence cleverly,
and you know, you're a flight guy. Um,
you have pitch, yaw, and roll, which is
effectively a spanning of the SO3 Lee
algebra. But then you have an aphine
shift, which is X, Y, and Z, your center
of mass. So he took the six edges of a
regular tetrahedrin,
found a very close match 108 versus
109.47,
stuck in pentagonal
fans as propellers,
and spanned the aphine lee algebra of
the aphine group on three-dimensional
space with a regular structure within
engineering tolerances that can form
docahedral structures in midair. Now, my
claim is I'm not out to get Terrence and
I'm not out to celebrate Terrence. I'm
out to evaluate Terrence and give him
his best hearing. Why can't Lenny do
that for Peter White? That's exactly
what I was going to say. So, I think not
to answer, but I would say the same
reason that you don't answer every email
that you get. There is a finite amount
of time. I don't think my job is to
evaluate others. I was asked by Patrick
Beck David to come on his show multiple
times including to give uh and
ironically I couldn't make it the first
time because he I was being interviewed
by Neil Gres Tyson in which in his
office in New York City so I couldn't do
it and then by the time I said look get
someone who's knowledgeable. I didn't
mention I mentioned that you obviously
converse with with with Joe and Terrence
and you know Terrence has my email and
my phone number thanks to you. So why
didn't he call me up and ask me if I
wanted to do it? felt like it might be a
setup. Maybe Patrick's trying to get
this, which was confirmed. Patrick is
causing trouble for reasons. I don't
know. I don't understand. He wants to be
like Joe. He wants to have an influence
like Joe Rogan. He even has a Jaime like
character. No, but what I'm trying to
say about Patrick, I I don't know
Patrick. I don't know him either. His
team has been very polite to me. They
tried to get me out multiple times. I
don't have a negative view on that. But
he's looking to say something like,
"Wow, this smells of gatekeeping." Well,
gatekeeping is the wrong concept. He
exactly said that. He said, "This
reminds me of what they did to RFK
during COVID that they won't talk to
Terrence." I said, "Look, something
doesn't become true once Eric debunked
whatever." I don't want to say debunked,
but let's say once Eric gave an expert
review on Joe Rogan. Yeah. Um of
Terrence, those aspects were now no
longer um gristed for the mill of
discussion. Now, Terrence knows that
he's intelligent. So, he will say,
"Well, now I've got this new proof of
the threebody problem, right? So now
he's got a new reason to incite, you
know, an interest in his work and get
you an invite. So then, but Patrick's
like, well, he wants to have a live
debate with you in front of a live
audience. That's not what science is.
I'm sorry. Science is not about, you
know, who has the more eloquent. I'm
sure he's more eloquent than me and he
can talk more. So this is this problem
that we don't know how to do demarcation
theory. And you know who's actually
what's demarcation? What is science?
What is not science? And you know, one
of the people who's actually said the
most thoughtful things on this is is
Sean Carroll of all people. And what
Sean said is, "I'm I Sean Carroll am not
that interested in labeling things as
pseudocience." Because I think we have
to talk about this so-called debunking
community. The debunking community is
this bizarre mixture of keeping the
world safe from total horseshit and
keeping the world safe from legitimate
heterodoxy at the same time. All right,
the MC West, the uh the whoever
counterpart or analog would be, right?
Doesn't matter. Sometimes you see it
online as debunking uh because there's
this weird energy of like I review so
and so and I call out all his BS. I
owned him, right? Yeah. I owned him
pawning and all this. Okay. What Sean
Carol said is I'm I Sean am not
interested in the science versus
pseudocience.
I'd rather call it science and say
that's bad science. So I thought that
was interesting is is that it gets rid
of the psychologicalization of why is
this person behaving the way they are?
You know, if somebody believes that they
have a a means of turning lead into
gold, that person may be an absolute
lunatic. But if they did have such a
process, I would understand why they
would want to protect it. Sure. But when
you have people that say that they have
proof that the moon landings didn't
happen, the Earth is So this is this
issue about I try to say to people the
odds that JFK was assassinated by
something other than a lone gunman named
Lee Harvey Oswald are in a different
category than the idea that we didn't go
to the moon. And there shouldn't be a
category called conspiracy theory lab
leak. Right. Right. Because these things
are at all different levels and you know
including things in previous times like
plate tectonics. And so in a certain
weird sense the problem is words like
gatekeeping like sorry is gatekeeping
bad? There are lots of things that I
really appreciate there's a gate around
them and the gatekeeping is done really
well. So you know in part it's the
internet the tyranny of the internet uh
has infected our speech. So in the case
of all of these things yes we are all
besieged with requests and demands
please look at my thing. My claim is in
part we're lying because if we
administered a rudimentary test I don't
mean like giving really hard detailed
problems at the math olympiad or physics
olympiad level. I mean like name name
some lepttons. You know most people
would fall apart. What's the
plank equation? Right. And what I'm
claiming is that we don't listen to our
colleagues who know a lot of that basis.
Can I summarize? I think I I want to
move on but I I do now see something I
didn't see before. Please. There's a
difference between me saying me saying
look I don't I'm an experimental
physicist Terrence. I'm not going to
criticize that except when you have on
this complete pseudocience expert uh Dr.
Waying Yu who Patrick chose to because
he wouldn't wait a week or two. Maybe I
could have done it, maybe I couldn't. He
had this person who's supposedly he
knows me way Ping. Yeah, he's talked to
you actually. He's visited you and talk
to you in California. He
see the interview. He'll talk about it.
He'll say that he not only did that but
he found flaws in GU. Anyway, I don't
want to talk about that. No, no, no.
Just what I'm trying to say is
how interesting that I have no knowledge
of this person. No, I agree. But I want
to say this. There's a difference
between me a there's many possibilities
ignoring Terrence or ignoring way uh you
there are ways to do it and I'm what I'm
hearing and what I now finally
understand is that Lenny Suskin took the
latter approach. He could have said
nothing. He could have been charitable.
I don't have time to evaluate geometric
or Peter White or Gu. He talks to me
about geometric unity when I'm when I
meet him. Yeah. But he chose instead to
say something negative to say I don't
know or maybe proaricate or proceverate.
He he said Kurt Jungle is providing a
service that has never existed. I think
it's very important because I'll be
honest I did not have an easy time with
Kurt when I met him and I didn't
understand who he was. This is a very
strange phenomenon and I just just let
me spend a minute on it. In general,
there are two kinds of interviewers in
physics.
There are
ostensibly disinterested interviewers
who don't know enough physics who have
to basically go along with the party
line because they just don't have the
basis to challenge. Then there are
interested physics people who don't
challenge their colleagues because that
leads to loss of funds, loss of
reputation, bad things. So what happened
with Kurt is that he was assumed to be
of the former category because he's not
a PhD. He's not a researcher
and people he would accept people would
accept interviews with him and then he'd
say things like uh do you favor this
approach? Somebody would say oh yes and
then he say well what do you think of
the other approaches? And the person
would sort of do the usual and say well
I don't I don't really think there are
any other approaches. And and so then
Kurt would say, "Well, I I could list
five of them for you." And well, I I
don't know anything about Well,
actually, I I know about them. If you
don't mind, I I I could describe what
the time for that, right? And suddenly
in 40 years,
Kurt managed to get through something no
one else has gotten through. I'll say
what it is. How can you have a community
that is absolutely convinced that they
are doing the only thing possible that
it is the only game in town and they
know nothing about what's going on
outside of their community? There's that
that is, if you think about it, it's
just for 40 years that question has
never been asked by anyone. M and Kurt
was the first person to get through this
by saying, you know, I'm not a physicist
and I'm not a mathematician,
but I can tell you that you're distorted
completely in claiming that you're doing
the only possible thing. You're just
wrong. Do do you care to answer? And
that's when Lenny had to back up and
say, you know what? I have no idea what
I'm talking about. And by the way,
praise to Lenny Suskin for having the
presence of mind, intellectual honesty.
Yeah. So, right, even even uh he can be
distemperate. Uh by by the way, I just
want to also point out that when you and
I are talking about Sean Carroll or
Lenny Suskin or Neil Degrasse Tyson or
any of these people, I'm not denigrating
them. Well, no. Sometimes, you know, I I
I can't stand I can't stand Neil's
condescension. On the other hand, I
don't know of a person who does as well
explaining so many things brilliantly.
Yeah. Guy's got a tremendous amount of
knowledge and an incredible gift for
exposition. Yeah. What's weird is And
don't say gift. He played he literally
when I claimed that he had a gift for
explanation, he play said I it was a
implied it was racism and and said I'm
going to play the race into the
wellspoken trap. No, I said uh how do
you react to people that will that you
know don't have these gifts? And he
said, "Wait a second. I work very hard."
Yeah. You assume you see a white person
doing that? You wouldn't say, "Oh,
you're just gifted at at at eleocution
and and explication and and the way that
you've communicated." But you don't
realize how much work I do. When I go on
Steven Cobearer, I spend three weeks of
investigating what past jokes he's told
and how I can relate them to my science.
And then how long does he pause between
asking a question and letting me answer
it and I do studies. I work hard at a
gift because I'm black. I think he works
his ass off. I do. I do too. On top of
that, yes, I think he man has a gift,
right? I said you're 6'2. you wrestled
and and got into college in part because
you were a wrestler. That wasn't like
you didn't work for that. You were born
you won this lucky sperm club and
there's nothing to be you know the the
confluence of greatness occurs when
there is a confluence of I could work
that hard at exposition and I couldn't
do what he does. Exactly. And he works
right. Exactly. Um, but let let's move
on to one last thing. No, but I just
wanted to sum that one thing up. That
riff is Isn't it interesting? I don't
sense with either you or myself any
desire
to just negate people. If somebody is
just determined to be horrible, yeah, I
don't mind commenting. That person seems
to want to be horrible. Dave Fina,
perfect example. But if he did if he did
something genius or something really
brilliant, I would like to think that we
would say, you know, hey, this is kind
of uncomfortable, but this person
actually really did something
impressive. My claim is is that one of
the the hallmarks that there's something
going wrong in the science system
is these absolute ad homonym attacks
that attempt to get rid of humans. not
say, you know, that person's a little
high on his own supply, that person is
overplaying a weaker result, blah blah
blah blah, because he's insane. He's
unhinged, right? Yeah. And and I think
that that is that is what really
offended me in part about like the
slight against Peter White when Peter
White everybody uh highly recommend go
buy his book on symmetry and the quantum
theory. If you know anything, you will
not be disappointed. when you were here
two years ago uh in person, we did an
interview, sorry, we did a podcast with
Dan Green about the progress in physics.
I thought that was very uh positive, but
we did a solo episode or you know,
two-part episode conversation. Dan Green
was terrific. Yeah, Dan Green's
wonderful. No, I'm saying then we did
another episode where was you and I in
conversation. That was our last inerson
interview, although we met many times
since then in LA and Florence and other
words. You said two things that I want
to double click on as they say. Uh, one
was about the war in Ukraine and it was
just had was entering its first year of
ending its first year rather. Sure. And
it was six months, seven months before
October 7th and I we haven't talked
about this in the conversation yet or in
conversation on at least on the podcast.
you know, as a friend. I know this is
not the primary motivation, nor was it
my invitation to you to come down here
and talk politics and stuff, but I I I
do want to talk about that and I want to
talk about academia and the future of
academia in light of especially the
October 7th events because on this
campus and you know, and you've been a
big supporter of Okay, so here's the
thing. I am happy to talk about October
7th and I'm also happy to talk about the
threat to science and the context of
science and the current situation. I
think both of those things are huge
issues and and and even Ukraine,
although I'm I'm less clear where I
stand. The thing that I don't want to do
is what I said before. If I'm going to
come down and talk on dark energy, I
really want us to focus on I'm saying a
thing. I'd prefer to adjudicate it and
figure out where it stands than that we
just sort of treat it like, oh, you gave
a talk on dark energy. Yeah. All right.
And and again, we have the talk which
we'll put on the channel. We'll put a
link to that. But what I want to say is
how does this pertain to the to the
practice of science, the destruction of
the superructures that support science?
We're told recently that your alma mater
or Harvard is the lone defender, you
know, of of the integrity of the
university where we're sitting. We're
sitting in a top university. I felt like
this quote from I think it was I I
forget the name of it, but you know,
first they came for the socialist, but I
wasn't a socialist. You know that famous
quote, right? Um then they came for the
gays, but I wasn't gay, so I didn't
stand up for them. Then they came for
the Jews and I didn't I wasn't Jewish so
I didn't stand up to them. And then they
came for me and there was no one left to
speak for me. I feel like in academia we
scientists who get money from the
federal government in many cases or even
from private institutions like myself.
We get institutional money from
foundations. We still pay overhead. That
overhead goes to the university that is
used to support activities that have
nothing to do with science whatsoever.
What I want to ask you is do we need a
new paradigm for the university where we
have even beyond MIT where you uh you
know are familiar with where we cleave
off the science, the engineering, the
technology, the math, we cleave it off
forever and we have a separate
university structure and we go it alone
or is am I missing the point of the
liberal education which I don't think is
actually occurring anywhere on campus.
Oh boy is this a tough Okay, so this is
what I want to talk about. You got any?
You got any alcohol? Yes, I do. Right.
Let's have a drink. Well, ham to life,
Jim Simons, wherever you may be. We're
drinking to your memory, to your
generosity, to your mentorship. You were
like a a godfather to me, and I miss you
every day. And we're trying to make you
proud with the Simons Observatory. And
the only thing I said when I gave him
one of these himself, this is an
engraved bottle. You see how beautiful
that is? I love it. He said, "I wish it
was gin." Is that right?
Tell me, sir. Academia. Should we cleave
it off? Is it time for the bliss? We
have a problem. And the problem, as I
see it, is very clear. This was a system
that was architected by a bunch of
people who are now dead and much, much
smarter than almost any of us. This was
a very cleverly worked out, cryptic
system that did all sorts of things that
people have no idea how it worked. No,
I'm not kidding. I'm laughing. Overhead,
do you have any idea what overhead
really is? Overhead is a system to avoid
third tier universities putting
political pressure on the government
to fund them at the expense of our top
tier institutions aka a cartel. The
first tier colluded exercise cartel
behavior. No to exclude the new
portenders. I don't agree with this.
Basically Vanavar Bush the endless
frontier. The endless frontier.
A small number of people realized they
had a problem post World War II, which
was we figured out, oh my god, science
is so much more valuable than we even
knew. We have radar, we have nuclear
weapons, we are doing things never
thought possible. We're spoofing.
You know, all of the stuff that you've
talked about. Thank you for bringing up.
Was it Alvarez? Also,
and then suddenly all of these people
said, "Okay, we're done with the
government. We're not doing that
military." That was just to defeat
Hitler. The defense industry and the
intelligence services and the covert
groups said, "Wait a minute. Don't you
love us?"
And a lot of left-leaning socialist
idealists who were the ones calculating
uh you know chain reactions. Exactly. Uh
suddenly said I don't want anything
further to do with you. So that there
had to be a system that was worked out
in which we kept our scientists happy,
wellfed, able to be free,
and we could call on them in times of
national emergency or national interest.
And we decided that we were going to get
into the business of funding elite
private, nominally private institutions.
So Harvard and Princeton and MIT and
Stanford were going to get money from
the federal government to keep America
wealthy and powerful. Safe and powerful
and safe. Yeah. And then weird stuff
started to happen because this was a
quiet structure.
So I want to talk about the difference
between esoteric and exoteric behavior.
The exoteric reason
for overhead,
indirect costs, is that it costs some
money to administer a grant. That is not
what overhead is. It's not what it was
supposed to be. It was supposed to be a
cryptic payment to a university based on
the merit of who it hired. So we'd have
a merit-based system and based on merit
your university would get richer or
poorer depending upon whether you hired
great researchers.
Then we lost all of this information. We
lost the idea that universities as
distinct from colleges are about
research and mentorship not about
teaching. Most universities have a
college but there's a distinction in
software between ISA and has a. So, the
University, let's say, um of
Pennsylvania has a college, but it isn't
a college. It's a university.
Uh Swarmore College is a college, but
has not a university, but it's not a
university. We have two basic systems.
One of which was called the AAOU,
probably still is association of
American Universities. The other one
changed its name. Used to be like
NASLAG, National Association of State
Universities and Land Grant Colleges.
And that was sort of the public IVs or
whatever you want to call them. And what
we tried to do was we tried to
hide the system from the American
taxpayer
and allow the taxpayer to benefit. a
tiny amount of money in certain terms
would go into this weird endeavor
and then we would be powerful and rich.
So the American taxpayer had this
incredible deal that the American
taxpayer was not consulted about. This
was an elite idea coming out of the mind
of Ven of our Bush and tragedy of the
commons was sure to follow. And so this
this issue about esoteric and esoteric
has become a lightning rod.
You can't expect that your doctor or
your financial advisor
or whoever is going to give you all
information about everything that's
going on.
And you can't expect that people are
going to be represented by a fiduciary
that doesn't take on fiduciary duties
either. So what we've had is we've had a
very badly behaved group of people who
have abused public trust and a populist
revolt against them saying trash the
system, pull the plug, cut the funding,
stop the bleed.
And that's where we find ourselves. And
and this is the thing that I I I really
do want to talk about, but it's just I
don't think I've done this in public
yet. So let's give it a shot. This
physics department, like every other top
physics department, is engaged in
and the most demanding possible stuff
you could do that is honest,
brilliant, and pure. And it's happening
simultaneously in the same department.
We tolerate certain kinds of
misrepresentation to the public, which
we call exoteric speech, to let the
public know everything is going great.
There's never been a better time. You
should continue to fund us. Future will
be better than tomorrow. Future blah
blah blah. Yeah.
And we also accepted a terrible deal for
us where we basically don't have
intellectual property rights. People
wonder, well, Eric, why do you say
you're an entertainer and entertainer?
And I always say, here's a joke. What's
the difference between a physicist and
an entertainer? An entertainer has
rights.
um you know you complain about physics
and you say well somebody was attributed
my work suck it up you know that has a
name it's the Johnson effect or you know
um you you have something called uh the
Matthew effect to him as much more will
be given and the Matilda effect which is
that women can't be heard then you have
the Sudarian effect which is that uh
brown people tend not to be credited
with their uh discoveries as much as
white people and and you know what
there's real truth in this. You don't
have to be woke. You can be anti-woke
and still see that there's truth in
this. What happened is is that we let
the ethics slide. And in particular, we
started this with the Mansfield
Amendment. The Mansfield Amendment was
the withdrawal in the late 60s, early
70s of military support
for our science departments to do blue
sky research. The military was the best
friend of pure research, often by people
who didn't like the military at all. And
so we pulled the plug on that. The Mike
Mansfield was I think a senator from
Montana had this amendment that said you
couldn't fund university professors to
do research unless there was an express
military purpose like it was directed.
And then we followed on with all of
these bad laws. The Ileberg amendment in
1976, the BOLO amendment in 1980. We
started this uh labor shortage scare
which VC Ramaswani is still on about in
the mid uh 80s which became the
immigration act of 1990 or imact 90.
We've been making all sorts of terrible
rules
which has been making science more and
more precarious. So the average
scientist is too focused on what do I
need to do to keep my health care going
and it's offensive. This is, you know,
I'm I'm not I'm an entertainer. I'm not
a scientist, says the man with the PhD
in mathematics. This is offensive that
you have a tiny group of people who were
secure producing insecurity in everyone
else and it's affecting the science.
This is how Anthony Fouchy got away with
claiming that it was racism
to ask the question about whether the
Wuhan Institute of Irology might have
something to do with the bad corona
virus. It's far less racist to ask the
to say that they prefer to eat pengalins
and bats than to say that it escaped
from the Hey man, I had Hong Kong flu in
like 1968. I know. You know my racist
actually. You're right. Yeah, that was
one of the deadliest flu went around
during Woodstock. It's ridiculous,
right? And so more or less everybody
Fouchy and CO caused a I don't know an
aneurysm in the tech elite. I don't I
still don't understand this exactly, but
all sorts of people who are now called
the tech, right? Yeah. Woke up some
point during COVID and said, "You know
what? We were all pro-science. Screw
these guys. These are liars. They won't
stand up. They're cowards. Universities
are over science's done."
And I thought, "Wait, what? What meeting
did I just miss? like Fouchy and Public
Health have nothing to do in my mind
with science. Science. Yeah. Right.
Somehow the quote techright is like
David Saxs and I didn't say anybody. I
felt that way about the tech right
whatever they are have developed
a a brain illness. Science is over.
Universities are over. Everything is
unreformable. I go to seminar after
seminar at UCLA and Caltech and I never
see any of them. They have no idea
what's going on. No, of course. Okay.
Well, that's what's going on at Demonize
that with you. But that's what's going
on at Mara Lago. If as long as you don't
invite actual PhD researchers, you'll
have no idea that actual PhD level
research is acts as the adviser on AI
and the ZAR of science and technology to
the president. I find that scary because
he even on his own podcast, he's an
entertainer as well as a craft ventures,
you know, founder, etc., and friend of
of Elon and so forth. But he will say on
the previous podcast he would it was a
running g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
g g g g gig that when Freriededberg
who's been on the podcast, David
Freriededberg would start talking about
something interesting in science.
David's actually a very uh curious and
imaginative person and very
knowledgeable about science especially
bioscience and and and Sax would say I'm
checking out. I'll talk to me in 10
minutes when you're done when he's done
yapping his mouth. I mean he's
explicitly I don't know anything about
this. This is on the all. David David's
been nothing but nice to me. So I just
don't have I don't have any knowledge.
I'm just saying from his public
statements, he's claimed that, you know,
he's demonstrated his lack of curiosity
at least about science. That's all I'll
say. But let me get back to the original
question, which is what the hell do we
do? We have a literature department. We
have a gender studies department. We
have a they're all supported in some way
by fringe benefits that I get charged on
my grants. So, how do I what do I do as
a I mean, there's a lot of science
professors listening to this podcast. 21
Nobel Prize winners have been on. Okay.
What do we do? What would you have us
do? And Einstein University, what would
it look like? We have an elite product.
We should own what we're doing badly.
STEM.
Um, to be honest, it's not just STEM.
Oh, I mean, let me say more. Is it?
Yeah. Okay.
If you look at a music department,
good luck trying to do voice leading
first day, uh, you know, of class if you
don't know any theory. What's singing?
Well, you've got different, you've got a
chord progression. You've got different
lines that might be sung or played as
chords and you're trying to figure out
how to keep the voices in a melodic
pattern with following a harmonic
progression. I can hardly play Spotify.
So, okay, I'll take your word for it.
Yeah. My claim is
linguistics has lots of aspects of this
ancient languages, you know, people who
know, you know, ancient Sumerian,
those are highly technical people. But
the anthropology department in which
they're housed, wait, wait, wait, wait,
wait. They're having a different version
of our problem, which is much more
severe.
So my claim is is that the English
department and the physics department
look somewhat the same.
The nonsense about the only game in
town,
which is, pardon me, string
identitarianism.
Okay. No, it's it's basically elev. It's
like an intersectional Olympics. the
people who can't do physics have to be
the best, right? Whatever. Um, and and
by the way, I'm just going to be
merciless about this because those boys
have caused so much trouble and so much
pain to so many people. If there's ever
a group of people, the only game in
town, cowboys, deserve everything coming
their way. In an English department,
that looks like intersectional studies.
Now, is there somebody who's also doing
Chaucer's middle English? Yes, there is.
So you have a portion of the English
department that is actually engaged with
English literature, scholarship,
everything that you want
is still happening, but it's much more
infected and it's much more political.
So my claim is one, let's not pretend
that STEM has escaped this
and two, let's not pretend that our
friends in the humanities now do nothing
other than write about uh God
transgenderism, transgender dog parks or
whatever it is that they that they do. I
tell you what happened. Uh wait, I don't
want to go ahead. Go finish. So your
question is, well, what should we do? I
think that the key point to say is we
have some problems in STEM. They're far
less than our problems in the
humanities.
And Mhm. And what's worth salvaging is
is everything is worth salvaging. But if
we have to go it alone, I am prepared to
cut the most ideological, political, and
antiscolarly departments loose,
particularly starting with activist
studies. I don't think I ever told you
this, but the day after the 2016
election, I was having uh lunch with one
of my colleagues who's a literature
professor. We actually co-taught a class
poetry for physicists. You'll be pleased
to know because typically the trope is
you got to teach physics for poets. But
I said no actually the physicists need
the poetry sometimes. Right. Um so we
taught co taught a class. It was a
wonderful class. She won the puliter
prize and poetry. Ray arduck do a
beautiful nutrinos. Yes. Nutrinos they
are very small. They have no mass at
all. But he's wrong. We know if only he
had been talking about dark energy. Eric
he could have had a career. Um so we had
lunch and it was the day after the
election. She was depressed as I've ever
seen her and um she was moping around
and I said um you know Ry I'm so you
know I could tell that you're not as
enthusiastic as you know as as many of
our you know colleagues on the right may
be wherever they are on the campus but
you know you seem really far gone you
know what's bother she goes I understood
that there would be people that would
vote not the way I like in other
departments say vote for Trump at this
time it's Trump versus Hillary but I
didn't I I could not believe the people
in my own department that that turned
on us. I was like, "Is she saying what I
think she's saying? She's saying that
there were literature professors that
voted for Trump." And I said, "Uh, Rey,
you got to tell me. What do you mean?"
And she uh did they did any of her
colleagues vote for Trump? Oh, god, no.
He's horrendous. They voted for Bernie.
They threw their vote away as if Hillary
would have won if it wasn't for these
ride in votes for Bernie. uh so
ideologically you know uniform were they
that to defect to Bernie was considered
an treasonous act from which there was
no recovery in the social circles among
them but last thing I I we we have to we
have to get to unless unless there's
some other things I do I do want to
mention this turn Simon thing I I
started to mention to you so I think we
got okay go ahead look the big problem
is a lot of other stuff is happening
that shouldn't be happening in the
universities and I'm just going to be
very clear to Harvard is right to try to
resist what the Trumpies are doing and
it's trying to do it from a position
that is untenable. You cannot fight from
where they are. So in other words, if
they had an commitment to scholarship as
opposed to commitment to uh supplication
of the government when the government
asks for some sort of cryptic program to
be undertaken through Harvard, then
Harvard would be in a position of saying
we have always jealously defended our
independence and our integrity. Our use
to the country is because of our
unwillingness to bend to the temporary
needs of politics. 33 cancer patents
last year alone, right? No, I'm saying
things like what they did with the CPI
where they tried to raise taxes and
slash the benefits by artificially
cutting the CPI by 1.1 percentage point
because they backed out that that would
be a 10-year savings uh of a trillion
dollars. And so my claim is is that if
you play that game and you bury real
scholarships and then you attempt to
play the next card which is Harvard is
committed to the truth. It's on our
motto in Latin and um don't you ever
tell us what we can and cannot do. So
good day. My point is who are you
fooling exactly? I would much rather
that come from the University of Chicago
which has also done the business of the
United States government particularly
through its economics department far too
often. But if I had to pick a school the
school would not be Harvard. Harvard
plays with the federal government far
too much. And what they're really saying
is you so with the orange hair are
beneath us today. Contemptable. Yeah.
And my feeling is that that's not going
to work. So what do I think we should
do? Honestly, I think we should say, you
know what, you're mildly right. You got
a few points. We have departments that
are completely riddled with with uh
ideological cancer and we have we don't
know what to do about them. We've let in
too many people who are here for
protesting. We've taken too much money
from abroad. Absolutely. There's a bunch
of things that we've done that are
wrong.
And having said that, you now want to
tell us that you want out of the
compact.
Oh boy. You're you're initiating divorce
proceedings with the thing that kept
America strong, rich, and safe. Think
twice. Think three times. Is it is this
really important to you in these terms?
And then if you want to sit down,
remember something. A university goes
home at night. All that you have left at
the end of the day is the facilities.
The brains leave.
And by the way, any country at the
moment that wants to absolutely
leapfrog. Yeah. China, all it needs to
do is start offering freedom
and an upper middle class existence to
professors at the top of their game in
science. They wouldn't do it for the
other. There's no critical studies in
the University of Logos. I have no idea
what we're talking about here. I'm just
saying in or we're restricted to
science. It's there's not it's not true.
That's all the It could be Milton Babid
in the music department at Princeton. I
don't know what you're saying. The
science we talked about. Okay, fine.
Eric, is it mostly science? Are they
studying critical uh theory at the
University of Logos? Are they studying,
you know, physics, science, technology?
They just blow the whole thing up. I
have no
what are we even talking about? I'm
saying something as truly legitimate as
an academic discipline suitable for an
intellectual. It should be something
universal. It should be something that
is done in Nigeria. They're no less
intellectually capable as we are. That's
why they do the same calculus and and
group theory. They teach at the
university there as well as we do here
at UCSD. But they don't have things that
we do have here. As I said, any critical
anything with critical in it, any
studies department, we don't have Can we
do me a favor? Yeah. I'm tired of
focusing on the people with blue hair.
Fine. Okay. I'm happy to move on. Okay.
So, there's all of this that
shouldn't be happening. But you know
what? No string theorist that I know has
blue hair. And they are absolutely the
blue hair problem of physics. And it's
not string theory. It's the only game in
town add-on. In other words, you could
do
string action, string phenomenology. You
could do all sorts of stringy physics.
You'll never hear anything from me. Mhm.
You touch this thing where you say, "And
my colleagues are pseudocientists
because if they don't actually tow the
line, then that's not physics." And my
feeling is, "Oh boy, did you pick the
wrong fight." You're not you're not
entitled to Well, my claim is is that
any country that wants to clean up on
academics and take the part that makes
the US wealthy, safe, and powerful can
do it.
All you need to do is to start offering
people half a million dollars a year,
second homes,
travel budgets. The world is your
oyster. I can't believe we are this dumb
sacrificing, right? Surely the baby is
being ditched. Sometimes the baby, you
know, is the battle. Okay, let's talk
about Ukraine in October 7th. Yeah. So
last time you were here, we were
concerned about the precipice that we
seem to be facing uh with a president
who had a one in 20 or or higher percent
chance of dying in any given year is Joe
Biden at the time. And then his
surrogate, you know, should that
heartbeat be skipped was none other than
uh Camela Harris. Now that that's no
longer the case, first of all, we don't
know who the surrogate was in case the
call came in the night and Joe Biden was
not up for making a decision. He was
rested and ready. What are you talking
about? He was he was sharp as attack. I
heard from I don't want to make a joke
about this. We had a brain deadad
president uh for part part of that
presidency who was pulling the strings.
I don't know. But I was told I was given
names. I was said I was told don't worry
about this. Stop talking about it
publicly. And my feeling about this is,
you know, this is like the Democratic
party has to own the fact that they
covered for a Parkinson's patient that
could be diagnosed from his gate, from
his speech, from his memory. Like this
was completely known symptoms. Does that
give you hope in some sense that
actually the president isn't that
important? I don't know why you do these
moves. I'm just No, I said this thing.
What happens when the missiles come?
The missiles didn't come. Maybe I can
clarify something. The Cold War is
forever. And I'm a child of the Cold
War. When I hear about people who are
postcold war, they don't care about the
apocalypse much. They're vaguely
apocalyptic.
But part of the problem is is that I
look this physics thing, the reason that
we are important in the minds of the
public in part is that we are the ones
who brought the end of the world. We
brought the the final sword of Damocles.
You can add to the sword, but it's been
over the head of humanity. And I don't
love making light of it. I think the
people who are guilty of making light
and and I think that's an important
distinction are the people who
deliberately misled the public, that he
was and and that you still consider
yourself a Democrat is of curiosity to
me. Yeah. Tell me. I mean, a lot of the
positions you hold, I mean, the ones
that we've just discussed in particular
are not that dissimilar from except for
the possible denigration of
technological engineering and military
prowess in the United States, which I
agree is paramount important. No,
Democrats were were destroying that
left, right, and center. Right. What
tenants of the Democratic party do
resonate with you besides the fact that
yes, that was a tradition of most Jews
when they were born in the era that you
were born in had Democrat on their on
their birth certificate. No, no, that's
not what it is. What it is is or what
would it take to have you say I am not a
member of the Democratic party even if
I'm not a Republican. I think people
just don't grasp what this is. If you
were in France as a French person
and it became Vichi France, would you
stop being French? Do you think Marina
Dietrich stopped being German because of
Adolf Hitler?
You know, this is this thing. Oh, this
I'm no longer an American. I leave the
country. I Einstein did what? Einstein
was no longer a German. Yeah. Well, he
was a that's a path that he chose where
he was actually stateless. Yeah.
Okay. He never stopped being German.
Read what he writes. He's German. Um, my
claim is
we have forgotten ourselves. I don't
think I've seen a world I recognize
since the 80s. I just see madness. I
just all I see since Dick Morris is
madness. But okay, so you didn't like
what I said. Doesn't that make you more
hopeful? But isn't there a resilience in
America? There's something resil you on
a different point. You were on a point
about why do you consider yourself a
Democrat? Okay, I made a tangent. I want
it's my prerogative. That's all right.
It's your whiskey. Okay. Okay. Okay. So,
why are you Yes. Go back. Let's go back
to that. So, my claim is is that the
stated aims of the Democratic Party
as they once were
are to make the world a bit better for
working families and to be to take the
position of the little guy against the
overdog. Okay. of the two parties
that is closer to my orientation. Now,
to be honest, JD Vance led a pro
workingclass
movement before he was ever considered
for vice president. It just came out of
him. I was on board. I would help the
Trumpies. I would I would help Kla
Harris. I would help anybody who wants
to make the country better. Right now,
we're caught in this loyalty thing and
it's tearing people apart for very good
reason. Do you really want to say I
support X and then have to sign on to
all the stuff that X is doing like this
tariff stuff? This is this is re I don't
know what the plan is. Nobody's clued me
in as to how this is just great. I
didn't want to be associated with Kla
Harris. I didn't want to be associated
with Donald Trump. I didn't Nobody
called me up and said, "Here's the plan.
Are you with us?" I have no idea what
the plan is. I just I I tune in and you
know Joe Biden, Kla Harris would
announce things and now Donald Trump and
Elon Musk announce things and I just
clutch my head. So am I am I strongly
attached to either party as it currently
stands? No. But I what I've said is I'm
a nailhouse Democrat. Somebody has to be
left behind to remind the party you're
just going mad. This is what I say about
theoretical physics or science. It's
like there's a theme. Yeah. Well, yeah.
The theme is you've forgotten yourself.
Somebody will in tone quantum gravity is
the holy grail of theoretical physics.
And I will put up a slide that shows
nobody even mentioned the words quantum
gravity before 1972. You know, at some
level we're caught in a mass delusion.
So that's where my life is living out is
is that I've got two political parties
have no clue as to what the planet is,
how everything worked. We had a bunch of
technocrats. They built a system that
was too complicated.
It was way too exoteric, esoteric. So,
it kept certain things in secret, shared
certain things in the public. That's the
that system spun out of control. And
right now, we're sitting on a planet
where we're at risk of nuclear
proliferation because quite honestly,
the Trumpies are all about uh
revitalizing. And as they revitalize and
they pull in America's commitments from
overseas, it's like pulling the control
rods out of a reactor. You you'll see
what happens next. Two beautiful oceans
will keep us safe because no nothing
knows how to cross and Lord knows there
are no submarines that patrol our
coasts. I have no idea what Chinese
balloons are flyable. Well, this is
ridiculous. And we're playing with the
planet in this completely cavalier way
where and I'll just be honest about
something really offends me. There's
this meme in my very smart friends which
is don't worry Trump and Elon have this.
And my claim is,
do you have any idea how many nonlinear
interacting things they just threw up in
the air?
So, imagine that you threw up a spinning
chainsaw,
uh, bungee cords, uh, a plasma TV, uh,
glitter. I don't know. You just start
electrical stuff with water, blah, blah,
blah. That's called bedtime at the keing
house. The, um, Oh, yeah. Don't worry.
They've got this. Well, no one on planet
Earth can control. Yeah. It's like
you're you're playing 40,000 dimensional
quantum chess. You're just making things
crazy. And the only thing that I can see
about this is is that at least when
things are crazy,
Donald Trump at least knows what he's
going to do next, which nobody else can
say. So, in some sense, he's got a
permanent one move advantage by throwing
the world into chaos. Yeah. The
instability has a tactical advantage if
not a strategic one. Okay, last topic
before we break bread. Kind of highlight
this from a perspective of you recently
having been both to this art conference
where you spoke about this this
clandestine war so to speak or the
secret war that people don't realize
that they're in hybrid war. Hybrid war
and also your recent trip to Israel.
Yeah. So what are these two trips? What
is there some core that resonates
between the two of them? Is there some
the post October 7th world? Is it is it
can we go back to the time before or are
we permanently in a new era? Um not
unlike the cold war or something like
that. We don't want to go back. October
6th was a really dangerous and stupid
time in Israeli history.
Isra Israel was focused on internal
issues thinking that it was as stable as
Spain or France. Mhm. And
it isn't. And Israel's been in a
terrible bind
that no one will let it out of. As long
as the US harbors
a fantasy about a two-state solution
involving people who cannot live under a
two-state solution.
You will consign people to bury their
children. And I think this is a problem
with 20th century idealism. It's just
not real enough. So yes, there are
people who can live in harmony in the
Middle East, even if it's cold and
bitter as a peace, and there are people
who cannot. And my feeling is that both
the Jews and the Arabs who cannot live
in peace
need to be relocated and then whoever is
left needs to get on with it. The
business of living and where do they go
is the obvious question.
That has always been
a question of absorption. And to be
entirely honest, part of the problem
lies at the foot of the Arab League. The
issue is
that we keep doing
weird Western style
idealism in a region in which the
participants are much smarter than the
tourists. And for the most part, I'm a
tourist. the people who cannot live in
peace
need to leave on both sides. You know,
you can't have uh Israeli settlers
uh taking their frustration out by
humiliating their Arab neighbors and you
cannot have a bunch of psychopaths on
paragliders
attacking music festivals
and whatever. You know, you can't have
Baroo Goldstein gunning down people in
the tomb of the patriarchs. They're just
people who can't be placated. I will
point out Israel
has repatriated people in Yamit in in
Sinai once upon a time and it's moved
people out of Gaza. There were Israelis
who were living in Gaza. It's like your
time is up. Yeah. Including graveyards
and digging up remains. Now, my claim is
we've got to recognize that under
extreme circumstances that haven't been
visited much since World War II when we
had the pots dam agreement where we
repatriated the Sudatan Germans
to German soil. We have to reexamine,
are we really being idealistic?
Are we really doing something good and
positive by telling people who cannot
get along, you will remain married
forever? the only thing that deon's a
human being. I mean, well, you look at
Black September, you know, when when
Jordan had a state within a state, they
didn't sit around saying, "Oh, we cannot
expel these people because that would be
ethnic cleansing and that would, you
know, or Kuwait, right? They they went
to um they went to Lebanon and then
Lebanon says, "We can't deal with these
people." And they sent them to Tunisia.
You know, ultimately
you need to live someplace where you can
live hating another person every moment
and not kill anybody. Mhm. Let's find
that place. I've been talking thinking a
lot about my late great friend and
mentor Jim Simons who was a fan and
actually the one one of my regrets is
that we never got to take him up on his
offer to to repatriate you to the uh to
the East Coast for at least some
sabbatical time. Maybe we still will.
Maybe we still will. You should tell
that story because it's something you
did. Yeah. Well, my you called me and
you said, "Eric, how quickly can you get
to Santa Barbara?"
Now, I knew Jim from before. Yeah. But I
knew him in a professional context. I
never I never was wildly friendly with
him. And you invited me to a family
event. Yeah. It was my mother's uh 80th
birthday party four years ago. And uh
and we uh my brother who's living in
Santa Barbara at the time had uh you
know was um hosting a big party. He
threw this wonderful party for her,
right? And my only contribution was I
invited Jim and Marilyn Simons to come
to the birthday party of my mom and I
kept it a secret from her which so it
was a great surprise. Very nice. And so
they came out and uh spent a couple days
in Santa Barbara. And then we had this
party. And then after the main
festivities were over, uh Jim, as his
want wanted to sit by the fireplace and
recount stories, both of smoke cigarette
with no socks. Cigarettes, no socks, and
no filter on the cigarette or on the
conversation. Exactly. Um and we had my
uh my nephews who had never really met
him. Um and uh my my some of my children
were there at the time and uh we had a
great time and talked late into the
night. We had a crazy time. Yeah, it was
quite good. You played the hand pan drum
of my brother at one point and uh and we
stayed up till we hours of the morning
talked physics and by the end of the
evening um we uh you exchanged
information or I exchanged your
information with Jim. No, something more
important happened before that. Say
okay. So don't say the recollection.
That's too Well, this is important
because these are historical figures and
nobody's going to have a further
conversation with Jim Simon. So I want
to make sure that we talk about what
actually happened.
So Jim in my estimation was very aware
of the string theoretic and related
interest in the churn Simons theory
and at least
officially he professed that he didn't
quite understand what the big deal was.
Now, I bring this up because there's an
interview that Jim did with his
arguably main collaborator. He had two
great Chinese collaborators, one in
differential geometry, one in physics.
And Cenyang was his great collaborator
at Stonybrook. And Cyang realized what
they had done together. And I have been
keeping this Wooyang dictionary which in
my opinion is actually the Simon's Yang
dictionary which is the Rosetta Stone
between bundle theoretic differential
geometry and particle theory. One of the
most important things that happened that
has almost no discussion of whatsoever
in the literature uh that anybody could
read outside of the field is the
discovery that all of particle theory
was geometry except for the Hig sector.
And Jim was very reticent to make a big
deal of this. You can see it on camera
when CN Yang is like this is incredible.
It's amazing. Jim's like I I never
really understand fully. But in part
that was just him.
So what I said to Jim is
you do realize that the churn Simons
functional
is the only other real action or
lrangeian the magic thing that
determines all physics that produces
Oiler Lrange equations with no
differential operator in front of the
curvature other than the Einstein field
equations from the Hilbert Lrange.
He thought about that.
He said something like, "Do you think
that's important?"
And I said, "Without
wanting to give you false hope,
it is my belief that the final theory of
gravity will be as much churn Simons as
it is Einstein Hilbert."
And so he said, "Well, how do you figure
that?" So I started explaining why
I believe the marriage of these ideas
with extra stuff that isn't yet in the
story
is going to be what fixes gravity and it
will fix what I believe is the
cosmological constant problem. Then
there was this bizarre interaction which
I I still to this day can't understand.
And Jim says
that's remarkable and he asked me if I
knew anything about the Simon Center. I
said yes I visited. you have an
incredible leader in Luise Alvarez Gal
at the Simon Center for Geometry and
Physics
and he says why don't you come for a
year and develop the theory at
Stonybrook
and I said that is a remarkable and
generous offer.
I just need some help because I have a
son who's finishing high school and I
have to relocate and move a family for a
year. So, if if there's the ability to
help with the with the heavy lift, I
would be very interested.
And Jim said, and I'll never forget
this. Do you have any idea where you get
the money? And I could not figure out
what was happening. I was trying to tell
him that I believe that churn Simons is
going to be as important as Einstein
Hilbert in the final theory of gravity.
He saw it. He was very interested and
then it got hung up on this completely
bizarre issue of a guy who was made of
money himself and I I just don't
understand it. Yeah. I mean, I can't
offer too much insight into it other
than um
he was um blessed in some ways by having
an infinite amount of people that he was
curious about their work and wanted to
support. I'll never forget he had a
charity that was a subsidiary of the
Simons Foundation called Math for
America. Yeah. Was to do what Teach for
America did, but specifically for math.
So, we had a chapter here of all places
at UC San Diego. And I was one of the
members of the board of adviserss at the
time and we had an event at the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography on the beach
here in San Diego. There's a beautiful
uh facility and we had a fundraiser
which we invited wealthy people. Let's
be honest, who's going to give money?
You know, the students know. So we had a
big, you know, fundraiser. It cost a lot
of money to raise. And we brought in um
congresswoman, our local congresswoman.
We brought in uh dignitaries,
visionaries, um you know, other rich
people, potential donors. I eventually
ended up setting him up with Irwin
Jacobs and and that was a nice coup for
me to get uh some support from Irwin to
support Jim's support. You two
billionaires, you know, arguing about,
you know, who could give each other, you
know, the 50k check. And then Craig
Ventner was there and Craig's been on
the show. Marvelous. And um we're
talking and I didn't know Craig at the
time, but I saw them scrolling off and
I'm like, "What's he doing?" And then
Jim came back and said, "Oh yeah, he he
wants me to give him money." He says,
"I'm a genius." And I and I said, "Wow."
And he's supposedly pretty smart guy. I
mean, he sequenced the human genome. Um
you know, before Francis Collins, by the
way. And uh and Jim said, "Yeah, but you
know something, Brian, if I gave a
dollar to everyone who told me I was a
genius, even I would be broke." Now
obviously he's tongue and cheek but I
think yes I think if we had to follow
because he did follow up to be honest
with I mean to give him you know I don't
want to say say anything negative
obviously about him but he did after the
fact he did go to I got emails from him
coordinating a possible invitation from
Louise to you and so I mean I have that
he mentioned it and then I think maybe
well let's talk off camera about my
supposition what happened next but but
yes I don't know why that happened Eric
but but the point I don't want to dwell
on that aspect it was just mysterious
ious. The thing that I wanted to get to
though is what is the churn simons
functional
because I don't think people really know
about it. No. And I don't think they
know how important it is. So the churn
Simons functional
is a an object that eats two of a thing
called a connection and spits out
a three-dimensional object that can only
be integrated in dimension three. So we
don't live in dimension three even
though it feels like we do at any
instant of time because you have a bunch
of time instance. So you have this
fourth dimension. Mhm. But imagine that
we lived in two spatial dimensions like
we were in flat land and that was
progressing in time. Jim
and SS Churn
figured out that if you hand their
object two different connections, it can
in some sense take a difference between
them. Technically called a
transgression.
And that object can be integrated. And
that integration gives you information
about a physical system which was sort
of rediscovered by Ed Whitten originally
due to a guy named Albert Schwarz from
the Soviet Union who settled at UC Davis
and he did the Aelian theory and I
really wish we called uh Churn Simons
theory after uh Albert Schwarz as well
as Ed Whitten as well as Churn and
Simons.
The key thing is that it's mispresented
almost always. It's presented as a thing
that eats one object called a connection
a and you're hiding the fact that
there's a trivial second object so that
you you suppress it and you don't see it
in the actual equation. But if you do it
properly as a mathematician would, it
eats two connections and spits out a
thing that can be integrated to give a
number.
And this thing is so beautiful and so
remarkable because it is the rival to
general relativity and that is not
really appreciated I think enough worse
than that. I mean, as we were talking
last night, say less. Uh, as we were
talking last night, I think to a good
approximation, thousands or maybe
hundreds of thousands of people know
about um know about Calabiao Manif heard
about them, don't know them, but let's
just say they know about them, heard
about them rather, and zero people know
about turns. I mean, basically zero
people. I think even in this department,
well, this is astronomy building now. uh
we're on enemy territory, but zero
people in this building know about what
turn Simons is, but a few of them would
know about uh that which I think is a is
much a marketing branding failure of Jim
Simons. It's also part of the story to
be entirely honest because I think it
was in 1986 there was a centinary
conference at Duke University
for Herman Vile
and I I I was an activist at the time
and I lobbyed the Harvard math
department for funds so that all of the
graduate students could go to this
historic conference and to Barry Ma's
credit he just said yes and he gave us
all money so we traveled and I saw one
of the most remar remarkable lectures
ever where sir Michael Aia stood up in
front of this incredibly prestigious
uh conference and all of these great
luminaries and said you know there have
been these discoveries recently
I think of invariants of the the Jones
polomial and the casten invariant and
they should have a description in
quantum field theory. If only somebody
could find the quantum field theory
to give us this topology
and Whitten was there. Sure.
And it is a testament to the fact that
nobody knew enough about the churn
Simons function that they searched I
think for three or four years before
rediscovering what Albert Schwarz had
done in the commutative case and Ed
Whitten did it in the non-commutative
case. And that's what Ed Whitten won the
Fields Medal for. He won it for churn
simons. So in other words, it was the
fact that nobody was conscious enough of
it that meant that it had to be this
mystery theory that no one could find.
When they actually found it, it was very
deeply embedded in real science. Now,
here's a completely crazy story that
shouldn't necessarily be linked to this,
but I throw it out. There is a guy named
Bob Lazar.
Yes.
Who may be a crazy person.
I have no idea whether anything he says
is true. But in 1989 he gave a crazy
interview. And in the interview he says,
you know, gravity comes in two flavors.
Gravity wave A and gravity wave B. Now
as a physics person, have you ever heard
anyone talk like this? No. No. Exactly.
And he says, "One of these things is the
weak form of gravity that you already
know, but if there is an alien
engineering project, it uses the other
gravity wave, which you most likely know
is associated with the strong force."
And I thought, "What is this guy talking
about?" Okay. Well, the strong force
comes from a theory called
QCD.
QCD actually has two subsectors.
One of which is called the Yang Mills
theory which involves F wedge starf
but the other sector is called the theta
angle or the theta sector and that's f
wedge f
and that is the first pontriagen class
which when transgressed never mind what
that means exactly means question of how
does it change you're trying to figure
out how it changes with response to
perturbation
that transgresses to the churn Simon's
function
and that churn Simon's function
mirrors gravity because it it results in
a curvature tensor with no differential
operator in front of it. Whereas the
other term results in a curvature tensor
with a differential operator in front of
it. In other words, Maxwell's theory is
da star of FA where FA is the curvature.
So it's a differential of curvature
equals stuff. Whereas Einstein's theory
is contraction of curvature with no
differentiation. You just do some linear
algebra equals stuff. So these two
theories that are sort of incompatible,
gravity and Yang Mills theory in fact
are very closely related. And the crazy
thing that Bob Lazar says about
gravity wave B, which you most likely
know as the as involved in QCD, actually
has a highlevel interpretation, although
I have no idea whether Bob Lazar has any
clue what he's even talking about.
That's so what I'm claiming. Didn't
expect that on my bingo card for the
podcast. Well, but but this is the
thing. He also prayed an alien or
something. He he flew like a a bomber
over an alien base or something like
that or I don't care. No, no. Look,
assume that assume that a lot of what
he's saying is, you know, he's like a a
convicted criminal. He's a I I
keep laughing about everything, right?
Okay, you can take the following to the
bank. There's something called the theta
sector in QCD. It's associated with the
strong force and the transgression of it
leads to the churn simon's action and
the churn simon's action when
differentiated in dimension three to
give the oiler lrangee equations is
eerily similar to the Einstein Hilbert
equations which give you general
relativity you don't you can take do Bob
Lazard the hell out of that story and
I'll stand by everything I just said and
I've never heard anyone mention this so
my claim is Jim stands to win
at an enormous level
if what I believe is true is true and
it's it's not churn Simon's theory and
it's not Einstein Hilbert it's it's more
than both of them but boy is churn
Simon's theory going to be important to
gravity and the reason that by the way
it doesn't have credence in a place like
an astronomy or physics department is
it's locked in dimension three
what I said today in in our talk is that
Einstein is the first person in a
certain sense to show that through his
contraction operator you can make
dimension 4 look a great deal like
dimension three if you augment something
called the lorren group to the ponare
group the ditter group or the
anti-deitter group and in all of those
cases you can relate something
called a curvature tensor or a field
strength to a gauge potential or a
connection one form
And in that that relationship where you
take something of degree two and turn it
into something of degree 1 in churn
Simon's theory you do it through a hodge
star operator and in Einsteinian gravity
you do it through a contraction through
a tensor product. So this story is far
from played out. Absolutely. Jim Simons
has a horse in this race. And Jim was
very briefly active in mathematics
before he became this mysterious hedge
fund figure. And what I would say is the
little bit that he did do in math before
he jumped ship is absolutely first rate
astonishing mathematics. Amen. There was
one thing that he wanted. He he had a
Gulfream. He had a mega yacht. I even
got him an asteroid which you can read
about here. Asteroid 6618 Jim Simons
discovered by Clyde Tombbo. Do you know
what Clyde Tombbo was? What his fame is?
Discovered Pluto which was killed by
past guest Michael Brown who was here a
couple weeks ago sitting in that very
But how did he discover it? How did he
discover how did how did Clyde Tomba
discover Pluto? Wasn't it the visible
world's failure to close is how you
discover an invisible object? That was
Laarier. That was the discovery of
Neptune. Oh, okay. So close. One planet
off, but actually it's a planet and
Pluto is not. Anyway, got him the
planet. I got him the minor planet,
which call considered a minor planet.
And he said, "Brian," you know, grizzled
voice, merit cigarettes for 60 years. He
said, "Brian, it's wonderful. Answer one
question. Do I have mining rights?"
That was Jim Simons. I said, "No, so
funny." Um, by the way, you can I just
tell my tiny Math for America story?
Yeah. Yeah, go for it. I wouldn't have
told this, I think, uh, while he was
alive. Yeah. But years ago, I met with
him in New York before I knew you. And I
spent three hours talking to him and I
knew he'd made all this money in the
markets. And I said, "Look, you're a
geometer. I'm a geometer. You're married
to an economist as am I. I know what
you're up to." And I said, "Uh, the
markets are actually differential
geometric.
And in fact, they're gauge theoretic.
you've figured out that the markets are
gauge theoretic and that's what you're
doing to make money. And I get I went
through three hours explaining it. And
he looked up at me and he said, "Eric,
if you only knew how we actually made
money, you'd be so disappointed."
I said, "What are you talking about?" He
says, "You know, look, I found all sorts
of He didn't know any of this stuff.
Thank you for telling me." He said,
"It's astounding,
but I'm caught on much simpler
problems." I said, 'What do you mean?'
He said, 'You know, I was determined to
solve the problem of math education in
America.
He said, and after studying it and being
willing to give away a very large amount
of money, he said, I had to settle for
making terrible teachers slightly less
terrible, and that was so uninspiring
that I didn't feel uh energized by it.
And I felt so sad that such a a a
brilliant and amazing human being when
tackling a real world problem, it just
him no end. No, I mean he was uh he was
one of the most amazing ever got to
know. But he said to me um well I have
to tell you one quick vignette about him
before we close. um he was um being
awarded a prize uh by you know for being
such a great supporter of the American
Lung Association and they came to his
office to present him not only with a
prize but it was on his birthday eight
years ago. Hold on, it gets better. And
he invited them to his office cuz he had
only a few minutes to meet and they kept
he kept they said they kept droning on
and on about it and he was you know
understandably he was a little bit you
know getting nervous. He had to use the
bathroom but he would smoke. He had the
only office in Manhattan you were
allowed to smoke inside because he owned
the whole building. Um and then he got
so uh he was insufferable. He didn't
have an ashtray. And so in the middle of
this meeting with the American Lung
Association, they had the birthday cake
for him and he ashed a cigarette in the
birthday cake with the American Lung
Association logo. But Eric, I want to
conclude with one thing. The one thing
that he always wanted, he had the mega
yacht, the mega jet, the asteroid, the
the accolades galore. um he wanted one
of these. He really did and you know
with God's help perhaps will not only
tell his story but uh but maybe just
maybe someone not saying me I've lost my
affinity as you know uh spoiler alert um
but I think he should be recognized and
I think churn too obviously I mean this
law butostumous Nobel Pri tell me where
in the laws of physics you can't give
away a prize postumously uh it's
actually been done but Eric anyway we
got to go we got to go have dinner we
got to leave get you back home and I
just want to thank you. Let's not make
it two years next time. Let's make it at
least uh 18 months or sooner. and uh
you're a fan favorite and I enjoyed your
talk very much and and seeing you in
your element the the lion amongst his
amongst his fellow his fellow beast of
the field in the best possible way of
the mind was quite inspiring and fun and
I always learn tremendous amount from
you and benefit from your company your
collegiality your friendship and your
conscience as a as a voice of reason of
the field so thank you very much really
appreciate that Brian thank you if you
can't get enough of Eric Make sure you
check out his lecture given at UCSD the
day that this conversation was recorded.
Click here for that. And if you want to
hear a deep dive of Eric debating a
fellow theoretical physicist, my
colleague, Professor Dan Green, click
here. You don't want to miss that
conversation either.