Welcome to the Quantum Healthy Podcast.
I'm Andia, a licensed addiction
counselor, and along with my co-host,
Laura Kissman, a quantum nutritionist,
we will be inviting expert scientists,
clinicians, survivors, and thrivers to
distill their pearls of wisdom attained
from applying quantum biology to their
fields of research and everyday lives.
Our goal is to bring you easy to
understand principles and practices
about the study of light, water, and
magnetism so you can take your health
into your own hands.
[Music]
Episode is sponsored by Viva Rays, the
only eyewear company that truly
understands your biology. Viva rays are
advanced blue light glasses designed
with circadian biology in mind. Unlike
typical blue blockers, they filter light
in harmony with your body's natural
rhythms, helping you sleep deeper, feel
more energized, and protect your
long-term health. We love companies that
support biologybacked wellness, and Viva
Ray is leading the way. Use code quantum
healthy at vivar.com to save 15% and
support your sleep, focus, and natural
energy the way nature intended. Enjoy
this episode.
Hello everyone. Welcome back to the
Quantum Healthy podcast. We have a very
exciting guest today. Jerry Pollack is
with us and he is a professor of
bioengineering at the University of
Washington. He is the founding editor
and chief of the journal water,
executive director of the Institute of
Venture Science and founder of the
annual conference on physics, chemistry,
and the biology of water. You've
published over 300 papers and authored
several books including at least in our
our space the very popular cells gels
and the engines of life and the fourth
phase of water. So welcome to our
podcast Jerry.
&gt;&gt; Well thanks to both of you for the
invitation. I really appreciate it and
I'm delighted and thrilled to be with
you.
&gt;&gt; Awesome. Well, we thought we would start
it off with you sharing a little bit on
how an electrical engineering student
becomes a renowned water researcher
&gt;&gt; and prolific writer.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's a good question. You know,
it's it's a question I haven't really
really thought about a whole lot. So, I
studied through electrical engineering
as an undergraduate student and I I
never thought I'd do anything with it. I
went to graduate school and and studied
biomemed engineering and I wound up at
the University of Washington where I am
now. And my interest for quite a few
years was muscle contraction, how how
the molecules act in measin and other
molecules interact to produce force and
motion. And I was happily doing that and
and and the work was was exciting. I'm
not sure how much traction I really
gained in that field because my nemesis
was a famous scientist, Sir Andrew
Huxley.
And Sir Andrew, he was part of the
Huxley family, you know, distinguished
family, Aldis Huxley, Thomas Henry
Huxley, he won a Nobel Prize, he was
president of the Royal Society, etc.,
etc., etc. Unfortunately, his theory was
wrong. I I I say that blatantly
because it simply didn't fit the
evidence. But, you know, he was so
distinguished that he would walk into a
room and when he'd walk into a room, it
was like God has just walked into the
room. So, there was a hush. And I I came
to realize that no matter how strong was
your challenge and and how meaningful
was your challenge, if you're up against
someone like that, you won't succeed
because he is so distinguished that many
other people in the field rather than
succumb to what appears to be truth,
they rather acquies to the views of of
of so so important a person, you know,
and and so I learned something of
sociology. I also learned I also learned
that he was a rather lonely man and and
I learned that this is to my great
surprise because you know such such a
distinguished man and it was early in my
career that with some trepidation I went
to London to show him our evidence we
had three different experiments
all three of which any one of which
would demonstrate his theory is all wet.
It doesn't make sense. So I I I gathered
my strength, my emotional strength and
and I approached him. I remember I was
sitting outside his building. I arrived
30 minutes early and scared to death
meet meeting the great man and he was
very cordial. He invited me in. He ran
up the stairs two steps at a time and
ran went down two steps at a time also.
So we went into his office and we spent
three hours and he was really really
curious about everything that we had
found and he asked many questions and
this was a a really good scientific
discussion. I I doubt that I convinced
him of anything, but he did listen and
he asked many questions. And then after
3 hours, he turns around and there's a
little small piece of furniture behind
him, a cabinet of some to opens the
cabinet and pulls out a a bottle of
Randy, I think it was, and pours it.
Glass for him, a glass for me. And there
was a student of his who was sitting
nearby. And I realized he so enjoyed
this scientific discussion even though
he might not have liked what we were
presenting. But I realized nobody would
challenge this guy. He was too
important. You know, nobody challenges
God. You you don't you don't simply go
into a room and say, "Hey, God, you
know, I've got I've got some some
material here and it doesn't agree with
your point of view." You simply don't do
that. And so for me, you know, people
come to me, ah, you're all wet. I don't
believe this. I don't believe that. No,
but but God God doesn't get challenged
that way. And I realized he enjoyed it
so much for being a human being and
having a a real scientific discussion
that the poor guy is living in an ivory
tower and and nobody approaches the
great guru in the ivory tower. So the
upside of the whole thing, I learned
something about the sociology. And you
know, if you get to be in in the
scientific realm, if you if you get to
be a godlike figure, you're lonely.
Nobody nobody would challenge you. And
and this is a problem because, you know,
if you're serious about finding
scientific truth, then there's got to be
debate. You know, you got two different
points of view. you argue the points of
view and in in theory the better the
more accurate point of view is going to
win out and that's the usual but not if
you're God and
&gt;&gt; so his theory prevails even even today
and no challenge at all it's in every
textbook and the central idea now is so
pervasive it applies to so many systems
even beyond muscle contraction anything
that that moves or generates some motion
of some sort. That's the theory that's
invoked. But there's so much that
doesn't fit the theory. And I wrote a
book in 1990 about muscle contraction.
&gt;&gt; And I realized practically everybody in
the field has a copy, but almost
nobody's read it. I I I remember
visiting a colleague. I'm sitting in his
office and I'd look on his shelf. Oh,
hey. Hey, there's my book, Muscles and
Molecules. So, he he pulls it out and he
opens it and sort of cracks open. And
so, this is the first time it's been
ever been opened. You got the book,
&gt;&gt; but not interested in reading it because
we we all know we have to cater to the
master. We we see that a little bit in
politics today, but it's not so
different in science. You know that the
sociology of science. Anyway, you you
asked me a question and I I couldn't
hesitate. I can't help but tell you the
story of the late Sir Andrew Huxley
whose view
&gt;&gt; who is who's is his is it his
grandfather or uncle that is Aldwis
Huxley brave brave new world the author
&gt;&gt; I think a cousin or half
&gt;&gt; okay why am I thinking half something
yeah I can't remember and then I think
Thomas Henry Huxley the great biologist
I think his grandfather or something
like this but he's the only one who won
a Nobel Prize
And he he wanted for his work on
membranes. And well, I I I guess I I I I
hesitate to say, but but I think that
that his ideas in that realm are not
correct either. But this is another
story. And you know, I I I don't want to
come across as saying, "Oh, I know
everything and he knows nothing." That's
not exactly what So, it's just that if
you look at the evidence produced by
other people and and some some by us, it
doesn't fit. And when it doesn't fit,
you know, you have to you have to ask
whether the emperor has no clothes.
&gt;&gt; You know, that's the way it goes. So, I
learned something and in in those
younger days and I learned that it's not
just the facts that count, it the
sociology counts as well.
&gt;&gt; Interesting. how and how science can
just take so long to change because the
sociology of us all thinking that this
someone is God, right? I I was in the
Air Force, so the whole analogy of him
walking in the room, that was us all
standing to attention when the general
walks in and and you don't question the
general, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's pretty much the same thing,
you know, you don't question the
general. The general knows what he or
she is is talking about and and that's
it. It maybe is designed to be a bit
more strict in the military re regime
the scientific it's not supposed to be
supposed to be the opposite should both
supposed to be completely open and open
discussion and
&gt;&gt; the facts win but it doesn't always work
that way. Well, Jerry, that actually is
a great segue into the next thing we
want to talk about because it makes
sense to me why you would see the like
how something isn't working out or the
theory is wrong or however you want to
word that because of your work on with
easy water. So, do you want to share
with the audience? I mean, we have had a
a couple of conversations on water, but
I think this will be really cool for
people to hear from you. What is easy?
&gt;&gt; Easy. Easy to remember.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's true.
&gt;&gt; And that there's a a measure of truth to
that. E actually stands for exclusion
zone. It's a a zone that we zone of
water that we looked at that tends to
exclude any foreign particles or
molecules and such. So, so someone asked
after we began doing experiments and
identified this zone of water, some
Australian colleague said, "Oh, you
know, you ought to give it a name
instead of running through this
elaborate description. Just call it
something." He said, "Call it exclusion
zone because it's a zone that excludes
and it's easy to remember." Doesn't work
in some countries where it's ezed, you
know, but
&gt;&gt; that's that's my country.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And so just just last funny
thing just last week a friend of mine
sent me a photograph that she took at
the airport and you know after you go
through security you can't take water
through security but after security now
they have some machines that you can use
to fill your water bottle and and she
took took a photograph of the machine
and it said easy water on on the
machine. So I would and I took a trip
right after that, a few days after and I
I went through San Francisco and Phoenix
and one other airport and I saw the same
machines there. So I guess the I don't I
don't really know if they have easy
water, but but anyway, they advertise it
as easy water. I was kind of interested
to see that. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Wouldn't that be something?
&gt;&gt; Well, I it Yeah, something. something or
or wrong if if it's not really easy.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. Like, wouldn't that be
something if we had negatively charged
water coming out like
&gt;&gt; what what we need, right? But it's
&gt;&gt; good for you.
&gt;&gt; Good good for your health, but I'm not
sure.
&gt;&gt; I'm not sure that the company is really
producing easy water. I you know, I've
seen no evidence, but they might be. I I
don't know. But it was just a curious
observation. Okay. So, but I need to go
back, you know, and and started at at
the beginning. So, I was I was in a
completely different field, the muscle
contraction. I I went to a meeting. The
meeting was in Hungary and it was to
commemorate the work, a memorial
symposium of a Hungarian biophysicist
whose name was Ernst. And Ernst had two
interests. One is muscle contraction and
the other one is water. And and so I was
asked to come and present about muscle
contraction, which is what I was what I
was doing. And I I did my thing and I I
guess it went okay. But then came a guy
named Gilbert Ling
&gt;&gt; who presented on water. And you're
nodding your head. You know, of the work
of Gilbert Ling. What you might not know
is is that Gilbert came as in the first
cohort of Chinese scholars to come and
study in the US. There were four of them
and three of the four won Nobel prizes.
So you know this is it was quite a
distinguished group and many who know
Gilbert Ling's work their opinions are
that he should have won two Nobel prizes
for for his contribution. So what was
his contribution? Well his contribution
was he said that the water inside the
cell is not like liquid water. It's it's
not like this stuff sitting in a glass.
How's it different? He said, he said
it's different and pro provided enormous
amounts of evidence. He said the
molecules of water are stacked like
soldiers at attention. You know, being a
former military person, you understand
that soldiers do
&gt;&gt; like soldiers at attention. They're kind
of lined up. And if you think about each
water molecule being a a dipole in in
structure, you know, like a bean with
plus at one end and minus at the other
end, you can understand how one would
stack upon another, negative next to
positive. They can just stack. And and
the the standard point of view is that
at at surfaces, the water molecules can
indeed stack maybe one or two molecular
layers, but Gilbert was saying, "Oh, no,
it's not one or two layers.
It's it actually could be hundreds if
not thousands. And what we found is
sometimes millions. I mean, this is this
is something that is macroscopic. And
and and so so I was intrigued. You know,
I heard what Gilbert Ling had to say and
I I I find myself easily impressed by
interesting ideas. So I didn't trust
myself. I was really blown away by the
amount of evidence that he had. So, I
went home. I came home back to Seattle.
I got one of his books and I I gave one
of his books to some of my students.
Hey, what do you think of this stuff?
You know, just threw it out there. And
the responses were uniform. They said
they said well it looks like if if this
guy is right then all of biology is
wrong because biology is based on the
idea that inside each cell the water is
like ordinary liquid water you know and
molecules can diffuse around easily. But
but if he's right it's not liquid water
at all. It's a different a different
kind of water. He called it structured
water. We later had different names for
it including fourthphase water because
every feature of that water differed
from from ordinary liquid water. Every
feature that we measured but we didn't
start at first. I I I I just first I
listened to those students and and they
said not only is if he's right, not only
is all of biology wrong, but also he's
provided mounds of evidence in favor of
of his point of view. So you can't just
easily dismiss it. Well, that for me
that sealed it. We had to we had to move
into water. Move from muscle to water.
muscle is interesting and important, but
water is maybe even more important. And
indeed, we found so we were able to
confirm a good deal of what Gilbert Ling
had to say, but we went on to find some
features that that differ from Gilbert Ling and are centrally important for for
our lives, for our existence. So what
were they? Well, the first thing we
found is that there are or there is
indeed a kind of structure of water and
it's like a liquid crystal and when
liquid crystal forms it it squeezes out
or pushes out all contaminants. So, we
were able to identify a region of water
next to certain surfaces that did
exactly that. that region that good that
started from ordinary liquid water and
transformed itself to this what we call
easy water fourphase water and as it
grew it pushed out contaminants that's
why we called it exclusion zone and and
the surprise came a few years later when
when I guess I was the one who decided
to check the electrical potential of of
this kind of water because I had done
work very early in my career measuring
the electrical potential of cells. And I
I I knew how to measure electrical
potential in in very fine regions using
an invention of Gilbert Ling himself, a
kind of electrode that could be stuck
into a cell. Now, you jab the cell, you
measure the electrical potential between
the inside and the outside, and then you
pull out the electrode and the cell
manages to live even after this insult.
some some of some of my friends in
colorful language, you know, they talk
about sticking bigger electrodes in into
sale and in his colorful language, my
friend says it's sort of like sticking a
telephone pole up your rear end and
expecting you to behave normally. But
Gilbert Lane's electrode has a tiny
point and you can stick it in and then
pull it out and it works. So, so I had
experienced using this and I figured
well okay let's let's measure the
electrical potential of this EZ region
or fourthphase region and to my shock
surprise instead of being neutral it was
negatively charged now you'd expect it
to be neutral because it starts with
neutral water
&gt;&gt; you know water is neutral to begin with
and if anything happens to the water you
certainly don't expect something neutral
to become negatively charged. If it
becomes negatively charged, then there
must be a positively charged region
somewhere else because the two negative
and positive have to add up to zero
because that's what you started with.
You can't just invent charge from from
nothing. So we found next to hydrophilic
water loving surfaces we found typically
not not every time but typically the the
water this easy water or fourth phase
water transitioned into something
negatively charged and beyond that
region. So you're you're starting with a
hydrophilic surface. Then comes the easy
or fourth phase of water negatively
charged and beyond that positive charges
just basically situated in in in the
water and bouncing around. Now if you
got negative next to positive and if
they remain separated you have a bad. So
the I I I I guess uh the the kind of
important finding is is that water can
become a battery and water and we could
demonstrate that if we put one electrode
in the negative, one electrode in the
positive and connect the two electrodes
to for example an LED lamp, we could
light the lamp. So we have proof of
principle that this battery can really
supply current and could supply
electrical energy. And of course
question arises you know do do we you
and I or all of us do do we could we
could we be using this kind of
electrical energy to run our bodies? You
know electrical energy it's a good kind
of energy and we found that that was
indeed the case. So one thing you know
one one thing we learned is that we get
our energy from from ATP this molecule
having a high energy phosphate bond and
that is the bond that's been known since
oh close to 100 years 1941 a guy named
Lipincot found that the molecule ATP has
a high energy bond and and and that bond
surrenders its energy and and lets
That's how we gain energy. That's how
our muscles derive energy to lift a load
or something and our nerves supply
energy to transmit information etc etc.
What what's not known so you'll find
that in in every book every cell biology
book tells you about ATP the source of
energy derived from things that we eat
for example. What what they don't tell
you is that soon after that finding w
was obtained there another another group
of equally prominent group said oh Libot
was wrong he made he made a simple
arithmetic error and there is no such
thing as a high energy phosphate bond
and that was tested later by two two
guys whom I know because they're in the
muscle contraction field and and they
they also found experiment
experimentally that there was no such
thing as a high energy phosphate bond
doesn't exist. Now a lot of people are
not aware of that. I can tell by the
expression on your face that maybe you
haven't heard about that but but is
really really important to follow
through. We don't know who is right, the
original experimentalist or the
challenger or challengers are right. But
it's possible, you know, if Lipenov is
correct and perhaps ATP is the source of
energy that we have, the main source of
energy or maybe even the exclusive
source of energy. But if he's wrong,
then there's another must be another
source of energy because you need a
source of energy, you know, to and and
and a possibility is that energy comes
from electricity, electrical energy.
And if you ask me, I can explain to you
how we found that indeed uh this
electrical energy is used. We don't we
don't know if it's used extensively or
if it's used only in the few instances
that we've explored but as I mean it's
really critically important to know
where our energy comes from right we go
skiing and requires a lot of energy
where does it come from so I mean there
aren't too many questions that are more
fundamental than that
&gt;&gt; yeah exactly
&gt;&gt; I would argue that it's not really clear
at the moment it's not it's not as firm
as the biology ology books would uh
suggest.
&gt;&gt; And didn't Gilbert Ling do the math
&gt;&gt; and and realize and like I thought I
heard that that Gilbert Ling did the
math and there's no way ATP could be the
source of energy for our whole entire
body.
&gt;&gt; I think he did I he did he he did the
math particularly in in in terms of
membrane pumps. Maybe that's what you're
referring to. I I know he did that.
heat. He was able to demonstrate that
for the sodium pump alone, which was the
first pump that was discovered, he would
poison the cell. So, the cell would
would run out of out of energy. And
under the under his conditions, the pump
appeared to continue to work. And in
order for it to continue to work, not
withstanding it it's being poisoned, it
simply couldn't have enough energy to do
it. It was short short by about 30
times. And and that was when it was
thought that there was only one membrane
pump. Now there are more than a
thousand. So you know you have to ask
the question if the cell doesn't have
enough energy to run one pump how is it
going to run a thousand pumps,
&gt;&gt; right? Yeah. And you know, and Gilbert
was pretty pretty clear on that, but
people have not accepted it because it
seems to be fashionable to accept the
idea that membranes have pumps and
channels. But there are plenty of
arguments that that that paradigm
doesn't work at all. And I've written
about it several, and I'm happy to talk
about it, but I'm not sure, you know,
what exactly you you you'd like to be
asking. But the whole the whole energy
problem needs really serious
consideration because we there are no
students maybe maybe being taught to
completely wrong wrong answers in some
of this stuff.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, there's so many years that
that's what has been taught. It's almost
like, oh, well, now it's uncomfortable
to think in that, I don't know,
compartmentalized like way. Like
everything's a mechanism, a pump. Like
that was maybe easy to grasp in the
human brain. And like now that we know
that isn't true. It's like, oh, we all
have to learn something new and that is
going to change so many things. And it's
like an overwhelming thing. Like I've
thought about that before. If that's why
it hasn't become more main and it's not
in the textbooks yet. No, it's not in
the textbook. It should be in the
textbooks.
&gt;&gt; It should be
&gt;&gt; Gilbert Ling's work. This was done 30,
40 years ago,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; But, you know, I I I I guess it's the
old
it's a sort of akin to the muscle
contraction story. You know, if there's
a story, even if it's not right, it's
familiar. And if it's familiar, it's
easy because people understand it and
they can invoke it
&gt;&gt; and use it. They feel comfortable doing
that. and someone comes along and say
hey it's all wrong can't be right it
feels uncomfortable to to accept that
and so we tend to reject it and then in
terms of the textbooks the publishers of
textbooks what they want is to sell
textbooks
&gt;&gt; and if they if the textbooks contain
radical information or information says
well here's the prevailing view and
here's the evidence against the
prevailing view and here's another view
they're not going to sell many textbooks
because the medical schools want to buy
books that are sort of the quote
accepted way of looking at things and
and the radical ideas won't sell because
the medical schools want to teach what's
accepted. So
&gt;&gt; is this this book in front of us?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The fourth phase of water to me it it
reads like a textbook, you know, and
it's it's even better though because it
has way more little diagrams and and
your son's cartoons are incredible in
this book. But to me like is this my in
my view it's going to be a textbook
&gt;&gt; right is it's not accepted yet.
&gt;&gt; I don't know if it will be a textbook
but you know it's very popular on
Amazon. If you just take a look,
&gt;&gt; I mean mo most books these days are sold
through Amazon and this one is sold too
&gt;&gt; and there are reviewer ratings of the
books and if you take a look at the
reviewer reviewer score it sometimes if
I feel a little bit down in the dumps I
look at the reviews and I feel better.
So I don't I don't know if you'd call it
a textbook, but
&gt;&gt; yeah, it's it's meant for wide
dissemination. Yes, it's meant for
people to understand that
&gt;&gt; in in my view, you know, if you can't
explain it to your grandmother, then
probably something is wrong and then
it's probably not true. Of course, these
days, you know, there are grandmothers
who have PhDs in in cosmology and
whatever. So it goes, but but you know
what I mean. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it it should be it should be
understandable to just about anybody and
if it can't be made explainable, there
might be something seriously wrong with
the idea.
[Music]
&gt;&gt; So, so we have this. So, really quick
just to give people an idea here of the
importance or you gave an idea of the
importance here. This is a source of
energy in the body. But our envir there
are things in our environment that are
really wreaking havoc on our water
battery.
&gt;&gt; So can you talk a little bit about what
destroys it and then things to do to
help it? Like how do a person really
stay hydrated?
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, so one one thing at a time.
Yeah. first the the the system of
hydration and what the environment does
and then if I forget to answer the
second question about how you stay
hydrated, please ask me again.
&gt;&gt; Okay?
&gt;&gt; You know, I sometimes I start like the
trunk of the tree and I go up on a
branch and then a twig and whatever and
I forget where I started. But okay, so
why first is this water that's inside
the cell, the easy water. And by the
way, easy water negatively charged.
That's why the cell is negatively
charged. It has nothing to do with pumps
or channels. It's very simple. The cell
is filled with easy water which has
negative charge. And so now how does it
how does the cell get filled with easy
water? Well, the cell is you know it's
it it's got macro molecules inside the
cell. It's ab absolutely packed with so
many macroolelecules, proteins, nucleic
acids, what whatever. And and the
surfaces are mostly charged or
hydrophilic. So any water that's inside
the cell will gradually or or quickly
grow into easy water. So the cell gets
filled up with negatively charged easy
water and that's why the cell is
negatively charged. the the
complimentary positively charged water
gets gets pushed out of the cell. So the
cell remains with easy water and so what
what builds the easy water what
nucleates it starts the growth are these
surfaces of the macroolelecules.
Now if you have some contaminant from
from outside that contaminant if if it
destroys or if it changes the DNA and
creates mutations those surfaces are not
necessarily able to nucleate the growth
of easy water. So then you have less
easy water and if you have less easy
water the cell can't undergo its
transition. the cell needs to the water
I'm sorry there there are several steps
along the way what the water does if the
water is in the easy state it's sort of
a little bit like ice and nothing can
happen inside of ice it needs to undergo
a transition and in in the previous book
to the one that you you showed the the
the book that
&gt;&gt; the cells cells gels
&gt;&gt; and the engines of life yeah I I spent
half the book describing desing perhaps
a half dozen different cell types where
the evidence is that the water under
goes a transition. So the water starts
like if you consider a muscle cell and
in the relaxed state the muscle cell the
water is Gilbert Ling would say
structured water we'd say easy or fourth
phase water but nothing happens but if a
cell needs to do something like if it's
a muscle cell that needs to contract
then the entire cell under goes a
so-called phase transition where the
water is structured and the proteins are
in their extended state and then when
the cell is triggered. The muscle cell
again triggered to contract. Everything
changes. The water changes. It it
undergoes a transition from structured
easy water to ordinary liquid water. And
that is is what allows the proteins to
undergo their change and to create the
contraction itself after which
everything returns to the initial state.
Now if you don't if you have
environmental factors that impact the
DNA then those surfaces of those
proteins and other macroolelecules are
mutated they're changed they don't
necessarily have the capacity to
nucleate the growth of easy water. So
the cell then doesn't have as much easy
water and and you can tell that because
the electrical potential will be the
magnitude will be smaller and if it
doesn't have that easy water which needs
to undergo a transition to to ordinary
liquid water there's less of a
transition that's occurring and
therefore the action will be weaker. So,
so if you want if you want full
activity, you have no no mutations and
the easy water undergoes a transition to
ordinary water. But if you have
mutations that occur as a consequence of
environmental factors, then there's not
as much easy water in the cell because
the surfaces can't nucleate the growth
of easy water as well. and and the
transition from easy water to ordinary
water is smaller, less transition and
therefore less action and therefore your
muscle will contract more weekly or your
secrettory cell won't secrete as much or
your nerve cell won't conduct as well,
etc., etc. So,
&gt;&gt; is that is that aging you're you're
describing or or chronic disease?
&gt;&gt; Well, all of the above.
&gt;&gt; All of the above. Cancer,
&gt;&gt; I think all of the above. Yeah.
And you know especially I guess the one
of the prime examples of this is cancer
cells. you know cancer cells the
electrical potential of cancer cells a
wide variety of cancer cells instead of
being minus60 or 70 or 80 it's minus 10
or 20 millolts which means uh there's
less easy water in the cell and it it so
it turns out that that the cancer cells
don't have as much capacity to to do
whatever they're designed to do and also
the most critical feature is that if the
electrical potential is really low,
magnitude is low, you know, - 10, -20,
-30, that's exactly the condition that's
required for cells for cells to divide.
This has been demonstrated in many
cells, not only cancer cells, but
embryionic cells too. Very small
magnitude electrical potential. So I
think that you know cancer cells might
be taken as a as the the extreme of a
continuum a continuum of dysfunction or
pathology. So you you have a if you have
a full complement of easy water you have
a healthy cell. If if the amount of easy
water is compromised in some way the
cell is somewhat dysfunctional. If it's
if it's seriously compromised, the cell
is pathological. And if it's very
seriously compromised, it's cancerous.
It's a a continuum. It's not that that
each one of those is it's separate
disease. And I I argue that that it's
basically dehydration. It could be put
into a simple term dehydration because
the cell has got if hydration is equal
to easy water. If the cell has
progressively less easy water, then it's
progressively more dehydrated.
And I would argue that cancer cells, I
wrote a paper about this published last
year, that cancer cells are at the
extreme of dehydration. So the so then
the second part of the question was
well, you know, what what can you do
about this? What what can you do about
about these dysfunctions? and and I
argue that that anything you do to
increase the amount of easy water in the
cell will tend to reverse the
dysfunction. So I can I can give you
some examples of that. First thing
&gt;&gt; please please do
&gt;&gt; Oh okay. Well I'm happy happy to do so.
Drink more water.
&gt;&gt; I mean that's
&gt;&gt; have one.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And you because the water you
drink some of the water will turn into
Yeah, that's exactly right. will turn
into easy water. Some gets peed out, but
but basically you're you're rehydrating
by by increasing the amount of easy
water in the cell. And it and you know
that you you you know that if you've
been skiing all day, you know, taking a
a drink of water and re or playing
tennis, two matches of tennis, sitting
down and drinking a liter of water or
something is refreshes you, gives you
energy. Another another way is juicing.
And you know about juicing, but not
everybody does. I mean, basically, you
go to your backyard, you take some
freshly growing plants, you pull off the
leaves, you put it into a machine that
squeezes out the juice, and you drink
&gt;&gt; cucumber would be great, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, cucumber is is very good. But even
besides cucumber, there are lots of
other vegetables. And what are you
drinking? You're drinking the water from
inside the plant cells. And that water
is easy water. And if the plant is
freshly grown, it's got a lot of easy
water in it. And that's why many health
practitioners will argue that that's the
simplest thing you can do to to preserve
your health or improve your health is to
drink that that juice on a daily basis.
So that's to another another is
sunshine. I I didn't tell you this, but
but the agent that builds easy water is
light, especially infrared light. And
&gt;&gt; so I know there are lots of red light
therapies and infrared therapies. So and
and the way they work, I I would argue,
is that they build easy water and builds
easy water in your cells makes you
healthy. So it builds easy water in your
cells, which makes your cells healthy.
And the the extreme of that I guess is
the sauna or as the Finn saya
because it's high temperature whether
it's dry or moist it's high temperature
and the high temperature is associated
with infrared. So infrared light or at
the red end of the spectrum near
infrared uh builds easy water and that's
what you want in your cells. So, so
that's why when you go into the sauna,
you you come out 30 minutes later and
you feel like a renewed person because
you're
&gt;&gt; even though you've dehydrated like it's
kind of a paradox. You think that you've
sweat and and and dehydrated, but at the
same time, people don't realize you're
actually hydrating from the inside out.
&gt;&gt; You're actually you're actually
hydrating. Yeah. Well, you may be
dehydrating some some parts of your
body, but the parts that need buildup of
easy water are are getting that buildup.
Yes, you're you're right. There there is
an element of dehydration involved.
That that's avoided somewhat in in the
saunas that are moist rather than the
ones that are are are dry. But anyway,
that that's one. And then another one is
grounding or earthing. you connect
yourself to the earth. And so what does
that do? Well, it turns out that I
didn't know this studying electrical
engineering. No, no professor even
hinted that the earth was anything but a
bland neutrality. And when a Russian guy
who was in my lab told me one day that,
"Oh, you don't know that the earth is
negatively charged?" I I said, "Andre,
you know, you must be on some kind of
drug. I never heard of such a thing."
And he said, It's amazing because when I
went to school in Russia, he's a
contemporary age, slightly younger. He
said, "Everybody knew, everybody in
Russia knew that the earth was
negatively charged." And I said, "I
never heard of such a thing." And I went
home. I was scratching my head. I had
trouble sleeping. And next day, my one
of my students brought me the famous
Fineman lectures on physics. and volume
two, chapter nine, a whole chapter
devoted to evidence that the earth is
negatively charged. So what does that
mean? Well, it means if you connect
yourself electrically to the earth, and
most of us aren't connected to the earth
because we wear leather shoes, so we're
insulated, but if you take off your
shoes and either walk on the wet grass
or walk on the sand next to the ocean,
we're connected electrically to the
earth. And any of our cells that are
missing this critical agent, the easy
water, the negative charge will come in.
And what negative charge does, we found
in the laboratory, is that if you start
with water and you add negative charge,
that water transitions into easy water.
So we know if electrical current flows
in, you'll get easy water. So that's
another way of building easy water. And
then finally, or maybe not finally,
there there are agents, herbs of various
sorts that have been known for 5,000
years or or more during Ayurvedic times
to be good for health. So there's like
turmeric is one of them. Holy basil is
another, ghee, you know, the clarified
butter. And we tested a whole bunch of
those and we found that every every one
of them builds easy water. So, so if you
have water and and you add say turmeric
in the right concentration, the easy
will be to a larger size. So, you get
more easy water in the presence of some
of those agent or essentially all of
those agents. And on the other other
side, if you we we took a poison like
glyphosate for example.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for mentioning.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And and you know, every
concentration it diminished the amount
of easy water. So that's to be expected
of a poison, you know, and we don't we
don't know about other poisons. I've
been I've been a little bit reluctant to
ask some of the students to deal with
the poisons because I I don't want
someone to die of of exposure. You know
what I mean? So, but at any rate, it
appears it's possible that many of these
poisons act by dehydration. Oh,
&gt;&gt; and
&gt;&gt; speak speaking of like dehydration, we
we you know in in our studies we've kind
of come across blue light and then
non-native EMFs like like cell phones
and and routers being dehydrating. Have
you tested those at all?
&gt;&gt; Uh yes, we did. We we have tested and
the the cell phone issue we tested. So
the there was there was a student in the
lab and he took a router and put a
router next to one of these chambers
that were used to study EZ growth and
when he turned on the router the easy
size diminished by some 20%.
We never published it and the reason we
never published it is somehow that
student disappeared. I don't know what
ever happened to him but completely out
of contact and nobody has been able to
contact him and I don't know what
happened. He was a really popular
student, very friendly, and he seemed to
be doing good work, but I I'm kind of
reluctant to to publish a result where I
I don't have access to the person who
actually did the experiment. So, but for
what it's worth, we found that easy size
diminished in the presence of
electromagnetic
&gt;&gt; at least a rotor
&gt;&gt; rotor. Yeah. So, so this is one more
that I I I want to mention because I I
think it's really important. You know,
hyperbaric oxygen therapy. I had a
student uh after he or postoc after he
finished in my lab, he went to work for
a company building and testing
hyperbaric oxygen chambers. And as you
know these chambers you you you get into
the chamber and they they the air that
you breathe is is done under high
pressure and high oxygen. And we we
wondered because these machines have
high efficacy for so many different
syndromes, not not only the original
wound healing, which they were for which
they were very effective, but for many
many syndromes, including cancer,
they're they're used. And so we
wondered, is there something magical
about about high oxygen and high
pressure? and we tested it and we
published it and we found that high
pressure builds easy and high oxygen
builds easy. When you put the two
together, you get a major easy buildup.
And and so it's possible that the reason
that hyperbaric oxygen therapy is so
successful for so many different
syndromes is basically it builds easy.
So anyway, I've given you a halfozen or
so different expedience that can be used
and and they're used effectively and I I
would argue that that that the buildup
of EZ is as a generality that you you
can improve whatever dysfunction you
have. I say whatever. You know, I'm
exaggerating somewhat because I don't
know if it's if it's everyone, but I
think there's a generality. And I think
that that generality is that your cells,
it doesn't matter whether there's a
muscle cell or a nerve cell or
pancreatic cell or whatever, whatever
kind of cell, if it doesn't have enough
easy water, it's not going to function
properly. And the the lesser the amount
of easy water the more pathological the
cell will be. So what you really want to
do is you want to apply any one of those
expedience that I mentioned and these
expedience will to to some extent or
more extent or whatever build easy water
and tend to reverse that kind of
pathology.
&gt;&gt; So I think that's a a kind of bottom
line that that is really important. I'm
I'm I'm working right now on on a paper
that will describe that. Wish I had time
is the issue.
&gt;&gt; Well, we are so thankful for the time
you're giving us today because this
clarifying so much. I used to spend a
little time in hypoaric I think they
were hypobaric chambers.
&gt;&gt; Hyperbaric, right? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Hyper. Well, to to to fly up in an F-18
in the Air Force,
&gt;&gt; we had we had to learn what our hypoxy
hypoxic symptoms were. So now I'm
thinking I think they probably lowered
my easy. Maybe I should have danger pay
for that.
&gt;&gt; Well, how did you feel when you were up
there?
&gt;&gt; Oh. Oh, exhilarating. It was incred. I
had two F-18 rides in my in my time and
it was the most exciting two hours of my
life. But in the chamber, oh, you don't
feel good at all. Like when they when
they take away the oxygen and you start
to get silly, you know?
&gt;&gt; Oh my goodness. Did you by any chance
fly upside down? Oh, yes. Yeah. My first
F-18 ride was a a one-hour dog fight
actually.
&gt;&gt; Against against against my husband who
was doing an upgrade mission, and it was
the most exciting, like I say, hour of
my life. I was actually when when we
came into landing, I was actually a
little relieved at the final, you know,
at the very end. I could do a whole
podcast episode on how exciting that
was.
&gt;&gt; I bet it was. Oh, have you ever could
you ever explain about flying upside
down if Bernie's principle is
&gt;&gt; Oh, but is that is it true that you're
you're writing a book on this?
&gt;&gt; I've written a book. It's at the right
now
&gt;&gt; and it will be out and in six weeks or
so. It's called
&gt;&gt; Oh my goodness.
&gt;&gt; called Charged and
&gt;&gt; Charged. I I I I deal with planes flying
and I deal with birds flying and a host
of other subjects that we think we
understand but I I argue that we really
don't and the real explanation differs
from from the the accepted explanation.
So in the case of planes they do fly
upside down and there are some birds
that fly upside down too. So, you know,
invoking the Bernoli principle doesn't
doesn't always work.
&gt;&gt; And some planes don't have that classic
curvature. The more modern planes are
flatter. The wings are flat on top. Um,
&gt;&gt; there's some hobby planes that are
completely flat and they fly just
perfectly.
&gt;&gt; So, I think it's not Bernulli's
principle. I think it's something else.
And I I guess I I don't want to give it
away right now, but please take a look
on Amazon and if if you're interested, I
deal with a you know a whole lot of
whole lot of subjects in including
what's the nature of gravitation, the
real nature of gravitation because you
know the idea the idea that one mass
attracts another seems to work most of
the time but not always. It doesn't it
doesn't work. For example, some
measurements show a periodic variation
in the gravitational constant that
varies every 24 hours. Another one shows
that it's different in the summer from
the winter. And and and there are
observations like that that simply don't
don't make sense in the standard
paradigm. So, you need to think about
maybe something else that might explain
these observations a little bit better.
a whole lot of observations like I know
either of you do sailing.
&gt;&gt; I do.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You ever do you know about ice
boats?
&gt;&gt; No. Oh, breaking through the ice or No,
not sailboats, but they're sailboats
that run on ice. So, you don't have a
keel that runs through the water. So,
&gt;&gt; you don't have the complications imposed
by the water viscosity. It it it runs on
skids that run on the top of the ice
just like a sled.
&gt;&gt; I'm thinking of of kites. Is it kite
serving? I've seen them do it on our
lake on the snow on the ice.
&gt;&gt; I I I think that's probably the same,
right? They're they're called ice boats
and and they they can head almost
directly into the wind. So, in other
words, I'm blowing on your face and
you're moving toward me instead of away
from me.
If you think about that, I mean, sounds
impossible, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Normally, you tack, you know, at
like 45 degrees.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But those those boats don't need
to tack. They can go up to five or six
degrees off the wind almost directly
into the wind at 100 miles an hour.
&gt;&gt; And it's just that it's easier, if you
think about those boats, the the the
physics and mathematics is easier
because there are no angles involved.
You go directly almost directly into the
wind. But if you think about it, it
doesn't make sense because if I'm
blowing on your nose and your face,
you're going to want to move backwards,
not toward me,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; But the boats move toward me
&gt;&gt; and really fast. So So how does that
work?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. How does that That's crazy. In
this book, do you happen to do your
theory of the atom? I heard you in a
summit talk about it just briefly.
&gt;&gt; No, that's included. Or is that's a
whole another book?
&gt;&gt; Next book. And my son, who's the artist,
who's a fantastic artist, he's taking a
a break of two weeks because we just
sent it the book to the printer, the
charge book, and the atom book will be
next. He's got half the drawings done
already. So, I think it won't be more
than six or eight months before it is
ready to be published, I hope.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Can you give us a little teaser on
your theory, or do you want to Do you
have to wait?
&gt;&gt; Well, I'll give you I I guess I can.
Yeah, I can give you a little teaser.
So, first of all, you you've learned
I've learned we've all learned about the
so-called solar system model
&gt;&gt; where you know you got a nucleus and the
nucleus contains protons and neutrons,
right? And then orbitals that contain
electrons. So, first first question and
we all believe that that's true, but I'm
raising a question whether indeed that
can be true. So think about the nucleus.
Nucleus contains neutrons and protons
and subatomic particles. But let's let
them let them aside for the for the
moment. Protons have positive charge,
right? Neutrons are neutral.
&gt;&gt; Now if you pack positive charges
together, what do they want to do?
&gt;&gt; They're going to repel,
&gt;&gt; right? And so the nucleus wants to
explode.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So the physicists
realize that this is a problem. And so
they I hesitate to to use the word
invented, but I guess there's no other
word for it. They invented something
because there's no independent evidence.
They something called strong force.
That's what they call it, a strong
force. And it's like a glue that holds
the nucleus together. It keeps it from
exploding. Now, you know, you can say,
well, yeah, okay, that's all right. But
absent independent evidence for the
existence of a strong force with those
particular characteristics, you have to
ask the question whether that's merely a
band-aid to cover up a gaping wound.
So I mean this this is a problem. But
there there's more. You learned I bet
you I learned in middle school that plus
and minus attract each other, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. nucleus is positive. The
electrons that run around in orbitals
are negative. Now, if minus attracts to
positive, how come all those electrons
that are running around the nucleus
don't collapse onto the nucleus,
reducing the atom to just a point?
&gt;&gt; Right. We're told that it's like the
circle and then the
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; And you're saying those those electrons
would not be able to stay on those
orbits. It would just go.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Well, that makes complete sense.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, yeah. So, so you know, you
have to ask a question. Well, if there's
no if there's no easy interpretation of
that, then maybe the model is wrong.
We don't we don't consider that there's
a possibility that the model could be
wrong because everybody believes for
five generations you know that the model
is correct and we start with the
assumption of the correctness of the
model but how do we know it's correct?
Has anybody ever seen the nucleus or
have seen electrons or seen electrons
existing in orbitals? Why would why
would electrons want to stick in the
same orbital? They repel each other.
They want to get as far away from each
other as possible. So why why do they
stick in close to one another in in
orbitals?
So another question, my my computer is
built of aluminum, right? It means that
aluminum atoms stick together.
Otherwise, you know, I would wouldn't
have a a solid computer, right? Every
aluminum atom likes to stick to every
other aluminum atom. But if you look at
the structure, each aluminum atom has a
negative charge on the outermost
orbital. So this one has and this one
has. And so the the two atoms, if if
that model is correct, they would repel
each other, not stick to each other. So
why would they stick to each other?
&gt;&gt; Those are a few of the multiple reasons
why the model doesn't work. So I came up
with a different model that I think
works and it's stable. It doesn't either
explode or collapse into nothingness.
And uh I I'll just say one one thing
about it and and that is after I
finished drafting the book, which was
actually quite a few years ago, it's
just been sitting there because my son
takes his time illustrating. So So it
takes a while. It's he's worth it. He's
amazing. tough to get those kids to to
do what we want when we want.
&gt;&gt; He is absolutely conscientious, but he's
he's persistent. He every every diagram
has to be just right. And so I'm I'm
ahead of him in in in the writing, but
it's coming.
&gt;&gt; What a team.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Oh, it it it's Wait, wait till you
see the charge book, which is coming out
soon. The the figures are just glorious.
&gt;&gt; Awesome.
&gt;&gt; Just amazing. and and he's so easy to
work with. It's it it's great. Anyway,
after I drafted the book, gone through
some rounds of editing, I I discovered
that someone else came up with a model
not too different from mine. And this
was hundred years ago. You know, it was
the the model is called the Boore model
because
&gt;&gt; Boore was the guy who came Neil came
Neils Boore, right? and from Copenhagen
came up with the model and the chemists
hated it. The chemists the physicists
loved it because it was the era of
physics you know all the great
physicists winning Nobel prizes and the
chemist chemists hated it because they
they said there there were a couple of
super famous chemists. One is Irving
Langmir and the other is GN Lewis.
Langir won a Nobel Prize I I think and
and Lewis was the kind of dean of
chemistry or something like that at
Berkeley and these were two of the
leaders in the field and they said this
bore model is nonsense. It doesn't
explain the simplest of chemical
reactions and many of the chemists
agreed that this is nonsense.
I'm not sure if they still agree but
they agreed. So I discovered notes from
GN Lewis and his his his notes will be
just outlined in in pencil or or pen
were reproduced and the model that Lewis
came up with is almost the same as the
model that I've come up with. That was a
hundred years ago. So I didn't know
about it. I found out after I derived
mine. So that gave me a bit of
confidence that maybe I was kind of on
the right track. So and and the mo the
model without going into detail because
it's hard to do it without some diagrams
and enough time to do it but I think the
model is cubic model rather than a a
spherical model. When you have spherical
model you know and you put two atoms
together you have dead space. You can't
you can't fit two spheres together.
There's always space
&gt;&gt; outside of the spheres. It's unbinded
you know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But if you have platonic solids
like like cubes, they fit together very
nicely. So I I think it's a largely a
cubic model with some some exceptions.
And please wait for the book and have a
look at the book and you can make
judgment yourself as to whether you
think it it the proposed model is is
more shall we say meaningful than the
other despite the fact that the other
has been around for five generations.
We'll see. Okay, awesome. Well, we're
excited for it. We're coming up on our
time now. I know that Laura had wanted
to bring up something about the
&gt;&gt; So, so many things I wanted to ask.
Well, we'll have to give up.
&gt;&gt; What do you have for time, Jerry?
&gt;&gt; Well, I' I've got a few minutes.
&gt;&gt; A few minutes. Okay. So, and then we'll
get to our signature question right
after. So, one one thing you want to
bring up, Laura. Which one? H I I did
want to ask about any research you've
done with dutarium depleted water. It's
probably
&gt;&gt; we just completed a study and
&gt;&gt; okay
&gt;&gt; paper is written and
&gt;&gt; excellent
&gt;&gt; waiting for a student who did the
hands-on work to submit it for
publication. We found that that dutyium
depleted water builds bigger eases than
ordinary water. And you know it it fits
it fits with the idea that you're better
off well better hydrated better
functioning you know if you have bigger
EZs because that's what we found dutium
depleted water does. We were we were
hoping to get a a result that gave us
the size of the easy as a function of
the percent of dutyium depleted water.
But the results were more scattered than
that. But we found in easily
statistically significant fashion that
when you've got easy when you have
dutium depleted water you get bigger
eases. So
&gt;&gt; okay
&gt;&gt; at least know that we don't know we
don't know about the quantitative
determination of that that remains for
the for the future but at least that's
what we found out. So it fits with the
idea that you know duterian depleted
water seems to be good for health. Yeah,
this might be a stupid question, but
isn't easy water in itself duterium
depleted?
&gt;&gt; No, it it it well we we don't know. We
start off with with water that contains
dutyium. So we
&gt;&gt; okay,
&gt;&gt; we can presume that there is some
dutyium in the lattice. really we're
we're talking about a a lattice that
forms
&gt;&gt; easy lattice and that's going to have
mostly proteium and some dutyium and
dutarium is like it's kind of like a
like a something of a contaminant you
know and
&gt;&gt; and it it we expect it to kind of
disrupt the growth of of the EZ because
when you when you've got something
that's included in EZ that's not the
same as every other component onent
that's contained in it. It is kind of
like like a contaminant and the
contaminants will inhibit the growth of
of the lattice. But if you get rid of
the contaminant, in other words, get rid
of the dutarium, then you're you're
going to that's going to facilitate the
growth of EZ, not compromise it. And so
it it kind of fits with what we expect.
And I'm glad we we found that result. So
I'm looking forward to publication of
it. Yeah, I bet there are so many people
listening that are too, including
ourselves. So, our signature question
that we want to ask you is, what does
healthy science mean to you?
&gt;&gt; Healthy science means the absence of
fear of asking the most fundamental
questions that exist in science. You
know, you start with a foundation and
you build on the foundation. And I guess
you you might consider the foundation to
be the atomic structure, for example.
You you build on that. And if you start
with the wrong atomic structure, you're
going to build on a foundation that's
not sound,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; And if you build on a foundation that's
not sound, everything is going to be
complicated. And right now, science
looks very complicated. And my own
thought is science is not very
complicated. You know, mother nature
builds simple systems. And the reason it
may look complicated is you're starting
with a foundation that's not correct. So
I didn't I didn't start out that way,
but I've now had enough experience to
realize that
many many concepts that we have are
actually wrong. And if you look into it
and you actually look at the evidence,
the amount of evidence that fits and
evidence that doesn't fit, turns out,
you know, if you're careful and and look
conscientiously, you find a lot of
evidence that doesn't fit. And in in
many cases, which means you can either
sweep it under the carpet and say, "Ah,
well, you know, it's good enough." Or
you can say, well, you know, there's
enough evidence that doesn't fit that
I'm going to look deeply myself and find
out what what's the the real evidence.
And the atomic structure that you
brought up is is one of those. You know,
if you start with the wrong structure,
then everything that you that everything
in chemistry is going to be, you might
say wrong. I hesitate to use so blatant
a term, but it's going to turn out to
seem more complicated than actually it
is. So,
&gt;&gt; but if you start and you find out what
is the real atomic structure and you got
the right answer, I'm not saying we have
the right answer. I hoping that we're
headed in the right direction and you
build from that foundation, then science
um uh should turn out to be simple,
straightforward. And that's my goal is
to start at the most foundational level
and build from there and winding up with
a a science that's not only simple but
beautiful because beauty and simplicity
I think go together. So that's I guess
that that's my message right now. uh as
you know it's not easy to uh dig into to
the most fundamental concepts because
you need money to do whatever you're
doing and it's hard to get money um you
know if you say hey give me some money
because I want to study the structure of
the atom well you know your reviewers
will think that they know what the
structure of the atom is right
&gt;&gt; and don't bother us with that and and
we're not going to give you money for
doing so so stupid a kind
endeavor, which means any scientists
who's, shall we say, intelligent won't
won't pursue a question like that
because they know that what's going to
happen is they won't get money. They'll
get a reputation as being a a kind of
crazy maverick who's on some kind of
drug, you know, and and and you'll
quickly disappear from the scientific
scene because if you can't get any
money, you can't do anything, you lose
your academic position, etc., etc. So,
you have to be a little bit crazy like
maybe I am in order to have interest in
pursuing something really fundamental,
but that's exactly what we need if we
want to make progress.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So,
&gt;&gt; yeah. Well, oh my gosh, we you're
certainly part of the paradigm shift we
find ourselves in. So, hopefully Yeah.
You just you're giving us so much hope
today.
&gt;&gt; Well, thank you. I appreciate that.
So much hope.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Jerry, how can people find you if a they
want to look, you know, see where your
research papers are? Can you mention
quickly the water conference that you
do?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean the Institute for Venture
Science.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So that's the URL is waterf water
nf as in water conference. Watercom.org
not not.org
water www.watercon
waterconump.org or and we're just in the
process of discuss discussing the next
one which should occur probably around
October and last year we held it in
Portugal Lisbon and probably it'll be in
Lisbon again though we're not absolutely
certain it's a lovely city and friendly
and cheaper than a lot of other cities
and and you're all anybody is welcome to
come and so that that's that's the way
to find out what's going on in the
entire field. Now, if you're interested
in the stuff that we do in particular,
we're, you know, our we're one of 35
presenters or so at the conference. I'm
just the organizer. If you want to find
out, then www.polloclab,
one word, polloclab.org
would be the place, and you can you can
find out all the papers there. And I
would I would recommend checking out the
books because they're cheap. We we we we
keep them actually very inexpensive
because the goal is dissemination, not
profit, you know, but we actually lose
money because we we charge so little for
the books and and the goal is to have
people read the books, not necessarily
to to make this a money money-making
endeavor. and the books have won prizes
and such and I, you know, I think
they're pretty good. So, I recommend
that. And if you want to contact me, I
my email address is all over the
internet. No, no problem finding me.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; I'm a little oversubscribed,
you know.
&gt;&gt; And the the Institute of Adventure
Science, can you mention just quickly?
&gt;&gt; Sure. That's IVscience is the URL.
IVscience.org.
www.i
IV as in intravenous IVscience.org
and there you can find I I'm I'm
actually quite proud of this institute
because
&gt;&gt; you know it it it it provides a way for
for people to actually get funded for
unorthodox ideas. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; It's almost impossible to get funded for
unorthodox ideas in in the mainstream
because what they do is, you know, if
you if you for example if you assert
that the earth is round and everybody
else knows that the earth is flat, you
write a grand proposal to study what you
propose to be the round earth and the
gatekeeper who receives your application
says, "Oh, I don't never heard of this
person. I better recruit the world's
expert on the shape of the earth to see
whether this person is a flake or
otherwise. So the person you're
challenging is the one who's reviewing
your proposal and there's no way you're
going to get funded or almost impossible
to get funded. There needs to be some
other way and the the other way to get
funded. And I think this is the reason
why we've had so few scientific
revolutions in the past 50 years or so.
There have been plenty of technological
revolutions like Zoom, you know, and
&gt;&gt; that's true.
&gt;&gt; But can you think of anything in the
past 50 years that's comparable say to
the discovery of the genetic code or the
splitting of the atom or something like
this? All of which took place.
&gt;&gt; Some may say the cell phone.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that's technology, right?
&gt;&gt; Technology. Okay. Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And there's plenty of money to
support technology because you invest
the money and you get rewards, financial
rewards from it. You take a risk, but
it's a good risk. It's not the same for
fundamental science, right? There's no
financial reward that comes at the end.
So, it it's really difficult. And you
know, I would I would actually challenge
you to to think of think of a a real
scientific revolution of that magnitude
that's impacted everybody's life. Not
that promises to impact everybody's
life, but has already impacted
everybody's life. Something that took
place in the past, say, 50 years, very
few. And and the reason I I would argue
is is that it's not possible to get
money to study ideas that challenge
mainstream views or that propose
something radical. You just can't get
the money. So that's what the Institute
for Venture Science is designed to do.
We need donations because it hasn't been
possible to get money from the
government. Although that might change
with the new administration, not not so
clear because you know RFK Jr.
controversial guy, but he has he has
interest he has interest in ideas that
are non- mainstream. Some of which could
maybe work out to create revolution. So
don't know if it's going to happen, but
it could happen.
&gt;&gt; Cross your fingers.
&gt;&gt; Well, I I'd like to see it happen. So, I
hope I've presented enough controversial
material.
&gt;&gt; You have. And thank you so much, Jerry,
for joining us. Thank you. Thank you.
And
&gt;&gt; we're just going to raise our glasses
here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Because we wanted to do this with water.
And thank you for being so curious, all
the continued dedication to science,
challenging all the long-held ideas,
including, you know, Ling and bringing
to life his work. and just it just seems
like you're such a humble person, but
you've accomplished so much with how in
I don't know how many papers. We thought
we think it was 300, but it's probably
even more than that and all the books.
&gt;&gt; A lot of papers. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; A lot of papers.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But and truly now this last piece that
you've, you know, mentioned with the
Institute of Venture Science that may
just produce fundamental breakthroughs
for today's seemingly intractable
problems like cancer and chronic
disease. And I hope so.
&gt;&gt; I also just want to say just know people
are reading your books.
&gt;&gt; Have the faith and and you gave us
ideas. I know my husband's a test pilot
and he's going to be getting charged
&gt;&gt; for his birthday.
&gt;&gt; I I hope so. I'd be curious to find out
what he thinks. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; for sure. Well, hey, maybe he'll contact
you. We'll get get you guys connected.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Okay. Anyway,
&gt;&gt; cheers, Dr. Pollack. Thank you so much.
&gt;&gt; Cheers to you. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Cheers. Byebye. Thank you everyone for
listening and we'll see you next time.
Thank you for sticking around to the end
of this podcast. We want to thank our
sponsor Viva Rays who allows for us to
get this information to you. They offer
top-of-the-line blue blocking glasses
which as we know are critical for our
health these days for blocking
artificial light at night. Over 90% of
our time is spent indoors under
artificial lights and this puts us all
prone to circadian rhythm disruption.
You can use the code quantum healthy for
a discount. Link is in the show notes.
Thank you so much for listening to the
Quantum Healthy podcast. We hope you
found some value in this information and
if you feel inspired, please share it
and leave us a five-star review. This
will help us reach so many more people.
If you want to connect with Laura, you
can find her at lauraissmanwellness.com
and endia.com.
Links are below in the show notes. Now
go find some sunlight and embrace your
own quantum healthy.
[Music]