For most of the 20th century, it was
believed by geologists, paleontologists,
archaeologists, and other scientists
that the rates and magnitudes of global
environmental change, such as we have
experienced during the past couple of
centuries since the dawn of the
scientific revolution, were the norm
throughout most of Earth history,
especially during the time which we
humans have existed. Researchers and
others who questioned the strictly
gradualistic models of change, who saw
the effects of large-scale catastrophes
and disruptions in the landscapes around
them, were consigned to the fringe,
considered crackpots or pseudocientists
at best. But this entrenched belief in
gradualism began to unravel in the year
1980 when three teams of researchers all
concluded independently that the
extinction of the dinosaurs was the
result of a great worldwide catastrophe
induced by a cosmic impact.
In the aftermath of that evolutionary
development, it has become respectable
to explore the possibility of
cataclysmic change, not only affecting
the planet as a whole, but the human
species as well. As a result of this new
insight, we are compelled now to ask to
what extent have global catastrophes
affected the rise and fall of human
civilization.
Join me as we dive into this critically
important question.
[Music]
Well, hello everyone.
Welcome to another episode of Squaring
the Circle. I'm your host, Randall
Carlson, and hopefully the rumor is that
I am going to be joined by my friend and
colleague, John Arthur. Well, sure
enough, it wasn't a mere rumor. There he
is in real life.
&gt;&gt; The rumors of my appearance are not
exaggerated. I I will be here producing
in the control room. Glad to be here.
&gt;&gt; It's so comforting to know, John, that
you are there in the control room
handling things.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's an honor to be here.
&gt;&gt; Preventing preventing the the the very
real possibility of catastrophe.
We had a near catastrophe a little
earlier when my microphone came
unscrewed from the stand. And I'm glad
it happened before we started recording
instead of happening in the middle of
the recording.
&gt;&gt; Well, so for those of you who who who
wish to say this, you can no longer
claim that Randall has a screw loose.
They've all been tightened. So, we're
all
&gt;&gt; Well, at least this one.
&gt;&gt; At least that one.
&gt;&gt; There still There actually may be a
couple of screws
that could just use a little more
tightening. Maybe they're not loose uh
in the sense that uh they're about to
they're about to fall apart. Um anyways,
we are going to be talking about
catastrophes which is something that we
seem to be inclined to do and there's a
reason for that. I think the reason is
simply that we now know since in the
introductory marks I mentioned the year
1980. Well, 1980 was to me was an
inflection point. It was a turning point
because if you go even though yeah you
can see the the the the developments
leading up to it. Yes, there was there
were more and more scientists like
throughout the 70s that were beginning
to raise questions but the dominant
paradigm was still strictly uniformity
gradualism and so on. But with that
public the three publications in 1980
it really did open the door to
realization that wow yeah there have
been great catastrophes and it's likely
that you know something from space from
time to time strikes the earth with
severe consequences and in the aftermath
of that when we see throughout the 80s
uh we see that
once scientists begin to take a deeper
look and consider that this was a very
real possibility in Earth history. They
started discovering more and more
craters and impact structures,
astrolams.
Um my understanding of the difference
why we would use two different terms one
crater and astroblam is that a crater is
going to be the classic bowlshaped that
we can actually see the evidence that
you know a ringed structure circular
structure it has some depth to it. Um
and then of course the associated impact
proxies that make the case that yeah
it's not volcanic or not a salt dome.
It's uh it's an impact of something from
out there, right? Well, once we've been
taking a look, of course, we started
finding them more and more and more
until now there's oh gosh, at least 200.
I think more than 200 actually. I think
it's quite a few more than 200 but there
has a whole rigorous process
of vetting of confirming that some of
these structures that are being found
are in fact from hypervelocity impact.
Now an astroblene
is tends to be uh well astroame like
astro meaning star and ble comes from
this is the is the root of the word uh
like for example blemish uh it it means
also wound so astro blame literally
means star wound okay so an astroblame I
think if we're going to have some fine
distinctions here between the definition
of the term crater and astroblam is A
crater is pretty much visible on the
macro scale. You can see it. There it
is. Um, an astrolam doesn't necessarily
have to be an astro like the KT boundary
66 million year old crater is buried
under like half a kilometer of limestone
sediment. You can't really see it from
the surface except for the ring of
cenotes which it might be interesting to
talk about. But otherwise the ring of
cenotes has been known for a long time
but without any awareness that that ring
of those sink holes in the Yucatan were
somehow connected to this uh buried
astrolene that we couldn't see. But now
we have models of the astrolam as it is.
And there's others, you know, we could
say the the uh Chesapeake Bay Astroblene
um which is buried uh it's under
Chesapeake Bay, we we can't see it, but
with uh the technologies available to
us, ground penetrating radar and such,
we can we can actually discern the
outlines of it. But it is an evolving
area of scientific research and the more
we learn I think the more relevant it
becomes to understanding not only the
past history of life on earth but the
past history of human life specifically
on earth and our attempts to establish
civilization to to to the rise and fall
of human civilization
which we now know there are many
examples of ancient civilizations that
once rained uh very impressively and
then they disappeared.
Why did they disappear? Well, it was
generally always considered that it was
due to internal factors with the
exception of warfare.
And if they couldn't uh attribute the
decline of a culture to strictly
internal things essentially the
priorities I guess of of of that
particular society then it could be
warfare and you know some of these sites
uh for example Abuhurera
there was found a cultural layer which
seemed to define the termination of that
that urban complex.
Um but one of the things associated with
that cultural layer with that horizon
was charcoal. So the assumption was well
there there was war right there was a
battle they got wiped out in the battle.
We don't know who they fought but it was
a war. Well, with the work of Steven
Collins and others,
what we've now found is that that
charcoal layer is sui is infused with
microsphererals and other impact proxies
prolifically enough that um it's almost
certain that that it was a cosmic
impact, something along the lines of the
1908 Tunguska explosion, but maybe even
more powerful than that that terminated.
And you know, we now know that there was
what's called the Bronze Age collapse.
There were two episodes of collapse,
widespread collapse that seem to have
terminated the Bronze Age. And and that
is something we definitely should dive
into in greater detail and depth. But
first of all, I think we need to kind of
define the stage, look at some of the
some of the uh props that are on the
stage, kind of get a backdrop and a
context for then understanding these
events better. So, and there's two
things that we we can say that I think
there's two um this is areas of science
which are now importantly needed to come
together and it's they're defined on the
one hand by geologists and and this of
course is an oversimplific
simplification but for the most part
geologists are looking down right
they're looking at the they're looking
at the earth they're looking at the
rocks they're looking at what's below
their feet right then you have
astronomers, they're looking up and out.
Right now, in the last couple of
decades, we have the emergence of a new
scientific discipline called the
planetary geologist.
Well, a planetary geologist necessarily
now has to look up and out because
you're looking at other planets. But the
astronomers have been looking out into
our cosmic neighborhood and discovering
say since 1980 that our cosmic
neighborhood is far more densely
populated than anyone had ever even
imagined a half a century ago or a
couple of generations ago.
Secondly, geologists are finding the
ubiquitous presence of craters and
astrols all around the Earth. I'm going
to pause for just a minute to talk about
our partners over at Shipo, who may save
you a significant amount of headache in
your day-to-day business. We sell a
variety of geometry tools and models
like our beautiful platonic solids here
at Randall Carlson LLC. And when it
comes to managing shipping, e-commerce,
and returns, we've been using Shipo for
over four years now, and we're very
pleased with their service. Shipo's
interface is intuitive, the primary
order page is easy to navigate, and we
have enjoyed stellar technical support.
If Shipo can help you with your needs,
please use the code below to partner
with a great company while supporting
our work here at Squaring the Circle.
Thanks. And now back to the show. And
what is now a couple of hundred is
probably only 10% 15%.
Right? And there's a couple of other
interesting developments too. When you
think that the vast majority of now
identified impact sites, craters and
astrols are on land,
but land is, you know, only a little bit
more than a quarter of the surface of
the earth. So right there it's fair to
assume that if we include the total
surface area of the planet including the
oceans there has to be at least three
times more of impact events which brings
us up to what about 600 events
or more. Right now the other thing is
that you know we look at the surface of
the moon and what is the most prevalent
feature you see on the surface of the
moon? Craters.
Millions of them. When you when you take
in the smaller ones less than a half a
kilometer in diameter say on the near
side on the far side there's actually
several million of them. Now, if it was
not for plate tectonics and weathering,
the environmental changes,
the vegetation canopy that's constantly
doing enormous work to the to the to the
uh crust of the earth. If it wasn't if
we took all away those factors, we have
to presume the earth would probably look
something like the moon. And we don't
know how many cr you know you look at
some of the deep ocean areas the the the
layers the the thickness of sediment can
be hundreds to thousands of feet thick.
How many craters are there buried under
that sediment?
&gt;&gt; Well, to your point, Mercury looks a lot
like the moon. A lot of our planets have
a significant amount of uh impactor
events that they've they've been
through.
&gt;&gt; Yes. All of the solid surface planets,
the silicut planets from Mars in have
cratering. Uh Jupiter's moons have
cratering. I mean, all of the satellites
that we see in the solar system have
cratering. Cratering seems to be ex, you
know, and craters are the evidence of
impacts. So it seems like impacts have
been fundamental
at all stages of development of of our
solar system.
Well, so once it was accepted that the
dinosaur extinction
and that extinction which is now called
the Cretaceous Paleo gene used to be
called the Cretaceous tertiary when that
took place uh and it was accepted that
there was an impact because the evidence
became overwhelming that there was a
cosmic impact associated with that. Then
paleontologists and scientists began to
look at some of the other great
uh extinction episodes in Earth history
which included the Peran Triacic which I
think at this point is still considered
to be the most severe mass extinction
because you know you've got the fossil
record going up to uh what was around 24
million years ago. I I got to get
refreshed on my geological timetable.
Look up perant triacic extinction and
let's get the date on that.
That's considered to be the biggest and
some most severe and some of the
estimates are that more than 90% maybe
95%
of all species terrestrial and marine
went extinct. In fact, life itself
almost became extinct on Earth in the
aftermath of the PT boundary event.
So that is estimated to have been
251
million years ago.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So that's yeah I was saying 240
244. So in the ballpark but now the
dates are constantly being refined. But
yeah 251 million years ago according to
that the geological time thing. And then
you've got the terminal orian you've got
the end deeonian extinction. You've got
the the the Jurassic triacic. Um, and
then you've got, of course, the late
Cretaceous. And then you've got lesser
extinctions like this, the the
extinction of 12, 13,000 years ago,
barely ranks within the great extinction
episodes of Earth history. Um, cuz we're
talking about, you know, the the
extinction, which we've discussed
already quite a bit. Uh what we saw is
that the extinction and it would qualify
as a mass extinction but we're looking
at you know a selective extinction the
top of the food chain. You know we saw
that 44 kilogram or 100 pounds in body
weight roughly 3/4 of all those
megaponal species in North and South
America went extinct. about 35%
I think we saw in the Eurasian continent
went extinct and what was it 10
somewhere between 10 and 15% there's
there are different ways of counting
species right like do we look at an
Indian elephant and an African elephant
and call that two different species or
one species of probosidian there's kind
of some judgment calls in there so
depending on whose data you use to get
the total number of species Well, but
that's accepted. Now, there's discussion
and arguments about the causes of these
mass extinctions in Earth history. I
think we I think that and and I'm not
alone in this. Some of the other
researchers that have spent many years
looking at these is that the extinction
events are the result of what we might
think of as perfect storms. Um because
there may be a set of integrated factors
all affecting
the stability of the biosphere. One, of
course, the direct result of cosmic
hypervelocity impacts. Uh, another uh
could very well be uh variability in the
sun because I think there's enough
evidence now to suggest that
uh from time to time there could be uh
hyperactive solar events.
That's something that needs to be
explored. And since I've learned about
the CO sungrazers and the consequences
of of uh hypervelocity impacts into the
solar chromosphere, it's starting to
look like there is some kind of quantum
response in the sun um to these impacts.
For one thing, because of the strong
gravity field, you know, the sun is the
final destiny of most cosmic material
that comes into the inner solar system.
If it's not swept up by the planets
uh or impact planets or swept up like in
the earth we could be talking not only
about impacts of
uh you know macroscale objects but we
could also be talking about the
accretion of cosmic dust and do cosmic
dust is going to be the final endroduct
of this hierarchical process of
disintegration
that starts like when they say a single
comet nucleus breaks into multiple
nuclei subnuclei through a sort of
through a cascading series of
uh disagregations if you want to call it
that with the end result being dust. Now
what happens if a planet with like the
earth with an atmosphere passes through
a stream of that cosmic dust dust? Well,
it actually looks like that happened
between 536 and 540 AD, which we're
going to which is going to be one of the
episodes that of of global change that
we're going to really focus in on and
unpack that because it's happened
relatively recently. And there's a whole
body of mythology that has emerged
around that period of time. and
unpacking that is going to be extremely
interesting because there's new work and
we'll soon be interviewing uh Dr. Dallas
Abbott
and she has done some really exceptional
work on that particular period. I in
fact I just read her paper on the 540 AD
event for the second time uh last
weekend just in preparation for having a
an an intelligible interview with her.
Um but anyways the question now is how
many of those other oh the the third
factor I failed to mention uh besides
hypervelocity impacts and uh solar
extreme solar variability is vulcanism.
Now, vulcanism is interesting because we
could think of it as an isolated
phenomena, but I'm beginning more and
more to believe that it's not because we
actually see that in some of the great
mass extinction episodes
tanalyzing evidence, not convincing, not
proof, but definitely enough evidence to
to to consider it realistically as a
factor, the evidence of cosmic impact.
But simultaneous with that huge
uh volcanic events particularly the the
magmatic events where you have enormous
extrusion of of magma like for example
the delta traps in India look like they
were happening concurrently or
subsequently to the great cretaceous
tertiary impact. Likewise, the Siberian
traps up in Siberia, vast extent of
basaltic bedrock. There's actually a a a
plume under that as well. And that looks
like it dates right to the Perian
Triacic. Taking Bill a little bit of a
detour here to uh tell a story that I
think is going to be valuable. I was
coming down the stairs and I think
somebody just ahead of me had spilled a
little bit. My foot hit it, slid out
from under me, and I tumbled down three
or four stairs to the bottom. I sure
banged up my left knee. It was painful,
but uh I was very relieved to remember
that I had brought I happened to pack my
CBD from the God SAV. And I was really
grateful that I had remembered to do
that. So, I that night I put some of the
SAV on, went to bed. Though, I've I've,
you know, being in the construction and
building industry, I've had many falls
and in uh injuries and stuff, and I
figured I'm going to be laid up with
this for a month. We drove home. I think
it was 3 to 4 days later. I continued
applying the SAV, and I would say within
a week, I was getting around pretty
good. I always bring the oil uh when I
travel and I I'm now after this episode
I'm like okay I'm always gonna have the
SAB with me too. So a lot of schools of
thought I'm yes per
the PT boundary. So a lot of schools of
thought attribute the mass extinction of
the of the various species uh 251
million years ago to the uh to this
eruption of these this tremendous uh
magma uh volcanic eruption and the
formation of this magma province right
now. Was there an impact? I think there
probably was. Again, the proof the the
evidence is not conclusive, but it
certainly is very suggestive that there
was an impact as well. So, um there's a
number of researchers, I think Michael
Rampino is one particularly who I've
read recently, who who really is now
thinking that a lot of the the mass
extinctions are the result of this
perfect storm of events. Now, it
certainly is plausible that an hyper
velocity impact, one of the effects of
that could be extreme volcanism, magma
extrusion.
That's not so exotic. Likewise, we also
have seen evidence now, and we can maybe
pull it up here before this episode is
over. We've got now two instances where
we've actually satellites have filmed
hypervelocity impacts into the sun. And
because of the sun's extreme
mass, the gravity attraction of the sun
accelerates an incoming comet nucleus to
extreme velocities. Now, the faster it's
moving when it plunges into the sun, the
more kinetic energy is going to be
released.
And if the sun happens to be a quasi
stable star,
maybe there's some mechanism within the
star that can amplify the effects of a
hypervelocity impact.
I don't know if you've got are you
pulling up looking for those videos?
&gt;&gt; So So this is the video that you were
asking for.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. See? Make sure we have that off
where you can see this impactor
landing into the sun.
And for those of you on audio, it's
it's really quite interesting because
you see this this flare that occurs.
Did you catch that? Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; See that plume right there?
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
And so that can lead to a coronal mass
ejection.
I mean, obviously it makes perfect
sense.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, what does that end up being like for
the climate here on Earth?
&gt;&gt; Well, there we go. So,
&gt;&gt; worth studying.
&gt;&gt; Let's see. I have. So, let's play it.
You're going to see the comet coming in
from down here uh roughly about four
o'clock coming in towards the sun. Uh
and then it makes it encounters the sun.
It's swallowed up by the sun and then
you'll see the consequence of it. Here
we go.
Get this out of the way.
Here we go.
Watch.
Let's watch that again.
You'll see the comet coming in.
Boom.
&gt;&gt; Again, for those of you on audio, small
comet going in, big seat, coronal mass
ejection going out. It's like a hollow
point with a watermelon
&gt;&gt; on the opposite side of the sun.
&gt;&gt; On the opposite side. Yeah.
So, here it comes.
&gt;&gt; So, what happens when the Earth's hit
with all of that radiation,
&gt;&gt; right? Well, we're going to be
discussing that because there's a lot of
new evidence acrewing
showing. Here we go. Watch this one. Now
this is this
you can see the comet zooming in and
boom.
So if this turns out to
be not just an anomaly, which is
starting to look more and more like it's
not,
what we're looking at and have to start
thinking about is an integrated system
that the cosmos, the planets, they all
interact.
There's a whole set of feedback
processes going on amongst the whole
the whole solar system which we now know
includes the Kyper disc, the UR cloud
that whole outer structure that it
extends all almost two light years out
almost halfway to the nearest star in
fact. Um, and if we see that the influx
of comets to the inner solar system that
gets swept into the sun and and that
comet that we saw there was not an
especially large one. I think it was uh
I think what I read was it is estimated
to be about a Haley Halley sized comet
which would be 8 or 10 miles in
diameter. But what would happen like in
the uh in the catastrophist models that
are now conjecturing
quite
legitimately I would say that somewhere
between 25 and 30,000 years ago possibly
within that range a very large comet
nucleus came into the inner solar system
and begin to undergo a hierarch
hierarchy of disintegrations of which
the torid family of meteor streams is
the remnant
of that large comet which included now
we see it within this uh within this
orbital system we find uh comet Rniki
comet Anki
uh Ojato an asteroid the Torah
uh uh meteor streams also So probably
the Tangusa event of 1908.
And why would why? Well, because Earth
crosses the Torid stream twice each
year. Late June, early July, late
October, early November. And I'm going
to pull up a graphic here in a minute
that we can look at um to help get the
picture. This diagram here shows the
orbits of Torid meteors. Now, this is
going back to the uh work of Fred
Whipple. Let's see. I think I got him.
Let's see. There he is. Uh oh, no,
that's Clue. Uh
Fred Whipple back in the 30s and 40s, he
was one of the first astronomers who
really studied comets and meteors and
things like that. and he uh did a a
program where he began to photograph
torid meteors.
And I think he got 40 over 40
photographs of torid meteors. And he did
like a a a time succession so that he
was able to
capture enough of the elliptical orbit
of these meteors and the timing that he
was able to recreate the elliptical
orbit of the whole meteor. Now these
meteors there's some deviation within
the orbit. Um but what he did here is he
what I did was I went to his his data of
the oh 40 or 45 meteor photographs
whatever it was that he did and I took
the two extremes
uh of of orbits and that's what's in you
see here in orange. So you follow one of
these around like this.
This one it's a which is its furthest
distance from the sun is is less say
than this one. This is number 700
number 712 and this is number 697.
So he they were all labeled with
numbers. So these were these two orbits.
I chose those two because they more or
less defined the outer outer boundaries
of the stream.
Okay. Now we go back to here and we have
uh right here if you can see this is the
orbit of Mars this outer white circle
and then we have the orbit of Earth and
we have the orbit of uh uh Venus and
then we have the orbit of Mercury but
we're interested in the orbit of the
Earth and all of these are going from
our vantage point here counterclockwise
right as is the uh orbital uh
motion of the to meteor stream. So if I
go to this
kind of done a little infill here and I
provided some dates. So again
earth is moving around here and then
it crosses the stream
and this is the summertime towards
around June like it says here around
June 30th. Uh it takes takes about 10
days 12 days for the earth to entirely
cross the stream. Um the torid stream is
one of the more diffuse streams and it's
which suggests it's probably older
because there's been more time for the
material to to disperse throughout the
orbit.
Right? a younger stream like the
Geminids for example I think the earth
crosses the stream in a couple of days
right so now you see late June early
July it's crossing the stream it comes
on around like this then
late October early November it crosses
the stream again because the torid
stream lays very close to the plane of
the ecliptic which is the orbital plane
of the planets
to be more precise It's the orbital
plane of the Earth itself, but all the
other planets lie more or less fairly
close to that plane. So, we can kind of
refer to the plane of the ecliptic as
being the orbital plane of the planets.
Now,
when it's in summer, notice here Earth
is crossing, but notice that the stream
has just only recently made its
perihelion passage, meaning its closest
passage to the Sun. So, if we're
crossing the stream and you're looking
at an object, a torid meteor or a
fireball or an asteroid
coming through here, well, can you see
right here? You have to look up into the
direction of the sun. So, the sun is
going to blind you. It's going to blot
it out. You're not going to see. It's
not. And that's what happened that June
30th morning uh in 1908 is that the
Tunguska object came in from a region of
space
almost directly
bullseyed on the sun. In fact, and when
you read through the eyewitness
accounts, people say like it looked like
the sun split in two, the uh the object
was uh born out of the sun, it disorged
from the sun, etc. Right now,
when you come to the falltime torids
to look upstream, you're looking out
into space. You're looking away from the
sun. You see that difference?
So, obviously, a torid meteor or a
fireball, whatever it might be, is going
to be a lot more visible in the fall
than it is in the summer. That's
important. Now, when you're looking
upstream, here's the line of sight. If
you're here, the Earth is crossing
stream. The line of sight leads out into
space and it almost bullse eyes on the
Plleades.
And the Plleades, you know, in classical
depictions is the shoulder of the bull
Taurus.
And hence the name of the torid meteor
shower from Taurus the bull. Right now,
this is not something we're going to get
into today and here, but there's some
extremely interesting symbolism
associated with the pletes
and the bull symbolism and so on that
suggest that there was a tradition in
fact
in some cases like there's an old Jewish
legend that when God the way that God
when God decided destro to destroy the
earth with a great flood, he pulled one
of the stars out of the pleades and
threw it at the earth. That's an actual
legend. It's an old Jewish legend. And
there's more, but once we'll not get
into that territory today, but it's very
potent, interesting stuff because it
really does imply that our ancestors had
a much more sophistic sophisticated
understanding about these kind of
cosmological phenomena than they have
been given credit for. Um
particularly when we look at um
Mithriism, one of the great competitive
religions to Christianity
in the early centuries AD um had very
interesting symbolism about the bull.
And Mithris is shown depicted as
stabbing a sword into the shoulder of
the bull. And if you look at the
classical depictions of of the bull and
the pletes, the pletes is prominently
the the bull's shoulder.
And then of course what you see in the
mythic depictions is that Mithris is
stabbing the sword into the bull's
shoulder into the pletes and you see
this outpouring that presumably you
would think you know
a sword into the bull. He's bleeding and
this copious blood is coming forth.
However, there may be an alternate
meaning as well because what's likely is
that if there were extreme uh impact
multi-impact events in the past when the
torid stream and there is evidence that
the store torid stream was much more
active in the past that people all over
the world from time to time witnessed
things that left an indel indelible
impression on their consciousness and
perhaps even triggered
um catastrophes.
And as you're going to find out when we
we as we unpack what we now know about
hypervelocity impacts in general
and the younger dus impact hypothesis
specifically
is that there is evidence for uh the
objects that struck the earth during the
younger dus uh were torid related.
In fact, after uh after we did our
podcast on Joe Rogan, we got a letter
from which I'll read at some point. I
don't have it in front of me now, but I
can pull it up. We got a letter um sort
of congratulating from from um uh uh
Will Bill Napier William Napier who has
been part of this team in England that
has been exploring uh what's called
coherent catastrophism
which is the leading into this idea of
coherent catastrophism is a great term
for what we were just talking about this
integrated model of impacts vcanism
solar outbursts and so forth.
these guys have been doing since the
1980s. I have a a book right up on my
shelf there uh called the cosmic serpent
published in 1980 where they're
beginning to propose these ideas that
there's this kind of this integrated
model of catastrophism. Anyways, we got
a very nice complimentary letter from
from Bill Nape here um talking about
pretty much what we were just talking
about here. So, this is the Torid meteor
sheep. If you look down here at the
bottom, you see orbits of two torid
meteors. Number 697,
which was photographed on October 31st,
1937, and number 712, which was
photographed on November 10th, 1937.
And uh and so this this defines the two
and pretty much also sets the boundaries
or the limits of the stream itself. So
outside those lines, you're not going to
find much activity
and that's the importance of this. So
it's very interesting stuff.
And uh anyhow, so we're in a position
now where we're recognizing that many of
the great extinctions in Earth history
were probably triggered by cosmic impact
and then could have had secondary
consequences
uh in terms of it's far more likely that
impacts are going to trigger vulcanism
than the other way around.
And then if you have a a large comet
breaking up in the inner solar system,
you might have multiple repeated
incursions of comets into the
chromosphere of the sun.
What would happen if we had a succession
uh of very closely spaced impacts into
the sun? Is it possible then that there
could be a a reciprocal response or
feedbacks introduced into the stability
of the sun that could amplify
the solar storms? I don't know. We're
only at the very beginnings of
understanding the role of the sun. But
we are you know what 20ome 23 24 25
years now into uh since the inception of
the deployment of solar observing
satellites and so we're collecting a lot
of new data and it's coming in all the
time. I don't have time to explore all
of it. I wish I did. I I really I need
to be three or four people because then
I might be able to research all of the
things that are uh interest me. But, you
know, hopefully as we pursue this, we're
we're actually getting a lot of interest
from really smart young people who are
looking to make a serious exploration
into this kind of knowledge. And one of
the things I would like to see in the
very near future is a whole school uh an
academic school looking at the role of
great catastrophes.
Catastrophism 101. That's kind of what
we're trying to do here. And over at our
sister podcast that I do with with
Becket Fusk, we've been looking at a lot
of the flood evidence, but we haven't
really tied that specifically to impacts
yet. Although I think ultimately that's
going to be exactly where this leads us
because it's looking more and more
feasible that some kind of an impact
event or series of impact events were
associated with the great flood legends,
even the biblical story of Noah. Uh
which I think would be a very
interesting thing for us to unpack at
some point um because of a possible
impact into the Indian Ocean. And that's
something that I'm definitely going to
be talking to Dr. Abbott about because
she's done the work probably the leading
researcher of the evidence of tsunamis
along the coastlines of the world. And
some of these tsunamis are are are
pretty mind-blowing. The one that struck
the southern coast of Madagascar had to
be at least 600 feet high at when it
made landfall.
And I've explained that over on uh the
big picture with with on the last
episode.
&gt;&gt; You and I have talked about it too. We
have because you have those 600 foot
high chevrons deposit on
&gt;&gt; Yes, that's what we're talking about.
Exactly.
&gt;&gt; So it had to be at least however.
However, it could have been could have
been more. We can actually determine
what it is, how we know it was that
because we can see the chevrons making
landfall and then there's a 500 ft
escarment,
right? We see the chevrons and the
deposits of the of the runin
maybe something like uh 25 kilometers
something like that inland
but then we see the deposits on top of
the escarment as well. So I think it's
at the base. I think it's maybe like a
100 feet above sea level and then it's
another 500 feet to the top of the
cliff. The wave over topped o washed
over the top of the cliff. So it had to
be high enough
to overwash the cliff which puts it at
least 600 feet high. Now that in my mind
satisfies the definition of a cataclysm.
In fact, the word cataclysm comes from
cataclysmos
which was the Greek term for their story
of the great deluge
because you know in the Greek mythology
you have um Ducalian and Pyra his wife.
Uh unlike the biblical we never know the
name of Noah's wife in the biblical
account but we learn the name of
Ducalian's wife and the parallels are
striking. He was given forewarning by
Zeus in that particular tale that there
was this great flood coming and he built
an ark and that's how he survived. And
then in the aftermath they there was
also he I think one of the
yeah I think he had I think it names
that he had his whole family with him in
the ark. And then another variant of it
is the Sumerian tale of Utapishtam
who was the pilot of an arc and he was
he was uh forewarned by the the god Ia I
don't remember if it was Ia or Anki I
think it was Ia um but he is he is uh in
the descriptions of that flood account
he was joined by his family and the crew
and they survived this great flood
world destroying flood blood in this ark
that they built. So I mean there's many
var and then we find American legends
talking about Native Americans surviving
in the great canoe.
This is wild stuff. uh further
definitely worth looking into more
because I operate from the assumption
that there's a lot more of scientific
value in those ancient tales and legends
and myths and folklore and so on than
they've been given credit for. Now,
they've been recognized as being
valuable going back to the days of Carl
Jung and his analysis of the the
archetypes of our subconscious.
But to me, it's no
No surprise that the archetypes of these
great events have somehow been encoded.
They're so powerful that they would
become encoded in our consciousness and
passed down through generation after
generation.
Anyways, back to impacts. Let me read a
quote from Bill Napier and Victor Clue
that was published in 1990 in a book
called The Cosmic Winter, which of
course could be a good lead in to the
younger dus because that's what we're
talking about, a cosmic winter. Now,
they aren't making this quote is not any
specific relevance to the younger dus,
but um so here we go. 1990 the cosmic
winter. So the long evolution of the
earth then is distinguished by a
relatively steady evolution
superimposed on which are rapid
sometimes overwhelming changes whether
in the evolution of life or mountain
building or even disturbances in the
core itself.
Many geologists over the years have
voiced the suspicion that these changes
have a galactic periodicity
and have speculated that somehow the
galaxy is affecting the affairs of
Earth. What was lacking in all these
speculations was a mechanism for
inducing the galactic periodicities. And
it was not until the late 1970s
with the discovery of the molecular
cloud and Apollo asteroid systems that
the mechanism was discovered.
There are two main causitive links in
the chain connecting the galaxy and the
earth. The first of these is the eb and
flow of the galactic tide which we have
seen is reflected in the eb and flow of
comets into the interplanetary system.
The second link is the existence of
giant comets. Rare though they are, it
is the giant comets which contain the
bulk of the mass which enters the
planetary system. And it is their
disintegration products which interact
most strongly and directly with the
earth. As we have seen, the breakup of a
very large comet will produce a wide
range of debris from objects 10
kilometer kilometers across to probably
hundreds of kilomesized
bodies to temporary swarms of subcometer
objects down to dust in quantities
sufficient to block the path of
sunlight. we now ask how would the earth
machine respond to the influx of such
material. So this kind of gives I think
a good summation of what we've just been
talking about here and this idea of
coherent catastrophism actually
encompassing phenomena on the galactic
level but then filtering all the way
down to our realm here on the surface of
this planet.
So, we're truly talking about expanding
the purview of our own domain
to a cosmic level. And I think that's
got to be the next step. I think that
the the divine plan for humans on earth
involves us becoming
much more aware of the great celestial
realm, the heavens. We'll read this and
then we'll we'll we'll come back to uh
we'll come back to the Clovis.
Between 3 and 15th of November each
year, the Earth runs through a meteor
stream coming from a small area in the
constellation of Taurus, the bull. A
young stream made up of meteors not long
released from their parent comet would
be narrow and probably strong and the
Earth would pass through it in a half a
day or so. The Geminid meteor stream is
one such the earth encountering it on
the 10th of December each year and the
shower being over by the 12th of
December. The torid meteor stream on the
other hand uh takes the earth 12 days to
cross and it is not very intense. It
looks old. It has two main branches
northern and southern emerging from
slightly different parts of the
constellation. The branches being about
equal intensity.
Orbiting the Torid meteor stream is a
small comet discovered in 1818 by pawns.
An orbit was calculated for this comet
by Johan Enki, a pupil of the famous
mathematician Gaus who had developed a
method for calculating the orbits of
bodies from their movement across the
sky. There are about a hundred known
short- period comets. All of these, with
the sole exception of Anki's comet, are
in orbits which sooner or later lead to
an close encounter with Jupiter and
ejection from the solar system by the
powerful gravitational pole of the
planet. But Ankkey's comet has somehow
established itself in a stable orbit
such that it never comes with within the
Jovian sphere of influ influence. It
does however come close to Earth.
In addition, and here's here's the
critical part. In addition, there be may
be one or 2,000 asteroids
over a kilometer across in orbits which
make them a potential collision hazard
with the Earth.
None is more than about 10 km across.
Their surface is extremely dark and
fewer than 50 have been discovered. They
are known as Apollo asteroids after the
prototype discovered in 1932.
Anki's comet is in fact the sole example
of an active comet in an Apollo orbit.
The orbit is highly elongated and the
comet may approach to within 34
astronomical units of the sun. An
astronomical unit is the distance from
the sun to the earth. So 34 is going to
be right about a third of that distance
between the sun and the earth. um and go
out to about 4.1 astronomical units. The
comet's orbit is inclined at only 12° to
that uh of the earth's. This low
inclination and the shortness of the
orbital period ensure that there is
frequent interaction between the earth
and the material of the torid stream
with the potential for occasional very
close encounters with Anky's comet or
the rest of the material in that stream.
And that's brings us back again to the
discussion we just had in showing that
uh that the Tangusa object
is not proven it was part of it. But the
time of year
was ideal and the position in the sky
from which it emerged was ideal. Both of
those would be consistent with the torid
object of 1908 being a part of the torid
stream.
Um,
and then this quote I think really kind
of nails it. Peter Tyson 1995 comet
busters technology review. Recent
studies have shown that a host of
fair-sized pieces could have more
devastating global consequences than a
single wintercausing object by igniting
many separate conflrations that merge
into a global firestorm. And I think
this is more the model we have to look
at when talking about the younger dus
impact. And a lot of the critics have
invoked this oversimplified model that
one object randomly coming from space
with no particular uh orbital structure
or pattern to it hits the earth and then
have shown what they do is they create
this straw man model and show that it
couldn't work to accomplish what the
proponents of the younger destact
hypothesis are saying. and they're
right, but their model is not the model.
I think at this point that that idea has
been discredited for probably at least a
decade now.
&gt;&gt; It's your neighbors who do the worst the
worst to you as opposed to those who
come from out of town. It's the it's the
neighboring asteroids and comets that we
got to be worried about. That's what I'm
hearing.
Well, along those lines, I wonder if we
should actually address this from 1913.
An extraordinary meteoric display
uh show uh published in the journal of
the British Astronomical Association
from 1913. Now, for all the listeners,
where else are you going to get this
kind of information brought
right to your computer screen?
I've done a lot of work, invested a lot
of time in bringing this information
together. So, I want I hope people
appreciate that. Okay. So, at about 9.5
p.m. 9:30 p.m. on the 9th of February,
1913, there suddenly appeared in the
northwestern sky a fiery red body, which
quickly grew larger as it came nearer,
and which was then seen to be followed
by a long tail. To some observers, the
tale seemed like the glare from an o the
open door of a furnace. To others, it
was like the illumination from a search
light. To others, like the stream of
sparks blown away from a burning chimney
by a strong wind. The body moved on a
perfectly horizontal path with peculiar,
majestic, dignified deliberation, and
continuing its course, it moved on to
the southeast, where it disappeared in
the distance. Before the astonishment
aroused by this first meteor had
subsided,
other bodies were seen coming from the
northwest,
emerging from precisely the same place
as the first one. Onward they moved at
the same deliberate pace in twos and
threes with tails streaming behind. They
all traversed the same path and headed
for the same point in the southeast.
Gradually, the bodies became smaller
until the last ones were but red sparks,
some of which were snuffed out before
they reached their destination.
As to the number of bodies, there was a
great diversity of statement. The usual
estimate was from 15 to 20. Some said 60
to 100, while others said there were
thousands.
The entire time occupied by the display
was about 3 minutes. Just as the bodies
were vanishing, there was heard in many
places a rumbling sound like distant
thunder. The stretch of country over
which the display was seen is
unprecedented.
In the present case, persons dwelling
2,500 miles apart saw the same bodies.
Moreover, the descriptions furnished by
observers in Bermuda, in Ontario, and in
Saskatchewan
do not materially differ.
Observations
of the size of the bodies were very
discordant, but there is s sufficient
evidence to show that they were of
considerable size.
Several observers considered the leading
body to have a diameter equal to that of
the full moon or nearly so. One observer
estimated the diameter at half that of
the full moon and another at 115th of
the moon's diameter. The last estimate
gives a real diameter of 123 ft. The
largest bodies were probably at least
100 ft in diameter. The tail of the
largest meteor is estimated to have been
39 miles long. Now, let's bear in mind
when you're talking about 123 feet,
we're getting right up into the realm of
Tungusa.
So, this was a painting by Gustav Han of
the Great Meteor Procession of 1913.
And this shows the path from where it
was first observers first saw it in
Saskatchewan
coming down here and then passing out
into the Atlantic Ocean. Now, if we look
here, notice uh the path. It's crossing
right over Lake Superior. It crosses
over the northern end of Lake Michigan,
Lake Huron. comes down here, passes
between um just to the south of Lake
Ontario,
passing over New York, let's see, I
believe it comes right over roughly over
Philadelphia,
Montreal. A lot of cities lie along this
path.
Uh
so let's go back to this.
If there were
hundreds of bodies, let's go back to
here.
15 to 20. Some said 16 to 100, 60 to
100, while others said there were
thousands. Let's just take some of the
the meaning here. 20. Let's just take
20.
Okay.
The largest bodies were at least 100 ft
in diameter.
So within that procession,
it's likely you had multiple maybe even
dozens of Tangusized objects.
Now 2500 miles they're passing
essentially right parallel to the
surface of the Earth.
Most likely
they then passed out into space at some
point
unless they fell into the Atlantic Ocean
somewhere.
But we don't know the ultimate fate of
those objects. However, it's almost like
they were captured into a temporary
Earth orbit, followed more or less
parallel to the surface of the Earth,
and then probably almost like a stone
skipping off the pond.
If that angle had been just a little bit
more oblique,
can you imagine? Well, even even the
Atlantic hypothesis, I mean, that that
would have likely caused
&gt;&gt; tsunamis sized waves.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Multiple air bursts in the 15 megat ton
category
&gt;&gt; would be pretty noticeable.
&gt;&gt; Now, you let's So, really what this is
looking like is we came within a hair's
breath of a multiple impact
event.
10, 12, 15, 20 possible or more tungusa
like objects. Can you imagine?
&gt;&gt; And this was October, November.
&gt;&gt; February of 1913.
&gt;&gt; February.
&gt;&gt; February of 1913.
&gt;&gt; So 5 years after Tungusa.
&gt;&gt; February though. So it's not the right
time of year for for uh
&gt;&gt; for the Torid.
&gt;&gt; It's something it's something else
entirely.
something else entirely. Yes.
But this is important because
it shows us that we were like we were
given a warning in a sense. Look 1908
here's one object. Boom. 15 megaton
hydrogen bomb equivalent.
Then what' you say 193? Five years
later,
here we're given this incredible display
of a train of objects, maybe dozens of
Tangus- sized objects just barely
missing us.
Can you imagine if those had had
impacted coming down over Ontario, over
New England? We'd be a lot less worried
about cow farts and a lot more worried
about a real actor of climate change.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Absolutely. We would have.
But see,
people don't know about this. This is
not taught as part of our history, you
know. Now, I mean, there are probably
astronomers and some fringe researchers
that know about this event, but overall,
I'm hoping as a result of this now, we
increase the number of people who know
this about this event by at least a few
hundred thousand,
right? Um, which may be the total number
of people equivalent to the total number
of people around the entire globe that
all that presently know about it, right?
One of the things though I I fantasize
about
How mind-blowing would it be to witness
something like that?
I mean, what astonishment. That was the
word that was used. What astonishment it
must have incited in the minds of people
who witnessed this.
Now, we've been talking about the
Clovis. So, this is from our friend Dr.
Malcolm Lampt who I was able to hang out
with at the cosmic summit and he has
graciously agreed to be a guest on
Square podcast
and we'll get to talk to him about his
most recent research but this goes back
to a paper that he co-authored uh in
2012 that was published in the
proceedings of the national academy of
sciences. Yeah. So this is from the
abstract of this paper. Firestone at L
which just means and others sampled
sedimentary sequences at many sites
across North America, Europe and Asia.
In sediments dated to the younger dus
onset or boundary the YDB approximately
12,900
calendar years ago Firestone at Al
reported discovery of markers including
nanodiamonds
asopform soot high temperature melt
glass and magnetic microspherals
attributed to cosmic impacts/air
bursts.
The microsphererals were explained as
either cosmic material ablation or
terrestrial ejector from a hypothesized
North American impact. A number of
independent groups have confirmed the
presence of YDB spirals. Uh but two have
not. One of them, Suravel, in 2009,
collected and analyzed samples from
seven YDB sites, purportedly using the
same protocol as Firestone at Al, but
did not find a single spiral in YDB
sediments at two previously reported
sites. To examine this discrepancy, we
conducted an independent blind
investigation at two sites common to
both studies and a third site
investigated only by Suravel. Now,
Suravel is part of the team that has
been highly critical of the impact
hypothesis.
In any case, independently, Malcolm and
his team did find abundant YDB
microsphererals
at all three widely separated sites
consistent with the results of Firestone
at all and conclude that the analytical
protocol employed by Suravel at Al
deviated significantly from that of
Firestone. We're going to look at that.
That's another thing we're going to look
at as we unpack the pros and cons of the
controversy surrounding younger dus
impact, right? Because the critics have
raised some very valid points,
legitimate points, but in the end, I I
think their attempts to
uh dismiss this uh have failed. Um but
it's helped hone some of the ideas um
because that's the way science works and
is supposed to work.
So then they go on here. Now this is the
topper quarry near Elendale, South
Carolina. This was um
where we visited with um uh by Dr. Al
Goodyear who's the lead archaeologist on
the site. I I visited that site along
with George Howard and Graham Hancock
and Chris Moore who's one of the leading
investigators uh scientists working on
the younger dus boundary event uh or
events and so we visited the Clovis age
topper quarry site um and got a personal
tour it's on private property of uh some
cor it's in corporate property we we we
got permission went in there and got the
tour of the site by Dr. a good year. Um
Malcolm
I don't think was there. Um
we did attend a scientific roundt that
weekend that Malcolm was at Malcolm
Lacmpt but no I don't remember I don't
think he accompanied us out to the site.
Anyways, sampling was conducted at the
Clover Age Topper Quarry site near
Alendale, South Carolina, where a
complete stratographic profile was
collected in June 2008 from the surface
to four centimeters below a Clovis layer
containing extensive debit or waste
material resulting from stone toll
production. at TPR that is the topper
site based on optically stimulated
luminescence or OSL dating and cultural
strategraphy. The YDB layer dating to
12.9,000
years before present is accepted by P
both Firestone at L and Suravel. One of
the critics as being represented by a
few centime thick layer containing
highly abundant Clovis artifacts and
debit
for approximately 20 cm above the Clovis
artifacts. There are extremely few human
artifacts indicating that the quarry
experienced a multi-entury hiatus in
human activity perhaps as long as 600
to,200 years after which the site was
reoccupied.
So
this graphic here really drives home the
point at the topper site. So notice here
you've got the number of artifacts on
the y ais. So we have a graph depicting
distribution of total known clovis
artifacts. Uh n equals 453
uh projectile points, preforms, blades,
and cores compared to postlovis. Now
look at here. So you've got up here this
so 453
they're finding up to the younger dest
boundary.
And then look what happens.
Boom.
So there's clearly
consider considerable amount of cultural
activity associated with this quarry
site. And then right at the boundary,
boom, you have a depopulation episode.
Now more and more evidence is acrewing
that shows the same kind of model at
many sites not just in America but in
Eurasia as well. And again I keep
referring to this but this is all part
of the whole the detailed story that
we're going to unpack right now. In some
of the older interpretations, the
assumption was, "Oh, well, these guys
got up and they
they left. They immigrated somewhere
else. They moved on for whatever
reason." Well, then you look at other
sites where they supposedly moved on to
and you see the same phenomena.
And instead of being indication of
uh mobility of cultural groups moving to
different sites, it's pointing much more
directly at essentially a mass
extinction event involving humans. Now,
here's the thing.
This is exactly the interval that
represents the final catastrophic demise
of the great megapona,
the great ice age megapona.
&gt;&gt; Did they move too?
&gt;&gt; Well,
&gt;&gt; they took them with them. The Clovis
people took the megapana with them.
Randall,
&gt;&gt; that's the only logical.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. You can Yeah, you can see on
some of the rock art, you know, you're
seeing the the the the chieftains of the
Clovis riding on the woolly mammoths
while all the other extinct megapon are
falling behind.
But no, I I don't think that's what
happened.
Uh
let's see. So, uh yeah, this is part of
the same paper. This is a great paper. I
wouldn't be a bit surprised uh if we
could find this paper, if somebody was
interested in going into it further. I
wouldn't be surprised if uh we could
this was actually available on Google
Scholar.
You might look up pull up Google Scholar
and put it in if if somebody wants to
read this and and it is available. I'm
not sure that it is
uh but we could check here relatively
quickly and
&gt;&gt; independent
&gt;&gt; yeah independent independent
&gt;&gt; evaluation
of conflicting
microsphererals
&gt;&gt; that would be enough microsphero
and what I'm seeing here is by golly
it's available
So people listening go to Google Scholar
type in independent evaluation of
conflicting microsphereral results
and you can download it in PDF form.
That's awesome.
So this this is a graphic that appeared
in the paper relative to younger dest
boundary. Now, Blackwater Draw is one of
the places where we find the black Matt
uh
Brad Young, myself, Russ, and Kyle
Allen, the Serpent Brothers.
We were with a couple other guys. I
don't remember who. We we visited this
site um a few years ago. Blackwater
Drive got some great photographs. I
mean, there's some very prominent black
matte layers that are
easily found when you go into the site.
So this is a graph showing the
stratographic distribution of magnetic
sphereral concentrations less than 53
microns grain size fraction.
So uh right here you see there's a peak
of these
um magnetic sphirerals right here
relative to the younger dus boundary. So
the younger dest boundary is zero right.
So look what's happen. There's there's a
few that show up down here at what is
this 24 maybe 30 uh cm down from the
younger dus boundary. Now this this
would be at at blackwater draw. This is
the younger dest boundary is the the
black mat. So zero would probably be
right here would be so you've got looks
like two pulses but this is obviously
the major one where you've got magnetic
sphirerals and then interestingly at at
48 cm above younger d boundary there's
another spike it's not nearly as
prominent could this be a secondary
accretion event impact event
maybe
this could be some of this the the the
the the uh fleeting but tantalizing
evidence for a later impact. I'd be
interested to know how this might uh
correlate with the upper younger dus
boundary. Here we're looking at 129. We
actually know now it's between 128 and
129, but I just like 129. 129 here,
right? I don't know that he doesn't give
a a a chronological scale of this. It's
simply the depth.
But um but yeah, looked like there is
some accretion of magnetic sphirerals
48 cm above the younger dus. But clearly
right at the younger dus you've got is
where they found the concentration of
magnetic sphericals which are consistent
as proxies for the for for an impact
event.
Um so yeah here's the sampling site. Uh
the blackwater draw sampling site
showing the YDB layer as a dotted line
right here. That would be this line.
this stratum, the YDB sample location at
the orange bar right here.
Uh, other samples at yellow bars. Okay,
so they took a sample down here and they
took a sample up here.
Um, let's see. Stratum F up here has
been excavated and is not visible in
this photo. Okay, so they sampled a site
that apparently had subsequently been
excavated. Black arrows point to bones
from a postclovis bison kill dating to
many hundreds of years after 12,900.
There we go. Remains of a a post Clovis
killed site. Um there are no artifacts
known in the intervening strata between
here the kill site and here there are no
artifacts found which again supports the
conclusion that
the population disappeared.
Uh
so the topper site again from debit
centimeters. Yeah. So here you've got uh
let's see what do we got? copper sight
graph showing the stratographic
distribution of magnetic sphereral
concentrations less than 50 53 micron
grain size fraction Clovis debit is at 0
cm
uh right here.
So look right here. Here's here's Clovis
and then look what happens right on top
of where the Clovis debotage is. You've
got this huge spike of uh magnetic
sphereral concentrations and here and
then again you've got this other one
looks like a lesser event up here. I
would love to have some dates on these
and just for those who are joining us
for this episode Randall just remind me
again why are sphererals important? What
are they a proxy of and what can't they
be anything other than
&gt;&gt; because they are produced in extreme
environments of high temperature and
pressure 2,000 3,000 degrees centigrade
and more up to 4,000. Uh and there's no
known the only other known
uh source for temperatures that high is
in nuclear weapons testing, nuclear
weapons explosions.
So this is evidence of some kind of a
very high energy event that involved
temperatures of thousands of degrees
centigrade. That's the importance of the
uh sphirerals.
Uh
okay. Topper sampling site showing the
YDB layer as a dotted black line. A top
Clovis debit.
YDB sample location at the orange bar.
Other samples at yellow bars.
So yeah, you can get this paper
yourself. Um
here we go. Here's the answer to your
question. Magnetic sphereral surface
morphology is distinctive when created
by processes involving high temperatures
followed by rapid cooling such as during
meteoritic atmospheric ablation and
impacts. A variety of sphero forms 16
subtypes were found to be relatively
ubiquitous in small concentrations
throughout the soil column. The
sphererals were categorized according to
their distinctive polygonal and
dendritic surface patterning or
microructures
formed by rapid crystallization
indicating that they were in a molten
state and rapidly quenched. These
sphererals exhibit the surface micro
microructures
which are consistent with formation at
high temperatures followed by rapid
quenching.
In summary, we found that uh scanning
electron microscopy analysis to
determine microructure
and the application of a correction
factor are essential because true YDB
sphererals cannot be reliably identified
by light microscopy alone as was
attempted by Suravel at all, Pinter at L
and Pagati at L. all of whom were part
of the click of of critics attempting to
discredit the younger destact and they
only used lightbased microscopes. They
didn't use SEM. They didn't use scanning
electron microscopes. And that was one
of the reasons just one of a number of
reasons why they did not find the
proxies that Firestone found. And then
they made a big to-do about publishing
the fact that they didn't find these
proxies and therefore the work of
Firestone and others was not replicable
and therefore that was then used to
discredit.
But we can go through it's a very
interesting exercise to go through uh
their the claims they made and the
debunking of their attempts the
debunking of the debunking. All right.
Uh so this just shows you some of the uh
varieties of the YDB sphererals
displaying some of the wide range of
surface microructures indicative of
melting and rapid quenching. The top
three are uh from above the deotage
layer at topper.
Right. The middle six are from the
Blackwater draw
uh in the in the DC layer and the bottom
are from the Pawpa Cove. I think that's
Pawpa Co. Where was that? New Jersey
maybe. Uh oh, Maryland. The Pawpa Cove
site is an archaeological site on the
coast of Talbat County, Maryland. The
site first identified in 1979 is a
complex of three locations on 500 meters
of shoreline on Chesapeake Bay at which
stone artifacts with an estimated date
of 11,500
to 10,500
years before common era have been found.
So you can look this is some interesting
look at this one was hollow and it's
busted probably from colliding with
another one. And here what you have is a
larger sphero that was bombarded by
smaller sphirerals. But in the high
temperature, high pressure environment,
the smaller spherical sphererals um
uh they embedded themselves. They fused.
They fused themselves to the larger
ones. And if you look at this one right
here, interestingly, after it it fused,
it then collapsed. So, this was
apparently a hollow one and then it
collapsed.
So, they're almost like little warts,
but these are smaller microsphererals
fusing to a larger microsphereral.
&gt;&gt; Like we said a couple of uh uh times
back, the spall, and someone corrected
me in the comments section. You're
right. I was tired. I said I said
sprawl. It's spall. The spall from from
metal work. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know, as a child, I would go and I
would look at the spall. I'd pick up
each one of these and look at how they
all melted together. Only under the
heat, intense intense heat, do you ever
get something like this? And it's it's
only from impact.
&gt;&gt; Heat and impact.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yep. So, I think this is probably
a good place right here to uh you know,
&gt;&gt; put a pen in and come back next time.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah.
Uh, and I can assure people listening,
if if you follow this, if you put in
forth a little bit of the effort to
follow this amazing scientific work and
ponder the implications of this work for
the bigger picture of where we came from
and where we're going, uh, I think
you'll find it worthwhile. And so I want
to encourage people, uh, yes, to
exercise your attention span and stay
with us in this journey because what
What John Arthur and I are going to
attempt to do here is to lay out a a
great concentrated summary of the whole
younger dus phenomena from its inception
up to where it is now. and we may take
several
episodes to to cover all of the
material, but stick with us and
hopefully what we're doing here is going
to create uh a a team of quasi experts
who can talk intelligably about the
younger dus boundary. I still people see
see people online saying, "Oh, that's
been disproven long ago." I I I'll still
see that. Although th that kind of a
comment is not nearly as prevalent as it
was four, five, six years ago, I'm still
seeing people and of course those are
people who have not invested the time or
effort to keep up with the scientific
the pace of scientific discoveries and
uh but it is continuing a pace and what
we're learning has tremendous
implications
for
understanding the bigger picture of
human life on Earth and our
civilizations that we've attempted.
So, we've got a lot more interesting
material coming up to cover. So, I hope
you stay with us and uh we'll try to
deliver the goods as best we can.
So, John, I'll turn it over to you for
some final words perhaps.
Well, you know, it's it's been a
privilege sitting here listening to it.
I'm looking forward to doing a little
bit more digging on uh 1913.
And at some point, I think we should do
a closer look at some of the literature
on all of the eyewitness testimony on
that because there has to be some good
information on that.
&gt;&gt; If you do some digging, that would be
awesome. I will
&gt;&gt; find anything. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And anyone in the comments section, I
know you guys are listening. Randall,
you and I can't get away with anything
on this. And that's good. If someone in
the comments section has a good source,
feel free to drop it for the 1913 meteor
stream. Want to want to look at that.
&gt;&gt; What did you just say? Somebody in the
comment section.
&gt;&gt; In the comment section. Is that is is
that Did you just dub the the the
Randall Carlson comment section the
comment section?
&gt;&gt; No, I that's what I heard. But uh
&gt;&gt; I wonder if that's going to stick.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I that's maybe so. But uh yeah, uh
well, you know, I consider it a positive
if somebody,
you know, like you said, you were tired.
Sometimes I get really tired and we're
trying to do and you know I'll I'll
misstate something or I I'll
mispronounce a word here and there.
Let's see. What was somebody recently
getting on my case for?
&gt;&gt; Supposably.
So, so it's supposed
that they should say supposedly.
&gt;&gt; Okay. It was something. It was more of a
Oh, I don't remember what it was.
Somebody was uh caught me. Oh, well it
was in a clip I was referring to um I
was talking about nice G ne I ss which
is metamorphized granite but that was
the larger picture but the the the small
minute or two minute clip that went up
I'm referring to I'm probably discussing
um some layer of granite
but I referred to it as as granite and I
referred to it as a metamorphic rock and
somebody came out and said granite's an
ignous rock. It's not metamorphic.
Well, I was talking about nice, which is
metamorphosed granite, right? So, if
they had seen the whole context, I think
that would have been clear. But, you
know, it was a little bit of a fauxpaw
because technically I should have not
referred to granite
uh in the context that I did. But it
it's small things like that. But that
doesn't bother me. Am I right?
&gt;&gt; But it's a good thing. It's a good
thing. And so if someone has a good
reference on 1913 or if uh I
mispronounced something again, put it
down there in the comments section. Feed
the algorithm, folks. Make sure you like
and subscribe. All that good stuff.
&gt;&gt; There you go. Because listen, that's
going to help us. We're really one of
our goals is to get this to the next
level. This is why we've been working
hard to expand the network to make the
connections with the people who are
doing the cutting edge work and this is
actually happening and this network I
think of of people scholars scientists
independent researchers and and
free-minded thinkers we are in the
process of I think we're altering the
paradigm and it's a paradigm that I
think is going to be critically
important going forward for our it's not
just an abstract academic pursuit that
we're engaged in. And uh if we can help
to raise some more money that the Comet
Research Group can do some of its
critically important work if it allows
us to reach a wider audience uh to to do
the field research
uh like we've been doing and and it was
very gratifying, John, that you were
able to join us that week um out in Utah
and Idaho and did that amazing job of
documenting
everything that we did and saw and where
we went and I know that's going to be
edited coming up. It's going to be
edited into a sort of a documentary
style presentation. Uh but we haven't
had that level of professionalism in
terms of documenting our our tours and
our reconnaissance out in the field, our
field studies, uh like like you were
able to to accomplish last uh on our
Bonavville flood tour. But this is the
kind of thing that support is going to
help us do more and more of. And
eventually the idea and and and Beckett
and his team over at Titan O Titan Zero
are working on the presentation of a a
model of an institute, a school, a
center, a conference center that can
serve as a hub where this kind of
information, these kind of ideas can be
brought together
on the next level and we can literally
create I think we're in the process of
creating a global community of people
who are now thinking outside the old
standard models of history and
prehistory. And it's going to be so
exciting to see where this goes.
&gt;&gt; So, drop a like, drop a comment, and uh
we really appreciate it. And if you got
any criticism, drop that, too. We always
we always look for constructive
criticism.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But if you have criticisms, now
direct most of them to John.
I'll take it.
&gt;&gt; Okay, just kidding, folks. All right,
see you on the next episode of Squaring
the Circle.
&gt;&gt; Bye all.
&gt;&gt; Bye.