ta 


of  % 

ttj  uf 


Dr.  I.R.   Smith 


PROF.  MENDELEEFF 


"  tf 


(A  LIBRARY  OF        ^ 
UNIVERSAL    LITERATURE 


7JV    ^  (9  U R    PA  R  T  S 


^Comprising  Science,  Biography,  Fiction 
and  the  Great  Orations 


PART    ONE— SCIENCE 


The  Principles   of  Chemistry 

(PART    ONE) 

BY 

D.  MENDELEEFF 


520956 


NEW    YORK 

P.  F.  COLLIER  AND  SON 

•  M  C  M  I  • 

25 


PRESS  OF 
P.  F.  COLLIER  &SON 


ALL    RIGHTS     RESERVED 


A   LIBRARY   OF 
UNIVERSAL    LITERATURE 


S C IE N C E 

VOLUME  TWENTY-FIVE 


BOARD  OF  EDITORS 

> 

SCIENCE 

ANGBLO   HEILPRIN,  author  of  "The  Earth  and  Its  Story,"  etc.; 

Curator  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  of  Philadelphia. 
JOSEPH   TORRE Y,  JR.,  Ph.D.,  Instructor  in  Chemistry  in  Harvard 

University. 
RAY  STANNARD  BAKER,  A.B.,  author  of  "The  New  Prosperity," 

etc.;  Associate  Editor  of  McClure's  Magazine. 

BIOGRAPHY 

MAYO  W.  HAZELTINE,  A.M.,  author  of  "Chats  About  Books,"  etc.; 

Literary  Editor  of  the  New  York  Sun. 
JULIAN  HAWTHORNE,  author  of  "Nathaniel  Hawthorne  and  His 

Wife,"  "History  of  the  United  States,"  etc. 
CHARLES  G.  D.  ROBERTS,  A.B.,  A.M.,  author  of  "A  History  of 

Canada";   late  Professor  of  English  and   French   Literature, 

King's  College. 

FICTION 

RICHARD  HENRY  STODDARD,  author  of  "The  King's  Bell,"  etc.; 

Literary  Editor  of  the  New  York  Mail  and  Express. 
HENRY  VAN  DYKE,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  author  of  "Little  Rivers,"  etc.; 

Professor  of  English  Literature  at  Princeton  University. 
THOMAS  NELSON  PAGE,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  author  of  "Red  Rock,"  etc. 

ORATIONS 

HON.  HENRY  CABOT  LODGE,  A.B.,  LL.B.,  author  of  "Life  of  Daniel 
Webster,"  etc.;  U.  S.  Senator  from  Massachusetts. 

HON.  JOHN  R.  PROCTOR,  President  U.  S.  Civil  Service  Commission. 

MORRIS  HICKEY  MORGAN,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  in  Latin,  Har- 
vard University. 


PBEFACE 

TO    THE 

ENGLISH   TRANSLATION 


THE  first  English  edition  of  this  work  was  published  in  1891,  and 
that  a  second  edition  is  now  called  for  is,  we  think,  a  sufficient 
proof  that  the  enthusiasm  of  the  author  for  his  science,  and  the 
philosophical  method  of  his  teaching,  have  been  duly  appreciated 
by  English  chemists. 

In  the  scientific  work  to  which  Professor  Mendeleeff's  life 
has  been  devoted,  his  continual  endeavour  has  been  to  bring  the 
scattered  facts  of  chemistry  within  the  domain  of  law,  and  accord- 
ingly in  his  teaching  he  endeavours  to  impress  upon  the  student 
the  principles  of  the  science,  the  generalisations,  so  far  as  they  have 
been  discovered,  under  which  the  facts  naturally  group  themselves. 

Of  those  generalisations  the  periodic  law  is  perhaps  the  most 
important  that  has  been  put  forward  since  the  establishment  of  the 
atomic  theory.  It  is  therefore  interesting  to- note  that  Professor 
Mendel6eff  was  led  to  its  discovery  in  preparing  the  first  Russian 
edition  of  this  book. 

It  is  natural,  too,  that  the  further  application  and  development 
of  that  generalisation  should  be  the  principal  feature  of  this,  the 
latest  edition. 

There  are  special  difficulties  in  rendering  the  Russian  lan- 
guage into  good  English,  and  we  are  conscious  that  these  have 
not  been  entirely  overcome.  Doubtless  also  there  are  errors  of 


Vi  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

statement  which  have  escaped  correction,  but  we  believe  that  the 
present  edition  will  be  found  better  in  both  respects  than  its  pre- 
decessor. We  have  thought  it  our  duty  as  translators  to  give  as 
far  as  possible  a  faithful  reproduction  of  Professor  MendeleefFs 
work — the  sixth  Russian  edition — without  amplifying  or  modifying 
his  statements,  and  in  this  we  have  the  author's  approval. 

Although  other  duties  have  prevented  Mr.  Greenaway  from 
undertaking  the  care  of  the  present  edition,  he  has  been  kind 
enough  to  give  us  the  benefit  of  his  suggestions  on  several  points. 
We  also  wish  to  thank  the  Managers  of  the  Royal  Institution  for 
permission  to  reprint  the  lecture  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution 
by  Professor  Mendeleeff  (Appendix  I.),  and  to  the  Council  of  the 
Chemical  Society  for  permission  to  reprint  the  Faraday  lecture 
which  forms  Appendix  II. 

In  conclusion,  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.  F.  Evershed,  who  has 
given  us  much  valuable  assistance  in  revising  the  sheets  for  the 
press. 

O.K. 
T.  A.  L. 

August  1897 


AUTHOR'S   PREFACE 

TO 

THE    SIXTH     RUSSIAN    EDITION 


THIS  work  was  written  during  the  years  1868-1870,  its  object 
being  to  acquaint  the  student  not  only  with  the  methods  of  observa- 
tion, the  experimental  facts,  and  the  laws  of  chemistry,  but  also 
with  the  insight  given  by  this  science  into  the  unchangeable  sub- 
stratum underlying  the  varying  forms  of  matter. 

If  statements  of  fact  themselves  depend  upon  the  person  who 
observes  them,  how  much  more  distinct  is  the  reflection  of  the  per- 
sonality of  him  who  gives  an  account  of  methods  and  of  philosophical 
speculations  which  form  the  essence  of  science !  For  this  reason  there 
will  inevitably  be  much  that  is  subjective  in  every  objective  exposi- 
tion of  scieuce.  And  as  an  individual  production  is  only  significant 
in  virtue  of  that  which  has  preceded  and  that  which  is  contemporary 
with  it,  it  resembles  a  mirror  which  in  reflecting  exaggerates  the 
size  and  clearness  of  neighbouring  objects,  and  causes  a  person  near 
it  to  see  reflected  most  plainly  those  objects  which  are  on  the  side 
to  which  it  is  directed.  Although  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  my 
book  a  true  mirror  directed  towards  the  whole  domain  of  chemical 
changes,  yet  involuntarily  those  influences  near  to  me  have  been  the 
most  clearly  reflected,  the  most  brightly  illuminated,  and  have  tinted 
the  entire  work  with  their  colouring.  In  this  way  the  chief  pecu- 
liarity of  the  book  has  been  determined.  Experimental  and 
practical  data  occupy  their  place,  but  the  philosophical  principles 


viii  P&&CIPLES  OF  CHEMI8TBY 

of  our  science  form  the  chief  theme  of  the  work.  la  former  times 
sciences,  like  bridges,  could  only  be  built  up  by  supporting  them 
on  a  few  broad  buttresses  and  long  girders.  In  addition  to  the 
exposition  of  the  principles  of  chemistry,  it  has  been  my  desire  to 
show  how  science  has  now  been  built  up  like  a  suspension  bridge, 
supported  by  the  united  strength  of  a  number  of  slender,  but 
firmly-fixed,  chains,  which  individually  are  of  little  strength,  and 
has  thus  been  carried  over  difficulties  which  before  appeared  in- 
superable. In  comparing  the  science  of  the  past,  the  present,  and 
the  future,  in  placing  the  particulars  of  its  restricted  experiments 
side  by  side  with  its  aspirations  after  unbounded  and  infinite 
truth,  and  in  restraining  myself  from  yielding  to  a  bias  towards 
the  most  attractive  path,  I  have  endeavoured  to  incite  in  the  reader 
a  spirit  of  inquiry,  which,  dissatisfied  with  speculative  reasonings 
alone,  should  subject  every  idea  to  experiment,  encourage  the  habit 
of  stubborn  work,  and  excite  a  search  for  fresh  chains  of  evidence  to 
complete  the  bridge  over  the  bottomless  unknown.  History  proves 
that  it  is  possible  by  this  means  to  avoid  two  equally  pernicious 
extremes,  the  Utopian — a  visionary  contemplation  which  proceeds 
from  a  current  of  thought  only — and  the  stagnant  realism  which 
is  content  with  bare  facts.  Sciences  like  chemistry,  which  deal 
with  ideas  as  well  as  with  material  substances,  and  create  a  possi- 
bility of  immediately  verifying  that  which  has  been  or  may  be 
discovered  or  assumed,  demonstrate  at  every  step  that  the  work 
of  the  past  has  availed  much,  and  that  without  it  it  would  be 
impossible  to  advance  into  the  ocean  of  the  unknown.  They 
also  show  the  possibility  of  becoming  acquainted  with  fresh 
portions  of  this  unknown,  and  compel  us,  while  duly  respecting 
the  teachings  of  history,  to  cast  aside  classical  illusions,  and  to 
engage  in  a  work  which  not  only  gives  mental  satisfaction  but  is 
also  practically  useful  to  all  our  fellow-creatures.1 

1  Chemistry,  like  every  other  science,  is  at  once  a  means  and  an  end.  It  is  a 
means  of  attaining  certain  practical  results.  Thus,  by  its  assistance,  the  obtaining 
of  matter  in  its  various  forms  is  facilitated ;  it  shows  new  possibilities  of  availing 
ourselves  of  the  forces  of  nature,  indicates  the  methods  of  preparing  many  sub- 
stances, points  out  their  properties,  Ac.  In  this  sense  chemistry  is  closely  connected 
with  the  work  of  the  manufacturer  and  the  artisan,  its  sphere  is  active,  and  is  a 


PREFACE  ir 

Thus  the  desire  to  direct  those  thirsting  for  truth  to  the  pure 
source  of  the  science  of  the  forces  acting  throughout  nature  forms 

means  of  promoting  general  welfare.  Besides  this  honourable  vocation,  chemistry 
has  another.  With  it,  as  with  every  other  elaborated  science,  there  are  many  lofty 
aspirations,  the  contemplation  of  which  serves  to  inspire  its  workers  and  adherents. 
This  contemplation  comprises  not  only  the  principal  data  of  the  science,  but  also 
the  generally-accepted  deductions,  and  also  hypotheses  which  refer  to  phenomena 
as  yet  but  imperfectly  known..  In  this  latter  sense  scientific  contemplation  varies 
much  with  times  and  persons,  it  bears  the  stamp  of  creative  power,  and  em- 
braces the  highest  forms  of  scientific  progress.  In  that  pure  enjoyment  ex* 
perienced  on  approaching  to  the  ideal,  in  that  eagerness  to  draw  aside  the  veil 
from  the  hidden  truth,  and  even  in  that  discord  which  exists  between  the  various 
workers,  we  ought  to  see  the  surest  pledges  of  further  scientific  progress.  Science 
thua  advances,  discovering  new  truths,  and  at  the  same  time  obtaining  practical 
results.  The  edifice  of  science  not  only  requires  material,  but  also  a  plan,  and 
necessitates  the  work  of  preparing  the  materials,  putting  them  together,  working 
out  the  plans  and  the  symmetrical  proportions  of  the  various  parts.  To  conceive, 
understand,  and  grasp  the  whole  symmetry  of  the  scientific  edifice,  including  its 
unfinished  portions,  is  equivalent  to  tasting  that  enjoyment  only  Conveyed  by  the 
highest  forms  of  beauty  and  truth.  Without  the  material,  the  plan  alone  is  but 
a  castle  in  the  air — a  mere  possibility ;  whilst  the  material  without  a  plan  is  but 
useless  matter.  All  depends  on  the  concordance  of  the  materials  with  the  plan  and 
execution,  and  the  general  harmony  thereby  attained.  In  the  work  of  science,  the 
artisan,  architect,  and  creator  are  very  often  one  and  the  same  individual ;  but 
sometimes,  as  in  other  walks  of  life,  there  is  a  difference  between  them ;  sometimes 
the  plan  is  preconceived,  sometimes  it  follows  the  preparation  and  accumulation 
of  the  raw  material.  Free  access  to  the  edifice  of  science  is  not  only  "allowed  to 
those  who  devised  the  pla'n,  worked  out  the  detailed  drawings,  prepared  the 
materials,  or  piled  up  the  brickwork,  but  also  to  all  those  who  are  desirous  of 
making  a  close  acquaintance  with  the  plan,  and  wish  to  avoid  dwelling  in  the 
vaults  or  in  the  garrets  where  the  useless  lumber  is  stored. 

Knowing  how  contented,  free,  and  joyful  is  life  in  the  realm  of  science,  one 
fervently  wishes  that  many  would-  enter  its  portals.  On  this  account  many 
pages  of  this  treatise  are  unwittingly  stamped  with  the  earnest  desire  that  the 
babits  of  chemical  contemplation  which  I  have  endeavoured  to.  instil  into  the 
minds  of  my  readers  will  incite  them  to  the  further  study  of  science.  Science  will 
then  nourish  in  them  and  by  them,  on  a  fuller  acquaintance  not  only  with  that 
little  which  is  enclosed  within  the  narrow  limits  of  my  work,  but  with  the  further 
learning  which  they  must  imbibe  in  order  to  make  themselves  masters  of  our 
science  and  partakers  in  its  further  advancement. 

Those  who  enlist  in  the  cause  of  science  have  no  reason  to  fear  when  they 
remember  the  urgent  need  for  practical  workers  in  the  spheres  of  agriculture,  arts, 
and  manufacture.  By  summoning  adherents  to  the  work  of  theoretical  chemistry, 
I  am  confident  that  I  call  them  to  a  most  useful  labour,  to  the  habit  of  dealing 
correctly  with  nature  and  its  laws,  and  to  the  possibility  of  becoming  truly  practical 
men.  In  order  to  become  actual  chemists,  it  is  necessary  for  beginners  to  be  well 
and  closely  acquainted  with  three  important  branches  of  chemistry— analytical, 
organic,  and  theoretical.  That  part  of  chemistry  which  is  dealt  with  in  this 
treatise  is  only  the  groundwork  of  the  edifice.  For  the  learning  and'  development 


X  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTEY 

the  first  and  most  important  aim  of  this  book.  The  time  has  ar- 
rived when  a  knowledge  of  physics  and  chemistry  forms  as  im- 
portant a  part  of  education  as  that  of  the  classics  did  two  centuries 
ago.  In  those  days  the  nations  which  excelled  in  classical  learning 
stood  foremost,  just  as  now  the  most  advanced  are  those  which  are 
superior  in  the  knowledge  of  the  natural  sciences,  for  they  form 
the  strength  and  characteristic  of  our  times.  In  following  the  above 
and  chief  aim,  I  set  myself  a  second  object :  to  furnish  a  text-book 
for  an  elementary  knowledge  of  chemistry  and  so  satisfy  a  want 
which  undoubtedly  exists  among  students  and  those  who  have  re- 
course to  chemistry  either  as  a  source  of  truth  or  welfare.2  Hence, 

of  chemistry  in  its  truest  and  fullest  sense,  beginners  ought,  in  the  first  place,  to 
turn  their  attention  to  the  practical  work  of  analytical  chemistry ;  in  the  second 
place,  to  practical  and  theoretical  acquaintance  with  some  special  chemical  ques- 
tion, studying  the  original  treatises  of  the  investigators  of  the  subject  (at  first, 
under  the  direction  of  experienced  teachers),  because  in  working  out  particular 
facts  the  faculty  of  judgment  and  of  correct  criticism  becomes  sharpened  ;  in  the 
third  place,  to  a  knowledge  of  current  scientific  questions  through  the  special 
chemical  journals  and  papers,  and  by  intercourse  with  other  chemists.  The  time 
has  come  to  turn  aside  from  visionary  contemplation,  from  platonic  aspirations, 
and  from  classical  verbosity,  and  to  enter  the  regions  of  actual  labour  for  the 
common  weal,  to  prove  that  the  study  of  science  is  not  only  an  excellent  education 
for  youth,  but  that  it  instils  the  virtues  of  industry  and  veracity,  and  creates  solid 
national  wealth,  material  and  mental,  which  without  it  would  be  unattainable. 
Science,  which  deals  with  the  infinite,  is  itself  without  bounds. 

2  I  recommend  those  who  are  commencing  the  study  of  chemistry  with  my 
book  to  first  read  only  what  is  printed  in  the  large  type,  because  in  that  part  I 
have  endeavoured  to  concentrate  all  the  fundamental,  indispensable  knowledge 
required  for  that  study.  In  the  footnotes,  printed  in  small  type  (which  should  be 
read  only  after  the  large  text  has  been  mastered),  certain  details  are  discussed ; 
they  are  either  further  examples,  or  debatable  questions  on  existing  ideas  which 
I  thought  useful  to  lay  before  those  entering  into  the  sphere  of  science,  or  certain 
historical  and  technical  details  which  might  be  withdrawn  from  the  fundamental 
portion  of  the  book.  Without  intending  to  attain  in  my  treatise  to  the  complete- 
ness of  a  work  of  reference,  I  have  still  endeavoured  to.  express  the  principal 
developments  of  science  as  they  concern  the  chemical  elements  viewed  in  thai 
aspect  in  which  they  appeared  to  me  after  long  continued  study  of  the  subject  and 
participation  in  the  contemporary  advance  of  knowledge. 

I  have  also  placed  my  personal  views,  suppositions,  and  arguments  in  the  foot* 
notes,  which.are  chiefly  designed  for  details  and  references.  But  I  have  endeavoured 
to  avoid  here,  as  in  the  text,  not  only  all  that  I  consider  doubtful,  but  also  those 
details  which  belong  either  to  special  branches  of  chemistry  (for  instance,  to 
analytical,  organic,  physical,  theoretical,  physiological,  agricultural,  or  technical 
chemistry),  or  to  different  branches  of  natural  science  which  are  more  and  more 
coming  into  closer  and  closer  contact  with  chemistry.  Chemistry,  I  am  convinced, 


PREFACE  XI 

although  the  fundamental  object  of  this  work  was  to  express  and 
embrace  the  general  chemical  teaching  of  the  present  day  from  a 
personal  point  of  view,  I  have  nevertheless  striven  throughout  to 
maintain  such  a  level  as  would  render  the  '  Principles  of  Chemistry ' 
accessible  to  the  beginner.  Many  aspects  of  this  work  are  deter- 
mined by  this  combination  of  requirements  which  frequently  differ 
widely.  An  issue  was  only  possible  under  one  condition,  i.e.  not 
to  be  carried  away  by  what  appears  to  be  a  plausible  theory  in  ex- 
plaining individual  facts  and  to  always  endeavour  to  transmit  the 
simple  truth  of  a  given  fact,  extracting  it  from  the  vast  store  of  the 
literature  of  the  subject  and  from  tried  personal  experience.  In 
publishing  a  new  edition  of  this  work  I  have  striven  to  add  any  facts 
of  importance  recently  discovered 3  and  to  revise  the  former  edition 
in  the  above  spirit.  With  this  object  I  have  entirely  gone  over  this 
edition,  and  a  comparison  of.it  with  the  former  one  will  show  that 
the  additions  and  alterations  have  cost  as  much  labour  as  many 

must  occupy  a  place  among  the  natural  sciences  side  by  side  with  mechanics ;  for 
mechanics  treats  of  matter  as  a  system  of  ponderable  points  having  scarcely  any 
individuality  and  only  standing  in  a  certain  state  of  mobile  equilibrium.  For 
chemistry,  matter  is  an  entire  world  of  life,  with  an  infinite  variety  of  individuality 
both  in  the  elements  and  in  their  combinations.  In  studying  the  general 
uniformity  from  a  mechanical  point  of  view,  I  think  that  the  highest  point  of 
knowledge  of  nature  cannot  be  attained  without  taking  into  account  the  indi- 
viduality of  things  in  which  chemistry  is  set  to  seek  for  general  higher  laws. 
Mechanics  may  be  likened  to  the  science  of  statesmanship,  chemistry  to  the  sciences 
of  jurisprudence  and  sociology  The  general  universe  could  not  be  built  up  without 
the  particular  individual  universe,  and  would  be  a  dry  abstract  were  it  not  enlivened 
by  the  real  variety  of  the  individual  world.  Mechanics  forms  the  classical  basis  of 
natural  philosophy,  while  chemistry,  as  a  comparatively  new  and  still  young  science, 
already  strives  to— and  will,  in  the  future — introduce  a  new,  living  aspect  into 
4he  philosophy  of  nature  ;  all  the  more  as  chemistry  alone  is  never  at  rest  or  any- 
where dead — its  vital  action  has  universal  sway,  and  inevitably  determines  the 
general  aspect  of  the  universe.  Just  as  the  microscope  and  telescope  enlarge  the 
scope  of  vision,  and  discover  life  in  seeming  immobility,  so  chemistry,  in  discovering 
and  striving  to  discern  the  life  of  the  invisible  world  of  atoms  and  molecules 
and  their  ultimate  limit  of  divisibility,  will  clearly  introduce  new  and  important 
problems  into  our  conception  of  nature.  And  I  think  that  its  rdle,  which  is  now 
considerable,  will  increase  more  and  more  in  the  future ;  that  is,  I  think  that  in 
its  further  development  it  will  occupy  a  place  side  by  side  with  mechanics  for  the 
comprehension  of  the  secrets  of  nature.  But  here  we  require  some  second  Newton ; 
end  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  will  soon  appear. 

8  I  was  much  helped  in  gathering  data  from  the  various  chemical  journals  of 
the  last  five  years  by  the  abstracts  made  for  me  by  Mr.  V.  V.  Kourilloff,  to  whom  I 
tender  my  best  thanks. 


xii  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

chapters  of  the  work.  I  also  wished  to  show  in  an  elementary 
treatise  on  chemistry  the  striking  advantages  gained  by  the 
application  of  the  periodic  law,  which  I  first  saw  in  its  entirety  in 
the  year  1869  when  I  was  engaged  in  writing  the  first  edition  of 
this  book,  in  which,  indeed,  the  law  was  first  enunciated.  At  that 
time,  however,  this  law  was  not  established  so  firmly  as  now,  when 
so  many  of  its  consequences  have  been  verified  by  the  researches  of 
numerous  chemists,  and  especially  byRoscoe,  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran, 
Nilson,  Brauner,  Thorpe,  Carnelley,  Laurie,  Winkler.  and  others. 
The,  to  me,  unexpectedly  rapid  success  with  which  the  teaching 
of  the  periodicity  of  the  elements  has  spread  in  our  science,  and 
perhaps  also,  the  perseverance,  with  which  I  collected  in  this  work, 
and  upon  a' new  plan,  the  most  important  data  respecting  the  ele- 
ments and  their  mutual  relations,  explained  sufficiently  the  fact 
that  the  former  (5th,  1889)  edition  of  ray  work  has  been  translated 
into  English 4  and  German 5  and  is  being  translated  into 
French.6  Deeply  touched  by  the  favourable  opinions  expressed 
by  English  men  of  science  upon  my  book,  I  ascribe  them  chiefly  to 
the  periodic  law  placed  at  the  basis  of  my  treatise  and  especially  of 
the  second  part  of  the  book,  which  contains  a  large  amount  of  data 
having  a  special  and  sometimes  quite  unexpected,  bearing  from 
the  point  of  view  of  this  law.  As  the  entire  scheme  of  this  work 
is  subordinated  to  the  law  of  periodicity,  which  may  be  illustrated  in 
a  tabular  form  by  placing  the  elements  in  series,  groups,  and  periods, 
two  such  tables  are  given  at.  the  end  of  this  preface. 
^  In  this  the  sixth  edition  I  have  not  altered  any  essential  feature 
of  the  original  work,  and  have  retained  those  alterations  which 
were  introduced  into  the  fifth  edition.7  I  have,  however,  added 

4  The  English  translation  was  made  by  G.  Kamensky,  and  edited  by  A.  J. 
Greenaway ;  published  by  Longmans,  Green  &  Co. 

5  The  German  translation  was  made  by  L.  Jawein  and  A.  Thillot ;  published 
by  Bicker  (St.  Petersburg). 

8  The  French  translation  has  been  commenced  by  E.  Achkinasi  and  H.  Carrion 
from  the  fifth  edition,  and  is  published  by  Tignol  (Paris). 

7  The  fifth  edition  was  not  only  considerably  enlarged,  compared  with  the 
preceding,  but  also  the  foundations  of  the  periodic  system  of  the  elements  were 
placed  far  more  firmly  in  it  than  in  the  former  editions.  The  subject-matter  was 
also  divided  into  text  and  footnotes,  which  contained  details  unnecessary  for  a  first 
acquaintance  with  chemistry.  The  fifth  edition  sold  out  sooner  than  1  expected, 


PREFACE  Xlii 

many  newly  discovered  facts,  and  in  this  respect  it  is  necessary  to 
say  a  few  words.  Although  all  aspects  of  the  simplest  chemical 
relations  are  as  far  as  possible  equally  developed  in  this  book,  yet 
on  looking  back  I  see  that  I  have,  nevertheless,  given  most 
attention  to  the  so-called  indefinite  compounds  examples  of  which 
may  be  seen  in  solutions.  I  recur  repeatedly  to  them,  and  to 
all  the  latest  data  respecting  them,  for  in  them  I  see  a  starting 
point  for  the  future  progress  of  our  science  and  to  them  I 
affiliate  numerous  instances  of  definite  compounds,  beginning 
with  alloys  and  silicates  and  ending  with  complex  acids.  There 
are  two  reasons  .for  this.  In  the  first  place,  this  subject  has 
deeply  interested  me  from  rny  youth  ;  I  have  devoted  a  portion  of 
my  own  researches  to  it,  and  therefore  it  occupied  an  important 
position  even  in  the  first  edition  of  my  book  ;  besides  which  all  that 
has  been  subsequently  accomplished  in  our  science,  especially  during 
the  last  five  or  six  years,  shows  that  at  the  present  day  an  interest 
in  these  questions  plays  an  important  part  in  the  minds  of  a 
large  circle  of  contemporary  workers  in  chemistry.  This  personal 
attachment,  if  I  may  so  call,  it,  to  the  question  of  solutions  and 
such  indefinite  compounds,  must  involuntarily  have  impressed  itself 
upon  my  work,  and  in  the  later  editions  I  have  even  had  to  strive 
not  to  give  this  subject  a  greater  development  than  previously, 
so  great  was  the  material  accumulated,  which  however  does  not 
yet  give  us  the  right  to  consider  even  the  most  elementary  questions 
respecting  solutions  as  solved.  Thus,  we  cannot  yet  say  what  a 
solution  really  is.  My  own  view  is  that  a  solution  is  a  homo- 
geneous liquid  system  of  unstable  dissociating  compounds  of 
the  solvent  with  the  substance  dissolved.  But  although  such  a 
theory  explains  much  to  me,  I  cannot  consider  my  opinion 
as  proved,  and  therefore  give  it  with  some  reserve  as  one  of 
several  hypotheses.8  As  a  subject  yet  far  from  solved,  I  might 

so-  4hat  instead  of  issuing  supplements  (containing  the  latent  discoveries  in 
chemistry),  as  I  had  proposed,  I  was  obliged  to  publish  the  present  entirely  new 
edition  of  the  work. 

8  This  hypothesis  is  not  only  mentioned  in  different  parts  of  this  book',  but  is 
partly  (from  the  aspect  of  the  specific  gravity  of ''solutions)  developed  in  my  work* 
The  Investigation  of  Solutions  from  tlicir  Specific  Gravity,  1887. 


Xiv  PE1NCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

naturally  have  ignored  it,  or  only  mentioned  it  cursorily,  but  such  a 
treatment  of  solutions,  although  usual  in  elementary  treatises  on 
chemistry,  would  not  have  answered  my  views  upon  the  subject  of 
our  science,  and  I  wished  that  the  reader  might  find  in  my  book 
beyond  everything  an  expression  of  all  that  a  study  of  the  subject 
built  up  for  .me.  If  in  solutions  I  see  and  can  frequently  prove 
distinct  evidences  of  the  existence  of  those  definite  compounds 
which  form  the  more  generalised  province  of  chemical  data,  I 
could  not  refrain  from  going  into  certain  details  respecting 
solutions ;  otherwise,  there  would  have  remained  no  trace  of  that 
general  idea,  that  in  them  we  have  only  a  certain  instance  of  ordi- 
nary -definite  or  atomic  compounds,  subject  to  Dalton's  laws. 
Having  long  had  this  idea,  I  wished  to  impress  it  upon  the 
reader  of  my  book,  and  it  is  this  desire  which  forms  the  second  of 
those  chief  reasons  why  I  recur  so  frequently  to  solutions  in  this 
work.  At  present,  my  ideas  respecting  solutions  are  shared  by 
few,  but  I  trust  that  by  degrees  the  instances  I  give  will  pave 
the  way  for  their  general  recognition,  and  it  is  my  hope  that  they 
may  find  adherents  among  those  of  my  readers  who  are  in  a 
position  to  work  out  by  experiment  this  difficult  but  highly 
interesting  pro*blem. 

In  conclusion,  I  desire  to  record  my  thanks  to  V.  D.  Sapogenikoff, 
who  has  corrected  the  proofs  of  the  whole  of  this  edition  and  com- 
piled the  indexes  which  greatly  facilitate  the  search  for  those 
details  which  are  scattered  throughout  the  work. 

D.   MENDELEEFF. 


XV 


V 


' 

0                 bO 
C2                *^J 

5        3 

I         9 

I         £ 
1         A 

1               0 

! 

1 

ffi       03 

! 

j-j 

«            •—  •                                  »H                  • 
1 

fc     .•:•!     ,     1 

.1.1,1 

I  i 

£ 

« 

02          '       jg 
1 

o     .    S     .    a' 

5    •    1    ;   1    • 

.      1      .    £      .    p 

Stf 

If  ' 

" 

•  *     •'   3     ' 

*o 

s    .  >    .   s 

s    *    i    •  a.    ' 

C" 

.5      .    &      .1 

1  1 

g" 

(i 

,  '  *  '  *  ; 

0     .    S      .    «S 

QQ                                       P-i 

*"•* 

tf 

3 

I 

W           .        GQ           .        (H 

5        '        1         '      H        ' 

.  i    .  S    .    1 

1- 

' 

H 

S            N 

8*1     '   tS5    : 
.   «    .    I     .1 

la 

1 

- 

W          fe          2, 

a«o 
SH                    Q2 

1    '    '     '   I    ' 
.6,1      .1 

^ 

1 

I 

.«.«.. 

"•    «    *    2    3    S 

TABLE  II 

Periodic  System  and  Atomic  Weights  of  the  Elements 

(Giving  the  pages  on  which  they  are  described) 


2nd  Series. 
Typical 
elements 

4th  Series 

6th  Series 

8th  Series 

10th  Series 

13th  Series 

I. 
II. 
III. 

IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII.  " 

VIII. 

I. 
II. 
III. 

IV. 
V. 
VI 
VII. 

H  1 

Li  7 
vol.  i.  574 
Be  9 
vol.-i.  618 
B  11 

K  39 

Bb  86 
vol.  i.  576 
Sr  88 
vol.  i.  614 
Y  89 
vol.ii.  93 
Zr  91 
vol.  ii.  146 
Nb  94 
vol.  ii.  197 
Mo  96 
vol.  ii.  290 
?  99 

Bu  102 
vol.  ii.  369 
Bh  103 
vol.  ii.  369 
Pd  106 
vol.  ii.  369 

7th  Series 
Ag  108 

Cs  133 
vol.  i.  576 
Ba  137 

- 

vol.iif;i48 

U  239 
vol.  ii.  297 

vol.  i.  558 
Ca  40 

vol.  i.  590 
Sc  44 
vol.  ii.  94 
Ti  48 
vol.  ii.  144 
V  51 
vol.  ii.  194 
Cr  52 

vol.  i.  614 
La  138 
vol.  ii.  93 
Ce  140 
yol.  ii.  93 
?Di  142 
vol.  ii.  93 

9th  Series 

Yb  173 
vol.  ii.  98 
?  178 

Ta  183 
-vol.  ii.  197 

W  184 
vol.  ii.  290 

vol.  ii.  60 
C  12 

vol.  i.  338 
N  14 

vol.  i.  223 
O  16 

vol.  i.  1§5 
F  19 

vol.  ii.  276 
Mn  55 

vol.  i.  489 

3rd  Series 
Na  23 
vol.  i.  533 
Mg  24 
vol.  i.  590 
Al  27 

vol.  ii.  303 
Fe  56 
vol.  ii.  317 
Co  59 
vol.  ii.  353 
Ni  59-5 

Os  192 
vol.  ii.  369 
Ir  193 
vol.  ii.  369 
Pt  196 

vol.  ii.  353 

6th  Series 
Cu  64 

vol.  ii.  369 

llth  Series 

Au  197 

vol.  i.  129 

vol.  ii.  398 
Zn  65 

vol.  ii.  415 
Cd  112 
vol.  ii.  47 
In  114 
vol.  ii.  91 
Sn  119 

— 

vol.  ii.  442 
Eg  200' 

vol.  ii.  39 
Ga  70 
vol.  ii.  90 
Ge  72 
vol.  ii.  124 
As  75 

vol.  ii.  48 
Tl  204 
vol.  ii,  91 
Pb  207 

vol.  ii.  70 
Si  28 

vol.  ii.  99 
P  31 

vol.  ii.  125 
Sb  120 

vol.  ii.  134 
Bi  209 
vol.  ii.  189 

vol.  ii.  149 
8  32 

vol.  ii.  179 
Se  79 
vol.  ii.  270 
Br  80 

vol.  ii.  L86 
Te  125 
vol.  ii.  270 
I  127 

vol.  ii.  200 
Cl  35-5 

- 

- 

vol.  i.  459 

vol.  i.  494 

vol.  i.  496 

Note.— Two  lines  under  the  elements  indicate  those  which  are  very  widely  distributed  in 
nature ;  one  line  indicates  those  which,  although  not  so  frequently  met  with,  are  of  general  use 
in  the  arts  and  manufactures 


CONTENTS 

or 
THE    FIKST    VOLUME 


TRANSLATORS'    PREFACE .  .  V 

AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SIXTH  RUSSIAN  EDITION        .        .    .      vti 

TABLE   OF  THE   DISTRIBUTION    OF    THE  ELEMENTS  IN  GROUPS   AND 


TABLE  OF  THE   PERIODIC    SYSTEM    AND  ATOMIC    WEIGHTS    OF  THE 

ELEMENTS .           .           .      .  XVl 

INTRODUCTION           ...........  1 

CHAP. 

I.      ON   WATER  AND   ITS   COMPOUNDS           .           .          ,.           .           .           ...  40 

II.      THE   COMPOSITION  OF   WATER.      HYDROGEN       ..          .           .           .           .  113 

III.  OXYGEN  AND  THE   CHIEF  ASPECTS  OF  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS    .  152 

IV.  OZONE   AND   HYDROGEN   PEROXIDE.      DALTON'S   LAW            .           .           .  193 
V.      NITROGEN   AND   AJR .    .  228 

VI.      THE   COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND   OXYGEN        .  246 

VII.      MOLECULES      AND      ATOMS.          THE      LAWS      OF      GAY-LUSSAC     AND 

AVOGADRO-GERHARDT             .           .           ...           .           .      .  299 

Vin.      CARBON  AND   THE    HYDROCARBONS 338 

IX.      COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON  WITH   OXYGEN  AND   NITROGEN                          ,  379 


xviii  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

CHAPTBH  PAOH 

X.      SODIUM   CHLORIDE.      BERTHOLLEX'S   LAWS.      HYDROCHLORIC   ACID    .  417 

XI.      THE   HALOGENS  :   CHLORINE,  BROMINE,  IODINE  AND   FLUORINE    .      .  459 

XII.      SODIUM 518 

XIII.  POTASSIUM,      RUBIDIUM,      CESIUM      AND      LITHIUM.  SPECTRUM 

ANALYSIS 543 

XIV.  THE    VALENCY   AND   SPECIFIC   HEAT   OF  THE   METALS.       MAGNESIUM, 

CALCIUM,   STRONTIUM,   BARIUM,   AND  BERYLLIUM      .           .           .  581 


PRINCIPLES    OF    CHEMISTRY 


INTRODUCTION 

THE  study  of  natural  science,  whose  rapid  development  dates  frotn 
the  days  of  Galileo  (f!642)  and  Newton  (f!727),  and  its  closer  applica- 
tion to  the  external  universe  !  led  to  the  separation  of  Chemistry  as  a 

1  The  investigation  of  a  substance  ora  natural  phenomenon. consists  (a)  in  determin- 
ing the  relation  of  the  object  under  examination  to  that  which  is  already  known,  either 
from  previous  researches,  or  from  experiment,  or  from  the  knowledge  of  the  common 
surroundings  of  life — that  is,  in  determining  and  expressing  the  quality  of  the  unknown 
by  the  aid  of  that  which  is  known ;  (6)  in  measuring  all  that  which  can  be  subjected  to 
measurement,  and  thereby  denoting  the  quantitative  relation  of  that  under  investigation 
to  that  already  known  and  its  relation  to  the  categories  of  time,  space,  temperature, 
mass,  &c. ;  (c)  in  determining  the  position  held  by  the  object  under  investigation  in  the 
system  of  known  objects  guided  by  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  data ;  (d)  in  de- 
termining, from  the  quantities  which  have  been  measured,  the  empirical  (visible)  depen- 
dence (function,  or  '  law,'  as  it  is  sometimes  termed)  of  variable  factors — for  instance,  the 
dependence  of  the  composition  of  the  substance  on  its  properties,  of  temperature  on 
time,  of  time  on  locality,  &c. ;  (e)  in  framing  hypotheses  or  propositions  as  to  the  actual 
cause  and  true  nature  of  the  relation  between  that  studied  (measured  or  observed)  and 
that  which  is  known  or  the  categories  of  time,  space,  &c. ;  (/)  in  verifying  the  logical 
consequences  of  the  hypotheses  by  experiment ;.  and  (g)  in  advancing  a  theory  which 
shall  account  for  the  nature  of  the  properties  of  that  studied  in  its  relations  with  things 
already  known  and  with  those  conditions  or  categories  among  which  it  exists.  It  is 
certain  that  it  is  only  possible  to  carry  out  these  investigations  when  we  have  taken  as 
a  basis  some  incontestable  fact  which  is  self-evident  to  our  understanding ;  as,  for  instance, 
number,  tune,  space,  motion,  or  mass.  The  determination  of  such  primary  or  funda- 
mental conceptions,  although  not  excluded  from  the  possibility  of  investigation,  frequently 
does  not  subject  itself  to  our  present  mode  of  scientific  generalisation.  Hence  it  follows 
that  m  the  investigation  of  anything,  there  always  remains  something  which  is  accepted 
without  investigation,  or  admitted  as  a  known  factor.  The  axioms  of  geometry  may  be 
taken  as  an  example.  Thus  in  the  science  of  biology  it  is  necessary  to  admit  the  faculty 
of  organisms  for  multiplying  themselves,  as  a  conception  whose  meaning  is  as  yet 
unknown.  In  the  study  of  chemistry,  too,  the  notion  of  elements  must  be  accepted  almost 
without  any  further  analysis.  However,  by  first  investigating  that  which  is  visible  and 
subject  to  direct  observation  by  the  organs  of  the  senses,  we  may  hope  that  in  the  first 
place  hypotheses  will  be  arrived  at,  and  afterwards  theories  of  that  which  has  now  to  be 
placed  at  the  basis  of  our  investigations.  The  minds  of  the  ancients  strove  to  seize  at 
once  the  very  fundamental  categories  of  investigation,  whilst  all  the  successes  of  recent 


2  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

particular  branch  of  natural  philosophy,  not  only  owing  to  the  in- 
creasing store  of  observations  and  experiments  relating  to  the  mutual 
transformations  of  substances,  but  also,  and  more  especially,  because 
in  addition  to  gravity,  cohesion,  heat,  light  and  electricity  it  became 
necessary  to  recognise  the  existence  of  particular  internal  forces  in  the 
ultimate  parts  of  all  substances,  forces  which  make  themselves  mani- 
fest in  the  transformations  of  substances  into  one  another,  but  remain 
hidden  (latent)  under  ordinary  circumstances,  and  whose  existence  can- 
not therefore  be  directly  apprehended,  and  so  for  a  long  time  remained 
unrecognised.  The  primary  object  of  chemistry  is  the  study  of  the 
homogeneous  substances  2  of  which  all  the  objects  of  the  universe  are 

knowledge  are  based  on  the  above-Cited  method  of  investigation  without  the  determina- 
tion of  '  the  beginning  of  all  beginnings.'  By  following  this  inductive  method,  the  exact 
sciences  have  already  succeeded  in  becoming  accurately  acquainted  with  much  of  the 
invisible  world,  which  directly  is  imperceptible  to  the  organs  of  sense  (for  example,  the 
molecular  motion  of  all  bodies,  the  composition  of  the  heavenly  luminaries,  the  paths  of 
their  motion,  the  necessity  for  the  existence  of  substances  which  cannot  be  subjected 
to  experiment,  &c.),  and  have  verified  the  knowledge  thus  obtained,  and  employed  it  for 
increasing  the  interests  of  humanity.  It  may  therefore  be  safely  said  that  tlie  induc- 
tive method  of  investigation  is  a  more  perfect  mode  of  acquiring  knowledge  than  the 
deductive  method  alone  (starting  from  a  little  of  the  unknown  accepted  as  incontestable 
to  arrive  at  the  much  which  is  visible  and  observable)  by  which  the  ancients  strove  to 
embrace  the  universe.  By  investigating  the  universe  by  an  inductive  method  (endeavour- 
ing from  the  much  which  is  observable  to  arrive  at  a  little  which  may  be  verified  and 
is  indubitable)  the  new  science  refuses  to  recognjse  dogma  as  truth,  but  through  reason, 
by  a  slow  and  laborious  method  of  investigation,  strives  for  and  attains  to  true  de- 
ductions. 

2  A  substance  or  material  is  that  which  occupies  space  and  has  weight ;  that  is, 
which  presents  a  mass  attracted  by  the  earth  and  by  other  masses  of  material,  and  of 
which  the  objects  of  nature  are  composed,  and  by  means  of  which  the  motions  and 
phenomena  of  nature  are  accomplished.  It  is  easy  to  discover  by  examining  and 
investigating,  by  various  methods,  the  objects  met  with  in  nature  and  in  the  arts,  that 
some  of  them  are  homogeneous,  whilst  others  are  composed  of  a  mixture  of  several 
homogeneous  substances.  This  is  most  clearly  apparent  in  solid  substances.  The 
metals  used  in  the  arts  (for  example,  gold,  iron,  copper)  must  be  homogeneous,  otherwise 
they  are  brittle  and  unfit  for  many  purposes  Homogeneous  matter  exhibits  similar 
properties  in  all  its  parts.  By  breaking  up  a  homogeneous  substance  we  obtain  parts 
which,  although  different  in  form,  resemble  .each  other  in  their  properties.  Glass,  pure 
sugar,  marble,  &c.,  are  examples  of  homogeneous  substances.  Examples  of  non-homo- 
geneous substances  are,  however,  much  more  frequent  in  nature  and  the  arts.  Thug 
the  majority  of  the  rocks  are  not  homogeneous.  In  porphyries  bright  pieces  of  a  mineral 
called  'orthoclase'  are  often  seen  interspersed  amongst  the  dark  mass  of  the  rock.  In 
ordinary  red  granite  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  large  pieces  of  orthoclase  mixed  with  dark 
eemi-transparent  quartz  and  flexible  laminae  of  mica.  Similarly,  plants  and  animals  are 
non-homogeneous.  Thus,  leaves  are  composed  of  a  skin,  fibre,  pulp,  sap,  and  a  green 
colouring  matter.  As  an  example  of  those  non-homogeneous  substances  which  are  pro- 
duced artificially,  gunpowder  may  be  cited,  which  is  prepared  by  mixing  together  known 
proportions  of  sulphur,  nitre,  and  charcoal.  Many  liquids,  also,  are  not  homogeneous,  as 
may  be  observed  by  the  aid  of  the  microscope,  when  drops  of  blood  are  seen  to  consist  of 
ft  colourless  liquid  in  which  red  corpuscles,  invisible  to  the  naked  eye  owing  to  their 
small  size,  are  floating  about.  IMS  these  corpuscles  which  give  blood  its  peculiar  colour. 


INTRODUCTION  3 

made  up,  with  the  transformations  of  these  substances  into  each  other, 
and  with  the  phenomena3  which  accompany  such  transformations. 
Every  chemical  change  or  reaction,4  as  it  is  called,  can  only  take  place 
under  a  condition  of  most  intimate  and  close  contact  of  the  re -acting 
substances,5  and  is  determined  by  the  forces  proper  to  the  smallest 
invisible  particles  (molecules)  of  matter.  We  must  distinguish  three 
chief  classes  of  chemical  transformations. 

1.  Combination  is  a  reaction  in  which  the  union  of  two  substances 
yields  a  new  one,  or  in  general  terms,  from  a  given  number  of  sub- 
stances, a  lesser  number  is  obtained.  Thus,  by  heating  a  mixture  of 
iron  and  sulphur6  a  single  new  substance  is  produced,  iron  sulphide,  in 

Milk  is  also  a  transparent  liquid,  in  which  microscopical  drops  of  fat  are  floating,  which 
rise  to  the  top  when  milk  is  left  at  rest,  forming  cream.  It  is  possible  to  extract  from 
every  non-homogeneous  substance  those  homogeneous  substances  of  which  it  is  made 
up.  Thus  orthoclase  may  be  separated  from  porphyry  by  breaking  it  off.  So  also  gold  is 
extracted  from  auriferous  sand  by  washing  away  the  mixture  of  clay  and  sand. 
Chemistry  deals  only  with  the  homogeneous  substances  met  with  in  nature,  or  extracted 
from  natural  or  artificial  non-homogeneous  substances.  The  various  mixtures  found 
in  nature  form  the  subjects  of  other  natural  sciences— as  geognosy,  botany,  zoology, 
anatomy,  <fec. 

5  All  those  events  which  are  accomplished  by  substances  in  time  are  termed  '  pheno- 
mena.'   Phenomena  in  themselves  form  the  fundamental  subject  of  the  study  of  physics. 
Motion  is  the  primary  and  most  generally  understood  form  of  phenomenon,  and  there- 
fore we  endeavour  to  reason  about  other  phenomena  as  clearly  as  when  dealing  with  motion. 
For  this  reason  mechanics,  which  treats  of  motion,  forms  the  fundamental  science  of 
natural  philosophy,  and  all  other  sciences  endeavour  to  reduce  the  phenomena  with 
which  they  are  concerned  to  mechanical  principles.    Astronomy  was  the  first  to  take 
to  this  path  of  reasoning,  and  succeeded  in  many  cases  in  reducing  astronomical  to 
purely  mechanical  phenomena.     Chemistry  and  physics,  physiology  and  biology  are  pro- 
ceeding in  the  same  direction.    One  of  the  most  important  questions  of  all  natural  science, 
and  one  which  has  been  handed  down  from  the  philosophers  of  classic  times,  is,  whether 
the  comprehension  of  all  that  is  visible  can  be  reduced  to  motion  ?    Its  participation  in 
all,  from  the  '  fixed '  stars  to  the  most  minute  parts  of  the  coldest  bodies  (Dewar,  in  1894 
showed  that  many  substances  cooled  to  — 180°  fluoresce  more  strongly  than  at  the  ordinary 
temperature ;  i.e.  that  there  is  a  motion  in  them  which  produces  light)  must  now  be 
recognised  as  undoubtable  from  direct  experiment  and  observation,  but  it  does  not  follow 
from  this  that  by  motion  alone  can  all  be  explained.    This  follows,  however,  from  the 
fact  that  we  cannot  apprehend  motion  otherwise  than  by  recognising  matter  in  a  state 
of  motion.    If  light  and  electricity  be  understood  as  particular  forms  of  motion,  then  we 
must  inevitably  recognise  the  existence  of  a  peculiar  luminiferous  (universal)  ether  as  a 
material,  transmitting  this  form  of  motion.    And  so,  under  the  present  state  of  know- 
ledge, it  is  inevitably  necessary  to  recognise  the  particular  categories,  motion  and  matter, 
and  as  chemistry  is  more  closely  concerned  with  the  various  forms  of  the  latter,  it  should, 
together  with  mechanics  or  the  study  of  motion,  lie  at  the  basis  of  natural  science. 

4  The  verb  '  to  react '  means  to  act  or  change  chemically. 

6  If '  a  phenomenon  proceeds  at  visible  or  measurable  distances  (as,  for  instance, 
magnetic  attraction  or  gravity),  it  cannot  be  described  as  chemical,  since  these  phenomena 
only  take  place  at  distances  immeasurably  small  and  undistinguishable  to  the  eye  or  the 
microscope ;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  purely  molecular. 

6  For  this  purpose  a  piece  of  iron  may  be  made  red  hot  in  a  forge,  and  then  placed 
in  contact  with  a  luir  p  of  sulphur,  when  iron  sulphide  will  be  obtained  as  a  molten 


4  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

which  the  constituent  substances  cannot  be  distinguished  even  by 
the  highest  magnifying  power.  Before  the  reaction,  the  iron  could  be 
separated  from  the  mixture  by  a  magnet,  and  the  sulphur  by  dissolving 
it  in  certain  oily  liquids  ;  7  in  general,  before  combination  they  might 
be  mechanically  separated  from  each  other,  but  after  combination  both 
substances  penetrate  into  each  other,  and  are  then  neither  mechanically 
separable  nor  individually  distinguishable.  As  a  rule,  reactions  of 
direct  combination  are  accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  heat,  and  the 
common  case  of  combustion,  evolving  heat,  consists  in  the  combination 
of  combustible  substances  with  a  portion  (oxygen)  of  the  atmosphere, 
the  gases  and  vapours  contained  in  the  smoke  being  the  products  of 
combination. 

2.  Reactions  of  decomposition  are  cases   the  reverse  of  those  of 
combination,  that  is,  in  which  one  substance  gives  two — or,  in  general,  a 
given  number  of  substances  a  greater  number.    .Thus,  by  heating  wood 
(and  also  coal  and  many  animal  or  vegetable  substances)  without  access 
to  air,  a  combustible  gas,  a  watery  liquid,  tar/and  carbon  are  obtained. 
It  is  in  this  way  that  tar,  illuminating  gas,  and  charcoal  are  prepared 
on  a  large  scale.8     All  limestones,  for  example,  flagstones,  chalk,  or 
marble,  are  decomposed  by  heating  to  redness  into  lime  and  a  peculiar 
gas  called  carbonic  anhydride.     A  similar  decomposition,  taking  place, 
however,  at  a  much  lower  temperature,  proceeds  with  the  green  copper 
carbonate  which  is  contained  in  natural  malachite.     This  example  will 
be  studied  more  in  detail  presently.     Whilst  heat  is  evolved  in  the 
ordinary  reactions  of  combination,  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  absorbed  in 
the  reactions  of  decomposition. 

3.  The  third  class  of  chemical  reactions— where  the  number  of 
re-acting  substances  is  equal  to  the  number  of  substances  formed — may 

liquid,  the  combination  being  accompanied  by  a  visible  increase  in  the  glow  of  the  iron. 
Or  else  iron  filings  are  mixed  with  powdered  sulphur  in  the  proportion  of  5  parts  of  iron 
to  8  parts  of  sulphur,  and  the  mixture  placed  in  a  glass  tube,  which  is  then  heated  in  one 
place.  Combination  does  not  commence  without  the  aid  of  external  heat,  but  when  once 
started  in  any  portion  of  the  mixture  it  'extends  throughout  the  entire  mass,  because 
the  portion  first  heated  evolves  sufficient  heat  in  forming  iron  sulphide  to  raise  the 
adjacent  parts  of  the  mixture  to  the  temperature  required  for  starting  the  reaction.  The 
rise  in  temperature  thus  produced  is  so  high  as  to  soften  the  glass  tube. 

7  Sulphur  is  slightly  soluble  in  many  thin  oils ;  it  is  very  soluble  in  carbon  bisulphide 
and  in  some  other  liquids.    Iron  is  insoluble  in  carbon  bisulphide,  and  the  sulphur  there- 
fore can  be  dissolved  away  from  the  iron. 

8  Decomposition  of  this  kind  is  termed  '  dry  distillation,'  because,  as  in  distillation, 
the  substance  is  heated  and  vapours  are  given  off  which,  on  cooling,  condense  into 
liquids.    In  general,  decomposition,  in  absorbing  heat,  presents  much  in  common  to  a 
physical  change  of  state — such  as,  for  example,  that  of  a  liquid  into  a  gas.    Deville 
likened  complete  decomposition  to  boiling,  and  compared  partial  decomposition,  when  a 
portion  of  a  substance  is  not  decomposed  in  the  presence  of  its  products  of  decomposition 
(or  dissociation),  to  evaporation. 


INTRODUCTION  5 

be  considered  as  a  simultaneous  decomposition  and  combination.  If, 
for  instance,  two  compounds  A  and  B  are  taken  and  they  react  on  each 
other  to  form  the  substances  C  and  D,  then  supposing  that  A  is 
decomposed  into  D  and  E,  and  that  E  combines  with  B  to  form  C,  we 
have  a  reaction  in  which  two  substances  A,  or  D  E,  and  B  were  taken 
and  two  others  C,  or  E  B,  and  D  were  produced.  Such  reactions 
xmght  to  be  placed  under  the  general  term  of  reactions  of  *  rearrange^ 
menty  and  the  particular  case  where  two  substances  give  two  fresh 
ones,  reactions  of  *  substitution.'9  Thus,  if  a  piece  of  iron  be  immersed 
in  a  solution  of  blue  vitriol  (copper  sulphate),  copper  is  formed — or, 
rather,  separated  out,  and  green  vitriol  (iron  sulphate,  which  only 
differs  from  the  blue  vitriol  in  that  the  iron  has  replaced  the  copper)  is 
obtained  in  solution.  In  this  manner  iron  may  be  coated  with  copper, 
so  also  copper  with  silver  ;  such  reactions  are  frequently  made  uge  of 
in  practice. 

The  majority  of  the  chemical  changes  which  occur  in  nature  and 
are  made  use  of  technically  are  very  complicated,  as  they  consist  of  an 
association  of  many  separate  and  simultaneous  combinations,  decom- 
positions, and  replacements.  It  is  chiefly  due  to  this  natural  complexity 
of  chemical  phenomena  that  for  so  many  centuries  chemistry  did  not 
exist  as  an  exact  science  ;  that  is  so  say,  that  although  many  chemical 
changes  were  known  and  made  use  of,1?  yet  their  real  nature  was 
unknown,  nor  could  they  be  predicted  or  directed  at  will.  Another 
reason  for  the  tardy  progress  of  chemical  knowledge  is  the  participation 
of  gaseous  substances,  especially  air,  in  many  reactions.  The  true 
comprehension  of  air  as  a  ponderable  substance,  and  of  gases  in  general 
as  peculiar  elastic  and  dispersive  states  of  matter,  was  only  arrived  at 
in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  and  it  was  only  after  this 
that  the  transformations  of  substances  could  form  a  science.  Up  to 
that  time,  without  understanding  the  invisible  and  yet  ponderable 
gaseous  and  vaporous  states  of  substances,  it  was  impossible  to  obtain 
any  fundamental  chemical  evidence,  because  gases  escaped  from  notice 

9  A  reaction  of  rearrangement  may  in  certain  cases  take  place  with  one  substance 
only ;  that  is  to  say,  a  substance  may  by  itself  change  into  a  new  isomeric  form.  Thus, 
for  example,  if  hard  yellow  sulphur  be  heated  to  a  temperature  of  250°  and  then  poured 
into  cold  water  it  gives,  on  cooling,  a  soft,  brown  variety.  Ordinary  phosphorus,  which 
is  transparent,  poisonous,  and  phosphorescent  in  the  dark  (in  the  air),  gives,  after  being 
heated  at  270°  (in  an  atmosphere  incapable  of  supporting  combustion,  such  as' steam),  an 
opaque,  red,  and  non-poisonous  isomeric  variety,  which  is  not  phosphorescent.  Cases  of 
isomerism  point  out  the  possibility  of  an  internal  rearrangement  in  a  substance,  and  are 
the  result  of  an  alteration  in  the  grouping  of  the  same  elements,  just  as  a  certain  number 
of  balls  may  be  grouped  in  figures  and  forms  of  different  shapes. 

w  Thus  the  ancients  knew  how  to  convert  the  juice  of  grapes  containing  the  saccharine 
principle  (glucose)  into  wine  or  vinegar,  how  to  extract  metals  from  the  ores  which  are 
found  in  the  earth's  crust,  -and  how  to  prepare  glass  from  earthy  substances. 


6  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

between  the  reacting  and  resultant  substances.  It  is  easy  from  the 
impression  conveyed  to  us  by  the  phenomena  we  observe  to  form  the 
opinion  that  matter  is  created  and  destroyed  :  a  whole  mass  of  treea 
burn,  and  there  only  remains  a  little  charcoal  and  ash.  whilst  from  one 
small  seed  there  grows  little  by  little  a  majestic  tree.  In  one  case 
matter  seems  to  be  destroyed,  and  in  the  other  to  be  created.  Thu 
conclusion  is  arrived  at  because  the  formation  or  consumption  of  gaseSj 
being  under  the  circumstances  invisible  to  the  eye,  is  not  observed, 
When  wood  burns  it  undergoes  a  chemical  change  into  gaseout 
products,  which  escape  as  smoke.  A  very  simple  expeiiment  wil] 
prove  this.  By  collecting  the  smoke  it  may  be  observed  that  it 
contains  gases  which  differ  entirely  from  air,  being  incapable  oi 
supporting  combustion  or  respiration.  These  gases  may  be  weighed, 
and  it  will  then  be  seen  that  their  weight  exceeds  that  of  the  wood 
taken.  This  increase  in  weight  arises  from  the  fact,  that,  in  burning, 
the  component  parts  of  the  wood  combine  with  a  portion  of  the  air  ;  ir 
like  manner  iron  increases  in  weight  by  rusting.  In  burning  gunpowdei 
its  substance  is  not  destroyed,  but  only  converted  into  gases  an< 
smoke.  So  also  in  the  growth  of  a  tree  ;  the  seed  does  not  increase  h 
mass  of  itself  and  from  itself,  but  grows  because  it  absorbs  gases  from 
the  atmosphere  and  sucks  water  and  substances  dissolved  therein  from 
the  earth  through  its  roots.  The  sap  and  solid  substances  which  giv< 
plants  their  form  are  produced  from  these  absorbed  gases  and  liquid; 
by  complicated  chemical  processes.  The  gases  and  liquids  are  converte< 
into  solid  substances  by  the  plants  themselves.  Plants  not  only  d< 
not  increase  in  size,  but  die,  in  a  gas  which  does  not  contain  tto 
constituents  of  air.  When  moist  substances  dry  they  decrease  in  weight 
when  water  evaporates  we  know  that  it  does  not  disappear,  but  wil 
return  from  the  atmosphere  as  rain,  dew,  and  snow.  When  water  i 
absorbed  by  the  earth,  it  does  not  disappear  there  for  ever,  bu 
accumulates  somewhere  underground,  from  whence  it  afterwards  flow 
forth  as  a  spring.  Thus  matter  does  not  disappear  and  is  not^creaj;ed 
but  only  undergoes  vanouT'physTclir'a^^  ations- 

that  is  to  say,  changes  its  locality  and  form.  Matter  remains  on  th 
earth  in  the  same  quantity  as  before  ;  in  a  word  it  is,  so  far  as  we  ar 
concerned,  everlasting.  It  was  difficult  to  submit  this  simple  an< 
primary  truth  of  chemistry  to  investigation,  but  when  once  made  clea 
it  rapidly  spread,  and  now  seems  as  natural  and  simple  as  many  truth 
which  have  been  acknowledged  for  ages.  Mariotte  and  other  savant 
of  the  seventeenth  century  already  suspected  the  existence  of  the  lav 
of  the  indestructibility  of  matter,  but  they  made  no  efforts  to  expres 
it  or  to  apply  it  to  the  requirements  of  science.  The  experiments  fr 


INTRODUCTION  7 

means  of  which  this  simple  law  was  arrived  at  were  made  during  the 
latter  half  of  the  last  century  by  the  founder  of  modern  chemistry,. 
LAVOISIER,  the  French  Academician  and  tax  farmer.  The  numerous 
experiments  of  this  savant  were  conducted  with  the  aid  of  the  balance, 
which  is  the  only  means  of  directly  and  accurately  determining  the 
quantity  of  matter. 

Lavoisier  found,  by  weighing  all  the  substances,  and  even  the 
apparatus,  used  in  every  experiment,  and  then  weighing  the  substances 
obtained  after  the  chemical  change,  that  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the 
substances  formed  was  always  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the 
substances  taken ;  or,  in  other  words  :  MATTER  is  NOT  CREATED  AND 
DOES  NOT  DISAPPEAB,  or  that,  matter  is  everlasting.  •  This  expression 
naturally  includes  a  hypothesis,  but  our  only  aim  in  using  it  is  to 
concisely  express  the  following  lengthy  period — That  in  all  experiments, 
and  in  all  the  investigated  phenomena  of  nature,  it  has  never  been 
observed  that  the  weight  of  the  substances  formed  was  less  or  greater 
(as  far  as  accuracy  of  weighing  permits  n)  than  the  weight  of  the  sub- 
stances originally  taken,  and  as  weight  is  proportional  to  mass  l *  bis  or 
quantity  of  matter,  it 'follows  that  no  one  has  ever  succeeded  in  observ- 
ing a  disappearance  of  matter  or  its  appearance  in  fresh  quantities. 
The  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  endows  all  chemical  investi- 
gations with  exactitude,  as,  on  its  basis,  an  equation  may  be  formed  for 
every  chemical  reaction.  If  in  any  reaction  the  weights  of  the  sub- 
stances taken  be  designated  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  &o.,  and  the 
weights  of  the  substances  formed  by  the  letters  M,  N,  O,  &c.,  then 

A  +  B  +  C  +   =  M  +  N  +  -O  +• 

Therefore,  should  the  weight  of  one  of  the  re-acting  or  resultant  sub- 
stances be  unknown,  it  may  be  determined  by  solving  the  equation. 

11  The  experiments  conducted  by  Staas  (described  in  detail  in  Chap.  XXIV.  on 
Silver)  form  some  of  the  accurate  researches,  proving  that  the  weight  of  matter  is  not 
altered  in  chemical  reactions,  because  he  accurately  weighed  (introducing  all  the  neces- 
sary corrections)  the  reacting  and  resultant  substances.  Landolt  (1893)  carried  on 
various  reactions  in  inverted  and  sealed  glass  U-tubes,  and  on  weighing  the  tubes  before 
reaction  (when  the  reacting  solutions  were  separated  in  each  of  the  branches  of  the 
tubes),  and  after  (when  the  solutions  had  been  well  mixed  together  by  shaking),  found 
that  either  the  weight  remained  perfectly  constant  or  that  the  variation  was  so  small 
(for  instance,  0'2  milligram  in  a  total  weight  of  about  a  million  milligrams)  as  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  inevitable  errors  of  weighing. 

11  bii  The  iflea  Of  the  mass  Of  matter  waa  first  shaped  into  an  exact  form  by  Galileo 
(died  1642),  and  more  especially  by  Newton  (born  1648,  died  1727),  in  the  glorious  epoch 
of  the  development  of  the  principles  of  inductive  reasoning  enunciated  by  Bacon  and 
Descartes  in  their  philosophical  treatises.  Shortly  after  the  death  of  Newton,  Lavoisier, 
whose  fame  in  natural  philosophy  should  rank  with  that  of  Galileo  and  Newton,  was  born 
on  August  20,  1743.  The  death  of  Lavoisier  occurred  during  the  Reign  of  Terror  of  the 
*2 


8  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

The  chemist,  in  applying  the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter, 
and  in  making  use  of  the  chemical  balance,  must  never  lose  sight  of 
any  one  of  the  re-acting  or  resultant  substances.  Should  such  an  over- 
sight be  made,  it  will  at  once  be  remarked  that  the  sum  of  the  weights 
of  the  substances  taken  is  unequal  to  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the 
substances  formed.  All  the  progress  made  by  chemistry  during  the 
end  of  the  last,  and  in  the  present,  century  is  entirely  and  immovably 
founded  on  the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter.  It  is  absolutely 
necessary  in  beginning  the  study  of  chemistry  to  become  familiar  with 
the  simple  truth  which  is  expressed  by  this  law,  and  for  this  purpose 
several  examples  elucidating  its'  application  will  now  be  cited. 

1.  It  is  well  known  that  iron  rusts  in  damp  air,12  and  that  w'hen 
heated  to  redness  in  air  it  becomes  coated  with  scoria  (oxide),  having, 
like  rust,  the  appearance  of  an  earthy  substance  resembling  some  of  the 
iron  ores  from  which  metallic  iron  is  extracted.  If  the  iron  is  weighed 
before  and  after  the  formation  of  the  scoria  or  rust,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  metal  has  increased  in  weight  during  the  operation.13  It 
can  easily  be  proved  that  this  increase  in  weight  is  accomplished  at 
the  expense  of  the  atmosphere,  and  mainly,  as  Lavoisier  proved,  at  the 
expense  of  that  portion  which  is  called  oxygen.  In  fact,  in  a  vacuum, 
or  in  gases  which  do  not  contain  oxygen,  for  instance,  in  hydrogen  or 
nitrogen,  the  iron  neither  rusts  nor  becomes  coated  with  scoria.  Had 
the  iron  not  been  weighed,  the  participation  of  the  oxygen  of  the  atmo- 
sphere in  its  transformation  into  an  earthy  substance  might  have  easily 
passed  unnoticed,  as  was  formerly  the  case,  when  phenomena  like  the 
above  were,  for  this,  reason,,  misunderstood.  It  is  evident  from  the 

French  Revolution,  when  he,  together  with  twenty-six  other  chief  fanners  of  the  revenue, 
was  guillotined  on  May  8,  1794,  at  Paris:  but  his  works  and  ideas  have  made  him 
immortal. 

l*  By  covering  iron  with  an  enamel,  or  varnish,  or  with  unrustable  metals  (such  as 
nickel),  or  a  coating  of  paraffin,  or  other  similar  substances,  it  is  protected  from  the  air 
and  moisture,  and  so  kept  from  rusting 

15  Such  an  experiment  may  easily  be  made  by  taking  the  finest  (unrnsted)  iron  filings 
(ordinary  filings  must  be  first  washed  in  ether,  dried,  and  passed  through  a  very  fine 
sieve)  The  filings  thus  obtained  are  capable  of  burning  directly  in  air  (by  oxidising  or 
forming  rust),  especially  when  they  hang  (are  attracted)  on  a  magnet.  A  compact  piece 
of  iron  does  not  burn  in  air,  but  spongy  iron  glows  and  smoulders  like  tinder.  In  making 
the  experiment,  a  horse-shoe  magnet  is  fixed,  with  the  poles  downwards,  on  one  arm  of  a 
rather  sensitive  balance,  and  the  iron  filings  are  applied  to  the  magnet  (on  a  sheet  of 
paper)  so  as  to  form  a  beard  about  the  poles.  The  balance  pan  should  be  exactly  under 
the  filings  on  the  magnet,  in  order  that  any  which  might  fall  from  it  should  not  alter  the 
weight.  The  filings,  having  been  weighed,  are  set  light  to  by  applying  the  flame  of  ft 
candlo ;  they  easily  take  fire,  and  go  on  burning  by  themselves,  forming  rust.  When  the 
combustion  is  ended,  it  will  be  clear  that  the  iron  has  increased  in  weight ;  from  5£  parts 
by  weight  of  iron  filings  taken,  there  are  obtained,  by  complete  combustion,  7^  parts  by 
weight  of  rust. 


INTRODUCTION  9 

law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  that  as  the  iron  increases  in 
weight  in  its  conversion  into  rust,  the  latter  must  be  a  more  complex 
substance  than  the  iron  itself,  and  its  formation  is  due  to  a  reaction  of 
combination.  We  might  form  an  entirely  wrong  opinion  about  it,  and 
might,  for  instance,  consider  rust  to  be  a  simpler  substance  than  iron, 
and  explain  the  formation  of  rust  as  the  removal  of  something  from 
the  iron.  Such,  indeed,  was  the  general  opinion  prior  to  Lavoisier, 
when  it  was 'held  that  iron  contained  a  certain  unknown  substance 
called  *  phlogiston,'  and  that  rust  was  iron  deprived  of  this  supposed 
substance. 

J2.  Copper  carbonate  (in  the  form  of  a  powder,  or  as  the  well-known 
green  mineral  called  'malachite/  which  is  used  for  making  ornaments, 
or  as  an  ore  for  the  extraction  of  copper)  changes  into  a  black  sub- 
stance called  'copper  oxide'  when  heated  to  redness.14  This  black 
substance  is  also  obtained  by  heating  copper  to  redness  in  air — that  is, 
it  is  the  scoria  or  oxidation  product  of  copper.  The  weight  of  the 
black  oxide  of  copper  left  is  less  than  that  of  the  copper  carbonate 
originally  taken,  and  therefore  we  consider  the  reaction  which  occurred 
to  have  been  one  of  decomposition,  and  that  by  it  something  was  sepa- 
rated from  the  green  copper  carbonate,  and,  in  fact,  by  closing  the  orifice 
of  the  vessel  in  which  the  copper  carbonate  is  heated  with  a  well- 
fitting  cork,  through  which  a  gas  delivery  tube  15  passes  whose  end  is 
immersed  under  water,  it  will  be  observed  that  on  heating,  a  gas  is 
formed  which  bubbles  through  the  water.  This  gas  can  be  easily 
collected,  as  will  presently  be  described,  and  it  will  be  found  to  essen- 

u  For  the  purpose  of  experiment,  it  is  most  convenient  to  take  copper  carbonate, 
which  may  be  prepared  by  the  experimenter  himself,  by  adding  a  solution  of  sodium  car- 
bonate to  a  solution  of  copper  sulphate.  The  precipitate  (deposit)  so  formed  is  collected 
on  a  filter,  washed,  and  dried.  The  decomposition  of  copper  carbonate  into  copper  oxide 
is  effected  by  so  moderate  a  heat  that  it  may  be  performed  in  a  glass  vessel  heated  by  a 
lamp.  For  this  purpose  a  thin  glass  tube,  closed  at  one  end,  and  called  a  '  test  tube/ 
may  be  employed,  or  else  a  vessel  called  a  'retort.'  The  experiment  is  carried  on,  as 
described  in  example  three  on  p..  11,  by  collecting  the  carbonic  anhydride  over  water, 
as  will  be  afterwards  explained. 

15  Gas  delivery  tubes  are  usually  made  of  glass  tubing  of  various  diameters  and  thick- 
nesses. If  of  small  diameter  and  thickness,  a  glass  tube  is  easily  bent  by  heating  in  a  gas 
jet  or  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp,  and  it  may  also  be  easily  divided  at  a  given  point  by  making 
a  deep  scratch  with  a  file  and  then  breaking  the  tube  at  this  point  with  a  sharp  jerk. 
These  properties,  together  with  their  impermeability,  transparency,  hardness,  and  regu- 
larity of  bore,  render  glass  tubes  most  useful  in  experiments  with  gases.  Naturally  they 
might  be  replaced  by  straws,  india-rubber,  metallic,  or  other  tubes,  but  these  are  more 
difficult  to  fix  on  to  a  vessel,  and  are  not  entirely  impervious  to  gases.  A  glass  gas 
delivery  tube  may  be  hermetically  fixed  into  a  vessel  by  fitting  it  into  a  perforated  cork, 
which  should  be  soft  and  free  from  flaws,  and  fixing  the  cork  into  the  orifice  of  the' 
vessel.  To  protect  the  cork  from  the  action  of  gases  it  is  sometimes  previously  soaked 
in  paraffin,  or  it  may  be  replaced  by  an  india-rubber  cork. 


10  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

tially  differ  from  air  in  many  respects  ;  for  instance,  a  burning  taper 
is  extinguished  in  it  as  if  it  had  been  plunged  into  water.  If  weighing 
had  not  proved  to  us  that  some  substance  had  been  separated,  the 
formation  of  the  gas  might  easily  have  escaped  our  notice,  for  it  is 


Fio.  1.— Apparatus  for  the  decomposition  of  red  mercury  oxide. 

colourless  and  transparent  like  air,  and  is  therefore  evolved  without 
any  striking  feature.  The  carbonic  anhydride  evolved  may  be  weighed,16 
and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the  black  copper 
oxide  and  carbonic  anhydride  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  copper 
carbonate  n  originally  taken,  and  thus  by  carefully  following  out  the 

lfl  Gases,  like  all  other  substances,  may  be  weighed,  but,  owing  to  their  extreme  light- 
'ncss  and  the  difficulty  of  dealing  with  them  in^large  masses,  they  can  only  be  weighed 
by  very  sensitive  balances ;  that  is,  in  such  as,  with  a  considerable  load,  indicate  a  very 
small  difference  in  weight— for  example,  a  centigram  or  a  milligram  with  a  load  of  1,000 
grams.  In  order  to  weigh  a  gas,  a  glass  globe  furnished  with  a  tight-fitting;  stop-cock  is 
first  of  all  exhausted  of  air  by  an  air-pump  (a  Sprengel  pump  is  the  best).  The  stop- 
cock is  then  closed,  and  the  exhausted  globe  weighed.  If  the  gas  to  be  weighed  is  then 
let  into  the  .globe,  its  weight  can  be  determined  from  the  increase  in  the  weight  of  the 
globe;  It  is  necessary,  however,  that  the' temperature  and  pressure  of  the  air  about  the 
balance  should  remain  constant  for  both  weighings,  as  the  weight  of  the  globe  in  air  will 
(according  to  the  laws  of  hydrostatics)  vary  with  its  density  The  volume  of  the  air  dis» 
placed,  and  its  weight,  must  therefore  be  determined  by  observing  the  temperature, 
density,  and  moisture  of  the  atmosphere  during  the  time  of  experiment.  This  will 
be  partly  explained  later,  but  may  be  studied  more  in  detail  by  physics.  Owing  to  the 
complexity  of  all  these  operations,  the  mass  of  a  gas  is  usually  determined  from  its 
volume  and  density,  or  from  the  weight  of  a  known  volume. 

17  The  copper  carbonate  should  be  dried  before  weighing,  as  otherwise — besides 
copper  oxide  and  carbonic  anhydride — water  will  be  obtained  in  the  decomposition. 
Water  forms  a  part  of  the  composition  of  malachite,  and  has  therefore  to  be  taken  into 
consideration.  The  water  produced  in  the  decomposition  may  be  all  collected  by  absorb- 
ing it  in  sulphuric  acid  or  calcium  chloride,  as  will  be  described  further  on.  In  order  to 


INTRODUCTION 


11 


various  stages  of  all  chemical  reactions  we  arrive  at  a  confirmation  of 
the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter. 

3.  Red  mercury  oxide  (which  is  formed  as  mercury  rust  by  heating 
mercury  in  air)  is  decomposed  like  copper  carbonate  (only  by  heating 
more  slowly  and  at  a  somewhat  higher  temperature),  with  the  formation 
of  the  peculiar  gas,  oxygen.  '  For  this  purpose  the  mercury  oxide  is 
placed  in  a  glass  tube  or  retort,18  to  which  a  gas  delivery  tube  is 
attached  by  means  of  a  cork.  This  tube  is  bent  downwards,  as  shown 
in  the  drawing  (Fig.  1).  The  open  end  of  the  gas  delivery  tube  is  im- 
mersed in  a  vessel  filled  with  water,  called  a  pneumatic  trough.19  When 

dry  a  salt  it  must  be  heated  at  about  100°  until  its  weight  remains  constant,  or  be  placed 
under  an  air  pump  over  sulphuric  acid,  as  will  also  be  presently  described.  As  water  Is 
met  with  almost  everywhere,  and  as  it  is  absorbed  by  many  substances,  the  possibility 
of  its  presence  should  never  be  lost  sight  of. 

18  As  the  decomposition  of  red  oxide  of  mercury  requires  so  high  a  temperature,  near 
redness,  as  to  soften  ordinary  glass,  iUga  necessary  for  this,  experiment  to  take  a  retort 
(or  test  tube)  made  of  hard  glass,  which  is  able  to  stand  high  temperatures  without 
softening.    For  the  same  reason,  the  lamp  used  must  give  a  strong  heat  and  a  large 
flame,  capable  of  embracing  the  whole  bottom  of  the  retort,  which  should  be  as  small  as 
possible  for  the  convenience  of  the  experiment. 

19  The  pneumatic  trough  may  naturally  be  made  of  any  material  (china,  earthenware, 
or  metal,  &c.),  but  usually  a  glass  one,  as  shown  in  the  drawing,  is  used,  as  it  allows  the 
progress  of  the  experiment  to  be  better  observed.    For  this  reason,  as  well  as  the  ease 
with  which  they  are  kept  clean,  and  from  the  fact  also  that  glass  is  not  acted  on  by  many 


FiO.  2.— Apparatus  for  distilling  under  a  diminished  pressure  liquids  which  decompose  at  their 
boiling  points  under  the  ordinary  pressure.  The  apparatus  in  which  the  liquid  is  distilled  is  con- 
nected with  a  large  globe  from  which  the  air  is  pumped  out :  the  liquid  is  heated,  and  the  receiver 
cooled, 

substances  which  affect  other  materials  (for  instance,  metals),  glass  vessels  of  all  kinds — 
such  as  retorts,  test  tubes,  cylinders,  beakers,  flasks,  globes,  &c. — are  preferred  to  any 
other  for  chemical  experiments.  Glass  vessels  may  be  heated  without  any  danger  if  the 
following  precautions  be  observed  :  1st,  they  should  be  roatla  of  thin  glass,  as  otherwise 
they  are  liable  to  crack  from  the  bad  heat-conducting  power  of  glass ;  2nd,  they  should  be 
surrounded  by  a  liquid  or  with  sand  (Fig.  2),  or  sand  bath  as  it  is  called ;  or  else  should 
etand  in  a  current  of  hot  gases  without  touching  the  fuel  from  which  they  proceed,  or  in 
the  fame  of  a  smokeless  lamp.  A  common  candle  or  lamp  forms  a  deposit  of  soot  on* 


12  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

the  gas  begins  to  be  evolved  in  the  retort  it  is  obliged,  having  no  other 
outlet,  to  escape  through  the  gas  delivery  tube  into  the  water  in  the 
pneumatic  trough,  and  therefore  its  evolution  will  be  rendered  visible 
by  the  bubbles  coming  from  this  tube.  In  heating  the  retort  containing 
the  mercury  oxide,  the  air  contained  in  the  apparatus  is  first  partly 
expelled,  owing  to  its  expansion  by  heat,  and  then  the  peculiar  gas 
called  *  oxygen  '  is  evolved,  and  may  be  easily  collected  as  it  comes  off. 
For  this  purpose  a  vessel  (an  ordinary  cylinder,  as  in  the  drawing)  is 
filled  quite  full  with  water  and  its  mouth  closed  ;  it  is  then  inverted 
and  placed  in  this  position  under  the  water  in  the  trough  ;  the  mouth 
is  then  opened.  The  cylinder  will  remain  full  of  water— that  is,  the 
water  will  remain  at  a  higher  level  in  it  than  in  the  surrounding  vessel, 
owing  to  the  atmospheric  pressure.  The  atmosphere  presses  on  the 
surface  of  the  water  in  the  trough,  and  prevents  the  water  from  flow- 
ing out  of  the  cylinder.  The  mouth  of  the  cylinder  is  placed  over  the 
end  of  the  gas  delivery  tube,20  and  the  bubbles  issuing  from  it  will  rise 
into  the  cylinder  and  displace  the  water  contained  in  it.  Gases  are 
generally  collected  in  this  manner  When  a  sufficient  quantity  of  gas 
has  accumulated  in  the  cylinder  it  can  be  clearly  shown  that  it  is  not 
air,  but  another  gas  which  is  distinguished  by  its  capacity  for  vigorously 
supporting  combustion  In  order  to  show  this,  the  cylinder  is  closed, 
under  water,  and  removed  from  the  bath  ,  its  mouth  is  then  turned  up- 
wards, and  a  smouldering  taper  plunged  into  it.  As  is  well  known,  a 
smouldering  taper  will  be  extinguished  in  air,  but  in  the  gas  which 
is  given  off  from  red  mercury  oxide  it  burns  clearly  and  vigorously, 
showing  the  property  possessed  by  this  gas  for  supporting  combustion 
more  energetically  than  air,  and  thus  enabling  it  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  latter.  It  may  be  observed  in  this  experiment  that,  besides 
the  formation  of  oxygen,  metallic  mercury  is  formed,  which,  volatilising 
at  the  high  temperature  required  for  the  reaction,  condenses  on  the 
cooler  parts  of  the  retort  as  a  mirror  or  in  globules.  Thus  two  sub- 
cold  object  placed  in  their  flames.  The  soot  interferes  with  the  transmission  of  heat,  and 
so  a  glass  vessel  when  covered  with  soot  often  cracks.  And  for  this  reason  spirit  lamps, 
which  burn  with  a  smokeless  flame,  or  gas  burners  of  a  peculiar  construction,  are  used. 
In  the  Bunsen  burner  the  gas  is  mixed  with  air,  and  burns  with  a  non-luminous  and 
smokeless  flame.  On  the  other  hand,  if  an  ordinary  lamp  (petroleum  or  benzine)  does 
not  smoke  it  may  be  used  for  heating  a  glass  vessel  without  danger,  provided  the  glass  is 
placed  well  above  the  flame  in  the  current  of  hot  ga-~s.  In  all  cases,  the  heating  should 
be  begun  very  carefully  by  raising  the  temperature  by  degrees. 

->u  In  order  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  holding  the  cylinder,  its  open  end  is  widened  (and 
also  ground  so  that  it  may  be  closely  covered  with  a  ground-glass  plate  when  necessary), 
and  placed  on  a  stand  below  the  level  of  the  water  in  the  bath.  This  stand  is  called  '  the 
bridge.'  It  has  several  circular  openings  cut  through  it,  and  the  gas  delivery  tube  is 
placed  under  one  of  these,  and  the  cylinder  for  collecting  (he  gas  over  it. 


INTRODUCTION  13 

stances,  mercury  and  oxygen,  are  obtained  by  heating  red  mercury 
oxide.  In  this  reaction,  from  one  substance,  two  new  substances  are 
produced — that  is,  a  decomposition  has  taken  place.  The  means  of 
collecting  and  investigating  gases  were  known  before  Lavoisier's  time, 
but  he  first  showed  the  real  part  they  played  in  the  processes  of  many 
chemical  changes  which  before  his  era  were  either  wrongly  understood 
(as  will  be  afterwards  explained)  or  were  not  explained  at  all,  but  only 
observed  in  their  superficial  aspects.  This  experiment  on  red  mercury 
oxide  has  a  special  significance  in  the  history  of  chemistry  contempo- 
rary with  Lavoisier,  because  the  oxygen  gas  which  is  here  evolved  is 
contained  in  the  atmosphere,  and  plays  a  most  important  part  in 
nature,  especially  in  the  respiration  of  animals,  in  combustion  in  air, 
and  in  the  formation  of  rusts  or  scoriae  (earths,  as  they  were  then 
called)  from  metals— that  is,  of  earthy  substances,  like  the  ores  from 
which  metals  are  extracted. 

4.  In  order  to  illustrate  by  experiment  one  more  example  of 
chemical  change  and  the  application  of  the  law  of  the  indestructibility 
of  matter,  we  will  consider  the  reaction  between  common  table  salt 
and  lunar  caustic,  which  is  well  known  from  its  use  in  cauterising 
wounds  By  taking  a  clear  solution  of  each  and  mixing  them  together, 
it  will  at  once  be  observed  that  a  solid  white  substance  is  formed, 
which  settles  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  is  insoluble  in  water. 
This  substance  may  be  separated  from  the  solution  by  filtering  ,  it  is 
then  found  to  be  an  entirely  different  substance  from  either  of  those 
taken  originally  in  the  solutions.  This  .is  at  once  evident  from  the 
fact  that  it  does  not  dissolve  in  water  On  evaporating  the  liquid 
which  passed  through  the  filter,  it  will  be  found  to  contain  a  new  sub- 
stance unlike  either  table  salt  or  lunar  caustic,  but,  like  them,  soluble 
in  water  Thus  table  salt  and  lunar  caustic,  two  substances  soluble  in 
water,  produced,  by  their  mutual  chemical  action,  two  new  substances, 
one  insoluble  in  water,  and  the  other  remaining  in  solution.  Here, 
from  two  substances,  two  others  are  obtained,  consequently  there 
occurred  a  reaction  of  substitution.  The  water  served  only  to  convert 
the  re-acting  substances  into  a  liquid  and  mobile  state.  If  the  lunar 
caustic  and  salt  be  dried  fl  and  weighed,'  and  if  about  58J  grams  2a  of 

n  Drying  is  necessary  in  order  to  remove  any  water  which  may  be  held  in  the  salts 
(see  Note  17,  and  Chapter  I.,  Notes  13  and  14). 

M  The  exact  weights  of  the  re-acting  and  resulting  substances  are  determined  with  the 
greatest  difficulty,  not  only  from  the  possible  inexactitude  of  the  balance  (every  weighing 
is  only  correct  within  the  limits  of  the  sensitiveness  of  the  balance)  and  weights  used 
In'  weighing,  not  only  from  the  difficulty  in  making  corrections  for  the  weight  of  air  dis» 
placed  by  the  vessels  holding  the  substances  weighed  and  by  the  weights  themselves, 
but  also  from  the  hygroscopic  nature  of  many  substances  (and  vessels)  causing  absorption 


14  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

salt  and  170  grams  of  lunar  caustic  be  taken,  then  143|  grams  ol  in- 
soluble silver  chloride  and  85  grams  of  sodium  nitrate  will  be  obtained. 
The  sum  of  the  weights  of  the  re-acting  and  resultant  substances  are 
seen  to  be  similar  and  equal  to  228-J,  grams,  whicn  necessarily  follows 
from  the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter 

Accepting  the  truth  of  the  above  law,  the  question  naturally  arises 
as  to  whether  there  is  any  limit  to  the  various  chemical  transforoia 
tions,  or  are  they  unrestricted  in  number — that  is  to  say,  is  it  possible 
from  a  given  substance  to  obtain  an  equivalent  quantity  of  any  other 
substance  ?  In  other  words,  does  there  exist  a  perpetual  and  infinite 
change  of  one  kind  of  material  into  every  other  kind,  or  is  the  cycle 
of  these  transformations  limited  ?  This  is  the  second  essential  problem 
of  Chemistry,  a  question  of  quality  of  matter,  and  one,  it  is  evident, 
which  is  more  complicated  than  the  question  of  quantity  It  cannot 
be  solved  by  a  mere  superficial  glance  at  the  subject  Indeed,  on 
seeing  how  all  the  varied  forms  and  colours  of  plants  are  built  up  from 
air  and  the  elements  of  the  soil,  and  how  metallic  iron  can  be  trans- 
formed into  colours  such  as  inks  and  Prussian  blue,  we  might  be  led 
to  think  that  there  is  no  end  to  the  qualitative  changes  to  which 
matter  is  susceptible  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  experiences  of 
everyday  life  compel  us  to  acknowledge  that  food  cannot  be  made  out 
of  a  stone,  or  gold  out  of  copper  Thus  a  definite  answer  can  only  be 
looked  for  in  a  close  and  diligent  study  of  the  subject,  and  the  problem 
has  .been  resolved  in  different  way  at  different  times  In_  ancie^t»,iini£s 
the  opinion  most  generally  held  was  that  everything  visible  was  com- 
posed of  four  elements — Air,  Water,  Earth,  and  Fire  The  origin  of 
this  doctrine  can  be  traced  far  back  into  the  confines  of  Asia,  whence 
it  was  handed  down  to  the  Greeks,  and  most  fully  expounded  by 
Empedocles,  who  lived  before  460  B.C  This  doctrine  was  not  the 
result  of  exact  research,  but  apparently  owes  its  origin  to  the  clear 
division  of  bodies  into  gases  (like  air),  liquids  (like  water),  and  solids 
(like  the  earth).  The  Arabs  appear  to  have  been  the  first  who 
attempted  to  solve  the  question  by  experimental  methods,  and  they 
introduced,  through  Spain,  the  taste  for  the  study  of  similar  problems 
into  Europe,  where  from  that  time  there  appear  many  adepts  in 
chemistry,  which  was  considered  as  an  unholy  art,  and  called  *al 
chemy.'  As  the  alchemists  were  ignorant  of  any  exact  law  which 

of  moisture  from  the  atmosphere,  and  from  the  difficulty  in  not  losing  any  of  the  substance 
to  be  weighed  in  the  several  operations  (filtering,  evaporating,  and  drying,  &c.)  which 
have  to  be  performed  before  arriving  at  a  final  result.  All  these  circumstances  have  to 
be  taken  into  consideration  in  exact  researches,  and  their  elimination  requires  very  many 
special  precautions  which  are  impracticable  in  preliminary  experiments 


INTRODUCTION  15 

could  guide  them  in  their  researches,  they  obtained  most  anomalous 
results.  Their  chief  service  to  chemistry  was  that  they  made  a 
number  of  experiments,  and  discovered  many  new  chemical  trans- 
formations ,  but  it  is  well  known  how  they  solved  the  fundamental 
problem  of  chemistry.  Their  view  may  be  taken  as  a  positive  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  infinite  transmutability  of  matter,  for  they  aimed  at 
discovering  the  Philosopher's  Stone,  capable  of  converting  everything 
into  gold  and  diamonds,  and  of  making  the  old  young  again.  This 
solution  of  the  question  was  afterwards  completely  overthrown,  but  it 
must  not,  for  this  reason,  be  thought  that  the  hopes  held  by  the 
alchemists  were  only  the  fruit  of  their  imaginations.  The  first 
chemical  experiments  might  well  lead  them  to  their  conclusions.  They 
took,  for  instance,  the  bright  metallic  mineral  galena,  and  extracted 
metallic  lead  from  it.  Thus  they  saw  that  from  a  metallic  substance 
which  is  unfitted  for  use  they  could  obtain  another  metallic  substance 
which  is  ductile  and  valuable  for  many  technical  purposes.  Further- 
more, they  took  this  lead  and  obtained  silver,  a  still  more  valuable 
metal,  from  it,  Thus  they  might  easily  conclude  that  it  was  possible 
to  ennoble  metals  by  means  of  a  whole  series  of  transmutations — that 
is  to  say,  to  obtain  from  them  those  which  are  more  and  more  precious. 
Having  got  silver  from  lead,  they  assumed  that  it  would  be  possible  to 
obtain  gold  from  silver  The  mistake  they  made  was  that  they  never 
weighed  or  measured  the  substances  used  or  produced  in  their  experi- 
ments. Had  they  done  so,  they  would  have  learnt  that  the  weight  of 
the  lead  was  much  less  than  that-  of  the  galena  from  which  it  was 
obtained,  and  the  weight  of  the  silver  infinitesimal  compared  with  that 
of  the  lead.  Had  they  looked  more  closely  into  the  process  of  the  ex- 
traction of  the  silver  from  lead  (and  silver  at  the  present  time  is  chiefly 
obtained  from  the  lead  ores)  they  would  have  seen  that  the  lead  does 
not  change  into  silver,  but  that  it  only  contains  a  certain  small  quan- 
tity of  it,  and  this  amount  having  once  been  separated  from  the  lead 
it  cannot  by  any  further  operation  give  more.  The  silver  which  the 
alchemists  extracted  from  the  lead  was  in  the  lead,  and  was  not  ob- 
tained by  a  chemical  change  of  the  lead  itself.  This  is  now  well  known 
from  experiment,  but  the  first  view  of  the  nature  of  the  process  was 
very  likely  to  be  an  erroneous  one.23  The  methods  of  research  adopted 

!3  Besides  which,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  the  first  explanation  of  most  subjects  which, 
3o  not  repeat  themselves  in  everyday  experience  under  various  aspects,  but  always  in  one 
form,  or  only  at  intervals  and  infrequently,  is  usually  wrong.  Thus  the  daily  evidence 
of  the  rising  of  the  sun  and  stars  evokes  the  erroneous  idea  that  the  heavens  move  and 
the  earth  stands  still.  This  apparent  truth  is  far  from  being  the  real  truth,  and,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  is  contradictory  to  it.  Similarly,  an  ordinary  mind  and  everyday  experi- 
ence concludes  that  iron  is  incombustible,  whereas  it  burns  not  only  as  filings,  but  even 


16  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

by  the  alchemists  could  give  but  little  success,  for  they  did  not  set  them- 
selves clear  and  simple  questions  whose  answers  would  aid  them  to  make 
further  progress.  Thus  though  they  did  not  arrive  at  any  exact  law, 
they  left  nevertheless  numerous  and  useful  experimental  data  as  an 
inheritance  to  chemistry ;  they  investigated,  in  particular,  the  trans- 
formations proper  to  metals,  and  for  this  reason  chemistry  was  for 
long  afterwards  entirely  confined  to  the  study  of  metallic  substances. 

In  their  researches,  the  alchemists  frequently  made  use  of  two 
chemical  processes  which  are  now  termed  *  reduction '  and  *  oxidation.' 
The  rusting  of  metals,  and  in  general  their  conversion  from  a  metallic 
into  an  earthy  form,  is  called  'oxidation,'  whilst  the  extraction  of  a 
metal  from  an  earthy  substance  is  called  '  reduction.'  Many  metals — 
for  instance,  iron,  lead,  and  tin — are  oxidised  by  heating  in  air  alone, 
and  may  be  again  reduced  by  heating  with  carbon.  Such  oxidised 
metals  are  found  in  the  earth,  and  form  the  majority  of  metallic  ores. 
The  metals,  such  as  tin,  iron,  and  copper,  may  be  extracted  from  these 
ores  by  heating  them  together  with  carbon.  All  these  processes  were 
well  studied  by  the  alchemists.  It  was  afterwards  shown  that  all 
earths  and  minerals  are  formed  of  similar  metallic  rusts  or  oxides,  or 
of  their  combinations.  Thus  the  alchemists  knew  of  two  forms  of 
chemical  changes  :  the  oxidation  of  metals  and  the  reduction  of  the 
oxides  so  formed  into  metals.  The  explanation  of  the  nature  of  these 
two  classes  of  chemical  phenomena  was  the  meana  for  the  discovery 
of  the  most  important  chemical  laws.  The  first  hypothesis  on  their 
nature  is  due  to  Becker,  and  more  particularly  to  Stahl,  a  surgeon 
to  the  King  of  Prussia.  Stahl  writes  in  his  *  Fundamenta  Chymise,' 
1723,  that  all  substances  consist  of  an  imponderable  fiery  substance 
called  '  phlogiston '  (materia  aut  principium  ignis  non  ipse  ignis),  and  of 
another  element  having  particular  properties  for  each  substance.  The 
greater  the  capacity  of  a  body  for  oxidation,  or  the  more  combustible 
it  is,  the  richer  it  is  in  phlogiston.  Carbon  contains  it  in  great 
abundance.  In  oxidation  or  combustion  phlogiston  is  emitted,  and  in 
reduction  it  is  consumed  or  enters  into  combination.  Carbon  reduces 
earthy  substances  because  it  is  rich  in  phlogiston,  and  gives  up  a 

as  wire,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see.  With  the  progress  of  knowledge  very  many  primitive 
prejudices  have  been  obliged  to  give  way  .to  true  ideas  which  have  been  verified  by 
experiment.  In  ordinary  life  we  often  reason  at  first  sight  with  perfect  truth,  only 
because  we  are  taught  a  right  judgment  by  our  daily  experience.  It  is  a  necessary 
consequence  of  the  nature  of  our  minds  to  reach  the  attainment  of  truth  through  ele- 
mentary and  often  erroneous  reasoning  and  through  experiment,  and  it  would  be  very 
wrong  to  expect  a  knowledge  of  truth  from  a  simple  mental  effort.  Naturally,  experiment 
Itself  cannot  give  truth,  but  it  gives  the  means  of  destroying  erroneous  representations 
Whilst  confirming  those  which  are  true  in  all  their  consequences. 


INTRODUCTION  17 

portion  of  its  phlogiston  to  the  substance  reduced.  Thus  Stahl  supposed 
metals  to  be  compound  substances  consisting  of  phlogiston  and  an 
earthy  substance  or  oxide.  This  hypothesis  is  distinguished  for  its 
very  great  simplicity,  and  for  this  and  other  reasons  it  acquired  many 
supporters.24 

Lavoisier  proved  by  means  of  the  balance  that  every  case  of  rusting 
of  metals  or  oxidation,  or  of  combustion,  is  accompanied  by  an  increase 
in  weight  at  the  expense  of  the  atmosphere.  He  formed,  therefore, 
the  natural  opinion  that  the  heavier  substance  is  more  complex  than 
the  lighter  one.25  Lavoisier's  celebrated  experiment,  made  in  1774, 

*4  It  is  true  that  Stahl  was  acquainted. with  a  fact  which  directly  disproved  his 
hypothesis.  It  was  already  known  (from  the  experiments  of  Geber,  and  more  especially 
of  Ray,  in  1630)  that  metals  increase  in  weight  by  oxidation,  whilst,  according  to  Stahl's 
hypothesis,  they  should  decrease  in  weight,  because  phlogiston  ia  separated  by  oxidation. 
Btahl  speaks  on  this  point  as  follows  : — '  I  am  well  aware  that  metals,  in  their  transforma- 
tion into  earths,  increase  in  weight.  But  not  only  does  this  fact  not  disprove  my  theory, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  confirms  it,  for  phlogiston  is  lighter  than  air,  and,  in  combining 
with  substances,  strives  to  lift  them,  and  so  decreases  their  weight ;  consequently,  a 
substance  which  has  lost  phlogiston  must  be  heavier.'  This  argument,  it  will  be  seen,  ia 
founded  on  a  misconception  of  the  properties  of  gases,  regarding  them  as  having  no  weight- 
and  as  not  being  attracted  by  the  earth,  or  else  on  a  confused  idem,  of  phlogiston  itself, 
since  it  was  firs*,  defined  as  imponderable^  The  conception  of  imponderable  phlogiston 
tallies  well  with  the  habit  and  methods  01  the  last  century,  when  recourse  was  often  had 
to  imponderable  fluids  for  explaining  a  large  number  of  phenomena.  Heat,  light,  mag- 
netism, and  electricity  were  explained  as  being  peculiar  imponderable  fluids.  In  this 
sense  the  doctrine  of  Stahl  corresponds  entirely  with  the  spirit  of  his  age,.  If  heat  te 
now  regarded  as  motion  or  energy,  then  phlogiston  also  should  be  considered  in  this 
light.  In  fact,  in  combustion,  of  cools  for  instance,  heat  and  energy  are  evolved,  and 
not  combined  in  the  coal,  although  the  oxygen  and  coal  do  combine.  Consequently,  the 
doctrine  of  Stahl  contains  the  essence  of  a  true  representation  of  the  evolution  of  energy, 
but  naturally  this  evolution  is  only  a  consequence  of  the  combination  occurring  between 
the  coal  and  oxygen.  As  regards  the  history  of  chemistry  prior  to  Lavoisier,  besides 
Stahl's  work  (to  which  reference  "has  been  made  above),  Priestley's  Experiments  and 
Observations  on  Different  Kinds  of  Air,  London,  1790,  and  also  Scheele's  Opuscula 
Chimica  et  Physica,  Lips.,  1788-89,  2  vols.,  must  be  recommended  as  the  two  leading 
works  of  the  English  and  Scandinavian  chemists  showing  the  condition  of  chemical 
learning  before  the  propagation  of  Lavoisier's  views,  and  containing  also  many  important 
observations  which  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  chemistry  of  our  times.  A  most  interesting 
memoir  on  the  history  of  phlogiston  is  that  of  Rodwell,  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine, 
1868,  in  which  it  is  shown  that  the  idea  of  phlogiston  dates  very  far  back,  that  Basil 
Valentine  '(1394-1415),  in  the  Cursus  Triumphalis  Antimonii,  Paracelsus  (1493-1541), 
in  his  work,  De  Rerun  Natura,  Glauber  (1604-1668),  and  especially  John  Joachim  Becher 
(1625-1682),  in  his  Physica  Subterranea,  all  referred  to  phlogiston,  but  under  different 
names. 

**  An  Englishman,  named  Mayow,  who  lived  a  whole  century  before  Lavoisier  (in 
1666),  understood  certain  phenomena  of  oxidation  in  their  true  aspect,  but  was  not  able 
to  develop  his  views  with  clearness,  or  support  them  by  conclusive  experiments  ;  he 
cannot  therefore  be  considered,  like  Lavoisier,  as  the  founder  of  contemporary  chemical 
learning.  Science  is  a  universal  heritage,  and  therefore  it  is  only  just  to  give  the  highest 
honour  in  science,  not  to  those  who  first  enunciate  a  certain  truth,  but  to  those  who  are 
first  able  to  convince  others  of  its  authenticity  and  establish  it  for  the  general  welfare. 
But  scientific  discoveries  are  rarely  made  all  at  once;  as  a  rule,  the  first  teachers  do  not 


18  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

gave  indubitable  support  to  his  opinion,  which  in  many  respects  was 
contradictory  to  Stahl's  doctrine.  Lavoisier  poured  four  ounces  of  pure 
mercury  into  a  glass  retort  (fig.  3),  whose  neck  was  bent  as  shown  in 
the  drawing  and  dipped  into  the  vessel  R  s,  also  full  of  mercury.  The 
projecting  end  of  the  neck  was  covered  with  a  glass  bell-jar  p.  The 
weight  of  all  the  mercury  taken,  and  the  volume  of  air  remaining  in 
the  apparatus,  namely,  that  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  retort,  and 
under  the  bell-jar,  were  determined  before  beginning  the  experiment. 
It  was  most  important  in  this  experiment  to  know  the  volume  of  air 
in  order  to  learn  what  part  it  played  in  the  oxidation  of  the  mercury, 
'because,  according  to  Stahl,  phlogiston  is  emitted  into  the  air,  whilst, 
according  to  Lavoisier,  the  mercury  in  oxidising  absorbs  a  portion  of 
the  air  ;  and  consequently  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  determine 
whether  the  amount  of  air  increased  or  decreased  in  the  oxidation  of 
the  metal.  It  was,  therefore,  most  important  to  measure  the  volume 


Pro.  3.    Lavoisier's  apparatus  for  determining  the  composition  of  air  and  the  reason 
of  metals  increasing  in  weight  when  they  are  calcined  in  air. 

of  the  air  in  the  apparatus  both  before  and  after  the  experiment.  For 
this  purpose  it  was  necessary  to  know  the  total  capacity  of  the  retort, 
the  volume  of  the  mercury  poured  into  it,  the  volume  of  the  bell-jar 
above  the  level  of  the  mercury,  and  also  the  temperature  and  pressure 
of  the  air  at  the  time  of  its  measurement.  The  volume  of  air  con- 
tained in  the  apparatus  and  isolated  from  the  surrounding  atmosphere 
could  be  determined  from  these  data.  Having  arranged  his  apparatus 
in  this  manner,  Lavoisier  heated  the  retort  holding  the  mercury  for  a 
period  of  twelve  days  at  a  temperature  near  the  boiling  point  of 
mercury.  The  mercury  became  covered  with  a  quantity  of  small  red 

succeed  in  convincing  others  oi  the  truth  they  have  discovered ;  with  time,  however,  a 
true  herald  comes  forward,  possessing  every  means  for  making  the  truth  apparent  to  all, 
but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  such  are  entirely  indebted  to  the  labours  and  mass 
of  data  accumulated  by  many  others.  Such  was  Lavoisier,  and  such  are  all  the  great 
founders  of  science.  They  are  the-enunciators  of  all  past  and  present  learning,  and  their 
names  will  always  be  revered  by  posterity. 


INTEODUCTION  Id 

scales ,  that  is,  it  was  oxidised  or  converted  into  an  earth.  This 
substance  is  the  same  mercury  oxide  which  has  already  been  mentioned 
(example  3).  After  the  lapse  of  twelve  days  the  apparatus  was  cooled, 
and  it  was  then  seen  that  the  volume  of  the  air  in  the  apparatus  had 
diminished  during  the  time  of  the  experiment.  This  result  was  in 
exact  contradiction  to  Stahl's  hypothesis.  Out  of  50  cubic  inches  of 
air  originally  taken,  there  only  remained  42.  Lavoisier's  experiment  led 
to  other  equally  important  results.  The  weight  of  the  air  taken  decreased 
by  as  much  as  the  weight  of  the  mercury  increased  in  oxidising  ;  that  is, 
the  portion  of  the  air  was  not  destroyed,  but  only  combined  with  mercury. 
This  portion  of  the  air  may  be  again  separated  from  the  mercury  oxide 
and  has,  as  we  saw  (example  3),  properties  different  from  those  of  air. 
It  is  called  *  oxygen.'  That  portion  of  the  air  which  remained  in  the 
apparatus  and  did  not  combine  with  the  mercury  does  not  oxidise 
metals,  and  cannot  support  either  combustion  or  respiration,  so  that 
a  lighted  taper  is  immediately  extinguished  if  it  be  dipped  into  the 
gas  which  remains  in  the  bell-jar.  *  It  is  extinguished  in  the  residual 
gas  as  if  it  had  been  plunged  into  water,'  writes  Lavoisier  in  his 
memoirs.  This  gas  is  called  'nitrogen.'  Thus  air  is  not  a  simple 
substance,  but  consists  of  two  gases,  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  and  therefore 
the  opinion  that  air  is  an  elementary  substance  is  erroneous.  The 
oxygen  of  the  air  is  absorbed  in  combustion  and  the  oxidation  of 
metals,  and  the  earths  produced  by  the  oxidation  of  metals  are 
substances  composed  of  oxygen  and  a  metal.  By  mixing  the  oxygen 
with  the  nitrogen  the  same  air  as  was  originally  taken  is  re-formed. 
It  has  also  been  shown  by  direct  experiment  that  on  reducing  an 
oxide  with  carbon,  the  oxygen  contained  in  the  oxide  is  transferred  to 
the  carbon,  and  gives  the  same  gas  that  is  obtained  by  the  combus- 
tion of  carbon  in  air.  Therefore  this  gas  is  a  compound  of  carbon 
and  oxygen,  just  as  the  earthy  oxides  are  composed  of  metals  and 
oxygen. 

The  many  examples  of  the  formation  and  decomposition  of  sub- 
stances which  are  met  with  convince  us  that  the  majority  of  substances 
with  which  we  have  to  deal  are  compounds  made  up  of  several  other 
substances.  By  heating  chalk  (or  else  copper  carbonate,  as  in  the 
second  example)  we  obtain  lime  and  the  same  carbonic  acid  gas  which 
is  produced  by  the  combustion  of  carbon.  On  bringing  lime  into 
contact  with  this  gas  and  water,  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  we  again 
obtain  the  compound,  carbonate  of  lime,  or  chalk.  Therefore  chalk  is 
a  compound.  So  also  are  those  substances  from  which  it  may  be  built 
up.  Carbonic  anhydride  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  carbon  and 
oxygen  ;  and  lime  is  produced  by  the  oxidation  of  a  certain  metal 


20  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

called  *  calcium.'  By  resolving  substances  in  this  manner  into  their 
component  parts,  we  arrive  at  last  at  such  as  are  indivisible  into  two 
or  more  substances  by  any  means  whatever,  and  which  cannot  be  formed 
from  other  substances.  All  we  can  do  is  to  make  such  substances  com- 
bine together  to  act  on  other  substances.  Substances  which  cannot  be 
formed  from  or  decomposed  into  others  are  termed  simple  substances 
(elements).  Thus  all  homogeneous  substances  may  be  classified  into 
simple  and  compound  substances.  This  view  was  introduced  and 
established  as  a  scientific  fact  during  the  lifetime  of  Lavoisier.  The 
number  of  these  elements  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  number 
of  compound  substances  which  are  formed  by  them.  At  the  present 
time,  only  seventy  elements  are  known  with  certainty  to  exist.  Some 
of  them  are  very  rarely  met  with  in  nature,  or  are  found  in  very  small 
quantities,  whilst  the  existence  of  others  is  still  doubtful.  The  number 
of  elements  with  whose  compounds  we  commonly  deal  in  everyday  life 
is  very  small.  Elements  cannot  be  transmuted  into  one  another — at 
least  up  to  the  present  not  a  single  case  of  such  a  transformation  has 
been  met  with  ;  it  may  therefore  be  said  that,  as  yet,  it  is  impossible 
to  transmute  one  metal  into  another.  And  as  yet,  notwithstanding 
the  number  of  attempts  which  have  been  made  in  this  direction,  no 
fact  has  been  discovered  which  could  in  any  way  support"  the  idea  of 
the  complexity  of  such  well-known  elements 26  as  oxygen,  iron,  sulphur, 
&c.  Therefore;  from  its  very  conception,  an  element  is  not  susceptible 
to  reactions  of  decomposition.*7 

26  Many  of  the  ancient  philosophers  assumed  the  existence  of  one  elementary  form  of 
matter.    This  idea  still  appears  in  our  times,  in  the  constant  efforts  which  are  made  to 
reduce  the  number  of  the  elements ;  to  prove,  for  instance,  that  bromine  contains  chlorine 
or  that  chlorine  contains  oxygen.     Many  methods,  founded  both  on  experiment  and 
theory,  have  been  tried  to  prove  the  compound  nature  of  the  elements.    All  labour  in 
this  direction  has  as  yet  been  in  vain,  and  the  assurance  that  elementary  matter  is  not 
eo  homogeneous  (single)  as  the  mind  would  desire  in  its  first  transport  of  rapid  generali- 
sation is  strengthened  from  year  to  year.     All  our  knowledge  shows  that  iron  and 
other  elements  remain,  even  at  such  a  high  temperature  as  there  exists  in  the  sun,  as 
(different  substances,  and  are  not  converted  into  one  common  material.    Admitting,  even 
'mentally,  the  possibility  of  one  elementary  form  of  matter,  a  method  must  be  imagined 
fay  which  it  could  give  rise  to  the  various  elementsj  as  also  the  modus  operandi  of  their 
formation  from  one  material.    If  it  be  said  that  this  diversitude  only  takes  place  at  low 
temperatures,  as  is  observed  with  isomerides,  then  there  would  be  reason  to  expect,  if  not 
the  transition  of  the  various  elements  into  one  particular  and  more  stable  form,  at  least 
the  mutual  transformation  of  some  into  others.    But  nothing  of  the  kind  has  as  yet  been 
observed,  and  the  alchemist's  hope  to  manufacture  (as  Berthollet  puts  it)  elements  has  no 
theoretical  or  practical  foundation. 

27  The  weakest  point  in  the  idea  of  elements  is  the  negative  character  of  the  determi- 
native signs  given  them  by  Lavoisier,  and  from  that  time  ruling  in  chemistry.    They  do 
not  decompose,  they  do  not  change  into  one  another.    But  it  must  be  remarked  that 
elements  form  the  limiting  horizon  of  our  knowledge  of  matter,  and  it  is  always  difficult  to 
determine  a  positive  side  on  the  borderland  of  what  is  known.    Besides,  there  is  no  doubt 


INTRODUCTION  21 

The  quantity,  therefore,  of  each  element  remains  constant  in  all 
chemical  changes  :  a  fact  which  may  be  deduced  as  a  consequence  of 
the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter,  and  of  the  conception  of 
elements  themselves.  Thus  the  equation  expressing  the  law  of  th« 
indestructibility  of  matter  acquires  a  new  and  still  more  important 
signification.  If  we  know  the  quantities  of  the  elements  which  occur 
in  the  re-acting  substances,  and  if  from  these  substances  there  proceed, 
by  means  of  chemical  changes,  a  series  of  new  compound  substances, 
then  the  latter  will  together  contain  the  same  quantity  of  each  of 
the  elements  as  there  originally  existed  in  the  re-acting  substances. 
The  essence  of  chemical  change  is  embraced  in  the  study  of  how, 
and  with  what  substances,  each  element  is  combined  before  and  after 
change. 

In  order  to  be  able  to  express  various  chemical  changes  by  equations, 
it  has  been  agreed  to  represent  each  element  by  the  first  or  some  two 
letters  of  its  (Latin)  name.  Thus,  for  example,  oxygen  is  represented  by 
the  letter  O ;  nitrogen  by  N  ;  mercury  (hydrargyrum)  by  Hg  ;  iron 
(ferrum)  by  Fe  ,  and  so  on  for  all  the  elements,  as  is  seen  in  the  tables 
on  page  24.  A  compound  substance  is  represented  by  placing  the 
symbols  representing  the  elements  of  which  it  is  made  up  side  by  side. 
For  example,  red  mercury  oxide  is  represented  by  HgO,  which  shows 
that  it  is  composed  of  oxygen  and  mercury.  Besides  this,  the  symbol 
of  every  element  corresponds  with  a  certain  relative  quantity  of  it  by 
weight,  called  its  *  combining '  weight,  or  the  weight  of  an  atom  j  so  that 
the  chemical  formula  of  a  compound  substance  not  only  designates  the 
nature  of  the  elements  of  which  it  is  composed,  but  also  their  quantita- 
tive proportion.  Every  chemical  process  may  be  expressed  by  an 
equation  composed  of  the  formulae  corresponding  with  those  substances 
which  take  part  in  it  and  are  produced  by  it.  The  amount  by  weight 
of  the  elements  in  every  chemical  equation  must  be  equal  on  both  sides 
fcof  the  equation,  since  no  element  is  either  formed  or  destroyed  in  a 
chemical  change. 

On  pages  24,  25,  and  26  a  list  of  the  elements,  with  their  symbols 
aud  combining  or  atomic  weights,  is  given,  and  we  shall  see  afterwards 
on  what  basis  the  atomic  weights  of  elements  are  determined.  At 
present  we  will  only  point  out  that  a  compound  containing  the  elements 
A  and  B  is  designated  by  the  formula  An  Bra,  where  m  and  n  are  the 
coefficients  or  multiples  in  which  the  combining  weights  of  the 
elements  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  substance.  If  we  represent 

(from  the  results  of  spectrum  analysis)  that  the  elements  are  distributed  as  far  as  the 
most  distant  stars,  and  that  they  support  the  highest  attainable  temperatures  without 
decomposing. 


22  PRINCIPLES  OF   CHEMISTRY 

the  combining  weight  of  the  substance  A  by  a  and  that  of  the 
substance  B  by  6,  then  the  composition  of  the  substance  An  Bm  will 
be  expressed  thus  :  it  contains  na  parts  by  weight  of  the  substance  A 
and  mb  parts  by  weight  of  the  substance  B,  and  consequently  100  parts 

of  our  compound  contain  — percentage  parts  by  weight  of  the 

na-f-ww 

substance  A  and   -  .   of  the  substance  B.     It  is  evident  that  as 

na+mb 

a  formula  shows  the  relative  amounts  of  all  the  elements  contained 
in  a  compound,  the  actual  weights  of  the  elements  contained  in  a  given 
weight  of  a  compound  may  be  calculated  from  its  formula.  For  example, 
the  formula  NaCl  of  table  salt  shows  (as  Na=23  and  Cl=35-5) 
that  58-5  Ibs.  of  salt  contain  23  Ibs.  of  sodium  and  35-5  Ibs.  of  chlorine, 
and  that  100  parts  of  it  contain  39-3  per  cent,  of  sodium  and  60-7  per 
cent,  of  chlorine. 

What  has  been  said  above  clearly  limits  the  province  of  chemical 
changes,  because  from  substances  of  a  given  kind  there  can  be  obtained 
only  such  as  contain  the  same  elements.  Even  with  this  limitation, 
however,  the  number  of  -possible  combinations  is  infinitely  great.  Only 
a  comparatively  small  number  of  compounds  have  yet  been  described 
or  subjected  to  research,  and  any  one  working  in  this  direction  may 
easily  discover  new  compounds  which  had  not  before  been  obtained. 
It  often  happens,  however,  that  such  newly-discovered  compounds 
were  foreseen  by  chemistry,  whose  object  is  the  apprehension  of  that 
uniformity  which  rules  over  the  multitude  of  compound  substances, 
and  whose  aim  is  the  comprehension  of  those  laws  which  govern  their 
formation  and  properties.  The  conception  of  elements  having  been 
established,  the  next  objects  of  chemistry  were  :  the  determination  of 
the  properties  of  compound  substances  on  the  basis  of  the  determination 
of  the  quantity  and  kind  of  elements  of  which  they  are  composed  ;  the 
.investigation  of  the  elements  themselves ;  the  determination  of  what 
compound  substances  can  be  formed  from  each  element  and  the 
properties  which  these  compounds  show  ;  and  the  apprehension  of  the 
nature  of  the  connection  between  the  elements  in  different  compounds. 
An  element  thus  serves  as  the  starting  point,  and  is  taken  as  the 
primary  conception  on  which  all  other  substances  are  built  up. 

When  we  state  that  a  certain  element  enters  into  the  composition 
of  a  given  compound  (when  we  say,  for  instance,  that  mercury  oxide 
contains  oxygen)  we  do  not  mean  that  it  contains  oxygen  as  a  gaseous 
substance,  but  only  desire  to  express  those  transformations  which 
mercury  oxide  is  capable  of  making  ;  that  is,  we  wish  to  say  that  it  is 
possible  to  obtain  oxygen  from  mercury  oxide,  and  that  it  can  give 


INTRODUCTION  23 

tip  oxygen  to  various  other  substances ;  in  a  word,  we  desire  only  to 
express  those  transformations  of  which  mercury  oxide  is  capable.  Or, 
more  concisely,  it  may  be  said  that  the  composition  of  a  compound  is 
the  expression  of  those  transformations  of  which  it  is  capable.  It  is 
useful  in  this  sense  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  the  conception 
of  an  element  as  a  separate  homogeneous  substance,  and  as  a  material 
but  invisible  part  of  a  compound.  Mercury  oxide  does  not  contain 
two  simple  bodies,  a  gas  and  a  metal,  but  two  elements,  mercury  and 
oxygen,  which,  when  free,  are  a  gas  and  a  metal.  Neither  mercury  as 
a  metal  nor  oxygen  as  a  gas  is  contained  in  mercury  oxide  ;  it  only 
contains  the  substance  of  these  elements,  just  as  steam  only  contains 
the  substance  of  ice,  but  not  ice  itself,  or  as  corn  contains  the  substance 
of  the  seed,  but  not  the  seed  itself.  The  existence  of  an  element  may 
be  recognised  without  knowing  it  in  the  uncombined  state,  but  only 
from  an  investigation  of  its  combinations,  and  from  the  knowledge  that 
it  gives,  under  all  possible  conditions,  substances  which  are  unlike 
other  known  combinations  of  substances.  Fluorine  is  an  example  of 
this  kind.  It  was  for  a  long  time  unknown  in  a  free  state,  and 
nevertheless  was  recognised  as  an  element  because  its  combinations 
with  other  elements  were  known,  and  their  difference  from  all  other 
similar  compound  substances  was  determined.  In  order  to  grasp  the 
difference  between  the  conception  of  the  visible  form  of  an  element  as 
we  know  it  in  the  free  state,  and  of  the  intrinsic  element  (or  '  radicle,' 
as  Lavoisier  called  it)  contained  in  the  visible  form,  it  should  be 
remarked  that  compound  substances  also  combine  together  forming  yet 
more  complex  compounds,  and  that  they  evolve  heat  in  the  process  of 
combination.  The  original  compound  may  often  be  extracted  from 
these  new  compounds  by  exactly  the  same  methods  as  elements  are 
extracted  from  their  corresponding  combinations.  Besides,  many 
elements  exist  under  various  visible  forms  whilst  the  intrinsic  element 
contained  in  these  various  forms  is  something  which  is  not  subject  to 
change.  Thus  carbon  appears  as  charcoal,  graphite,  and  diamond,  but 
yet  the  element  carbon  alone,  contained  in  each,  is  one  and  the  same 
Carbonic  anhydride  contains  carbon,  and  not  charcoal,  or  graphite,  or 
the  diamond. 

Elements  alone,  although  not  all  of  them,  nave  the  peculiar  lustre, 
opacity,  malleability,  and  the  great  heat  and  electrical  conductivity 
which  are  proper  to  metals  and  their  mutual  combinations.  But 
elements  are  far  from  all  being  metals.  Those  which  do  not  possess 
the  physical  properties  of  metals  are  called  non-metals  (or  metalloids). 
It  is,  however,  impossible  to  draw  a  strict  line  of  demarcation  between 
metals  and  non-metals,  there  being  many  intermediary  substances. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


Thus  graphite,  from  which  pencils  are  manufactured,  is  an  element 
with  the  lustre  and  other  properties  of  a  metal ;  but  charcoal  and  the 
diamond,  which  are  composed  of  the  same  substance  as  graphite,  do 
not  show  any  metallic  properties.  Both  classes  of  elements  are  clearly 
distinguished  in  definite  examples,  but  in  particular  cases  the  distinc- 
tion is  not  clear  and  cannot  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  exact  division  of 
the  elements  into  two  groups. 

The  conception  of  elements  forms  the  basis  of  chemical  knowledge, 
and  in  giving  a  list  of  them  at  the  very  beginning  of  our  work,  we 
wish  to  tabulate  our  present  knowledge  on  the  subject.  Altogether 
about  seventy  elements  are  now  authentically  known,  but  many  of 
them  are  so  rarely  met  with  in  nature,  and  have  been  obtained  in  such 
small  quantities,  that  we  possess  but  a  very  insufficient  knowledge  of 
them.  The  substances  most  widely  distributed  in  nature  contain  a. 
very  small  number  of  elements.  These  elements  have  been  more 
completely  studied  than  the  others,  because  a  greater  number  of 
investigators  have  been  able  to  carry  on  experiments  and  .observations 
on  them.  The  elements  most  widely  distributed  in  nature  are  : — 

Hydrogen,     H  =1         In  water,  and  in  animal  and  vegetable 

organisms. 

Carbon,          C  =12.       In  organisms,  coal,  limestones. 
Nitrogen,      N  =14.       In  air  and  in  organisms. 
Oxygen,        0  =16.      In  air,  water,  earth.     It  forms  the  greater 

part  of  the  mass  of  the  earth. 
In  common  salt  and  in  many  minerals. 
In  sea-water  and  in  many  minerals* 
In  minerals  and  clay. 
In  sand,  minerals,  and  clay. 
In  bones,  ashes  of  plants,  and  soil. 
In  pyrites,  gypsum,  and  in  sea-water. 
01  =35*5.    In  common  salt,  and  in  the  salts  of  sea* 

water. 

Potassium,  K  =39.  In  minerals,  ashes  of  plants,  and  in  nitre. 
Calcium,  Ca  =40.  In  limestones,  gypsum,  and  in  organisms. 
Iron,  Fe  =56.  In  the  earth,  iron  ores,  and  in  organisms. 

Besides  these,  the  following  elements,  although  not  very  largely 
distributed  in  nature,  are  all  more  or  less  well  known  from  their 
applications  to  the  requirements  of  everyday  life  or  the  arts,  either  in 
a  free  state  or  in  their  compounds  : — 

Lithium,  Li=7.     In  medicine  (Li2  C03),  and  in  photography  (LiBr). 
Boron,      B= 1 1.  As  borax,  B4Na2O7l  and  as  boric  anhydride,  B2O3. 


Sodium,  Na=23. 
Magnesium,  Mg=24. 
Aluminium,  Al=27 
Silicon,  Si  =28. 
Phosphorus,?  =31. 
Sulphur,  S  =32. 
Chlorine, 


INTRODUCTION 


Fluorine,      F   <=*19.    As  fluor  spar,  CaF2,  and  as  hydrofluoric 

acid,  HF 

Chromium,   Cr  =52.     As  chromic  anhydride,   Cr03,  and   potas- 
sium dichromate,  K2Cr2O7. 
Manganese,  Mn=55      As    manganese   peroxide,   Mn02,   and  po«; 

tassium  permanganate,  MnK04 
=59'5  In  smalt  and  blue  glass. 
=59 '5  For  electro-plating  other  metals. 


Cobalt, 

Nickel, 

Copper, 

Zinc, 

Arsenic, 


=63. 
=65. 
=75. 
Bromine,      Br  =80 


Co 
Ni 
Cu 
Zn 

As 


:87. 


Strontium,  Sr  = 

Silver,  Ag: 

Cadmium,  Cd= 

Tin,  Sn= 

Antimony,  Sb= 

Iodine,  I  = 


Barium,        Ba=137. 


Platinum,  Pt  = 

Gold,  Au= 

Mercury,  Hg: 

Lead,  Pb  = 

Bismuth,  Bi  = 

Uranium,  U  = 


The  well-known  red  metal. 

Used  for  the  plates  of  batteries,  roofing,  <feo. 

White  arsenic  (poison),  As2O3. 

A  brown   volatile  liquid  ,   sodium   bromide, 
NaBr. 

In  coloured  fires  (SrN206). 
:109.  The  well-known  white  metal. 
=  112.  In  alloys.     Yellow  paint  (CdS). 

119.  The  well-known  metal. 

120.  In  alloys  such  as  type  metal. 

1 27.  In  medicine  and  photography  ,  free,  and  as 

KI. 

Permanent   white,"  and   as  an  adulterant 
in  white  lead,  and  in  heavy  spar,  BaS04. 


Well-known  metals. 


=  196. 

=197. 

=200. 

=207. 

=209.  In  medicine  and  fusible  alloys. 

=239.  In  green  fluorescent  glass 


The  compounds  of  the  following  metals  and  semi-metals  have  fewer 
applications,  but  are  well  known,  and  are  somewhat  frequently  met 
vith  in  nature,  although  in  small  quantities  : — 


Beryllium, 

Titanium, 

Vanadium, 

Selenium, 

Zirconium, 


Be  =9. 
Ti  =48. 
V   =51. 
Se  =79. 
Zr  =91 


Molybdenum,  Mo  =96. 


Palladium,Pd=107. 
Cerium,  Ce=140. 
tungsten,  W=184. 
Osmium,  Os=192. 
Iridium,  Ir  =193. 
Thallium,  Tl  =204. 


The  following  rare  metals  are  still  more  seldom  met  with  in  nature, 
but  have  been  studied  somewhat  fully  :— 

Scandium,         Sc  =44.  Germanium,  Ge=72. 

Gallium,  Ga  =70.  Rubidium,   Rb=8G. 


26  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTEY 

Yttrium,  Y   =89.  Caesium,        Cs  =  133. 

Niobium,  Nb  =  94.  Lanthanum,  La =138. 

Ruthenium  Ru=102.  Didymium,    Di=H2. 

Rhodium,  Rh=103.  Ytterbium,   Yb=173. 

Indium,  In  =114.  Tantalum,     Ta  =183. 

Tellurium,  Te=125.  TJiorium,       Th  =232. 

Besides  these  66  elements  there  have  been  discovered  : — Erbium, 
Terbium,  Samarium,  Thullium,  Holmium,  Mosandrium,  Phillipium, 
and  several  others.  But  their  properties  and  combinations,  owing  to 
their  extreme  rarity,  are  very  little  known,  and  even  their  existence  as 
independent  substances 28  is  doubtful. 

It  has  been  incontestably  proved  from  observations  on  the  spectra- 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  that  many  of  the  commoner  elements  (such  as 
H,  Na,  Mg,  Fe)  occur  on  the  far  distant  stars.  This  fact  confirms  the 
belief  that  those  forms  of  matter  which  appear  on  the  earth  as  elements 
are  widely  distributed  over  the  entire  universe.  But  we  do  not  yet 
know  why,  in  nature,  the  mass  of  some  elements  should  be  greater 
than  that  of  others.28  bis 

The  capacity  of  each  element  to  combine  with  one  or  another 
element,  and  to  form  compounds  with  them  which  are  in  a  greater  or 
less  degree  prone  to  give  new  and  yet  more  complex  substances,  forms 
the  fundamental  character  of  each  element.  Thus  sulphur  easily  com- 
bines with  the  metals,  oxygen,  chlorine,  or  carbon,  whilst  gold  and 
silver  enter  into  combinations  with  difficulty,  and  form  unstable  com- 
pounds, which  are  easily  decomposed  by  heat.  The  cause  or  force 
which  induces  the  elements  to  enter  into  chemical  change  must  be  con- 
sidered, as  also  the  cause  which  holds  different  substances  in  combina- 
tion— that  is,  which  endues  the  substances  formed  with  their  particular 
degree  of  stability.  This  cause  or  force  is  called  affinity  (affinitas^ 
affinit^  Verwandtschaft),  or  chemical  affinity.29  Since  this  force  must 

**  Possibly  some  of  their  compounds  are  compounds  of  other  already -known  elements. 
Pure  and  incontestably  independent  compounds  of  these  substances  are  unknown,  and 
Borne  of  them  have  not  even  been  separated,  but  are  only  supposed  to  exist  from  the 
results  of  spectroscopic  researches.  There  can  be  no  mention  of  such  contestable  and 
doubtful  elements  in  a  short  general  handbook  of  chemistry. 

28  bis  Clark  in  America  made  an  approximate  calculation  of  the  amount  of  the  dif- 
ferent elements  contained  in  the  earth's  crust  (to  a  depth  of  15  kilometres),  and  found 
that  the  chief  mass  (over  50  per  cent.)  is  composed  of  oxygen ;  then  comes  silicon,  &c. ; 
while  the  amount  of  hydrogen  is  less  than  1  per  cent.,  carbon  scarcely  0*25  per  cent., 
nitrogen  even  less  than  0'03  per  cent.  The  relative  masses  of  such  metals  as  Cu,  Ni,  Au 
is  minute.  Judging  from  the  density  (see  Chapter  VUl.)  of  the  earth,  a  large  proportion 
of  its  mass  must  be  composed  of  iron. 

**  This  word,  first  introduced,  if  I  mistake  not,  into  chemistry  by  Glauber,  is  based 
on  the  idea  of  the  ancient  philosophers  that  combination  can  only  take  place  when  the 
substances  combining  have  something  in  common — a  medium.  As  is  generally  the  case, 


INTRODUCTION  27 

be  regarded  as  exclusively  an  attractive  force,  like  gravity,  many 
writers  (for  instance,  Bergniann  at  the  end  of  the  last,  and  Berthollet 
at  the  beginning  of  this,  century)  supposed  affinity  to  be  essentially 
similar  to  the  universal-  force  of  gravity,  from  which  it  only  differs  in 
that  the  latter  acts  at  observable  distances  whilst  affinity  only  evinces 
itself  at  the  smallest  possible  distances.  But  chemical  affinity  cannot 
be  entirely  identified  with  the  universal  attraction  of  gravity,  ^rhich 
acts  at  appreciable  distances  and  is  dependent  only  on  mass  and  dis- 
tance, and  not  on  the  quality  of  the  material  on  which  it  acts,  whilst 
it  is  by  the  quality  of  matter  that  affinity  is  most  forcibly  influenced. 
Neither  can  it  be  entirely  identified  with  cohesion,  which  gives  to 
homogeneous  solid  substances  their  crystalline  form,  elasticity,  hard- 
ness, ductility,  and  other  properties,  and  to  liquids  their  surf  ace  tension, 
drop  formation,  capillarity,  and  other  properties,  because  affinity  acts 
between  the  component  parts  of  a  substance  and  cohesion  on  a  sub- 
stance in  its  homogeneity,  although  both  act  at  imperceptible  distances 
(by  contact)  and  have  much  in  common.  Chemical  force,  which  makes 
one  substance  penetrate  into  another,  cannot  be  entirely  identified  with 
even  those  attracting  forces  which  make  different  substances  adhere  to 
each  other,  or  hold  together  (as  when  two  plane-polished  surfaces  of 
solid  substances  are  brought  into  close  contact),  or  which  cause  liquids 
to  soak  into  solids,  or  adhere  to  their  surfaces,  or  gases  and  vapours  to 
condense  on  the  surfaces  of  solids.  These  forces  must  not  be  con- 
founded with  chemical  forces,  which  cause  one  substance  to  penetrate 
into  the  substance  of  another  and  to  form  a  new  substance,  which  is 
never  the  case  with  cohesion.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  forces  which 
determine  cohesion  form  a  connecting-link  between  mechanical  and 
chemical  forces,  because  they  only  act  by  intimate  contact.  For  a 
long  time,  and  especially  during  the  first  half  of  this  century,  chemical 
attraction  and  chemical  forces  were  identified  with  electrical  forces. 
There  is  certainly  an  intimate  relation  between  them,  for  electricity  is 
evolved  in  chemical  reactions,  and  has  also  a  powerful  influence  on 
chemical  processes — for  instance,  compounds  are  decomposed  by  the 
action  of  an  electrical  current.  And  the  exactly  similar  relation  which 
exists  between  chemical  phenomena  and  the  phenomena  of  heat  (heat 
being  developed  by  chemical  phenomena,  and  heat  being  able  to  decom- 
pose compounds)  only  proves  the  unity  of  the  forces  of  nature,  the 
capability  of  one  force  to  produce  arid  to  be  transformed  into  others. 
For  this  reason  the  identification  of  chemical  force  with  electricity  will 

another  idea  evolved  itself  in  antiquity,  and  has  lived  until  now,  side  by  side  with  the 
first,  to  which  4t  is  exactly  contradictory ;  this  considers  union  as  dependent  on  contrast, 
on  polar  difference,  on  an  effort  to  fill  up  a  want. 


28  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

not  bear  experimental  proof.30  As  of  all  the  (molecular)  phenomena 
of  nature  which  act  on  substances  at  immeasurably  small  distances, 
the  phenomena  of  heat  are  at  present  the  best  (comparatively)  known, 
having  been  reduced  to  the  simplest  fundamental  principles  of 
mechanics  (of  energy,  equilibrium,  and  movement),  which,  since 
Newton,  have  been  subjected  to  strict  mathematical  analysis,  it  is 
quite  natural  that  an  effort,  which  has  been  particularly  pronounced 
during  recent  years,  should  have  been  made  to  bring  chemical 
phenomena  into  strict  correlation  with  the  already  investigated  phe- 
nomena of  heat,  without,  however,  aiming  at  any  identification  of 
chemical  wtth  heat  phenomena.  The  true  nature  of  chemical  force  is 
still  a  secret  to  us,  just  as  is  the  nature  of  the  universal  force  of  gravity, 
and  yet  without  knowing  what  gravity  really  is,  by  applying  mechani- 
cal conceptions,  astronomical  phenomena  have  been  subjected  not  only 
to  exact  generalisation  but  to  the  detailed  prediction  of  a  number  of 
particular  facts  ;  and  so,  also,  although  the  true  nature  of  chemical 
affinity  may  be  unknown,  there  is  reason  to  hope  for  considerable  pro- 
gress in  chemical  science  by  applying  the  laws  of  mechanics  to  chemical 
phenomena  by  means  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat.  As  yet  this 
portion  of  chemistry  has  been  but  little  worked  at,  and  therefore,  while 
forming  a  current  problem  of  the  science,  it  is  treated  more  fully  in 
that  particular  field  which  is  termed  either  *  theoretical '  or  '  physical ' 
chemistry,  or,  more  correctly,  chemical  mechanics.  As  this  province  of 
chemistry  requires  a  knowledge  not  only  of  the  various  homogeneous 

30  Especially  conclusive  are  those  cases  of  so-called  metalepsis  (Dumas,  Laurent). 
Chlorine,  in  combining  with  hydrogen,  forms  a  very  stable  substance  called  'hydrochloric 
acid,'  which  is  split  up  by  the  action  of  an  electrical  current  into  chlorine  and  hydrogen, 
the  chlorine  appearing  at  the  positive  and  the  hydrogen  at  the  negative  pole.  Hence 
electro-chemists  considered  hydrogen  to  be  an  electro-positive  and  chlorine  an  electro- 
negative element,  and  that  they  are  held  together  in  virtue  of  their  opposite  electrical 
charges.  It  appears,  however,  from  metalepsis,  that  chlorine  can  replace  hydrogen  (and, 
inversely,  hydrogen  can  replace  chlorine)  in  its  compounds  without  in  any  way  changing 
tiie  grouping  of  the  other  elements,  or  altering  their  chief  chemical  properties.  For 
instance,  acetic  acid  in  which  hydrogen  has  been  replaced  by  chlorine  is  still  capable  of 
forming  salts.  It  must  be  observed,  whilst  considering  this  subject,  that  the  explanation 
suggesting  electricity  as  the  origin  of  chemical  phenomena  is  unsound,  since  it  attempts  to 
explain  one  class  of  phenomena  whose  nature-is  almost  unknown  by  another  class  which 
is  no  better  known.  It  is  most  instructive  to  remark  that  together  with  the  electrical 
theory  of  chemical  attraction  there  arose  and  survives  a  view  which  explains  the  galvanic 
current  as  being  a  transference  of  chemical  action  through  the  circuit — i.e.,  regards  the 
origin  of  electricity  as  being  a  chemical  one.  It  is  evident  that  the  connection  is  very 
intimate,  although  both  phenomena  are  independent  and  represent  different  forms  of 
molecular  (atomic)  motion,  whose  real  nature  is  not  yet  understood.  Nevertheless,  the 
connection  between  the  phenomena  of  both  categories  is  not  only  in  itself  very  instructive, 
but  it  extends  the  applicability  of  the  general  idea  of  the  unity  of  the  forces  of  nature, 
conviction  of  the  truth  of  which  has  held  BO  important  a  place  in  the  science  of  the  last 
ten  years. 


INTRODUCTION  29 

substances  which  have  yet  been  obtained  and  of  the  chemical  trans- 
formations  which  they  undergo,  but  also  of  the  phenomena  (of  heat  and 
other  kinds)  by  which  these  transformations  are  accompanied,  it  is  only 
possible  to  enter  on  the  study  of  chemical  mechanics  after  an  acquain- 
tance with  the  fundamental  chemical  conceptions  and  substances  which 
form  the  subject  of  this  book.31 

As  the  chemical  changes  to  which  substances  are  liable  proceed 
from"  internal  forces  proper  to  these  substances,  as  chemical  phenomena 
certainly  consist  of  motions  of  material  parts  (from  the  laws  of  the 
indestructibility  of  matter  and  of  elements),  and  as  the  investigation 
of  mechanical  and  physical  phenomena  proves  the  law  of  the  indestruc- 
tibility of  forces,  or  the  conservation  of  energy — that  is,  the  possibility 
of  the  transformation  of  one  kind  of  motion  into  another  (of  visible 
or  mechanical  into  invisible  or  physical) — we  are  inevitably  obliged  to 
Acknowledge  the  presence  in  substances  (and  especially  in  the  elements 
of  which  all  others  are  composed)  of  a  store  of  chemical  energy  or  in- 
visible motion  inducing  them  to  enter  into  combinations.  If  heat 
be  evolved  in  a  reaction,  it  means  that  a  portion  of  chemical  energy  is 

J1  I  consider  that  in  an  elementary  textbook  of  chemistry,  like  the  present,  it  is  only 
possible  and  advisable  to  mention,  in  reference  to  chemical  mechanics,  a  few  general 
ideas  and  some  particular  examples  referring  more  especially  to  gases,  whose  mechanical 
theory  must  be  regarded  as  the  most  complete.  The  molecular  mechanics  of  liquids  and 
solids  is  as  yet  in  embryo,  and  contains  much  that  is  disputable;  for  this  reason, 
chemical  mechanics  has  made  less  progress  in  relation  to  these  substances.  It  may  not 
be  superfluous  here  to  remark,  with  respect  to  the  conception  of  chemical  affinity,  that 
up  to  the  present  time  gravity,  electricity,  and  heat  have  all  been  applied  to  its  elucida- 
tion. Efforts  have  also  been  made  to  introduce  the  luminiferous  ether  into  theoretical 
chemistry,  and  should  that  connection  between  the  phenomena  of  light  and  electricity 
which  was  established  by  Maxwell  be  worked  out  more  in  detail,  doubtless  these  efforts 
to  elucidate  all  or  a  great  deal  by  the  aid  of  luminiferous  ether  will  again  appear  in 
theoretical  chemistry.  An  independent  chemical  mechanics  of  the  material  particles  of 
matter,  and  of  their  internal  (atomic)  changes,  would,  in  my  opinion,  arise  as  the  result 
of  these  efforts.  Two  hundred  years  ago  Newton  laid  the  foundation  of  a  truly  scientific 
theoretical  mechanics  of  external  visible  motion,  and  on  this  foundation  erected  the 
edifice  of  celestial  mechanics.  One  hundred  years  ago  Lavoisier  arrived  at  the  first 
fundamental  law  of  the  internal  mechanics  of  invisible  particles  of  matter.  This  subject 
is  tar  from  having  been  developed  into  a  harmonious  whole,  because  it  is  much  more 
difficult,  and,  although  many  details  have  been  completely  investigated,  it  does  not 
possess  any  starting  points.  Newton  only  came  after  Copernicus  and  Kepler,  who  had 
discovered  empirically  the  exterior  simplicity  of  celestial  phenomena.  Lavoisier  and 
Dalton  may,  in  respect  to  the  chemical  mechanics  of  the  molecular  world,  be  compared 
to  Copernicus  and  Kepler.  But  a  Newton  has  not  yet  appeared  in  the  molecular  world ; 
when  he  does,  I  think  that  he  will  find  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  mechanics  of  the 
invisible  motions  of  matter  more  easily  and  more  quickly  in  the  chemical  structure  of 
matter  than  in  physical  phenomena  (of  electricity,  heat,  and  light) ;  for  these  latter  are 
accomplished  by  particles  of  matter  already  arranged,  whilst  it  is  now  clear  that  the 
problem  of  chemical  mechanics  mainly  lies  in  the  apprehension  of  those  motions  which 
are  invisibly  accomplished  by  the  smallest  atoms  of  matter. 


80  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

transformed  into  heat  ;  32  if  heat  be  absorbed  in  a  reaction,33  that  it  is 
partly  transformed  (rendered  latent)  into  chemical  energy.  The  store 
of  force  or  energy  going  to  the  formation  of  new  compounds  may,  after 
several  combinations,  accomplished  with  an  absorption  of  heat,  at  last 
diminish  to  such  a  degree  that  indifferent  compounds  will  be  obtained, 
although  these  sometimes,  by  combining  with  energetic  elements  or 
compounds,  give  more  complex  compounds,  which  may  be  capable  of 
entering  into  chemical  combination.  Among  elements,  gold,  platinum, 
and  nitrogen  have  but  little  energy,  whilst  potassium,  oxygen,  and 
chlorine  have  a  very  marked  degree  of  energy.  When  dissimilar  sub- 
stances enter  into  combination  they  often  form  substances  of  diminished 
energy.  Thus  sulphur  and  potassium  when  heated  easily  burn  in  air, 
but  when  combined  together  their  compound  is  neither  inflammable 
nor  burns  in  air  like  its  component  parts.  Part  of  the  energy  of  the 
potassium  and  of  the  sulphur  was  evolved  in  their  combination  in  the 
form  of  heat.  Just  as  in  the  passage  of  substances  from  one  physical 
state  into  another  a  portion  of  their  store  of  heat  is  absorbed  or 
evolved,  BO  in  combinations  or  decompositions  and  in  every  chemical 

s*  The  theory  of  heat  gave  the  idea  of  a  store  of  internal  motion  or  energy,  and 
therefore  with  it,  it  became  necessary  to  acknowledge  chemical  energy,  but  there  is  no 
foundation  whatever  for  identifying  heat  energy  with  chemical  energy.  It  may  be  sup- 
posed, but  not  positively  affirmed,  that  heat  motion  is  proper  to  molecules  and  chemical 
motion  to  atoms,  but  that  as  molecules  are  made  up  of  atoms,  the  motion  of  the  one 
passes  to  the  other,  and  that  for  this  reason  heat  strongly  influences  reaction  and 
appears  or  disappears  (is  absorbed)  in  reactions.  These  relations,  which  are  apparent 
and  hardly  subject  to  doubt  on  general  lines,  still  present  much  that  is  doubtful  in 
detail,  because  all  forms  of  molecular  and  atomic  motion  are  able  to  pass  into  each 
other. 

53  The  reactions  which  take  place  (at  the  ordinary  or  at  a  high  temperature)  directly 
between  substances  may  be  clearly  divided  into  exothermal,  which  are  accompanied  by 
an  evolution  of  heat,  and  endothermal,  which  are  accompanied  by  an  absorption  of  heat. 
It  is  evident  that  the  latter  require  a  source  of  heat.  They  are  determined  either  by  the 
directly  surrounding  medium  (as  in  the  formation  of  carbon  bisulphide  from  charcoal  and 
sulphur,  or  in  decompositions  which  take  place  at  high  temperatures),  or  else  by  a 
secondary  reaction  proceeding  simultaneously,  or  by  some  other  form  of  energy  (light, 
electricity).  So,  for  instance,  hydrogen  sulphide  is  decomposed  by  iodine  in  the  presence 
of  water  at  the  expense  of  the  heat  which  is  evolved  by  the  solution  in  water  of  the 
hydrogen  iodide  produced.  This  is  the  reason  why  this  reaction,  as  exothermal,  only 
takes  place  in  the  presence  of  water ;  otherwise  it  would  he  accompanied  by  a  cooling 
effect.  As  in  the  combination  of  dissimilar  substances,  the  bonds  existing  between  the 
molecules  and  atoms  of  the  homogeneous  substances  have  to  be  broken  asunder,  whilst  in 
reactions  of  rearrangement  the  formation  of  any  one  substance  proceeds  simultaneously 
with  the  formation  of  another,  and,  as  in  reactions,  a  series  of  physical  and  mechanical 
changes  take  place,  it  is  impossible  to  separate  the  heat  directly  depending  on  a  given 
reaction  from  the  total  sum  of  the  observed  heat  effect.  For  this  reason,  thermo-chemical 
data  are  very  complex,  and  cannot  by  themselves  give  the  key  to  many  chemical  problems, 
as  it  was  at  first  supposed  they  might.  They  ought  to  form  a.part  of  chemical  mechanics, 
but  alone  they  do  not  constitute  it. 


INTRODUCTION  81 

process,  there  occurs  a  change  in  the  store  of  chemical  energy,  and  at 
the  same  time  an  evolution  or  absorption -of  heat.*4 

For  the  comprehension  of  chemical  phenomena  as  mechanical  pro- 
cesses— i.e.,  the  study  of  the  modus  opercmdi  of  chemical  phenomena — 
it    is    most    important    to    consider  :    (1)    the  facts  gathered  frow 
stoichiometry,  or  that  part  of  chemistry  which  treats  of  the  quantita- 
tive relation,  by  weight  or  volume,  of  the  reacting  substances  ;  (2)  the 
distinction    between    the  different    forms    and    classes    of    chemical 
reactions ;   (3)  the  study  of  the  changes  in  properties  produced   by 
alteration  in  composition  ;  (4)  the  study  of  the  phenomena  which  ac- 
company chemical  transformation  ;    (5)  a  generalisation  of  the  con- 
ditions under  which  reactions  occur.     As  regards  stoichiometry,  this 
branch    of    chemistry  has  been  worked    out  most  thoroughly,   and 
comprises  laws  (of  Dalton,  Avogadro-Gerhardt,  and  others)  which  bear 
so  deeply  on  all  parts  of  chemistry  that  at  the  present  time  the  chief 
problem  of  chemical  research  consists  in   the  application  of  general 
etoichiometrical    laws  to    concrete    examples,   i.e.,    the    quantitative 
(volumetric  or  gravimetric)   composition  of    substances.     All    other 
branches  of  chemistry  are  clearly  subordinate  to  this  most  important 
portion  of  chemical  knowledge.     Even  the  very   signification  of  re- 
actions of  combination,  decomposition,  and  rearrangement,  acquired,  as 
we  shall  see,  a  particular  and  new  character  under  the  influence  of  the 
progress  of  exact  ideas  concerning  the  quantitative  relations  of  sub- 
stances entering  into  chemical  changes.     Furthermore,  in  this  sense 
there  arose  a  new — and,  till  then,  unknown — division  of  compound 
substances  into  definite  and  indefinite  compounds.    Even  at  the  beginning 
of  this  century,  Berthollet  had  not  made  this  distinction.     But  Prout 
showed  that  a  number  of  compounds  contain  the  substances  of  which 
they  are  composed  and  into  which  they  break  up,  in  exact  definite  pro- 
portions by  weight,  which  are  unalterable  under  any  conditions.     Thus, 
for  example,  red  mercury  oxide  always  contains  sixteen  parts  by  weight 
of  oxygen  for  every  200  parts  by  weight  of  mercury,  which  is  expressed 
by  the  formula  HgO.     But  in  an  alloy  of  copper  and  silver  one  or  the 
other  metal  may  be  added  at  will,  and  in  an  aqueous  solution  of  sugar, 
the  relative  proportion  of  the  sugar  and  water  may  be  altered  and 
nevertheless  a  homogeneous  whole  with  the  sura  of  the  independent 

54  As  chemical  reactions  are  effected  by  heating,  so  the  heat  absorbed  by  substances 
before  decomposition  or  change  of  state,  and  called  '  specific  heat,'  goes  in  many  cases  to 
the  preparation,  if  it  may  be  so  expressed,  of  reaction,  even  when  the  limit  of  the 
temperature  of  reaction  is  not  attained.  The  molecules  of  a  substance  A,  which  is  not  able 
(,6  react  on  a  substance  B  below  a  temperature  t,  by  being  heated  from  a  somewhat  lower 
temperature  to  t,  undergoes  that  change  which  had  to  be  arrived  at  for  the  formation 
ofAB. 

*3 


82  PRINCIPLES  OP  CHEMISTRY 

properties  will  be  obtained — i.e.,  in  these  cases  there  was  indefinite 
chemical  combination.  Although  in  nature  and  chemical  practice  the 
formation  of  indefinite  compounds  (such  as  alloys  and  solutions)  plays 
as  essential  a  part  as  the  formation  of  definite  chemical  compounds,  yet, 
as  the  stoichiometrical  laws  at  present  apply  chiefly  to  the  latter,  all 
facts  concerning  indefinite  compounds  suffer  from  inexactitude,  and  it 
is  only  during  recent  years  that  the  attention  of  chemists  has  been 
directed  to  this  province  of  chemistry. 

In  chemical  mechanics  it  is,  from  a  qualitative  point  of  view,  very 
important  to  clearly  distinguish  at  the  very  beginning  between  rever* 
eible  and  non-reversible  reactions.  Substances  capable  of  reacting  on 
each  other  at  a  certain  temperature  produce  substances  which  at  the 
same  temperature  either  can  or  cannot  give  back  the  original  substances. 
For  example,  salt  dissolves  in  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and 
the  solution  so  obtained  is  capable  of  breaking  up  at  the  same  tempera- 
ture, leaving  salt  and  separating  the  water  by  evaporation.  Carbon 
bisulphide  is  formed  from  sulphur  and  carbon  at  about  the  same 
temperature  at  which  it  can  be  resolved  into  sulphur  and  carbon.  Iron, 
at  a  certain  temperature,  separates  hydrogen  from  water,  forming  iron 
oxide,  which,  in  contact  with  hydrogen  at  the  same  temperature,  is  able 
to  produce  iron  and  water.  It  is  evident  that  if  two  substances,  A 
and  B,  give  two  others  C  and  D,  and  the  reaction  be  reversible,  then 
C  and  D  will  form  A  and  B,  and,  consequently,  by  taking  a  definite 
mass  of  A  and  B,  or  a  corresponding  mass  of  C  and  D,  we  shall  obtain, 
in  each  case,  all  four  substances — that  is  to  say,  there  will  be  a  state 
of  chemical  equilibrium  between  the  reacting  substances.  By  increasing 
the  mass  of  one  of  the  substances  we  obtain  a  new  condition  of  equi- 
librium, so  that  reversible  reactions  present  a  means  of  studying  the 
influence  of  mass  on  the  modus  operandi  of  chemical  changes.  Many 
of  those  reactions  which  occur  with  very  complicated  compounds  or 
mixtures  may  serve  as  examples  of  non-reversible  reactions.  Thus 
many  of  the  compound  substances  of  animal  and  vegetable  organisms 
are  broken  up  by  heat,  but  cannot  be  re-formed  from  their  products 
of  decomposition  at  any  temperature.  Gunpowder,  as  a  mixture  of 
sulphur,  nitre,  and  carbon,  on  being  exploded,  forms  gases  from  which 
the  original  substances  cannot  be  re-formed  at  any  temperature.  In 
order  to  obtain  them,  recourse  must  be  had  to  an  indirect  method  of 
combination  at  the  moment  of  separation.  If  A  does  not  under  any 
circumstances  combine  directly  with  B,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  cannot 
give  a  compound  A  B.  For  A  can  often  combine  with  C  and  B  with 
D,  and  if  C  has  a  great  affinity  for  D,  then  the  reaction  of  A  C  or  B  D 
produces  not  only  C  D,  but  also  A  B.  As  on  the  formation  of  C  D, 


INTRODUCTION  §0 

the  substances  A  and  B  (previously  in  A  0  and  B  D)  are  left  in  a, 
peculiar  state  of  separation,  it  is  supposed  that  their  mutual  com- 
bination occurs  because  they  meet  together  in  this  tiascent  state  at  ths 
moment  of  separation  (in  statu  nascendi).  Thus  chlorine  does  not 
directly  combine  with  charcoal,  graphite,  or  diamond  ;  there  are,  never- 
theless,  compounds  of  chlorine  with  carbon,  and  many  of  them  are 
distinguished  by  their  stability.  They  are  obtained  in  the  action  of 
chlorine  on  hydrocarbons,  as  the  separation  products  from  the  direct 
action  of  chlorine  on  hydrogen.  Chlorine  takes  up  the  hydrogen,  and 
the  carbon  liberated  at  the  moment  of  its  separation,  enters  into  com. 
bination  with  another  portion  of  the  chlorine,  so  that  in  the  end  the 
chlorine  is  combined  with  both  the  hydrogen  and  the  carbon.38 

As  regards  those  phenomena  which  accompany  chemical  action,  the 
most  important  circumstance  in  reference  to  chemical  mechanics  is  that 
not  only  do  chemical  processes  produce  a  mechanical  displacement  (a 
motion  of  particles),  heat,  light,  electrical  potential  and  current ;  but 
that  all  these  agents  are  themselves  capable  of  changing  and  governing 
chemical  transformations.  This  reciprocity  or  reversibility  naturally 
depends  on  the  fact  that  all  the  phenomena  of  nature  are  only  different 
kinds  and  forms  of  visible  and  invisible  (molecular)  motions.  First 
sound,  and  then  light,  was  shown  to  consist  of  vibratory  motions,  as 
the  laws  of  physics  have  proved  and  developed  beyond  a  doubt. 
The  connection  between  heat  and  mechanical  motion  and  work  has 
ceased  to  be  a  supposition,  but  has  become  an  accepted  fact,  and  the 
mechanical  equivalent  of  heat  (425  kilogrammetres  of  mechanical  work 
correspond  with  one  kilogram  unit  of  heat  or  Calorie)  gives  a  mecha- 
nical measure  for  thermal  phenomena.  Although  the  mechanical 
theory  of  electrical  phenomena  cannot  be  considered  so  fully  developed 
as  the  theory  of  heat,  both  statical  and  dynamical  electricity  are 

35  It  is  possible  to  imagine  that  the  cause  of  a  great  many  of  such  reactions  is,  that 
aubstances  taken  in  a  separate  state,  for  instance,  charcoal,  present  a  complex  molecule 
composed  of  separate  atoms  of  carbon  which  are  fastened  together  (united,  as  is  usually 
eaid)  by  a  considerable  affinity  ;  for  atoms  of  the  same  kind,  just  like  atoms  of  different 
kinds,  possess  a  mutual  affinity.  The  affinity  of  chlorine  for  carbon,  although  unable 
to  break  this  bond  asunder,  may  be  sufficient  to  form  a  stable  compound  with  atoms  of 
carbon,  which  are  already  separate.  Such  a  view  of  the  subject  presents  a  hypothesis 
which,  although  dominant  at  the  present  time,  is  without  sufficiently  firm  foundation.  It 
is  evident,  however,  that  not  only  does  chemical  reaction  itself  consist  of  motions,  but 
that  in  the  compound  formed  (in  the  molecules)  the  elements  (atoms)  forming  it  are  in 
harmonious  stable  motion  (like  the  planets  in  the  solar  system),  and  this  motion  will 
affect  the  stability  and  capacity  for  reaction,  and  therefore  the  mechanical  side  of  chemical 
action  must  be  exceedingly  complex.  Just  as  there  are  solid,  physically  constant  non- 
volatile substances  like  rock,  gold,  charcoal,  &c.,  so  are  there  stable  and  chemically  con- 
stant bodies  ;  while  corresponding  to  physically  volatile  substances  there  are  bodies  like 
ounphor,  which  are  chemically  unstable  and  variable. 


34  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

produced  l>y  mechanical  means  (in  common  electrical  machines  or  in 
Gramme  or  other  dynamos),  and  conversely,  a  current*  (in  electric 
motors)  can  produce  mechanical  motion.  Thus  by  connecting  a  current 
with  the  poles  of  a  Gramme  dynamo  it  may  be  made  to  revolve,  and, 
conversely,  by  rotating  it  an  electrical  current  is  produced,  which 
demonstrates  the  reversibility  of  electricity  into  mechanical  motion. 
Accordingly  chemical  mechanics  must  look  for  the  fundamental  lines 
of  its  advancement  in  the  correlation  of  chemical  with  physical  and 
mechanical  phenomena.  But  this  subject,  owing  to  its  complexity  and 
comparative  novelty,  has  not  yet  been  expressed  by  a  harmonious 
theory,  or  even  by  a  satisfactory  hypothesis,  and  therefore  we  shall 
avoid  lingering  over  it. 

A  chemical  change  in  a  certain  direction  is  accomplished  not  only 
by  reason  of  the  difference  of  masses,  the  composition  of  the  substances 
concerned,  the  distribution  of  their  parts,  and  their  affinity  or  chemical 
energy,  but  also  by  reason  of  the  conditions  under  which  the  sub- 
stances occur.  In  order  that  a  certain  chemical  reaction  may  take 
place  between  substances  which  are  capable  of  reacting  on  each  other, 
it  is  often  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  conditions  which  are  sometimes 
very  different  from  those  in  which  the  substances  usually  occur  in 
nature.  For  example,  not  only  is  the  presence  of  air  (oxygen)  necessary 
for  the  combustion  of  charcoal,  but  the  latter  must  also  be  heated  to 
redness.  The  red-hot  portion  of  the  charcoal  burns — i.e.  combines 
with  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere — and  in  so  doing  evolves  heat, 
which  raises  the  temperature  of  the  adjacent  parts  of  charcoal,  so 
that  they  burn.  Just  as  the  combustion  of  charcoal  is  dependent  on 
its  being  heated  to  redness,  so  also  every  chemical  reaction  only  takes 
place  under  certain  physical,  mechanical,  or  other  conditions.  The 
following  are  the  chief  conditions  which  exert  an  influence  on  the 
progress  of  chemical  reactions. 

(a)  Temperature. — Chemical  reactions  of  combination  only  take 
place  within  certain  definite  limits  of  temperature,  and  cannot  be 
accomplished  outside  these  limits.  We  may  cite  as  examples  not  only 
that  the  combustion  of  charcoal  begins  at  a  red  heat,  but  also  that 
chlorine  and  salt  only  combine  with  water  at  a  temperature  below  0°. 
These  compounds  cannot  be  formed  at  a  higher  temperature,  for  they 
are  then  wholly  or  partially  broken  up  into  their  component  parts. 
A  certain  rise  in  temperature  is  necessary  to  start  combustion.  In 
certain  cases  the  effect  of  this  rise  may  be  explained  as  causing  one 
of  the  reacting  bodies  to  change  from  a  solid  into  a  liquid  or  gaseous 
form.  The  transference  into  a  fluid  form  facilitates  the  progress  of 
the  reaction,  because  it  aids  the  intimate  contact  of  the  particles 


INTRODUCTION  35 

reacting  on  each  other  Another  reason,  and  to  this  must  be  ascribed 
the  chief  influence  of  heat  in  exciting  chemical  action,  is  that  the 
physical  cohesion,  or  the  internal  chemical  union,  of  homogeneous 
particles  is  thereby  weakenjed^  and  in  this  way  the  separation  of  the 
particles  oTTEcT  original  substances,  and  their  transference  into  new 
<?ompo  onds^s  rendered  easier.  When  a  reaction  absorbs  heat—  as  in 
decomposition  —  the  reason  why  heat  is  necessary  is  self-evident. 

At  the  present  day  it  may  be  asserted  upon  the  basis  of  existing 
data,  respecting  the  action  of    high  temperature,  that  all 


bodies  are  decomposed  at  a  more  or  less  high  temperature.  We  have 
already  seen  examples  of  this  in  describing  the  decomposition  of 
mercury  oxide  into  mercury  and  oxygen,  and  the  decomposition  of 
•wood  under  the  influence  of  heat.  Many  substances  are  decomposed 
<at  a  very  moderate  temperature  ;  for  instance,  the  fulminating  salt 
which  is  employed  in  cartridges  is  decomposed  at  a  little  above  1  20° 
The  majority  of  those  compounds  which  make  up  the  mass  of  animal 
and  vegetable  tissues  are  decomposed  at  200°.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  reason  to  think  that  at  a  very  low  temperature  no  reaction 
whatever  can  take  place.  Thus  plants  cease  to  carry  on  their  chemical 
processes  during  the  winter.  Raoul  Pictet  (1892),  employing  the  very 
low  temperatures  (as  low  as  —  200°C.)  obtained  by  the  evaporation  of 
liquefied  gases  (see  Chap.  II.),  has  recently  again  proved  that  at  tempera- 
tures below  —  120°,  even  such  reactions  as  those  between  sulphuric  acid 
and  caustic  .soda  or  metallic  sodium  do  not  take  place,  and  even  the 
coloration  of  litmus  by  acids  only  commences  at  temperatures  above 
—  80°.  If  a  given  reaction  does  not  take  place  at  a  certain  low  tempera- 
ture, it  will  at  first  only  proceed  slowly  with  a  rise  of  temperature  (even 
if  aided  by  an  electric  discharge),  and  will  only  proceed  rapidly,  with 
the  evolution  of  heat,  when  a  certain  definite  temperature  has  been 
reached.  Every  chemical  reaction  requires  certain  limits  of  tempera- 
ture for  its  accomplishment,  and,  doubtless,  many  of  the  chemical 
changes  observed  by  us  cannot  take  place  in  the  sun,  where  the 
temperature  is  very  high,  or  on  the  moon,  where  it  is  very  low. 

The  influence  of  heat  on  reversible  reactions  is  particularly  instruc- 
tive. If,  for  instance,  a  compound  which  is  capable  of  being  reproduced 
from  its  products  of  decomposition  be  heated  up  to  the  temperature  at 
which  decomposition  begins,  the  decomposition  of  a  mass  of  the  sub- 
stance contained  in  a  definite  volume  is  not  immediately  completed. 
Only  a  certain  fraction  of  the  substance  is  decomposed,  the  other  por- 
tion remaining  unchanged,  and  if  the  temperature  be  raised,  the  quan- 
tity of  the  substance  decomposed  increases  ;  furthermore,  for  a  given 
volume,  the  ratio  between  the  part  decomposed  and  the  part  unaltered 


86  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

corresponds  with  each  definite  rise  in  temperature  until  it  reaches  that 
at  which  the  compound  is  entirely  decomposed.  Tfeis  partial  decpm- 
Y  position  under  the  influence  of  heat  is  c&lledjlissociation.  It  is  pos- 
sible to  distinguish  between  the  temperatures  at  which  dissociation 
begins  and  ends.  Should  dissociation  proceed  at  a  certain  temperature, 
yet  should  the  product  or  products  of  decomposition  not  remain  in 
contact  with  the  still  undecomposed  portion  of  the  compound,  then 
decomposition  will  go  on  to  the  end.  Thus  limestone  is  decomposed 
in  a  limekiln  into  lime  and  carbonic  anhydride,  because  the  latter  is 
carried  off  by  the  draught  of  the  furnace.  But  if  a  certain  mass  of 
limestone  be  enclosed  in  a  definite  volume — for  instance,  in  a  gun 
barrel — which  is  then  sealed  up,  and  heated  to  redness,  then,  as  the 
carbonic  anhydride  cannot  escape,  a  certain  proportion  only  of  the 
limestone  will  be  decomposed  for  every  increment  of  heat  (rise  in  tem- 
perature) higher  than  that  at  which  dissociation  begins.  Decomposition 
will  cease  when  the  carbonic  anhydride  evolved  presents  a  maximum 
dissociation  pressure  corresponding  with  each  rise  in  temperature.  If 
the  pressure  be  increased  by  increasing  the  quantity  of  gas,  then  com- 
bination begins  afresh  ;  if  the  pressure  be  diminished  decomposition 
will  recommence.  Decomposition  in  this  case  is  exactly  similar  to 
evaporation  ;  if  the  steam  given  off  by  evaporation  cannot  escape,  its 
pressure  will  reach  a  maximum  corresponding  with  the  given  tempera- 
ture, and  then  evaporation  will  cease.  Should  steam  be  added  it  will 
be  condensed  in  the  liquid  ;  if  its  quantity  We  diminished  — i.e.  if  the 
pressure  be  lessened,  the  temperature  being  constant — then  evaporation 
will  go  on.  We  shall  afterwards  discuss  more  fully  these  phenomena  of 
dissociation^  which  were  first  discovered  by  Henri  St.  Claire  Deville. 
We  will  only  remark  that  the  products  of  decomposition  re- combine 
with  greater  facility  the  nearer  their  temperature  is  to  that  at  which 
dissociation  begins,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  initial  temperature  of 
dissociation  is  near  to  the  initial  temperature  of  combination. 

(6)  The  influence  of  an  electric  current,  and  of  electricity  in  general, 
on  the  progress  of  chemical  transformations  is  very  similar  to  the. 
influence  of  heat.  The  majority  of  compounds  which  conduct  elec- 
tricity are  decomposed  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current,  and  as 
there  is  great  similarity  in  the  conditions  under  which  decomposition 
and  combination  proceed,  combination  often  proceeds  under  the  in- 
fluence of  electricity.  Electricity,  like  heat,  must  be  regarded  as  a 
peculiar  form  of  molecular  motion,  and  all  that  refers  to  the  influence  of 
heat  also  refers  to  the  phenomena  produced  by  the  action  of  an 
electrical  current,  with  this  difference,  only  that  a  substance  can  be 
•eparated  into  its  component  parts  with  much  greater  ease  by  electricity, 


INTRODUCTION  97 

since  the  process  goes  on  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  The  most 
stable  compounds  may  be  decomposed  by  this  means,  and  a  most  im- 
portant fact  is  then  observed — namely,  that  the  component  parts 
appear  at  the  different  poles  of  electrodes  by  which  the  current  passes 
through  the  substance.  Those  substances  which  appear  at  the  positive, 
pole  (anode)  are  called  'electro-negative,'  and  those  which  appear  at 
the  negative  pole  (cathode,  that  in  connection  with  the  zinc  of  an 
ordinary  galvanic  battery)  are  called  '  electro-positive/  The  majority 
of  non-metallic  elements,  such  as  chlorine,  oxygen,  <fec.,  and  also  acids 
and  substances  analogous  to  them,  belong  to  the  first  group,  whilst  the 
metals,  hydrogen,  and  analogous  products  of  decomposition  appear 
at  the  negative  pole.  Chemistry  is  indebted  to  the  decomposition  of 
compounds  by  the  electric  current  for  many  most  important  discoveries. 
Many  elements  have  been  discovered  by  this  method,  the  most  im- 
portant being  potassium  and  sodium.  Lavoisier  and  the  chemists  of 
his  time  were  not  able  to  decompose  the  oxygen  compounds  of  these 
metals,  but  Davy  showed  that  they  might  be  decomposed  by  an 
electric  current,  the  metals  sodium  and  potassium  appearing  at  the 
negative  pole.  Now  that  the  dynamo  gives  the  possibility  of  pro- 
ducing an  electric  current  by  the  combustion  of  fuel,  this  method  of 
Sir  H.  Davy  is  advantageously  employed  for  obtaining  metals,  &c.  on 
a  large  scale,  for  instance,  sodium  from  fused  caustic  soda  or  chlorine 
from  solutions  of  salt. 

(c)  Certain  unstable  compounds  are  also  decomposed  by  the  action 
of  light.  Photography  is  based  on  this  property  in  certain  substances 
(for  instance,  in  the  salts  of  silver).  The  mechanical  energy  of  those 
vibrations  which  determine  the  phenomena  of  light  is  very  small,  and 
therefore  only  certain,  and  these  generally  unstable,  compounds  can  be 
decomposed  by  light — at  least  under  ordinary  circumstances.  But 
there  is  one  class  of  chemical  phenomena  dependent  on  the  action  of 
light  which  forms  as  yet  an  unsolved  problem  in  chemistry — these  are 
the  processes  accomplished  in  plants  under  the  influence  of  light 
Here  there  take  place  most  unexpected  decompositions  and  combina- 
tions, which  are  often  unattainable  by  artificial  means.  For  instance, 
carbonic  anhydride,  which  is  so  stable  under  the  influence  of  heat  and 
electricity,  is  decomposed  and  evolves  oxygen  in  plants  under  the 
influence  of  light.  In  other  cases,  light  decomposes  unstable  com- 
pounds, such  as  are  usually  easily  decomposed  by  heat  and  other 
agents.  Chlorine  combines  with  hydrogen  under  the  influence  of 
light,  which  shows  that  combination,  as  well  as  decomposition,  can 
be  determined  by  its  action,  as  was  likewise  the  case  with  heat  and 
electricity. 


88  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

(d)  Mechanical  causes  exert,  like  the  foregoing  agents,  an  action 
both  on  the  process  of  chemical  combination  and  of  decomposition. 
Many  substances  are  decomposed  by  friction  or  by  a  blow— as,  for 
example,  the  compound  called  iodide  of  nitrogen  (which  is  composed  of 
iodine,   nitrogen,  and   hydrogen),  and  silver  fulminate.     Mechanical 
friction  causes  sulphur  to  burn  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  contained 
in  potassium  chlorate.     Pressure  affects  both  the  physical  and  chemical 
state  of  the  reacting  substances,  and,  together  with  the  temperature, 
determines  the  state  of  a  substance.     This  is  particularly  evident  when 
the  substance  occurs  in  an  elastic -gaseous  form  since  the  volume,  and 
hence  also  the  number  of  points  of  encounter  between  the  reacting 
substances  is  greatly  altered  by  a  change  of  pressure.     Thus,  under 
equal  conditions  of  temperature,  hydrogen  when  compressed  acts  more 
powerfully  upon  iodine  and  on  the  solutions  of  many  salts. 

(e)  Besides  the  various   conditions  which  have  been  enumerated 
above,  the  progress  of  chemical  reactions  is  accelerated  or  retarded  by 
the  condition  of  contact  in  which  the  reacting  bodies  occur      Other 
conditions  remaining  constant,  the  .rate  of  progress  of  a  chemical  re- 
action is  accelerated  by  increasing  the  number  of  points  of  contact.     It 
will  be  enough  to  point  out  the  fact  that  sulphuric  acid  does  not  absorb 
ethylene  under  ordinary  conditions  of  contapt,  but  only   after  con- 
tinued shaking,  by  which  means  the  number  of  points  of  contact  is 
greatly  increased.     To   ensure   complete  action  between  solids,  it  is 
necessary  to  reduce  them  to  very  fine  powder  and  to  mix  them  as 
thoroughly  as  possible.     M.  Spring,  the  Belgian  chemist,  has  shown 
that  finely  powdered  solids  which  do  not  react  on  each  other  at  the 
ordinary  temperature  may  do  so  under  an  increased  pressure.     Thus, 
under  a  pressure  of  6,000  atmospheres,  sulphur  combines  with  many 
metals  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  mixtures  of  the  powders  of 
many  metals  form  alloys.     It  is  evident  that  an  increase  in  the  number 
of  points  or  surfaces  must  be  regarded  as  the  chief  cause  producing 
reaction,  which  is  doubtless  accomplished  in  solids,  as  in  liquids  and 
gases,  in  virtue  of  an  internal  motion  of  the  particles,  which  motion, 
although  in  different  degrees  and  forms,  must  exist  in  all  the  states  of 
matter.     It  is  very  important  to  direct  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
internal  motion  or  condition  of  the  parts  of  the  particles  of  matter 
must  be  different  on  the  surface  of  a  substance  from  what  it  is  inside  ; 
because  in  the  interior  of  a  substance  similar  particles  are  acting  on 
all  sides  of  every  particle,  whilst  at  the  surface  they  act  on  one  side 
only.     Therefore,  the  condition  of  a  substance  at  its  surfaces  of  contact 
with  other  substances  must  be  more  or  less  modified  by  them — it  may 
t)e  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  caused  by  an  elevation  of  temperature.. 


INTRODUCTION  89 

These  considerati6na  throw  some  light  on  the  action  in  the  large  class 
of  contact  reactions  ;  that  is,  such  as  appear  to  proceed  from  the  mere 
presence  (contact)  of  certain  special  substances.  Porous  or  powdery 
substances  are  very  prone  to  act  in  this  way,  especially  spongy 
platinum  and  charcoal.  For  example,  sulphurous  anhydride  does  not 
combine  directly  with  oxygen,  but  this  reaction  takes  place  in  the 
presence  of  spongy  platinum.36 

The  above  general  and  introductory  chemical  conceptions  cannot  be 
thoroughly  grasped  in  their  true  sense  without  a  knowledge  of  the 
particular  facts  of  chemistry  to  which  we  shall  now  turn  our  attention* 
It  was,  however,  absolutely  necessary  to  become  acquainted  on  the 
very  threshold  with  such  fundamental  principles  as  the  laws  of  the 
indestructibility  of  matter  and  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  since  it  is 
Only  by  their  acceptance,  and  under  their  direction  and  influence,  that 
the  examination  of  particular  facts  can  give  practical  and  fruitful  results. 

50  Contact  phenomena  are  separately  considered  in  detail  in  the  work  of  Professor 
Konovaloff  (1884).  In  my  opinion,  it  must  be  held  that  the  state  of  the  internal  motions 
of  the  atoms  in  molecules  is  modified  at  the  points  of  contact  of  substances,  and  this 
state  determines  chemical  reactions,  and  therefore,  that  reactions  of  combination,  de- 
composition, and  rearrangement  are  accomplished  by  contact.  Professor  Konovaloff 
showed  that  a  number  of  substances,  under  certain  conditions  of  their  surfaces,  act  by 
contact ;  for  instance,  finely  divided  silica  (from  the  hydrate)  acts  just  like  platinum, 
decomposing  certain  compound  ethers.  As  reactions  are  only  accomplished  under  closd 
contact,  it  is  probable  that  those  modifications  in  the  distribution  of  the  atoms  in  mole- 
cules which  come  about  by  contact  phenomena  prepare  the  way  for  them.  By  this  the 
rdle  of  contact  phenomena  is  considerably  extended.  Such  phenomena  should  explain 
the  fact  why  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  yields  water  (explodes)  at  different 
temperatures,  according  to  the  kind  of  heated  substance  which  transmits .  tlu's  tempera- 
ture. In  chemical  mechanics,  phenomena  of  this  kind  have  great  importance,  but  as  yet 
they  have  been  but  little  studied.  It  murt  not  be  forgotten  that  contact  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  every  chemical  reaction. 


40  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


CHAPTER  I 

ON    WATER   AND   ITS   COMPOUNDS 

WATER  is  found  almost  everywhere  in  nature,  and  in  all  three  physical 
states.  As  vapour,  water  occurs  in  the  atmosphere,  and  in  this  form 
it  is  distributed  over  the  entire  surface  of  the  earth.  The  vapour  of 
water  in  condensing,  by  cooling,  forms  snow,  rain,  hail,  dew,  and  fog. 
One  cubic  metre  (or  1,000,000  cubic  centimetres,  or  1,000  litres,  or 
35*316  cubic  feet)  of  air  can  contain  at  0°  only  4  8  grams  of  water,  at 
20°  about  17*0  grams,  at  40°  about  50*7  grams  ;  but  ordinary  air  only 
contains  about  60  per  cent,  of  this  maximum.  Air  containing  less 
than  40  per  cent,  is  felt  to  be  dry,  whilst  air  which  contains  more  than 
80  per  cent,  of  the  same  maximum  is  considered  as  distinctly  damp.1 
Water  in  the  liquid  state,  in  falling  as  rain  and  snow,  soaks  into  the 

1  In  practice,  the  chemist  has  to  continually  deal  with  gases,  and  gases  are  often 
collected  over  water ;  in  which  case  a  certain  amount  of  water  passes  into  vapour,  and 
this  vapour  mixes  with  the  gases.  It  is  therefore  most  important  that  he  should  be  able 
to  calculate  the  amount  of  water  or  of  moisture  ^n  air  and  other  gases.  Let  us 
imagine  a  cylinder  3 landing  in  a  mercury  bath,  and  filled  with  a  dry  gas  whose  volume- 
equals  v,  temperature  t°,  and  pressure  or  tension  h  mm.  (h  millimetres  of  the  column  of 
mercury  at  0°).  We  will  introduce  water  into  the  cylinder  in  such  a  quantity  that  a  small 
part  remains  in  the  liquid  state,  and  consequently  that  the  gas  will  be  saturated  with 
aqueous  vapour ;  the  volume  of  the  gas  will  then  increase  (if  a  larger  quantity  of  water  be 
taken  some  of  the  gas  will  be  dissolved  in  it,  and  the  volume  may  therefore  be  diminished). 
We  will  further  suppose  that,  after  the  addition  of  the  water,  the  temperature  remains 
constant;  then  since  the  volume  increases,  the  mercury  in  the  cylinder  falls,  and  therefore 
the  pressure  as  well  as  the  volume  is  increased.  In  order  to  investigate  the  phenomenon 
we  will  artificially  increase  the  pressure,  and  reduce  the  volume  to  the  original 
volume  v.  Then  the  pressure  or  tension  will  be  greater  than  h,  namely  h  +f,  which 
means  that  by  the  introduction  of  aqueous  vapour  the  pressure  of  the  gas  is  increased. 
The  researches  of  Dalton,  Gay-Lussac,  and  Regnault  showed  that  this  increase  is  equal 
to  the  maximum  pressure  which  is  proper  to  the  aqueous  vapour  at  the  temperature  at 
which  the  observation  is  made.  -The  maximum  pressure  for  all  temperatures  may  be 
found  in  the  tables  made  from  observations  on  the  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour.  The 
quantity  /  will  be  equal  to  this  maximum  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour.  This  may  be 
expressed  thus :  the  maximum  tension  of  aqueous  vapour  (and  of  all  other  vapours) 
saturating  a  space  in  a  vacuum  or  in  any  gas  is  the  same.  This  rule  is  known  as 
Dalian's  law.  Thus  we  have  a  volume  of  dry  gas  v,  under  a  pressure  h,  and  a  volume 
of  moist  gas,  saturated  with  vapour,  under  a  pressure  h  +/.  The  volume  v  of  the  dry 

gas  under  a  pressure  h  +f  occupies,  from  Boyle's  law,  a  volume  - —  ;  consequently  the 

h+f 


ON  WATEK  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  41 

soil  and  collects  together  into  springs,  lakes,  rivers,  seas,  and  oceans. 
It  is  absorbed  from  the  soil  by  the  roots  of  plants,  which,  when  fresh, 

volume  occupied  by  the  aqueous  vapour  under  the  pressure  h+f  equals  v  —  ,-—  „,  or 

h+f 

£i~.  Thus  the  volumes  of  the  dry  gas  and  of  the  moisture  which  occurs  in  it,  at  a 
h+f 

pressure  h  +/,  are  in  the  ratio  /  :  h.  And,  therefore,  if  the  aqueous  vapouf.  saturates  a 
space  at  a  pressure  n,  the  volumes  of  the  dry  air  and  of  the  moisture  which  is  contained 
in  it  are  in  the  ratio  n-f:f,  where  /  is  the  pressure  of  tho  vapour  according  to  the 
tables  of  yapour  tension.  Thus,  if  a  volume  N  of  a  gas  saturated  with  moisture 
be  measured  at  a  pressure  H,  then  the  volume  of  the  gas,  when  dry,  will  be  equal  to 

TT      -f 

N          -     k1  fact>  the  entire  volume  N  must  be  to  the  volume  of  dry  gas  a;  as  H  is  to 


TT  _  _  f 

H-/;  therefore,  N  :x  =  H  :  H-/,  from  which  x  =  N-j^.    Under  any  o^ther  pressure  — 

for  instance,  760  mm.  —  the  volume  of  dry  gas  will  be  —  ,  or  -—  /,  and  we  thus  obtain 

760          760 

the  following  practical  rule  :  If  a  volume  of  a  gas  saturated  with  aqueous  vapour  be 
measured  at  a  pressure  H  mm.,  then  the  volume  of  dry  gas  contained  hv  it  will  be 
obtained  by  finding  the  volume  corresponding  to  the  pressure  H,  lees  the  pressure  due 
to  the  aqueous  vapour  at  the  temperature  observed.  For  example,  87*5  cubic  centi- 
metres of  air  saturated  with  aqueous  «vapour  were  measured  at  a  temperature  of  15'8°, 
and  under  a  pressure  of  747'3  mm.  of  mercury  (at  0°).  What  will  be  the  volume,  of  dry 
gas  at  0°  and  760  mm.  ? 

The  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour  corresponding  to  16*8°  is  equal  to  12*9  mm.,  and 

therefore  the  volume  of  dry  gas  at  15'8°  and  747'8  mm.  is  equal  to  87-5  x  .747'8"12'9  ;    at 

•  747'S 


760  mm.  it  will  be  equal  to  87'5  x  ,    and  at  0°  the  volume  of  dry  gas  will   be 

' 


From  this  rule  may  also  be  calculated  what  fraction  of  a  volume  of  gas  is  occupied  by 
moisture  under  the  ordinary  pressure  at  different  temperatures  ;  for  instanee,  at  80°  C. 
f  <=81'5,  consequently  ICO  volumes  of  a  moist  gas  or  air,  at  760  mm.,  contain  a  volume  of 

aqueous  vapour  100  x  ^L?,   or  4-110  ;  it  is  also  found  that  at  0°  there  is  contained 

0'61  p.o.  by  volume,  at  10°  1'21  p.c.,  at  20°  2*29  p.c.,  and  at  60°  up  to  12-11  p.c.  From 
this  it  may  be  judged  how  great  an  error  might  be  made  in  the  measurement  of  gases 
by  volume  if  the  moisture  were  not  taken  into  consideration.  From  this  it  is  also 
evident  how  great  are  the  variations  in  volume  of  the  atmosphere  when  it  loses  or  gains 
aqueous  vapour,  which  again  explains  a  number  of  atmospheric  phenomena  (winds, 
variation  of  pressure,  rainfalls,  storms,  Sic.) 

If  a  gas  is  not  saturated,  then  it  is  indispensable  that  the  degree  of  moisture  should 
be  known  in  order  to  determine  the  volume  of  dry  gas  from  the  volume  of  moist  gas. 
The  preceding  ratio  gives  the  maximum  quantity  of  water  which  can  be  held  in  a  gas, 
and  the  degree  of  moisture  shows  what  fraction  of  this  maximum  quantity  occurs  in  n 
given  case,  when  the  vapour  does  not  saturate  the  space  occupied  by  the  gas.  Conse- 
quently, if  the  degree  of  moisture  equals  50  p.c.—  that  is,  half  the  maximum—  then  the 
volume  of  dry  gas  at  760  mm.  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  dry  gas  at  760  mm.  multiplied  by 

7605^'  °r>  'n  general>  by  ^g5~'  wnere  r  is  the  degree  of  moisture.  Thus,  if  it  is 
required  to  measure  the  volume  of  a  moist  gas,  it  must  either  be  thoroughly  dried  or 
quite  saturated  with  moisture,  or  else  the  degree  of  moisture  determined.  The  first  and 
last  methods  are  inconvenient,  and  therefore  recourse  is  usually  had  to  the  second.  For 
this  purpose  water  is  introduced  into  the  cylinder  holding  the  gas  to  be  measured  ;  it  is 


42  PE1NCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

contain  from  40  to  80  per  cent,  of  water  by  weight.  Animals  contain 
about  the  same  amount  of  water.  In  a  solid  state,  water  appears 

left  for  a  certain  time  so  that  the  gas  may  become  saturated,  the  precautibn  being  taken 
that  a  portion  of  the  water  remains  in  a  liquid  state  ;  then  the  volume  of  the  moist  gas 
is  determined,  from  which  that  of  the  dry  gas  may  be  calculated.  In  order  to  find  the 
weight  of  the  aqueous  vapour  in  a  gas  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  weight  of  a  cubio 
measure  at  0°  and  760  mm.  Knowing  that  one  cubic  centimetre  of  air  in  these  circum- 
stances weighs  0'001293  gram,  and  that  the  density  of  aqueous  vapour  is  0'62,  we  find 
that  one  cubic  centimetre  of  aqueous  vapour  at  0°  and  760  mm.  weighs  O'OOOS  gram> 
And  at  a  temperature  t°  and  pressure  h  the  weight  of  one'fcubic  centimetre  will  be 

U'0008  x    .  '*.  x  JK?  .    We  already  know  that  v  volumes  of  a  gas  at  a  temperature  IP 
760    278  +  1 

pressure  h  contain  v  x  t  volumes  of  aqueous  vapour  which  saturate  it,  therefore  the 
weight  of  the  aqueous  vapour  held  in  v  volumes  of  a  gas  will  be 


Accordingly,  the  weight  of  water  which  is  contained  in  one  volume  of  a  gas  depends 
only  on  (he  temperature  and  not  on  the  pressure.  This  also  signifies  that  evapora- 
tion proceeds  to  the  same*  extent  in  air  as  in  a  vacuum,  or,  in  general  terms  (this  is 
Dalton's  law),  vapours  and  gases  diffuse  into  each  other  as  if  into  a  vacuum.  In  a  given 
space,  at  a  given  temperature,  a  constant  quantity  of  vapour  enters,  whatever  be  the 
pressure  of  the  gas  filling  that  space. 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  if  the  weight  of  the  vapour  contained  in  a  given  volume 

7fiO 

of  a  gas  be  known,  it  is  easy  to  determine  the  degree  of  moisture  r=  —  £  —  -  .  x  —  x 

'-•-  *  ...     On  this  is  founded  the  very  exact  determination  of  the  degree  of  moisture  of 
278  f 

air  by  the  weight  of  water  contained  in  a  given  volume.  It  is  easy  to  calculate  from 
the  preceding  formula  the  number  of  grams  of  water  contained  at  any  pressure  in  one 
cubic  metre  or  million  cubic  centimetres  of  air  saturated  with  vapour  at  various  tempera- 
tures; for  instance,  at  80°  /=81'5,  hence  ^  =  29'84  grams. 

The  laws  of  Mariotte,  Dalton,  and  Gay-Lussac,  which  are  here  applied  to  gases  and 
vapours,  are  not  entirely  exact,  but  are  approximately  true.  If  they  were  quite  exact, 
a  mixture  of  several  liquids,  having  a  certain  vapour  pressure,  would  give  vapours  of  a 
very  high  pressure,  which  is  not  the  case.  In  fact  the  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour  is 
slightly  less  in  a  gas  than  in  a  vacuum,  and  the  weight  of  aqueous  vapour  held  in  a  gas 
is  slightly  less  than  it  should  be  according  to  Dalton's  law,  as  was  shown  by  the  experi- 
ments of  Regnault  and  others.  This  means  that  the  tension  of  the  vapour  is  less  in  air 
than  in  a  vacuum.  The  difference  does  not,  however,  exceed  5  per  cent,  of  the  total 
pressure  of  the  vapours.  This  decrement  in  vapour  tension  which  occurs  in  the  inter- 
mixture of  vapours  and  gases,  although  small  indicates  that  there  is  then  already,  so  to 
speak,  a  beginning  of  chemical  change.  The  essence  of  the  matter  is  that  in  this  case 
there  occurs,  as  on  contact  (see  preceding  footnote),  an  alteration  in  the  motions  of  the 
atoms  in  the  molecules,  and  therefore  .  also  a  change  in  the  motion  of  the  molecules 
themselves. 

In  the  uniform  intermixture  of  air  and  other  gases  with  aqueous  vapour,  and  in  the 
capacity  of  water  to  pass  into  vapour  and  form  a  uniform  mixture  with  air,  we  may 
perceive  an  instance  of  a  physical  phenomenon  which  is  analogous  to  chemical  phe- 
nomena, forming  indeed  a  transition  from  one  class  of  phenomena  to  the  other.  Between 
water  and  dry  air  there  exists  a  kind  of  affinity  which  obliges  the  water  to  saturate  the 
air.  But  such  a  homogeneous  mixture  is  formed  (almost)  independently  of  the  nature  of 
the  gas  in  which  evaporation  takes  place  ;  even  in  a  vacuum  the  phenomenon  occurs  in 
exactly  the  same  way  as  in  a  gas,  and  therefore  it  is  not  the  property  of  the  gas,  nor  its 
relation  to  water,  but  the  property  of  thf  water  itself,  which  compels  it  to  evaporate,  and 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  48 

as  snow,  ice,  or  in  an  intermediate  form  between  these  two,  which 
is  seen  on  mountains  covered  with  perpetual  snow.  The  water  of 
rivers,2  springs,  oceans  and  seas,  lakes,  and  wells  contains  various 

therefore  in  this  case  chemical  affinity  is  not  yet  operative— at  least  its  action  is  not 
clearly  pronounced.  That  it  does,  however,  play  a  certain  part  is  seen  from  the  deviation 
from  Dalton's  law. 

2  In  falling  through  the  atmosphere,  water  dissolves  the  gases  of  the  atmosphere, 
nitric  acid,  ammonia,  organic  compounds,  salts  of  sodium,  magnesium,  and  calcium,  and 
mechanically  washes  out  a  mixture  of  dust  and  microbes  which  are  suspended  in  the 
atmosphere.  The  amount  of  these  and  certain  other  constituents  is  very  variable.  Even 
in  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  same  rainfall  a  variation  which  is  often  very  considerable 
may  be  remarked.  Thus',  for  example,  Bunsen  found  that  rain  collected  at  the  beginning 
of  a  shower  contained  3' 7  grams  of  ammonia  per  cubic  metre,  whilst  that  collected  at  the 
end  of  the  same  shower  contained  only  0*64  gram.  The  water  of  the  entire  shower  con- 
tained an  average  of  1-47  gram  of  ammonia  per  cubic  metre.  In  the  course  of  a  year 
rain  supplies  an  acre  of  ground  with  as  much  as  6£  kilos  of  nitrogen  in  a  combined  form. 
Marchand  found  in  one  cubic  metre  of  snow  water  15*68,  and  in  one  cubic  metre  of  rain 
water  10*07,  grams  of  sodium  sulphate.  Angus  Smith  showed  that  after  a  thirty  hours' 
fall  at  Manchester  the  rain  still  contained  84*8  grams  of  salts  per  cubic  metre.  A  con- 
siderable amount  of  organic  matter,  namely  25  grams  per  cubic  metre,  has  been  found 
in  rain  water.  The  total  amount  of  solid  matter  in  rain  water  reaches  50  grams  per 
cubic  metre.  Rain  water  generally  contains  very  little  carbonic  acid,  whilst  river 
water  contains  a  considerable  quantity  of  it.  In  considering  the  nourishment  of 
plants  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  view  the  substances  which  are  carried  into  the  soil 
by  rain. 

River  water,  which  is  accumulated  from  springs  and  sources  fed  by  atmospheric 
water,  contains  from  50  to  1,600  parts  by  weight  of  salts  in  1,000,000  parts.  The  amount 
of  solid  matter,  per  1,000,000  parts  by  weight,  contained  in  the  chief  rivers  is  aa 
follows :— the  Don  124,  the  Loire  185,  the  St.  Lawrence  170,  the  Rhone  182,  the  Dnieper 
187,  the  Danube  from  117  to  284,  the  Rhine  from  158  to  317,  the  Seine  from  190  to  482, 
the  Thames  at  London  from  400  to  450,  in  its  upper  parts  887,  and  in  its  lower  parts  up 
to  1,617,  the  Nile  1,580,  the  Jordan  1,052.  The  Neva  is  characterised  by  the  remarkably 
small  amount  of  solid  matter  it  contains.  From  the  investigations  of  Prof.  G.  K.  Trapp, 
a  cubic  metre  of  Neva  water  contains  82  grams  of  incombustible  and  23  grams  of 
organic  matter,  or  altogether  about  55  grams.  This  is  one  of  the  purest  waters  which  is 
known  in  rivers.  The  large  amount  of  impurities  in  river  water,  and  especially  of  organio 
impurity  produced  by  pollution  with  putrid  matter,  makes  the  water  of  many  rivers  unfit 
for  use. 

The  chief  part  of  the  soluble  substances  in  river  water  consists  of  the  calcium  salts. 
100  parts  of  the  solid  residues  contain  the  following  amounts  of  calcium  carbonate— 
from  the  water  of  the  Loire  58,  from  the  Thames  about  50,  the  Elbe'  55,  the  Vistula  65, 
the  Danube  65,  the  Rhine  from  55  to  75,  the  Seine  75,  the  Rhone  from  82  to  94.  The 
Neva  contains  40  parts  of  calcium  carbonate  per  100  parts  of  saline  matter.  The  con* 
aider-able  amount  of  calcium  carbonate  which  river  water  contains  is  very  easily  explained 
from  the  fact  that  water  which  contains  carbonic  acid  hi  solution  easily  dissolves  calcium 
carbonate,  which  occurs  all  over  the  earth.  Besides  calcium  carbonate  and  sulphate, 
river  water  contains  magnesium,  silica,  chlorine,  sodium,  potassium,  aluminium,  nitric  acid, 
iron  and  manganese.  The  presence  of  salts  of  phosphoric  acid  has  not  yet  been  determined 
with  exactitude  for  all  rivers,  but  the  presence  of  nitrates  has  been  proved  with  certainty 
in  almost  all  kinds  of  well-investigated  river  water.  The  quantity  of  calcium  phosphate 
does  not  exceed  0*4  gram  in  the  water  of  the  Dnieper,  and  the  Don  does  not  contain  more 
than  5  grams.  The  water  of  the  Seine  contains  about  15  grams  of  nitrates,  and  that  of  the 
Rhone  about  8  grams.  The  amount  of  ammonia  is  much  less ;  thus  in  the  water  of  the 
Jttxine  about  0*5  gram  in  June,  and  0*2  gram  in  October ;  the  water  of  the  Seine  contains 


44  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

substances  in  solution  mostly  salt,—  that  is,  substances  resembling 
common  table  salt  in  their  physical  properties  and  chief  chemical 
transformations.  Further,  the  quantity  and  nature  of  these  salt* 
differ  in  different  waters.3  Everybody  knows  that  there  are 


(he  same  amount.  This  is  less  than  in  rain  water.  Notwithstanding  this  insignificant 
quantity,  the  water  of  the  Rhine  alone,  which  is  not  so  very  large  a  river,  carries  16,241 
kilograms  of  ammonia  into  the  ocean-every  day.  The  difference  between  the  amount  of 
ammonia  in  rain  and  river  water  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  soil  through  which  lh« 
rain  water  passes  is  able  to  retain  the  ammonia.  (Soil  can  also  absorb  many  other  sub- 
stances,  such  as  phosphoric  acid,  potassium  salts,  &c.) 

The  waters  of  springs,  rivers,  wells,  and  in  general  of  those  localities  from  which  it  M 
taken  for  drinking  purposes,  may  be  injurious  to  health  if  it  contains  much  organic 
pollution,  the  more  so  as  in  such  water  the  lower  organisms  (bacteria)  may  rapidly 
develop,  and  these  organisms  often  serve  as  the  carriers  or  causes  of  infectious  diseases. 
For  instance,  certain  pathogenic  (disease-producing)  bacteria  are  known  to  produce 
-typhoid,  the  Siberian  plague,  and  cholera.  Thanks  to  the  work  of  Pasteur,  Metchnikoff, 
Koch,  and  many  others,  this  province  of  research  has  made  considerable  progress.  It  is 
possible  to  investigate  the  number  and  properties  of  the  germs  in  water.  In  bacterio- 
logical researches  a  gelatinous  medium  in  which  the  germs  can  develop  and  multiply  is 
prepared  with  gelatin  and  water,  which  has  previously  been  heated  several  times,  at 
intervals,  to  100°  (it  is  thus  rendered  sterile  —  that  is  to  say,  all  the  germs  in  it  are  killed). 
The  water  to  be  investigated  is  added  to  this  prepared  medium  in  a  definite  and  small 
quantity  (sometimes  diluted  with  sterilised  water  to  facilitate  the  calculation  of  the 
number  of  germs),  it  is  protected  from  dust  (which  contains  germs),  and  is  left  at  rest 
until  whole  families  of  lower  organisms  are  developed  from  each  germ.  These  families 
(colonies)  are  visible  to  the  naked  eye  (as  spots),  they  may  be  counted,  and  by  examining 
them  under  the  microscope  and  observing  the  number  of  organisms  they  produce,  their 
significance  may  be  determined.  The  majority  of  bacteria  are  harmless,  but  there  are 
decidedly  pathogenic  bacteria,  whose  presence  is  one  of  the  causes  of  malady  and  of  the 
spread  of  certain  diseases.  The  number  of  bacteria  in  one  cubic  centimetre  of  water 
sometimes  attains  the  immense  figures  of  hundreds  of  thousands  and  millions.  Certain 
well,  spring,  and  river  waters  contain  very  few  bacteria,  and  are  free  from  disease- 
producing  bacteria  under  ordinary  circumstances.  By  boiling  water,  the  bacteria  in  it 
are  killed,  but  the  organic  matter  necessary  for  their  nourishment  remains  in  the  water. 
The  best  kinds  of  water  for  drinking  purposes  do  not  contain  more  than  800  bacteria  in 
a  cubic  centimetre. 

The  amount  of  gases  dissolved  in  river  water  is  much  more  constant  than  that  of  its 
solid  constituents.  One  litre,  or  1,000  c.c.,  of  water  contains  40  to  55  c.c.  of  gas  measured 
at  normal  temperature  and  pressure.  In  winter  the  amount  of  gas  is  greater  than  in 
summer  or  autumn.  Assuming  that  a  litre  contains  50  c.c.  of  gases,  it  may  be  admitted 
that  these  consist,  on  an  average,  of  20  vols.  of  nitrogen,  20  vols  of  carbonic  anhydride 
(proceeding  in  all  likelihood  from  the  soil  and  not  from  the  atmosphere),  and  of  10  vols. 
of  oxygen.  If  the  total  amount  of  gases  be  less,  the  constituent  gases  are  still  in  about 
the  same  proportion  ;  in  many  cases,  however,  carbonic  anhydride  predominates.  The 
water  of  many  deep  and  rapid  rivers  contains  less  carbonic  anhydride,  which  shows  their 
rapid  formation  from  atmospheric  water,  and  that  they  have  not  succeeded,  during  a  long 
and  slow  course,  in  absorbing  a  greater  quantity  of  carbonic  anhydride.  Thus,  for 
instance,  the  water  of  the  Rhine,  near  Strasburg,  according  to  Deville,  contains  8  c.c. 
of  carbonic  anhydride,  16  c.c.  of  nitrogen,  and  7  c.c.  of  oxygen  per  litre.  From  the 
researches  of  Prof.  M.  R.  Kapoustin  and  his  pupils,  it  appears  that  in  determining  the 
quality  of  a  water  for  drinking  purposes,  it  is  most  important  to  investigate  the  composi- 
tion of  the  dissolved  gases,  more  especially  oxygen. 

5  Spring  water  is  formed  from  rain  water  percolating  through  the  soil  Naturally  a 
part  of  the  rain  water  is  evaporated  directly  from  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  from  the 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  45 

fresh,  iron,  and  other  waters.     The  presence  of  about  3|  per  cent. 

vegetation  on  it.  It  has  been  shown  that  out  of  100  parts  of  water  falling  on  the  earth 
only  86  parts  flow  to  the  oeean ;  the  remaining  64  are  evaporated,  or  percolate  far  under- 
ground. After  flowing  underground  along  some  impervious  strata,  water  comes  out  at 
the  surface  in  many  places  as  springs,  whose  temperature  is  determined  by  the  depth 
from  which  the  water  has  flowed.  Springs  penetrating  to  a  great  depth  may  become 
considerably  heated,  and  this  is  why  hot  mineral  springs,  with  a  temperature  of  up  to 
80°  and  higher,  are  often  met  with.  When  a  spring  water  contains  substances  which 
endow  it  with  a  peculiar  taste,  and  especially  if  these  substances  are  such  as  are  only 
found  in  minute  quantities  in  river  and  other  flowing  waters,  then  the  spring  water  is 
termed  a  mineral  water.  Many  such  waters  are  employed  for  medicinal  purposes. 
Mineral  waters  are  classed  according  to  their  composition  into — (a)  saline  waters,  which 
often  contain  a  large  amount  of  common  salt;  (6)  alkaline  waters,  which  contain  sodium 
carbonate ;  (c)  bitter  waters,  which  contain  magnesia ;  (d)  chalybeate  waters,  which  hold 
iron  carbonate  in  solution ;  (e)  aerated  waters,  which  are  rich  in  carbonic  anhydride ; 
(/)  sulphuretted  waters,  which  contain  hydrogen  sulphide.  Sulphuretted  waters  may  b« 
recognised  by  their  smell  of  rotten  eggs,  and  by  their  giving  a  black  precipitate  with  lead 
salts,  and  also  by  their  tarnishing  silver  objects.  Aerated  waters,  which  contain  an 
excess  of  carbonic  anhydride,  effervesce  in  the  air,  have  a  sharp  taste,  and  redden  litmus 
paper.  Saline  waters  leave  a  large  residue  of  soluble  solid  matter  on  evaporation,  and 
have  a  salt  taste.  Chalybeate  waters  have  an  inky  taste,  aud  are  coloured  black  by  an 
infusion  of  galls ;  on  being  exposed  to  tho  air  they  usually  give  a  brown  precipitate. 
Generally,  the  character  of  mineral  waters  is  mixed.  In  the  table  below  the  analyses 
are  given  of  certain  mineral  springs  which  are  valued  for  their  medicinal  properties. 
The  quantity  of  the  substances  is  expressed  in  raillionths  by  weight. 


III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX 

X. 

XI. 


1.928 
816 


343 
1,406 
352 


1,726 
S  551 


340 


if 


386 
1,430 
3,783 
15,049 
3,145 
1,036 
9,480 
2,040 


910 


152 

1,239 

1,105 

16 


2,583 

1,150 
279 


3,431 


1,261 

999 
3,813 


24 
43 
90 
14 

50 

120 

I 


Iron  and  aluminium  sulphates 


•i 


1,020 
1,660 


448 
267 
187 
251 
1,587 
260 
178 


45 

940 


152 
46 
65 
112 
229 
11 
75 
40 
50 
45 

190 


1,300 
1,485 
1,326 
2,883 


2,740 
2,268 

2,550 


76 


2.609 
2,812 
3,950 
7,980 
20,290 


3,970 
5,451 
11,790 
4,070 
5.031 
Sulphuric 

and  hydro- 
chloric acids 


I.  Sergieffsky,  a  sulphur  water,  Gov.  of  Samara  (temp.  8°  C.),  Analysis  by  Clause. 
II.  Geleznovodskya  water  source  No.  10,  near  Patigorsk,  Caucasus  (temp.  22'5°),  analysis 
by  Fritzsche.  III.  Aleksandroffsky,  alkaline-sulphur  source,  Patigorsk  (temp.  dG'S0^ 
average  of  analyses  by  Herman,  Zinin  and  Fritzsche.  IV  Bougouiitouksky,  alkaline 
source,  No.  17,  Essentoukah,  Caugasus  (temp.  21'6°),  analysis  by  Fritzsche.  V.  Saline 
water,  Staro-Russi,  Gov.  of  Novgorod,  analysis  by  Nelubin.  VI.  Water  from  artesian 
well  at  the  factory  of  state  papers,  St.  Petersburg,  analysis  by  Struve.  VII.  Sprtidel, 
Carlsbad  (temp.  83'7°),  analysis  by  Berzelius.  VIII.  Kreuznach  spring  (Elisenquelle), 
Prussia  (temp.  8'8°),  analysis  by  Bauer.  IX.  Eau  de  Seltz,  Nassau,  analysis  by  Henry. 
X.  Vichy  water,  France,  analysis  by  Berthier  and  Pnvy.  XI.  Paramo  de  Ruiz,  New 
Granada,  analysis  by  Levy  ;  it  is  distinguished  by  the  amount  of  free  acids. 


46  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

of  salts  renders  sea- water4  bitter  to  the  taste  and  increases  its  specific 
gravity.  Fresh  water  also  contains  salts,  but  only  in  a  compara- 
tively small  quantity.  Their  presence  may  be  easily  proved  by  simply 
evaporating  water  in  a  vessel.  On  evaporation  the  water  passes 
away  as  vapour,  whilst  the  salts  are  left  behind.  This  is  why  a  crust 
(incrustation),  consisting  of  salts,  previously  in  solution,  is  deposited  on 
the  insides  of  kettles  or  boilers,  and  other  vessels  in  which  water  is 
boiled.  Running  water  (rivers,  &c.)  is  charged  with  salts,  owing  to  its 
being  formed  from  the  collection  of  rain  water  percolating  through  the 
soil.  While  percolating,  the  water  dissolves  certain  parts  of  the  soil. 
Thus  water  which  niters  or  passes  through  saline  or  calcareous  soils 
becomes  charged  with  salts  or  contains  .calcium  carbonate  (chalk). 
Rain  water  and  snow  are  much  purer  than  river  or  spring  water 
Nevertheless,  in  passing  through  the  atmosphere,  rain  and  snow  succeed 
in  catching  the  dust  held  in  it,  and  dissolve  air,  which  is  found  in  every 
water.  The  dissolved  gases  of  the  atmosphere  are  partly  disengaged, 
as  bubbles  from  water  on  heating,  and  water  after  long  boiling  is  quite 
freed  from  them. 

In  general  terms  water  is  called  pure  when  it  is  clear  and  free  from 
insoluble  particles  held  in  suspension  and  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  from 

4  Sea  water  contains  more  non-volatile  saline  constituents  than  the  usual  kinds  of 
fresh  water.  This  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  waters  flowing  into  the  sea  supply 
it  with  salts,  and  whilst  a  large  quantity  of  vapour  is  given  off  from  the  surface  of  the 
sea,  the  salts  remain  behind.  Even  the  specific  gravity  of  sea  water  differs  considerably 
from  that  of  pure  water.  It  is  generally  about  T02,  but  in  this  and  also  in  respect  of 
the  amount  of  salts  contained,  samples  of  sea  water  from  different  localities  and  from 
different  depths  offer  rather  remarkable  variations.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  point  out 
that  one  cubic  metre  of  water  from  the  undermentioned  localities  contains  the  following 
quantity  in  grams  of  solid  constituents : — Gulf  of  Venice,  19,122 ;  Leghorn  Harbour 
24,812 ;  Mediterranean,  near  Cetta,  87,665 ;  the  Atlantic  Ocean  from  82,585  to  85,695,  the 
Pacific  Ocean  from  35,288  to  84,708.  In  closed  seas  which  .do  not  communicate,  or  are 
in  very  distant  communication,  with  the  ocean,  the  difference  is  often  still  greater.  Thus 
the  Caspian  Sea  contains  6,800  grams  ;  the  Black  Sea  and  Baltic  17,700.  Common  salt 
forms  the  chief  constituent  of  the  saline  matter  of  sea  or  ocean  water ;  thus  in  one  cubic 
metre  of  sea  water  there  are  25,000-81,000  grams  of  common  salt,  2,600-6,000  grams  of 
magnesium  chloride,  1,200-7,000  grams  of  magnesium  sulphate,  1,500-6,000  grams  of 
calcium  sulphate,  and  10-700  grams  of  potassium  chloride.  The  small  amount  of  organic 
matter  and  of  the  salts  of  phosphoric  acid  in  sea  water  is  very  remarkable.  Sea  water 
<the  composition  of  which  is  partially  discussed  in  Chapter  X.)  contains,  in  addition  to 
salts  of  common  occurrence,  a: certain  and  sometimes  minute  amount  of  the  most  varied 
•elements,  even  gold  and  silver \  and  as  the  mass  of  water  of  the  oceans  is  so  enormous 
these  '  traces '  of  rare  substances  amount  to  large  quantities,  so  that  it  maybe  hoped  that 
in  time  methods  will  be  found  ito  extract  even  gold  from  sea  water,  which  by  means  of  the 
rivers  forms  a  vast  reservoir  for  the  numerous  products  of  the  changes  taking  place  on 
the  earth's  surface.  The  works  of  English,  American,  German,  Russian,  Swedish,  and 
other  navigators  and  observers  prove  that  a  study  of  the  composition  of  sea  water  no* 
only  explains  much  in  the  history  of  the  earth's  life,  but  also  gives  the  possibility  (espe. 
cially  since  the  researches  of  Cti  O.  Makaroff  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy)  of  fixing  one's 
position  in  the  ocean  in  the  absence  of  other  means,  for  instance,  in  a  fog,  or  in  the  dark* 


ON  WATEK  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  47 

which  it  may  be  freed  by  filtration  through  charcoal,  sand,  or  porous 
(natural  or  artificial)  stones,  and  when  it  possesses  a  clean  fresh  taste. 
It  depends  on  the  absence  of  any  taste,  decomposing  organic  matter, 
on  the  quantity  of  air  5  and  atmospheric  gases  in  solution,  and  on  the 
presence  of  mineral  substances  to  the  amount  of  about  300  grams  per 
ton  (or  1000  kilograms  per  cubic  metre,  or,  what  is  the  same,  300 
milligrams  to  a  kilogram  or  a  litre  of  water),  and  of  not  more  than 
100  grams  of  organic  matter.6  Such  water  is  suitable  for  drinking  and 

5  The  taste  of  water  is  greatly  dependent  on  the  quantity  of  dissolved  gases  it  con- 
tains.   These  gases  are  given  off  on  boiling,  and  it  is  well  known  that,  even  when  cooled, 
boiled  water  has,  until  it  has  absorbed  gaseous  substances  from  the  atmosphere,  quite  a 
different  taste  from  fresh  water  containing  a  considerable  amount  of  gas.    The  dissolved 
gases,  especially  oxygen  and  carbonic  anhydride,  have  an  important  influence  on  the 
health.    The  following  instance  is  very  instructive  in  this  respect.    The  G-renelle  artesian 
well  at  Paris,  when  first  opened,  supplied  a  water  -which  had  an  injurious  effect  on  men 
and  animals.    It  appeared  that  this  water  did  not  contain  oxygen,  and  was  in  general 
very  poor  in  gases.    As  soon  as  it  was  made  to  fall  in  a  cascade,  by  which  it  absorbed  air, 
it  proved  quite  fit  for  consumption.    In  long  sea  voyages  fresh  water  is  sometimes  not 
taken  at  all,  or  only  taken  in  a  small  quantity,  because  it  spoils  by  keeping,  and  becomes 
putrid  from  the  organic  matter  it  contains  undergoing  decomposition.    Fresh  water  may 
be  obtained  directly  from  sea- water  by  distillation.  The  distilled  water  no  longer  contains 
sea  salts,  and  is  therefore  fit  for  consumption,  but  it  is  very  tasteless  and  has  the  pro- 
perties of  boiled  water.   In  order  to  render  it  palatable  certain  salts,  which  are  usually  held 
in  fresh  water,  are  added  to  it,  and  it  is  made  to  flow  in  thin  streams  exposed  to  the  air 
in  order  that  it  may  become  saturated  with  the  component  parts  of  the  atmosphere— 
that  is,  absorb  gases. 

6  Hard  water  is  such  as  contains  much  mineral  matter,  and  especially  a  large  pro- 
portion  of  calcium  salts.     Such  water,  owing  to  the  amount  of  lime  it  contains,  does  not 
form  a  lather  with  soap,  prevents  vegetables  boiled  in  it  -from  softening  properly,  and 
forms  a  large  amount  of  incrustation  on  vessels  in  which  it  is  boiled.    When  of  a  high 
degree  of  hardness,  it  is  injurious  for  drinking  purposes,  which  is  evident  from  the  fact 
that  in  several  large  cities  the  death-rate  has  been  found  to  decrease  after  introducing  a 
soft  water  in  the  place  of  a  hard  water.    Putrid  water  contains  a  considerable  quantity 
of  decomposing  organic  matter,  chiefly  vegetable,  but  in  populated  districts,  especially  in 
towns,  chiefly  animal  remains.    Such  water  acquires  an  unpleasant  smell  and  taste,  by 
which  stagnant  bog  water  and  the  water  of  certain  wells  in  inhabited  districts  are  par- 
ticularly characterised.    Water  of  this  kind  is  especially  injurious  at  a  period  of  epidemic. 
It  may  be  partially  purified  by  being  passed  through  charcoal,  which  retains  the  putrid 
and  certain  organic  substances,  and  also  certain  mineral  substances.    Turbid  water  may 
be  purified  to  a  certain  extent  by  the  addition  of  alum,  which  aids,  after  standing  some 
time,  the  formation  of  a  sediment.    Condy's  fluid  (potassium  permanganate)  is  another 
means  of  purifying  putrid  water.    A  solution  of  this  substance,  even  if  very  dilute,  is  of 
a  red  colour ;  on  adding  it  to  a  putrid  water,  the  permanganate  oxidises  and  destroys  the 
organic  matter.    When  added  to  water  in  such  a  quantity  as  to  impart  to  it  an  almost 
imperceptible  rose  colour  it  destroys  much  of  the  organic  substances  it  contains.    It  i» 
especially  salutary  to  add  a  small  quantity  of  Condy's  fluid  to  impure  water  in  times  of 
epidemic. 

The  presence  in  water  of  one  gram  per  litre,  or  1,000  grams  per  cubic  metre,  of  any 
eubstance  whatsoever,  renders  it  unfit  and  even  injurious  for  consumption  by  animals, 
and  this  whether  organic  or  mineral  matter  predominates.  The  presence  of  1  p.o.  of 
.chlorides  makes  water  quite  salt,  and  produces  thirst  instead  of  assuaging  it.  The 
presence  of  magnesium  salts  is  most  unpleasant ;  they  hMe  a  disagreeable  bitter  taste. 


-48 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


every  practical  application,  but  evidently  it  is  not  pure  in  a  chemical 
sense.  A  chemically  pure  water  is  necessary  not  only  for  scientific 
purposes,  as  an  independent  substance  having  constant  and  definite 
properties,  but  also  for  many  practical  purposes — for  instance,  in  photo- 
graphy and  in  the  preparation  of  medicines — because  many  properties 
of  substances  in  solution  are  changed  by  the  impurities  of  natural 
waters.  Water  is  usually  purified  by  distillation,  because  the  solid 
substances  in  solution  are  not  transformed  into  vapours  in  this  process. 
Such  distilled  water  is  prepared  by  chemists  and  in  laboratories  by 
boiling  water  in  closed  metallic  boilers  or  stills,  and  causing  the  steam 
produced  to  pass  into  a  condenser — that  is,  through  tubes  (which  should 
be  made  of  tin,  or,  at  all  events,  tinned,  as  water  and  its  impurities 
do  not  act  on  tin)  surrounded  by  cold  water,  and  in  which  the  steam, 
being  cooled,  condenses  into  water  which  is  collected 7  in  a  receiver. 
By  standing  exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  however,  the  water  in  time 
absorbs  air,  and  dusfc  carried  in  the  air.  Nevertheless,  in  distillation, 
water  retains,  besides  air,  a  certain  quantity  of  volatile  impurities 
(especially  organic)  and  the  walls  of  the  distillation  apparatus  are  partly 

and,  in  fact,  impart  to  sea  water  its  peculiar  taste.  A  large  amount  of  nitrates  is  only 
found  in  impure  water,  and  is  usually  injurious,  as  they  may  indicate  the  presence  of 
decomposing  organic  matter. 

7  Distilled  water  may  be  prepared,  or  distillation  in  general  carried  on,  either  m  a 
metal  still  with  worm  condenser  (fig.  4)  or  on  a  small  scale  in  the  laboratory 


PIG.  4.— Distillation  by  means  of  a  metallic  still.  The  liquid  in  0  is  heated  by  the  fire  P.  Tu» 
vapours  rise  through  the  head  A  and  pass  by  the  tube  T  to  the  worm  S  placed  in  a  vessel  R, 
through  which  a  current  of  cold  water  flows  by  means  of  the  tubes  D  and  P. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS 


49 


corroded  by  the  water,  and  a  portion,  although  small,  of  their  substance 
renders  the  water  not  entirely  pure,  and  a  residue  is  left  on  evaporation.8 
For  certain  physical  and  chemical  researches,  however,  it  is  necessary 
to  have  perfectly  pure  water.  To  obtain  it,  a  solution  of  potassium 
permanganate  is  added  to  distilled  water  until  the  whole  is  a  light  rose 
colour  By  this  means  the  organic  matter  in  the  water  is  destroyed 
(converted  into  gases  or  non- volatile  substances).  An  excess  of  potas- 
sium permanganate  does  no  harm,  because  in  the  next  distillation  it  is 
left  behind  in  the  distillation  apparatus.  The  second  distillation  should 
take  place  in  a  platinum  retort  with  a  platinum  receiver.  Platinum  is 
a  metal  which  is  not  acted  on  either  by  air  or  water,  and  therefore 
nothing  passes  from  it  into  the  water.  The  water  obtained  in  the 
receiver  still  contains  air.  It  must  then  be  boiled  for  a  long  time,  and 
afterwards  cooled  in  a  vacuum  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump.  Pure 
water  does  not  leave  any  residue  on  evaporation  ;  does  not  in  the  least 
change,  however  long  it  be  kept ;  does  not  decompose  like  water  only 

retort  (fig.  5)  heated  by  a  lamp.     Fig.  5  illustrates  the  main  part8  of  the  usual  glasa 
laboratory  apparatus  used  for  distillation.    The  steam  issuing  from  the  retort  (on  the 


Fin.  5.— Distillation  from  a  glass  retort.  The  neck  of  the  retort  fits  into  the  inner  tuhe  of  the 
Liebig's  condenser.  The  space  between  the  inner  and  outer  tube  of  the  condenser  is  filled  with 
cold  water,  which  enters  by  the  tube  g  and  flows  out  at/. 

right-hand  side)  pas«es  through  a  glass  tube  surrounded  by  a  larger  tube,  through  which 
ft  stream  of  cold  water  passes,  by  which  the  steam  is  condensed  and  runs  into  a  receiver 
(on  the  left-hand  side). 

8  One  of  Lavoisier's  first  memoirs  (1770)  referred  to  this  question.  He  investigated 
the  formation  of  the  earthy  residue  in  the  distillation  of  water  in  order  to  prove  whether 
it  was  possible,  as  was  affirmed,  to  convert  water  into  earth,  and  he  found  that  the 
residue  was  produced  by  the  action  of  water  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel  containing  it,  and 
not  from  the  water  itself.  He  proved  this  to  be  the  case  by  direct  weighing. 


PRINCIPLES-  OF  CHEMISTRY 


once  distilled  or  impure  ;  and  it  does  not  give  bubbles  of  gas  on  heating, 
nor  does  it  change  the  colour  of  a  solution  of  potassium  permanganate. 
Water,  purified  as  above  described,  has  constant  physical  and 
chemical  properties.  For  instance,  it  is  of  such  water  only  that  one 
cubic  centimetre  weighs  one  gram  at  4°  C.— i.e.  it  is  only  such  pure 
water  whose  specific  gravity  equals  1  at  4°  C.9  Water  in  a  solid  state 

•  Taking  the  generally- accepted  specific  gravity  of  water  at  its  greatest  density— z.0. 
at  4°  as  one— it  has  been  shown  by  experiment  that  the  specific  gravity  of  water  at  different 
temperatur^  s  is  as  follows  : 


At 


0° 
10° 
15° 
20° 


0-99987 
0-99974 
099915 
0-99827 


At 


30° 
40° 

60° 
100° 


0-9957* 
0-99283 
0-98817 
095859 


A  comparison  of  all  the  data  at  present  known  shows  that  the  variation  of  the 
specific  gravity  St  with  the  temperature  t  (determined  by  the  mercurial  thermometer) 
may  be  expressed  (Mendeleeff  1891)  by  the  formula 

(t  -  4)» 


St  =  l- 


;94--l  +  0  (703-51  -  t)  1-9 


t°  C.  according 

Variation  of  8p.  gr  with  a  rise  of 

to  the  mer- 
curial ther- 
mometer 

(at  4°P=f,  000,000) 

Temp,  per  1°  0. 
or  ds/dt 

Pressure  per 
I  atmosphere 
or  ds/dp 

Volume  taking  voL 
at  4°=  1 

-10 

998,281 

•t  264 

+  54 

1,001,7  2 

0 

999,873 

+  65 

+  50 

1,000,127 

10 

999,788 

-85 

447 

1,000,262 

20 

998,272 

-203 

+  45 

1,001,731 

30 

995^748 

-299 

44$ 

1,004,276 

50 

988,174 

-450 

+  40 

1,011,967 

70 

977,948 

-569 

+  39 

1,02<>,549 

90 

965,587 

-670 

+  41 

1,035,692 

100 

958  595 

-718 

+  42 

1,043,194 

120 

943,314 

-810 

+  48 

1,060,093 

160 

907,263 

-995 

+  55 

1,102,216 

200 

#63,473 

-1,200 

+  73 

1,158,114 

If  the  temperatute  be  determined  by  the  hydrogen  thermometer,  whose  indications 
between  0°  and  100  are  slightly  lower  than  the  mercurial  (for  example,  about  O*!9  C .  at 
20°),  then  a  slightly  smaller  sp.  gr.  will  be  obtained  for  a  given  t.  Thus  Chappuis  (1892) 
obtained  0'99823S  for  20°.  Water  at  4°  is  taken  as  the  basis  for  reducing  measures  of 
length  to  measures  of  weight  and  volume.  The  metric,  decimal,  system  of  measures  of 
weights  and  volumes  is  generally  employed  in  science.  The  starting  point  of  this  system 
is  the  metre  (S9'S7  inches)  divided  into  decimetres  ( =  O'l  metre),  centimetres  ( =  O'Ol  metre), 
millimetres  (  — O'OOl  metro),  and  micrometres  (•=  one  millionth,  of  a  metre)  A  cubio 
decimetre  is  called' a  litre,  and  is  used  for  the  measurement  of  volumes.  The  weight  of 
a  litre  of  wa'er  at  4°  in  a  vacuum  is  called  a  kilogram.  One  thousandth  part  of  a  kilo- 
gram of  water  weighs  one  gram.  It  is  divided  into  decigrams,  centigrams,  and  milli- 
grams (  =  0'001  gram).  An  English  pound  equals  453'59  grams.  The  great  advantage  of 
this  system  is  that  it  is  a  decimal  one,  and  that  it  is  universally  adopted  in  science  and  in 
most  international  relations.  All  the  measures  cited  in  this  wcrlc  are  metrical.  The 
units  most  often  used  in  science  are : — Of  length,  the  centimetre ;  of  weight,  the  gram ; 
of  time,  the  second ;  •  of  temperature,  the  degree  Celsius  or  Centigrade.  According  to 
the  most  trustworthy  determinations  (Kupfer  in  Russia  1841,  and  Chaney  in  England 
1892),  the  weight  of  a  c.  dcm.  of  water  at  4°  in  vacuo  is  about  999'9  grms.  For  ordinary 
purposes  the  weight  of  a  c.  dcg.  may  be  taken  as  equal  to  a  kg.  Hence  thB  litre  (deter- 
jnined  by  the  weight  of  water  it  holds)  is  slightly  greater  than  a  cubic  decimetre. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS 


foftns  crystals  of  the  hexagonal  system10  which  are  seen  in  snow,  which 

10  As  solid  substances  appear  in  independent,  regular,  crystalline  forms  which  are 
dependent,  judging  from  their  cleavage  or  lamination  (in  virtue  of  which  mica  breaks 


FIG.  6.— Example  of  the  form  belonging  to  the 
regular  system.  Combination  of  au  octahe  Iron 
and  a  cube.  The  former  predominates.  Aluna» 
fluor  spar,  suboxide  of  copper,  aud  others. 


Fio.  8.— Hexagonal  prism  terminated  by  hexagouai 
pyramids.    Quartz,  dsc. 


f.— r.hombio  Dodecahedron  of  the  regular 

system.    Garnet. 


P:o.  9.— Ehombohedron.  Calc  spar,  dec. 


FlG.  10.— Rhombic  system. 
Desmine. 


PIG.  1L— Tri clinic  pyramid. 


FIG.  12.— Triclinic  system. 
Albite,  dec. 


up  into  lamina*,  and  Iceland  spar,  &c.,  into  pieces  bounded  by  faces  inclined  to  each  other 
at  angles  which  are  definite  for  each  substance),  on  an  inequality  of  attraction  (cohesion, 
hardness)  in  different  directions  which  intersect  at  definite  angles  the  determioation  of 


62  PRINCIPLES   OF  CHEMISTRY 

generally  consists  of  star-like  clusters  of  several  crystals,  and  also  in 
the  half-melted  scattered  ice  floating  on  rivers  in  spring  time.  At 
this  time  of  the  year  the  ice  splits  up  into  spars  or  prisms,  bounded  by 
angles  proper  to  substances  crystallising  in  the  hexagonal  system 

The  temperatures  at  which  water  passes  from  one  state  to  another 
are  taken  as  fixed  points  on  the  thermometer  scale  ;  namely,  the  zero 
corresponds  with  the  temperature  of  melting  ice,  and  the  temperature 
of  the  steam  disengaged  from  water  boiling  at  the  normal  barometric 
pressure  (that  is  760  millimetres  measured  at  0°,  at  the  latitude  of  45°, 
at  the  sea  level)  is  taken  as  100°  of  the  Celsius  scale.  Thus,  the  fact 
that  water  liquefies  at  0°  and  b6ils  at  100°  is  taken  .as  one  of  its 
properties  as  a  definite  chemical  compound.  The  weight  of  a  litre  of 
water  at  4°  is  1,000  grams,  at  0°  it  is  999-8  grams.  The  weight  of  a 
litre  of  ice  at  0°  is  less — namely,  917  giams  ;  the  weight  of  the  same 
cubic  measure  of  water  vapour  at  760  ram.  pressure  and  100°  is  only 
0-60  gram  ;  the  density  of  the  vapour  compared  with  air  =  0'62,  and 
compared  with  hydrogen  =  9. 

These  data  briefly  characterise  the  physical  properties  of  water  as 
a  separate  substance.  To  this  may  be  added  that  water  is  a  mobile 
liquid,  colourless,  transparent,  without  taste  or  smoll,  Ac.  Its  latent 
heat  of  vnporisation  is  534  units,  of  liquefaction  79  units  of  heat.11 
The  large  amount  of  heat  stored  up  in  water  vapour  and  also  in 

crystalline  form  therefore  affords  one  of  the  most  important  characteristics  for  identifying 
definite  chemical  compounds.  The  elements  of  crystallography  which  comprise  a  special 
science  should  therefore  be  familiar  to  all  who  desire  to  work  in  scientific  chemistry.  In 
this  work  we  shall  only  have  occasion  to  speak  of  a  few  crystalline  forms,  some  of  which 
are  shown  in  figs.  6  to  12. 

— X.  ll  Of  all  known  liquids,  water  exhibits  the  greatest  cohesion  of  particles.  Indeed,  it 
ascends  to  a  greater  height  in  capillary  tubes  than  other  liquids ;  for  instance,  two  and  a 
half  times  as  high  as  alcohol,  nearly  three  times  as  high  as  ether,  and  to  a  much  greater 
height  than  oil  of  vitriol,  &c,  In  a  tube  one  mm.  in  diameter,  water  at  0°  ascends  1 5  tf  mm., 
measuring  from  the  height^  of  the  liquid  to  two-thirds  of  the  height  of  the  meniscus,  and 
at  100°  it  rises  12'5  mm.  The  cohesion  varies  very  uniformly  with  the  temperature ;  thus 
at  50°  the  height  of  the  capillary  column  equals  13'9  mm.— that  is,  the  mean  between  the 
/  columns  at  Oc  and  100°.  TJWsunj&oaQityjs  not  destroyed  even  at  temperatures  near 
^  the  freezing  point,  and  hence  it  may  be  assumed  that  at  high  temperatures  cohesion  will 
vary  as  uniformly  as  at  ordinary  temperatures ;  that  is,  the  difference  between  the  columns 
at  0°  and  100°  being  2'8  mm.,  the  height  of  the  column  at  500°  should  be  15'2-  (5  x  2'8)~ 
1'2  mm. ,  cr,  in  other  words,  at  these  high  temperatures  the  cohesion  between  the  particles 
of  water  would  be  almost  nil.  Only  certain  solutions  (sal  ammoniac  and  lithium  chlo- 
ride), and  these  only  with  a  great  excess  of  water,  rise  higher  than  pure  water  in 
capillary  tubes.  The  great  cohesion  of  water  doubtless  determines  many  of  both  its 
physical  and  chemical  properties. 

The  quantity  of  heat  required  to  raise  the  temperature  of  one  part  by  weight  of  water 
from  0°  to  1°,  i.e.  by  1°  C.,  is  called  the  unit  of  heat  or  calorie;  the  specific  heat  of 
liquid  water  at  0°  is  taken  as  equal  to  unity.  The  variation  of  this  specific  heat  with  a 
rise  in  temperature  is  inconsiderable  in  comparison  with  the  variation  exhibited  by  the 
specific  heats  of  other  liquids.  According  to  Ettinger,  the  specific  heat  of  water  at  20° 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  53 

liquid  water  (for  its  specific  heat  is  greater  than  that  of  other  liquids) 
renders  it  available  in  both  forms  for  heating  purposes.  The  chemical 

•  1-016,  at  50°  =  1-039,  and  at  100°  =  1-073.  The  specific  heat  of  water  isjgeaterjihan 
that  of  any  other  known  liquid;  for  example,  the  specific  heat  of  alcohorat^lTo-65— 
i»e.  the  quantity  of  heat  which  raises  55  parts  of  water  1°  raises  100  parts  of  alcohol  1°. 
The  specific  heat  of  oil  of  turpentine  at  0°  is  0'41,  of  ether  0'53,  of  acetic  acid  0-5274,  of 
mercury  0'083,  E^njjej^ej^isjihejreb^^^  This  property 

of  water  has  an  important  significance  in  practice  and  in  nature!  Wate'r  j)re  vents jrapkl 
cooling  or  heating,  and  thus  tempera  cold  and  heat.  The  specific  heats  of  ice  and 
aqueous  vapour  are  much  less  than  that  of  water ;  namely,  that  of  ice  is  0-504,  and 
of  steam  0*48. 

With  an  increase  in  pressure  equal  to  one  atmosphere,  the  compressibility  of  water 
(see  Note  9)  is  0-000047,  of  mercury  0-00000852,  of  ether  0-00012  at  0°,  of  alcohol  at  13° 
0'000095.  The  addition  of  various  substances  to  water  generally  decreases  both  its 
compressibility  and  cohesion.  The  compressibility  of  other  liquids  increases  with  a  rise 
of  temperature,  but  for  water  it  decreases  up  to  58°  and  then  increases  like  other  liquids 

TJifi^^amtOTi^^afeT^byh^a^Note  9)  also  exhibits  many  peculiarities  which  are 
not  found  in  otherliqmds! TTnf  expansion  of  water  at  low  temperatures  is  very  small 
compared  with  other  liquids ;  at  4°  it  is  almost  zero,  and  at  100°  it  is  equal  to  0  0008 ; 
below  4 3  it  is  negative— i.e.  water  on  cooling  then  expands,  and  does  not  decrease  in 
volume.  In  passing  into  a  solid  state,  the  specific  gravity  of  water  decreases ;  at  0°  one 
c.c.  of  water  weighs  0'999887  gram,  and  one  c.c.  of  ice  at  the  same  temperature  weighs 
only  0-9175  gram.  The  ice  formed,  however,  contracts  on  cooling  like  the  majority  of 
other  substances.  Thus  100  volumes  of  ice  are  produced  from  92  volumes  of  watsr— that 
is,  water  expands  considerably  on  freezing,  which  fact  determines  a  number  of  natural 
phenomena.  The  freezing  point  of  water  falls  with  an  increase  in  pressure  (0'007°  per 
atmosphere),  because  in  freezing  water  expands  (Thomson),  whilst  with  substances  which 
contract  in  solidifying  the  melting  point  rises  with  an  increase  in  pressure ;  thus,  paraffin 
under  one  atmosphere  melts  at  46°,  and  under  100  atmospheres  at  49° 

Whe^  Iigtuid_water_£ag3e8into  vapour,  thejiohesiongf  its  particles  must  be  destroyed, 
as  the  particles  are  removecTto  such^aT  distanceErom  eaclT  other  that  ^heir  mutual 
attraction  no  longer  exhibits  any  influence.  As  the  cohesion  of  aqueous  particles  varies 
at  different  temperatures,  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  expended  in  overcoming  this 
cohesion — or  the  latent  lieat  of  evaporation — will  for  this  reason  aloiie  be  different  at 
different  temperatures.  The  quantity  of  heat  which  is  consumed  in  the  transformation 
of  one  part  by  weight  of  water,  at  different  temperatures,  into  vapour  was  determined  by 
Keguault  with  great  accuracy.  His  researcheg_jfeowed^that  one  partby  weight  of  water 
at  0°,  in  passing  into  vapour  having  a  temperature  t°,  consumes  606'5  -f  0'305<  unitifof 
heat,  at  50°  621-7,  at  100°  6S7'0,  at  150°  652-2,  and  at  200°  667'5.  But  this  quantity 
includes  also  the  quantity  of  heat  required  for  heating  the  water  from  0°  to  t°— i.e. 
besides  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation,  also  that  heat  which  is  used  in  heating  the  water 
in  a  liquid  state  to  a  temperature  £D.  On  deducting  this  amount  of  heat,  we  obtain  the 
latent  heat  of  evaporation  of  water  as  606'5  at  0°,  571  at  50°,  534  at  100°,  494  at  150°,  and 
only  453  at  200°,  which  shows  that  the  conversion  of  water  at  different  temperatures  into 
vapour  at  a  constant  temperature  requires  very  different  quantities  of  heat.  This  is 
chiefly  dependent  on  the  difference  of  the  cohesion  of  water  at  different  temperatures ; 
the  cphesioixJa-jggater  at  low  thanat_high_temperatures,  and  therefore  at  low  tern- 
peratures  a  greater  quantity~of  heaTTsTequired  to  overcome  the  cohesion.  On  comparing 
these  quantities  of  heat,  it  will  be  observed  that  they  decrease  rather  uniformly,  namely 
their  difference  between  0°  and  100°  is.  72,  and  between  100°  and  200°  is  81  units  of  heat. 
Prom  this  we  may  conclude  that  this  variation  will  be  approximately  the  same  for  high 
temperatures  also,  and  therefore  that  no  heat  would  be  required  for  the  conversion 
of  water  into  vapour  at  a  temperature  of  about  400  .  At  this  temperature,  water 
passes  into  vapour  whatever  be  the  pressure  (see  Chap.  II.  The  absolute  boiling  point 
of  water,  according  to  Dewar,  is  370°,  the  critical  pressure  196  atmospheres).  It  must 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


reactions  which  water  undergoes,  and  by  means  of  which  it  is  formed, 
are  so  numerous,  and  so  closely  allied  to  the  reactions  of  many  other 

here  be  remarked  that  water,  in  presenting  a  greater  cohesion,  reqturesjijarger_ciu^tity 
ofLheat  igj^itsconversiop  into  vapour_thaiuQther  liquids.  Thus  alcohol  consumes  208, 
ether  90,  turpentine  70,  units  of  heat  in  their  conversion  into,  vapour 

The  whole  amount  of  heat  which  is  consumed  in  the  conversion  of  water  into  vapour 
is  not  used  in  overcoming  the  cohesion — that  is,  in  internal  work  acomplished  in  the 
liquid.  A  part  of  this  heat  is  employed  in  moving  the  aqueous  particles;  in  fact, 
ftqueous  vapour  at  100°  occupies  a  volume  1,653  times  greater  than  that  of  water  (at  the 
ordinary  pressure),  consequently  a  portion  of  the  heat  or  work  is  employed  in  lifting  the 
aqueous  particles,  in  overcoming  pressure,  or  in  external  work,  which  may  be  usefully 
employed,  and  which  is  so  employed  in  steam  engines.  In  order  to  determine  this  work, 
let  us  consider  the  variation  of  the  maximum  pressure  or  vapour  tension  of  tteam  at 
different  temperatures.  The  observations  of  Rejnault  in  this  respect,  as  on  those  pre- 
ceding, deserve  special  attention  from  their  comprehensiveness  and  accuracy.  The 
pressure  or  tension  of  aqueous  vapour  at  various  temperatures  is  given  in  the  adjoining 
table,  and  is  expressed  in  millimetres  oT  the  barometric  column  reduced  to  0° 


Temperature 

Tens'.on 

Temperature 

Tension 

-20° 

0-9 

70° 

233-3 

-10° 

2-1 

90° 

525-4 

0° 

4-6 

100° 

760-0 

+  10° 

9-1 

105° 

906-4 

15° 

127 

110° 

1075-4 

20° 

17-4 

115° 

1269-4 

25° 

235 

120° 

1491-3 

80° 

SI'S 

150° 

8581-0 

50° 

92-0 

200° 

116890 

The  table  shows  the  boiling  points  of  water  at  different  pressures.  Thus  on  the 
summit  of  Mont  Blanc,  where  the  average  pressure  is  about  424  mm.,  water  boils  at 
84'4 '.  In  a  rarefied  atmosphere  water  boils  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  but  in 
evaporating  it  absorbs  heat  from  the  neighbouring  parts,  and  therefore  it  becomes  cold 
and  may  even  freeze  if  the  pressure  does  not  exceed  4'6  mm.,  and  especially  if  the  vapour 
be  rapidly  absorbed  as  it  is  formed.  Oil  of  vitriol,  which  absorbs  the  aqueous  vapour,  is 
use!  for  this  purpose.  Thus  ice  may  be  obtained  artificially  at  the  ordinary  temperature 
with  the  aid  of  an  air-pump.  This  table  of  the  tension  of  aqueous  vapour  also  shows  the 
temperature  of  water  contained  in  a  closed  boiler  if  the  pressure  of  the  steam  formed  be 
known.  Thus  at  a  pressure  of  five  atmospheres  (a  pressure  of  five  times  the  ordinary 
atmospheric  pressure — i.e.  5  x  760  =  3,800  mm.)  the  temperature  of  the  water  would  be 
152°.  The  table  also  shows  the  pressure  produced  on  a  given  surface  by  steam  on  issuing 
from  a  boiler.  Thus  steam  having  a  temperature  of  152°  exerts  a  pressure  of  517  kilos 
on  a  piston  whose  surface  equals  100  sq.  cm.,  for  the  pressure  of  one  atmosphere  on  one 
sq.  cm.  equals  1,033  kilos,  and  steam  at  1523  has  a  pressure  of  five  atmospheres.  As 
a  column  of  mercury  1  mm.  high  exerts  a  pressure  of  1-85959  grams  on  a  surface  of 
2  sq.  cm.,  therefore  the  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour  at  0°  corresponds  with  a  pressure  of 
6'25  grams  per  square  centimetre.  The  pressures  for  all  temperatures  may  be  calculated 
in  a  similar  way,  and  it  will  be  found  that  at  100°  it  is  equal  to  1,033'28  grams.  This 
means  that  if  a  cylinder  be  taken  whose  sectional  area  equals  1  sq.  cm.,  and  if  water  be 
poured  into  it  and  it  be  closed  by  a  piston  weighing  1,033  grams,  then  on  heating  it  in  a 
vacuum  to  100°  no  steam  will  be  formed,  because  the  steam  cajinot  overcome  the  pres- 
sure of  the  piston ;  and  if  at  100°  534  units  of  heat  be  transmitted  to  each  unit  of  weight 
of  water,  then  the  whole  of  the  water  will  be  converted  into  vapour  having  the  same 
temperature ;  and  so  also  for  every  other  temperature.  The  question  now  arises,  To 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS 


55 


substances,  that  it  is  impossible  to  describe  the  majority  of  them  at 
this  early  stage  of  chemical  exposition.  We  shall  become  acquainted 

what  height  does  the  piston  rise  under  these  circumstances?  that  is, in  other  words,  What 
is  the  volume  occupied  by  the  steam  under  a  known  pressure  ?  For  this  we  must  know 
the  weight  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  steam  at  various  temperatures.  It  has  been  shown. 
by  experiment  that  the  density  of  steam,  which  does  not  saturate  a  space,  varies  very 
inconsiderably  at  all  possible  pressures,  and  is  nine  times  the  density  of  hydrogen  under 
similar  conditions.  Steam  which  saturates  a  space  varies  in  density  at  different  tern* 
peratures,  but  this  diffdrence  is  very  small,  and  its  average  density  with  reference  to  ait 
is  0-64  We  will  employ  this  number  in  our  calculation,  and  will  calculate  what  volume 
the  steam  occupies  at  100°  One  cubic  centimetre  of  air  at  0°  and  760  mm.  weigh$ 

0-001293  gram,  at  100°  and  under  the  same  pressure  it  will  weigh  °'001293  or   about 

0*000946  gram,  and  consequently  one  cubic  centimetre  of  stoani  whose  density  is  0'64 
will  weigh  0'000605  gram  at  100°,  and  therefore  one  gram  of  aqueous  vapour  will  occupy 
a  volume  of  about  1,653  c.c.  Consequently,  the  piston  in  the  cylinder  of  1  sq.  cm.  sec* 
tional  area,  and  in  which  the  water  occupied  a  height  of  1  era.,  will  be  raised  1,658  cm 
on  the  conversion  of  this  water  into  steam  This  piston,  as  has  been  mentioned,  weighs 
1,038  grams,  therefore  the  external  work  of  the  steam— that  is,  that  work  which  the 
water  does  in  its  conversion  into  steam  at  100  — is  equal  to  lifting  a  piston  weighing 
1,088  grams  to  a  height  of  1,653  cm.,  or  17'07  kilogram -metres  of  work — i.e.  is  capable  of 
lifting  17  kilograms  1  metre,  or  1  kilogram  17  metres.  One  gram  of  water  requires  for 
its  conversion  into  steam  534  gram  unite  of  heat  or  0'534  kilogram  unit  of  heat — i.e.  the 
quantity  of  heat  absorbed  in  the  evaporation  of  one  gram  of  water  is  equal  to  the  quan- 
tity of  heat  which  is  capable  of  heating  1  kilogram  of  water  0'534°.  Each  unit  of  heat, 
as  has  been  shown  by  accurate  experiment,  is  capable  of  doing  424  kilogram-metres  of 
work.  Hence,  in  evaporating,  one  gram  of  water  expends  424  x  0*534  =  (almost)  227 
kilogram-metres  of  work.  The  external  work  was  found  to  be  only  17  kilogram-metree4 
therefore  210  kilogram-metres  are  expended  in  overcoming  the  internal  cohesion  of  the 
aqueous  particles,  and  consequently  about  92  p.  c.  of  the  total  heat  or  work  is  consumed 
in  overcoming  the  internal  cohesion.  The  following  figures  are  thus  calculated  approxi- 
mately :— 


Temperature 

Total  work  of 
evaporation  in 
kilogram-  metres 

External  work  of 
vapour  in 
kilogram-metres 

Internal 
work  of  vapour 

0° 
60° 
100° 
150° 
200° 

255 
242 
226 
209 
192 

13 
15 
17 
19 
20 

242 
227 
209 
190 
172 

The  work  necessary  for  overcoming  the  internal  cohesion  of  water  in  its  passage  into 
vapour  decreases  with  the  rise  in  temperature — that  is,  corresponds  with  the  decrease  oJ 
cohesion  ;  and,  in  fact,  the  variations  which  take  place  in  this  case  are  very  similar  to 
those  which  are  observed  in  the  heights  to  which  water  rises  in  capillary  tubes  ftfc 
different  temperatures.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  amount  of  external— or,  as  it  td 
termed,  useful — work  which  water  can  supply  by  its  evaporation  is  very  small  compared 
with  the  amount  which  it  expends  in  its  conversion  into  vapour. 

lit  considering  certain  physico-mechanical  properties  of  water,  I  had  in  view  not  only 
their  importance  for  theory  and  practice,  but  also  their  purely  chemical  significance ;  fojf 
it  is  evident  from  the  above  considerations  that  even  in  a  physical  change  of  state  thj& 
greatest  part  of  the  work  done  is  employed  in  overc^mmg^o^8ionJ_aj|d_that^aj3^fiP» 
mons  amount  of  internal  energy  must  be  expended  in  overcoming  chemical  cohesion  of 
affinity. 
*4 


$6  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

with  many  of  them  afterwards,  but  at  present  we  shall  only  cite  certain 
compounds  formed  by  water.  In  order  to  see  clearly  the  nature  of 
the  various  kinds  of  compounds  formed  by  water  we  will  begin  with 
the  most  feeble,  which  are  determined  by  purely  mechanical  superficial 
properties'of  the  reacting  substances.12 

Water  is  mechanic-ally  attracted  by  many  substances  ;  it  adheres  to 
their  surfaces  just  as  dust  adheres  to  objects^  or  one  piece  of  polished 
glass  adheres  to  another.  Such  attraction  is  termed  c  moistening,'  '  soak- 
ing/ or  'absorption  of  water.'  Thus  water  moistens  clean  glass  and 
adheres  to  its  surface,  is  absorbed  by  the  soil,  sand,  and  clay,  and  does 
not  flow  away  from  them,  but  lodges  itself  between  their  particles. 
Similarly,  water  soaks  into  a  sponge,  cloth,  hair,  or  paper,  tfcc.,  but  fat 
and  greasy  substances  in  general  are  not  moistened.  Attraction  of 
this  kind  does  not  alter  the  physical  or  chemical  properties  of  water. 
For  instance,  under  these  circumstances  water,  as  is  known  from  every- 
day experience,  may  be  expelled  from  objects  by  drying.  Water  which 
is  in  any  way  held  mechanicajly  may  be  dislodged  by  mechanical 
means,  by  friction,  pressure,  centrifugal  force,  &c.  Thus  water  is 
squeezed  from  wet  cloth  by  pressure  or  centrifugal  machines.  But 
objects  which  in  practice  are  called  dry  (because  they  do  not  feel  wet) 
often  still  contain  moisture,  as  may  be  proved  by  heating  the  object 
in  a  glass  tube  closed  at  one  end.  By  placing  a  piece  of  paper,  dry 
earth,  or  any  similar  object  (especially  porous  substances)  in  such  a 
glass  tube,  and  heating  that  part  of  the  tube  where  the  object  is  situa- 
ted, it  will  be  remarked  that  water  condenses  on  the  cooler  portions  of 
the  tube.  The  presence  of  such  absorbed,  or  *  hygroscopic,'  water  is 
generally  best  detected  in  non-volatile  substances  by  drying  them  at 
100°,  or  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump  and  over  substances  which 

12  When  it  is  necessary  to  heat  a  considerable  mass  of  liquid  in  different  vessels,  it 
would  be  very  uneconomical  to  make  use  of  metallic  vessels  and  to  construct  a  separate 
furnace  for  each ;  such  cases  are  continually  met  with  in  practice.  Steam  from  a  boiler 
is  introduced  into  the  liquid,  or,  in  general,  into  the  vessel  which  it  is  required  to  heat. 
The  steam,  in  condensing  and  passing  into  a  liquid  state,  parts  with  its  latent  heat,  and 
as  this  is  very  considerable  a  small  quantity  of  steam  will  produce  a  considerable  heating 
effect.  If  it  be  required,  for  instance,  to  heat  1,000  kilos  of  water  from  20°  to  50°,  which 
requires  approximately  80,000  units  of  heat,  steam  at  100°  is  passed  into  the  water 
from  a  boiler.  Each  kilogram  of  water  at  50 '  contains  about  50  units  of  heat,  and  each 
kilogram  of  steam  at  100°  contains  637  units  of  heat ;  therefore,  each  kilogram  of  steam 
in  cooling  to  50°  gives  up  587  units  of  heat,  and  consequently  52  kilos  of  steam  are 
capable  of  heating  1,000  kilos  of  water  from  20°  to  50°.  Water  is  very  often  applied  for 
heating  in  chemical  practice.  For  this  purpose  metallic  vessels  or  pans,  called  'water- 
baths,'  are  made  use  of.  They  are  closed  by  a  cover  formed  of  concentric  rings  lying  on 
each  other.  The  vessels — such  as  beakers,  evaporating  basins,  retorts,  &c. — containing 
liquids,  are  placed  on  these  rings,  and  the  water  in  the  bath  is  heated.  The  steam  given 
off  heats  the  bottom  of  the  vessels  to  be  heated,  and  thus  effects  the  evaporation,  or 
distillation. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  57 

attract  water  chemically.  By  weighing  a  substance  before  and  after 
drying,  it  is  easy  to  determine  the  amount  of  hygroscopic  water  from 
the  loss  in  weight.13  Only  in  this  case  the  amount  c>£  water  must  be 

13  In  order  to  dry  any  substance  at  about  100°— that  is,  at  the  boiliag  point  of  water 
(hygroscopic  water  passes  off  at  this  temperature)— an  apparatus  called  a  '  drying-oven  ' 
is  employed.  It  consists  of  a  double  copper  box ;  water  is  poured  into  the  space 
between  the  internal  and  external  boxes,  and  the  oven  is  then  heated  over  a  stove  or  by 
any  other  means,  or  else  steam  from  a  boiler  is  passed  between  the  walls  of  the  two 
boxes.  When  the  water  boils,  the  temperature  inside  the  inner  box  will  be  approximately 
100°  C.  The  substance  to  be  dried  is  placed  inside  the  oven,  and  the  door  is  closed. 
Several  holes  are  cut  in  the  door  to  allow  the  free  passage  of  air,  which  carries  off  the 
aqueous  vapour  by  the  chimney  on  the  top  of  the  oven.  Often,  however,  desiccation  is 
carried  on  in  copper  ovens  heated  directly  over  a  lamp  (fig.  18).  In  this  case  any  desired 


PlG.  13.— Drying  oven,  composed  of  brazed  copper.    It  is  heated  by  a  lamp.    The  object  to  be  dri«fl 
ts  placed  on  the  gauze  inside  the  oven.    The  thermometer  indicates  the  temperature. 

temperature  may  be  obtained,  which  is  determined  by  a  thermometer  fixed  in  a  special 
orifice.  There  are  substances  which  only  part  with  their  water  at  a  much  higher 
temperature  than  100°,  and  then  such  air  baths  are  very  useful.  In  order  to  determine 
directly  the  amount  of  water  in  a  substance  which  does  not  part  with  anything  except 
water  at  a  red  heat,  the  substance  is  placed  in  a  bulb  tube.  By  first  weighing  the  tube 
empty  and  then  with  the  substance  to  be  dried  in  it,  the  weight  of  the  substance  taken  may 
be  found.  The  tube  is  then  connected  on  one  side  with  a  gas-holder  full  of  air,  which,  on 
opening  a  stop-cock,  passes  first  through  a  flask  containing  sulphuric  acid,  and  then  into 
a  vessel  containing  lumps  of  pumice  stone  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid.  In  passing 
through  these  vessels  the  air  is  thoroughly  dried,  having  given  up  all  its  moisture  to  the 
sulphuric  acid.  Thus  dry  air  will  pass  into  the  bulb  tube,  and  as  hygroscopic  water  is 
entirely  given  up  from  a  substance  in  dry  air  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  still 
more  rapidly  on  beating,  the  moisture  given  up  by  the  substance  in  the  tube  will  be 


68  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

judged  with  care,  because  the  loss  in  weight  may  sometimes  proceed 
from  the  decomposition  of  the  substance  itself,  with  disengagement  of 
gases  or  vapour.  In  making  exact  weighings  the  hygroscopic  capacity 
of  substances — that  is,  their  capacity  to  absorb  moisture — must  be  con- 
tinually kept  in  view,  as  othe'rwise  the  weight  will  be  untrue  from  the 
presence  of  moisture.  The  quantity  of  moisture  absorbed  depends  on 
the  degree  of  moisture  of  the  atmosphere  (that  is,  on  the  tension  of  the 
aqueous  vapour  in.it)  in  which  a  substance  is  situated.  In  an  entirely 
dry  atmosphere,  or  in  a  vacuum,  the  hygroscopic  water  is  expelled, 
being  converted  into  vapour  ;  therefore,  substances  containing  hygro- 
scopic water  may  be  completely  dried  by  placing  them  in  a  dry  atmo- 
sphere or  in  a  vacuum.  The  prdcess  is  aided  by  heat,  as  it  increases  the 
tension  of  the  aqueous  vapour.  Phosphoric  anhydride  (a  white  powder), 
liquid  sulphuric  acid,  solid  and  porous  calcium  chloride,  or  the  white 
powder  of  ignited  copper  sulphate,  are  most  generally  employed  in  dry- 
ing gases  They  absorb  the  moisture  contained  in  air  and  all  gases  to 
a  considerable,  but  not  unlimited,  extent.  Phosphoric  anhydride  and 
calcium  chloride  deliquesce,  become  damp,  sulphuric  acid  changes  from 
an  oily  thick  liquid  into  a  more  mobile  liquid,  and  ignited  copper 
sulphate  becomes  blue  ;  after  which  changes  these  substances  partly 
lose  their  capacity  of  holding  water,  and  can,  if  it  be  in  excess,  even 
give  up  their  water  to  the  atmosphere.  We  may  remark  that  the  order 
in  which  these  substances  are  placed  above  corresponds  with  the  order 
in  which  they  stand  in  respect  to  their  capacity  for  absorbing  moisture. 
Air  dried  by  calcium  chloride  still  contains  a  certain  amount  of  mois- 
ture, which  it  can  give  up  to  sulphuric  acid.  The  most  complete  desic- 
cation takes  place  with  phosphoric  anhydride.  Water  is  a'so  removed 
from  many  substances  by  placing  them  in  a  dish  over  a  vessel  contain- 
ing a  substance  absorbing  water  undsr  a  glass  bell  jar.14  The  bell  jar, 

carried  off  by  the  air^passing  through  it.  This  damp  air  then  passes  through  a  U-shaped 
tube  full  of  pieces  of  pumice  stone  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid,  which  absorbs  all  the 
moisture  given  off  from  the  substance  in  the  bulb  tube.  Thus  all  the  water  expelled 
from  the  substance  will  collect  in  the  U  tube,  and  so,  if  this  be  weighed  before  and  after, 
the  difference  will  show  the  quantity  of  wa'er  expelled  from  the  substance.  If  only  water 
(and  not  any  gases)  come  over,  the  increase  of  the  weight  of  the  U  tube  will  be  equal  to 
the  decrease  in  the  weight  of  the  bulb  tube. 

14  Instead  of  under  a  glass  bell  jar,  drying  over  sulphuric  acid  is  often  carried  on  in 
a  desiccator  consisting  of  a  shallow  wide-mouthed  glass  vessel,  closed  by  a  well-fitting 
ground-glass  cover.  Sulphuric  acid  is  poured  over  the  bottom  of  the  desiccator,  and  the 
substance  to  be  dried  is  placed  on  a  glass  stand  above  the  acid.  A  lateral  glass  tube  with 
a  stop-cock  is  often  fused  into  the  desiccator  in  order  to  connect  it  with  an  air  pump,  and 
BO  allow  drying  under  a  diminished  pressure,  when  the  moisture  evaporates  more  rapidly. 
The  fact  that  in  the  usual  form  of  desiccator  the  desiccating  substance  (sulphuric  acid) 
is  placed  beneath  the  substance  to  be  dried  has  the  disadvantage  that  the  moist  air  being 
lighter  than  dry  air  distributes  itself  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  desiccator  and  not  below. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  59 

like  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  should  be  hermetically  closed.  In 
this  case  desiccation  takes  place  ;  because  sulphuric  acid,  for  instance, 
first  dries  the  air  in  the  bell  jar  by  absorbing  its  moisture,  the  substance 
to  be  dried  then  parts  with  its  moisture  to  the  dry  air,  from  which  it  is 
again  absorbed  by  the  sulphuric  acid,  <fcc.  Desiccation  proceeds  still 
better  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  for  then  the  aqueous  vapour 
is  formed  more  quickly  than  in  a  bell  jar  full  of  air. 

From  what  has  been  said  above,  it  is  evident  that  the  transference 
of  moisture  to  gases  and  the  absorption  of  hygroscopic  moisture  present 
great,  resemblance  to,  but  still  are  not,  chemical  combinations  with 
water.  Water,  when  combined  as  hygroscopic  water,  does  not  lose  its 
properties  and  does  not  form  new  substances.15 

The  attraction  of  water  for  substances  which  dissolve  in  it  is  of  a 
different  character.  In  the  solution  of  substances  in  water  there  pro- 
ceeds a  peculiar  kind  of  indefinite  combination  ;  a  new  homogeneous 
substance  is  formed  from  the  two  substances  taken.  But  here  also  the 
bond  connecting  the  substances  is  very  unstable.  Water  containing 
different  substances  in  solution  boils  at  a  temperature  near  to  its  usual 
boiling  point.  From  the  solution  of  substances  which  are  lighter  than 
water  itself,  there  are  obtained  solutions  of  a  less  density  than  water — 
as,  for  example,  in  the  solution  of  alcohol  in  water  ;  whilst  a  heavier 
substance  in  dissolving  in  water  gives  it  a  higher  specific  gravity. 
Thus  salt  water  is  heavier  than  fresh.16 

We  will  consider  aqueous  solutions  somewhat  fully,  because,  among 
other  reasons,  solutions  are  constantly  being  formed  on  the  earth  and 
in  the  waters  of  the  earth,  in  plants  and  in  animals,  in  chemical  pro- 
cesses and  in  the  arts,  and  these  solutions  play  an  important  part  in 
the  chemical  transformations  which  are  everywhere  taking  place,  not 

Hempel,  in  his  desiccator  (1891),  avoids  this  by  placing  the  absorbent  above  the  substance 
to  be  dried.  The  process  of  desiccation  can  be  further  accelerated  by  cooling  the  upper 
portion  of  the  desiccator,  and  so  inducing  ascending  and  descending  currents  of  air  within 
the  apparatus. 

15  Chappuis,  however,  determined  that  in  wetting  1  gram  of  charcoal  with  water  7  units 
of  heat  are  evolved,  and  on  pouring  carbon  bisulphide  over  1  gram  of  charcoal  as  much 
as  24  units  of  heat  are  evolved.  Alumina  (1  gram),  when  moistened  with  water,  evolves 
24  calories.  This  indicates  that  in  respect  to  evolution  of  heat  moistening  already 
presents  a  transition  towards  exotheimal  combinations  (those  evolving  heat  in  their 
formation). 

1(5  Strong  acetic  acid  (C2H4OW),  whose  specific  gravity  at  15°  is  1'055,  does  not  become 
lighter  on  the  addition  of  water  (a  lighter  substance,  sp.  gr.  =  0'999),  but  heavier,  so  thai 
a  solution  of  80  parts  of  acetic  acid  and  20  parts  of  water  has  a  specific  gravity  of  T074, 
and  even  a  solution  of  equal  parts  of  acetic  acid  and  water  (50  p.c.)  has  a  sp.  gr.  of  1'065, 
which  is  still  greater  than  that  of  acetic  acid  itself.  This  shows  the  high  degree  of  con- 
traction which  takes  place  on  solution.  In  fact,  solutions— and,  in  general,  liquids 
mixing  with  water,  decrease  in  volume. 


60  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

only  because  water  is  everywhere  met  with,  but  chiefly  because  a  sub- 
stance in  solution  presents  the  most  favourable  conditions  for  the 
process  of  chemical  changes,  which  require  a  mobility  of  parts  and  a 
possible  distension  of  parts.  In  dissolving,  a  solid  substance  acquires 
a  mobility  of  parts,  and  a  gas  loses  its  elasticity,  and  therefore  reactions 
often  take  place  in  solutions  which  do  not  proceed  in  the  undissolved 
substances.  Further,  a  substance,  distributed  in  water,  evidently 
breaks  up— that  is,  becomes  iuore  like  a  gas  and  acquires  a  greater 
mobility  of  parts.  All  these  considerations  require  that  in  describing 


14.— Method  of  transferring  a  gas  into  a  cylinder  filled  with  mercury  and  whose  open  end  is  im- 
mersed under  the  mercury  in  a  bath  having  two  glass  sides.  TUe  apparatus  containing  the  gas  Is 
represented  on  the  right.  Its  upper  extremity  is  furnished  with  a  tube  extending  under  the 
cylinder.  The  lower  part  of  the  vessel  communicates  with  a  vertical  tube.  If  mercury  be  poured 
into  this  tube,  the  pressure  of  the  gas  in  the  apparatus  is  increased,  and  it  passes  through  the  gas. 
conducting  tube  into  the  cylinder,  where  it  displaces  tUe  mercury,  and  can  be  measured  or  subjected 
to  the  action  of  absorbing  agcuts,  such  as  water. 

the    properties  of  substances,  particular  attention  should  be  paid  to 
their  relation  to  water  as  a  solvent. 

It  is  well  known  that  water  dissolves  many  substances.  Salt, 
sugar,  alcohol,  and  a  number  of  other  substances,  dissolve  in  water  and 
form  homogeneous  liquids  with  it.  To  demonstrate  the  solubility  of 
gases  in  water,  a  gas  should  be  taken  which  has  a  high  co-efficient  of 
solubility— for  instance,  ammonia.  This  is  introduced  into  a  bell  jar 
(or  cylinder,  as  in  tig.  14),  which  is  previously  filled  with  mercury 
and  stands  in  a  mercury  bath.  If  water  be  then  Introduced  into  the 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  61 

cylinder,  the  mercury  will  rise,  owing  to  the  water  dissolving  the 
ammonia  gas.  If  thf  column  of  mercury  be  less  than  the  barometric 
column,  and  if  there  be  sufficient  water  to  dissolve  the  gas,  all  the 
ammonia  will  bo  absorbed  by  the  water.  The  water  is  introduced  into 
the  cylinder  by  a  glass  pipette,  with  a  bent  end.  The  bent  end  is  put 
into  water,  and  the  air  is  sucked  out  from  the  upper  end.  When  full 
of  water,  its  upper  end  is  closed  with  the  finger,  and  the  bent  end 
placed  in  the  tnercury  bath  under  the  orifice  of  the  cylinder.  On 
blowing  into  the  pipette  the  water  will  rise  to  the  surface  of  the 
mercury  in  the  cylinder  owing  to  its  lightness.  The  solubility  of  a  gas 
like  ammonia  may  be  demonstrated  by  taking  a  flask  full  of  the  gas, 
and  closed  by  a  cork  with  a  tube  passing  through  it.  On  placing  the 
tube  under  water,  the  water  will  rise  into  the  flask  (this  may  be 
accelerated  by  previously  warming  the  flask),  and  begin  to  play  like  a 
fountain  inside  it.  Both  the  rising  of  the  mercury  and  the  fountain 
clearly  show  the  considerable  affinity  of  water  for  ammonia  gas,  and 
the  force  acting  in  this  dissolution  is  rendered  evident.  A  certain 
period  of  time  is  required  both  for  the  homogeneous  intermixture  of 
gases  (diffusion)  and  the  process  of  solution,  which  depends,  not  only  on 
the  surface  of  the  participating  substances,  but  also  on  their  nature. 
This  is  seen  from  experiment.  Solutions  of  different  substances 
heavier  than  water,  such  as  salt  or  sugar,  are  poured  into  tall  jais. 
Pure  water  is  then  very  carefully  poured  into  these  jars  (through  a 
funnel)  on  to  the  top  of  the  solutions,  so  as  not  to  disturb  the  lower 
stratum,  and  the  jars  are  then  left  undisturbed.  The  line  of  demarca- 
tion between  the  solution  and  the  pure  water  will  be  visible,  owing  to 
their  different  co-efficients  of  refraction.  Notwithstanding  that  the 
solutions  taken  are  heavier  than  water,  after  some  time  complete 
intermixture  will  ensue.  Gay-Lussac  convinced  himself  of  this  fact  by 
this  particular  experiment,  which  he  conducted  in  the  cellars  under  the 
Paris  Astronomical  Observatory.  These  cellars  are  well  known  as  the 
locality  where  numerous  interesting  researches  have  been  conducted, 
because,  owing  to  their  depth  under  ground,  they  have  a  uniform  tem- 
perature during  the  whole  year  ;  the  temperature  does  not  change 
during  the  day,  and  this  was  indispensable  for  the  experiments  on  the 
diffusion  of  solut'ons,  in  order  that  no  doubt  as  to  the  results  should 
arise  from  a  daily  change  of  temperature  (the  experiment  lasted  several 
months),  which  would  set  up  currents  in  the  liquids  and  intermix  their 
strata.  Notwithstanding  the  uniformity  of  the  temperature,  the  sub- 
stance in  solution  in  time  ascended  into  the  water  and  distributed  itself 
uniformly  through  it,  proving  that  there  exists  between  water  and  a 
pubstance  dissolved  in  it  a  particular  kind  of  attraction  or  striving  for 


62  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

mutual  interpenetration  in  opposition  to  the  force  of  gravity.  Farther, 
this  effort,  or  rate  of  diffusion,  is  different  for  salt  or  sugar  or  for 
various  other  substances.16  bis  It  follows  therefore  that  a  peculiar  force 
acts  in  solution,  as  in  actual  chemical  combinations,  and  solution  is 
determined  by  a  particular  kind  of  motion  (by  the  chemical  energy 
of  a  substance)  which  is  proper  to  the  substance  dissolved  and  to  the 
solvent. 

Graham  made  a  series  of  experiments  similar  to  those  above 
described,  and  showed  that  the  rate  of  diffusion^1  in  water  is  very 
variable -that  is,  a  uniform  distribution  of  a  substance  in  the  water 
dissolving  it  is  attained  in  different  periods  of  time  with  different 
solutions.  Graham  compared  diffusive  capacity  with  volatility.  There 
are  substances  which  diffuse  easily,  and  there  are  others  which  diffuse 
with  difficulty,  just  as  there  are  more  or  less  vola'tile  substances.  Seven 
hundred  cubic  centimetres  of  water  were  poured  into  ajar,  and  by  means 
of  a  syphon  (or  a  pipette)  100  cub.  centimetres  of  a  solution  containing 
10  grams  of  a  substance  were  cautiously  poured  in  so  as  to  occupy 
the  lower  portion  of  the  jar.  After  a  lapse  of  several  days,  successive 
layers  of  50  cubic  centimetres  were  taken  from  the  top  downwards, 
and  the  quantity  of  substance  dissolved  in  the  different  layers  deter- 
mined. Thus,  common  table  salt,  after  fourteen  days,  gave  the 
following  amounts  (in  milligrams)  in  the  respective  layers,  beginning 
from  the  top  :  104,  120,  126,  198,  267,  340,  429,  535,  654,  766,  881, 
991,  1,090,  1,187,  and  2,266  in  the  remainder  ;  whilst  albumin  in  the 
same  time  gave,  in  the  first  seven  layers,  a  very  small  amount,  and 
beginning  from  the  eighth  layer,  10,  15,  47,  113,  343,  855,  1,892,  and 
in  the  remainder  6,725  milligrams.  Thu.°,  the  diffusive  power  of  a 
solution  depends  on  time  and  on  the  nature  of  the  substance  dis- 
solved, which  fact  may  serve,  not  only  for  explaining  the  process  of 
solution,  but  also  for  distinguishing  one  substance  from  another. 
Graham  showed  that  substances  which  rapidly  diffuse  through  liquids 

ie  bu  Graham,  in  the  jelly  formed  by  gelatine,  and  De  Vries  in  gelatinous  silica 
(Chapter  XVIII.)  most  frequently  employed  coloured  (tinted)  substances,  for  instance, 
KjCi'jO;,  wlu'oh  showed  the  rate  of  diffusion  with  very  great  clearness.  Prof.  Oumoff 
employed  the  method  described  in  Chapter  X.,  Note  17,  for  this  purpose. 

»7  The  researches  of  Graham,  Pick,  Nernst,  and  others  showed  ti.at  the  quantity  of  a 
dissolved  substance  which  is  transmitted  (risps)  from  one  stratum  of  liquid  to  another  in 
a  vertical  cylindrical  vessel  is  not  only  proportional  to  the  time  and  to  the  sectional  area 
of  the  cylinder,  but  also  to  the  amount  and  nature  of  the  substance  dissolved  in  a  stratum 
Of  liquid,  so  that  each  substance  has  its  corresponding  co-efficient  of  diffusion.  The  cause 
of  the  diffusion  of  solutions  must  be  considered  as  essentially  the  same  as  the  cause  of 
the  diffusion  of  gases— that  is,  as  dependent  on  motions  which  are  proper  to  their  mole- 
cules ;  but  here  most  probably  those  purely  chemical,  although  feebly-developed,  forces, 
which  incline  the  substances  dissolved  to  the  formation  of  definite  compounds,  also  play 
their  part. 


ON  WATEK  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS 


63 


are  able  to  rapidly  pass  through  membranes  and  crystallise,  whilst 
substances  which  diffuse  slowly  and  do  not  crystallise  are  colloids, 
that  is,  resemble  glue,  and  penetrate  through  a  membrane  slowly,  and 
form  jellies  ,  that  is,  occur  in  insoluble  forms,18  as  will  be  explained 
in  speaking  of  silica. 


18  The  rate  of  diffusion—  like  the  rate  of  transmission—  through  membranes,  or  dialysis 
(which  plays  an  important  part  in  the  vital  processes  of  organisms  and  also  in  technical 
processes),  presents,  according  to  Graham's  researches,  a  sharply  defined  change  in 
'passing  from  such  crystallisable  substances  as  the  majority  of  salts  and  ax  ids  to  sub- 
stances which  are  capable  of  giving  jellies  (gum,  gelatin,  &c.)  The  former  diffuse  into 
solutions  and  pass  through  membranes  much  more  rapidly  than  the  latter,  and  Graham 
therefore  distinguishes  between  crystalloids,  which  diffuse  rapidly,  and  colloids,  which 
diffuse  slowly.  On  breaking  solid  colloids  into  pieces,  a  total  absence  of  cleavage  is 
remarked.  The  fracture  of  such  substances  is  like  that  of  glue  or  glass.  It  is  termed  a 
'  conchoidal  '  fracture.  Almost  all  the  substances  of  which  animal  and  vegetable  bodies 
consist  are  colloids,  and  this  is,  at  all  events,  partly  the  reason  why  animals  and  plants 
have  such  varied  forms,  which  have  no  resemblance  to  the  crystalline  forms  of  the 
majority  of  mineral  substances.  The  colloid  solid  substances  in  organisms  —  that  is,  in 
animals  and  .plants  —  almost  always  contain  water,  and  take  most  peculiar  forms,  of  net- 
works, of  granules,  of  hairs,  of  mucous,  shapeless  masses,  etc.,  which  are  quite  different 
from  the  forms  taken  by  crystalline  substances.  When  colloids  separate  out  from  solu- 
tions, or  from  a  molten  state,  they 
present  a  form  which  is  similar  to 
that  of  the  liquid  from  which  they 
were  formed.  Glass  may  be  taken 
as  the  best  example  of  this.  Colloids 
are  distinguishable  from  crystal- 
loids, not  only  by  the  absence  of 
crystalline  form,  but  by  many  other 
properties  which  admit  of  clearly 
distinguishing  both  these  classes  of 
solids,  as  Graham  showed.  Nearly 
all  colloids  are  capable  of  passing, 


which  do  not. 


ription  in  text. 


under  certain  circumstances,  from 
a  soluble  into  an  insoluble  state. 
The  best  example  is  shown  by  white 
of  eggs  (albumin)  in  the  raw  and 
soluble  form,  and  in  the  hard- 
boiled  and  insoluble  form.  The 
majority  of  colloids,  on  passing  into  an  insoluble  form  in  the  presence  of  water,  give 
substances  having  a  gelatinous  appearance,  which  is  familiar  to  every  one  in  starch, 
solidified  glue,  jelly,  &c.  Thus  gelatin,  or  common  carpenter's  glue,  when  soaked  in 
water,  swells  up  into  an  insoluble  jelly.  If  this  jelly  be  heated,  it  melts,  and  is  then 
soluble  in  water,  but  on  <  ooling  it  again  forms  a  jelly  which  is  insoluble  in  water.  One 
of  the  properties  which  distinguish  colloids  frdm  crystalloids  is  that  the  former  pass  very 
slowly  through  a  membrane,  whilst  the  latter  penetrate  very  rapidly.  This  may  be  shown 
by  taking  a  cylinder,  open  at  both  ends,  and  by  covering  its  lower  end  with  a  bladder  or 
with  vegetable  parchment  (unsized  paper  immersed  for  two  or  three  minutes  in  a  mixture 
of  sulphuric  acid  and  half  its  volume  of  water,  and  then  washed),  or  any  other  mem- 
branous substance  (all  such  substances  are  themselves  colloids  in  an  insoluble  form). 
The  membrane  must  be  firmly  tied  to  the  cylinder,  so  as  not  to  leave  any  opening. 
Such  an  apparatus  is  called  a  dialyser  (fig.  15),  and  the  process  of  separation  of  crystal- 
loids from  colloids  by  means  of  such  a  membrane  is  termed  dialysis.  An  aqueous 


64  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Hence,  if  it  be  desired  to  increase  the  rate  of  solution,  recourse 
must  be  had  to  stirring,  shaking,  or  some  such  mechanical  motion. 
But  if  once  a  uniform  solution  is  formed,  it  will  remain  uniform,  no 
matter  how  heavy  the  dissolved  substance  is,  or  how  long  the  solution 
be  left  at  resfc,  which,  fact  again  shows  the  presence  of  a  force  holding 
together  the  particles  of  the  body  dissolved  and  of  the  solvent  l9 

solution  of  a  crystalloid  or  colloid,  or  a  mixture  of  both,  is  poured  into  the  dialysery 
which  is  then  placed  in  a  vessel  containing  water,  so  that  the  bottom  of  the  membrane 
is  covered  with  water.  Then,  after  a  certain  period  of  time,  the  crystalloid  passes  through, 
the  membrane,  whilst  the  colloid,  if  it  does  pass  through  at  all,  does  so  at  an  incompar- 
ably slower  rate.  The  crystalloid  naturally  passes  through  into  the  water  until  the  solution 
attains  the  same  strength  on  both  sides  of  the  membrane.  By  replacing  the  outside 
water  with  fresh  water,  a  fresh  quantity  of  the  crystalloid  may  be  separated  from  the 
dialyser.  While  a  crystalloid  is  passing  through  the  membrane,  a  colloid  remains  almost 
entirely  in  the  dialyser,  and  therefore  a  mixed  solution  of  these  two  kinds  of  substances 
may  be  separated  from  each  other  by  a  dialyser.  The  study  of  the  properties  of  colloids^ 
'and  of  the  phenomena  of  their  passage  through  membranes,  should  elucidate  much 
respecting  the  phenomena  which  are  accomplished  in  organisms. 

19  The  formation  of  solutions  may  be  considered  in  two  aspects,  from  a  physical  and 
from  a  chemical  point  of  view,  and  it  is  more  evident  in  solutions  than*  in  any  other 
department  of  chemistry  how  closely  these  provinces  of  natural  science  are  allied 
together.  On  the  one  hand  solutions  form  a  particular  case  of  a  physico-mechanical 
inter-penetration  of  homogeneous  substances,  and  a  juxtaposition  of  the  molecules  of  the 
substance  dissolved  and  of  the  solvent,  similar  to  the  juxtaposition  which  is  exhibited  in 
homogeneous  substances.  From  this  point  of  view  this  diffusion  of  solutions  is  exactly 
.similar  to  the  diffusion  of  gases,  with  only  this  difference,  that  the  nature  and  store  of  energy 
are  different  in  gases  from  what  they  are  in  liquids,  and  that  in  liquids  there  is  consider- 
able friction,  whilst  in  gases  there  is  comparatively  little.  The  penetration  of  a  dissolved 
substance  into  water  is  likened  to  evaporation,  and  solution  to  the  formation  of  vapour. 
This  resemblance  was  clearly  expressed  even  by  Graham.  In  recent  years  the  Dutch 
chemist,  Van't  Hoff,  has  developed  this  view  of  solutions  in  great  detail,  having  shown 
(in  a  memoir  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Swedish  Academy  of  Science,  Fart  21,  No.  17, 
'  Lois  de  1'equilibre  chimique  dans  1'e'tat  dilue,  gazeux  ou  dissous,'  1886),  that  for  dilute 
solutions  the  osmotic  pressure  follows  the  same  laws  (of  Boyle,  Mariotte,  G.ay-Lussac, 
and  Avogadro-Gerhardt)  as  for  gases.  The  osmotic  pressure  of  a  substance  dissolved  in 
water  is  determined  by  means  of  membranes  which  allow  the  passage  of  water,  but  not 
of  a  substance  dissolved  in  it,  through  them.  This  property  is  found  in  animal  proto- 
plasmic membranes  and  in  porous  substances  covered  with  an  amorphous  precipitate, 
such  as  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  copper  sulphate  on  potassium  ferrocyanide  (Pfeffer, 
Traube).  If,  for  instance,  a  one  p.c.  solution  of  sugar  be  placed  in  such  a  vessel,  which 
is  then  closed  and  placed  in  water,  the  water  passes  through  the  walls  of  the  vessel  and 
increases  the  pressure  by  50  mm.  of  the  barometric  column.  If  the  pressure  be  artificially 
increased  inside  the  vessel,  then  the  water  will  be  expelled  through  the  walls.  De  Vries 
found  a  convenient  means  of  determining  isotonic  solutions  (those  presenting  a  similar 
osmotic  pressure)  in  the  cells  of  plants.  For  this  purpose  a  portion  of  the  soft  part  of 
the  leaves  of  the  Tradescantis  discolor,  for  instance,  is  cut  away  and  moistened  with  the 
solution  of  a  given  salt  and  of  a  given  strength.  If  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  solution 
taken  be  less  than  that  of  the  sap  contained  in  the  cells  they  will  change  their  form  or 
shrink ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  osmotic  pressure  be  greater  than  that  of  the  sap,  then 
the  cells  will  expand,  as  can  easily  be  seen  under  the  microscope.  By  altering  the 
amount  of  the  different  salts  in  solution  it  is  possible  to  find  for  each  salt  the  strength 
of  solution  at  which  the  cells  begin  to  swell,  and  at  which  they  will  consequently  have 
&n  equal  osmotic  pressure.  As  it  increases  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  a  substance 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  65 

In  the  consideration  of  the  process  of  solution,  besides  the  con- 
ception of  diffusion,  another  fundamental  conception  is  necessary — 
gamely,  that  of  the  saturation  of  solutions. 

dissolved  per  100  parts  of  water,  it  is  possible,  knowing  the  osmotic  pressure  of  a  given  sub. 
etance — for  instance,  sugar  at  various  degrees  of  concentration  of  solution — and  knowing 
the  composition  of  isotonic  solutions  compared  with  sugar,  to  determine  the  osmotic 
pressure  of  all  the  salts  investigated.  The  osmotic  pressure  of  dilute  solutions  determined 
in  this  manner  directly  or  indirectly  (from  observations  made  by  Pfeffer  and  De  Vries^ 
waa  shown  to  follow  the  same  laws  as  those  of  the  pressure  of  gases  ;  for  instance,  by 
doubling  or  increasing  the  quantity  of  a  salt  (in  a  given  volume)  n  times,  the  pressure  is 
doubled  or  increases  n  times.  So,  for  example,  in  a  solution  containing  one  part  of  sugar 
per  100  parts  of  water  the  osmotic  pressure  (according  to  Pfeffer)  =  53'5  cm.  of  mercury, 
if  2  parts  of  sugar  =  101-6,  if  4  parts  «*  208'2  and  so  on,  which  proves  that  the  ratio  is  true 
Within  the  limits  of  experimental  error.  (2)  Different  substances  for  equal  strengths  of 
solutions,  show  very  different  osmotic  pressures,  just  as  gases  for  equal  parts  by  weight 
in  equal  volumes  show  different  tensions.  (8)  If,  for  a  given  dilute  solution  at  0°,  the 
osmotic  pressure  equal  p°,  then  at  t°  it  will  be  greater  and  equal  to  p°  (1  +  0'00367<),  i.e. 
it  increases  with  the  temperature  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  the  tension  of  gases 
increases.  (4)  If  in  dilute  solutions  of  such  substances  as  do  not  conduct  an  electric 
current  (for  instance,  sugar,  acetone,  and  many  other  organic  bodies)  the  substances  be 
taken  in  the  ratio  of  their  molecular  weights  (expressed  by  their  formulae,  see  Chapter 
VII.),  then  not  only  will  the  osmotic  pressure  be  equal,  but  its  magnitude  will  be  deter- 
mined by  that  tension  which  would  be  proper  to  the  vapours  of  the  given  substances 
when  they  would  be  contained  in  the  space  occupied  by  the  solution,  just  as  the  tension 
of  the  vapours  of  molecular  quantities  of  the  given  substances  will  be  equal,  and  deter- 
mined by  the  laws  of  Gay-Lussac,  Mariotte,  and  Avogadro-Gerhardt.  Those  formulae 
(Chapter  VII.,  Notes  23  and  24)  by  which  the  gaseous  state  of  matter  is  detennined,  may 
also  be  applied  in  the  present  case.  So,  for  example,  the  osmotic  pressure  p,  in  centi- 
metres of  mercury,  of  a  one  percent,  solution  of  sugar,  may  be  calculated  according  to  the 
formula  for  gases : 

Mp  =  6200  a  (273  +  t), 

where  M  is  the  molecular  weight,  8  the  weight  in  grams  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  vapour, 
and  t  its  temperature.  For  sugar  M  —  342  (because  its  molecular  composition  is 
C12H22Qn).  The  specific  gravity  of  the  solution  of  sugar  is  T003,  hence  the  weight  of 
eugar  s  contained  in  a  1  per  cent,  solution  =  O'OIOOS  gram.  The  observation  was  made 
at  t  =  14°.  Hence,  according  to  the  formula,  we  find  p  =  52'2  centimetres.  And  experi- 
ments carried  on  at  14°  gave  58'5  eentimetres,  which  is  very  near  to  the  above.  (5)  For 
the  solutions  of  salts,  acids,  and  similar  substances,  which  conduct  an  electric  current, 
the  calculated  pressure  is  usually  (but  not  always  in  a  definite  or  multiple  number  of 
times)  less  than  the.  observed  by  *  times,  and  this  i  for  dilute  solutions  of  MgSO4  is  nearly 
1,  for  CO2  =  1,  for  KC1,  NaCl,  KI,  KN03  greater  than  1,  and  approximates  to  2,  for 
BaCl2,  MgCl2,  K2CO3,  and  others  between  2  and  8,  for  HC1,  H2S04,  NaNO3,  CaN2O6,  and 
Others  nearly  2  and  so  op.  It  should  be  remarked  that  the  above  deductions  are  only 
applicable  (and  with  a  certain  degree  of  accuracy)  to  dilute  solutions,  and  in  this  respect 
resemble  the  generalisations  of  Michel  and  Kraft  (see  Note  44).  Nevertheless,  the 
arithmetical  relation  found  by  Van't  Hoff  between  the  formation  of  vapours  and  the 
transition  into  dilute  solutions  forms  an  important  scientific  discovery,  which  should 
facilitate  the  explanation  of  the  nature  of  solutions,  while  the  osmotic  pressure  of  solu- 
tions already  forms  a  very  important  aspect  of  the  study  of  solutions.  In  this  respect  it 
is  necessary  to  mention  that  Prof.  Konovaloff  (1891,  and  subsequently  others  also) 
discovered  the  dependence  (and  it  may  be  a  sufficient  explanation)  of  the  osmotic 
pressure  upon  the  differences  of  the  tensions  of  aqueous  vapours  and  aqueous  solutions ; 
this,  however,  already  enters  into  a  special  province  of  physical  chemistry  (certain  data 
are  given  in  Note  49  and  following),  and  to  this  physical  side  of  the  question  also  belongs 


66  PRINCIPLES   OF  CHEMISTRY 

Just  as  moist  air  may  be  diluted  with  any  desired  quantity  of  dry 
air,  so  also  an  indefinitely  large  quantity  of  a  liquid  solvent  may  be  taken, 

one  of  the  extreme  consequences  of  the  resemblance  of  osmotic  pressure  to  gaseoua 
pressure,  which  is  that  the  concentration  of  a  uniform  solution  varies  in  parts  which  are 
heated  or  cooled.  Soret  (1881)  indeed  observed  that  a  solution  of  copper  sulphate 
containing  17  parts  of  the  salt  at  20°  only  contained  14  parts  after  heating  the  upper 
portion  of  the  tube  to  80°  for  a  long  period  of  time.  This  aspect  of  solution,  which  is 
now  being  very  carefully  and  fully  worked  out,  may  be  called  the  physical  side.  Its 
other  aspect  is  purely  chemical,  for  solution  does  not  take  place  between  any  two  sub- 
stances, but  requires  a  special  and  particular  attraction  or  affinity  between  them.  A 
vapour  or  gas  permeates  any  other  vapour  or  gas,  but  a  salt  which  dissolves  in  water  may 
not  be  in  the  least  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  is  quite  insoluble  in  mercury.  -In  considering 
solutions  as  a  manifestation  of  chemical  force  (and  of  chemical  energy),  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  they  are  here  developed  to  so  feeble  an  extent  that  the  definite 
compounds  (that  is,  those  formed  according  to  the  law  of  multiple  proportions)  formed 
between  water  and  a  soluble  substance  dissociate  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature, 
forming  a  homogeneous  system — that  is,  one  in  which  both  the  compound  and  the  pro- 
ducts into  which  it  decomposes  (water  and  the  aqueous  compound)  occur  in  a  liquid 
state.  The  chief  difficulty  in  the  comprehension  of  solutions  depends  on  the  fact  that 
the  mechanical  theory  of  the.  structure  of  liquids  has  not  yet  been  so  fully  developed  as 
the  theory  of  gases,  and  solutions  are  liquids.  The  conception  of  solutions  as  liquid 
dissociated  definite  chemical  compounds  is  based  on  the  following  considerations :  (1) 
that  there  exist  certain  undoubtedly  definite  chemical  crystallised  compounds  (such  as 
H2SO4,  H2O ;  or  NaCl,  2H2O ;  or  Cafclj,  6H.jO ;  &c.)  which  melt  on  a  certain  rise  of 
temperature,  and  then  form  true  solutions ;  (2)  that  metallic  alloys  in  a  molten  condition 
are  real  solutions,  but  on  cooling  theyoft^n  give  entirely  distinct  and  definite  crystallised 
compounds,  which  are  recognised  by  the  properties  of  alloys;  (3)  that  between  the  solvent 
and  the  substance  dissolved  there  are  formed,  in  a  number  of  cases,  many  undoubtedly 
definite  compounds,  such  as  compounds  with  water  of  crystallisation;  (4)  that  the 
physical  properties  of  solutions,  and  especially  their  specific  gravities  (a  property  which 
can  be  very  accurately  determined),  vary  with  a  change  in  composition,  and  in  such  a 
manner  as  would  be  required  by  the  formation  of  one  or  more  definite  but  dissociating 
compounds.  Thus,  for  example,  on  adding  water  to  fuming  sulphuric  acid  its  density  is 
observed  to  decrease  until  it  attains-the  definite  composition  HaSO4,  or  SO3-f  H2O,  when 
the  specific  gravity  increases,  although  on  further  diluting  with  water  it  again  falls. 
Moreover  (Mendele"eff,  The  Investigation  of  Aqueous  Solutions  from  their  Specific 
Gravities,  1887),  the  increase  in  specific  gravity  (ds),  varies  in  all  well-known  solutions 
with  the  proportion  of  the  substance  dissolved  (dp),  and  this  dependence  can  be  expressed 

by  a  formula  (-^  =  A  +  "Bp)  between  the  limits  of  definite  compounds  whose  existence 
dp 

in  solutions  must  be  admitted,  and  this  is  in  complete  accordance  with  the  dissociation 
hypothesis.  Thus,  for  .instance,  from  H2SO4  to  H2SO4  +  H2O  (both  these  substances 

exist  as  definite  compounds  in  a  free  state),  the  fraction     -  =  0'0729-0'000749j)  (where 

dp 

p  is  the  percentage  amount  of  H2SO4).  For  alcohol  C2H6O,  whose  aqueous  solutions 
have  been  more  accurately  investigated  than  all  others,  the  definite  compound  C2H6O  + 
8H2O,  and  others  must  be  acknowledged  in  its  solutions. 

The  two  aspects  of  solution  above  mentioned,  and  the  hypotheses  which  have  as  yet 
been  applied  to  the  examination  of  solutions,  although  they  have  somewhat  different 
starting  points,  will  doubtless  in  time  lead  to  a  general  theory  of  solutions,  because  the 
same  common  laws  govern  both  physical  and  chemical  phenomena,  inasmuch  as  the 
properties  and  motions  of  molecules,  which  determine  physical  properties,  depend  on 
the  motions  and  properties  of  atoms,  which  determine  chemical  reactions.  For  details 
of  the  questions  dealing  with  theories  of  solution,  recourse  must  now  be  had  to  special 
memoirs  and  to  works  on  theoretical  (physical)  chemistry ;  for  this  subject  forms  one  of 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  67 

and  yet  a  uniform  solution  will  be  obtained.  But  more  than  a  definite 
quantity  of  aqueous  vapour  cannot  be  introduced  into  a  certain  volume 
of  air  at  a  certain  temperature.  The  excess  above  the  point  of 
saturation  will  remain  in  the  liquid  state.2**  The  relation  between 
water  and  substances  dissolved  in  it  is  similar  More  than  a  definite 
quantity  of  a  substance  cannot,  at  a  certain  temperature,  dissolve  in  a 
given  quantity  of  water  ;  the  excess  does  not  unite  with  the  water. 
Just  as  air  or  a  gas  becomes  saturated  with  vapour,  so  water  becomes 
saturated  with  a  substance  dissolved  in  it.  If  an  excess  of  a  substance 
be  added  to  water  which  is  already  saturated  with  it,  it  will  remain  in 
its  original  state,  and  will  not  diffuse  through  the  water.  The  quantity 
of  a  substance  (either  by  volume  with  gases,  or  by  weight  with  solids 
and  liquids)  which  is  capable  of  saturating  100  parts  of  water  is  called 
the  co-efficient  of  solubility  or  the  solubility.  In  100  grams  of  water 

special  interest  at  the  present  epoch  of  the  development  of  our  science.  In  working  out 
chiefly  the  chemical  side  of  solutions,  I  consider  it  to  be  necessary  to  reconcile  the  two 
aspects  of  the  question  ;  this  seems  to  me  to  be  all  the  more  possible,  as  the  physical  side  is 
limited  to  dilute  solutions  only,  whilst  the  chemical  side  deals  mainly  with  strong  solutions. 

30  A.  system  of  (chemically  or  physically)  re-acting  substances  in  different  states  of 
aggregation — for  instance,  some  solid,  others  liquid  or -gaseous— is  termed  a  hetero- 
geneous system.  Up  to  now  it  is  only  systems  of  this  kind  which  can  be  subjected  to 
detailed  examination  in  the  sense  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  matter.  Solutions  (i.e. 
unsaturated  ones)  form  fluid  homogeneous  systems,  which  at  the  present  time  can  only 
be  investigated  with  difficulty. 

In  the  case  of  limited  solution  of  liquids  in  liquids,  tho  difference  between  the  solvent 
and  the  substance  dissolved  is  clearly  seen.  The  former  (that  is,  the  solvent)  may  be 
added  in  an  unlimited  quantity,  and  yet  the  solution  obtained  will  always  be  uniform, 
whilst  only  a  definite  saturating  proportion  of  the  substance  dissolved  can  be  taken, 
We  will  take  water  and  common  (sulphuric)-  ether.  On  shaking  the  ether  with  the 
water,  it  will  be  remarked  that  a  portion  of  it  dissolves  in  the  water.  If  the  ether  be 
taken  in  such  a  quantity  that  it  saturates  the  water  and  a  portion  of  it  remains  -undis' 
solved,  then  this  remaining  portion  will  act  as  a  solvent,  and  water  will  diffuse  through 
it  and  also  form  a  saturated  solution  of  water  in  the  ether  taken.  Thus  two  saturated 
solutions  will  be  obtained.  One  solution  will  contain  ether  dissolved  in  water,  and  the 
other  solution  will  contain  water  dissolved  in  ether.  These  two  solutions  will  arrange 
themselves  in  two  layers,  according  to  their  density  }  the  ethereal  solution  of  water  will 
be  on  the  top.  If  the  upper  ethereal  solution  be  poured  off  from  the  aqueous  solution, 
any  quantity  of  ether  may  be  added  to  it ;  this  shows  that  the  dissolving  substance  is 
ether.  If  water  be  added  to  it,  it  is  no  longer  dissolved  in  it ;  this  shows  that  water 
saturates  the  ether — here  water  is  the  substance  dissolved.  If  we  act  in  the  same 
manner  with  the  lower  layer,  we  shall  find  that  water  is  the  solvent  and  ether 'the  sub- 
stance dissolved.  By  taking  different  amounts  of  ether  and  water,  the  degree  of 
solubility  of  ether  in  water,  and  of  water  in  ether,  may  be  easily  determined.  Water 
approximately  dissolves  ^  of  its  volume  of  etner,  and  ether  dissolves  a  very  small  quan- 
tity of  water.  Let  us  now  imagine  that  the  liquid  poured  in  dissolves  a  considerable 
amount  of  water,  and  that  water  dissolves  a  censiderable  amount  of  the  liquid.  Two 
layers  could  not  be  formed,  because  the  saturated  solutions  would  resemble  each  other, 
and  therefore  they  would  intermix  in  all  proportions.  This  is,  consequently,  a  case  of 
a  phenomenon  where  two  liquids  present  considerable  co-efficients  of  solubility  in  each 
other,  but  where  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  these  co-efficients  are,  because  it  is  impos- 
sible to  obtain  a  saturated  solution. 


68 


PBINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


at  15°,  there  can  be  dissolved  not  more  than  35-86  grams  of  common 
salt.     Consequently,  its  solubility  at  15°  is  equal  to  35-86  2I     It  is 

21  The  solubility,  or  co-efficient 
of  solubility,  of  a  substance  » 
determined  by  various  methods. 
Either  a  solution  is  expressly 
prepared  with  a  clear  excess  of 
Che  soluble  substance  and  satu- 
rated at  a  given  temperature,  and 
the  quantity  of  water  and  of  the 
substance  dissolved  in  it  deter- 
mined by  evaporation,  desicca- 
tion, or  other  means;  or  else,  as 
is  done  with  gases,  definite  quan- 
tities of  water  and  of  the  soluble 
substance  are  taken  and  the 
amount  remaining  undissolved  is 
determined. 

The  solubility  of  a  gas  in 
water  is  determined  by  means  of 
an  apparatus  called  an  absorp- 
tiomcter  (fig.  16).  It  consists  of 
an  iron  stand  /,  on  which  an 
india-rubber  ring  rests.  A  wide 
glass  tube  is  placed  on  this  ring, 
and  is  pressed  down  on  it  by  the 
ring  h  and  the  screws  ii.  The 
tube  is  thus  firmly  fixed  on  the 
stand.  A  cock  rt  communicating 
with  a  funnel  r,  passes  into  the 
lower  part  of  the  stand.  Mercury 
can  be  poured  into  the  wide  tube 
through  this  funnel,  which  is 
therefore  made  of  steel,  as  copper 
would  be  affected  by  the  mer- 
cury. The  upper  ring  h  is  fur- 
nished with  a  cover  p,  which  can 
be  firmly  pressed  down  on  to  the 
wide  tube,  and  hermetically  closes 
it  by  means  of  an  india-rubber 
ring.  The  tube  r  r  can  be  raised 
at  will,  and  so  by  pouring  mercury 
into  the  funnel  the  height  of  the 
column  of  mercury,  which  pro- 
duces pressure  inside  the  appa- 
ratus, can  be  increased.  The 
pressure  can  also  be  diminished 
at  will,  by  letting  mercury  out 
through  the  cock  r.  A  graduated 
tube  e,  containing  the  gas  and 
liquid  to  be  experimented  on,  is 
placed  inside  the  wide  tube.  This 
tube  is  graduated  in  millimetres 

FIG.  16.— Bunsen's  absorptiometcr.    Apparatus  for  for  determining  the  pressure,  and 

determining  the  solubility  of  gases  in  liquids.  it  is  calibrated  for  volume,  so  that 


ON  WATER  AND  1T8  COMPOUNDS  69 

most  important  to  turn  attention  to  the  existence  of  the  solid  insoluble 
substances  of  nature,  because  on  them  depends  the  shape  of  the 
substances  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  of  plants  and  animals.  There 
is  so  much  water  on  the  earth's  surface,  that  were  the  surface  of  sub- 
stances formed  of  soluble  matters  it  would  constantly  change,  and 

the  number  of  volumes  occupied  by  the  gas  and  liquid  dissolving  it  can  be  easily  calcu- 
lated. This  tube  can  also  be  easily  removed  from  the  apparatus.  The  lower  portion  of  this 
tube  when  removed  from  the  apparatus  is  shown  to  the  right  of  the  figure.  It  will  be  ob- 
served that  its  lower  end  is  furnished  with  a  male  screw  6,  fitting  in  a  nut  a.  The  lower 
surface  of  the  nut  a  is  covered  with  india-rubber,  so  that  on  screwing  up  the  tube  its 
lower  end  presses  upon  the  india-rubber,  and  .thus  hermetically  closes  the  whole  tube,  for 
its  upper  end  is  fused  up.  The  nut  a  is  furnished  with  arms  c  c,  and  in  the  stand  / 
there  are  corresponding  spaces,  so 'that  when  the  screwed-up  internal  tube  is  fixed  into 
stand  /,  the  arms  c  c  fix  into  these  spaces  cut  in  /.  This  enables  the  internal  tube  to  be 
fixed  on  to  the  stand/.  When  the  internal  tube  is  fixed  in  the  stand,  the  wide  tube  is  put 
iuto  its  right  position,  and  mercury  and  water  are  poured  into  the  space  between  the  two 
tubes,  and  communication  is  opened  between  the  inside  of  the  tube  e  and  the  mercury 
between  the  interior  and  exterior  tubes.  This  is  done  by  either  revolving  the  interior 
tube  e,  oi  by  a  key  turning  the  nut  about  the  bottom  part  of/.  The  tube  0  is  filled  with 
gasr  and  water  as  follows :  the  tube  is  removed  from  the  apparatus,  filled  with  mercury, 
and  the  gas  to  be  experimented  on  is  passed  into  it.  The  volume  of  the  gas  is  measured, 
the  temperature  and  pressure  determined,  and  the  volume  it  would  occupy  at  0°  and 
760  mm.  calculated.  A  known  volume  of  water  is  then  introduced  into  the  tube.  The 
water  must  be  previously  boiled,  so  as  to  be  quite  freed  from  air  in  solution.  The  tube  is 
then  closed  by  screwing  it  down  on  to  the  india-rubber  on  the  nut.  It  is  then  fixed  on  to 
the  stand/,  mercury  and  water  are  poured  into  the  intervening  space  between  it  and  the 
exterior  tube,  which  is  then  screwed  up  and  closed  by  the  cover  p,  and  the  whole 
apparatus  is  left  at  rest  for  some  time,  so  that  the  tube  e,  and  the  gas  in  it,  may  attain  the 
same  temperature  as  that  of  the  surrounding  water,  which  is  marked  by  a  thermometer 
k  tied  to  the  tube  e.  The  interior  tube  is  then  again  closed  by  turning  it  in  the  nut, 
the  cover  p  again  shut,  and  the  whole  apparatus-  is  shaken  in  order  that  the  gas  in  the 
tube  e  may  entirely  saturate  the  water.  After  several  shakings,  the  tube  e  is  again 
opened  by  turning  it  in  the  nut,  and  the  apparatus  is  left  at  rest  for  a  certain  time  ;  it  is 
then  closed  and  again  shaken,  and  so  on  until  the  volume  of  gas  does  not  diminish  after 
a  fresh  shaking— that  is,  until  saturation  ensues.  Observations  are  then  made  of  the 
temperature,  the  height  -of  the  mercury  in  the  interior  tube,  and-  the  level  of  the  water  in 
it,  and  also  of  the  level  of  the  mercury  and  water  in  the  exterior  tube.  All.  these  data 
are  necessary  in  order  to  calculate  the  pressure  under  which  the  solution  of  the  gas  takes 
place,  and  what  volume  of  gas  remains  undissolved,  and  also  the  quantity  of  water  which 
servos  as  the  solvent.  By  varying  the  temperature  of  the  surrounding  water,  the  amount 
of  gas  dissolved  at  various  temperatures  may  be  determined.  Bunsen,  Carius,  and 
many  others  determined  the  solution  of  various  gases  in  water,  alcohol,  and  certain 
other  liquids,  by  means  of  this  apparatus.  If  in  a  determination  of  this  kind  it  is  found 
that  n  cubic  centimetres  of  water  at  a  pressure  h  dissolve  m  cubic  centimetres  of  a 
given  gas,  measured  at  0°  and  760  mm.,  when  the  temperature  under  which  solution 
took  place  was  t°,  then  it  follows  that  at  the  temperature  t  the  co-efficient  of  solubility 

of  tins  gas  in  1  volume  of  the  liquid  will  be  equal  to  ™  x  ZJ° 

n       h 

This  formula  is  very  clearly  understood  from  the  fact  that  the  co-efficient  of  solubility 
of  gases  is  that  quantity  measured  at  0°  and  760  mm.,  which  is  absorbed  at  a  pressure 
of  760  mm.  by  one  volume  of  a  liquid.  If  n  oubic  centimetres  of  water  absorb  m  cubic 

centimetres  of  a  gas,  then  one  cubic  centimetre  absorbs  — *.  If  '-  c.c.  of  a  gas  are/ 

n  n 

absorbed  under  a  pressure  of  h  mm.,  then,  according  to  the  law  of  the  variation  of 


70 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


however  substantial  their  forms  might  be,  mountains,  river  banks  and 
sea  shores,  plants  and  animals,  or  the  habitations  and  coverings  of  men, 
could  not  exist  for  any  length  of  time.22 

Substances  which  are  easily  soluble  in  water  bear  a  certain  resem- 
blance to  it.     Thus  sugar  and  salt  in  many  of  their  superficial  features 

solubility  of  a  gas  with  the  pressure,  there  would  be  dissolved;  under  a  pressure  of 

760  mm.,  a  quantity  varying  in  the  same  ratio  to  ™  as   760  :  h.      In   determining  the 

n 

residual  volume  of  gas  its  moisture  (note  1)  must  be  taken  into  consideration. 

Below  are  given  the  number  of  grams  of  several  substances  saturating  100  grams  of 
water — that  is,  their  co-efficients  of  solubility  by  weight  at  three  different  temperatures:— 


AtO° 

Atao° 

At  100° 

Oxygen,  O2                                 . 

io«»oo 

io«oo 



Gases 

Carbonic  anhydride,  CO2          .        ,. 
Ammonia,  NHs         .                »       « 

9$ 

$8 

7-8 

Liquids  * 

Phenol,  C6HeO  .        .    .            4        . 
Amyl  alcohol,  C5Hj2O 

4-9 
4-4 

6-2 

2-9 

00 

Sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4 

GO 

00 

00 

Solids    • 

Gypsum,  CaSO4  ,  2H2O 
Alum,  A1KS2O8  ,  12H2O 
Anhydrous  sodium  sulphate,  N  3^804 

,1 

4-5 

15i 

20 

857-6 
48 

Common  Salt,  NaCl 

85-7 

86-0 

89'7 

Nitre,  KN03     .        .                . 

18-8 

81-7 

246-0 

Sometimes  a  substance  is  so  slightly  soluble  that  it  may  be  considered  as  insoluble. 
Many  such  substances  are  met  with  both  in  solids  and  liquids,  and  such  a  gas  as  oxygen, 
although  it  doea  dissolve,  does  so  in  so  small  a  proportion  by  weight  that  it  might  be 
considered  as  zero  did  not  the  solubility  of  even  so  little  oxygen  play  an  important  part 
in  nature  (as  in  the  respiration  of  fishes)  and  were  not  an  infinitesimal  quantity  of  a  gas 
by  weight  so  easily  measured  by  volume.  The  sign  oo,  which  stands  on  a  line  with  sul- 
phuric acid  in  the  above  table,,  indicates  that  it  intermixes  with  water  in  all  proportions. 
There  are  many  such  cases  among  liquids,  and  everybody  knows,  for  instance,  that  spirit 
(absolute  alcohol)  can  be  mixed  in  any  proportion  with  water. 

22  Just  as  the  existence  must  be  admitted  of  substances  which  are  completely  un- 
decomposable  (chemically)  at  the  ordinary  temperature — and  of  substances  which 
are  entirely  non-volatile  at  such  a  temperature  (as  wood  and  gold),  although  capable  of 
decomposing  (wood)  or  volatilising  (gold)  at  a  higher  temperature — so  also  the  existence 
must  be  admitted  of  substances  which  are  totally  insoluble  in  water  without  some  degree 
of  change  in  their  state.  Although  mercury  is  partially  volatile  at  the  ordinary  tem- 
perature, there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  it  and  other  metals  are  soluble  in  water,  alcohol, 
or  other  simflar  liquids.  However,  mercury  forms  solutions,  as  it  dissolves  other  metals. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  substances  found  in  nature  which  are  so  very 
slightly  soluble  in  water,  that  in  ordinary  practice  they  may  be  considered  as  insoluble 
(for  example,  barium  sulphate).  For  the  comprehension  of  that  general  plan  according  to 
which  a  change  of  state  of  substances  (combined  or  dissolved,  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous) 
takes  place,  it  is  very  important  to  make  a  distinction  at  this  boundary  line  (on  approach* 
ing  zero  of  decomposition,  volatility,  or  solubility)  between  an  insignificant  amount  and 
zero,  but  the  present  methods  of  research  and  the  data  at  our  disposal  at  the  present 
time  only  just  touch  such  questions  (by  studying  the  electrical  conductivity  of  dilute 
solutions  and  the  development  of  micro-organisms  in  them).  It  must  be  remarked, 
besides,  that  water  in  a  number  of  cases  does  not  dissolve  a  substance  as  such,  but  acts 
on  it  chemically  and  forms  a  soluble  substance.  Thus  glass  and  many  rocks,  especially 
if  taken  as  powder,  are  chemically  changed  by  water,  but  are  not  directly  soluble  in  it. 


ON  WATER  AND   ITS  COMPOUNDS  71 

remind  one  of  ice.  Metals,  which  are  not  soluble  in  water,  have  no 
points  in  common  with  it,  whilst  on  the  other  hand  they  dissolve  each 
other  in  a  molten  state,  forming  alloys,  just  as  oily  substances  dissolve 
each  other  ;  for  example,  tallow  is  soluble  in  petroleum  and  in  olive  oil, 
although  they  are  all  insoluble  in  water.  From  this  it  is  evident  that 
the  analogy  of  substances  forming  a  solution  plays  an  important  part, 
and  a§  aqueous  and  all  other  solutions  are  liquids,  there  is  good  reason 
to  believe  that  in  the  process  of  solution  solid  and  gaseous  substances 
change  in  a  physical  sense,  passing  into  a  liquid  state.  These  con- 
siderations elucidate  many  points  of  solution — as,  for  instance,  the 
variation  of  the  co- efficient  of  solubility  with  the  temperature  and  t^e 
evolution  or  absorption  of  heat  in  the  formation  of  solutions. 

The  solubility — that  is,  the  quantity  of  a  substance  necessary  for 
saturation — varies  with  the  temperature,  and,  further,  with  an  increase 
in  temperature  the  solubility  of  solid  substances  generally  increases,  and 
that  of  gases  decreases  ;  this  might  be  expected,  as  solid  substances  by 
heating,  and  gases  by  cooling,  approach  to  a  liquid  or  dissolved  state.28 
A  graphic  method  is  often  employed  to  express  the  variation  of  solu- 
bility with  temperature.  On  the  axis  of  abscissae  or  on  a  horizontal 
line,  temperatures  are  marked  out  and  perpendiculars  are  raised  corre- 
sponding with  each  temperature,  whose  length  is  determined  Jby.  the. 
solubility  of  the  salt  at  that  temperature  —expressing,  for  instance,  one 
part  by  weight  of  a  salt  in  100  parts  of  water  by  one  unit  of  length, 
such  as  a  millimetre.  By  joining  the  summits  of  the  perpendiculars, 
a  curve  is  obtained  which  expresses  the  degree  of  solubility  at  different 
temperatures.  For  solids,  the  curve  is  generally  an  ascending  one — i.e. 
recedes  from  the  horizontal  line  with  the  rise  in  temperature.  These 
curves  clearly  show  by  their  inclination  the  degree  of  "rapidity  of  increase 
in  solubility  with  the  temperature.  Having  determined  several  points 
of  a  curve — that  is,  having  made  a  determination  of  the  solubility  for 
several  temperatures — the  solubility  at  intermediary  temperatures  may 
be  determined  from  the  form  of  the  curve  so  obtained  ;  in  this  way 
the  empirical  law  of  solubility  may  be  examined.24  The  results  of 

K  Beilby  (1883)  experimented  on  paraffin,  and  found  that  one  litre  of  solid  paraffin 
at  21°  weighed  874  grams,  and  when  liquid,  at  its  melting-point  38°,  783  grams,  at  49°, 
776  grams,  and  at  60°,  767  grams,  from  which  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  liquefied-paraffin 
would  be  795*4  grams  at  21°  if  it  could  remain  liquid  at  that  temperature.  By  dissolving 
solid  paraffin  in  lubricating  oil  at  21°  Beilby  found  that  795*6  grams  occupy  one  cubio 
decimetre,  from  which  he  concluded  that  the  solution  contained  liquefied  paraffin. 

24  Gay-Lussac  was  the  first  to  have  recourse  to  such  a  graphic  method  of  expressing 
solubility,  and  he  considered',  in  accordance  with  the  'general  opinion,. that  by  joining  up 
the  summits  of  the  'ordinates  in  one  harmonious  curve  it  is  possible  to  express  the  entire 
change  of  solubility  with  the  temperature.  Now,  there  are  many  reasons  for  doubting 
the  accuracy  of  such  an  admission,  for  there  are  undoubtedly  critical  points  in  curves  of 


72  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

research  have  shown  that  the  solubility  of  certain  salts — as,  for  example, 
common  table  salt — varies  comparatively  little  with  the  temperature  j 
whilst  for  other  substances  the  solubility  increases  by  equal  amounts 
for  equal  increments  of  temperature.  Thus,  for  example,  for  the 
saturation  of  100  parts  of  water  by  potassium  chloride  there  is  required 
at  0°,  29-2  parts,  at  20°,  34-7,  at  40°,  40-2,  at  60°,  45-7  ;  and  so  on, 
for  every  10°  the  solubility  increases  by  2-75  parts  by  weight  of  the 
salt.  Therefore  the  solubility  of  the  potassium  chloride  in  water  may  be 
expressed  by  a  direct  equation  :  «=29-2^-0'275<,  where  a  represents  the 
solubility  at  V.  For  other  salts,  more  complicated  equations  are  required. 
For  example,  for  nitre:  a=i3-3  +  0-574«  +  0'017m8-f  0-0000036*3, 
which  shows  that  when  t=.Q°  «  =  13'3,  when  *=?10°  u=20'8,  and  when 
*=100°  <«=246-0. 

Curves  of  solubility  give  the  means  of  estimating  the  amount  of 
salt  separated  by  the  cooling  to  a  known  extent  of  a  solution  saturated 
solubility  (for  example,  of  sodium  sulphate,  as  shown  further  on),  and  it  may  be  thai 
definite  compounds  of  dissolved  substances  with  water,  in  decomposing  within  known 
limits  of  temperature,  give  critical  points  more  often  than  would  be  imagined ;  it  may 
even  be,  indeed,  that  instead  of  a  continuous  curve,  solubility  should  be  expressed — if 
not  always,  then  not  unfrequently — by  straight  or  broken  lines.  According  to  Ditte,  the 
solubility  of  sodium  nitrate,  NaNO3l  is  expressed  by  the  following  figures  per  100  parts 
of  water  :— 

0°  4°  10°  15°  '21°  29°  86°  61°  68° 
66-7  71-0  76-8  80'6  85'7  92'9  99'4  118'6  125'1 
In  my  opinion  (1881)  these  data  should  be  expressed  with  exactitude  by  a  straight  line, 
67'5  +  0'87£,  which  entirely  agrees  with  the  results  of  experiment.  According  to  this 
the  figure  expressing  the  solubility'  of  salt  at  0Q  exactly  coincides  with  the  composition 
of  a  definite  chemical  compound — NaNOs,  7H2O.  The  experiments  made  by  Ditte 
showed  that  all  saturated  solutions  between  0°  and  — 15'7°  have  such  a  composition, 
and  that  at  the  latter  temperature  the  solution  completely  solidifies  into  one  homo- 
geneous whole.  Between  0°  and  -15°'7  the  solution  NaNb57H2O  does  not  deposit 
either  salt  or  ice.  Thus  the  solubility  of  .sodium  nitrate  is  expressed  by  a  broken 
straight  line.  In  recent  times  (1888)  Etard  discovered  a  similar  phenomenon 
in  many  of  the  sulphates.  Brandes,  in  1880,  shows  a  diminution  in  solubility 
below  100°  for  manganese  sulphate.  The  percentage  by  weight  (i.e.  per  100  parts 
of  the  solution,  and  not  of  water)  of  saturation  for  ferrous  sulphate,  FeSO4,  from 
-  2°  to  +  65°  =  18-5  +  0<8784£ — that  is,  the  solubility  of  the  salt  increases.  The  solubility 
remains  constant  from  65°  to  98°  (according  to  Brandes  the  solubility  then  increases ; 
this  divergence  of  opinion  requires  proof),  and  from  98°  to  150°  it  falls  as  =  104-85  — 
0'6685£.  Hence,  at  about  +156°  the  solubility  should  =0,  and  this  has  been  confirmed 
by  experiment.  I  observe,  on  my  part,  that  Etard's  formula  gives  88'1  .p.c.  of  salt  at 
65°  and  38'8  p.c.  at  92°,  and  this  maximum  amount  of  salt  in  the  solution  very  nearly 
corresponds  with  the  composition  FeSO4,14H2O,  which  requires  S7'6  p.c.  From  what 
lias  been  said,  it  is  evident  that  the  data  concerning  solubility  require  a  new  method  of 
investigation,  which  should  have  in  view  the  entire  scale  of  solubility— from  the  form- 
ation of  completely  solidified  solutions  (cryohydrates,  which  we  shall  speak  of  presently) 
to  the  separation  of  salts  from  their  solutions,  if  this  ^s  accomplished  at  a  higher  tern- 
perature  (for  manganese  and  cadmium  sulphates  there  is  an  entire  separation,  according 
to  Etard),  or  to  the  formation  of  a  constant  solubility  (for  potassium  sulphate  the  solu- 
bility, according  to  Etard,  remains  constant  from  168°  to  220°  and  equals  24'9  p.c.) 
(See  Chapter  XIV.,  note  60,  solubility  of 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  73 

at  a  given  temperature  For  instance,  if  200  parts  of  a  solution  of 
potassium  chloride  in  water  saturated  at  a  temperature  of  60°  be  taken, 
and  it  be  asked  how  much  of  the  salt  will  be  separated  by  cooling  the. 
solution  to  0°,  if  its  solubility  at  60° =45 -7  and  at  0°=29-2?  The 
answer  is  obtained  in  the  following  manner  •  At  60°  a  saturated 
solution  contains  45'7  parts  of  potassium  chloride  per  100  parts  by 
weight  of  water,  consequently  145*7  parts  by  weight  of  the  solution 
contain  45-7  parts,  or,  by  proportion,  200  parts  by  weight  of  the 
solution  contain  62*7  parts  of  the  salt.  The  amount  of  salt  remaining 
in  solution  at  0°  is  calculated  as  follows  :  In  200  grams  taken  there 
will  be  137-3  grams  of  water  ;  consequently,  this  amount  of  water  is 
capable  of  holding  only  40*1  grams  of  the  salt,  and  therefore  in  lower- 
ing the  temperature  from  60°  to  0°  there  should  separate  from  the 
solution  62-7  — 40-1=22-6  grams  of  the  dissolved  salt. 

The  difference  in  the  solubility  of  salts,  &c.,  with  a  rise  or  fall  of 
temperature  is  often  taken  advantage  of,  especially  in  technical  work, 
for  the  separation  of  salts,  in  intermixture  from  each  other.  Thus  a 
mixture  of  potassium  and  sodium  chlorides  (this  mixture  is  met  with  in 
nature  at  Stassfurt)  is  separated  from  a  saturated  solution  by  subject- 
ing it  alternately  to  boiling  (evaporation)  and  cooling.  The  sodium 
chloride  separates  out  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  water  expelled 
from  the  solution  by  boiling,  and  is  removed,  whilst  the  potassium 
chloride  separates  out  on  cooling,  as  the  solubility  of  this  salt  rapidly 
decreases  with  a  lowering  in  temperature.  Nitre,  sugar,  and  many 
other  soluble  substances  are  purified  (refined)  in  a  similar  manner 

Although  in  the  majority  of  cases  the  solubility  of  solids  increases 
with  the  temperature,  yet  there  are  some  solid  substances  whose 
solubilities  decrease  on  heating.  Glauber's  salt,  or  sodium  sulphate, 
forms  a  particularly  instructive  example  of  the  case  in  question.  If 
this  salt  be  taken  in-  an  ignited  state  (deprived  of  its  water  of 
crystallisation),  then  its  solubility  in  100  parts  of  water  varies  with  the 
temperature  in  the  following  manner  :  at  0°,  5  parts  of  the  salt  form  a 
saturated  solution  ,  at  20°,  20  parts  of  the  salt,  at  33°  more  than  50 
parts.  The  solubility,  as  will  be  seen,  increases  with  the  temperature, 
as  is  the  case  with  nearly  all  salts  ;  but  starting  from  33°  it  suddenly 
diminishes,  and  at  a  temperature  of  40°,  less  than  50  parts  of  the  salt 
dissolve,  at  60°  only  45  parts  of  the  salt,  and  at  100°  about  43 
parts  of  the  salt  in  100  parts  of  water  This  phenomenon  may  be 
traced  to  the  following  facts  :  Firstly,  that  this  salt  forms  various 
compounds  with  water,  as  will  be  afterwards  explained  ;  secondly, 
that  at  33°  the  compound  Na2S04  +  10H2O  formed  from  the  solution 
at  lower  temperatures,  melts  ;  and  thirdly,  that  on  evaporation  at  a 


74  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

temperature  above  33°  an  anhydrous  salt,  Na2SO4  separates  out.  It  will 
be  seen  from  this  example  how  complicated  such  an  apparently  simple 
phenomenon  as  solution  really  is  ;  and  all  data  concerning  solutions 
lead  to  the  same  conclusion.  This  complexity  becomes  evident  in  inves- 
tigating the  heat  of  solution.  If  solution  consisted  of  a  physical  change 
only,  then  in  the  solution  of  gases  there  would  be  evolved — and  in  the 
solution  of  solids,  there  would  be  absorbed — just  that  amount 'of  heat 
corresponding  to  the  change  of  state  ;  but  in  reality  a  large  amount  of 
heat  is  always  evolved  in  solution,  depending  on  the  fact  that  in  the 
process  of  solution  chemical  combination  takes  place  accompanied  by 
an  evolution  of  heat.  Seyenteen  grams  of  ammonia  (this  weight  cor-  1 
responds  with  its  formula  NH3),  in  passing  from  a  gaseous  into  a  I 
liquid  state,  evolve  4,400  units  of  heat  (latent  heat) ;  that  is,  the  * 
quantity  of  heat  necessary  to  raise  the. temperature  of  4,400  grams  of 
water  1°.  The  same  quantity  of  ammonia,  in  dissolving  in  an  excess 
of  water,  evolves  twice  as  much  heat — namely  8,800  units — showing 
that  the  combination  with  water  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of 
4,400  units  of  heat.  Further,  the  chief  part  of  this  heat  is  separated 
in  dissolving  in  small  quantities  of  water,  so  that  17  grams  of  ammonia, 
in  dissolving  in  18  grams  of  water  (this  weight  corresponds  with  its 
composition  H20),  evolve  7,535  units  of  heat,  and  therefore  the  for- 
mation of  the  solution  NH3  +  H20  evolves  3,135  units  of  heat  beyond 
that  due  to  the  change  of  state.  As  in  the  solution  of  gases,  the  heat 
of  liquefaction  (of  physical  change  of  state)  and  of  chemical  combination 
with  water  are  both  positive  (  + ),  therefore  in  the  solution  of  gases  in 
water  a  heat  effect  is  always  observed.  This  phenomenon  is  different  in 
the  solution  of  solid  substances,  because  their  passage  from  a  solid  to  a 
liquid  state  is  accompanied  by  an  absorption  of  heat  (negative,  —  heat), 
whilst  their  chemical  combination  with,  water  is  accompanied  by  an 
evolution  of  heat  (  -H  heat)  ;  consequently,  their  sum  may  either  be  a 
cooling  effect,  when  the  positive  (chemical)  portion  of  heat  is  less  than 
the  negative  (physical),  or  it  may  be,  on  the  contrary,  a  heating  effect. 
This  is  actually  the  case.  124  grams  of  sodium  thiosulphate  (employed  \/ 
in  photography)  Na2S2O3,5H2O  in  melting  (at  48°)  absorbs  9,700  units  I 
of  heat,  but  in  dissolving  in  a  large  quantity  of  water  at  the  ordinary  I 
temperature  it  absorbs  5,700  units  of  heat,  which  shows  the  evolution  * 
of  heat  (about  +  4,000  units),  notwithstanding  the  cooling  effect 
observed  in  the  process  of  solution,  in  the  act  of  the  chemical  com- 
bination of  the  salt  with  water.25  But  in  most  cases  solid  substances 

8*  The  latent  heat  of  fusion  is  determined  at  the  temperature  of  fusion,  whilst  solution 
takes  place  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  one  must  think  that  at  this  temperature 
(he  latent  heat  would  be  different,  just  as  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation  varies  with. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  75 

in  dissolving  in  water  evolve  heat,  notwithstanding  the  passage  into  a 
liquid  state,  which  indicates  so  considerable  an  evolution  of  (  +)  heat 

the  temperature  (see  Note  11).  Besides  which,  in  dissolving,  disintegration  of  the 
particles  of  both  the  solvent  and  the  substance  dissolved  takes  place,  a  process  which  in 
its  mechanical  aspect  resembles  evaporation,  and  therefore  must  consume  much  heat* 
The  heat  emitted  in  the  solution  of  a  solid  must  therefore  be  considered  (Personne)  as 
composed  of  three  factors — (1)  positive,  the  effect  of  combination ;  (2)  negative,  the  effect 
of  transference  into  a  liquid  state  ;  and  {3)  negative,  the  effect  of  disintegration.  In  the 
solution  of  a  liquid  by  a  liquid  the  second  factor  is  removed  ;  and  therefore,  if  the  heat 
evolved  in  combination  is  greater  than  that  absorbed  in  disintegration  a  heating  effect  is 
observed,  and  in  the  reverse  case  a  cooling  effect ;  and,  indeed,  sulphuric  acid,  alcohol, 
and  many  liquids  evolve  heat  in  dissolving  in  each  other.  But  the  solution  of  chloroform 
in  carbon  bisulphide*  (Bussy  and.Binget),  or  of  phenol  (or  aniline)  in  water  (Alexeeff), 
produces  cold.  In  the  solution  of  a  small  quantity  of  water  in  acetic  acid  (Abasheff),  or 
hydrocyanic  acid  (Bussy  and  Binge t),  or  amyl  alcohol  (Alexe'eff),  cold  is  produced,  whilst 
in  the  solution  of  these  substances  in  an  excess  of  water  heat  is  evolved. 

The  relation  existing  between  the  solubility  of  solid  bodies  and  the  heat  and  tempera- 
ture of  fusion  and  solution  has  been  studied  by  many  investigators,  and  more  recently 
(1898)  by  Schroder,  who  states  that  in  the  solution  of  a  solid  body  in  a  solvent  which 
does  not  act  chemically  upon  it,  a  very  simple  process  takes  place,  which  differs  but  little 
from  the  intermixture  of  two  gases  which  do  not  react  chemically  upon  each  other.  The 
following  relation  between  the  heat  of  solution  Q  and  the  heat  of  fusion  p  may  then  be 

taken :  S.  =  i.  =  constant,  where  T0  and  T  are  the  absolute  (from  —273°)  temperatures 

J-Q          •*• 

of  fusion  and  saturation.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  naphthalene  the  calculated 
and  observed  magnitudes  of  the  heat  of  solution  differ  but  slightly  from  each  other. 

The  fullest  information  concerning  the  solution  of  liquids  in  liquids  has  been 
gathered  by  W.  T.  Alexe'eff  (1883-1885) ;  these  data  are,  however,  far  from  being 
sufficient  to  solve  the  mass  of  problems  respecting  this  subject.  He  showed  that  two 
liquids  which  dissolve  in  each  other,  intermix  together  in  all  proportions  at  a  certain 
temperature.  Thus  the  solubility  of  phenol,  C6H6O,  in  water,  and  the  converse,  is 
limited  up  to  70°,  whilst  above  this  temperature  they  intermix  in  all  proportions.  This 
is  seen  from  the  following  figures,  where  p  is  the  percentage  amount  of  phenol  and  t 
the  temperature  at  which  the  solution  becomes  turbid — that  is,  that  at  which  it  is 
saturated  :— 

p  =  7*12         10-20        15-31        26-15        -28-55        86'70        48'86        61'15        71'97 

t  =  l°  45°  60°  67°  67°  67°  65°  53°  20° 

It  is  exactly  the  same  with  the  solution  of  benzene,  aniline,  and  other  substances  in 
molten  sulphur.  Alexeeff  discovered  a  similar  complete  intermixture  for  solutions  of 
secondary  butyl  alcohol  in  water  at  about  107° ;  at  lower  temperatures  the  solubility  is 
not  only  limited,  but  between  50°  and  70°  it  is  at  its  minimum,  both  for  solutions  of  the 
alcohol  in  water  and  for  water  in  the  alcohol ;  and  at  a  temperature  of  5°  both  solutions 
exhibit  a  fresh  change  in  their  scale  of  solubility,  so  that  a  solution  of  the  alcohol  in 
water  which  is  saturated  between  5°  and  40°  will  become  turbid  when  heated  to  60°. 
In  the  solution  of  liquids  in  liquids,  Alexe'eff  observed  a  lowering  in  temperature  (an 
absorption  of  heat)  and  an  absence  of  change  in  specific  heat  (calculated  for  the  mixture) 
much  more  frequently  than  had  been  done  by  previous  observers.  As  regards  his  hypo- 
thesis (in  the  sense  of  a  mechanical  and  not  a  chemical  representation  of  solutions)  that 
substances  in  solution  preserve  their  physical  states  (as  gases,  liquids,  or  solids),  it  is 
very -doubtful,  for  it  would  necessitate  admitting  the  presence  of  ice  in  water  or  its 
vapour. 

Prom  what  has  been  said  above,  it  will  be  clear  that  even  in  so  very  simple  a  case  as 
solution,  it  is  impossible  to-calculate  the  heat  emitted  by  chemical  action  alone,  and  that 
the  chemical  process  cannot  be  separated  from  the  physical  and  mechanical. 


76  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

in  the  act  of  combination  with  water  that  it  exceeds  the  absorption  of 
( — )  heat  dependent  on  the  passage  into  a  liquid  state,  Thus,  for 
instance,  calcium  chloride,  CaCl2,  magnesium  sulphate,  MgSO4,  and 
many  other  salts  evolve  heat  in  dissolving  ;  for  example,  60  grams 
,of  magnesium  sulphate  evolve  about  10,000  units  of  heat.  Therefore, 
•in  the  solution  of  solid  bodies  either  a  cooling26  or  a  heating2^  effect  is 
produced,  according  to  the  difference  of  the  reacting  affinities.  When 
they  are  considerable — that  is,  when  water  is  with  difficulty  separated 
from  the  resultant  solution,  and  only  with  a  rise  of  temperature 
(such  substances  absorb  water  vapour)-:- then  much  heat  is  evolved  in 
the  process  of  solution,  just  as  in  many  reactions  of  direct  combination, 
and  therefore  a  considerable  heating  of  the  solution  is  observed.  Of 
such  a  kind,  for  instance,  is  the  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  (oil  of  vitriol 
H2SO4),  and  of  caustic  soda  (JJaHO),  &c.,  in  water.28 

Solution  is  a  reversible  reaction  ;  for,  if  the  water  be  expelled  from 
a  solution,  the  substance  originally  taken  is  obtained  again.  But  it 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  expulsion  of  the  water  taken  for 
solution  is  not  always  accomplished  with  equal  facility,  because  water 
has  different  degrees  of  chemical  affinity  for  the  substance  dissolved. 
Thus,  if  a  solution  of  sulphuric  acid,  which  mixes  with  water  in  all 
proportions,  be  heated,  it  will  be  found  that  very  different  degrees  of 
heat  are  required  to  expel  the  water.  When  it  is  in  a  large  excess,. 

*°  The  cooling  effect  produced  in  the  solution  of  solids  (and  also  in  the  expansion  of 
gases  and  in  evaporation)  is  applied  to  the  prodi+etion  of  low  temperatures.  Ammo- 
nium nitrate  is  very  often  used  for  this  purpose ;  in  dissolving  in  water  it  absorbs  77 
units  of  heat  per  each  part  by  weight.  On  evaporating  the  solution  thus  formed,  the 
solid  salt  is  re-obtained.  The  application  of  the  various  freezing  mixtures  is  based  on 
the  same  principle.  Snow  or  broken  ice  frequently  enters  into  the  composition  of  these 
mixtures,  advantage  being  taken  of  its  latent  heat  of  fusion  in  order  to  obtain  the 
lowest  possible  temperature  (without  altering  the  pressure  or  employing  heat,  as  in  other 
methods  of  obtaining  a  low  temperature).  For  laboratory  work  recourse  is  most  often 
had  to  a  mixture  of  three  parts  of  snow  and  one  part  of  common  salt,  which  causes  the 
temperature  to  fall  from  0°  to  —21°  C.  Potassium  thiocyanate,  KCNS,  mixed  with 
water  (f  by  weight  of  the  salt)  gives  a  still  lower  temperature.  By  mixing  ten  parts  of 
crystallised  calcium  chloride,  CaCljGHjO,  with  seven  parts  of  snow,  the  temperature 
may  even  fall  from  0°  to  —55°. 

27  The  heat  which  is  evolved  in  solution,  or  even  in  the  dilution  of  solutions,  is  also 
sometimes  made  use  of,  in  practice.    Thus  caustic  soda  (NaHO),  in  dissolving  or  on  the 
addition  of  water  to  a  strong  solution  of  it,  evolves  so  much  heat  that  it  can  replace  fuel. 
In  a  steam  boiler,  which  has  been  previously  heated  to  the  boiling  point,  another  boiler 
is  placed  containing  caustic  soda,  and  the  exhaust  steam  is  made  to  pass  through  the 
latter ;  the  formation  of  steam  then  goes  on  for  a  somewhat  long  period  of  time  without 
any  other  heating.    Norton  makes  use  of  this  for  smokeless  street  locomotives. 

28  The  temperatures  obtained  by  mixing  monohydrated  sulphuric  acid,  H2SC>4r  with 
different  quantities  of  water,  are  shown  on  the-  lowest  curve  in  fig.  17,  the  relative  pro 
portions  of  both  substances  being  expressed  in  percentages  by  weight  along  the  hori- 
zontal ax-is.     The  greatest  rise  of  temperature  is  149°.     It  corresponds  with  the  greatest 
evolution  of  heat  (given  on  the  middle  curve)  corresponding  with  a  definite  volume 


ON  "WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  77 

water  is  given  off  at  a  temperature  slightly  above  100°,  but  if  it  be  in 
but  a  small  proportion  there  is  such  an  affinity  between  it  and  the 
sulphuric  acid  that  at  120°,  150°,  200°,  and  even  at  300°,  water  is  still 
retained  by  the  sulphuric  acid.  The  bond  between  the  remaining 
quantity  of  water  and  the  sulphuric  acid  is  evidently  stronger  than  the 
bond  between  the  sulphuric  acid  and  the  excess  of  water.  The  force 
acting  in  solutions  is  consequently  of  different  intensity,  starting  from 
so  feeble  an  attraction  that  the  properties  of  water — as,  for  instance,  its 
power  of  evaporation — are  but  very  little  changed,  and  ending  with 
cases  of  strong  attraction  between  the  water  and  the  substance  dis- 
solved in  or  chemically  combined  with  it.  In  consideration  of  the  very 
important  significance  of  the  phenomena,  and  of  the  cases  of  the 
breaking  up  of  solutions  with  separation  of  water  or  of  the  substance 
dissolved  from  them,  we  shall  further  discuss  them  separately,  after 

(100  c.c.)  of  the  solution  produced.  The  top  curve  expresses  the  degree  of  contraction, 
•which  also  corresponds  with  100  volumes  of  the  solution  produced.  The  greatest  con- 
traction,  as  also  the  greatest  rise  of  temperature,  corresponds  with  the  formation  of  a 
trihydrate,  H2SO4,2H2O  (  =  73'1  p.c.  H^SO4),  which  very  likely  repeats  itself  in  a  similar 


*IO.  17.— Corves  expressing  the  contraction,  quantity  of  heat,  and  rises  of  temperature  produced  by 
mixing  sulphuric  acid  with  water.    Percentage  of  HaS04  is  given  along  the  axis  of  abscissae. 

form  in  other  solutions,  although  all  the  phenomena  (of  contraction,  evolution  of  beat,  and 
rise  of  temperature)  are  very  complex  and  are  dependent  on  many  circumstances.  One 
would  think,  however,  judging  from  the  above  examples,  that  all  other  influences  are 
feebler  in  their  action  than  chemical  attraction,  especially  when  it  is  so  considerable  as 
between  sulphuric  acid  and  water. 


78  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTEY 

having  acquainted  ourselves  with  certain  peculiarities  of  the  solution 
of  gases  and  of  solid  bodies. 

The  solubility  of  gases,  which  is  usually  measured  by  the  volume 
of  gas  29  (at  0°  and  760  mm.  pressure)  per  100  volumes  of  water,  varies 
Tiot  only  with  the  nature  of  the  gas  (and  also  of  the  solvent),  and 
with  the  temperature,  but  also  with  the  pressure,  because  gases  them- 
selves change  their  volume  considerably  with  the  pressure.  As  might 
be  expected,  (1)  gases  which  are  easily  liquefied  (by  pressure  and  cold) 
are  more  soluble  than  those  which  are  liquefied  with  difficulty.  Thus, 
in  100  volumes  of  water  only  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  dissolve  at  0° 
and  760  mm.,  three  volumes  of  carbonic  oxide,  four  volumes  of  oxygen, 
<fec.,  for  these  are  gases  which  are  liquefied  with  difficulty  ;  whilst 
there  dissolve  180  volumes  of  carbonic  anhydride,  130  of  nitrous  oxide, 
and  437  of  sulphurous  anhydride,  for  these  are  gases  which  are  rather 
easily  liquefied.  (2)  The  solubility  of  a  gas  is  diminished  by  heating, 
which  is  easily  intelligible  from  what  has  been  said  previously — 
the  elasticity  of  a  gas  becomes  greater,  it  is  removed  further  from 
a  liquid  state.  Thus  100  volumes  of  water  at  0°  dissolve  2 -5  volumes 
of  air,  and  at  20°  only  1*7  volume.  For  this  reason  cold  water,  when 
brought  into  a  warm  room,  parts  with  a  portion  of  the  gas  dissolved  in 
it.30  (3)  The  quantity  of  the  gas  dissolved  varies  directly  with  the 
pressure.  This  rule  is  called  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton,  and  is 
applicable  to  those  gases  which  are  little  soluble  in  water.  Therefore 
a  gas  is  separated  from  its  solution  in  water  in  a  vacuum,  and  water 
saturated  with  a  gas  under  great  pressure  parts  with  it  if  the  pressure 

29  If  a  volume  of  gas  v  be  measured  under  a  pressure  of  h  mm.  of  mercury  (at.0°) 
and  at  a  temperature  t°  Centigrade,  then,  according  to  the  combined  laws  of  boyle, 
Mariotte,  and  of  Gay-Lussac,  its  volume  at  0°  and  760  mm.  will  equal  the  product  of  v 
into  760  divided  by  the  product  of  h  into  1  +  at°,  where  a  is  the  co-efficient  of  expansion 
of  gases,  which  is  equal  to  0-00867.  The  weight  of  the  gas  will  be  equal  to  its  volume  a.t 
0°  and  760  mm.  multiplied  by  its  density  referred  to  air  and  by.  the  weight  of  one  volume 
of  air  at  0°  and  760  mm.  The  weight  of  one  litre  of.  air  under  these  conditions  being  = 
T293  gram.  If  the  density  of  the  gas  be  given  in  relation  to  hydrogen  this  must  be 
divided  by  H'4  to  bring  it  in  relation  to  air.  "  If  the  gas  be  measured  when  saturated 
with  aqueous  vapour,  then  it  must  be  reduced  to  the  volume  and  weight  of  the  gas  when 
dry,  according  to  the  rules  given  in  Note  1.  If  the  pressure  be  determined  by  a  column 
of  mercury  having  a  temperature  t,  then  by  dividing  the  height  ot  the  column  by 
1  -f  O'OOOISI  the  corresponding  height  at  0°  is  obtained.  If  the  gas  be  enclosed  in  a 
tube  in  which  a  liquid  stands  above  the  level  of  the  mercury,  the  height  of  the  column  of 
the  liquid  being  =  H  and  its  density  =  D,  then  the  gas  will  be  under  a  pressure  which 

TTT\ 

is  equal  to  the  barometric  pressure  less          ,  where  18'59  is  the  density  of  mercury.     By. 

18*59 

these  methods  the  quantity  of  a  0os. is  determined,  and  its  observed  volume  reduced  to 
normal  conditions  or  to  parts  by  weight.  The  physical  data  concerning  vapours  and 
gases  must  be  continually  kept  in  sight  in  dealing  with  and  measuring  gases.  The  student 
must  become  perfectly  familiar  with  the  calculations  relating  to  gases. 

so  According  to  Bunsen,  Winkler,  Timofeeff,  and  others,  100  vols.  of  water  under  » 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS 


79 


be  diminished.  Thus  many  mineral  springs  are  saturated  underground 
with  carbonic  anhydride  •  under  the  great  pressure  of  the  column  of 
water  above  them.  On  coming  to  the  surface,  the  water  of  these  springs 
boils  and  foams  on  giving  up  the  excess  of  dissolved  gas.  Sparkling 
wines  and  aerated  waters  are  saturated  under  pressure  with  the  same 
gas.  They  hold-  the  gas  so  long  as  they  are  in  a  well-corked  vessel. 
When  the  cork  is  removed  and  the  liquid  comes  in  contact  with  air  at 
a  lower  pressure,  part  of  the  gas,  unable  to  remain  in  solution  at  a  lower 
pressure,  is  separated  as  froth  with  the  hissing  sound  familiar  to  all. 
It  must  be  remarked  that  the  law  cf  Henry  and  Dalton  belongs  to  the 
class  of  approximate  laws,  like  the  laws  of  gases  (Gay-Lussac's  and 
Mariotte's)  and  many  others— that  is,  it  expresses  only  a  portion  of  a 
complex  phenomenon,  the  limit  towards  which  the  phenomenon  aims. 
The  matter  is  rendered  complicated  from  the  influence  of  the  degree  of 
solubility  and  of  affinity  of  the  dissolved  gas  for  water.  Gases  which 
are  little-  soluble — for  instance,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen — follow 
the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton  the  most  closely.  Carbonic  anhydride 
exhibits  a  decided  deviation  from  the  law,  as  is  seen  from  the  determi- 
nations of  Wroblewski  (1882).  He  showed  that  at  0°  a  cubic  centi- 
metre of  water  absorbs  1  *8  cubic  centimetre  of  the  gas  under  a  pressure 
of  one  atmosphere  ;  under  10  atmospheres,  16  cubic  centimetres  (and 
not  18,  as  it  should  be  according  to  the  law)  ;  under  20  atmospheres, 

pressure  of  one  atmosphere  absorb  the  following  volumes  of  gas  (measured  at  0°  and 
760  mm.)  :— 

123456  7  8  9  10  11 

0°     4-82     2-85     2-15     179'7    3'54      130'5     487'1     688'6      5'4       104960     7'88 

20°     8-10     1-54     1-83      90'1     2'32       67'0     290'5     862'2      3'5        65400     4'71 

1,  oxygen ;  2,  nitrogen  ;  3,  hydrogen ;  4,  carbonic  anhydride ;  5,  carbonic  oxide ;  6,  nitrous 
oxide ;  7,  hydrogen  sulphide ;  8,  sulphurous  anhydride  ;  9,  marsh  gas ;  10,  ammonia ;  11, 
nitric  oxide.  The  decrease  of  solubility  with  a  rise  of  temperature  varies  for  different 
gases ;  it  is  greater,  the  greater  the  molecular  weight  of  the  gas.  It  is  shown  by  calcula- 
tion that  this  decrease  varies  (Winkler)  as  the  cube  root  of  the  molecular  weight  of  the 
gas.  This  is  seen  from  the  following  table  : 


Decrease  of  solubility  per 
20°  in  per  cent. 

Cube  root  of  molecular 
weight 

Ratio  between  decrease 
and  cube  root  of  mol.  wt. 

H2           15-32 
N2           84-38 
CO          84-44 
NO         86-24 
O2           86-55 

1-259 
8-037 
8-087 
8-107 
3-175 

12-17 
11-80 
11-84 
11-66 
11-51 

The  decrease  in  the  coefficient  of  absorption  with  the  temperature  must  be  connected 
with  a  change  in  the  physical  properties  of  the  water.  Winkler  (1891)  remarked  a  certain 
relation  between  the  internal  friction  and  the  coefficient  of  absorption  at  various  tem- 
peratures. 

*5 


80 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


26 '6  cubic  centimetres  (instead  of  36),  and  under  30  atmospheres,  33*7 
cubic  centimetres.31  However,  as  the  researches  of  Sechenoff  show, 
the  absorption  of  carbonic  anhydride  within  certain  limits  of  change 
of  pressure,  and  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  by  water— and  even  by 
solutions  of  salts  which  .are  not  chemically  changed  by  it,  or  do  not 
form  compounds  with  it — very  closely  follows  the  law  of  Henry  and 
Dalton,  so  that  the  chemical  bond  between  this  gas  and  water  is  so 
feeble  that  the  breaking  up  of  the  solution  with  separation  of  the  gas 
is  accomplished  by  a  decrease  of  pressure  alone.32  The  caseis  different 
if  a  considerable  affinity  exists  between  the  dissolved  gas  and  water. 
Then  it  might  even  be  expected  that  the  ga.s  would  not  be  entirely 
separated  from  water  in  a  vacuum,  as  should  be  the  case  with  gases 
according  to  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton.  Such  gases— and,  in 
general,  all  those  which  are  very  soluble — exhibit  a  distinct  deviation 
from  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton.  As  examples,  ammonia  and  hydro- 
chloric acid  gas  may  be  taken.  The  former  is  separated  by  boiling  and 
decrease  of  pressure,  while  the  latter  is  not,  but  they  both  deviate  dis- 
tinctly from  the  law. 


Pressure  in  mm. 
of  mercury 

Ammonia  dissolved 
in  100  grams  of 
water  at  0° 

Hydrochloric  acid 
.     gas  dissolved  in  100 
grams  of  water  at  0° 

100 

500 
1,000 
1,500 

Grams 
28-0 
69-2 
112-6 
165-6 

Grams 
65-7 
78-2 
85-6 

It  will  be  remarked,  for  instance,  from  this  table  that  whilst  the 

31  These  figures  show  that  the  co-efficient  of  solubility  decreases  with  an  increase  of 
pressure,  notwithstanding  that  the  carbonic  anhydride  approaches  a  liquid  state.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  liquefied  carbonic  anhydride  does  not  intermix  with  water,  and  does  not 
exhibit  a  rapid  increase  in  solubility  at  its  temperature  of  liquefaction.  This  indicates, 
in  the  first  place,  that  solution  does  not  consist  in  liquefaction,  and  in  the  second  place 
that  the  solubility  of  a  substance  is  determined  by  a  peculiar  attraction  of  water  for  the 
substance  dissolving.  Wroblewski  even  considered  it  possible  to  admit  that  a  dissolved 
gas  retains  its  properties  as  a  gas.  This  he  deduced  from  experiments,  which  showed 
that  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  gases  in  a  solvent  is,  for  gases  of  different  densities,  inversely 
proportional  to  the  square  roots  of  their  densities,  just  as  the  velocities  of  gaseous  mole- 
cules (see  Note  34).  Wroblewski  showed  the  affinity  of  water,  H2O,  for  carbonid 
Anhydride,  CO2,  from  the  fact  that  on  expanding  moist  compressed  carbonic  anhydride 
(compressed  at  0°  under  a  pressure  of  10  atmospheres)  he  obtained  (a  fall  in  temperature 
takes  place  from  the  expansion)  a  very  unstable  definite  crystalline  compound,  CO2  +  8H2O. 

52  As,  according  to  the  researches  of  Roscoe  and  his  collaborators,  ammonia  exhibits 
a,  considerable  deviation  at  low  temperatures  from  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton,  whilst 
at  100°  the  deviation  is  small,  it  would  appear  that  the  dissociating  influence  of  tem- 
perature affects  all  gaseous  solutionss  that  is,  at  high  temperatures,  the  solutions  of  all 
gases  will  follow  the  law,  and  at  lower  temperatures  there  will  in  all  cases  be  a  deviation 
icom  it. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  81 

pressure  increased  10  times,  the  solubility  of  ammonia  only  increased 
4^  times. 

A  number  of  examples  of  such  cases  of  the  absorption  of  gases 
by  liquids  might  be  cited  which  do  not  in  any  way,  even  approximately, 
agree  with  the  laws  of  solubility.  Thus,  for  instance,  carbonic  anhy- 
dride is  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  caustic  potash  in  water,  and  if 
sufficient  caustic  potash  be  present  it  is  not  separated  from  the  solution 
by  a  decrease  of  pressure.  This  is  a  case  of  more  intimate,  chemical 
combination.  A  correlation  less  completely  studied,  but  similar  and 
clearly  chemical,  appears  in  certain  cases  of  the  solution  of  gases  in 
water,  and  we  shall  afterwards  find  an  example  of  this  in  the  solution 
of  hydrogen  iodide  ;  but  we  will  first  stop  to  consider  a  remarkable 
application  of  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dal  ton  33  in  the  case  of  the  solution 
of  a  mixture  of  two  gases,  and  this  we  must  do  all  the  more  because 
the  phenomena  which  there  take  place  cannot  be  foreseen  without  a 
clear  theoretical  representation  of  the  nature  of  gases.34 

33  The  ratio  between  the  pressure  and  the  amount  of  gas  dissolved  was  discovered  by 
Henry  in  1805,  and  Dalton  in  1807  pointed  out  the  adaptability  of  this  law  to  cases  of 
gaseous  mixtures,  introducing  the  conception  of  partial  pressures  which  is  absolutely 
necessary  for  a  right  comprehension  of  Dalton's  law.  The  conception  of  partial  pressures 
essentially  enters  into  that  of  the  diffusion  of  vapours  in  gases  (footnote  1) ;  for  the 
pressure  of  damp  air  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  pressures  of  dry  air  arid  of  the  aqueous 
vapour  in  it,  and  it  is  admitted  as  a  corollary  to  Dalton's  law  that  evaporation  in  dry 
air  takes  place  as  in  a  vacuum.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  remark  that  the  volume  of 
'  a  mixture  of  two  gases  (or  vapours)  is  only  approximately  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  volumes 
of  its  constituents  (the  same,  naturally,  also  refers  to  their  pressures)— that  is  to  say,  in, 
mixing  gases  a  change  of  volume  occurs,  which,  although  small,  is  quite  apparent  when 
carefully  measured.  For  instance^in  1888  Brown  showed  that  on  mixing  various  volumes* 
of  sulphurous  anhydride  (SO2)  with  carbonic  anhydride  (at  equal  pressures  of  760  mm. 
,and  equal  temperatures)  a  decrease  of  pressure  of  8'9  millimetres  Of  mercury  was 
observed.  The  possibility  of  a  chemical  action  in  similar  mixtures  is  evident  from  the 
!act  that  equal  volumes  of  sulphurous  and  carbonic  anhydrides  at  - 19°  form,  according 
to  Pictet's  researches  in  1888,  a  liquid  which  may  be  regarded  as  an  unstable  chemical 
compound,  or  a  solution  similar  to  that  given  when  sulphurous  anhydride  and  watef 
combine  to  an  unstable  chemical  whole. 

**'The  origin  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  now  generally  accepted,  according  to 
which  they  are  animated  by  a  rapid  progessive  motion,  is  very  ancient  (Bernouilli  and 
others  in  the  last  century  had  already  developed  a  similar  representation),  but  it  waa 
only  generally  accepted  after  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  had  been  established,  and 
after  the  work  of  Kronig  (1855),  and -especially  after  .its  inathematical  side  had  been 
worked  out  by  Clausius  and  •  Maxwell.  The  pressure,  .elasticity,  diffusion,  and  internal 
friction  of  gases,  the  laws  of  Boyle,  Mariotte,  and  of  Gr'ay-Lussac  and  Avogadro-Gerhardb 
are  not  only  explained  (deduced)  by  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  but  also  expressed  with 
perfect  exactitude ;  thus,  for  example,  the  magnitude  of  the  internal  friction  of  different 
gases  was  foretold  with  exactitude, by  Maxwell,  by  applying  the  theory  of  probabilities 
to  the  impact  of  gaseous  particles.  The  kinetic  theory  of  gases  must  -therefore'  be- 
considered  as  one  of  the  most  brilliant  acquisitions  .of  the  latter  half  of  the  pres.ent 
century.  The  velocity  of  the  progressive  motion  of  the  particles  of  a  gas,  one  cubic 
centimetre  of  which  weighs  d  grams,  is  found,  according  to  the  theory,  to  be  equal  to 
the  square  root  of  the  product  of  QpDg  divided  by  ,d,  where  p  is  the  pressure  under  which 


82  PEINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

The  law  of  partial  pressures  is  as  follows  : — The  solubility  of  gases 
in  intermixture  with  each  other  does  not  depend  on  the  influence  of 
the  total  pressure  acting  on  the  mixture,  but  on  the  influence  of  that 
portion  of  the  total  pressure  which  is  due  to  the  volume  of  each  given 
gas  in  the  mixture.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  oxygen  and  carbonic 
anhydride  were  mixed  in  equal  volumes  and  exerted  a  pressure  of  760 
millimetres,  then  water  would  dissolve  so  much  of  each  of  these  gases 
as  would  be  dissolved  if  each  separately  exerted  a  pressure  of  half  an 
atmosphere,  and  in  this  case,  at  0°  one  cubic  centimetre  of  water  would 
dissolve  O02  cubic  centimetre  of  oxygen  and  0'90  cubic  centimetre  of 
carbonic  anhydride.  If  the  pressure  of  a  gaseous  mixture  equals  A, 
and  in  n  volumes  of  the  mixture  there  be  a  volumes  of  a  given  gas, 

d  is  determined  expressed  in  centimetres  of  the  mercury  column,  D  the  weight  of  a  cubic 
centimetre  of  mercury  in  grams  (D  =  lS'59,p  =  76,  consequently  the  normal  pressure  = 
1,038  grams  on  a  sq.  cm.),  and  g  the  acceleration  of  gravity  in  centimetres  (g  =  980'5, 
at  the  sea  level  and  lopg.  45°  =  98r9jJ  at  St.  Petersburg;  in  general  it  varies  with  the 
longitude  and  altitude  of  the  locality).  Therefore,  at  0°  the  velocity  of  hydrogen  is  1,843, 
and  of  oxygen  461,  metres  per  second.  This  is  the  average  velocity,  and  (according  to 
Maxwell  and  others)  it  is  probable  that  the  velocities  of  individual  particles  are  different ; 
that  is,  they  occur  in,  as  it  were,  different  conditions  of  temperature,  which  it  is  very 
important  to  take  into  consideration  in  investigating  many  phenomena  proper  to  matter. 
It  is  evident  from  the  above  determination  of  the  velocity  of  gases,  that  different  gases 
at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure  have  average  velocities,  which  are  inversely  pro- 
portional to  the  square  roots  of  their  densities;  this  is  also 'shown  by  direct  experi-' 
meiit  on  the  flow  of  gases  through  a  fine  orifice,  or  through  a  porous  wall.  This  dis- 
similar velocity  of  flow  for  different  gases  is  frequently  taken  advantage  of  in  chemical 
researches  (see  Chap.  II.  and  also  Chap.  VII.)  in  order  to  separate  two  gases  having 
different  densities  and  velocities.  The  difference  of  the  velocity  of  flow  of  gases  also 
determines  the  phenomenon  cited  in  the  following  footnote  for  demonstrating  the  exist- 
ence of  an  internal  motion  in  gases. 

If  for  a  certain  mass  of  a  gas  which  fully  and  exactly  follows  the  laws  of  Mariotte 
and  Gay-Lussac  the  temperature  t  and  the  pressure  p  be  changed  simultaneously,  then 
the  entire  change  would  be  expressed  by  the  equation  pv  =  C  (1  +  at),  or,  what  is  the 
same,  pv  =  RT,  where  T  =  t  +  273  arid  C  and  B  are  constants  which  vary  not  only  with  the 
units  taken  but  with  the  nature  of  the  gas  and  its  mass.  But  as  there  are  discrepancies 
from  both  the  fundamental  laws  of  gases  (which  will  be  discussed  in  the  following 
chapter),  and  as,  on  the  one  hand,  a  certain  attraction  between  the  gaseous  molecules 
must  be  admitted,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  molecules  of  gases  themselves  must 
occupy  a  portion  of  a  space,  hence  for  ordinary  gases,  within  any  considerable  variation 
of  pressure  and  temperature,  recourse  should  be  had  to  Van  der  Waal's  formula — 

(p+^)(v-p)  =  B  (l  +  at) 

where  a  is  the  true  co-efficient  of  expansion  of  gases. 

The  formula  of  Van  der  Waals  has  an  especially  important  significance  in  the  case 
of  the  passage  of  a  gas  into  B,  liquid  state,  because  the  fundamental  properties  of  both 
gases  and  liquids  are  equally  well  expressed  by  it,  although  only  in  their  general 
features. 

The  further  development  of  the  questions  referring  to  the  subjects  tore  touched  on, 
which  are  of  especial  interest  for  the  theory  of  .solutions,  must  be  looked  for  in  special 
memoirs  and  works  on  theoretical  and  physical  chemistry.  A  small  part  of  this  subject 
will  be  partially  considered  in  the  footnotes  of  the  following  chapter. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  83 

then  its  solution  will  proceed  as  though  this  gas  were  dissolved  under 

a  pressure  . .     That  portion  of  the  pressure  under  influence  of 

n 

•which  the  solution  proceeds  is  termed  the  '  partial '  pressure. 

In  order  to  clearly  understand  the  cause  of  the  law  of  partial 
pressures,  an  explanation  must  be  given  of  the  fundamental  properties 
of  gases.  Gases  are  elastic  and  disperse  in  all  directions.  We  are 
led  from  what  we  know  of  gases  to  the  assumption  that  these  funda- 
mental properties  of  gases  are  due  to  a  rapid  progressive  motion,  in 
all  directions,  which  is  proper  to  their  smallest  particles  (molecules).3-5 
These  molecules  in  impinging  against  an  obstacle  produce  a  pressure. 
The  greater  the  number  of  molecules  impinging  against  an  obstacle  in 
a  given  time,  the  greater  the  pressure.  The  pressure  of  a  separate  gas 
or  of  a  gaseous  mixture  depends  on  the  sum  of  the  pressures  of  all  the 
molecules,  on  the  number  of  blows  in  a  unit  of  time  on  a  unit  of 
surface^  and  on  the  mass  and  velocity  (or  the  vis  viva)  of  the  impinging 
molecules.  The  nature  of  the  different  molecules  is  of  no  account ; 
the  obstacle  is  acted  on  by  a  pressure  due  to  the  sum  of  their  vis  viva. 
But,  in  a  chemical  action  such  as  the  solution  of  gases,  the  nature  of 
the  impinging  molecules  plays,  on  the  contrary,  the  most  important 
part.  In  impinging  against  a  liquid,  a  portion  of  the  gas  enters  into 
the  liquid  itself,  and  is  held  by  it  so  long  as  other  gaseous  molecules 
impinge  against  the  liquid— exert  a  pressure  on  it.  As  regards  the 
solubility  of  a  given  gas,  for  the  number  of  blows  it  makes  on  the 
surface  of  a  liquid,  it  is  immaterial  whether  other  molecules  of 


35  Although  the  actual  motion  of  gaseous  molecules,  which  is  accepted  by  tho 
kinetic  theory  of  gases,  cannot  be  seen,  yet  its  existence  may  be  rendered  evident  by 
taking  advantage  of  the  difference  in  the  velocities  undoubtedly  belonging  to  different 
gases  which  are  of  different  densities  under  equal  pressures.  The  molecules  of  a 
light  gas  must  move  more  rapidly  than  the  molecules  of  a  heavier  gas  in  order  to  pro- 
duce the  same  pressure.  Let  us  take,  therefore,  two  gases — hydrogen  and  air ;  the 
former  is  14*4  times  lighter  than  the  latter,  and  hence  the  molecules  of  hydrogen  must 
.move  almost  four  times  more  quickly  than  air  (more  exactly  S'8,  according  to  the  formula 
given  in  the  preceding  footnote).  Consequently,  if  a  porous  cylinder  containing  air  is 
introduced  into  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,  then  in  a  given  time  the  volume  of  hydrogen 
which  succeeds  in  entering  the  cylinder  will  be  greater  than  the  volume  of  air  leaving 
the  cylinder,  and  therefore  the  pressure  inside  the  cylinder  will  rise  until  the  gaseous 
mixture  (of  air  and  hydrogen)  attains  an  equal  density  both  inside  and  outside  the 
cylinder.  If  now  the  experiment  be  reversed  and  air  surround  the  cylinder,  and 
hydrogen  be  inside  the  cylinder,  then  more  gas  will  leave  the  cylinder  than  enters  it,  and 
.  hence  the  pressure  inside  the  cylinder  will  be  diminished.  In  these  considerations  we 
have  replaced  the  idea  of  the  number  of  molecules  by  the  idea  of  volumes.  We  shall 
learn  subsequently  that  equal  volumes  of  different  gases  contain  an  equal  number  of 
molecules  (the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt),  and  therefore  instead  of  speaking  of  the 
number  of  molecules  we  can  speak  of  the  number  of  volumes.  If  the  cylinder  be  par- 
tially immersed  in  water  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  pressure  can  be  observed  directly,  andj 
the  experiment  consequently  rendered  self-evident 


84  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

impinge  side  by  side  with  it  or  not.  Hence,  the  solubility  of  a  given 
gas  will  be  proportional,  not  to  the  total  pressure  of  a  gaseous  mixture, 
but  to  that  portion  of  it  which  is  due  to  the  given  gas  separately. 
Moreover,  the  saturation  of  a  liquid  by  a  gas  depends  on  the  fact  that 
the  molecules  of  gises  that  have  entered  into  a  liquid  do  not  remain 
At  rest  in  it,  although  they  enter  in  a  harmonious  kind  of  motion  with 
the  molecu'es  of  the  liquid,  and  therefore  they  throw  themselves  off 
from  the  surface^  of  the  liquid  (just  like  its  vapour  if  the  liquid  be 
volatile).  If  in  a  unit  of  time  an  equal  number  of  molecules  penetrate 
into  (leap  into)  a  liquid  and  leave  (or  leap  out  of)  a  liquid,  it  is 
saturated.  It  is  a  case  of  mobile  equilibrium,  and  not  of  rest.  There- 
fore, if  the  pressure  be  diminished,  the  number  of  molecules  departing 
from  the  liquid  will  exceed  the  .number  of  molecules  entering  into  the 
liquid,  and  a  fresh  state  of  mobile  equilibrium  only  takes  place  un'der  a 
fresh  equality  of  the  number  of  molecules  departing  from  and  entering 
into  the  liquid.  In  this  manner  the  main  features  of  the  solution  are 
explained,  and  furthermore  of  that  special  (chemical)  attraction  (pene- 
tration and  harmonious  motion)  of  a  gas  for  a  liquid,  which  determines 
both  the  measure  of  solubility  and  the  degree  of  stability  of  the 
solution  produced. 

The  consequences  of  the  law  of  partial  pressures  are  exceedingly 
numerous  and  important.  All  liquids  in  nature  are  in  contact  with  the 
atmosphere,  which,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see  more  fully,  consists  of 
an  intermixture  of  gases,  chiefly  four  in  number— oxygen,  nitrogen, 
Carbonic  anhydride,  and  aqueous  vapour.  100  volumes  of  air  contain, 
approximately,  78  volumes  of  nitrogen,  and  about  21  volumes  of 
oxygen  ;  the  quantity  of  carbonic  anhydride,  by  volume,  does  not 
exceed  0-05.  Under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  quantity  of  aqueous 
vapour  is  much  greater  than  this,  but  it  varies  of  course  with  climatic 
conditions.  We  conclude  from  these  numbers  that  the  solution  of 
nitrogen  in  a  liquid  in  contact  with  the  atmosphere  will  proceed  under 
a  partial  pressure  of  fifc  x  760  mm.  if  the  atmospheric  pressure  ejqual 
760  mm.  ;  similarly,  under  a  pressure  of  600  mm.  of  mercury,  the 
solution  of  oxygen  will  proceed  under  a  partial  pressure  of  about 
160  mm.,  and  the  solution  of  carbonic  anhydride  only  under  the  very 
small  pressure  of  0'4  mm.  As,  however,  the  solubility  of  oxygen  in 
water  is  twice  that  of  nitre-gen,  the  ratio  of  O  to  N  dissolved  in  water 
will  be  greater  than  the  ratio  in  air.  It  is  easy  to  calculate  what 
quantity  of  each  of  the  gases  will  be  contained  in  water,  and  taking 
the  simplest  case  we  will  calculate  what  quantity  of  oxygen,  nitrogen, 
and  carbonic  anhydride  will  be  dissolved  from  air  having  the  above 
composition  at  0°  and  760  mm,  pressure.  Under  a  pressure  of  760  mm*, 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  85 

1  cubic  centimetre  of  water  dissolves  0'0203  cubic  centimetre  of  nitrogen 
or  under  the  partial  pressure  of  600  mm.  it  will  dissolve  0-0203  x  f  $$; 
or  0  0160  cubic  centimetre  ;  of  oxygen  0-0411  x  j|$,  or  00086  cubic  cen- 
timetre ;  of  carbonic  anhydride  T8x  -7™  or  0-00095  cubic  centimetre  : 

hence,  100  cubic  centimetres  of  water  will  contain  at  0°  altogether 

2  55  cubic  centimetres  of  atmospheric  gases,  and  100  volumes  of  air 
dissolved  in  water  will  contain  about  62  p.c.  of  nitrogen,  34  p.c.  of 
oxygen,  and  4  p.c.  of  carbonic  anhydride.     The  water  of  rivers,  wells, 
•Ac.  usually  contains  more  carbonic  anhydride.      This  proceeds  from 
the  oxidation  of  organic  substances  falling  into  the  water.     The  amount 
of  oxygen,  however,  dissolved  in  water  appears  to  be  actually  about  J 
the  dissolved  gases,  whilst  air  contains  only  £  of  it  by  volume. 

According  to  the  law  of  partial  pressures,  whatever  gas  be  dissolved 
in  water  will  be  expelled  from  the  solution  in  an  atmosphere  of  another 
gas.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that  gases  dissolved  in  water  escape 
from  it  in  a  vacuum,  because  the  pressure  is  nil.  An  atmosphere  of 
another  gas  acts  like  a  vacuum  on  a  gas  dissolved  in  water.  Separation 
then  proceeds,  because  the  molecules  of  the  dissolved  gas  no  longer 
impinge  upon  the r liquid,  are  not  dissolved  in  it,  and  those  previously 
held  in  solution  leave  the  liquid  in  virtue  of  their  elasticity.36  For  the 

56  Here  two  cases  occur ;  either  the  atmosphere  surrounding  the  solution  may  be 
limited,  or  it  may  be  proportionally  so  vast  as  to  be  unlimited,  like  the  earth's  atmo- 
sphere. If  a  gaseous  solution  be  brought  into  an  atmosphere  of  another  gas  which  is 
limited — for  instance,  as  in  a  closed  vessel — then  a  portion  of  the  gas  held  in  solution 
will  be  expelled,  and  thus  pass  over  into  the  atmosphere  surrounding  the  solution,  and 
will  produce  its  partial  pressure.  Let  us  imagine  that  water  saturated  with  carbonio 
anhydride  at  0°  and  under  the  ordinary  pressure  is  brouglit  into  an  atmosphere  of  a  gas 
which  is  not  absorbed  by  water ;  for  instance,  that  10  c.c.  of  an  aqueous  solution  of  car- 
bonic anhydride  is  introduced  into  a  vessel  holding  10  c.c.  of  such  a  gas.  The  solution 
will  contain  18  c.c.  of  carbonic  anhydride.  The  expulsion  of  this  gas  proceeds  until  a 
stata  of  equilibrium  is  arrived  at.  The  liquid  will  then  contain  a  certain  amount  of 
carbonic  anhydride,  which  is  retained  under  the  partial  pressure  .of  that  gas  which  has 
been  expelled.  Now,  how  much  gas  will  remain  in  the  liquid  and  how  much  will  pass 
over  into  the  surrounding  atmosphere  ?  In  order  to  solve  this  problem,  let  us  suppose 
that  x  cubic  centimetres  of  carbonic  anhydride  are  retained  in  the  solution.  It  is  evident 
that  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  which  passed  over  into  the  surrounding  atmo- 
sphere will  be  18  — a;,  and  the  total  volume  of  gas  will  be  10  +  18  — a;  or  28— a?  cubic  centi- 
metres. The  partial  pressure  under  which  the  carbonic  anhydride  is  then  dissolved  will 
be  (supposing  that  the  common  pressure  remains  constant  the  whole  time)  equal  to 

— ^",  hence  there  is  not  in  solution  18  c.c.  of  carbonic  anhydride  (as  would  be 
28-x 

the   case    were  the    partial    pressure  equal  to  the  atmospheric  pressure),  but  only 

18  n  ~-x,  which  is  equal  to  a;,  and  we  therefore  obtain  the  equation  18    -iz^^o?, 
28— a;  28  — a; 

fcence  x  =  8'69.  Again,  where  the  atmosphere  into  which  the  gaseous  solution  is  intro- 
duced is  not  only  that  of  another  gas  but  also  unlimited,  then  the  gas  dissolved  will,  on 
passing  over  from  the  solution,  diffuse  into  this  atmosphere,  and  produce  an  infinitely 


86  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

same  reason  a  gas  may  be  entirely  expelled  from  a  gaseous  solution  by 
boiling— at  least,  in  many  cases  when  it  does  not  form  particularly 
stable  compounds  with  water.  In  fact  the  surface  of  the  boiling  liquid 
will  be  occupied  by  aqueous  vapour,  and  therefore  all  the  pressure 
acting  on  the  gas  will  be  due  to  the  aqueous  vapour.  On  this  account, 
the  partial  pressure  of  the  dissolved  gas  will  be  very  inconsiderable,  and 
this  is  the  sole  reason  why  a  gas  separates  from  a  solution  on  boilinp 
the  liquid  containing  it.  At  the  boiling  point  of  water  the  solubility 
of  gases  in  water  is  still  sufficiently  great  for  a  considerable  quantity, 
of  a  gas  to  remain  in  solution.  The  gas  dissolved  in  the  liquid  is 
•carried  away,  together  with  the  aqueous  vapour  ;  if  boiling  be  con- 
tinued for  a  long  time,  all  the  gas  will  finally  be  separated.37 

It  is  evident  that  the  conception  of  the  partial  pressures  of  gases 
should  be  applied  not  only  to  the  formations  of  solutions,  but  also  to  all 
cases  of  chemical  action  of  gases.  Especially  numerous  are  its  appli- 
cations to  the  physiology  of  respiratipn,  for  in  these  cases  it  is  only  the 
oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  that  acts.38 

small  pressure  in  the  unlimited  atmosphere.  Consequently,  no  gas  can  be  retained  in 
solution  under  this  infinitely  small  pressure,  and  it  will  be  entirely  expelled  from  the 
solution.  For  this  reason  water  saturated  with  a  gas  which  is  not  contained  in  air,  will 
be  entirely  deprived  of  ths  dissolved  gas  if  left  exposed  to  the  air.  Water  also  passes 
off  from  a  solution  into  the  atmosphere,  and  it  is  evident  that  there  might  be  such  a 
case  as  a  constant  proportion  between  the  quantity  of  water  vaporised  and  the  quantity 
of  a  gas  expelled  from  a  solution,  so  that  not  the  gas  alone,  but  the  entire  gaseous  solu- 
tion, would  pass  off.  A  similar  case  is  exhibited  in  solutions  which  are  not  decomposed 
by  heat  (such  as  those  of  hydrogen  chloride  and  iodide),  as  will  afterwards  be  considered. 
57  However,  in  those  cases  when  the  variation  of  the  co-efficient  of  solubility  with  the 
temperature  is  not  sufficiently  great,  and  when  a  known  quantity  of  aqueous  vapour 
and  of  the  gas  passes  off  from  a  solution  at  the  boiling  point,  an  atmosphere  may  be 
obtained  having  the  same  composition  as  the  liquid  itself.  In  this  case  the  amount  of 
gas  passing  over  into  such  an  atmosphere  will  not  be  greater  than  that  held  by  the 
liquid,  and  therefore  such  a  gaseous  solution  will  distil  over  unchanged.  The  solution 
will  then  represent,  like  a  solution  of  hydriodic  acid  in  water,  a  liquid  which  is  no* 
altered  by  distillation,  whDe  the  pressure  under  which  this  distillation  takes  place  re- 
mains constant.  Thus  in  all  its  aspects  solution  presents  gradations  from  the  most  feeble 
affinities  to  examples  of  intimate  chemical  combination.  The  amount  of  heat  evolved  in 
the  solution  of  equal  volumes  of  different  gases  is  in  distinct  relation  with  these  variations 
of  stability  and  solubility  of  different  gases.  22'S  litres  of  the  following  gases  (at  760 
mm.  pressure)  evolve  the  following  number  of  (gram)  units  of  heat  in  dissolving  in  a 
large  mass  of  water ;  carbonic  anhydride  5,600,  sulphurous  anhydride  7,700,  ammonia 
8,800,  hydrochloric  acid  17,400,  and  hydriodic  acid  19,400.  The  two  last-named  gases, 
which  are  not  expelled  from  their  solution  by  boiling,  evolve  approximately  twice  as 
much  heat  as  gases  like  ammonia,  which  are  separated  from  their  solutions  by  boiling, 
whilst  gases  which  are  only  slightly  soluble  evolve  very  much  less  heat. 

3S  Among  the  numerous  researches  concerning  this  subject,  certain  results  obtained 
by  Paul  Bert  are  cited  in  Chapter  III.,  and  we  will  here  point  out  that  Prof.  Sechehoff, 
in  his  researches  on  the  absorption  of  gases  by  liquids,  very  fully  investigated  the 
phenomena  of  the  solution  of  carbonic  anhydride  in  solutions  of  various  salts,  and 
arrived  at  many  important  results,  which  showed  that,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  solution 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  87 

The  solution  of  solids,  whilst  depending  only  in  a  small  measure  on 
the  pressure  under  which  solution"  takes  place  (because  solids  and 
liquids  are  almost  incompressible),  is  very  clearly  dependent  on  the 
temperature.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  solubility  of  solids  in 
water  increases  with  the  temperature  ;  and  further,  the  rapidity  of 
solution  increases  also.  The  latter  is  determined  by  the  rapidity  of 
diffusion  of  the  solution  formed  into  the  remainder  of  the  water.  The 
solution  of  a  solid  in  water,  although  it  is  as  with  gases,  a  physical 
passage  into  a  liquid  state,  is  determined,  however,  by  its  chemical 
affinity  for  water  ;  this  is  clearly  shown  from  the  fact  that  in  solution: 
there  occurs  a  diminution  in  volume,  a  change  in  the  boiling  point  of 
water,  a  change  in  the  tension  of  its  vapour,  in  the  freezing  point,  and 
in  many  similar  properties.  If  solution  were  a  physical,  and  not  a 
chemical,  phenomenon,  it  would  naturally  be  accompanied  by  an 
increase  and  not  by  a  diminution  of  volume,  because  generally  in 
melting  a  solid  increases  in  volume  (its  density  diminishes).  Contraction 
is  the  usual  phenomenon  accompanying  solution  and  takes  place  even 
in  the  addition  of  solutions  to  water,39  and  in  the  solution  of  liquids 
in  water,40  just  as  happens  in  the  combination  of  substances  when 

of  carbonic  anhydride  in  solutions  of  salts  on  which  it  is  capable  of  acting  chemically  (for 
example,  sodium  carbonate,  borax,  ordinary  sodium  phosphate),  there  is  not  only  an 
increase  of  solubility,  but  also  a  distinct  deviation  from  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton ; 
whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  that  solutions  of  salts  which  are  not  acted  on  by  carbonic 
anhydride  (for  example,  the  chlorides,  nitrates,  and  sulphates)  absorb  less  of  it,  owing  to 
the  '  competition  '  of  the  salt  already  dissolved,  and  follow  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton, 
but  at  the  same  time  show  undoubted  signs  of  a  chemical  action  between  the  salt,  water* 
and  carbonic  anhydride.  Sulphuric  acid  (whose  co-efficient  of  absorption  is  92  vols.  per 
100),  when  diluted  with  water,  absorbs  less  and  less  carbonic  anhydride,  until  the  hydrate 
HaSO^H-jO  (co-eff.  of  absorption  then  equals  66  vols.)  is  formed;  then  on  further 
addition  of  water  the  solubility  again  rises  until  a  solution  of  100  p.c.  of  water  is 
obtained. 

39  Kremers  made  this  observation  in  the  following  simple  form  :  —He  took  a  narrow, 
necked  flask,  with  a  mark  on  the  narrow  part  (like  that  on  a  litre  flask  which  is  used  for 
accurately  measuring  liquids),  poured  water  into  it,  and  then  inserted  a  funnel,  having  a 
fine  tube  which  reached  to  the  bottom  of  the  flask.    Through  this  funnel  he  carefully 
poured  a  solution  of  any  salt,  and  (having  removed  the.  funnel)  allowed  the  liquid  to 
attain  a  definite  temperature  (in  a  water  bath) ;  he  then  filled  the  flask  up  to  the  mark 
with  water.     In  this  manner  two  layers  of  liquid  were  obtained,  the  heavy  saline  solution 
below  and  water  above.     The  flask  was  then  shaken  in  order  to  accelerate  diffusion,  and 
it  was  observed  that  the  volume  became  less  if  the  temperature  remained  constant. 
This  can  be  proved  by  calculation,  if  the  specific  gi-avity  of  the.  solutions  and  water  bo, 
known.    Thus  at  15°  one  c.c.  of  a  20  p.c.  solution  of  common  salt  weighs  1'1500  gram, 
hence  100  grams  occupy  a  volume  of  86'96  c.c.     As  the  sp.  gr.  of  water  at  15°  =  0-99916, 
therefore  100  grams  of  water  occupy  a  volume  of  100*08  c.c.    The  sum  of  the  volumes  ia 
187'04  c.c.    After  mixing,  200  grams  of  a  10  p.c.  solution  .are  obtained.    Its  specific  gravity 
IB  1-0725  (at  15C  and  referred  to  water  at  its  maximum  density),  hence  the  200  grama 
will  occupy  a  volume  of  186-48  c.c.     The  contraction  is  consequently  equal  to  0'66  c.c. 

40  The  contractions  produced  in  the  case  of  the  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  in  water 
Are  shown  in  the  diagram  Fig.  17  (page  77).    Their  maximum  is  101  c.c.  per  100  c.c.  of 


88  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

evidently  nett  substances  are  produced.41  The  contraction  which  takes* 
•place  in  solution  is,  however,  very  small,  a  fact  which  depends  on  the 
small  compressibility  of  solids  and  liquids,  and  on  the  insignificance  of 
the  compressing  force  acting  in  solution.42  The  change  of  volume  which 
takes  place  in  the  solution  of  solids  and  liquids,  or  the  alteration  in 
specific  gravity  43  corresponding  with  it,  depends  on  peculiarities  of  the 
dissolving  substances,  and  of  water,  and,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  w  not 
proportional  to  the  quantity  of  the  substance  dissolved,44  showing  the 

the  solution  formed.  A  maximum  contraction  of  4'15  at  0°,  3'78  at  15°,  and  8'50  at  30°, 
takes  place  in  the  solution  of  46  parts  by  weight  of  anhydrous  alcohol  in  54  parts  of 
water.  This  signifies  that  if,  at  0°,  46  parts  by  Weight  of  alcohol  be  taken  per  54  parts 
by  weight  of  water,  then  the  sum  of  their  separate  volumes  will  be  104*15,  and  after 
mixing  their  total  volume"  will  be  100. 

«  This  subject  will  be  considered  later  in  this  work,  and  we  shall  then  see  that  the 
contraction  produced  in  reactions  of  combination  (of  solids  or  liquids)  is  very  variable 
in  its  amount,  and  that  there  are,  although  rarely,  reactions  of  combination  in  which 
contraction  does  not  take  place,  or  When  an  increase  of  volume  is  produced. 

42  The  compressibility  of  solutions  of  common  salt  is  less,  according  to  Grassi,  than 
that  of  water.  At  18°  the  compression  of  water  per  million  volumes  =  48  vols.  for  a 
pressure  of  one  atmosphere ;  for  a  15  p.c.  solution  of  common  salt  it  is  82,  and  for  a  24 
p.c.  solution  26  vols.  Similar  determinations  were  made  by  Brown  (1887)  for  saturated 
solutions  of  sal  ammoniac  (88  vols.),  alum  (46  vols.),  common  salt  (27  vols.),  and  sodium 
sulphate  at  + 1°,  when  the  compressibility  of  water  =  47  per  million  volumes.  This 
investigator  also  showed  that  substances  which  dissolve  with  an  evolution  of  heat  and 
•with  an  increase  in  volume  (as,  for  instance,  sal  ammoniac)  are  partially  separated  from 
their  saturated  solutions  by  an  increase  of  pressure  (this  experiment  was  particularly 
conclusive  in  the  case  of  sal  ammoniac),  whilst  the  solubility  of  substances  which  dissolve 
•with  an  absorption  of  heat  or  diminution  in  volume  increases,  although  very  slightly, 
with  an  increase  of  pressure.  Sorby  observed  the  same  phenomenon  with  common 
salt  (1863). 

45  The  most  trustworthy  data  relating  to  the  variation  of  the  specific  gravity  of 
solutions  with  a  change  of  their  composition  and  temperature,  are  collected  and  dis- 
cussed in  my  work  cited  in  footnote  19.  The  practical  (for  the  amount  of  a  substance  in 
solution  is  determined  by  the  aid  of  the  specific  gravities  of  solutions,  both  in  works  end 
in  laboratory  practice)  and  the  theoretical  (for  specific  gravity  can  be  more  accurately 
observed  than  other  properties,  and  because  a  variation  in  specific  gravity  governs  the 
variation  of  many  other  properties)  interest  of  this  subject,  besides  the  strict  rules  and 
laws  to  which  it  is  liable,  make  one  wish  that  this  province  of  data  concerning  solutions 
may  soon  be  enriched  by  further  observations  of  as  accurate  a  nature  as  possible.  Their 
collection  does  not  present  any  great  difficulty,  although  requiring  much  time  and  atten- 
tion. Pickering  in  London  and  Tourbaba  in  Kharkoff  must  be  ranked  first  among  those 
who  have  pursued  problems  of  this  nature  during  recent  years. 

44  Inasmuch  as  the  degree  of  change  exhibited  in  many  properties  on  the  formation  of 
bolutions  is  not  large,  so,  owing  to  the  insufficient"  accuracy  of  observations,  a  proportion- 
ality between  this  change  and  a  change  of  composition  may,  in  a  first  rough  approxima- 
tion and  especially  within  narrow  limits  of  change  of  composition,  easily  be  imagined  in 
caces  where  it  does  not  even  exist.  The  conclusion  of  Michel  and  Kraft  is  particularly 
instructive  in  this  respect ;  in  1854,  on  the  basis  of  their  incomplete  researches,  they 
supposed  that  the  increment  of  the  specific  gravity  of  solutions  was  proportional  to  the 
increment  of  a  salt  in  a  given  volume  of  a  solution,  which  is  only  true  for  determinations 
of  specific  gravity  which  are  exact  to  the  second  decimal  place — an  accuracy  insufficient 
even  for  technical  determinations.  Accurate  measurements  do  not  confirm  a  propor- 
tionality either  in  this  case  or  In  many  others  where  a  ratio  has  been  generally  accepted; 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  89 

existence  of  a  chemical  force  between  the  solvent  and  the  substance 
dissolved  which  is  of  the  same  nature  as  in  all  other  forms  of  chemical 
reaction.45 

The  feeble  development  of  the  chemical  affinities  acting  in  solutions 
of  solids  becomes  evident  from  those  multifarious  methods  by  which 

as,  for  example,  for  the  rotatory  power  (with  respect  to  the  plane  of  polarisation)  of  solu- 
tions, and  for  their  capillarity,  &c.  Nevertheless,  such  a  method  is  not  only  still  made 
use  of,  but,  even  has  its  advantages  when  applied  to  solutions  within  a  limited  scope — as, 
for  instance,  very  weak  solutions,  and  for  a  first  acquaintance  with  the  phenomena 
accompanying  solution,  and  also  as  a  means  for  facilitating  the  application  of  mathe- 
matical analysis  to  the  investigation  of  the  phenomenon  of  solution.  Judging  by  the 
results  obtained  in  my  researches  on  the  specific  gravity  of  solutions,  I  think  that  in 
many  cases  it  would  be  nearer  the  truth  to  take  the  change  of  properties  as  proportional, 
not  to  the  amount  of  a  substance  dissolved,  but  to  the  product  of  this  quantity  and  the 
amount  of  water  in  which  it  is  dissolved,,;  the  more  so  since  many  chemical  relations 
vary  in  proportion  to  the  reacting  masses,  and  a  similar  ratio  has  been  established  for 
many  phenomena  of  attraction  studied  by  mechanics.  This  product  is  easily  arrived  at 
when  the  quantity  of  water  in  the  solutions  to  be  compared  is  constant,  as  is  shown  in 
investigating  the  fall  of  temperature  in  the  formation  of  ice  (see  footnote  49,  p.  91). 

4i  All  the  different  forms  of  chemical  reaction  may  be  said  to  take  place  in  the  process 
of  solution.  (1)  Combinations  between  the  solvent  and  the  substance  dissolved,  which 
are  more  or  less  stable  (more  or  less  dissociated).  This  form  of  reaction  is  the  most 
probable,  and  is  that  most  often  observed.  (2)  Reactions  of  substitution  or  of  double 
decomposition  between  the  molecules.  Thus  it  may  be  supposed  that  in  the  solution  of 
sal  ammoniac,  NH4C1,  the  action  of  water  produces  ammonia,  NH4HO,  and  hydrochloric 
acid,  HC1,  which  are  dissolved  in  the  water  and  simultaneously  attract  each  other.  As 
these  solutions  and  many  others  do  indeed  exhibit  signs,  which  are  sometimes  indis- 
putable, of  similar  double  decompositions  (thus  solutions  of  sal-ammoniac  yield  a  certain 
amount  of  ammonia),  it  is  probable  that  this  form  of  reaction  is  more  often  met  with 
than  is  generally  thought.  -(3)  Reactions  of  isomerism  or  replacement  are  also  probably 
met  with  in  solution,  all  the  move  as  here  molecules  of  different  kinds  come  into  intimate 
contact,  and  it  is  very  likely  that  the  configuration  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecules  under 
these  influences  is  somewhat  different  from  what  it  was  in  its  original  and  isolated 
state.  One  is  led  to  this  supposition  especially  from  observations  made  on  solutions  of 
substances  which  rotate  the  plane  of  polarisation  (and  observations  of  this'kind  are  very 
sensitive  with  respect  to  the  atomic  structure  of  molecules),  because  they  show,  for 
example  (according  to  Schneider,  1881),  that  strong  solutions  of  malic  acid  rotate  the 
plane  of  polarisation  to  the  right,  whilst  its  ammonium  salts  in  all  degrees  of  concentra- 
tion rotate  the  plane  of  polarisation  to  the  left.  (4)  Reactions  of  decomposition  under 
the  influences  of  solution  are  not  only  rational  in  themselves,  but  have  in  recent  years 
been  recognised  by  Arrhenius,  Ostwald,  and  others,  particularly  on  the  basis  of  electro- 
lytic determinations.  If  a  portion  of  the  molecules  of  a  solution  occur  in  a  condition  of 
decomposition,  the  other  portion  may  occur  in  a  yet  more  complex  state  of  combination, 
just  as  the  velocity  of  the  motion  of  different  gaseous  molecules  may  be  far  from  being 
the  same  (see  Note  84,  p.  81). 

It  is,  therefore,  very  probable  that  the  reactions  talcing  place  in  solution  vary  both 
quantitatively  and  qualitatively  with  the  mass  of  water  in  the  solution,  and  the  great 
difficulty  in  arriving  at  a  definite  conclusion  as  to  the  nature  of  the  chemical  relations 
which  take  place  in  the  process  of  solution  will  be  understood,  and  if  besides  this 
ihe  existence  of  a  physical  process,  like  the  sliding  between  and  interpenetration  of 
two  homogeneous  liquids,  be  also  recognised  in  solution,  then  the  complexity  of  the 
iproblem  as  to  the  actual  nature'  of  solutions,  which  is  now  to  the  fore,  appears  in  its 
4rue  light.  However,  the  efforts  which  are  now  being  applied  to  the  solution  of  thia 
rproblem  are  so  numerous  and  of  such  varied  aspect  that  they  will  afford  future 


90  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

their  solutions  are  decomposed,  whether  they  be  saturated  or  not.  On 
heating  (absorption  of  heat),  on  cooling,  and  by  internal  forces  alone, 
aqueous  solutions  in  many  cases  separate  into  their  components  or  their 
definite  compounds  with  water.  The  water  contained  in  solutions  is 
removed  from  them  as  vapour,  or,  by  freezing,  in  the  form  of  ice,46  but 
the  tension  of  the  vapour  of  water*1  held  in  solution  is  less  than  that  of 
water  in  a  free  state,  and  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ir,e  from 
solutions  is  lower  than  0°  Further,  both  the  diminution  of  vapour  ten- 
sion and  the  lowering  of  the  freezing  point  proceed,  in  dilute  solutions, 
almost  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  a  substance  dissolved.48  Thus,  if 

investigators  a  vast  mass  of  material  .towards  the  construction  of  a  complete  theory 
of.  solution. 

For  my  part,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  study  of  the  physical  properties  of  solutions 
(and  especially  of  weak  ones)  which  now  obtains,  cannot  give  any  fundamental  and  com- 
plete solution  of  the  problem  whatever  (although  it  should  add  much  to  both  the 
provinces  of  physics  and  chemistry),  but  that,  parallel  with  it,  should  be  undertaken  the 
study  of  the  influence  of  temperature,  and  especially  of  low  temperatures,  the  application 
to  solutions  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat,  and  the  comparative  study  of  the  chemical 
properties  of  solutions.  The  beginning  of  all  this  is  already  established,  but  it  itf 
impossible  to  consider  in  so  short  an  exposition  of  chemistry  the  .further  efforts  of  this 
kind  which  have  been  made  up  to  the  present  date. 

46  If  solutions  are  regarded  as  being  in  a  state  of  dissociation  (see  footnote  19,  p.  64)  it 
would  be  expected  that  they  would  contain  free  molecules  of  water,  which  form  one  of  the 
products  of  the  decomposition  of  those  definite  compounds  whose  formation  is  the  cause 
.of  solution.    In  separating  aa  ice  or  vapour,  water-  makes,  with  a  solution,  a  heteroge- 
neous system  (made  up  of  substances  in  different  physical  states)  similar,  for  instance, 
to  the  formation  of  a  precipitate  or  volatile  substance  in  reactions  of  double  decom- 
position. 

47  If  the  substance  dissolved  is  non- volatile  (like  salt  or  sugar),  or  only  slightly  vola- 
tile, then  the  whole  of  the  tension  of  the  vapour  given  off  is  due  to  the  water,  but  if  a 
solution  of  a  volatile  substance — for  instance,  «•  g*8  or  a  volatile  liquid — evaporates,  then 
only  a  portion  of  the  pressure  belongs  to  the  water,  and  the  whole  pressure  observed 
consists  of  the  sum  of  the  pressures  of  the  vapours  of  the  water  and  of  the  substance 
dissolved.    The  majority  of  researches  bear  on  the  first  case,  which  will  be  spoken  of 
presently,  and  the  observations  of  D.  P.  KonOvaloff  (1881)  refer  to  the  second  case.    He 
showed  that  in  the  case  of  two  volatile  liquids,  mutually  soluble  in  each  other,  forming 
two  layers  of  saturated  solutions  (for  example,  ether  and  water,  Note  20,  p.  67),  both  solu- 
tions have  an  equal  vapour  tension  (in  the  case  in  point  the  tension  of  both  is  equal  to 
431  mm.  of  mercury  at  19'8°).     Further,  he  found  that  for  solutions  which  are  formed 
in  all  proportions,  the  tension  is  either  greater  (solutions  of  alcohol  and  water)  or  less 
(solutions  of  formfc  acid)  than  that  which  answers  to  the  rectilinear  change  (proportional 
to  the  composition)  from  the  tension,  of  water  to  the  tension  of  the  substance  dissolved ; 
thus,  the  tension,  for  example,  of  a  70  p.c.  solution  of  formic  acid  is  less,  at  all  tempera- 
tures, than,  the  tension  of  water  and  of  formic  acid  itself.    In  this  case  the  tension  of  a 
solution  is  never  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  tensions  of  the  dissolving  liquids,  as  Regnault 
already  showed  when  he  distinguished  this  case  from  that  in  which  a  mixture  of  liquids, 
which  are  insoluble  in  each  other,  evaporates.     From  this  it  is  evident  that  a  mutual 
action  occurs  in  solution,  which  diminishes  the  vapour  tensions  proper  to  the  individual 
substances,  as  would  be  expected  on  the  supposition  of  the  formation  of  compounds  in 
solutions,  because  the  elasticity  then  always  diminishes. 

48  This  amount  is  usually  expressed  by  the  weight  of  the  substance  dissolved  per 
100  parts  by  weight  of  water.    Probably  it  would  be  better  to  express  it  by  the  quantity  ol 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  91 

per  100  grams  of  water  there  be  in  solution  1,  5,  10  grams  of  common 
salt  (NaCl),  then  at  100°  the  vapour  tension  of  the  solutions  decreases 
by  4,  21,  43  mm.  of  the  barometric  column,  against  760  mm.,  or  the 
vapour  tension  of  water,  whilst  the  freezing  points  are  -  0'58°,  —  2'91°, 
and  —  6*10°  respectively.  The  above  figures 40  are  almost  proportional 

the  substance  in  a  definite  volume  of  the  solution^for  instance,  in  a  litre — or  by  the 
ratios  of  the  number  of  molecules  of  water  and  of  the  substance  dissolved.. 

49  The  variation  of  the  vapour  tension  of  solutions  has  been  investigated  by  many. 
The  best  known  researches  are  those  of  Wullner  in  Germany  (1858-1860)  and  of  Tammari 
in  Russia  (1887).  The  researches  on  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice  from  various 
solutions  are  also  very  numerous;  Blagden  (1788),  Riidorff  (1861),  and  De  Coppet  (1871) 
established  the  beginning,  but  this  kind  of  investigation  takes  its  chief  interest  from  the 
work  of  Raoult,  begun  in  1882  on  aqueous  solutions,  and  afterwards  continued  for  solu- 
tions in  various  other  easily  frozen  liquids— for  instance,  benzene,  C6H«,  (melts  at  4'96°), 
acetic  acid,  C2H4O,  (16'75°),  and  others.  An  especially  important  interest  is  attached  to 
these  cryoscopic  investigations  of  Raoult  in  France  on  the  depression  of  the  freezing 
point,  because  he  took  solutions  of  many  well-known  carbon-compounds  and  discovered 
*  simple  relation  between  the  molecular  weight  of  the  substances  and  the  temperature 
of  crystallisation  of  the  solvent,  which  enabled  this  kind  of  research  to  be  applied  to  the 
investigation  of  the  nature  of  substances.  We  shall  meet  with  the  application  of  this 
method  later  on  (see  also  Chapter  VII.),  and  at  present  will  only  cite  the  deduction 
arrived  at  from  these  results.  The  solution  of  one-hundredth  part  of  that  molecu  at 
gram  weight  which  corresponds  with  the  formula  of  a  substance  dissolved  (for  example, 
NaCl  =  58-5,  C2HeO  =  46,  &c.)  in  100  pans  of  a  solvent  lowers  the  freezing  point  of  its 
solution  in  water  0*185°,  in  benzene  0*49°,  and  in  acetic  acid  0'89°,  or  twice  as  much  a* 
with  water.  And  as  in  weak  solutions  the  depression  or  fall  of  freezing  point  is  propor- 
tional to  the  amount  of  the  substance  dissolved,  it  follows  that  the  fall  of  freezing  point 
for  all  other  solutions  may  be  calculated  from  this  rule.  So,  for  instance,  the  weight 
which  corresponds  with  the  formula  of  acetone,  C3H6O  is  58  ;  a  solution  containing  2'42, 
6'22,  and  12'85  grams  of  acetone  per  100  grams  of  water  forms  ice  (according  to  the 
determinations  of  Beckmann)  at  0'770°,  1'930°,  and  8'8200,  and  these  figures  show  that 
with  a  solution  containing  0"58  gram  of  acetone  per  100  of  water  the  fall  of  the  tempera, 
ture  of  the  formation  of  ice  will  be  0'185°,  0'180°,  and  0'179°.  It  must  be  remarked  that 
the  law  of  proportionality  between  the  fall  of  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice,  and 
the  composition  of  a  solution,  is  in  general  only  approximate,  and  is  only  applicable  to 
weak  solutions  (Pickering  and  others). 

We  will  here  remark  that  the  theoretical  interest  .of  this  subject  was  strengthened 
on  the  discovery  of  the .  connection  existing  between  the.  fall  of  tension,  the  fall  of  the 
temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice,  of  osmotic  pressure  (Van't  Hoff,  Note  19),  and  of  the 
electrical  conductivity  of  solutions,  and  we  will  therefore  supplement  what  we  havs 
already  said  on  the  subject  by  some  short  remarks  on  the  method  of  cryoscopic  invest!, 
gations,  although  the  details  of  the  subject  form  the  subject  of  more  special  works  on 
physical  chemistry  (such  as  Ostwald's  Lehrbuch  der  allgemeinen  Chemie,  1891-1894, 
2  vo'ls.) 

In  order  to  determine  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice  (or  of  crystallisation 
of  other  solvents),  a  solution  of  known  strength  is  prepared  and  poured  into  a  cylindrical 
vessel  surrounded  by  a  second  similar  vessel,  leaving  a  layer  of  air  between  the  two,  which, 
being  a  bad  conductor,  prevents  any  rapid  change  of  temperature.  The  bulb  of  a  sensi- 
tive and  corrected  thermometer  is  immersed  in  the  solution,  and  also  a  bent  platinum 
wire  for  stirring  the  solution  ;  the  whole  is  then  cooled  (by  immersing  the  apparatus  in 
a  freezing  mixture),  and  the  temperature  at  which  ice  begins  to  separate  observed.  If 
the  temperature  at  first  falls  slightly  lower,  it  nevertheless  becomes  constant  when  ioe 
begins  to  form.  By  then  allowing  the  liquid  to  get  just  warm,  and  again  observing  the 
temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice,  an  exact -determination  may  be  arrived  at.  It  is  still 


92  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

to  the  amounts  of  salt  in  solution  (1,  5,  and  10  per  100  of  water). 
Furthermore,  it  has  been  shown  by  experiment  that  the  ratio  of  the 

better  to  take  a  large  mass  of  solution,  and  induce  the  formation  of  the  first  crystals  by 
dropping  a  small  lump  of  ice  into  the  solution  already  partially  over-cooled.  This  only 
imperceptibly  changes  the  composition  of  the  solution.  The  observation  should  be  made 
at  the  point  of  formation  of  only  a  very  small  amount  of  crystals,  as  otherwise  the 
composition  of  the  solution  will  become  altered  from  their  separation.  Every  precaution 
must  be  taken  to  prevent  the  access  of  moisture  to  the  interior  of  the  apparatus,  which 
might  also  alter  the  composition  of  the  solution  or  properties  of  the  solvent  (for  instance, 
when  using  acetic  acid). 

With  respect  to  the  depression  of  dilute  solutions  it  is  known— (1)  That  the  depression 
Increases  in  almost  direct  proportion  to  the  amount  of  the  substance  in  solution  (always 
per  100  parts  of  water),  for  example,  for  KC1  when  the  solution  contains  1  part  of  salt 
(per  100  parts  of  water)  the  depression  =  0'45  ',  when  the  solution  contains  2  parts  of  salt 
=  0-90°,  with  10  parts  of  salt  =  4'40  (2)  The  greater  the  molecular  weight  expressed  by 
the  formula  (see  Chapter  VII.),  and  designated  by  M,  the  less,  under  other  similar  condi- 
tions, will  be  the  depression  d,  and  therefore  if  the  concentration  of  a  solution  (the 
ftjuount  by  weight  of  substance  dissolved  per  100  parts  of  water)  be  designated  by  p,  then 

the  fraction  M-  or  the  molecular  depression  for  a  given  class  of  substances  will  be  a 

P 

constant  quantity;  for  example,  in  the  case  of  methyl  alcohol  in  water  17'8,  for  acetone 
about  18'0,  for  sugar  about  18'5.  (3)  In  general  the  molecular  depression  for  substanceB 
Whose  solutions  do  not  conduct  an  electric  current  is  about  18'5,  while  for  acids,  salts, 
ftnd  such  like  substances  whose  solutions  do  conduct  electricity,  it  is  i  times  greater  ;  for 
instance,  for  HC1,  KI,  HNO3,  KHO,  &c.,  about  86  (i  is  nearly  2),  for  borax  about  66,  and 
so  on  where  i  varies  in  the- same  manner  as  it  does  in  the  case  of  the  osmotic  pressure  of 
solutions  (Note  19).  (4)  Different  solvents  (water,  acetic  acid,  benzene,  &c.)  have  each 
their  corresponding  constants  of  molecular  depression  (which  have  a  certain  remote 
Connection  with  their  molecular  weight) ;  for  example,  for  acetic  acid  the  molecular 
depression  is  about  39  and  not  19  (as  it  is  for  water),  for  benzene  49,  for  methyl  alcohol 
'about  17,  &c.  (5)  If  the  molecular  weight  M  of  a  substance  be  unknown,  then  in  the 
Case  of  non-conductors  of  electricity  or  for  a  given  group,  it  may  be  found  by  determining 
the  depression,  d,  for  a  given  concentration,  p  ',  for  example,  in  the  case  of  peroxide  of 
hydrogen,  which  is  a  non-conductor  of  electricity,  the  molecular  weight,  M,  was  found  to 
be  nearly  34,  i.e.  equal  to  H2O2. 

Similar  results  have  also  been  found  for  the  fall  in  the  vapour  tension  of  solutions 
(Note  51),  and  for  the  rise  of  their  boiling  points  (hence  these  data  may  also  serve  for 
determining  the  molecular  weight  of  a  substance  in  solution,  as  is  shortly  described  in 
Chapter  VII.,  Note  27bl').  And  as  these  conclusions  are  also  applicable  in  the  case  of 
osmotic  pressure  (Note  19),  and  a  variation  in  the  magnitude  of  i,  in  passing  from  solu- 
tions which  do  not  conduct  an  electric  current  to  those  which  do  conduct  electricity  is 
everywhere  remarked,  so  it  was  natural  to  here  seek  that  causal  connection  which  Arr- 
benius  (1888),  Ostwald,  and  others  expected  to  find  in  the  supposition  that  a  portion  of 
the  substance  of  the  electrolyte  is  already  decomposed  in  the  very  act  of  solution,  into 
its  ions  (for  example,  NaCl  into  Na  and  C1.),  or  into  the  atoms  of  those  individual  sub- 
stances which  make  their  appearance  in  electrolysis,  and  in  this -way  to  explain  the  fact 
that  i  is  greater  for  those  bodies  which  conduct  an  electric  current.  We  will  not  consider 
bere  this  supposition,  known  as  the  hypothesis  of  '  electrolytic  dissociation,'  not  only 
because  it  wholly  belongs  to  that  special  branch — physical  chemistry,  and  gives  scarcely 
,any  help  towa:ds  explaining  the  chemical  relations  of  solutions  (particularly  their  passage 
into  definite  compounds,  their  reactions,  and  their  very  formation),  but  also  because — (1) 
all  the  above  data  (for  constant  depression,  osmotic  pressure,  &c.)  only  refer  to  dilute 
solutions,  and  are  not  applicable  to  strong  solutions ;  whilst  the  chemical  interest  in 
strong  solutions  is  not  less  than  in  dilute  solutions,  and  the  transition  from  the  former 
into  the  latter  is  consecutive  and  inevitable;  (2)  because  in  all  homogeneous  bodies 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  93 

diminution  of  vapour  tension  to  the  vapour  tension  of  water  at  different 
temperatures  in  a  given,  solution  is  an  almost  constant  quantity,60  and 
that  for  every  (dilute)  solution  tb,e  ratio  between  the  diminution  of  vapour 
tension  and  of  the  freezing  point  is  also  a  tolerably  constant  quantity.51 

(although  it  may  be  insoluble.and  not  an  electrolyte)  a  portion  of  the  atoms  may  be  i 
supposed  (Clausius)  to  be  passmg  from  one  particle  to  another  (Chapter  X.,  Note  28), 
and  as  it  were  dissociated,  but  there  are  no  reasons  for  believing  that  such  a  phenomenon 
is  proper  to  the  solutions  of  electrolytes  only ;  (3)  because  no  essential  mark  of  difference 
is  observed  between  the  solution  of  electrolytes  and  non-conductors,  although  it  might  be 
expected  there  wo'uld  be  according  to  Arrheuius'  hypothesis;  (4)  because  it  is  most 
reasonable  to  suppose  the  formation  of  new,  more  complex,  but  unstable  and  easily  disso- 
ciated compounds  in  the  act  of  solution,  than  a  decomposition,  even  partial,  of  the 
substances  taken ;  (5)  because  if  Arrhenius'  hypothesis  be  accepted  it  becomes  necessary 
to  admit  the  existence  in  solutions  of  free  ions,  like  the  atoms  Cl  or  Na,  without  any 
apparent  expenditure  of  the  energy  necessary  for  their  disruption,  and  if  in  this  case  it 
can  be  explained  why  i  {hen  =  2,  it  is  not  at  all  clear  why  solutions  of  MgSO4  give  *  =  1, 
although  the  solution  does  conduct  an  electric  current ;  (6)  because  in  dilute  solutions, 
the  approximative  proportionality  between  the  depression  and  concentration  may  be 
recognised,  while  admitting  the  formation  of  hydrates,  with  as  much  right  as  in  admitting 
the  solution  of  anhydrous  substances,  and  if  the  formation  of  hydrates  be  recognised  it 
is  easier  to  admit  that  a  portion  of  these  hydrates  is  decomposed  than  to  accept  the 
breaking-up  into  ions  J  (7)  because  the  best  conductors  of  electricity  are  solutions  like  the 
sulphates  in  which  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  the  formation  of  associated  systems  or 
hydrates;  (8)  because  the  cause  of  electro-conductivity  can  be  sooner  looked  for  in  this 
affinity  and  this  combination  of  the  substance  dissolved  with  the  solvent,  as  is  seen  from 
the  fact,  that  (D.  P.  Koiiovaloff)  neither  aniline  nor  acetic  acid  alone  conduct  an  electric 
current,  a  solution  of  aniline  in  water  conducts  it  badly  (and  here  the  affinity  is  very 
small),  while  a  solution  of  aniline  in  acetic  acid  forms  a  good  electrolyte,  in  which,  without 
doubt,  chemical  forces  are"  acting,  bringing  aniline,  like  ammonia,  into  combination  with 
the  acetic  acid ;  which  is  evident  from  the  researches  made  by  Prof.  Konovaloff  upon 
mixtures  (solutions)  of  aniline  and  other  amines ;  and,  lastly,  (9)  because  I,  together  with 
many  of  the  chemists  of  the  present  day,  cannot  regard  the  hypothesis  of  electrolytic 
dissofciation  in  the  form  given  to  it  up  to  now  by  Arrhenius  and  Ostwald,  as  answering 
to  the  sum  total  of  the  chemical  data  respecting  solutions  and  dissociation  in  general. 
Thus,  although  I  consider  it  superfluous  to  discuss  further  this  evolution  of  the  above 
theory  of  solutions,  still  I  think  that  it  would  be  most  useful  for  students  of  chemistry  to 
consider  all  the  data  referring  to  this  subject,  which  can  be  found  in  the  Ztitschriftfiir 
fhysikalische  Chemie,  1888-1894. 

60  This  fact,  which  was  established  by  Gay-Lussac,  Pierson,  and  v.  Babo,  is  confirmed 
by  the  latest  observations,  and  enables  us  to  express  not  only  the  fall  of  tension  (p—  p') 

itself,  but  its  ratio  to  the  tension  of  water  ^?LllLY    It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  the 

absence  of  any  chemical  action,  the  fall  of  pressure  is  either  very  small,  or  does  not 
exist  at  all  (note  88),  and  is  not  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  the  substance  added.  Aa 
a  rule,  the  tension  is  then  equal,  according  to  the  law  of  Dalton,  to  the  sum  of  the 
tensions  of  the  substances  taken.  Hence  liquids  which  are  insoluble  in  each  other  (for 
example,  water  and  chloride  of  carbon)  present  a  tension  equal  to  the  sum  of  their  indi- 
vidual tensions,  and  therefore  such  a  mixture  boils  at  a  lower  temperature  than  the  more 
volatile  liquid  (Magnus,  Regnault). 

41  If,  in  the  example  of  common  salt,  the  fall  of  tension  be  divided  by  the  tension  of 
water,  a  figure  is  obtained  which  is  nearly  105  times  less  than  the  magnitude  of  the  fall 
of  temperature  of  formation  of  ice.  This  correlation  was  theoretically  deduced  by  Gold- 
berg, on  the  basis  of  the  application  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat,  and  is  repeated  by 
many  investigated  solutions. 


94  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

The  diminution  of  the  vapour  tension  of  solutions  explains  the  rise, 
in  boiling  point  due  to  tha  solution  of  solid  non-volatile  bodies  in) 
water.  The  temperature  of  a  vapour  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  solu- 
tion from  which  it  is  generated,  and  therefore  it  follows  that  the 
aqueous  vapour  given  off  from  a  solution  will  be  superheated.  A 
saturated  solution  of  common  salt  boils  at  103*4°,  a  solution  of  335 
parts  of  nitre  in  100  parts  of  water  at  115'9°,  and  a  solution  of  325 
parts  of  potassium  chloride  in  100  parts  of  water  at  179°,  if  the 
temperature  of  ebullition  be  determined  by  immersing  the  thermometer1 
bulb  in  the  liquid  itself.  This  is  another  proof  of  the  bond  which: 
exists  between  water  and  the  substance  dissolved.  And  this  bond  isj 
seen  still  more  clearly  in  those  cases  (for  example,  in  the  solution  of! 
nitric  or  formic  acid  in  water)  where  the  solution  boils  at  a  higher' 
temperature  than  either  water  or  the  volatile  substance  dissolved  in  it., 
For  this  reason  tho  solutions  of  certain  gases — for  instance,  hydriodici 
or  hydrochloric  acid— boil  above  100°. 

9  The  separation  of  ice  from  solutions  52  explains  both  the  phenome- 
non, well  known  to  sailors,  that  the  ice  formed  from  salt  water  gives 
fresh  water,  and  also  the  fact  that  by  freezing,  just  as  by  evaporation, 
a  solution  is  obtained  which  is  richer  in  salts  than  before.  This  is 
taken  advantage  of  in  cold  countries  for  obtaining  a  liquor  from  sea 
water,  which  is  then  evaporated  for  the  extraction  of  salt, 

On  the  removal  of  part  of  the  water  from  a  solution  (by  evaporation 
or  the  separation-  of  ice),  a  saturated  solution  should  be  obtained,  and 
then  the  solid  substance  dissolved  should  separate  out.  Solutions  satu- 
rated at  a  certain  temperature  should  also  separate  out  a  corresponding 
portion  of  the  substance  dissolved  if  they  be  reduced,  by  cooling,53  to  a 
temperature  at  which  the  water  can  no  longer  hold  the  former  quantity 
of  the  substance  in  solution.  If  this  separation,  by  cooling  a  saturated 

82  Fritzsche  showed  that  solutions  of  certain  colouring  matters  yield  colourless  ice, 
which  clearly  proves  the  passage  of  water  only  into  a  solid  state,  without  any  intermix-' 
ture  of  ibhe  substance  dissolved,  although  the  possibility  of  the  admixture  in  certain  other 
Cases  cannot  be  denied. 

*3  As  the  solubility  of  certain  substances  (for  example,  coniine,  cerium  sulphate,  and; 
others)"decreases  with  a  rise  of  temperature  (between  certain  limits — see,  for  example, 
note  24),  so  these  substances  do  not  separate  from  their  saturated  solutions  on  cooling' 
but  on  heating.  Thus  a  solution  of  manganese  sulphate,  saturated  at  70°,  becomes  cloudy 
On  further  heating.  The  point  at  which  a.  substance  separates  from  its  solution  with  a 
Change  of  temperature  gives  an  easy  means  of  determining  the  co-efficient  of  solubility, 
0nd  this  was  taken  advantage  of  by  Prof.  Alexeeff  for  determining  the  solubility  of  .many 
Substances.  The  phenomenon  and  method  of  observation  are  here  essentially  the  same 
as  in  the  determination  of  the  temperature  of  formation  of  ice.  If  a  solution  of  a  sub- 
Stance  which  separates  out  on  heating  be  taken  (for  example,  the  sulphate  of  calcium. 
Or  manganese),  then  at  a  certain  fall  of  temperature  ice  will  separate  out  from  it,  and  at 
ft  certain  rise  of  temperature  the  salt  will  separate  out.  From  this  example,  and 


ON  WATER  AND-  ITS  COMPOUNDS  95 

solution  or  by  evaporation,  take  place  slowly,  crystals  of  the  substance 
dissolved  are  in  many  cases  formed  ;  and  this  is  the  method  by  which 
crystals  of  soluble  salts  are  usually  obtained  Certain  solids  very 
easily  separate  out  from  their  solutions  in  perfectly  formed  crystals, 
which  may  attain  very  large  dimensions.  Such  are  nickel  sulphate, 
alum,  sodium  carbonate,  chrome-alum,  copper  sulphate,  potassium  ferri- 
cyanide,  and  a  whole  series  of  other  salts.  The  most  remarkable  circum- 
stance in  this  is  that  many  solids  in  separating  out  from  an  aqueous 
solution  retain  a  portion  of  water,  forming  crystallised  solid  substances 
•which  contain  water.  A  portion  of  the  water  previously  in  the  solution 
remains  in  the  separated  crystals.  The  water  which  is  thus  retained 
is  called  the  water  of  crystallisation.  Alum,  copper  sulphate,  Glauber's 
salt,  and  magnesium  sulphate  contain  such  water,  but  neither  sal- 
ammoniac,  table  salt,  nitre,  potassium  chlorate,  silver  nitrate,  nor 
sugar,  contains  any  water  of  crystallisation.  One  -and  the  same 
substance  may  separate  out  from  a  solution  with  or  without  water 
of  crystallisation,  according  to  the  temperature  at  which  the  crystals  are 
formed.  Thus  common  salt  in  crystallising  from  its  solution  in  water 
at  the  ordinary  or  at  a  higher  temperature  does  not  contain  water  of 
crystallisation.  But  if  its  separation  from  the  solution  takes  place 
at  a  low  temperature,  namely  below  —5°,  then  the  crystals  contain 
38  parts  of  water  in  100  parts.  Crystals  of  the  same  substance  which 
separate  out  at  different  temperatures  may  contain  different  amounts 
of  water  of  crystallisation.  This  proves  to  us  that  a  solid  dissolved  in 
water  may  f  Drm  various  compounds  with  it,  differing  in  their  properties 
and  composition,  and  capable  of  appearing  in  a  solid  separate  form  like 
many  ordinary  definite  compounds.  This  is  indicated  by  the  numerous 
properties  and  phenomena  connected  with  solutions, , and  gives  reason 
for  thinking  that  there  exist  in  solutions  themselves  such  compounds  of 
the  substance  dissolved,  and  the  solvent  or  compounds  similar  to  them, 
only  in  a  liquid  partly  decomposed  form.  Even  the  colour  of  solutions 
may  often  confirm  this  opinion.  Copper  sulphate  forms  crystals  having 
a  blue  colour  and  containing  water  of  crystallisation.  If  the  water  of 
crystallisation  be  removed  by  heating  the  crystals  to  redness,  a  colour- 
less anhydrous  substance  is  obtained  (a  white  powder).  From  this  it 
may  be  seen  that  the  blue  colour  belongs  to  the  compound  of  the  copper 
salt  with  water.  Solutions  of  copper  sulphate  are  all  blue,  and  con- 
sequently they  contain  a  compound  similar  to  the  compound  formed  by 

general  considerations,  it  is  clear  that  the  separation  of  a  substance  dissolved  from  a 
solution  should  present  a  certain  analogy  to  the  separation  of  ice  from  a  solution.  In 
both  cases,  a  heterogeneous  system  of  a  solid  and  a  liquid  is  formed  from  a  homogeneous 
(liquid)  system. 


96  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

the  salt  with  its  water  of  crystallisation.  Crystals  of  cobalt  chloride 
when  dissolved  in  an  anhydrous  liquid — like  alcohol,  for  instance — give 
a  blue  solution,  but  when  they  are  dissolved  in  water  a  red  solution  is 
obtained.  Crystals  from  the  aqueous  solution,  according  to  Professor 
Potilitzin,  contain  six  times  as  much  water  (CoC^GHgO)  for  a  given 
weight  of  the  salt,  as  those  violet  crystals  (CoCl2,H2O)  which  are 
formed  by  the  evaporation  of  an  alcoholic  solution. 

That^solutions  contain  particular  compounds  with  water  is  further 
shown  by  the  phenomena  of  supersaturated  solutions,  of  so-called  cryo- 
hydrates,  of  solutions  of  certain  acids  having  constant  boiling  points, 
and  the  properties  of  compounds  containing  water  of  crystallisation 
whose  data  it  is  indispensable  to  keep  in  view  in  the  consideration  of 
solutions. 

Supersaturated  solutions  exhibit  the  following  phenomena  : — On 
the  refrigeration  of  a  saturated  solution  of  certain  salts,54  if  the  liquid 
be  brought  under*  certain  conditions,  the  excess  of  the  solid  may 
sometimes  remain  in  solution  and  not  separate  out..  A  great  number 
of  substances,  and  more  especially  sodium  sulphate,  Na2SO4,  or 
Glauber's  salt,  easily  form  supersaturated  solutions.  If  boiling  water 
be  saturated  witli  this  salt,  and  the  solution  be  poured  off  from  any 
remaining  undissolved  salt,  and,  the  boiling  being  still  continued,  the 
vessel  holding  the  solution  be  well  closed  by  cotton  wool,  or  by  fusing 
up  the  vessel,  or  by  covering  the  solution  with  a  layer  of  oil,  then  it 
will  be  found  that  this  saturated  solution  does  not  separate  out  any 
Glauber's  salt  whatever  on  cooling  down  to  the  ordinary  or  even  to  a 
much  lower  temperature  ;  although  without  the  above  precautions  a 
salt  separates  out  on  cooling,  in  the  form  of  crystals,  which  contain 
Na2SO410H2O— that  is,  180  parts  of  water  for  142  parts  of  anhydrous 
salt  The  supersaturated  solution  may  be  moved  about  or  shaken 
inside  the  vessel  holding  it,  and  no  crystallisation  will  take  place  ;  the 
salt  remains  in  the  solution  in  as  large  an  amount  as  at  a  higher  tempera- 
ture. If  the  vessel  holding  the  supersaturated  solution  be  opened  and 
a  crystal  of  Glauber's  salt  be  thrown  in,  crystallisation  suddenly  takes 
place.55  A  considerable  rise  in  temperature  is  noticed  during  this 

M  Those  salts  which  separate  out  with  water  of  crystallisation  and  give  several 
crystallohydrates  form  supersaturated  solutions  with  ths  greatest  facility,  and  the  phe- 
nomenon is  much  more  common  than  was  previously  imagined.  The  first  data  were 
given  in  the  last  century  by  Loewitz,  in  St.  Petersburg.  Numerous  researches  have 
proved  that  supersaturated  solutions  do  not  differ  from  ordinary  solutions  in  any  of  their 
essential  properties.  The  variations  in  specific  gravity,  vapour  tension,  formation  of  ice, 
&c.,  take  place  according  to  the  ordinary  laws. 

**  Inasmuch  as  air,  as  has  been  shown  by  direct  experiment,  contains,  although  in 
*ery  small  quantities,  minute  crystals  of  ^alts,  and  among  them  sodium  sulphate,  air  can 
bring  about  the  crystallisation  of  a  super- saturated  solution  of  sodium  sulphate  in  an  open. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  97 

rapid  separation  of  crystals,  which  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  salt, 
previously  in  a  liquid  state,  passes  into  a  solid  state.  This  bears  some  re- 
semblance to  the  fact  that  water  maybe  cooled  below  0°  (even to  — 10°) 
if  it  be  left  at  rest,  under  certain  circumstances,  and  evolves  heat  in 
suddenly  crystallising.  Although  from  this  point  of  view  there  is  a 
resemblance,  yet  in  reality  the  phenomenon  of  supersaturated  solutions 
is  much  more  complicated.  Thus,  on  cooling,  a  saturated  solution  of 
Glauber's  salt  deposits  crystals  containing  Na2S04,7H2O,56  or  126  parts 

vessel,  but  it  has  no  effect  on  saturated  solutions  of  certain  other  salts ;  for  example,  lead 
acetate.  According  to  the  observations  of.  De  Boisbaudran,  Gernez,  and  others,  isomor- 
phous  salts  (analogous  in  composition)  are  capable  ^f  inducing  crystallisation.  Thus,  a 
supersaturated  solution  of  nickel  sulphate  crystallises  by  contact  with  crystals  of  sul- 
phates of  other  metals  analogous  to  it,  such  as  those  of  magnesium,  cobalt,  copper,  and 
manganese.  The  crystallisation  of  a  supersaturated  solution,  set  up  by  the  contact  of 
a  minute  crystal,  starts  from  it  in  rays  with  a  definite  velocity,  and  it  is  evident  that 
the  crystals  as  they  form  propagate  the  crystallisation  in  definite  directions.  This 
phenomenon  recalls  the  evolution  of  organisms  from  germs.  An  attraction  of  similar 
molecules  ensues,  and  they  dispose  themselves  in  definite  similar  forms. 

56  At  the  present  time  a  view  is  very  generally  accepted,  which  regards  supersaturated 
solutions  as  homogeneous  systems,  which  pass  into  heterogeneous  systems  (composed  of 
a  liquid  and  a  solid  substance),  in  all  respects  exactly  resembling  the  passage  of  water 
cooled  below  its  freezing  point  into  ice  and  water,  or  the  passage  of  crystals  of  rhombic 
sulphur  into  monoclinic  crystals,  and  Df  the  monoclinic  crystals  into  rhombic.  Although 
many  phenomena  of  supersaturation  are  thus  clearly  understood,  yet  the  spontaneous  for- 
mation of  the  unstable  hepta-hydrated  salt  (with  7H.2O),  in  the  place  of  the  more  stable 
deca-hydrated  salt  (with  mol.  10H3O),  indicates  a  property  of  a  saturated  solution  of 
sodium  sulphate  which  obliges  one  to  admit  that  it  has  a  different  structure  from  an 
ordinary  solution.  Stcherbacheff  asserts,  on  the  basis  of  his  researches,  that  a  solution 
of  the  deca-hydrated  salt  gives,  on  evaporation,  without  the  aid  of  heat,  the  deca-hydrated 
salt,  whilst  after  heating  above  33°  it  forms  a  supersaturated  solution  and  the  hepta- 
hydrated  salt.  But  in  order  that  this  view  should  be  accepted,  some  facts  must  be  dis- 
covered distinguishing  solutions  (which  are,  according  to  this  view,  isomeric)  containing 
the  hepta-hydrated  salt  from  those  containing  the  deca-hydrated  salt,  and  all  efforts  in  this 
direction  (the  study  of  the  properties  of  the  solutions)  have  given  negative  results.  As 
some  crystallohydrates  of  salts  (alums,  sugar  of  lead,  calcium  chloride)  melt  straightway 
(without  separating  out  anything),  whilst  others  (like  NaaSO^lOHjO)  are  broken  up, 
then  it  may  be  that  the  latter  are  only  in  a  :state  of  equilibrium  at  a  higher  temperature 
than  their  melting  point.  It  may  here  be  observed  that  in  melting  crystals  of  the  deca- 
hydrated  salt,  there  is  formed,  besides  the  solid  anhydrous  salt,  a  saturated  solution 
giving  the  hepta-hydrated  salt,  so  that  this  passage  from  the  deca-  to  the  hepta-hydrated 
salt,  and  the  reverse,  takes  place  with  the  formation  of  the  anhydrous  (or,  it  may  be. 
mono-hydrated)  salt. 

Moreover,  supersaturation  (Potilitzin,  1889)  only  takes  place  with  those  substances 
which  are  capable  of  giving  several  modifications  or  several  crystallohydrates,  i.e.  super- 
saturated solutions  separate  out,  besides  the  stable  normal  crystallohydrate,  hydrates 
containing  less  water  and  also  the  anhydrous  salt.  This  degree,  of  saturation  acts  upon 
the  substance  dissolved  in  a  like  manner  to  heat.  Sulphate  of  nickel  in  a  solution  at 
15°  to  20°  separates  out  rhombic  crystals  with  7H2O,  at  30°  to  40°  cubical  crystals,  with 
6H2O,  at  50°  to  70°  monoclinic  crystals,  also  containing  6H2O.  Crystals  of  the  same 
composition  separate  out  from  supersaturated  solutions  at  one  temperature  (17°  to  19°), 
but  at  different  degrees  of  saturation,  as  was  shown  by  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran.  The 
capacity  to  voluntarily  separate  out  slightly  hydrated  or  anhydrous  salts  by  the  jntro- 


98  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

of  water  per  142  parts  of  anhydrous  salt,  and  not  180  parts  of  water, 
as  in  the  above-mentioned  salt.  The  crystals  containing  7H2O  are 
distinguished  for  their  instability  ;  if  they  stand  in  contact  not  only' 
with  crystals  of  Na2S04,10H2O,  but  with  many  other  substances,  they 
immediately  become  opaque,  forming  a  mixture  of  anhydrous  and  deca- 
hydrated  salts.  It  is  evident  that  between  water  and  a  soluble  sub- 
stance there  may  be  established  different  kinds  of  greater  or  less  stable 
equilibrium,  of  which  solutions  form  a  particular  case.57 

duct  ion  of  a  crystal  into  the  solution  is  common  to  all  supersaturated  solutions.  If  a. 
salt  forms  a  supersaturated  solution,  then  one  would  expect,  according  to  this  view,  that 
it  should  exist  in  the  form  of  several  hydrates  or  in  several  modifications.  Thus 
Potilitzin  concluded  that  chlorate  of  strontium,  which  easily  gives  supersaturated  solu- 
tions, should  be  capable  of  forming  several  hydrates,  besides  the  anhydrous  salt  known ; 
and  he  succeeded  in  discovering  the  existence  of  two  hydrates,  SrfClOj^SHsO  and. 
apparently  Sr(ClO3)28H2O.  Besides  this,  three  modifications  of  the  common  anhydrous 
salt  were  obtained,  differing  from  each  other  in  their  crystalline  form.  One  modification 
separated  out  in  the  form  of  rhombic  octahedra,  another  in  oblique  plates,  and  a  third 
in  long  brittle  prisms  or  plates.  Further  -researches  showed  that  salts  which  are  not 
capable  of  forming  supersaturated  solutions  such  as  the  bromates  of  calcium,  stiontium, 
and  barium,  part  with  their  water  of  hydration  with  difficulty  (they  crystallise  with 
1H2O),  and  decompose  very  slowly  in  a  vacuum  or  in  dry  air.  In  other  words  the 
tension  of  dissociation  is  very  small  in  this  class  of  hydrates.  As  the  hydrates  charac- 
terised by  a  small  dissociation  tension  are  incapable  of  giving  supersaturated  solutions, 
so  conversely  supersaturated  solutions  give  hydrates  whose  tension  of  dissociation  is 
great  (Potilitzin,  1898). 

57  Emulsions,  like  milk,  are  composed  of  a  solution  of  glutinous  or  similar  substances, 
or  of  oily  liquids  suspended  in  a  liquid  in  the  form  of  drops,  which  are  clearly  visible 
under  a  microscope,  and  form  an  example  of  a  mechanical  formation  which  resembles 
solution.  But  the  difference  from  solutions  is  here  evident.  There  are,  however, 
solutions  which  approach  very  near  to  emulsions  in  the  facility  with  which  the  substance 
dissolved  separates  from  them.  It  ha  s  long  been  known,  for  example,  that  a  particular 
kind  of  Prussian  blue,  KFe2(CN)6,  dissolves  in  pure  water,  but,  on  the  addition  of  the 
smallest  quantity  of  either  of  a  number  of  salts,  it  coagulates  and  becomes  quite  in- 
soluble. If  copper  sulphide  (CuS),  cadmium  sulphide  (CdS),  arsenic  sulphide  ^8383) 
{the  experiments  with  these  substances  proceed  with  great  ease,  and  the  solution  ob- 
tained is  comparatively  stable),  and  many  other  metallic  sulphides,  be  obtained  by  a 
method  of  double  decomposition  (by  precipitating  salts  of  these  metals  by  hydrogen 
sulphide),  and  be  then  carefully  washed  (by  allowing  the  precipitate  to  settle,  pouring  off 
the  liquid,  and  again  adding  sulphuretted  hydrogen  water),  then,  as  was  shown  by 
Schulze,  Spring,  Prost,  and  others,  the  previously  insoluble  sulphides  pass  into  trans- 
parent (for  mercury,  lead,  and  silver,  reddish  brown ;  for  copper  and  iron,  greenish 
brown ;  for  cadmium  and  indium,  yellow ;  and  for  zinc,  colourless)  solutions,  which  may 
be  preserved  (the  weaker  they  are  the  longer  they  keep)  and  even  boiled,  but  which, 
nevertheless,  in  time  coagulate— that  is,  separate  in  an  insoluble  form,  and  then  some- 
times become  crystalline  and  quite  incapable  of  re-dissolving.  Graham  and  others 
observed  the  power  shown  by  colloids  (see  note  18)  of  forming  similar  hydrosols  or  solu- 
tions of  gelatinous  colloids,  and,  in  describing  alumina  and  silica,  we  shall  again  have 
occasion  to  speak  of  such  solutions. 

In  the  existing  state  of  our  knowledge  concerning  solution,  such  solutions  may  be 
looked  on  as  a  transition  between  emulsion  and  ordinary  solutions,  but  no  fundamental 
judgment  can  be  formed  about  them  until  a  study  has  been  made  of  their  relations  to 
ordinary  solutions  (the  solutions  of  even  soluble  colloids  freeze  immediately  on  cooling, 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  99 

Solutions  of  salts  on  refrigeration  below  0°  deposit  ice  or  crystals 
(which  then  frequently  contain  water  of  crystallisation)  of  the  salt 
dissolved,  and  on  reaching  a  certain  degree  of  concentration  they 
solidify  in  their  entire  mass.  These  solidified  masses  are  termed  cryo- 
hydrates.  My  researches  on  solutions  of  common  salt  -(1868)  showed 
that  its  solution  solidifies  when  it  reaches  a  composition  NaCl  +  10H2O 
(180  parts  of  water  per  58-5  parts  of  salt),  which  takes  place  at 
about  —23°  The  solidified  solution  melts  at  the  same  temperature, 
and  both  the  portion  melted  and  the  remainder,  preserve  the  above 
composition.  Guthrie  (1874-1876)  obtained  the  cryohydrates  of  many 
salts,  and  he  showed  that  certain  of  them  are  formed  like  the  above  at 
comparatively  low  temperatures,  whilst  others  (for  instance,  corrosive 
sublimate,  alums,  potassium  chlorate,  and  various  colloids)  are  formed 
on  a  slight  cooling,  to  •—  2°  or  even  before.58.  In  the  case  of  common  salt, 
the  cry ohyd rate  with  10  molecules  of  water,  and  in  the  case  of  sodium 
nitrate,  the  cryohydrate  59  with  7  molecules  of  water  (i.e.  126  parts 
of  water  per  85  of  salt)  should  be  accepted  as  established  substances, 
capable  of  passing  from  a  solid  to  a  liquid  state  and  conversely  ;  and 
therefore  it  may  be  thought  that  in  cryohydrates  we  have  solutions 
which  are  not  only  undecomposable  by  cold,  but  also  have  a  definite 
composition  which  would  present  a  fresh  case  of  definite  equilibrium 
between  the  solvent  and  the  substance  dissolved. 

The  formation  of  definite  but  unstable  compounds  in  the  process  of 

below  0°,  and,  according  to  Guthrie,  do  not  form  cryohydrates),  and  to  supersaturated 
solutions,  with  which  they  have  certain  points  in  common. 

68  Offer  (1880)  concludes,  from  his  researches  on  cryohydrates,  that  they  are  simple 
mixtures  of  ice  and  salts,  having  a  constant  melting  point,  just  as  there  are  alloys  having 
a  constant  point  of  fusion,  and  solutions  of  liquids  with  a  constant  boiling  point  (see  note 
60).  This  does  not,  however,  explain  in  what  form  a  salt  is  contained,  for  instance,  in  the 
cryohydrate  NaCl  +  10H2O.  At  temperatures  above  —10°  common  salt  separates  out  in 
anhydrous  crystals,  and  at  temperatures  near  — 10°,  in  combination  with  water  of 
crystallisation,  NaCl  +  2H20,  and,  therefore,  it  is  very  improbable  that  at  still  lower 
temperatures  it  would  separate  without  water*  If  the  possibility  of/  the  solidified  cryo- 
lydrate  containing  NaCl  +  2H2O  and  ice  be  admitted,  then  it  is  not  clear  why  one  of 
these  substances  does  not  melt  before  the  other.  If  alcohol  does  not  extract  water  from 
the  solid  mass,  leaving  the  salt  behind,  this  does  not  prove  the  presence  of  ice,  because 
alcohol  also  takes  up  water  from  the  crystals  of  many  hydrated  substances  (for  instance, 
from  NaCl  +  2H2O)  at  about  their  melting-points.  Besides  which,  a  simple  observation 
on  the  cryohydrate,  NaCl  +  10H2O,  shows  that  with  the  most  careful  cooling  it  does  not 
on  the  addition  of  ice  deposit  ice,  which  would  occur  if  ice  were  formed  on  solidification 
intermixed  with  the  salt. 

I  may  add  with  regard  to  cryohydrates  that  many  of  the  solutions  of  acids  solidify 
completely  on  prolonged  cooling  (for'  example,  H2SO4H2O),  and  then  form  perfectly 
definite  compounds.  For  the  solutions  of  sulphuric  acid  (see  Chapter  XX.)  Pickering 
obtained,  for  instance,  a  hydrate,  H2SO44H8O  at  —25°.  Hydrochloric,  nitric,  and  other 
acids  also  give  similar  crystalline  hydrates,  melting  at  low  temperatures  and  presenting 
many  similarities  with  the  cryohydrates. 

w  See  note  24. 


100  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

solution  becomes  evident  from  the  phenomena  of  a  marked  decrease  of 
vapour  tension,  or  from  the  rise,  of  the  temperature  of  ebullition  which 
occurs  in  the  solution  of  certain  volatile  liquids  and  gases  in  water. 
As  an  example,  we  will  take  hydriodic  acid,  HI,  a  gas  which  liquefies, 
giving  a  liquid  which  boils  at  -  20°.  A  solution  of  it  containing  57 
p.c.  of  hydriodic  acid  is  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  if  it  be  heated 
the  hydriodic  acid  volatilises  together  with  the  water  in  the  same  pro- 
portions as  they  occur  in  the  solution,  therefore  such  a  solution  may  be 
distilled  unchanged.  The  solution  boils  at  a  higher  temperature  than 
water,  at  127°.  A  portion  of  the  physical  properties  of  the  gas  and 
water  have  in  this  case  already  disappeared — a  new  substance  is  formed, 
which  has  its  definite  boiling  point.  To  put  it  more  correctly,  this  is 
not  the  temperature  of  ebullition,  but  the  temperature  at  which  the 
compound  formed  decomposes,  forming  the  vapours  of  the  products  of 
dissociation,  which,  on  cooling,  re-combine.  Should  a  less  amount  of 
hydriodic  acid  be  dissolved  in  water  than  the  above,  then,  on  heating 
such  a  solution,  water  only  at  first  distils  over,  until  the  solution 
attains  the  above-mentioned  composition ;  it  will  then  distil  over 
unaltered.  If  more  hydriodic  acid  be  passed  into  such  a  solution  a 
fresh  quantity  of  the  gas  will  dissolve,  but  it  passes  off  with  great 
ease,  like  air  from  water.  It  must  not,  however,  be  thought  that  those 
forces  which  determine  the  formation  of  ordinary  gaseous  solutions 
play  no  part  whatever  in  the  formation  of  a  solution  having  a  definite 
boiling  point ;  that  they  do  react  is  shown  from  the  fact  that  such  con- 
stant gaseous  solutions  vary  in  their  composition  under  different 
pressures.60  It  is  not,  therefore,  at  every,  but  only  at  the  ordinary, 

60  For  this  reason  (the  want  of  entire  constancy  of  the  composition  of  constant  boil- 
ing solutions  with  a  change  of  pressure),  the  existence  of  definite  hydrates  formed  by 
volatile  substances — for  instance,  by  hydrochloric  acid  and  water — is  frequently  denied. 
It  is  generally  argued  as  follows  :  If  there  did  exist  a  constancy  of  composition,  then  it 
would  be  unaltered  by  a  change  of  pressure.  But  the  distillation  of  constant  boiling 
hydrates  is  undoubtedly  accompanied  (judging  by  the  vapour  densities  determined  by 
Bineau),  like  the  distillation  of  sal  ammoniac,  sulphuric  acid,  <fec.,  by  a  complete  decom- 
position of  the  original  compound— that  is,  these  substances  do  not  exist  in  a  state  of 
vapour,  but  their  products  of  decomposition  (hydrochloric  acid  and  water)  are  gases  at 
the  temperature  of  volatilisation,  which  dissolve  in  the  volatilised  and  condensed  liquids ; 
but  the  solubility  of  gases  in  liquids  depends  on  the  pressure,  and,  therefore,  the  com- 
position of  constant  boiling  solutions  may,  and  even  ought  to,  vary  with  a  change  of 
pressure,  and,  further,  the  smaller  the  pressure  and  the  lower  the  temperature  of  vola- 
tilisation, the  more  likely  is  a  true  compound  to  be  obtained.  According  to  the  researches 
of  Rpscoe  and  Dittmar  (1859),  the  constant  boiling  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  proved 
to  contain  18  p.c.  of  hydrochloric  acid  at  a  pressure  of  8  atmospheres,  20  p.c.  at  1  atmo- 
sphere, and  28  p.c.  at  -^  of  an  atmosphere.  On  passing  air  through  the  solution  until 
its  composition  became  constant  (i.e.  forcing  the  excess  of  aqueous  vapour  or  of  hydro- 
chloric acid  to  pass  away  with  the  air),  then  acid  was  obtained  containing  about 
20  p.c.  at  100°,  about  23  p.c.  at  50°,  and  about  25  p.c.  at  0°.  From  this  it  is  seen  that 
jloy  decreasing  the  pressure  and  lowering  the  temperature  of  evaporation  one  arrives 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  101 

atmospheric  pressure  that  a  constant  boiling  solution  of  hydriodic  acid 
will  contain  57  p.c.  of  the  gas.  At  another  pressure  the  proportion  of 
water  and  .hydriodic  acid  will  be  different.  It  varies,  however,  judging 
from  observations  made  by  Roscoe,  very  little  for  considerable  variations 
of  pressure.  This  variation  in  composition  directly  indicates  that 
pressure  exerts  an  influence  on  the  formation  of  unstable  chemical 
compounds  which  are  easily  dissociated  (with  formation  of  a  gas),  just 
•as  it  influences  the  solution  of  gases,  only  the  latter  is  influenced  to  a 
more  considerable  degree  than  the  former.61  Hydrochloric,  nitric,  and 
•other  acids  form  solutions  having  definite  boiling  points,  like  that  of 
hydriodic  acid.  They  show  further  the  common  property,  if  containing 
•but  a  small  proportion  of  water,  that  iheyfume  in  air.  Strong  solu- 
tions of  nitric,  hydrochloric,  hydriodiCj  and  other  gases  are  even  termed 

at  the  same  limit,  where  the  composition  should  be  taken  as  HC1  +  6H.X),  which  requires 
•25'26  p.c.  of  hydrochloric  acid.  Fuming  hydrochloric  acid  contains  more  than  this. 

In  the  case  already  considered,  as  in  the  case  of  formic  acid  in  the  researches  of 
D.  P.  Konovaloff  (note  47),  the  constant  boiling  solution  corresponds  with  a  minimum 
tension — that  is,  with  a  boiling  point  higher  than  that  of  either  of  the  component 
•elements.  But  there  is  another  case  of  constant  boiling  solutions  similar  to  the  case  of 
the  solution  of  propyl  alcohol,  C5H8O,  when  a  solution,  undecomposed  by  distillation* 
'boils  at  a  lower  point  than  that  of  the  more  volatile  liquid.  However,,  in  this  case  also, 
if  there  be  solution,  the  possibility  of  the  formation  of  a  definite  compound  in  the  form 
•C3H8O  +  H2O  cannot  be  denied,  and  the  tension  of  the  solution  is  not  equal  to  the  sum 
•of  tensions  of  the  components.  There  are  possible  cases  of  constant  boiling  mixtures 
•even  when  there  is  no  solution  nor  any  loss  of  tension,  and  consequently  no  chemical 
action,  since  the  amount  of  liquids  that  are  volatilised  is  determined  by  the  product  of 
<the  vapour  densities  into  their  vapour  tensions  (Wanklyn),  in  consequence  of  which 
liquids  whose  boiling  point  is  above  100°— for  instance,  turpentine  and  ethereal  oils  in 
.general — when  distilled  with  aqueous  vapour,  pass  over  at  a  temperature  below  100°. 
Consequently,  it  is  not  in  the  constancy  of  composition  and  boiling  point  (temperature  of 
•decomposition)  that  evidence  of  a  distinct  chemical  action  is  to  be  found  in  the  aboye- 
•described  solutions  of  acids,  but  in  the  great  loss  of  tension,  which  completely  resembles 
the  loss  of  tension  observed,  for  instance,  in  the  perfectly-definite  combinations  of  sub- 
stances with  water  of  crystallisation  (see  later,  note  65).  Sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4,  as  we 
shall  learn  later,  is  also  decomposed  by  distillation,  like  HC1  +  6H2O,  and  exhibits,  more* 
'bver,  all  the  signs  of  a  definite  chemical  compound.  The  study  of  the  variation  of  the 
specific  gravities  of  solutions  as  dependent  on  their  composition  (see  note  19)  shows  that 
phenomena  of  a  similar  kind,  although  of  different  dimensions,  take  place  in  the  forma- 
tion of  both  H2SO4  from  H2O  and  SO3,  and  of  HC1  +  6H2O  (or  of  aqueous  solutions 
Analogous  to  it)  from  HC1  and  H2O. 

01  The  essence  of  the  matter  may  be  thus  represented.  A  gaseous  or  easily  volatile- 
substance  A  forms  with  a  certain  quantity  of  water,  «H2O,  a  definite  complex  compound 
,4nH2O,  which  is  stable  up  to  a  temperature  t°  higher  than  100°.  At  this  temperature 
it  is  decomposed  into  two  substances,  A  +  H2O.  Both  boil  below  t°  at  the  ordinary 
pressure,  and  therefore  at  t°  they  distil  over  and  re-combine  in  the  receiver.  But  if  a 
part  of  the  substance  .4nH2O  is  decomposed  or  volatilised,  a  portion  of  the  undecomposed 
liquid  still  remains  in  the  vessel,  which  can  partially  dissolve  one  of  the  products  of 
•decomposition,  eand  that  in  quantity  varying  with  the  pressure  and  temperature,  and 
therefore  the  solution  at  a  constant  boiling  point  will  have  a  slightly  different  composi- 
tion at  different  pressures. 


102  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

'fuming  acids/  The  fuming  liquids  contain  a  definite  compound  whose 
temperature  of  ebullition  (decomposition)  is  higher  than  100°,  and  con- 
tain also  an  excess  of  the  volatile  substanc^  dissolved,  which  exhibits  a 
capacity  to  combine  with  water  and  form  a  hydrate,  whose  vapour 
tension  is  less  than  that  of  aqueous  vapour.  On  evaporating  in  air, 
this  dissolved  substance  meets  the  atmospheric  moisture  and  forms  a 
visible  vapour  (fumes)  with  it,  which  consists  of  the  above-mentioned 
compound.  The  attraction  or  affinity  which  binds,  for,  instance, 
hydriodic  acid  with  water  is  evinced  not  only  in  the  evolution  oLheat 
and  the  diminution  of  vapour  tension  (rise  of  boiling  point),  but  also 
in  many  purely  chemical  relations.  Thus  hydriodic  acid  is  produced 
from  iodine  and  hydrogen  sulphide  in  the  presence  of  water,  but  unless 
water  is  present  this  reaction  does  not  take  place.62 

Many  compounds  containing  water  of  crystallisation  are  solid  sub- 
stances (when  melted  they  are  already  solutions— i.e.  liquids) ;  further- 
more, they  are  capable  of  being  formed  from  solutions,  like  ice  or 
aqueous  vapour.  They  may  be  called  c ry stall o  hydrates.  Inasmuch  as 
the  direct  presence  of  ice  or  aqueous  vapour  cannot  be  admitted  in 
solutions  (for  these  are  liquids),  although  the  presence  of  water  may 
be,  so  also  there  is  no  basis  for  acknowledging  the  presence  in  solutions 
of  crystallo  hydrates,  although  they  are  obtained  from  solutions  as 
such.63  It  is  evident  that  such  substances  present  one  of  the  many 
forms  of  equilibrium  between  water  and  a  substance  dissolved  in  it 
This  form,  however,  reminds  one,  in  all  respects,  of  solutions — that  is, 
aqueous  compounds  which  are  more  or  less  easily  decomposed,  with 
separation  of  water  and  the  formation  of  a  less  aqueous  or  an  anhydrous 
compound.  In  fact,  there  are  not  a  few  crystals  containing'  water 
which  lose  a  part  of  their  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  Of  such 
a  kind,  for  instance,  are  the  crystals  of  soda,  or  sodium  carbonate, 
which,  when  separated  from  an  aqueous  •  solution  at  the  ordinary 
temperature,  are  quite  transparent ;  but  when  left  exposed  to  air,  lose 

•  6J  For  solutions  of  hydrochloric  acid  in  water  there  are  still  greater  differences  in 
reactions.  For  instance,  strong  solutions  decompose  antimony  sulphide  (forming  hydro- 
gen sulphide,  H2S),  and  precipitate  common  salt  from  its  solutions,  whilst  weak  solutions 
do  not  act  thus. 

.  65  Supersaturated  solutions  give  an  excellent  proof  in  this  respect.  Thus  a  solution 
of  copper  sulphate  generally  crystallises  in  penta-hydrated  crystals,  CuSO4  +  5H2O,  and 
its  saturated  solution  gives  such  crystals  if  it  be  brought  into  contact  with  the  minutest 
possible  crystal  of  the  same  kind.  But,  according  to  the  observations  of  Lecoq  de  Bois- 
baudran,  if  a  crystal  of  ferrous  sulphate  (an  isomorphous  salt,  see  note  55),  FeSO4  4-  7H2O, 
be  placed  in  a  saturated  solution  of  copper  sulphate,  then  crystals  of  hepta-hyd rated  salt, 
CuSO4  +  7H2O,  are  obtained.  It  is  evident  that  neither  the  penta-  nor  the  hepta-hydrated 
salt  is  contained  as  such  in  the  solution.  The  solution  presents  its  own  particular  liquid 
lorm  of  equilibrium. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  103 

ft  portion  of  their  water,  becoming  opaque,  and,  in  the  process,  lose 
their  crystalline  appearance,  although  preserving  their  original  form. 
This  process  of  the  separation  of  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature 
is  termed  the  efflorescence  of  crystals.  Efflorescence  takes  place  more 
rapidly  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  and  especially  at  a  gentle 
heat.  This  breaking  up  of  a  crystal  is  dissociation  at  the  ordinary 
temperature.  Solutions  are  decomposed  in  exactly  the  same  manner.6* 
The  tension  of  the  aqueous  vapour  which  is  given  off  from  crystallo- 
hydrates  is  naturally,  as  with  solutions,  less  than  the  vapour  tension  of 
water  itself  65  at  the  same  temperature,  and  therefore  many  anhydrous 
salts  which  are  capable  of  combining  with  water  absorb  aqueous  vapour 

64  Efflorescence,  like  every  evaporation,  proceeds  from  the  surface.    In  the  interior  of 
crystals  which  have  effloresced  there  is  usually  found  a  non-effloresced  mass,  so  that  the 
majority  of  effloresced  crystals  of  washing  soda  show,  in  their  fracture,  a  transparent 
nucleus  coated  by  an  effloresced,  opaque,  powdery  mass.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance 
in  this  respect  that  efflorescence  proceeds  in  a  completely  regular  and  uniform  manner, 
so  that  the  angles  and  planes  of  similar  crystallographic  character  effloresce  siinul 
taneously,  and  in  this  respect  the  crystalline  form  determines  those  parts  of  crystal* 
where  efflorescence  starts,  and  the  order  in  which  it  continues.    In  solutions  evaporation 
also  proceeds  from  the  surface,  and  the  first  crystals  which  appear  on  its  reaching  the 
required  degree  of  saturation  are  also  formed  at  the  surface.    After  falling  to  the  bottom, 
the  crystals  naturally  continue  to  grow  (see  Chapter  X.). 

65  According  to  Lescoeur  (1888),  at  100°  a  concentrated  solution  of  barium  hydroxide, 
BaH2O2,  on  first  depositing  crystals  (with   +  H2O)  has  a  tension  of  about  680  min. 
(instead  of  760  mm.,  the  tension  of  water),  which  decreases  (because  the  solution  evapo- 
rates) to  45  mm.,  when  all  the  water  is  expelled  from  the  crystals,  BaH2O2  +  H2O,  which 
are  formed,  but  they  also  lose  water  (dissociate,  effloresce  at  100°),  leaving  the  hydroxide, 
BaH202,  which  is  perfectly  undecomposable  at  100° — that  is,  does  not  part  with  water. 
At  73°  (the  tension  of  water  is  then  265  mm.)  a  solution,  containing  88H2O,  on  crystallis- 
ing has  a  tension  of  280  mm. ;  the  crystals,  BaH2O2  +  8H2O,  which  separate  out,  have  & 
tension  of  160  mm. ;  on  losing  water  they  give  BaH2O2  +  H2O.    This  substance  does  not 
decompose  at  78°,  and  therefore  its  tension  =  0.      In   those  crystallohydrates  which 
effloresce  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  the  tension  of  dissociation  nearly  approximates  to 
that  of  the  aqueous  vapour,  as  Lescoeur  (1891)  showed.    To  this  category  of  compounds 
belong  B2O3  (8  +  x)  H2O,  C2O4H2  (2  +  x)  H2O,  BaO  (9  +  x)  H2O,  and  SrO  (9  +  a?)  H2O.    And 
a  still  greater  tension  is  possessed  by  Na2S0410H2O,  Na2CO310H2O,  and  MgSO4(7  +  «) 
H2O.    Miiller-Erzbach  (1884)  determines  the  tension  (with  reference  to  liquid  water)  by 
placing  tubes  of  the  same  length  with  water  and  the  substances  experimented  with,  in  a 
desiccator,- the  rate  of  loss  of  water  giving  the  relative  tension.    Thus,  at  the  ordinary- 
temperature,  crystals  of  sodium  phosphate,  Na2HFO4  +  12H2O,  present  a  tension  of  0'7 
compared  with  water,  until  they  lose  5H2O,  then  0'4  until  they  lose  5H2O  more,  and  on 
losing  the  last  equivalent  of  water  the  tension  falls  to  0*04  compared  with  water.     It  ia 
clear  that  the  different  molecules  of  water  are  held  by  an  unequal  force.    Out  of  the  five 
molecules  of  water  in  copper  sulphate  the  two  first  are  comparatively  easily  separated 
even  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (but  only  after  several  days  in  a  desiccator,  according 
to  Latchinoff) ;  the  next  two  are  more  difficultly  separated,  and  the  last  equivalent  in 
retained  even  at  100°.    This  is  another  indication  of  the  capacity  of  CnSO4  to  form  three 
hydrates,  CuSO45H2O,  CuSO43H2O,  and  CuSO4H2O.    The  researches  of  Andreae  on  the 
tension  of  dissociation  of  hydrated  sulphate  of  copper  showed  (1891)  the  existence  of 
three  provinces, characterised  at  a  given  temperature  by  a  constant  tension:  (1)  between. 
8-5,  (2)  between  1-3,  and  lastly  (3)  between  0-1  molecule  of  water,  which  again  confirms 
the  existence  of  three  hydrates  of  the  above  composition  for  this  salt. 

*G 


104  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

from  moist  air  ;  that  is,  they  act  like  a  cold  body  on  which  water  is 
deposited  from  steam.  It  is  on  this  that  the  desiccation  of  gases  is 
based,  and  it  must  further  be  remarked  in  this  respect  that  certain 
substances — for  instance,  potassium  carbonate  (K2CO3)  and  calcium 
chloride  (CaCl2)— not  only  absorb  the  water  necessary  for  the  formation 
of  a  solid  crystalline  compound,  but  also  give  solutions,  or  deliquesce, 
as  it  is  termed,  in  moist  air.  Many  crystals  do  not  effloresce  in  the 
least  at  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  for  example,  copper  sulphate,  which 
may  be  preserved  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time  without  efflorescing, 
but  when  placed  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  if  efflorescence  be 
once  started,  it  goes  on  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  The  tempera- 
ture at  which  the  complete  separation  of  water  from  crystals  takes 
place  varies  considerably,  not  only  for  different  substances,  but  also  for 
different  portions  of  the  contained  water.  Very  often  the  temperature 
at  which  dissociation  begins  is  very  much  higher  than  the  boiling  point 
of  water  So,  for*  example,  copper  sulphate,  which  contains  36  p.c.  of 
water,  gives  up  28-8  p.c.  at  100°,  and  the  remaining  quantity,  namely 
7-2  p.c.,  only  at  240°  Alum,  out  of  the  45 -5  p.c.  of  water  which  it 
contains,  gives  up  18-9  p.c.  at  100°,  17'7  p.c.  at  120°,  77  p.c.  at  180°, 
and  1  p.c.  at  280°  ;  it  only  loses  the  last  quantity  (1  p.c.)  at  its  tem- 
perature of  decomposition.  These  examples  clearly  show  that  the 
annexation  of  water  of  crystallisation  is  accompanied  by  a  rather  pro- 
found, although,  in  comparison  with  instances  which  we  shall  consider 
later,  still  inconsiderable,  change  of  its  properties.  In  certain  cases  the 
water  of  crystallisation  is  only  given  off  when  the  solid  form  of  the 
substance  is  destroyed  :  when  the  crystals  melt  on  heating.  The 
crystals  are  then  said  to  melt  in  their  water  of  crystallisation.  Further, 
(after  the  separation  of  the  water,  a  solid  substance  remains  behind,  so 
that  by  further  heating  it  acquires  a  solid  form.  This  is  seen  most 
clearly  in  crystals  of  sugar  of  lead  or  lead  acetate,  which  melt  in  their 
water  of  crystallisation  at  a  temperature  of  56-25°,  and  in  so  doing 
begin  to  lose  water.  On  reaching  a  temperature  of  100°  the  sugar  of 
lead  solidifies,  having  lost  all  its  water  ;  and  then  at  a  temperature  of 
280°,  the  anhydrous  and  solidified  salt  again  melts.65  bls 

It  is  most  important  to  recognise  in  respect  to  the  water  of  crys- 
tallisation that  its  ratio  to  the  quantity  of  the  substance  with  which  it 
»is  combined  is  always  a  constant  quantity.  However  often  we  may 

65  bt«  Sodium  acetate  (C2H3p2Na3H2O)  melts  at  58°,  but  re-solidifies  only  on  contact 
'with  a  crystal,  otherwise  it  may  remain  liquid  even  at  0°,  and  may  be  used  for  obtaining 
*  constant  temperature.  According  to  Jeannel,  the  latent  heat  of  fusion  is  about  28 
calorieSj  and  according  to  Pickering  the  heat  of  solution  35  calories.  When  melted  this 
salt  boils  at  123° — that  is,  the  tension  of  the  vapour  given  off  at  that  temperature  equals 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  105 

prepare  copper  sulphate,  we  shall  always  find  36*14  p.c.  of  water  in  its 
crystals,  and  these  crystals  always  lose  four-fifths  of  their  water  at 
100°,  and  one-fifth  of  the  whole  amount  of  the  water  contained  remains 
in  the  crystals  at  100°,  and  is  only  expelled  from  them  at  a  temperature 
of  about  240°.  What  has  been  said  about  crystals  of  copper  sulphate 
refers  also  to  crystals  of  every  other  substance,  which  contain  water  of 
crystallisation.  It  is  impossible  in  any  of  these  cases  to  increase  either 
the  relative  proportion  of  the  salt  or  of  the  water,  without  changing 
the  homogeneity  of  the  substance.  If  once  a  portion  of  the  water  be 
lost — for  instance,  if  once  efflorescence  takes  place— a  mixture  is  ob- 
tained, and  not  a  homogeneous  substance,  namely  a  mixture  of  a  sub- 
stance deprived  of  water  with  a  substance  which  has  not  yet  lost  water 
— i.e.  decomposition  has  already  commenced.  This  constant  ratio  is 
an  example  of  the  fact  that  in  chemical  compounds  the  quantity  of  the 
component  parts  is  quite  definite  ;  that  is,  it  is  an  example  of.  the  so- 
called  definite  chemical  compounds.  They  may  be  distinguished  from 
solutions,  and  from  all  other  so-called  indefinite  chemical  compounds, 
in  that  at  least  one,  and  sometimes  both,  of  the  component  parts  may 
be  added  in  a  large  quantity  to  an  indefinite  chemical  compound,  with- 
out destroying  its  homogeneity,  as  in  solutions,  whilst  it  is  impossible 
to  add  any  one  of  the  component  parts  to  a  definite  chemical  compound 
without  destroying  the  homogeneity  of  the  entire  mass.  Definite 
chemical  compounds  only  decompose  at  a  certain  rise  in  temperature  ; 
on  a  lowering  in  temperature  they  do  not,  at  least  with  very  few  ex- 
ceptions, yield  their  components  like  solutions  which  form  ice  or  com- 
pounds with  water  of  crystallisation.  This  leads  to  the  assumption 
that  solutions  contain  water  as  water,66  although  it  may  sometimes  be 
in  a  very  small  quantity.  Therefore  solutions  which  are  capable  of 
solidifying  completely  (for  instance,  crystallo-hydrates  capable  of  melt- 
ing) such  as  the  compound  of  84J  parts  of  sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4,  with 
15J  parts  of  water,  H2O,  or  HoSO^HjO  (or  H4SOa),  appear  as  true 
definite  chemical  compounds.  If,  then,  we  imagine  such  a  definite 
compound  in  a  liquid  state,  and  admit  that  it  partially  decomposes  in 
this  state,  separating  water— not  as  ice  or  vapour  (for  then  the  system 
would  be  heterogeneous,  including  substances  in  different  physical 
states),  but  in  a  liquid  form,  when  the  system  will  be  homogeneous — 

06  Such  a  phenomenon  frequently  presents  itself  in  purely  chemical  action.  Fov 
instance,  let  a  liquid  substance  A  give,  with  another  liquid  substance  B,  under  the  condi- 
tions of  an  experiment,  a  mere  minute  quantity  of  a  solid  or  gaseous  substance  C.  This 
ttnall  quantity  will  separate  out  (pass  away  from  the  sphere  of  action,  as  Berthollet 
expressed  it),  and  the  remaining  masses  of  A  and  B  will  again  give  C ;  consequently, 
Tinder  these  conditions  action  will  go  on  to  the  end.  Such,  it  seems  to  me,  is  the  action 
in  solutions  when  they  yield  ice  or  vapour  indicating^the  presence  of  water. 


106  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

we  shall  form  an  idea  of  a  solution  as  an  unstable,  dissociating  fluid 
state  of  equilibrium  between  water  and  the  substance  dissolved.  More- 
over, it  should  be  remarked  that,  judging  by  experiment,  many  substances- 
give  with  water  not  one  but  diverse  compounds,67  which  is  seen  in  the- 
capacity  of  one  substance  to  form  with  water  many  various  crystallo- 
hydrates,  or  compounds  with  water  of  crystallisation,  showing  diverse 
and  independent  properties.  From  these  considerations,  solutions69* 
may  be  regarded  as  fluid,  unstably  definite  chemical  compounds  in  a 
state  of  dissociation.™ 

67  Certain  substances  are  capable  of  forming  together  only  one  compound,  others- 
several,  -and  these  of  the  most  varied  degrees  of  stability.     The  compounds  of  water  are 
instances  of  this  kind.    In  solutions  the  existence  of  several  different  definite  compounds. 
insist  be  acknowledged,  but  many  of  these  have  not  yet  been  obtained  in  a  free  state,  and 
it  may  be  that  they  cannot  be  obtained  in  any  other  but  a  liquid  form— that  is,  dissolved  ; 
just  as  there  are  many  undoubted  definite  compounds  which  only  exist  in  one  physical 
state.    Among  the  hydrates  such  instances  occur.     The  compound  CO2  +  8H2O  (see  note 
81),  according  to  Wroblewski,  only  occurs  in  a  solid  form.     Hydrates  like  H^S  +  12H2O 
(De  Forcrand  and  Villard),  HBr  +  H2O  (Roozeboom),  can  only  be  accepted  on  the  basis. 
of  a  decrease  of  tension,  but  present  themselves  as  very  transieht  substances,  incapable 
of  existing  in  a  stable  free  state.    Even  sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4,  itself,  which  undoubtedly 
is  a  definite  compound,  fumes  in  a  liquid  form,  giving  off  the  anhydride,  SOj — that  is,  it 
exhibits  a  very  unstable  equilibrium.     The  crystallo-hydrates  of  chlorine,  C12  +  8H2O, 
of  hydrogen  sulphide,  H2S  +  12H2O  (it  is  fonned  at  0°,  and  is  completely  decomposed  at 
•f  1°,  as  then  1  vol.  of  water  only  dissolves  4  vole,  of  hydrogen  sulphide,  while  at  0'1°  it 
dissolves  about  100  vols.),  and  of  many  other  gases,  are  instances  of  hydrates  which  are 
very  unstable. 

68  Of  such  a  kind  are   also  other   indefinite  chemical  compounds ;    for  example, 
metallic  alloys.     These  are  solid  substances  or  solidified  solutions  of  metals.    They  also- 
contain  definite  compounds,  and  may  contain  an  excess  of  one  of  the  metals.     According" 
to  the  experiments  of  Laurie  (1888),  the  alloys  of  zinc  with  copper  in  respect  to  the  elec- 
tromotive force  in  galvanic  batteries  behave  just  like  zinc  if  the  proportion  of  copper  in 
the  alloy  does  not  exceed  a  certain  percentage— that  is,  until  a  definite  compound  is 
attained — for  in  that  case  particles  of  free  zinc  are  present ;  but  if  a  copper  surface  be 
taken,  and  it  be  covered  by  only  one-thousandth  part  of  its  area  of  zinc,  then  only  the 
zinc  will  act  in  a  galvanic  battery. 

69  According  to  the  above  supposition,  the  condition  of  solutions  in  the  sense  of  the 
kinetic    hypothesis  of  matter  (that  is,  on  the  supposition  of  an    internal    motion   of 
molecules  and  atoms)  may  be  represented  in  the  following  fonn : — In  a  homogeneous, 
liquid — for  instance,  water — the  molecules  occur  in  a  certain  state  of,  although  mobile, 
still  stable,  equilibrium.   When  a  substance  A  dissolves  in  water,  its  molecules  form  with 
several  molecules  of  water,  systems  .4nH2O,  which  are  so  unstable  that  when  surrounded 
by  molecules  of  water  they  decompose  and  re-form,  so  that  A  passes  from  one  mass  of 
molecules  of  water  to  another,  and  the  molecules  of  water  which  were  at  this  moment  in 
harmonious  motion  with  A   in  the  form  of  the   system  AnU^O,  in   the  next  instant 
may  have  already  succeeded  in  getting  free.    The  addition  of  water  or  of  molecules  of  A 
may  either  only  alter  the  number  of  free  molecules,  which  in  their  turn  enter  into  systems 
ylwH2O,  or  they  may  introduce  conditions  for  the  possibility  of  building  up  new  systems, 
AiriH.%0,  where  m  is  either  greater  or  less  than  n.    If  in  the  solution  the  relation  of  the 
molecules  be  the  same  as  in  the  sy&tem  AmJl^O,  then  the  addition  of  fresh  molecules  of 
water  or  of  A  would  be  followed  by  the  formation  of  new  molecules  AnH^O.    The  relative 
quantity,  stability,  and  composition  of  these  systems  or  definite  compounds  will  vary  in 
one  or  another  solution.    I  adopted  this  view  of  solutions  (1«87,  Pickering  subsequently 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  107 

In  regarding  solutions  from  this  point  of  view  they  come  under  the 
head  of  those  definite  compounds  with  which  chemistry  is  mainly  con- 
cerned.70 

We  saw  above  that  copper  sulphate  loses  four-fifths  of  its  water  at 
100°  and  the  remainder  at  240.°  This  means  that  there  are  two  defi- 

jmt  forward  a  similar  view)  after  a  most  intimate  study  of  the  variation  of  their  specific 
jgravities,  to  which  my  book,  cited  in  note  19,  is  devoted.  Definite  compounds,  J.n1H2O 
and  4?»1H2O,  existing  in  a  free— for  instance,  solid— form,  may  in  certain  cases  be  held 
in  solutions  in  a  dissociated  state  (although  but  partially) ;  they  are  similar  in  their 
structure  to  those  definite  substances  which  are  formed  in  solutions,  but  it  is  not  necessary 
to  assume  that  such  systems  as  Na-jSC^  +  lOHoO,  or  Na2SO4  +  7H2O,  or  Na2S04,  are  con- 
tained in  solutions.  The  comparatively  more  stable  systems  ^jELjO  which  exist  in  a 
free  state  and  change  their  physical  state  must  present,  although  within  certain  limits 
of  temperature,  an  entirely  harmonious  kind  of  motion  of  A  with  niH.%0  ;  the  property 
also  and  state  of  systems  .4«H2O  and  AmtL^Q,  occurring  in  solutions,  is  that  they  are 
in  a  liquid  form,  although  partially  dissociated.  Substances  Alt  which  give  solutions, 
are  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  they  can  fonn  such  unstable  systems  -4nH2O,  but 
besides  them  they  can  give  other  much  more  stable  systems  ^Ln1H2O.  Thus  ethylene, 
jC2H4,  in  dissolving  in  water,  probably  forms  a  system  C2H4wHoO,  which  easily  splits  up 
into  C2H4  and  H.2O,  but  it  also  gives  the  system  of  alcohol,  C2H4,H2O  or  C2H6O,  which 
is  comparatively  stable.  Thus  oxygen  can  dissolve  in  water,  and  it  can  combine  with  it, 
forming  peroxide  of  hydrogen.  Turpentine,  C10H16,  does  not  dissolve  in  water,  but  it 
combines  with  it  as  a  comparatively  stable  hydrate.  In  other  words,  the  chemical  struc- 
ture of  hydrates,  or  of  the  definite  compounds  which  are  contained  in  solutions,  is  dis- 
tinguished not  only  by  its  original  peculiarities  but  also  by  a  diversity  of  stability.  A 
teimilar  structure  to  hydrates  must  be  acknowledged  in  crystallo-hydrates.  On  melting 
*hey  give  actual  (real)  solutions.  As  substances  which  give  crystallo-hydrates,  like  salts, 
are  capable  of  forming  a  number  of  diverse  hydrates,  and  as  the  greater  the  number  of 
molecules  of  water  (n)  they  (AriH2O)  contain,  the  lower  is  the  temperature  of  their 
formation,  and  as  the  more  easily  they  decompose  the  more  water  they  hold,  therefore, 
(in  the  first  place,  the  isolation  of  hydrates  holding  much  water  existing  in  aqueous  solu- 
tions may  be  soonest  looked  for  at  low  temperatures  (although,  perhaps,  in  certain  cases 
%hey  cannot  exist  in  the  solid  state) ;  and,  secondly,  the  stability  also  of  such  higher 
[hydrates  will  be  at  a  minimum  under  the  ordinary  circumstances  of  the  occurrence  of 
(liquid  water.  Hence  a  further  more  detailed  investigation  of  cryohydrates  may  help  to 
the  elucidation  of  the  nature  of  solution's.  But  it  may  be  foreseen  that  certain  cryo- 
jhydrates  will,  like  metallic  alloys,  present  solidified  mixtures  of  ice  with  the  salts  them- 
Selves  and  their  more  stable  hydrates,  and  others  will  be  definite  compounds. 

70  The  above  representation  of  solutions,  &c.,  considering  them  as  a  particular  state 
of  definite  compounds,  excludes  the  independent  existence  of  indefinite  compounds ; 
by  this  means  that  unity  of  chemical  conception  i  -,  obtained  which  cannot  be  arrived 
at  by  admitting  the  physico-mechanical  conception  of  indefinite  compounds.  The 
gradual  transition  from  typical  solutions  (as  of  gases  in  water,  and  of  weak  saline 
solutions)  to  sulphuric  acid,  and  from  it  and  its  definite,  but  yet  unstable  and  liquid, 
fcompounds,  to  clearly  defined  compounds,  such  as  salts  and  their  crystallo-hydrates, 
is  so  imperceptible,  that  in  denying  that  solutions  pertain  to  the  number  of  definite 
but  dissociating  compounds,  we  risk  denying  the  definiteness  of  the  atomic  com* 
[position  of  such  substances  as  sulphuric  acid  or  of  molten  crystallo-hydrates.  I 
(repeat,  however,  that  for  the  present  the  theory  of  solutions  cannot  be  considered  as 
firmly  established.  The  above  opinion  about  them  is  nothing  more  than  a  hypothesis 
ivhich  endeavours  to  satisfy  those  comparatively  limited  data  which  we  have  for  the 
jpresent  about  solutions,  and  of  those  cases  of  their  transition  into  definite  compounds. 
By  submitting  solutions  to  the  Daltonic  conception  of  atomism,  I  hope  that  we  may  not 


108  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

trite  compounds  of  water  with  the  anhydrous  salt.  Washing  soda  or  car- 
bonate  of  sodium,  Na2C03  separates  out  as  crystals,  Na2C03,10H20, 
containing  62 '9  p.c.  of  water  by  weight,  from  its  solutions  at  the 
ordinary  temperature.  When  a  solution  of  the  same  salt  deposits 
crystals  at  a  low  temperature,  about  — 20°,  then  these  crystals  contain 
71-8  parts  of  water  per  28-2  parts  of  anhydrous  salt.  Further,  the 
•crystals  are  obtained  together  with  ice,  and  are  left  behind  when  it 
melts.  If  ordinary  soda,  with  62-9  p.c.  of  water,  be  cautiously  melted 
in  its  own  water  of  crystallisation,  there  remains  a  salt,  in  a  solid  state, 
•containing  only  14'5  p.c.>of  water,  and  a  liquid  is  obtained  which  con- 
tains the  solution' of  a  salt  which  separates  out  crystals  at  34°,  which 
contain  46  p.c.  of  water  and  do  not  effloresce  in  air.  Lastly,  if  a  super- 
saturated solution  of  soda  be  prepared,  then  at  temperatures  below  8° 
it  deposits  crystals  containing  54-3  p.c.  of  water.  Thus  as  many  as 
five  compounds  of  anhydrous  soda  with  water  are  known  ;  and  they  are 
•dissimilar  in  their  properties  and  crystalline  form,  and  even  in  their 
solubility.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  greatest  amount  of  water  in 
the  crystals  corresponds  with  a  temperature  of  —  20°,  and  the  smallest 
to  the  highest  temperature.  There  is  apparently  no  relation  between 
the  above  quantities  of  water  and  the  salts,  but  this  is  only  because  in 
each  case  the  amount  of  water  and  anhydrous  salt  was  given  in  per- 
centages ;  but  if  it  be  calculated  for  one  and  the  same  quantity  of 
anhydrous  salt,  or  of  water,  a  great  regularity  will  be  observed  in  the 
amounts  of  the  component  parts  in  all  these  compounds.  It  appears 
that  for  106  parts  of  anhydrous  salt  in  the  crystals  separated  out  at 
—  20°  there  are  270  parts  of  water  ;  in  the  crystals  obtained  at  15°  there 
are  180  parts  of  water  ;  in  the  crystals  obtained  from  a  supersaturated 
solution  126  parts,  in  the  crystals  which  separate  out  at  34°,  90  parts, 
and  the  crystals  with  the  smallest  amount  of  water,  18  parts.  On 
comparing  these  quantities  of  water  it  may  easily  be  seen  that  they  are 
in  simple  proportion  to  each  other,  for  they  are  all  divisible  by  18,  and 
are  in  the  ratio  15:10:7:5:1.  Naturally,  direct  experiment, 
however  carefully  it  be  conducted,  is  hampered  with  errors,  but  taking 
these  unavoidable  experimental  errors  into  consideration,  it  will  be 
seen  that  for  a  given  quantity  of  an  anhydrous  substance  there  occur, 
in  several  of  its  compounds  with  water,  quantities  of  water  which  are 
in  very  simple  multiple  proportion.  This  is  observed  in,  and  is  common 

only  attain  to  a  general  harmonious  chemical  doctrine,  but  also  that  new  motives  for 
investigation  and  research  will  appear  in  the  problem  of  solutions,  which  must  either 
confirm  the  proposed  theory  or  replace  it  by  another  fuller  and  truer  one  ;  and  I  for  my 
part  cannot  consider  this  to  be  the  case  with  any  of  the  other  present  doctrines  of  solu- 
tions (note  49). 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  109 

to,  all  definite  chemical  compounds  This  rule  is  called  the  law  of 
multiple  proportions.  It  was  discovered  by  Dalton,  and  will  be  evolved 
in  further  detail  subsequently  in  this  work.  For  the  present  we 
•will  only  state  that  the  law  of  definite  composition  enables  the  com- 
position of  substances  to  be  expressed  by  formulae,  and  the  law  of 
multiple  proportions  permits  the  application  of  whole  numbers  as  co- 
efficients of  the  symbols  of  the  elements  in  these  formulae.  Thus  the 
formula  Na2C03,  10H2O  shows  directly  that  in  this  crystallo-hydrate 
there  are  180  parts  of  water  to  106  parts  by  weight  of  the  anhydrous 
salt,  because  the  formula  of  soda,  Na2CO3,  directly  answers  to  a  weight 
of  106,  and  the  formula  of  water  to  18  parts,  by  weight,  which  are  here 
taken  10  times. 

In  the  above  examples  of  the  combinations  of  water,  we  saw  the 
gradually  increasing  intensity  of  the  bond  between  water  and  a 
substance  with  which  it  forms  a  homogeneous  compound.  There  is  a 
series  of  such  compounds  with  water,  in  which  the  water  is  held  with 
very  great  force,  and  is  only  given  up  at  a  very  high  temperature,  and1, 
sometimes  cannot  be  separated  by  any  degree  of  heat  without  the  entire 
decomposition  of  the  substance.  In  these  compounds  there  is  generally 
no  outward  sign  whatever  of  their  containing  water.  A  perfectly  new- 
substance  is  formed  from  an  anhydrous  substance  and  water,  in  which 
sometimes  the  properties  of  neither  one  nor  the  other  substance  are 
observable.  In  the  majority  of  cases,  a  considerable  amount  of  heat  is 
evolved  in  the  formation  of  such  compounds  with  water.  Sometimes 
the  heat  evolved  is  so  intense  that  a  red  heat  is  produced  and  light 
is  emitted.  It  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at,  after  this,  that  stable 
compounds  are  formed  by  such  a  combination.  Their  decomposition- 
requires  great  heat ;  a  large  amount  of  work  is  necessary  to  separate 
them  into  their  component  parts.  All  such  compounds  are  definite, 
and,  generally,  completely  and  clearly  definite.  The  number  of  such 
definite  compounds  with  water  or  hydrates,  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the- 
word,  is  generally  inconsiderable  for  each  anhydrous  substance  ,  in  the 
greater  number  of  cases,  there  is  formed  only  one  such  combination  of  a 
substance  with  water,  one  hydrate,  having  so  great  a  stability.  The 
water  contained  in  these  compounds  is  often  called  water  oj  constitution 
— i.e.  water  which  enters  into  the  structure  or  composition  of  the  given 
substance.  By  this  it  is  desired  to  express,  that  in  other  cases  the 
molecules  of  water  are,  as  it  were,  separate  from  the  molecules  of  that 
substance  with  which  it  is  combined.  It  is  supposed  that  in  the  forma- 
tion of  hydrates  this  water,  even  in  the  smallest  particles,  forms  one 
complete  whole  with  the  anhydrous  substance.  Many  examples  of 
the  formation  of  such  hydrates  might  be  cited.  The  most  familiar 


110  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

example  in  practice  is  the  hydrate  of  lime,  or  so-called  *  slaked '  lime. 
Lime  is  prepared  by  burning  limestone,  by  which  the  carbonic  anhydride 
is  expelled  from  it,  and  there  remains  a  white  stony  mass,  which  is 
dense,  compact,  and  rather  tenacious.  Lime  is  usually  sold  in  this 
form,  and'  bears  the  name  of  '  quick '  or  ( unslaked '  lime.  If  water  be 
poured  over  such  lime,  a  great  rise  in  temperature  is  remarked  either 
directly,  or  after  a  certain  time.  The  whole  mass  becomes  hot,  part  of 
the  water  is  evaporated,  the  stony  mass  in  absorbing  water  crumbles  into 
powder,  and  if  the  water  be  taken  in  sufficient  quantity  and  the  lime 
be  pure  and  well  burnt,  not  a  particle  of  the  original  stony  mass  is  left — 
it  all  crumbles  into  powder.  If  the  water  fc>e  in  excess,  then  naturally 
a  portion  of  it  remains  and  forms  a  solution.  This  process  is  called 
*  slaking  '  lime.  Slaked  lime  is  used  in  practice  in  intermixture  with 
sand  as  'mortar.  Slaked  lime  is  a  definite  hydrate  of  lime.  If  it  is 
dried  at  100°  it  retains  24'3  p.c.  of  water.  This  water  can  only  be 
expelled  at  a  temperatnre  above  400°,  and  then  quicklime  is  re-obtained. 
The  heat  evolved  in  the  combination  of  lime  with  water  is  so  intense 
that  it  can  set  fire  to  wood,  sulphur,  gunpowder,  <fec.  Even  on  mixing 
vlime  with  ice  the  temperature  rises  to  100°.  If  lime  be  moistened  with  a 
small  quantity  of  water  in  the  dark,  a  luminous  effect  is  observed.  But, 
nevertheless,  water  may  still  be  separated  from  this  hydrate.71  If 
phosphorus  be  burnt  in  dry  air,  a  white  substance  called  'phosphoric 
.anhydride '  is  obtained.  It  combines  with  water  with -such  energy,  that 
the  experiment  must  be  conducted  with  great  caution.  A  red  heat  is 
produced  in  the  formation  of  the  compound,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
separate  the  water  from  the  resultant  hydrate  at  any  temperature. 
The  hydrate  formed  by  phosphoric  anhydride  is  a  substance  which  is 
totally  undecomposable  into  its  original  component  parts  by  the  action 
of  heat.  Almost  as  energetic  a  combination  occurs  when  sulphuric 
anhydride,  S03,  combines  with  water,  forming  its  hydrate,  sulphuric 
acid,  H2S04.  In  both  cases  definite  compounds  are  produced,  but 
the  latter  substance,  as  a  liquid,  and  capable  of  decomposition  by 
heat,  forms  an  evident  link  with  solutions.  If  80  parts  of  sulphuric 
anhydride  retain  18  parts  of  water,  this  water  cannot  be  separated  from 
the  anhydride,  even  at  a  temperature  of  300°.  It  is  only  by  the 
addition  of  phosphoric  anhydride,  or  by  a  series  of  chemical  transforma- 
tions, that  this  water  can  be  separated  from  its  compound  with 
sulphuric  anhydride.  Oil  of  vitriol,  or  sulphuric  acid,  is  such  a  com- 

71  In  combining  with  water  one  part  by  weight  of  lime  evolves  245  units  of  heat.  A 
liigh  temperature  is  obtained,  because  the  specific  heat  of  the  resulting  product  is  small; 
"Sodium  oxide,  Naj'G,  in  reacting  on  water,  H2O,  and  forming  caustic  soda  (sodium 
hydroxide),  NaHO,  evolves  552  units  of  heat  for  each  part  by  weight  of  sodium  oxide. 


ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  111 

pound.  If  a  larger  proportion  of  water  be  taken,  it  will  combine 
with  the  H2SO4  ;  for  instance,  if  36  parts  of  water  per  80  parts  of 
sulphuric  anhydride  be  taken,  a  compound  is  formed  which  crystallises 
in  the  cold,  and  melts  at  -f  8°,  whilst  oil  of  vitriol  does  not  solidify  even 
at— 30°.  If  still  more  water  be  taken,  the  oil  of  vitriol  will  dissolve  in 
the  remaining  quantity  of  water.  An  evolution  of  heat  takes  place, 
not  only  on  the  addition  of  ttye  water  of  constitution,  but  in  a  less 
degree  on  further  additions  of  water.72  And  therefore  there  is  no 
distinct  boundary,  but  only  a  gradual  transition,  between .  those 
chemical  phenomena  which  are  expressed  in  the  formation  of  solutions 
and  those  which  take  place  in  the  formation  of  the  most  stable 
hydrates.73 

72  The  diagram  given  in  note  28  shows  the  evolution  of  heat  on  the  mixture  of 
sulphuric  acid,  or  mono-hydrate  (H2SO4,  i.e.  SO3  +  H2O),  with  different  quantities  of  water 
per  100  vols.  of  the  resultant  solution.    Every  98  grama  of  sulphuric  acid  (H2S04)  evolve, 
on  the  addition  of  18  gftms  of  water,  6,879  units  of  heat ;  with  twice  or  three  times  the 
quantity  of  water  9,418  and  11,187  units  of  heat,  and  with  an  infinitely  large,  quantity  of 
water  17,860  units  of  heat,  according  to  the  determinations  of  Thomsen.    He  also  showed 
that  when  H2SO4  is  formed  from  SO3  (  =  80)  and  H2O  (  =  18),  21,808  units  of  heat  are 
evolved  per  98  parts-  by  weight  of  the  resultant  sulphuric  acid. 

73  Thus,  for  different  hydrates  the  stability  with  which  they  hold  water  is  very  dis- 
similar.   Certain  hydrates  hold  water  very  loosely,  and  in  combining  with  it  evolve  little 
heat.    From  other  hydrates  the  water  cannot  be  separated  by  any  degree  of  heat,  even 
if  they  are  formed  from  anhydrides  (i.e.  anhydrous  substances)  and  water  with  little 
evolution  of  heat ;  for  instance,  acetic  anhydride  in  combining  with  water  evolves  an 
inconsiderable  amount  oi  heat,  but  the  water  cannot  then  be  expelled  from  it.    If  the 
hydrate  (acetic  acid)  formed  by  this  combination  be  strongly  heated  it  either  volatilises 
•without  change,  or  decomposes  into  new  substances,  but  it  does  not  again  yield  the  origi- 
nal substances — i.e.,  the  anhydride  and  water,  at  least  in  a  liquid  form.    Here  is  an 
instance  which  gives  the  reason  foi  calling  the  water  entering  into  the  composition  of  the 
hydrate,  water  of  constitution.    Such,  for 'example,  is  the  water  entering  into  the  so- 
called  caustic  soda  or  sodium  hydroxide  (see  note  71).    But  there  are  hydrates  which 
easily  part  with  their  water ;  yet  this  water  cannot  be  considered  as  water  of  crystallisa- 
tion, not  only  because  sometimes  such  hydrates  have  no  crystalline  form,  but  also  because, 
in  perfectly  analogous  cases,  very  stable  hydrates  are  formed,  which  are  capable  of  parti- 
cular  kinds  of  chemical  reactions,  as  we  shall  subsequently  learn.    Such,  for  example,  is 
the  unstable  hydrated  oxide  of  copper,  which  is  not  formed  from  water  and  oxide  of 
copper,  but  which  is  obtained  just  like  far  more  stable  hydrates,  for  example,  the  hydrated 
oxide  of  barium  BaH2O2  equal  to  BaO  +  H2O,  by  the  double  decomposition  of  the  solution 
of  salts  with  alkalies.    In  a  word,  there  is  no  distinct  boundary  either  between  the  water 
of  hydrates  and  of  crystallisation,  or  between  solution  and  hydration. 

It  must  be  observed  that  in  separating  from  an  aqueous  solution,  many  subsjtancea, 
without  having  a  crystalline  form,  hold  water  in  the  same  unstable  state  as  in  crystals ; 
only  this  water  cannot  be  termed  'water  of  crystallisation '  if  the  substance  which 
separates  out  has  no  crystalline  form.  The  hydrates  of  alumina  and  silica  are  examples 
of  such  unstable  hydrates.  If  these  substances  are  separated  from  an  aqueous  solution 
by  a  chemical  process,  then  they  always  contain  water.  The  formation  of  a  new  chemical 
compound  containing  water  is  here  particularly  evident,  for  alumina  and  silica  in  an 
Anhydrous  state  have  chemical  properties  differing  from  those  they  show  when  combined 
with  water,  and  do  not  combine  directly  with  it.  The  entire  series  of  colloids  on  separ» 
ating  from  water  form  similar  compounds  with  it,  which  have  the  aspect  of  solid  gelatinous 


112  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

We  have  thus  considered  many  aspects  and  degrees  of  combination 
of  various  substances  with  water,  or  instances  of  the  compounds  of 
water,  when  it  and  other  substances  form  new  homogeneous  substances, 
which  in  this  case  will  evidently  be  complex — i.e.  made  up  of  different 
substances— and  although  they  are  homogeneous,  yet  it  must  be 
admitted  that  in  them  there  exist  those  component  parts  which  entered 
into  their  composition,  inasmuch  as  these  parts  may  be  re-obtained  from 
them.  It  must  not  be  imagined  that  water  really  exists  in  hydrate  of 
lime,  any  more  than  that  ice  or  steam  exists  in  water.  When  vre  say 
that  water  occurs  in  the  composition  of  a  certain  hydrate,  we  only  wish 
to  point  out  that  there  are  chemical  transformations  in  which  it  is 
possible  to  obtain  that  hydrate  by  means  of  water,  and  other  transfor- 
mations in  which  this  water  may  be  separated  out  from  the  hydrate. 
This  is  ah  simply  expressed  by  the  words,  that  water  enters  into  the 
composition  of  this  hydrate.  If  a  hydrate  be  formed  by  feeble  bonds, 
and  be  decomposed  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  be  a  liquid, 
then  the  water  appears  as  one  of  the  products  of  dissociation,  and 
this  gives  an  idea  of  what  solutions  are,  and  forms  the  fundamental 
distinction  between  them  and  other  hydrates  in  which  the  water  is 
combined  with  greater  stability 

substances.  Water  is  held  in  a  considerable  quantity  in  solidified  glue  or  boiled  albumin. 
It  cannot  be  expelled  from  them  by  pressure  ;  hence,  in  this  case  there  has  ensued  some 
kind  of  combination  of  the  substance  with  water.  ThU  water,  however,  is  easily  separated 
on  drying ;  but  not  the  whole  of  it,  a  portion  being  retained,  and  this  portion  is  considered 
to  belong  to  the  hydrate,  although  in  this  case  it  is  very  difficult,  if  not  impostible,  to 
obtain  definite  compounds.  The  absence  of  any  distinct  boundary  lines  between  solu- 
tions, crystallo-hydrates,  and  ordinary  hydrates  above  referred  to,  is  very  clearly  seen  in, 
such  examples. 


113 


CHAPTER  II 

THE   COMPOSITION   OP   WATER,    HYDROGEN 

THE  question  now  arises,  Is  not  water  itself  a  compound  substance? 
Cannot  it  be  formed  by  the  mutual  combination  of  some  component 
parts  1  Cannot  it  be  broken  up  into  its  component  parts  ?  There  can- 
not be  the  least  doubt  that  if  it  does  split  up,  and  if  it  is  a  compound, 
then  it  is  a  definite  one  characterised  by  the  stability  of  the  union 
between  those  component  parts  from  which  it  is  formed.  From  the 
fact  alone  that  water  passes  into  all  physical  states  as  a  homogeneous 
whole,  without  in  the  least  varying  chemically  in  its  properties  and 
without  splitting  up  into  its  component  parts  (neither  solutions  nor 
many  hydrates  can  be  distilled — they  are  split  up),  we  must  conclude, 
from  this  fact  alone,  that  if  water  is  a  compound  then  it  is  a  stable  and 
definite  chemical  compound  capable  of  entering  into  many  other  com- 
binations. Like  many  other  great  discoveries  in  the  province  of 
chemistry,  it  is  to  the  end  of  the  last  century  that  we  are  indebted 
for  the  important  discovery  that  water  is  not  a  simple  substance,  that 
it  is  composed  of  two  substances  like  a  number  of  other  compound 
substances.  This  was  proved  by  two  of  the  methods  by  which  the  com- 
pound nature  of  bodies  may  be  directly  determined  ,  by  analysis 
and  by  synthesis — that  is,  by  a  method  of  the  decomposition  of  water 
into,  and  of  the  formation  of  water  from,  its  component  parts.  In  1781 
Cavendish  first  obtained  water  by  burning  hydrogen  in  oxygen,  both  of 
which  gases  were  already  known  to  him.  He  concluded  from  this  that 
water  was  composed  of  two  substances.  But  he  did  not  make  more 
accurate  experiments,  which  would  have  shown  the  relative  quantities 
of  the  component  parts  in  water,  and  which  would  have  determined  its 
complex  nature  with  certainty.  Although  his  experiments  were  the 
first,  and  although  the  conclusion  he  drew  from  them  was  true,  yet  such 
novel  ideas  as  the  complex  nature  of  water  are  not  easily  recognised  so 
long  as  there  is  no  series  of  researches  which  entirely  and  indubitably 
proves  the  truth  of  such  a  conclusion.  The  fundamental  experiments 
which  proved  the  complexity  of  water  by  the  method  of  synthesis,  and 


114  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

of  its  formation  from  other  substances,  were  made  in  1789  by  Monge, 
Lavoisier,  Fourcroy,  and  Vauquelin.      They  obtained  four  ounces  of 
water  by  burning  hydrogen,  and  found  that  water  consists  of  15'  parts 
of  hydrogen  and  gp  parts  of  oxygen.      It  was  also  proved  that  the 
weight  of  water  formed  was  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the 
component  parts  entering  into  its  composition  ;  consequently,  water  con- 
tains all  the  matter  entering  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen.     The  com- 
plexity of  water  was  proved  in  this  manner  by  a  method  of  synthesis. 
But  we  will  turn  to  its  analysis— i.e.  to  its  decomposition  into  its  com- 
ponent parts.      The  analysis  may  be  more  or  less  complete.     Either 
both   component  parts  may  be  obtained  in  a  separate  state,  or  else 
only  one  is  separated  and  the  other  is  converted  into  a  new  compound 
in  which  its  amount  may  be  determined  by  weighing.     This  will  be  a 
reaction   of   substitution,    such   as  is  often   taken   advantage  of  for 
analysis.     The  first  analysis  of  water  was  thus  conducted  in  1784  by 
Lavoisier  and  Meusnier.     The  apparatus  they  arranged  consisted  of  a 
glass  retort  containing  water  previously   purified,  and  of  which  the 
weight  had  been  determined.     The  neck  of  the  retort  was  inserted  into 
a  porcelain  tube,  placed  inside  an  oven,  and  heated  to  a  red  heat  by 
charcoal.      Iron 'filings,  which  decompose  water  at  a  red  heat,  were 
placed  inside  this  tube.     The  end  of  the  tube  was  connected  with  a 
worm,  for  condensing  any  water  which  might  pass  through  the  tube 
undecomposed.     This  condensed   water  was   collected   in   a   separate 
flask.     The  gas  formed  by  the  decomposition  was  collected  over  water 
in  a  bell  jar.     The  aqueous  vapour  in  passing  over  the  red-hot  iron  was 
decomposed,  and  a   gas  was  formed  from  it  whose   weight  could   be 
determined   from   its  volume,  its  density  being  known.     Besides  the 
water  which  passed  through  the  tube  unaltered,  a  certain  quantity  of 
.water  disappeared  in  the  experiment,  and  this  quantity,  in  the  experi- 
ments of  Lavoisier  and  Meusnier,  was  equal  to  the  weight  of  gas  which 
was  collected  in  the  bell  jar  plus  the  increase  in  weight  of  the  iron 
filings.     Hence   the  water   was  decomposed   into  a  gas,  which   was 
collected  in  the  bell  jar,  and  a  substance,  which  combined  with  the 
iron  ;  consequently,  it  is  composed  of  these  two  component  parts.     This 
was  the  first  analysis  of  water  ever  made  ;  but  here  only  one  (and  not 
both)  of  the  gaseous  component  parts  of  water  was  collected  separately. 
Both  the  component  parts  of  water  can,  however,  be  simultaneously 
obtained  in  a  free  state.   For  this  purpose  the  decomposition  is  brought 
about  by  a  galvanic  current  or  by  heat,  as  we  shall  learn  directly.1 

1  The  fnst  experiments  of  the  synthesis  and  decomposition  of  water  did  not  afford, 
however,  an  entirely  convincing  proof  that  water  was  composed  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen 
only.  Davy,  who  investigated  the  decomposition  of  water  by  the  galvanic  current, 


THE   COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN  115 

Water  is  a  bad  conductor  of  electricity — that  is,  pure  water  does 
not  transmit  a  feeble  current ;  but  if  any  salt  or  acid  be  dissolved  in 
it,  then  its  conductivity  increases,  and  on  the  passage  of  a  current 
through  acidified  water  it  is  decomposed  into  its  component  parts. 
Some  sulphuric  acid  is  generally  added  to  the  water.  By  immersing 
platinum  plates  (electrodes)  in  this  water  (platinum  is  chosen  because 
it  is  not  acted  on  by  acids,  whilst  many  other  metals  are  chemically 
acted  on  by  acids),  and  connecting  them  with  a  galvanic  battery,  it 
will  be  observed  that  bubbles  of  gas  appear  on  these  plates.  The  gas 
which  separates  is  called  detonating  gas?  because,  onjgnition,  it^very 
easily  explodes.3  What  takes  place  is  as  follows  : — First,  the  water, 
by  the  action  of  the  current,  is  decomposed  into  two  gases.  The 
mixture  of  these  gases  forms  detonating  gas.  When  detonating  gas  is 
brought  into  contact  with  an  incandescent  substance  — for  instance,  a 
lighted  taper  —the  gases  re-combine,  forming  water,  the  combination 
being  accompanied  by  a  great^  evolution  of  heat,  and  therefore  the 
vapour  of  the  water  formed  expands  considerably,  which  it  does  very 
rapidly,  and  as  a  consequence,  an  explosion  takes  place — that  is,  sound 
and  increase  of  pressure,  and  atmospheric  disturbance,  as  in  the  ex- 
plosion of  gunpowder. 

In  order  to  discover  what  gases  are  obtained  by  the  decomposition 
of  water,  the  gases  which  separate  at  each  electrode  must  be  collected 
separately.  For  this  purpose  a  V-shaped  tube  is  taken ;  one  of  its 
ends  is  open  and  the  other  fused  up.  A  platinum  wire,  terminating 
inside  the  tube  in  a  plate,  is  fused  into  the  closed  end  ;  the  closed  end 

thought  for  a  long  time  that,  besides  the  gases,  an  acid  and  alkali  were  also  obtained. 
He  was  only  convinced  of  the  fact  that  water  contains  nothing  but  hydrogen  and  oxygen 
by  a  long  series  of  researches,  which  showed  him  that  the  appearance  of  an  acid  and 
alkali  in  the  decomposition  of  water  proceeds  from  the  presence  of  impurities  (especially 
from  the  presence  of  ammonium  nitrate)  in  water.  A  final  comprehension  of  the  cora* 
position  of  water  is  obtained  from  the  accurate  determination  of  the  quantities  of  the 
component  parts  which  enter  into  its  composition.  It  will  be  seen  from  this  how  many 
data  are  necessary  for  proving  the  composition  of  water — that  is,  of  the  transformations 
of  which  it  is  capable.  What  has  been  said  of  water  refers  to  all  other  compounds ;  the 
investigation  of  each  one,  the  entire  proof  of  its  composition,  can  only  be  obtained  by  the 
accumulation  of  a  large  mass  of  data  referring  to  it. 

2  This  gas  is  collected  in  a  voltameter. 

3  In  order  to  observe  this  explosion  without  the  slightest  danger,  it  is  best  to  proceed 
in  the  following  manner.     Some  soapy  water  is  prepared,  so  that  it  easily  forms  soap 
bubbles,  and  it  is  poured  into  an  iron  trough.     In  this  water,  the  end  of  a  gas-conducting 
tube  is  immersed.     This  tube  is  connected  with  any  suitable  apparatus,  in  which  deto- 
nating gas  is  evolved.     Soap  bubbles,  full  of  this  gas,  are  then  formed.     If  the  apparatus 
in  which  the  gas  is  produced  be  then  removed  (otherwise  the  explosion  might  travel  into 
the  interior  of  the  apparatus),  and  a  lighted  taper  be  brought  to  the  soap  bubbles,  a  very 
sharp  explosion  takes  place.    The  bubbles  should  be  small  to  avoid  any  danger ;  ten, 
each  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  suffice  to  give  a  sharp  report,  like  a  pistol  shot. 


116  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

is  entirely  filled  with  water  4  acidified  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  another 
platinum  wire,  terminating  in  a  plate,  is  immersed  in  the  open  end. 
If  a  current  from  a  galvanic  battery  be  now  passed  through  the  wires 
an  evolution  of  gases  will  be  observed,  and  the  gas  which  is  obtained 
in  the  open  branch  passes  into  the  air,  while  that  in  the  closed  branch 
accumulates  above  the  water  As  this  gas  accumulates  it  displaces  the 
water,  which  continues  to  descend  in  the  closed  and  ascend  into  the 
open  branch  of  the  tubes.  When  the  water,  in  this  way,  reaches  the 
top  of  the  open  end,  the  passage  of  the  current  is  stopped,  and  the  gas 
which  was  evolved  from  one  of  the  electrodes  only  is  obtained  in  the 
apparatus.  By  this  means  it  is  easy  to  prove  that  a  particular  gas 
appears  at  each  electrode.  If  the  closed  end  be  connected  with  the 
negative  pole — i.e.  with  that  joined  to  the  zinc— then  the  gas  collected 
in  the  apparatus  is  capable  of  burning.  This  may  be  demonstrated  by 
the  following  experiment  : — The  bent  tube  is  taken  off  the  stand,  and 
its  open  end  stopped  up  with  the  thumb  and  inclined  in  such,  a  manner 
that  the  gas  passes  from  the  closed  to  the  open  end.  It  will  then  be 
found,  on  applying  a  lighted  lamp  or  taper,  that  the  gas  burns.  This 
combustible  gas  is  hydrogen.  If  the  same  experiment  be  carried  on 
with  a  current  passing  in  tne  opposite  direction — that  is,  if  the  closed 
end  be  joined  up  with  the  positive  pole  (i.e.  with  the  earHon,  copper, 
or  platinum),  then  the  gas  which  is  evolved  from  it  does  not  itself  burn, 
but  it  supports  combustion  very  vigorously,  so  that  a  smouldering  taper 
in  it  immediately  bursts  into  flame.  This  gas,  which  is  collected  at  the 
anode  or  positive  pole,  is  oxygen,  which  is  obtained,  as  we  saw  before 
(in  the  Introduction),  from  mercury  oxide  and  is  contained  in  air. 

Thus  in  the  decomposition  of  water  oxygen  appears  at  the  positive 
pole  and  hydrogen  at  the  negative  pole,4bis  so  that  detonating  gas  will  be 
a  mixture  of  both.  Hydrogen  burns  in  air  from  the  fact  that  in  doing 
so  it  re-forms  water,  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air.  Detonating  gas 

4  In  order  to  fill  the  tube  with  water,  it  is  turned  up,  so  that  the  closed  end  points 
downwards  and  the  open  end  upwards,  and  water  acidified  with  sulphuric  acid  is  poured 
into  it.  ' 

4  bU  Owing  to  the  gradual  but  steady  progress  made  during  the  last  twenty-five  years 
in  the  production  of  an  electric  current  from  the  dynamo  and  its  transmission  over  con- 
siderable distances,  the  electrolytic,  decomposition  of  many  compound  bodies  has  acquired 
great  importance,  and  the  use  of  the  electric  current  is  making  its  way  into  many  chemical 
manufactures.  Hence,  Prof.  D.  A.  Lachinoff's  proposal  to  obtain  hydrogen  and  oxygen 
(both  of  which  have  many  applications)  by  means  of  electrolysis  (either  of  a  10  to  15  per  cent, 
solution  of  caustic  soda  or  a  15  per  cent,  solution  of  sulphuric  acid)  may  find  a  practical 
application,  at  all  events  in  the  future.  In  general,  owing  to  their  simplicity,  electrolytic 
methods  have  a  great  future,  but  as  yet,  so  Jong  as  the  production  of  an  electric  current 
remains  so  costly,  their  application  is  limited.  And  for  this  reason,  although  certain  of 
these  methods  are  mentioned  in  this  work,  they  are  not  specially  considered,  the  more 
so  since  a  profitable  and  proper  use  of  the  electric  current  for  chemical  purposes  requires 
special  electro-technical  knowledge  which  beginners  cannot  be  assumed  to  have,  and 


THE   COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  HYDROGEN 


117 


For 


FIG.  18.— Decomposition  of  watci 
by  the  galvanic  current,  for 
determining  the  relation  b«» 
tween  the  volumes  of  hydrogen 
and  oxygen. 


explodes  from  the  fact  that  the  hydrogen  burns  in  the  oxygen  mixed 
with  it.  It  is  very  easy  to  measure  the  relative  quantities  of  one  and 
the  other  gas  which  are  evolved  in  the  decomposition  of  water 
this  purpose  a  funnel  is  taken,  whose  orifice 
is  closed  by  a  cork  through  which  two  platinum 
wires  pass.  These  wires  are  connected 
with  a  battery.  Acidified  water  is  poured 
into  the  funnel,  and  a  glass  cylinder  full  of 
water  is  placed  over  the  end  of  each  wire 
(fig.  18).  On  passing  a  current,  hydrogen  and 
oxygen  collect  in  these  cylinder^,  and  it  will 
easily  be  seen  that  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  are 
evolved  for  every  one  volume  of  oxygen.  This 
signifies  that,  in  decomposing,  water  gives  two 
volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen. 
Water  is  also  decomposed  into  its  com- 
ponent parts  \wjlhe  action  of  heat.  At  the 
melting  point  of  silver  (960°),  and  in  its 
presence,  water  is  decomposed  and  the  oxygen 
absorbed  by  the  molten  silver,  which  dis- 
solves it  so  long  as  it  is  liquid.  But  directly  the  silver  solidifies  the 
oxygen  is  expelled  from  it.  However,  this  experiment  is  riot  entirely 
convincing  ;  it  might  be  thought  that  in  this  case  the  decomposition  of 
the  water  did  not  proceed  from  the  action  of  heat,  but  from  the  action 
of  the  silver  on  water — that  silver  decomposes  water,  taking  up  the 
oxygen.  If  steam  be  passed  through  a  red-hot  tube,  whose  internal 
temperature  attains  1,000°,  then  a  portion  *  of  the  water  decomposes 
into  its  component  parts,  forming  detonating  gas.  But  on  passing 
into  the  cooler  portions  of  the  apparatus  this  detonating  gas  again  re- 
unites and  forms  water.  The  hydrogen  and  oxygen  obtained  combine 
together  at  a  lower  temperature.6  Apparently  the  problem — to  show 
the  decomposability  of  water  at  high  temperatures — is  unattainable.  -j> 

therefore,  an  exposition  of  the  principles  of  electrotechnology  as  applied  to  the  production 
of  chemical  transformations,  although  referred  to  in  places,  does  not  come  within  the 
scope  of  the  present  work. 

5  As  water  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  with  a  considerable 
evolution  of  heat,  and  as  it  can  also  be  decomposed,  this  reaction  is  a  reversible  one 
(see  Introduction),  and  consequently  at  a  high  temperature  the  decomposition  of -water 
cannot  be  complete — it  is  limited  by  the  opposite  reaction.  Strictly  speaking,  it  is 
•  not  known  how  much  water  is' decomposed  at  a  given  temperature,  although  many  efforts 
(Bunsen,  and  others)  have  been  made  in  various  directions  to  solve  this  question.  Not 
knowing  the  coefficient  of  expansion,  and  the  specific  heat  of  gases  at  such  high  tem- 
peratures, renders  all  calculations  (from  observations  of  the  pressure  on  explosion) 
.doubtful. 


118  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

It  was  considered  as  such  before  Henri  Sainte-Clairo  Deville  (in  the 
fifties)  introduced  the  conception  of  dissociation  into  chemistry,  as  of 
a  change  of  chemical  state  resembling  evaporation,  if  decomposition  be 
likened  to  boiling,  and  before  he  had  demonstrated  the  decomposability 
of  water  by  the  action  of  heat  in  an  experiment  which  will  presently  be 
described.  In  order  to  demonstrate  clearly  the  dissociation  of  water, 
or  its  decomposability  by  heat,  at  a  temperature  approaching  that  at 
which  it  is  formed,  it  was  necessary  to  separate  the  hydrogen  from  the 
oxygen  at  a  high  temperature,  without  allowing  the  mixture  to  cool. 
Deville  took  advantage  of  the  difference  between  the  densities  of 
hydrogen  and  oxygen. 

A  wide  porcelain  tube  P  (fig.  19)  is  placed  in  a  furnace,  which  can 
be  raised  to  a  high  temperature  (it  should  be  heated  with  small  pieces 


Flo.  19.— Decomposition  of  water  by  the  action  of  heat,  and  the  separation  of  the  hydrogen  formed  by 
"its  permeating  through  a  porous  tube. 

of  good  coke).     In  this  tube  there  is  inserted  a  second   tube  T,   of 
smaller  diameter,  made  of  unglazed  earthenware  and  therefore  porous. 

6  Grove,  in  1847,  observed  that  a  platinum  wire  fused  in  the  oxy-hydrogen  flame- 
that  is,  having  acquired  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  water — and  having  formed 
a  molten  drop  at  its  end  which  fell  into  water,  evolved  detonating  gas— that  is,  decom- 
posed water.  It  therefore  follows  that  water  already  decomposes  at  the  temperature  of 
its  formation.  At  that  time,  this  formed  a  scientific  paradox  ;  this  we  shall  unravel 
only  with  the  development  of  the  conceptions  of  dissociation,  introduced  into  science 
6y  Henri  Sainte-HatrTrTteville,  in  1857.  These  conceptions  .form  an  importantjepoch 
in  science,  and  their  development  is  one  of  the  problems  of  modern  chemistry.  The 
essence  of  the  matter  is  that,  at  high  temperatures,  water  exists  but  also  decomposes, 
just  as  a  volatile  liquid,  at  a  certain  temperature,  exists  both  as  a  liquid  and  as  a  vapour. 
Similarly  as  a  volatile  liquid  saturates  a  space,  attaining  its  maximum  tension,  so  also 
the  products  of  dissociation  have  their  maximum  tension,  and  once  that  is  attained 
decomposition  ceases,  just  as  evaporation  ceases.  Under  like  conditions,  if  the  vapour 
be  allowed  to  escape  (and  therefore  its  partial  pressure  be  diminished),  evaporation  re- 
commences, so  also  if  the  products  of  decomposition  be  removed,  decomposition  again 
continues.  These  simple  conceptions  of  dissociation  introduce  infinitely  varied  conse- 
quences into  the  mechanism  of  chemical  reactions,  and  therefore  we  shall  have  occasion 


THE   COMPOSITION   OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN  119 

The  ends  of  the  tube  are  luted  to  the  wide  tube,  and  two  tubes,  c  and 
C',  are  inserted  into  the  ends,  as  shown  in  the  drawing.  With  this 
arrangement  it  is  possible  for  a  gas  to  pass  into  the  annular  space  be- 
tween the  walls  of  the  two  tubes,  from  whence  it  can  be  collected. 
Steam  from  a  retort  or  flask  is  passed  through  the  tube  D,  into  the 
inner  porous  tube  T.  This  steam,  on  entering  the  red -hot  space  is  De- 
composed into  hydrogen  and  oxygen.  The  densities  of  these  gases  are 
very  different,  hydrogen  being  sixteen  times  lighter  than  oxygen. 
Light  gases,  as  we  saw  above,  penetrate  through  porous  surfaces  very 
much  more  rapidly  than  denser  gases,  and  therefore  the  hydrogen 
passes  through  the  pores  of  the  tube  into  the  annular  space  very  much 
more  rapidly  than  the  oxygen.  The  hydrogen  which  separates  out  into 
the  annular  space  can  only  be  collected  when  this  space  does  not 
contain  any  oxygen.  If  any  air  remains  in  this  space,  then  the  hydro- 
gen which  separates  out  will  combine  with. its  oxygen  and  form  water. 
For  this  reason  a  gas  incapable  of  supporting  combustion — for  instance, 
nitrogen  or  carbonic  anhydride — is  previously  passed  into  the  annular 
space.  Thus  the  carbonic  anhydride  is  passed  through  the  tube  c,  and 
the  hydrogen,  separated  from  the  steam,  is  collected  through  the  tube  o', 
and  will  be  partly  mixed  with  carbonic  anhydride.  A  certain  portion 
of  the  carbonic  anhydride  will  penetrate  through  the  pores  of  the  un- 
glazed  tube  into  the  interior  of  the  tube  T.  The  oxygen  will  remain 
in  this  tube,  and  the  volume  of  the  remaining  oxygen  will  be  half  that 
of  the  volume  of  hydrogen  which  separates  out  from  the  annular 
space.61'" 

The  decomposition  of  water   is   effected    much   more   easily   by  a       t 
method  of  substitution,  taking  advantage  of  the  affinity  pf  substances 
for  the  oxygen  or  the  hydrogen  of  water.     If  a  substance  be  added  to 

to  return  to  them  very  often.  We  may  add  that  Grove  also  concluded  that  water__wa8 
decomposed  at  a  white  heat,  froni  the  fact  that  he  obtained  detonating  gas  hy  passing  „ 

steam  through  a  tube  with  a  wire  heated  strongly  by  an  electric  current,  and  also  by 
passing  steam  over  molten  oxide  ofTead,  he  obtained,  on  the  one  hand,  litharge  ( =  oxide 
of  lead  and  oxygen),  and  on  the  other,  metallic  lead  formed  by  the  action  of  hydrogen. 

6  bis  part  Of  the  oxygen  will  also  penetrate  through  the  pores  of  the  tube  ;  but,  as  was 
said  before,  a  much  smaller  quantity  than  the  hydrogen,  and  as  the  density  of  oxygen  is 
sixteen  times  greater  than  that  of  hydrogen,  the  volume  of  oxygen  which  passes  through 
the  porous  walls  will  be  four  times  less  than  the  volume  of  hydrogen  (the  quantities  of 
gases  passing  through  porous  walls  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  roots  of  their 
densities).  The  oxygen  which  separates  out  into  the  annular  space  will  combine,  at  a  ^^L** 
certain  fall  of  temperature,  with  the  hydrogen ;  hut  as  each  volume  of  oxygen  only 
requires  tWovolume8""oJ  hydrogen,  whilst  at  least  four  volumes  of  hydrogen  will  pass 
through  the  porous  walls  for  every  volume  of  oxygen  that  passes,  therefore,  part  of  the 
hydrogen  will  remain  free,  and  can  be  collected  from  the  annular  space.  A  corresponding 
quantity  of  oxygen  remaining  from  the  decomposition  of  the  water  can  be  collected  from 
the  internal  tube. 


120  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

water,  which  takes  up  the  oxygen  and  replaces  the  hydrogen— then  we 
shall  obtain  the  latter  gas  from  the  water.  Thus  with  sodium,  water 
gives  hydrogen,  and  with  chlorine,  which  takes  up  the  hydrogen. 
oxygenjs^oitbained. 

Hydrogen  is  evolved .frQjQjKftter  bv  many  metals,  which  are  capable 

I     of  forming  oxides  in  air — that  is,  which  are  capable  ofjburnjiig  or  jgpm- 

bining_jwith_joxyjgen.     The,  capacity   of  metals   for   coinjiiuing  with 

j      oxJ£Sen>  and  therefore  for  decomposing  water,  or  for  the  evolution  of 

r^  hydrogen,  is  very  dissimilar.7     Among  metals,  potassium  and  sodhim 

exhibit  considerable  energy  in  this  respect.     The  first  occurs  in  potash, 

'  In  order  to  demonstrate  the  difference  of  the  affinity  of  oxygen  for  different 
elements,  it  is  enough  to  compare  the  amounts  of  heats  which  are  evolyed  in  their  combi- 
nation with  16  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen ;  in  the  case  of  sodium  (when  Na2O  is  formed, 
or  46  parts  of  Na  combine  with  16  parts  of  oxygen,  according  to  Beketoff)  100,000  calories  — |- 
(or  units  of  heat),  are  evolved,  for  hydrogen  (when  water,  H2O,  is  formed)  69,000  eatories,  -|- 
for  iron  (when  the  oxide  FeO   is  formed)  ,69,000,  and  if  the  oxide  Fe2O3  is  formed, 
64,000  calories,  for  zinc  (ZnO  is  formed)  86,000  calories,  for  lead  (when  PbO  is  formed) 
61,000  calories,  for  copper  (when  CuO  is  formed)  38,000  calories,  and  for  mercury  (HgO 
is  formed)  81,000  calories. 

These  figures  cannot  correspond  directly  with  the  magnitude  of  the  affinities,  for  the 
physical  and  mechanical  side  of  the  matter  is  very  different  in  the  different  cases. 
J^  Hydrogen  is  a  gas,  and,  in  combining  with  oxygen,  g^yqg  a  Ijoj^id ;  consequently  it  changes 
its  physical  stale,  and,  in  doing  jof  evolves  heat.  But  zinc  and  copper  are  solids,  and, 
in  combining  with  oxygen,  give  "solid  oxides.  'The  oxygen,  previously  a  gas,  now  passes 
into  a  solid  or  liquid  state,  and,  therefore,  also  must  have  given  up  its  store  of  heat  in 
forming  oxides.  As  we  shall  afterwards  see',  the  degree  of  contraction  (and  conse- 
quently of  mechanical  work)  was  different  in  the  different  cases,  and  therefore  the 
figures  expressing  the  heat  of  combination  cannot  directly  depend  on  the  affinities,  on 
the  loss  of  internal  energy  previously  in  the  elements.  Nevertheless,  the  figures  above 
cited  correspond,  in  a  certain  degree,  with  the  order  in  which  the  elements  stand  in 
respect  to  their  affinity  for  oxygen,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  mercury  oxide, 
which  evolves  the  least  heat  (among  the  above  examples),  is  the  least  stable  is  easily 
decomposed,  giving  up  its  oxygen ;  whilst^sodium,  the  formation  of  whoseoxide  ia  accom- 
panied  by  the  greatest  evolution  of  heat,  is  able  to  decompose  all  the  otEer~oxides,  taking 
up  their  oxygen.  In  order  to  generalise  the  connection  between  affinity  and  the  evblu- 
tion  and  the  absorption  of  heat,  which  is  evident  in  its  general  features,  and  was  firmly 
established  by  the  researches  of  Favre  and  Silberman  (aboutj.84p),  and  then  of  Thojnsea 
(in  Denmark)  and  Bertlu-lut  (in  France),  many  investigators,  especially  the  one  last 
mentioned,  established  the  law  of  maximum  work.  This  states  that  only  those  chemical 
reactions  take  place  of  their  own  accord  in  which  the  greatest  amount  of  chemical 
(latent,  potential)  energy  is  transformed  into  heat.  But,  in  the  first  place,  we  are  not 
able,  judging  from  what  has  been  said  above,  to  distinguish  that  heat  which  corresponds 
with  purely  chemical  action  from  the  sum  total  of  the  heat  observed  in  a  reaction  (in  the 
•calorimeter) ;  in  the  second  place,  there  are  evidently  endotherinal  reactions  which 
proceed  under  the  same  circumstances  as  exothermal  (carbon  burns  in  the  vapour  of 
sulphur  with  absorption  of  heat,  whilst  in  oxygen  it  evolves  heat) ;  and,  in  the  third 
place,  there  are  reversible  reactions,  which  when  taking  place  in  one  direction  evolve 
heat,  and  when  taking  place  in  the  opposite  direction  absorb  it;  and,  therefore,  the 
principle  of  maximum  work  in  its  elementary  form  is  not  supported  by  science.  But  the 
subject  continues  to  be  developed,  and  will  probably  lead  to  a  general  law,  such  as 
thermal  chemistry  does  not  at  present  possess. 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN  121 

the  second_inj3oda.  They  are  both  lighter  than  water,  soft,  and  easily 
change  in  air.  By  bringing  one  or  the  other  of  them  in  contact  with 
water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,8  a  quantity  of  hydrogen,  correspond- 
ing with  the  amount  of  the  metal  taken,  may  be  directly  obtained. 
One  gram  of  hydrogen,  occupying  a  volume  of  11*16  litres  at  0°  and 
760  mm.,  is  evolved  from  every  39  grams  of  potassium,  or  23  grams  of 
eodiuin.  The  phenomenon  may  be. observed  in  the  following  way  :  a 
solution  of  sodium  in  mercury — or  •  sodium  amalgam,'  as  it  is  generally 
called — is  poured  into  a  vessel  containing  water,  and  owing  to  its 
weight  sinks  to  the  bottom  ;  the  sodium  held  in  the  mercury  then  acts 
on  the  water  like  pure  sodium,  liberating  hydrogen.  The  mercury  does 
not  act  here,  and  the  same  amount  of  it  as  was  taken  for  dissolving  the 
sodium'  is  obtained  in  the  residue.  The  hydrogen  is  evolved  gradually 
in  the  form  of  bubbles,  which  pass  through  the  liquid. 

Beyond  the  hydrogen  evolved  and  a  solid  substance,  which  remains 
in  solution  (it  may  be  obtained  by  evaporating  the  resultant  solution) 
no  other  products  are  here  obtained.  Consequently,  from  the  two  sub- 
stances (water  and  sodium)  taken,  the  same  number  of  new  substances 
(hydrogen  and  the  substance  dissolved  in  water)  have  been  obtained, 
from  which  we  may  conclude  that  the  reaction  which  here  takes  place 
is  a  reaction  of  double  decomposition  or  of  substitution.  The  resultant 
solid  is  nothing  else  but  the  so-called  caustic  soda  (sodium  hy- 
droxide), which  is  made  up  of  sodium,  oxygen,  and  half  of  the  hydrogen 
contained  in  the  water.  Therefore,  the  substitution  took  place  between 
the  hydrogen  and  the  sodium,  namely  half  of  the  hydrogen  in  the  water 
was  replaced  by  the  sodium,  and  was  evolved  in  a  free  state.  Hence 
the  reaction  which  takes  place  here  may  be  expressed  by  the  equation 

8  If  a  piece  of  metallic  sodium  be  thrown  into  water,  it  floats  on  it  (owing  to  its  light-\ 
ness),  keeps  in  a  state  of  continual  motion   (owing  to  the  evolution  of  hydrogen  on  1 
all  sides),  and   immediately  decomposes  the  water,  evolving  hydrogen,  which  can  be  I 
lighted.     This  experiment  may,  however,  lead  to  an  explosion  should  the  sodium  stick  to  I       J 
the  walls  of  the  vessel,  and  begin  to  act  on  the  limited  mass  of  water  immediately  adjacent    f 
to  it  (probably  in  this  case  NaHO  forms  with  Na,  Na-jO,  which  acts  on  the  water,  evolving    \ 
much  heat  and  rapidly  forming  steam),  and  the  experiment  should  therefore  be  carried    ) 
on- with  caution.    The  decomposition  of  water  by  sodium  maybe  better  demonstrated>  X 
and  with  greater  safety,  in  the  following  manner.     Into  a  glass  cylinder  filled  with  mer- 
cury, and  immersed  in  a  mercury  bath,  water  is  first  introduced,  which  will,  owing  to  its 
lightness,  rise  to  the  top,  and  then  a  piece  of  sodium  wrapped  in  paper  is  introduced  with 
forceps"  into  the  cylinder.    The  metal  rises  through  the  mercury  to  the  surface  of  the 
water,  on  which  it  remains,  and  evolves  hydrogen,  which  collects  in  the  cylinder,  and 
may  be  tested  after  the  experiment  has  been  completed.     The  safest  method  of  making 
this  experiment  is,  however,  as  follows.   The  sodium  (cleaned  from  the  naphtha  in  which  I    , 
it  is  kept)  is  either  wrapped  in  fine  copper  gauze  and  held  by  forceps,  or  else  held  in  I  -r- 
forceps  at  the  end  of  which  a  small  copper  cage  is  attached,  and  is  then  held  undeJr  I 
water.    The  evolution  of  hydrogen  goes  ou  quietly,  and  it  mav  be  collected  in  a  bett  » 
jar  and  'then  lighted. 


122  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

H20  +  Na=NaHO-f  H  ;  the  meaning  of  this  is  clear  from  what  has 
already  been  said.9 

Sodium  and  potassium  act  on  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature. 
Other  heavier  metals  only  act  on  it  with  a  rise  of  temperature,  and 
then  not  so  rapidly  or  vigorously.  Thus  magnesium  and  calcium  only 
liberate  hydrogen  from  water  at  its  boiling  point,  and  zinc  and  iron 
only  a  red  heat,  whilst  a  whole  series  of  heavy  metals,  such  as  copper, 
lead,  mercury,  silver,  gold,  and  platinum,  do  not  in  the  least  decompose 
water  at  any  temperature,  and  do  not  replace  its  hydrogen. 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  hydrogen  may  be_obtained?j)y  thajdecom- 
position .  pt  steam  by  the  action  of  iroji  (orpine)  with  a  rise  of  tempera- 
ture. The  experiment  is  conducted  in  the  following  manner  :  pieces 
of  iron  (filings,  nails,  &C.),  ara  pIgMffll  ]n  a.  pprnel^in  tyhe.  which  is  then 

subjecte4,tQ_a^trong .Aeat  and  steam  passed  through  it.     The  steam, 

9  This  reaction  is  vigorously  exothermal,  i.e.  it  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of 
heat.  If  a  sufficient  quantity  of  water  be  taken  the  whole  of  the  sodium  hydroxide,  NaHO, 
formed  is  dissolved,  and  about  42,500  units  of  heat  are  evolved  per  23  grams  of  sodium 
taken.  As  40  grams  of  sodium  hydroxide  are  produced,  and  they  in  dissolving,  judging 
from  direct  experiment,  evolve  about  10,000  calories ;  therefore,  without  an  excess  of 
water,  and  without  the  formation  of  a  solution,  the  reaction  would  evolve  about  82,500 
calories.  We  shall  afterwards  learn  that  hydrogen  contains  in  its  smallest  isolable  par- 
tides  H2  and  not  H,  and  therefore  it  follows  that  the  reaction  should  be  written  thus — 
2Na  +  2H2O  =  H2  +  2NaHo,  and  it  then  corresponds  with  an  evolution  of  heat  of  +  65,000 
calories.  And  as  N.  N.  Beketoff  showed  that  Na2O,  or  anhydrous  oxide  of  sodium,  forms 
the  hydrate,  or  sodium  hydroxide  (caustic  soda),  2NaHO,  with  water,  evolving  about  85,500 
calories,  therefore  the  reaction  2Na  +  H2O  =  H2  +  Na2O  corresponds  to  29,500  calories. 
This  quantity  of  heat  is  less  than  that  which  is  evolved  in  combining  with  water,  in  the 
formation  of  caustic  soda,  ajid  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  hydrate,  NaHO, 
is  always  formed  and  not  the  anhydrous  substance  Na2O.  That  such  a  conclusion,  which 
agrees  with  facts,  is  inevitable  is  also  seen  from  the  fact  that,  according  to  Beketoff,  the 
anhydrous  sodium  oxide,  Na2O,  acts  directly  on  hydrogen,  with  separation  of  sodium, 
Na-jO  +  H  =  NaHO  +  Na.  This  reaction  is  accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  heat  equal  to 
about  3,000  calories,  because  NaaO  +  H30  gives,  as  we  saw,  85,500  calories  and  Na  +  H-jO 
evolves  82,500  calories.  However,  an  opposite  reaction  also  takes  place — NaHO-f  Na  = 
Na2O  +  H  (both  with  the  aid  of  heat) — consequently,  in  this  case  heat  is  absorbed.  In 
this  we  see  an  example  of  calorimetric  calculations  and  the  limited  application  of  the  law 
of  maximum  work  for  the  general  phenomena  of  reversible  reactions,  to  which  the  case 
just  considered  belongs.  But  it  must  be  remarked  that  all  reversible  reactions  evolve  or 
absorb  but  little  heat,  and  the  reason  of  the  law  of  maximum  work,  not  being  universal* 
must  first  of  all  be  looked  for  in  the  fact  that  we  have  no  means  of  separating  the  heat 
which  corresponds  with  the  purely  chemical  process  from  the  sum  total  of  the  heat 
observed,  and  as  the  structure  of  a  number  of  substances  is  altered  by  beat  and  also  by 
contact,  we  can  scarcely  hope  that  the  time  approaches  when  such  a  distinction  will  b» 
possible.  A  heated  substance,  in  point  of  fact,  has  no  longer  the  original  energy  of  its. 
atoms— that  is,  the  act  of  heating  not  only  alters  the  store  of  motion  of  the  molecules 
but  also  of  the  atoms  forming  the  molecules,  in  other  words,  it  makes  the  beginning  of  or 
preparation  for  chemical  change.  From  this  it  must  be  concluded  that  thermo-chemistry, 
or  the  study  of  the  heat  accompanying  chemical  transformations,  cannot  be  identified 
with  chemical  mechanics.  Thermo-chemica.1  data  form  a  part  of  it,  but  they  alone  cannot 
give  it. 


'THE  COMPOSITION   OF  WATER,    HYDROGEN 

coining  into  contact  with  the  iron,  gives  up  its  oxygen  to  it,  and  thus- 
the  hydrogen  is  set  free  and  passes  out  at  the  other  end  of  the  tube 
together  with  undecomposeji  steam.  This  method,  which  is  historically 
very  significant,10  is  practically  inconvenient,  as  it  requires  a  rather 
high  temperature.  Further,  this  reaction,  as  a  reversible  one  (a  red-- 
hot mass  of  iron  decomposes  a  current  of  steam,  forming  oxide  and: 
hydrogen  ;  and  a  mass  of  oxide  of  iron,  heated  to  redness  in  a  stream 
of  hydrogen,  forms  iron  and  steam),  does  not  proceed  in  virtue  of  the 
comparatively  small  difference  between  the  affinity  of  oxygen  for  iron 
(or  zinc)  and  lor  hydrogen,  but  only  because  the  hydrogen  escapes,  as- 
it  is  formed,  in  virtue  of  its  elasticity.11  If  the  oxygen  compounds — 
that  is,  the  oxides — which  are  obtained  from  the  iron  or  zinc,  be  able 
to  pass  into  solution,  then  the  affinity  acting  in  solution  is  added,  and  the 
reaction  may  become  non- reversible,  and  proceed  with  comparatively 
much  greater  facility.12  As  the  oxides  of  iron  and  zinc,  by  themselves 

10  The  composition  of  water,  as  we  saw  above,  was  determined  by  passing  steam  over 
red-hot  iron  ;  the  same  method  has  been  used  for  making  hydrogen  for  filling  balloons. 
An  oxide  having  the  composition  Fe3O4  is  formed  in  the  reaction,  so  that  it  is  expressed 
by  the  equation  8Fe  +  4H2O  =  Fe304  +  8H. 

11  The  reaction  between  iron  and  water  (note  10)  is  reversible.    By  heating  the  oxide 
in  a  current  of  hydrogen,  water  and  iron  are  obtained.    From  this  it  follows,  from  the 
principle  of  chemical  equilibria,  that  if  iron  and  hydrogen  be  taken,  and  also  oxygen,  but 
in  such  a  quantity  that  it  is  insufficient  for  combination  with  both  substances,  then  it  will 
divide  itself  between  the  two ;  part  of  it  will  combine  with  the  iron  and  the  other  part 
with  the  hydrogen,  but  a  portion  of  both  will  remain  in  an  uncombined  state. 

Therefore,  if  iron  and  water  be  placed  in  a  closed  space,  decomposition  of  the  water 
will  proceed  on  heating  to  the  temperature  at  which  the  reaction  3Fe  +  4H2O  =  Fe5O4  +  8H 
commences ;  but  it  ceases,  does  not  go  on  to  the  end,  because  the  conditions  for  a, 
reverse  reaction  are  attained,  and  a  state  of  equilibrium  will  ensue  after  the  decomposition 
of  a  certain  quantity  of  water.  Here  agaiij  (see  note  9)  the  reversibility  is  connected  with 
the  small  heat  effect,  and  again  both  reactions  (direct  and  reverse)  proceed  at  a  red 
heat.  But  if,  in  the  above-described  reaction,  the  hydrogen  escapes  as  it  is  erolved,  then 
its  partial  pressure  does  not  increase  with  its  formation,  and  therefore  all  the  iron  can  be 
oxidised  by  the  water.  In  this  we  see  the  elements  of  that  influence  of  mass  Urwhichwe 
shall  have  occasion  to  return  later.  With  copper  and  lead  there  will  be  no  decomposition, 
either  at  the  ordinary  or  at  a  high  temperature,  because  the  affinity  of  these  metals  for 
oxygen  is  much  less  than  that  of  hydrogen. 

18  In  general,  if  reversible  as  well  as  non-reversible  reactions  can  take  place  between 
substances  acting  on  each  other,  then,  judging  by  our  present  knowledge,  the  non- 
reversible  reactions  take  place  in  the  majority  of  cases,  which  obliges  one  to  acknowledge 
the  action,  in  this  case,  of  comparatively  strong  affinities.  The  reaction,  Zn-f  H2SO4  = 
H2-f  ZnSO4,  which  takes  place  in  solutions  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  is  scarcely  re- 
versible under  these  conditions,  but  at  a  certain  high  temperature  it  becomes  reversible, 
because  at  this  temperature  zinc  sulphate  and  sulphuric  acid  split  up,  and  the  action  must 
take  place  between  the  water  and  zinc.  From  the  preceding  proposition-results  proceed 
which  are  in  some  cases  verified  by  experiment.  If  the  action  of  zinc  or  iron  on  a  solu- 
tion of  sulphuric"  acid  presents  A  non-reversible  reaction,  then  we  may  by  this  means 
obtain  hydrogen  in  a  very' compressed  state,  and  compressed  hydrogen  will  not  act  on 
solutions  of  sulphates  of  the  above-named  metals.  This  is  verified  in  reality  as  far  as  was 
possible  in  the  experiments  to  keep  up  the  compression  or  pressure  of  the  hydrogen. 


I-*- 


124  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

insoluble  in  water,  are  capable  of  combining  with  (have  an  affinity  for) 
acid  oxides  (as  we  shall  afterwards  fully  consider),  and  form  saline  and 
soluble  substances,  with  acids,  or  hydrates  having  acid  properties,  hence 
by  the  action  of  such  hydrates,  or  of  their  aqueous  solutions,'3  iron 
and  zinc  are  able  to  liberate  hydrogen  with  great  ease  at  the  ordinary 
temperature — that  is,  they  act  on  solutions  of  acids  just  as  sodium  acts 
on  water.14  Sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4,  is  usually  chosen  for  this  purpose  ; 
the  hydrogen  is  displaced  from  it  by  many  metals  with  much  greater 
facility  than  directly  from  water,  and  such  a  displacement  is  accompanied 
by  the  evolution  of  a  large  amount  of  heat.15  When  the  hydrogen  in 

Those  metals  which  do  not  evolve  hydrogen  with  acids,  on  the  contrary,  should,  at  least 
at  an  increase  of  pressure,  be  displaced  by  hydrogen.  And  in  fact  Brunner  showed  that 
gaseous  hydrogen  displaces  platinum  and  palladium  from  the  aqueous  solutions  of 
their  chlorine  compounds,  but  not  gold,  and  Beketoff  succeeded  in  showing  that  silver 
and  mercury,  under  a  considerable  pressure,  are  separated  from  the  solutions  of  certain 
of  their  compounds  by  means  of  hydrogen.  Reaction  already  commences  under  a  pres- 
sure of  six  atmospheres,  ifr  a  weak  solution  of  silver  sulphate  be  taken  ;  with  a  stronger 
solution  a  much  greater  pressure  is  required,  however,  for  the  separation  of  the  silver. 

13  For  the  same  reason,  many  metals  in  acting  on  solutions  of  the  alkalis  displace 
hydrogen.     Aluminium  acts  particularly  clearly  in  this  respect,  because  its  oxide  gives  a 
soluble  compound  with  alkalis.     For  the  same  reason  tin,  in  acting  on  hydrochloric  acid,, 
evolves  hydrogen,  and  silicon  does  the  same  with  hydrofluoric  acid.     It  is  evident  that 
in  such  cases  the  sum  of  all  the  affinities  plays  a  part ;  for  instance,  taking  the  action  of 
zinc  on  sulphuric  acid,  we  have  the  affinity  of  zinc  for  oxygen  (forming  zinc  oxide,  ZnO), 
the  affinity  of  its  oxide  for  sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3  (forming  zinc  sulphate,  ZnSO4),  and 
the  affinity  of.  the  resultant  salt,  ZnSO4,  for  wate*.    It  is  only  the  first-named  affinity  that 
acts  in  the  reaction  between.water  and  the  metal,  if  no  account  is  taken  of  those  forces 
(of  a  physico-mechanical  character)  which  act  between  the  molecules  (for  instance,  the 
Cohesion  between  the  molecules  of  the  oxide)  and  those  forces  (of  a  chemical  character) 
which  acjfc  bet  ween  the  atoms  forming  the  molecule,  for  instance,  between  the  atoms  of 
hydrogen  giving  the  molecule  H2  containing  two  atoms.     I  consider  it  necessary  to 
remark,  that  the  hypothesis  of  the  affinity  or  endeavour  of  heterogeneous  atoms  to  enter 
into  a  common  system  and  in  harmonious  motion  (i.e.  to  form  a  compound  molecule) 
must  inevitably  be  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis  of  forces  including  homogeneoua 
atoms  to  form  complex  molecules  (for  instance,  H2),  and  to  build  up  the  latter  into  solid 
or  liquid  substances,  in  which  the  existence  of  an  attraction  between  the  homogeneous 
particles  must  certainly  be  admitted.     Therefore,  those  forces  which  bring  about  solution 
must  also  be  taken  into  consideration.    These  are  all  forces  of  one  and  the  same  series, 
and  in  this  maybe  seen  the  great  difficulties  surrounding  the  study  of  molecular  mechanics 
and  its  province — chemical  mechanics. 

14  It  is  acknowledged  that  zinc  itself  acts  on  water,  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature, 
but  that  the  action  is  confined  to  small  masses  and  only  proceeds  at  the  surface.     In 
reality,  zinc,  iu  the  form  of  a  very  fine  powder,  or. so-called  .'zinc  dust,'  is  capable  of 
decomposing  water  with  the  formation  of  oxide  (hydrated)  and  hydrogen.     The  oxide 
formed  acts  on    sulphuric  acid,  water  tb,en  dissolves  the  salt  produced,  and  the  action 
continues  because  one  of  the  products  of  the  action  of  water  on  zinc,  zinc  oxide,  is  removed 
from  the  surface.      One  might  naturally  imagine  that  the  reaction  does  not  proceed 
directly  between  the  metal  and  water,  but  between  the  metal  and  the  acid,  but  such  a. 
Simple  representation,  which  we  shall  cite  afterwards,  hides  the  mechanism  of  the  reaction, 
and  does  not  permit  of  its  actual  complexity  being  seen. 

15  According  to  Thomson  the  reaction  between   zinc   and  a  very  weak  solution  of 
ftulphuric  acid  evolves  about  88,000  calories  (zinc  sulphate  being  formed)  per  65  parts 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN  125 

sulphuric  acid  is  replaced  by  a  metal,  a  substance  is  obtained  which  is 
called  a  salt  of  sulphuric  acid  or  a  sulphate.  Thus,  by  the  action  of  zinc 
on  sulphuric  acid,  hydrogen  and  zinc  sulphate  ZnSO4,l5bis  are  obtained. 
The  latter  is  a  solid  substance,  soluble  in  water.  In  order  that  the 
action  of.  the  metal  on  the  acid  should  go  on  regularly,  and  to  the  end 
it  is  necessary  that  the  acid  should  be  diluted  with  water,  which  dis- 
solves, the  salt  as  it  is  formed  ;  otherwise  the  salt  covers  the  metal, 
and  hinders  the  acid  from  attacking  it.  Usually  the  acid  is  diluted 
•with  from  three  to  five  times  its  volume  of  water,  and  the  metal  is 


FIG.  20.— Apparatus  for  the  preparation  of  hydrogen  from  zinc  and  sulphuric  acid. 

covered  with  this  solution.  In  order  that  the  metal  should  act 
rapidly  on  the  acid,  it  should  present  a  large  surface,  so  that  a  maxi- 
mum amount  of  the  reacting  substances  may  come  into  contact  in  a 
given  time.  For  this  purpose  the  zinc  is  used  as  strips  of  sheet  zinc, 
or  in  the  granulated  form  (that  is,  zinc  which  has  been  poured  from  a. 
certain  height,  in  a  molten  state,  into  water).  The  iron  should  be  in. 
the  form  of  wire,  nails,  tilings,  or  cuttings. 

by, weight  of  zinc;  and  56  parts  by  weight  of  iron — which  combine,  like  65  parts  by 
weight  of  zinc,  with  16  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen— evolve  about  25,000  calories  (forming 
ferrous  sulphate,  FeSO4).  Paracelsus  observed  the  action  of  metals  on  acids  in  the 
seventeenth  century ;  but  it  was  not  until  the  eighteenth  century  that  Lemery  determined 
that  the  gas  which  is  evolved  in  this  action  is  a  particular  one  which  differs  from  air 
and  is  capable  of  burning.  Even  Boyle  confused  it  with  air.  Cavendish  determined  the 
chief  properties  of  the  gas  discovered  by  Paracelsus.  At  first  it  was  called  '  inflammable- 
air  ' ;  later,  when  it  was  recognised  that  in  burning  it  gives  water,  it  was  called  hydrogen,, 
from  the  Greek  words  for  water  and  generator. 

15  bis  jf(  when  the  sulphuric  acid  is  poured  over  the  zinc,  the  evolution  of  the  hydrogen 
proceed  too  slowly,  it  may  be  greatly  accelerated  by  adding  a  small  quantity  of  a  solution 
of  CuSO4  or  PtCl4  to  the  acid.  The  reason  of  this  is  explained  in  Chap.  XVI.,  note  10'bto. 


126 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


The  usual  method  of  obtaining  hydrogen  is  as  follows  : — A  certain 
•quantity  of  granulated  zinc  is  put  into  a  double -necked,  or  Woulfe's, 
bottle  Into  one  neck  a  funnel  is  placed,  reaching  to  the  bottom  of 
the  bottle,  so  that  the  liquid  poured  in  may  prevent  the  hydrogen  from 
•escaping  through  it.  The  gas  escapes  through  a  special  gas- conducting 
tube,  which  is  firmly  fixed,  by  a  cork,  into  the  other  neck,  and  ends  in 
.a  water  bath  (fig.  20),  under  the  orifice  of  a  glass  cylinder  full  of 
water.16  If  sulphuric  acid  be  now  poured  into  the  Woulfe's  bottle  it 
will  soon  be  seen  that  bubbles  of  a  gas  are  evolved,  which  is  hydrogen. 
The  first  part  of  the  gas  evolved  should  not  be  collected,  as  it  is 
mixed  with  the  air  originally  in  the  apparatus.  This  precaution 
.should  be  taken  in  the  preparation  of  all  gases.  Time  must  be  allowed 

16  As  laboratory  experiments  with  gases  require  a  certain  preliminary  knowledge,  we 
will  describe  certain  practical  methods  for  the  collection  and  preparation  of  gases. 
When  in  laboratory  practice  an  intermittent  supply  of  hydrogen  (or  other  gas  which  is 
«volved  without  the  aid  of  heat)  is  required  the  apparatus  represented  in  fig.  21  is  the 
most  convenient.  It  consists  of  two  bottles,  having  orifices  at  the  bottom,  in  which 
corks  with  tubes  are  placed,  and  these  tubes  are  connected  by  an  india-rubber  tube 
{sometimes  furnished  with  a  spring  clamp).  Zinc  is  placed  in  one  bottle,  and  dilute  sul- 
phuric acid  in  the  other  The  neck  of  the  former  is  closed  by  a  cork,  which  is  fitted  with 


FIG.  21.  -  A  very  convenient  apparatus  for  the  preparation  of  gases  obtained  without  heat. 
It  may  also  replace  an  aspirator  or  gasometer. 

*  gas-conducting  tube  with  a  stopcock  If  the  two  bottles  are  connected  with  each' 
•other  and  the  stopcock  be  opened,  the  acid  will  flow  to  the  zinc  and  evolve  hydrogen. 
If  the  stopcock  be  closed,  the  hydrogen  will  force  out  the  acid  from  th«  bottle  containing 
the  zinc,  and  the  action  will  cease.  Or  the  vessel  containing  the  acid  may  be  placed  at 
-A  lower  level  than  that  containing  the  zinc,  when  all  the  liquid  will  flow  into  it,  and  in 
order  to  start  the  action  the  acid  vessel  may  be  placed  on  a  higher  level  than  the  other, 
and  the  acid  will  flow  to  the  zinc.  It  can  also  be  employed  for  collecting  gases  (as  an 
aspirator  or  gasometer). 

In  laboratory  practice,  however,  other  forms  of  apparatus  are  generally  employed  for 
exhausting,  collecting,  and  holding  gases.  We  will  here  cite  the  most  usual  forms.  An 
•aspirator  usually  consists  of  a  vessel  furnished  with  a  stopcock  at  the  bottom.  A  stout 
cork,  through  which  a  glass  tube  passes,  is  fixed  into  the  neck  of  this  vessel.  If  the 
vessel  be  filled  up  with  water  to  the  cork  and  the  bottom  stopcock  is  opened-,  then  the 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN  127 

for  the  gas  evolved  to  displace  all  the  air  from  the  apparatus,  otherwise 
in  testing  the  combustibility  of  the  hydrogen  an  explosion  may  occur 

•water  will  run  out  and  draw  gas  in.     For  this  purpose  the  glass  tube  is  connected  with 
the  apparatus  from  which  it  is  desired  to  pump  out  or  exhaust  the  gas. 

The  aspirator  represented  in  fig.  22  may  be  recommended  for  its  continuous 
action.  It  consists  of  a  tube  d  which  widens  out  at  the  top,  the  lower  part  being  long 
and  narrow.  In  the  expanded  upper  portion  c,  two  tubes  are  sealed ;  one,  e,  for  drawing 
in  the  gas,  whilst  the  other,  6,  is  connected  to  the  water  supply  w.  The  amount  of  water 


FIG.  22.— Continuous  aspirator.    The  tube  d  should  be  more  than  32  feet  loug. 

Supplied  through  the  tube  b  must  be  less  than  the  amount  which  can  be  carried  off  by 
the  tube  d.  Owing  to  this  the  water  in  the  tube  d  will  flow  through  it  in  cylinders 
alternating  with  cylinders  of  gas,  which  will  be  thus  carried  away.  The  gas  which  is  drawn 
through  may  be  collected  from  the  end  of  the  tube  d,  but  this  form  of  pump  is  usually 
employed  where  the  air  or  gas  aspirated  is  not  to  be  collected.  If  the  tube  d  is  of  con- 
siderable  length,  say  40  ft.  or  more,  a  very  fair  vacuum  will  be  produced,  the  amount  of 
which  is  shown  by  the  gauge  g ;  it  is  often  used  for  filtering  under  reduced  pressure,  as 
*7 


128 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


from  the  formation  of  detonating  gas  (the  mixture  of  the  oxygen  of  the 
air  with  the  hydrogen).17 

shown  in  the  figure.  If  water  be  replaced  by  mercury,  and  the  length  of  the  tube  d  be 
greater  than  760  mm.,  the  aspirator  may  be  employed  as  an  air-pump,  and  all  the  air 
may  be  exhausted  from  a  limited  space ;  for  instance,  by  connecting  g  with  a  hollow 
sphere. 

Gasholders  are  often  used  for  collecting  and  holding  gases.  They  are  made  of  glass, 
copper,  or  tin  plate.  The  usual  form  is  shown  in  fig.  23.  The  lower  vessel  B  is  made 
hermetically  tight— i.e.,  impervious  to  gases— and  is  filled  with  water.  A  funnel  is 
attached  to  this  vessel  (on  several  supports).  The  vessel  J5  communicates  with  the 

bottom  of  the  funnel  by  a  stopcock  6  and 
a  tube  a,  reaching  to  the  bottom  of  the 
vessel  B.  If  water  be  poured  into  the 
funnel  and  the  stopcocks  a  and  b  opened, 
the  water  will  run  through  a,  and  the  air 
escape  from  the  vessel  B  by  b.  A  glass 
tube/  runs  up  the  side  of  the  vessel  J3,  with 
which  it  communicates  at  the  top  and  bot- 
tom, and  shows  the  amount  of  water  and 
gas  the  gasholder  contains.  In  order  to  fill 
the  gasholder  with  a  gas,  it  is  first  filled 
with  water,  the  cocks  a,  b  and  e  are  closed, 
the  nut  d  unscrewed,  and  the  end  of  the 
tube  conducting  the  gas  from  the  apparatus 
in  which  it  is  generated  is  passed  into  d. 
As  the  gas  fills  the  gasholder,  the  water 
runs  out  at  d.  If  the  pressure  of  a  gas  be 
not  greater  than  the  atmospheric  pressure 
and  it  be  required  to  collect  it  in  the  gas- 
holder, then  the  stopcock  e  is  put  into 
communication  with  the  space  containing 
the  gas.  Then,  having  opened  the  orifice 
d,  the  gasholder  acts  like  an  aspirator ;  the 
gas  will  pass  through  e,  and  the  water  run 
out  at  d.  If  the  cocks  be  closed,  the  ga* 
collected  in  the  gasholder  may  be  easily 
preserved  and  transported.  If  it  be  desired 
to  transfer  this  gas  into  another  vessel, 
then  a  gas-conducting  tube  is  attached  to  e,  the  cock  a  opened,  6  and  d  closed,  and  the 
gas  will  then  pass  out  at  e,  owing  to  its  pressure  in  the  apparatus  being  greater  than  the 
atmospheric  pressure,  due  to  the  pressure  of  the  water  poured  into  the  funnel.  If  it 
be  required  to  fill  a  cylinder  or  flask  with  the  gas,  it  is  filled  with  water  and  inverted  in 
the  funnel,  and  the  stopcocks  b  and  a  opened.  Then  water  will  run  through  a,  and  the 
gas  will  escape  from  the  gasholder  into  the  cylinder  through  b. 

17  When  it  is  required  to -prepare  hydrogen  in  large  quantities  for  filling  balloons, 
copper  vessels  or  wooden  casks  lined  with  lead  are  employed  ;  they  are  filled  with  scrap 
iron,  over  which  dilute  sulphuric  acid  is  poured.  The  hydrogen  generated  from  a  number 
of  casks  is  carried  through  lead  pipes  into  special  casks  containing  water  (in  order  to  cool 
the  gas)  and  lime  (in  order  to  remove  acid  fumes).  To  avoid  loss  of  gas  all  the  joints  are 
made  hermetically  tight  with  cement  or  tar.  In  order  to  fill  his  gigantic  balloon  (of 
25,000  cubic  metres  capacity),  Giffard,  in  1878,  constructed  a  complicated  apparatus  for 
giving  a  continuous  supply  of  hydrogen,  in  which  a  mixture  of  sulphuric  acid  and  water 
was  continually  run  into  vessels  containing  iron,  and  from  which  the  solution  of  iron 
sulphate,  formed  was  continually  drawn  off.  When  coal  gas,  extracted  from  coal,  is 
employed  for  filling  balloons,  it  should  be  as  light,  or  as  rich  in  hydrogen,  as  possible. 


FIG.  23.— Gasholder. 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  HYDROGEN  129 

Hydrogen,  besides  being  contained  in  water,  is  also  contained  in 
many  other  substances,18  and  may  be  obtained  from  them.  As  examples 
of  this,  it  may  be  mentioned  (1)  that  a  mixture  of  formate  of  sodium, 
CHNaO2,  and  caustic  soda,  NaHO,  when  heated  to  redness,  forms 
sodium  carbonate,  Na2CO3,  and  hydrogen,  H2 ; l9  (2)  that  a  number  of 
organic  substances  are  decomposed  at  a  red  heat,  forming  hydrogen, 
among  other  gases,  and  thus  it  is  that  hydrogen  is  contained  in  ordinary 
coal  gas. 

Charcoal  itself  liberates  hydrogen  from  steam  at  a  high  tempera - 
Jtuce  ; 20  but  the  reaction  which  here  takes  place  is  distinguished  by  a 
certain  complexity,  and  will  therefore  be  considered  later. 

The  properties  of  hydrogen. — Hydrogen  presents  us  with  an  example 
of  a  gas  which  at  first  sight  does  not  differ  from  air.  It  is  not  sur- 
prising, therefore,  that  Paracelsus,  having  discovered  that  an  aeriform 
substance  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  metals  on  sulphuric  acid,  did  not 
determine  exactly  its  difference  from  air.  Tn  ffliff1»,,hy<frogen>  likeaiiyis. 

For  this  reason,  oiily  the  last  portions  of  the  gas  coming  from  the  retorts  are  collected, 
tend,  besides  this,  it  is  then  sometimes  passed  through  red-hot  vessels,  in  order  to 
decompose  the  hydrocarbons  as  much  as  possible ;  charcoal  is  deposited  in  the  red-hot 
vessels,  and  hydrogen  remains  as  gas.  Coal  gas  may  be  yet  further  enriched  in  hydro- 
gen, and  consequently  rendered  lighter,  by  passing  it  over  an  ignited  mixture  of  charcoal 
and  lime. 

L.  Mond  (London)  proposes  to  manufacture  hydrogen  on  a  large  scale  from  water  gas 
«  (see  infra,  and  Chapters  VIII.  and  IX.),  which  contains  a  mixture  oi  oxide  of  carbon  (CO) 
and  hydrogen,  and  is  produced  by  the  action  of  steam  upon  incandescent  coke  (C  +  H2O 
=  CO  +  H2^.  He  destroys  the  oxide  of  carbon  by  converting  it  into  carbon  and  carbonic 
anhydride  (2CO  =  C  +  CO2),  which  is  easily  done  by  means  of  incandescent,  finely-divided 
metallic  nickel ;  the  carbon  then  remains  with  the  nickel,  from  which  it  may  be  removed 
by  buniing  it  in  air,  and  the  nickel  can  then  be  used  over  again  (see  Chapter  IX.,  Note 
24  bis).  The  CO2  formed  is  removed  from  the  hydrogen  l>y  passing  it  through  milk  of 
lime.  This  process  should  apparently  give  hydrogen  on  a  large  scale  more  economically 
than  any  of  the  methods  hitherto  proposed. 

18  Of  the  metals,  only  a  very  few  combine  with  hydrogen  (for  example,  sodium), 
and  give  substances  which  are  easily  decomposed.     Of  the  non-metals,  the  halogens 
(fluorine,  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine)  most  easily  form  hydrogen  compounds ;  of  these 
the  hydrogen  compound  of  chlorine,  and  still  more  that  of  fluorine,  is  stable,  whilst 
those  of  bromine  and  iodine  are  easily  decomposed,  especially  the  latter.    The  other 
non-metals — for  instance,  sulphur,  carbon,  and  phosphorus — give  hydrogen  compounds 
of  different  composition  and  properties,  but  they  are  all  less  stable  than  water.    The 
number  of  the  carbon  compounds  of  hydrogen  is  enormous,  but  there  are  very  few 
ftmong  them  which  are  not  decomposed,  with  separation  of  the  carbon  and  hydrogen,  at 
tv  red  heat. 

19  The  reaction  expressed  by  the  equation  CNaHO.i  +  NaHO  =  CNa.>O3-i-H2  may  be 
effected  in  a  glass  vessel,  like  the  decomposition  of  copper  carbonate  or  mercury  oxide 
{see  Introduction) ;  it  is  non-reversible,  and  takes  place  without  the  presence  of  water, 
and  therefore  Pictet  (see  later)  made  use  of  it  to  obtain  hydrogen  under  great  pressure. 

80  The  reaction  between  charcoal  and  superheated  steam  is  a  double  one— that  i», 
there  may  be  formed  either  carbonic  oxide,  CO  (according  to  the  equation  H20  +  Q 
=  H2  +  CO),  or  carbonic  anhydride  C02  (according  to  the  equation  2H.>O  +  C  =  2H3  +  C02), 
and  the  resulting  mixture  is  called  ivater-gas',  we  shall  speak  of  it  in  Chapter  IX 


t 


130  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

colourless,  and  has  no  smell  ;21  but  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with 
its  properties  proves  it  to  be  entirely  different  from  air.  The  first  sign 
which  distinguishes,  hydrogen  frqm__air  is  its^combustibility.  This 
property  is  so  easily  observed  that  it  is  the  one  to  which  recourse  is 
usually  had  in  order  to  recognise  hydrogen,  if  it  is  evolved  in  a  re- 
action, although  there  are  many  other  combustible  gases.  But  before 
speaking  of  the  combustibility  and  other  chemical  properties  of  hydro- 
gen, we  will  first  describe  the  physical  properties  of  this  gas,  as  we 
did  in  the  case  of  water.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  it  is  or^gM^B 
lightest^^gases.22  If  passed  into  the  bottom  of  a  flask  full  of  air, 
hydrogen  will  not  remain  in  it,  but,  owing  to  its  lightness,  rapidly 
escapes  and  mixes  with  the  atmosphere.  If,  however,  a  cylinder  whose 
orifice  is  turned  downwards  be  filled  with  hydrogen,  it  will  not  escape, 
or,  more  correctly,  it  will  only  slowly  mix  with  the  atmosphere.  This 
may  be  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  a  lighted  taper  sets  fire  to  the 
hydrogen  at  the  orifice  of  the  cylinder,  and  is  itself  extinguished  inside 
the  cylinder.  Hence,  hydrogen,  being  itself  combustible,  does  not 
support  combustion.  The  great  lightness  of  hydrogen  is  taken  advan- 
tage of  for  balloons.  Ordinary_coal_gas,  which  is  often  also  used  for 
the  same  purpose,  is  only  about  twice  as  Hffht  as  air,  whilst  hycjrpgen  is 

21  Hydrogen  obtained  by  the  action  of  zinc  or  iron  on  sulphuric  acid  generally  smells 
of  hydrogen  sulphide  (like  rotten  eggs),  which  it  contains  in  admixture.  As  a  rule  such 
hydrogen  is  not  so  pure  as  that  obtained  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current  or  of  sodium 
on  water.  The  impurity  of  the  hydrogen  depends  on  the  impurities  contained  in  the 
zinc,  or  iron,  and  sulphuric  acid,  and  on  secondary  reactions  which  take  place  simul- 
taneously with  the  main  reaction.  Impure  hydrogen  may  be  easily  freed  from  tho 
impurities  it  contains :  some  of  them — namely,  those  h&ving  acid  properties — are  absorbed 

•by  caustic  soda,  and  therefore  may  be  removed  by  passing  the  hydrogen  through  a  solu- 
tion of  this  substance ;  another  series  of  impuritiea  is  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  mercuric 
chloride ;  and,  lastly,  a  third  series  is  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  potassium  permanganate. 
If  absolutely  pure  hydrogen  be  required,  it  is  sometimes  obtained  by  the  decomposition 
of  water  (previously  boiled  to  expel  all  air,  and  mixed  with  pure  sulphuric  acid)  by  the 

'  galvanic  current.  Only  the  gas  evolved  at  the  negative  electrode  is  collected.  Or  else, 
an  apparatus  like  that  which  gives  detonating  gas  is  used,  the  positive  electrode,  however, 
being  immersed  under  mercury  containing  zinc  in  solution.  The  oxygen  which  is  evolved 
at  this  electrode  then  immediately,  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution,  combines  with  the 
zinc,  and  this  compound  dissolves  in  the  sulphuric  acid  and  forms  zinc  sulphate,  which 
remains  in  solution,  and  therefore  the  hydrogen  generated  will  be  quite  free  from  oxygen. 
22  An  inverted  beaker  is  attached  to  one  arm  of  the  beam  of  a  tolerably  sensitive 
balance,  and  its  weight  counterpoised  by  weights  in  the  pan  attached  to  the  other  arm. 
If  the  beaker  be  then  filled  with  hydrogen  it  rises,  owing  to  the  air  being  replaced  by 
hydrogen.  Thus,  at  the  ordinary  temperature  of  a  room,  a  litre  of  air  weighs  about  T2 
gram,  and  on  replacing  the  air  by  hydrogen  a  decrease  in  weight  of  about  1  gram  per 
litre  is  obtained.  Moist  hydrogen  is  heavier  than  dry — for  aqueous  vapour  is  nine  times 
heavier  than  hydrogen.  In  filling  balloons  it  is  usually  calculated  that  (it  being  impos- 
sible to  have  perfectly  dry  hydrogen  or  to  obtain  it  quite  free  from  air)  the  lifting  force 
due  to  the  difference  between  the  weights  of  equal  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  air  is  equal 
to  1  kilogram  (=  1,000  grams)  per  cubic  metre  (  =  1,000  litres). 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN 


131 


T4|  times  lighter  than   air.     A   very   simple  experiment   with  soap 
bubbles    very  well  illustrates  the  application  of   hydrogen  for  filling 
balloons.     Charles,  of  Paris,  showed  the  lightness  of  hydrogen  in  this  » 
way,  and   constructed  a  balloon   filled   with  hydrogen   almost  simul^^y 
taneously  with  Montgolfier.     One  litre  of  pure  and  dry  hydrogen23  at 

25  The  density  of  hydrogen  in  relation  to  the  air  has  been  repeatedly  determined  by 
accurate  experiments.  The  first  determination,  made  by  Lavoisier,  was  not  very  exact ; 
taking  the  density  of  air  as  unity,  he  obtained  0*0769  for  that  of  hydrogen— that  is, 
hydrogen  as  thirteen  times  lighter  than  air.  More  accurate  determinations  are  due  to 
Thomsen,  who  obtained  the  figure  0'0693 ;  Berzelius  and  Dulong,  who  obtained  0-0688  ; 
and  Dumas  and  Boussingault,  who  obtained  0'06945.  _Regnault,  and  more  recently  Le 
Due  (1892),  took  two  spheres  of  considerable  capacity,  which  contained  equal  volumes  of 
air  (thus  avoiding  the  necessity  of  any  correction  for  weighing  them  in  air).  Both  spheres 
were  attached  to  the  scale  pans  of  a  balance.  One  was  sealed  up,  and  the  other  first 
weighed  empty  and  then  full  of  hydrogen.  Thus,  knowing  the  weight  of  the  hydrogen 
filling  the  sphere,  and  the  capacity  of  the  sphere,  it  was  easy  to  find  the  weight  of  a  litre 
of  hydrogen;  and,  knowing  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  at  the  same  temperature  and 
pressure,  it  was  easy  to  calculate  the  density  of  hydrogen.  Begnault,  by  these  experi- 
ments, found  the  average  density  of  hydrogen  to  be  .0*06926  in  relation  to  air ;  Hie  Due, 
0*06948  (with  a  possible  error  of  ±0-00001;,  and  this  latter  figure  must  now  be  looked  upon 
as  near  to  the  truth. 

In  this  work  I  shall  always  refer  the  densities  of  all  gases  to  hydrogen,  and  not 
to  air ;  I  will  therefore  give,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  dry  pure 
hydrogen  in  grams  at  a  temperature  t°  and  under  a  pressure  H  (measured  in  millimetres 
of  mercury  at  0°,  in  lat.  45°).  The  weight  of  a  litre  of  hydrogen 


760     1  +  0-00867* 


gram. 


For  aeronauts  it  is  very  useful  to  know,  besides  this,  the  weight  of  the  air  at  different 
heights,  and  I  therefore  insert  the  adjoining  table,  constructed  on  the  basis  of  Glaisher's 
data,  for  the  temperature  and  moisture  of  the  atmospheric  strata  in  clear  weather.  All 
the  figures  are  given  in  the  metrical  system— 1,000  millimetres  =  39'37  inches,  1,000  kilo- 
grams =  2204-8375  Ibs.,  1,000  cubic  metres  =  85,816-6  cubic  feet.  The  starting  temperature 
at  the  earth's  surface  is  taken  as  =15°  C.,  its  moisture  60  p.c.,  pressure  760  millimetres. 
The  pressures  are  taken  as  indicated  by  an  aneroid  barometer,  assumed  to  be  corrected 
at  the  sea  level  and  at  lat.  45°.  If  the  height  above  the  level  of  jkhe  sea  equal  z  kilo- 
metres, then  the  weight  of  1  cubic  metre  of  air  may  be  approximately  taken  as  1*222  — 
0-122  +  0-00377*2  kilogram 


Pressure 

Temperature 

Moisture 

Height 

Weight  of  the  air 

760  mm. 

15°     C, 

60  p.c. 

0  metres 

1222  kilos. 

700 

11-0°  „ 

64    „ 

690      „ 

1141      „ 

03 

650 

7-6°  „ 

64    „ 

1800 

1078     „ 

-§ 

600 

4-3°  „ 

63    „ 

1960 

1003     „ 

1 

550 

+   1-0°  „ 

62 

2660 

931      „ 

B 

500 

—  2'4° 

58 

3420 

857      „ 

;! 

450 

-   5-8° 

52 

4250 

781      „     1 

§ 

400 

-  9-1° 

44 

5170 

703     „ 

850 

-12-5° 

36 

6190 

624      „ 

800 

-15-9° 

27 

7860       „ 

542      „ 

5- 

250 

-19-2° 

18 

8720       „ 

457     „     J 

Although  the  figures  in  this  table  are  calculated  with  every  possible  care  from  average 
data,  yet  they  can  only  be  taken  approximately,  for  in  every  separate  case  the  conditions, 
both  at  the  earth's  surface  and  in  the  atmosphere,  will  differ  from  those  here  taken.  In 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

0°  and  760  mm.  pressure  weighs  0-08986  gram  ;  that  is,  hydrogen  is 
almost  14)?  (more  exactly,  14'39)  times  lighter  than  air.  It  is  the 
lightest  of  all  gases.  The  small  density  of  hydrogen  determines  many 
remarkable  properties  which  it  shows  ;  thus,  hydrogen  passes  exceed- 
ingly  rapidly  through  fine  j>rifices,  its  molecules  (Chapter  I.)  being 
endued  with  the  greatest  velocity.21  At  pressures  somewhat  higher 
than  the  atmospheric  pressure,  all  other  gases  exhibit  a  greater 
compressibility  and  co-efficient  of  expansion  than  they  should  accord- 
ing to  the  laws  of  J^Iariotte  and  Gay-Lussac  ;  whilst  hydrogen,  on 
the  contrary,  is  compressed  to  a  less  degree  than  it  should  be  from 
the  law  of  Mariotte,2"'  and  with  a  rise  of  pressure  it  expands  slightly 

Calculating  the  height  to  which  a  balloon  can  ascend,  it  is  evident  that  the  density  of  gas 
in  relation  to  air  must  be  known.  This  density  for  ordinary  coal  gas  is  from  0'6  to  0'85, 
and  for  hydrogen  with  its  ordinary  contents  of  moisture  and  air  from  O'l  to  0'15. 

Hence,  for  instance,  it  may  be  calculated  that  a  balloon  of  1,000  cubic  metres  capacity 
filled  with  pure  hydrogen,  and  weighing  (the  envelope,  tackle,  people,  and  ballast)  727 
kilograms,  will  only  ascend  to  a  height  of  about  4,250  metres. 

24  If  a  cracked  flask  be  filled  with  hydrogen  and  its  neck  immersed  under  water  or 
mercury,  then,  the  liquid  will  rise  up  into  the  flask,  owing  to  the  hydrogen  passing 
through  the  cracks  about  8'8  times  quicker  than  the  air  is  able  to  pass  through  these 
cracks  into  the  flask.    The  same  phenomenon  may  be  better  observed  if.  instead  of  a  flask, 
u  tube  be  employed,  whose  end  is  closed  by  a  porous  substance,  such  as  graphite,  unglazed 
earthenware,  or  a  gypsum  plate. 

25  According  to  Boyle  and  Mariotte's  law,  for  a  given  gas  at  a  constant  temperature 
the  volume  decreases  by  as  many  times  as  the  pressure  increases  ;  that  is,  this  law  requires 
that  the  product  of  the  volume  v  and  the  pressure  p  for  a  given  gas  should  be  a  constant 
quantity:  pv  =  C,  a  constant  quantity  which  does  not  vary  with  a  change  of  pressure. 
This  equation  does  very  nearly  and  exactly  express  the  observed  relation  between  the 
volume  and  pressure,  but  only  within  comparatively  small  variations  of  pressure,  density, 
and.volume.     If  these  variations  be  in  any  degree  considerable,  the  quantity  pv  proves 
to  be  dependent  on  the  pressure,  and  it  either  increases  or  diminishes  with  an  increase 
of  pressure.     In  the  former  case  the  compressibility  is  less  than  it  should  be  according 
to  Mariotte's  law,  in  the  latter  case  it  is  greater.     We  will  call  the  first  case  a  positive 
discrepancy   (because  then   d(pv)!d(p)  is  greater  than  zero),  and   the  second  case  a 
negative  discrepancy  (because  then  d(pv)  /d(p)  is  less  than  zero).    Determinations  made 
by  myself  (in  the  seventies),  M.  L.  Kirpicheff,  and  V.  A.  Hemilian  showed  that  all  known 
gases  at  low  pressures — i.e.  when  considerably  rarefied — present  positive  discrepancies. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  appears  from  the  researches  of  Cailletet,  Natterer,  and  Amagat  that 
all  gases  under  great  pressures  (when  the  volume  obtained  is  500-1,000  times  less  than 
under  the  atmospheric  pressure)  also  present  positive  discrepancies.    Thus  under  a  pres- 
sure of  2,700  atmospheres  air  is  compressed,  not  2,700  times,  but  only  800.  and  hydrogen 
1,000  times.    Hence  the  positive  kind  of  discrepancy  is,  so  to  say,  normal  to  gases.     And 
this  is  easily  intelligible.     If  a  gas  followed  Mariotte's  law,  or  if  it  were  compressed  to  a 
greater  extent  than  is  shown  by  this  law,  then  under  great  pressures  it  would  attain  a 
density  greater  than  that  of  solid  and  liquid  substances,  which  is  in  itself  improbable  and 
even  impossible  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  solid  and  liquid  substances  are  themselves  but 
little  compressible.     For  instance,  a  cubic  centimetre  of  oxygen  at  0°  and  under  the  at- 
mospheric pressure  weighs  about  0'0014  gram,  and  at  a  pressure  of  3,000  atmospheres 
(this  pressure  is  attained  in  guns)  it  would,  if  it  followed  Mariotte's  law,  weigh  4'2  grama 
—that  is,  would  be  about  four  times  heavier  than  water— and  at  a  pressure  of  10,000 
atmospheres  it  would  be  heavier  than  mercury      Besides  this,  positive  discrepancies  are 
probable  because  the  molecules  of  a  gas  themselves  must  occupy  a  certain  volume.    Con- 
ftfdering  that  Mariotte's  law.  strictly  speaking,  applies  only  to  the  intermolecular  space,  we 


THE   COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  HYDROGEN  133 

less  tharf  at  the  atmospheric  pressure.26  However,  hydrogen,  like 
Air  and  many  other  gases  which  are  permanent  at  the  ordinary  tern- 
can  understand  the  necessity  of  positive  discrepancies.  If  we  designate  the  volume  of  the 
molecules  of  a  gas  by  b  (like  van  der  Waals,  see  Chap.  I.,  Note  84),  then  it  must  be  expected 
ih&tp  (v  —  b)  =  C  Hencepv  =  C  +  bp,  which  expresses  a  positive  discrepancy.  Supposing 
that  for  hydrogen pv  =  1,006,  at  a  pressure  of  one  metre  of  mercury,  according  to  the  results 
of  Regnault's,  Amagat's,  and  Natterer'p  experiments,  we  obtain  b  as  approximately  0'7  to  0'9 

Thus  the  increase  of  pv  with  the  increase  of  pressure  mtrst  be  considered  as  the 
normal  law  of  the  compressibility  of  gases.  Hydrogen  presents  such  a  positive  compres 
aibility  at  all  pressures,  for  it  presents  positive  discrepancies  from  Mariotte's  law,  accord 
ing  to  Regnault,  at  all  pressures  above  the  atmospheric  pressure.  Hence  hydrogen  is, 
BO  to  say,  a  perfect  gas.  No  other 'gas  behaves  so  simply  with  a  change  of  pressure.  All 
other  gases  at  pressures  from  1  to  80  atmospheres  present  negative  discrepancies — that 
is,  they  are  then  compressed  to  a  greater  degree  than  should  follow  from  Mariotte's  law, 
as  was  snown  by  the  determinations  of  Regnault,  which  were  verified  when  repeated  by 
myself  and  Boguzsky.  Thus,  for  example,  on  changing  the  pressure  from  4  to  20  metres 
of  mercury — that  is,  on  increasing  the  pressure  five  times — the  volume  only  decreased 
4'93  times  when  hydrogen  was  taken,  and  5'06  when  air  was  taken. 

The  positive  discrepancies  from  the  law  at  low  pressures  are  of  particular  interest, 
and,  according  to  the  above-mentioned  determinations  made  by  myself,  Kirpicheff, 
and  Hemilian,  and  verified  (by  two  methods)  by  K.  D.  Kraevitch  and  Prof.  Ramsay 
(London,  1894),  they  are  proper  to  all  gases  (even  to  those  which  are  easily  compressed 
into  a  liquid  state,  such  as  carbonic  and  sulphurous  anhydrides).  These  discrepancies 
approach  the  case  of  a  very  high  rarefaction  of  gases,  where  a  gas  is  near  to  a  condition  of 
maximum  dispersion  of  its  molecules,  and  perhaps  presents  a  passage  towards  the  sub- 
stance termed  '  luminiferous  ether '  which  fills  up  interplanetary  and  interstellar  space. 
If  we  suppose  that  gases  are  rarefiable  to  a  definite  limit  only,  having  attained  which 
they  (like  solids)  do  not  alter  in  volume  with  a  decrease  of  pressure,  then  on  the  one 
hand  the  passage  of  the  atmosphere  at  its  upper  limits  into  a  homogeneous  ethereal 
medium  becomes  comprehensible,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  would  be  expected  that  gases 
would,  in  a  state  of  high  rarefaction  (i.e.  when  small  masses  of  gases  occupy  large 
volumes,  or  when  furthest  removed  from  a  liquid  state),  present  positive  discrepancies 
from  Boyle  and  Mariotte's  law.  Our  present  acquaintance  with  this  province  of  highly 
rarefied  gases  is  very  limited  (because  direct  measurements  are  exceedingly  difficult  to 
make,  and  are  hampered  by  possible  errors  of  experiment,  which  may  be  considerable), 
and  its  further  development  promises  to  elucidate  much  in  respect  to  natural  phenomena. 
To  the  three  states  of  matter  (solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous)  it  is  evident  a  fourth  must  yet 
be  added,  the  ethereal  or  ultra- gaseous  (as  Crookes  proposed),  understanding  by  this, 
matter  in  its  highest  possible  state  of  rarefaction. 

K  The  law  of  Gay-Lussac  states  that  all  gases  in  all  conditions  present  one  coefficient 
of  expansion  0'00867 ;  that  is,  when  heated  from  0°  to  100°  they  expand  like  air, 
namely,  a  thousand  volumes  of  a  gas  measured  at  0°  will  occupy  1867  volumes  at  100° 
Regnault,  about  1850,  showed  that  Gay-Lussac's  law  is  not  entirely  correct,  and  that 
different  gases,  and  also  one  and  the  same  gas  at  different  pressures,  have  not  quite  the 
same  coefficients  of  expansion.  Thus  the  expansion  of  air  between  0°  and  100°  is  0'867 
under  the  ordinary  pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  and  at  three  atmospheres  it  is  0'871,  the 
expansion  of  hydrogen  is  0'866,  and  of  carbonic  anhydride  0'37.  Regnault,  however,  did 
not  directly  determine  the  change  of  volume  between  0°  and  100°,  but  measured  the 
variation  of  tension  with  the  change  of  temperature;  but  since  gases  do  not  entirely 
follow  Mariotte's  law,  the  change  of  volume  cannot  be  directly  judged  by  the  variation 
of  tension.  The  investigations  carried  on  by  myself  and  Kayander,  about  1870,  showed- 
the  variation  of  volume  on  heating  from  0°  to  100°  under  a  constant  pressure  These 
investigations  confirmed  Regnault's  conclusion  that  Gay-Lussac's  law  is  not  entirely 
correct,  and  farther  showed  (1)  that  the  expansion  per  volume  from  0°  to  100°  under  a 
pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  for  air  =  0'368,  for  hydrogen  =  0'367,  for  carbonic  anhydride 
=  0-378,  for  hydrogen  bromide  =  0'386,  &c ;  (2)  that  for  gases  which  are  more  compres. 


134  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

perature,  does  not  pass  into  a  liquid  state  under  a  very  considerable 
pressure,27  but  is  compressed  into  a  lesser  volume  than  -would  follow 

Bible  than  should  follow  from  Marietta's  law  the  expansion  by  heat  increases  with  the 
pressure — for  example,  for  air  at  a  pressure  of  three  and  a  half  atmospheres,  it  equals 
0*371,  for  carbonic  anhydride  at  one  atmosphere  it  equals  0-373,  at  three  atmospheres 
0-889,  and  at  eight  atmospheres  0-418 ;  (8)  that  for  gases  which  are  less  compressible 
than  should  follow  from  Mariotte's  law,  the  expansion  by  heat  decreases  with  an  increase  of 
pressure — for  example,  for  hydrogen  at  one  atmosphere  0'S67,  at  eight  atmospheres  0'369, 
for  air  at  a  quarter  of  an  atmosphere  d'370,  at  one  atmosphere  0'368  ;  and  hydrogen  like 
air  (and  all  gases)  is  less  compressed  at  low  pressures  than  should  follow  from  Mariotte's 
law  (see  Note  25).  Hence,  hydrogen,  starting  from  zero  to  the  highest  pressures,  exhibits 
a  gradually,  although  only  slightly,  varying  coefficient  of  expansion,  whilst  for  air  and 
other  gases  at  the  atmospheric  and  higher  pressures,  the  coefficient  of  expansion 
increases  with  the  increase  of  pressure,  so  long  as  their  compressibility  is  greater  than 
should  follow  from  Mariotte'a  law.  But  when  at  considerable  pressures,  this  kind  of 
discrepancy  passes  into  the  normal  (see  Note  25),  then  the  coefficient  of  expansion  of  all 
gases  decreases  with  an  increase  of  pressure,  as  is  seen  from  the  researches  of  Amagat. 
The  difference  between  the  two  coefficients  of  expansion,  for  a  constant  pressure  and  for 
a  constant  volume,  is  explained  by  these  relations.  Thus,  for  example,. for  air  at  a 
pressure  of  one  atmosphere  the  true  coefficient  of  expansion  (the  volume  varying  at  con- 
stant pressure)  =0'00368  (according  to  Mendele"eff  and  Kayander)  and  the  variation  of 
tension  (at  a  constant  volume,  according  to  Regnatilt)  =  0'00367. 

27  Permanent  gases  are  those  which  cannot  be  liquefied  by  an  increase  of  pressure 
alone.  With  a  rise  of  temperature,  all  gases  and  vapours  become  permanent  gases.  As 
we  shall  afterwards  learn,  carbonic  anhydride  becomes  a  permanent  gas  at  temperatures 
above  81°,  and  at  lower  temperatures  it  has  a  maximuir  *"nsion,  and  may  be  liquefied 
by  pressure  alone. 

The  liquefaction  of  gases,  accomplished  by  Faraday  (see  Ammonia,  Chapter  VI.)  and 
others,  in  the  first  half  of  this  century,  showed  that  a  number  of  substances  are  capable, 
like  water,  of  taking  all  three  physical  states,  and  that  there  is  no  essential  difference 
between  vapours  and  gases,  the  only  distinction  being  that  the  boiling  points  (or  the 
temperature  at  which  the  tension  =  760  mm.)  of  liquids  lie  above  the  ordinary  tempera- 
ture, and  those  of  liquefied  geses  below,  and  consequently  a  gas  is  a  superheated  vapour, 
or  vapour  heated  above  the  boiling  point,  or  removed  from  saturation,  rarefied,  having 
a  lower  tension  than  that  maximum  which  is  proper  to  a  given  temperature  and  sub- 
stance. We  will  here  cite  the  maximum  tensions  of  certain  liquids  and  gases  at  various 
temperatures,  because  they  may  be  taken  advantage  of  for  obtaining  constant  tempera- 
tures by  changing  the  pressure  at  which  boiling  or  the  formation  of  saturated  vapoura 
takes  place.  (1  may  remark  that  the  dependence  between  the  tension  of  the  saturated 
vapours  of  various  substances  and  the  temperature  is  very  complex,  and  usually  requires 
three  or  four  independent  constants,  which  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  substance,  and 
are  found  from  the  dependence  of  the  tension  p  on  the  temperature  t  given  by  experi- 
ment ;  but  in  1892  K.  D.  Kraevitch  showed  that  this  dependence  is  determined  by  the 
properties  of  a  substance,  such  as  its  density,  specific  heat,  and  latent  heat  of  evapora- 
tion.) The  temperatures  (according  to  the  air  thermometer)  are  placed  on  the  left,  and 
the  tension  in  millimetres  of  mercury  (at  0°)  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equations. 
Carbon  bisulphide,  CS*,  0°  =  127'9;  10°  =  198'5;  20°  =  298-1;  30°  =  431-6 ;  40°  =  617'5 ; 
500  =  857'1.  Chlorobenzene,  CeHjCl,  70°  =  97'9;  80°  =  141'8;  90°  =  208'4;  100°  =  292'8; 
110°  =  402-6;  1206  =  542-8;  130°  =  719'0.  Aniline,  C6H7N,  150°  =  283'7;  160°-387'0; 
170°  =  515-6;  180°  =  677'2;  185°  =  771'5.  Methyl  salicylate,  C8H8O3,  180°  =  294'4;  190° 
=  880-9;  200°  =  432-4;  210°  =  557-5;  220° =710-2;  224°  =  779'9.  Mercury,  Hg,  300°  =  246"8 ; 
810°  =  304-9;  8200  =  878'7;  330°  =  454:4;  340°  =  548-6;  350°  =  658'0;  359°  =  770'9.  Sul- 
phur, S,  395°  =  300  ;  423°  =  500 ;  448°  =  700 ;  452°  =  800 ;  459°  =  900.  These  figures  (Bam- 
say,  and  Young)  show  the  possibility  of  obtaining  constant  temperatures  in  the  vapours 
of  boiling  liquids  by  altering  the  pressure.  We  may  add  the  following  boiling  points 
Tinder  a  pressure  of  760  mm.  (according  to  the  air  thermometer  by  Collendar  and 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  HYDROGEN  135 

from  Marietta's  law.28     From  this  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  abso- 
lute boiling  point  of  hydrogen,  and  of  gases  resembling  it,29  lies,  very 

Griffiths,  1891):  aniline,  184°  =  1S;  naphthalene,  217°  =  94";  benzophenone,  305°  =  82; 
mercury,  356°  =  76;  triphenyl-methane,  856°  =  44;  sulphur,  444°  =  53.  And  melting 
points:  tin,  231°  =  68;  bismuth,  269°  =  22;  lead,  827°  =  69;  and  zinc,  417°  =  57.  These 
data  may  be  used  for  obtaining  a  constant  temperature  and  for  verifying  thermometers. 
The  same  object  may  be  attained  by  the  melting  points  of  certain  salts,  determined 
according  to  the  air  thermometer  by  V.  Meyer  and  Riddle  (1893) :  NaCl,  851° ;  NaBr, 
727°  ;  Nal,  650°  ;  KC1,  760°  ;  KBr,  715°  ;  KI,  623° ;  K2CO3,  1045°  ;  Na2CO3,  1098°  ; 
Na2B4O7,  873° ;  Na2SO4, 843°  ;  K2SO4, 1073°.  The  tension  of  liquefied  gases  is  expressed 
in  atmospheres.  Sulphurous  anhydride,  SO.,,  —  30°  =  0'4;  —  20°  =  0'6;  — 10°  =  1;  0°  =  1'5  ; 
+  10°  =  2-3;  20°  =  3-2;  30°  =  5-3.  Ammonia,  NH3,  -40°  =  0'7  ;  -30°  =  ri;  -20°=a-8; 
-10°  =  2-8;  0°  =  4-2;  +10°  =  6'0;  203  =  8t4.  Carbonic  anhydride,  CO2,  -1150  =  0'033; 
-80°  =  1;  -70°  =  2-1;  -60°  =  3'9;  -50°  =  6'8;  -40°  =  10;  -20°  =  23;  0°  =  35 ;  +10° 
=  46;  20°  =  58.  Nitrous  oxide,  N2O, -125°  =  0-033;  -92°  =  1;  -80°  =  1'9;  -50'  =  7'6; 
-20°  =  23'1;  0°  =  86-1;  +20°  =  55'8.  Ethyleiie,  C2H4,  -140°  =  0'033;  -130°  =  0'1  ; 
-103°  =  1;  -40°  =  13;  -1°  =  42.  Air,  -191°  =  1;  -158°  =  14;  -140J=89.  Nitrogen, 
N2,  -203°  =  0-085;  -193°  =  1;  -160°  =  14;  -146°  =  32.  The  methods  of  liquefying 
gases  (by  pressure  and  cold)  will  be  described  under  ammonia,  nitrous  oxide,  sulphurous 
anhydride,  and  in  later  footnotes.  We  will  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
evaporation  of  volatile  liquids,  under  various,  and  especially  under  low,  pressures,  gives  • 
an  easy  means  for  obtaining  low  temperatures.  Thus  liquefied  carbonic  anhydride,  under 
the  ordinary  pressure,  reduces  the  temperature  to  —80°,  and  when  it  evaporates  in  a 
rarefied  atmosphere  (under  an  air-pump)  to  25  mm.  ( =  0'033  atmosphere)  the  tempera- 
ture, judging  by  the  above-cited  figures,  falls  to  -115°  (Dewar).  Even  the  evaporation 
of  liquids  of  common  occurrence,  under  low  pressures  easily  attainable  with  an  air-pump, 
may  produce  low  temperatures,  which  may  be  again  taken  advantage  of  for  obtaining 
still  lower  temperatures.  Water  boiling  in  a  vacuum  becomes  cold,  and  under  a  pressure 
of  less  than  4'5  mm.  it  freezes,  because  its  tension  at  0?  is  4'5  mm.  A  sufficiently  low 
temperature  may  be  obtained  by  forcing  fine  streams  of  air  through  common  ether,  or 
liquid  carbon  bisulphide,  CS2,  or  methyl  chloride,  CH3C1,  and  other  similar  volatile 
liquids.  In  the  adjoining  table  are  given,  for  certain  gases,  (1)  the  number  of  atmo- 
spheres necessary  for  their  liquefaction  at  15°,  and  (2)  the  boiling  points  of  the  resultant 
liquids  under  a.  pressure  of  760  mm. 

C2H,        NaO        CO,         HaS        AsH3      NHS        HC1        CH.C1      C3Na         S0a 

(1)  42  31  52  10  8  7  25  4  4  3 

(2)  -103°       -92°       -80°       -74°       -58°       -38°       -35°       -24°       -21°       -10° 

2«  Natterer's  determinations  (1851-1854),  together  with  Amagat's  results  (1880-1888), 
show  that  the  compressibility  of  hydrogen,  under  high  pressures,  may  be  expressed  by 
the  following  figures  :— 

p  =  1  100  1000  2500 

v  1         0-0107  0-0019  0-0013 

pv          =  1  1-07  1-9  8-25 

8  =        O'll  10-8  58  85 

where  p  =  the  pressure  in  metres  of  mercury,  v  =  the  volume,  if  the  volume  taken  under 
a  pressure  of  1  metre  =  1,  and  s  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  hydrogen  at  20°  in  grams.  If 
hydrogen  followed  Mariotte's  law,  then  under  a  pressure  of  2,500  metres,  one  litre  would" 
contain  not  85,  but  265  grams.  It  is  evident  from  the  above  figures  that  the  weight  of 
a  litre  of  the  gas  approaches  a  limit  as  the  pressure  increases,  which  is  doubtless  the 
density  of  the  gas  when  liquefied,  and  therefore  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  liquid  hydrogen 
will  probably  be  near  100  grams  (density  about  0*1,  being  less  than  that  of  all  other 
liquids). 

29  Cagniard  de  Latour,  on  heating  ether  in  a  closed  tube  to  about  190°,  observed  that 
at  this  temperature  the  liqxiid  is  transformed  into  vapour  occupying  the  original  volume — 
that  is,  having  the  same  density  as  the  liquid.  The  further  investigations  made  by  Drion 
and  my&ell  Eho-,veu  that,  every  liquid  haa  such  ari  absolute  boiling  point,  abcvc  which 


136 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


much  below  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  that  is,  that  the  liquefaction  of 

it  cannot  exist  as  a  liquid  and  is  transformed  into  a  dense  gas.  In  order  to  grasp  the  true 
signification  of  this  absolute  boiling  temperature,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  liquid 
state  is  characterised  by  a  cohesion  of  its  particles  which  does  not  exist  in  vapours  and 
gases.  The  cohesion  of  liquids  is  expressed  in  their  capillary  phenomena  (the  breaks 
in  a  column  of  liquid,  drop  formation,  and  rise  in  capillary  tubes,  &c.),  and  the  product  of 
the  density  of  a  liquid  into  the  height  to  which  it  rises  in  a  capillary  tube  (of  a  definite 
diameter)  may  serve  as  the  measure  of  the  magnitude  of  cohesion.  Thus,  in  a  tube  of 
1  mm.  diameter,  water  at  15°  rises  (the  height  being  corrected  for  the  meniscus)  14'8  mm., 
and  ether  at  t°  to  a  height  5'85 -0*028  t°  mm.  The  cohesion  of  a  liquid  is  lessened  by 
heating,  and  therefore  the  capillary  heights  are  also  diminished.  It  has  been  shown 
by  experiment  that  this  decrement  is  proportional  to  the  temperature,  and  hence  by  the 
aid  of  capillary  observation*  we  are  able  to  form  an  idea  that  at  a  certain  rise  of 
temperature  the  cohesion  may  become  =0.  For  ether,  according  to  the  above  formula, 
this  would  occur  at  191°.  If  the  cohesion  disappear  from  a  liquid  it  becomes  a  gas, 
for  cohesion  is  the  only  point  of  difference  between  these  two  states;  A  liquid  in 
evaporating  and  overcoming  the  force  of  cohesion  absorbs  heat.  Therefore,  the  absolute 
boiling  point  was  defined  by  me  (1861)  as  that  temperature  at  which  (a)  a  liquid  cannot 
exist  as  a  liquid,  but  forms  a  gas  which  cannot  pass  into  a  liquid  state  under  any  pres- 
sure whatever;  (b)  cohesion =0;  and  (c)  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation =0. 

This  definition  was  but  little  known  until  Andrews  (1869)  explained  the  matter  from 
another  aspect.  Starting  from  gases,  he  discovered  that  carbonic  anhydride  cannot 
be  liquefied  by  any  degree  of  compression  at  temperatures  above  31°,  whilst  at  lower 
temperatures  it  can  be  liquefied.  He  called  this  temperature  the  critical  temperature. 
It  is  evident  that  it  is  the  same  as  the  absolute  boiling  point.  We  shall  afterwards 
designate  it  by  tc.  At  low  temperatures  a  gas  which  is  subjected  to  a  pressure  greater 
than  its  maximum  tension  (Note  27)  is  transformed  into  a  liquid,  which,  in  evaporating, 
gives  a  saturated  vapour  possessing  this  maximum  tension ;  whilst  at  temperatures  above 
tc  the  pressure  to  which  the  gas  is  subjected  may  increase  indefinitely.  However,  under 
these  conditions  the  volume  of  the  gas  does  not  change  indefinitely  but  approaches  a 
definite  limit  (see  Note  28)— that  is,  it  resembles  in  this  respect  a  liquid  or  a  solid  which 
is  altered  but  little  in  volume  by  pressure.  The  volume  which  a  liquid  or  gas  occupies 
at  tc  is  termed  the  critical  volume,  and  corresponds  with  the  critical  pressure,  which 
we  will  designate  by  pc  and  express  in  atmospheres.  It  is  evident  from  what  has  been 
sard  that  the  discrepancies  from  Mariotte  and  Boyle's  law,  the  absolute  boiling  point,  the 
density  in  liquid  and  compressed 'gaseous  states,  and  the  properties  of  liquids,  must  all 
be  intimately  connected  together.  We  will  consider  these  relations  in  one  of  the  follow- 
ing notes.  At  present  we  will  supplement  the  above  observations  by  the  values  of  tc  and 
pc  for  certain  liquids  and  gases  which  have  been  investigated  in  this  respect— 


1C 

pc 

tc 

pc 

N2                 -   146° 

38 

H2S                 108° 

92 

CO                -    140° 

89 

CaNg               124° 

62 

O2                -    119° 
CH4             -   100° 

50 

50 

NH3                131° 
CH3C1            141° 

114 
73 

NO              -     98° 
C2H4                   10° 

71 
51 

SO2                 155° 
C5H10             192° 

79 
34 

CO3                    32° 
N2O                    58° 

77 
75 

C4H10O          193° 
CHC13            268° 

40 
55 

C2H2                   37° 
HC1                     52° 

68 
86 

CS2                  278° 
C6H6              292° 

78 
60 

H2O                  365° 

200 

C6H5F        "  287° 

45 

CHSOH            240° 

79 

C6H3C1           360° 

45 

CoH5OH      +   248° 
CH5COOH-f   822° 

63 
57 

C6H5Br          397° 
C<sH5I              448° 

45 
45 

Young  and  Guy  (1891)  showed  that  tc  and  pc  clearly  depend  upon  the  composition^ 
1  molecular  weight. 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN 


137 


sfhis  gas  is  only  possible  at  low  temperatures,  and  under  great  pressures.30 
This  conclusion  was  verified  (1877)  by  the  experiments  of  Pictet  and 
Cailletet.31  They  compressed  gases  at  a  very  low  temperature,  and 

30  I  came  to  this  conclusion  in  1870  (Ann.  Phys  Chem.  141,  028). 

51  Pictet,  in  his  researches,  effected  the  direct  liquefaction  of  many  gases  which  up  to 
that  time  had  not  been  liquefied.  He  employed  the  apparatus  used  for  the  manufacture 
of  ice  on  a  large  scale,  employing  the  vaporisation  of  liquid  sulphurous  anhydride, 
which  may  be  liquefied  by  pressure  alone.  This  anhydride  is  a  gas  which  is  transformed 
into  a  liquid  at  the  ordinary  temperature  under  a  pressure  of  several  atmospheres  (see 
Note  27),  and  boils  at  -10°  at  the  ordinary  atmospheric  pressure.  This  liquid,  like  all 
others,  boils  at  a  lower  temperature  under  a  diminished  pressure,  and  by  continually 
pumping  out  the  gas  which  comes  off  by  means  of  a  powerful  air-pump  its  boiling  point 
falls  as  low  as  -75°.  Consequently,  if  on  the  one  hand  we  force  liquid  sulphurous 
anhydride  into  a  vessel,  and  on  the  other  hand  pump  out  the  gas  from  the  same  vessel 
by  powerful  air-pumps,  then  the  liquefied  gas  will  boil  in  the  vessel,  and  cause  the  tem- 
perature in  it  to  fall  to  —75°.  If  a  second  vessel  is  placed  inside  this  vessel,  then  another 
gas  may  be  easily  liquefied  in  it  at  the  low  temperature  produced  by  the  boiling  liquid 
sulphurous  anhydride.  Pictet  in  this  manner  easily  liquefied  carbonic  anhydride,  CO , 
(at  -60°  under  a  pressure  of  from  four  to  six  atmospheres).  This  gas  is  more  refractory 
to  liquefaction  than  sulphurous  anhydride,  but  for  this  reason  it  gives  on  evaporating  a 
still  lower  temperature  than  can  be  attained  by  the  evaporation  of  sulphurous  anhydride. 
A  temperature  of  —  80°  may  be  obtained  by  the  evaporation  of  liquid  carbonic  anhydride  at 
a  pressure  of  760  mm.,  and  in  an  atmosphere  rarefied  by  a  powerful  pump  the  temperature 
falls  to  — 140°.  By  employing  such  low  temperatures,  it  was  possible,  with  the  aid  of 
pressure,  to  liquefy  the  majority  of  the  other  gases.  It  is  evident  that  special  pumps 
.which  are  capable  of  rarefying  gases  are  necessary  to  reduce  the  pressure  in  the 
chambers  in  which  the  sulphurous  and  carbonic  anhydride  boil ;  and  that,  in  order  t 
re-condense  the  resultant  gases  into  liquids,  special  force  pumps  are  required  for  pumping 
the  liquid  anhydrides  into  the  refrigerating  chamber.  Thus,  in  Pictet's  apparatus 
(fig.  24),  the  carbonic  anhydride  was  liquefied  by  the  aid  of  the  pumps  E  F,  which 


Fro.  »4.— General  arrangement  of  the  apparatus  employed  by  Pictet  for  liquefying  gases. 


138  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

then  allowed  them  to  expand,  either  by  directly  decreasing  the  pressure 
or  by  allowing  them  to  escape  into  the  air,  by  which  means  the  tem- 
perature fell  still  lower,  and  then,  just  as  steam  when  rapidly  rarefied  32 

compressed  the  gas  (at  a  pressure  of  4-6  atmospheres)  and  forced  it  into  the  tube  K, 
vigorously  cooled  by  being  .surrounded  by  boiling  liquid  sulphurous  anhydride,  which 
was  condensed  in  the  tub'e  C  by  the  pump  B,  and  rarefied  by  the  pump  A.  The 
liquefied  carbonic  anhydride .  flowed*  down  the  tube  K  into  the  tube  H,  in  which  it  was 
subjected  to  a  low  pressure  by  the  pump  E,  and  thus  gave  a  very  low  temperature  of 
about  — 140°.  The  pump  E  carried  off  the  vapour  of  the  carbonic  anhydride,  and  con- 
ducted it  to  the  pump  F,  by  which  it  was  again  liquefied.  The  carbonic  anhydride  thus 
made  an  entire  circuit— that  i$,  it  passed  from  a  rarefied  vapour  of  small  tension  and  low 
temperature  into  a  compressed  and  cooled  gas,  which  was  transformed  into  a  liquid,  which 
again  vaporised  and  produced  a  low  temperature. 

Inside  the  wide  inclined  tube  H,  where  the  carbonic  acid  evaporated,  was  placed  a 
second  and  narrow  tube  M  containing  hydrogen,  which  was  generated  in  the  vessel  L 
from  a -mixture  of  sodium  formate  and  caustic  soda  (CHO2Na  +  NaHO  =  Na2CO5  +  H2). 
This  mixture  gives  hydrogen  on  heating  the  vessel  L.  This  vessel  and  the  tube  M 
were  made  of  thick  copper,  and  could  withstand  great  pressures.  They  were,  more- 
over, hermetically  connected  together  and  closed  up.  Thus  the  hydrogen  which  was 
evolved  had  no  outlet,  accumulated  in  a  limited  space,  and  its  pressure  increased  in 
proportion  to  the  amount  of  it  evolved.  This  pressure  was  recorded  on  a  metallic  mano- 
meter R  attached  to  the  end  of  the  tube  M.  As  the  hydrogen  in  this  tube  was  submitted 
to  a  very  low  temperature  and  a  powerful  pressure,  all  the  necessary  conditions  were 
present  for  its  liquefaction.  When  the  pressure  in  the  tube  H  became  steady — i.e.  when 
the  temperature  had  fallen  to  - 140°  and  the  manometer  B  indicated  a  pressure  of  650 
atmospheres  in  the  tube  M — then  this  pressure  did  not  rise  with  a  further  evolution  of 
hydrogen  in  the  vessel  L.  This  served  as  an  indication  that  the  tension  of  the  vapour  of 
the  hydrogen  had  attained  a  maximum  corresponding  with  — 140°,  and  that  consequently 
all  the  excess  of  the  gas  was  condensed  to  a  liquid.  Pictet  convinced  himself  of  thia 
by  opening  the  cock  N,  when  the  liquid  hydrogen  rushed  out  from  the  orifice.  But,  on 
leaving  a  space  where  the  pressure  was  equal  to  650  atmospheres,  and  coming  into  contact 
with  air  under  the  ordinary  pressure,  the  liquid  or  powerfully  compressed  hydrogen 
expanded,  began  to  boil,  absorbed  still  more  heat,  and  became  still  colder.  In  doing  so 
a  portion  of  the  liquid  hydrogen,  according  to  Pictet,  passed  into  a  solid  state,  and  did 
not  fall  in  drops  into  a  vessel  placed  under  the  outlet  N,  but  as  pieces  of  solid  matter, 
which  struck  against 'the  sides  of  the  vessel  like  shot  and  immediately  vaporised; 
Thus,  although  it  was  impossible  to  see  and  keep  the  liquefied  hydrogen,  still  it  was 
clear  that  it  passed  not  only  into  a  liquid,  but  also  into  a  solid  state.  Pictet  in  his  ex- 
periments obtained  other  gases  which  had  not  previously  been  liquefied,  especially  oxygen 
and  nitrogen,  in  a  liquid  and  solid  state.  Pictet  supposed  that  liquid  and  solid  hydrogen 
has  the  properties  of  a  metal,  like  iron. 

52  At  the  same  time  (1879)  as  Pictet  was  working  on  the  liquefaction  of  gases  in 
Switzerland,  Cailletet,  in  Paris,  was  occupied  on  the  same  subject,  and  his  results, 
although  not  so  convincing  as  Pictetfs,  still  showed  that  the  majority  of  gases,  previously 
unliquefied,  were  capable  of  passing  into  a  liquid  state.  Cailletet  subjected  gases  to  a 
pressure  of  several  hundred  atmospheres  in  narrow  thick-walled  glass  tubes  (fig.  25) ;  he 
then  cooled  the  compressed  gas  as  far  as  possible  by  surrounding  it  with  a  freezing  mix- 
ture ;  a  cock  was  then  rapidly  opened  for  the  outlet  of  mercury  from  the  tube  containing 
the  gas,  which  consequently  rapidly  and  vigorously  expanded.  This  rapid  expansion  of 
the  gas  would  produce  great  cold,  just  as  the  rapid  compression  of  a  gas  evolves  heat  and 
causes  a  rise  in  temperature.  This  cold  was  produced  at  the  expense  of  the  gas  itself, 
for  in  rapidly  expanding  its  particles  were  not  able  to  absorb  heat  from  the  walls  of  the 
tube,  and  in  cooling  a  portion  of  the  expanding  gas  was  transformed  into  liquid.  Thia 
was  seen  from  the  formation  of  cloud-like  drops  like  a  fog  which  rendered  the  gas 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  HYDROGEN 


139 


deposits  liquid  water  in  the  form  of  a  fog,  hydrogen  in  expanding" 
forms  a  fog,  thus  indicating  its  passage  into  a  liquid  state.  But  as  yet 
it  has  been  impossible  to  preserve  this  liquid,  even  for  a  short  time, 
to  determine  its  properties,  notwithstanding  the  employment  of  a  tem- 
perature of  —200°  and  a  pressure  of  200  atmospheres,33  although  by 

opaque.  Thus  Cailletet  proved  the  possibility  of  the  liquefaction  of  gases,  but  he  did  not 
isolate  the  liquids.  The  method  of  Cailletet  allows  the  passage  of  gases  into  liquid*, 
being  observed  with  greater  facility  and  simplicity  than  Pictet's  method,  which  requires 
a  very  complicated  end  expensive  apparatus. 

The  methods  of  Pictet  and  Cailletet  were  afterwards  'improved  by  Olszewski, 
Wroblewski,  Dewar,  »nd  qShers.  In'  order  to  obtain  a  still  lower  temperature  they  em- 
ployed, instead  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  liquid  ethyl«ne  or  nitro- 
gen and  oxygen,  whose  evaporation  at  low  pi-essures  pro- 
duces a  much  lower  temperature  (to  —200°).  They  also 
improved  on  the  methods  of  determining  such  low  tem- 
peratures, but  the  methods  were  not  essentially  altered; 
they  obtained  nitrogen  and  oxygen  in  a  liquid,  and  nitrogen 
even  in  a  solid,  state,  but  no  one  has  yet  succeeded  in  seeing 
hydrogen  in  a  liquid  form. 

The  most  illustrative  and  instructive  results  (because 
they  gave  the  possibility"  of  maintaining  a  very  low  tem- 
perature and  the  liquefied  gas,  even  air,  for  a  length  of 
time)  were  obtained  in  recent  years  by  Prof.  Dewar  in  the 
Royal  Institution  of  London,  which  is  glorified  bythe  names 
of  Davy,  Faraday,  and  Tyndall.  Dewar,  with  the  aid  of 
powerful  pumps,  obtained  many  kilograms  of  oxygen  and 
air  (the  boiling  point  under  the  atmospheric  pressure 
=  — 190°)  in  a  liquid  state  and  kept  them  in  this  state  for 
a  length  of  time  by  means  of  open  glass  vessels  with 
double  walls,  having  a  vacuum  between  them,  which  pre- 
vented the  rapid  transference  of  heat,  and  so  gave  the  pos- 
sibility of  maintaining  very  low  temperatures  inside  the 
vessel  for  a  long  period  of  time.  The  liquefied  oxygen  or 
air  can  be  poured  from  one  vessel  into  another  and  used 
for  any  investigations.  Thus 'in  June  1894.  Prof.  Dewar 
showed  that  at  the  low  temperature  produced  .by  liquid 
oxygen  many  substances  become  phosphorescent  (become 
self-luminous ;  for  instance,  oxygen  on  passing  into  a 
vacuum)  and  fluoresce  (emit  light  after  being  illuminated ; 
for  instance,  paraffin,  glue,  &c.)  much  more  powerfully  than 
at  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  also  that  solids  then  greatly  alter  in  their  mechanical  pro- 
perties, &c.  I  had  the  opportunity  (1894)  at  Prof.  Dewar's  of  seeing  many  such  experi- 
ments in  which  open  vessels  containing  pounds  of  liquid  oxygen  were  employed,  and  in 
following  the  progress  made  in  researches  conducted  at  low  temperatures,  it  is  my  firm 
impression  that  the  study  of  many  phenomena  at  low  temperatures  should  widen  the 
horizon  of  natural  science  as  much  as  the  investigation  of  phenomena  made  at  the 
highest  temperatures  attained  in  the  voltaic  arc. 

35  The  investigations  of  S.  Wroblewski  in  Cracow  give  reason  to  believe  that  Pictet 
could  not  have  obtained  liquid  hydrogen  in  the  interior  of  his  apparatus,  and  that  if  he 
did  obtain  it,  it  could  only  have  been  at  the  moment  of  its  outrush  due  to  the  fall  in 
temperature  following  its  sudden  expansion.  Pictet  calculated  that  he  obtained  a  tem- 
perature of  - 140°,  but  in  reality  it  hardly  fell  below  - 120°,  judging  from  the  latest 
data  for  the  vaporisation  of  carbonic  anhydride  under  low  pressure.  The  difference 
lies  in  the  method  of  determining  low  temperatures.  Judging  from  other  properties  of 


FIG.  25.— Cailletet' s  apparatus 
for  liquefying  gases. 


140  PRINCIPLES   OF   CHEMISTRY 

these  means  the  gases  of  the  atmosphere  may  be  kept  in  a  liquid  state 
for  a  long  time.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  absolute  boiling  point 
of  hydrogen  lies  lower  than  that  of  all  other  known  gases,  which  also 
depends  on  the  extreme  lightness  of  hydrogen.34 

hydrogen  (see  Note  84),  one  would  think  that  its  absolute  boiling  point  lies  far  below 
- 120°,  and  even  - 140°  (according  to  the  calculation  of  Sarrau,  on  the  basis  of  its  com- 
.  pressibility,  at  -174°).  But  even  at  —200°  (if  the  methods  of  determining  such  low 
temperatures  be  correct)  hydrogen  does  not  give  a  liquid  even  under  a  pressure  of  several 
hundred  atmospheres.  However,  on  expansion  a  fog  is  formed  and  a  liquid  state  attained, 
but  the  liquid  does  not  separate. 

54  After  the  idea  of  the  absolute  temperature  of  ebullition  (tc,  Note  29)  had  been 
worked  out  (about  1870),  and  its  connection  with  the  deviations  from  Mariotte's  law 
had  become  evident,  and  especially  after  the  liquefaction  of  permanent  gases,  general 
attention  was  turned  to  the  development  of  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  the  gaseous 
and  liquid  states  of  matter.  Some  investigators  directed  their  energies  to  the  further 
study  of  vapours  (for  instance,  Ramsay  and  Young),  gases  (Amagat),  and  liquids 
(Zaencheffsky,  Nadeschdin,  and  others),  especially  to  liquids  near  tc  and  pc ;  others 
(Konovaloff  and  De  Heen)  endeavoured  to  discover  the  relation  between  liquids  under 
ordinary  conditions  (removed  from  tc  and  pc)  and  gases,  whilst  a  third  class  of  investi- 
gators (van  der  Waals',  Clausius,  and  others),  starting  from  the  generally- accepted 
principles  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  and  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  and  assuming 
in  gases  the  existence  of  those  forces  which  certainly  act  in  liquids,  deduced,  the 
connection  between  the  properties  of  one  and  the  other.  It  would  be  out  of  place  in 
on  elementary  handbook  like  the  present  to  enunciate  the  whole  mass  of  conclusions 
arrived  at  by  this  method,  but  it  is  well  to  give  an  idea  of  the  results  of  van  der 
Waals'  considerations,  for  they  explain  the  gradual  uninterrupted  passage  from  a  liquid 
into  a  gaseous  state  in  the  simplest  manner,  and,  although  the  deduction  cannot  be 
considered  as  complete  and  decisive  (see  Note  25),  nevertheless  it  penetrates  so  deeply 
into  the  essence  of  the  matter  that  its  signification  is  not  only  reflected  in  a  great  number 
of  physical  investigations,  but  also  in  the  province  of  chemistry,  where  instances  of  the 
passage  of  substances  from  a  gaseous  to  a  liquid  state  are  so  common,  and  where  the 
very  processes  of  dissociation,  decomposition,  and  combination  must  be  identified  with  a 
change  of  physical  state  of  the  participating  substances,  which  has  been  elaborated  by 
Gibbs,  Lavenig,  and  others. 

For  a  given  quantity  (weight,  mass)  of  a  definite  substance,  its  state  is  expressed 
by  three  variables — volume  v,  pressure  (elasticity,  tension)  p,  and  temperature  t. 
Although  the  compressibility— [i.e.,  d(v)  ld(p)]—of  liquids  is  small,  still  it  is  clearly  ex- 
pressed, and  varies  not  only  with  the  nature  of  liquids  but  also  with  their  pressure  and 
temperature  (at  tc  the  compressibility  of  liquids  is  very  considerable).  Although  gases, 
according  to  Mariotte's  law,  with  small  variations  of  pressure,  are  uniformly  compressed, 
nevertheless  the  dependence  of  their  volume  v  on  t  and  p  is  very  complex.  This  also 
applies  to  the  coefficient  of  expansion  [=d(v)  ld(t),  or  d(p)  Id(t)'],  which  also  varies  with 
t  and  p,  both  for  gases  (see  Note  26),  and  for  liquids  (at  tc  it  is  very  considerable,  and 
often  exceeds  that  of  gases,  0'00867).  Hence,  the  equatidn  of  condition  must  include 
three  variables,  v>  p,  and  t.  For  a  so-called  perfect  (ideal)  gas,  or  for  inconsiderable 
variations  of  density,  the  elementary  expression  pv  =  Ra(l  +  at),  orpv  =  R  (273  + 1)  should 
be  accepted,  where  JB  is  a  constant  varying  with  the  mass  and  nature  of  a  gas,  as 
expressing  this  dependence,  because  it  includes  in  itself  the  laws  of  Gay-Lussac  and 
Mariotte,  for  at  a  constant  pressure  the  volume  varies  proportionally  to  1  +  at,  and  when 
t  is  constant  the  product  of  tv  is  constant.  In  its  simplest  form  the  equation  may  be 
expressed  thus : 

pv  =  RT\ 

where  T  denotes  what  is  termed  the  absolute  temperature,  or  the  ordinary  temperature 
f  278  -that  is,  T  =  t  +  278. 


THE   COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN  141 

Although   a  substance   which  passes  with  great   difficulty  into  & 
liquid  state  by  the  action  of  physico- mechanical  forces,  hydrogen  loses 

Starting  from  the  supposition  of  the  existence  of  an  attraction  or  internal  pressure 
(expressed  by  a)  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  density  (or  inversely  proportional  to 
the  square  of  the  volume),  and  of  the  existence  of  a  real  volume  or  diminished  length 
of  path  (expressed  by  6)  for  each  gaseous  molecule,  van  der  Waals  gives  for  gases  the 
following  more  complex  equation  of  condition : — 

(p  +  -t)  (v- 6)  =  1  +  0-00867*; 

if  at  0°  under  a  pressure^?  =  1  (for  example,  under  the  atmospheric  pressure),  the  volume 
(for  instance,  a  litre)  of  a  gas  or  vapour  be  taken  as  1,  and  therefore  v  and  b  be  expressed 
by  the  same  units  as  p  and  a.  The  deviations  from  both  the  laws  of  Mariotte  and  Gay- 
Lussac  are  expressed  by  the  above  equation.  Thus,  for  hydrogen  a  must  be  taken  as 
infinitely  small,  and  6  =  0'0009,  judging  by  the  data  for  1,000  and  2,500  metres  pressure 
(Note  28).  For  other  permanent  gases,  for  which  (Note  28)  I  showed  (about  1870)  from 
Regnault's  and  Natterer's  data,  a  decrement  of  pv,  followed  by  an  increment,  which  wan 
confirmed  (about  1880)  by  fresh  determinations  made  by  Amagat,  this  phenomena  may 
be  expressed  in  definite  magnitudes  of  a  and  b  (although  van  der  Waals'  formula  is  not 
applicable  in  the  case  of  very  small  pressures)  with  sufficient  accuracy  for  contemporary 
requirements.  It  is  evident  that  van  der  Waals'  formula  dan  also  express  the  difference 
of  the  coefficients  of  expansion  of  gases  with  a  change  of  pressure,  and  according  to  the 
methods  of  determination  (Note  26).  Besides  this,  van  der  Waals'  formula  shows  that 

at  temperatures   above  278  (J~  -  l)  only  one  actual  volume  (gaseous)   is  possible, 

whilst  at  lower  temperatures,  by  varying  the  pressure,  three  different  volumes— liquid 
gaseous,  and  partly  liquid,  partly  saturated-vaporous—  are  possible.  It  is  evident  that 
the  above  temperature  is  the  absolute  boiling  point — that  is  (tfc)  =  27S  f  — L  —  lY  It  i* 

found  under  the  condition  that  all  three  possible  volumes  (the  three  roots  of  van  der 
Waals'  cubic  equation)  are  then  similar  and  equal  (vc  =  86).  The  pressure  in  this  case 

(pc)  =  —?.    These  ratios  between  the  constants  a  and  b  and  the  conditions  of  critical 

etate—z.e.  (tc)  and  (pc)— give  the  possibility  of  determining  the  one  magnitude  from  the 
other.  Thus  for  ether  (Note  29),  (fc)  =  193°,  (tp)  =  40,  hence  a  =  0*0807,  6  =  0-00588,  and 
(vc)  =  0'016.  That  mass  of  ether  which  at  a  pressure  of  one  atmosphere  at  0°  occupied 
one  volume — for  instance,  a  liti-e — occupies,  according  to  the  above-mentioned  condition, 
this  critical  volume.  And  as  the  density  of  the  vapour  of  ether  compared  with  hydrogen 
=  37,  and  a  litre  of  hydrogen  at  0°  and  under  the  atmospheric  pressure  weighs  0'0896 
gram,  then  a  litre  of  ether  vapour  weighs  S'82  grams ;  therefore,  in  a  critical  state  (at 
198°  and  40  atmospheres)  8'82  grams  occupy  0'016  litre,  or  16  c.c. ;  therefore  1  gram 
occupies  a  volume  of  about  5  c.c.,  and  the  weight  of  1  c.c.  of  ether  will  then  be  0'21. 
According  to  the  investigations  of  Ramsay  and  Young  (1887),  the  critical  volume  of  ether 
was  approximately  such  at  about  the  absolute  boiling  point,  but  the  compressibility  of 
the  liquid  is  so  great  that  the  slightest  change  of  pressure  or  temperature  has  a  consider- 
able effect  on  the  volume.  But  the  investigations  of  the  above  savants  gave  another 
indirect  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  van  der  Waals'  equation.  They  also  found  for 
ether  that  the  isochords,  or  the  lines  of  equal  volumes  (if  both  t  and^j  vary),  are  generally 
straight  lines.  Thus  the  volume  of  10  c.c.  for  1  gram  of  ether  corresponds  with  pressure* 
(expressed  in  metres  of  mercury)  equal  to  0'185£  —  3'8  (for  example,  at  180°  the  pressui-ea 
81  metres,  and  at  280°  it  =  84'5  metres).  The  rectilinear  form  of  the  isochord  (when  y=a 
constant  quantity)  is  a  direct  result  of  van  der  Waals'  formula. 

When,  in  1888,  I  demonstrated  that  the  specific  gravity  of  liquids  decreases  in  pro- 
portion to  the  rise  of  temperature  [S^S^-K*  or  S,  =  S<>  (l-K<)],or  that  the  volumes 
increase  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  binomial  1-K/,  that  is*  V,  =  V0  (1-K^-i,  where  K 


142  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

its  gaseous  state  (that  is,  its  elasticity,  or  the  physical  energy  of  its 
molecules,  or  their  rapid  progressive  motion)  with  comparative  ease 
under  the  influence  of  chemical  attraction,35  which  is  not  only  shown 
from  the  fact  that  hydrogen  and  oxygen  (two  permanent  gases)  form 
liquid  water,  but  also  from  many  phenomena  of  the  absorption  of 
hydrogen. 

Hydrogen  is  vigorously  condensed  by  certain  solids  ;  for  example, 
by  charcoal  and  by  spongy  platinum.  If  a  piece  of  freshly  ignited 
charcoal  be  introduced  into  a  cylinder  full  of  hydrogen  standing  in  a 
mercury  bath,  then  the  charcoal  absorbs  as  much  as  twice  its  volume 
of  hydrogen.  Spongy  platinum  condenses  still  more  hydrogen.  But 
palladium,  a  grey  metal  which  occurs  with  platinum,  absorbs  more 
hydrogen  than  any  other  metal.  Graham  showed  that  when  heated  to 
a  red  heat  and  cooled  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,  palladium  retains 
as  much  as  600  volumes  of  hydrogen.  When  once  absorbed  it  retains 

is  the  modulus  of  expansion,  which  varies  with  the  nature  of  ihe  liquid,  then,  in  general, 
not  only  does  a  connection  arise  between  gases  and  liquids  with  respect  to  a  change  of 
volume,  but  also  it  would  appear  possible,  by  applying  van  der  Waals'  formula,  to  judge, 
from  the  phenomena  of  the  expansion  of  liquids,  as  to  their  transition  into  vapour,  and 
to  connect  together  all  the  principal  properties  of  liquids,  which  up  to  this  time  had 
not  been  considered  to  be  in  direct  dependence.  Thus  Thorpe  and  Riicker  found  that 
•2(£c)  +  273  =  1/K,  where  K  is  the  modulus  of  expansion  in  the  above-mentioned  formula. 
For  example,  the  expansion  of  ether  is  expressed  with  sufficient  accuracy  from  0°  to  100° 
by  the  equation  S(=0'786  (1-0-00154J),  or  Vi=l  (1-0-00154*),  where  0'00154  is  the 
modulus  of  expansion,  and  therefore  (<c)  =  188°,  or  by  direct  observation  198°.  For 
silicon  tetrachloride,  SiCl4,  the  modulus  equals  0'00136,  from  whence  (£e)  =  281°,  and 
by  experiment  230°.  On  the  other  hand,  D.  P.  Konovaloff,  admitting  that  the  external 
pressure  p  in  liquids  is  insignificant  when  compared  with  the  internal  (a  in  van  der 
Waals'  formula),  and  that  the  work  in  the  expansion  of  liquids  is  proportional  to  their 
temperature  (as  in  gases),  directly  deduced,  from  van  der  Waals'  formula,  the  above- 
mentioned  formula  for  the  expansion  of  liquids,  Vt=l/  (l-'Kt),  and  also  the  magnitude 
of  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation,  cohesion,  and  compressibility  under  pressure.  In  this 
way  van  der  Waals'  formula  embraces  the  gaseous,  critical,  and  liquid  states  of  sub» 
stances,  and  shows  the  connection  between  them.  On  this  account,  although  van  der 
Waals'  formula  cannot'be  considered  as  perfectly  general  and  accurate,  yet  it  is  not  only 
very  much  more  exact  than  pv=RT,  but  it  is -also  more  comprehensive,  because  it 
applies  both  to  gases  and  liquids!  Further  research  will  naturally  give  a  closer  proximity 
to  truth,  and  will  show  the  connection  between  composition  and  the  constants  (a  and  b) ; 
but  a  great  scientific  progress  is  seen  in  this  form  of  the  equation  of  state. 

Clausius  (in  1880),  taking  into  consideration  the  variability  of  a,  in  van  dor  Waals' 
formula,  with  the  temperature,  gave  the  following  equation  of  condition : — 


Sarrau  applied  this  formula  to  Amagat's  data  for  hydrogen,  and  found  a  =  0'0551, 
<;=— 0-00043, 6  =  0-00089,  and  therefore  calculated  its  absolute  boiling  point  as  —  174°jand' 
{ pc)  =  99  atmospheres.  But  as  similar  calculations  for  oxygen  ( — 105°),  nitrogen  ( — 124°),' 
And  marsh  gas  ( -  76  )  gave  tc  higher  than  it  really  is,  the  absolute  boiling  point  of  hydro- 
gen must  lie  below  —174°. 

55  This  and  a  number  of  similar  cases  clearly  show  how  great  are  the  internal 
chemical  forces  compared  with  physical  and  mechanical  forces. 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  HYDROGEN  143 

the  hydrogen  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  only  parts  with  it  when 
heatgd  to  a  red  heat.36  This  capacity  of  certain  dense  metals  for  the 
absorption  of  hydrogen  explains  the  property  of  hydrogen  of ,  passing 
through  metallic  tubes.37  It  is  termed  occlusion,  and  presents  a 
similar  phenomenon  to  solution  ;  it  is  based  on  the  capacity  of  metals 
of  forming  unstable  easily  dissociating  compounds38  with  hydrogen, 
similar  to  those  which  salts  form  with  water. 

At  the  ordinary  temperature  hydrogen  very  feebly  and  rarely  enters 

36  The  property  of  palladium  of  absorbing  hydrogen,  and  of  increasing  in  volume  in 
so  doing,  may  be  easily  demonstrated  by  taking  a  sheet  of  palladium  varnished  on  one 
side,  and  using  it  as  a  cathode.  The  hydrogen  which  is  evolved  by  the  action  of  the 
current  is  retained  by  the  unvarnished  surface,  as  a  consequence  of  which  the  sheet  curia 
up.  By  attaching  a  pointer  (for  instance,  a  quill)  to  the  end  of  the  sheet  this  bending 
effect  is  rendered  strikingly  evident,  and  on  reversing  the  current  (when  oxygen  will  be 
evolved  and  combine  with  the  absorbed  hydrogen,  forming  water)  it  may  be  shown  that 
on  losing  the  hydrogen  the  palladium  regains  its  original  form. 

57  Deville  discovered  that  iron  and  platinum  become  pervious  to  hydrogen  at  a  red 
heat.    He  speaks  of  this  in  the  following  terms  :— '  The  permeability  of  such  homogeneous 
substances  as  platinum  and  iron  is  quite  different  from  the  passage  of  gases  through 
such  non-compact  substances  as  clay  and  graphite.    The  permeability  of  metals  depends 
on  their  expansion,  brought  about  by  heat,  and  proves  that  metals  and  alloys  have  a 
certain  porosity.'    However,  Graham  proved  that  it  is  only  hydrogen  which  is  capable  of 
passing  through  the  above-named  metals  in  this  manner.     Oxygen,  nitrogen,  ammonia, 
and  many  other  gases,  only  pass  through  in  extremely  minute  quantities.     Graham 
showed  that  at  a  red  heat  about  500  c.c.  of  hydrogen  pass  per  minute  through  a  surface 
of  one  square  metre  of  platinum  I'l  mm.  thick;  but  that  with  other  gases  the  amount 
transmitted  is  hardly  perceptible.     Indiarubber  has  the  same  capacity  for  allowing  the 
transference  of  hydrogen  through  its  substance  (see  Chapter  III.),  but  at  the  ordinary 
temperature  one  square  metre,  0'014  mm.  thick,  transmits  only  127  c.c.  of  hydrogen  per 
minute.     In  the  experiment  on  the  decomposition  of  water  by  heat  in  porous  tubes,  the 
clay  tube  may  be  exchanged  for  a  platinum  one  with  advantage.     Graham  showed  that 
by  placing  a  platinum  tube  containing  hydrogen  under  these  conditions,  and  surrounding 
it  by  a  tube  containing  air,  the  transference  of  the  hydrogen  may  be  observed  by  the 
decrease  of  pressure  in  the  platinum  tube.     In  one  hour  almost  all  the  hydrogen  (97  p.c.) 
had  passed  from  the  tube,  without  being  replaced  by  air.     It  is  evident  that  the  occlusion 
and  passage  of  hydrogen  through  metals  capable  of  occluding  it  are  not  only  intimately 
connected  together,  but  are  dependent  on  the  capacity,  of  metals  to  form  compounds  of 
various  degrees  of  stability  with  hydrogen — like  salts  with  water. 

58  It  appeared  on  further  investigation  that  palladium  gives  a  definite  compound, 
Pd2H  (see  further)  with  hydrogen  ;  but  what  was  most  instructive  was  the  investigation 
of  sodium  hydride,  Na-jH,  which  clearly  showed  that  the  origin  and  properties  of  such 
compounds  are  in  entire  accordance  with  the  conceptions  of  dissociation. 

Since  hydrogen  is  a  gas  which  is  difficult  to  condense,  it  is  little  soluble  in  water  and 
other  liquids.  At  0°  a  hundred  volumes  of  water  dissolve  1'9  volume  of  hydrogen,  and 
alcohol  6-9  volumes  measured  at  0°  and  760  mm.  Molten  iron  absorbs  hydrogen,  but  in 
solidifying,  it  expels  it.  The  solution  of  hydrogen  by  metals  is  to  a  certain  degree 
based  on  its  affinity  for  metals,  and  must  be  likened  to  the  solution  of  metals  in  mercury 
and  to  the  formation  of  alloys.  In  its  chemical  properties  hydrogen,  as  we  shall  see 
later,  has  much  of  a  metallic  character.  Pictet  (see  Note  81)  even  affirms  that  liquid 
hydrogen  has  metallic  properties.  The  metallic  properties  of  hydrogen  are  also  evinced 
in  the  fact  that  it  is  a  good  conductor  of  heat,  which  is  not  the  case  with  other  gasea 
(Magnus). 


144  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

into  chemical  reaction.  The  capacity  of  gaseous  hydrogen  for  reaction 
becomes  evident  only  under  a  change  of  circumstances — by  compression, 
heating,  or  the  action  of  light,  or  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution. 
However,  under  these  circumstances  it  combines  directly  with  only  a 
very  few  of  the  elements.  Hydrogen  combines  directly  with  oxygen, 
sulphur,  carbon,  potassium,  and  certain  other  elements,  but  it  does 
I  not  combine'directly  with  either  the  majority  of  the  metals  or  with 
I  nitrogen,  phosphorus,  &c.  Compounds  of  hydrogen  with  certain 
'  elements  on  which  it  does  not  act  directly  are,  however,  known  ;  they 
are  not  obtained  by  a  direct  method,  but  by  reactions  of  decomposi- 
tion, or  of  double  decomposition,  of  other  hydrogen  compounds.  The 
property  of  hydrogen  of  combining  with  oxygen  at  a.Jffd  beat  de^gr- 
mines  its  combustibility.  We  have  already  seen  tha£ Jiydrogen  easily 
takes  fire,  and  that  it  then  burns  wjth  a  pale — that  is,  non-luminous — 
flamed9  Hydrogen  does  not  combine  with  the  oxygen  of  the  a,tmo- 
sphere  at  the  ordinary^ temperature  ;  but  this  combination  takes  place 
^  at  a  red  heat,40  and  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  much  heat. 
The  product  of  this  combination  is  water — that  is,  a  compound  of 
oxygen  and  hydrogen.  This  is  the  synthesis  of  water,  and  we  have 
already  noticed  its  analysis  or  decomposition  into  its  component  parts. 
The  synthesis  of  water  may  be  very  easily  observed  if  a  cold  gla^s  bell 
jar  be  placed  over  a  burning  hydrogen  flame,  and,  better  still,  if  the 
hydrogen  flame  be  lighted  in  the  tube  of  a  condenser.  The  water  will 
condense  in  drops  as  it  is  formed  on  the  walls  of  the  condenser  and 
trickle  down.41 

59  If  it  be  desired  to  obtain  a  perfectly  colourless  hydrogen  flame,  it  must  issue  from 
A  platinum  nozzle,  as  the  glass  end  of  a  gas-conducting  tube  imparts  a  yellow  tint  to  the 
flame,  owing  to  the  presence  of  sodium  in  the  glass. 

40  Let  us  imagine  that  a  stream  of  hydrogen  passes  along  a  tube,  and  let  us  mentally 
*  Divide  this  stream  into  several  parts,  consecutively  passing  out  from  the  orifice  of  the 
tube.  The  first  part  is  lighted — that  is,  brought  to  a  state  of  incandescence,  in  which 
State  it  combines  with  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.  A  considerable  amount  of  heat  £3 
evolved  in  the  combination.  The  heat  evolved  then,  so  to  say,  ignites  the  second  part  of 
hydrogen  coming  from  the  tube,  and,  therefore,  when  once  ignited,  the  hydrogen  con- 
tinues to  burn,  if  there  be  a  continual  supply  of  it,  and  if  the  atmosphere  in  which  it 
burns  be  unlimited  and  contains  oxygen. 

«  The  combustibility  of  hydrogen  may.be  shown  by  the  direct  decomposition  of  water 
by  sodium.  If  a  pellet  of  sodium  be  thrown  into  a  vessel  containing  water,  it  floats  on 
the  water  and  evolves  hydrogen,  which  may  be  lighted.  The  presence  of  sodium  imparts 
ft  yellow  tint  to  the  flame.  If  potassium  be  taken,  the  hydrogen  bursts  into  flame  spon» 
taneously,  because  sufficient  heat  is  evolved  in  the  reaction  to  ignite  the  hydrogen. '  The 
flame  is  coloured  violet  by  the  potassium.  If  sodium  be  thrown  not  on  to  water,  but  on 
to  an  acid,  it  will  evolve  more  heat,  and  the  hydrogen  will  then  also  burst  into  flame. 
These  experiments  must  be  carried  on  with  caution,  as,  sometimes  towards  the  end,  a 
mass  of  sodium  oxide  (Note  8)  is  produced,  and  flies  about ;  it  is  therefore  best  to  cover 
the  vessel  in  which  the  experiment  is  carried  on. 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  HYDROGEN  145 

Light  does  nob  aid  the  combination  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  so 
that  a  mixture  of  these  two  gases  does  not  change  when  exposed  to  the 
action  of  light  ;  but  an  electric  spark  A.p.f.g  juaf.  lika  a.  f  a.™^  and  this  is 
taken  advantage  of  for  inflaming  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  hvdr9ftenT  or 
detonating  gas,  inside  a  vessel,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  following 
chapters.  As  hydrogen  (and  oxygen  also)  is  condensed  by  spongy 
platinum,  by  which  a  rise  of  temperature  ensues,  and  as  platinum  acts 
by  contact  (Introduction),  therefore  hydrogen  also  combines  with 
'oxygen,  under  the  influence  of  platinum,  as  Ddbereiner  showed.  II 
spongy  platinum  be  thrown  into  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  pxjjgen, 
an^xplosignjgjfrflfg  pi  a.™*.  If  a  mixture  of  the  gases  be  passed  over 
spongy  platinum,  combination  also  ensues,  and  the  platinum  becomes 


Although  gaseous  hydrogen  does  not  act  directly43  on  many  sub- 
stances, yet  in  a  nascent  state  reaction  often  takes  place.  Thu8t  fog 
instance,  water  ^on  which^sodium  i  jaaalgani  is  acting  contains  hydrogen 
in  a  nascent  state.  The  hydrogen  is  here  evolved  from  a  liquid, 
and  at  the  first  moment  of  its  formation  must  be  in  a  condensed 

42  This  property  of  gpongy  platinum  is  made  use  of  in  the  so-called  hydrogen  cigar- 
lighter.  It  consists  of  a  glass  cylinder  or  beaker,  inside  which  there  is  a  small  lead  stand 
(which  is  not  acted  on  by  sulphuric  acid),  on  which  a  piece  of  zinc  is  laid.  This  zin«  is 
Covered  by  a  bell,  which  is  open  at  the  bottom  and  furnished  with  a  cock  at  the  top. 
Sulphuric  acid  is  poured  into  the  space  between  the  bell  and  the  sides  of  the  outer  glasa 
cylinder,  and  will  thus  compress  the  gas  in  the  bell.  If  the  cock  of  Hhe  cylinder  be 
opened  the  gas  will  escape  by  it,  and  will  be  replaced  by  the  acid,  which,  coming  int6 
contact  with  the  zinc,  evolves  hydrogen,  and  it  will  escape  through  the  cock.  II  the 
cock  be  closed,  then  the  hydrogen  evolved  will  increase  the  pressure  of  the  gas  in  the* 
bell,  and  thus  again  force  the  acid  into  the  space  between  the  bell  and  the  walls  of  the 
outer  cylinder.  Thus  the  action  of  the  acid  on  the  zinc  may  be  stopped  or  started  at 
will  by  opening  or  shutting  the  cock,  and  consequently  a  stream  of  hydrogen  may  be 
always  turned  on.  Now,  if  a  piece  of  spongy  platinum  be  placed  in  this  stream,  the 
hydrogen  will  take  light,  because  the  spongy  platinum  becomes  hot  in  condensing  the 
hydrogen  and  inflames  it.  The  considerable  rise  in  temperature  of  the  platinum  depends, 
among  other  things,  on  the  fact  that  the  hydrogen  condensed  in  its  pores  comes  into 
contact  with  previously  absorbed  and  condensed  atmospheric  oxygen,  with  which  hydro. 
gen  combines  with  great  facility  in  this  form.  In  this  manner  the  hydrogen  cigar-lighter 
gives  a  stream  of  burning  hydrogen  when  the  cock  is  open.  In  order  that  it  should  work 
regularly  it  is  necessary  that  the  spongy  platinum  should  be  quite  clean,  and  it  is  best 
enveloped  in  a  thin  sheet  of  platinum  foil,  which  protects  it  from  dust.  In  any  case, 
after  some  time  it  will  be  necessary  to  clean  the  platinum,  which  may  be  easily  done  by 
boiling  it  in  nitric  acid,  which  does  not  dissolve  the  platinum,  but  clears  it  of  all  dirt. 
This  imperfection  has  given  rise  to  several  other  forms,  in  wliich  an  electric  spark  is 
made  to  pass  before  the  orifice  from  which  the  hydrogen  escapes.  This  is  arranged  in 
such  a  manner  that  the  zinc  of  a  galvanic  element  is  immersed  when  the  cock  is  turned, 
or  a  small  coil  giving  a  spark  is  put  into  circuit  on  turning  the  hydrogen  on. 

45  Under  conditions  similar  to  those  in  which  hydrogen  combines  with  oxygen  it  is, 
also  capable  of  combining  with  chlorine.  A  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine  explodes 
on  the  passage  of  an  electric  spark  through  it,  or  on  contact  with  an  incandescent  sub- 
stance, and  also  in  the  presence  of  spongy  platinum  ;  but,  besides  this,  the  action  of  light 


146  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

state.44  In  this  condition  it  is  capable  of  reacting  on.  substances  on 
which  it  does  not  act  in  a  gaseous  state.44  bis  Reactions  of  substitution 
or  displacement  of  metals  by  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  its  formation 
are  particularly  numerous.45 

Metals,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  are  in  many  cases  able  to  replace 
each  other ;  they  also,  and  in  some  cases  still  more  easily,  replace  and 
are  replaced  by  hydrogen.  We  have  already  seen  examples  of  this .  in 
the  formation  of  hydrogen  from  water,  sulphuric  acid,  &c.  In  all  these 

alone  is  enough  to  bring  about  the  combination  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine.  If  a  mixture 
of  equal  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine  be  exposed  to  the  action  of  sunlight,  com* 
plete  combination  rapidly  ensues,  accompanied  by  a  report.  Hydrogen  does  not  combine 
directly  with  carbon,  either  at  the  ordinary  temperature  or  by  the  action  of  heat  and 
pressure.  But  if  an  electric  current  be  passed  through  carbon  electrodes  at  a  short 
distance  from  each  other  (as  in  the  electric  light  or  voltaic  arc),  so  as  to  form  an  electric 
arc  in  which  the  particles  of  carbon  are  carried  from  one  pole  to  the  other,  then,  in  the 
intense  heat  to  which  the  carbon  is  subjected  in  this  case,  it  is  capable  of  combining 
with  hydrogen.  A  gas  of  peculiar  smell  called  acetylene,  C2H.2,  is  thus  formed  from 
carbon  and  hydrogen. 

**  There  is  another  explanation  of  the  facility  with  which  hydrogen  reacts  in  a  nascent 
state.  We  shall  afterwards  learn  that  the  molecule  of  hydrogen  contains  two  atoms,  HJ, 
but  there  are  elements  the  molecules  of  which  only  contain  one  atom — for  instance, 
mercury.  Therefore,  every  reaction  of  gaseous  hydrogen  must  be  accompanied  by  the 
disruption  of  that  fcond  which  exists  between  the  atoms  forming  a  molecule.  At  the 
moment  of  evolution,  however,  it  is  supposed  that  free  atoms  exist,  and  in  this  condition, 
according  to  the  hypothesis,  act  energetically.  This  hypothesis  is  not  based  upon  facts, 
and  the  idea  that  hydrogen  is  condensed  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution  is  more  natural, 
and  is  in  accordance  with  the  fact  (Note  12)  that  compressed  hydrogen  displaces  palladium 
and  silver  (Brunner,  Beketoff) — that  is,  acts  as  at  the  moment  of  its  liberation. 

44  bis  There  is  a  very  intimate  and  evident  relation  between  the  phenomena  which 
take  place  in  the  action  of  spongy  platinum  and  the  phenomena  of  the  action  in  a  nascent 
state.     The  combination  of  hydrogen  with  aldehyde  may  be  taken  as  an  example.    Alde- 
hyde is  a  volatile  liquid  with  an  aromatic  smell,  boiling  at  21°,  soluble  in  water,  and 
absorbing  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere,  and  in  this  absorption  forming  acetic  acid— the 
substance  which  is  found  in  ordinary  vinegar.     If  sodium  amalgam  be  thrown  into  an 
aqueous  solution  of  aldehyde,  the  greater  part  of  the  hydrogen  evolved  combines  with 
the     aldehyde,    forming    alcohol — a    substance    also     soluble    in    water,   which   forms 
the  principle  of  all   spirituous   liquors,  boils  at  78°,  and  contains  the  same  amount  of 
oxygen  and  carbon  as  aldehyde,  but  more  hydrogen.     The  composition  of  aldehyde  is 
C2H4O,  that  of  alcohol  CoH6O. 

45  When,  for  instance,  an  acid  and  zinc  are  added  to  a  salt  of  silver,  the  silver  is 
reduced ;  but  this  may  be  explained  as  a  reaction  of  the  zinc,  and  not  of  the  hydrogen  at 
the  moment  of  its  formation.     There  are,  however,  examples  to  which  this  explanation 
is  entirely  inapplicable ;  thus,  for  instance,  hydrogetf,  at  the  moment  of  its  liberation 
easily  takes  up  oxygen  from  its  compounds  with  nitrogen  if  they  be  in  solution,  and 
converts  the  nitrogen  into  its  hydrogen-compound.    Here  the  nitrogen  and  hydrogen, 
so  to  speak,  meet  at  the  moment  of  their  liberation,  and  in  this  state  combine  together. 

It  is  evident  from  this  that  the  elastic  gaseous  state  of  hydrogen  fixes  the  limit  of  its 
energy  prevents  it  from  entering  into  those  combinations  of  which  it  is  capable.  In  the 
nascent  state  we  have  hydrogen  which  is  not  in  a  gaseous  state,  and  its  action  is  then 
much  more  energetic.  At  the  moment  of  evolution  that  heat,  which  would  be  latent  in 
the  gaseous  hydrogen,  is  transmitted  to  its  molecules,  and  consequently  they  are  in  fr- 
et ate  of  strain,  and  can  hence  act  on  many  substances. 


THE   COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,   HYDROGEN  147 

cases  the  metals  sodium,  iron,  or  zinc  displace  the  hydrogen  which  occurs 
in  these  compounds.  Hydrogen  may  be  displaced  from  many  of  its 
compounds  by  metals  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  it  is  displaced 
from  water  ;  so,  for  example,  hydrochloric  acid,  which  is  formed 
directly  by  the  combination  of  hydrogen  with  chlorine,  gives  hydrogen 
by  the  action  of  a  great  many  metals,  just  as  sulphuric  acid  does. 
Potassium  and  sodium  also  displace  hydrogen  from  its  compounds  with 
nitrogen  ,  it  is  only  from  its  compounds  with  ca,rbqn  that'  hydrogen  is 
not  displaced  by  metals.  Hydrogen,  in  its  turn,  is  able  to  replace 
mftfcjt]s  j  this  is  accomplished  most  easily  on  heating,  and  with  those 
metals  which  do  not  themselves  displace  hydrogen.  If  hydrogen  be 
passed  over  the  compounds  of  many  metals  with  oxygen  at 


it  takes_  up   the  oxygen  t  from   the   metals  and   displaces  them  just 
as  it  is  itself  displaced  by  metals.     If  hydrogen  be  passed  over  the 
compound  of  oxygen  with  copper  at  a  red  heat,  then  metallic  copper 
and  water  are  obtained  —  CuO  +  H2=H2O  +  Cu.     This  kind  of  double 
decomposition  is  called  reduction  with  respect  to  the  metal,  which  is 
thus  reduced  to  a  metallic  state  from  its  combination  with  oxygen. 
But  it  must  be  recollected  that  all  metals  do  not  displace  hydrogen 
from  its  compound  with  oxygen,  and,  conversely,  hydrogen  is  not  able 
to  displace  all  metals  from  their  compounds  with  oxygen  ;  thus  it  does 
not  displace  potassium,   calcium,    or  aluminium   from  its  compounds 
with   oxygen.     If  the   metals  be  arranged   in   the  following  series  : 
K,  Na,  Ca,  Al  ....  Fe,  Zn,  Hg  ....  Cu,  Pb,  Ag,  Au,  then  the 
first  are  able  to  take  up  oxygen  from  water  —  that  is,  displace  hydrogen 
—  whilst  the  last  do  not  act  thus,  but  are,  on  the  contrary,  reduced 
by  hydrogen  —  that  is,  have,  as  is  said,  a  less  affinity  for  oxygen  than 
hydrogen,  whilst  potassium,  sodium,  and  calcium  have  more.     This  is 
also  expressed  by  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  in  the  act  of  combination 
with  oxygen  (see  Note  7),  and  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  potassium  and 
sodium  and  other  similar  metals  evolve  heat  in  decomposing  water  ;  but 
copper,  silver,  and  the  like  do  not  do  this,  because  in  combining  with 
oxygen  they  evolve  less  heat  than  hydrogen  does,  and  therefore  it  hap- 
pens that  when  hydrogen  reduces  these  metals  heat  is  evolved.     Thus, 
for  example,  if  16  grams  of  oxygen  combine  with  copper,  .38.000  units 
of  heat  are  evolved  ;  and  when^l6  grams  of  oxygen  combine  with 
hydrogen,  forming  water,  69,000  units  of  heat  are  evolved  ;  whilst  23 
grams  of  sodium,  in  combining  with  16  grams  of  oxygen,  evolve  100,000 
units  of  heat.     This  example  clearly  shows   that  chemical   reactions 
which  proceed  directly  and  unaided  evolve  heat.     Sodium  decomposes 
water  and   hydrogen  reduces  copper,   because   they  are    exothermal 
reactions,  or  those  which  evolve  heat  ;  copper  does  not  decompose  water, 


148  PRINCIPLES  OP  CHEMISTRY 

because  such  a  reaction  would  be  accompanied  by  an  absorption  (or 
secretion)  of  heat,  or  belongs  to  the  class  of  eiidothermal  reactions  in 
which  heat  is  absorbed  \  and  such  reactions  do  not  generally  proceed 
directly,  although  they  may  take  place  with  the  aid  of  energy  (electri- 
cal, thermal,  <fcc.)  borrowed  from  some  foreign  source.46 

The  reduction  of  metals  by  hydrogen  is  taken  advantage  of  for 
determining  the  exact  composition  of  water  by  weight.  Cojygej^Oxjji&Js 
usually  chosen  for  this  purpose.  It  is  heated  to  redness  in  hydrogen, 
and  the  quantity  of  water  thus  formed  is  determined,  when  the  quantity 
of  oxygen  which  occurs  in  it  is  found  from  the  loss  of  weight  of  the 
copper  oxide.  The  copper  oxide  must  be  weighed  immediately  before 
and  after  the  experiment.  The  difference  shows  the  weight  of  the 
oxygen  which  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  water  formed.  In 
this  manner  only  solids  have  to  be  weighed,  which  is  a  very  great  gain 
in  the  accuracy  of  the  results  obtained.47  Dulong  and  Berzelius  (1819) 
were  the  first 'to  determine  the  composition  of  water  by  this  method, 
and  they  found  that  water  contains  88'91  of  oxygen  and  11-09  of 
hydrogen  in  100  parts  by  weight,  or  8*008  parts  of  oxygen  per  one  part 
of  hydrogen.  Dumas  (1842)  improved  on  this  method,48  and  found  that 

•J*8  Several  numerical  data  and  reflections  bearing  on  this  matter  are  enumerated  in 
Notes  7,  9,  and  11.  It  must  be  observed  that  the  action  of  iron  or  zinc  on  water  is  rever- 
sible. But  the  reaction  CuO  +  Ha  =  Cu  +  BLjO  is  not  reversible ;  the  difference  between 
the  degrees  of  affinity  is  very  great  in  this  case,  -and,  therefore,  so  far  as  is  at  present 
known,  no  hydrogen  is  liberated  even  in  the  presence  of  a  large  excess  of  water.  It  is 
to  be  further  remarked,  that  under  the  conditions  of  the  dissociation  of  water,  copper  is 
not  oxidised  by  water,  because  the  oxide  of  copper  is  reduced  by  free  hydrogen.  If  a 
definite  amount  of  a  metal  and  acid  be  taken  and  their  reaction  be  carried  on  in  a  closed 
space,  then  the  evolution  of  hydrogen  will  cease,  when  its  tension  equals  that  at  which 
(Compressed  hydrogen  displaces  the  metal.  The  result  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the 
metal  and  the  strength  of  the  solution  of  acid.  Tammann  and  Nerust  (1892)  found  that 
the  metals  stand  in  the  following  order  in  respect  to  this  limiting  tension  of  hydrogen  :— 
Na,  Mg,  Zn,  Al,  Cd,  Fe,  Ni. 

47  This  determination  may  be  carried  on  in  an  apparatus  like  that  mentioned  in 
Note  18  of  Chapter.1. 

48  We  will  proceed  to  describe  Dumas'  method  and  results.     For  this  determination 
,  pure  and  dry-copper  oxide  is  necessary.    Dumas  took  a  sufficient  quantity  of  copper 

oxide  for  the  formation  of  50  grams  of  water  in  each  determination.  As  the  oxide  of 
copper  was  weighed  before  and  after  the  experiment,  and  as  the  amount  of  oxygen  con- 
tained in  water  was  determined  by  the  difference  between  these  weights,  it  was  essential 
that  no  other  substance  besides  the  oxygen  forming  the  water  should  be  evolved  from 
the  oxide  of  copper  during  its  ignition  in  hydrogen.  It  was  necessary,  also,  that  the 
hydrogen  should  be  perfectly  pure,  and  free  not  only  from  traces  of  moisture,  but  from 
any  other  impurities  which  might  dissolve  in  the  water  or  combine  with  the  copper  and 
form  some .  other  compound  with  it.  The  bulb  containing  the  oxide  of  copper  (fig.  26), 
•which  was  heated  to  redness,  should  be  quite  free  from  air,  as  otherwise  the  oxygen  in 
the  air  might,  in  combining  with  the  hydrogen  passing  through  the  vessel,  form  water 
in  addition  to  that  formed  by  the  oxygen  of  the  oxide  of  copper.  The  water  formed 
.should  be  entirely  absorbed  in  order  to  accurately  determine  its  quantity.  The 
hydrogen  was  evolved  in  the  three-necked  bottle.  The  sulphuric  acid,  for  acting  on  the 


THE  COMPOSITION  OP  WATER,  HYDROGEN 


149 


water  contains  1 2-575  parts  of  hydrogen  per  100  parts  of  oxygen — that  is,  i 
990  parts  of  oxygen  per  1  pajpt  of  hydrogen — and  therefore  it  is  usually 

einc,  is  poured  through  funnela 
into  the  middle  neck.  The  hydro* 
gen  evolved  in  the  Woulfe's  bottle 
passes  through  U  tubes,  in  which 
it  is  purified,  to  the  bulb,  where 
it  comes  into  contact  with  the 
Copper  oxide,  forms  water,  and 
.reduces  the  oxide  to  metalliq 
copper ;  the  water  formed  is^con* 
densed  in  the  second  bulb^and 
any  passing  off  is  absorbed  in  the 
second  set  of  U  tubes.  This  i^ 
the  general  arrangement  of  the 
apparatus.  The  bulb  with  the 
copper  oxide  is  weighed  before, 
and  after  the  experiment.  The; 
loss  in  weight  shows  the  quantity' 
of  oxygen  which  entered  into  the 
composition  of  the  water  formed, 
the  weight  of  the  latter  being 
shown  by  the  gain  in  weight  oi 
the  absorbing  apparatus.  Know* 
ing  the  amount  of  oxygen  in  the 
water  formed,  we  also  know  the" 
quantity  of  hydrogen  contained 
in  it,  and  consequently  we  deter* 
mine  the  composition  of  water  by 
weight.  This  is  the  essence  of 
the  determination.  We  will  now 
turn  to  certain  particulars.  In 
one  neck  of  the  three-necked 
bottle  a  tube  is  placed  dipping 
under  mercury.  This  serves  as  a, 
safety-valve  to  prevent  the  pres/ 
•sure  inside  the  apparatus  be- 
coming too  great  from  the  rapid 
evolution  of  hydrogen.  If  the 
pressure  rose  to  any  consider- 
able  extent,  the  current  of  gases 
and  vapours  would  be  very  rapid, 
and,  as  a  consequence,  the  hy- 
drogen would  not  be  perfectly 
purified,  or  the  water  entirely 
absorbed  in  the  tubes  placed  for 
this  purpose.  .In  the  third  neck 
of  the  Woulfe's  bottle  is  a  tube 
conducting  the  hydrogen  to  the 
purifying  apparatus,  consisting- 
Of  eight  U  tubes,  destined  for 
the  purification  and  testing  of 
the  hydrogen.  The  hydrogen,  evolved  by  zinc  and  sulphuric  acid,  is  purified  by 
passing  it  first  through  a  tube  full  of  pieces  of  glass  moistened  with  a  solution  of 
lead  nitrate  next  through  .silver  sulphate;  the  lead  nitrate  retains  sulphuretted 


150  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

I  accepted  that  water  contains  eight  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  to  one  part 
by  weight  of  hydrogen.  By  whatever  method  water  be  obtained,  it  will 

hydrogen,  and  arseniuretted  hydrogen  is  retained  by  the  tube  with  silver  sulphate. 
Caustic  potash  in  the  next  U  tube  retains  any  acid  which  might  come  over.  The 
two  following  tubes  are  filled  with  lumps  of  dry  caustic  potash  in  order  to  absorb 
any  carbonic  anhydride  and  moisture  which  the  hydrogen  might  contain.  The  next  two 
tubes,  to  remove  the  last  traces  of  moisture,  are  filled  with  phosphoric  anhydride,  mixed 
with  lumps  of  pumice-stone.  They  are  immersed  in  a  freezing  mixture.  The  small 
U  tube  contains  hygroscopic  substances,  and  is  weighed  before  the  experiment :  this  is 
in  order  to  know  whether  the  hydrogen  passing  through  still  retains  any  moisture.  If  it 
does  not,  then  the  weight  of  this  tube  will  not  vary  during  the  whole  experiment,  but 
if  the  hydrogen  evolved  still  retains  moisture,  the  tube  will  increase  in  weight.  The 
copper  oxide  is  placed  in  the  bulb,  which,  previous  to  the  experiment,  is  dried  with  the 
copper  oxide  for  a  long  period  of  time.  The  air  is  then  exhausted  from  it,  in  order  to 
weigh  the  oxide  of  copper  in  a  vacuum  and  to  avoid  the  need  of  a  correction  for  weigh- 
ing  in  air.  The  bulb  is  made  of  infusible  glass,  that  it  may  be  able  to  withstand  a 
lengthy  (20  hours)  exposure  to  a  red  heat  without  changing  in  form.  The  weighed  bulb 
is  only  connected  with  the  purifying  apparatus  after  the  hydrogen  has  passed  through 
for  a  long  time,  and  after  experiment  has  shown  that  the  hydrogen  passing  from  the 
purifying  apparatus  is  pure  and  does  not  contain  any  air.  On  passing  from  the  con- 
densing bulb  the  gas  and  vapour  enter  into  an  apparatus  for  absorbing  the  last  traces  of 
moisture.  The  first  U  tube  contains  pieces  of  ignited  potash,  the  second  and  third  tubes 
phosphoric  anhydride  or  pumice-stone  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid.  The  last  of  the 
two  is  employed  for  determining  whether  all  the  moisture  is  absorbed,  and  is  therefore 
weighed  separately.  The  final  tube  only  serves  as  a  safety-tube  for  the  whole  apparatus, 
in  order  that  the  external  moisture  should  not  penetrate  into  it.  The  glass  cylinder 
Contains  sulphuric  acid,  through  which  the  excess  of  hydrogen  passes ;  it  enables  the 
rate  at  which  the  hydrogen  is  evolved  to  be  judged,  and  whether  its  amount  should  be 
decreased  or  increased. 

When  the  apparatus  is  fitted  up  it  must  be  seen  that  all  its  parts  are  hermetically 
tight  before  commencing  the  experiment.  When  the  previously  weighed  parts  are  con- 
nected together  and  the  who^e  apparatus  put  into  communication,  then  the  bulb  contain- 
ing the  copper  oxide  is  heated  with  a  spirit  lamp  (reduction  does  not  take  place  without 
the  aid  of  heat),  and  the  reduction  of  the  copper  oxide  then  takes  place,  and  water  is 
formed.  When  nearly  all  the  copper  oxide  is  reduced  the  lamp  is  removed  and  th« 
apparatus  allowed  to  cool,  the  current  of  hydrogen  being  kept  up  all  the  time.  When 
cool,  the  drawn-out  end  of  the  bulb  is  fused  up,  and  the  hydrogen  remaining  in  it  ia 
exhausted,  in  order  that  the  copper  may  be  again  weighed  in  a  vacuum.  The  absorbing 
apparatus  remains  full  of  hydrogen,  and  would  therefore  present  a  less  weight  than  if  it 
were  full  of  air,  as  it  was  before  the  experiment,  and  for  this  reason,  having  disconnected 
the  copper  oxide  bulb,  a  current  of  dry  air  is  passed  through  it  until  the  gas  passing  from 
the  glass  cylinder  is  quite  free  from  hydrogen.  The  condensing  bulb  and  the  two  tubes 
next  to  it  are  then  weighed,  in  order  to  determine  the  quantity  of  water  formed.  Dumas 
repeated  this  experiment  many  times.  The  average  result  was  that  water  contains 
1253*8  parts  of  hydrogen  per  10,000  parts  of  oxygen.  Making  a  correction  for  the  amount 
of  air  contained  in  the  sulphuric  acid  employed  for  producing  the  hydrogen,  Dumas 
obtained  the  average  figure  1251*5,  between  the  extremes  1247*2  and  1256*2.  This 
proves  that  per  1  part  of  hydrogen  water  contains  7*9904  parts  of  oxygen,  with  a  possible 
error  of  not  more  than  ^y,  or  0*08,  in  the  amount  of  oxygen  per  1  part  of  hydrogen. 

Erdmann  and  Marchand,  in  eight  determinations,  found  that  per  10,000  parts  of 
oxygen  water  contains  an  average  of  1,252  parts  of  hydrogen,  with  a  difference  of  from 
1,258.5  to  1,248*7  ;  hence  per  1  part  of  hydrogen  there  would  be  7*9952  of  oxygen,  with  an 
error  of  at  least  0*05. 

Keiser    1888),  in  America    by  employing  palladium  hydride,  and  by  introducing 


THE  COMPOSITION  OF   WATER,   HYDROGEN  151 

always  present  the  same  composition.     Whether  it  be  taken  from  nature 
and  purified,  or  whether  it  be  obtained  from  hydrogen  by  oxidation,  or 
whether  it  be  separated  from  any  of  its  compounds,  or  obtained  by  some 
double  decomposition — it  will  in  every  case  contain  one  part  by.  weight 
of  hydrogen  and  eight  parts  of  oxygen.    This  is  because  water  is  a  definite 
chemical  compound.     Detgnating  gas,  from  which  it  maybe  formed,  is       1,1. 
a  simple  mixture  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  although  a  mixture  of  the       |   * 
same  composition  as  water.     All  the  properties  of  both  constituent 
gases  arj^e^ejved  J^_  de^o^nating^^as.     Either  one  or  the  other  gas 
may  be  added  to  it  without  destroying  its  homogeneity.     The^fpnfo.  A 
mental  properties  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  are  not  found  in  \vater,  and  j 
neither  of  the  gases  can  be  directly  combined  with  it.     But  they  may  be  1 
evolved  from  it.     In  the  formation  of  water  there  is  an  evolution  of  heat ;  j 
for  the  decomposition  of  water  heat  is  required.     All  this  is  expressed 
by  the  words,    Water  is  a  definite  chemical  compound  of  hydrogen  with 
oxygen.    Taking  the  symbol  of  hydrogen,  H,  as  expressing  a  unitquan- 
tity  by  weight  of  this  substance,  and  expressing  16  parts  by  weight 
of  oxygen  by  O,  we  can  formulate  all  the  above  statements  by  the 
chemical  symbol  of  water,  H2O.     As  only  definite  chemical  compounds 
are  denoted  by  formulae,  having  denoted  the  formula  of  a  compound 
substance  we  express  by  it  the  entire  series  of  properties  which 
go  to  make  up  our  conception  of  a  definite  compound,  and  at  the 
same  time  the  quantitative  composition  of  the  substance  by  weight. 
Further,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  formula  express  the  volume  of 
the  gases  contained  in  a  substance.     Thus  the  formula  of  water  shows  i    • 
that  it  contains  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen.  I   • 
Besides  which,  we  shall  learn  that  the  formula  expresses  the  density  of 
the  vapour  of  a  compound,  and  on  this  many  properties  of  substances 
depend,  and,  as  we  shall  learn,  determine  the  quantities  of  the  bodies 
entering  into  reactions.     This  vapour  density  we  shall  find  also  deter- 
mines the  quantity  of  a  substance  entering  into  a  reaction.     Thus  the 
letters  H^O  tell  the  chemist  the  entire  history  of  the-  substance.    This 
is  an  international  language,  which  endows  chemistry  with  a  simplicity, 
clearness,  stability,  and  trustworthiness  founded  on  the  investigation 
of  the  laws  of  nature. 

various  fresh  precautions  for  obtaining  accurate  results,  found  the  composition  of  water  to 
be  15-95  parts  of  oxygen  per  2  of  hydrogen. 

Certain  of  the  latest  .determinations  of  the  composition  of  water,  as  also  those  made 
by  Dumas,  always  give  less  than  8,  and  on  the  average  7'98,  of  oxygen  per  1  part  of 
hydrogen.    However,  not  one  of  these  figures  is  to  be  entirely  depended  on,  and  for 
ordinary  accuracy Jt  may  be  considered  that  0  =  16  when  H»l. 
*8 


152  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


CHAPTER  III 

OXYGEN  AND  THE  CHIEF  ASPECTS   OP  ITS  SALINE   COMBINATIONS 

ON  the  earth's  surface  there  is  no  other  element  which  is  so  widely  dis- 
tributed as  oxygen  in  its  various  compounds. l  It  makes  up  eight-ninths 
of  the  weight  of  water,  which  occupies  the  greater  part  of  the  earth's 
surface.  Nearly  all  earthy  substances  and  rocks  consist  of  compounds 
of  oxygen  with  metals  and  other  elements.  Thus,  the  greater  part  of 
sand  is  formed  of  silica,  SiO9,  which  contains  53  p.c.  of  oxygen  ;  clay 
contains  water,  alumina  (formed  of  aluminium  and  oxygen),  and  silica. 
It  may  be  considered  that  earthy  substances  and  rocks  contain  up  to 
one-third  of  their  weight  of  oxygen  ;  animal  and  vegetable  substances 
are  also  very  rich  in  oxygen.  Without  counting  the  water  present  in 
them,  plants  contain  up  to  40,  and  animals  up  to  20  p.c.  by  weight  of 
oxygen.  Thus,  oxygen  compounds  predominate  on  the  earth's  surface. 
Besides  this,  a  portion  exists  in  a  free  state,  and  is  contained  in  admix- 
ture with  nitrogen  in  the  atmosphere,  forming  about  one-fourth  of  its 
mass,  or  one-fifth  of  its  volume. 

Being  so  widely  distributed  in  nature,  oxygen  plays  a  very  im- 
portant part  in  it,  for  a  number  of  the  phenomena  which  take  place 
before  us  are  mainly  dependent  on  it.  Animals  breathe  air  in  order 
to  obtain  only  oxygen  from  it,  the  oxygen  entering  into  their  respiratory 
organs  (the  lungs  of  human  beings  and  animals,  the  gills  of  fishes,  and 
the  trachse  of  insects)  ;  they,  so  to  say,  drink  in  air  in  order  to  absorb 
the  oxygen.  The  oxygen  of  the  air  (or  dissolved  in  water)  passes 
through  the  membranes  of  the  respiratory  organs  into  the  blood,  is 
retained  in  it  by  the  blood  corpuscles,  is  transmitted  by  their  means 
to  all  parts  of  the  body,  aids  their  transformations,  bringing  about 
chemical  processes  in  them,  and  chiefly  extracting  carbon  from  them 
in  the  form  of  carbonic  anhydride,  the  greater  part  of  which  passes 
into  the  blood,  is  dissolved  by  it,  and  is  thrown  off  by  the  lungs  during 

1  A.8  regards  the  interior  of  the  earth,  it  probably  contains  far  less  oxygen  com- 
pounds thaii  the  surface,  judging  by  the  accumulated  evidences  of  the  earth's  origin,  of 
meteorites,  of  the  earth's  density,  &c.  (tee  Chapter  VIII.,  Note  58,  and  Chapter  XXII., 
Note  2} 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  153 

the  absorption  of  the  oxygen.  Thus,  in  the  process  of  respiratiop 
carbonic  anhydride  (and  water)  is  given  off",  and  the  oxygen  of  the  air 
absorbed,  by  which  means  the  blood  is  changed  from  a  red  veno.us 
to  a  dark -red  arterial  blood.  The  cessation  of  this  process  causes 
death,  because  then  all  those  chemical  processes,  and  the  consequent 
heat  and  work  which  the  oxygen  introduced  into  the  system  brought 
about,  cease.  For  this  reason  suffocation  and  death  ensue  in  a  vacuum, 
or  in  a  gas  which  does  not  contain  free  oxygen,  i.e.  which  does  not 
support  combustion.  If  an  animal  be  placed  in  an  atmosphere  of  free 
oxygen,  at  first  its  movements  are  very  active  and  a  general  invigoratioti 
is  remarked,  but  a  reaction  soon  sets  in,  and  death  may  ensue.  The 
oxygen  of  the  air  when  it  enters  the  lungs  is  diluted  with  four  volumes 
of  nitrogen,  which  is  not  absorbed  into  the  system,  so  that  the  blood 
absorbs  but  a  small  quantity  of  oxygen  from  the  air,  whilst  in  au 
atmosphere  of  pure  oxygen  a  large  quantity  of  oxygen  would  be 
absorbed,  and  would  produce  a  very  rapid  change  of  all  parts  of  the 
organism,  and  destroy  it.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  under* 
stood  that  oxygen  may  be  emplojed  in  respiration,  at  any  rate  for  a 
limited  time,  "when  the  respiratory  organs  suffer  under  certain  forms  of 
suffocation  and  impediment  to  breathing.2 

The  combustion  of  organic  substances — that  is,  substances  which 
make  up  the  composition  of  plants  and  animals — proceeds  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  combustion  of  tnanyt  inorganic  substances,  such  as 
sulphur,,  phosphorus,  iron,  <fec.,  from  the  combination  of  these  substances 
with  oxygen,  as  was  described  in  the  Introduction.  The  decomposi- 
tion, rotting,  and  similar  transformations  of  substances,  which  proceed 
ground  us,  are  also  very  often  dependent  on  the  action  of  the  oxygen 
«of  the  air,  and  also  reduce  it  from  a  free  to  a  combined  state.  The 

*  II  is  evident  that  the  partial  pressure  (see  Chapter  I.)  acts  in  respiration.  The 
researches  of  Paul  Bert  showed  this  with  particular  clearness.  Under  a  pressure  of  one- 
fifth  of  an  atmosphere  consisting  of  oxygen  only,  animals  and  human  beings  remain 
under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  the  partial  pressure  of  oxygen,  but  organisms  cannot 
support  air  rarefied  to  one-fifth,  for  then  the  partial  pressure  of  the  oxygen  falls  to  one. 
twenty-fifth  of  an  atmosphere.  Even  under  a  pressure  of  one-third  of  an  atmosphere  the 
regular  life  of  human  beings  is  impossible,  by  reason  of  the  impossibility  of  respiration 
(because  of  the  decrease  of  solubility  of  oxygen  in  the  blood),  owing  to  the  small  partial 
pressure  of  the  oxygen,  and  not  from  any  mechanical  effect  of  the  decrease  of  pressure. 
Paul  Bert  illustrated  all  this  by  many  experiments,  some  of  which  he  conducted  on  him* 
self.  This  explains,  among  other  things,  the  discomfort  felt  in  the  ascent  of  high  rnouu. 
tain*  or  in  balloons  when  the  height  reached  exceeds  eight  kilometres,  and  at  pressures 
below  250  mm.  (Chapter  II.,  Note  23),  II  is  evident  that  an  artificial  atmosphere  has 
to  be  employed  in  the  ascent  to  great  heights,  just  as  in  submarine  work.  The  cure  by 
compressed  and  rarefied  air  which  is  practised  in  certain  illnesses  is  based  partly  oa 
the  mechanical  action  of  the  change  of  pressure,  and  partly  on  the  alteration  i»  the  partial 
faressure  of  the  respired  oxygen. 


154  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

majority  of  the  compounds  of  oxygen  are,  like  water,  very  stable,  and 
do  not  give  up  their  oxygen  under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  nature. 
As  these  processes  are  taking  place  everywhere,  it  might  be  expected 
that  the  amount  of  free  oxygen  in  the  atmosphere  should  decrease, 
and  this  decrease  should  proceed  somewhat  rapidly.  This  is,  in  fact, 
observed  where  combustion  or  respiration  proceeds  in  a  closed  space. 
Animals  suffocate  in  a  closed  space  because  in  consuming  the  oxygen 
the  air  remains  unfit  for  respiration.  In  the  same  manner  combustion, 
after  a  time,  ceases  in  a  closed  space,  which  may  be  proved  by  a  very 
simple  experiment.  An  ignited  substance — for  instance,  a  piece  of  burn- 
ing sulphur — has  only  to  be  placed  in  a  glass  flask,  which  is  then  closed 
with  a  stout  cork  to  prevent  the  access  of  the  external  air ;  combus- 
tion will  proceed  for  a  certain  time,  so  long  as  the  flask  contains  any 
free  oxygen,  but  it  will  cease  when  the  oxygen  of  the  enclosed  air  has 
combined  with  the  sulphur.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident 
that  regularity  of  combustion  or  respiration  requires  a  constant  renewal 
of  air— that  is,  that  the  burning  substance  or  respiring  animal  should 
have  access  to  a  fresh  supply  of  oxygen.  This  is  attained  in  dwellings 
by  having  many  windows,  outlets,  and  ventilators,  and  by  the  current 
of  air  produced  by  fires  and  stoves.  As  regards  the  air  over  the  entire 
earth's  surface  its  amount  of  oxygen  hardly  decreases,  because  in 
nature  there  is  a  process  going  on  which  renews  the  supply  of  free 
oxygen.  Plants,  or  rather  their  leaves,  during  daytime,3  under  the 
influence  of  light,  absorb  carbonic  anhydride  CO2,  and  evolve  free  oxygen. 
Thus  the  loss  of  oxygen  which  occurs  in  consequence  of  the  respiration 
of  animals  and  of  combustion  is  made  good  by  plants.  If  a  leaf  be 
placed  in  a  bell  jar  containing  water,  and  carbonic  anhydride  (because 
this  gas  is  absorbed  and  oxygen  evolved  from  it  by  plants)  be  passed 
into  the  bell,  and  the  whole  apparatus  placed  in  sunlight,  then 
oxygen  will  accumulate  in  the  bell  jar.  This  experiment  was  first 
made  by  Priestley  at  the  end  of  the  last  century.  Thus  the  life  of  plants 
on  the  earth  not  only  serves  for  the  formation  of  food  for  animals,  but 
also  for  keeping  up  a  constant  percentage  of  oxygen  in  the  atmosphere. 
In  the  long  period  of  the  life  of  the  earth  an  equilibrium  has  been 
attained  between  the  processes  absorbing  and  evolving  oxygen,  by 
which  a  definite  quantity  of  free  oxygen  is  preserved  in  the  entire  mass 
of  the  atmosphere.4 

5  At  night,  without  the  action  of  light,  without  the  absorption  of  that  energy  which  is 
required  for  the  decomposition  of  carbonic  anhydride  into  free  oxygen  and  carbon  (which 
is  retained  by  the  plants)  they  breathe  like  animals,  absorbing  oxygen  and  evolving 
carbonic  anhydride.  This  process  also  goes  on  side  by  side  with  the  reverse  process  in 
the  daytime,  but  it  is  then  far  feebler  than  that  which  gives  oxygen. 

4  The  earth's  surface  is  equal  to  about  510  million  square  kilometres,  and  the  mass  of 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  155 

Oxygen  was  obtained  as  ah  independent  gas  in  1774  by  Priestley  iq_      4- 
England  and  in  the  same  year  by  Scheele  in  Sweden,  but  its  nature  and 
great  importance  were  only  perfectly  elucidated  by  Lavoisier. 

Free  oxygen  may  be  obtained  by  one  or  other  method  from  all  the 
substances  in  which  it  occurs.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  oxygen  of  many 
substances  may  be  transferred  into  water,  £rom  which,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  oxygen  may  be  obtained.5  We  will  first  consider  the 
methods  of  extracting  oxygen,  from  air  as  being  a  substance  everywhere 
distributed.  The  separation  of  oxygen  from  it  is,,  however,  hampered 
by  many  difficulties. 

From  air,  -which  contains  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  the  f! 
nitrogen  alone  cannot  be  removed,  because  it  has  no  inclination  to  I 
combine  directly  or  readily  with  any  substance  ;  and  although  it  doesP 
combine  with  certain  substances  (boron,  titanium),  these  substances  K 
combine  simultaneously  with  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.6  However, * 

,the  air  (at  a  pressure  of  7dO  mml)  6,ri,each  kilometre  of  surface  is  about  10 £  thousand 
millions  of  kilograms,  or  about  10$  million  tons  ;  therefore  the  whole  weight  of  the  atmo- 
sphere is  about  5,100  million  million  (  =  51xl014)  tons.  Consequently  there  are  about 
2  x  1015  tons  of  free  oxygen  in  the  earth's  atmosphere.  The  innumerable  series  of  pro- 
cesses  which  absorb  a  portion  of  this  oxygen  are  compensated  for  by  the  plant  processes. 
Assuming  that  100  million  tons  of  vegetable,  matter,  containing  40  p.c.  of  carbon,  formed 
from  carbonic  acid,  are  produced  (and  the  same  process  proceeds  in  water)  per  year  on 
the  100  million  square  kilometres  of  dry  land  (ten  tons  of  roots,  leaves,  stems,  &c.,  per 
hectare,  or  ^  of  a  square  kilometre),  we^nd  that  the  plant  life  of  the  dry  land  gives 
about  100,000  tons  of  oxygen,  which  is  an  insignificant  fraction  of  the  entire  mass  of  the 
oxygen  of  the  air. 

4  The  extraction  of  oxygen  ffbm- water  .may  be  effected  by  two  processes:  either  by 
the  decomposition  of  water  into  its  .constituent  parts  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current 
(Chapter  II.),  or  by  means  of  the  removal  of  the  hydrogen  from  water.  But,  as  we  have 
seen  and  already  know,  hydrogen  enters  into  direct  combination  with  very  few  substances, 
and  then  only  under  special  circumstances ;  whilst  oxygen,  as  we  shall  soon  learn,  com- 
bines with  nearly  all  substances.  Only  gaseous  chlorine  (and,  especially,  fluorine)  is 
capable  of  decomposing  water,  taking  up  the  hydrogen  from  it,  without  combining  with 
the  oxygen.  Chlorine  is  soluble  in  water,  and -if  an  aqueous  solution  of  chlorine,  so-called 
chlorine  water,  be  poured  into  a  flask,  and  this  flask  be  inverted  in  a  basin  containing 
the  same  chlorine  water,  then  we  shall  have  an  apparatus  by  means  of  which  oxygen  may  be 
extracted  from  water.  At  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  in  the  dark,  chlorine  does  not 
act  on  water,  or  only  acts  very  feebly ;  but  under  the  action  of  direct  sunlight  chlorine 
decomposes  water,  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen.  The  chlorine  then  combines  with  the 
hydrogen,  and  gives  hydrochloric  acid,  which  dissolves  in  the  water,  and  therefore  free 
oxygen  only  will  be  separated  from  the  liquid,  and  it  will  only  contain  a  small  quantity 
of  chlorine  in  admixture,  which  <5&n  be  easily  removed  by  passing  the  gas  through  a 
solution  of  caustic  potash. 

6  A  difference  in  the  physical  properties  of  both  gases  cannot  be  here  taken  advantage 
Of,  because  they  are  very  similar  in  this  respect.  Thus  the  density  of  oxygen  is  16  times 
and  of  nitrogen  14  times  greater  than  the  density  of  hydrogen,  and  therefore  porous 
vessels  cannot  be  here  employed — the  difference  between  the  times  of  their  passage 
through  a  porous  surface  would  be  too  insignificant. 

Graham,  however,  succeeded  in  enriching  air  in  oxygen  by  passing  it  through  india- 
rubber.  This  may  be  done  in  the  following  way :— A  common  india-rubber  cushion,  B 


156 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


oxygen  may  be  separated  from  air  by  causing  it  to  combine  with  sub- 
stances which  may  be  easily  decomposed  by  the  action  of  heat,  and,  in 


(Fig.  27),  is  taken,  and  its  orifice  hermetically  connected  with  an  air-pump,  or,  better 
still,  a  mercury  aspirator  (the  Sprengel  pump  is  designated  by  the  letters  A,  c,  B).  When 
the  aspirator  (Chapter  II.,  Note  16)  has  pumped  out  the  air,  which  will  be  seen  by  the 
mercury  running  out  in  an  almost  uninterrup ted  -stream,  and  from  its  standing  approxi- 
mately  at  the  barometric  height,  then  it  maybe  clearly  observed  that  gas  passes  through  the 

india-rubber.  This  is  also  seen 
from  the  fact  that  bubbles  of  gas 
continually  pass  along  with  the 
mercury.  A  minus  pressure  may 
be  constantly  maintained  in  the 
cushion  by  pouring  mercury 
into  the  funnel  A,  and  screwing 
up  the  pinchcock  c,  BO  that  the 
stream  flowing  from  it  is  small, 
and  then  a  portion  of  the  air 
passing  through  the  india- 
rubber  will  be  carried  along 
with  the  mercury.  This  air 
may  be  collected  in'  the  cylin- 
der, B.  Its  composition  proves 
to  be  about  42  volumes  of 
oxygen  with  67  volumes  of  ni- 
trogen, and  one  volume  of  car- 
bonic anhydride,whilst  ordinary 
air  contains  only  21  volumes 
of  oxygen  in  100  volumes.  A 
square  metre  of  india-rubber 
surface  (of  the  usual  thickness) 
passes  about  45  c.c.  of  such  air 
per  hour.  This  experiment 
clearly  shows  that  india-rubber 
ia  permeable  to  gases.  This 
may,  by  tho  way,  be  observed 
in  common  toy  balloons  filled 
with  coal-gas.  They  fall  after 
a  day  or  two,  not  because  there 
are  holes  in  them,  but  because 
air  penetrates  into,  and  the  gas 
from,  their  interior,  through  the 
surface  of  the  india-rubber  of 
which  they  are  made.  The 
rate  of  the  passage  of  gases 
through  india-rubber  does  not, 
as  Mitchell  and  Graham  showed, 
depend  on  their  densities,  and 
consequently  its.  permeability 
ie  not  determined  by  orifices.  It  more  resembles  dialysis — that  is,  the  penetration 
of  liquids  through  colloid  surfaces.  Equal  volumes  of  gases  penetrate  through  india- 
rubber  in  periods  of  time  which  are  related  to  each  other  as  follows  •.—carbonic- anhydride, 
100 ;  hydrogen,  247 ;  oxygen,  582 ;  marsh  gas,  633  ;  carbonic  oxide,  1,220 ;  nitrogen,  1,858. 
Hence  nitrogen  penetrates  more  slowly  than  oxygen,  and  carbonic  anhydride  more 
quickly  than  other  gases.  2'556  volumes  of  oxygen  and  18-585  volumes  »f  carbonic 


Fia.  27.— Graham's  apparatus  for  the  decomposition  of  air 
by  pumping  it  through  india-rubber. 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  157 

so  doing,  give  up  the  oxygen  absorbed— that  is,  by  making  use  of  re- 
versible reactions.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere 
may  be  made  to  oxidise  sulphurous  anhydride,  S02  (by  passing  directly 
over  ignited  spongy  platinum),  and  to  form  sulphuric  anhydride,  or 
sulphur  trioxide,  SO3  ;  and  this  substance  (which  is  a  solid  and  volatile, 
and  therefore  easily  separated  from  the  nitrogen  and  sulphurous 
anhydride),  on  further  heating,  .gives  oxygen  and  sulphurous  anhydride. 
Caustic  soda  or  lime  extracts  (absorbs)  the  sulphurous  anhydride 
from  this  mixture,  whilst  the  oxygen  is  not  absorbed,  and  thus  it  is 
isolated'  from  the  air.  On-  a  large  scale  in  works,  as  we  shall  afterwards 
see,  sulphurous  anhydride  is  transformed  into  hydrate  of  sulphuric 
trioxide,  or  sulphuric  acid,  H2S04  ;  if  this  is  allowed  to  drop  on  to 
red-hot  flagstones,  water,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  oxygen  are  obtainecj. 
The  oxygen  is  easily  isolated  from  this  mixture  by  passing  the  gases 
over  lime.  The- extraction  of  oxygen  from  oxide  of  mercury  (Priestley, 
Lavoisier),  which  is  obtained  from  mercury  and  the  oxygen  of  the 
atmosphere,  is  also  a  reversible  reaction  by  which  oxygen  may  be 
obtained  from  the  atmosphere.  So  also,  by  passing  dry  air  through  a 
red-hot  tube  containing  barium  oxide,  it  is  made  to  combine  with  the 
oxygen  of  the  air.  In  this  reaction  the  so-called  barium  peroxide, 
BaO2,  is  formed  from  the  barium  oxide,  BaO,  and  at  a  higher  tempera- 
ture the  former  evolves  the  absorbed  oxygen,  and  .leaves  the  barium 
oxide  originally  taken.7 

anhydride  penetrate  in  the  same  time  as  one  volume  of  nitrogen.  By  multiplying  these 
ratios  by  the  amounts  of  these  gases  in  air,  we  obtain  figures  which  are  in  almost  the 
same  proportion  as  the  volumes  of  the  gases  penetrating  from  air  through  india-rubber. 
If  the  process  of  dialysis  be  repeated  on  the  air  which  has  already  passed  through  india- 
rubber,  then  9,  mixture  containing  65  p.c.  by  volume  of  bxygen  is  obtained.  It  may  be 
thought  that  the  cause  of  this  phenomenon  is  the  absorption  or  occlusion  (see  Chap.  II., 
Note  37)  of  gases  by  india-rubber  and  the  evolution  of  the  gas  dissolved  in  a  vacuum  ;  and, 
indeed,  india-rubber  does  absorb  gases,  especially  carbonic  anhydride.  Graham  called  the 
above  method  of  the  decomposition  of  air  atmolysi*. 

"  The  preparation  of  oxygen  by  this  method,  which  is  due  to  Boussinganlt,  is  conducted 
rn  a  porcelain  tube,  which  is  placed  in  a  stove  heated  by  charcoal,  so  that  its  ends  project 
beyond  the  stove.  Barium  oxide  (which  may  be  obtained  by  igniting  barium  nitrate, 
previously  dried)  is  placed  in  the  tube,  one  end  of  which  is  connected  with  a  pair  of 
bellows,  or  a  gas-holder,  for  keeping  up  a  current  of  air  through  it.  The  air  is  previously 
passed  through  a  solution  of  caustic  potash,  to  remove  all  traces  of  carbonic  anhydride, 
and  it  is  very  carefully  dried  (for  the  hydrate  BaH2O2  does  not  give  the  peroxide).  At  a 
dark-red  heat  (500-600°)  the  oxide  of  barium  absorbs  oxygen  from  the  air,  so  that  the  gas 
leaving  the  tube  consists  almost  entirely  of  nitrogen.  When  the  absorption  ceases,  the  air 
will  pass  through  the  tube  unchanged,  which  may  be  recognised  from  the  fact  that  it  sup- 
ports combustion.  The  barium  oxide  is  converted  into  peroxide  under  these  circumstances, 
and  eleven  parts  of  barium  oxide  absorb  about  one  part  of  oxygen  by  weight.  When  the 
absorption  ceases,  one  end  of  the  tube  is  closed,  a  cork  with  a  gas-conducting  tube  is  fixed 
into  the  other  end,  and  the  heat  of  the  stove  is  increased  to  a  bright-red  heat  (800°)-  At 
this  temperature  the  barium  peroxide  gives  up  all  that  oxygen  which  it  acquired  at  a  dark- 
red  heat — i.e.  about  one  part  by  weight  of  oxygen  is  evolved  from  twelve  parts  of  barium 


158  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Oxygen  is  evolved  with  particular  ease  by  a  whole  series  of  unstable 
oxygen  compounds,  of  which  we  shall  proceed  to  take  a  general  survey, 
remarking  that  many  of  these  reactions,  although  not  all,  belong  to  the 
number  of  reversible  reactions  ; 8  so  that  in  order  to  obtain  many  o£ 
these  substances  (for  instance,  potassium  chlorate)  rich  in  oxygen, 
recourse  must  be  had  to  indirect  methods  (see  Introduction)  with 
which  we  shall  become  acquainted  in  the  course  of  this  book. 

1.  The  compounds  of  oxygen  with  certain  metals,  and  especially 
with  the  so-called  noble  metals — that  is,  mercury,  silver,  gold,  and 
platinum — having  once  been  obtained,  retain  their  oxygen  at  the  ordi- 
nary temperature,  but  part  with  it  at  a  red  heat.  The  compounds  are 
solids,  generally  amorphous  and  infusible,  and  are  easily  decomposed  by 
heat  into  the  metal  and  oxygen.  We  have  seen  an  example  of  this  in 

peroxide.  After  the  evolution  of  the  oxygen  there  remains  the  barium  oxide  which  was 
originally  taken,  so  that  air  may  be  again  passed  over  it,  and  thus  the  preparation  of  oxygen 
from  one  and  the  same  quantity  of  barium  oxide  maybe  repeated  many  times.  Oxygen 
has  been  produced  one  hundred  times  from  one  mass  of  oxide  by  this  method  ;  all  the  ne- 
cessary precautions  being  taken,  as  regards  the  temperature  of  the  mass  and  the  removal 
of  moisture  and  carbonic  acid  from  the  air.  Unless  these  precautions  be  taken,  the  mass 
of  oxide  soon  spoils. 

As  oxygen  may  become  of  considerable  technical  use,  from  its  capacity  for  giving 
high  temperatures  and  intense  light  in  the  combustion  of  substances, .  its  preparation 
directly  from  air  by  practical  methods  forms  a  problem  whose  solution  many  investi- 
gators continue  to  work  at  up  to  the  present  day.  The  most  practical  methods  are  those 
of  Tessie*  du  Motay  and  Kassner.  The  first  is  based  on  the  fact  that  a  mixture  of  equal 
weights  of  manganese  peroxide  and  caustic  soda  at  an  incipient  red  heat  (about  B50°) 
absorbs  oxygen  from  air,  with  the  separation  of  water,  according  to  the  equation  MnO2  + 
2NaHO  +  O  =  Na2MnO4+H2O.  If  superheated  steam,  at  a  temperature  of  about  450°, 
be  then  passed  through  the  mixture,  the  manganese  peroxide  and  caustic  soda  originally 
taken  are  regenerated,  and  the  oxygen  held  by  them  is  evolved,  according  to  the  reverse 
equation  Na2Mn04  +  HaO  =  MnO2  +  2NaHO  +  O.  This  mode  of  preparing  oxygen  may  be 
repeated  for  an  infinite  number  of  times.  The  oxygen  in  combining  liberates  water,  and 
steam,  acting  on  the  resultant  substance,  evolves  oxygen.  Hence  all  that  is  required  for 
the  preparation  of  oxygen  by  this  method  is  fuel  and  the  alternate  cutting  off  the  supply 
of  air  and  steam.  In  Kassner's  process  (1891)  a  mixture  of  oxide  of  lead  and  lime  (PbO  + 
2CaO)  is  heated  to  redness  in  the  presence  of  air,  oxygen  is  then  absorbed  and  calcium 
plumbate,  CaoPb04,  formed.  The  latter  is  of  a  chocolate  colour,  and  on  further  heating 
evolves  oxygen  and  gives  the  original  mixture  PbO  +  2CaO — that  is,  the  phenomenon  is 
essentially  the  same  as  in  Boussingault's  process  (with  BaO),  but  according  to  Le  Chate- 
lier  (1893)  the  dissociation  tension  of  the  oxygen  evolved  from  Ca2PbO4is  less  than  with 
BaO2  at  equal  temperatures ;  for  instance,  at  940°,  112  mm.  of  mercury  for  the  first,  and 
for  the  latter  210  mm.  at  720°,  and  670  mm.  at  790°,  while  for  Ca2PbO4  this  tension  is  only 
reached  at  1,080°,  However,  in  Kassner's  process  the  oxygen  is  absorbed  more  rapidly, 
and  the  influence  of  the  presence  of  moisture  and  CO2  in  the  air  is  not  so  marked,  so  that 
this  process,  like  that  of  Tessie*  du  Motay,  deserves  consideration. 

8  Even  the  decomposition  of  manganese  peroxide  is  reversible,  and  it  may  be  re- 
obtained  from  that  suboxide  (or"  its  salts),  which  is  formed  in  the  evolution  of  Oxygen 
(Chap.  XL,  Note  6).  The  compounds  of  chromic  acid  containing  the  trioxide  CrO3  in 
evolving  oxygen  give  chromium  oxide,  Ci'aOg,  but  they  re-form  the  salt  of  chromic,  acid 
when  heated  to  redness  in  air  with  an  alkali. 


OXYGEN  ANI)  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  159 

speaking  of  the  decomposition  of  mercury  oxide.  Priestley,  .in  1774, 
obtained  pure  oxygen  for  the  first  time  by  heating  mercury  oxide  by 
means  of  a  burning-glass,  and  clearly  showed  its  difference  from  air. 
He  showed  its  characteristic  property  of  supporting  combustion  '  with 
remarkable  vigour/  and  named  it  dephlogisticated  air. 

2.  The  substances  called  peroxides  9  evolve  oxygen  at  a  greater  or 
less  heat  (and  also  by  the  action  of  many  acids).  They  usually  contain 
metals  combined  with  a  large  quantity  of  oxygen.  Peroxides  are  the 
highest  oxides  of  certain  metals  ;  those  metals  which  form  them  gene- 
rally give  several  compounds  with  oxygen.  Those  of  the  lowest  degrees 
of  oxidation,  containing  the  least  amount  of  oxygen,  are  generally  sub- 
stances which  are  capable  of  easily  reacting  with  acids— for  instance, 
with  sulphuric  acid.  Such  low  oxides  are  called  bases.  Peroxides 
contain  more  oxygen  than  the  bases  formed  by  the  same  metals.  For 
example,  lead  oxide  contains  7'1  parts  of  oxygen  in  100  parts,  and  is 
basic,  but  lead  peroxide  contains  13*3  parts  of  oxygen  in  100  parts. 
Manganese  pewxide  is  a  similar  substance,  and  is  a  solid  of  a  dark 
colour,  which  occurs  in  nature.  It  is  employed  for  'technical  purposes 
under  the  name  of  black  oxide  of  manganese  (in  German,  *  Braunstein/ 
the  pyrolusite  of  the  mineralogist).  Peroxides  are  able  to  evolve 
oxygen  at  a  more  or  less  elevated  temperature.  They  do  not  then  part 
with  all  their  oxygen,  but  with  only  a  portion  of  it,  and  are  converted 
into  a  lo*wer  oxide  or  base.  Thus,  for  example,  lead  peroxide,  on  heat- 
ing, gives  oxygen  and  lead  oxide.  The  decomposition  of  this  peroxide 
proceeds  tolerably  easily  on  heating,  even  in  a  glass  vessel,  but  manganese 
peroxide  only  evolves  oxygen  at  a  strong  red  heat,  and  therefore  oxygen 
can  only  be  obtained  from  it  in  iron,  or  other  metallic,  or  clay  vessels. 
This  was  formerly  the  method  for  obtaining  oxygen.  Manganese 
peroxide  only  parts  with  one-third  of  its  oxygen  (according  to  the 
equation  3Mn02=Mn304  +  02),  whilst  two-thirds  remain  in  the  solid 
substance  which  forms  the  residue  after  heating.  Metallic  peroxides 
are  also  capable  of  evolving  oxygen  on  heating  with  sulphuric  acid. 
They  then  evolve  just  that  amount  of  oxygen  which  is  in  excess  of 
that  necessary  for  the  formation  of  the  base,  the  latter  reacting  on 
the  sulphuric  acid  forming  a  compound  (salt)  with  it.  Thus  barium 
peroxide,  when  heated  with  sulphuric  acid,  forms  oxygen  and  barium 
oxide,  which  gives  a  compound  with  sulphuric  acid  termed  barium 
sulphate  (BaO2  +  H2SO4=BaSO4  +  H2O  +  O).9  bls  This  reaction  usually 

9  We  shall  afterwards  see  that  it  is  only  substances  like  barium  peroxide  (which 
give  hydrogen  peroxide)  which  should  be  counted  as  true  peroxides,  and  that  MnO.j,  PbO2f. 
&c.,  should  be  distinguished  from  them  (they  do  not  give  hydrogen  peroxide  with  acids),, 
and  therefore  it  is  best  to  call  them  dioxides. 

9  bit  Peroxide  of  barium  also  gives  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  the  presence'- 


160 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


proceeds  with  greater  ease  than  the  decomposition  of  peroxides  by  heat 
alone.  For  the  purposes  of  experiment  powdered  manganese  peroxide  is 
usually  taken  and  mixed  with  strong  sulphuric  acid  in  a  flask,  and  the 
apparatus  set  up  as  shown  in  Fig.  28.  The  gas  which  is  evolved  is 
passed  through  a  Woulfe's  bottle  containing  a  solution  of  caustic  potash, 


FIG.  28 


.— Preparation  of  oxygen  from  manganese  peroxide  and  sulphuric  acid, 
is  passed  through  a  Woulfe's  bottle  containing  caustic  potash. 


The  gas  evolved 


to  purify  it  from  carbonic  anhydride  and  chlorine,  which  accompany  the 
evolution  of  oxygen  from  commercial  manganese  peroxide,  and  the  gas  is 
not  collected  until  a  thin  smouldering  taper  placed  in  front  of  the  escape 
orifice  bursts  into  flame,  which  shows  that  the  gas  coming  off  is  oxygen. 
By  this  method  of  decomposition  of  the  manganese  peroxide  by  sul- 

of  the  solutions  of  many  substances  in  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation.  In  this  respect  w& 
may  mention  that  Kassner  (1890)  proposes  to  obtain  oxygen  for  laboratory  purposes  by 
mixing  BaO8  with  FeK5(CN)6  (red  prussiate  of  potash;  Chapter  'XXII.) :  the  reaction 
proceeds  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen  even  on  the  addition  of  a  very  small  quantity  of 
water  In  order  to  ensure  a  gradual  evolution  of  gas  the  author  proposes  to  introduce 
"both  substances  into  the  reaction,  little  by  little,  instead  of  all  at  once,  which  may  be 
•done  with  the  following  arrangement  (Gavaloff  sky) :  finely  .powdered  peroxide  of  barium 
is  placed  in  an  ordinary  flask  and  sufficient  water  is  added  to  fill  the  flask  one-third 
full.  The  cork  closing  the  flask  has  three  holes;  (1)  for  the  gas-conducting  tube ;  (2)  for 
a  rod  to  stir  the  BaO2  ;  and  (8)  for  a  glass  rod  terminating  in  a  perforated  glass  vessel 
containing  crystals  of  FeK3(CN)6.  When  it  is  desired  to  start  the  evolution  of  the 
oxygen,  the  vessel  is  lowered  until  it  is  immersed  in  the  liquid  in  the  flask,  and  the  Ba02 
is  stirred  with  the  other  rod.  The  reaction  proceeds  according  to  the  equation,  BaO2  + 
3FeK3(CN)6=  FeK4(CN)6  +  FeK5Ba(CN)6  +  O2.  The  double  salt,  FoB^CX)*  crystallises 
out  from  the  mother  liquor.  TO  understand  the  course  of  the  reaction,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered BaO2  is  of  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation,  and  that  it  parts  with  oxygen  and  gives  the 
base  BaO  which  enters  into  the  complex  salt  FeK2Ba(CN)6=Fe(CN)2  +  2KCN  +  Ba(CN)2, 
and  this  latter  =  BaO  -f  2HCN -  H2O.  Moreover,  FeK5(CN)6  contains  the  salt  Fe^CNJe 
w,hich  also  corresponds  to  the  higher  degree  of  oxidation  of  iron,  Fe2O3,  whilst  after  the 
reaction  a  salt  is  obtained  which  contains  Fe(CN)2,  and  corresponds  to  the  lower  degree  of 
oxidation,  FeO,  so  that  (in  the  presence  of  water)  oxygen  is  also  set  free  on  this  side  also, 
i.e.  the  reaction  gives  lower  degrees  of  oxidation  and  oxygen^ 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  161 

phuric  acid  there  is  evolved,  not,  as  in  heating,  one-third,  but  one-half  of 
the  oxygen  contained  in  the  peroxide  (MnO2  +  H2S04=MnSO4  +  H2O 
+  O) — that  is,  from  50  grams  of  peroxide  about  7£  grams,  or  about  5J 
litres,  of  oxygen,10  whilst  by  heating  only  about  3^  litres  are  obtained. 
The  chemists  of  Lavoisier's  time  generally  obtained  oxygen  by  heating 
manganese  peroxide.  At  the  present  time  more  convenient  methods 
are  known. 

3.  A  third  source  to  which  recourse  may  be  had  for  obtaining 
oxygen  is  represented  in  acids  and  salts  containing  much  oxygen, 
which  are  capable,  by  parting  with  a  portion  or  all  of  their  oxygen, 
of  being  converted  into  other  compounds  (lower  products  of  oxidation) 
which  are  more  difficultly  decomposed.  These  acids  and  salts  (like 
peroxides)  evolve  oxygen  either  on  heating  alone,  or  only  when  in  the 
presence  of  some  other  substance.  Sulphuric  acid  may  b.e  taken  as  an 
example  of  an  acid  which  is  decomposed  by  the  action  of  heat  alone,11 
for  it  breaks  up  at  a  red  heat  into  water,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and 
oxygen,  as  was  mentioned  before.  Priestley,  in  1772,  and  Scheele, 
somewhat  later,  obtained  oxygen  by  heating  nitre  to  a  red  heat.  The 
best  examples  of  the  formation  of  oxygen  by  the  heating  of  salts  is 
given  in  potassium  chlorate,  or  Berthollet's  salt,  so  called  after  the 
French  chemist  who  discovered  it.  Potassium  chlorate  is  a  salt  com- 
posed of  the  elements  potassium,  chlorine,  and  oxygen,  KC103.  It 
occurs  as  transparent  colourless  plates,  is  soluble  in  water,  especially  in 
hot  water,  and  resembles  common  table  salt  in  some  of  its  reactions  and 
physical  properties  ;  it  melts  on  heating,  and  in  melting  begins  to  decom- 
pose,  evolving  oxygen  gas.  This  decomposition  ends  in  all  the  oxygen 
being  evolved  from  the  potassium  chlorate,  potassium  chloride  being 
left  as  a  residue,  according  to  the  equation  KClO3=KCl-f  03.12  Thifc 

10  Scheele,  in  1785,  discovered  the  method  of  obtaining  oxygen  by  treating  manganese 
peroxide  with  sulphuric  acid. 

11  All  acids  rich  in  oxygen,  and  especially  those  whose  elements  form  lower  oxides, 
evolve  oxygen  either  directly  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (for  instance,  ferric  acid),  or  on 
heating  (nitric,  manganic,  chromic,  chloric,  and  others),  or  if  basic  lower  oxides  are 
formed  from  them,  by  heating  with  sulphuric  acid.    Thus  the  salts  of  chromic  acid  (for 
example,  potassium  dichrqmate,  K2Cr2OT)  give  oxygen  with  sulphuric  acid ;  first  potassium 
sulphate,  K.2SO4,  is  formed,  and  then  the  chromic  acid  set  free  gives  a  sulphuric  acid  salt 
of  the  lower  oxide,  Cr2O3. 

12  This  reaction  is  not  reversible,  and  is  exothermal— that  is,  it  does  not  absorb  heat, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  evolves  9,718  calories  per  molecular  weight  KClOj,  equal  to  122 
parts  of  salt  (according  to  the  determination  of  Thomsen,  who  burnt  hydrogen  in  a 
calorimeter  either  alone  or  with  a  definite  quantity  of  potassium  chlorate  mixed  with 
oxide  of  iron).    It  does  not  proceed  at  once,  but  first  forms  perchlorate,  KC1O4  (see 
Chlorine  and  Potassium).     It  is  to  be  remarked  that  potassium  chloride  melts  at  766°, 
potassium  chlorate  at  859°,  and  potassium  perchlorate  at  610°     (Concerning  the  decom- 
position of  KC1O3,  see  Chapter  II.,  Note  47.) 


i- 


162  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

I  decomposition  proceeds  at  a  temperature  which  allows  of  its  being 
/  conducted  in  a  glass  vessel.  However,  in  decomposing,  the  molten 
/}  potassium  chlorate  swells  up  and  boils,  and  gradually  solidifies,  so  the 
I  evolution  of  the  oxygen  is  not  regular,  and  the  glass  vessel  may  crack. 
In  order  to  overcome  this  inconvenience,  the  potassium  chlorate  is 
crushed  and  mixed  with  a  powder  of  a  substance  which  is  infusible, 
incapable  of  combining  with  the  oxygen  evolved,  and  is  a  good  conductor 
of  heat.  Usually  it  is  mixed  with  manganese  peroxide.13  The  decom- 
position of  the  potassium  chlorate  is  then  considerably  facilitated,  and 
proceeds  at  a  lower  temperature  (because  the  entire  mass  is  then  better 
heated,  both  externally  and  internally),  without  swelling  u]^  and  this 
method  is  therefore  more  convenient  than  the  decomposition  of  the  salt 
alone.  This  method  for  the  preparation  of  oxygen  is  very  convenient ; 
it  is  generally  employed  when  a  small  quantity  of  oxygen  is  required. 
Further,  potajgium  chlorate  is_easily  obtained  pure,  and  it  evolves 
much  oxygen,  100  grams  of  the  salt  give  as  much  as  39  grams,  or 
30  litres,  of  oxygen.  This  method  is  so  simple  and  easy,14  that  a 
course  of  practical  chemistry  is  often  commenced  by  the  preparation 
of  oxygen  by  this  method,  and  of  hydrogen  by  the  aid  of  zinc-  and 
sulphuric  acid,  since  by  means  of  these  gases  many  interesting  and 
striking  experiments  may  be  performed.13 

A  solution  of  bleaching  powder,  which  contains  calcium  hypochlorite, 
CaCl2O2,  evolves  oxygen  on  gently  heating  when  a  small  quantity  of 
certain  oxides  is  added — for  instance,  cobalt  oxide,  which  in  this  case 
acts  by  contact  (see  Introduction).  When  heated  by  itself,  a  solution 
of  bleaching  powder  does  not  evolve  oxygen,  but  it  oxidises  the  cobalt 
oxide  to  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation  ;  this  higher  oxide  of  cobalt  in 
contact  with  the  bleaching  powder  decomposes  into  oxygen  and  lower 

13  The  peroxide  does  not  evolve  oxygen  in  this  case.     It  may  be  replaced  by  many 
oxides — for  instance,  by  oxide  of  iron.     It  is  necessary  to  take  the  precaution  that  no> 
combustible  substances  (such  as  bits  of  papeiy  splinters,  sulphur,  &c.)  fall  into  the  mix- 
ture,  as  they  might  cause  an  explosion. 

14  The  decomposition  of  a  mixture  of  fused  and  well-crushed  potassium  chlorate  with, 
powdered  manganese  peroxide  proceeds  at  so  low  a  temperature  (the  salt  does  not  melt) 
that  it  may  be  effected  in  an  ordinary  glass  flask.     The1  apparatus  is  arranged  in  the 
same  manner  as  in  the  decomposition  of  mercury  oxide  (Introduction),  or  as  shown  ia 
the  last  drawing.      As  the  reaction   is  exothermal,  the  decomposition  of  potassium, 
chlorate  with  the  formation  of  oxygen  may  probably  be  accomplished,  under  certain 
conditions  (for  example,  under  contact  action),  at  very  low  temperatures.    Substances 
mixed  with  the  potassium  chlorate  probably  act  partially  in  this  manner. 

15  Many  other  salts  evolve  oxygen  by  heat,  like  potassium  chlorate,  but  they  only 
part  with  it  either  at  a  very  high  temperature  (for  instance,  common  nitre)  or  else 
are  unsuited  for  use  on  account  of  their  cost  (potassium  manganate),  or  evolve  im- 
pure oxygen  at  a  high  temperature   (zinc  sulphate  at  a  red  heat  gives  a  mixture  of 
sulphurous  anhydride  and  oxygen),  and  are  not  therefore  used  in  practice. 


OXYGEN   AND   ITS   SALINE   COMBINATIONS  163 

oxidation  products,  and  the  resultant  lower  oxide  of  cobalt  with  bleach- 
ing powder  again  gives  the  higher  oxide,  which  again  gives  up  its 
oxygen,  and  so  on.16  The  calcium  hypochlorite  is  here  decomposed 
according  to  the  equation  CaCl2O2=CaCl2  +  O2.  In  this  manner  a 
small  quantity  of  cobalt  oxide17  is  sufficient  for  the  decomposition  of  an 
indefinitely  large  quantity  of  bleaching  powder. 

The  properties  of  oxygen.19" — It  is  a  permanent  gas — that  is,  it  can- 
not be  liquefied  by  pressure  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  further, 
is  only  liquefied  with  difficulty  (although  more  easily  than  hydrogen)  at 
temperatures  below  —  1 20°,  because  this  is  its  absolute  boiling  point. 
As  its  critical  pressure  l9  is  about  50  atmospheres,  ikcan  be  easily  lique- 
fied under  pressures  greater  than  50  atmospheres  at  temperatures 
below  — 120°.  According  to  Dewar,  the  density  of  oxygen  in  a  critical 

16  Such  is,  at  present,  the  only  possible  method  of  explaining  the  phenomenon  of 
contact  action.    In  many  cases,  such  as  the  present  one,  it  is  supported  by  observations 
based  on  facts.    Thus,  for  instance,  it  is  known,  as  regards  oxygen,  that  often  two  sub- 
stances rich  in  oxygen  retain  it  so  long  as  they  are  separate,  but  directly  they  come  into 
contact  free  oxygen  is  evolved  from  both  of  them.    Thus,  an  aqueous  solution  of  hydro- 
gen peroxide  (containing  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  water)  acts  in  this  manner  on  silver 
oxide  (containing  silver  and  oxygen).    This  reaction  takes  place  at  the  ordinary  tempera- 
ture, and  the  oxygen  is  evolved  from  both  compounds.     To  this  class  of  phenomena  may 
be  also  referred  the  fact  that  a.  mixture  of  barium  peroxide  and  potassium  manganate 
with  water  and  sulphuric  acid  evolves  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (Note  9  bis). 
It  would  seem  that  the  essence  of  phenomena  of  this  kind  is  entirely  j,nd  purely  a 
property  of  contact ;  the  distribution  of  the  atoms  is  Changed  by  contact,  and  if  the 
equilibrium  be  unstable  it  is  destroyed.     This  is  more  especially  evident  in  the  case 
of  those  substances  which  change  exothermally — that  is,  for  those  reactions  which  are 
accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  heat.     The  decomposition  CaCl2O2  =  CaCl2  +  O2  belongs 
to  this  class  (like  the  decomposition  of  potassium  chlorate). 

17  Generally  a  solution  of  bleaching  powder  is  alkaline    (contains  free  lime),  and 
therefore,  a  solution  of  cobalt  chloride  is  added  directly  to  it,  by  which  means  the  oxide 
of  cobalt  required  for  the  reaction  is  formed. 

18  It  must  be  remarked  that  in  all  the  reactions  above  mentioned  the  formation  of 
oxygen  may  be  prevented  by  the  admixture  of  substances  capable  of  combining  with  it — 
for  example,  charcoal,  many  carbon   (organic)   compounds,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  and 
various  lower  oxidation  products,  &o.    These  substances  absorb  the  oxygen  evolved, 
combine  with  it,  and  a  compound  containing  oxygen  is  formed.    Thus,  if  a  mixture  of 
potassium  chlorate  and  charcoal  be  heated,  no  oxygen  is  obtained,  but  an  explosion 
takes  place  from  the  rapid- formation  of  gases  resulting  from  the  combination  of  the 
oxygen  'of  the  potassium  chlorate  with  the  charcoal  and  the  evolution  of  gaseous  COo. 

The  oxygen  obtained  by  any  of  the  above-described  methods  is  rarely  pure.  It 
generally  contains  aqueous  vapour,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  very  often  small  traces  of 
chlorine.  The  .oxygen  may  be  freed  from  these  impurities  by  passing  it  through  a  solu- 
tion of  caustic  potash,  and  by  drying  it.  If  the  potassium  chlorate  be  dry  and  pure,  it 
gives  almost  pure  oxygen.  However,  if  the  oxygen  be  required  for  respiration  in  cases 
of  sickness,  it  should  be  washed  by  passing  it  through  a  solution  of  caustic  alkali  and 
through  water.  The  best  way  to  obtain  pure  oxygen  directly  is  to  take  potassium 
perchlorate  (KC1O4),  which  can  be  well  purified  and  then  evolves  pure  oxygen  on 
heating. 

19  With  regard  to1  the  absolute  boiling  point,  critical  pressure,  and  the  critical  state 
in  general,  see  Chapter  II.,  Notes  29  and  84. 


164  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

State  is  0'65  (water=l),  but,  like  all  other  substances  in  this  state,2*5  it 
varies  considerably  in  density  with  a  change  of  pressure  and  tempera, 
ture,  and  therefore  many  investigators  who  made  their  observations 
under  high  pressures  give  a  greater  density,  as  much  as  1*1.  Liquefied 
oxygen  is  an  exceedingly  mobile  transparent  liquid,  with  a  faint  blue 
tint  and  boiling  (tension =1  atmosphere)  about  —180°  Oxygen,  like 
all  gases,  is  transparent,  and  like  the  majority  of  gases,  colourless.  It 
has  no  smell  or  taste,  which  is  evident  from  the  fact  of  its  being  a  com- 
ponent of  air.  The  weight  of  one  litre  of  oxygen  gas  at  0°  and  760  mm. 
.pressure  is  1*4298  gram  ;  it  is  therefore  slightly  denser  than  air. 
Its  density  in  respect  to  air= 1-1056,  and  in  respect  to  hydrogen=16.21 
In  its  chemical  properties  oxygen  is  remarkable  from  the  fact  that 
it  very  easily — and,  in  a  chemical  sense,  vigorously — reacts  on  a  number 
of  substances,  forming  oxygen  compounds  However,  only  a  few 
substances  and  mixtures  of  substances  (for  example,  phosphorus,  copper 
with  ammonia,  decomposing  organic  matter,  aldehyde,  pyrogallol  with 
an  alkali,  <fec.)  combine  directly  with  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  tem- 
perature, whilst  many  substances  easily  combine  with  oxygen  at  a  red 
heat,  and  often  this  combination  presents  a  rapid  chemical  reaction 
accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  a  large  quantity  of  heat.  Every 
reaction  which  takes  place  rapidly,  if  it  be  accompanied  by  so  great  an 
evolution  of  heat  as  to  produce  incandescence,  is  termed  combustion. 
Thus  combustion  ensues  when  many  metals  are  plunged  into  chlorine, 
or  oxide  of  sodium  or  barium  into  carbonic  anhydride,  or  when  a  spark 
falls  on  gunpowder.  A  great  many  substances  are  combustible  in 
oxygen,  and,  owing  to  its  presence,  in  air  also.  In  order  to  start 

20  Judging  from  what  has  been  said  in  Note  34  of  the  last  chapter,  and  also  from  the 
results  of  direct  observation,  it  is  evident  that  all  substances  in  a  critical  state  have 
a  large  coefficient  of  expansion,  and  are  very  compressible. 

21  As  water    consists  of   1  volume  of  oxygen  and  2  volumes  of    hydrogen,  and 
contains  16  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  per  2  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen,  it  therefore 
follows  directly  that  oxygen  is  16  times  denser  than  hydrogen.    Conversely,  the  com- 
position of  water  by  weight  may  be  deduced  from  the  densities  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen, 
and  the  volumetric  composition  of  water.     This  method  of  mutual  and  reciprocal  correc- 
tion strengthens  the  practical  data  of  the  exact  sciences,  whose  conclusions  require  the 
greatest  possible  exactitude  and  variety  of  corrections. 

It  must  be  observed  that  the  specific  heat  of  oxygen  at  constant  pressure  is  0'2175, 
consequently  it  is  to  the  specific  heat  of  hydrogen  (3'409)  as  1  is  to  15P6.  Hence,  the 
specific  heats  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  weights  of  equal  volumes.  This  signifies 
that  equal  volumes  of  both  gases  have  (nearly)  equal  specific  heats — that  is,  they  require 
an  equal  quantity  of  heat  for  raising  their  temperature  by  1°.  We  shall  afterwards  con- 
eider  the  specific  heat  of  different  substances  more  fully  in  Chap.  XIV. 

Oxygen,  like  the  majority  of  difficultly-liquefiable  gases,  is  but  slightly  soluble  in 
water  and  other  liquids.  The  solubility  is  given  in  Note  30,  Chap.  I.  From  this  it  ia 
evident  that  water  standing  in  air  must  absorb — i.e.  dissolve — oxygen.  This  oxygen 
serves  for  the  respiration  of  fishes.  Fishes  cannot  exist  in  boiled  water,  because  it  does 
not  contain  the  oxygen  necessary  for  their  respiration  (see  Chap.  I.) 


OXYGEN   AND  ITS  SALINE   COMBINATIONS  1G5 

combustion  it  is  generally  necessary  22  that  the  combustible  substance 
should  be  brought  to  a  state  of  incandescence.  The  continuation  of  the 
process  does  not  require  the  aid  of  fresh  external  heat,  because  sufficient] 
heat  -3  is  evolved  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  remaining  parts  of  the 
combustible  substance  to  the  required  degree.  Examples  of  this  are 
familiar  to  all  from  every-day  experience.  Combustion  proceeds  in 
oxygen  with  greater  rapidity,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  more  powerful 
incandescence,  than  in  ordinary  air.  This  may  be  demonstrated  by  a 
number  of '  very  convincing  experiments.  If  a  piece  of  charcoal, 
attached  to  a  wire  and  previously  brought  to  red-heat,  be  plunged  into 
a  flask  full  of  oxygen,  it  burns  rapidly  at  a  t 

white  heat — i.e.  it  combines  with  the  oxy- 
gen, forming  a  gaseous  product  of  combus- 
tion called -carbonic  anhydride,  or  carbonic 
acid  gas,  COa-  This  is  the  same  gas  that  is 
evolved  in  the  act  of  respiration,  for  charcoal 
is  one  of  the  substances  which  is  obtained  by 
the  decomposition  of  all  organic  substances 
which  contain  it,  and  in  the  process -of  re- 
spiration part  of  the  constituents  of  the  body, 
so  to  speak,  slowly  burn.  If  a  piece  of  FIO  29_ 
burning  sulphur  be  placed  in  a  small  cup 
attached  to  a  wire  and  introduced  into  a 

flask  full  of  oxygen,  then  the  sulphur,  which  burns  in  air  with  a 
very  feeble  flame,  burns  in  the  oxygen  with  a  violet  flame,  which, 
although  pale,  is  much  larger  than  in  air.  If  the  sulphur  be  ex- 
changed for  a  piece  of  phosphorus,24  then,  unless  the  phosphorus  be 
heated,  it  combines  very  slowly  with  the  oxygen  ;  but,  if  heated, 
although  on  only  one  spot,  it  burns  with  an  exceedingly  brilliant  white 
flame.  In  order  to  heat  the  phosphorus  inside  the  flask,  the  simplest 
way  is  to  bring  a  red-hot  wire  into  contact  with  it.  Before  the  char- 
coal can  burn,  it  must  be  brought  to  a  state  of  incandescence.  Sulphur 

22  Certain  substances  (with  which  we  shall  afterwards  become  acquainted),  however, 
ignite  spontaneously  in  air ;  for  example,  impure  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  silicon  hydride, 
zinc  ethyl,  and  pyrophorus  (very  finely  divided  iron,  &c.) 

25  If  so  little  heat  is  evolved  that  the  adjacent  parts  are  not  heated  to  the  temperature 
of  combustion,  then  combustion  will  cease. 

24  The  phosphorus  must  be  dry ;  it  is  usually  kept  in  water,  as  it  oxidises  in  air.  Ifc 
should  be  cut  under  water,  as-otherwise  the  freskly-Cut  surface  oxidises.  It  must  be  dried 
carefully  and  quickly  by  wrapping  it  in  blotting-paper.  If  damp,  it  splutters  on  burning. 
A  small  piece  should  be  taken,  as  otherwise  the  iron  spoon  will  melt.  In  this  and  the 
other'experiments  on  combustion,  water  should  be  poured  over  the  bottom  of  the  vessel 
containing  the  oxygen,  to  prevent  it  from  cracking.  The  cork  closing  the  vessel  should 
not  fit  tightly,  in  order  to  allow  {or  the  expansion  of  the  gas  due  to  the  heat  of  the 
combustion. 


166  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

also  will  not  burn  under  100°,  whilst  phosphorus  inflames  at  40° 
Phosphorus  which  has  been  already  lighted  in  air  cannot  so  well  be 
introduced  into  the  flask,  because  it  burns  very  rapidly  and  with  a  large 
flame  in  air.  If  a  small  lump  of  metallic  sodium  be  put  in  a  small  cup 
made  of  lime,25  melted,  and  ignited,26  it  burns  very  feebly  in  air.  But 
if  burning  sodium  be  introduced  into  oxygen,  the  combustion  is  in- 
vigorated and  is  accompanied  by  a  brighter  yellow  flame.  Metallic 
magnesium,  which  burns  brightly  in  air,  continues  to  burn  with 
still  greater  vigour  in  oxygen,  forming  a  wliite  powder,  which  is  a 
compound  of  magnesium  with  oxygen  (magnesium  oxide ;  magnesia). 
A  strip  of  iron  or  steel  does  not  burn  in 
air,  but  an  iron  wire  or  steel  spring  may 
be  easily  burnt  in  oxygen.27  The  combus- 
tion of  steel  or  iron  in  oxygen  is  not  accom- 
panied by  a  flame,  but  sparks  of  oxide  fly  in 
all  directions  from  the  burning  portions  of 
the  iron.38 

In  order  to  demonstrate  by  experiment 
the  combustion  of  hydrogen  in  oxygen,  a 
gas-conducting  tube,  bent  ao  as  to  form 
a  convenient  jet,  is  led  from  the  vessel 
FIG'  307pri0ng7nfob^ga8teel      evolving  hydrogen.     The  hydrogen  is- first 
set  light  to  in  air,  and  then  the  gas- con- 
ducting tube  is  let  down  into  a  flask  containing  oxygen.     The  combus- 
tion in  oxygen  will  be  similar  to  that  in  air ;  "the  flame  remains  pale, 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  its  temperature  rises  considerably.     It  is 

25  An  iron  cup  will  melt  with  sodium  in  oxygen. 

**  In  order  to  rapidly  heat  the  lime  crucible  containing  the  sodium,  it  is  heated  in  the 
flame  of  a  blow-pipe  described  in  Chap.  VIII. 

27  In  order  to  burn  a  watch  spring,  a  piece  of  tinder  (or  paper  soaked  in  a  solution  of 
nitre,  and  dried)  is  attached  to  one  end.    The  tinder  is  lighted,  and  the  spring  is  then 
plunged  into  the  oxygen.     The  burning  tinder  heats  the  end  of  the  spring,  the  heated 
part  burns,  and  in  so  doing  heats  the  further  portions  of  the  spring,  which  then  burns 
completely  if  sufficient  oxygen  be  present. 

28  The  sparks  of  rust  are  produced,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  volume  of  the  oxide  of 
iron  is  nearly  twice  that  of  the  volume  of  the  iron,  and  as  the  heat  evolved  is  not  suffl. 
cient  to  entirely  melt  the  oxide  or  the  iron,  the  particles  must  be  torn  off  and  fly  about. 
Similar  sparks  are  formed  in  the  combustion  of.  iron,  in  other  cases  also.    We  saw  the 
combustion  of  iron  filings  in  the  Introduction.    In  the  welding  of  iron  small  iron  splinters 
fly  off  in  all  directions  and  burn  in  fche  air,  as  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  whilst  flying 
through  the  air  they  remain  red  hot,  and  also  because,  on  cooling,  they  are  seen  to  be"  no 
longer  iron,  but  a  compound  of  it  with  oxygen.    The  same  thing  takes  place  when  the 
hammer  of  a  gun  strikes  against  the  flint.     Small  scales  of  steel  are  heated  by  the  fric. 
tion,  and  glow  and  burn  in  the  air.     The  combustion  of  iron  is  ptill  better  seen  by  taking 
it  as  a  very  fine  powder,  such  as  is  obtained  by  the  decomposition  of  certain  of  its  com- 
pounds—for instance,  by  heating  Prussian  blue,  or  by  the  reduction  of  itu  compound^ 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  167 

instructive  to  remark  that  oxygen  may  burn  in  hydrogen,  just  aj 
hydrogen  in  oxygen.  In  order  to  show  the  combustion  of  oxygen  in 
hydrogen,  a  tube  bent  vertically  upwards  and  ending  in  a  fine  orifice 
is  attached  to  the  stopcock  of  a  gas-holder  full  of  oxygen.  Two  wires,, 
placed  at  such  a  distance  from  each  other  as  to  allow  the  passage  of  a 
constant  series  of  sparks  from  a  Ruhmkorff's  coil,  are  fixed  in  front  of 
the  orifice  of  the  tube.  This  is  in  order  to  ignite  the  oxygen,  which  may 
also  be  done  by  attaching  tinder  round  the  orifice,  and  burning  it.  When 
the  wires  are  arranged  at  the  orifice  of  the  tube,  and  a  series  of  sparks 
passes  between  them,  then  an  inverted  (because  of  the  lightness  of  the 
hydrogen)  jar  full  of  hydrogen  is  placed  over  the  gas- conducting  tube. 
When  the  jar  covers  the  orifice  of  the  gas-conducting  tube  (and  not 
before,  as  otherwise  an  explosion,  might  take  place)  the  cock  of  the  gaso- 
meter is  opened,  and  the  oxygen  flows  into  the  hydrogen  and  is  set  light 
to  by  the  sparks.  The  flame  obtained  is  similar  to  that  formed  by  the 
combustion  of  hydrogen  in  oxygen.29  From,  this  it  is  evident  that  the 
flame  is  the  locality  where  the  oxygen  combines  with  the  hydrogen, 
therefore  a  flame  of  burning  oxygen  can  be  obtained  as  well  as  a  flame 
of  burning  hydrogen. 

If,  instead  of  hydrogen,  any  other  combustible  gas  be  taken— foy 
example,  ordinary  coal  gas — then  the  phenomenon  of  combustion  will 
be  exactly  the  same,  only  a  bright  flame  will  be  obtained,  and  the 
products  of  combustion  will  be  different.  However,  as  coal  gas  con- 
tains a  considerable  amount  of  free  and  combined  hydrogen,  it  will  also 
form  a  considerable  quantity  of  water  in  its  combustion. 

with  oxygen  by  hydrogen ;  when  this  fine  powder  is  strewn  in  air,  it  burns  by  itself,  even 
without  being  previously  heated  (it  forms  a  pyrophorus).  This  obviously  depends  on  the 
fact  that  the  powder  of  iron  presents  a  larger  surface  of  contact  with  air  than  an  equal 
weight  in  a  compact  form. 

29  The  experiment  may  be  conducted  without  the  wires,  if  the  hydrogen  be  lighted  in 
the  orifice  of  an  inverted  cylinder,  and  at  the  same  time  the  cylinder  be  brought  over  tho 
end  of  a  gas- conducting  tube  connected  with  a  gas-holder  containing  oxygen.  Thomson's 
method  may  be  adopted  for  a  lecture  experiment.  Two  glass  tubes,  with  platinum  ends, 
are  passed  through  orifices,  about  l-l£  centimetre  apart,  in  a  cork,  One  tube  is  con- 
nected with  a  gas-holder  containing  oxygen,  and  the  other  with  a  gas-holder  full  of 
hydrogen.  Having  turned  on  the  gases,  the  hydrogen  is  lighted,  and  a  common  lamp 
glass,  tapering  towards  the  top,  is  placed  over  the  cork.  The  hydrogen  continues  to  bum 
inside  the  lamp  glass,  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen.  .  If  the  current  of  oxygen  be  thea 
decreased  little  by  little,  a  point  is  reached  when,  owing  to  the  insufficient  supply  of 
oxygen,  the  flame  of  the  hydrogen  increases  in  size,  disappears  for  several  moments,  and 
then  reappears  at  the  tube  supplying-  the  oxygen.  If  the  flow  of  oxygen  be  again  in- 
creased, the  flame  reappears  at  the  hydrogen  tube%  Thus  the  flame  may  be  ma.de  to 
appear  at  one  or  the  other  tube  at  will,  only  the  increase  or  decrease  of  the  current  of 
gas  must  take  place  by  degrees  and  not  suddenly.  Further,  air  may  be  taken  instead  of 
oxygen,  and  ordinary  coal-gas  instead  of  hydrogen,  and  it  will  then  be  shown  how  air 
burns  in  an  atmosphere  of  coal-gas,  and  it  can  easily  be  proved  that  the  lamp  glass  19 
full  of  a  gas  combustible  in  air,  because  it  may  be  lighted  at  the  top. 


168 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


If  hydrogen  be  mixed  with  oxygen  in  the  proportion  in  which  they 
form  water— i.e.  if  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  be  taken  for  each 
volume  of  oxygen— then  the  mixture  will  be  the  same  as  that  obtained 

by  the  decomposition  of  water, 
by  a  galvanic  current — deto- 
nating gas. 

We  have  already  men- 
tioned in  the  last  chapter 
that  the  combination  of  these 
gases,  or  their  explosion,  may 
be  brought  about  by  the 
action  of  an  electric  spark, 
because  the  spark  heats  the 
space  through  which  it  passes, 
and  acts  consequently  in  a 
manner  similar  to  ignition  by 
means  of  contact  with  an  in- 
candescent or  burning  sub- 
stance.39 bis  Cavendish  made 
this  experiment  on  the  ignition 
of  detonating  gas,  at  the  end 
of  the  last  century,  in  the 
apparatus  shown  in  fig.  31. 
Ignition  by  the  aid  of  the 
electric  spark  is  convenient, 
for  the  reason  that  it  may 
then  be  brought  about  in  a 
closed  vessel,  and  hence  che- 
mists stilLemploy  this  method 
when  it  is  required  to  ignite 

a  mixture  of  oxygen  with  a  combustible  gas  in  a  closed  vessel.  For  this 
purpose,  especially  since  Bunsen's  time,30  an  eudiometer  is  employed. 
It  consists  of  a  thick  glass  tube  graduated  along  its  length  in  milli- 
metres (for  indicating  the  height  of  the  mercury  column),  and  calibrated 
for  a  definite  volume  (weight  of  mercury).  Two  platinum  wires  are 

29  bu  In  fact,  instead  of  a  spark  a  fine  wire  may  be  taken,  and  an  electric  current 
passed  through  it  to  bring  it  to  a  state  of  incandescence ;  in  this  case  there  will  be  no 
eparks,  but  the  gases  will  inflame  if  the  wire  be  fine  enough  to  become  red  hot  by  the 
passage  of  the  current. 

50  Now,  a  great  many  other  different  forms  of  apparatus,  sometimes  designed  for 
Special  purposes,  are  employed  in  the  laboratory  for  the  investigation  of  gases.  Detailed 
descriptions  of  the  methods  of  gas  analysis,  and  of  the  apparatus  employed,  must  be 
looked  for  in  works  on  analytical  and  applied  chemistry- 


3L— Cavendish's  apparatus  for  exploding  detonating 
gas.  The  bell  jar  standing  in  the  bath  is  filled  with  a 
mixture  of  two  volumes  Of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of 
oxygen,  and  the  thick  glass  vessel  A  is  then  screwed 
on  to  it.  The  air  is  first  pumped  out  of  this  vessel,  so 
that  when  the  stopcock  c  is  opened,  it  becomes  filled 
with  detonating  gas.  The  stopcock  is  then  re-closed, 
and  the  explosion  produced  by  means  of  a  spark  from 
a-Leyden  jar.  After  the  explosion  has  taken  place  the 
stopcock  is  again  opened,  and  the  water  rises  into  the 
vessel  A. 


OXYGEN   AND   ITS  SALINE   COMBINATIONS  169 

fused  into  the  upper  closed  end  of  the  tube,  as  shown  in  fig.  32.31  By 
the  aid  of  the  eudiometer  we  may  not  only  determine  the  volumetric 
composition  of  water,32  and  the  quantitative  contents  of  oxygen  in 

31  They  must  be  sealed  into  the  tube  in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  no  aper- 
ture between  them  and  the  glass     In  order  to  test  this,  the  eudiometer  is  filled 
with  mercury,  and  its  open  end  inverted  Into  mercury.      If  there  be  the 
smallest  orifice  at  the  wires,  the  external  air  will  enter  into  the  cylinder  and 
the  mercury  will  fall,  although  not  rapidly  if  the  orifice  be  very  fine. 

32  The  eudiometer  is  used  for  determining  the  composition  of  combustible 
gases.     A  detailed  account  of  gas  analysis  would  be  out  of  place  in  this  work 
(see  Note  30),  but,  as  an  example,  we  will  give  a  short  description  of  the 
determination  of  the  composition  of  water  by  the  eudiometer. 

Pure  and  dry  oxygen  is  first  introduced  into  the  eudiometer.  When  the 
eudiometer  and  the  gas  in  it  acquire  the  temperature  of  the  surrounding 
atmosphere — which  is  recognised  by  the  fact  of  the  meniscus  of  the  mercury 
not  altering  its  position  during  a  long  period  of  time — then  the  heights  at 
which  the  mercury  stands  in  the  eudiometer  and  in  the  bath  arc  observed. 
The  difference  (in  millimetres)  gives  the  height  of  the  column  of  mercury  in 
the  eudiometer.  It  must  be  reduced  to  the  height  at  which  the  mercury 
would  stand  at  0°  and  xleducted  from  the  atmospheric  pressure,  in  order  to 
find  the  pressure  under  which  the  oxygen  is  measured  (see  Chap.  I.  Note  29). 
The  height  of  the  mercury  also  shows  the  volume  of  the  oxygen.  The  tem- 
perature of  the  surrounding  atmosphere  and  the  height  of  the  barometric 
column  must  also  be  observed,  in  order  to  know  the  temperature  of  the 
oxygen  and  the  atmospheric  pressure.  When  the  volume  of  the  oxygen  has 
been  measured,  pure  and  dry  hydrogen  is  introduced  into  the  eudiometer, 
and  the  volume  of  the  gases  in  the  eudiometer  again  measured.  They  are 
then  exploded.  This  is  done  by  a  Leyden  jar,  whose  outer  coating  is  con- 
nected by  a  chain  with  one  wire,  so  that  a  spark  passes  when  the  other  wire, 
fused  into  the  eudiometer,  is  touched  by  the  terminal  of  the  jar.  Or  else  an 
electrophorus  is  used,  or,  better  still,  a  Ruhmkorff's  coil,  which  has  the 
advantage  of  working  equally  well  in  damp  or  dry  air,  whilst  a  Leyden  jar 
or  electrical  machine  does  not  act  in  damp  weather  Further,  it  is  necessary 
to  close  the  lower  orifice  of  the  eudiometer  before  the  explosion  (for  this 
purpose  the  eudiometer,  which  is  fixed  in  a  stand,  is  firmly  pressed  down 
from  above  on  to  a  piece  of  india-rubber  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  bath),  as 
otherwise  the  mercury  and  gas  would  be  thrown  out  of  the  apparatus  by  the 
explosion.  It  must  also  be  remarked  that  to  ensure  complete  combustion 
the  proportion  between  the  volumes  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  must  not  ex- 
ceed twelve  of  hydrogen  to  one  volume  of  oxygen,  or  fifteen  volumes  of  Eudiometer 
oxygen  to  one  volume  of  hydrogen,  because  no  explosion  will  take  place  if 
one  of  the  gases  be  in  great  excess.  It  is  best  to  take  a  mixture  of  one  volume  of 
hydrogen  with  several  volumes  of  oxygen.  The  combustion  will  then  be  complete.  It 
is  evident  that  water  is  formed,  and  that  the  volume  (or  tension)  is  diminished,  so  that 
on  opening  the  end  of  the  eudiometer  the  mercury  will  rise  in  it.  But  the  tension  of  the 
aqueous  vapour  is  now  added  to  the  tension  of  the  gas  remaining  after  the  explosion. 
This  must  be  taken  into  account  (Chap.  I.  Note  1).  If  but  little  gas  remain,  the  water 
which  is  formed  will  be  sufficient  for  its  saturation  with  aqueous  vapour.  This  may  be 
learnt  from  the  fact  that  drops  of  water  are  visible  on  the  sides  of  the  eudiometer  after 
the  mercury  has  risen  in  it.  If  there  be  none,  a  certain  quantity  of  water  must  be  intro- 
duced into  the  eudiometer.  Then  the  number  of  millimetres  expressing  the  pressure  of 
the  vapour  corresponding  with  the  temperature  of  the  experiment  must  be  subtracted 
from  the  atmospheric  pressure  at  which  the  remaining  gas  is  measured,  otherwise  the 
result  will  be  inaccurate  (Chap.  I.  Note  1). 

This  is  essentially  the  method  of  the  determination  of  the  composition  of  water  which 


170  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTKY 

air,33  but  also  make  a  number'of  experiments  explaining  the  phenome- 
non of  combustion. 

Thus,  for  example,  it  may  be  demonstrated,  by  the  aid  of  the 
eudiometer,  that  for  the  ignition  of  detonating  gas,  a  definite  temperature 
is  required.  If  the  temperature  be  below  that  required,  combination 
will  not  take  place,  but  if  at  any  spot  within  the  tube  it  rises  to  the 
temperature  of  inflammation,  then  combination  will  ensue  at  that  spot, 
and  evolve  enough  heat  for  the  ignition  of  the  adjacent  portions  of  the 
detonating  mixture.  If  to  1  volume  of  detonating  gas  there  be  added 
10  volumes  of  oxygen,  or  4  volumes  of  hydrogen,  or  3  volumes  of 
carbonic  anhydride,  then  we  shall  not  obtain  an  explosion  by  passing 
a  spark  through  the  diluted  mixture.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that 
the  temperature  falls  with  the  dilution  of  the  detonating  gas  by  another 
gas,  because  the  heat  evolved  by  the  combination  of  the  small  quantity 
of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  brought  to  incandescence  by  the  spark  is  not 
only  transmitted  to  the  water  proceeding  from  the  combination,  but 
also  to  the  foreign  substance  mixed  with  the  detonating  gas.34  The 
necessity  of  a  definite  temperature  for  the  ignition  of  detonating  gas  is 
also  seen  from  the  fact  that  pure  detonating  gas  explodes  in  the  presence 
of  a  red-hot  iron  wire,  or  of  charcoal  heated  to  275°,  but  with  a  lower 
degree  of  incandescence  there  is  not  any  explosion.  It  may  also  be 
brought  about  by  rapid  compression,  when,  as  is  known,  heat  is  evolved.35 

was  made  for  the  first  time  by  Gay-Lussac  and  Hurnboldt  with  sufficient  accuracy. 
Their  determinations  led  them  to  the  conclusion  that  water  consists  of  two  volumes  of 
hydrogen  (more  exactly  2'003,  Le  Due  1892),  and  one  volume  of  oxygen.  Every  time 
they  took  a  greater  quantity  of  oxygen,  the  gas  remaining  after  the  explosion  was  oxygen. 
When  they  took  an  excess  of  hydrogen,  the  remaining  gas  was  hydrogen ;  and  when  the 
oxygen  and  hydrogen  were  taken  in  exactly  the  above  proportion,  neither  one  nor  the 
other  remained.  The  composition  of  water  was  thus  definitely  confirmed. 

3f  Concerning  this  application  of  the  eudiometer,  see  the  chapter  on  Nitrogen.  It  may 
be  mentioned  as  illustrating  the  various  uses  of  the  eudiometer  that  Prof.  Timeraseefl 
employed  microscopically  small  eudiometers  to  analyse  the  bubbles  of  gas  given  off  from 
the  leaves  of  plants. 

54  Thus  J  volume  of  carbonic  oxide,  an  equal  volume  of  marsh  gas,  two  volumes  of 
hydrogen  chloride  or  of  ammonia,  and  six  volumes  of  nitrogen  or  twelve  volumes  of  air 
added  to  one  volume  of  detonating  gas,  prevent  its  explosion. 

35  If  the  compression  be  brought  about  slowly,  so  that  the  heat  evolved  succeeds  in 
passing  to  the  surrounding  space,  then  the  combination  of  the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  does 
not  take  place,  even  when  the  mixture  is  compressed  by  150  times;  for  the  gases  are  not 
heated.  If  paper  soaked  with  a  solution  of  platinum  (in  aqua  regia)  and  sal  ammoniac 
be  burnt,  then  the  ash  obtained  contains  very  finely-divided  platinum,  and  in  this  form 
it  is  best  fitted  for  igniting  hydrogen  and  detonating  gas.  Platinum  wire  requires  to  be 
heated,  but  platinum  in  so  finely  divided  a  state  as  it  occurs  in  tliis  ash  inflames  hydro- 
gen, even  at  —20°.  Many  other  metals,  such  as  palladium  (175°),  iridium,  and  gold,  act 
with  a  slight  rise  of  temperature,  like  platinum  ;  but  mercury,  at  its  boiling  point,  does 
not  inflame  detonating  gas,  although  the  slow  formation  of  water  then  begins  at 
805°  All  data  of  this  kind  show  that  the  explosion  of  detonating  gas  presents  one 
rf  the  many  cases  of  contact  phenomena.  This  conclusion  is  further  confirmed  by  tha 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE   COMBINATIONS 


171 


Experiments  made  in  the  eudiometer  showed  that  the  ignition  of 

researches  of  V.  Meyer  (1892).  He  showed  that  only  a  very  slow  formation  of  steam 
begins  at  448°,  and  that  it  only  proceeds  more  rapidly  at  518°  The  temperature  of  the 
explosion  of  detonating  gas,  according  to  the  same  author,  varies  according  as  to  whether 
the  explosion  is  produced  in  open  vessels  or  in  closed  tubes.  In  the  first  case  the  tem- 
perature of  explosion  lies  between  530°-606°,  and  in  the  second  between  630°-7SO*>. 
In  general  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  temperature  of  explosion  of  gaseous  mixtures  is 
always  lower  in  closed  vessels  than  when  the  detonating  mixture  flows  freely  through 
tubes.  According  to  Freyer  and  V.  Meyer,  the  following  gases  when  mixed  with  the 
requisite,  amount  of  oxygen  explode  at  the  following  temperatures 


- 

When  flowing  freely 

In  closed  vessels 

H2 

630°-7300 

5800-606° 

C2E?6 

650°-7SO° 
606°-650° 

606°-650° 
530°-606° 

606°-650° 

530°-606° 

CO 

650°-730° 

650°-780° 

H2S 

815°-320° 

250°-270° 

H2  +  C12 

430°-440D 

240°-270° 

The  velocity  of  the  transmission  of  explosion  in  gaseous  mixtures  is  as  characteristic. 
a  quantity  for  gaseous  systems  as  the  velocity  of  the  transmission  of  sound.  Berthelot 
showed  that  this  velocity  depends  neither  upon  the  pressure  nor  upon  the  size  of  the 
tubes  in  which  the  gaseous  mixture  is  contained,  nor  upon  the  material  out  of  which  the 
tube  is  made.  Dixon  (1891)  determined  the  magnitude  of  these  velocities  for  various 
mixtures,  and  his  results  proved  very  near  to  those  previously  given  by  Berthelot.  For 
comparison  we  give  the  velocities  expressed  in  metres  per  second  : 


- 

Dixon 

Berthelot 

Ho  +  O 

2,821 

2,810 

H.,+N.,O 

CH4  +  4~O 
C2H2  +  6O 

2,305 
2,322 
2,364 

2,284 
2,287 
2,210 

C2H2  +  5O 

2,391 

2,482 

CoN2  +  40 

2,821 

2,195 

The  addition  of  oxygen  to  detonating  gas  lowers  the  velocity  of  the  transmission  of 
explosion  almost  as  much  as  the  introduction  of  nitrogen.    An  excess  of  hydrogen  on  the 
contrary  raises  the  velocity  of  transmission.  It  is  remarked  that  the  explosion  of  mixtures 
of  oxygen  with  marsh  gas,  ethylene  and  cyanogen  is  transmitted  more  quickly  if  the 
oxygen  be  taken  in  such  a  proportion  that  the  carbon  should  burn' to,  oxide  of  carbon,  i.e. 
the  velocity  of  the  explosion  is  less  if  the  oxygen  be  taken  in  sufficient  quantity  to  form 
carbonic  anhydride.    Observations  upon  liquid  and  solid  explosives  (Berthelot)  show  that 
in  this  case  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  explosion  is  dependent  upon  the  material  of 
the  tube.     Thus  the  explosion  of  liquid  nitro-methyl  ether  in  glass  tubes  travels -at  the 
rate  (in  dependence  upon  the  diam.,  from  1  mm.-45  mm.)  of  from  1,890  to  2,482  metres, 
and  in  tubes  of  Britannia  metal  (8  mm.  in  diain)  at  the  rate  of  1,230  metres.     The  harder 
the  tube  the  greater  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  explosion.    The  following  are  the 
velocities  for  certain  bodies : 

metres 

Nitro-glycerine        »•«••»»•«    1,800 
Dynamite        *       4       •       «        9       »       o       •       a        .    2,500 
Nitro-mannite  »••••••£    7,700 

Picric  acid      »•§+•»•••»   6,500 


172 


PRINCIPLES   OF   CHEMISTRY 


detonating    ffas    takes    place  at  a  temperature  between    450°   andj     *4" 

The  combination  of  hydrogen  with  oxygen  is  accompanied  by  the 
evolution  of  a  very  considerable  amount  of  heat  ;  according  to  the 
determinations  of  Favre  and  Silbermann,37  1  part  by  weight  of  hydro-  „ 

In  conclusion  we  may  add  that  Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier  (1882)  observed  that  in  the, 
explosion  of  a  mixture  of  1  volume  of  detonating  gas  with  n  volumes  of  an  inert  gas,  the. 
pressure  is  approximately  equal  to  9'2  — 0'9n  atmospheres. 

y'  From  the  very  commencement  of  the  promulgation  of  the  idea  of  dissociation,  it 
might  have  been  imagined  that  reversible  reactions  of  combination  (the  formation  of  Hj 
and  O  belongs  to  this  number)  commence  at  the  same  temperature  as  that  at  which 
dissociation  begins.  And  in  many  cases  this  is  so,  but  not  always,  as  may  be  seen  from 
the  facts  (1)  that  at  450-560°,  when  detonating  gas  explodes,  the  density  of  aqueous 
vapour  not  only  does  not  vary  (and  it  hardly  varies  at  higher  temperatures,  probably 
because  the  amount  of  the  products  of  dissociation  is  small),  but  there  are  not,  as  far  as 
is  yet  known,  any  traces  of  dissociation ;  (2)  that  under  the  influence  of  contact  the  tem- 
perature at  which  combination  takes  place  falls  even  to  the  ordinary  temperature,  when  . 
water  and  similar  compounds  naturally  are  not  dissociated  and,  judging  from  the  data 
communicated  by  D.  P.  KonovaloJf  (Introduction,  Note  89)  and  others,  it  is  impossible  to 
escape  the  phenomena  of  contact ;  all  vessels,  whether  of  metal  or  glass,  show  the  same 
influence  as  spongy  platinum,  although  to  a  much  less  degree.  The  phenomena  of 
contact,  judging  from  a  review  of  the  data  referring  to 
it,  must  be  especially  sensitive  in  reactions  which  are 
powerfully  exothermal,  and  the  explosion  of  detonating 
gas  is  of  this  kind. 

57  The  amount  of  heat  evolved  in  the  combustion  of 
a  known  weight  (for  instance,  1  gram)  of  a  given  sub- 
stance is  determined  by  the  rise  in  temperature  of 
water,  to  which  the  whole  of  the  heat  evolved  in  the 
combustion  is  transmitted.  A  calorimeter,  for  example 
that  shown  in  fig.  88,  is  employed  for  this  purpose.  It 
consists  of  a  thin  (in  order  that  it  may  absorb  less 
heat),  polished  (that  it  should  transmit  a  minimum  of 
heat)  metallic  vessel,  surrounded  by  down  (c),  or  some 
other  bad  conductor  of  heat,  and  an  outer  metallic 
Vessel.  This  is  necessary  in  order  that  the  least 
possible  amount  of  heat  should  be  lost  from  the 
vessels ;  nevertheless,,  there  is  always  a  certain  loss, 
whose  magnitude  is  determined  "by  preliminary  experi- 
ment (by  taking  warm  water,  and  determining  its  fall 
in  temperature  after  a  definite  period  of  time)  as  a 
correction  for  the  results  of  observations.  The  water 
FIG.  33.— Favre  and  Silbermann'scalo-  to  which  the  heat  of  the  burning  substance  is  trans- 
rimeter  for  determining  the  heat  mitted  is  poured  into  the  vessel.  The  stirrer  g  allows 
evolved  in  combustion.  .  ,  ,  " 

of  all  the  layers  of  water  being  brought  to  the  same 

temperature,  and  the  thermometer  serves  for  the  determination  of  the  temperature  of  the 
water.  The  heat  evolved  passes,  naturally,  not  to  the  water  only,  but  to  all  the  parts  of 
the  apparatus.  The  quantity  of  water  corresponding  to  the  whole  amount  of  those 
objects  (the  vessels,  tubes,  &c.)  to  which  the  heat  is  transmitted  is  previously  determined, 
and  in  this  manner  another  most  important  correction  is  made  in  the  calorimetric  deter- 
minations. The  combustion  itself  is  carried  on  in  the  vessel  a.  The  ignited  substance 
is  introduced  through  the  tube  at  the  top,  which  closes  tightly.  In  fig.  83  the  apparatus 
is  arranged  for  the  combustion  of  a  gas,  introduced  by  a  tube.  The  oxygen  required  for 
the  combustion  is  led  into  a  by  the  tube  e,  and  the  products  of  combustion  either  remain 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  173 

gen  in  forming  water  evolves  34,462  units  of  heat.     Many  of  the  most 
recent  determinations  are  very  close  to  this  figure,  so  that  it  may  be        -4— 
taken  that  in  the  formation  of  18  parts  of  water  (H?O)  there  are  evolved 
69    major  calories,   or    69,000  units  of  heat38     If  the  specific  heat  of 

in  the  vessel  a  (if  liquid  or  solid),  or  escape  by  the  tube/  into  an  apparatus  in  which  their 
quantity  and  properties  can  easily  be  determined.  Thus  the  heat  evolved  in  combustion 
passes  to  the  walls  of  the  vessel  a,  and  to  the  gases  which  are  formed  in  it,  and  these 
transmit  it  to  the  water  of  the  calorimeter. 

38  This  quantity  of  heat  corresponds  with  the  formation  of  liquid  water  at  the  ordinary 
temperature  from  detonating  gas  at  the  same  temperature.  If  the  water  be  as  vapour 
the  heat  evolved  =  58  major  calories ;  if  as  ice  =  70'4  major  calories.  A  portion  of  this 
heat  is  due  to  the  fact  that  2  vols.  of  hydrogen  and  1  vol.  of  oxygen  give  2  vols.  of 
aqueous  vapour — that  is  to  say,  contraction  ensues — and  this  evolves  heat.  This  quan- 
tity of  heat  may  'be  calculated,  but  it  cannot  be  said  how  much  is  expended  in  the 
separation  of  the  atoms  of  oxygen  from  each  other,  and,  therefore,  strictly  speaking,  we 
do  not  know  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  evolved  in  the  reaction  alone,  although  the 
number  of  units  of  heat  evolved  in  the  combustion  of  detonating  gas  is  accurately 
known. 

The  construction  of  the  calorimeter  and  even  the  method  of  determination  vary 
considerably  in  different  cases.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  nineties,  a  large  number  of 
determinations  of  the  heat  of  combustion  have  been  conducted  in  closed  bombs  con- 
taining compressed  oxygen.  The  greatest  number  of  calorimetric  determinations  were 
made  by  Berthelot  and  Thomsen.  They  are  given  in  their  works  Essai  de  mecanique 
chimique- fondee  sur  la  therniochimie,  by  M.  Berthelot,  1879  (2  vols.),  and  thermo- 
cJiemische  Untersuchungen,  by  J.  Thomsen,  1886  (4  vols.)  The  most  important  methods 
of  recent  thermochemistry,  and  all  the  trustworthy  results  of  experiment,  are  given  in 
Prof.  P.  F.  Louginin's  Description  of  the  Different  Modes  of  Determining  the  Heat  of 
Combustion  of  Organic  Compounds,  Moscow,  1894.  The  student  must  refer  to  works 
on  theoretical  and  physical  chemistry  for  a  description  of  the  elements  and  methods 
of  thermochemistry,  into  the  details  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  enter  in  this  work.  One 
of  the  originators  of  thermochemistry,  Hesa,  was  a  member  of  the  St.  Petersburg 
Academy  of  Sciences.  Since  1870  a  large  amount  of  research  has  been  carried  out  in 
this  province  of  chemistry,  especially  in  France  and  Germany,  after  the  investigations 
of  the  French  Academician,  Berthelot,  and  Professor  Thomsen,  of  Copenhagen.  Among 
Bussians,  Beketoff,  Louginin,  Cheltzoff,  Chroustchoff,  and  others  are  known  by  their 
thermochemical  researches.  The  present  epoch  of  thermochemistry  must  be  considered 
rather  as  a  collective  one,  wherein  the  material  of  facts  is  amassed,  and  the  first  conse- 
quences arising  from  them  are  noticed.  In  my  opinion  two  essential  circumstances 
prevent  the  possibility  of  deducing  any  exact  consequences,  of  importance  to  chemical 
mechanics,  from  the  immense  store  of  thermochemical  data  already  collected  :  (1)  The 
majority  of  the  determinations  are  conducted  in  weak  aqueous  solutions,  and,  the  heat 
of  solution  being  known,  are  referred  to  the  substances  in  solution  ;  yet  there  is  much 
(Chapter  I.)  which  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  in  solution  water  does  not  play  the 
simple  part  of  a  diluting  medium,  but  of  itself  acts  independently  in  a  chemical  sense 
on  the  substance  dissolved.  (2)  Physical  and  mechanical  changes  (decrease  of  volume, 
diffusion,  and  others)  invariably  proceed  side  by  side  with  chemical  changes,  and  for  the 
present  it  is  impossible,  in  a  number  of  cases,  to  distinguish  the  thermal  effect  of  the  one 
and  the  other  kind  of  change.  It  is  evident  that  the  one  kind  of  change  (chemical)  is 
essentially  inseparable  and  incomprehensible  without  the  other  (mechanical  and  physi- 
cal) ;  and  therefore  it  seems  to  me  that  thermochemical  data  will  only  acquire  their  true 
meaning  when  the  connection  between  the  phenomena  of  both  kinds  (on  the  one  hand 
chemical  and  atomic,  and  on  the  other  hand  mechanical  and  molecular  or  between 
.entire  masses)  is  explained  more  clearly  and  fully  than  is  at  present  the  case.  As  there 
is  no  doubt  that  the  simple  mechanical  contact,  or  the  action  of  heat  alone,  on  sub- 


174  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

aqueous  vapour  (b*'48)  remained  constant  from  the  ordinary  temperature 
v/o  that  at  which  the  combustion  of  detonating  gas  takes  place  (but  there 
is  now  no  doubt  that  it  increases),  were  the  combustion  concentrated 
at  one  point39  (but  it  occurs  in  the  whole  region  of  a  flame),  were  there 
.no  loss  from  radiation  and  heat  conduction,  and  did  dissociation  not 
take  place—  that  is,  did  not  a  state  of  equilibrium  between  the  hydrogen, 
oxygen,  and  water  come  about  —  then  it  would  be  possible  to  calculate 
the  temperature  of  thejlame  of  detonating  gas.  It  would  then  be  8,000°. 40 
In  reality  it  is  very  much  lower,  but  it  is  nevertheless  higher  than  the 
temperature  attained  in  furnaces  and  flames,  and  is  as  high  as  2,000°, 
The  explosion  of  detonating  gas  is  explained  by  this  high  temperature^, 
because  the  aqueous  vapour  formed  must  occupy  a  volume  at  least 
5  times  greater  than  that  occupied  by  the  detonating  gas  at  the  ordi- 
nary temperature,  Detonating  gas  emits  a  sound,  not  only  as  a  con- 
sequence of  the  commotion  which  occurs  from  the  rapid  expansion  of 
the  heated  vapour,-  but  also  because  it  is  immediately  followed  by  a 
cooling  effect,  the  conversion  of  the  vapour  into  water,  and  a  rapid 
contraction.41 

fttances  sometimes  causes  an  evident  and  always  a  latent  (incipient)  chemical  change- 
that  is,  a  different  distribution  or  motion  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecules— it  follows 
that  purely  chemical  phenomena  are  inseparable  from  physical  and  mechanical  phefno- 
mena.  A  mechanical  change,  may  be  imagined  without  a  physical  change,  and  a  physical 
without  a  chemical  change,  but  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  chemical  change  without 
a  physical  and  mechanical  one,  for. without  the  latter  we  should  not  be  able  to  recognise 
the  former,  and  it  is  by  their  means  that  we  are  enabled  to  do  so. 

89  The  flame,  or  locality  where  the  combustion  of  gases  and  vapours  takes  place,  is  a 
complex  phenomenon,  'an. entire  factory,'  as  Faraday  says,  and  therefore  we  will  consider 
flame  in  some  detail  in  one  of  the  following  notes. 

40  If  84,500  units  of  heat  are  evolved  in  the  combu'stion  of  1  part  of  hydrogen,  and 
this  heat  is  transmitted  to  the  resulting  9  parts  by  weight  of  aqueous  vapour,  then  w6 
find  that,  taking  the  specific  heat  of  the  latter  as  0-47,5,  each  "unit  of  heat  raises  the 
temperature  of  1  part  by  weight  of  aqueous  vapour  2°'l  and  9  parts  by  weight  (2'l-*-9) 
0°'28  ;  hence  the  84,600  units  of  heat  raise  its  temperature  7,985°,  If  detonating  gas  i9 
converted  into  water  in  a  closed  space,  then  the  aqueous  vapour  formed  cannot  expand, 
and  therefore,  in  calculating  the  temperature  of  combustion,  the  specific  heat  at  a  con* 
Stant  volume  must  be  taken  into  consideration;  for  aqueous  vapour  it  is  0'36.  Thift 
figure  gives  a  still  higher  temperature  for  the  flame.  In  reality  it  is  much  lower,  but  the 
results  given  by  different  observers  are  very  contradictory  (from  1,700°  to  2,400°),  the 
discrepancies  depending  on  the  fact  that  flames  of  different  sizes  are  cooled  by  radiation 
to  a  different  degree,  but  mainly  on  the  fact  that  the  methods  and  apparatus  (pyro- 
meters) for  the  determination  of  high  temperatures,  although,  they  enable  relative 
Changes  of  temperature  to  be  judged,  are  of  little  use  for  determining  their  absolute 
magnitude.  'By  taking  the  temperature  of  the  flame  of  detonating  gas  as  2,000°,  I  give, 
I  think,  the  average  of  the  most  trustworthy  determinations  and  -calculations  based  upon 
the  determination  of  the  variation  of  the  specific  heat  of  aqueous  vapour  and  other 
gases  (see  Chapter  XLI.) 

'*  It  is  evident  that  not  only  hydrogen,  but  every  other  combustible  gas,  will  give  an 
explosive  mixture  with  oxygen.  For  this  reason  coal-gas  mixed  with  air  explodes  when 
the  mixture  is  ignited.  The  pressure  obtained  in  the  explosions  serves  as  .the  motive 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE   COMBINATIONS 


175 


Mixtures  of  hydrogen  and  of  various  other  gases  with  oxygen 
are  taken  advantage  of  for  obtainmg^high  temgerutures.  By  th§ 
aid  of  such  high  temperatures  metals  like  platinum  may  be  melted 
on  a  large  scale,  which  cannot  be_performed  in  furnaces  heated  with 
charcoal  and  fed  by  a  current  of  air.  The  burner^  shown  in  fig.  34,j& 
constructed  for  the  application  of  detonating  gas  to  the  purpose.  It 
consists  of  two  brass  tubes,  one  fixed  inside  the  other,  as  shown  in  the 
drawing.  The  internal  central  tube  0  0  conducts  oxygen,  and  the- 
outside,  enveloping,  tube  E'  E'  conducts 
hydrogen.  Previous  to  their  egress  the 
gases  do  not  mix  together,  so  that 
there  can  be  no  explosion  inside  the 
apparatus.  When  this  burner  is  in 
use  C  is  connected  with  a  gas-holder 
containing  oxygen,  and  E  with  a  gas- 
holder containing  hydrogen  (or  some* 
times  coal-gas).  The  flow  of  the  gases 
can  be  easily  regulated  by  the  stop- 
cocks 0  H.  The  flame  is  shortest  and 
evolves  the  greatest  heat  when  the 
gases  burning  are  in  the  proportion  of  Dj 
1  volume  of  oxygen  to  2  volumes  of 
hydrogen.  The  degree  of  heat  may  be 
easily  judged  from  the  fact  that  a  thin 
platinum  wire  placed  in  the  flame  of  a 
properly  proportioned  mixture  easily 
melts.  By  placing  the  burner  in  the 
orifice  of  a  hollow  piece  of  lime,  a  crucible  A  B  is  obtained  in  which 
the  platinum  may  be  easily  melted,  even  in  large  quantities  if  the 
current  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  be  sufficiently  great  (Deville).  The 
flame  of  detonating  gas  may  also  be  used  for  illuminating  purposes. 
It  is  by  itself  very  pale,  but  owing  to  its  high  temperature  it  may 
serve  for  rendering  infusible  objects  incandescent,  and  at  the  very 
high  temperature  produced  by  the  detonating  gas  the  incandescent 


FlG.  34.— Safety  burner  for  detonating 
gas,  described  in  text. 


power  of  gas  engines.  In  this  case  advantage  is  taken,  not  only  of  the  pressure  pro- 
duced by  the  explosion,  but  also 'of  that  contraction  which  takes  place  after  the  explosion. 
On  this  is  based  the  construction  of  several  motors,  of  which  Lenoir's  was  formerly,  and 
Otto's  is  now,  the  best  known.  The  explosion  is  usually  produced  by  coal-gas  and  air, 
but  of  late  the  vapours  of  combustible  liquids  (kerosene,  benzene)  are  also  being 
employed  in  place  of  gas  (Chapter  IX.)  In  Lenoir's  engine  a  mixture  of  coal-gas  ana 
air  is  ignited  by  means  of  sparks  from  a  Ruhmkorff '$  coil,  but  in  the  most  recent  machine* 
the  gases  are  ignited  by  the  direct  action  of  a  gas  jet,  or  by  contact  with  the  hot  walls  o| 
ft  side  tube. 


176 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


t 


substance  gives  a  most  intense  light.  For  this  purpose  lime,  mag- 
nesia, or  oxide  of  zirconium  are  used,  as  they  are  not  fusible  at 
the  very  high  temperature  evolved  by  the  detonating  gas.  A  small 
cylinder  of  lime  placed  in  the  flame  of  detonating  gas,  if  regulated  to 
the  required  point,  gives  a  very  brilliant  white  light,  which  was  at  one 
time  proposed  for  illuminating  lighthouses.  At  present  in  the  majority 
of  cases  the  electric  light,  owing  to  its  constancy  and  other  advantages, 
has  replaced  it  for  this  purpose  The  light  produced  by  the  incan- 
descence of  lime  in  detonating  gas  is  called  the  Drummond  light  or 
limelight 

The  above  cases  form  examples  of  the  combustion  of  elements  in 
oxygen,  but  exactly  similar  phenomena  are  observed  in  the  combustion 
of  compounds.  So,  for  instance,  the  solid,  colourless,  shiny  substance, 
naphthalene,  C,0H8,  burns  in  the  air  with  a  smoky  flame,  whilst  in 
oxygen  it  continues  to  burn  with  a  very  brilliant  flame.  Alcohol,  oil, 
and  other  substances  burn  brilliantly  in  oxygen  on  conducting  the 
oxygen  by  a  tube  to  the  flame  of  lamps  burning  these  substances.  A 
high  temperature  is  thus  evolved,  which  is  sometimes  taken  advantage 
of  in  chemical  practice. 

In  order  to  understand  why  combustion  in  oxygen  proceeds  more 
rapidly,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  more  intense  heat  effect,  than  com- 
bustion in  air,  it  must  be  recollected  that  air  is  oxygen  diluted  with 
nitrogen,  which  does  not  support  combustion^,  and  therefore  fewer  par- 
ticles of  oxygen  flow  to  the  surface  of  a  substance  burning  in  air  than 
when  burning  in  pure  oxygen,  besides  which  the  reason  of  the  intensity 
of  combustion  in  oxygen  is  the  high  temperature  acquired  by  the  sub- 
stance burning  in  it.41  bl8 

41  bi»  Let  us  consider  as  an  example  the  combustion  of  sulphur  in  air  and  in  oxygen 
If  1  gram  of  sulphur  burns  in  air  or  oxygen  it  evolves  in  either  case  2250  units  of  heat- 
i.e.  evolves  sufficient  heat  for  heating  2,260  grams  of  water  1°  C.  This  heat  is  first  of  all 
transmitted  to  the  sulphurous  anhydride,  SO2,  formed  by  the  combination  of  sulphur 
with  oxygen.  In  its  combustion  1  gram  of  sulphur  forms  2  grams  of  sulphurous  an- 
hydride—i.e.  the  sulphur  combines  with  1  gram  of  oxygen.  In  order  that  1  gram  of 
sulphur  should  have  access  to  1  gram  of  oxygen  in  air,  it  is  necessary  that  8'4  grams 
of  nitrogen  should  simultaneously  reach  the  sulphur,  because  air  contains  seventy-seven 
parts  of  nitrogen  (by  weight)  per  twenty-three  parts  of  oxygen.  Thus  in  the  combustion 
of  1  gram  of  sulphur,  the  2,250  units  of  heat  are  transmitted  to  2  grams  of  sulphurous 
6xide  and  to  at  least  3'i  grams  of  nitrogen.  As  0*155  unit  of 'heat  is  required  to  raise 
1  gram  of  sulphurous  anhydride  1°  C.,  therefore  2  grams  require  0'81  unit.  So  also  8'4 
grams  of  nitrogen  require  8'4  x  0'244  or  0'83  unit  of  heat,  and  therefore  in  order  to  raise 
both  gases  1°  C.  0'81  +  0*88  or  1'14  unit  of  heat  is  required;  but  as  the  combustion  of 
the  sulphur  evolves  2,250  units  of  heat,  therefore  the  gases  might  be  heated  (if  their 

specific  heats  remained  constant)  to  —  —  or  1,974°  C.    That  is,  the  maximum  possible 

temperature  of  the  flame  of  the  sulphur  burning  in  air  will  be  1,974°  C.    In  the  combus- 
tion of  the  sulphur  in  oxygenate  heat  evolved  (2,250  units)  con  only  pass  to  the  2  grams 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS   SALINE   COMBINATIONS  177 

Among  the  phenomena  accompanying  the  combustion  of  certain, 
substances,  the  phenomenon  of  flame,  attracts  attention.  Sulphur, 
phosphorus,  sodium,  magnesium,  naphthalene,  tfcc.,  burn  like  hydrogen 
with  a  flame,  whilst  in  the  combustion  of  other  substances  no  flame  is 
observed,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  combustion  of  iron  and  of  charcoal. 
The  appearance  of  flame  depends  on  the  capacity  of  the  combustible 
substance  to  yield  gases  or  vapours  at  the  temperature  of  combustion. 
At  the  temperature  of  combustion,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  sodium,  and 
naphthalene  pass  into  vapour,  whilst  wood,  alcohol,  oil,  etc.,  are  decom- 
posed into  gaseous  and  vaporous  substances.  The  combustion  of  gases 
and  vapours  forms  flames,  and  therefore  aflame  is  composed  of  the  hot 
and  incandescent  gases  and  vapours  produced  by  combustion.  It  may 
easily  be  proved  that  the  flames  of  such  non- volatile  substances  as  wood 
contain  volatile  and  combustible  substances  formed  from  them,  by 
placing  a  tube  in  the  flame  connected  with  an  aspirator.  Besides  the 
products  of  combustion,  combustible  gases  and  liquids,  previously  in  the 
flame  as  vapours,  collect  in  the  aspirator.  For  this  experiment  to 
succeed— i.e.  in  order  to  really  extract  combustible  gases  and  vapours 
from  the  flame— it  is  necessary  that  the  suction  tube  should  be  placed 
inside  the  flame.  The  combustible  gases  and  vapours  can  only  remain 
unburnt  inside  the  flame,  for  at  the  surface  of  the  flame  they  come  into 
contact  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air  and  burn.42  Flames  are  of  different) 
degrees  of  brilliancy,  according  to  whether  solid  incandescent  particles 
occur  in  the  combustible  gas  or  vapour,  or  not.  Incandescent  gases 
and  vapours  emit  but  little  light  by  themselves,  and  therefore  give  a 
paler  flame.43  If  a  flame  does  not  contain  solid  particles  it  is  trans- 

of  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  therefore  the  highest  possible  temperature  of  the  flame  of 

the   sulphur  in  oxygen  will  be  =  £22  or  7258°.    In  the  same  manner  it  may  be  calcu- 
O'ol 

lated  -that  the  temperature  of  charcoal  burning  in  air  cannot  exceed  2,700°,  while  in 
oxygen  it  may  attain  10,100°  C.  For  this  reason  the  temperature  in  oxygen  will  always 
be  higher  than  in  air,  although  (judging  from  what  has  been  said  respecting  detonating 
gas)  neither  one  temperature  nor  the  other  will  ever  approximate  to  the  theoretical 
amount. 

42  Faraday  proved  this  by  a  very  convincing  experiment  on  a  candle  flame.     If  one 
arm  of  a  bent  glass  tube  be  placed  in  a  candle  flame  above  the  wick  in  the  dark  portion 
of  the  flame,  then  the  products 'of  the  partial  combustion  of  the  stearin  will  pass  up  the 
tube,  condense  in  the  other  arm,  and  collect  in  a  flask  placed  under  it  (fig.  85)  as  heavy 
white  fumes  which  burn  when  lighted.     If   the  tube  be  raised  into  the  upper  lumi- 
nous portion  of  the  flame,  then  a  dense  black  smoke  which  will  not  inflame  accumulates 
in  the  flask.    Lastly,  if  the  tube  be  let  down  until  it  touches  the  wick,  then  little  but 

•  Btearic  acid  condenses  in  the  flask. 

43  All  transparent  substances  which  transmit  light  with  great  ease  (that  is,  which 
absorb  but  little  light)  are  but  little  luminous  when  heated ;  so  also  substances  which 
absorb  but  few  heat  rays,  when  heated  transmit  few  rays  of  heat. 


I 


178 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


parent,  pale,  and  emits  but  little  light.44  The  flames  of  burning 
alcohol,  sulphur,  and  hydrogen  are  of  this  kind.  A  pale  flame  may  be 
rendered  luminous  by  placing  fine  particles  of  solid  matter  in  it.  Thus, 
if  a  very  fine  platinum  wire  be  placed  in  the  pale  flame  of  burning 
alcohol — or,  better  still,  of  hydrogen — the  flame  emits  a  bright  light. 

This  is  still  better  seen 
by  sifting  the  powder  of 
an  incombustible  substance, 
such  as  fine  sand,  into  the 
flame,  or  by  placing  a  bunch 
of  asbestos  threads  in  it. 
Every  brilliant  flame  always 
contains  some  kind  of  solid 
particles,  or  at  least  some 
very  dense  vapour.  The 
flame  of  sodium  burning 
in  oxygen  has  a  brilliant 
yellow  colour,  from  the 
presence  of  particles  of  solid 
sodium  oxide.  The  flame 
of  magnesium  is  brilliant 
from  the  fact  that  in  burn- 
ing it  forms  solid  magnesia, 
which  becomes  white  hot, 
and  similarly  the  brilliancy 
of  the  Drummond  light  is 
due  to  the  heat  of  the  flame  raising  the  solid  non-volatile  lime  to  a 
state  of  incandescence.  The  flames  of  a  candle,  wood,  and  similar  sub-, 
stances  are  brilliant,  because  they  contain  particles  of  charcoal  or  soot. 
It  is  not  the  flame  itself  which  is  luminous,  but  the  incandescent  soot 
it  contains.  These  particles  of  charcoal  which  occur  in  flames  may  be 
easily  observed  by  introducing  a  cold  object,  like  a  knife,  into  the 
flame.45  The  particles  of  charcoal  burn  at  the  outer  surface  of  the 
flame  if  the  supply,  of  air  be  sufficient,  but  if  the  supply  of  air— that  is, 

44  There  is,  however,  no  doubt  but  that  very  heavy  dense  vapours  or  gases  under 
pressure  (according  to  the  experiments  of  Frankland)  are  luminous  when  heated,  be- 
cause, as  they  become  denser  they  approach  a  liquid  or  solid  state.     Thus  detonating 
gas  when  exploded  under  pressure  gives  a  brilliant  light. 

45  If  hydrogen  gas  be  passed  through  a  volatile  liquid  hydrocarbon — for  instance, 
through  benzene  (the  benzene  m'ay  be  poured  directly  into  the  vessel  in  which  hydrogen 
is  generated) — then  its  vapour  burns  with  the  hydrogen  and  gives  a  very  bright  flame, 
because  the  resultant  particles  of   carbon  (soot)  become  incandescent.     Benzene,  or 
platinum  gauze,  introduced  into  A  hydrogen  flame  may  be  employed  for  illuminating 
purposes. 


.  35.— Faraday's  experiment  for  investigating  the 
different  parts  of  a  caudle  flame. 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS 


179 


/      of  oxygen —be  insufficient  for  their  combustion  the  flame  smokes,  because  I 
N.      the  unconsuined  particles  of  charcoal  are  carried  off  by  the  current  of  f 
>  air.4f> 

46  In  flames  the  separate  parts  may  be  distinguished  with  more  or  less  distinctness 
That  portion  of  the  flame  whither  the  combustible  vapours  or  gases  flow,  is  not  luminous 
because  its  temperature  is  still  too  low  for  the  process  of  combustion  to  take  place  in  it. 
This  is  the  space  which  in  a  candle  surrounds  the  wick,  or  in  a  gas  jet  is  immediately 
above  the  orifice  from  which  the  gas  escapes.  In  a  candle  the  combustible  vapours  and 
gases  which  are  formed  by  the  action  of  heat  on  the  melted  tallo^r  or  stearin  rise  in  the. 
wick,  and  are  heated  by  the  high  temperature  of  the  flame.  By  the  action  of  the  heat, 
the  solid  or  liquid  substance  is  here,  as  in  other  cases,  decomposed,  forming  products  of 
dry  distillation.  These  products  occur  in  the  central  portion  of  the  flame  of  a  candle. 
The  air  travels  to  it  from  the  outside,  and  is  not  able  to  intermix  at  once  with  the  vapours 
and  gases  in  all  parts  of  the  flame  equally ;  consequently, 
in  the  outer  portion  of  the  flame  the  amount  of  oxygen  will 
be  greater  than  in  the  interior  portions.  But,  owing  to 
diffusion,  the  oxygen,  of  course  mixed  with  nitrogen,  flowing 
towards  the  combustible  substance,  does  finally  penetrate  to 
the  interior  of  the  flame  (when  the  combustion  takes  place 
in  ordinary  air).  The  combustible  vapours  and  gases  combine 
with  this  oxygen,  evolve  a  considerable  amount  of  heat,  and 
bring  about  that  state  of  incandescence  which  is  so  necessary 
both  for  keeping  up  the  combustion  and  also  for  the  uses  to 
which  the  flame  is  applied.  Passing  from  the  colder  envelope 
of  air  through  the  interior  of  the  flame,  to  the  source  of  the 
combustible  vapours  (for  instance,  the  wick),  we  evidently 
first  traverse  layers  of  higher  and  higher  temperature,  and 
then  portions  which  are  less  and  less  hot,  in  which  the  combus- 
tion is  less  complete,  owing  to  the  limited  supply  of  oxygen. 

Thus  unburnt  products  of  the  decomposition  of  organic 
substances  occur  in  the  interior  of  the  flame.  But  there  is 
always  free  hydrogen  in  the  interior  of  the  flame,  even  when 
oxygen  is  introduced  there,  or  when  a  mixture  of  hydrogen 
and  oxygen  burns,  because  the  temperature  evolved  in  the 
combustion  of  hydrogen  or  the  carbon  of  organic  matter  is 
so  high  that  the  products  of  combustion  are  themselves 
partially  decomposed— that  is,  dissociated — at  this  tempera- 
ture. Hence,  in  a  flame  a  portion  of  the  hydrogen  and  of 
the  oxygen  which  might  combine  with  the  combustible  sub- 
stances must  always  be  present  in  a  free  state.  If  a  hydro- 
carbon burns,  and  we  imagine  that  a  portion-  of  the  hydrogen 
is  in  a  free  state,  then  a  portion  of  the  carbon  must  also  occur 
in  the  same  form  in  the  flame,  because,  other  conditions 
being  unchanged,  carbon  burns  after  hydrogen,  and  this 
is  actually  observed  in  the  combustion  of  various  hydro- 
carbons. Charcoal,  or  the  soot  of  a  common  flame,  arises 

from  the  dissociation  of  organic  substances  contained  in  the  flame.  The  majority  of 
hydrocarbons,  especially  those  containing  much  carbon — for  instance,  naphthalene — 
burn,  even  in  oxygen,  with  separation  of  soot.  In  that  portion  of  the  flame  where 
the  hydrogen  burns  the  carbon  remains  unburnt,  or  at  least  partly  so.  It  is  this 
free  carbon  which  causes  the  brilliancy  of  the  flame.  That  the  interior  of  the  flame 
contains  a  mixture  which  is  still  capable  of  combustion  may  be  proved  by  the  follow- 
ing experiment:  A  portion  of  the  gases  may  be  .withdrawn  by  an  aspirator  from 
the  central  portion  of  the  flame  of  carbonic  oxide,  which  is  combustible  in  air.  For 


FIG.  36. — In  the  candle  flame 
the  portion  C  contains  the 
vapours  and  products  of  de- 
composition ;  in  the  bright 
zone  A  the  combustion  has 
commenced,  and  particles 
of  carbon  are  emitted ;  and 
in  the  pale  zone  B  the  com- 
bustion is  completed. 


180  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

The  combination  of  various  substances  with  oxygen  may  not 
present  any  signs  of  combustion — that  is,  the  temperature  may  rise 
but  inconsiderably  This  may  either  proceed  from  the  fact  that  the 
reaction  of  the  substance  (for  example,  tin,  mercury,  lead  at  a  high 
temperature,  or  a  mixture  of  pyrogallol  with  caustic  potash  at  the 
ordinary  temperature)  evolves  but  little  heat,  or  that  the  heat 
evolved  is  transmitted  to  good  conductors  of  heat,  like  metals,  or  that 
the  combination  with  oxygen  takes  place  so  slowly  that  the  heat 
evolved  succeeds  in  passing  to  the  surrounding  objects.  Combustion 
fa  only  a  particular,  intense,  and  evident  case  of  combination  with 

this  purpose  Deville  passed  water  through  a  metallic  tube  having  a  fine  lateral  orifice, 
which  is  placed  in  the  flame.  As  the  water  flows  along  the  tube  portions  of  the  gases 
of  the  flame  enter,  and,  passing  along  the  tube  alternately  with  cylinders  of  water,  are 
carried  away  into  an  apparatus  where  they  can  be  investigated.  It  appears  that  all 
portions  of  the  flame  obtained  by  the  combustion  of  a  mixture  of  carbonic  oxide  and 
oxygen  contain  a  portion  of  this  mixture  still  unburnt.  The  researches  of  Deville 
and  Bunsen  showed  that  in  the  explosion  of  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  of  carbonic  oxide 
with  oxygen  in  a  closed  space,  complete  combustion*  does  not  ever  take  place  im- 
mediately. If  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen  be  confined  in  a 
closed  space,  then  on  explosion  the  pressure  does  not  attain  that  magnitude  which  it 
would  were  there  immediate  and  complete  combustion.  It  may  be  calculated  that  the 
pressure  should  attain  twenty-six  atmospheres.  In  reality,  it  does  n"t  exceed  nine  and  a 
half  atmospheres. 

Hence  the  admixture  of  the  products  of  combustion  with  an  explosive  mixture  pre- 
vents the  combustion  of  the  remaining  mass,  although  capable  of  burning.  The  ad- 
mixture of  carbonic  anhydride  prevents  carbonic  oxide  from  burning.  The  presence 
of  any  other  foreign  gas  interferes  in  the  same  manner.  This  shows  that  every  portion 
of  a  flame  must  contain  combustible,  burning,  and  already  burnt  substances — i.e.  oxygen, 
carbon,  carbonic  oxide,  hydrogen,  hydrocarbons,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  water.  Con- 
sequently, it  is  impossible  to  attain  instantaneous  complete  combustion,  and  this  is  one 
of  the  reasons  of  the  phenomenon  of  flame.  A  certain  space  is  required,  and  the  tem- 
perature must  be  unequal  in  different  parts  of  it.  In  this  space  different  quantities  of 
the  component  parts  are  successively  subjected  to  combustion,  or  are  cooled  under  the 
influence  of  adjacent  objects,  and  combustion  only  ends  where  the  flame  ends.  If  the 
combustion  could  be  concentrated  at  one  spot,  then  the  temperature  would  be  incom- 
parably higher  than  it  is  under  the  actual  circumstances. 

The  various  regions  of  the  flame  have  formed  the  frequent  subject  of  experimental 
research,  and  the  experiments  conducted  by  Smithells  and  Ingle  (1892)  are  particularly 
instructive ;  they  show  that  the  reducing  (interior)  and  oxidising  (exterior)  portions  of 
the  flame  of  a  burning  gas  may  be  divided  by  taking  a  Bunsen  burner,  and  surrounding 
the  flame  of  the  gas  burnt  in  it,  by  another  wider  tube  (without  the  access  of  air  to  the 
annular  space  or  allowing  only  a  small  current  of  air  to  pass),  when  a  gaseous  mixture, 
containing  oxide  of  carbon  and  capable  of  further  combustion,  will  issue  from  this 
enveloping  tube,  so  that  a  second  flame,  corresponding  to  the  exterior  (oxidising)  portion 
of  an  ordinary  flame,  may  be  obtained  above  theN  enveloping  tube.  This  division  of  the 
flame  into  two  portions  is  particularly  clear  when  cyanogen  C2N2  is  burnt,  because  tho 
interior  portion  (where  CO  is  chiefly  formed  according  to  the  equation  C2N2  +  O2  = 
2CO  +  N2,  but  a  portion  of  the  nitrogen  is  oxidised)  is  of  a  rose  colour,  while  the  exterior 
portion  (where  the  CO  burns  into  CO2  at  the  expense  of  a  fresh  quantity  of  oxygen 
and  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  proceeding  from  the  interior  portions)  is  of  a  bluish-grey 
colour. 


OXYGEN  AND   ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  181 

oxygen.  Respiration  is  also  an  act  of  combination  with  oxygen  ; 
it  also  serves,  like  combustion,  for  the  development  of  heat  by  those 
chemical  processes  which  accompany  it  (the  transformation  of  oxygen 
into  carbonic  anhydride).  Lavoisier  enunciated  this  in  the  lucid  ex- 
pression, '  respiration  is  slow  combustion.' 

Reactions  involving  slow  combination  of  substances  with  oxygen 
are  termed  oxidations.  Combination  of  this  kind  (and  also  combustion) 
often  results  in  the  formation  of  acid  substances,  and  hence  the 
name  oxygen  (Sauerstoff)  Combustion  is  only  rapid  oxidation. 
Phosphorus,  iron,  and  wine  may  be  taken  as  examples  of  substances 
which  slowly  oxidise  in  air  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  If  such  a 
substance  be  left  in  .con tact  with  a  definite  volume  of  air  or  oxygen,  it 
absorbs  the  oxygen  little  by  little,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  decrease  in 
volume  of  the  gas.  This  slow  oxidation  is  not  often  accompanied  by 
a  sensible  evolution  of  heat ;  an  evolution  of  heat  really  does  occur,  only 
it  is  not  apparent  to  our  senses  owing  to  the  small  rise  in  temperature 
which  takes  place  ;  this  is  owing  to  the  slow  rate  of  the  reaction  and 
to  the  transmission  of  the  heat  formed  as  radiant  heat,  <fcc.  Thus,  in 
the  oxidation  of  wine  and  its  transformation  into  vinegar  by  the  usual 
method  of  preparation  of  the  latter,  the  heat  evolved  cannot  be  observed 
because  it  extends  over  several  weeks,  but  in  the  so-called  rapid  process^ 
of  the  manufacture  of  vinegar,  when  a  large  quantity  of  wine  is 
comparatively  rapidly  oxidised,  the  evolution  of  heat  is  quite  appa- 
rent. 

Such  slow  processes  of  oxidation  are  always  taking  place  in  nature 
by  the  action  of  the  atmosphere.  Dead  organisms  and  the  substances 
obtained  from  them — such  as  bodies  of  animals,  wood,  wool,  grass,  &c, — 
are  especially  subject  to  this  action.  They  rot  and  decompose — that  is, 
their  solid  matter  is  transformed  into  gases,  under  the  influence  of 
moisture  and  atmospheric  oxygen,  and  generally  under  the  influence  of 
other  organisms,  such  as  moulds,  worms,  micro-organisms  (bacteria), 
and  the  like.  These  are  processes  of  slow  combustion,  of  slow  com- 
bination with  oxygen.  It  is  well  known  that  manure  rots  and 
developes  heat,  that  stacks  of  damp  hay,  damp  flour,  straw,  &c.,  become 
heated  and  are  changed  in  the  process.47  In  all  these  transformations 
the  same  chief  products  of  combustion  are  formed  as  those  which  are 
contained  in  smoke  ;  the  carbon  gives  carbonic  anhydride,  and  the 
hydrogen  water.  Hence  these  processes  require  oxygen  just  like  com- 
bustion. This  is  the  reason  why  the  entire  prevention  of  access  of 


7  Cotton  waste  (used  in  factories  for  cleaning  machines  from  lubricating  oil)  soaked 
4n  oil  and  lying  in  heaps  is  self-combustible,  being  oxidised  by  the  air. 


182  PRINCIPLES  OP  CHEMISTRY 

air  hinders  these  transformations,48  -and  an  increased  supply  of  air 
accelerates  them.  The  mechanical  treatment  of  arable  lands  by  the 
plough,  harrow,  and  other  similar  means  has  not  only  the  object  of 
facilitating  the  spread  of  roots  in  the  ground,  and  of  making  the  soil 
more  permeable  to  water,  but  it  also  serves  to  facilitate  the  access  of 
the  air  to  the  component  parts  of  the  soil ;  as  a  consequence  of  which 
the  organic  remains  of  soil  rot— so  to  speak,  breathe  air  and  evolve 
carbonic  anhydride.  One  acre  of  good  garden  land  in  the  pourse  of  a 
summer  evolves  more  than  sixteen  tons  of  carbonic  anhydride. 

3tt  is  not  only  vegetable  and  ani":r,l  substances  which  are  subject  to 
elow  oxidation  in  the  presence  of  water.  Some  metals  even  rust  under 
these  conditions.  Copper  very  easily  absorbs  oxygen  in  the  presence  of 
acids.  Many  metallic  sulphides  (for  example,  pyrites)  are  very  easily 
oxidised  with  access  of  air  and  moisture.  Thus  processes  of  slow 
oxidation  proceed  throughout  nature.  However,  there  are  many  ele- 
ments which  do  not  under  any  circumstances  combine  directly  with 
gaseous  oxygen ;  nevertheless  their  compounds  with  oxygen  may  be 
obtained.  Platinum,  gold,  iridium,  chlorine,  and  iodine  are  examples 
of  such  elements.  In  this  case  recourse  is  had  to  a  so-called  indirect 
method — i.e.  the  given  substance  is  combined  with  another  element, 
and  by  a  method  of  .double  decomposition  this  element  is  replaced  by 
oxygen.  Substances  which  do  not  directly  combine  with  oxygen,  but 
form  compounds  with  it  by  an  indirect  method,  often  readily  lose 
the  oxygen  which  they  had  absorbed  by  double  decomposition  or 
at  the  moment  of  its  evolution.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  com- 
pounds of  oxygen  with  chlorine,  nitrogen,  and  platinum,  which  evolve 
oxygen  on  heating — that  is,  they  may  be  used  as  oxidising  agents.  In 
this  respect  oxidising  agents,  or  those  compounds  of  oxygen  which  are 
employed  in  chemical  and  technical  practice  for  transferring  oxygen 
to  other  substances,  are  especially  remarkable.  The  most  important 
among*  these  is  nitric  acid  or  aqua  fortis — a  substance  rich  in  oxygen, 
and  capable  of  evolving  it  when  heated,  which  easily  oxidises  a  great 
number  of  substances.  Thus  nearly  all  metals  and  organic  substances 
containing  carbon  and  hydrogen  are  more  or  less  oxidised  when  heated 

48  When  it  is  desired  to  preserve  a  supply  of  vegetable  and  animal  food,  the  access  of 
the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  (and  also  of  the  germs  of  organisms  present  in  the  air)  is 
often  prevented.  With  this  object  articles  of  food  are  often  kept  in  hermetically  closed 
vessels,  from  which  the  air  has  been  withdrawn ;  vegetables  are  dried  and  soldered  up  while 
hot  in  tin  boxes ;  sardines  are  immersed  in  oil,  &c.  The  removal  of  water  from  substances 
is  also  sometimes  resorted  to  with  the  same  object  (the  drying  of  hay,  corn,  fruits),  as  also 
is  saturation  with  substances  which  absorb  oxygen  (such  as  sulphurous  anhydride),  or 
which  hinder  the  growth  of  organisms  forming  the  first  cause  of  putrefaction,  as  in 
processes  of  smoking,  embalming,  and  in  the  keeping  of  fishes  and  other  animal  speci- 
mens in  spirit,  &c. 


OXYGEN    AND   ITS   SALINE   COMBINATIONS  183 

v 

with  nitric  acid.  If  strong  nitric  acid  be  taken,  and  a  piece  of  burning 
charcoal  be  immersed  in  the  acid,  it  continues  to  burn.  Chromic  acid 
acts  like  nitric  acid  ,  alcohol  burns  when  mixed  with  it.  Although 
the  action  is  not  so  marked, -even  water  may  oxidise  with  its  oxygen, 
Sodium  is  not  oxidised  in  perfectly  dry  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  tem- 
perature, but  it  burns  very  easily  in  water  and  aqueous  vapour 
Charcoal  can  burn  in  carbonic  anhydride — a  product  of  combustion — 
forming  carbonic  oxide.  Magnesium  burns  in  the  same  gas,  separating 
carbon  from  it.  Speaking  generally,  combined  oxygen  can  pass  from 
one  compound  to  another. 

The  products  of  combustion  or  oxidation — and  in  general  the  definite 
compounds  of  oxygen — are  termed  oxides.  Some  oxides  are  not  capable 
of  combining  with  other  oxides— or  combine  with  only  a  few,  and  then 
with  the  evolution  of  very  little  heat ;  others,  on  the  contrary,  enter 
into  combination  with  very  many  other  oxides,  and  in  general  have 
remarkable  chemical  energy.  The  oxides  incapable  of  combining  with 
others,  or  only  showing  this  quality  in  a  small  degree,  are  termed 
indifferent  oxides.  Such  are  the  peroxides,  of  which  mention  has  before 
been  made. 

The  class  of  oxides  capable  of  entering  into  mutual  combination 
we  will  term  saline  oxides.  They  fall  into  two  chief  groups — at  least, 
as  regards  the  most  extreme  members.  The  members  of  one  group 
combine  with  the  members  of  the  other  group  with  particular  ease, 
As  representative  of  one  group  may  be  taken  the  oxides  of  the  metals^ 
magnesium,  sodium,  calcium,  &c.  Representatives  of  the  other  group 
are  the  oxides  formed  by  the  non-metals,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  carbon. 
Thus,  if  we  take  the  oxide  of  calcium,  or  lime,  and  bring  it  into 
contact  with  oxides  of  the  second  group,  combination  very  readily 
ensues.  For  instance,  if  we  mix  calcium  oxide  with  oxide  of  phos- 
phorus they  combine  with  great  facility  and  with  the  evolution  of 
much  heat.  If  we  pass  the  vapour  of  sulphuric  anhydride,  obtained 
by  the  combination  of  sulphurous  oxide  with  oxygen,  over  pieces  of 
lime  heated  to  redness,  the  sulphuric  anhydride  is  absorbed  by  the 
lime  with  the  formation  of  a  substance  called  calcium  sulphate.  The 
oxides  of  the  first  kind,  which  contain  metals,  are  termed  basic  oxides 
or  bases.  Lime  is  a  familiar  example  of  this  class.  The  oxides  of  the 
second  group,  which  are  capable  of  combining  with  the  bases,  are 
termed  anhydrides  of  the  acids  or  acid  oxides.  Sulphuric  anhydride, 
SO3,  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  latter  group.  It  is  a  compound 
of  sulphur  with  oxygen  formed  not  directly  but  by  the  addition  of 
a  fresh  quantity  of  oxygen  to  sulphurous  anhydride,  SO2,  by  passing 
it  together  with  oxygen  over  incandescent  spongy  platinum.  Carbonic 


184  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

anhydride  (often  termed  carbonic  acid '),  CO2,  phosphoric  anhydride, 
sulphurous  anhydride,  are  all  acid  oxides,  for  they  can  combine  with 
such  oxides  as  lime  or  calcium  oxide,  magnesia  or  magnesium  oxide, 
MgO,  soda  or  sodium  oxide,  Na^O,  <fec 

If  a  given  element  form  but  one  basic  oxide,  it  is  termed  the  oxide  ; 
for  example,  calcium  oxide,  magnesium  oxide,  potassium  oxide  Some 
indifferent  oxides  are  also  called  '  oxides  '  if  they  have  not  the  properties 
of  peroxides,  and  at  the  same  time  do  not  show  the  properties  of  acid 
anhydrides — for  example,  carbonic  oxide,  of  which  mention  has  already 
been  made.  If  an  element  forms  two  basic  oxides  (or  two  indifferent 
oxides  not  having  the  characteristics  of  a  peroxide)  then  that  of  the 
lower  degree  of  oxidation  is  called  a  suboxide — that  is,  suboxides  contain 
less  oxygen  than  oxides.  Thus,  when  copper  is  heated  to  redness  in  a 
furnace  it  increases  in  weight  and  absorbs  oxygen,  until  for  63  parts 
of  copper  there  is  absorbed  not  more  than  8  parts  of  oxygen  by  weight, 
forming  a  red  mass,  which  is  suboxide  of  copper  ;  but  if  the  roasting 
be  prolonged,  and  the  draught  of  air  increased,  63  parts  of  copper 
absorb  16  parts  of  oxygen,  and  form  black  oxide  of  copper.  Some- 
times to  distinguish  between  the  degrees  of  oxidation  a  change  of 
suffix  is  made  in  the  oxidised  element,  -ic  oxide  denoting  the  higher 
degree  of  oxidation,  and  -ous  oxide  the  lower  degree.  Thus  ferrous 
oxide  and  ferric  oxide  are  the  same  as  suboxide  of  iron  and  oxide  of 
iron.  If  an  element  forms  one  anhydride  only,  then  it  is  named  by  an- 
adjective  formed  from  the  name  of  the  element  made  to  end  in  -ic  and 
the  word  anhydride.  When  an  element  forms  two  anhydrides,  then 
the  suffixes  -ous  and  -ic  are  used  to  distinguish  them  c  -ous  signify- 
ing less  oxygen  than  -ic  ;  for  example,  sulphurous  and  sulphuric 
anhydrides.49  When  several  oxides  are  formed  from  the  same  element* 
the  prefixes  mon,  di,  tri,  tetra  are  used,  thus  :  chlorine  monoxide^ 

49  It  must  be  remarked  that  certain  elements  form  oxides  of  all  three  kinds— i.e. 
indifferent,  basic,  and  acid  ;  for  example,  manganese  forms  manganous  oxide,  manganid 
oxide,  peroxide  of  manganese,  red  oxide  of  manganese,  and  manganic  anhydride,  although 
some  of  them  are  not  known  in  a  free  state  but  only  in  combination.  The  basic  oxides 
contain  less  oxygen  than  the  peroxides,  and  the  peroxides  less  than  the  acid  anhydrides. 
Thus  they  must  be  placed  in  the  following  general  normal  order  with  respect  to  the 
amount  of  oxygen  entering  into  their  composition — (1)  basic  oxides,  suboxides,  and, 
oxides  ;  (2)  peroxides ;  (3)  acid  anhydrides.  The  majority  of  elements,  however,  do  nofe 
give  all  three  kinds  of  oxides,  some  giving  only  one  degree  of  oxidation.  It  must  further 
be  remarked  that  there  are  oxides  formed  by  the  combination  of  acid  anhydrides  with 
basic  oxides,  or,  in  general,  of  oxides  with  oxides.  For  every  oxide  having  a  higher  and 
a  lower  degree  of  oxidation,  it  might  be  said  that  the  intermediate  oxide  was  formed  by 
the  combination  of  the  higher  with  the  lower  oxide.  But  this  is  not  true  in  all  cases— 
for  instance,  when  the  oxide  under  consideration  forms  a  whole  series  of  independent 
compounds— for  oxides  which  are  really  formed  by  the  combination  of  two  other  oxides 
do  not  give  such  independent  compounds,  but  in  many  cases  decompose  into  the  higher 
*yad  lower  oxides. 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  185 

chlorine  dioxide,  chlorine  trioxide,  and  chlorine  tetroxide  or  chloric 
anhydride. 

The  oxides  themselves  rarely  undergo  chemical  transformations,  and 
in  the  few  cases  where  they  are  subject  to  such  changes  a  particularly 
important  part  is  played  by  their  combinations  with  water.  The 
majority  of,  if  not  all,  basic  and  acid  oxides  combine  with  water,  either 
by  a  direct  or  an  indirect  method  forming  hydrates — that  is,  compounds 
which  split  up  into  water  and  an  oxide  of  the  same  kind  only.  It 
is  well  known  that  many  substances  are  capable  of  combining  with 
water.  Oxides  possess  this  property  in  the  highest  degree.  We  have 
already  seen  examples  of  this  (Chapter  I.)  in  the  combination  of  lime, 
and  of  sulphuric  and  phosphoric  anhydrides,  with  water.  The  resulting 
combinations  are  basic  and  acid  hydrates.  Acid  hydrates  are  called 
acids  because  they  have  an  acid  taste  when  dissolved  in  water  (or 
saliva),  for  then  only  can  they  act  on  the  palate.  Vinegar,  for  example, 
has  an  acid  taste  because  it  contains  acetic  acid  dissolved  in  water. 
Sulphuric  acid,  to  which  we  have  frequently  referred,  because  it 
is  the  acid  of  the  greatest  importance  both -in  practical  chemistry  and 
for  its  technical  applications,  is  really  a  hydrate  formed  by  the  com- 
bination of  sulphuric  anhydride  with  water.  Besides  their  acid  taste, 
dissolved  acids  or  acid  hydrates  have  the  property  of  changing  the  blue 
colour  of  certain  vegetable  dyes  to  red.  Of  these  dyes  litmus  is 
particularly  remarkable  and  much  used.  It  is  the  blue  substance  ex- 
tracted from  certain  lichens,  and  -is  used  for  dyeing  tissues  blue  ,  it 
gives  a  blue  infusion  with  water.  This  infusion,  on  the  addition  of  an 
acid  changes  from  blue  to  red.™ 

50  Blotting  or  unsized  paper,  soaked  in  a  solution  of  litmus,  is  usually  employed  for 
detecting,  the  presence  of  acids;  This  paper  is  cut  into  strips,  and  is  called  test  paper ; 
when  dipped  into  acid  it  immediately  turns  red.  This  is  a  most  sensitive  reaction,  and 
may  be  employed  for  testing  for  the  smallest  traces  of  acids.  If  10,000  parts  by  weight 
of  water  be  mixed  with  1  part  of  sulphuric  acid,  the  coloration  is  distinct,  and  it  is 
even  perceptible  on  the-  addition  of  ten  times  more  water.  Certain  precautions  must, 
however,  be  taken  in  the  preparation  of  such  very  sensitive  litmus  paper.  Litmus  is 
sold  in  lumps.  Take,  say,  100  grams  of  it ;  powder  it,  and  add  it  to  cold  pure  water  in 
a  flask;  shake  and  decant  the  water.  Repeat  this  three  times.  This  is  done  to  wash 
away  easily- soluble  impurities,  especially  alkalis.  Transfer  the  washed  litmus  (it  is.  washed 
with  absolute  alcohol  to  remove  the  non-sensitive  reddish  colouring  matter)  to  a  flask, 
and  pour  in  600  c.c.  of  water,  heat,  and  allow  the  hot  infusion  to  remain  for  some  hours 
in  a  warm  place.  Then  filter,  and  divide  the  filtrate  into  two  parts.  Add  a  few  drops  of 
nitric  acid  to  one  portion,  so  that  a  faint  red  tinge  is  obtained,  and  then  mix  the  two 
portions.  Add  spirit  to  the  mixture,  and  keep  it  in  a  stoppered  bottle  (it  goon  spoils 
if  left  open  to  the  air).  This  infusion  may  be  employed  directly ;  it  reddens  in  the 
presence  of  acids,  and  turns  blue  in  the  presence  of  alkalis.  If  evaporated,-  a  solid  mass 
is  obtained  which  is  soluble  in  water,  and  may  be  kept  unchanged  for  any  length  of  time. 
The  test  paper  may  be  prepared  as  follows :— Take  a  strong  infusion  of  litmus,  and  soak 
blotting-paper  with  it ;  dry  it,  and  cut  it  into  strips,  and  use  it  as  test-paper  for  acids. 
For  the  detection  of  alkalis,  the  paper  must  be  soaked  in.  a  solution  of  litmus  just  red- 


186  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Basic  oxides,  in  combining  with  water,  form  hydrates,  of  which, 
however,  very  few  are  soluble  in  water.  Those  which  are  soluble  in 
water  have  an  alkaline  taste  like  that  of  soap  or  of  water  in  which 
wood  ashes  have  been  boiled,  and  are  called  alkalis.  Further,  alkalis 
have  the  property  of  restoring  the  blue  colour  to  litmus  which  has  been 
reddened  by  the  action  of  acids.  The  hydrates  of  the  oxides  of  sodium 
and  potassium,  NaHO  and  KHO,  are  examples  of  basic  hydrates 
easily  soluble  in  water.  They  are  true  alkalis,  and  are  termed  caustic, 
because  they  act  very  powerfully  on  the  skin  of  animals  and  plants. 
Thus  NaHO  is  called  'caustic  '  soda. 

The  saline  oxides  are  capable  of  combining  together  and  with 
water.  Water  itself  is  an  oxide,  and  not  an  indifferent  one,  for  it  can, 
as  we  have  seen,  combine  with  bagic  and  acid  oxides  ;  it  is  a  represen- 
tative of  a  whole  series  of  saline  oxides,  intermediate  oocides,  capable  of 
combining  with  both  basic  and  acid  oxides.  There  are  many  such 
oxides,  which,  like  water,  combine  with  basic  and  acid  anhydrides — for 
instance,  the  oxides  of  aluminium  and  tin,  &c.  From  this  it  may  be 
concluded  that  all  oxides  might  be  placed,  in  respect  to  their  capacity 
for  combining  with  one  another,  in  one  uninterrupted  series,  at  one 
extremity  of  which  would  stand  those  oxides  which  do  not  combine 
with  the  bases— that  is,  the  alkalis— while  at  the  other  end  would  be 
the  acid  oxides,  and  in  the  interval  those  oxides  which  combine  with 
one  another  and  with  both  the  acid  and  basic  oxides.  The  further 
apart  the  members  of  this  series  are,  the  more  stable  are  the  compounds 
they  form  together,  the  mere  energetically  do  they  act  on  each  other, 
the  greater  the  quantity  of  heat  evolved  in  their  reaction,  and  the 
more  marked  is  their  saline  chemical  character. 

We  said  above  that  basic  and  acid  oxides  combine  together,  but 
rarely  react  on  each  other  ;  this  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  majority 
of  them  are  solids  or  gases— that  is,  they  occur  in  the  state  least  prone 

dened  by  a  few  drops  of  acid  ;  if  too  much  acid  be  taken,  the  paper  will  not  be  sensitive. 
Such  acids  as  sulphuric  acid  colour  litmus,  and  especially  its  infusion,  a  brick-red  colour, 
whilst  more  feeble  acids,  such  as  carbonic,  give  a  faint  red-wine  tinge.  Test-paper  of  a 
yellow  colour  is  also  employed  ;  it  is  dyed  by  an  infusion  of  turmeric  roots  in  spirit.  In 
alkalis  it  turns  brown,  but  regains  its  original  hue  in  acids.  Many  blue  and  other  vege- 
table colouring  matters  may  be  used  for  the  detection  of  acids  and  alkalis ;  for  example, 
infusions  of  cochineal,  violets,  log- wood,  &c.  Certain  artificially  prepared  substances  and 
dyes  may  also  be  employed.  Thus  rosolic  acid,  C.2oH1605  and  phenolphthalei'n,  0^3.^,0^ 
(it  is  used  in  an  alcoholic  solution,  and  is  not  suitable  for  the  detection  of  ammonia), 
are  colourless  in  an  acid,  and  red  in  an  alkaline,  solution.  Cyanine  is  also  colourless  in 
the  presence  of  acids,  and,  gives  a  blue  coloration  with  alkalis.  Methyl-orange  (yellow 
in  an  aqueous  solution)  is  not  altered  by  alkalis  but  becomes  pink  with  acids  (weak 
acids  have  no  action),  &o.  These  are  very  sensitive  tests.  Their  behaviour  in  respect  to 
various  acids,  alkalis,  and  salts  sometimes  give  the  means  of  distinguishing  substances 
from  each  other. 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  187 

to  chemical  reaction.  The  gaseo-elastic  state  is  with  difficulty  destroyed, 
because  it  necessitates  overcoming  the  elasticity  proper  to  the  gaseous 
particles.  The  solid  state  is  characterised  by  the  immobility  of  its 
particles  ;  whilst  chemical  action  requires  contact,  and  hence  a  dis- 
placement and  mobility.  If  solid  oxides  be  heated,  and  especially  if 
they  be  melted,  then  reaction  proceeds  with  great  ease.  But  such  a 
change  of  state  rarely  occurs  in  nature  or  in  practice.  Only  in  a  few 
furnace  processes  is  this  the  case.  For  example,  in  the  manufacture  of 
glass,  the  oxides  contained  in  it  combine  together  in  a  molten  state. 
But  when  oxides  combine  with  water,  and  especially  when  they  form 
hydrates  soluble  in  water,  then  the  mobility  of  their  particles  increases 
to  a  considerable  extent,  and  their  reaction  is  greatly  facilitated.  Re- 
action then  takes  place  at  the  ordinary  temperature — easily  and  rapidly  ; 
so  that  this  kind  of  reaction  belongs  to  the  class  of  those  which  take 
place  with  unusual  facility,  and  are,  therefore,  very  often  taken  advan- 
tage of  in  practice,  and  also  have  been  and  are  going  on  in  nature  at 
every  step.  We  will  i:ow  consider  the  reactions  of  oxides  in  the  state 
of  hydrates,  not  losing  sight  of  the  fact  that  water  is  itself  an  oxide 
with  definite  properties,  and  has,  therefore,  no  little  influence  on  the 
course  of  those  changes  in  which  it  takes  part. 

If  we  take  a  definite  quantity  of  an  acid,  and  add  an  infusion  of 
litmus  to  it,  it  turns  red  ;  the  addition  of  an  alkaline  solution  does  not 
immediately  alter  the  red  colour  of  the  litmus,  but  on  adding  more  and 
more  of  the  alkaline  solution  a  point  is  reached  when  the  red  colour 
changes  to  violet,  and  then  the  further  addition  of  a  fresh  quantity  of 
the  alkaline  solution  changes  the  colour  to  blue.  This  change  of  the 
colour  of  the  litmus  is  a  consequence  of  the  formation  of  a  new  com- 
pound. This  reaction  is  termed  the  saturation  or  neutralisation  of 
the  acid  by  the  base,  or  vice  versd.  The  solution  in  which  the  acid 
properties  of  the  acid  are  saturated  by  the  alkaline  properties  of  the 
base  is  termed  a  neutral  solution.  Such  a  solution,  although  derived 
from  the  mixture  of  a  base  with  an  acid,  does  not  exhibit  either 
the  acid  or  basic  reaction  on  litmus,  yet  it  preserves  many  other 
signs  of  the  acid  and  alkali.  It  is  observed  that  in  such  a  definite 
admixture  of  an  acid  with  an  alkali,  besides  the  changes  in  the  colour 
of  litmus  there  is  a  heating  effect — i.e.  an  evolution  of  heat — which  is 
alone  sufficient  to  prove  that  there  was  chemical  action.  And,  indeed, 
if  the  resultant  violet  solution  be  evaporated,  there  separates  out,  not 
the  acid  or  the  alkali  originally  taken,  but  a  substance  which  has 
neither  acid  nor  alkaline  properties,  but  is  usually  solid  and  crystal- 
line, having  a  saline  appearance  ;  this  is  a  salt  in  the  chemical  sense  of 
the  word.  Hence  a  salt  is  derived  from  the  reaction  of  an  acid  on 


188  PRINCIPLES   OF   CHEMISTRY 

an  alkali,  in  a  certain  definite  proportion.  The  water  here  taken  for 
solution  plays  no  other  part  than  merely  facilitating  the  progress  of 
the  reaction.  This  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  anhydrides  of  the 
acids  are  able  to  combine  with  basic  oxides,  and  give  the  same  salts  as 
do  the  acids  with  the  alkalis  or  hydrates.  Hence,  a  salt  is  a  compound 
of  definite  quantities  of  an  acid  with  an  alkali.  In  the  latter  reaction, 
water  is  separated  out  if  the  substance  formed  be  the  same  as  is  pro- 
duced by  the  combination  of  anhydrous  oxides  together.51  Examples 
of  the  formation  of  salts  from  acids  and  bases  are  easily  observed,  and 
are  very  often  applied  in  practice.  If  we  take,  for  instance,  insoluble 
magnesium  oxide  (magnesia)  it  is  easily  dissolved  in  sulphuric  acid,  and 
on  evaporation  gives  a  saline  substance,  bitter,  like  all  the  salts  of  mag- 
nesium, and  familiar  to  all  under  the  name  of  Epsom  salts,  used  as  a 
purgative.  If  a  solution  of  caustic  soda — which  is  obtained,  as  we  saw, 
by  the  action  of  water  on  sodium  ox^de — be  poured  into  a  flask  in  which 
charcoal  has  been  burnt ;  or  if  carbonic  anhydride,  which  is  produced 
under  so  many  circumstances,  be  passed  through  a  solution  of  caustic 
soda,  then  sodium  carbonate  or  soda,  Ka2CO3,  is  obtained,  of  which  we 
have  spoken  several  times,  and  which  is  prepared  on  a  large  scale  and 
often  used  in  manufactures.  This  reaction  is  expressed  by  the  equation, 
2NaHO  +  CO2=N"a2CO3-f-H2O.  Thus,  the  various  bases  and  acids 
form  an  innumerable  number  of  different  salts.52  Salts  constitute  an 

sl  That  water  really  is  separated  in  the  reaction  of 'acid  on  alkaline  hydrates,  may  be 
shown  by  taking  some  other  intermediate  hydrate — for  example,  alumina — instead  of 
•water.  Thus,  if  a  solution  of  alumina  in  sulphuric  acid  be  taken,  it  will  have,  like  the 
acid,  an  acid  reaction,  and  will  therefore  colour  litmus  red.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a 
solution  of  alumina  in  an  alkali — say,  potash — be  taken,  it  -will  have  an  alkaline 
reaction,  and  will  turn  red  litmus  blue.  On  adding  the  alkaline  to  the  acid  solution 
until  neither  an  alkaline  nor  an  acid  reaction  is  produced,  a  salt  is  formed,  consisting  of 
sulphuric  anhydride  and  potassium  oxide.  In  this,  as  in  the  reaction  of  hydrates,  an 
intermediate  oxide  is  separated  out— namely,  alumina.  Its  separation  will  be  very  evident 
in  this  case,  as  alumina  is  insoluble  in  water. 

62  The  mutual  interaction  of  hydrates,  and  their  capacity  of  forming  salts,  may  be 
taken  advantage  of  for  determining  the  character  of  those  hydrates  which  are  insoluble 
in  water.  Let  us  imagine  that  a  given  hydrate,  whose  chemical  character  is  unknown,  is 
insoluble  in  water.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  test  its  reaction  on  litmus.  It  is  then 
mixed  with  water,  and  an  acid— for  instance,  sulphuric  acid — is  added  to  the  mixture.  If 
the  hydrate  taken  be  basic,  reaction  will  take  place,  either  directly  or  by  the  aid  of 
heat,  with  the  formation  of  a  salt.  In  certain  cases,  the  resultant  salt  is  soluble  in 
water,  and  this  will  at  once  show  that  combination  has  taken  place  between  the  in- 
soluble basic  hydrate  and  the  acidj  with  the  formation  of  a  soluble  saline  substance.  In 
those  cases  where,  the  resultant  salt  is  insoluble,  still  the  water  loses  its  acid  reaction, 
and  therefore  it  may  be  ascertained,  by  the  addition  of  an  acid,  whether  a  given  hydrate 
has  a  basic  character,  like  the  hydrates  of  oxide  of  copper,  lead,  &c.  If  the  acid  does 
not  act  on  the  given  insoluble  hydrate  (at  any  temperature),  then  it  has  not  a  basic 
character,  and  it  should  be  tested  as  to  whether  it  has  an  acid  character.  This  is  done 
by  taking  an  alkali,  instead  of  the  acid,  and  by  observing  whether  the  unknown  hydrate 
then  dissolves,  or  whether  the  alkaline  reaction  disappears.  Thus  it  may  be  proved  that 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS 

example  of  definite  chemical  compounds,  and  both  in  the  history  and 
practice  of  science  are  most  often  cited  as  confirming  the  conception  of 
definite  chemical  compounds.  Indeed,  all  the  indications  of  a  definite 
chemical  combination  are  clearly  seen  in  the  formation  and  properties 
of  salts.  Thus,  they  are  produced  with  a  definite  proportion  of  oxides, 
heat  is  evolved  in  their  formation,53  and  the  chemical  character  of  the 
oxides  and  many  of  the  physical  properties  become  hidden  in  their  salts. 
For  example,  when  gaseous  carbonic  anhydride  combines  with  a  base 

hydrate  of  silica  is  acid,  because  it  dissolves  in  alkalis  and  not  in  acids.  If  it  be  a  case 
of  an  insoluble  intermediate  hydrate,  then  it  will  be  observed  to  react  on  both  the  acid 
and  alkali.  Hydrate  of  alumina  is  an  instance  in  question,  which  is  soluble  both  in 
caustic  potash  and  in  sulphuric  acid. 

The  degree  of  affinity  or  chemical  energy  proper  to  oxides  and  their  hydrates  is  very 
dissimilar ;  some  extreme  members  of  the  series  possess  it  to  a  great  extent.  When 
acting  on  each  other  they  evolve  a  large  quantity  gf  heat,  and  when  acting  on  intermediate 
hydrates  they  also  evolve  heat  to  a  considerable  degree,  as  we  saw  in  the  combination 
of  lime  and  sulphuric  anhydride  with  water.  When  extreme  oxides  combine  they  form 
stable  salts,  which  are  decomposed  with  difficulty,  and  often  show  characteristic  proper- 
ties. The  compounds  of  the  intermediate  oxides  with  each  other,  or  even  with  basic 
and  acid  oxides,  present  a  very  different  case.  However  much  alumina  we  may  dissolve 
in  sulphuric  acid,  we  cannot  saturate  the  acid  properties  of  the  sulphuric  acid,  the 
resulting  solution  will  always  have  an  acid  reaction.  So  also,  whatever  quantity  of 
alumina  is  dissolved  in  an  alkali,  the  resulting  solution  will  always  present  an  alkaline 
reaction. 

53  In  order  to  give  an  idea  of  the  quantity  of  heat  evolved  in  the  formation  of  salts 
I  append  a  table  of  data  for  very  dilute  aqueous  solutions  of  acids  and  alkalis,  accord- 
ing to  the  determinations  of  Berthelot  and  Thomsen.  The  figures  are  given  in  major 
calories— that'is,  in  thousands  of  units  of  heat.  For  example,  49  grams  of  sulphuric  acid, 
H2SO4,  taken  in  a  dilute  aqueous  solution,  when  mixed  with  such  an  amount  of  a  weak 
solution  of  caustic  soda,  NaHO,  that  a  neutral  salt  is  formed  (when  all  the  hydrogen  of 
the  acid  is  replaced  by  the  sodium),  evolves  15,800  units  of  heat. 


49  parts  of  63  parts  of 

HS04  HNO, 

NaHO        .        .     15-8  13'7 

KHO.        .        .     15-7  13-8 

NH3   .         .         .     14-5  12-5 

CaO   .        .        .     15-6  13-9 

BaO    .  .     18-4  13-9 


49  parts  of  63  parts  of 

H,SO,  HN03 

MgO  .        r        .     15-6  13-8 

FeO   .        ,        .    12-5  10-7  (?) 

ZnO    .        ,        .     11'7  9-8 

Fe20s         .    .    .       5'7  5'9 


These  figures  cannot  be  considered  as  the  heat  of  neutralisation,  because  the  water 
here  plays  an  important  part.  Thus,  for  instance,  sulphuric  acid  and  caustic  soda  in 
dissolving  in  water  evolve  very  much  heat,  and  the  resultant  sodium  sulphate  very  little ; 
consequently,  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  in  an  anhydrous  combination  will  be  different 
from  that  evolved  in  a  hydrated  combination.  Those  acids  which  are  not  energetic  in. 
combining  with  the  same  quantity  of  alkalis  required  for  the  formation  of  normal  salts 
of  sulphuric  or  nitric  acids  always,  however,  give  less  heat.  For  instance,  with  caustic 
soda  :  carbonic  >acid  gives  10'2,  hydrocyanic,  2'9,  hydrogen  sulphide,  3'9  major  calories. 
And  as  feeble  bases  (for  example,  Fe2O3)  also  evolve  less  heat  than  those  which  are  more 
powerful,  so  a  certain  general  correlation  between  thermochemical  data  and  the  degree  of 
affinity  shows  itself  here,  as  in  other  cases  (see  Chapter  II.,  Note  7) ;  this  does  not,  how- 
ever, give  any  reason  for  measuring  the  affinity  which  binds  the  elements  of  salts  by  the 
heat  of  their  formation  in  dilute  solutions.  This  is  very  clearly  demonstrated  by  the 
fact  that  water  is  able  to  decompose  many  salts,  and  is  separated  in  their  formation. 


190  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

to  form  a  solid  salt,  the  elasticity  of t  the  gas  quite  disappears  in  its 
passage  into  the  salt.8* 

Judging  from  the  above,  a  salt  is  a  compound  of  basic  and 
acid  oxides,  or  the  result  of  the  action  of  hydrates  of  these  classes  on 
each  other  with  separation  of  water.  But  salts  may  be  obtained  by 
other  methods.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  basic  oxides  are  formed 
by  metals,  and  acid  oxides  usually  by  non-metals.  But  metals  and 
non-metals  are  capable  of  combining  together,  and  a  salt  is  frequently 
formed  by  the  oxidation  of  such  a  compound.  For  example,  iron  very 
easily  combines  with  sulphur,  forming  iron  sulphide  FeS  (as  we  saw 
in  the  Introduction)  ;  this  in  air,  and  especially  moist  air,  absorbs 
oxygen,  with  the  formation  of  the  same  salt  FeSO4,  that  may  be  obtained 
by  the  combination  of  the  oxides  of  iron  and  sulphur,  or  of  the  hydrates 
of  these  oxides.  Hence,  it  cannot  be  said  or  supposed  that  a.  salt  has 
the  properties  of  the  oxides,  or  must  necessarily  contain  two  kinds 
of  oxides  in  itselft  The  derivation  of  salts  from  oxides  is  merely  one 
of  the  methods  of  their  preparation.  We  saw,  for  instance,  that  in 
sulphuric  acid  it  was  possible  to  replace  the  hydrogen  by  zinc,  and  that 
by  this  means  zinc  sulphate  was  formed ;  so  .likewise  the  hydrogen 
in  many  other  acids  may  be  replaced  by  zinc,  iron,  potassium,  sodium, 
and  a  whole  series  of  similar  metals,  corresponding  salts  being 
obtained.  The  hydrogen  of  the  acid,  in  all  these  cases,  is  exchanged 
for  a  metal,  and  a  salt  is  obtained  from  the  hydrate.  Regarding  a 
salt  from  this  point  of  view,  it  may  be  said  that  a  salt  is  an  acid  in 
which  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  a  metal.  This  definition  shows  that  a 
salt  and  an  acid  are  essentially  compounds  of  the  same  series,  with  the 
difference  that  the  latter  contains  hydrogen  and  the  former  a  metal. 
Such  a  definition  is  more  exact  than  the.  first  definition  of  salts, 
inasmuch  as  it  likewise  includes  those  acids  which  do  not  contain 
oxygen,  and,  as  we  shall  afterwards  learn,  there  is  a  series  of  such  acids. 
Such  elements  as  chlorine  and  bromine  form  compounds  with  hydrogen 
in  which  the  hydrogen  may  be  replaced  by  a  metal,  forming  substances 
which,  in  their  reactions  and  external  characters,  resemble  the  salts 
formed  from  oxides  Table  salt,  NaCl,  is  an  example  of  this.  It  may 

M  Carbonic  anhydride  evolves  heat  iu  dissolving  in  water.  The  solution  easily  dis- 
sociates and  evolves  carbonic  anhydride,  according  to  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton  (see 
Chapter  I.)  In  dissolving  in  caustic  soda,  it  either  gives  a  normal  salt,  NajCOs, 
which  does  not  evolve  carbonic  anhydride,  or  an  acid  salt,  NaHCOs,  which  easily  evolves 
carbonic  anhydride  when  heated.  The  same  gas,  when  dissolved  in  solutions  of  salts,  acts 
in  one  or  the  other  manner  (see  Chapter  II.,  Note  88).  Here  "it  is  seen  what  a  successive 
series  of  relations  exists  between  compounds  of  a  different  order,  between  substances,  of 
different  degrees  of  stability.  By  making  a  distinction  between  the  phenomena  of  solu- 
tions and  chemical  compounds,  we  overlook  those  natural  transitions  which  in  reality 
exist. 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  191 

be  obtained  by  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  in  hydrochloric  acid,  HCf, 
by  the  metal  sodium,  just  as  sulphate  of  sodium,  Na2SO4,  may  be 
obtained  by  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  in  sulphuric  acid,  H2S04,  by 
sodium.  The  exterior  appearance  of  the  resulting  products,  their 
neutral  reaction,  and  even  their  saline  taste,  show  their  resemblance 
to  one  another. 

To  the  fundamental  properties  of  salts  yet  another  must  be  added—* 
namely,  that  they  are  more  or  less  decomposed  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic 
current.  The  results  of  this  decomposition  are  very  different  according 
to  whether  the  salt  be  taken  in  a  fused  or  dissolved  state.  But  the  decom- 
position may  generally  be  so  represented,  that  the  metal  appears  at  the 
electro-negative  pole  or  cathode  (like  hydrogen  in  the  decomposition  of 
water,  or  its  mixture  with  sulphuric  acid),  and  the  remaining  parts  of 
the  salt  appear  at  the  electro-positive  pole  or  anode  (where  the  oxygen  of 
water  appears).  If,  for  instance,  an  electric  current  acts  on  an  aqueous 
solution  of  sodium  sulphate,  then  the  sodium  appears  at  the  negative 
pole,  and  oxygen  and  the  anhydride  of  sulphuric  acid  at  the  positive 
pole.  But  in  the  solution  itself  the  result  is  different,  for  sodium,  as 
we  know,  decomposes  water  with  evolution  of  hydrogen,  forming 
caustic  soda  ;  consequently  hydrogen  will  be  evolved,  and  caustic  soda 
appear  at  the  negative  pole  :  while,  at  the  positive  pole  the  sulphuric 
anhydride  immediately  combines  with  water  and  forms  sulphuric  acid, 
and  therefore  oxygen  will  be  evolved  and  sulphuric  acid  formed  round 
this  pole.55  In  other,  cases,  when  the  metal  separated  is  not  able  to 
decompose  water,  it  will  be  deposited  in  a  free  state.  Thus,  for  example, 
in  the  decomposition  of  copper  sulphate,  copper  separates  out  at  the 
cathode,  and  oxygen  and  sulphuric  acid  appear  at  the  anode,  and  if  a 
copper  plate  be  attached  to  the  positive  pole,  then  the  oxygen  evolved 
will  oxidise  the  copper,  and  the  oxide  of  copper  will  dissolve  and  be 
deposited  at  the  negative  pole — that  is,  a  transfer  of  copper  from  the 
positive  to  the  negative  pole  ensues.  The  galvanoplastic  art  (electro- 
typing)  is  based  on  this  principle.66  Therefore  the  most  radical  and 
general  properties  of  salts  (including  also  such  salts  as  table  salt,  which 

55  This  kind  of  decomposition  may  be  easily  observed  by  pouring  a  solution  of  sodium 
sulphate  into  a  U-shaped  tube  and  inserting  electrodes  in  the  two  branches.  If  the  solu- 
tion be  coloured  with  an  infusion  of  litmus,  it  will  easily  be  seen  that  it  turns  blue  at  the 
cathode,  owing  to  the  formation  of  sodium  hydroxide,  and  red  at  the  electro-positive 
pole,  from  the  formation  of  sulphuric  acid. 

ie  In  other  cases  the  decomposition  of  salts  by  the  electric  current  may  be  accom- 
panied by  much  more  complex  results.  Thus,  when  the  metal  of  the  salt  is  capable  of  a 
higher  degree  of  oxidation,  such  a  higher  oxide  may  be  formed  at  the  positive  pole  by 
the  oxygen  which  is  evolved  there.  This  takes  place,  for  instance,  in  the  decomposition 
of  salts  of  silver  and1  manganese  by  the  galvanic  current,  peroxides  of  these  metals 
being  formed.  Thus  in  the  electrolysis  of  a  solution  of  KC1,  KC105  is  formed,  and  of 


I 


192  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

contain  no  oxygen)  may  be  expressed  by  representing  the  salt  as 
composed  of  a  metal  M  and  a  haloid  X — that  is,  by  expressing  the  salt 
by  MX.  In  common  table  salt  the  metal  is  sodium,  and  the  haloid  an 
elementary  body,  chlorine.  In  sodium  sulphate,  Na2SO4,  sodium  is 
again  the  metal,  but  the  complex  group,  S04,  is  the  haloid.  In  sulphate 
of  copper,  CuS04,  the  metal  is  copper  and  the  haloid  the  same  as  in 
the  preceding  salt.  Such  a  representation  of  salts  expresses  with  great 
simplicity  the  capacity  of  every  salt  to  enter  into  saline  double  decompo- 
sitions with  other  salts ;  consisting  in  the  mutual  replacement  of  the 
metals  in  the  salts.  This  exchange  of  their  metals  is  the  funda- 
mental property  of  salts.  In  the  case  of  two  salts  with  different  metals 
and  haloids,  which  are  in  solution  or  fusion,  or  in  any  other  manner 
brought  into  contact,  the  metals  of  these  salts  will  always  partially 
or  wholly  exchange  places.  If  we  designate  one  salt  by  MX,  and  the 
other  by  NY,  then  we  either  partially  or  wholly  obtain  from  them  new 
salts,  MY  and  NX.  Thus  we  saw  in  the  Introduction,  that  on  mixing 
solutions  of  table  salt,  NaCl,  and  silver  nitrate,  AgNO3,  a  white 
insoluble  precipitate  of  silver  chloride,  AgCl,  is  formed  and  a  new  salt, 
sodium  nitrate,  NaNO3,  is  obtained  in  solution.  If  the  metals  of  salts 
exchange  places  in  reactions  of  double  decomposition,  it  is  clear  that 
metals  themselves,  taken  in  a  separate  state,  are  able  to  act  on  salts,  as 
zinc  evolves  hydrogen  from  acids,  and  as  iron  separates  copper  from 
copper  sulphate.  When,  to  what  extent,  and  which  metals  displace 
each  other,  and  how  the  metals  are  distributed  between  the  haloids, 
will  be  discussed  in  Chapter  X.,  where  we  shall  be  guided  by  those 
reflections  and  deductions  which  Berthollet  introduced  into  the  science 
at  the  beginning  of  this  century. 

According  to  the  above  obsejryatioiis^  antacid  is  nothing  more  than 
a  salt  of  hydrogen.  Water  itself  may  be  looked  on  as  a  salt  in  which 
the  hydrogen  is^  combined  with  either  oxygen  or  the  aqueous  radicle, 
OH  ;  water  will  then  be  HOH,  and  alkalis  or  basic  hydrates,  MOH. 
The  group  OH,  or  the  aqueous  radicle,  otherwise  called  'hydroxyl,  may 
foe  looked  on  as  a  haloid  like  the  chlorine  in  table  salt,  not  only  because 
the  element  Cl  and  the  group  OH  very  often  change  places,  and  com- 
bine with  one  and  the  same  element,  but  also  because  free  chlorine  is 
very  similar  in  many  properties  and  reactions  to  peroxide  of  hydrogen, 
which  is  the  same  in  composition  as  the  aqueous  radicle,  as  we  shall 
afterwards  see  in  Chapter  IV  Alkalis  and  basic  hydrates  are  also 

sulphuric  acid  (corresponding  to  SOs)  persulphuric  acid,  corresponding  to  S^Oi-  But  all 
the  phenomena  as  yet  known  may  be  expressed  by  the  above  law — that  the  current 
decomposes  salts  into  metals,  which  appear  at  the  negative  pole,  and  into  the  remaining 
Component  parts,  which  appear  at  the  positive  pole. 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS'  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  193 

salts  consisting  of  a  metal  and  hydroxyl— for  instance,  caustic  soda, 
NaOH  ;  this  is  therefore  termed  sodium  hydroxide.  According  to  this 
view,  acid  salts  are  those  in  which  a  portion  only  of  the  hydrogen  is 
replaced  by  a  metal,  and  a  portion  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  acid  remains. 
Thus  sulphuric  acid  (H2S04)  not  only  gives  the  normal  salt  Na2SO4, 
with  sodium,  but  also  an  acid  salt,  NaHS04.  A  basic  salt  is  one  in 
which  the  metal  is  combined  not  only  with  the  haloids  of  acids,  but 
also  with  the  aqueous  radicle  of  basic  hydrates — for  example,  bismuth 
gives  not  only  a  normal  salt  of  nitric  acid,  Bi(NO3)3,  but  also  basic 
salts  like  Bi(OH)2(NO3). 

As-  basic  and  acid  salts  of  the  oxygen  acids  contain  hydrogen  and 
oxygen,  they  are  able  to  part  with  these  as  water  and  to  give  anhydro- 
salts,  which  it  is  evident  will  be  compounds  of  normal  salts  with 
anhydrides  of  the  acids  or  with  bases.  Thus  the  above-mentioned  acid 
sodium  sulphate  corresponds  with  the  anhydro-salt,  Na2S2O7,  equal  to 
2NaHSO4,  less  H2O.  The  loss  of  water  is  here,  and  frequently  in 
other  cases,  brought  about  by  heat  alone,  and  therefore  such  salts  are 
frequently  termed  pyro-salts — for  instance,  the  preceding  is  sodium 
pyrosulphate  (Na2S2O7),  or  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  normal  salt 
Na2SO4  4-  sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3.  Double  salts  are  those  which 
contain  either  two  metals,  KA1(SO4)2,  or  two  haloids.57 

57  The  above-enunciated  generalisation  of  the  conception  of  salts  as  compounds  of 
the  metals  (simple,  or  compound  like  ammonium,  NH4),  with  the  haloids  (simple,  like 
chlorine,  or  compound,  like  cyanogen,  CN,  or  the  radicle  of  sulphuric  acid,  SO4),  capable 
of  entering  into  double  saline  decomposition,  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  general 
data  respecting  salts,  was  only  formed  little  by  little  after  a  succession  of  most  varied 
propositions  as  to  the  chemical  structure  of  salts. 

Salts  belong  to  the  class  of  substances  which  haye  been  known  since  very  early  times, 
and  have  long  been  investigated  in  many  directions.  At  first,  however,  no  distinction 
was  made  between  salts,  acids,  and  bases.  Glauber  prepared  many  artificial  salts  during 
the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Up  to  that  time  the'  majority  of  salts  were 
obtained  from  natural  sources,  and  that  salt  which  we  have  referred  to  several  times — 
namely,  sodium  sulphate — was  named  Glauber's  salt  after  this  chemist.  Rouelle  dis- 
tinguished normal,  acid,  and  basic  salts,  and  showed  their  action  on  vegetable  dyes,  still 
lie  confounded  many  salts  with  acids  (even  now  every  acid  salt  ought  to  be  regarded  as 
an  acid,  because  it  contains  hydrogen,  which  may  be  replaced  by  metals— that  is,  it  is 
thejaydrogen  of  an  acid).  Baume"  disputed  Bouelle's  opinion  concerning  the  subdivision 
of  salts,  contending  that  normal  salts  only  are  true  salts,  and  that  basic  salts  are  simple 
mixtures  of  norftral  salts  with  bases  and  acid  salts  with  acids,  considering  that  washing 
alone  could  remove  the  base  or  acid  from  them.  Rouelle,  in  the  middle  of  the  last  cen- 
tury, however,  rendered  a  great  service  to  the  study  of  salts  and  the  diffusion  of  know- 
ledge respecting  this  class  of  compounds  in  his  attractive  lectures.  He,  like  the  majority 
of  the  chemists  of  that  period,  did  not  employ  the  balance  in  his  researches,  but  satisfied 
himself  with  purely  qualitative  data.  The  first  quantitative  researches  on  salts  were 
carried  on  about  this  time  by  Wenzel,  who  was  the  director  of  the  Freiburg  mines,  in 
Saxony.  Wenzel  studied  the  double  decomposition  of  salts,  and  observed  that  in  the 
double  decomposition  of  neutral  salts  a  neutral  salt  was  always  obtained.  He  proved', 
by  a  method  of  weighing,  that  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  saturation  of  a  given 


194  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Inasmuch  as  oxygen  compounds  predominate  in  nature,  it  should  be 
expected  from  what  has  been  said  above,  that  salts,  rather  than  acids 

quantity  of  a  base  requires  such  relative  quantities  of  different  acids  as  are  capable  of 
saturating  every  other  base.  Having  taken  two  neutral  salts — for  example,  sodium  sul» 
phate  and  calcium  nitrate— let  us  mix  their  solutions  together.  Double  decomposition 
takes  place,  because  calcium  sulphate  is  formed,  which  is  almost  insoluble.  However 
much  we  might  add  of  each  of  the  salts,  the  neutral  reaction  will  still  be  preserved, 
consequently  the  neutral  character  of  the  salts  is  not  destroyed  by  the  interchange  of 
metals ;  that  is  to  say,  that  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid  which  saturated  the  sodium  is 
sufficient  for  the  saturation  of  the  calcium,  and  that  amount  of  nitric  acid  which  satu- 
rated the  calcium  is  enough  to  saturate  the  sodium  contained  in  combination  with 
sulphuric  acid  in  sodium  sulphate.  Wenzel  was  even  convinced  that  matter  does  not 
disappear  hi  nature,  and  on  this  principle  he  corrects,  in  his  Doctrine  of  Affinity,  the 
results  of  his  experiments  when  he  found  that  he  obtained  less  than  he  had  origi- 
nally taken.  Although  Wenzel  deduced  the  law  of  the  double  decomposition  of  salts 
quite  correctly,  he  did  not  determine  those  quantities  in  which  acids  and  bases  act  on 
each  other.  This  was  carried  out  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  by  Richter  r  He  deter- 
mined the  quantities  by  weight  of  the  bases  which  saturate  acids  and  of  the  acids  which 
saturate  bases,  and  obtained  comparatively  correct  results,  although  his  conclusions 
were  not  correct,  for  he  "states  that  the  quantity  of  a  base  saturating  a  given  acid  varies 
in  arithmetical  progression,  and  the  quantity  of  an  acid  saturating  a  given  base  in  geo- 
metrical progression.  Richter  studied  the  deposition  of  metals  from  their  salts  by  other 
metals,  and  observed  that  the  neutral  reaction  of  the  solution  is  not  destroyed  by  this 
exchange.  He  also  determined  the  quantities  by  weight  of  the  metals  replacing  one 
another  in  salts.  He  showed  that  copper  displaces  silver  from  its  salt,  and  that  zino 
displaces  copper  and  a  whole  series  of  other  metals.  Those  quantities  of  metals  which 
were  capable  of  replacing  one  another  were  termed  equivalents. 

Richter's  teaching  found  no  followers,  because,  although  he  fully  believed  in  the  dis- 
•coveries  of  Lavoisier,  yet  he  still  held  to  the  phlogistic  reasonings  which  rendered  his 
expositions  very  obscure.  The  works  of  the  Swedish  savant  Berzelius  freed  the  facts 
discovered  by  Wenzel  and  Richter  from  the  obscurity  of  former  conceptions,  and  led  to 
their  being  explained  in  accordance  with  Lavoisier's  views,  and  in  the  sense  ^ot  the  law 
of  multiple  proportions  which  had  already  been  discovered  by  Dalton.  On  applying  to 
salts  those  conclusions  which  Berzelius  arrived  at  by  a  whole  series  of  researches  of 
remarkable  accuracy,  we  arrive  at  the  following  law  of  equivalents— one  part  by  weight 
of  hydrogen  in  an  acid  is  replaced  by  the  corresponding  equivalent  weight  of  any 
metal ;  and,  therefore-,  when  metals  replace  each  other  their  weights  are  in  the  same 
ratio  as  their  equivalents.  Thus,  for  instance,  one  part  by  weight  of  hydrogen  is  replaced, 
by  23  parts  of  sodium,  39  parts  of  potassium,  12  parts  of  magnesium,  20  parts  of  cal- 
cium, 28  parts  of  iron,  108  parts  of  silver,  83  parts  of  zinc,  &c. ;  and,  therefore,  if  zino 
replaces  silver,  then  33  parts  of  zinc  will  take  the  place  of  108  parts  of  silver,  or  38  parts 
of  zinc  will  be  substituted  by  23  parts  of  sodium,  &c. 

The  doctrine  of  equivalents  would  be  precise  and  simple  did  every  metal  only  give 
t»ne  oxide  or  one  salt.  It  is  rendered  complicated  from  the  fact  that  many  metals  form 
several  oxides,  and  consequently  offer  different  equivalents  in  their  different  degrees  of 
oxidation.  For  example,  there  are  oxides  containing  iron  in  which  its  equivalent  is 
23— this  is  hi  the  salts  formed  by  the  suboxide ;  and  there  is  another  series  of  salts 
in  which  the  equivalent  of  iron  equals  18f — which  contain  less  iron,  and  consequently 
more  oxygen,  and  correspond  with  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation — ferric  oxide.  It  is  true 
that  the  former  salts  are  easily  formed  by  the  direct  action  of  metallic  iron  on  acids,  and 
the  latter  only  by  a  further  oxidation  of  the  compound  formed  already  ;  but  this  is  not 
always  so.  In  the  case  of  copper,  mercury,  and  tin,  under  different  circumstances,  salts 
are  formed  which  correspond  with  different  degrees  of  oxidation  of  these  metals,  and 
many  metals  have  two  equivalents  in  their  different  salts— that  is,  in  salts  corresponding 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  195 

or  bases,  would  occur  most  frequently  in  nature,  for  these  latter  would 
always  tend  to  combine  forming  salts,  especially  through  the  medium 

with  the  different  degrees  of  oxidation.  Thus  it  is  impossible  to  endow  every  metal  with 
one  definite  equivalent  weight.  Hence  the  conception  of  equivalents,  while  playing 
an  important  part  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  appears,  with  a  fuller  study  of 
chemistry,  to  be  but  subordinate  to  a  higher  conception,  with  which  we  shall  afterwards 
become  acquainted. 

The  fate  of  the  theoretical  views  of  chemistry  was  for  a  long  time  bound  up  with 
the  history  of  salts.  The  clearest  representation  of  this  subject  dates  back  to  Lavoisier, 
and  was  systematically  developed  by  Berzelius.  This  representation  is  called  the  binary 
theory.  All  compounds,  and  especially  salts,  are  represented  as  consisting  of  two  parts. 
Salts  are  represented  as  compounds  of  a  basic  oxide  (a  base)  and  an  acid  (that  is,  an 
anhydride  of  an  acid,  then  termed  an  acid),,  whilst  hydrates  are  represented  as  com- 
pounds of  anhydrous  oxides  with  water.  Such  an  expression  was  employed  not  only  to 
denote  the  most  usual  method  of  formation,  of  these  substances  (where  it  would  be  quite 
true),  but  also  to  express  that  internal  distribution-  of  the  elements  by  which  it  was 
proposed  to  explain  all  the  properties  of  these  substances.  Copper  sulphate  was  sup- 
posed to  contain  two  most  intimate  component  oarts— copper  oxide  and  sulphuric  anhy- 
dride. This  is  an  hypothesis.  It  arose  from  the  so-called  electro-chemical  hypothesis, 
which  supposed  the  two  component  parts  to  be  held  in  mutual  union,  because  one  com- 
ponent (the  anhydride  of  the  acid)  has  electro-negative  properties,  and  the  other  (the 
base  in  salts)  electro-positive.  The  two  parts  are  attracted  together,  like  substances 
having  opposite  electrical  charges.  But  as  the  decomposition  of  salts  in  a  state  of  fusion 
by  an  electric  current  always  gives  a  metal,  that  representation  of  the  constitution 
and  decomposition  of  salts  called  the  hydrogen  theory  of  acids  is  nearer  the  truth  than 
that  which  considers  salts  as  made  up  of  a  base  and  an  anhydride  of  an  acid.  But  the 
hydrogen  theory  of  acids  is  also  a  binary  .hypothesis,  and  does  not  contradict . the 
electro-chemical  hypothesis,  but  is  rather  a  modification  of  it.  The  binary  theory  dates 
from  Rouelle  and  Lavoisier,  the  electro-chemical  aspect  was  zealously  developed  by 
Berzelius,  and  the  hydrogen  theory  of  acids  is  due  to  Davy  and  Liebig. 

These  hypothetical  views  simplified  and  generalised  the  study  of  a  complicated 
subject,  and  served  to  support  further  arguments,  but  when  salts  were  in  question  it 
was  equally  convenient  to  follow  one  or  the  other  of  these  hypotheses.  But  these 
theories  were  brought  to  bear  on  all  other  substances,  on  all  compound  substances. 
Those  holding  the  binary  and  electro-chemical  hypotheses  searched  for  two  anti-polar 
component  parts,  and  endeavoured  to  express  the  process  of  chemical  reactions  by  electro- 
chemical and  similar  differences.  If  zinc  replaces  hydrogen,  they  concluded  that  it  is 
more  electro-positive  than  hydrogen,  whilst  they  forgot  that  hydrogen  may,  under  different 
circumstances,  displace  zinc— for  instance,  at  a  red  heat.  Chlorine  and  oxygen  were  con- 
sidered as  being  of  opposite  polarity  to  hydrogen  because  they  easily  combine  with  it, 
nevertheless  both  are  capable  of  replacing  hydrogen,  and,  what  is  very  character- 
istic, in  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  by  chlorine  in  carbon  compounds  not  only  does  the 
chemical  character  often  remain  unaltered,  but  even  the  external  form  may  remain 
unchanged,  as  Laurent  and  Dumas  demonstrated.  These  considerations  undermine  the 
binary,  and  more  especially  the  electro-chemical  theory  An  explanation  of  known 
reactions  then  began  to  be  sought  for  not  in  the  difference  of  the  polarity  of  the  different 
substances,  but  in  the  joint  influences  of  all  the  elements  011  the  properties  of  the  com- 
pound formed.  This  is  the  reverse  of  the  preceding  hypothesis. 

This  reversal  was  not,  however,  limited  to  the  destruction  of  the  tottering  foundations 
of  the  preceding  theory ;  it  proposed  a  new  doctrine,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  the 
modern  course  of  our  science.  This  doctrine  may  be  termed  the  unitary  theory — that  is, 
it  strictly  acknowledges  the  joint  influences  of  the  elements  in  a  compound  substance, 
denies  the  existence  of  separate  and  contrary  components  in  them,  regards  copper 
sulphate,  for  instance,  as  a  strictly  definite  compound  of  copper,  sulphur,  and  oxygen ; 


196  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

of  the  all-pervading  water.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  salts  are  found 
everywhere  in  nature.  They  occur  in  animals  and  plants,  although  in  but 
small  quantity,  because,  as  forming  the  last  stage  of  chemical  reaction, 
they  are  capable  of  only  a  few  chemical  transformations.  And  organisms 
are  bodies  in  which  a  series  of  uninterrupted,  varied,  and  active 
chemical  transformations  proceed,  whilst  salts,  which  only  enter  into 
double  decompositions  between  each  other,  are  little  prone  to  such 
changes.  But  organisms  always  contain  salts.  Thus,  for  instance, 
bones  contain  calcium  phosphate,  the  juice  of  grapes  potassium  tartrate 
(cream  of  tartar),  certain  lichens  calcium  oxalate,  and  the  shells  of 
mollusca  calcium  carbonate,  <fec.  As  regards  water  and  soil,  portions 
of  the  earth  in  which  the  chemical  processes  are  less  active,  they  are 
full  of  salts.  Thus  the  waters  of  the  oceans,  and  all  others  (Chap.  I.), 
abound  in  salts,  and  in  the  soil,  in  the  rocks  of  the  earth's  crust,  in  the 
upheaved  lavas,  and  in  the  falling  meteorites  the  salts  of  silicic  acid, 
and  especially  its'  double  salts,  predominate.  Saline  substances  also 
make  up  the  composition  of  those  limestones  which  often  form  mountain 
chains  and  whole  thicknesses  of  the  earth's  strata,  these  consisting  of 
calcium  carbonate,  CaC03. 

Thus  we  have  seen  oxygen  in  a  free  state  and  in  various  compounds 
of  different  degrees  of  stability,  from  the  unstable  salts,  like  Berthol- 
let's  salt  and  nitre,  to  the  most  stable  silicon  compounds,  such  as  exist 
in  granite.  We  saw  an  entirely  similar  gradation  of  stability  in  the 
compounds  of  water  and  of  hydrogen  In  all  its  aspects  oxygen,  as  an 
element,  or  single  substance,  remains  the  same  however  varied  its 
chemical  states,  just  as  a  substance  may  appear  in  many  different 
physical  states  of  aggregation.  But  our  notion  of  the  immense  variety 
of  the  chemical  states  in  which  oxygen  can  occur  would  not  be  corn- 
then  seeks  for  compounds  which  are  analogous  in  their  properties,  and,  placing  them  side 
by  side,  endeavours  to  express  the  influence  of  each  element  in  determining  the  united 
properties  of  its  compound.  In  the  majority  of  cases  it  arrives  at  conclusions  similar  to 
those  which  are  obtained  by  the  above-mentioned  hypotheses,  but  in  certain  special  cases 
the  conclusions  of  the  unitary  theory  are.in  entire  opposition  to  those  of  the  binary  theory 
and  its  corollaries.  Cases  of  this  kind  are  most  often  met  with,  in  the  consideration  of 
compounds  of  a  more  complex  nature  than  salts,  especially,  organic  compounds  containing 
hydrogen  But  it  is  not  in  this  change  from  an  artificial  to  a  natural  system,  impor- 
tant as  it  is,  that  the  chief  service  and  strength  of  the  unitary  doctrine  lies.  By  a  simple 
review  of  the  vast  store  of  data  regarding  the  reactions  of  typical  substances,  it  succeeded 
from  its  first  appearance  in  establishing  a  new  and  important  law,  it  introduced  a  new 
conception  into  science — namely,  the  conception  of  molecules,  with  which  we  shall  soon 
become  acquainted.  The  deduction  of  the  law  and  of  the  conception  of  molecules  ha» 
been  verified  by  facts  in  a  number  of  cases,  and  was  the  cause  of  the  .majority  of  chemists 
of  our  times  deserting  the  binary  theory  and  accepting  the  unitary  theory,  which  forms 
the  basis  of  the  present  work  Laurent  and  Gerhardt  must  be  considered  as  the  founders 
of  this  doctrine 


OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  197 

pletely  understood  if  we  did  not  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  it  in, 
the  form  in  which  it  occurs  in  ozone  and  peroxide  of  hydrogen.  In  these 
it  is  most  active,  its  energy  seems  to  have  increased.  They  illustrate 
fresh  aspects  of  chemical  correlations,  and  the  variety  of  the  forms  in 
which  matter  can  appear  stand  out  clearly.  We  will  therefore  consider 
these  two  substances  somewhat  in  detail. 


198  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


CHAPTER  IV 

OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON's  LAW 

VAN  MARUM,  during  the  last  century,  observed  that  oxygen  in  a  glass 
tube,  when  subjected  to  the  action  of  a  series  of  electric  sparks,  acquired 
a  peculiar  smell,  and  the  property  of  combining  with  mercury  at  the 
ordinary  temperature.  This  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  a  number  of 
fresh  experiments.  Even  in  the  simple  revolution  of  an  electrical 
machine,  when  electricity  diffuses  into  the  air  or  passes  through  it,  the 
peculiar  and  characteristic  smell  of  ozone,  proceeding  from  the  action 
of  the  electricity  on  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere,  is  recognised.  In 
1840  Prof.  Schonbein,  of  Basle,  turned  his  attention  to  this  odori- 
ferous substance,  and  showed  that  it  is  also  formed,  with  the 
oxygen  evolved  at  the  positive  pole,  in  the  decomposition  of  water 
by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current ;  in  the  oxidation  of  phosphorus 
in  damp  air,  and  also  in  the  oxidation  of  a  number  of  substances, 
although  it  is  distinguished  for  its  instability  and  capacity  for  oxidis- 
ing other  substances.  The. characteristic  smell  of  this  substance  gave 
it  its  name,  from  the  Greek  o£<^  'I  emit  an  odour.'  Schonbein 
pointed  out  that  ozone  is  capable  of  oxidising  many  substances 
on  which  oxygen  does  not  act  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  It 
will  be  sufficient  to  point  out  for  instance  that  it  oxidises  silver,  mer- 
cury, charcoal,  and  iron  with  great  energy  at  the  ordinary  temperature. 
It  might  be  thought  that  ozone  was  some  new  compound  substance,  as 
it  was  at  first  supposed  to  be  ;  but  careful  observations  made  in  this 
direction  have  long  led  to  the  conclusion  that  ozone  is  nothing  but 
oxygen  altered  in  its  properties.  This  is  most  strikingly  proved  by  the 
complete  transformation  of  oxygen  containing  ozone  into  ordinary 
oxygen  when  it  is  passed  through  a  tube  heated  to  250°.  Further,  at 
a  low  temperature  pure  oxygen  gives  ozone  when  electric  sparks  are 
passed  through  it  (Marignac  and  De  la  Rive).  Hence  it  is  proved  both 
by  synthesis  and  analysis  that  ozone  is  that  same  oxygen  with  which  we 
are  already  acquainted,  only  endowed  with  particular  properties  and  in 
a  particular  state.  However,  by  whatever  method  it  be  obtained,  the 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE -D ALTON'S  LAW        199 

amount  of  it  contained  in  the  oxygen  is  inconsiderable,  generally  only  a 
few  fractions  per  cent.,  rarely  2  per  cent.,  and  only  under  very  propiti- 
ous circumstances  as  much  as  20  per  cent.  The  reason  of  this  must  be. 
looked  for  first 'in  the  fact  that  ozone  in  its  formation  from  oxygen 
absorbs  heat.  If  any  substance  be  burnt  in  a  calorimeter  at  the  expense 
of  ozonised  oxygen,  then  more  heat  is  evolved  than  when  it  is  burnt  in 
ordinary  oxygen,  -and  Berthelot  showed  that  this  difference  is  very 
]arge — namely,  29,600  heat  units  correspond  with  every  forty-eight 
parts  by  weight  of  ozone.  This  signifies  that  the  transformation  of 
forty-eight  parts  of  oxygen  into  ozone  is  accompanied  by  the  absorp- 
tion of  this  quantity  of  heat,  and  that  the  reverse  process  evolves  this 
quantity  of  heat.  Therefore  the  passage  of  ozone  into  oxygen  should 
take  place  easily  and  fully  (as  an  exothermal  reaction),  like  combustion , 
and  this  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  at  250°  ozone  entirely  disappears, 
forming  oxygen.  Any  rise  of  temperature  may  thus  bring  about  the 
breaking  up  of  ozone,  and  as  a  rise  of  temperature  takes  place  in  the 
action  of  an  electrical  discharge,  there  are  in  an  electric  discharge  the 
conditions  both  for  the  preparation  of  ozone  and  for  its  destruction. 
Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  transformation  of  oxygen  into  ozone  as  a 
reversible  reaction  has  a  limit  when  a  state  of  equilibrium  is'  arrived  at 
between  the  products  of  the  two  opposite  reactions,  that  the  phenomena 
of  this  transformation  accord  with  the  phenomena  of  dissociation,  and 
that  a  fall  of  temperature  should  aid  the  formation  of  a  large  quantity 
of  ozone.1  Further,  it  is  evident,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the 
best  way  of  preparing  ozone  is  not  by  electric  sparks,2  which  raise  the 
temperature,  but  by  the  employment  of  a  continual  discharge  or  flow 
of  electricity  —that  is,  by  the  action  of  a  silent  discharge?  For  this 

1  This  conclusion,  deduced  by  me  as  far  back  as  1878  (Moniteur  Scientifique)  by 
conceiving  the  molecules  of  ozone  (see  later)  as  more  complex  than  those  of  oxygen,  and 
ozone  as  containing  a  greater  quantity  of  heat  than  oxygen,  has  been  proved  experi- 
mentally by  the  researches  of  Mailfert  (1880)x  who  showed  that  the  passage  of  a  silent 
discharge  through  a  litre  of  oxygen  at  0°  may  form  up  to  14  milligrams  of  ozone,  and  at 
-80°  up  to  60  milligrams ;  but  best  of  all  in  the  determinations  of  Chappuis  and  Haute- 
feuille  (1880),  who  found  that  at  a  temperature  of  -25°  a  silent  discharge  converted  20 
p.c.  of  oxygen  into*  ozone,  whilst  at  20°  it  was  impossible  to  obtain  more  than  12  p.c..  and 
at  100°  less  than  2  p.c.  of  ozone  was  obtained. 

2  A  series  of  electric  sparks  may  be  obtained  by  an  ordinary  electrical  machine, 
the  electrophorous  machines  of  Holtz  and  Teploff,  &c.,  Leyden  jars,  Ruhmkorff  coils,  or 
similar  means,  when  the-  opposite  electricities  are  able  to  accumulate  at  the  terminals 
of>conductors,  and  a  discharge  of  sufficient  electrical  intensity  passes  through  the  non- 
conductors air  or  oxygen. 

3  A  silent  discharge  is  such  a  combination  of  opposite  statical  (potential)  electricities 
as  takes  place  (generally  between  large  surfaces)  regularly,  without  sparks,  slowly,  and 
quietly  (as  in  the  dispersion  of  .electricity).    The  discharge  is  only  luminous  in  the  dark ; 
there  is  no  observable  rise  of  temperature,  and  therefore  a  larger  amount  of  ozone  is 
formed.     But,  nevertheless,  on  continuing  the  passage  of  a  silent  discharge  through 

*10 


200  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

reason  all  ozonisers  (which  are  of  most  varied  construction),  or  forms  of 
apparatus  for  the  preparation  of  ozone  from  oxygen'  (or  air)  by  the 
action  of  electricity,  now  usually  consist  of  sheets  of  metal — for  in- 
stance, tinfoil — or  a  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  mixed  with  chromic  acid, 
&c.  separated  by  thin  glass  surfaces  placed,  at  short  distances  from  each 
other,  and  between  which  the  oxygen  or  air  to  be  ozonised  is  introduced 
and  -subjected  to  the  action  of  a-  silent  discharge.4  Thus  in  Siemens' 
apparatus  (fig.  37)  the  exterior  of  the  tube  a  and  the  interior  of  the 


FiO.  37.— Siemens'  apparatus  for  preparing  ozone  by  means  of  a  silent  discharge. 

tube  b  c  are  coated  with  tinfoil  and  connected  with  the  poles  of  a  source 
of  electricity  (with  the  terminals  of  a  Ruhmkorff's  coil).  A  silent  dis- 
charge passes  through  the  thin  walls  of  the  glass  cylinders  a  and  b  c 

ozone  it  is  destroyed.  For  the  action  to  be  observable  a  large  surface  is  necessary,  and 
consequently  a  source  of  electricity  at  a  high  potential.  For  this  reason  the  silent  dis- 
charge is  best  produced  by  a  Ruhmkorff  coil,  as  the  most  convenient  means  of  obtaining 
a  considerable  potential  of  statical  electricity  with  the  employment  of  the  comparatively 
feeble  current  of  a  galvanic  battery. 

4  v.  Babo's  apparatus  was  one  of  the  first  constructed  for  ozonising  oxygen  by  mean* 
of  a  silent  discharge  (and  it  is  still  one  of  the  best).  It  is  composed  of  a  number  (twenty 
and  more)  of  long,  thin  capillary  glass  tubes  closed  at  one  end.  A  platinum  wire,  ex- 
tending along  their  whole  length,  is  introduced  into  the  other  end  of  each  tube,  and  this 
end  is  then  fused  up  round  the  wire,  the  end  of  which  protrudes  outside  the  tube. 
The  protruding  ends  of  the  wires  are  arranged  alternately  in  two  sides  in  such  a  manner 
that  on  one  side  there  are  ten  closed  ends  and  ten  wires.  A  bunch  of  such  tubes  (forty 
should  make  a  bunch  of  not  more  than  1  c.m.  diameter)  is  placed  in  a  glass  tube,  and 
the  ends  of  the  wires  are  connected  with  two  conductors,  and  are  fused  to  the  ends  of  the 
surrounding  tube.  The  discharge  of  a  Ruhmkorff  coil  is  passed  through  these  ends  of 
the  wires,  and  the  dry  .air  or  oxygen  to  be  ozonised  is  passed  through  the  tube.  If 
oxygen  be  passed  through,  ozone  is  obtained  in  large  quantities,  and  -free  from  oxides  of 
nitrogen,  which  are  partially  formed  when  air  is  acted  on.  At  low  temperatures  ozone  is 
formed  in  large  quantities.  As  ozone  acts  on  corks  and  india-rubber,  the  apparatus 
should  be  made  entirely  of  glass.  With  a  powerful  Ruhmkorff  coil  and  forty  tubes  the 
ozonation  is  so  powerful  that  the  gae  when  passed  through  a,  solution  of  iodide  of  potas- 
sium not  only  sets  the  iodine  free,  but  even  oxidises  it  to  potassium  ipdate,  so  that  in 
five  minutes  the  gas-conducting  tube  is  choked  up  witli  crystals  of  the  insoluble  iodate. 


OZ6NE  AND  HYDKOGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW        201 

over  all  their 'surfaces,  and  consequently,  if  oxygen  be  passed  through 
the  apparatus  by  the  tube,  d,  fused  into  the  side  of  a,  it  will  be  ozonised 
in  the  annular  space  between  a  and  b  c.  The  ozonised  oxygen  escapes 
by  the  tube  .e,  and  may  be  introduced  into  any  other  apparatus.8" 

{The  properties  of  ozone  obtained  by  such  a  method  6  distinguish  ib 
•iA  many  respects  from  oxygen.  Ozone  very  rapidly  .decolorises  indigo, 
litmus,  and  many  other  dyes  by  oxidising  them.  Silver  is  oxidised  by 
it  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  whilst  oxygen  js  not  able  to  oxidise 
silver  even  at  high  temperatures  ;  a  bright  silver  plate  rapidly  turns 
black  (from  oxidation)  -in  ozonised  oxygen.  It  is  rapidly  absorbed  by 
mercury,  forming  oxide  ;  it  transforms  the  lower  oxides  into -higher — 
for  instance,  sulphurous  anhydride  into  sulphuric,  nitrous  oxide  into 
nitric,  arsenious  anhydride  (As2O3)  into  arsenic  anhydride  (As2O5)  &c.7 
But  what  is  especially  characteristic  in  ozone  is  the  decomposing  action. 

5  In  order  to  connect  the  ozoniser  with  any  other  apparatus  it  is  impossible  to  make 
use  of  india-rubber,  mercury,  or  cements,  &c.,  because  they  are  themselves  acted  on  by, 
and  act  on,  ozone.  All' connections  must,  as  was  first  proposed  by  Brodie,  be  hermetically 
closed  by  sulphuric  acid,  which  is  not  acted  on  .by  ozone.  Thus,  a  cork  is  passed  over 
the  vertical  end  of  a^tube,  over  which  a  wide  tube  passes  so  that  the  end  of  the  first  tube 
protrudes  above  the  cork ;  mercury  is  first  poured  over  the  cork  (to  prevent  its  being 
acted  on  by  the  sulphuric  acid),  and  then  sulphuric  acid  IB  poured  over  the  mercury. 
The  protruding  end  of  the  first  tube  is  covered  by  the  lower  end  of  a  third  tube,  immersed 
'in  the  sulphuric  acid, 

<*  The  method  above  described  is  the  only  one  which  has  been  well  investigated.  The^ 
admixture  of  nitrogen,  or  even  of  hydrogen,  atid  especially  of  silicon  fluoride,  appears  to> 
Aid  the  formation  and.  preservation  of  ozone.  Amongst  other  methods  'for  preparing, 
ozone  we  may  mention  the  following : — 1.  In  the  action  of  oxygen  on  phosphorus  at  the 
ordinary  temperature  a  portion  of  the  oxygen  is  converted  into  ozone.  At  the  ordinary 
temperature  a  stick  of  phosphorus,  partially  immersed  in.  water  and  partially  in  air  in  a 
large  glass  vessel,  causes  the  air  to  acquire  the  odour  of  ozone..  It  must  further  be 
remarked  that  if  the  air  be  left  for  long  in  contact  with  the  phosphorus,  or  without  the 
presence  of  water,  the  ozone  formed  is  destroyed  by  the  phosphorus.  -2.  By  the  action 
of  sulphuric  acid  .on  peroxide  of  barium.  If  the  latter  be  covered  with  strong  sulphurio 
acid  (the  acid,  if  diluted  with  only  one-tenth  of  water,  does  not  give  ozone),  then  at  a  low 
temperature  the  oxygen  evolved  contains  ozone,  and  in  much  greater  quantities  than 
in  that  ozone  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  electric  sparks  or  phosphorus,  8.  Ozone  may 
also  be  .obtained  by  decomposing,  strong  sulphuric  acid  by  potassium  manganate  es- 
pecially with  the  addition  of  barium  peroxide. 

Ozone  takes  up  the  hydrogen  from  hydrochloric  acid;  chlorine  is  liberated,  and  carf 
dissolve  gold.  Iodine  is  directly  oxidised  by  ozone,  but  not  by  oxygen.  Ammonia,  NHj, 
is  oxidised  by  ozone  into  ammonium  nitrite  (and.  nitrate),  2NH3  +  O3  =  NH4NO2  +  H2O, 
and  therefore  a  drop  of  ammonia,  on  falling  into  the  gas,  gives  a  thick  .cloud  of 
the  salts  formed.  Ozone  converts  lead  oxide  into  peroxide,  and  suboxide  of  thallium 
(which  is  colourless)  into  oxide  (which  is  brown),  so  that  this  reaction  is  made  use  of  for 
detecting  the  presence  of  ozone.  Lead  sulphide,  PbS  (black),  is  converted  into  sul- 
phate, PbSO4  (colourless),  by  ozone.  A  neutral  solution  of  manganese  sulphate  gives  a 
precipitate  of  manganese  peroxide,  and  an  acid  solution  may  be  oxidised  into  perman- 
ganic acid,  HMnO4.  With  respect  to  the -oxidising  action  of  ozone  on  organic  sub- 
stances, it  may  be  mentioned  that  with  ether,  C4H10O,  ozone  gives  ethyl  peroxide,  which 
is  capable  of  decomposing  with  explosion  (according  to  Berthelot),  and  is  decomposed  by 
water  into  alcohol,  2C2HeO,  and  hydrogen  peroxide,  H2O2. 


202  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

it  exerts  on  potassium  iodide.  Oxygen  does  not  act  on  it,  but  ozonel 
passed  into  a  solution  of  potassium  iodide  liberates  iodine,  whilst  the 
potassium  is  obtained  as  caustic  potash,  which  remains  in  solution, 
2KI  +  H2O  +  O=2KHO  4  I2,  As  the  presence  of  minute  traces  of  free 
iodine  may  be  discovered  by  means  of  starch  paste,  with  which  it  forms 
a  very  dark  blue-coloured  substance,  a  mixture  of  potassium  iodide  with, 
starch  paste  will  detect  the  presence  of  very  small  traces  of  ozone.8' 
Ozone  is  destroyed  or  converted  into  ordinary  oxygen  not  only  by  heat,, 
but  also  by  long  keeping,  especially  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  peroxide- 
of  manganese,  chlorine,  &c. 

Hence  ozone,  although  it  has  the  same  composition  as  oxygen,  differs 
from  it  in  stability,  and  by  the  fact  that  it  oxidises  a  number  of  sub- 
stances very  energetically  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  In  this  respect 
ozone  resembles  the  oxygen  of  certain  unstable  compounds,  or  oxygen 
at  the  moment  of  its  liberation.8  bis 

In  orcMnary  oxygen  and  ozone  we  see  an  example  of  one  and  the 
same  substance,  in  this  case  an  element,  appearing  in  two  states.  This 
indicates  that  the  properties  of  a  substance,  and  even  of  an  element, 
may  vary  without  its  composition  varying.  Very  many  such  cases 
are  known.  Such  cases  of  a  chemical  transformation  which  determine 
a  difference  in  the  properties  of  one  and  the  same  element  are  termed 

8  This  reaction  is  the  one  usually  made  use  of  for  detecting  the  presence  of  ozone. 
In  the  majority  of  cases  paper  is  soaked  in  solutions  of  potassium  iodide  and  starch- 
Such  ozonometrical  or  iodised  starch-paper  when  damp  turns  blue  in  the  presence  of 
ozone,  and  the  tint  obtained  varies  considerably,  according  to  the  length  of  time  it  is 
exposed  and  to  the  amount  of  ozone  present.  The  amount  of  ozone  in  a  given  gas  may 
even  to  a  certain  degree  be  judged  by  the  shade  of  colour  acquired  by  the  paper,  if  pre- 
liminary tests  be  made* 

Test-paper  for  ozone  is  prepared  in  the  following  manner : — One  gram  of  neutral 
potassium  iodide  is  dissolved  in  100  grams  of  distilled  water ;  10  grams  of  starch  are 
then  shaken  up  in  the  solution,  and  the  mixture  is  boiled  until  the  starch  is  converted 
into  a  jelly.  This  jelly  is  then  smeared  over  blotting-paper  and  left  to  dry.  It  must 
always  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  colour  of  iodised  starch  paper  is  changed  not 
only  by  the  action  of  ozone,  but  of  many  other  oxidisers ;  for  example,  by  the  oxides  of 
nitrogen  (especially  N2O3)  and  hydrogen  peroxide.  Houzeau  proposed  soaking  comnion 
litmus-paper  with  a  solution  of  potassium  iodide,  which  in  the  presence  of  iodine  would 
turn  blue,  owing  to  the  formation  of  KHO.  In  order  to  determine  if  the  blue  colour  is 
not  produced  by  an  alkali  (ammonia)  in  the  gas,  a  portion  of  the  paper  is  not  soaked  in 
the  potassium  iodide,  but  moistened  with  water ;  this  portion  will  then  also  turn  blue  il 
ammonia  be  present.  A  reagent  for  distinguishing  ozone  from  hydrogen  peroxide  with 
certainty  is  not  known,  and  therefore  these  substances  in  very  small  quantities  (for  in- 
stance, in  the  atmosphere)  may  easily  be  confounded.  Until  recent  years  the  mistake 
has  frequently  been  made  of  ascribing  the  alteration  of  iodised  starch-paper  in  the  air 
to  the  presence  of  ozone ;  at  the  present  time  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  most 
often  due  to  the  presence  of  nitrous  acid  (Hosva,  1889). 

8  bis  Fluorine  (Chap.  XI.),  acting  upon  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  takes  up 
the  hydrogen,  and  evolves  the  oxygen  in  the  form  of  ozone  (Moissan,  1889),  and  therefore 
the  reaction  must  be  expressed  thus :— 8H3O  -f  8Fa  =  6HF  +  O$. 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW        203 

cases  of  isomerism.  The  cause  of  isomerism  evidently  lies  deep  within 
the  essential  conditions  of  a  substance,  and  its  investigation  has  already 
led  to  a  number  of  results  of  unexpected  importance  and  of  immense 
scientific  significance.  It  is  easy  to  understand  the  difference  between 
substances  containing  different  elements  or  the  same  elements  in 
different  proportions.  That  a  difference  should  exist  in  these  cases 
necessarily  follows,  if,  as  our  knowledge  compels  us,  we  admit  that 
there  is  a  radical  difference  in  the  simple  bodies  or  elements.  But 
when  the  composition — i.e.  the  quality  and  quantity — of  the  elements 
in  two  substances  is  the  same  and  yet  their  properties  are  different, 
then  it  becomes  clear  that  the  conceptions  of  diverse  elements  and  of  the 
varying  composition  of  compounds,  alone,  are  insufficient  for  the  expres- 
sion of  all  the  diversity  of  properties  of  matter  in  nature.  Something 
else,  still  more  profound  and  internal  than  the  composition  of  sub- 
stances, must,  judging  from  isomerism,  determine  the  properties  and 
transformation  of  substances. 

On  what  are  the  isomerism  of  ozone  and  oxygen,  and  the  peculiari- 
ties of  ozone,  dependent  ?  In  what,  besides  the  extra  store  of  energy, 
which  is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  ozone,  resides  the  cause  of  its 
difference  from  oxygen  1  These  questions  for  long  occupied  the  minds' 
of  investigators,  and  were  the  motive  for  the  most  varied,  exact,  and 
accurate  researches,  which  were  chiefly  directed  to  the  study  of  the 
volumetric  relations  exhibited  by  ozone.  In  order  to  acquaint  the 
reader  with  the  previous  researches  of  this  kind,  I  cite  the  following 
from  a  memoir  by  Soret,  in  the  '  Transactions  of  the  French  Academy  of 
Sciences.'  for  1866 

Our  present  knowledge  of  the  volumetric  relations  of  ozone  may  be 
expressed  in  the  following  manner 

1.  "  Ordinary  oxygen  in  changing  into  ozone  under  the  action  of 
electricity  shows  a  diminution  in  volume."  This  was  discovered  by 
Andrews  and  Tait. 

1  2.  "  In  acting  on  ozonised  oxygen  with  potassium  iodide  and  other 
substances  capable  of  being  oxidised,  we  destroy  the  ozone,  but  the 
volume  of  the  gas  remains  unchanged."  For  the  researches  of  Andrews, 
Soret,  v.  Babo,  and  others  showed  that  the  proportion  of  ozonised 
oxygen  absorbed  by  the  potassium  iodide  is  equal  to  the  original  con- 
traction of  volume  of  the  oxygen — that  is,  in  the  absorption  of  the  ozone 
the  volume  of  the  gas  remains  unchanged.  From  this  it  might  be 
imagined  that  ozone,  so  to  say,  does  not  occupy  any  space — is -indefi- 
nitely dense. 

'  3.  "  By  the  action  ot  heat  ozonised  oxygen  increases  in  volume, 
and  is  transformed  into  ordinary  oxygen.  This  increase  in  volume 


204  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

corresponds  with  the  quantity  of  ozonised  oxygen  which  is  given  up  tOi 
the  potassium  iodide  in  its  decomposition  "  (the  same  observers). 

4.  These  unquestionable  experimental  results  lead  to  the  conclusion 
that  ozone  is  denser  than  oxygen,  and  that  in  its  oxidising  action  it 
gives  off  that  portion  of  its  substance  to  which  is  due  its  extra  density 
distinguishing  it  from  ordinary  oxygen. 

If  we  imagine  (says  "Weltzien)  that  n  volumes  of  ozone  consist  of  n 
volumes  of  oxygen  combined  with  m  volumes  of  the  same  substance,  and 
that  ozone  in  oxidising  gives  up  m  volumes  of  oxygen  and  leaves  n 
volumes  of  ordinary  oxygen  gas,  then  all  the  above  facts  can  be  ex- 
plained ;  otherwise  it  must  be  supposed  that  ozone  is  infinitely  dense. 
'In  order  to  determine  the  density  of  ozone  '  (we  again  cite  Soret)  '  re- 
course cannot  be  had  to  the  direct  determination  of  the  weight  of  a  given 
volume  of  the  gas,  because  ozone  cannot  be  obtained  in  a  pure  state.    It  is 
always  mixed  with  a  very  large  quantity  of  oxygen.     It  was  necessary, 
therefore,  to  have -recourse  to  such  substances  as  would  absorb  ozone 
without  absorbing  oxygen  and  without  destroying  the  ozone.     Then  the 
density  might  be  deduced  from  the  decrease  of  volume  produced  in  the 
gas  by  the  action  of  this  solvent  in  comparison  with  the  quantity  of 
oxygen  given  up  to  potassium  iodide.     Advantage  must  also  be  taken 
of  the  determination  of  the  increase  of  volume  produced  by  the  action 
of  heat  on  ozone,  if  the  volume  occupied  by  the  ozone  before  heating 
be  known.'     Soret  found  two  such  substances,  turpentine   and  oil  of 
cinnamon.     '  Ozone  disappears  in  the  presence  of  turpentine.     This  is 
accompanied  by  the  appearance  of  a  dense  vapour,  which  fills  a  vessel 
of  small  capacity  (0'14  litre)  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  impenetrable 
to  direct  solar-rays.     On  leaving  the  vessel  at  rest,  it  is  observed  that 
the  cloud  of  vapour  settles  ;  the  clearing  is  first  remarked  at  the  upper 
portion  of  the  vessel,  and  the  brilliant  colours  of  the  rainbow  are  seen  on 
the  edge  of  a  cloud  of  vapour.'     Oil  of  cinnamon — that  is,  the  volatile  or 
essential  oil  of  the  well-known  spice,  cinnamon— gives  under  similar 
circumstances  the  same  kind  of  vapours,  but  they  are  much  less  volu- 
minous.    On  measuring  the  gaseous  volume  before  and  after  the  action 
of  both  volatile  oils,  a  considerable  decrease  is  remarked.     On  applying 
all  the  necessary  corrections  (for  the  solubility  of  oxygen  in  the  oily 
liquids  named  above,  for  the  tension  of  their  vapour,  for  the  change  of 
pressure,  &c.)  and  making  a  series  of  comparative  determinations,  Soret 
obtained  the  following  result :  two  volumes  of  ozone  capable  of  being  dis- 
solved, when  changed  to  ordinary  (by  heating  a  wire  to  a  red-heat  by  a 
galvanic  current)  increase  by  one  volume.     Hence  it  is  evident  that  in 
the  formation  of  ozone  three  volumes  of  oxygen  give  two  volumes  of 
ozone — that  is,  its  density  (referred  to  hydrogen) =24. 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW        205' 

The  observations  and  determinations  of  Soret  showed  that  ozone" 
is  heavier  than  oxygen,  and  even  than  carbonic  anhydride  (because 
ozonised  oxygen  passes  through  fine  orifices  more  slowly  than  oxygen 
and  than  its  mixtures  with  carbonic  anhydride),  although  lighter  than 
chlorine  (it  flows  more  rapidly  through  .such  orifices  than  chlorine),  and 
they  indicated  that  ozone  is  one  sand  a  half  times  denser  than  oxygen, 
which  may  be  expressed  by  designating  a  molecule  of  oxygen  by  02 
and  of  ozone  by  O3,  and  hence  ozone  O02  is  comparable  with  compound 
substances9  formed  by  oxygen,  as  for  instance  CO2,  SO2,  NO2,  <fec. 
This  explains  the  chief  differences  between  ozone  and  oxygen  and  the 
cause  of  the  isomerism,  and  at  the  same  time  leads  one  to  expect 10 
that  ozone,  being  a  gas  which  is  denser  than  oxygen,  would  be  liquefied 
much  more  easily.  This  was  actually  shown  to  be  the  case  in  1880,  by 
Chappuis  and  Hautefeuille  in  their  researches  on  the  physical  properties 
of  ozone.  Its  boiling  point  under  a  pressure  of  760  mm.  is  about— 106°, 
and  consequently  compressed  and  refrigerated  ozone  when  rapidly  ex- 
panded forms  drops,  i.e.  is  liquefied.  Liquid  and  compressed  n  ozone  is 

9  Ozone  is,  so  to  say,  an  oxide  of  oxygen,  just  as  water  is  an  oxide  of  hydrogen.    Just 
as  aqueous  vapour  is  composed  of  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen, 
which  on  combining  condense  into  two  volumes  of  aqueous  vapour,  so  also  two  volumes 
of  oxygen  are  combined  in  ozofle  with  one  volume  of  oxygen  to  give  two  volumes  of 
ozone.    In  the  action  of  ozone  on  different  substances  it  is  only  that  additional  portion 
of  its  molecule  by  which  it  differs  from  ordinary  oxygen  that  combines  with  other  bodies, 
and  that  is  why,  under  these  circumstances,  the  volume  of  the  ozonised  oxygen  does  not 
change.    Starting  with  two  volumes  of  ozone,  one-third  of  its  weight  is  parted  with, 
and  two  volumes  of  oxygen  remain. 

The  above  observations  of  Soret  on  the  capacity  of  turpentine  for  dissolving  ozone, 
together  with  Schbnbein's  researches  on  the  formation  of  ozone  in  the  oxidation  of  tur- 
pentine and  of  similar  volatile  vegetable  oils  (entering  into  the  composition  of  perfumes), 
also  explain  the  action  of  this  ethereal  oil  on  a  great  many  substances.  It  is  known  thai 
turpentine  oil,  when  mixed  with  many  substances,  promotes  their  oxidation.  .In  thi* 
case  it  probably  not  only  itself  promotes  the  formation  of  ozone,  but  also  dissolves  ozone 
from  the  atmosphere,  and  thus  acquires  the  property  of  oxidising  many  substances.  It 
bleaches  linen  and  cork,  decolorises  indigo,  promotes  the-  oxidation  and/hardening  of 
boiled  linseed  oil,  &c.  These  properties  of  turpentine  oil  ar"e  made  use  of  in  practice. 
Dirty  linen  and  many  stained  materials  are  easily  cleaned  by  turpentine,  not  only  because 
it  dissolves  the  grease,  but  also  because  it  oxidises  it.  The  admixture  of  turpentine  with 
drying  (boiled)  oil,  oil-colours,  and  lacs  aids  their  rapid  drying  because  it  attracts  ozone. 
Various  oils  occurring  in  plants,  and  entering  into  the  composition  of  perfumes  and1 
certain  scent  extracts,  also  act  as  oxidisers.  They  act  in  the  same  manner  as  oil  of  tur- 
pentine and  oil  of  cinnamon.  This  perhaps  explains  the  refreshing  influence  they  have 
in  scents  and  other  similar  preparations,  and  also  the  salubrity  of  the  air  of  pine  forests. 
Water  upon  which  a  layer  of  turpentine  oil  has  been  poured  acquires,  when  left  standing 
in  the  light,  the  disinfecting  and  oxidising  properties  in  general  of  Ozonised  turpentine 
(is  this  due  to  the  formation  of  H2O2  ?)• 

10  The  densest,  most  complex,  and  heaviest  particles  of  matter  should,  under  equal 
conditions,  evidently  be  less  capable  of  passing  into  a  state  of  gaseous  motion,  should 
sooner  attain  a  liquid  state,  and"  have  a  greater  cohesive  force. 

11  TThe  blue  colour  proper  to  ozone  may  be  seen  through  a  tube  one  metre  long,  filled 
with  oxygen,  containing  lO.p.c.  of  ozone.     The  density  of  liquid  ozone  has  not,  so  fa* 
M I  am  aware,  been  determined. 


206  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

blue.  In  dissolving  in  water  ozone  partly  passes  into  oxygen.  It 
explodes  violently  when  suddenly  compressed  and  heated,  changing  into 
ordinary  oxygen  and  evolving,  like  all  explosive  substances,12  that  extra 
heat  which  distinguishes  it  from  oxygen. 

Thus,  judging  by  what  has  been  said  above,  ozone  should  be  formed 
in  nature  not  only  in  the  many  processes  of  oxidation  which  go  on,  but 
also  by  the  condensation  of  atmospheric  oxygen.  The  significance  of 
ozone  in  nature  has  often  arrested  the  attention  of  observers.  There  is 
a  series  of  OZOD  ©metrical  observations  which  show  the  different  amounts 
of  ozone  in  the  air  at  different  localities,  at  different  times  of  the  year, 
and  under  different  circumstances.  But  the  observations  made  in  this 
direction  cannot  be  considered  as  sufficiently  exact,  because  the  methods 
in  use  for  determining  ozone  were  not  quite  accurate.  It  is  however 
indisputable  13  that  the  amount  of  ozone  in  the  atmosphere  is  subject  to 
variation  ;  that  the  air  of  dwellings  contains  no  ozone  (it  disappears  in 
oxidising  organic  matter)  ;  that  the  air  of  fields  and  forests  always  con- 
tains ozone,  or  substances  (peroxide  of  hydrogen)  which  act  like  it  (on 
iodised  starch  paper  &c.)13  bls ;  that  the  amount  of  ozone  increases  after 
storms  ;  and  that  miasms,  <fec.,  are  destroyed  by  ozonising  the  atmo- 
sphere. It  easily  oxidises  organic  substances,  and  miasms  are  produced 
by  organic  substances  and  the  germs  of  organisms,  all  of  which  are  easily 
changed  and  oxidised.  Indeed,  many  miasms— for  instance,  the  volatile 
substance  of  decomposing  organisms — are  clearly  destroyed  or  changed 
not  only  by  ozone,  but  also  by  many  other  powerfully  oxidising  substances, 
such  as  chlorine  water,  potassium  permanganate,  and  the  like.14  AH 
that  is  now  known  respecting  the  presence  of  ozone  in  the  air  may  be 

12  All  explosive  bodies  and  mixtures  (gunpowder,  detonating  gas,  &c.)  evolve  heat  in 
exploding — that  is,  the  reactions  which  accompany  explosions  are  exothermal.  In  this 
manner  ozone  in  decomposing  evolves  latent  heat,  although  generally  heat  is  absorbed 
in  decomposition.  This  shows  the  meaning  and  cause  of  explosion. 

15  In  Paris  it  has  been  found  that  the  further  from  the  centre  of  the  town  the  greater 
the  amount  of  ozone  in  the  air.  The  reason  of  this  is  evident :  in  a  city  there  are  many 
conditions  for  the  destruction  of  ozone.  This  is  why  we  distinguish  country  air  as  being 
fresh.  In  spring  the  air  contains  more  ozone  than  in  autumn ;  the  air  of  fields  more  than 
the  air  of  towns. 

is  bu  The  question  of  the  presence  of  ozone  in  the  air  has  not  yet  been  fully  eluci- 
dated, as  those  reactions  by  which  ozone  is  generally  detected  are  also  common  to  nitrous 
acid  (and  its  ammonia  salt).  Ilosvay  de  Bosva  (1889),  in  order  to  exclude  the  influence 
of  such  bodies,  passed  air  through  a  40  per  cent,  solution  of  caustic  soda,  and  then 
through  a  20  per  cent,  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  (these  solutions  do  not  destroy  ozone), 
and'  tested  the  air  thus  purified  for  the  presence  of  ozone.  As  no  ozone  was  then 
detected  the  author  concludes  that  all  the  effects  which  were  formerly  ascribed  to  ozone 
should  be  referred  to  nitrous  acid.  But  this  conclusion  requires  more  careful  verifica- 
tion, since  the  researches  of  Prof.  Schonbein  on  the  presence  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  in 
the  atmosphere. 

14  The  oxidising  action  of  ozone  may  be  taken  advantage  of  for  technical  purposes  ; 
lor  instance,  for  destroying  colouring  matters.  It  has  even  been  employed  for  bleaching 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW       207 

summed  up  in  the  following  words  :  A  small  quantity  of  an  oxidising 
substance,  resembling  ozone  in  its  reactions,  has  undoubtedly  been 
observed  and  determined  in  the  atmosphere,  especially  in  fresh  air,  for 
instance  after  a  storm,  and  it  is  very  likely  that  this  substance  contains 
a  mixture  of  such  oxidising  substances  as  ozone,  peroxide  of  hydrogen, 
and  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogeri  (especially  nitrous  acid  and  its  ammonia 
Bait)  produced  from  the  elements  of  the  atmosphere  by  oxidation  and 
by  the  action  of  electrical  discharges. 

Thus  in  ozone  we  see  (1)  the  capacity  of  elements  (and  it  must  be 
all  the  more  marked  in  compounds)  of  changing  in  properties  without 
altering  in  composition  ;  this  is-  termed  isomerism  ; 15  .(2)  the  capacity 
of  certain  elements  for  condensing  themselves  into  molecules  of  different 
densities  ;  this  forms  a  special  case  of  isomerism  called  polymerism  ; 
(3)  the  capacity  of  oxygen  for  appearing  in  a  still  more  active  and 
energetic  chemical  state  than  that  in  which  it  occurs  in  ordinary 
gaseous  oxygen  ;  and  (4)  the  formation  of  unstable  equilibria,  or 
chemical  states,  which  are  illustrated  both  by  the  ease  with  which 
ozone  acts  as  an  oxidiser  and  by  its  capacity  for  decomposing  with 
explosion.16 

Hydrogen  peroxide. — Many  of  those  properties  which  we  have  seen 
in  ozone  belong  also  to  a  peculiar  substance  containing  oxygen  and 
hydrogen  and  called  hydrogen  peroxide  or  oxygenated  water.  This 
substance  was  discovered  in  1818  by  The'nard.  When  heated  it  is 
decomposed  into  water  and  oxygen,  evolving  as  much  oxygen  as  is 
contained  in  the  water  remaining  after  the  decomposition.  That 
portion  of  oxygen  by  which  hydrogen  peroxide  differs  from  water  be- 
haves in  a  number  of  cases  just  like  the  active  oxygen  in  ozone,  which 
distinguishes  it  from  ordinary  oxygen.  In  H2O2,  and  in  03,  one  atom 
of  oxygen  acts  as  a  powerful  oxidiser,  and  on  separating  out  it 
leaves  H20  or  O2,  which  do  not  act  so  energetically,  although  they 
still  contain  oxygen.17  Both  H.20  and  O3  contain  the  oxygen  in  a  com- 
pressed state,  so  to  speak,  and  when  freed  from  pressure  by  the  forces 
(internal)  of  the  elements  in  another  substance,  this  oxygen  is  easily 
evolved,  and  therefore  acts  as  oxygen  does  at  the  moment  of  its  liberation. 

tissues  and  for  the  rapid  preparation  of  vinegar,  although  these  methods  have  not  yet 
received  wide  application. 

14  Isomerism  in  elements  is  termed  allotropism. 

16  A  number  of  substances  resemble  ozone  in  one  or  other  of  these  respects.    Thua 
cyanogen,  C2N2,  nitrogen  chloride,  &c.,  decompose  with  an  explosion  and  evolution  of 
heat.    Nitrous  anhydride,  N2O5,  forms  a  blue  liquid  like  ozone,  and  in  a  number  of  cases 
oxidises  like  ozone. 

17  It  is  evident  that  there  is  a  want  of  words  here  for  distinguishmg.oxygen,  O,  as  an 
ultimate  element,  from  oxygen,  O2,  as  a  free  element.    The  latter  should  be  termed 
oxygen  gas,  did  not  custom  and  the.length  of  the  expression  rendev  it  inconvenient. 


208  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Both  substances  in  decomposing,  with  the  separation  of  a  portion  of 
their  oxygen,  evolve  heat,  whilst  decomposition  is  usually  accompanied 
by  an  absorption  of  heat. 

Hydrogen  peroxide  is  formed  under  many  circumstances  by  com- 
bustion and  oxidation,  but  in  very  limited  quantities  ;  thus,  for  instance, 
it  is  sufficient  to  shake  up  zinc  with  sulphuric  acid,  or  even  with  water, 
to  observe  the  formation  of  a  certain  quantity  of  hydrogen  peroxide  in 
the  water.18  From  this  cause,  probably,  a  series  of  diverse  oxidation 
processes  are  accomplished  in  nature,  and  according  to  Prof.  Schone  oi 
Moscow,  hydrogen  peroxide  occurs  in  the  atmosphere,  although  in  vari- 
able and  small  quantities,  and  probably  its  formation  is  connected  with 
ozone,  with  which  it  has  much  in  common.  The  usual  mode  of  the 
formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  and  the  method  by  which  it  may  be  in- 
directly obtained,1?  is  by  the  double  decomposition  of  an  acid  and  the 

18  Schonbein  states  that  the  formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is 'to  be  remarked  in 
every  oxidation  in  water  .or  in  the  presence  of  aqueous  vapour.  According  to  Struve, 
hydrogen  peroxide  is  contained  in  snow  and  in  rain-water,  and  its  formation,  together 
with  ozone  and  ammonium  nitrate,  is  even  probable  in  the  processes  of  •  respiration  and 
combustion.  A  solution  of  tin  in  mercury,  or  liquid  tin  amalgam,,  when  shaken  up  in 
water  containing  sulphuric  acid,  produces  hydrogen .  peroxide,  whilst  iron  under  the 
same  circumstances  does  not  give  rise  to  its  formation.  The  presence  of  small  quantities 
of  hydrogen  peroxide  in  these  and  similar  cases  is  recognised  by  many  reactions. 
Amongst  them,  its  -action  on  chromic  acid  in  the  presence  of  ether  is  very  characteristic. 
Hydrogen  peroxide  converts  the.  chromic  acid  into  a  higher  oxide,  Cr2O7,  which  is  of  a 
dark-blue  colour  and  dissolves  in  ether.  This  ethereal  solution  is  to  a  certain  degree 
•stable,  and  therefore  the  presence  of  hydrogen  peroxide  may  be  recognised  by  mixing 
the  liquid  to  be  tested  with  ether  and  adding  several  drops  of  a  solution  of  chromic  acid. 
On  shaking  the  mixture  the  ether  dissolves  the  higher  oxide  of  chromium  which  is 
formed,  and  acquires  a  blue  colour.  The  formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide"  in  the  combus- 
tion and  oxidation  of  substances  containing  or  evolving  hydrogen  must  be  understood  in 
the  light  of  the  conception,  to  be  considered  later,  of  molecules  occupying  equal  volumes 
in  a  gaseous  state.  At  the  moment  of  its  evolution  a  molecule  H2  combines  with  a  mole- 
cule O2,  and  gives  H-jOa-  As  this  substance  is  unstable,  a  large  proportion  of  it  is 
decomposed,  a  small  amount  only  remaining  unchanged.  If  it  is  obtained,  water  is  easily 
.  formed  from  it ;  this  reaction  evolves  heat,  and  the  reverse  action  is  not  very  probable. 
Direct  detenninations  show  that  the  reaction  H2O2  =  H2O  +  O  evolves  22,000  heat  units. 
From  this  it  will  be  understood  how  easy  is  the  decomposition  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  as 
well  as  the  fact  that  a  number  of  substances  which  are  not  directly  oxidised  by.  oxygen 
are  oxidised  by  hydrogen  peroxide  and  by  ozone,  which  also  evolves  heat  on  decomposi- 
tion. Such  a  representation  of  the  origin  of  hydrogen  peroxide  has  been  developed  by 
me  since  1870.  Eecently  (1890)  Traube  has  pronounced  a  similar  opinion,  stating  that 
.  Zn  under  the  action  of.  water  and  air  gives,  besides  .ZnH2O2,  also  H2O2. 

10  The  formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide  from  barium  peroxide  by  a  method  of  double 
'decomposition  is  an  instance  of  a  number  of  indirect  methods  of  preparation.  A  sub- 
stance  A  does  not  combine  with  Br  but  A  B  is  obtained  from  A  c  in  its  action  on  B  D  (see 
'Introduction)  when  c  D  is  formed.  Water  does  riot  combine  with  oxygen,  but  as  a  hydrate 
of  acids  it  acts  on  the  compound  of  oxygen  with  barium  oxide,  because  this  oxide  gives  a 
salt  with  an  acid  anhydride ;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  hydrogen  with  oxygen  does  not 
directly  form  hydrogen  peroxide,  but  when  combined  with  a  haloid  (for  example,  chlorine), 
under  the  action  of  barium  peroxide,  Ba02,  it  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  salt  of  barium 
It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  passage  of  barium  oxide,  BaO,  into  the  peroxide, 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE -D ALTON'S  LAW        209 

peroxides  of  certain  metals,  especially  those  of  potassium,  calcium,  and 
barium.20  We  saw  when  speaking  of  Oxygen  (Chap.  III.)  that  it  is  only 
necessary  to  heat  the  anhydrous  oxide  of  barium  to  a  red  heat  in  a 
current  of  air  or  oxygen  (or,  better  still,  to  heat  it  with  potassium 
chlorate,  and  then  to  wash  away  the  potassium  chloride  formed)  to  ob- 
tain peroxide  of  barium.21  Barium  peroxide  gives  hydrogen  peroxide 
by  the  action  of  acids  in  the  cold.22  The  process  of  decomposition  is 
very  clear  in  this  case  ;  the  hydrogen  of  the  acid  replaces  the  barium 
of  the  peroxide,  a  barium  salt  of  the  acid  being  formed,  while  the 
hydrogen  peroxide  formed  in  the  reaction  remains  in  solution.23 

BaO2,  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  12,100  heat  units  per  16  parts  of  oxygen  by 
weight  combined,  and  the  passage  of  H2O  into  the  peroxide  -  H2O.2  does  not  proceed 
directly,  because  it  would  be  accompanied  by  the  absorption  of  22,000  units  of  heat  by 
16  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  combined.  Barium  peroxide,  in  acting  on  an  acid,  evidently 
evolves  less  heat  than  the  oxide,  and  it  is  this  difference  of  heat  that  is  absorbed  in  the 
hydrogen  peroxide.  Its  energy  ia  obtained  from  that  evolved  in  the  formation  of  the 
salt  of  barium. 

80  Peroxides  of  lead  and  manganese,  and  other  analogous  peroxides  (see  Chap.  III., 
Note  9),  do  not  give  hydrogen  peroxide  under  these  conditions,  but  yield  chlorine  with 
hydrochloric  acid. 

11  The  impure  barium  peroxide  obtained  in  this  manner  may  be  easily  purified.  For 
this  purpose  it  is  dissolved  in  a  dilute  solution  of  nitric  acid.  A  certain  quantity  of  an 
insoluble  residue  always,  remains,  from  which  the  solution  is  separated  by  filtration. 
The  solution  will  contain  not  only  the  compound  of  the  barium  peroxide,  but  also  a 
compound  of  the  barium  oxide  itself,  a  certain  quantity  of  which  always  remains  uncom- 
bined  with  oxygen.  The  acid  compounds  of  the  peroxide  and  oxide  of  barium  are  easily 
distinguishable  by  their  stability.  The  peroxide  gives  an  unstable  compound,  and  the 
oxide  a  stable  salt.  By  adding  an  aqueous  solution  of  barium  oxide  to  the  resultant 
solution,  the  whole  of  the  peroxide  contained  in  the  solution  may  be  precipitated  as  a 
pure  aqueous  compound  (Kouriloff,  1889,  obtained  the  same  result  by  adding  an  excess 
of  BaO2).  The  first  portions  of  the  precipitate  will  consist  of  impurities— for  instance, 
oxide  of  iron.  The  barium  peroxide  then  separates  out,  and  is  collected  on  a  filter 
and  washed ;  it  forms  a  substance  having  a  definite  composition,  BaO2,8H20,  and  is  very 
pure.  Pure  hydrogen  peroxide  should  always  be  prepared  from  such  purified  barium, 
peroxide. 

n  In  the  cold,  strong  sulphuric  acid  with  barium  peroxide  gives  ozone ;  when  diluted 
with  a  certain  amount  of  water  it  gives  oxygen  (see  Note  6),  and  hydrogen  peroxide  is 
only  obtained  by  the  action  of  very  weak  sulphuric  acid.  Hydrochloric,  hydrofluoric, 
carbonic,  and  hydrosilicofluoric  acids,  and  others,  when  diluted  with  water  also  give 
hydrogen  peroxide  with  barium  peroxide.  Professor  Schbne,  who  very  carefully  investi- 
gated hydrogen  peroxide,  showed  that  it  is  formed  by  the  action  of  many  of  the  above- 
mentioned  acids  on  barium  peroxide.  In  preparing  peroxide  of  hydrogen  by  means  of 
sulphuric  acid,  the  solution  must  be  kept  cold.  A  solution  of  maximum  concentration 
may  be  obtained  by  successive  treatments  with  sulphuric  acid  of  increasing  strength. 
In  this  manner  a  solution  containing  2  to  8  grams  of  pure  peroxide  in  100  c.c.  of  water 
may  be  obtained  (V.  Kouriloff). 

t5  With  the  majority  of  acids,  that  salt  of  barium  which  is  formed  remains  in  solution ; 
thus,  for  instance,  by  employing  hydrochloric  acid,  hydrogen  peroxide  and  barium  chloride 
remain  in  solution.  Complicated  processes  would  be  required  to  obtain  pure  hydrogen 
peroxide  from  such  a  solution.  It  is  much  more  convenient  to  take  advantage  of  the 
action  of  carbonic  anhydride  on  the  pure  hydrate  of  barium  peroxide.  For  this  purpose 
the  hydrate  is  stirred  up  in  water,  and  a  rapid  stream  of  carbonic  anhydride  is  passed 


I 


210  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


The  reaction  is  expressed  by  the  equation 
-l-BaS04.  It  is  best  to  take  a  weak  cold  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  and 
to  almost  saturate  it  with  barium  peroxide,  so  that  a  small  excess  of  acid 
remains  ;  insoluble  barium  sulphate  is  formed.  A  more  or  less  dilute 
aqueous  solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  obtained.  This  solution  may 
be  concentrated  in  a  vacuum  over  sulphuric  acid.  In  tliis  way  the 
water  may  even  be  entirely  evaporated  from  the  solution  of  the  hydro- 
gen peroxide  ;  only  in  this  case  it  is  necessary  to  work  .at  a  low  tem- 
perature, and  not  to  keep  the  peroxide  for  long  in  the  rarefied  atmo- 
sphere, as  otherwise  it  decomposes.23  bls  A  solution  of  peroxide  of 
hydrogen  (mixed,  with  the  solution  of  a  salt  of  sodium  NaX)  is  used  for 
bleaching  (especially  silk  and  wool)  on  a  large  scale,  and  is  now  usually 
prepared  from  peroxide  of  sodium  Na.202  by  the  action  of  acids.  Na20a 
+  2HX=2NaX  +  H2O224. 

When  pure,  hydrogen  peroxide  is  a  colourless  liquid,  without  smell, 
and  having  a  very  unpleasant  taste—  such  as  belongs  to  the  salts  of 
many  metals  —  the  so-called  '  metallic  '  taste.  Water  stored  in  zinc  vessels 
has  this  taste,  which  is  probably  due  to  its  containing  hydrogen  per- 
oxide. The  tension  of  the  vapour  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  less  than  that 
of  aqueous  vapour  ;  this  enables  its  solutions  to  be  concentrated  in  a 
vacuum.  The  specific  gravity  of  anhydrous  hydrogen  peroxide  is  1-455. 
Hydrogen  peroxide  decomposes,  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen^wten 
heated  even  to  20°.  But  the  more  dilute  its  aqueous  solution  the  more 
stable  it  is.  Very  weak  solutions  may  be  distilled  without  decomposing 
the  hydrogen  peroxide.  It  decolorises  solutions  of  litmus  and  turmeric, 
and  acts  in  a  similar  manner  on  many  colouring  matters  of  organic 
origin  (for  which  reason  it  is  employed  for  bleaching  tissues).24  bis 

Many  substances  decomjjose  hydrogen  peroxide,  forming  water  and 
oxygen,  without  apparently  Buffering  any  change.  In  this  case  sub- 

(through  the  water.  Barium  carbonate,  insoluble  in  water,  is  formed,  and  the  hydrogen 
peroxide  remains  in  solution,  so  that  it  may  be  separated  from  the  carbonate  by  filtering 
only.  On  a  lai-ge  scale  hydrofluosilicic  •  acid  is  employed,  its  barium  salt  being  also 
insoluble  in  water. 

?3  bit  Hydrogen  peroxide  may  be  extracted  from  very  dilute  solutions  by  means  of 
ether,  which  dissolves  it,  and  when  mixed  with  it  the  hydrogen  peroxide  may  even  be 
distilled.  A  solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide  in  water  may  be  strengthened  by  cooling  it  to 
a  low  temperature,  when  the  water  crystallises  out  —  that  is,  is  converted  into  ice—  -whilst 
the  hydrogen  peroxide  remains  in  solution,  as  it  only  freezes  at  very  low  temperatures. 
It  must  be  observed  that  hydrogen  peroxide,  in  a  strong  solution  in  a  pure  state,  is 
exceedingly  unstable  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  therefore  it  must  be  preserved 
in  vessels  always  kept  cold,  as  otherwise  it  evolves  oxygen  and  forms  water. 

24  Peroxide  of  sodium  (Chap.  XII.,  Note  49)  is  prepared  by  burning  sodium  in  dry  air. 

Mbts  Peroxide  of  hydrogen  should  apparently  find  an  industrial  application  in  the  arts, 

lor  instance,  (1)  as  a  bleaching  agent,  it  having  the  important  advantage  over  chloride 

t>t  lime,  S02,  &c.,  of  not  acting  upon  the  material  under  treatment.    It  may  be  used  for 


I 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE-DALTON'S  LAW        211 

stances  in  a  state  of  fine  division  show  a  much  quicker  action  than  com- 
pact masses,  from  which  it  is  evident  that  the  action  is  here  based  on 
contact  (see  Introduction).  It  is  sufficient  to  bring  hydrogen  peroxide 
into  contact  with  charcoal,  gold,  the  peroxide  of  manganese  or  lead,  the 
alkalis,  metallic  silver,  and  platinum,  to  bring  about  the  above  decom- 
position.25 Besides  which,  hydrogen  peroxide  forms  water  and  parts 
with  its  oxygen  with  great  ease  to  a  number  of  substances  which  are 
capable  of  being  oxidised  or  of  combining  with  oxygen,  and  in  this  re- 
spect is  very  like  ozone  and  other  powerful  oxidisers.™  To  the  class  of 
contact  phenomena,  which  are  so  characteristic  of  hydrogen  peroxide  as  a 
substance  which  is  unstable  and  easily  decomposable  with  the  evolution 
of  heat,  must  be  referred  the  following — that  in  the  presence  of  many 
substances  containing  oxygen  it  evolves,  not  only  its  own  oxygen,  but 
also  that  of  the  substances  which  are  brought  into  contact  with  it — that 

bleaching  feathers,  hair,  silk,  wool,  wood,  &c.,  it  also  removes  stains  of  all  kinds,  such  as 
wine,  ink,  and  fruit  stains ;  (2)  it  destroys  bacteria  like  ozone  without  having  any  injurious 
effect  upon  the  human  body.  It  can  also  be  used  for  washing  all  kinds  of  wounds,  for 
purifying  the  air  in  the  sick  room,  &c.,  and  (3)  as  a  preserving  agent  for  potted  meats,  &c. 

25  As  the  result  of  careful  research,  certain  of  the  catalytic  or  contact  phenomena 
have  been  subjected  to  exact  explanation,  which  shows  the  participation  of  a  substance 
present  in  the  process  of  a  reaction,  whilst,  however,  it  does  not  alter  the  series  of  changes 
proceeding  from  mechanical  actions  only.  Professor  Schone,  of  the  Petroffsky  Academy, 
has  already  explained  a  number  cf  reactions  of  hydrogen  peroxide  which  previously  were 
not  understood.  Thus,  for  instance,  he  showed  that  with  hydrogen  peroxide,  alkalis  give 
peroxides  of  the  alkaline  metals,  which  combine  with  the  remaining  hydrogen  peroxide, 
forming  unstable  compounds  which  are  easily  decomposed,  and  therefore  alkalis  evince  a 
decomposing  (catalytic)  influence  on  solutions  of  hydrogen  peroxide.  Only  acid  solutions 
of  hydrogen  peroxide,  and  then  only  dilute  ones,  can  be  preserved  well. 

2fi  Hydrogen  peroxide,  as  a  substance  containing  much  oxygen  (namely,  16  parts  to 
one  part  by  weight  of  hydrogen),  exhibits  many  oxidising  reactions.  Thus,  it  oxidises 
arsenic,  converts  lime  into  calcium  peroxide,  the  oxides  of  zinc  and  copper  into  peroxides ; 
it  parts  with  its  oxygen  to  many  sulphides,  converting  them  into  sulphates,  &c.  So,  for 
example,  it  converts  black  lead  sulphide,  PbS,  into  white  lead  sulphate,  PbSO4,  copper 
sulphide  into  copper  sulphate,  and  so  on.  The  restoration  of  old  oil  paintings  by  hydrogen 
peroxide  is  based  on  this  action.  Oil  colours  are  usually  admixed  with  white  lead,  and  in 
many  cases  the  colour  of  oil-paints  becomes  darker  in  process  of  time.  This  is  partly 
due  to  the  sulphuretted  hydrogen  contained  in  the  air,  which  acts  on  white  lead, 
forming  lead  sulphide,  which  is  black.  The  intermixture  of  the  black  colour  darkens  the 
rest.  In  cleaning  a  picture  with  a  solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  the  black  lead  sulphide 
is  converted  into  white  sulphate,  and  the  colours  brighten  owing  ta  the  disappearance 
of  the  black  substance  which  previously  darkened  them.  "Hydrogen  peroxide  oxidises 
with  particular  energy  substances  containing  hydrogen  and  capable  of  easily  parting 
with  it  to  oxidising  substances.  Thus  it  decomposes  hydriodic  acid,  setting  the  iodine 
free  and  converting  the  hydrogen  it  contains  into  water ;  it  also  decomposes  sulphuretted 
hydrogen  in  exactly  the  same  manner,  setting  the  sulphur  free.  Starch  paste  with 
potassium  iodide  is  not,  however,  directly  coloured  by  peroxide  of  hydrogen  in  the  entire 
absence  of  free  acids ;  but  the  addition  of  a  small  quantity  of  iron  sulphate  (green  vitriol) 
or  of  lead  acetate  to  the  mixture  is  enough  to  entirely  blacken  the  paste.  This  is  a  very 
eensitive  reagent  (test)  for  peroxide  of  hydrogen,  like  the  test  with,,  chromic  acid  and 
ether  (see  Note  8). 


212  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

is,  it  acts  in  a  reducing  manner.  It  behaves  thus  with  ozone,  the 
oxides  of  silver,  mercury,  gold  and  platinum,  and  lead  peroxide.  The 
oxygen  in  these  substances  is  not  stable,  and  therefore  the  feeble 
influence  of  contact  is  enough  to  destroy  its  position.  Hydrogen  per- 
oxide, especially  in  a  concentrated  form,  in  contact  with  these  substances, 
evolves  an  immense  quantity  of  oxygen,  so  that  an  explosion  takes 
place  and  an  exceedingly  powerful  evolution  of  heat  is  observed  if 
hydrogen  peroxide  in  a  concentrated  form  be  made  to  drop  upon 
these  substances  in  dry  powder.  Slow  decomposition  also  proceeds  in 
dilute  solutions.27 

Just  as  a  whole  series  of  metallic  compounds,  and  especially  the 
oxides  and  their  hydrates,  correspond  with  water,  so  also  there  are 
many  substances  analogous  to  hydrogen  peroxide.  Thus,  for  instance, 
calcium  peroxide  is  related  to  hydrogen  peroxide  in  exactly  the  same 
way  as  calcium  oxide  or  lime  is  related  to  water.  In  both  cases  the 
hydrogen  is  replaced  by  a  metal— namely,  by  calcium.27  bis  But  it  is 
most  important  to  remark  that  the  nearest  approach  to  the  properties 
of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  afforded  by  a  non-metallic  element,  chlorine  ; 

w  To  explain  the  phenomenOn/an  hypothesis  has  been  put  forward  by  Brodie,  Clausius, 
and  Schbnbein  which  supposes  ordinary  oxygen  to  be  an  electrically  neutral  substance, 
composed,  so  to  speak,  of  two  electrically  opposite  kinds  of  oxygen — positive  and  nega- 
tive. It  is  supposed  that  hydrogen  peroxide  contains  one  kind  of  such  polar  oxygen, 
whilst  in  the  oxides  of  the  above-named  metals  the  oxygen  is  of  opposite  polarity.  It  ia 
supposed  that  in  the  oxides  of  the  metals  the  oxygen  is  electro-negative,  and  in  hydrogen 
peroxide  electro-positive,  and  that  on  the  mutual  contact  of  these  substances  ordinary 
neutral  oxygen  is  evolved  as  a  consequence  of  the  mutual  attraction  of  the  oxygens  of 
opposite  polarity.  Brodie  admits  the  polarity  of  oxygen  in  combination,  but  not  in  an 
uncombined  state,  whilst  Schb'nbein  supposes  uncombined  oxygen  to  be  polar  also,  con- 
sidering ozone  as  electro-negative  oxygen.  The  supposition  that  the  oxygen  of  ozone  ia 
different  from  that  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  contradicted  by  the  fact  that  in  acting  on  barium 
peroxide  strong  sulphuric  acid  forms  ozone,  and  dilute  acid  forms  hydrogen  peroxide. 

17  M«  It  should  be  mentioned  that  Schiloff  (1893)  on  taking  a  8  per  cent,  solution  of 
Hfc02,  adding  soda  to  it,  and  then  extracting  the  peroxide  of  hydrogen  from  the  mixture 
by  shaking  it  with  ether,  obtained  a  50  per  cent,  solution  of  H3O2,  which,  although 
perfectly  free  from  other  acids,  gave  a  distinctly  acid  reaction  with  litmus.  And  here 
attention  should  first  of  all  be  turned  to  the  fact  that  the  peroxides  of  the  metals  corre- 
spond to  H202,  like  salts  to  an  acid,  for  instance,  Na^Oj  and  BaO2,  &c.  Furthermore,  it 
must  be  remembered  that  O  is  an  analogue  of  S  (Chapters  XV.  and  XX.),  and  sulphur 
gives  H2S,  H2SO5,  and  H2SO4.  And  sulphurous  acid,  H.^SOj,  is  unstable  as  a  hydrate, 
and  gives  water  and  the  anhydride  SO2.  If  the  sulphur  be  replaced  by  oxygen,  then 
instead  of  H2SO3  and  SO2,  we  have  H2OO3  and  O02.  The  latter  is  ozone,  while  the  salt 
KoOa  (peroxide  of  potassium)  corresponds  to  the  hydrate  H2O4  as  to  an  acid.  And 
between  H2O  and  H2O4  there  may  exist  intermediate  acid  compounds,  the  first  of  which 
would  be  H2O2,  in  which,  from  analogy  to  the  sulphur  compounds,  one  would  expect  acid 
properties.  Besides  which  we  may  mention  that  for  sulphur,  besides  H2S  (which  is  a 
feeble  acid),  H2S2,  H2S3,  H2S5  -are  known.  Thus  in  many  respects  H2O2  offers  points  of 
resemblance  to  acid  compounds,  and  as  regards  its  qualitative  (reactive)  analogies,  it  not 
only  resembles  Na2O2,  BaO2,  &c.,  but  also  persulphuric  acid  HSO4  (to  which  the  an» 
hydride  S2O7  corresponds)  and  CujOj,  &c.,  which  will  be  subsequently  described. 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW        218 

its  action  on  colouring  matters,  its  capacity  for  oxidising,  and  for 
evolving  oxygen  from  many  oxides,  is  analogous  to  that  exhibited  by 
hydrogen -peroxide.  Even,  the  very  formation  of  chlorine  is  closely 
analogous  to  the  formation  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen ;  chlorine  is 
obtained  from  manganese  peroxide,  MnO2,  and  hydrochloric  acid,  HC1, 
and  hydrogen  peroxide  from  barium  peroxide,  Ba02,  and  the  same 
acid.  The  result  in  one  case  is  essentially  water,  chlorine,  and 
manganese  chloride  ;  and  in  the  other  case  barium  chloride  and  hydro- 
gen peroxide  are  produced.  Hence  water  +  chlorine  corresponds  with 
hydrogen  peroxide,  and  the  action  of  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water 
is  analogous  to  the  action  of  hydrogen  peroxide.  This  analogy  between 
chlorine  and  hydrogen  peroxide  is  expressed  in  the  conception  of  an 
aqueous  radicle,  which  (Chapter  III.)  has  been  already  mentioned. 
This  aqueous  radicle  (or  hydroxyl)  is  that  which  is  left  from  water  if 
it  be  imagined  as  deprived  of  half  of  its  hydrogen.  According  to  this 
method  of  expression,  caustic  soda  will  be  a  compound  of  sodium  with 
the  aqueous  radicle,  because. it  is  formed  from  water  with  the  evolution 
of  half  the  hydrogen.  This  is  expressed  by  the  following  formulae  • 
water,  H.2O,  caustic  soda,  NaHO,  just  as  hydrochloric  acid  is  HC1  and 
sodium  chloride  NaCl.  Hence  the  aqueous  radicle  HO  is  a  compound 
radicle,  just  as  chlorine,  Cl,  is  a  simple  radicle.  They  both  give  hydro- 
gen compounds,  HHO,  water,  and  HC1,  hydrochloric  acid  ;  sodium 
compounds,  NaHO  and  NaCl,  and  a  whole  series  of  analogous  com- 
pounds. Free  chlorine  in  this  sense  will  be  C1C1,  and  hydrogen 
peroxide  HO  HO,  which  indeed  expresses  its  composition,  because  it 
contains  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  water  does.28 

Thus  in  ozone  and  hydrogen  peroxide  we  see  examples  of  very 
unstable,  easily  decomposable  (by  time,  spontaneously,  and  on  contact) 
substances,  full  of  the  energy  necessary  for  change,28  bis  capable  of  being 
easily  reconstituted  (in  this  case  decomposing  with  the  evolution  of 
heat)  ;  they  are  therefore  examples  of  unstable  chemical  equilibria.  If 
a  substance  exists,  it  signifies  that  it  already  presents  a  certain  form 
of  equilibrium  between  those  elements  of  which  it  is  built  up.  But 

28  Tamman  and  Carrara  (1892)  showed  by  determining  the  depression  (fall  of  the 
temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice,  Chapters  I.  and  VII.)  that  the  molecule  of  peroxide 
of  hydrogen  contains  H2O2,  and  not  HQ  or  H3O3. 

28  t>u  The  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  and  chlorine  and  the  higher  oxides  of  manganese 
are  also  formed  with  the  absorption  of  heat,  and  therefore,  like  hydrogen  peroxide,  act  in 
a  powerfully  oxidising  manner,  and  are  not  formed  by  the  same  methods  as  the  majority 
of  other  oxides.  It  is  evident  that,  being  endowed  with  a  richer  store  of  energy  (acquired 
in  combination  or  by  absorption  of  heat),  such  substances,  compared  with  others  poorer 
in  energy,  will  exhibit  a  greater  diversity  of  cases  of  chemical  action  with  other  sub- 
stances. 


214  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

chemical;  like  mechanical,  equilibria  exhibit  different  degrees  of  stability 
or  solidity.29 

Besides  this,  hydrogen  peroxide  presents  another  side  of  the 
subject  which  is  not  less  important,  and  is  much  clearer  and  more 
general. 

Hydrogen  unites  with  oxygen  in  two  degrees  of  oxidation  :  water 
or  hydrogen  oxide,  and  oxygenated  water  or  hydrogen  peroxide  ;  for  a 
given  quantity  of  hydrogen,  the  peroxide  contains  twice  as  much  oxygen 
as  does  water.  This  is  a  fresh  example  confirming  the  correctness  of 
the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  to  which  we  have  already  referred  in 
speaking  of  the  water  of  crystallisation  of  salts.  We  can  now  formu- 
late this  law — the  law  of  multiple  proportions.  If  two  substances  A  and 
/?  (either  simple  or  compound),  unite  togetlier  to  form  several  compounds , 
An£mt  AqBr  .  .  .  .,  then  having  expressed  the  compositions  of  all  these 
compounds  in  such  a  way  that  the  quantity  (by  weight  or  volume)  of  one 
of  the  component  parts  will  be  a  constant  quantity  A,  it  will  be  observed 
that  in  all  the '  compounds  ABa,  AB6  ....  the  quantities  of  the  other 
component  part,  B,  will  always  be  in  commensurable  relation :  generally 
in  simple  multiple  proportion — that  is,  that  a :  b  .  .  .,  or  m/n  is  to  r/q 
as  whole  numbers^  for  instance  as  2  :  3  or  3  :  4.  .  .  . 

The  analysis  of  water  shows  that  in  100  parts  by  weight  it  contains 
11  •!!  2  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen  and  88*888  of  oxygen,  and  the 
analysis  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  shows  that  it  contains  94'112  parts  of 
oxygen  to  5-888  parts  of  hydrogen.  In  this  the  analysis  is  expressed, 

19  If  the  point  of  support  of  a  body  lies  in  a  vertical  line  below  the  centre  of  gravity, 
it  is  in  unstable  equilibrium.  If  the  centre  of  gravity  lies  below  the  point  of  support, 
the  state  of  equilibrium  is  very  stable,  and  a  vibration  may  take  place  about  this  posi- 
tion of  stable  equilibrium,  as  in  a  pendulum  or  balance,  when  finally  the  body  assumes 
a  position  of  stable  equilibrium.  But  if,  keeping  to  the  same  mechanical  example, 
the  body  be  supported  not  on  a  point,  in  the  geometrical  sense  of  the  word,  but  on  a 
small  plane,  then  the  state  of  unstable  equilibrium  may  be  preserved,  unless  destroyed 
by  external  influences.  Thus  a  man  stands  upright  supported  on  the  plane,  or  several 
points  of  the  surfaces  of  his  feet,  having  the  centre  of  gravity  above  the  points  of  support. 
Vibration  is  then  possible,  but  it  is  limited,  otherwise  on  passing  outside  the  limit  of 
possible  equilibrium  another  more  stable  position  is  attained  about  which  vibration 
becomes  more  possible.  A  prism  immersed  in  water  may  have  several  more  or  less  stable 
positions  of  equilibrium.  The  same  is  also  true  with  the  atoms  in  molecules.  Some 
molecules  present  a  state  of  more  stable  equilibrium  than  others.  Hence  from  this  simple 
comparison  it  will  be  at  once  evident  that  the  stability  of  molecules  may  vary  considerably, 
that  one  and  the  same  elements,  taken  in  the  same  number,  may  give  isomerides  of  dif- 
ferent stability,  and,  lastly,  that  there  may  exist  r.tates  of  equilibria  which  are  so  unstable, 
BO  ephemeral,  that  they  will  only  arise  under  particularly  special  conditions— such,  for 
example,  as  certain  hydrates  mentioned  in  the  first  chapter  (see  Notes  57, 67,  and  others). 
And  if  in  one  case  the  instability  of  a  given  state  of  equilibrium  is  expressed  by  ita 
instability  with  a  change  of  temperature  or  physical  state,  then  in  other  fcases  it  is 
expressed  by  the  facility  with  which  it  decomposes  under  the  influence  of  contact  or  of 
the  chemical  influence  of  other  substances. 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE-DALTON'S  LAW        215 

as  analyses  generally  are,  in  percentages  ;  that  is,  it  gives  the  amounts 
of  the  elements  in  a  hundred  parts  by  weight  of  the  substance.  The 
direct  comparison  of  the  percentage  compositions  of  water  and  hydro- 
gen peroxide  does  not  give  any  simple  relation.  But  such  a  relation  is 
immediately  apparent  if  we  calculate  the  composition  of  water  and  of 
hydrogen  peroxide,  having  taken  either  the  quantity  of  oxygen  or  the 
quantity  of  hydrogen  as  a  constant  quantity — for  instance,  as  unity. 
The  most  simple  proportions  show  that  in  water  there  are  contained 
eight  parts  of  oxygen  to  one  part  of  hydrogen,  and  in  hydrogen  peroxide 
sixteen  parts  of  oxygen  to  one  part  of  hydrogen  ;  or  one-eighth  part  of 
hydrogen  in  water  and  one-sixteenth  part  of  hydrogen  in  hydrogen 
peroxide  to  one  part  of  oxygen.  Naturally,  the  analysis  does  not  give 
these  figures  with  absolute  exactness — it  gives  them  within  a  certain 
degree  of  error — but  they  approximate,  as  the  error  diminishes,  to  that 
limit  which  is  here  given.  The  comparison  of  the  quantities  of  hydro- 
gen and  oxygen  in  the  two  substances  above  named,  taking  one  of  the 
components  as  a  constant  quantity,  gives  an  example  of  the  application 
of  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  because  water  contains  eight  parts 
and  hydrogen  peroxide  sixteen  parts  of  oxygen  to  one  part  of  hydrogen, 
and  these  figures  are  commensurable  and  are  in  the  simple  proportion  of 
1  :  2. 

An  exactly  similar  multiple   proportion  is  observed  in  the  com- 
position of  all  other  well-investigated  definite  chemical  compounds,30 

50  When,  for  example,  any  element  forma  several  oxides,  they  are  subject  to  the  law 
of  multiple  proportions.  For  a  given  quantity  of  the  non-metal  or  metal  the  quantities 
of  oxygen  in  the  different  degrees  of  oxidation  will  stand  as  1  :  2,  or  as  1  :  8,  or  as  2  :  8, 
or  as  2  :  7,  and  so  on.  Thus,  for  instance,  copper  combines  with  oxygen  in  at  least  two 
proportions,  forming  the  oxides  found  in  nature,  and  called  the  suboxide  and  the  oxide 
of  copper,  CujO  and  CuO ;  the  oxide  contains  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  the  suboxide. 
Lead  also  presents  two  degrees  of  oxidation,  the  oxide  and  peroxide,  and  in  the  latter 
there  is  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  in  the  former,  PbO  and  PbO2.  When  a  base  and  an 
acid  are  capable  of  forming  several  kinds  of  salts,  normal,  acid,  basic,  and  anhydro-,  it  is 
found  that  they  also  clearly  exemplify  the  law  of  multiple  proportions.  This  was  demon- 
strated by  Wollaston  soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  law  in  question.  We  saw  in  the 
first  chapter  that  salts  show  different  degrees  of  combination  with  water  of  crystallisation, 
and  that  they  obey  the  law  of  multiple  proportions.  And,  more  than  this,  the  indefinite 
chemical  compounds,  existing  as  solutions  may,  as  we  saw  in  the  same  chapter,  be  brought 
under  the  law  of  multiple .  proportions  by  the  hypothesis  that  solutions  are  unstable 
hydrates  formed  according  to  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  but  occurring  in  a  state  of 
dissociation.  By  means  of  this  hypothesis  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  becomes  still 
more  general,  and  all  the  aspects  of  chemical  compounds  are  subject  to  it.  The  direction 
of  the  whole  contemporary  state  of  chemistry  was  determined  by  the  discoveries  of 
Lavoisier  and  Dalton.  By  endeavouring  to  prove  that  in  solutions  we  have  nothing  else 
than  the  liquid  products  of  the  dissociation  of  definite  hydrates,  it  is  my  aim  to  bring  also 
this  category  of  indefinite  compounds  under  the  general  principle  enunciated  by  Dalton ; 
just  as  astronomers  have  discovered  a  proof  and  not  a  negation  of  the  laws  of  Newton  in 
perturbations. 


216  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

and  therefore  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  is  accepted  in  chemistry 
as  the  starting  point  from  which  other  considerations  proceed. 

The  law  of  multiple  proportions  was  discovered  at  the  beginning 
of  this  century  by  John  Dalton,  of  Manchester,  in  investigating  the 
compounds  of  carbon  with  hydrogen.  It  appeared  that  two  gaseous 
compounds  of  these  substances — marsh  gas,  CH4,  and  olefiant  gas, 
C2H4,  contain  for 'one  and  the  same  quantity  of  hydrogen,  quantities 
of  carbon  which  stand  in  multiple  proportion  ;  namely,  marsh  gas 
contains  relatively  half  as  much  carbon  as  defiant  gas.  Although  the 
analysis  of  that  time  was  not  exact,  still  the  accuracy  of  this  law, 
recognised  by  Dalton,  was  further  confirmed  by  more  accurate  investi- 
gations. On  establishing  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  Dalton  gave 
a  hypothetical  explanation  for  it.  This  explanation  is  based  on  the 
atomic  theory  of  matter.  In  fact,  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  may 
be  very  easily  understood  by  admitting  the  atomic  structure  of  matter. 

The  essence  of  the  atomic  theory  is  that  matter  is  supposed  to  con- 
sist of  an  agglomeration  of  small  and  indivisible  parts — atoms — which 
do  not  fill  up  the  whole  space  occupied  by  a  substance,  but  stand  apart 
from  each  other,  as  the  sun,  planets,  and  stars  do  not  fill  up  the  whole 
space  of  the  universe,  but  are  at  a  distance  from  each  other.  The  form 
and  properties  of  substances  are  determined  by  the  position  of  their 
'atoms  in  space  and  by  their  state  of  motion,  whilst  the  reactions  ac- 
complished by  substances  are  understood  as  redistributions  of  the 
relative  positions  of  atoms  and  changes  in  their  motion.  The  atomic 
representation  of  matter  arose  in  very  ancient  times,31  and  up  to  recent 

51  Leucippus,  Democritus,  and  especially  Lucretius,  in  the  classical  ages,  repre- 
sented matter  as  made  up  of  atoms — that  is,  of  parts  incapable  of  further  division.  The 
geometrical  impossibility  of  such  an  admission,  as  well  as  the  conclusions  which  were 
deduced  by  the  ancient  atomists  from  their  fundamental  propositions,  prevented  other 
philosophers  from  following  them,  and  the  atomic  ddctrine,  like  very  many  others,  lived, 
without  being  ratified  by  fact,  in  the  imaginations  of  its  followers.  Between  the  present 
atomic  theory  and  the  doctrine  of  the  above-named  ancient  philosophers  there  is 
naturally  a  remote  historical  connection,  as  between  the  doctrine  of  Pythagoras  and 
Copernicus,  but  they  are  essentially  different.  For  us  the  atom  is  indivisible,  not  in  the 
geometrical  abstract  sense,  but  only  in  a  physical  and  chemical  sense.  It  would  be  better 
to  call  the  atoihs  indivisible  individuals.  The  Greek  atom  =  the  Latin  individual,  both 
according  to  the  etymology  and  original  sense  of  the  words,  but  in  course  of  time  these  two 
words  have  acquired  a  different  meaning.  The  individual  is  mechanically  and  geometrically 
divisible,  and  only  indivisible  in  a  special  sense.  The  earth,  the  sun,  a  man  or  a  fly  are 
individuals,  although  geometrically  divisible.  Thus  the  '  atoms '  of  contemporary  science, 
indivisible  in  a  chemical  sense,  form  those  units  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  the  in- 
vestigation of  the  natural  phenomena  of  matter,  just  as  a  man  is  an  indivisible  unit  in 
the  investigation  of  social  relations,  or  as  the  stars,  planets,  and  luminaries  serve  as  units  in 
astronomy.  The  formation  of  the  vortex  hypothesis,  in  which,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see» 
atoms  are  entire  whirls  mechanically  complex,  although  physicb-chemically  indivisible, 
clearly  shows  that  the  scientific  men  of  our  time  in  holding  to  the  atomic  theory  have 
only  borrowed 'the  word  and  form  of  expression  from  the  ancient  philosophers,  and  not  the 


OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW        217 

times  was  at  variance  with  the  dynamical  hypothesis,  which  considers 
matter  as- only  a  manifestation  of  forces.  At  the  present  time,  how- 
ever, the  majority  of  scientific  men  uphold  the  atomic  hypothesis, 

essence  of  their  atomic  doctrine.  It  is  erroneous  to  imagine  that  the  contemporary  con- 
ceptions of  the  atomists  are  nothing  but  the  repetition  of  the  metaphysical  reasonings 
of  the  ancients.  To  show  the  true  meaning  of  the  atomism  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  and 
the  profound  difference  between  their  points  of  argument  and  those  of  contemporary 
men  of  science,  I  cite  the  following  fundamental  propositions  of  Democritus  (B.C.  470- 
880)  as  the  best  expounder  of  the  atomic  doctrine  of  the  ancients :— (1)  Nothing  can 
proceed  from  nothing,  nothing  that  exists  can  disappear  or  be  destroyed  (and  hence 
matter),  and  every  change  only  consists  of  a  combination  or  separation.  (2)  Nothing  is 
accidental,  there  is  a  reason  and  necessity  for  everything.  (3)  All  except  atoms  and 
vacua  is  reason  and  n6t  existence.  (4)  The  atoms,  which  are  infinite  in  number  and 
form,  constitute  the  visible  universe  by  their  motion,  impact,  and  consequent  re- 
volving motion.  (5)  The  variety  of  objects  depends  only  upon  a  difference  in  the 
number,  form,  and  order  of  the  atoms  of  which  they  are  formed,  and  not  upon  a  quali- 
tative difference  of  their  atoms,  which  only  act  upon  each  other  by  pressure  and  impact. 
(6)  The  spirit,  like  fire,  consists  of  minute,  spherical,  smooth,  and  very  mobile  and  all- 
penetrating  atoms,  whose  motion  forms  the  phenomenon  of  life.  These  Democritiaii, 
chiefly  metaphysical,  principles  of  atomism  are  so  essentially  different  from  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  present  atomic  doctrine,  which  is  exclusively  applied  to  explaining  the  phe- 
nomena of  the  external  world,  that  it  may  be  useful  to  mention  the  essence  of  the 
atomic  propositions  of  Boscovitch,  a  Slav  who  lived  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  and  who  is  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the  modern  atomic  doctrines  which, 
however,  did  not  take  hold  upon  the  minds  of  scientific  men,  and  were  rarely  applied 
prior  to  Dalton — i.e.  until  the  beginning  ot  the  nineteenth  century.  The  doctrine  of 
Boscovitch  was  enunciated  by  him  in  1758-1764  in  his  '  Philosophies  naturalis  theoria 
reducta  ad  unicam  legem  virium  in  natura  existentium'  Boscovitch  considers 
matter  to  be  composed  of  atoms,  and  the  atoms  .to  be  the  points  or  centres  of  forces  (just 
as  the  stars  and  planets  may  be  considered  as  points  of  space),  acting  between  bodies  and 
their  parts.  These,  forces  vary  with  the  distance,  so  that  beyond  a  certain  very  small 
distance  all  atoms,  and  hence  also  their  aggregates,  are  attracted  according  to  Newton's* 
law,  but  .at  less  distances,  there  alternate  wave-like  spheres  of  gradually  decreasing 
attraction  and  increasing  (as  the  distance  decreases)  repulsion,  until  at  last  at  a  minimum 
distance  only  the  repellent  action  remains.  Atoms,  therefore,  cannot  merge  into  each 
other.  Consequently,  the  atoms  are  held  at  a  certain  distance  from  each  other,  and 
therefore  occupy  space.  Boscovitch  compares  the  sphere  of  repulsion  surrounding  the 
atoms  to  the  spheres  of  action  of  firing  of  a  detachment  of  soldiers.  According 
to  his  doctrine,  atoms  are  indestructible,  do  not  merge  into  each  other,  have  mass, 
are  everlasting  and  mobile  under  the  action  of  the  forces  proper  to  them.  Maxwell 
rightly  calls  this  hypothesis  the  '  extreme  '  among  those  existing  to  explain  matter,  but 
many  aspects  of  Boscovitch's  doctrine  repeat  themselves  in  the  views  of  our  day,  with 
this  essential  difference,  that  instead  of  a  mathematical  point  furnished  with  the  pro- 
perties of  mass,  the  atoms  are  endowed  with  a  corporality,  just  as  the  stars  and  planets 
ore  corporal,  although  in  certain  aspects  of  their  interaction  they  may  be  regarded 
as  mathematical  points.  In  my  opinion,  the  atomism  of  our  day  must  first  of  all 
be  regarded  merely  as  a  convenient  method  for  the  investigation  of  ponderable 
matter.  As  a  geometrician  in  reasoning  about  curves  represents  them  as  formed  of  a 
succession  of  right  lines,  because  such  a  method  enables  him  to  analyse  the  subject 
under  investigation,  so  the  scientific  man  applies  the  atomic  theory  as  a  method  of 
analysing  the  phenomena  of  nature.  Naturally  there  are  people  now,  as  in  ancient 
times,  and  as  there  always  will  be,  who  apply  reality  to  imagination,  and  therefore 
there  are  to  be  found  atomists  of  extreme  views ;  but  it  is  not  in  their  spirit  that  we 
should  acknowledge  the  great  services  rendered  by  the  atomic  doctrine  to  all  science, 


218  PRINCIPLES   OF  CHEMISTRY 

although  the  present  conception  of  an  atom  is  quite  different  from  that 
of  the  ancient  philosophers.  An  atom  at  the  present  day  is  regarded 
rather  as  an  individual  or  unit  which  is  indivisible  by  physical32  and 
chemical  forces,  whilst  the  atom  of  the  ancients  was  actually  mechanically 
and  geometrically  indivisible.  When  Dalton(  1804)  discovered  the  law 
of  multiple  proportions,  he  pronounced  himself  in  favour  of  the  atomic 
doctrine,  because  it  enables  this  law  to  be  very  easily  understood.  If 
the  divisibility  of  every  element  has  a  limit,  namely  the  atom,  then  the 
atoms  of  elements  are  the  extreme  limits  of  all  divisibility,  and  if  they 
differ  from  each  other  in  their  nature,  the  formation  of  a  compound 
from  elementary  matter  must  consist  in  the  aggregation  of  several 
different  atoms  into  one  whole  or  system  of  atoms,  now  termed 
particles  or  molecules.  As  atoms  can  only  combine  in  their  entire 
masses,  it  is  evident  that  not  only  the  law  of  definite  composition,  but 
also  that  of  multiple  proportions,  must  apply  to  the  combination  of 
atoms  with  one  another ;  for  one  atom  of  a  substance  can  combine 
with,  one,  two,  or  three  atoms  of  another  substance,  or  in  general  one, 
two,  three  atoms  of  one  substance  are  able  to  combine  with  one,  two, 
or  three  atoms  of  another;  this  being  the  essence  of  the  law  of 
multiple  proportions.  Chemical  and  physical  data  are  very  well  ex- 
plained by  the  aid  of  the  atomic  theory.  The  displacement  of  one 
element  by  another  follows  the  law  of  equivalency.  In  this  case  one 
or  several  atoms  of  a  given  element  take  the  place  of  one  or  several 
atoms  of  another  element  in  its  compounds.  The  atoms  of  different 
substances  can  be  mixed  together  in  the  same  sense  as  sand  can  be 
mixed  with  clay.  They  do  not  unite  into  one  whole — i.e.  there  is  not 
a  perfect  blending  in  the  one  or  other  case,  but  only  a  juxtaposition,  a 
homogeneous  whole  being  formed  from  individual  parts.  This  is  the 
first  and  most  simple  method  of  applying  the  atomic  theory  to  the  ex- 
planation of  chemical  phenomena.33 

which,  while  it  has  been  essentially  independently  developed,  is,  if  it  be  desired  to 
reduce  all  ideas  to  the  doctrines  of  the  ancients,  a  union  of  the  ancient  dynamical  and 
atomic  doctrines. 

52  Dalton  and  many  of  his  successors  distinguished  the  atoms  of  elements  and  com- 
pounds, in  which  they  clearly  symbolised  the  difference  of  their  opinion  from  the  repre- 
sentations of  the  ancients.  Now  only  the  individuals  of  the  elements,  indivisible  by 
physical  and  chemical  forces,  are  termed  atoms,  and  the  individuals  of  compounds  in* 
divisible  under  physical  changes  are  termed  molecules ;  these  are  divisible  into  atoms  by 
chemical  forces. 

K  In  the  present  condition  of  science,  either  the  atomic  or  the  dynamical  hypothesis 
is  inevitably  obliged  to  admit  the  existence  of  an  invisible  and  imperceptible  motion  in 
matter,  without  which  it  is  impossible  to  understand  either  light  or  heat,  or  gaseous 
pressure,  or  any  of  the  mechanical,  physical,  or  chemical  phenomena.  The  ancients 
saw  vital  motion  in  animals  only,  but  to  us  the  smallest  particle  of  matter,  endued  with 
vis  viva,  or  energy  in  some  degree  or  other,  is  incomprehensible  without  self -existent 


OZONE  AND   HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW        219 

A  certain  number  of  atoms  n  of  an  element  A  in  combining  with 
several  atoms  m  of  another  element  B  give  a  compound  A^  BTO,  each 

motion.  Thus  motion  has  become  a  conception  inseparably  knit  with  the  conception 
of  matter,  and  this  has  prepared  the  ground  for  the  revival  of  the  dynamical  hypothesis 
of  the  constitution  of  matter.  In  the  atomic  theory  there  has  arisen  that  generalising 
idea  by  which  the  world  of  atoms  is  constructed,  like  the  universe  of  heavenly  bodies, 
with  its  suns,  planets,  and  meteors,  endued  with  everlasting  force  of  motion,  forming 
molecules  as  the  heavenly  bodies  form  systems,  like,  the  solar  system,  which  molecules 
are  only  relatively  indivisible  in  the  same  way  as  the  planets  of  the  solar  system  are 
inseparable,  and  stable  and  lasting  as  the  solar  system  is  lasting.  Such  a  representa- 
tion, without  necessitating  the  absolute  indivisibility  of  atoms,  expresses  all  that  science- 
can  require  for  an  hypothetical  representation  of  the  constitution  of  matter.  In  closer 
proximity  to  the  dynamical  hypothesis  of  the  constitution  of  matter  is  the  oft-times 
revived  vortex  hypothesis.  Descartes  first  endeavoured  to  raise  it ;  Helmholtz  and 
Thomson  (Lord  Kelvin)  gave  it  a  fuller  and  more  modern  form ;  many  scientific  men 
applied  it  to  physics  and  chemistry.  The  idea  of  vortex  rings  serves  as  the  starting 
point  of  this  hypothesis ;  these  are  familiar  to  all  as  the  rings  of  tobacco  smoke,  and 
may  be  artificially  obtained  by  giving  a  sharp  blow  to  the  sides  of  a  cardboard  box 
having  a  circular  orifice  and  filled  with  smoke.  Phosphuretted  hydrogen,  as  we  shall 
see  later  on,  when  bubbling  from  water  always  gives  very  perfect  vortex  rings  in  a  still 
atmosphere.  In  such  rings  it  is  easy  to  observe  a  constant  circular  motion  about  their 
axes,  and  to  notice  the  stability  the  rings  possess  in  their  motion  of  translation.  This 
unchangeable  mass,  endued  with  a  rapid  internal  motion,  is  likened  to  the  atom.  In  a 
medium  deprived  of  friction,  such  a  ring,  as  is  shown  by  theoretical  considerations  of  the 
subject  from  a  mechanical  point  of  view,  would  be  perpetual  and  unchangeable.  The  rings 
are  capable  of  grouping  together,  and  in  combining,  without  being  absolutely  indivisible, 
remain  indivisible.  The  vortex  hypothesis  has  been  established  in  our  times,  but  it  has 
not  been  fully  developed  ;  its  application  to  chemical  phenomena  is  not  clear,  although 
not  impossible  ;  it  does  not  .satisfy  a  doubt  in  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  space  existing 
between  the  rings  (just  as  it  is  not  clear  what  exists  between  atoms,  and  between  the 
planets),  neither  does  it  tell  us  what  is  the  nature  of  the  moving  substance  of  the  ring, 
and  therefore  for  the  present  it  only  presents  the  germ  of  an  hypothetical  conception  of 
the  constitution  of  matter;  consequently,  I  consider  that  it  would  be  superfluous  to 
speak  of  it  in  greater  detail.  However,  the  thoughts  of  investigators  are  now  (and 
naturally  will  be  in  the  future),  as  they  were  in  the  time  of  Dalton,  often  turned  to  the 
question  of  the  limitation  of  the  mechanical  division  of  matter,  and  the  atomists  have 
searched  for  an  answer  in  the  most  diverse  spheres  of  nature.  I  select  one  of  the 
methods  attempted,  which  does  not  in  any  way  refer  to  chemistry,  in  order  to  show  how 
closely  all  the  provinces  of  natural  science  are  bound  together.  Wollaston  proposed  the 
investigation  of  the  atmosphere  of  the  heavenly  bodies  as  a  means  for  confirming  the 
existence  of  atoms.  If  the  divisibility  of  matter  be  infinite,  then  air  must  extend 
throughout  the  entire  space  of  the  heavens  as  it  extends  all  over  the  earth  by  its  elasticity 
and  diffusion.  If  the  infinite  divisibility  of  matter  be  admitted,  it  is  impossible  that  any 
portion  of  the  whole  space  of  the  universe  can  be  entirely  void  of  the  component  parts  of 
our  atmosphere.  But  if  matter  be  divisible  up  to  a  certain  limit  only — namely,  up  to  the 
atom — then  there  can  exist  a  heavenly  body  void  of  an  atmosphere ;  and  if  such  a  body 
be  discovered,  it  would  serve  as  an  important  factor  for  the  acceptation  of  the  validity  of 
the  atomic  doctrine.  The  moon  has  long  been  considered  as  such  a  luminary  and  this 
circumstance,  especially  from  its  proximity  to  the  earth,  has  been  cited  as  the  best  proof 
of  the  validity  of  the  atomic  doctrine.  This  proof  is  apparently  (Poisson)  deprived  of 
some  of  its  force  from  the  possibility  of  the  transformation  of  the  component  parts  of 
our  atmosphere  into  a  solid  or  liquid  state  at  immense  heights  above  the  earth's  surface, 
where  the  temperature  is  exceedingly  low ;  but  a  series  of  researches  (Pouillet)  has  shown 
that  the  temperature  of  the  heavenly  space  is  comparatively  not  so  very  low,  and  is 
attainable  by  experimental  means,  so  that  at  the  low  existing  pressure  the  liquefaction 


220  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

molecule  of  which  will  contain  the  atoms  of  the  elements  A  and  B  in 
this  ratio,  and  therefore  the  compound  will  present  a  definite  composition, 

of  the  gases  of  the  atmosphere  cannot  be  expected  even  on  the  moon.  Therefore  the 
absence  of  an  atmosphere  about  the  moon,  if  it  were  not  subject  to  doubt,  would  be 
counted  as  a  forcible  proof  of  the  atomic  theory.  As  a  proof  of  the  absence  of  a  lunar 
atmosphere,  it  is  cited  that  the  moon,  in  its  independent  motion  between  the  stars,  when 
eclipsing  a  star — that  is,  when  passing  between  the  eye  and  the  star — does  not  show  any) 
signs  of  refraction  at  its  edge  ;  the  image  of  the  star  does  not  alter  its  position  in  the 
heavens  on  approaching  the  moon's  surface,  consequently  there  is  no  atmosphere  on  the 
moon's  surface  capable  of  refracting  the  rays  of  light.  Such  is  the  conclusion  by  which 
the  absence  of  a  lunar  atmosphere  ia  acknowledged.  But  this  conclusion  is  most  feeble, 
and  there  are  even  facts  in  exact  contradiction  to  it,  by  which  the  existence  of  a  lunar 
atmosphere  may  be  proved.  The  entire  surface  of  the  moon  is  covered  with  a  number  of 
mountains,  having  in  the  majority  of  cases  the  conical  form  natural  to  volcanoes.  The 
volcanic  character  of  the  lunar  mountains  was  confirmed  in  October  1866,  when  a  change 
was  observed  in  the'form  of  one  of  them  (the  crater  Linnea).  These  mountains  must 
be  on  the  edge  of  the  lunar  disc.  Seen  in  profile,  they  screen  one  another  and  inter- 
fere with  observations  on  the  surface  of  the  moon,  so  that  when  looking  at  the  edge  of 
the  lunar  disc  we  are  obliged  to  make  our  observations  not  on  the  moon's  surface,  but 
at  the  summits  of  the,  lunar  mountains.  These  mountains  are  higher  than  those  on 
our  earth,  and  consequently  at  their  summits  the  lunar  atmosphere  must  be  exceedingly 
rarefied  even  if  it  possess  an  observable  density  at  the  surface.  Knowing  the  mass  of 
the  inoon  to  be  eighty-two  times  less  than  the  mass  of  the  earth,  we  are  able  to  determine 
approximately  that  our  atmosphere  at  the  moon's  surface  would  be  about  twenty- 
eight  times  lighter  than  it  is  on  the  earth,  and  consequently  at  the  very  surface  of  the 
moon  the  refraction  of  light  by  the  lunar  atmosphere  must  be  very  slight,  and  at  the 
^heights  of  the  lunar  mountains  it  must  be  imperceptible,  and  would  be  lost  within  the 
limits  of  experimental  error.  Therefore  the  absence  of  refraction  of  light  at  the  edge  of 
the  moon's  disc  cannot  yet  be  urged  in  favour  of  the  absence  of  a  lunar  atmosphere. 
There  is  even  a  series  of  observations  obliging  us  to  admit  the  existence  of  this  atmo- 
sphere. These  researches  are  due  to  Sir  John  Herschel.  This  is  what  he  writes :  'It  has 
often  been  remarked  that  during  the  eclipse  of  a  star  by  the  moon  there  occurs  a  peculiar 
optical  illusion  ;  it  seems  as  if  the  star  before  disappearing  passed  over  the  edge  of  the 
moon  and  is  seen  through  the  lunar  disc,  sometimes  for  a  rather  long  period  of  time.  I 
myself  have  observed  this  phenomenon,  and  it  has  been  witnessed  by  perfectly  trust- 
worthy observers.  I  ascribe  it  to  optical  illusion,  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  star 
might  have  been  seen  on  the  lunar  disc  through  some  deep  ravine  on  the  moon.'  Geniller, 
in  Belgium  (1856),  following  the  opinion  of  Cassini,  Eiler,  and  others,  gave  an  explana- 
tion of  this  phenomenon.:  .he  considers  it  due  to  the  refraction  of  light  in  the  valleys  of 
the  lunar  mountains  which  occur  on  the  edge  of  the  lunar  disc.  In  fact,  although  these 
valleys  do  not  probably  present  the  form  of  straight  ravines,  yet  it  may  sometimes 
happen  that  the  light  of  a  star  is  so  refracted  that  its  image  might  be  seen,  notwith- 
standing th«  absence  of  a  direct  path  for  the  light-rays.  He  then  goes  on  to  remark 
that  the  density  of  the  lunar  atmosphere  must  be  variable  in  different  parts,  owing  to 
the  very  long  nights  on  the  moon.  On  the  dark,  or  non-illuminated  portion,  owing  to 
these  long  nights,  which  last  thirteen  of  our  days  and  nights,  there  must  be  excessive  cold, 
and  hence  a  denser  atmosphere,  while,  on  the  contrary,  on  the  illuminated  portion  the 
atmosphere  must  be  much  more  rarefied.  This  variation  in  tlie  temperature  of  the 
different  parts  of  the  moon's  surface  explains  also  the  absence  of  clouds,  notwithstanding 
the  possible  presence  of  air  and  aqueous  vapour,  on  the  visible  portion  of  the  moon.  The 
presence  of  an  atmosphere  round  the  sun  and  planets,  judging  from  astronomical  observa- 
tions, may  be  considered  as  fully  proved.  On  Jupiter  and  Mars  even  bands  of  cloudd 
-may  be  distinguished.  Thus  the  atomic  doctrine,  admitting  a  finite  mechanical  divi- 
sibility only,  must  be,  as  yet  at  least,  only  accepted  as  a  means,  similar  to  that  means 
which  a  mathematician  employs  when  he  breaks  up  a  continuous  curvilinear  line  into  a 


OZONE   AND   HYDROGEN   PEROXIDE— DALTON'S   LAW        221 

expressed  by  the  formula  A,(Bm,  where  A  and  B  are  the  weights  of  the 
atoms  and  n  and  ra  their  relative  number.  If  the  same  elements  A 
and  B,  in  addition  to  A^BTO,  also  yield  another  compound  ArB9,  then 
by  expressing  the  composition  of  the  first  compound  by  AnrBmr  (and  this 
is  the  same  composition  as  A,tBro),  and  of  the  second  compound  by 
AmB,n,  we  have  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  because  for  a  given 
quantity  of  the  first  element,  A.mt  there  occur  quantities  of  the  second 
element  bearing  the  same  ratio  to  each  other  as  mr  is  to  qn  ;  and 
as  w,  r,  q,  and  n  are  whole  numbers,  their  products  are  also  whole 
numbers,  and  this  is  expressed  by  the  law  of  multiple  proportion 
Consequently  the  atomic  theory  is  in  accordance  with  and  evokes  the 
first  laws  of  definite  chemical  compounds  :  the  law  of  definite  composi- 
tion and  the  law  of  multiple  proportions. 

So,  also,  is  the  relation  of  the  atomic  theory  to  the  third  law  of  de- 
finite chemical  compounds,  the  law  of  reciprocal  combining  weights, 
which  is  as  follows  : — If  a  certain  weight  of  a  substance  C  combine 
with  a  weight  a  of  a  substance  A,  and  with  a  weight  b  of  a  substance 
B,  then,  also,  the  substances  A  and  B  will  combine  together  in  quanti- 
ties a  and  b  (or  in  multiples  of  them).  This  should  be  the  case  from 
the  conception  of  atoms.  Let  A,  B,  and  C  be  the  weights  of  the  atoms 
of  the  three  substances,  and  for  simplicity  of  reasoning  suppose  that 
combination  takes  place  between  single  atoms.  It  is  evident  that  if 
the  substance  gives  AC  and  BC,  then  the  substances  A  and  B  will 
give  a  compound  AB,  or  their  multiple,  A,,Bm.  And  so  it  is  in  reality 
in  nature. 

Sulphur  combines  with  hydrogen  and  with  .oxygen.  Sulphuretted 
hydrogen  contains  thirty-two  parts  by  weight  of  sulphur  to  two  parts 
by  weight  of  hydrogen  ;  this  is  expressed  by  the  formula  H2S.  Sul- 
phur dioxide,  S02,  contains  thirty-two  parts  of  sulphur  and  thirty-two 
parts  of  oxygen,  and  therefore  we  conclude,  from  the  law  of  combining 
weights,  that  oxygen  and  hydrogen  will  combine  in  the  proportion  of 
two  parts  of  hydrogen  and  thirty-two  parts  of  oxygen,  or  multiple 
numbers  of  them.  And  we  have  seen  this  to  be  the  case.  Hydrogen 
peroxide  contains  thirty-two  parts  of  oxygen,  and  water  sixteen  parts, 
to  two  parts  of  hydrogen  ;  and  so  it  is  in  all  other  cases.  This  con- 
sequence of  the  atomic  theory  is  in  accordance  with  nature,  with  the 
results  of  analysis,  and  is  one  of  the  most  important  laws  of  chemistry. 
It  is  a  law,  because  it  indicates  the  relation  between  the  weights  of 
substances  entering  into  chemical  combination.  Further,  it  is  an 

number  of  straight  lines.  There  is  a  simplicity  of  representation,  in  atoms,  but  there  is 
no  absolute  necessity  to  have  recourse  to  them.  The  conception  of  the  individuality  of 
the  parts  of  matter  exhibited  in  chemical  elements  only  is  necessary  and  trustworthy. 


222  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

eminently  exact  law,  and  not  an  approximate  one.  The  law  of  com- 
bining weights  is  a  law  of  nature,  and  by  no  means  an  hypothesis,  for 
even  if  the  entire  theory  of  atoms  be  refuted,  still  the  laws  of  multiple 
proportions  and  of  combining  weights  will  remain,  inasmuch  as  they 
deal  with  facts.  They  may  be  guessed  at  from  the  sense  of  the  atomic 
theory,  and  historically  the  law  of  combining  weights  is  intimately 
connected  with  this  theory  ;  but  they  are  not  identical,  but  only 
connected,  with  it.  The  law  of  combining  weights  is  formulated  with 
great  ease,  and  is  an  immediate  consequence  of  the  atomic  theory  ; 
without  it,  it  is  even  difficult  to  understand.  Data  for  its  evolution 
existed  previously,  but  it  was  not  formulated  until  those  data  were  in- 
terpreted by  the  atomic  theory,  an  hypothesis  which  up  to  the  present 
time  has  contradicted  neither  experiment  nor  fact,  and  is  useful  and 
of  general  application.  Such  is  the  nature  of  hypotheses.  They  are 
indispensable  to  science  ;  they  bestow  an  order  and  simplicity  which 
are  difficultly  attainable  without  their  aid.  The  whole  history  of 
science  is  a  proof  of  this.  And  therefore  it  may  be  truly  said  that  it 
is  better  to  hold  to  an  hypothesis  which  may  afterwards  prove  untrue 
than  to  have  none  at  all.  Hypotheses  facilitate  scientific  work  and 
render  it  consistent.  In  the  search  for  truth,  like  the  plough  of  the 
husbandman,  they  help  forward  the  work  of  the  labourer. 


223 


CHAPTER  V 

NITROGEN   AND  AIB 

GASEOUS  nitrogen  forms  about  four-fifths  (by  volume)  of  the  atmo- 
sphere  ;  consequently  the  air  contains  an  exceedingly  large  mass  of  it. 
Whilst  entering  in  so  considerable  a  quantity  into  the  composition  of 
air,  nitrogen  does  not  seem  to  play  any  active  part  in  the  atmosphere, 
the  chemical  action  of  which  is  mainly  dependent  on  the  oxygen  it  con- 
tains. But  this  is  not  an  entirely  correct  idea,  because  animal  life 
cannot  exist  in  pure  oxygen,  in  which  animals  pass  into  an  abnormal 
state  and  die;  and  the  nitrogen  of  the  air,  although  slowly,  forms 
diverse  compounds,  many  of  which  play  a  most  important  part  in 
nature,  especially  in  the  life  of  organisms.  However,  neither  plants ! 
nor  animals  directly  absorb  the  nitrogen  of  the  air,  but  take  it  up 
from  already  prepared  nitrogenous  compounds  ;  further,  plants  are 
nourished  by  the  nitrogenous  substances  contained  in  the  soil  and 
water,  and  animals  by  the  nitrogenous  substances  contained  in  plants 
and  in  other  animals.  Atmospheric  electricity  is  capable  of  aiding  the 
passage  of  gaseous  nitrogen  into  nitrogenous  compounds,  as  we  shall 
afterwards  see,  and  the  resultant  substances  are  carried  to  the  soil 
by  rain,  where  they  serve  for  the  nourishment  of  plants.  Plentiful 
harvests,  fine  crops  of  hay,  vigorous  growth  of  trees — other  conditions 
being  equal — are  only  obtained  when  the  soil  contains  ready  prepared 
nitrogenous  compounds,  consisting  either  of  those  which  occur  in  air 
and  water,  or  of  the  residues  of  the  decomposition  of  other  plants  or 
animals  (as  in  manure).  The  nitrogenous  substances  contained  in 
animals  have  their  origin  in  those  substances  which  are  formed  in 
plants.  Thus  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere  is  the  origin  of  all  the 
nitrogenous  substances  occurring  in  animals  and  plants,  although  not 
directly  so,  but  after  first  combining  with  the  other  elements  of  air. 

The  nitrogenous  compounds  which  enter  into  the  composition  of  plants 
and  animals  are  of  primary  importance ;  no  vegetable  or  animal  cell — that 
is,  the  elementary  form  of  organism— exists  without  containing  a  nitro- 

i  See  Note  15  «*. 


224  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

genous  substance,  and  moreover  organic  life  manifests  itself  primarily 
in  these  nitrogenous  substances.  The  germs,  seeds,  and  those  parts  by 
which  cells  multiply  themselves-  abound  in  nitrogenous  substances  ;  the 
sum  total  of  the  phenomena  which  are  proper  to  organisms  depend 
primarily  on  the  chemical  properties  of  the  nitrogenous  substances  which 
enter  into  their  composition.  It  will  be  sufficient,  for  instance,  to  point 
out  the  fact  that  vegetable  and  animal  organisms,  clearly  distinguish- 
able as  such,  are  characterised  by  a  different  degree  of  energy  in  their 
nature,  and  at  the  same  time  by  a  difference  in  the  amount  of  nitro- 
genous substances  they  contain.  In  plants,  which  compared  with 
animals  possess  but  little  activity,  being  incapable  of  independent 
movement,  &c.,  the  amount  of  nitrogen  is  very  much  less  than 
in  animals,  whose  tissues  are  almost  exclusively  formed  of  nitro- 
genous substances.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  nitrogenous  parts  of 
plants,  chiefly  of  the  lower  orders,  sometimes  present  both  forms  and 
properties  which,  approach  to  those  of  animal  organisms  ;  for  example, 
the  zoospores  of  seaweeds,  or  those  parts  by  means  of  which  the  latter 
multiply  themselves.  These  zoospores  on  leaving  the  seaweed  in  many 
respects  resemble  the  lower  orders  of  animal  life,  having,  like  the  latter, 
the  property  of  moving.  They  also  approach"  the  animal  kingdom  in 
their  composition,  their  outer  coating  containing  nitrogenous  matter. 
Directly  the  zoospore  becomes  covered  with  that  non -nitrogenous  or 
cellular  coating  which  is  proper  to  all  the  ordinary  cells  of  plants,  it 
loses  all  resemblance  to  an  animal  organism  and  becomes  a  small  plant. 
It  may  be  thought  from  this  that  the  cause  of  the  difference  in  the 
vital  processes  of  animals  and  plants  is  the  different  amount  o£  nitroge- 
nous substances  they  contain.  The  nitrogenous  substances  which  occur 
in  plants  and  animals  appertain  to  a  series  of  evceedingly  complex 
and  very  changeable  chemical  compounds  ;  their  elementary  composi- 
tion alone  shows  this  ;  besides  nitrogen,  they  contain  carbon,  hydrogen, 
oxygen,  and  sulphur.  Being  distinguished  by  a  very  great  instability 
under  many  conditions  in  which  other  compounds  remain  unchanged, 
these  substances  are  titted  for  those  perpetual  changes  which  form  the 
first  condition  of  vital  activity.  These  complex  and  changeable  nitro- 
genous substances  of  the  organism  are  called  prote'id  substances.  The 
white  cf  eggs  is  a  familiar  example  of  such  a  substance.  They  are  also 
contained  in  the  flesh  of  animals,  the  curdy  elements  of  milk,  the 
glutinous  matter  of  wheaten  flour,  or  so-called  gluten,  which  forms  the 
chief  component  of  macaroni,  <fcc. 

Nitrogen  occurs  in  the  earth's  crust,  in  compounds  either  forming 
the  remains  of  plants  and  animals,  or  derived  from  the  nitrogen  of  the 
atmosphere  as  a  consequence  of  its  combination  with  the  other  COHJ« 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR 

ponent  parts  of  the  air.  It  is  not  found  in  other  forms  in  the  earth's 
crust ;  so  that  nitrogen  must  be  considered,  in  contradistinction  to 
oxygen,  as  an  element  which  is  purely  superficial,  and  does  not  extend 
to  the  depths  of  the  earth.1  bi8 

Nitrogen  is  liberated  in  a  free  state  in  the  decomposition  of  the 
nitrogenous  organic  substances  entering  into  the  composition  of 
organisms— for  instance,  on  their  combustion.  All  organic  substances 
burn  when  heated  to  redness  with  oxygen  (or  substances  readily  yield- 
ing it,  such  as  oxide  of  copper)  ;  the  oxygen  combines  with  the  carbon, 
sulphur,  and  hydrogen,  and  the  nitrogen  is  evolved  in  a  free  state, 
because  at  a  high  temperature  it  does  not  form  any  stable  compound, 
but  remains  uncombined.  Carbonic  anhydride  and  water  are  formed 
from  the  carbon  and  hydrogen  respectively,  and  therefore  to  obtain  pure 
nitrogen  it  is  necessary  to  remove  the  carbonic  anhydride  from  the 
gaseous  products  obtained.  This  may  be  done  very  easily  by  the  action 
of  alkalis — for  instance,  caustic  soda.  The  amount  of  nitrogen  in 
organic  substances  is  determined  by  a  method  founded  on  this. 

It  is  also  very  easy  to  obtain  nitrogen  from  air,  because  oxygen 
combines  with  many  substances.  Either  phosphorus  or  metallic  copper 
is  usually  employed  for  removing  the  oxygen  from  air,  but,  naturally, 
a  number  of  other  substances  may  also  be  used.  If  a  small  saucer  on 
which  a  piece  of  phosphorus  is  laid  be  placed  on  a  cork  floating  on 
water,  and  the  phosphorus  be  lighted,  and  the  whole  covered  with  a 
glass  bell  jar,  then  the  air  under  the  jar  will  be  deprived  of  its  oxygen, 
and  nitrogen  only  will  remain,  owing  to  which,  on  cooling,  the  water 
will  rise  to  a  certain  extent  in  the  bell  jar^  The  same  object  (procuring 
nitrogen  from  air)  is  attained  much  more  conveniently  and  perfectly 
by  passing  air  through  a  red-hot  tube  containing  copper  filings.  At  a 
red  heat,  metallic  copper  combines  with  oxygen  and  gives  a  black 
powder  of  copper  oxide  If  the  layer  of  copper  be  sufficiently  long  and 
the  current  of  air  slow,  all  the  oxygen  will  be  absorbed,  and  nitrogen 
alone  will  pass  from  the  tube.2 

H>>»  The  reason  why  there  are  no  other  nitrogenous  substances  within  the  earth's 
mass  beyond  those  which  have  come  there  with  the  remains  of  organisms,  and  from  the 
air  with  rain-water,  must  be  looked  for  in  two  circumstances.  In  the  first  place,  in  the 
instability  of  many  nitrogenous  compounds,  which  are  liable  to  break  up  with  the  forma- 
tion of  gaseous  nitrogen ;  and  in  the  second  place  in  the  fact  that  the  salts  of  nitric  acid, 
forming  the  product  of  the  'action  of  air  on  many  nitrogenous  and  especially  organic 
compounds,  are  very  soluble  in  water,  and  on  penetrating  into  the  depths  of  the  earth 
(with  water)  give  up  their  oxygen.  The  result  of  the  changes  of  the  nitrogenous  organic 
substances  which  fall  into  the  earth  is  without  doubt  frequently,  if  not  invariably,  the 
formation  of  gaseous  nitrogen.  Thus  the  gas  evolved  from  coal  always  contains  mucn 
nitrogen  (together  with  marsh  gas,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  other  gases). 

2  Copper  (best  as  turnings,  which  present  a  large  surface)  absorbs  oxygen,  forming 
CuO,'at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  the  presence  of  solutions  of  acids,  or,  better  still,  in 


226  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Nitrogen  may  also  be  procured  from  many  of  its  compounds  with 
oxygen^  and  hydrogen ,4  but  the  best  fitted  for  this  purpose  is  a  saline 
mixture  containing,  on  the  one  hand,  a  compound  of  nitrogen  with 
oxygen,  termed  nitrous  anhydride,  N2O3,  and  on  the  other  hand, 
ammonia,  NH3 — that  is,  a  compound  of  nitrogen  with  hydrogen.  By 
heating  such  a  mixture,  the  oxygen  of  the  nitrous  anhydride  combines 
with  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonia,  forming  water,  and  gaseous  nitrogen 
is  evolved,  2NH3  +  N203  =  3H2O  +  N4.  Nitrogen  is  procured  by 
this,  method  in  the  following  manner  : — A  solution  of  caustic  potash  is 
saturated  with  nitrous  anhydride,  by  which  means  potassium  nitrite  is 
formed.  On  the  other  hand,  a  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  saturated 
with  ammonia  is  prepared ;  a  saline  substance  called  sal-ammoniac, 
NH4C1,  is  thus  formed  in  the  solution.  The  two  solutions  thus  pre- 
pared are  mixed  together  and  heated.  Reaction  takes  place  according 
to  the  equation  KNO2  +  NH4C1  =  KC1  +  2H2O  4-  N2.  This  reaction 
proceeds  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  potassium  nitrite  and  ammonium 
chloride  are  salts  which,  on  interchanging  their  metals,  give  potassium 
chloride  and  ammonium  nitrite,  NH4NO2,  which  breaks  up  into  water 
and  nitrogen.  This  reaction  does  not  take  place  without  the  aid  of 
heat,  but  it  proceeds  very  easily  at  a  moderate  temperature.  Of  the 
resultant  substances,  the  nitrogen  only  is  gaseous.  Pure  nitrogen  may 
be  obtained  by  drying  the  resultant  gas  and  passing  it  through  a  solu- 
tion of  sulphuric  acid  (to  absorb  a  certain  quantity  of  ammonia  which 
is  evolved  in  the  reaction).4  bis 

the  presence  of  a  solution  of  ammonia,  when  it  forms  a  bluish-violet  solution  of  oxide 
•of  copper  in  ammonia.  Nitrogen  is  very  easily  procured  by  this  method.  A  flask  filled 
with  copper  turnings  is  closed  with  a  cork  furnished  with  a  funnel  and  stopcock.  A 
solution  of  ammonia  is  poured  into  the  funnel,  and  caused  to  drop  slowly  upon  the 
copper  If  at  the  same  time  a  current  of  air  be  slowly  passed  through  the  flask  (from  a 
gasholder),  then  all  the  oxygen  will  be  absorbed  from  it  and  the  nitrogen  will  pass  from 
the  flask.  It  should  be  washed  with  water  to  retain  any  ammonia  that  may  be  carried 
off  with  it 

3  The  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen  (for  example,  N2O,  NO,  N02)  are  decomposed 
at  a  red  heat  by  themselves,  and  under  the  action  of  red-hot  copper,  iron,  sodium,  &c., 
they  give  up  their  oxygen  to  the  metals,  leaving  the  nitrogen  free.    According  to  Meyer 
and  Langer  (1885),  nitrous  oxide,  N2O,  decomposes  below  900°,  although  not  completely 

4  Chlorine  and  bromine  (in  excess),  as  well  as  bleaching  powder  (hypochlorites),  take 
up  the  hydrogen  from  ammonia,  NHs,  leaving  nitrogen.     Nitrogen  is  best  procured  from 
ammonia  by  the  action  of  a  solution  of  sodium  hypobromite  on  solid  sal-ammoniac. 

4  bis  Lord  Rayleigh  in  1894,  when  determining  the  weight  of  a  volume  of  carefully 
purified  nitrogen  by  weighing  it  in  one  and  the  same  globe,  found  that  the  gas  obtained 
from  air,  by  the  action  of  incandescent  copper  (or  iron  or  by  removing  the  oxygen  by 
ferrous  oxide)  was  always  -^  heavier  than  the  nitrogen  obtained  from  its  compounds, 
for  instance,  from  the  oxide  or  suboxide  of  nitrogen,  decomposed  by  incandescent  pul- 
verulent iron  or  from  the  ammonia  salt  of  nitrous  acid.  For  the  nitrogen  procured  from 
air,  he  obtained,  at  0°  and  760'4  mm.  pressure,  a  weight  =  2'810  grms.,  while  for  the 
nitrogen  obtained  from  its  compounds,  2'299  grms.  This  diffei'ence  of  about  ^n  could 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR  227 

Nitrogen  is  a  gaseous  substance  which  does  not  differ  much  in 
physical  properties  from  air ;  its  density,  referred  to  hydrogen,  is 
approximately  equal  to  1 4 — that  is,  it  is  slightly  lighter  than  air,  its 
density  referred  to  air  being  0-972  ;  one  litre  of  nitrogen  weighs  1'257 
gram.  Nitrogen  mixed  with  oxygen,  which  is  slightly  heavier  than 
air,  forms  air.  It  is  a  gas  which,  like  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  is 
liquefied  with  difficulty,  and  is  but  little  soluble  in  water  and  other 
liquids.  Its  absolute  boiling  point5  is  about  —  140°;  above  this 
temperature  it  is  not  liquefiable  by  pressure,  and  at  lower  tempera- 
tures it  remains  a  gas  at  a  pressure  of  50  atmospheres.  Liquid 
nitrogen  boils  at  —  193°,  so  that  it  may  be  employed  as  a  source  o£ 
great  cold.  At  about  —  203°,  in  vaporising  under  a  decrease  of  pres- 
sure, nitrogen  solidifies  into  a  colourless  snow-like  mass.  Nitrogen 
does  not  burn,5bi8  does  not  support  combustion,  is  not  absorbed  by  any 
of  the  reagents  used  in  gas  analysis,  at  least  at  the  ordinary  tempera- 
ture— in  a  word,  it  presents  a  whole  series  of  negative  chemical 
properties  ;  this  is  expressed  by  saying  that  this  element  has  no  energy 
for  combination.  Although  it  is  capable  of  forming  compounds  both 
with  oxygen  and  hydrogen  as  well  as  with  carbon,  yet  these  com- 
pounds are  only  formed  under,  particular  circumstances,  to  which  we 
will  directly  turn  our  attention.  At  a  red  heat  nitrogen  combines 
with  boron,  titanium,  and  silicon,  barium,  magnesium,  &c.,  forming 
very  stable  nitrogenous  compounds,6  whose  properties  are  entirely 
different  from  those -of  nitr&gen  with  hydrogen,  oxygen  and  carbon. 
However,  the  combination  of  nitrogen  with  carbon,  although  it  does 
not  take  place  directly  between  the  elements  at  a  red  heat,  yet  proceeds 
with  comparative  ease  by  heating  a  mixture  of  charcoal  with  an 
alkaline  carbonate,  especially  potassium  carbonate  or  barium  carbonate, 

not  be  explained  by  the  nitrogen  not  having  been  well  purified,  or  by  inaccuracy  6?  ex- 
periment, and  was  the  means  for  the  remarkable  discovery  of  the  presence  of  a  heavy 
gas  in  air,  which  will  be  mentioned  in  Note  16  bb. 

5  See  Chapter  II.  Note  29. 
«  >>fc  See  Note  11  "». 

6  The  combination  of  boron  with  nitrogen  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  suffi- 
cient heat  to  raise  the  mass  to  redness ;  titanium  combines  so  easily  with  nitrogen  that  it 
is  difficult  to  obtain  it  free  from  that  element ;  magnesium  easily  absorbs  nitrogen  at  a 
red  heat.    It  is  a  remarkable  and  instructive  fact  that  these  compounds  of  nitrogen  are 
very  stable  and  non- volatile.    Carbon  (C  =  12)  with  nitrogen  gives  cyanogen,  C2N2,  which 
is  gaseous  and  very  unstable,  and  whose  molecule  is  not  large,  whilst  boron  (B  =  11) 
forms  a  nitrogenous  compound  which  is  solid,  non-volatile,  and  very  stable.    Its  compo- 
sition,   BN,  is  similar  to    that    of  cyanogen,  but    its    molecular    weight,    BnNn,  is 
probably  greater.    Its  composition,  like  that  of  N2Mg3,  NNa3,  N2Hg5  and  of  many  of 
the  metallic  nitrides,  corresponds  to  ammonia  with  the  substitution  of  all  its  hydrogert 
by  a  metal.    In  my  opinion,  a  detailed  study  of  the  transformations  of  the  nitrides  now 
known,  should  lead  to  the  discovery  of  many  facts  in  the  history  of  nitrogen. 


228'  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

to  redness,  carbo-nitrides  or  cyanides  of  the  metals  being  formed  ;  for 
Instance,  K2CO3  +  40  +  N2  =  2KCN  +  SCO.7 

Nitrogen  is  found  with  oxygen  in  the  air,  but  they  do  not  readily 
combine.  Cavendish,  however,  in  the  last  century,  showed  that 
nitrogen  combines  with  oxygen  under  the  influence  of  a  series  of  electrio 
sparks.  Electric  sparks  in  passing  through  a  moist 8  mixture  of  nitro- 
gen and  oxygen  cause  these  elements  to  combine,  forming  reddish- 
brown  fumes  of  oxides  of  nitrogen,9  which  form  nitric  acid,10  NS03-." 
The  presence  of  the  latter  is  easily  recognised,  not  only  from  its 
reddening  litmus  paper,  but  also  from  its  acting  as  a  powerful  oxidiser 
even  of  mercury.  Conditions  similar  to  these  occur  in  nature,  during  a 

1  This  reaction,  so  far  as  is  known,  does  not  proceed  beyond  a  certain  limit,  probably 
because  cyanogen,  CN,  itself  breaks  up  into  carbon  and  nitrogen. 

8  Fremy  and  Becquerel  took  dry  air,  and  observed  the  formation  of  brown  vapours  of 
oxides  of  nitrogen  on  the  passage  of  sparks. 

9  If  a  mixture  of  one  volume  of  nitrogen  and  fourteen  volumes  of  hydrogen  be  burnt, 
then  water  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  nitric  acid  are  formed.    It  may  be  partly  due 
to  this  that  a  certain  quantity  of  nitric  acid  is  produced  in  the  slow  oxidation  of  nitro- 
genous substances  in  an  excess  of  air.    This  is  especially  facilitated  by  the  presence  of 
an  alkali  with  which  the  nitric  acid  formed  can  combine.    If  a  galvanic  current  be  passed 
through  water  containing  the  nitrogen  and  oxygen  of  the  air  in  solution,  then  the  hydro- 
gen and  oxygen  set  free  combine  with  the  nitrogen,  forming  ammonia  and  nitric  acid. 

When  copper  is  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  the  air  at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  the 
presence  of  ammonia,  oxygen  is  absorbed,  not  only  for  combination  with  the  copper,  but 
also  for  the  formation  of  nitric  acid. 

The  combination  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen,  even,  for  example,  by  the  action  of  electrio 
sparks,  is  not  accompanied  by  an 'explosion  or  rapid  combination,  as  in  the  action  of  a 
spark  on  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  This  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  heat  is 
not  evolved  in  the  combination  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen,  but  is  absorbed — an  expenditure 
of  energy  is  required,  there  is  no  evolution  of  energy.  In  fact,  there  will  not  be  the 
transmission  of  heat  from  particle  to  particle  which  occurs  in  the  explosion  of  deto- 
nating gas.  Each  spark  will  aid  the  formation,  of  a  certain  quantity  of  the  compound 
of  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  but  will  not  excite  the  same  in  the  neighbouring  particles,  In 
other  words,  the  combination  of  hydrogen  with  oxygen  is  an  exothermal  reaction,  and 
the  combination  bf  nitrogen  with  oxygen  an  endothermal  reaction. 

A  condition  particularly  favourable  for  the  oxidation  of  nitrogen  is  the  explosion  of 
detonating  gas  and  air  if  the  former  be  in  excess.  If  a  mixture  of  two  volumes  of 
detonating  gas  and  one  volume  of  air  be  exploded,  then  one-tenth  of  the  air  is  converted 
into  nitric  acid,  and  consequently  after  the  explosion  has  taken  place  there  remain  'only 
nine-tenths  of  the  volume  of  air  originally  taken.  If  a  large  proportion  of  air  be  taken—- 
for instance,  four  volumes  of  air  to  two  volumes  of  detonating  gas— then  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  explosion  is  lowered,  the  volume  of  air  taken  remains  unchanged,  and  no 
nitric  acid  is  formed.  This  gives  a  rule  to  be  observed  in  making  use  of  the  eudio- 
meter— namely  that  to  weaken  the  force  of  the  explosion  not  less  than  an  equal  volume 
bf  air  should  be  added  to  the  explosive  mixture.  On  the  other  hand  a  large  excess  must 
not  be  taken  as  no  explosion  would  then  ensue  (see  Chapter  III.  Note  34).  Probably  in 
the  future  means  will  be  found  for  obtaining  compounds  of  nitrogen  on  a  large  industrial 
scale  by  the  aid  of  electric  discharges,  and  by  making  uso  of  the  inexhaustible  mass  of 
nitrogen  in  the  atmosphere. 

10  In  reality  nitric  oxide,  NO,  is  first  formed,  but  with  oxygen  and  water  it  gives 
(brown  fumes)  nitrous  anhydride,  which,  as  we  shall  afterwards  learn,  in  the  presence  of 
water  and  oxygen  gives  nitric  acid. 


NITKOGEN  AND  AIR  229 

thunderstorm  or  in  other  electrical  discharges  which  take  place  in  the 
atmosphere ;  whence  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  air  and  rain-water 
always  contain  traces  of  nitric  and  nitrous  acids.11  Besides  which 
Crookes  (1892)  showed  that  under  certain  circumstances  and  when 
electricity  of  high  potential 1 1  bis  passes  through  the  air,  the  com- 
bination of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  is  accompanied  by  the  formation  of 
a  true  flame.  This  was  also  observed  previously  (1880)  during  the 
passage  of  electrical  discharges  through  the  air. 

Further  observations  showed  that  under  the  influence  of  electrical 
discharges,12  silent  as  well  as  with  sparks,  nitrogen  is  able  to  enter  into 
many  reactions  with  hydrogen  and  with  many  hydrocarbons  ;  although 
these  reactions  cannot  be  effected  by  exposure  to  a  red  heat.  Thus, 
for  instance,  a  series  of  electric  sparks  passed  through  a  mixture  of 
nitrogen  and  hydrogen  causes  them  to  combine  and  form  ammonia  l3 
or  nitrogen  hydride,  NH3,  composed  of  one  volume  of  nitrogen  and 
three  volumes  of  hydrogen.  This  combination  is  limited  to  the  forma- 
tion of  6  per  cent,  of  ammonia,  because  ammonia  is  decomposed, 
although  not  entirely  (£yG)  by  electric  sparks.  This  signifies  that  under 
tho  influence  of  an  electrical  discharge  the  reaction  NH3  =  N  +  3H 
is  reversible,  consequently  it  is  a  dissociation,  and  in  it  a  state  of 
equilibrium  is  arrived  at.  The  equilibrium  may  be  destroyed  by  the 
addition  of  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid,  HC1,  because  with  ammonia  it 
forms  a  solid  saline  compound,  sal-ammoniac,  NH4C1,  which  (being 
formed  from  a  gaseous  mixture  of  3H,  N,  and  HCl)  fixes  the  ammonia. 
The  remaining  mass  of  nitrogen  and  hydrogen,  under  the  action  of  the 

"  The  nitric  acid  contained  in  the  soil,  river  water  (Chapter  L,  Note  2),  wells,  &c., 
proceeds  (like  carbonic  anhydride)  from  the  oxidation  of  organic  compounds  which  have 
fallen  into  water,  soil,  &c. 

11  bi»  Crookes  employed  a  current  of  15  amperes  and  65  volts,  and  passed  it  through 
an  induction  coil  with  830  vibrations  per  second,  and  obtained  a  flame  between  the  poles 
placed  at  a  distance  of  46  mm.  which  after  the  appearance  of  the  arc  and  flame  could 
be  increased  to  200  mm.  A  platinum  wire  fused  in  the  flame. 

11  This  property  of  nitrogen,  which  under  normal  conditions  is  inactive,  leads  to  the 
Idea  that  under  the  influence  of  an  electric  discharge  gaseous  nitrogen  changes  in  its 
properties  ;  if  not  permanently  like  oxygen  (electrolysed  oxygen  or  ozone  does  not  react 
on  nitrogen,  according  to  Berthelot),  it  may  be  temporarily  at  the  moment  of  the  action 
of  the  discharge,  just  as  some  substances  under  the  action  of  heat  are  permanently 
affected  (that  is,  when  once  changed  remain  so— for  instance,  white  phosphorus  passes 
into  red,  &c.),  whilst  others  are  only  temporarily  altered  (the  dissociation  of  S6  into  83 
or  of  sal-ammoniac  into  ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid).  Such  a  proposition  is  favoured 
by  the  fact  that  nitrogen  gives  two  kinds  of  spectra,  with  which  we  shall  afterwards 
become  acquainted.  It  may  be  that  the  molecules  N2  then  give  less  complex  molecules, 
N  containing  one  atom,  or  form  a  complex  molecule  N3,  like  oxygen  in  passing  into 
Ozone.  Probably  under  a  silent  discharge  the  molecules  of  oxygen,  O2,  are  partly  decom- 
posed and  the  individual  atoms  O  combine  with  O2,  forming  ozone,  O3. 

13  This  reaction,  discovered  by  Chabrie  and  investigated  by  The'nard,was  only  rightly 
understood  when  Deville  applied  the  principles  of  dissociation  to  it. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

sparks,  again  forms  ammonia,  and  in  this  manner  solid  sal-ammonias 
is  obtained  to  the  end  by  the  action  of  a  series  of  electric  sparks  on  a 
mixture  of  gaseous  N,  H3,  and  HC1.14  Berthelot  (1876)  showed  that 
under  the  action  of  a  silent  discharge  many  non-nitrogenous  organic 
substances  (benzene,  C6H6,  cellulose  in  the  form  of  paper,  resin, 
glucose,  C6H1005,  and  others)  absorb  nitrogen  and  form  complex 
nitrogenous  compounds,  which  are  capable,  like  albuminous  sub- 
stances, of  evolving  their  nitrogen  -  as  ammonia  when  heated  with 
alkalis.15 

By  such  indirect  methods  does  the  gaseous  nitrogen  of  the  atmo- 
sphere yield  its  primary  compounds,  in  which  form  it  enters  into 
plants,  and  is  elaborated  in  them  into  complex  albuminous  sub- 
stances.15bis  But,  starting  from  a  given  compound  of  nitrogen  with 


14  The  action  of  nitrogen  on  acetylene  (Berthelot)  resembles  this  reaction.    A  mixture 
of  these^  gases  under  the*  influence  of  a  silent  discharge  gives  hydrocyanic  acid,  C2H2+  Ng 
,*=2CNH.    This  reaction  cannot  proceed  beyond  a  certain  limit  because  it  is  reversible. 

15  Berthelot  successfully  employed  electricity  of  even  feeble  potential  in  these  experi- 
ments, which  fact  led  him  to  think  that  in  nature,  where  the  action  of  electricity  takes 
place  very  frequently,  a  part  of  the  Complex  nitrogenous  substances  may  proceed  from 
the  gaseous  nitrogen  of  the  air  by  this  method. 

As  the  nitrogenous  substances  of  organisms  play  a  very  important  part  in  them 
(organic  life  cannot  exist  without  them),  and  as  the  nitrogenous  substances  introduced 
into  the  soil  are  capable  of  invigorating  its  crops  (of  course  in-the  presence  of  the 
other  nourishing  principles  required  by  plants),  the  question  of  the  means  of  converting 
the  atmospheric  nitrogen  into  the  nitrogenous  compounds  of  the  soil,  or  into  assimilable 
nitrogen  capable  of  being  absorbed  by  plants  and  of  forming  complex  (albuminous) 
substances  in  them,  is  one  of  great  theoretical  and  practical  interest.  The  artificial 
(technical)  conversion  of  the  atmospheric  nitrogen  into  nitrogenous  compounds,  not- 
withstanding repeated  attempts,  cannot  yet  be  considered  as  fulfilled  in  a  practical 
remunerative  manner  although  its  possibility  is  already  evident.  Electricity  will 
probably  aid  in  solving  this  very  important  practical  problem.  When  the  theoretical 
side  of  the  question  is  further  advanced,  then  without  doubt  an  advantageous  means 
will  be  found  for  the  manufacture  of  nitrogenous  substances  from  the  nitrogen  of  the 

/air ;  and  this  is  needed,  before  all,  for  the  agriculturist,  to  whom  nitrogenous  fertilisers 
form  an  expensive  item,  and  are  more  important  than  all  other  manures. 
v^  /      One  thousand  tons  of  farmyard  manure  do  not  generally  contain  more  than  four  tons 
~      f-V/  of  nitrogen  in  the  form  of  complex  nitrogenous  substances,  and  this  amount  of  nitrogen 
is  contained  in   lv,e".iy  ions  of  ammonium  sulphate,  there-lore  the  effect  of  a  mass  of 
V  «,F  /     farmyard  manure  in  respect  to  the  introduction  of  nitrogen  may  be  produced  by  small 
Jy^  /        quantities  of  artificial  nitrogenous  fertilisers  (see  Note  15  bis). 

is  bis  Although  the  numerous,  and  as  far  as  possible  accurate  and  varied  researches 
made  in  the  physiology  of  plants  have  proved  that  the  higher  forms  oi  plants  are  not 
capable  of  directly  absorbing  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere  and  converting  it  intocomple* 
albuminous  substances,  still  it  has  been  long  and  repeatedly  observed  that  the  amount 
af  nitrogenous  substances  in  the  soil  is  increased  by  the*  cultivation  of  plants  of  the 
bean  (leguminous)  family  such  as  pea,  acacia,  &c.  A  closer  study  of  these  plants  has 
shown  that  this  is  connected  with  the  formation  of  peculiar  nodular  swellings  in  theii 
roots  caused  by  the  growth  of  peculiar  micro-organisms*(bacteria)  which  cohabit  the  soil 
trith  the  roots,  and  are  capable  of  absorbing  nitrogen  from  the  air,  i.e.  of  converting -it 
into  assimilated  nitrogen.  This  branch  of  plant  physiology,  which  forms  another  proof 


NITROGEN  AND  AIfc  231 

hydrogen  or  oxygen,  we  may,  without  the  aid  of  organisms,  obtain,  ag 
will  afterwards  be  partially  indicated,  most  diverse  and  complex 
nitrogenous  substances,  which  cannot  by  any  means  be  formed  directly 
from  gaseous  nitrogen.  In  this  we  see  an  example  not  only  of  the 
difference  between  an  element  in  the  free  state  and  an  intrinsic  element, 
but  also  of  those  circuitous  or  indirect  methods  by  which  substances 
are  formed  in  nature.  The  discovery,  prognostication,  and,  in  general, 
the  study  of  such  indirect  methods  of  the  preparation  and  formation  of 
substances  forms  one  of  the  existing  problems  of  chemistry.  From  the 
fact  that  A  does  not  act  at  all  on  B,  it  must  not  be  concluded  that  a 
compound  AB  is  not  to  be  formed.  The  substances  A  and  B  contain 
atoms  which  occur  in  AB,  but  their  state  or  the  nature  of  their  motion 
may  not  be  at  all  that  which  is  required  for  the  formation  of  AB, 
and  in  thia  substance  the  chemical  state  of  the  elements  may  be  ag 
different  as  the  state  of  the  atoms  of  oxygen  in  ozone  and  in  water. 
Thus  free  nitrogen  is  inactive ;  but  in  its  compounds  it  very  easily 
enters  into  changes  and  is  distinguished  by  great  activity.  An  acquaint- 
ance with  the  compounds  of  nitrogen  confirms  this.  But,  before 
entering  on  this  subject,  let  us  consider  air  as  'a  mass  containing  free 
nitrogen. 

Judging  from  what  has  been  already  stated,  it  will  be  evident  that 
atmospheric  air  16  contains  a  mixture  of  several  gases  and  vapours. 
Some  of  them  are  met  with  in  it  in  nearly  constant  proportions,  whilst 
others,  on  the  contrary,  are  very  variable  in  their  amount.  The  chief 

<?f  the  important  part  played  by  micro-organisms  in  nature,  cannot  be  discussed  in 
this  work,  but  it  should  be  mentioned,  since  it  is  of  great  theoretical  and  practical 
interest,  and,  moreover,  phenomena  of  this  kind,  which  have  recently  been  discovered, 
promise  to  explain,  to  some  extent  at  least,  certain  of  the  complex  problems  concerning 
the  development  of  life  on  the  earth. 

16  Under  the  name  of  atmospheric  air  the  chemist  and  physicist  understand  ordinary 
air  containing  nitrogen  and  oxygen  only,"notwithstanding  that  the  other  component  parts 
of  air  have  a  very  important  influence  on  the  living  matter  of  the  earth's  surface.  That 
air  is  so  represented  in  science  is  based  on  the  fact  that  only  the  two  components  above- 
named  are  met  with  in  air  in  a  constant  quantity,  whilst  the  others  are  variable.  The 
solid  impurities  may  be  separated  from  air  required  for  chemical  or  physical  research 
by  simple  nitration  through  a  long  layer  of  cotton- wool  placed  in  a  tube.  Organic  im- 
purities are  removed  by  passing  the  air  through  a  solution  of  potassium  permanganate. 
The  carbonic  anhydride  contained  in  air  is  absorbed  by  alkalis — best  of  all,  soda-lime, 
which  in  a  dry  state  in  porous  lumps  absorbs  it  with  exceeding  rapidity  and  complete-, 
,  ness.  Aqueous  vapour  is  removed  by  passing  the  air  over  calcium  chloride,  strong  sul- 
.phuric  acid,  or  phosphoric  anhydride.  Air  thus  purified  is  accepted  as  containing  only 
nitrogen  and  oxygen,  although  in  reality  it  still  contains  -a-  certain  quantity  of  hydrogen 
and  hydrocarbons,  from  which  it  may  be  purified  by  passing  over  copper  oxide  heated  to 
redness.  The  copper  oxide  then  oxidises  the  hydrogen  and  hydrocarbons — it  burns  them, 
forming  water  and  carbonic  anhydride,  which  may  be  removed  as  above  described.  When 
it  is  said  that  in  the  determination  of  the  density  of  gases  the  weight  of  air  is  taken  as 
Unity,  it  is  understood  to  be  such  air,  containing  only  nitrogen  and  oxygen. 


232  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

component  parts  of  air,  placed  in  the  order  of  their  relative  amounts, 
are  the  following  :  nitrogen,16  bi3  oxygen,  aqueous  vapour,  carbonic 
anhydride,  nitric  acid,  salts  of  ammonia,  oxides  of  nitrogen,  and  also 
ozone,  hydrogen  peroxide,  and  complex  organic  nitrogenous  substances. 
Besides  these,  air  generally  contains  water,  as  spray,  drops,  and  snow, 
and  particles  of  solids,  perhaps  of  cosmic  origin  in  certain  instances, 
but  in  the  majority  of  cases  proceeding- from  the  mechanical  translation 
of  solid  particles  from  one  locality  to  another  by  the  wind.  These  small 
solid  and  liquid  particles  (having  a  large  surface  in  proportion  to  their 
weight)  are  suspended  in  air  as  solid  matter  is  suspended  in  turbid  water ; 
they  often  settle  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  but  the  air  is  never  entirely 
free  from  them  because  they  are  never  in  a  state  of  complete  rest. 
Then,  air  not  unfrequently  contains  incidental  traces  of  various  sub- 
stances as  everyone  knows  by  experience.  These  incidental  substances 
sometimes  belong  to  the  order  of  those  which  aict  injuriously,  the  germs 
of  lower  organisms— for  instance  of  moulds — and  the  class  of  carriers 
of  infectious  diseases. 

In  the  air  of  the  various  countries  of  the  earth,  at  different  longi- 
tudes and  at  different  altitudes  above  its  surface,  on  the  ocean  or  on  the 
dry  land — in  a  word,  in  the  air  of  most  diverse  localities  of  the  earth — 
the  oxygen  and  nitrogen  are  found  everywhere  to  be  in  a  constant  ratio. 
This  is,  moreover,  self-evident  from  the  fact  that  the  air  constantly 
diffuses  (intermixes  by  virtue  of  the  internal  motion  of  the  gaseous 
particles)  and  is  also  put  into  motion  and  intermixed  by  the  wind,  by 
which  processes  it  is  equalised  in  its  composition  over  the  entire  surface 
of  the  earth.  In  those  localities  where  the  air  is  subject  to  change, 
and  is  in  a  more  or  less  enclosed  space,  or,  at  any  rate,  in  an  un  ventilated 
space,  it  may  alter  very  considerably  in  its  composition.  For  this 
reason  the  air  in  dwellings,  cellars,  and  wells,  in  which  there  are 
substances  absorbing  oxygen,  contains  less  of  this  gas,  whilst  the  air  on 

16  bu  Thanks  to  the  remarkable  discovery  made  in  the  summer  of  1894  by  Lord  Ray- 
leigh  and  Prof.  Ramsay,  the  well-known  component  elements  of  air  must  now  be  supple- 
mented by  1  p.c.  (by  volume)  of  a  heavy  gas  (density  about  19,  H  =  l),  inactive  like  nitro- 
gen, which  was  discovered  in  the  researches  made  by  Lord  Rayleigh  on  the  density  of 
nitrogen  as  mentioned  in  note  4  bl9.  Up  to  the  present  time  this  gas  has  been  always 
determined  together  with  nitrogen,  because  it  combines  with  neither  the  hydrogen  in 
the  eudiometer  nor  with  the  copper  in  the  gravimetric  method  of  determining  the  com- 
position of  air,  and  therefore  has-  always  remained  with  the  nitrogen.  It  has  been 
possible  to  separate  it  from  nitrogen  since  magnesium  absorbs  nitrogen  at  a  red  heat, 
while  this  gas  remains  unabsorbed,  and  was  found  to  have  a  density  nearly  one  and  a 
half  time  greater  than  that  of  nitrogen  (is  it  not  a  polymer  of  nitrogen,  N5  ?).  It  is  now 
known  also  that  this  gas  gives  a  luminous  spectrum,  which  contains  the  bright  blue  line 
observed  in  the  spectrum  of  nitrogen.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  it  is  an  exceedingly  inert 
substance,  even  more  so  than  nitrogen,  it  has  been  termed  Argon.  Further  reference 
will  be  made  to  it  in  the  Appendix. 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR  233 

the  surface  of  standing  water,  which  abounds  in  the  lower  orders  of 
plant  life  evolving  oxygen,  contains  an  excess  of  this  gas.17  The 
constant  composition  of  air  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth  has 
been  proved  by  a  number  of  most  careful  researches.18 

The  analysis  of  air  is  effected  by  converting  the  oxygen  into  a  non- 
gaseous  compound,  so  as  to  separate  it  from  the  air.     The  original 

17  As  a  further  proof  of  the  fact  that  certain  circumstances  may  change  "the  com- 
position of  air,  it  will  be  enough  to  point  out  that  the  air  contained  in  the  cavities  of 
glaciers  contains  only  up  to  10  p.c.  of  oxygen.     This  depends  on  the  fact  that  at  low 
temperatures  oxygen  is  much  more  soluble  in  snow-water  and  snow  than. nitrogen.  When 
shaken  up  with  water  the  composition  of  air  should  change,  because  the  water  dissolves 
unequal  quantities  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen.    We  have  already  seen  (Chapter  I.)  that 
the  air  boiled  off  from  water  saturated  at  about  0°  contains  about  thirty-five  volumes 
of  oxygen  and  sixty-five  volumes  of  nitrogen,  and  we  have  considered  the  reason  of 
this. 

18  The  analysis  of  air  by  weight  conducted  by  Dumas  and  Boussingault  in  Paris, 
which  they  repeated  many  times  between  April  27  and  September  22, 1841,  under  various 
conditions  of  weather,  showed  that  the  amount  by  weight  of  oxygen  only  varies  between 
22'89  p.c.  and  23'08  p.c.,  the  average  amount  being  23'07  p.c.     Brunner,  at  Bern  in 
Switzerland,  and  Bravais,  at-Faulhorn  in  the  Bernese  Alps,  at  a  height  of  two  kilometres 
above  the  level  of    the  sea,  Marignac  at  Geneva,  Lewy  at  Copenhagen,  and  Stas  at 
Brussels,  have  analysed  the  air  by  the  same  methods,  and  found  that  its  composition 
does  not  exceed  the  limits  determined  for  Paris.    The  most  recent  determinations  (with 
an  accuracy  of  ±  0'05  p.c.)  confirm  the  conclusion  that  the  composition  of  the  atmosphere 
is  constant. 

As  there  are  some  grounds  (which  will  be  mentioned  shortly)  for  considering  that  the 
composition  of  the  air  at  great  altitudes  is  slightly  different  from  that  at  attainable 
heights — namely,  that  it  is  richer  in  the  lighter  nitrogen — several  fragmentary  observations 
made  at  Munich  (Jolly,  1880)  gave  reason  for  thinking  that  in  the  upward  currents  (that  is 
in  the  region  of  minimum  barometric  pressure  or  at  the  centres  of  meteorological  cyclones) 
the  air  is  richer  in  oxygen  than  in  the  descending  currents  of  air  (in  the  regions  of  anti- 
cyclones or  of  barometric  maxima) ;  but  more  carefully  conducted  observations  showed 
this  supposition  to  be  incorrect.  Improved  methods  for  the  analysis  of  air  have  shown 
that  certain  slight  variations  in  its  composition  do  actually -occur,  but  in  the  first  place 
they  depend  on  incidental  local  influences  (on  the  passage  of  the  air  over  mountains 
and  large  surfaces  of  water,  regions  of  forest  and  herbage,  and  the  like),  and  in  the 
second  place  are  limited  to  quantities  which  are  scarcely  distinguishable  from  possible 
errors  in  the  analyses.  The  researches  made  by  Itreisler  in  Germany  (1885)  are  par- 
ticularly convincing. 

The  considerations  which  lead  to  the  supposition  that  the  atmosphere  at  great  alti- 
tudes contains  less  oxygen  than  at  the  .surface  of  the  earth  are  based  on  the  law  of  par- 
tial pressures  (Chapter  I.)  According  to  this  law,  the  equilibrium  of  the  oxygen  in 
the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  is  not  dependent  on  the  equilibrium  of  the  nitrogen,  and 
the  variation  in  the  densities  of  both  gases  with  the  height  isi  determined  by  the  pressure 
of  each  gas  separately.  Details  of  the  calculations  and  considerations  here  involved 
are  contained  in  my  work  On  Barometric  Levellings,  1876,  p.  48. 

On  the  basis  of  the  law  of  partial  pressure  and  of  hypsometrical  formulae,  expressing 
the  laws  of  the  variation  of  pressures  at  different  altitudes,  the  conclusion  may  be  deduced 
that  at  the  upper  strata  of  the  atmosphere  the  proportion  of  the  nitrogen  with  respect 
to  the  oxygen  increases,  but  the  increase  will  not  exceed  a  fraction  per  cent.,  even  at 
altitudes  of  four  and  a  half  to  six  miles,  the  greatest  height  within  the  reach  of  msn 
either  by  climbing  mountains  or  by  means  of  balloons.  This  conclusion  fe  confirmed  by 
the  analyses  of  air  collected  by  Welch  in  England  during  his  aeronautic  ascents. 


-v     .x?*     \*0* 

&*  ^  volume  of  the  air  is  first  measured,  and  then  the  volume  of  the  re- 
maining nitrogen.  The  quantity  of  oxygen  is  calculated  either  from 
the  difference  between  these  volumes  -or  by  the  weight  of  the  oxygen 
compound  formed,  All  the  volumetric  measurements  have  to  be 
corrected  for  pressure,  temperature,  and  moisture  (Chapters  I.  and  II.) 
The  medium  employed  for  converting  the  oxygen  into  a  non-gaseous 
substance  should  enable  it  to  be  taken  up  from  the  nitrogen  to  the 
'  very  end  without  evolving  any  gaseous  substance.  So,  for  instance,19 
ij  a  mixture  of  pyrogallol,  06H603,  with  a  solution  of  a  caustic  alkali 
absorbs  oxygen  with  great  ease  at  the  Ordinary  temperature  (the 
solution  turns  black),  but  it  is  unsuitedfor  accurate  analysis  because  it 
requires  an  aqueous  solution  of  an  alkali,  and  it  alters  the  composition 
of  the  air  by  acting  on  it  as  a  solvent.20  However,  for  approximate 
determinations  this  simple  method  gives  results  which  are  entirely 
satisfactory. 

The  determinations  in  a  eudiometer  (Chapter  III.)  give  more  exact 
results,  if  all  the  necessary  corrections  for  changes  of  pressure,  tempera- 
ture, and  moisture  be  taken  into  account.  This  determination  is 
carried  out  essentially  as  follows  : — A  certain  amount  of  air  is  intro- 
duced into  the  eudiometer,  and  its  volume  is  determined.  About  an 
equal  volume  of  dry  hydrogen  is  then  passed  into  the  eudiometer,  and 
the  volume  again  determined.  The  mixture  is  then  exploded,  in  the 
way  described  for  the  determination  of  the  composition  of  water.  The 
remaining  volume  of  the  gaseous  mixture  is  again  measured  ;  it  will  be 
less  than  the  second  of  the  previously  measured  volumes.  Out  of  tnree 
volumes  which  have  disappeared,  one  belonged  to  the  oxygen  and  two 
to  the  hydrogen,  consequently  one-third  of  the  loss  of  volume  indicates 
the  amount  of  oxygen  contained  in  the  air.21 

The  most  complete  method  for  the  analysis  of  air,  and  one  which  is 

19  The  complete  absorption  of  the  oxygen  may  be  attained  by  introducing  moist  phoS- 
phorus  into  a  definite  volume  of  air ;  the  occurrence  of  this  is  recognised  by  the  fact  of 
the  phosphorus  becoming  non-luminous  in  the  dark.  The  amount  of  oxygen  may  be 
determined  -by  measuring  the  volume  of  nitrogen  remaining.  This  method  however, 
cannot  give  accurate  results,  owing  to  a  portion  of  the  air  being  dissolved  in  the  water, 
to  the  combination  of  some  of  the  nitrogen  with  oxygen  and  to  the  necessity  of  intro- 
ducing and  withdrawing  the  phosphorus,  which  cannot  be  accomplished  without 
introducing  bubbles  of  air. 

80  For  rapid  and  approximate  analyses  (technical  and  hygienic),  such  a  mixture  is 
very  suitable  for  determining  the  amount  of  oxygen  in  mixtures  of  gases  from  which 
the  substances  absorbed  by  alkalis  have  first  been  removed.  According  to  certain  ob- 
servers, this  mixture  evolves  a  certain  (small)  quantity  of  carbonic  oxide  after  absorbing 
oxygen. 

21  Details  of  eudiometrical  analysis  must,  as  was  pointed  out  in  Chap.  III.)  Note  32, 
be  looked  for  in  works  on  analytical  chemistry.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  other 
analytical  methods  mentioned  in  this  work.  They  are  only  described  for1  the  purpose 
of  showing  the  diversity  of  the  methods  of  chemical  research. 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR 


235 


accompanied  by  the  least  amount  of  error,  consists  in  the  direct  weigh- 
ing, as  far  as  is  possible,  of  the  oxygen,  nitrogen,  water,  and  carbonic 
anhydride  contained  in  it.  For  this  purpose  the  air  is  first  passed 
through  an  apparatus  for  retaining  the  moisture  and  carbonic  anhy- 
dride (which  will  be  considered  presently),  and  is  then  led  through 
a  tube  which  contains  shavings  of  metallic  copper  and  has  been  pre- 
viously weighed.  A  long  layer  of  such  copper  heated  to  redness  absorbs 
all  the  oxygen  from  the  air,  and  leaves  pure  nitrogen,  whose  weight  must 
be  determined.  This  is  done  by  collecting  it  in  a  weighed  and  ex- 


PIG.  38. — Dumas  and  Boussingault's  apparatus  for  the  analysis  of  air  by  weight.  The  globe  B  con- 
tains 10-15  litres.  The  air  is  first  pumped  out  of  it,  and  it  is  weighed  empty.  The  tube  T  con- 
nected.with  it  is  filled  with  copper,  and  is  weighed  empty  of  air.  It  is  heated  in  a  charcoal  furnace. 
When  the  copper  has  become  red-hot,  the  stopcock  r  (near  R)  is  slightly  opened,  and  the  air 
Dasses  through  the  vessels  L,  containing  a  solution  of  potash,  f,  containing  solutions  and  pieces 
of  caustic  potash,  which  remove  the  carbonic  anhydride  from  the  air,  and  then  through  o  and  tt 
containing  sulphuric  acid  (which  has  been  previously  boiled  to  expel  dissolved  air)  and  pumice- 
stone,  which  removes  the  moisture  from  the  air.  The  pure  air  then  gives  up  its  oxygen  to  the 
copper  in  T.  When  the  air  passes  into  T  the  stopcock  R  of  the  globe  B  is  opened,  and  it  becomes 
filled  with  nitrogen.  When  the  air  ceases  to  flow  in,  the  stopcocks  are  closed,  and  the  globe  B 
and  tube  T  weighed.  The  nitrogen  is  then  pumped  out  of  the  tube  and  it  is  weighed  again. 
The  increase  in  weight  of  the  tube  shows  the  amount  of  oxygen,  and  the  difference  of  the  second 
and  third  weighings  of  the  tube,  with  the  increase  in  weight  of  the  globe,  gives  the  weight  of 
the  nitrogen. 

hausted  globe,  while  the  amount  by  .weight  of  oxygen  is  shown  by  the 
increase  in  weight  of  the  tube  with  the  copper  after  the  experiment. 
Air  free  from  moisture  and  carbonic  anhydride 22  contains  20-95  to 

22  Air  free  from  carbonic  anhydride  indicates  after  explosion  the  presence  of  a  small 
quantity  of  carbonic  anhydride,  as  De  Saussure  remarked,  and  air  free  from  moisture, 
after  being  passed  over  red-hot  copper  oxide,  appears  invariably  to  contain  a  small 
quantity  of  water,  as  Boussingault  has  observed.  These  observations  lead  to  the 
assumption  that  air  always  contains  a  certain  quantity  of  gaseous  hydrocarbons,  like 
marsh  gas,  which,  as  we  shall  afterwards  learn,  is  evolved  from  the  earth,  marshes,  &c. 
Its  amount,  however,  does  not  exceed  a  few  hundredth  B  per  cent. 


236 


PRINCIPLES   OF  CHEMISTRY 


20-88  23  parts  by  volume  of  oxygen  the  mean  amount  of  oxygen  will 
therefore  be  20*92  ±  0-05  per  cent.  Taking  the  density  of  air  =  1  and 
of  oxygen  =  1/105  and  nitrogen  0'972  the  composition  of  air  by  weight 
will  be  23'12  per  cent,  of  oxygen  and  76*88  per  cent,  of  nitrogen.24 

The  possibility  of  the  composition  of  air  being  altered  by  the  mere 
action  of  a  solvent  very  clearly  shows  that  the  component  parts  of  air 
are  in  a  state  of  mixture,  in  which  any  gases  may  occur  ;  they  do  not 
in  this  case  form  a  definite  compound,  although  the  composition  of  the 
atmosphere  does  appear  constant  under  ordinary  conditions.  The  fact 


IFlG.  39.— Apparatus  for  the  absorption  and 
washing  of  gases,  known  as  Liebig's 
bulbs.  The  gas  enters  m,  presses  on  the 
absorptive  liquid,  and  passes  from  m  into 
b,  r,  d,  and  e  consecutively,  and  escapes 
through/ 


FIG.  40.-Geisler's  potash  bulbs.  The  gas  enters 
at  a,  and  passes  through  a  solution  of  potash 
in  the  lower  bn'bs,  where  the  carbonic  anhy- 
dride is  absorbed,  and  the  gas  escapes  from  6. 
The  lower  bulbs  are  arranged  in  a  triangle,  so 
that  the  apparatus  can  stand  without  support. 


that  its  composition  varies  under  different  conditions  confirms  the 
truth  of  this  conclusion,  and  therefore  the  constancy  of  the  composition 
of  air  must  not  be  considered  as  in  any  way  dependent  on  the  nature 
of  the  gases  entering  into  its  composition,  but  only  as  proceeding  from 
cosmic  phenomena  co-operating  towards  this  constancy.  It  must  be 
admitted,  therefore,  that  the  processes  evolving  oxygen,  and  chiefly  the 
processes  of  the  respiration  of  plants,  are  of  equal  force  with  those 
processes  which  absorb  oxygen  over  the  entire  surface  of  the  earth.25 

23  The  analyses  of  air  are  accompanied  by  errors,  and  there  are  variations  of  com- 
position attaining  hundredths  per  cent. ;  the  average  normal  composition  of  air  is  there- 
lore  only  correct  to  the  first  decimal  place. 

24  These  figures  express  the  mean  composition  of  air  from  an  average  of  the  most 
accurate  determinations  ;   they  are  accurate  within  ±0'05  p.c. 

25  In  Chapter  III.,  Note  4,  an  approximate  calculation  is  made  for  the  determination 
of  the  balance  of  oxygen  in  the  entire  atmosphere ;  it  may  therefore  be  supposed  that  the 
composition  of  air  will  vary  from  time  to  time,  the  relation  between  vegetation  and  the 
oxygen  absorbing  processes  changes ;  but  as  the  atmosphere  of  the  earth  can  hardly 
have  a  definite  limit  and  we  have  already  seen  (Chapter  IV.,  Note  83)  that  there  are 
observations  confirming  this,  it  follows  that  our  atmosphere  should  vary  in  its  com- 
jponent  parts  with  the  entire  heavenly  space,  and  therefore  it  must  be  supposed  that 
any  variation  in  the  composition  by  weight  of  the  air  can  only  take  place  exceedingly 
slowly,  and  in  a  manner  imperceptible  by  experiment. 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR  287 

Air  always  contains  more  or  less  moisture 26  and  carbonic  anhydride 
produced  by  the  respiration  of  animals  and  the  combustion  of  carbon 
and  carboniferous  compounds.  The  latter  sjiows  the  properties  of  an 
acid  anhydride.  In  order  to  determine  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhy- 
dride in  air,  substances  are  employed  which  absorb  it — namely,  alkalis 
either  in  solution  or  solid.  A  solution  of  caustic  potash,  KHO,  is 
poured  into  light  glass  vessels,  through 
which  the  air  is  passed,  and  the  amount  of 
carbonic  anhydride  is  determined  by  the 
increase  in  weight  of  the  vessel,  But  it 
is  best  to  take  a  solid  porous,  alkaline 
mass  such  as  soda-lime.27  With  a  slow 
current  of  air  a  layer  of  soda-lime  20  cm. 
in  length  is  sufficient  to  completely  deprive 
1  cubic  metre  of  air  of  the  carbonic  anhy- 
dride it  contains.  A  series  of  tubes  con-  „ 

Fiis.  41.— Tube  for  the  absorption  of 

taming  calcium  chloride  for  absorbing  the       carbonic  acid.   A  plug  of  cotton 

.         ,,     „          ,.  wool  is  placed  in  the  bulb  to  pre- 

moisture  28  IS  placed  before  the  apparatus  vent  the  powder  of  soda-lime  being 

fit  . .  ft  i  i  carried  off  by  the  gas.    The  tube 

for   the   absorption  OI    the   Carbonic   anhy-  contains  soda-lime  and  chloride  of 

dride,   and  a    measured    mass   of    air  is 

passed  through  the  whole  apparatus  by  means  of  an  aspirator.     In 

this  manner  the  determination  of  the  moisture  is  combined  with  the 


26  The  amount  of  moisture  contained  in  the  air  is  considered  in  greater  detail 
in  the  study  of  physics  and  meteorology  and  the  subject  has  been  mentioned  above, 
in  Chapter  I.,  Note  1,  where  the  methods  of  absorbing  moisture  from  gases  were  pointed 
out. 

27  Soda-lime  is  prepared  in  the  following  manner : — Unslaked  lime  is  finely  powdered 
and  mixed  with  a  slightly  warmed  and  very  strong  solution  of  caustic  soda.     The  mixing 
should  be  done  in  an  iron  dish,  and  the  materials  should  be  well  stirred  together  until  the 
lime  begins  to  slake.    When  the  mass  becomes  hot,  it  boils,  swells  up,  and  solidifies,  form- 
ing  a  porous  mass  very  rich  in  alkali  and  capable  of  rapidly  absorbing  carbonic  anhydride. 
A  lump  of  caustic  soda  or  potash  presents  a  much  smaller  surface  for  absorption  and  there- 
fore acts  much  less  rapidly.  It  is  necessary  to  place  an  apparatus  for  absorbing  water  after 
the  apparatus  for  absorbing  the  carbonic  anhydride,  because  the  alkali  in  absorbing  the 
latter  gives  off  water. 

88  It  is  evident  that  the  calcium  chloride  employed  for  absorbing  the  water  should  be 
free  from  lime  or  other  alkalis  in  order  that  it  .may  not  retain  carbonic  anhydride.  Such 
calcium  chloride  may  be  prepared  in  the  following  manner :  A  perfectly  neutral  solution 
of  calcium  chloride  is  prepared  from  lime  and  hydrochloric  acid ;  it  is  then  carefully 
evaporated  first  on  a  water-bath  and  then  on  a  sand-bath.  When  the  solution  attains  a 
certain  strength  a  scum  is  formed,  which  solidifies  at  the  surface.  This  scum  is 
collected,  and  will  be  found  to  be  free  from  caustic  alkalis.  Jt  is  necessary  in  any  case 
to  test  it  before  use,  as  otherwise  a  large  error  may  be  introduced  into  the  results,  owing 
to  the  presence  of  free  alkali  (lime).  It  is  best  to  pass  carbonic  anhydride  through  the 
tube  containing  the  calcium  chloride  for  some  time  before  the  experiment,  in  order  to 
Baturate  any  free  alkali  that  may  remain  from  the  decomposition  of  a  portion  of  the 
calcium  chloride  by  water,  CaCl2  +  2H20  =  CaOH20  +  2HC1. 


238  PEINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

absorption  of  the  carbonic  anhydride.     The  arrangement  shown  in 
fig.  38  is  such  a  combination. 

The  amdunt  of  carbonic  anhydride29  in  free  air  is  incomparably 
more  cdnstant  than  the  amount  of  moisture.  The  average  amount 
in  100  volumes  of  dry  ,air  is  approximately  0-03  volume — that  is, 
10,000  volumes  of  air  contain  about  three  volumes  of  carbonic  anhy- 
dride, most  frequently  about  2'95  volumes.  As  the  specific  gravity  of 
carbonic  anhydride  referred  to  air  =  1'52,  it  follows  that  100  parts  by 
weight  of  air  contain  0'045  part  by  weight  of  carbonic  anhydride. 
This  quantity  varies  according  to  the  time  of  year  (more  in  winter), 
the  altitude  above  the  level  of  the  sea  (less  at  high  altitudes),  the 
proximity  to  forests  and  fields  (less)  or  cities  (greater),  &c.  But  the 
variation  is  small  and  rarely  exceeds  the  limits  of  2  £  to  4  ten- thousandths, 
by  volume.30  As  there  are  many  natural  local  influences  which  either 
increase  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  in  the  air  (respiration,  com- 
bustion, decomposition,  volcanic  eruptions,  <fec.),  or  diminish  it  (absorp- 
tion by  plants  and  water),  the  reason  of  the  great  constancy  in  the 
amount  of  this  gas  in  the  air  must  be  looked  for,  in  the  first  place,  in  the 
fact  that  the  wind  mixes  the  air  of  various  localities  together,  and,  in 
the  second  place,  in  the  fact  that  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  holding  car- 
bonic acid  in  solution,31  form  an  immense  reservoir  for  regulating  the 
amount  of  this  gas  in  the  atmosphere.  Immediately  the  partial 

29  Recourse  is  had  to  special  methods  when  the  determination  only  takes  note  of  the 
carbonic  anhydride  of  the  air.    For  instance,  it  is  absorbed  by  an  alkali  which  does  not 
contain  carbonates  (by  a  solution  of  baryta  or  caustic  soda  mixed  with  baryta),  and  then 
the  carbonic  anhydride  is  expelled  by  an  excess  of  an  acid,  and  its  amount  determined  by  the 
volume  given  off.    A  rapid  method  of  determining  CO2  (for  hygienic  purposes)  is  given 
by  the  fall  of  tension  produced  by  the  introduction  of  an  alkali  (the  air  having  been 
either  brought  to  dryness  or  saturated  with  moisture).    Dr.  Schidloffsky's  apparatus  is 
based  upon  this  principle.    The  question  as  to  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  present 
in  the  air  has  been  submitted  to  many  voluminous  and  exact  researches,  especially  those 
of  Reiset,  Schloesing,  Miintz,  and  Aubin,  who  showed  that  the  amount  is  not  subject 
to  such  variations  as  at  first  announced  on  the  basis  of  incomplete  and  insufficiently 
accurate  determinations. 

30  It  is  a  different  case  in^nclosed  spaces,  in  dwellings,  cellars,  wells,  caves,  and  mines, 
where  the  renewal  of  air  is  impeded.     Under  these  circumstances  large  quantities  of 
carbonic  anhydride   may  accumulate.     In  cities,  where  there  are  many  conditions  for 
the  evolution  of    carbonic    anhydride    (respiration,    decomposition,    combustion),    its 
amount  is  greater  than   in  free  air,  yet  even  in  still  weather  the  difference  does  not 
often  exceed  one  ten-thousandth  (that  is,  rarely  Attains  4  instead  of  2'9  vols.  in  10000 
vols.  of  air). 

81  In  the  sea  as  well  as  in  fresh  water,  carbonic  acid  occurs  in  two  forms,  directly 
dissolved  in  the  water,  and  combined  with  lime  as  calcium  bicarbonate  (hard  waters 
sometimes  contain  very  much  carbonic  acid  in  this  form).  The  tension  of  the  carbonic 
anhydride  in  the  first  form  varies  with  the4emperature,  and  its  amount  with  the  partial 
pressure,  and  that  in  the  form  of  acid  salts  is  under  the  same  -conditions,  for  direct 
experiments  have  shown  a  similar  dependence  in  this  case,  although  the  quantitative 
relations  are  different  in  the  two  cases. 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR  239 

pressure  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  in  the  air  decreases,  the  water 
evolves  it,  and  when  the  partial  pressure  increases,  it  absorbs  it,  and 
thus  nature  supplies  the  conditions  for  a  natural  state  of  moving 
equilibrium  in  this  as  in  so  many  other  instances.32 

Besides  nitrogen,  oxygen,  moisture,  and  carbonic  acid,  all  the  other 
substances  occurring  in  air  are  found  in  infmitesimally  small  quantities 
by  weight,  and  therefore  the  weight  of  a  cubic  measure  of  air  depends, 
to  a  sensible  degree,  on  the  above-named  components  alone.  We  have 
already  mentioned  that  at  0°  and  760  mm.  pressure  the  weight  of  a 
cubic  litre  of  air  is  1-293  gram.  This  weight  varies  with  the  accelera- 
tion of  gravity,  g,  so  that  if  g  be  expressed  in  metres  the  weight  of  a 
litre  of  air,  e  =  g  x  0-131844  gram.  For  St.  Petersburg  g  is  about 
9-8188,  and  therefore  e  is  about  1-2946,33  the  air  being  understood  to  be 
dry  and  free  from  carbonic  anhydride.  Taking  the  amount  of  the 
latter  as  0-03  per  100  volumes,  we  obtain  a  greater  weight ;  for  example, 
for  St.  Petersburg  e  —  1-2948  instead  of  1-2946  gram.  The  weight 
of  one  litre  of  moist  air  in  which  the  tension34  of  the  aqueous 
vapour  (partial  pressure)  =/mm.,  at  a  pressure  (total)  of  air  of  H 

38  In  studying  the  phenomena  of  nature  the  conclusion  is  arrived  at  that  the 
universally  reigning  state  of  mobile  equilibrium  forms  the  chief  reason  for  that  harmonious, 
order  which  impresses  all  observers.  It  not  unfrequently  happens  that  we  do  not  see  the 
causes  regulating  the  order  and  harmony ;  in  the  particular  instance  of  carbonic^ 
anhydride,  it  is  a  striking  circumstance  that  in  the  first  instance  a  search  was  made 
for  an  harmonious  and  strict  uniformity,  and  in  incidental  (insufficiently  accurate  and 
fragmentary)  observations  conditions  were  even  found  for  concluding  it  to  be  absent. 
When,  later,  the  rule  of  this  uniformity  was  confirmed,  then  the  causes  regulating- 
such  order  were  also  discovered.  The  researches  of  Schloesing  were  of  this  character. 
Deville's  idea  of  the  dissociation  of  the  acid  carbonates  of  sea- water  is  suggested  in, 
them.  In  many  other  cases  also,  a  correct  interpretation  can  only  follow  from  a  detailed 
investigation. 

53  The  difference  of  tha  weight  of  a  litre  of  dry  air  (free  from  carbonic  anhydride)  at 
0°  and  760  mm.,  at  different  longitudes  and  altitudes,  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  force 
of  gravity  varies  under  these  conditions,  and  with  it  the  pressure  of  the  barometrical 
column  also  varies.    This  is  treated  in  detail  in  my  works  On  the  Elasticity  of  Gases 
and  On  Barometric  Levellings,  and  '  The  Publicationa  of  the  Weights  and  Measures. 
Department '  (Journal  of  the  Russian  Physico- Chemical  Society,  1894). 

In  reality  the  weight  is  not  measured  in  absolute  units  of  weight  (in  pressure — refer 
to  works  on  mechanics  and  physics),  but  in  relative  units  (grams,  scale  weights)  whose 
mass  is  invariable,  and  therefore  the  variation  of  the  weight  of  the  weights  itself  with 
the  change  of  gravity  must  not  be  here  taken  into  account,  for  we  are  here  dealing  with 
weights  proportional  to  masses,  since  with  a  change  of  locality  the  weight  of  the 
weights  varies  as  the  weight  of  a  given  volume  of  air  does.  In  other  words  :  the  mass  of 
a  substance  always  remains  constant,  but  the  pressure  produced  by  it  varies  with  the 
acceleration  of  gravity :  the  gram,  pound,  and  other  units  of  weight  are  really  units  of 
mass. 

54  The  tension  of  the  aqueous  vapour  in  the   air   is  determined  by  hygrometers 
and  other  similar  methods.    It  may  also  be  determined  by  analysis  (see  Chapter  I.,. 
Note  1). 


240  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

millimetres,  at  a  temperature  t,  will  be  (i.e.,  if  at  0°  and  760  mm.  the 

weight  of  dry  air  _.)  equal  to  ^^  -x  !=**§/.    Forin- 

stance,  if  H  =  730  mm.,  t  ==  20°,  and/=  10  mm.  (the  moisture  is  then 
slightly  below  60  p.c.),  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  at  St.  Petersburg 
=  1-1527  gram.35 

The  presence  of  ammonia,  a  compound  of  nitrogen  and  hydrogen, 
in  the  air,  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  all  acids  exposed  to  the  air  ab- 
sorb ammonia  from  it  after  a  time.  De  Saussure  observed  that 
aluminium  sulphate  is  converted  by  air  into  a  double  sulphate  of  am- 
monium and  aluminium,  or  the  so-called  ammonia  alum.  Quantitative 
determinations  have  shown  that  the  amount  of  ammonia 36  contained 
in  air  varies  at  different  periods.  However,  it  may  be  accepted  that 
100  cubic  metres  of  air  do  not  contain  less  than  1  or  more  than  5 
milligrams  of  ammonia.  It  is  remarkable  that  mountain  air  contains 
more  ammonia  than  the  air  of  valleys.  The  air  in  those  places  where 
animal  substances  undergoing  change  are  accumulated,  and  especially 
that  of  stables,  generally  contains  a  much  greater  quantity  of  this  gas. 
This  is  the  reason  of  the  peculiar  pungent  smell  noticed  in  such  places. 
'Moreover  ammonia,  as  we  shall  learn  in  the  following  chapter,  com- 
bines with  acids,  and  should  therefore  be  found  in  air  in  the  form  of 
such  combinations,  since  air  contains  carbonic  and  nitric  acids. 

The  presence  of  nitric  acid  in  air  is  proved  without  doubt  by  the 
fact  that  rain-water  contains  an  appreciable  amount  of  it. 

Further  (as  already  mentioned  in  Chapter  IV.),  air  contains  ozone 

55  For  rapid  calculation  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  (in  a  room)  in  St.  Petersburg,  may 
under  these  conditions  (H,  t,  and/)  be  obtained  by  the  formula  e  =  1-20671  +  0-0016 
[Hi  -  755  +  2-6  (18°  -  *°)]  where  H!  =  H  -  0'88/.    In  determining  the  weight  of  small  and 
lieavy  objects  (crucibles,  &c.  in  analysis,  and  in  determining  the   specific   gravities 
of  liquids,  &c.)  a  correction  may  be  introduced  for  the  loss  of  weight  in  the  air  of  the  room, 
by  taking  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  displaced  as  1-2  gram,  and  consequently  0-0012  gram 
for  every  cubic  centimetre.    But  if  gases  or,  in  general, large  vessels  are  weighed,  and  the 
weighings  require  to  be  accurate,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  account  all  the  data  for  thd 
•determination  of  the  density  of  the  air  (t,  H,  and  /),  because  sensitive  balances  can 
determine  the  possible  variations  of  the  weight  of  air,  as  in  the  case  of  a  litre  the 
weight  of  air  varies  in  centigrams,  even  at  a  constant  temperature,  wiih  variations  of  H 
and  /.     Some  time  ago  (1859)  I  proposed  the  following  method  and  applied  it  for  this 
purpose.    A  large  light  and  closed  vessel  is  taken,  and  its'  volume  and  weight  in  a  vacuum 
are  accurately  determined,  and  verified  from  time  to  time.      On  weighing  it  we  obtain 
the  weight  in  air  of  a  given  density,  and  by  subtracting  this  weight  from  its  absolute 
weight  and  dividing  by  its  volume  we  obtain  the  density  of  the  air. 

56  Schloesing  studied  the  equilibrium  of  the  ammonia  of  the  atmosphere  and  of  the 
rivers,  seas,  &c.,  and  showed  that  the  amount  of  the  gas  is  interchangeable  between  them. 
The  ratio  between  the  amount  of  ammonia  in  a  cubic  metre  of  air  and  in  a  litre  of  water 
at  o°  =  0-004,  at  10°  =  0-010,  at  25°  =  0'040  to  1,  and  therefore  in  nature  there  is  a  state' 
of  equilibrium  in  the  amount  of  ammonia  in  the  atmosphere  and  waters. 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR  241 

and  hydrogen  peroxide  and  nitrous  acid  (and  its  ammonia  salt),  i.e. 
substances  having  a  direct  oxidising  action  (for  instance,  upon  iodized 
starch-paper),  but  they  are  present  in  very  small  quantities.37 

Besides  substances  in  a  gaseous  or  vaporous  state,38  there  is  always 
found  a  more  or  less  considerable  quantity  of  substances  which  are  not 
known  in  a  state  of  vapour.  These  substances  are  present  in  the  air  as 
dust.  If  a  linen  surface,  moistened  with  an  acid,  be  placed  in  perfectly 
pure  air,  then  the  washings  are  found  to  contain  sodium,  calcium,  iron, 
and  potassium.39  Linen  moistened  with  an  alkali  absorbs  carbonic, 
sulphuric,  phosphoric,  and  hydrochloric  acid§.  Further,  the  presence 
of  organic  substances  in  air  has  been  proved  by  a  similar  experiment. 
If  a  glass  globe  be  filled  with  ice  and  placed  in  a  room  where  are  a 
number  of  people,  then  the  presence  of  organic  substances,  like  albu- 
minous substances,  may  be  proved  in  th£  water  which  condenses  on  the 
surface  of  the  globe.  It  may  be  that  the  miasmas  causing  infection  in 
marshy  localities,  hospitals,  and  in  certain  epidemic  illnesses  proceed 
from  the  presence  of  such  substances  in  the  air  (and  especially  in  water, 
which  contains  many  micro-organisms),  as  well  as  from  the  presence 
of  germs  of  lower  organisms  in  the  air  as  a  minute  dust.  Pasteur 
proved  the  existence  of  such  germs  in  the  air  by  the  following  expert 
ment : — He.  placed  gun-cotton  (pyroxylin),  which  has  the  appearance 
of  ordinary  cotton,  in  a  glass  tube.  Gun-cotton  is  soluble  in  a  mixture 
of  ether  and  alcohol,  forming  the  so-called  collodion.  A  current  of  air 

57  Whilst  formed  in  the  air  these  oxidising  substances  (N2O3,  ozone  and  hydrogen 
peroxide)  at  the  same  time  rapidly  disappear  from  it  by  oxidising  those  substances  which 
are  capable  of  being  oxidised.  Owing  to  this  instability  their  amounts  vary  considerably, 
and,  as  would  be  expected,  they  are  met  with  to  an  appreciable  amount  in  pure  air,  whilst 
their  amount  decreases  to  zero  in  the  air  of  cities,  and  especially  in  dwellings  where  there 
is  a  maximum  of  substances  capable  of  oxidisation  and  a  minimum  of  conditions  for  the 
formation  of  such  bodies.  There  is  a  causal  connection  between  the  amount  of  these 
substances  present  in  the  air  and  its  purity — that  is,  the  amount  of  foreign  residues  of 
organic  origin  liable  to  oxidation  present  in  the  air.  Where  there  is  much  of  such 
residues  their  amount  must  be  small.  When  they  are  present  the  amount  of  organic 
substances  must  be  small,  as  otherwise  they  would  be  destroyed.  For  this  reason 
efforts  have  been  made  to  apply  ozone  for  purifying  the  air  by  evolving  it  by  artificial 
means  in  the  atmosphere  ;  for  instance,  by  passing  a  series  of  electrical  sparks  through 
the  ventilating  pipes  conveying  air  into  a  building.  Air  thus  ozonised  destroys  by  oxidation 
— that  is,  brings  about  the  combustion  of — the  organic  residues  present  in  the  air,  and 
thus  will  serve  for  purifying  it.  For  these  reasons  the  air  of  cities^  contains  less  ozone 
and  such  like  oxidising  agents  than  country  air.  This  forms  the  distinguishing  feature 
of  country  air.  However,  animal  life  cannot  exist  in  air  containing  a  comparatively  large 
amount  of  ozone. 

38  Amongst  them  we  may  mention  iodine  and  alcohol,  C2H6O,  which  Miintz  found  to 
be  always  present  in  air,  the  soil,  and  water,  although  in  minute  traces  only. 

59  A  portion  of  the  atmospheric  dust  is  of  cosmic  origin  ;  this  is  undoubtedly  proved 
by  the  fact  of  its  containing  metallic  iron  as  do  meteorites.  Nordenskiold  found  iron  in 
the  dust  covering  snow,  and  Tissaudier  in  every  kind  of  air,  although  naturally  in  very 
small  quantities. 


242  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

was  passed  through  the  tube  for  a  long  period  of  time,  and  the  gun- 
cotton  was  then  dissolved  in  a  mixture  of  ether  and  alcohol.  An 
insoluble  residue  was  thus  obtained  which  actually  contained  the  germs 
of  organisms,  as  was  shown  by  microscopical  observations,  and  by  their 
capacity  to  develop  into  organisms  (mould,  &c.)  under  favourable 
conditions.  The  presence  of  these  germs  determines  the  property  of 
air  of  bringing  about  the  processes  of  putrefaction  and  fermentation — 
that  is  the  fundamental  alteration  of  organic  substances,  which  is 
accompanied  by  an  entire  change  in  their  properties.  The  appearance 
of  lower  organisms,  both  vegetable  and  animal,  is  always  to  be  remarked 
in  these  processes.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  process  of  fermentation, 
when,  for  example,  wine  is  procured  from  the  sweet  juice  of  grapes,  a 
sediment  separates  out  which  is  known  under  the  name  of  lees,  and 
contains  peculiar  yeast  organisms.  Germs  are  required  before  these 
organisms  can  appear.40  They  are  floating  in  the  air,  and  fall  into  the 
sweet  fermentable  liquid  from  it.  Finding  themselves  under  favourable 
conditions,  the  germs  develop  into  organisms ;  they  are  nourished  at 
the  expense  of  the  organic  substance,  and  during  growth  change  and 
destroy  it,  and  bring  about  fermentation  and  putrefaction.  This  is 
why,  for  instance,  the  juice  of  the  grape  when  contained  in  the  skin  of 
the  fruit,  which  allows  access  of  the  air  but  is  impenetrable  to  the 
germs,  does  not  ferment,  does  not  alter  so  long  as  the  skin  remains 
intact.  This  is  also  the  reason  why  animal  substances  when  kept  from 
the  access  of  air  may  be  preserved  for  a  great  length  of  time.  Preserved 
foods  for  long  sea  voyages  are  kept  in  this  way.41  Hence  it  is  evident 
that  however  infinitesimal  the  quantity  of  germs  carried  in  the  atmo- 
sphere may  be,  still  they  have  an  immense  significance  in  nature.42 

Thus  we  see  that  air  contains  a  great  variety  of  substances.     The 
nitrogen,  which  is  found  in  it  in  the  largest  quantity,  has  the  least 

40  The  idea  .of  the  spontaneous  growth  of  organisms  in  a  suitable  medium,  although 
still  upheld  by  many,  has  since  the  work  of  Pasteur  and  his  followers  (and  to  a  certain 
extent  of  his  predecessors)  been  discarded,  because  it  has  been  proved  how,  when,  and 
whence  (frpm  the  air,  water,  &c.)  the  germs  appear  ;  that  fermentation  as  well  as  infec- 
tious diseases  cannot  take  place  without  them ;  and  chiefly  because  it  has  been  shown  that 
any  change  accompanied  by  the  development  of  the  organisms  introduced  may  be  brought 
about  at  will  by  the  introduction  of  the  germs  into  a  suitable  medium. 

41  In  further  confirmation  of  the  fact  that  putrefaction  and  fermentation  depend  on 
4*erms  carried  in  the  air,  we  may  cite  the  circumstance  that  poisonous  substances  de- 
stroying the  life  of  organisms  stop  or  hinder  the  appearance  of  the  above  processes. 
Air  which  has  been  heated  to  redness  or  passed  through  sulphuric  acid  no  longer  contains 
the  germs  of  organisms,  and  loses  the  faculty  of  producing  fermentation  and  putrefaction. 

42  Their  presence  in  the  air  is  naturally  due  to  the  diffusion  of  germs  into  the  atmo- 
sphere, and  owing  to  their  microscopical  dimensions,  they,  as  it  were,  hang  in  the  air  in 
virtue  of  their  large  surfaces  compared  to  their  weight.    In  Paris  the  amount  of  dust 
suspended  in  the  air  equals  from  6  (after  rain)  to  23  grams  per  1,000  c.m.  of  air. 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR  243 

influence  on  those  processes  which  are  accomplished  by  the  action  of 
air.  The  oxygen,  which  is  met  with  in  a  lesser  quantity  than  the 
nitrogen,  on  the  contrary  takes  a  very  important  part  in  a  number  of 
reactions  ;  it  supports  combustion  and  respiration,  it  brings  about 
decomposition  and  every  process  of  slow  oxidation.  The  part  played 
by  the  moisture  of  air  is  well  known,  The  carbonic  anhydride,  which 
is  met  with  in  still  smaller  quantities,  has  an  immense  significance  in 
nature,  inasmuch  as  it  serves  for  the  nourishment  of  plants.  The 
importance  of  the  ammonia  and  nitric  acid  is  very  great,  because  they  are 
the  sources  of  the  nitrogenous  substances  comprising  an  indispensable 
element  in  all  living  organisms.  And,  lastly,  the  infinitesimal  quantity 
of  germs  also  have  a  great  significance  in  a  number  of  processes.  Thus 
it  is  not  the  quantitative  but  the  qualitative  relations  of  the  component 
parts  of  the  atmosphere  which  determine  its  importance  in  nature.43 

Air,  being  a  mixture  of  various  substances,  may  suffer  considerable 
changes  in  consequence  of  incidental  circumstances.  It  is  particularly 
necessary  to  remark  those  changes  in  the  composition  of  air  which  take 
place  in  dwellings  and  in  various  localities  where  human  beings  have 
to  remain  during  a  lengthy  period  of  time.  The  respiration  of  human 
beings  and  animals  alters  the  air.44  A  similar  deterioration  of  air  is 
produced  by  the  influence  of  decomposing  organic  substances,  and 
especially  of  substances  burning  in  it.45  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  have 

43  We  see  similar  cases  everywhere.    For  example,  the  predominating  mass  of  sand 
and  clay  in  the  soil  takes  hardly  any  chemical  part  in  the  economy  of  Ihe  soil  in  respect 
to  the  nourishment  of  plants.    The  plants  by  their  roots  search  for  substances  which  are 
diffused  in  comparatively  small  quantities  in  the  soil.    If  a  large  quantity  of  these 
nourishing  substances  are  removed,  then  the  plants  will  not  develop  in  the  soil,  just  aa 
animals  die  in  oxygen. 

44  A  man  in  breathing  burns  about  10  grams  of  carbon  per  hour — that  is,  he  produoea 
about  880  grams,  or  (as  1  cub.m.  of  carbonic  anhydride  weighs  about  2,000  grams)  about 
^  c.m.  of  carbonic  anhydride.     The  air  coming  from  the  lungs  contains  4  p.c.  of  carbonic 
anhydride  by  volume.    The  exhaled  air  acts  as  a  direct  poison,  owing  to  this  gas  and  to 
other  impurities. 

45  For  this  reason  candles,  lamps,  and  gas  change  the  composition  of  air  almost  in 
the  same  way  as  respiration.    In  the  burning  of  1  kilogram  of  stearin  candles,  50  cubio 
metres  of  air  are  changed  as  by  respiration—that  is,  4  p.c.  of  carbonic  anhydride  will  be 
formed  in  this  volume  of  air.    The  respiration  of  animals  and  exhalations  from  their  skins, 
and  especially  from  the  intestines  and  the  excrements  and  the  transformations  taking 
place  in  them,  contaminate  the  air  to  a  ntill  greater  extent,  because  they  introduce  other 
volatile  substances  besides  carbonic  anhydride  into  the  air.    At  the  same  time  that 
carbonic  anhydride  is  formed  the  amount  of  oxygen  in  the  air  decreases,  and  there  is 
noticed  the  appearance  of  miasmata  which  occur  in  but  small  quantity,  but  which  are 
noticeable  in  passing  from  fresh  air  into  a  confined  space  full  of  such  adulterated  air. 
The  researches  of  Schmidt  and  Leblanc  and  others  show  that  even  with  20*6  p.c.  of 
oxygen  (instead  of  20*9  p.c.),  when  the  diminution  is  due  to  respiration,  air  becomes 
noticeably  less  fit  for  respiration,  and  that  the  heavy  feeling  experienced  in  such  air 
increases  with  a  lesser  percentage  of  oxygen.    It  is  difficult  to  remain  for  a  few  minutes 
in  air  containing  17*2  p.o.  of  oxygen.    These  observations  were  chiefly  obtained  by 


244  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

regard  to  the  purification  of  the  air  of  dwellings.  The  renewal  of  air, 
the  replacing  of  respired  by  fresh  air,  is  termed  '  ventilation,' 46  and  the 

observations  on  the  air  of  different  mines,  at  different  depths  below  the  surface.  The 
air  of  theatres  and  buildings  full  of  people  also  proves  to  contain  less  oxygen ;  it  was 
found  on  one  occasion  that  at  the  end  of  a  theatrical  representation  the  air  iu  the  stalls 
contained  20'75  p.c.  of  oxygen,  whilst  the  air  at  the  upper  part  of  the  theatre  contained 
only  20'S6  p.c.  The  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  in  the  air  may  be  taken  as  a  measure 
of  its  purity  (Pettenkofer).  When  it  reaches  1  p.c.  it  is  very  difficult  for  human  beings 
to  remain  long  in  such  air,  and  it  is  necessary  to  set  up  a  vigorous  ventilation  for  the 
removal  of  the  adulterated  air.  In  order  to  keep  the  air  in  dwellings  in  a  uniformly  good 
state,  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  at  least  10  cubic  metres  of  fresh  air  per  hour  per 
person.  We  saw  that  a  man  exhales  about  five-twelfths  of  a  cubic  metre  of  carbonic  anhy- 
dride per  day.  Accurate  observations  have  shown  that  air  containing  one-tenth  p.c.  of 
exhaled  carbonic  anhydride  .(and  consequently  also  a  corresponding  amount  of  the  other 
substances  evolved  together  with  it)  is  not  felt  to  be  oppressive ;  and  therefore  the  five- 
twelfth  cubic  metres  of  carbonic  anhydride  should  be  diluted  with  420  cubic  metres  of 
fresh  air  if  it  be  desired  to  keep  not  more  than  one-tenth  p.c.  (by  volume)  of  carbonic 
anhydride  in  the  air.  Hence  a  man  requires  420  cubic  metres  of  air  per  day,  or  18  cubic 
metres  per  hour.  With  the  introduction  of  only  10  cubic  metres  of  fresh  air  per  person, 
the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  may  reach  one-fifth  p.c.,  and  the  air  will  not  then  be  of 
the  requisite  freshness. 

46  The  ventilation  of  inhabited  buildings  is  most  necessary,  and  is  even  indispensable 
in  hospitals,  schools,  and  similar  buildings.  In  winter  it  is  carried,  on  by  the  so-called 
calorifiers  or  stoves  heating  the  air  before  it  enters.  The  best  kind  of  calorifiers  in  this 
respect  are  those  .in  which  the  fresh  cold  air  is  led  through  a  series  of  pfpes  heated  by 
the  hot  gases  coming  from  a  stove.  In  ventilation,  particularly  during  winter,  care  is  taken 
that  the  incoming  air  shall  be  moist,  because  in  winter  the  amount  of  moisture  in  the 
air  is  very  small.  Ventilation,  besides  introducing  fresh  air  into  a  dwelling-place,  must 
also  withdraw  the  air  already  spoilt  by  respiration  and  other  causes— that  is,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  construct  channels  for  the  escape  of  the  bad  air,  besides  those  for  the  introduction 
of  fresh  air.  In  ordinary  dwelling-places,  where  not  many  people  are  congregated,  the 
ventilation  is  conducted  by  natural  means,  in  the  heating  by  fires,  through  crevices, 
windows,  and  various  orifices  in  walls,  doors,  and  windows.  In  mines,  factories,  and  work- 
rooms ventilation  is  of  the  greatest  importance. 

Animal  vitality  may  still  continue  for  a  period  of  several  minutes  in  air  containing  up 
to  30  p.c.  of  carbonic  anhydride,  if  the  remaining  70  p.c.  consist  of  ordinary  air ;  but  r^spi- 
ration  ceases  after  a  certain  time,  and  death  may  even  ensue.  The  flame  of  a  candle 
is  very  easily  extinguished  in  an  atmosphere  containing  from  5  to  6  p.c.  of  carbonic  anhy- 
dride, but  animal  vitality  can  be  sustained  in  if  for  a  somewhat  long  time,  although  the 
effect  of  such  air  is  exceedingly  painful  even  to  the  lower  animals.  There  are  mines  in 
which  a  lighted  candle  easily  goes  out  from  the  excess  of  carbonic  anhydride,  but  in  which 
the  miners  have  to  remain  for  a  long  time.  The  presence  of  1  p.c.  of  carbonic  oxide  is 
deadly  even  to  cold-blooded  animals.  The  air  in  the  galleries  of  a  mine  where  blasting 
has  taken  place,  is  known  to  produce  a  state  of  insensibility  resembling  that  produced  by 
charcoal  fumes.  Deep  wells  and  vaults  not  unfrequently  contain  similar  substances,  and 
their  atmosphere  often  causes  suffocation.  The  atmospheres  of  such  places  cannot  be 
tested  by  lowering  a  lighted  candle  into  it,  as  these  poisonous  gases  would  not  extinguish 
the  flame.  This  method  only  suffices  to  indicate  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride.  Jf 
a  candle  keeps  alight,  it  signifies  that  there  is  less  than  6  p.c.  of  this  gas.  In  doubtful 
cases  it  is  best  to  lower  a  dog  or  other  animal  into  the  air  to  be  tested.  If  CO2  be  very 
carefully  added  to  air,  the  flame  of  a  candle  is  not  extinguished  (although  it  becomes 
very  much  smaller)  even  when  the  gas  amounts  to  12  p.c.  of  air.  Researches  made  by 
F.  Clowes  (1894)  show  that  the  flames  (in  every  case  f  in.  long)  of  different  combustible 
substances  are  extinguished  by  the  gradual  addition  of  different  percentages  of  nitrogen  and 


NITROGEN  AND  AIR  245 

removal  of  foreign  and  injurious  admixtures  from  the  air  is  called 
'  disinfection.' 47  The  accumulation  of  all  kinds  of  impurities  in  the 
air  of  dwellings  and  cities  is  the  reason  why  the  air  of  mountains, 
forests,  seas,  and  non- marshy  localities,  covered  with  vegetation  or  snow, 
is  distinguished  for  its  freshness,  and,  in  all  respects,  beneficial  action . 

carbonic  acid  to  the  air;  the  percentage  sufficient  to  extinguish  the  flame  being  as 

follows  (the  percentage  of  oxygen  is  given  in  parenthesis) : 

p.c.  C0a  p.c.  N. 

Absolute  alcohol 14  (18-1)  21  (16'6) 

Candle   ......        .     14  (18'1)  22  (16'4) 

Hydrogen       .        .        .        .        .        .68  (  8'8)  70  (  6'3) 

Coal  gas         .        ,         .        .       -.        .     83(14-1)  46  (11-8) 

Carbonic  oxide       .        .        .        .        .24  (16'0)  28  (15'1) 

Methane        .        .        .       '.        .        .10  (18'9)  17  (17'4) 

The  flames  of  all  solid- and  liquid  substances  is  extinguished  by  almost  the  same  per- 
centage  of  CO%  or  N2,  but  the  flames  of  different  gases  vary  in  this  respect,  and  hydrogen 
continues  to  burn  in  mixtures  which  are  far  poorer  in  oxygen  than  those  in  which  the 
flames  of  other  combustible  gases  are  extinguished ;  the  flame  of  methane  CH4  is  (he 
most  easily  extinguished.  The  percentage  of  nitrogen  may  be  greater  than  that,  of  COj. 
This,  together  with  'the  fact  that,  under  the  above  circumstances,  the  flame  of  a  gas 
before  going  out  becomes  fainter  and  increases  in  size,  seems  to  indicate  that  the  chief 
reason  for  the  extinction  of  the  flame  is  th.e  fall  in  its  temperature. 

47  Different  so-called  disinfectants  purify  the  air,  and  prevent  the  injurious  action  of 
certain  of  its  components  by  changing  or  destroying  them.  Disinfection  is  especially 
necessary  in  those  places  where  a  considerable  amount  of  volatile  substances  are 
evolved  into  the  air,  and  where  organic  substances  are  decomposed;  for  instance, 
in  hospitals,  closets,  &c.  The  numerous  disinfectants  are  of  the  most  varied  nature. 
They  may.  be  divided  into  oxidising,  antiseptic,  and  absorbent  substances.  To  the 
oxidising  substances  used  for  disinfection  belong  chlorine,  and  various  substances 
evolving  it,  because  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water  oxidises  the  majority  of  organic 
substances,  and  this  is  why  chlorine  is  used  as  a  disinfectant  for  Siberian  plagues. 
Further,  to  this  class  belong  the  permanganates  of  the  alkalis  and  peroxide. of  hydrogen, 
as  substances  easily  oxidising  matters  dissolved  in  water ;  these  salts  are  not  volatile 
like  chlorine,  and  therefore  act  much  more  slowly,  and  in  a  much  more  limited  sphere. 
Antiseptic  substances  are  those  which  convert  organic  substances  into  such  as  are  little 
prone  to  change,  and  prevent  putrefaction  and  fermentation.  They  most  probably  kill 
the  germs  of  organisms  occurring  in  miasmata.  The  most  important  of  these  substances 
are  creosote  and  phenol  (carbolic  acid),  which  occur  in  tar,  and  act  in  preserving  smoked 
meat.  Phenol  is  a  substance  little*  soluble  in  water,  volatile,  oily,  and  having  the 
characteristic  smell  of  smoked  objects.  Its  action  on  animals  in  considerable  quantities 
is  injurious,  but  in  small  quantities,, used  in  the  form  of  a  weak  solution,  it  prevents  the 
change  of  animal  matter.  The  smell  ^f  privies,  which  depends  on  the  change  of  excre- 
mental  matter,  may  be  easily  removed  by  means  of  chlorine  or  phenol.  Salicylic  acid, 
thymol,  common  tar,  and  especially  its  solution  in  alkalis  as  proposed  by  Nensky,  &c., 
are  also  substances  having  the  same  property.  Absorbent  substances  are  of  no  less 
importance,  especially  as  preventatives,  than  the  preceding  two  classes  of  disinfectants, 
.inasmuch  as  they  are  innocuous.  They  are*  those  substances  which  absorb  the  odori- 
iferous  gases  and  vapours  emitted  during  putrefaction,  which  are  chiefly  ammonia, 
sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  other  volatile  compounds.  To  this  class  belong  charcoal, 
!  certain  salts  of  iron,  gypsum,  salts  of  magnesia,  and  similar  substances,  as  well  as  peat, 
'mould,  and  clay.  Questions  of  disinfection  and  ventilation  appertain  to  the  most 
serious  problems  of  common  life  and  hygiene.  These  questions  are  so  vast  that  we  are 
here  able  only  to  give  a.  short  outline  of  their  nature. 


246 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


CHAPTER  VI 


THE   COMPOUNDS   OF   NITROGEN  WITH   HYDROGEN   AND  OXYGEN 


IN  the  last  chapter  we  saw  that  nitrogen  does  not  directly  combine 
with  hydrogen,  but  that  a  mixture  of  these  gases  in  the  presence  of 

hydrochloric  acid  gas,  HC1, 
forms  ammonium  chloride, 
NH4C1,  on  the  passage  of  a 
series  of  electric  sparks.1  In 
ammonium  chloride,  HC1  is 
combined  with  NH3,  con- 
sequently N  with  H3  forms 
ammonia.'2  Almost  all  the 
nitrogenous  substances  of 
plants  and  animals  evolve 
ammonia  when  heated  with 

FIG.  42.  -The  dry  distillation  of  bones  on  a  large  scale,    an  alkali.     But  even  without 
The  bones  are  heated  in  the  vertical  cylinders  C  (about    ,1  »  11     •>• 

1J  metre  high  and  30  centimetres  in  diameter).     The    the     presence    Ot     an    alkali 

the  majority  of  nitrogenous 


substances,  when  decomposed 

and  the  cylinders  are  charged  with  a  fresh  quantity  of  ftr  V^/iofp^  with  fl  limifpH 
bones.  The  ammonia  water  is  preserved,  and  goes  to  the  Or  neatect  Wltn  a  "imte( 
preparation  of  ammoniacal  salts,  as  described  in  the  supply  of  air  evolve  their 

nitrogen,  if  not  entirely,  at 

all  events  partially,  in  the  form  of  ammonia.     When  animal  substances 
such  as  skins,  bones,  flesh,  hair,  horns,  &c.,  are  heated  without  access  of 

1  The  ammonia  in  the  air,  water,  and  soil  proceeds  from  the  decomposition  of  the 
nitrogenous  substances  of  plants  and  animals,  and  also  probably  from  the  reduction  of 
nitrates.    Ammonia  is  always  formed  in  the  rusting  of  iron.    Its  formation  in  this  case 
depends  in  all  probability  on  the  decomposition  of  water,  and  on  the  action  of  the  hydro- 
gen at  the  moment  of  its  evolution  on  the  nitric  acid  contained  in  the  air  (Cloez),  or  on 
the  formation  of  ammonium  nitrite,  which  takes  place  under  many  circumstances.     The 
evolution  of  vapours  of  ammonia  compounds  is  sometimes  observed  in  the  vicinity  of 
volcanoes.    At  a  red  heat  nitrogen  combines  directly  with  B  Ca  Mg,  and  with  many  other 
metals,  and  these  compounds,  when  heated  with  a'  caustic  alkali,  or  in  the  presence  of 
water,  give  ammonia  (see  Chapter  XIV.,  Note  14,  and  Chapter  XVII.,  Note  12).    These 
are  examples  of  the  indirect  combination  of  nitrogen  with  hydrogen. 

2  If  a  silent  discharge  or  a  series  of  electric  sparks'  be  passed  through  ammonia  gas, 
it  is  decomposed  into  nitrogen  and  hydrogen.    This  is  a  phenomenon  of  dissociation  ; 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDKOGEN  AND  OXYGEN  247 

air  in  iron  retorts — they  undergo  what  is  termed  dry  distillation.  A 
portion  of  the  resultant  substances  remains  in  the  retort  and  forms  a 
carbonaceous  residue,  whilst  the  other  portion,  in  virtue  of  its  volatility, 
escapes  through  the  tube  leading  from  the  retort.  The  vapours  given 
off,  on  cooling,  forjn  a  liquid  which  separates  into  two  layers  ;  the  one, 
which  is  oily,  is  composed  of  the  so-called  animal  oils  (oleum  animale) 
the  other,  an  aqueous  layer,  contains  a  solution  of  ammonia  salts.  If 
this  solution  be  mixed  with  lime  and  heated,  the  lime  takes  up  the 
elements  of  carbonic  acid  from  the  ammonia  salts,  and  ammonia  is 
evolved  as  a  gas.3  In  ancient  times  ammonia  compounds  were 
imported  into  Europe  from  Egypt,  where  they  were  prepared  from  the 
soot  obtained  in  the  employment  of  camels'  dung  as  fuel  in  the  locality 
of  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon  (in  Lybia),  and  therefore  the  salt 
obtained  was  called  '  sal-ammoniacale,'  from  which  the  name  of  ammonia 
is  derived.  At  the  present  time  ammonia  is  obtained  exclusively,  on  a 
large  scale,  either  from  the  products  of  the  dry  distillation  of  animal  or 

therefore,  a  series  of  sparks  do  not  totally  decompose  the  ammonia,  but  leave  a  certain 
portion  undecomposed.  One  volume  of  nitrogen  and  three  volumes  of  hydrogen  are 
obtained  from  two  volumes  of  ammonia  decomposed.  Ramsay  and  Young  (1884)  investi- 
gated the  decomposition  of  NH3  under  the  action  of  heat,  and  showed  that  at  500°,  IJp.c. 
is  decomposed,  at  600°  about  18  p.c.,  at  800°  65  p.c.,  but  these  results  were  hardly  free 
from  the  influence  of  'contact.'  The  presence  of  free  ammonia— that  is,  ammonia  not 
combined  with  acids — in  a  gas  or  aqueous  solution  may  be  recognised  by  its  characteristic 
smell.  But  many  ammonia  salts  do  not  .possess  this  smell.  However,  on  the  addition 
of  an  alkali  (for  instance,  caustic  lime,  potash,  or  soda),  they  evolve  ammonia  gas,  especially 
when  heated.  The  presence  of  ammonia  may  be  made  visible  by  introducing  a  sub- 
stance moistened  with  strong  hydrochloric  acid  into  its  neighbourhood.  A  white  cloud, 
or  visible  white  vapour,  then  makes  its  appearance.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that  both 
ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid  are  volatile,  and  on  coming  into  contact  with  each  other 
produce  solid  sal-ammoniac,  NH4C1,  which  forms  a  cloud.  This  test  is  usually  made  by 
dipping  a  glass  rod  into  hydrochloric  acid,  and  holding  it  over  the  vessel  from  which  the 
ammonia  is  evolved.  With  small  amounts  of  ammonia  this  test  is,  however,  untrust- 
worthy, as  the  white  vapour  is  scarcely  observable.  In  this  case  it  is  best  to  take  paper 
moistened  with  mercurous  nitrate,  HgNO3.  This  paper  turns  black  in  the  presence 
of  ammonia,  owing  to  the  formation  of  a  black  compound  of  ammonia  with  mercurous 
oxide.  The  smallest  traces  of  ammonia  (for  instance,  in  river  water)  may  be  detected 
by  means  of  the  so-called  Nessler's  reagent,  containing  a  solution  of  mercuric  chloride 
and  potassium  iodide,  which  forms  a  brown  coloration  or  precipitate  with  the  smallest 
quantities  of  ammonia.  It  will  be  useful  here  to  give  the  thermo-chemical  data  (in 
thousands  of  units  of  heat,  according  to  Thomsen),  or  the  quantities  of  heat  evolved  in 
the  formation  of  ammonia  and  its  compounds  in  quantities  expressed  by  their  formulae. 
Thus,  for  instance,  (N  +  H3)  26'7  indicates  that  14  grams  of  nitrogen  in  combining  with- 
8  grams  of  hydrogen  develop  sufficient  heat  to  raise  the  temperature  of  26'7  kilograms  of 
water  1°.  (NH3  +  nH2O)  8'4  (heat  of  solution);  (NH3,nH2O  +  HCl,nHsO)  12'3 ; 
(N  +  H4  +  Cl)  90-6 ;  (NH3  +  HC1)  41-9. 

5  The  same  ammonia  water  is  obtained,  although  in  smaller  quantities,  in  the 
dry  distillation  of  plants  and  of  coal,  which  consists  of  the  remains  of  fossil  plants* 
In  all  these  cases  the  ammonia  proceeds  from  the  destruction  of  the  complex  nitrogenous 
substances  occurring  in  plants  and  animals.  The  ammonia  salts  employed  in  the  arts 
are  prepared  by  this  method. 

•12 


248  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

vegetable  refuse,  from  urine,  or  from  the  ammoniacal  liquors  collected  in 
the  destructive  distillation  of  coal  for  the  preparation  of  coal  gas.  This 
ammoniacal  liquor  is  placed  in  a  retort  with  lime  and  heated ;  the 
ammonia  is  then  evolved  together  with  steam.4  In  the  artsr  only  a 
small  amount  of  ammonia  is  used  in  a  free  state — that  is,  in  an  aqueous 
solution  ;  the  greater  portion  of  it  is  converted  into  different  salts 
having  technical  uses,  especially  sal-ammoniac,  NH4C1,  and  ammonium 
sulphate,  (NH4)2SO,.  They  are  saline  substances  which  are  formed 


FlO.  43.— Method  of  abstracting  ammonia,  on  a  large  scale,  from  ammonia  water  obtained  at  gas 
works  by  the  dry  distillation  of  coal,  or  by  the  fermentation  of  urine,  &c.  This  water  is  mixed 
with  lime  and  poured  into  the  boiler  C",  and  from  thence  into  C'  and  C  consecutively.  The  last 
boiler  is  heated  directly  over  a  furnace,  and  hence  no  ammonia  remains  in  solution  after  the 
liquid  has  been  boiled  in  it.  The  liquid  is  therefore  then  thrown  away.  The  ammonia  vapour 
and  steam  pass  from  the  boiler  C,  through  the  tube  T,  into  the  boiler  C',  and  then  into  C",  so  that 
the  solution  in  C'  becomes  stronger  than  that  in  C,  and  still  stronger- in  C".  The  boilers  are  fur- 
nished with  stirrers  A.,  A',  and  A"  to  prevent  the  lime  settling.  From  C"  the  ammonia  and  steaiu 
pass  through  the  tube  T"  into  worm  condensers  surrounded  with  cold  water,  thence  into  the 
Woulfe's  bottle  P,  where  the  solution  of  ammonia  is  collected,  and  flnaHy  the  still  uncondensed 
ammonia  vapour  is  led  into,  the  flat  vessel  R,  containing  acid  which  absorbs  the  last  traces  of 
ammonia,. 

because  ammonia,  NH3,  combines  with  all  acids,  HX,  forming  ammonia 
salts,  NH4X.  Sal-ammoniac,  NH4C1,  is  a  compound  of  ammonia  with 
hydrochloric  acid.  It  is  prepared  by  passing  the  vapours  of  ammonia 
and  water,  evolved,  as  above  described,  from  ammoniacal  liquor,  into 
an  aqueous  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid,  and  on  evaporating  the 
solution  sal-ammoniac  is  obtained  in  the  form  of  soluble  crystals5 

4  The  technical  methods  for  the  preparation  of  ammonia  water,  and  for  the  extraction 
of  ammonia  from  it,  are  to  a  certain  extent  explained  in  the  figures  accompanying  the 
text. 

6  Usually  these  crystals  are  sublimed  by  heating  them  in  crucibles  or  pots,  when  the 
vapours  of  sal-ammoniac  condense  on  the  cold  covers  as  a  crust,  in  which  form  the  salt 
comes  into  the  market. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  249 

resembling  common  salt  in  appearance  and  properties.  Ammonia  may 
be  very  easily  prepared  from  this  sal-ammoniac,  NH4C1,  as  from  any 
other  ammoniacal  salt,  by  heating  it  with  lime.  Calcium  hydroxide, 
CaH2O2,  as  an  alkali  takes  up  the  acid  and  sets  free  the  ammonia, 
forming  calcium  chloride,  according  to  the  equation  2NH4Cl+CaH8Of 
.±=2H20  +  CaCl2  +  2NH3.  In  this  reaction  the  ammonia  is  evolved  at 
a  gas.6 

It  must  be  observed  that  all  the  complex  nitrogenous  substances  of 
plants,  animals,  and  soils  are  decomposed  when  heated  with  an  excess 
of  sulphuric  acid,  the  whole  of  their  nitrogen  being  converted  into 
ammonium  sulphate,  from  which  it  may  be  liberated  by  treatment  with 
an  excess  of  alkali.  This  reaction  is  so  complete  that  it  forms  the 
basis  of  Kjeldahl's  method  for  estimating  the  amount  of  nitrogen  in  its 
compounds. 

Ammonia  is  a  colourless  gas,  resembling  those  with  which  we  are 
already  acquainted  in  its  outward  appearance,  but  clearly  distinguishable 
from  any  other  gas  by  its  very  characteristic  and  pungent  smell.  It 
irritates  the  eyes,  and  it  is  positively  impossible  to  inhale  it.  Animals 
die  in  it.  Its  density,  referred  to  hydrogen,  is  8-5  ;  hence  it  is  lighter 
than  air.  It  belongs  to  the  class  of  gases  which  are  easily  liquefied.7 

6  On  a  small  scale  ammonia  may  be  prepared  in  a  glass  flask  by  mixing  equal  parts 
by  weight  of  slaked  lime  and  finely-powdered  sal-ammoniac,  the  neck  of  the  flask 
being  connected  with  an  arrangement  for  drying  the  gas  obtained.  In  this  instance 
neither  calcium  chloride  nor  sulphuric  acid  can  be  used  for  drying  the  gas,  since  both 
these  substances  absorb  ammonia,  and  therefore  solid  caustic  potash,  which  is  capable  of 
retaining  the  water,  is  employed.  The  gas-conducting  tube  leading  from  the  desiccating 
apparatus  is  introduced  into  a  mercury  bath,  if  dry  gaseous  ammonia  be  required,  because 
water  cannot  be  employed  in  collecting  ammonia  gas.  Ammonia  was  first  obtained  in 
this  dry  state  by  Priestley,  and  its  composition. was  investigated  by  Berthollet  at  the  end 
of  the  last  century.  Oxide  of  lead  mixed  with  sal-ammoniac  (Isambert)  evolves  ammonia 
with  Btill  greater  ease  than  lime.  The  cause  and  process  of  the  decomposition  are  almost 
"the  same,  2PbO  +  2NH4Cl=Pb3OCl2  +  H2O  +  2NH3.  Lead  oxychloride  is  (probably) 
formed. 

I  This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  its  absolute  boiling  point  lies  at  about  + 180°  (Chap- 
ter II. ,  Note  29).  It  may  therefore  be  liquefied  by  pressure  alone  at  the  ordinary,  and  even 
at  much  higher  temperatures.  The  latent  heat  of  evaporation  of  17  parts  by  weight 
of  ammonia  equals  4,400  units  of  heat,  and  hence  liquid  ammonia  may  be  employed 
for  the  production  of  cold.  Strong  aqueous  solutions  of  ammonia,  which  in  parting  with 
their  ammonia  act  in  a  similar  manner,  are  not  unfrequently  employed  for  this  purpose 
Suppose  a  saturated  solution  of  ammonia  to  be  contained  in  a  closed  vessel  furnished  with 
a  receiver.  If  the  ammoniacal  solution  be  heated,  the  ammonia,  with  a  small  quantity 
of  water,  will  pass  off  from  the  solution,  and  in  accumulating  in  the  apparatus  wiU 
produce  a  considerable  pressure,  and  will  therefore  liquefy  in  the  cooler  portions  of  the 
receiver.  Hence  liquid  ammonia  will  be  obtained  in  the  receiver.  The  heating  of  the 
vessel  containing  the  aqueous  solution  of  ammonia  is  then  stopped.  After  having  been 
heated  it  contains  only  water,  or  a  solution  poor  in  ammonia.  When  once  it  begins  to  cool 
the  ammonia  vapours  commence  dissolving  in  it,  the  space  becomes  rarefied,  and  a  rapid 
vaporisation  of  the  liquefied  ammonia  left  in  the  receiver  takes  place.  In  evaporating  in 


"250 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


Faraday  employed  the  following  method  for  liquefying  ammonia. 
Ammonia  when  passed  over  dry  silver  chloride,  AgCl,  is  absorbed  by  it 
to  a  considerable  extent,  especially  at  low  temperatures.8  The  solid 

the  receiver  it  will  cause  the  temperature  in  it  to  fall  considerably,  and  will  itself  pass  into 
the  aqueous  solution.  In  the  end,  the  same  ammoniacal  solution  as  originally  taken  is 
re-obtained.  Thus,  in  this  case,  on  heating  the  vessel  the  pressure  increases  by  itself, 
and  on  cooling  it  diminishes,  so  that  here  heat  directly  leplaces  mechanical  work.  This 
is  the  principle  of  the  simplest  forms  of  Carre's  ice-making  machines,  shown  in  fig.  44. 
C  is  a  vessel  made  of  boiler  plates  into  which  the  saturated  solution  of  ammonia  ia 
poured ;  m  is  a  tube  conducting  the  ammonia  vapour  to  the  receiver  A.  All  parts  of 
the  apparatus  should  be  hermetically  joined  together,  and  should  be  able  to  withstand 
a  pressure  reaching  ten  atmospheres.  The  apparatus  should  be  freed  from  air,  which 


FIG.  44. — Carre's  apparatus.    Described  in  text. 

would  otherwise  hinder  the  liquefaction  of  the  ammonia.  The  process  is  carried  on  aa 
follows : — The  apparatus  is  first  so  inclined  that  any  liquid  remaining  in  A  may  flow 
into  C.  The  vessel  C  is  then  placed  upon  a  stove  F,  and  heated  until  the  thermometer  t 
indicates  a  temperature  of  180°  C.  During  this  time  the  ammonia  has  been  expelled  from 
C,  and  has  liquefied  in  A  In  order  to  facilitate  the  liquefaction,  the  receiver  A  should 
be  immersed  in  a  tank  of  water  R  (see  the  left-hand  drawing  in  fig.  44).  After  about 
half  an  hour,  when  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  ammonia  has  been  expelled,  the  fire  is 
removed  from  under  C,  and  this  is  now  immersed  in  the  tank  of  water  R.  The  apparatus 
is  represented  in  this  position  in  the  right-hand  drawing  of  fig.  44.  The  liquefied  ammonia 
then  evaporates,  and  passes  over  into  the  water  in  C.  This  causes  the  temperature 
of  A  to  fall  considerably.  The  substance  to  be  refrigerated  is  placed  in  a  vessel  G,  in  the 
cylindrical  space  inside  the  receiver  A.  The  refrigeration  is  also  kept  on  for  about  half 
an  hour,  and  with  an  apparatus  of  ordinary  dimensions  (containing  about  two  litres 
of  ammonia  solution),  five  kilograms  of  ice  are  produced  by  the  consumption  of  one 
kilogram  of  coal.  In  industrial  works  more  complicated  types  of  Carre's  machines  are 
employed. 

8  Below  15°  (according  to  Isambert),  the  compound  AgCl,8NH3  is  formed,  and  above 
20°  the  compound  2AgCl,3NH3.  The  tension  of  the  ammonia  evolved  from  the  latter 
substance  is  equal  to  the  atmospheric  pressure  at  68°,  whilst  for  AgCljSNHj  tho 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  251 

compound  AgCl,3NH3  thus  obtained  is  introduced  into  a  bent  tube 
(fig.  45),  whose  open  end  c  is  then  fused  up.  The  compound  is  then 
slightly  heated  at  a,  and  the  ammonia  comes  off, 
owing  to  the  easy  dissociation  of  the  compound. 
The  other  end  of  the  tube  is  immersed  in  a  freez- 
ing mixture.  The  pressure  of  the  gas  coming  off, 
combined  with  the  low  temperature  at  one  end  of  FIG.  45.— The  liquefaction  of 

ammonia  in  a  thick  bent 

the  tube,  causes  the  ammonia  evolved  to  condense      glass  tube.  A  compound 

.    . .  .  .         of  chloride  of  silver  and 

into  a  liquid,  in  which  form  it  Collects  at  the  COld        ammonia  is  placed  in  the 

If,.,  -re      .1  ,  .  .  ,  1.1  etlcl     a>    and     the    eild     C    i3 

end  of  the  tube.     If  the  heating  be  stopped,  the      then  sealed  up. 
silver  chloride  again  absorbs  the  ammonia.     In 

this  manner  one  tube  may  serve  for  repeated  experiments.  Ammonia 
may  also  be  liquefied  by  the  ordinary  methods — that  is,  by  means  of 
pumping  dry  ammonia  gas  into  a  refrigerated  space.  Liquefied 
ammonia  is  a  colourless  and  very  mobile  liquid,9  whose  specific  gravity 
at  0°  is  0-63  (E.  Andreeff).  At  the  temperature  (about -70°)  given  by 
a  mixture  of  liquid  carbonic  anhydride  and  ether,  liquid  ammonia 
crystallises,  and  in  this  form  its  odour  is  feeble,  because  at  so  low  a 
temperature  its  vapour  tension  is  very  inconsiderable.  The  boiling 
point  (at  a  pressure  of  760  mm.)  of  liquid  ammonia  is  about  — 32°. 
Hence  this  temperature  may  be  obtained  at  the  ordinary  pressure  by 
the  evaporation  of  liquefied  ammonia. 

Ammonia,  containing,  as  it  does,  much  hydrogen,  is  capable  of 
combustion ;  it  does  not,  however,  burn  steadily,  and  sometimes  not 
at  all,  in  ordinary  atmospheric  air.  In  pure  oxygen  it  burns  with 
a  greenish-yellow  flame,10  forming  water,  whilst  the  nitrogen  set  free 

pressures  are  equal  at  about  20°;  consequently,  at  higher  temperatures  it  is  greater 
than  the  atmospheric  pressure,  whilst  at  lower  temperatures  the  ammonia  is  absorbed 
and  forms  this  compound.  Consequently,  all  the  phenomena  of  dissociation  are  here 
clearly  to  be  observed.  Joannis  and  Croisier  (1894)  investigated  similar  compounds 
with  AgBr,  Agl,  AgCN  and  AgNO3,  and  found  that  they  all  give  definite  compounds 
with  NH5,  for  instance  AgBr,3NH3, 2AgBr,8NH3  and  AgBr,2NH3 ;  they  are  all  colourless, 
solid  substances  which  decompose  under  the  atmospheric  pressure  at  +  8*5,  +  84°  and 
+  61°. 

9  The  liquefaction  of  ammonia  may  be  accomplished  without  an  increase  of  pressure, 
by  means  of  refrigeration  alone,  in  a  carefully  prepared  mixture  of  ice  and  calcium 
chloride  (because  the  absolute  boiling  point  of  NH3  is  high,  about  + 130°).    It  may  even 
take  place  in  the  severe  frosts  of  a  Russian  winter.    The  application  of  liquid  ammonia 
as  a  motive  power  for  engines  forms  a  problem  which  has  to  a  certain  extent  been  solved 
by  the  French  engineer  Tellier. 

10  The  combustion  of  ammonia  in  oxygen  may  be  effected  by  the  aid  of  platinum. 
A  small  quantity  of  an  "aqueous  solution  of  ammonia,  containing  about  20  p.c.  of  the  gas, 
is  poured  into  a  wide-necked  beaker  of  about  one  litre  capacity.    A  gas-conducting  tube 
about  10  mm.  in  diameter,  and  supplying  oxygen,  is  immersed  in  the  aqueous  solution  of 
ammonia.    But  before  introducing  the  gas  an  incandescent  platinum  spiral  is  placed  in 
the  beaker ;  the  ammonia  in  the  presence  of  the  platinum  is  oxidised  and  burns,  whilst 
the  platinum  wire  becomes  still  more  incandescent.    The  solution  of  ammonia  is  heated, 


•252  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTEY 

gives  its  oxygen  compounds — that  is,  oxides  of  nitrogen.  The  decomposi- 
tion of  ammonia  into  hydrogen  ajid  nitrogen  not  only  takes  place  at  a 
reql  heat  and  under  the  action  of  electric  sparks,  but  also  by  means  of 
many  oxidising  substances  ;  for  instance,  by  passing  ammonia  through 
a  tube  containing  red-hot  copper  oxide.  >-  The  water  thus  formed  may 
.be  collected  by  substances  absorbing  it,  and  the  quantity  of  nitrogen1 
may  be  measured  in  a  gaseous  form,  and  thus  the  composition  of 
ammonia  determined.  In  this  manner  it  is  very  easy  to  prove  that 
ammonia  contains"  3  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen  to  14  parts  by 
weight  of  nitrogen ;  and,  by  volume^  3  vols.  of  Jaydrogen  and  1  vol.  of 
nitrogen  form  2  vols.  of  ammonia.11 

Ammonia  is  capable  of  combining  with  a  number  of  substances, 
forming,  like  water,  substances  of  various  degrees  of  stability.  It  is 
more  soluble  than  any  of  the  gases  yet  described,  both  in  water  and  in 
many  aqueous  solutions.  We  have  already  seen,  in  the  first  chapter, 
that  one  volume  of  water,  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  dissolves  about 
tOO  vols.  of  ammonia  gas.  The  great  solubility  of  ammonia  enables  it 
to  be  always  kept  ready  for  use  in  the  form  of  an  aqueous  solution,12 

And  oxygen  passed  through  the  solution.  The  oxygen,  as  it  bubbles  off  from  the  ammonia 
solution,  carries  with  it  a  part  of  the  ammonia,  and  this  mixture  explodes  on  coming 
into  contact  with  the  incandescent  platinum.  This,  is  followed  by  a  certain  cooling 
effect,  owing  to  the  combustion  ceasing,  but  after  a  short  interval  this  •  is  renewed,  so 
that  one  feeble  explosion  follows  after  another.  During  the' period  of  oxidation  without 
explosion,  white  vapours  of  ammonium  nitrite  and  red-brown  vapours  of  oxides  of  nitrogen 
make  their  appearance,  while  during  the  explosion  there  is  complete  combustion  and 
consequently  water  and  nitrogen  are  formed. 

l\  This  may  be  verified  by  their  densities.  Nitrogen  is  14  times  denser  than  hydro- 
gen, and  ammonia  is  8  J  times.  If  8  volumes  of  hydrogen  with  1  volume  of  nitrogen  gave 
4  volumes  of  ammonia,  then  these  4  volumes  would  weigh  17  times  as  much  as  1  volume 
of  hydrogen ;  consequently  1  volume  of  ammonia  would  be  4^  times  heavier  than  the 
same  volume  of  hydrogen.  But  if  these  4  volumes  only  give  2  volumes  of  ammonia, 
.the  latter  will  be  8}  times  as  dense  as  hydrogen,  which  is  found  to  be  actually  the 
.pase. 

18  Aqueous  solutions  of  ammonia  are  lighter  than  water,  and  at  16°,  taking  water  at 
4° =10,000,  their  specific  gravity,  as.  dependent  on  pt  or  the  percentage  amount  (by 
weight)  of  ammonia,  is  given  by  the  expression  s  =  9,992  -  42'5p  +  0'21p2 ;  for  instance,  with 
10  p.c.  «= 9,587.  If  tf  represents  the  temperature  between  the  limits  of  +10°  and  +20°,  then 
the  expression  (15— t)  (1'5  +  0'14/p)  must  be  added  to  the  formula  for  the  specific  gravity. 
Solutions  containing  more  than  24  p.c.  have  not  been  sufficiently  investigated  in  respect 
to  the  variation  of  their  specific  gravity,'  It  is,  however,  easy  to  obtain  more  concentrated 
solutions,  and  at  0°  solutions  approaching  NH3,H2Q  (48'6  p.c.  NH3)  in  their  composition, 
and  of  sp.  gr.  0'85,  may  be  prepared.  But  such  solutions  give  up  the  bulk  of  their 
ammonia  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  so  that  more  than  24  p.c.  NH3  is  rarely  contained 
in  solution.  Ammoniacal  solutions  containing  a  considerable  amount  of  ammonia  give 
ice-like  crystals  which  seem  to  contain  ammonia  at  temperatures  far  below  0°  (for  instance, 
an  8  p.c.  solution  at  - 14°,  the  strongest  solutions  at  -48°).  The  whole  of  the  ammonia 
may  be  expelled  from,  a  solution  by  heating,  even  at  a  comparatively  low  temperature  ; 
hence  on  heating  aqueous  solutions  containing  ammonia  a  very  strong  solution  of 
ammonia  is.  obtained  in  the  distillate.  Alcohol,  ether,  and  many  other  liquids  are  also 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND   OXYGEN  253 

which  is  commercially  known  as  spirits  of  hartshorn.  Ammonia  water 
is  continually  evolving  ammoniacal  vapour,  and  so  has  the  characteristic 
smell  of  ammonia  itself.  It  is  a  very  characteristic  and  important  fact 
that  ammonia  has  an  alkaline  reaction,  and  colours  litmus  paper  blue; 
just  like  caustic  potash  or  lime  ;  it  is  therefore  sometimes  called  caustic 
ammonia  (volatile  alkali).  Acids  may  be  saturated  by  ammonia  water 
or  gas  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  by  any  other  alkali.  In  this  process 
ammonia  combines  directly  with  acids,  and  this  forms  the  most  essential 

capable  of  dissolving  ammonia.  Solutions  of  ammonia,  wh«n  exposed  to  the  atmosphere, 
give  off  a  part  of  their  ammonia  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  solution  of  gases  in 
liquids,  which  we  have  already  considered.  But  the  ammoniacal  solutions  at  the  same 
time  absorb  carbonic  anhydride  from  the  air,  and  ammonium  carbonate  remains  in  the 
solution. 

Solutions  of  ammonia  are  required  both  for  laboratory  and  factory  operations,  and  have 
therefore  to  be  frequently  prepared.  For  this  purpose  the  arrangement  shown  in  fig.  46 
is  employed  in  the  laboratory.  In  works  the  same  arrangement  is  used,  only  on  a  larger 
ecale  (with  earthenware  or  metallic  vessels).  The  gas  is  prepared  in  the  retort,  from 


FIG.  46.— Apparatus  for  preparing  solutions  ot  ammonia. 

whence  it  is  led  into  the  two-necked  globe  A,  and  then  through  a  series  of  Woulfe'a 
bottles,  B,  C,  D,  E.  The  impurities  spurting  over  collect  in  A,  and  the  gas  is  dissolved 
in  B,  but  the  solution  soon  becomes  saturated,  and  a  purer  (washed)  ammonia  passes 
over  into  the  following  vessels,  in  which  only  a  pure  solution  is  obtained.  The  bent 
funnel  tube  in  the  retort  preserves  the  apparatus  from  the  possibility  both  of  the  pres- 
sure of  the  gas  evolved  in  it  becoming  too  great  (when  the  gas  escapes  through  it  into 
the  air),  and  also  from  the  pressure  incidentally  falling  too  low  (for  instance,  owing  to  a 
cooling  effect,  or  from  the  reaction  stopping).  If  this  takes  place,  the  air  passes  into  the 
retort,  otherwise  the  liquid  from  B  would  be  drawn  into  A.  The  safety  tubes  in  each 
Woulfe's  bottle,  open  at  both  ends,  and  immersed  in  the  liquid,  serve  for  the  same  purpose. 
Without  them,  in  case  of  an  accidental  stoppage  in  the  evolution  of  so  soluble  a  gas  as 
ammonia,  the  solution  would  be  sucked  from  one  vessel  to  another — for  instance,  from  E 
into  D,  &c.  In  order  to  clearly  see  the  necessity  for  safety  tubes  in  a  gas  apparatus, 
it  must  be  remembered  that  the  gaseous  pressure  in  the  interior  of  the  arrangement  must 
exceed  the  atmospheric  pressure  by  the  height  of  the  sum  of  the  columns  of  liquid 
through  which  the  gas  has  to  pass. 


254  PRINCIPLES  OP  CHEMISTRY 

chemical  reaction  of  this  substance.  If  sulphuric,  nitric,  acetic,  or  any 
other  acid  be  brought  into  contact  with  ammonia  it  absorbs  it,  and  in 
so  doing  evolves  a  large  amount  of  heat  and  forms  a  compound  having 
all  the  properties  of  a  salt.  Thus,  for  example,  sulphuric  acid,  H2SO,, 
in  absorbing  ammonia,  forms  (on  evaporating  the  solution)  two  salts, 
according  to  the  relative  quantities  of  ammonia  and  acid.  One  salt  is 
formed  from  NH3  +  H2S04,  and  consequently  has  the  composition 
NH5S04,  and  the  other  is  formed  from  2NH3  +  H2S04,  and  its  com- 
position is  therefore  N2H8S04.  The  former  has  an  acid  reaction  and  the 
latter  a  neutral  reaction,  and  they  are  called  respectively  acid  ammonium 
sulphate  (ammonium  hydrogen  sulphate),  and  normal  ammonium 
sulphate,  or  simply  ammonium  sulphate.  The  same  takes  place  in  the 
action  of  all  other  acids  ',  but  certain  of  them  are  able  to  form  normal 
ammonium  saltsonly,  whilst  others  giveboth  acid  and  normal  ammonium 
salts.  This  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  acid  and  not  on  the  ammonia, 
as  we  shall  afterwards  see.  Ammonium  salts  are  very  similar  in  appear- 
ance and  in  many  of  their  properties  to  metallic  salts ;  for  instance, 
sodium  chloride,  or  table  salt,  resembles  sal-ammoniac,  or  ammonium 
chloride,  not  only  in  its  outward  appearance  but  even  in  crystalline 
form,  in  its  property  of  giving  precipitates  with  silver  salts,  in  its  solu- 
bility in  water,  and  in  its  evolving  hydrochloric  acid  when  heated  with 
sulphuric  acid — in  a  word,  a  most  perfect  analogy  is  to  be  remarked 
in  an  entire  series  of  reactions.  An  analogy  in  composition  is  seen 
if  sal-ammoniac,  NH4C1,  be  compared  with  table  salt,  NaCl ;  and  the 
ammonium  hydrogen  sulphate,  NH4HSO4,  with  the  sodium  hydrogen 
sulphate,  NaHSO4 ;  or  ammonium  nitrate,  NH4N03,  with  sodium 
nitrate,  NaN03.13  It  is  seen,  on  comparing  the  above  compounds,  that 
the  part  which  sodium  takes  in  the  sodium  salts  is  played  in  ammonium 
salts  by  a  group  NH4,  which  is  called  ammonium.  If  table  salt  be 

13  The  analogy  between  the  ammonium  and  sodium  salts  might  seem  to  be  destroyed 
by  the  fact  that  the  latter  are  formed  from  the  alkali  or  oxide  and  an  acid,  with  the  sepa- 
ration of  water,  whilst  the  ammonium  salts  are  directly  formed  from  ammonia  and  an 
acid,  without  the  separation  of  water ;  but  the  analogy  is  restored  if  we  compare  soda  to 
ammonia  water,  and  liken  caustic  soda  to  a  compound  of  ammonia  with  water.  Then  the 
very  preparation  of  ammonium  salts  from  such  a  hydrate  of  ammonia  will  completely  re- 
eemble  the  preparation  of  sodium  salts  from  soda.  We  may  cite  as  an  example  the  action 
of  hydrochloric  acid  on  both  substances. 

NaHO  M-  HC1.  =     H2O     +      NaCl 

Sodium  hydroxide        Hydrochloric  acid        Water         Table  salt 

NH4HO  +  HC1  =     H20      +        NH4C1 

Ammonium  hydroxide        Hydrochloric  acid        Water         Sal-ammoniac 

Just  as  in  soda  the  hydroxyl  or  aqueous  radicle  OH  is  replaced  by  chlorine,  so  it  is  in 
ijRp  hydrate. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  255 

called  'sodium  chloride/  then  sal-ammoniac  should  be  and  is  called 
'ammonium  chloride/ 

The  hypothesis  that  ammoniacal  salts  correspond  with  a  complex 
metal  ammonium  bears  the  name  of  the  ammonium  theory.  It  was 
enunciated  by  the  famous  Swedish  chemist  Berzelius  after  the  proposi- 
tion made  by  Ampere.  The  analogy  admitted  between  ammonium  and 
metals  is  probable,  owing  to  the  fact  that  mercury  is  able  to  form  an 
amalgam  with  ammonium  similar  to  that  which  it  forms  with  sodium 
or  many  other  metals.  The  only  difference  between  ammonium  amalgam 
and  sodium  amalgam  consists  in  the  instability  of  the  ammonium,  which 
easily  decomposes  into  ammonia  and  hydrogen.14  Ammonium  amalgam 
may  be  prepared  from  sodium  amalgam.  If  the  latter  be  shaken  up 
with  a  strong  solution  of  sal-ammoniac,  the  mercury  swells  up  violently 
and  loses  its  mobility  whilst  preserving  its  metallic  appearance.  In  so 
doing,  the  mercury  dissolves  ammonium — that  is,  the  sodium  in  the 
mercury  is  replaced  by  the  ammonium,  and  replaces  it  in  the  sal- 

14  Weyl  (1864)  by  subjecting  sodium  to  the  action  of  ammonia  at  the  ordinary  tem- 
perature and  under  considerable  pressures,  obtained  a  liquid,  which  was  subsequently 
investigated  by  Joannis  (1889),  who  confirmed  the  results  obtained  by  Weyl.  At  0°  and 
the  atmospheric  pressure  the  composition  of  this  substance  is  Na+5'3NH3.  The 
removal  (at  0°)  of  ammonia  from  the  liquid  gives  a  solid  copper-red  body  having  the 
composition  NH3Na.  The  determination  of  the  molecular  weight  of  this  substance  by 
the  fall  of  the  tension  of  liquid  ammonia  gave  N2HgNa2.  It  is,  therefore,  free  ammonium 
in  which  one  H  is  replaced  by  Na.  The  compound  with  potassium,  obtained  under  the 
same  conditions,  proved  to  have  an  analogous  composition.  By  the  decomposition  of 
NH3Na  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  Joannis  (1891)  obtained  hydrogen  and  sodium- 
amide  NH2Na  in  small  colourless  crystals  which  were  soluble  in  water.  The  addition  of 
liquid  ammonia  to  metallic  sodium  and  a  saturated  solution  of  sodium  chloride,  gives 
NH2Na2Cl,  and  this  substance  is  sal-ammoniac,  in  which  H2  is  replaced  by  Na2. 

If  pure  oxygen  be  passed  through  a  solution  of  these  compounds  in  ammonia  at  a 
temperature  of  about  —  50°,  it  is  seen  that  the  gas  is  rapidly  absorbed.  The  liquid  gradu- 
ally loses  its  dark  red  colour  and  becomes  lighter,  and  when  it  has  become  quite  colour- 
less a  gelatinous  precipitate  is  thrown  down.  After  the  removal  of  the  ammonia,  this 
precipitate  dissolves  easily  in  water  with  a  considerable  evolution  of  heat,  but  without 
giving  off  any  gaseous  products.  The  composition  of  the  sodium  compound  thus  obtained 
is  NILjNa^HO,  which  shows  that  it  is  a  hydrate  of  bisodium-ammonium.  Thus,  although 
free  ammonium  has  not  been  obtained,  still  a  sodium  substitution  product  of  it  is  known 
which  corresponds  to  it  as  a  salt  to  a  hydrate.  Ammonium  amalgam  was  originally 
obtained  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  sodium  amalgam  (Davy) ;  namely,  a  piece  of  sal- 
ammoniac  was  taken,  and  moistened  with  water  (in  order  to  render  it  a  conductor  of 
electricity).  A  cavity  was  made  in  it,  into  which  mercury  was  poured,  and  it  was  laid  on 
a  sheet  of  platinum  connected  with  the  positive  pole  of  a  galvanic  battery,  while  the 
negative  pole  was  put  into  connection  with  the  mercury.  On  passing  a  current  the 
mercury  increased  considerably  in  volume,  and  became  plastic,  whilst  preserving  its 
metallic  appearance,  just  as  would  be  the  case  were  the  sal-ammoniac  replaced  by  a  lump, 
of  a  sodium  salt  or  of  many  other  metals.  In  the  analogous  decomposition  of  common 
metallic  salts,  the  metal  contained  in  a  given  salt  separates  out  at  the  negative  pole,  im- 
mersed in  mercury,  by  which  the  metal  is  dissolved.  A  similar  phenomenon  is  observed 
in  the  case  of  sal-ammoniac ;  the  elements  of  ammonium,  NH^  in  this  case  are  also 
collected  in  the  mercury,  and  are  retained  by  it  for  a  certain  time. 


256  PEINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

ammoniac,  forming  sodium  chloride,  NH4Cl  +  HgNa== 
Naturally,  the  formation  of  ammonium  amalgam  does  not  entirely  prove 
the  existence  of  ammonium  itself  in  a  separate  state  ;  but  it  shows  the 
possibility  of  this  substance  existing,  and  its  analogy  with  the  metals, 
because  only  metals  dissolve  in  mercury  l5  Ammonium  amalgam  crystal- 
lises in  cubes,  three  times  heavier  than  water ;  it  is  only  stable  in  the 
cold,  and  particularly  at  very  low  temperatures.  It  begins  to  decompose 
at  the  ordinary  temperature,  evolving  ammonia  and  hydrogen  in  the 
proportion  of  two  volumes  of  ammonia  and  one  volume  of  hydrogen, 
NH4=NH3  +  H.  By  the  action  of  water,  ammonium  amalgam  gives 
hydrogen  and  ammonia  water,  just  as  sodium  amalgam  gives  hydrogen 
and  sodium  hydroxide  ;  and  therefore,  in  accordance  with  the  ammonium 
theory,  ammonia  water  must  be  looked  on  as  containing  ammonium 
hydroxide,  NH4OH,16  just  as  an  aqueous  solution  of  sodium  hydroxide, 
contains  NaOH.  The  ammonium  hydroxide,  like  ammonium  itself,  is 
an  unstable  substance,  which  easily  dissociates,  and  can  only  exist  in 
a  free  state  at  low  temperatures.17  Ordinary  solutions  of  ammonia 
must  be  looked  on  as  the  products  of  the  dissociation  of  this  hydroxide, 
inasmuch  as  NH4OH=NH3  +  H20. 

All  ammoniacal  salts'  decompose  at  a  red  heat  into  ammonia  and  an 
acid,  which,  on  cooling  in  contact  with  each  other,  re-combina  together. 
If  the  acid  be  non-volatile,  the  ammoniacal  salt,  when  heatfctt,  evolves 
the  ammonia,  leaving  the  non- volatile  acid  behind  ;  if  the  acid  be 
volatile,  then,  on  heating,  both  the  acid  and  ammonia  volatilise  together, 
and  on  cooling  re-combine  into  the  salt  which  originally  ^served  for  the 
formation  of  their  vapours.18 

16  We  may  mention,  however,  that  under  particular  conditions  hydrogen  is  also 
capable  of  forming  an  amalgam  resembling  the  amalgam  of  ammonium.  If  an  amalgam 
of  zinc  be  shaken  up  with  an  aqueous  solution  of  platinum  chloride,  without  access  of 
air,  then  a  spongy  mass  is  formed  which  easily  decomposes,  with  the  evolution  of 
hydrogen. 

16  We  saw  above  that  the  solubility  of  ammonia  in  water  at  low  temperatures  attains 
to  the  molecular  ratio  NHs  +  HgO,  in  which  these  substances  are  contained  in  caustic 
ammonia,  and  perhaps  it  may  be  possible  at  exceedingly  low  temperatures  to  obtain 
ammonium  hydroxide,  NH$HO,  in  a  solid  form.      Regarding  solutions  as  dissociated 
definite  compounds,  we  should  see  a  confirmation  of  this  view  in  the  property  shown  by 
ammonia  of  being  extremely  soluble  in  water,  and  in  so  doing  of  approaching  to  the 
limit  NH4HO. 

17  In  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  this  conclusion  we  may  cite  the  remarkable  fact 
that  there  exist,  in  a  free  state  and  as  comparatively  stable  compounds,  a  series  of  alka- 
line hydroxides,  NB4HO,  which  are  perfectly  analogous  to  ammonium  hydroxide,  and 
present  a  striking  resemblance  to  it  and  to  sodium  hydroxide,  with  the  only  difference* 
that  the  hydrogen  in  NH4HO  is  replaced  by  complex  groups,  R  =  CH5,  CjHs,  &c.,  for 
instance  N(CH3)4HO.    Details  will  be  found  in  organic  chemistry. 

18  The  fact  that  ammoniacal  salts  are  decomposed  when  ignited,  and  n6t  simply 
sublimed,  may  be  proved  by  a  direct  experiment  with  sal-ammoniac,  NH4C1,  which  in  a 
state  of  vapour  is  decomposed  into  ammonia,  NH?,  and  hydrochloric  acid,  HC1,  as  will 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  257 

Ammonia  is  not  only  capable  of  combining  with  acids,  but  also 
with  many  salts,  as  was  seen  from  its  forming  definite  compounds, 
AgCl,3NH3  and  2AgCl,3NH3,  with  silver  chloride.  Just  as  ammonia 
is  absorbed  by  various  oxygen  salts  of  the  metals,  so  also  is  it  absorbed 
by  the  chlorine,  iodine,  and  bromine  compounds  of  many  metals,  and  in 
so  doing  evolves  heat.  Certain  of  these  compounds  part  with  their 
ammonia  even  when  left  exposed  to  the  air,  but  others  only  do  so  at  a 
red  heat ;  many  give  up  their  ammonia  when  dissolved,  whilst  others 
dissolve  without  decomposition,  and  when  evaporated  separate  from  their 
solutions  unchanged.  All  these  facts  only  indicate  that  ammoniacal, 
like  aqueous,  compounds  dissociate  with  greater  or  lesser  facility.19 
Certain  metallic  oxides  also  absorb  ammonia  and  are  dissolved  in 
ammonia  water.  Such  are,  for  instance,  the  oxides  of  zinc,  nickel, 
copper,  and  many  others  ;  the  majority  of  such  compounds  are  unstable. 
The  property  of  ammonia  of  combining  with  certain  oxides  explains 
its  action  on  certain  metals.20  By  reason  of  such  action,  copper  vessels 
are  not  suitable  for  holding  liquids  containing  ammonia.  Iron  is  not 
acted  on  by  such  liquids. 

The  similarity  between  the  relation  of  ammonia  and  water  to  salts 
and  other  substances  is  more  especially  marked  in  those  cases  in  which 
the  salt  is  capable  of  combining  with  both  ammonia  and  water.  Take, 
for  example,  copper  sulphate,  CuSO4.  As  we  saw  in  Chapter  I.,  it 
gives  with  water  blue  crystals,  CuSO4,5H20 ;  but  it  also  absorbs 
ammonia  in  the  same  molecular  proportion,  forming  a  blue  substance, 
CuSO4,5NH3,  and  therefore  the  ammonia  combining  with  salts  may 
be  termed  ammonia  of  crystallisation. 

Such  are  the  reactions  of  combination  proper  to  ammonia.  Let  us 
now  turn  our  attention  to  the  reactions  of  substitution  proper  to  this 
substance.  If  ammonia  be  passed  through  a  heated  tube  containing 
metallic  sodium,  hydrogen  is  evolved,  and  a  compound  is  obtained 

be  explained  in  the  following  chapter.  The  readiness  with  which  ammonium  salts  decom- 
pose is  seen  from  the  fact  that  a  solution  of  ammonium  oxalate  is  decomposed  with  the 
evolution  of  ammonia  even  at  —1°.  Dilute  solutions  of  ammonium  salts,  when  boiled, 
•give  aqueous  vapour  having  an  alkaline  reaction,  .owing  to  the  presence  of  free  ammonia 
given  off  from  the  salt. 

19  Isambert  studied  the  dissociation  of  ammoniacal  compounds,  as  we  have  seen  in 
Note  8,  and  showed  that  at  low  temperatures  many  salts  are  able  to  combine  with  a 
still  greater  amount  of  ammonia,  which  proves  an  entire  analogy  with  hydrates ;  and  as 
in  this  case  it  is  easy  to  isolate  the  definite  compounds,  and  as  the  least  possible  tension 
of  ammonia  is  greater  than  that  of  water,  therefore  the  ammoniacal  compounds  present 
•&,  great  and  peculiar  interest,  as  a  means  for  explaining  the  nature  of  aqueous  solu- 
tions and  as  a  confirmation  of  the  hypothesis  of  the  formation  of  definite  compounds  in 
them ;  for  these  reasons  we  shall  frequently  refer  to  these  compounds  in  the  further  ex- 
position of  this  work. 

»  Chapter  V.,  Note  2. 


258  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

containing  ammonia  in  which  one  atom  of  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  an  atom 
of  sodium,  NH2Na  (according  to  the  equation  NH3-f  Na  =  NH2Na-j-H). 
This  body  is  termed  sodium  amide.  We  shall  afterwards  see  that 
iodine  and  chlorine  are  also  capable  of  directly  displacing  hydrogen  from 
ammonia,  and  of  replacing  it.  In  fact,  the  hydrogen  of  ammonia  may 
be  replaced  in  many  ways  by  different  elements.  If  in  this  replacement 
NH2  remains,  the  resultant  substances  NH2R  are  called  amides,  whilst 
the  substitution  products,  NHR2,  in  which  only  NH  remains,  are  called 
imidesf0  bis  and  those  in  which  none  of  the  ammoniacal  hydrogen 
remains,  NR3,  are  known  as  nitrides.  Free  amidogen,  N2H4,  is  now 
known  in  a  state  of  hydration  under  the  name  of  hydraziiie  ; 21  it  com- 

20  bis  lmide,  NH,  has  not  been  obtained  in  a  free  state,  but  its  hydrochloric  acid  salt, 
NHHC1,  has  apparently  been  obtained  (1890)  by  Maumene"  by  igniting  the  double  bi- 
chloride of  platinum  and  ammonium  chloride,  PtCl2NH4Cl  =  Pt  +  2HC1  +  NHHC1.     It  is 
soluble  in  water,  arid  crystallises  from  its  solution  in  hexagonal  rhombic  prisms.     It  gives 
ft  double  salt  with  FeCl3  of  the  composition  FeCl38NHHCl.    The  salt  NHHC1  is  similar 
(isomeric)  with  the  first  possible  product  of  the  metalepsis  of  ammonia,  NH2C1,  although 
it  does  not  resemble  i£  in  any  of  its  properties. 

21  Free  amidogen  or  hydrazine,  N2H4,  or  2NH2,  wa£  prepared  by  Curtius  (1887)  by 
means  of  ethyl  diazoacetate,  or  triazoacetic  acid.    Curtius  and  Jay  (1889)  showed  that 
triazoacetic  acid,  CHN2.COOH  (the  formula  should  be  sripled),  when  heated  with  water  or  a 
mineral  acid,  gives  (quantitatively)  oxalic  acid  and  amidogen  (hydrazine),  CHN2.COOH 
+  2H2O  =»  C2Oj(OH)2  +  N2H4 — i.e.  (empirically),  the  oxygen  of  the  water  replaces  the  nitro- 
gen of  the  azoacetic  acid.    The  amidogen  is  thus  obtained  in  the  form  of  a  salt.    With 
acids,  amidogen  forms  very  stable  salts  of  the  two  types  N2H4HX  and  N2H4H2X2,  as, 
for  example,  with  HC1,  H2SO4,  &c.    These  salts  are  easily  crystallised ;  in  acid  solutions 
they  act  as  powerful  reducing  agents,  evolving  nitrogen ;  when  ignited  they  are  decom- 
posed into  ammoniacal  salts,  nitrogen,  and  hydrogen ;  with  nitrites  they  evolve  nitrogen. 
The  sulphate  N2H4,H2SO4  is  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water  (3  parts  in  100  of  water), 
but  is  very  soluble  in  hot  water ;  its  specific  gravity  is  T378,  it  fuses  at  254°  with  de- 
composition.    The  hydrochloride  N2H4,2HC1  crystallises  in  octahedra,  is  very  soluble 
in  water,  but  not  in  alcohol ;  it  fuses  at  198°,  evolving  hydrogen  chloride  and  forming 
the  salt  N2H4HC1 ;  when  rapidly  heated  it  decomposes  with  an  explosion ;  with  platinio 
chloride  it  immediately  evolves  nitrogen,  forming  platinous  chloride.    By  the  action  of 
alkalis  the  salts  N2H4,2HX  give  hydrate  of  amidogen,  N2H4,H2O,  which  is  a  fuming 
liquid  (specific  gravity  I'OS),  boiling  at  119°,  almost  without  odour,  and  whose  aqueous 
solution  corrodes  glass  and  indiarubber,  has  an  alkaline  taste  and  poisonous  properties. 
The  reducing  capacities  of  the  hydrate  are  clearly  seen  from  the  fact  that  it  reduces  the 
metals  platinum  and  silver  from  their  solutions.    With  mercuric  oxide  it  explodes.    It 
reacts  directly  with  the  aldehydes  RO,  forming  N2R2  and  water ;  for  example,  with  benz- 
aldehydes  it  gives  the  very  stable  insoluble  benzalazine  (C6H6CHN)2  of  a  yellow  colour, 
We  may  add  that  hydrazine  often  forms  double  salts ;  for  example,  MgSO4N2H4H2S04 
or  KC1N2H4HC1,  and  that  it  is  also  formed  by  the  action  of  nitrous  acid  upon  aldehyde- 
ftmmonia.    The  products  of  the  substitution  of  the  hydrogen  in  hydrazine  by  hydro- 
carbon groups  R  (R  =  CH3,  C2H5,  C6H5,  &c.)  were  obtained  before  hydrazine  itself;  for 
example,  NHRNH2,  NR-jNHa,  and  (NRH)2. 

The  heat  of  solution  of  the  sulphuric  acid  salt  (1  part  in  200  and  300  parts  of  water 
at  10°-8)  is  equal  to  -8'7  C.  According~to  Berthelot  and  Matigon  (1892),  the  heat  of 
neutralisation  of  hydrazine  by  sulphuric  acid  is  +  5'5  C.  and  by  hydrochloric  acid  +  5'2  0. 
Thus  hydrazine  is  a  very  feeble  base,  for  its  heat  of  saturation  is  not  only  lower  than 
that  of  ammonia  (  + 12-4  C.  for  HC1),  but  even  below  that  of  hydroxylamine  (  +  9'3  C.) 
The  heat  of  formation.from  the  elements  of  hydrated  hydrazine  -9'5  C  was  deduced 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  259 

bines  with  acids  and  resembles  ammonia  in  this  respect.  In  the  action 
of  different  substances  on  ammonia  it  is  the  hydrogen  that  is  substituted, 
whilst  the  nitrogen  remains  in  the  resultant  compound,  so  to  say,  un- 
touched. The  same  phenomenon  is  to  be  observed  in  the  action  of 
various  substances  on  water.  In  the  majority  of  cases  the  reaction! 
of  water  consist  in  the  hydrogen  being  evolved,  and  in  its  being 
replaced  by  different  elements.  This  also  takes  place,  as  we  have  seen, 
in  acids  in  which  the  hydrogen  is  easily  displaced  by  metals.  This 
chemical  mobility  of  hydrogen  is  perhaps  connected  with  the  great 
lightness  of  the  atoms  of  this  element. 

In  practical  chemistry  21  bis  ammonia  is  often  employed,  not  only  for 
saturating  acids,  but  also  for  effecting  reactions  of  double  decomposi- 

from  the  heat  of  combustion,  determined  by  burning  N2H4H2S04  in  a  calorimetric  bomb, 
+ 127'7  C.  Thus  hydrazine  is  an  endothermal  compound ;  its  passage  into  ammonia  by 
the  combination  of  hydrogen  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  51'5  C.  In  the  presence 
of  an  acid  these  figures  were  greater  by  4- 14'4  C.  Hence  the  direct  converse  passage 
from  ammonia  into  hydrazine  is  impossible.  As  regards  the  passage  of  hydroxylamine 
into  hydrazine,  it  would  be  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  heat  (-t-  21'5  C.)  in  an  aqueous 
solution. 

Amidogen  must  be  regarded  as  a  compound  which  stands  to  ammonia  in  the  same 
relation  as  hydrogen  peroxide  stands  to  water.  Water,  H(OH),  gives,  according  to  the 
law  of  substitution,  as  was  clearly  to  be  expected,  (OH)  (OH) —that  is,  peroxide  of  hydro- 
gen is  the  free  radicle  of  water  (hydroxyl).  So  also  ammonia,  H(NH2),  forms  hydrazine, 
(NH2)(NH2) — that  is,  the  free  radicle  of  ammonia,  NH2,  or  amidogen.  In  the  case  of 
phosphorus  a  similar  substance,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  has  long  been  known  under 
the  name  of  liquid  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  P2H4. 

21  bis  in  practice,  the  applications  of  ammonia  are  very  varied.  The  use  of  ammonia  as 
a  stimulant,  in  the  forms  of  the  so-called  '  smelling  salts '  or  of  spirits  of  hartshorn,  in 
cases  of  faintness,  &c.,  is  known  to  everyone.  The  volatile  carbonate  of  ammonium,  or  a 
mixture  of  an  ammonium  salt  with  an  alkali,  is  also  employed  for  this  purpose.  Ammonia 
also  produces  a  well-known  stimulating  effect  when  rubbed  on  the  skin,  for  which  reason 
it  is  sometimes  employed  for  external  applications.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  well-known 
volatile  salve  is  prepared  from  any  liquid  oil  shaken  up  with  a  solution  of  ammonia.  A 
portion  of  the  oil  is  thus  transformed  into  a  soapy  substance.  The  solubility  of  greasy 
substances  in  ammonia,  which  proceeds  from  the  formation  both  of  emulsions  and  soaps, 
explains  its  use  in  extracting  grease  spots.  It  is  also  employed  as  an  external  application 
for  stings  from  insects,  and  for  bites  from  poisonous  snakes,  and  in  general  in  medicine. 
It  is  also  remarkable  that  in  cases  of  drunkenness  a  few  drops  of  ammonia  in  water  taken 
internally  rapidly  renders  a  person  sober.  A  large  quantity  of  ammonia  is  used  in 
dyeing,  either  for  the  solution  of  certain  dyes — for  example,  carmine — or  for  changing 
the  tints  of  others,  or  else  for  neutralising  the  action  of  acids.  It  is  also  employed  in 
the  manufacture  of  artificial  pearls.  For  this  purpose  the  small  scales  of  a  peculiar 
email  fish  are  mixed  with  ammonia,  and  the  liquid  so  obtained  is  blown  into  small  hollow 
glass  beads  shaped  like  pearls. 

In  nature  and  the  arts,  however,  ammonium  salts,  and  not  free  ammonia,  are  most 
frequently  employed.  In  this  form  a  portion  of  that  nitrogen  which  is  necessary  for  the 
formation  of  albuminous  substances  is  supplied  to  plants.  Owing  to  this,  a  large 
quantity  of  ammonium  sulphate  is  now  employed  as  a  fertilising  substance.  But  the  same 
effect  may  be  produced  by  nitre,  or  by  animal  refuse,  which  in  decomposing  gives 
ammonia.  For  this  reason,  an  arnnioniacal  (hydrogen)  compound  may  be  introduced  into 
the  soil  in  the  spring  which  will  be  converted  into  a  nitrate  (oxygen  salt)  in  the  summer. 


260  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

tion  with  salts,  and  especially  for  separating  insoluble  basic  hydroxides 
from  soluble  salts.  Let  MHO  stand  for  an  insoluble  basic  hydroxide 
and  HX  for  an  acid.  The  salt  formed  by  them  will  have  a  composition 
MHO  +  XH-H2O  =  MX.  If  aqueous  ammonia,  NH4OH,  be  added 
to  a  solution  of  this  salt,  the  ammonia  will  change  places  with  the 
metal  M,  and  thus  form  the  insoluble  basic  hydroxide,  or,  as  it  is  said, 
give  a  precipitate. 

MX         +        NH4(OH)      =      NH4X       +       MHO 

Salt  of  the  metal.        Aqueous  ammonia.        Ammonium  salt.        Basic  hydrate. 
In  solution  In  solution  In  solution  As  precipitate 

Thus,  for  instance,  if  aqueous  ammonia  is  added  to  a  solution  of  a 
salt  of  aluminium,  then  alumina  hydrate  is  separated  out  as  a  colourless 
gelatinous  precipitate  ,22 

In  order  to  grasp  the  relation  between  ammonia  and  the  oxygen 
compounds  of  nitrogen  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  the  general  law  of 
substitution,  applicable  to  all  cases  of  substitution  between  elements,23 
and  therefore  showing  what  may  be  the  cases  of  substitution  between 
oxygen  and  hydrogen  as  component  parts  of  water.  The  law  of  sub- 
stitution may  be  deduced  from  mechanical  principles  if  the  molecule  be 
conceived  as  a  system  of  elementary  atoms  occurring  in  a  certain  chemical 
and  mechanical  equilibrium ,  By  likening  the  molecule  to  a  system  of 
bodies  in  a  state  of  motion — for  instance,  to  the  sum  total  of  the  sun, 
planets,  and  satellites,  existing  in  conditions  of  mobile  equilibrium — 
then  we  should  expect  the  action  of  one  part,  in  this  system,  to  be 
equal  and  opposite  to  the  other,  according  to  Newton's  third  law  of 
mechanics.  Hence,  given  a  molecule  of  a  compound,  for  instance, 
H20,  NH3,  NaCl,  HC1,  &c.,  its  every  two  parts  must  in  a  chemical  sense 

22  As  certain  basic  hydrates  form  peculiar  compounds  with  ammonia,  in  some  cases 
it  happens  that  the  first  portions  of  ammonia  added  to  a  solution  of  a  salt  produce  a  pre- 
cipitate, whilst  the  addition  of  a  fresh  quantity  of  ammonia  dissolves  this  precipitate  if 
the  ammoniacal  compound  of  the  base  be  soluble  in  water.    This,  for  example,  takes 
place  with  the  copper  salts.    But  alumina  does  not  dissolve  under  these  circumstances. 

23  When  the  element  chlorine,  as  we  shall  afterwards  more  fully  learn,  replaces  the 
element  hydrogen,  the  reaction  by  which  such  an  exchange  is  accomplished  proceeds 
as  a  substitution,  AH  +  C12  =  AC1  +  HC1,  so  that  two  substances,  AH  and  chlorine,  react 
on  each  other,  and  two  substances,  AC1  and  HC1,  are  formed ;  and  further,  two  molecules 
yeact  on  each  other,  and  two"  others  are  formed.    The  reaction  proceeds  very  easily,  but 
the  substitution  of  one  element,  A,  by  another,  X,  does  not  always  proceed  with  such 
6ase,  clearness,  or  simplicity.    The  substitution  between  oxygen  and  hydrogen  is  very 
rarely  accomplished  by  the  reaction  of  the  free  elements,  but  the  substitution  between 
these  elements,  one  for  another,  forms  the  most  common  case  of  oxidation  and.  reduction. 
In  speaking  of  the  law  of  substitution,  I  have  in  view  the  substitution  of  the  elements 
one  by  another,  and  not  the  direct  reaction  of  substitution.    The  law  of  substitution 
determines  the  cycle  of  the  combinations  of  a  given  element,  if  a  few  of  its  compounds 
(for  instance,  the  hydrogen  compounds)  be  known.    A  development  of  the  conceptions 
of  the  law  of  substitution  may  be  found  in  my  lecture  given  at  the  Royal  Institution  in 
London,  1839. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDKOGEN  AND  OXYGEN  261 

represent  two  things  somewhat  alike  in  force  and  properties,  and  therefore 
every  two  parts  into  which  a,  molecule  of  a  compound  may  be  divided 
are  capable  of  replacing  each  other.  In  order  that  the  application  of 
the  law  should  become  clear  it  is  evident  that  among  compounds  the 
most  stable  should  be  chosen.  We  will  therefore  take  hydrochloric  acid 
and  water  as  the  most  stable  compounds  of  hydrogen.24  According  to 
the  above  law  of  substitution,  if  the  elements  H  and  Cl  are  able  to 
form  a  molecule,  HC1,  and  a  stable  one,  they  are  able  to  replace  each 
other.  And,  indeed,  we  shall  afterwards  see  (Chapter  XT.)  that  in  a 
number  of  instances  a  substitution  between  hydrogen  and  chlorine  can 
take  place.  Given  RH,  then  RC1  is  possible,  because  HC1  exists  and 
is  stable.  The  molecule  of  water,  H2O,  may  be  divided  in  two  ways, 
because  it  contains  3  atoms  :  into  H  and  (HO)  on  the  one  hand,  and 
into  H2  and  O  on  the  other.  Consequently,  being  given  RH,  its 
substitution  products  will  be  R(HO)  according  to  the  first  form,  and 
R20  according  to  the  second ;  being  given  RH2,  its  corresponding 
substitution  products  will  be  RH(OH),  R(OH)2,  RO,  (RH)2O,  &c. 
The  group  (OH)  is  the  same  hydroxyl  or  aqueous  radicle  which  we 
have  already  mentioned  in  the  third  chapter  as  a  component  part  of 
hydroxides  and  alkalis — for  instance,  Na(OH),  Ca(OH)2,  &c.  It  is 
evident,  judging  from  H(HO)  and  HC1,  that  (OH)  can  be  substituted  by 
Cl,  because  both  are  replaceable  by  H ;  and  this  is  of  common  occurrence 
in  chemistry,  because  metallic  chlorides — for  example,  NaCl  and  NH4C1 
— correspond  with  hydroxides  of  the  alkalis  Na(OH)  or  NH4(OH). 
In  hydrocarbons — for  instance,  C2H6 — the  hydrogen  is  replaceable  by 
chlorine  and  by  hydroxyl.  Thus  ordinary  alcohol  is  C2H6,  in  which 
one  atom  of  H  is  replaced  by  (OH) ;  that  is,  C2H5(OH).  It  is  evident 
that  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  by  hydroxyl  essentially  forms  the 
phenomenon  of  oxidation,  because  RH  gives  R(OH),  or  RHO. 
Hydrogen  peroxide  may  in  this  sense  be  regarded  as  water  in  which  the 
hydrogen  is  replaced  by  hydroxyl ;  H(OH)  gives  (OH)2  or  H2O2.  The 
other  form  of  substitution — namely,  that  of  O  in  the  place  of  H2 — is 
also  a  common  chemical  phenomenon.  Thus  alcohol,  C2H60,  or 
C2Hft(OH),  when  oxidising  in  the  air,  gives  acetic  acid,  C2H402,  or 
C2H3O(OH),  in  which  H2  is  replaced  by  O. 

In  the  further  course  of  this  work  we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to 
the  law  of  substitution  for  explaining  many  chemical  phenomena  and 
relations. 

24  If  hydrogen  peroxide  be  taken  as  a  starting  point,  then  still  higher  forms  of  oxida- 
tion than  those  corresponding  with  water  should  be  looked  for.  They  should  possess  the 
properties  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  especially  that  of  parting  with  their  oxygen  with  ex- 
treme ease  (even  by  contact).  Such  compounds  are  known.  Pernitric,  persulphuric,  and 
similar  acids  present  these  properties,  as  we  shall  see  in  describing  them. 


262  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

We  will -now  apply  these  conceptions  to  ammonia  in  order  to  see  its 
relation  to  the  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen.  It  is  evident  that  many 
substances  should  be  obtainable  from  ammonia,  NH3,  or  aqueous 
.ammonia,  NH4(OH),  by  substituting  their  hydrogen  by  hydroxyl,  or  H2 
by  oxygen,  And  such  is  the  case.  The  two  extreme  cases  of  such  sub- 
stitution will  be  as  follows  :  (1)  One  atom  of  H  in  NH3  is  substituted  by 
(OH),  and  NH2(OH)  is  produced.  Such  a  substance,  still  containing 
much  hydrogen,  should  have  many  of  the  properties  of  ammonia.  It  is 
known  under  the  name  of  hydroxylamine^  and,  in  fact,  is  capable,  like 

26  The  compound  of  hydroxylamine  with  hydrochloric  acid  has  the  composition 
NH2(OH)HC1  =  NH4C10— that  is,  it  is  as  it  were  oxidised  sal-ammoniac.  It  was  pre- 
pared by  Lossen  in  1865  by  the  action  of  tin  and  hydrochloric  acid  in  the  presence  of 
water  on  a  substance  called  ethyl  nitrate,  in  which  case  the  hydrogen  liberated  from  the 
hydrochloric  acid  by  the  tin  acts  upon  the  elements  of  nitric  acid— 

C2H5-NO3         +        6H     +     HC1     =        NH4OC1  4  H,>O    +    C2H5-OH 

Ethyl  nitrate         Hydrogen  from         Hydroxylamiue  +  HCJ  Water          Alcohol 

HC1  and  Sn 

Thus  in  this  case  the  nitric  acid  is  deoxidised,  not  directly  into  nitrogen,  but  into  hydroxyl- 
amine.  Hydroxylamine  is  also  formed  by  passing  nitric  oxide,  NO,  into  a  mixture  of  tin 
and  hydrochloric  acid— that  is,  by  the  action  of  the  hydrogen  evolved  on  the  nitric  oxide, 
NO  *3H  +  HC1=NH4OC1— and  in  many  other  cases.  According  to  Lossen's  method,  a 
mixture  of  30  parts  of  ethyl  nitrate,  120  parts  of  tin,  and  40  parts  of  a  solution  of  hydro- 
chloric acid  of  sp  gr.  T06  are  taken.  After  a  certain  time  the  reaction  commences 
spontaneously.  When  the  reaction  has  ceased  the  tin  is  separated  by  means  of  hydrogen 
sulphide,  theNsolution  is  evaporated,  and  a  large  amount  of  sal-ammoniac  is  thus  obtained 
(owing  to  the  further  action  of  hydrogen  on  the  hydroxylamine  compound,  the  hydrogen 
taking  up  oxygen  from  it  and  forming  water) ;  a  solution  ultimately  remains  containing 
the  hydroxylamine  salt ;  this  salt  is  dissolved  in  anhydrous  alcohol  and  purified  by  the 
addition  of  platinum  chloride,  which  precipitates  any  ammonium  salt  still  remaining  in 
the  solution.  After  concentrating  the  alcoholic  solution  the  hydroxylamine  hydrochloride 
Separates  in  crystals.  This  substance  melts  at  about  150°,  and  in  so  doing  decomposes 
into  nitrogen,  hydrogen  chloride,  water,  and  sal-ammom'ac.  A  sulphuric  acid  com- 
pound of  hydroxylamine  may  be  obtained  by  mixing  a  solution  of  the  above  salt 
with  sulphuric  acid.  The  sulphate  is  also  soluble  in  water  like  the  hydrochloride ; 
this  shows  that  hydroxylamine,  like  ammonia  itself,  forms  a  series  of  salts  in  which  one 
acid  may  be  substituted  for  another.  It  might  be  expected  that  by  mixing  a  strong 
solution  of  a  hydroxylamine  salt  with  a  solution  of  a  caustic  alkali  hydroxylamine  itself 
Vould  be  liberated,  just  as  an  ammonia  salt  under  these  circumstances  evolves  ammonia; 
but  the  liberated  hydroxylamine  is  immediately  decomposed  with  the  formation  of  nitro- 
gen and  ammonia  (and  probably  nitrous  oxide),  8NH3O  =  NH3  +  8H2O  +  N2.  Dilute 
'Solutions  give  the  same  reaction,  although  very  slowly,  but  by  decomposing  a  solution  of 
the  sulphate  with  barium  hydroxide  a  certain  amount  of  hydroxylamine  is  obtained  in 
Solution  (it  is  partly  decomposed).  Hydroxylamine  in  aqueous  solution,  like  ammonia, 
precipitates  basic  hydrates,  and  it  deoxidises  the  oxides  of  copper,  silver,  and  other 
metals.  Free  hydroxylamine  was  obtained  by  Lobry  de  Bruyn  (1891).  It  is  a  solid, 
colourless,  crystalline  substance,  without  odour,  which  does  not  melt  below  27°.  It  has 
the  property  of  dissolving  metallic  salts ;  for  instance,  sodium  chloride.  Hydroxylamine, 
when  rapidly  heated  with  platinum,  decomposes  with  a  flash  and  the  formation  of  a 
yellow  flame.  It  is  almost  insoluble  in  ordinary  solvents  like  chloroform,  benzine,  acetic 
ether,  and  carbon  bisulphide.  Its  aqueous  solutions  are  tolerably  stable,  contain  up  to 
60  per  cent.  (sp.  gr.1'16  at  20°),  and  may  be  kept  for  many  weeks  without  undergoing  any 
change.  Lobry  de  Bruyn  used  the  hydrochloric  salt  to  prepare  pure  hydroxylamine. 
The  salt  was  first  treated  with  sodium  methylate  (CHjNaO),  and  then  methyl  alcohol  was 


COMPOUNDS  .OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  265 

ammonia,  of  giving  salts  with  acids ;  for  example,  with  hydrochloric 
acid,  NH3(OH)C1 — which  is  a  substance  corresponding  to  sal-ammoniac, 
in  which  one  atom  of  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  hydroxyl.*5  bls  (2)  Tha 

added  to  the  mixture,  The  precipitated  sodium  chloride  was  separated  from  the  solution 
by  filtration.  (The  methyl  alcohol  is  added  to  prevent  the  precipitated  chloride  of  sodium 
from  coating  the  insoluble  hydrochloric  salt  of  hydroxylamine.)  The  methyl  alcohol  wa8 
driven  off  under  a  pressure  150-200  mm.,.and  after  extracting  a  further  portion  of  methyl 
alcohol  by  ether  and  several  fractional  distillations,  a  solution  was  obtained  containing 
70  per  cent,  of  free  hydroxylamine,  8  per  cent,  water,  9'9  per  cent,  chloride  of  sodium,  and 
12'1  per  cent',  of  the  hydrochloric  salt  of  hydroxylamine.  Pure  free  hydroxylamine, 
NH5O,  is  obtained  by  distilling  under  a  pressure  of  60  mm. ;  it  then  boils  at  70°,  and 
solidifies  in  a  condenser  cooled  to  0'  in  the  form  of  long  needles.  It  melts  at  88°,  boils 
at  68°  under  a  pressure  of  22  mm.,  and  has  a  sp.  gr.  of  about  1-235  (Briihl).  Under  the 
action  of  NaHO  it  gives  NH3  and  NH02  or  N2O,  and  forms  nitric  acid  (Kolotoff,  1898) 
under  the  action  of  oxidising  agents.  Hydroxylamine  is  obtained  in  a  great  number  of 
Cases,  for  instance  by  the  action  of  tin  on  dilute  nitric  acid,  and  also  by  the  action  of 
Bine  oh  ethyl  nitrate  and  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  &c.  The  relation  between  hydroxyl- 
amine, NH2(OH),  and  nitrous  acid,  NO(OH),  which  is  so  clear  in  the  sense  of  the  law  of 
substitutions,  becomes  a  reality  in  those  cases  when  reducing  agents  act  on  salts  of 
nitrous  acid.  Thus  Baschig  (1888)  proposed  the  following  method  for  the  preparation  of 
the  hydroxylamine  sulphate.  A  mixture  of  strong  solutions  of  potassium  nitrite,  KN02, 
and  hydroxide,  KHO,  in  molecular  proportions,  is  prepared  and  cooled.  An  excess  of 
sulphurous  anhydride  is  then  passed  into  the  mixture,  and  the  solution  boiled  for  a  long 
time.  A  mixture  of  the  sulphates  of  potassium  and  hydroxylamine  is  thus  obtained : 
KN02+KH04^S02  +  2H2O  =  NH2(OH),H2SO4-fK2S04.  The  salts  may  be  separated 
from  each  other  by  crystallisation. 

25  bis  in  order  to  illustrate  the  application  of  the  law  of  substitution  to  a  given  case, 
and  to  show  the  connection  between  ammonia  and  the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  let  us  consider 
the  possible  products  of  an  oxygen  and  hydroxyl  substitution  in  caustic  ammonia, 
NH4(OH).  It  is  evident  that  the  substitution  of  H  by  OH  can  give:  (1)  NH3(OH)2;. 
(2)  NH2(OH)3;  (8)  NH(OH)4;  and  (4)  N(OH)6.  They  should  all,  like  caustic  ammonia 
itself,  easily  part  with  water  and  form  products  (hydroxylic)  of  the  oxidation  of  am- 
monia. The  first  of  them  is  the  hydrate  of  hydroxylamine,  ttH2(OH)  +  H20 ;  the  second, 
NH(OH)2  +  H2O  (and  also  the  substance  NH(OH)4  or  NH302),  containing,  as  it  does, 
both  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  is  able  to  part  with  all  its  hydrogen  in  the  form  of  water 
(which  could  not  be  done  by  the  first  product,  since  it  contained  too  little  oxygen),  forming, 
as  the  ultimate  product,  2NH2(OH)3— 5H20  =  N20 — that  is,  it  corresponds  with  nitrous 
oxide,  or  the  lower  degree  of  the  oxidation  of  nitrogen.  So,  also,  nitrous  anhydride 
corresponds  with  the  third  of  the  above  products,  2NH(OH)4-6H2O  =  N2OS,  and  nitric- 
anhydride  with  the  fourth,  2N(OH)5-5H20  =  N2b5.  As,  in  these  three  equations,  two 
molecules  of  the  substitution  products  (-5H20)  are  taken,  it  is  also  possible  to  combine 
two  different  products  in  one  equation.  For  instance,  the  third  and  fourth  products : 
NH(OII)4  +  N(OH)5-  5H20  corresponds  to  N2O4  or  2N02,  that  is,  to  peroxide  of  nitrogen. 
Thus  ,all  the  five  (see  later)  oxides  of  nitrogen,  N2O,  NO,  N2O3,  NO2,  and  N2O6,  may  be 
deduced  from  ammonia.  The  above  may  be  expressed  in  a  general  form  by  the  equation 
(it  should  be  remarked  that  the  composition  of  all  the  substitution  products  of  caustic 
ammonia  may  be  expressed  by  NH5O5  -a,  where  a  varies  between  0  and  4)  j 

NH60S  -  a+ NH50&_b-  5H20  =  N206-<a+b), 

where  a  +  b  can  evidently  be  not  greater  than  5;  when  a  +  &  =  5  we  have  Na— nitrogen, 
when  =  4  we  have  N2O  nitrous  oxide;  when  a  +  6= 3  we  have  N2O2  or  NO -nitric  oxide, 
and  so  on  to  N2Os,  when  a  +  6  =  0.  Besides  which  it  is  evident  that  intermediate  products 
may  correspond  with  (and  hence  also  break  up  into)  different  starting  points ;  for  instance, 
K3O  is  obtained  when  a+6  =  2,  and  this  may  occur  either  when  a  =  0  (nitric  acid),  anc( 
6=2  (hydroxylamine),  or  when  a  =  6  =  1  (the  third  of  the  above  substitution  products). 


264  PRINCIPLES   OF  CHEMISTRY 

other  extreme  case  of  substitution  is  that  given  by  ammonium  hydroxide 
NH4(OH),  when  the  whole  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonium  is  re 
placed  by  oxygen  ;  and,  as  ammonium  contains  4  atoms  of  hydrogen 
the  highest  oxygen  compound  should  be  NO2(OH),  or  NHO3,  as  w< 
find  to  be  really  the  case,  for  NHO3  is  nitric  acid,  exhibiting  th< 
highest  degree  of  oxidation  of  nitrogen.26  If  instead  of  the  tw( 
extreme  aspects. of  substitution  we  take  an  intermediate  one,  weobtair 
the  intermediate  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen.  For  instance 
N(OH)3  is  orthonitrous  acid,27  to  which  corresponds  nitrous  acid 
NO(OH),  or  NHO2,  equal  to  N(OH)3— H20,  and  nitrous  anhydride 
N2O3=2N(OH)3— 3H2O.  Thus  nitrogen  gives  a  series  of  oxygei 
compounds,  which  we  will  proceed  to  describe.  We  will,  however,  firs 
show  by  two  examples  that  in  the  first  place  the  passage  of  ammonii 
into  the  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen  up  to  nitric  acid,  as  well  as  th 
converse  preparation  of  ammonia  (and  consequently  of  the  intermedia^ 
compounds  also)  from  nitric  acid,  are  reactions  which  proceed  directl; 
and  easily  under  many  circumstances,  and  in  the  second  place  that  tin 
above  general  principle  of  substitution  gives  the  possibility  of  under 
standing  many,  at  first  sight  unexpected  and  complex,  relations  an< 
transformations,  such  as  the  preparation  of  hydro- nitrous  acid,  HN3.  Ii 
nature  the  matter  is  complicated  by  a  number  of  influences  and  cir 


16  Nitric  acid  corresponds  with  the  anhydride  N2O5,  which  will  afterwards  be  describee 
but  which  must  be  regarded  as  the  highest  Raline  oxide  of  nitrogen,  just  as  Na2O  (and  th 
hydroxide  NaHO)  in  the  case  of  sodium,  although  sodium  forms  a  peroxide  possessing  th 
property  of  parting  with  its  oxygen  with  the  same  ease  as  hydrogen  peroxide,  if  not  o 
heating,  at  all  events  in  reactions — for  instance,  with  acids.  So  also  nitric  acid  has  il 
corresponding  peroxide,  which  may  be  called  pernitric  acid.  Its  composition  is  not  we 
known — probably  NHC>4 — so  that  its  corresponding  anhydride  would  be  N3O7.  It  i 
formed  by  the  action  of  a  silent  discharge  on  a  mixture  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen,  so  the 
a  portion  of  ita  oxygen  is  in  a  state  similar  to  that  in  ozone.  The  instability  of  this  sul 
stance  (obtained  by  Hautefeuille,  Chappuis,  and  Berthelot),  which  easily  splits  up  wit 
'the  formation  of  nitric  peroxide,  and  its  resemblance  to  persulphuric  acid,  which  we  sha 
afterwards  describe,  will  permit  our  passing  over  the  consideration  of  the  little  that 
further  known  concerning  it. 

27  Phosphorus  (Chapter  XIX.)  gives  the  hydride  PH3,  corresponding  with  ammonii 
NH3,  and  forms  phosphorous  acid,  PH3O3,  which  is  analogous  to  nitrous  acid,  just  « 
phosphoric  acid  is  to  nitric  acid;  but  phosphoric  (or,  better,  orthophosphoric)  aci< 
PH3O4,  is  able  to  lose  water  and  give  pyro-  and  meta-phosphoric  acids.  The  latter  : 
equal  to  the  ortho-acid  minus  water  =  PHO3,  and  therefore  nitric  acid,  NHO3,  is  real) 
meta-nitric  acid.  So  also  nitrous  acid,  HNO2,  is  meta-nitrous  (anhydrous)  acid,  and  thi 
the  ortho-acid  is  NH5O3  =  N(OH)3.  Hence  for  nitric  acid  we  should  expect  to  find,  b< 
sides  the  ordinary  or  meta-nitric  acid,  HNO3(  =  £N2O5H2O),  and  ortho-nitric  aci< 
H3N04(  =  £N2O53H2O),  an  intermediate  pyro-nitric  acid,  N2H4O7,  corresponding  < 
pyrophosphoric  acid,  P2H4O7.  We  shall  see  (for  instance,  in  Chapter  XVI.,  Note  2! 
that  in  nitric  acid  there  is  indeed  an  inclination  of  the  ordinary  salts  (of  the  meta-acid 
MNO3,  to  combine  with  bases  M2O,  and  to  approximate  to  the  composition  of  orth< 
compounds  which  are  equal  to  meta-compound  and  bases  (MN03  +  M20  = 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDKOGEN  AND  OXYGEN  265 

cumstances,  but  in  the  law  the  relations  are  presented  in  their  simplest 
aspect. 

1.  It  is  easy  to  prove  the  possibility  of  the  oxidation  of  ammonia 
into  nitric  acid  by  passing  a  mixture  of  ammonia  and  air  over  heated 
Spongy  platinum.     This  causes  the  oxidation  of  the  ammonia,  nitric 
acid    being    formed,   which  partially   combines  with   the  excess    of 
ammonia. 

The  converse  passage  of  nitric  acid  into  ammonia  is  effected 
by  the  action  of  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution.28  Thus 
metallic  aluminium,  evolving  hydrogen  from  a  solution  of  caustic  soda, 
is  able  to  completely  convert  nitric  acid  added  to  the  mixture  (as  a  salt, 
because  the  alkali  gives  a  salt  with  the  nitric  acid)  into  ammonia, 
NH03  +  8H=NH3  +  3H20. 

2.  In  1890  Curtius  in  Germany  obtained  a  gaseous  substance  of  the 
composition  HN3  (hydrogen  trinitride),  having  the  distinctive  properties 
of  an  acid,  and  giving,  like  hydrochloric  acid,  salts  ;  for  example,  a 
sodium  salt,  NaN3  ;   ammonium  salt,  NH4N3=N4H4  ;   barium  salt, 
Ba(N3)2,  &c.,  which  he  therefore  named  hydronitrous  acid,  J7^3.28  bis 

28  The  formation  of  ammonia  is  observed  in  many  cases  of  oxidation  by  means  of 
nitric  acid.  This  substance  is  even  formed  in  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  tin,  especially 
if  dilute  acid  be  employed  in  the  cold.  A  still  more  considerable  amount  of  ammonia  is 
obtained  if,  in  the  action  of  nitric  acid,  there  are  conditions  directly  tending  to  the  evolu- 
tion of  hydrogen,  which  then  reduces  the  acid  to  ammonia ;  for  instance,  in  the  action 
of  zinc  on  a  mixture  of  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids. 

88  bfa  Curtius  started  with  benzoylhydrazine,  C6H5CONHNir2  (hydrazine,  see  Note 
M  bis).  (This  substance  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  hydrated  hydrazine  on  the  com- 
pound ether  of  benzoic  acid).  Benzoylhydrazine  under  the  action  of  nitrous  acid  gives 
benzoylazoimide  and  water : 

C6H5CONHNH3 + N02H = C6H5CON5 + 2H2O. 

Benzoylazoimide  when  treated  with  sodium  alcoholate  gives  the  sodium  salt  of  hydro* 
nitrous  acid : 

C6H5CON3+C2H6ONa  =  C6H5CO3C2H5  +  NaN3. 

The  addition  of  ether  to  the  resultant  solution  precipitates  the  NaN3,  and  this  salt  when 
treated  with  sulphuric  acid  gives  gaseous  hydronitrous  acid,  HN5.  It  has  an  acrid  smell, 
and  is  easily  soluble  in  water.  The  aqueous  solution  exhibits  a  strongly  acid  reaction. 
Metals  dissolve  in  this  solution  and  give  the  corresponding  salts.  With  hydronitrous 
acid  gaseous  ammonia  forms  a  white  cloud,  consisting  of  the  salt  of  ammonium,  NH4Nj. 
This  salt  separates  out  from  an  alcoholic  solution  in  the  form  of  white  lustrous  scales. 
The  salts  of  hydronitrous  acid  are  obtained  by  a  reaction  of  substitution  with  the  sodium 
or  ammonium  salts.  In  this  manner  Curtius  obtained  and  studied  the  salts  of  silver 
(AgN5),  mercury  (HgN3),  lead  (PbN6),  barium  (BaN6).  With  hydrazine,  N2H4,  hydro- 
nitrous  acid  forms  saline  compounds  in  the  composition  of  which  there  are  one  or  two 
particles  of  N3H  per  one  particle  of  hydrazine ;  thus  N5H5  and  N8H6.  The  first  was 
obtained  in  an  almost  pure  form.  It  crystallises  from  an  aqueous  solution  in  dense, 
volatile,  lustrous  prisms  (up  to  1  in.  long),  which  fuse  at  50°,  and  deliquesce  in  the  air; 
from  a  solution  in  boiling  alcohol  it  separates  out  in  bright  crystalline  plates.  This  salt^ 
has  the  same  empirical  composition,  NH,  as  the  ammonium  salt  of  hydronitrous 


266  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

The  extraordinary  composition  of  the  compound  (ammonia,  NH3, 
contains  one  N  atom  and  three  H  atoms  ;  in  HN3,  on  the  contrary,  there 
are  three  N  atoms  and  one  H  atom),  the  facile  decomposition  of  its  salts 
with  an  explosion,  and  above  all  its  distinctly  acid  character  (an  aqueous 
solution  shows  a  strong  acid  reaction  to  litmus),  not  only  indicated 
the  importance  of  this  unexpected  discovery,  ,but  at  first  gave  rise- to  some 
perplexity  as  to  the  nature  of  the  substance  obtained,  for  the  relations 
in  which  HN3  stood  to  other  simple  compounds  of  nitrogen  which  had 
long  been  known  was  not  at  all  evident,  and  the  scientific  spirit 
especially  requires  that  there  should  be  a  distinct  bond  between  every 
innovation,  every  fresh  discovery,  and  that  which  is  already  firmly 
established  and  known,  for  upon  this  basis  is  founded  that  apparently 
paradoxical  union  in  science  of  a  conservative  stability  with  an 
irresistible  and  never-ceasing  improvement.  This  missing  connection 
between  the  newly  discovered  hydronitrous  acid,  HN3,  and  the  long 
known  ammonia,  NH3,  and  nitric  acid,  HN03,  may  be  found  in  the 
law  of  substitution,  starting  from  the  well-known  properties  and 
composition  of  nitric  acid  and  ammonia,  as  I  mentioned  in  the  '  Journal 
of  the  Russian  Physico-Che.mical  Society'  (1890).  The  essence  of  the 
matter  lies  in  the  fact  that  to  the  hydrate  of  ammonium,  or  caustic 
ammonia,  NH4OH,  there  should  correspond,  according  to  the  law  of 
substitution,  an  ortho-nitric  acid  (see  Note  27),  H3NO4=NO(OH)3, 
which  equals  NH4(OH)  with  the  substitution  in  it  of  (a)  two  atoms  of 
hydrogen  by  oxygen  (0  —  H2)  and  (b)  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  by  the 
aqueous  radicle  (OH  — H).  Ordinary  or  meta-nitric  acid  is  merely 
this  ortho-nitric  acid  minus  water.  To  ortho-nitric  acid  there  should 
correspond  the  ammoniacal  salts  :  mono-substituted,  H2NH4NO4  ;  bi- 
substituted,  H(NH4)2lSrO4  ,  and  tri-substituted,  (NH4)3N04,  These 
salts,  containing  as  they  do  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  like  many  similar 
ammoniacal  salts  (see,  for  instance,  Chapter  IX.— Cyanides),  are 

acidj  N4H4>  and  imide ;  but  their  molecules  and  structure  are  different.  Curtius  also 
obtained  (1898)  hydronitrous  acid  by  passing  the  vapour  of  N2O3  (evolved  by  the  action 
of  HN03  on  As2O3)  into  a  solution  of  hydrazine,  N2H4.  Similarly  Angeli,  by  acting  upon  a 
saturated  solution  of  silver  nitrite  with  a  strong  solution  of  hydrazine,  obtained  the 
explosive  AgN3  in  the  form  of  a  precipitate,  and  this  reaction,  which  is  based  upon  the 
equation  N2H4  +  NH02=HN3  +  2H2O,  proceeds  so  easily  that  it  forms  an  experiment 
for  the  lecture  table.  A  thermal  investigation  of  hydronitrous  acid  by  Berthelot  and 
Matignon  gave  the  following  figures  for  the  heat  of  solution  of  the  ammonium  salt 
ft3HNH5  (1  grm.  in  100  parts  of  water) -708  C.,  and  for  the  heat  of  neutralisation 
by  barium  hydrate  +  10fO  C.,  and  by  ammonia  +  8*2  C.  The  heat  of  combustion  of 
N4H4(  + 168'8  C.  at  a  constant  vol.)  gives  the  heat  of  formation  of  the  salt  N4H4  (solid)  as 
—  25*8  C.  and  (solution)  —  32'8  C.;  this  explains  the  explosive  nature  of  this  compound. 
In  its  heat  of  formation  from  the  elements  N3H=  -62'6  C.,  this  compound  differs  from 
all  the  hydrogen  compounds  of  nitrogen  in  having  a  maximum  absorption  of  heat,  which 
explains  its  instability. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  267 

able  to  part  with  them  in  the  form  of  water.  Then  from  the  first 
salt  we  have  H2NH4N04  — 4H20=N2O  —  nitrous  oxide,  and  from -the 
second  H(NH4)2N04  —  4H2O=HN3-hydrbnitrous  acid,  and  from  the 
third  (NH4)3NO  -  4H2O=N4H4— the  ammonium  salt  of  the  same  acid. 
The  composition  of  HN3  should  be  thus  understood,  whilst  its  acid 
properties  are  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  water  (4H20)  from 
H(NH4)2N04  is  formed  at  the  expense  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonium 
and  oxygen  of  the  nitric  acid,  so  that  there  remains  the  same  hydrogen 
as  in  nitric  acid,  or  that  which  rnay  be  replaced  by  metals  and  give 
salts.  Moreover,  nitrogen  undoubtedly  belongs  to  that  category  of 
metalloids  which  give  acids,  like  chlorine  and  carbon,  and  therefore, 
under  the  influence  of  three  of  its  atoms,  one  atom  of  hydrogen  acquires 
those  properties  which  it  has  in  acids,  just  as  in  HCN  (hydrocyanic 
acid)  the  hydrogen  has  received  these  properties  under  the  influence  of 
the  carbon  and  nitrogen  (and  HN3  may  be  regarded  as  HCN  where  C 
has  been  replaced  by  N2).  Moreover,  besides  explaining  the  com- 
position and  acid  properties  of  HN3,  the  above  method  gives  the 
possibility  of  foretelling  the  closeness  of  the  bond  between  hydronitrous 
acid  and  nitrous  oxide,  for  N2O  +  NH3=HN3  +  H20.  This  reaction, 
which  was  foreseen  from  the  above  considerations,  was  accomplished  by 
Wislicenus  (1892)  by  the  synthesis  of  the  sodium  salt,  by  taking  the 
amide  of.  sodium,  NH2Na  (obtained  by  heating  Na  in  a  current  of 
NH3),  and  acting  upon  it  (when  heated)  with  nitrous  oxide,  N20, 
when  2NH2Na  +  N2O  =  NaN3  +  NaHO  +  NH3.  The  resultant  salt, 
NaN3,  gives  hydronitrous  acid  when  acted  upon  by  sulphuric  acid, 
NaN3  +  H2S04  =  NaHS04  +  HN3.  The  latter  gives,  with  the  corre- 
sponding solutions  of  their  salts,  the  insoluble  (and  easily  explosive) 
salts  of  silver,  AgN3  (insoluble,  like  AgCl  or  AgCN),  and  lead,  Pb(N3)2. 
The  compounds  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  present  an  excellent 
example  of  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  because  they  contain,  for  14 
parts  by  weight  of  nitrogen,  8,  16,  24,  32,  and  40  parts  respectively  by 
weight  of  oxygen.  The  composition  of  these  compounds  is  as  follows  :— 

N20,  nitrous  oxide  ;  hydrate  NHO. 
N2O2,  nitric  oxide,  NO. 
N2O3,  nitrous  anhydride  ;  hydrate  NH02. 
N2O4,  peroxide  of  nitrogen,  N02, 
N2O5,  nitric  anhydride  ;  hydrate  NH03. 

Of  these  compounds,29  nitrous  and  nitric  oxides,  peroxide  of  nitrogen, 

29  According  to  the  thermochemical  determinations  of  Favro,  Thomsen,  and  more 
^specially  of  Berthelot,  it  follows  that,  in  the  formation  .of  such  quantities  of  the  oxides 
of  nitrogen  as  express  their  formulae,  if  gaseous  nitrogen  and  oxygen  be  taken  as  tho 


268  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

and  nitric  acid,  NH03,  are  characterised  as  being  the  most  stable.  The 
lower  oxides,  when  coming  into  contact  with  the  higher  ',  may  give  the 
intermediate  forms  ;  for  instance,  NO  and  NO2  form  N2O3,  and  the 
intermediate  oonides  may,  in  splitting  up,  give  a  higher  and  lower  oxide. 
So  N2O4  gives  N2O3  and  N2O5,  or,  in  the  presence  of  water,  their 
hydrates. 

We  have  already  seen  that,  under  certain  conditions,  nitrogen 
combines  with  oxygen,  and  we  know  that  ammonia  may  be  oxidised. 
In  these  cases  various  oxidation  products  of  nitrogen  are  formed,  but 
in  the  presence  of  water  and  an  excess  of  oxygen  they  always  give 
nitric  acid.  Nitric  acid,  as  corresponding  with  the  highest  oxide,  is 
able,  in  deoxidising,  to  give  the  lower  oxides  ;  it  is  the  only  nitrogen 
acid  whose  salts  occur  somewhat  widely  in  nature,  and  it  has  many 
technical  uses,  for  which  reason  we  will  begin  with  it. 

Nitric  acid,  NHO3,  is  likewise  known  as  aqua  fortis.  In  a  free 
state  it  is  only  met  with  in  nature  in  small  quantities,  in  the  air  and 
in  rain-water  after  storms  ;  but  even  in  the  atmosphere  nitric  acid  does 
not  long  remain  free,  but  combines  with  ammonia,  traces  of  which  are 
always  found  in  air.  On  falling  on  the  soil  and  into  running-  water, 
&c.,  the  nitric  acid  everywhere  comes  into  contact  with  bases  (or  their 
carbonates),  which  easily  act  on  it,  and  therefore  it  is  converted  into 
the  nitrates  of  these  bases.  Hence  nitric  acid  is  always  met  with  in 
the  form  of  salts  in  nature.  The  soluble  salts  of  nitric  acid  are  called 
nitres.  This  name  is  derived  from  the  Latin  sal  nitri.  The  potassium 
salt,  KN03,  is  common  nitre,  and  the  sodium  salt,  NaNO3,  Chili  salt- 
petre, or  cubic  nitre.  Nitres  are  formed  in  the  soil  when  a  nitrogenous 

starting  points,  and  if  the  compounds  formed  be  also  gaseous,  the  following  amounts 
of  heat,  expressed  in  thousands  of  heat  units,  are  absorbed  (hence  a  minus  sign)  :  — 


N20     N202     N203     N204     N205 
-21     -48     -22      «-5      -1 

-22      +21      +17      +  4 

The  difference  is  given  in  the  lower  line.  For  example,  if  N2,  or  28  grams  of  nitrogen, 
combine  with  O  —  that  is,  with  16  grams  of  oxygen  —  then  21,000  units  of  heat  are  absorbed, 
that  is,  sufficient  heat  to  raise  21,000  grams  of  water  through  1°.  Naturally,  direct 
observations  are  impossible  in  this  case  ;  but  if  charcoal,  phosphorus,  or  similar  sub- 
stances are  burnt  both  in  nitrous  oxide  and  in  oxygen,  and  the  heat  evolved  is  observed 
in  both  cases,  then  the  difference  (more  heat  will  be  evolved  in  burning  in  nitrous  oxide) 
gives  the  figures  required.  If  N2O2,  by  combining  with  O2,  gives  N2O4,  then,  as  ia 
seen  from  the  table,  heat  should  be  developed,  namely,  38,000  units  of  heat,  or  NO  +  O 
=  19,000  units  of  heat.  The  differences  given  in4he  table  show  that  the  maximum  absorp- 
tion of  heat  corresponds  with  nitric  oxide,  and  that  the  higher  oxides  are  formed  from  it 
with  evolution  of  heat.  If  liquid  nitric  acid,  NHOs,  were  decomposed  into  N  +  Oj  +  H, 
then  41,000  heat  units  would  be  required  ;  that  is,  an  evolution  of  heat  takes  place  in  its 
formation  from  the  gases.  It  should  be  observed  that  the  formation  of  ammonia,  NHj, 
from  the  gases  N  +  H3  evolves  12'2  thousand  heat  units. 


COMPOUNDS   OF  NITROGEN   WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  269 

substance  is  slowly  oxidised  in  the  presence  of  an  alkali  by  means  of 
the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.  In  nature  there  are  very  frequent 
instances  of  such  oxidation.  For  this  reason  certain  soils  and  rubbish 
heaps — for  instance,  lime  rubbish  (in  the  presence  of  a  base — lime) — 
contain  a  more  or  less  considerable  amount  of  nitre.  One  of  these 
nitres — sodium  nitrate — is  extracted  from  the  earth  in  large  quantities 
in  Chili,  where  it  was  probably  formed  by  the  oxidation  of  animal 
refuse.  This  kind  of  nitre  is  employed  in  practice  for  the  manufacture 
of  nitric  acid  and  the  other  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen.  Nitric 
acid  is  obtained  from  Chili  saltpetre  by  heating  it  with  sulphuric  acid. 
The  hydrogen  of  the  sulphuric  acid  replaces  the  sodium  in  the  nitre. 
The  sulphuric  acid  then  forms  either  an  acid  salt,  NaHSO4,  or  a 
noranal  salt,  Na2S04,  whilst  nitric  acid  is  formed  from  the  nitre  and 
is  volatilised.  The  decomposition  is  expressed  by  the  equations  : 
(1)  NaN03  +  H2S04=HN03  +  NaHS04,  if  the  acid  salt  be  formed, 
and  (2)  2NaNO3  +  H2SO4=Na2SO4  +  2HN03,  if  the  normal  sodium 
sulphate  is  formed.  With  an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid,  at  a  moderate 
heat,  and  at  the  commencement  of  the  reaction,  the  decomposition 
proceeds  according  to  the  first  equation  ;  and  on  further  heating  with 
a  sufficient  amount  of  nitre  according  to  the  second,  because  the  acid 
salt  NaHSO4  itself  acts  like  an  acid  (its  hydrogen  being  replaceable 
as  in  acids),  according  to  the  equation  NaNO3  +  NaHS04=Na2S04 
+  HN03. 

The  sulphuric  acid,  as  it  is  said,  here  displaces  the  nitric  acid  from 
its  compound  with  the  base.29bis     Thus,  in  the  reaction  of  sulphuric 

»9  bii  This  often  gives  rise  to  the  supposition  that  sulphuric  acid  possesses  a  consider- 
able degree  of  affinity  or  energy  compared  with  nitric  acid,  but  we  shall  afterwards  see 
that  the  idea  of  the  relative  degree  of  affinity  of  acids  and  bases  is,  "in  many  cases, 
exceedingly  unbiassed ;  it  need  not  be  accepted  so  long  as  it  is  possible  to  explain  the 
observed  phenomena  without  admitting  any  supposition  whatever  of  the  degree  of  the 
force  of  affinity,  because  the  latter  cannot  be  measured.  The  action  of  sulphuric  acid 
upon  nitre  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  alone  that  the  resultant  nitric  acid  is  volatile. 
The  nitric  acid  is  the  only  one  of  all  the  substances  partaking  in  the  reaction  which  is 
able  to  pass  into  vapour ;  it  alone  is  volatile,  while  the  remainder  are  non-volatile,  or, 
more  strictly  speaking,  exceedingly  difficultly  volatile  substances.  Let  us  imagine  that 
the  sulphuric  acid  is  only  ablevto  set  free  a  small  quantity  of  nitric  acid  from  its  salt, 
and  this  will  suffice  to  explain  the  decomposition  of  the  whole  of  the  nitre  by  the  sulphuric 
acid,  because  once  the  nitric  acid  is  separated  it  passes  into  vapour  when  heated,  and 
passes  away  from  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  remaining  substances ;  then  the  free 
sulphuric  acid  will  set  free  a  fresh  small  quantity  of  nitric  acid,  and  so  on  until  it  drives 
off  the  entire  quantity.  It  is  evident  that,  in  this  explanation,  it  is  essential  that  the 
sulphuric  acid  should  be  in  excess  (although  not  greatly)  throughout  the  reaction; 
according  to  the  equation  expressing  the  reaction,  98  parts  of  sulphuric  acid  are  required 
per  85  parts  of  Chili  nitre ;  but  if  this  proportion  be  maintained  in  practice  the  nitric 
acid  is  not  all  disengaged  by  the  sulphuric  acid ;  an  excess  of  the  latter  must  be  taken, 
and  generally  80  parts  of  Chili  nitre  are  taken  per  98  parts  of  acid,  so  that  a  portion  of 
the  sulphuric  acid  remains  free  to  the  very  end  of  the  reaction. 


270 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


acid  on  nitre  there  is  formed  a  non-volatile  salt  of  sulphuric  acid,  which 
remains,  together  with  an  excess  of  this  acid,  in  the  distilling  apparatus, 
and  nitric  acid,  which  is  converted  into  vapour,  and  may  be  condensed, 
because  it  is  a  liquid  and  volatile  substance.  On  a  small  scale,  this 
reaction  may  be  carried  on  in  a  glass  retort  with  a  glass  condenser. 
On  a  large  scale,  in  chemical  works,  the  process  is  exactly  similar,  only 
iron-retorts  are  employed  for  holding  the  mixture  of  nitre  and  sulphuric 


v-9 


FIG.  47.— Method  of  preparing  nitric  acid  on  a  large  scale.  A  cast-irou  retort,  0,  is  fixed  into  the 
furnace,  and  heated  by  the  fire,  B.  The  flame  and  products  of  combustion  are  at  first  led  along, 
the  flue,  M  (in  order  to  heat  the  receivers),  and  afterwards  into  L.  The  retort  is  charged  with 
Chili  saltpetre  and  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  cover  is  luted  on  with  clay  and  gypsum.  A  clay  tube, 
a,  is  fixed  into  the  neck  of  the  retort  (in  order  to  prevent  the  nitric  acid  from  corroding  the  cast 
iron),  and  a  bent  glass  tube,  D,  is  luted  on  to  it.  This  tube  carries  the  vapours  into  a  series  of 
earthenware  receivers,  E.  Nitric  acid  mixed  with  sulphuric  acid  collects  in  the  first.  The  purest 
nitric  acic  is  procured  from  the  second,  whilst  that  which  condenses  in  the  third  receiver  contains 
hydrochloric  acid,  and  that  iu  the  fourth  nitrous  oxide.  Water  is  poured  into  the  last  receiver  in 
order  to  condense  the  residual  vapours. 

acid,  and  earthenware  three-necked  bottles  are  used  instead  of  a  con- 
denser,30  as  shown  in  fig.  47. 

50  It  must  be  observed  that  sulphuric  acid,  at  least  when  undiluted  (60°  Baume*), 
corrodes  cast  iron  with  difficulty,  so  that  the  acid  may  be  heated  in  cast-iron  retorts. 
Nevertheless,  both  sulphuric  and  nitric  acids  have  a  certain  action  on  cast  iron,  and 
therefore  the  acid  obtained  will  contain  traces  of  iron.  In  practice  sodium  nitrate  (Chili 
saltpetre)  is  usually  employed  because  it  is  cheaper,  but  in  the  laboratory  it  is  best  to 
take  potassium  nitrate,  because  it  is  purer  and  does  not  froth  up  so  much  as  sodium 
nitrate  when  heated  with  sulphuric  acid.  In  the  action  of  an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid  on 
nitre  and  nitric  acid  a  portion  of  the  latter  is  decomposed,  forming  lower  oxides  of 
nitrogen,  which  are  dissolved  in  the  nitric  acid.  A  portion  of  the  sulphuric  acid  itself  is 
also  carried  over  as  spray  by  the  vapours  of  the  nitric  acid.  Hence  sulphuric  acid  occurs 
as  an  impurity  in  commercial  nitric  acid.  A  certain  amount  of  hydrochloric  acid  will 
also  be  found  to  be  present  in  it,  because  sodium  chloride  is  generally  found  as  an  im- 
purity in  nitre,  and  under  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  it  forms  hydrochloric  acid.  Com- 
mercial acid  further  contains  a  considerable  excess  of  water  above  that  necessary  for  the 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  271 

Nitric  acid  so  obtained  always  contains  water.  It  is  extremely 
difficult  to  deprive  it  of  all  the  admixed  water  without  destroying  a 
portion  of  the  acid  itself  and  partially  converting  it  into  lower  oxides, 
because  without  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  water  it  is  very  unstable. 
When  rapidly  distilled  a  portion  is  decomposed,  and  there  are  obtained 
free  oxygen  and  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which,  together  with  the 
water,  remain  in  solution  with  the  nitric  acid.  Therefore  it  is  necessary 
to  work  with  great  care  in  order  to  obtain  a  pure  hydrate  of  nitric  acid, 
HNO3,  and  especially  to  mix  the  nitric  acid  obtained  from  nitre,  as 
above  described,  with  sulphuric  acid,  which  takes  up  the  water,  and  to 
distil  it  at  the  lowest  possible  temperature — that  is,  by  placing  the 
retort  holding  the  mixture  in  a  water  or  oil  bath  and  carefully  heating 
it.  The  first  portion  of  the  nitric  acid  thus  distilled  boils  at  86°,  has  a 
specific  gravity  at  15°  of  1-526,  and  solidifies  at  —50°;  it  is  very 
unstable  at  higher  temperatures.  This  is  the  normal  hydrate,  HN03, 
which  corresponds  with  the  salts,  NM03,  of  nitric  acid.  When  diluted 
with  water  nitric  acid  presents  a  higher  boiling  point,  not  only  as 
compared  with  that  of  the  -nitric  acid  itself,  but  also  with  that  of  water  ; 
so  that,  if  very  dilute  nitric  acid  be  distilled,  the  first  portions  passing 
over  will  consist  of  almost  pure  water,  until  the  boiling  point  in  the 
vapours  reaches  121°.  At  this  temperature  a  compound  of  nitric  acid 
with  water,  containing  about  70  p.c.  of  nitric  acid,31  distils  over ;  its 

formation  of  the  hydrate,  because  water  is  first  poured  into  the  earthenware  vessels 
employed  for  condensing  the  nitric  acid  in  order  to  facilitate  its  cooling  and  condensation. 
Further,  the  acid  of  composition  HN03  decomposes  with  great  ease,  with  the  evolu- 
tion of  oxides  of  nitrogen.  Thus  the  commercial  acid  contains  a  great  number  of 
impurities,  and  is  frequently  purified  in  the  following  manner:— Lead  nitrate  is  first 
added  to  the  acid  because  it  forms  non-volatile  and  almost  insoluble  (precipitated) 
substances  with  the  free  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric  acids,  and  liberates  nitric  acid  in  so 
doing,  according  to  the  equations  Pb(NO3)2  +  2HCl  =  PbCl2  +  2NHO3  and  Pb(NO3)0 
-f  H2SO4  =  PbSC>4  -f  2NHO.v  Potassium  chromate  is  then  added  to  the  impure  nitric  acid,  by 
which  means  oxygen  is  liberated  from  the  chromic  acid,  and  this  oxygen,  at  the  moment 
of  its  evolution,  oxidises  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  and  converts  them  into  nitric  acid. 
A  pure  nitric  acid,  containing  no  impurities  other  than  water,  may  be  then  obtained  by 
carefully  distilling  the  acid,  treated  as  above  described,  and  particularly  if  only  the 
middle  portions  of  the  distillate  are  collected.  Such  acid  should  give  no  precipitate,, 
either  with  a  solution  of  barium  chloride  (a  precipitate  shows  the  presence  of  sulphuric 
Acid)  or  with  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate  (a  precipitate  shows  the  presence  of  hydrochloric 
acid),  nor  should  it,  after  being  diluted  with  water,  give  a  coloration  with  starch  con- 
taining potassium  iodide  (a  coloration  shows  the  admixture  of  other  oxides  of  nitrogen). 
The  oxides  of  nitrogen  maybe  most  easily  removed  from  impure  nitric  acid  by  heat- 
ing for  a  certain  time  with  a  small  quantity  of  pure  charcoal.  By  the  action  of  nitric 
acid  on  the  charcoal  carbonic  anhydride  is  evolved,  which  carries  off  the  lower  oxides  of 
nitrogen.  On  redistilling,  pure  acid  is  obtained.  The  oxides  of  nitrogen  occurring  in 
solution  may  also  be  removed  by  passing  air  through  the  nitric  acid. 

31  Dalton,  Smith,  Bineau,  and  others  considered  that  the  hydrate  of  constant  boiling 
point  (see  Chapter  I.,  Note  60)  for  nitric  acid  was  the  compound  2HNO3,3H2O,  but  Roscoe- 
showed  that  its  composition  changes  with  a  variation  of  the  pressure  and  temperature' 

*13 


272  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

specific  gravity  at  15°  =  1-421.  If  the  solution  contain  less  than 
25  p.c.  of  water,  then,  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solution  being  above 
1-44,  HN03  evaporates  off  and  fumes  in  the  air,  forming  the  above 
hydrate,  whose  vapour  tension  is  less  than  that  of  water.  Such  Solu- 
tions form  fuming  nitric  acid.  On  distilling  it  gives  monohydrated 
acid,32  HN08  ;  it  is  a  hydrate  boiling  at  121°,  so  that  it  is  obtained 
from  both  weak  and  strong  solutions.  Fuming  nitric  acid,  under  the 
action  not  only  of  organic  substances,  but  even  of  heat,  loses  a  portion 
of  its  oxygen,  forming  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which  impart  a  red- 
brown  colour  to  it ; 33  the  pure  acid  is  colourless. 

under  which  the  distillation  proceeds.  Thus,  at  a  pressure  of  1  atmosphere  the  solution 
of  constant  boiling  point  contains  68'6  p.c.,  and  at  one-tenth  of  an  atmosphere  66'8  p.o. 
Judging  from  what  has  been  said  concerning  solutions  of  hydrochloric  acid,  and  from  the 
variation  of  specific  gravity,  I  think  that  the  comparatively  large  decrease  in  the 
tensions  of  the  vapours  depends  on  the  formation  of  a  hydrate,  NH05,2H2O  (  =  63'6  p.c.). 
Such  a  hydrate  may  be  expressed  by  N(HO)5,  that  is,  as  NH4(HO),  in  which  all  the 
equivalents  of  hydrogen  are  replaced  by  hydroxyl.  The  constant  boiling  point  will 
then  be  the  temperature  of  the  decomposition  of  this  hydrate. 

The  variation  of  the  specific  gravity  at  15°  from  water  (p  =  0)  to  the  hydrate 
NHO35H2O  (41-2  p.c.  HNO3)  is  expressed  by  s  =  9992  +  57'ty  +  0'16p8,  if  water  =  10  000  at 
4°.  For  example,  when  p  =  80  p.c.,  s  =  11,860.  For  more  concentrated  solutions,  at  least, 
the  above-mentioned  hydrate,  HN05,2H3O,  must  be  taken,  up  to  which  the  specific  gravity 
s  =  9570  +  84-18jp-0-240p2;  but  perhaps  (since  the  results  of  observations  of  the  specific 
gravity  of  the  solutions  are  not  in  sufficient  agreement  to  arrive  at  a  conclusion)  the 
.hydrate  HNO3,8H2O  should  be  recognised,  as  is  indicated  by  many  nitrates  (Al,  Mg,  Co, 
&c.),  which  crystallise  with  this  amount  of  water  of  crystallisation.  From  HNO3,2H2O 
to  HNO3  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solutions  (at  15°)  s  =  10,652 +  62-08p-0'16Qp»  The 
hydrate  HNO32H2O  is  recognised  by  Berthelot  on  the  basis  of  the  thermo-chemical 
•data  for  solutions  of  nitric  acid,  because  on  approaching  to  this  composition  there  is  a 
rapid  change  in  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  by  mixing  nitric  acid  with  water.  Pickering 
<1892)  by  refrigeration  obtained  the  crystalline  hydrates :  HNO5H2O,  melting  at  -87° 
and  HNO33H20,  melting  at  - 18°.  A  more  detailed  study  of  the  reactions  of  hydrated 
nitric  acid  would  no  doubt  show  the  existence  of  change  in  the  process  and  rapidity  of 
reaction  in  approaching  these  hydrates. 

52  The  normal  hydrate  HN03,  corresponding  with  the  ordinary  salts,  may  be  termed 
the  monohydrated  acid,  because  the  anhydride  N2O5  with  water  forms  this  normal  nitric 
acid.     In  this  sense  the  hydrate  HNO3,2H2O  is  the  pentahydrated  acid. 

53  For  technical  and  laboratory  purposes  recourse  is  frequently  had  to  red  fuming 
nitric  acid — that  is,  the  normal  nitric  acid,  HNO3,  containing  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen 
in  solution.     This  acid  is  prepared  by  decomposing  nitre  with  half  its  weight  of  strong 
sulphuric  acid,  or  by  distilling  nitric  acid  with  an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid.    The  normal 
nitric  acid  is  first  obtained,  but  it  partially  decomposes,  and  gives  the  lower  oxidation 
products  of  nitrogen,  which  are  dissolved  by  the  nitric  acid,  to  which  they  impart  its 
usual  pale-brown  or  reddish  colour.     This  acid  fumes  in  the  air,  from  which  it  attracts 
moisture,  forming  a  less  volatile  hydrate.    If  carbonic  anhydride  be  passed  through  the 
Ted-brown  fuming  nitric  acid  for  a  long  period  of  time,  especially  if,  assisted  by  a 
moderate  heat,  it  expels  all  the  lower  oxides,  and  leaves  a  colourless  acid  free  from  these 
oxides.     It  is  necessary,  in  the  preparation  of  the  red  acid,  that  the  receivers  should  be 
kept  quite  cool,  because  it  is  only  when  cold  that  nitric  acid  is  able  to  dissolve  a  large 
proportion  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen.    The  strong  red  fuming  acid  has  a  specific  gravity 
1-56  at  20°,  and  has  a  suffocating  smell  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen.    When  the  red  acid  is 
ani::C'.1  with  walsr  it  turns  green,  and  then  of  a  bluish  colour,  ancl  v/ith  an  excess  of  water 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  273 

Nitric  acid,  as  an  acid  hydrate,  enters  into  reactions  of  double 
decomposition  with  bases,  basic  hydrates  (alkalis),  and  with  salts.  In  all 
these  cases  a  salt  of  nitric  acid  is  obtained.  An  alkali  and  nitric  acid 
give  water  and  a  salt ;  so,  also,  a  basic  oxide  with  nitric  acid  gives  'a 
salt  and  water;  for  instance,  lime,  CaO  +  2HNO3=Ca(N03)2  +  H2O. 
Many  of  these  salts  are  termed  nitres.34  The  composition  of  the  ordinary 
salts  of  nitric  acid  may  be  expressed  by  the  general  formula  M(NO3),(, 
where  M  indicates  a  metal  replacing  the  hydrogen  in  one  or  several 
(n)  equivalents  of  nitric  acid.  We  shall  find  afterwards  that  the  atoms  M 
of  metals  are  equivalent  to  one  (K,  Na,  Ag)  atom  of  hydrogen,  or  two 
(Ca,  Mg,  Ba),  or  three  (Al,  In),  or,  in  general,  n  atoms  of  hydrogen. 
The  salts  of  nitric  acid  are  especially  characterised  by  being  all  soluble 
in  water*5  From  the  property  common  to  all  these  salts  of  entering 
into  double  decompositions,  and  owing  to  the  volatility  of  nitric  acid, 
they  evolve  nitric  acid  when  heated  with  sulphuric  acid.  They  all,  like 
the  acid  itself,  are  capable  of  evolving  oxygen  when  heated,  and  con- 
sequently of  acting  as  oxidising  substances ;  they  therefore,  for  instance, 
deflagrate  with  ignited  carbon,  the  carbon  burning  at  the  expense  of 
the  oxygen  of  the  salt  and  forming  gaseous  products  of  combustion.36 

ultimately  becomes  colourless.  This  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  in 
the  presence  of  water  and  nitric  acid  are  changed,  and  give  coloured  solutions. 

Markleffsky  (1892)  showed  that  the  green  solutions  contain  (besides  HNO3)  HNO, 
and  N2O4,  whilst  the  blue  solutions  only  contain  HNO2  (see  Note  48). 

The  action  of  red  fuming  nitric  acid  (or  a  mixture  with  sulphuric  acid)  is  in  many 
cases  very  powerful  and  rapid,  and  it  sometimes  acts  differently  from  pure  nitric 
acid.  Thus  iron  becomes  covered  with  a  coating  of  oxides,  and  insoluble  in  acids ;  it 
becomes,  as  is  said,  passive.  Thus  chromic  acid  (and  potassium  dichromate)  gives  oxide 
of  chromium  in  this  red  acid — that  is,  it  is  deoxidised.  This  is  owing  to  the  presence  of 
the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which  are  capable  of  being  oxidised — that  is,  of  passing  into 
nitric  acid  like  the  higher  oxides.  But,  generally,  the  action  of  fuming  nitric  acid,  both 
red  and  colourless,  is  powerfully  oxidising. 

34  Hydrogen  is  not  evolved  in  the  action  of  nitric  acid  (especially  strong)  on  metals, 
even  with  those  metals  which  evolve  hydrogen  under  the  action  of  other  acids.  This  is 
because  the  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  its  separation  reduces  the  nitric  acid,  with  forma- 
tion of  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see. 

34  Certain  basic  salts  of  nitric  acid,  however  (for  example,  the  basic  salt  of  bismuth), 
are  insoluble  in  water ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  normal  salts  are  soluble,  and 
this  fonns  an  exceptional  phenomenon  among  acids,  because  all  the  ordinary  acids  form 
insoluble  salts  with  one  or  another  base.  Thus,  for  sulphuric  acid  the  salts  of  barium, 
lead,  &c.,  for  hydrochloric  acid  the  salts  of  silver,  &c.,  are  insoluble  in  water.  However, 
the  normal  salts  of  acetic  and  certain  other  acids  are  all  soluble. 

56  Ammonium  nitrate,  NH^NOs,  is  easily  obtained  by  adding  a  solution  of  am- 
monia or  of  ammonium  carbonate  to  nitric  acid  until  it  becomes  neutral.  On  evapo- 
rating this  solution,  crystals  of  the  salt  are  formed  which  contain  no  water  of  crystallisation. 
It  crystallises  in  prisms  like  those  formed  by  common  nitre,  and  has  a  refreshing  taste ; 
100  parts  of  water  at  t°  dissolve  54  +  0'61 1  parts  by  weight  of  the  salt.  It  is  soluble  in 
alcohol,  melts  at  160°,  and  is  decomposed  at  about  180°,  forming  water  and  nitrous  oxide, 
NH^NOs  =  2H2O  +  N.20.  If  ammonium  nitrate  be  mixed  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  the 
mixture  be  heated  to  about  the  boiling  point  of  water,  then  nitric  acid  is  evolved,  and 


274  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Nitric  acid  also  enters  into  double  decompositions  with  a  number 
of  hydrocarbons  not  in.  any  way  possessing  alkaline  characters  and  not 
reacting  with  other  acids.  Under  these  circumstances  the  nitric  acid 
gives  water  and  a  new  substance  termed  a  nitro-compound.  The 
chemical  character  of  the  nitro-compound  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
original  substance  ;  for  example,  if  an  indifferent  substance  be  taken, 
then  the  nitro-compound  obtained  from  it  will  also  be  indifferent  ; 
if  an  acid  be  taken,  then  an  acid  is  obtained  also.36bis  Benzene, 
C6H6,  for  instance,  acts  according  to  the  equation  C6H6  +  HNO3 
=H2O  +  CGHr,NO2.  Nitrobenzene  is  produced.  The  substance  taken, 
C6H6,  is  a  liquid  hydrocarbon  having  a  faint  tarry  smell,  boiling  at*80°, 
and  lighter  than  water ;  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  nitrobenzene  is 
.obtained,  which  is  a  substance  boiling  at  about  210°,  heavier  than  water, 
and  having  an  almond-like  odour  :  it  is  employed  in  large  quantities 
for  the  preparation  of  aniline  and  aniline  dyes.37  As  the  nitro-com- 

ammonium  hydrogqn  sulphate  remains  in  solution ;  but  if  the  mixture  be  heated  rapidly 
to  160°,  then  nitrous  oxide  is  evolved.  In  the  first  case  the  sulphuric  acid  takes  up 
ammonia,  and  in  the  second  place  water.  Ammonium  nitrate  is  employed  in  practice  for 
the  artificial  production  of  cold,  because  in  dissolving  in  water  it  lowers  the  temperature 
very  considerably.  For  this  purpose  it  is  best  to  take  equal  parts  by  weight  of  the  salt 
and  water.  The  salt  must  first  be  reduced  to  a  powder  and  then  rapidly  stirred  up  in 
the  water,  when  the  temperature  will  fall  from  +15°  to  —10°,  so  that  the  water  freezes. 

Ammonium  nitrate  absorbs  ammonia,  with  which  it  forms  unstable  compounds 
resembling  compounds  containing  water  of  crystallisation.  (Divers  1872,  Raoult  1878.) 
At  -10°  NH4NO3,2NH3  is  formed:  it  is  a  liquid  of  sp.  gr.  1'15,  which  loses  all  its 
ammonia  under  the  influence  of  heat.  At  +28°  NH4NO3,NH5  is  formed:  it  is  a  solid 
which  easily  parts  with  its  ammonia  when  heated,  especially  in  solution. 

Troost  (1882)  investigated  the  tension  of  the  dissociation  of  the  compounds  formed, 
and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  a  definite  compound  corresponding  to  the  formula 
2NH4NO58NH3  is  formed,  because  the  tension  of  dissociation  remains  constant  in  the 
decomposition  of  such  a  compound  at  0°.  V.  Kouriloff  (1893),  however,  considers  that 
the  constancy  of  the  tension  of  the  ammonia  evolved  is  due  to  the  decomposition  of  a 
saturated  solution,  and  not  of  a  definite  compound.  During  decomposition  the  system  is 
composed  of  a  liquid  and  a  solid ;  the  tension  only  becomes  constant  from  the  moment 
the  solid  falls  down.  The  composition  2NH4NO38NH3  corresponds  to  a  saturated 
solution  at  0°,  and  the  solubility  of  NH4NO3  in  NH3  increases  with  a  rise  of  temperature. 

56  bis  This  is  explained  by  saying  that  in  true  nitro-compounds  the  residue  of  nitric 
acid  NO2  takes  the  place  of  the  hydrogen  in  the  hydrocarbon  group.     For  example,  if 
C6H5OH  be  given,  then  C6H4(NO2)OH  will  be  a  true  nitro-compound  having  the  radical 
properties  of  CgH5OH.    If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  NO3.  replace  the  h}'drogen  of  the 
aqueous  radicle  (CdH5ONO2),  then  the  chemical  character  varies,  as  in  the  passage  of 
KOH  into  KONO2  (nitre)  (see  Note  87  and  Organic  Chemistry). 

57  The  compound  ethers  of  nitric  acid  in  which  the  hydrogen  of  the  aqueous  radicle 
(OH)   is  replaced  by  the  residue  of  nitric   acid  (NO2)   are   frequently  called  nitre- 
compounds.     But  in  their  chemical  character  they  differ  from  true  nitro-compounda 
(for  details  see  Organic  Chemistry)  and  do  not  burn  like  them. 

The  action  of  nitric  acid  on  cellulose,  C6H10O5)  is  an  example.  This  substance,  which 
forms  the-outer  coating  of  all  plant  cells,  occurs  in  an  almost  pure  state  in  cotton,  in 
common  writing-paper,  and  in  flax,  <fec. ;  under  the  action  of  nitric  acid  it  forms  water 
and  nitrocellulose  (like  water  and  KNO3  from  KHO),  which,  although  it  has  the  same 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITKOGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND   OXYGEN  275 

pounds  contain  both  combustible  elements  (hydrogen  and  carbon),  as 
well  as  oxygea  in  unstable  combination  with  nitrogen,  in  the  form  of 
the  radicle  NO2  of  nitric  acid,  they  decompose  with  an  explosion  when 
ignited  or  even  struck,  owing  to  the  pressure  of  the  vapours  and  gases 
formed — free  nitrogen,  carbonic  anhydride,  CO2,  carbonic  oxide,  CO,  and 
aqueous  vapour.  In  the  explosion  of  nitro- compounds  37  bis  much  heat  is 

appearance  as  the  cotton  originally  taken,  differs  from  it  entirely  in  properties.  14 
explodes  when  struck,  bursts  into  flame  very  easily  under  the  action  of  sparks,  and  acts 
like  gunpowder,  whence  its  name  of  pyroxylin,  or  gun-cotton.  The  composition  of 
gun-cotton  is  C6H7N30u  =  C6HloO5  +  8NHOr,-3H2O.  The  proportion  of  the  group  NO, 
in  nitrocellulose  may  be  decreased  by  limiting  the  action  of  the  nitric  acid  and 
compounds  obtained  with  different  properties;  for  instance,  the  (impure)  well-known 
collodion  cotton,  containing  from  11  to  12  per  cent,  of  nitrogen,  and  pyro-collodion 
(Mendeleeff,  1890),  containing  12'4  per  cent,  of  nitrogen.  Both  these  products  are  soluble  in 
a  mixture  of  alcohol  and  ether  (in  collodion  a  portion  of  the  substance  is  soluble  in  alcohol), 
and  the  solution  when  evaporated  gives  a  transparent  film,  which  is  insoluble  in  water.  A 
solution  of  collodion  is  employed  in  medicine  for  covering  wounds,  and  in  wet-plate 
photography  for  giving  on  glass  an  even  coating  of  a  substance  into  which  the  various 
reagents  employed  in  the  process  are  introduced.  Extremely  fine  threads  (obtained  by 
forcing  a  gelatinous  mixture  of  collodion,  ether,  and  alcohol  through  capillary  tubes  in 
water)  of  collodion  form  artificial  silk. 

57  bis  The  property  possessed  by  nitroglycerin  (occurring  in  dynamite),  nitrocellulose, 
and  the  other  nitre-compounds,  of  burning  with  an  explosion,  and  their  employment  for 
smokeletes  powder  and  as  explosives  in  general,  depends  on  the  reasons  in,  virtue  of 
which  a  mixture  of  nitre  and  charcoal  deflagrates  and  explodes ;  in  both  cases  the 
elements  of  the  nitric  acid  occurring  in  the  compound  are  decomposed,  the  oxygen  in 
burning  unites  with  the  carbon,  and  the  nitrogen  is  set  free  ;  thus  a  very  large  volume 
of  gaseous  substances  (nitrogen  and  oxides  of  carbon)  is  rapidly  formed  from  the  solid 
substances  originally  taken.  These  gases  occupy  an  incomparably  larger  volume  than 
the  original  substance,  and  therefore  produce  a  powerful  pressure  and  explosion.  It  is 
evident  that  in  exploding  with  the  development  of  heat  (that  is,  in  decomposing,  not 
with  the  absorption  of  energy,  as  is  generally  the  case,  but  with  the  evolution  of  energy) 
the  nitre-compounds  form  stores  of  energy  which  are  easily"  set  free,  and  that  con- 
sequently their  elements  occur  in  a  state  of  particularly  energetic  motion,  which  is 
especially  strong  in  the  group  NO2  :  this  group  is  common  to  all  nitro-compounds,  and 
all  the  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen  are  unstable,  easily  decomposable,  and  (Note  29) 
absorb  heat  in  their  formation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  nitro-compounds  are  instructive 
as  an  example  and  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  elements  and  groups  forming  compounds 
•are  united  in  definite  order  in  the  molecules  of  a  compound.  A  blow,  concussion,  or 
rise  of  temperature  is  necessary  to  bring  the  combustible  elements  O  and  H  into  the 
most  intimate  contact  with  NO2,  and  to  distribute  the  elements  in  a  new  order  in  new 
compounds. 

As  regards  the  composition  of  the  nitre-compounds,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  hydrogen 
of  a  given  substance  is  replaced  by  the  complex  group  NO2  of  the  nitric  &cid.  The  same 
is  observed  in  the  passage  of  alkalis  into  nitrates,  so  that  the  reactions  of  substitution  of 
nitric  acid — that  is,  the  formation  of  salts  and  nitro-compormds — may  be  expressed  in 
the  following  manner.  In  these  cases  the  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  the  so-called  radicle 
of  nitric  acid  NO2,  a?  is  evident  from  the  following  table: — 

,  Caustic  potash     .     .     .     KHO.  j  Glycerin 

\  Nitre K(NO2)O.  1  Nitroglycerin  ... 

j  Hydrate  of  lime  .     .     .     CaH2O2.  f  Phenol    .     .     •     .     .     .    CeH5OH. 

1  Calcium  nitrate  .    .    .    Ca(NO2)2Oa.      \  Picric  acid 

The  difference  between  the  salts  formed  by  nitric  acid  and  the  nitre-compounds 


276  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

evolved,  as  in  the  combustion  of  gunpowder  or  detonating  gas,  and  in 
this  case  the  force  of  explosion  in  a  closed  space  is  great,  because  from 
a  solid  or  liquid  nitro-compound  occupying  a  small  space  there  proceed 
vapours  and  gases  whose  elasticity  is  great  not  only  from  the  small 
space  in  which  they  are  formed,  but  owing  to  the  high  temperature 
corresponding  to  the  combustion  of  the  nitro-compound.38 

If  the  vapour  of  nitric  acid  is  passed  through  an  even  moderately 
heated  glass  tube,  the  formation  of  dark -brown  fumes  of  the  lower 
oxides  of  nitrogen  and  the  separation  of  free  oxygen  may  be  observed, 
2NH03=H2O  +  2N02  +  O.  The  decomposition  is  complete  at  a 
white  heat— that  is,  nitrogen  is  formed,  2NH03=H2O-f  N2  +  05. 
Hence  it  is  easily  understood  that  nitric  acid  may  part  with  its  oxygen 
to  a  number  of  substances  capable  of  being  oxidised.39  It  is  con- 
consists  in  the  fact  that  nitric  acid  is  very  easily  separated  from  the  salts  of  nitric  acid 
by  means  of  sulphuric  acid  (that  is,  by  a  method  of  double  saline  decomposition),  whilst 
nitric  acid  is  not  displaced  by  sulphuric  acid  from  true  nitro-compounds ;  for  instance, 
nitrobenzene,  C«H5'NO2.  As  nitro-compounds  are  formed  exclusively  from  hydrocarbons, 
they  are  described  with  them  in  organic  chemistry. 

The  group  NO.j  of  nitro-compounds  in  many  cases  (like  all  the  oxidised  compounds  of 
nitrogen)  passes  into  the  ammonia  group  or  into  the  ammonia  radicle  NH2.  This  requires 
the  action  of  reducing  substances  evolving  hydrogen :  RNO2  +  6H  =  RNH3  +  2H jO.  Thus 
Zinin  converted  nitrobenzene,  C6H5-NO2,  into  aniline,  CeHj-NH-j,  by  the  action  of 
hydrogen  sulphide. 

Admitting  the  existence  of  the  group  NO2,  as  replacing  hydrogen  in  various 
compounds,  then  nitric  acid  may  be  considered  as  water  in  which  half  the  hydrogen 
is  replaced  by  the  radicle  of  nitric  acid.  In  this  sense  nitric  acid  is  nitro-water, 
NO2.OH,  and  its  anhydride  dinitro-water,  (NO2)2O.  In  nitric  acid  the  radicle  of 
nitric  acid  is  combined  with  hydroxyl,  just  as'  in  nitrobenzene  it  is  combined  with  the 
radicle  of  benzene. 

It  should  here  be  remarked  that  the  group  NO5  may  be  recognised  in  the  salts  of 
nitric  acid,  because  the  salts  have  the  composition  M(NO5)n,  just  as  the  metallic  chlorides 
have  the  composition  MCI,,.  But  the  group  NO3  does  not  form  any  other  compounds 
beyond  the  salts,  and  therefore  it  should  be  considered  as  hydroxyl,  HO,  in  which  H  is 
replaced  by  NOo. 

38  The  nitro-compounds  play  a  very  important  part  in  mining  and  artillery.  Detailed 
accounts  of  them  must  be  looked  for  in  special  works,  among  which  the  works  of 
A.  R.  Shuliachenke  and  T.  M.  Chelletsoff  occupy  an  important  place  in  the  Russian 
literature  on  this  subject,  although  historically  the  scientific  works  of  Abel  in  England 
and  Berthelot  in  France  stand  pre-eminent.  The  latter  elucidated  much  in  connection 
with  explosive  compounds  by  a  series  of  both  experimental  and  theoretical  researches. 
Among  explosives  a  particularly  important  place  from  a  practical  point  of  view  is 
occupied  by  ordinary  or  black  gunpowder  (Chapter  XIII.,  Note  16),  fulminating 
mercury  (Chapter  XVI.,  Note  26),  the  different  forms  of  gun-cotton  (Chapter  VI.,  Note  87), 
and  nitro-glycerine  (Chapter  VIII.,  Note  45,  and  Chapter  XII.,  Note  83).  The  latter 
when  mixed  with  solid  pulverulent  substances,  like  magnesia,  tripoli,  &c.,  forms 
dynamite,  which  is  so  largely  used  in  quarries  and  mines  in  driving  tunnels,  &c.  We 
may  add  that  the  simplest  true  nitro-compound,  or  marsh  gas,  CH4,  in  which  all  the 
hydrogens  are  replaced  by  NOa  groups  has  been  obtained  by  L.  N.  Shishkoff,  C(N02)4, 
as  well  as  nitroform,  CH(NO2)3. 

»  Nitric  acid  may  be  entirely  decomposed  by  passing  its  vapour  over  highly  incan. 
descent  copper,  because  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  first  formed  give  up  their  oxygen  to  the 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN 

sequently  an  oxidising  agent.  Charcoal,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
burns  in  nitric  acid  ;  phosphorus,  sulphur,  iodine,  and  the  majority  of 
metals  also  decompose  nitric  acid,  some  on  heating  and  others  even  at 
the  ordinary  temperature  :  the  substances  taken  are  oxidised  and  the; 
nitric  acid  is  deoxidised,  yielding  compounds  containing  less  oxygen. 


FJG.  48.— The  method  of  .decomposition  of  nitrous  anhydride,  also  applicable  to  the  o'ther  oxides  of 
nitrogen,  and  to  their  analysis.  N0a  is  generated  from  nitrate  of  lead  in  the  retort  A.  Nitrio 
acid  and  other  less  volatile  products  are  condensed  in  B.  The  tube  0  C  contains  copper,  and  is 
heated  from  below.  Undecomposed  volatile  products  (if  any  are  formed)  are  condensed  in  D, 
which  is  cooled.  If  the  decomposition  be  incomplete,  brown  fumes  make  their  appearance  in  this 
receiver.  The  gaseous  nitrogen  is  collected  in  the  cylinder  E. 

Only  a  few  metals,  such  as  gold  and  platinum,  do  not  act  on  nitric  acid, 
but  the  majority  decompose  it  ;  in  so  doing,  an  oxide  of  the  metal  is 
formed,  which,  if  it  has  the  character  of  a  base,  acts  on  the  remaining 
nitric  acid  ;  hence,  with  the  majority  of  metals  the  result  of  the 
reaction  is  usually  not  an  oxide  of  the  metal,  but  the  corresponding  salt 

red-hot  metallic  copper.,,  so  that  water  and  nitrogen  gas  alone  are  obtained.  This 
forms  a  means  for  determining  the  composition  both  of  nitric  acid  and  of  all  the 
other  compounds  of  nitrogen  with 
oxygen,  because  by  collecting  the 
gaseous  nitrogen  formed  it  is 
possible  to  calculate,  from  its 
volume,  its  weight  and  conse- 
quently its  amount  in  a  given 
quantity  of  a  nitrogenous  sub- 
stance, and  by  weighing  the  copper 
before  and  after  the  decompo- 
sition it  is  possible  to  determine 
the  amount  of  oxygen  by  the 
increase  in  weight.  The  complete 
decomposition  of  nitric  acid  is 
also  accomplished  by  passing  a  *•*•" 

mixture  of  hydrogen  and  nitric         Fio.  49» — Decomposition  of  nitrous  oxide  by  sodium, 
acid  vapours  through  a  red-hot 

tube.  Sodium  also  decomposes  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  at  a  red-heat,  taking  up  all  the 
oxygen.  This  method  is  sometimes  used  for  determining  the  composition  of  the  oxides 
of  nitrogen. 


278  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

of  nitric  acid,  and,  at  the  same  time,  one  of  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen. 
The  resulting  salts  of  the  metals  are  soluble,  and  hence  it  is  said  that 
nitric  acid  dissolves  nearly  all  metals.40  This  case  is  termed  the  solution 
of  metals  by  acids,  although  it  is  not  a  case  of  simple  solution,  but  a  com- 
plex chemical  change  of  the  substances  taken.  When  treated  with  this 
acid,  those  metals  whose  oxides  do  not  combine  with  nitric  acid  yield 
the  oxide  itself,  and  not  a  salt ;  for  example,  tin  acts  in  this  manner 
on  nitric  acid,  forming  a  hydrated  oxide,  SnH203,  which  is  obtained  in 
the  form  of  a  white  powder,  Sn  +  4NHO3=H2SnO3  +  4NO2  +  H20. 
Silver  is  able  to  take  up  still  more  oxygen,  and  to  convert  a  large 
portion  of  nitric  acid  into  nitrous  anhydride,  4Ag  +  6HNO3 
=  4AgNO3  +  N203  +  3H2O.  Copper  takes  up  still  more  oxygen  from 
nitric  acid,  converting  it  into  nitric  oxide,  and,  by  the  action  of  zinc, 
nitric  acid  is  able  to  give  up  a  still  further  quantity  of  nitrogen, 
forming  nitrous  oxide,  4Zn  +  10NHO3=4Zn(NO3)2  +  N2O  +  5H2O.41 
Sometimes,  and  especially  with  dilute  solutions  of  nitric  acid,  the 
deoxidation  proceeds  as  far  as  the  formation  of  hydroxylamine  and 
ammonia,  and  sometimes  it  leads  to  the  formation  of  nitrogen  itself. 
The  formation  of  one  or  other  nitrogenous  substance  from  nitric  acid  is 

40  The  application  of  this  acid  for  etching  copper  or  steel  in  engraving  is  baaed  on 
this  fact.    The  copper  ia  covered  with  a  coating  of  wax,  resin,  &c.  (etching  ground),  on. 
which  nitric  acid  does  not  act,  and  then  the  ground  is  removed  in  certain  parts  with  a 
needle,  and  the  whole  is  washed  in  nitric  acid.    The  parts  coated  remain  untouched, 
whilst  the  uncovered  portions  are  eaten  into  by  the  acid.     Copper  plates  for  etchings, 
aquatints,  &c.,  are  prepared  in  this  manner. 

41  The  formation-  of  such  complex  equations  as  the  above  often  presents  some  diffi- 
culty to  the  beginner.     It  should  be  observed  that  if  the  reacting  and  resultant  sub- 
Stances  be  known,  it  is  easy  to  form  an  equation  for  the  reaction.    Thus,  if  we  wish  to 
form  an  equation  expressing  the  reaction  that  nitric  acid  acting  on  zinc  gives  nitrous 
oxide,  N2O,  and  zinc  nitrate,  Zn(NO3)2,  we  must  reason  as  follows :— Nitric  acid  contains 
'hydrogen, whilst  the  salt  and  nitrous  oxide  do  not;  hence  water  is  formed,  and  therefore 
it  is  as  though  anhydrous  nitric  acid,  N2O5,  were  acting.    "For  its  conversion  into  nitrous 
oxide  it. parts  with  four  equivalents  of  oxygen,  and  hence  it  is  able  to  oxidise  four  equi- 
valents of  zinc  and  to  convert  it  into  zinc  oxide,  ZnO.     These  four  equivalents  of  zinc 
oxide  require  for  their  conversion  into  the  salt  four  more  equivalents  of  nitric  anhydride ; 
consequently  five  equivalents  in  all  of  the  latter  are  required,  or  ten  equivalents  of  nitric 
acid.     Thus  ten  equivalents   of    nitric  acid  are    necessary   for    four    equivalents    of 
zinc  in  order  to  express  the  reaction  in  whole  equivalents.     It  must  not  be  forgotten, 
however,  that  there  are  very  few  such  reactions  which  can  be  entirely  expressed  by  simple 
1  equations.     The  majority  of  equations  of  reactions  only  express  the  chief  and  ultimate 

products  of  reaction,  and  thus  none  of  the  three  -preceding  equations  express  all  that 
in  reality  occurs  in  the  action  of  metals  on  nitric  acid.  In  no  one  of  theto  is  only  one 
oxide  of  nitrogen  formed,  but  always  several  together  or  consecutively — one  after  the 
other,  according  to  the  temperature  and  strength  of  the  acid.  And  this  is  easily  in- 
telligible. The  resulting  oxide  is  itself  capable  of  acting  on  metals  and  of  being 
deoxidised,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  nitric  acid  it  may  change  the  acid  and  be  itself 
changed.  The  equations  given  must  be  looked  on  as  a  systematic  expression  of  the 
main  features  of  reactions,  or  as  a  limit  towards  which  they  tend,  but  to  which  they 
only  attain  in  the  absence  of  disturbing  influences. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  279 

determined,  not  only  by  the  nature  of  the  reacting  substances,  but  also 
by  the  relative  mass  of  water  and  nitric  acid,  and  also  by  the  temper- 
ature and  pressure,  or  the  sum  total  of  the  conditions  of  reaction  ;  and 
as  in  a  given  mixture  even  these  conditions  vary  (the  temperature  and 
the  relative  mass  vary),  it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  a  mixture  of 
different  products  of  the  deoxidation  of  nitric  acid  is  formed. 

Thus  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  metals  consists  in  their  being 
oxidised,  whilst  the  acid  itself  is  converted,  according  to  the  temperature, 
concentration  in  which  it  is  taken,  and  the  nature  of  the  metal,  &c., 
into  lower  oxides,  ammonia,  or  even  into  nitrogen.42  Many  compounds 
are  oxidised  by  nitric  acid  like  metals  and  other  elements  ;  for  instance, 
lower  oxides  are  converted  into  higher  oxides.  Thus,  arsenious  acid  is 
converted  into  arsenic  acid,  suboxide  of  iron  into  oxide,  sulphurous 
acid  into  sulphuric  acid,  the  sulphides  of  the  metals,  M2S,  into  sulphates, 
M2SO4,  &c. ;  in  a  word,  nitric  acid  brings  about  oxidation,  its  oxygen 
is  taken  up  and  transferred  to  many  other  substances.  Certain  sub- 
stances are  oxidised  by  strong  nitric  acid  so  rapidly  and  with  so  great 
an  evolution  of  heat  that  they  deflagrate  and  burst  into  flame.  Thus 
turpentine,  Ci0H,6,  bursts  into  flame  when  poured  into  fuming  nitric 
acid.  In  virtue  of  its  oxidising  property,  nitric  acid  removes  the 
hydrogen  from  many  substances.  Thus  it  decomposes  hydriodic  acid, 
separating  the  iodine  and  forming  water  ;  and  if  fuming  nitric  acid  be 
poured  into  a  flask  containing  gaseous  hydriodic  acid,  then  a  rapid 

42  Montemartini  endeavours  to  show  that  the  products  evolved  in  the  action  of  nitric 
acid  upon  metals  (and  their  amount)  is  in  direct  connection  with  both  the  concentration 
of  the  acid  and  the  capacity  of  the  metals  to  decompose  water.  Those  metals  which 
only  decompose  water  at  a  high  temperature  give,  under  the  action  of  nitric  acid,  NO2, 
N2O4,  and  NO ;  whilst  those  metals  which  decompose  water  at  a  lower  temperature  give, 
besides  the  above  products,  N2O,  N,  and  NH3 ;  and,  lastly,  the  metals  which  decompose 
water  at  the  ordinary  temperature  also  evolve  hydrogen.  It  is  observed  that  concentrated 
nitric  acid  oxidises  many  metals  with  much  greater  difficulty  than  when  diluted  with 
water ;  iron,  copper,  and  tin  are  very  easily  oxidised  by  dilute  nitric  acid,  but  remain 
unaltered  under  the  influence  of  monohydrated  nitric  acid  or  of  the  pure  hydrate  NHOs, 
Nitric  acid  diluted  with  a  large  quantity  of  water  does  not  oxidjse  copper,  but  it  oxidises 
tin ;  dilute  nitric  acid  also  does  not  oxidise  either  silver  or  mercury ;  but,  on  the  addition 
of  nitrous  acid,  even  dilute  acid  acts  on  the  above  metals.  This  naturally  depends  on 
the  smaller  stability  of  nitrous  acid,  and  on  the  fact  that  after  the  commencement  of 
the  action  the  nitric  acid  is  itself  converted  into  nitrous  acid,  which  continues  to  act  on  the 
silver  and  mercury.  Veley  (Oxford  1891)  made  detailed  researches  on  the  action  of 
nitric  acid  upon  Cu,  Hg,  and  Bi,  and  showed  that  nitric  acid  of  80  p.c.  strength  does 
not  act  upon  these  metals  at  the  ordinary  temperature  if  nitrous  acid  (traces,  are  destroyed 
by  urea)  and  oxidising  agents  such  as  H2O2,  KClOs,  &c.  be  entirely  absent ;  but  in  the 
presence  of  even  a  small  amount  of  nitrous  acid  the  metals  form  nitrites,  which,  with 
HNOs,  form  nitrates  and  the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which  reform  the  nitrous  acid 
necessary  for  starting  the  reaction,  because  the  reaction  2NO-fHNO3  +  H2O  =  3HNO2  is 
reversible.  The  above  metals  are  quickly  dissolved  in  a  1  p.c.  solution  of  nitrous  acicl. 
Moreover,  Veley  observed  that  nitric  acid  is  partially  converted  into  nitrous  acid  by 
gaseous  hydrogen  in  the  presence  of  the  nitrates  of  Cu  and  Pb. 


260  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

reaction  takes  place,  accompanied  by  flame  and  the  separation  of  violet 
vapours  of  iodine  and  brown  fumes  of  oxides  of  nitrogen.43 

A^s  nitric  acid  is  very  easily  decomposed  with  the  separation  of 
oxygen,  it  was  for  a  long  time  supposed  that  it  was  not  capable  of 
forming  the  corresponding  nitric  anhydride,  N205  j  but  Deville  first 
ajid  subsequently  Weber  and  others,  discovered  the  methods  of  its  for- 
mation. Deville  obtained  nitric  anhydride  by  decomposing  silver  nitrate 
by  chlorine  under  the  influence  of  a  moderate  heat.  Chlorine  acts  on  the 
above  salt  at  a  temperature  of.  95°  (2AgN03  +  Cl2  =  2AgCl  +  N2O5+P), 
and  when  once  the  reaction  is  started,  it  continues  by  itself  without 
further  heating.  Brown  fumes  are  given  off,  which  are  condensed  in  a 
tube  surrounded  by  a  freezing- mixture.  A  portion  condenses  in  this 
tube  and  a  portion  remains  in  a  gaseous  state.  The  latter  contains 
free  oxygen.  A  crystalline  mass  and  a  liquid  substance  are  obtained  in 
the  tube  ;  the  liquid  is  poured  off,  and  a  current  of  dry  carbonic  acid 
gas  is  passed  through  the  apparatus  in  order  to  remove  all  traces  of 
volatile  substances  (liquid  oxides  of  nitrogen)  adhering  to  the  crystals 
of  nitric  anhydride..  These  form  a  voluminous  mass  of  rhombic  crystals 
(density  1'64),  which  sometimes  are  of  rather  large  size  ;  they  melt  at 
about  30°  and  distil  at  about  47°..  In  distilling,  a  portion  of  the  sub- 
stance is  decomposed.  With  water  these  crystals  jgive  nitric  acid. 
Nitric  anhydride  is  also  obtained  by  the  action  of  phosphoric  anhydride, 
P205,  on  cold  pure  nitric  acid  (below  0°).  During  the  very  careful 
distillation  of  equal  parts  by  weight  of  these  two  substances  a  por- 
tion of  the  acid  decomposes,  giving  a  liquid  compound,  H2O,2N2O5 
=N2O$,2HNO3,  whilst  the  greater  part  of  the  nitric  acid  gives  the 
anhydride  according  to  the  equation  2NH03  +  P205  =  2PHO3  +  N2O5. 
On  heating,  nitric  anhydride  decomposes  with  an  explosion,  or  gradu- 
ally, into  nitric  peroxide  and  oxygen,  N206=N2O4  +  O. 

Nitrogen  peroxide,  N2O4,  and  nitrogen  dioxide,  NO^  express  one 

43  When  nitric  acid  acts  on  many  organic  substances  it  often  happens  that  not  only 
js  hydrogen  removed,  but  also  oxygen  is  combined  ;  thus,  for  example,  nitric  acid  con- 
verts toluene,  C7H8,  into  benzoic  acid,  CyHgOj.  In  certain  cases,  also,  a  portion  of  the 
carbon  contained  in  an  organic  substance  burns  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the 
nitric  acid.  So,  for  instance,  phthalic  acid,  C8H6O4,  is  obtained  from  naphthalene.  C10Hg. 
Thus  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  the  hydrocarbons  is  often  most  complex ;  not  only  does, 
nitrification  take  place,  but  also  separation  of  carbon,  displacement  of  hydrogen,  and 
combination  of  oxygen.  There  are  few  organic  substances  which  can  withstand  the 
action  of  nitric  acid,  and  it  causes  fundamental  changes  in  a  number  of  them* 
It  leaves  a  yellow  stain  on  the  skin,  and  in  a  large  quantity  causes  a  wound  and  entirely 
.eats  away  the  membranes  of  the  body.  The  membranes  of  plants  are  eaten  into  with  the 
greatest  ease  by  strong  nitric  acid  in  just  the  same  manner.  One  of  the  most  durable 
blue  vegetable  dyes  employed  in  dyeing  tissues  is  indigo  ;  yet  it  is  easily  converted  into 
a  yellow  substance  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid,  and  small  traces  of  free  nitric  acid  may 
(be  recognised  by  this  means. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  281 

and  the  same  composition,  but  they  should  be  distinguished  like  ordinary 
oxygen  and  ozone,  although  in  this  case  their  mutual  conversion  is 
more  easily  effected  and  takes  place  on  vaporisation  ;  also,  03  loses  heat 
in  passing  into  O2,  whilst  N2O4  absorbs  heat  in  forming  NO2. 

Nitric  acid  in  acting  on  tin  and  on  many  organic  substances  (for 
example,  starch)  gives  brown  vapours,  consisting  of  a  mixture  of  N203 
and  N02.  A  purer  product  is  obtained  by  the  decomposition  of  lead 
nitrate  by  heat,  Pb(N03)2=2N02  +  O  +  PbO,  when  non-volatile  lead 
oxide,  oxygen  gas,  and  nitrogen  peroxide  are-  formed.  The  latter  con- 
denses, in  a  well-cooled  vessel,  to  a  brown  liquid,  which  boils  at  about 
22°.  The  purest  peroxide  of  nitrogen,  solidifying  at  —9°,  is  obtained 
by  mixing  dry  oxygen  in  a  freezing- mixture  with  twice  its  volume 
of  dry  nitric  oxide,  NO,  when  transparent  prisms  of  nitrogen  peroxide 
are  formed  in  the  receiver  :  they  melt  into  a  colourless  liquid  at  about- 
—  10°.  When  the  temperature  of  the  receiver  is  above  —9°,  the, 
crystals  melt,44  and  at  0°  give  a  reddish  yellow  liquid,  like  that  ob- 
tained in  the  decomposition  of  lead  nitrate.  The  vapours  of  nitrogen 
peroxide  have  a  characteristic  odour,  and  at  the  ordinary  temperature 
are  of  a  dark-brown  colour,  but  at  lower  temperatures  the  colour  of 
the  vapour  is  much  fainter.  When  heated,  especially  above  50°,  the 
colour  becomes  a  very  dark  brown,  so  that  the  vapours  almost  lose  their 
transparency. 

The  causes  of  these  peculiarities  of  nitrogen  peroxide  were  not 
clearly  understood  until  Deville  and  Troost  determined  the  density 
and  dissociation  of  the  vapour  of  this  substance  at  different  temperatures, 
and  showed  that  the  density  varies.  If  the  density  be  referred  to  that 
of  hydrogen  at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure,  then  it  is  found  to- 
vary  from  38  at  the  boiling  point,  or  about  27°,  to  23  at  135°,  after 
which  the  density  remains  constant  up  to  those  high  temperatures  at 
which  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  are  decomposed.  As  on  the  basis  of  the 
laws  enunciated  in  the  following  chapter,  the  density  23  corresponds 
with  the  compound  NO2  (because  the  weight  corresponding  with  this 
molecular  formula=46,  and  the  density  referred  to  hydrogen  as  unity  i& 
equal  to  half  the  molecular  weight) ;  therefore  at  temperatures  above  135* 
the  existence  of  nitrogen  dioxide  only  must  be  recognised.  It  is  this 
gas  which  is  of  a  brown  colour.  At  a  lower  temperature  it  forms 

44  According  to  certain  investigations,  if  a  brown  liquid  is  formed  from  the  melted 
crystals  by  heating  above  -9°,  then  they  no  longer  solidify  at  -10°,  probably  because  a 
certain  amount  of  N8O3  (and  oxygen)  is  formed,  and  this  substance  remains  liquid  at 
-80°,  or  it  may  be  that  the  passage  from  2NO2  into  N?O4  is  not  so  easily  accomplished 
«8  the  passage  from  N2O4  into  2NO2. 

Liquid  nitrogen  peroxide  (that  is,  a  mixture  of  NO3  and  N3O4)  is  employed  in  admix- 
ture with  hydrocarbons  as  an  explosive. 


282  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

nitrogen  peroxide,  N2O4,  whose  molecular  weight,  and  therefore  density, 
is  twice  that  of  the  dioxide.  This  substance,  which  is  isomeric  with 
nitrogen  dioxide,  as  ozone  is  isomeric  with  oxygen,  and  has  twice  as 
great  a  vapour  density  (46  referred  to  hydrogen),  is  formed  in  greater 
quantity  the  lower  the  temperature,  and  crystallises  at  —  10°.  The 
reasons  both  of  the  variation  of  the  colour  of  the  gas  (N2O4  gives 
colourless  and  transparent  vapours,  whilst  those  of  N02  are  brown  and 
opaque)  and  the  variation  of  the  vapour  density  with  the  variation  of 
temperature  are  thus  made  quite  clear  ;  and  as  at  the  boiling  point  a 
density  38  was  obtained,  therefore  at  that  temperature  the  vapours 
consist  of  a  mixture  of  79  parts  by  weight  of  N2O4  with  21  parts  by 
weight  of  NO2.46  It  is  evident  tha.t  a  decomposition  here  takes  place 
the  peculiarity  of  which  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  product  of  decom- 
position, NO2,  is  polymerised  (i.e.  becomes  denser,  combines  with  itself) 
at  a  lower  temperature  ;  that  is,  the  reaction 


is  a  reversible  reaction,  and  consequently  the  whole  phenomenon  re- 
presents a  dissociation  in  a  homogeneous  gaseous  medium,  where  the 
original  substance,  N2O4)  and  the  resultant,  NO2,  are  both  gases.  The 
measure  of  dissociation  will  be  expressed  if  we  find  the  proportion 
of  the  quantity  of  the  substance  decomposed  to  the  whole  amount  of 
the  substance.  At  the  boiling  point,  therefore,  the  measure  of  the 
decomposition  of  nitrogen  peroxide  will  be  21  p.c.  ;  at  135°  it  =  1, 
and  at  10°  it  =  0  ;  that  is,  the  N2O4  is  not  then  decomposable. 
Consequently  the  limits  of  dissociation  here  are  —  10°  and  135°  at 
the  atmospheric  pressure.46  Within  the  limits  of  these  tempera- 

45  Because  if  x  equal  the  amount  by  weight  of  N2O4,  its  volume  will  =  x/46,  and  the 
amount  of  NOj  will  =100—  a;,  and  consequently  its  volume  will  =  (100—  x)/28.    But  the 
•mixture,  having  a  density  88,  will  weigh   100;  consequently  its  volume  will  =100/38. 
Hence  x/46  +  (100  -o;)/28  =  100/38,  or  a?  =  79'0. 

46  The  phenomena  and  laws  of  dissociation,  which  we  shall  consider  only  in  particular 
instances,  are  discussed  in.  detail  in  works  on  theoretical  chemistry.     Nevertheless,  in 
respect  to  nitrogen  peroxide,  as  an  historically  important  example  of  dissociation  in  a 
homogeneous  gaseous  medium,  we  will  cite  the  results  of  the  careful  investigations  (1885- 
1886)  of  E.  and  L.  Natanson,  who  determined  the  densities  under  various  conditions  of 
temperature  and  pressure.     The  degree  of  dissociation,  expressed  as  above  (it  may  also  be 
expressed  otherwise  —for  example,  by  the  ratio  of  the  quantity  of  substance  decomposed  to 
that  unaltered),  proves  to  increase  at  all  temperatures  as  the  pressure  diminishes,  which 
would  be  expected  for  a  homogeneous  gaseous  medium,  as  a  decreasing  pressure  aids 
the  formation  of  the  lightest  product  of  dissociation  (that  having  the  least  density  or 
largest  volume).     Thus,  in  the  Natansons1  experiments  the  degree  of  dissociation  at  0°  in- 
creases from  10  p.c.  to  80  p.c.,  with  a  decrease  of  pressure  of  from  251  to  38  mm.;  at  49°'7 
it  increases  from  49  p.c.  to  93  p.c.,  with  a  fall  of  pressure  of  from  498  to  27  mm.,  and  at 
100°  it  increases  from  89'2  p.c.  to  99'7  p.c.,  with  a  fall  of  pressure  of  from  782*5  to  11'7  mm. 
At  130°  and  150°  the  decomposition  is  complete—  that  is,  only  NO2  remains  at  the  low 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITEOGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND   OXYGEN   283 

tures  the  vapours  of  nitrogen  peroxide  have  not  a  constant  density,  but, 
on  the  other  band,  above  and  below  these  limits  definite  substances  exist. 
Thus  above  135°  N2O4  has  ceased  to  exist  and  NO2  alone  remains.  It 
is  evident  that  at  the  ordinary  temperature  there  is  a  partially  dissociated 
system  or  mixture  of  nitrogen  peroxide,  N2O4,  and  nitrogen  dioxide, 
NO2.  In  the  brown  liquid  boiling  at  22°  probably  a  portion  of  the 
N2O4  has  already  passed  into  NO2,  and  it  is  only  the  colourless  liquid 
and  crystalline  substance  at  —10°  that' can  be  considered  as  pure 
nitrogen  peroxide.47 

The  above  explains  the  action  of  nitrogen  peroxide  on  water  at  low 
temperatures.  N2O4  then  acts  on  water  like  a  mixture  of  the  anhy- 
drides of  nitrous  and  nitric  acids.  The  first,  N2O3,  may  be  looked  on 
as  water  in  which  each  of  the  two -atoms  of  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  the 
radicle  NO,  while  in  the  second  each  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  the  radicle 
NO2,  proper  to  nitric  acid  ;  and  in  nitrogen  peroxide  one  atom  of  the 
hydrogen  of  water  is  replaced  by  NO  and  the  other  by  NO2,  as  is  seen 
from  the  formulae — 

HjQ.    N0l0.    NO  I         N0a 

H|°'   N0[°>    N02f°>   N02J 

or  H20;     N2O3 ;      N2O4 ;        N2O5. 

In  fact,  nitrogen  peroxide  at  low  temperatures  gives  with  water  (ice) 
both  nitric,  HNO3,  and  nitrous,  HN02>  acids.  The  latter,  as  we  shall 
afterwards  see,  splits  up  into  water  and  the  anhydride,  N2O3.  If,  how- 
ever, warm  water  act  on  nitrogen  peroxide,  only  nitric  acid  and  mon- 
oxide of  nitrogen  are  formed  :  3^O2+.H20=NO  +  2NHO3. 

Although  NO2  is  not  decomposed  into  N  and  O  even  at  500°, 
still  in  many  cases  it  acts  as  an  oxidising  agent.  Thus,  for  instance, 
it  oxidises  mercury,  converting  it  into  mercurous  nitrate,  2NO2  +  Hg 

pressures  (less  than  the  atmospheric)  at  which  the  Natansons  made  their  determina- 
tions ;  but  it  is  probable  that  at  higher  pressures  (of  several  atmospheres)  molecules  of 
N2O4  would  still  be  formed,  and  it  would  be  exceedingly  interesting  to  trace  the  pheno- 
mena under  the  conditions  of  both  very  considerable  pressures  and  of  relatively  large 
volumes. 

47  Liquid  nitrogen  peroxide  is  said  by  Geuther  to  boil  al  22°-26°,  and  to  have  a  sp.  gr. 
at  0°  =  1'494  and  all  16°  =  1'474,  It  is  evident  that,  in  the  liquid  as  in  the  gaseous  state, 
the  variation  of  density  with  the  temperature  depends,  not  only  on  physical,  Jbut  also  on( 
chemical  changes,  as  the  amount  of  N2O4  decreases  and  the  amount  of  NO2  increases  with, 
the  temperature,  and  they  (as  polymeric  substances)  should  have  different  densities,  aa 
we  find,  for  instance,  in  the  hydrocarbons  C$ELio  and  C]0H2o- 

It  may  not  be  superfluous  to  mention  here  that  the  measurement  of  the  specific  heat 
of  a  mixture  of  th«  vapours  of  N2O4  and  NO2  enabled  Berthelot  to  determine  that  the 
transformation  of  2NO2  into  N2O4  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  about  18,000  units 
of  heat,  and  as  the  reaction  proceeds  with  equal  facility  in  either  direction,  it  will  be 
exothermal  in  the  one  direction  and  endothermal  in  the  other ,  and  this  clearly  demon- 
strates the  possibility  of  reactions  taking  place  in  either  direction,  although,  as  a  rule, 
reactions  evolving  heat  proceed  with  greater  ease. 


284  PRINCIPLES   OF  CHEMISTRY 

—  HgN03  +  NO,  being  itself  deoxidised  into  nitric  oxide,  into  which 
the  dioxide  in  many  other  instances  passes,  and  from  which  it  is 
easily  formed.48 

Nitrous  anhydride,  N203,  corresponds49  to  nitrous  acid,  NH02, 
which  forms  a  series  of  salts,  the  nitrites  —for  example,  the  sodium  salt 
NaN02,  the  potassium  salt  KN02,  the  ammonium  salt  (NH4)NO2,50 
the  silver  salt  AgN02,c-l  &c.  Neither  the  anhydride  nor  the  hydrate 
of  the  acid  is  known  in  a  perfectly  pure  state.  The  anhydride  has  only 
been  obtained  as  a  very  unstable  substance,  and  has  not  yet  been  fully 
investigated  ;  and  on  attempting  to  obtain  the  acid  NH02  from  its 
salts,  it  always  gives  water  and  the  anhydride,  whilst  the  latter,  as  ao 
intermediate  oxide,  partially  or  wholly  splits  up  into  NO  +  NO2.  But 
the  salts  of  nitrous  acid  are  distinguished  for  their  great  stability. 
Potassium  nitrate,  KN03,  may  be  converted  into  potassium  nitrite  by 

48  Nitric  acid  of  sp.  gr.  1'51  imdissolving  nitrogen  peroxide  becomes  brown,  whilst 
nitric  acid  of  sp.  gr.  1'32  is  coloured  greenish  blue,  and  acid  of  sp.  gr.  below  1*15  remains 
colourless  after  absorbing  nflrogen  peroxide  (Note  33). 

49  Nitrogen  peroxide  as  a  mixed  substance  has  no  corresponding  independent  salts, 
but  Sabatier  and  Senderens  (1892)  showed  that  under  certain  conditions  NO2  combines 
directly  with  some  metals — for  instance,  copper  and  cobalt — forming  Cu2NO2  and  CoNOj 
as  dark  brown  pcfwders,  which  do  not,  however,  exhibit  the  reactions  of  salts.    Thus 
by  passing  gaseous  nitrogen  dioxide  over  freshly  reduced  (from  the  bxides  by  heating 
with  hydrogen)  copper  at  25°-30°,  Cu.^NO2is  directly  formed.    With  water  it  partly  gives 
off  NO..,  and  partly  forms  nitrite  of  copper,  leaving  metallic  copper  and  its  suboxide. 
The  nature  of  these  compounds  has  not  yet  been  sufficiently  investigated. 

60  Ammonium  nitrite  maybe  easily  obtained  in  solution  by  a  similar  method  of  double 
decomposition  (for  instance,  of  the  barium  salt  with  ammonium  sulphate)  to  the  other 
salts  of  nitrous  acid,  but  it  decomposes  with  great  ease  when  evaporated,  with  evo- 
lution of  gaseous  nitrogen,  as  already  mentioned  (Chapter  V.)  If  the  solution,  however, 
be  evaporated  at  the  ordinary  temperature  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  a  solid 
saline  mass  is  obtained,  which  is  easily  decomposed  when  heated.  The  dry  salt  even 
decomposes  with  an  explosion  when  struck,  or  when  heated  to  about  70°— NH4NOa 
=  2H20  +  N2.  It  is  also  formed  by  the  action  of  aqueous  ammonia  on  a  mixture  of  nitric 
oxide  and  oxygen,  or  by  the  action  of  ozone  on  ammonia,  and  in  many  other  instances. 
Zbrensen  (1894) 'prepared  NH4NO>  by  the  action  of  a  mixture  of  N2O5  and  other  oxides 
of  nitrogen  on  lumps  of  ammonium  carbonate,  extracting  the  nitrite  of  ammonium 
formed  with  absolute  alcohol,  and  precipitating  it  from  this  solution  by  ether.  This  salt 
is  crystalline,  dissolves  in  water  with  absorption  of  heat,  and  attracts  moisture  from  the 
air.  The  solid  salt  and  its  concentrated  solutions  decompose  with  an  explosion  when 
heated  to  50°-80°,  especially  in  the  presence  of  traces  of  fdreign  acids.  Decomposition 
also  proceeds  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  but  more  slowly ;  and  in  order  to  preserve  the 
salt  it  should  be  covered  with  a  layer  of  pure  dry  ether. 

51  Silver  nitrite,  AgNO2,  is  obtained  as  a  very  slightly  Soluble  substance,  as  a  preci- 
pitate, on  mixing  solutions  of  silver  nitrate,  AgNOs,  and  potassium  nitrite,  KNO2.  It 
is  soluble  in  a  large  volume  of  water,  and  this  is  taken  advantage  of  to  free  it  from 
silver  oxide,  which  is  also  present  in  the  precipitate,  owing  to  the  fact  that  potassium 
nitrite  always  contains  a  certain  amount  of  oxide,  which  with  water  gives  the  hydroxide, 
forming  oxide  of  silver  with  silver  nitrate.  The  solution  of  silver  nitrite  gives,  by  double 
decomposition  with  metallic  chlorides  (Tor  instance,  barium  chloride),  insoluble  silver 
chloride  and  the  nitrite  of  the  metal  taken  (in  this  case,  barium  nitrite,  Ba(NOj)a). 


COMPOUNDS   OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN   AND   OXYGEN   285 

depriving  it  of  a  portion  of  its  oxygen  ;  for  instance,  by  fusing  it  (at 
not  too  high  a  temperature)  with  metals,  such  as  lead,  KNO3  +  Pb 
=KN02  +  PbO.M  ws  The  resultant  salt  is  soluble  in  water,  whilst  the 
oxide  of  lead  is  insoluble.  With  sulphuric  and  other  acids  the  solution 
of  potassium  nitrite  r'2  immediately  evolves  a  brown  gas,  nitrous  anhy- 
dride :  2KNO.2  +  H2S04:=K2SO4  +  N203  +  H2O.  The  same  gas  (N2O.,) 
is  obtained  by  passing  nitric  oxide  at  0°  through  liquid  peroxide  of 
nitrogen,53  or  by  heating  starch  with  nitric  acid  of  sp.  gr.  1'3.  At  a 
very  low  temperature  it  condenses  into  a  blue  liquid  boiling  below  0°,54 
but  then  partially  decomposing  into  NO-j-NO2.  Nitrous  anhydride 
possesses  a  remarkable  capacity  for  oxidising.  Ignited  bodies  burn  in  it, 
nitric  acid  absorbs  it,  and  then  acquires  the  property  of  acting  on  silver 
and  other  metals,  even  when  diluted.  Potassium  iodide  is  oxidised  by 
this  gas  just  as  it  is  by  ozone  (and  by  peroxide  of  hydrogen,  chromic 
and  other  acids,  but  not  by  dilute  nitric  acid  nor  by  sulphuric  acid), 
with  the  separation  of  iodine.  This  iodine  may  be  recognised  (see 
Ozone,  Chapter  IV.)  by  its  turning  starch  blue.  Very  small  traces 
of  nitrites  may  be  easily  detected  by  this  method.  If,  for  example, 
starch  and  potassium  iodide  are  added  to  a  solution  of  potassium 
nitrite  (at  first  there  will  be  no  change,  there  being  no  free  nitrous  acid), 
and  then  sulphuric  acid  be  added,  the  nitrous  acid  (or  its  anhydride) 
immediately  set  free  liberates  iodine,  which  produces  a  blue  colour  with 
the  starch.  Nitric  acid  does  not  act  in  this  manner,  but  in  the  presence 
of  zinc  the  coloration  takes  place,  which  proves  the  formation  of 
nitrous  acid  in  the  deoxidation  of  nitric  acid.55  Nitrous  acid  acts 


5»  bi"  Leroy  (1889)  obtained  KNO.2  by  mixing  powdered  KNO3  with  BaS,  igniting  the 
mixture  in  a  crucible  and  washing  the  fused  salts ;  BaSO4  is  then  left  as  an  insoluble 
residue,  and  KNO.,  passes  into  solution:  4KN05  +  BaS  =  4KNO>  +  BaSO4. 

52  Probably  potassium  nitrite,  KNO2,  when  strongly  heated,  especially  with  metallic 
oxides,  evolves  N  and  O,  and  gives  potassium  oxide,  K2O,  because  nitre  is  liable  to  such 
a  decomposition ;  but  it  has,  as  yet,  been  but  little  investigated. 

53  There  are  many  researches  which  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  reaction  N2O3 
— NO2  +  NO  is  reversible,  i.e.  resembles  the  conversion  of  N204  into  NO.>.    The  brown 
colour  of  the  fumes  of  N2Oj  is  due  to  the  formation  of  NOj- 

If  nitrogen  peroxide  be  cooled  to  —  20°,  and  half  its  weight  of  water  be  added  to  it  drop 
by  drop,  then  the  peroxide  is  decomposed,  as  we  have  already  said,  into  nitrous  and  nitric 
acids ;  the  former  does  not  then  remain  as  a  hydrate,  but  straightway  passes  into  the 
anhydride,  and,  hence,  if  the  resultant  liquid  be  slightly  warmed  vapours  of  nitrous 
anhydride,  N2O3,  are  evolved,  and  condense  into  a  blue  liquid,  as  Fritzsche  showed. 
Tliis  method  of  preparing  nitrous  anhydride  apparently  gives  the  purest  product,  but  it 
easily  dissociates,  forming  NO  and  NO2  (and  therefore  also  nitric  acid  in  the  presence 
of  water). 

w  'According  to  Thorpe,  N.^Oj  boils  at  +  18°.  According  to  Geuther,  at  +  80>5,  and  its 
sp.  gr.  at  0°  =  1-449. 

55  In  its  oxidising  action  nitrous  anhydride  gives  nitric  oxide,  NX,O5  =  2NO  +  O.  Thus 
its  analogy  to  ozone  becomes  still  more  marked,  because  in  ozone  it  is  only  one-third  of 


286  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

directly    on  ammonia,   forming  nitrogen    and   water,   HNO2 


As  nitrous  anhydride  easily  splits  up  into  N02  -f  NO,  so,  like  NO2l 
with  warm  water  it  gives  nitric  acid  and  nitric  oxide,  according  to  the 
equation  3N2O3  +  H2O=  4NO  +  2NHO3. 

Being  in  a  lower  degree  of  oxidation  than  nitric  acid,  nitrous  acid 
and  its  anhydride  are  oxidised  in  solutions  by  many  oxidising  substances 
—  for  example,  by  potassium  permanganate  —  into  nitric  acid.57 

Nitric  oxide,  NO.  —  This  permanent  gas58  (that  is,  unliquefiable  bj 
pressure  without  the  aid  of  cold)  may  be  obtained  from  all  the  above- 
described  compounds  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen.  The  deoxidation  oi 
nitric  acid  by  metals  is  the  usual  method  employed  for  its  preparation. 
Dilute  nitric  acid  (sp.  gr.  1'18,  but  not  stronger,  as  then  N2O3  and 
N02  are  produced)  is  poured  into  a  flask  containing  metallic  copper.  5{ 

the  oxygen  that  acts  in  oxidising  ;  from  O3  there  is  obtained  O,  which  acts  as  an  oxidiser 
and  common  oxygen  O2.  In  a  physical  aspect  the  relation  between  N3O5  and  O6  is 
revealed  in  the  fact  that  both  substances  are  of  a  blue  colour  when  in  the  liquid  state. 

56  This  reaction  is  taken  advantage  of  for  converting  the  amides,  NH2R  (where  R  it 
an  element  or  a  complex  group)  into  hydroxides,  RHO.    In  this  case  NH2R  +  NH02  forms 
2N  +  H2O  -f  RHO  ;  NH2  is  replaced  by  HO,  the  radicle  of  ammonia  by  the  radicle  of  water 
This  reaction  is  employed  for  transforming  many  nitrogenous  organic  substances  having 
the  properties  of  amides  into  their  corresponding  hydroxides.     Thus  aniline,  CaH5'NHa 
which  is  obtained  from  nitrobenzene,  CeH5'NO2  (Note  37),  is  converted  by  nitrous  anhy- 
dride into  phenol,  C6H5-OH,  which  occurs  in  the  creosote  extracted  from  coal  tar.    Thus 
the  H  of  the  benzene  is  successively  replaced  by  NO2,  NH2,  and  HO  ;  a  method  which  is 
suitable  for  other  cases  also, 

57  The  action  of  a  solution  of  ^potassium  permanganate,  KMnO4,  on  nitrous  acid  in 
the  presence  of  sulphuric  acid  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  the  higher  oxide  of  man- 
ganese, Mu2O7,  contained  in  the  permanganate  is  converted  into  the  lower  oxide,  MnO, 
which  as  a  base  forms  manganese  sulphate,  MnSO4,  and  the  oxygen  serves  for  the  oxida- 
tion of  the  N^O5  into  N2O5,  or  its  hydrate.    As  the  solution  of  the  permanganate  is  of  a 
red  colour,  whilst  that  of  manganese  sulphate  is  almost  colourless,  this  reaction  is  clearlj 
seen,  and  may  be  employed  for  the  detection  and  determination  of  nitrous  acid  .and  its 
salts. 

58  The  absolute  boiling  point  =  -93°  (see  Chapter  II.,  Note  29). 

59  Kammerer  proposed  preparing  nitric  oxide,  NO,  by  pouring  a  solution  of  sodium 
nitrate  over  copper  shavings,  and  adding  sulphuric  acid  drop  by  drop.    The  oxidation  oi 
ferrous  salts  by  nitric  acid  also  gives  NO.    One  part  of  strong  hydrochloric  acid  is  taken 
and  iron  is  dissolved  in  it  (FeCl2),  and  then  an  equal  quantity  of  hydrochloric  acid  and 
nitre  is  added  to  the  solution.    On  heating,  nitric  oxide  is  evolved.    In  the  presence  oi 
an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid  and  mercury  the  conversion  of  nitric  acid  into  nitric  oxide  is 
complete  (that  is,  the  reaction  proceeds  to  the  end  and  the  nitric  oxide  is  obtained  without 
other  products),  and  upon  this  is  founded  one  of  the  methods  for  determining  nitric  acid 
(in  nitrometers  of  various  kinds,  described  in  text-  books  of  analytical  chemistry),  as  the 
amount  of  NO  can  be  easily  and  accurately  measured  volumetrically.     The  amount  oi 
nitrogen  in  gun-cotton,  for  instance,  is  determined  by  dissolving  it  in   sulphuric  acid. 
Nitrous  acid  acts  in  the  same  manner.    Upon  this  property  Emich  (1892)  founds  hia 
method  for  preparing  pure  NO.    He  pours  mercury  into  a  flask,  and  then  covers  it  with 
sulphuric  acid,  in  which  a  certain  amount  of  NaNO2  or  other  substance  corresponding 
to  HNO2  or  HNOS  has  been  dissolved.    The  evolution  of  NO  proceeds  at  the  ordinary 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  287 

The  reaction  commences  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  Mercury  and 
silver  also  give  nitric  oxide  with  nitric  acid. .  In  these  reactions  with 
metals  one  portion  of  the  nitric  acid  is  employed  in  the  oxidation  of  the 
metal,  whilst  the  other,  and  by  far  the  greater,  portion  combines  with  the 
metallic  oxide  so  obtained,  with  formation  of  the  nitrate  corresponding 
with  the  metal  taken.  The  first  action  of  the  copper  on  the  nitric  acid 
is  thus  expressed  by  the  equation 

2NH03  +  3Cu=iH20  +  3CuO  +  2NO. 

The  second  reaction  consists  in  the  formation  of  copper  nitrate — 
6NH03  +  3CuO=3H20  +  3Cu(N03)2. 

Nitric  oxide  is  a  colourless  gas  which  is  only  slightly  soluble  in 
water  (fa  of  a  volume  at  the  ordinary  temperature).  Reactions  of 
double  decomposition  in  which  nitric  oxide  readily  takes  part  are  not 
known — that  is  to  say,  it  is  an  indifferent,  not  a  saline,  oxide.  Like 
the  other  oxides  of  nitrogen,  it  is  decomposed  into  its  elements  at  a  red 
heat  (starting  from  900°,  at  1,200°  60  percent.  giveN2  and  2N203,  but 
complete  decomposition  into  "N2  an<*  O2  onty  takes  place  at  the  melting 
point  of  platinum,  Emich  1892).  The  most  characteristic  property  of 
nitric  oxide  is  its  capacity  for  directly  and  easily  combining  with  oxygen 
(owing  to  the  evolution  of  heat  in  the  combination).  With  oxygen  it 
forms  nitrous  anhydride  and  nitrogen  peroxide,  2NO  +  O=lSr2O3, 
2NO-f-O2=2NO2.  If  nitric  oxide  is  mixed  with  oxygen  and  imme- 
diately shaken  up  with  caustic  potash,  it  is  almost  entirely  converted 
into  potassium  nitrite  ;  whilst  after  a  certain  time,  when  the  formation 
of  nitric  peroxide  has  already  commenced,  a  mixture  of  potassium  nitrite 
and  nitrate  is  obtained.  If  oxygen  is  passed  into  a  bell  jar  filled  with  nitric 
oxide,  brown  fumes  of  nitrous  anhydride  and  nitric  peroxide  are  formed, 
even  in  the  absence  of  moisture  ;  these  in  the  presence  of  water  give,  aa 
we  already  know,  nitric  acid  and  nitric  oxide,  so  that  in  the  presence  of 
an  excess  of  water  and-  oxygen  the  whole  of  the  nitric  oxide  is  easily  and 
directly  converted  into  nitric  acid.  This  reaction  of  the  re-formation  of 
nitric  acid  from  nitric  oxide,  air,  and  water,  2NO  +  H2O-f-O3==2HNO3l 
is  frequently  made  use  of  in  practice.  The  experiment  showing  the 
conversion  of  nitric  oxide  into  nitric  acid  is  very  striking  and  instructive. 
As  the  intermixture  of  the  oxygen  with  the  oxide  of  nitrogen  proceeds, 
the  nitric  acid  formed  dissolves  in  water,  and  if  an  excess  of  oxygen 
has  not  been  added  the  whole  of  the  gas  (nitric  oxide),  being  converted 

temperature,  being  more  rapid  as  the  surface  of  the  mercury  is  increased  (if  shaken,  the 
reaction  proceeds  very  rapidly).  If  the  gas  be  passed  over  KHO,  it  is  obtained  quite 
pure,  because  KHO  does  not  act  upon  NO  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (if  heated,  KNOj 
and  N2O  or  N^  are  formed). 


288  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

into  HNO3,  is  absorbed,  and  the  water  entirely  fills  the  bell  jar 
previously  containing  the  gas.60  It  is  evident  that  nitric  oxide61  in 
combining  with  oxygen  has  a  strong  tendency  to  give  the  higher 
types  of  nitrogen  compounds,  which  we  see  in  nitric  acid,  HNO3  or 
NO2(OH),  in  nitric  anhydride,  N205  or  (NO2)2O,  and  in  ammonium 
chloride,  NH4C1.  If  X  stand  for  an  atom  of  hydrogen,  or  its 
equivalents,  chlorine,  hydroxyl,  <fec.,  and  if  O,  which  is,  according  to 
the  law  of  substitution,  equivalent  to  H2,  be  indicated  by  X2,  then  the 
three  compounds  of  nitrogen  above  named  should  be  considered  as 
compounds  of  the  type  or  form  NXS.  For  example,  in  nitric  acid 
X5=±O2-f  (OH),  where  O2=X4,  and  OH=X  whilst  nitric  oxide  is  a 
compound  of  the  form  N"X2.  Hence  this  lower  form,  like  lower  forms 
in  general,  strives  by  combination  to  attain  to  the  higher  forms  proper  to 
the  compounds  of  a  given  element.  NX2  passes  consecutively  into  NX3 
—namely,  into  N2O3  and  NH02,  NX4  (for  instance  NO2)  and  NX5. 

As  the  decomposition  of  nitric  oxide  begins  at  temperatures  above 
900°,  many  substances  burn  in  it ;  thus,  ignited  phosphorus  con- 
tinues to  burn  in  nitric  oxide,  but  sulphur  and  charcoal  are  extinguished 
in  it.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  heat  evolved  in  the  combustion 
of  these  two  substances  is  insufficient  for  the  decomposition  of  the  nitric 

60  This  transformation  of  the  permanent  gases  nitric  oxide  and  oxygen  into  liquid 
nitric  acid  in  the  presence  of  water,  and  with  the  evolution  of  heat,  presents  a  most 
striking  instance  of  liquefaction  produced  by  the  action  of  chemical  forces.    They  per- 
form  with  ease  the  work  which  physical  (cooling)  and  mechanical  (pressure)  forces  effect 
with  difficulty.     In  this  the  motion,  which  is  so  distinctively  the  property  of  the  gaseous 
molecules,  is  apparently  destroyed.     In  other  cases  of  chemical  action  it  is  apparently 
created,  arising,  no  doubt,  from  latent  energy — that  is,  from  the  internal  motion  of  the 
atoms  in  the  molecules. 

61  Nitric  oxide  is  capable  of  entering  into  many  characteristic  combinations;  it  is 
absorbed  by  the  solutions  of  many  acids,   for  instance,  tartaric,   acetic,  phosphoric, 
sulphuric,  and  metallic  chlorides  (for  example,  SbCl5,  BiCl3,  &c.,  with  which  it  forms 
definite  compounds ;  Besson  1889),  and  also  by  the  solutions  of  many  salts,  especially 
those  formed  by  suboxide.of  iron  (for  instance,  ferrous  sulphate).     In  this  case  a  brown 
compound  is  formed  which  is  exceedingly  unstable,  like  all  the  analogous  compounds  of 
nitric  oxide.     The  amount  of  nitric  oxide  combined  in  this  manner  is  in  atomic  pro- 
portion with  the  amount  of  the  substance  taken ;  thus  ferrous  sulphate,  FeSO4,  absorbs 
it  in  the  proportion  of  NO  to  2FeSO4.     Ammonia  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  a  caustic 
alkali  on  the  resultant  compound,  because  the  oxygen  of  the  nitric  oxide  and-water  are 
transferred  to  the  ferrous  oxide,  forming  ferric  oxide,  whilst  the  nitrogen  combines  with 
the  hydrogen  of  the  water.     According  to  the  investigations  of  Gay  (1885),  the  compound 
is  formed  with  the  evolution  of  a  large  quantity  of  heat,  and  is  easily  dissociated,  like  a 
solution  of  ammonia  in  water.     It  is  evident  that  oxidising  substances  (for  example, 
potassium  permanganate,  KMnO4,  Note  57)  are  able  to  convert  it  into  nitric  acid.    If 
the  presence  of  a  radicle  NO2,  composed  like  nitrogen  peroxide,  must  be  recognised  in 
the  compounds  of  nitric  acid,  then  a  radicle  NO,  having  the  composition  of  nitric  oxide, 
may  be  admitted  in  the  compounds  of  nitrous  acid.    The  compounds  in  which  the  radicle 
NO  is  recognised  are  called  nitroso-compounds.     These  substances  are  described  in 
Prof.  Bunge's  work  (Kief,  1868). 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  289 

oxide,  whilst  the  heat  developed  by  burning  phosphorus  suffices  to  pro- 
duce this  decomposition.  That  nitric  oxide  really  supports  combustion, 
owing  to  its  being  decomposed  by  the  action  of  heat,  is  proved  by  the 
fact  that  strongly  ignited  charcoal  continues  to  burn  in  the  same  nitric 
oxide62  in  which  a  feebly  incandescent  piece  of  charcoal  is  extin- 
guished. 

The  compounds  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  which  we  have  so  far  con- 
sidered may  all  be  prepared  from  nitric  oxide,  and  may  themselves  be 
converted  into  it.  Thus  nitric  oxide  stands  in  intimate  connection 
with  them.63  The  passage  of  nitric  oxide  into  the  higher  degrees  of 
oxidation  and  the  converse  reaction  is  employed  in  practice  as  a  means 
for  transferring  the  oxygen  of  the  air  to  substances  capable  of  being 
oxidised.  Starting  with  nitric  oxide,  it  may  easily  be  converted,  with 
the  aid  of  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  and  water,  into  nitric  acid, 
nitrous  anhydride,  and  nitric  peroxide,  and  by  their  means  employed  to 
oxidise  other  substances.  In  this  oxidising  action  nitric  oxide  is  again 
formed,  and  it  may  again  be  converted  into  nitric  acid,  and  so  on  con- 
tinuously, if  only  oxygen  and  water  be  present.  Hence  the  fact,  which 
at  first  appears  to  be  a  paradox,  that  by  means  of  a  small  quantity  of 
nitric  oxide  in  the  presence  of  oxygen  and  water  it  is  possible  to  oxidise 

6-  A  mixture  of  nitric  oxide  and  hydrogen  is  inflammable.  If  a  mixture  of  the  two 
gases  be  passed  over  spongy  platinum  the  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  even  combine,  forming 
ammonia.  A  mixture  of  nitric  oxide  with  many  combustible  vapours  and  gases  is  very  in- 
flammable. A  very  characteris*  ic  flame  is  obtained  in  burning  a  mixture  of  nitric  oxide 
and  the  vapour  of  the  combustible  carbon  bisulphide,  CS2.  The  latter  substance  is  very 
volatile,  so  that  it  is  sufficient  to  pass  the  nitric  oxide  through  a  layer  of  the  carbon  bisul- 
phide (for  instance,  in  a  Woulfe's  bottle)  in  order  that  the  gas  escaping  should  contain  a 
considerable  amount  of  the  vapours  of  this  substance.  This  mixture  continues  to  burn 
when  ignited,  and  the  flame  emits  a  large  quantity  of  the  so-Called  ultra-violet  rays, 
which  are  capable  of  inducing  chemical  combinations  and  decompositions,  and  therefore 
the  flame  may  be  employed  in  photography  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  daylight  (magnesium 
light  and  electric  light  have  the  same  property).  There  are  many  gases  (for  instance, 
ammonia)  which  when  mixed  with  nitric  oxide  explode  in  a  eudiometer. 

^  The  oxides  of  nitrogen  naturally  do  not  proceed  directly  from  oxygen  and  nitrogen 
by  contact  alone,  because  their  formation  is  accompanied  by  the  absorption  of  a  large 
quantity  of  heat,  for  (see  Note  29)  about  21,500  heat  units  are  absorbed  when  Id 
parts  of  oxygen  and  14  parts  of  nitrogen  combine ;  consequently  the  decomposition  of 
nitric  oxide  into  oxygen  and  nitrogen  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  this  amount  of 
heat ;  and  therefore  with  nitric  oxide,  as  with  all  explosive  substances  and  mixtures,  the 
reaction  once  started  is  able  to  proceed  by  itself.  In  fact,  Berthelot  remarked  the  decom- 
position of  nitric  oxide  in  the  explosion  of  fulminate  of  mercury.  This  decomposition 
does  not  take  place  spontaneously ;  substances  even  burn  with  difficulty  in  nitric  oxide, 
probably  because  a  certain  portion  of  the  nitric  oxide  in  decomposing  gives  oxygen,  which 
combines  with  another  portion  of  nitric  oxide,  and  forms  nitric  peroxide,  a  somewhat  more 
stable  compound  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen.  The  further  combinations  of  nitric  oxide  with 
oxygen  all  proceed  with  the  evolution  of  heat,  and  take  place  spontaneously  by  contact 
with  air  alone.  It  is  evident  from  these  examples  that  the  application  of  thermochemica) 
data  is  limited. 


290  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

an  indefinitely  large  quantity  of  substances  which  cannot  be  directly 
oxidised  either  by  the  action  of  the  atmospheric  oxygen  or  by  the 
action  of  nitric  oxide  itself.  The  sulphurous  anhydride,  S02,  which 
is  obtained  in  the  combustion  of  sulphur  and  in  roasting  many  metallic 
sulphides  in  the  air  is  an  example  of  this  kind.  In  practice  this  gas 
is  obtained  by  burning  sulphur  or  iron  pyrites,  the  latter  being  thereby 
converted  into  oxide  of  iron  and  sulphurous  anhydride.  In  contact  with 
the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  this  gas  does  not  pass  into  the  higher 
(degree  of  oxidation,  sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3,  and  if  it  does  form  sul- 
phuric acid  with  water  and  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere,  S0.2  +  H20  +  O 
=  HoS04,  it  does  so  very  slowly.  With  nitric  acid  (and  especially  with 
nitrous  acid,  but  not  with  nitrogen  peroxide)  and  water,  sulphurous 
anhydride,  on  the  contrary,  very  easily  forms  sulphuric  acid,  and 
especially  so  when  slightly  heated  (about  40°),  the  nitric  acid  (or,  better 
still,  nitrous  acid)  being  converted  into  nitric  oxide — 

3S0.2  +  2NH03  +  2H20= 2H2S04  +  2NO. 

The  presence  of  water  is  absolutely  indispensable  here,  otherwise 
Sulphuric  anhydride  is  formed,  which  combines  with  the  oxides  of 
nitrogen  (nitrous  anhydride),  forming  a  crystalline  substance  containing 
oxides  of  nitrogen  (chamber  crystals,  which  will  be  described  in  Chapter 
XX.)  Water  destroys  this  compound,  forming  sulphuric  acid  and 
separating  the  oxides  of  nitrogen.  The  water  must  be  taken  in  a 
greater  quantity  than  that  required  for  the  formation  of  the  hydrate 
H.2SO4,  because  the  latter  absorbs  oxides  of  nitrogen.  With  an  excess 
of  water,  however,  solution  does  not  take  place.  ,If,  in  the  above  re- 
action, only  water,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  nitric  or  nitrous  acid  be 
taken  in  a  definite  quantity,  then  a  definite  quantity-of  sulphuric  acid 
and  nitric  oxide  will  be  formed,  according  to  the  preceding  equation  ;  but 
there  the  reaction  ends  and  the  excess  of  sulphurous  anhydride,  if  there 
be  any,  will  remain  unchanged.  But  if  we  add  air  and  water,  then  the 
nitric  oxide  will  unite  with  the  oxygen  to  form  nitrogen  peroxide,  and 
the  latter  with  water  to  form  nitric  and  nitrous  acids,  which  again  give 
sulphuric  acid  from  a  fresh  quantity  of  sulphurous  anhydride.  Nitric 
oxide  is  again  formed,  which  is  able  to  start  the  oxidation  afresh  if 
there  be  sufficient  air.  Thus  it  is  possible  with  a  definite  quantity  of 
nitric  oxide  to  convert  an  indefinitely  large  quantity  of  sulphurous 
anhydride  into  sulphuric  acid,  water  and  oxygen  only  being  required.64 

**  The  instance  of  the  action  of  a  small  quantity  of  NO  in  inducing  a  definite 
chemical  reaction  between  large  masses  (SOj  +  O  +  H2O  =  H2SO4)  is  very  instructive, 
because  the  particulars  relating  to  it  have  been  studied,  and  show  that  intermediate 
'forms  of  reaction  may  bo  discovered  in  the  so-called  contact  or  catalytic  phenomena. 
The  essence  of  the  matter  here  is  that  A.  I  =  SO2)  reacts  upon  B  ( =  O  and  H2O)  in  the  pre. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN     291 

This  may  be  easily  demonstrated  by  an  experiment  on  a  small  scale,  if 
a  certain  quantity  of  nitric  oxide  be  first  introduced  into  a  flask,  and 
sulphurous  anhydride,  steam,  and  oxygen  be  then  continually  passed  in. 
Thus  the  above-  described  reaction  may  be  expressed  in  the  following 
manner  :  — 


if  we  consider  only  the  original  substances  and  those  finally  formed  In 
this  way  a  definite  quantity  of  nitric  oxide  may  serve  for  the  conversion  of 
an  indefinite  quantity  of  sulphurous  anhydride,  oxygen,  and  water  into 
sulphuric  acid  In  reality,  however,  there  is  a  limit  to  this,  because  air, 
and  not  pure  oxygen,  is  employed  for  the  oxidation,  so  that  it  is  necessary 
to  remove  the  nitrogen  of  the  air  and  to  introduce  a  fresh  quantity 
of  air.  A  certain  quantity  of  nitric  oxide  will  pass  away  with  this 
nitrogen,  and  will  in  this  way  be  lost.66 

The  preceding  series  of  changes  serve  as  the  basis  of  the  manufacture 
of  sulphuric  acid  or  so-called  chamber  acid.  This  acid  is  prepared  on  3, 
very  large  scale  in  chemical  works  because  it  is  the  cheapest  acid  whose 
action  can  be  applied  in  a  great  number  of  cases.  It  is  therefore  used 
in  immense  quantities. 

Bence  of  C,  because  it  gives  BC,  a  substance  which  forms  AB  with  A,  and  again  Iiberate3 
C.  Consequently  C  is  a  medium,  a  transferring  substance,  without  which  the  reaction 
does  not  proceed.  Many  similar  phenomena  may  be  found  in  other  departments  of  life. 
Thus  the  merchant  is  an  indispensable  medium  between  the  producer  and  the  consumer; 
experiment  is  a  medium  between  the  phenomena  of  nature  and  the  cognisant  faculties, 
and  language,  customs,  and  laws  are  media  which  are  as  necessary  for  the  exchanges 
of  social  intercourse  as  nitric  oxide  for  those  between  sulphurous  anhydride  and  oxygen 
and  water. 

65  If  the  sulphurous  anhydride  be  prepared  by  roasting  iron  pyrites,  FeS2,  then 
each  equivalent  of  pyrites  (equivalent  of  iron,  56,  of  sulphur  32,  of  pyrites  120)  requires 
six  equivalents  of  oxygen  (that  is  96  parts)  for  the  conversion  of  its  sulphur  into  sul- 
phuric acid  (for  forming  2H2SO4  with  water),  besides  1^  equivalents  (24  parts)  for  con- 
verting the  iron  into  oxide,  Fe2O3  ;  hence  the  combustion  of  the  pyrites  for  the  formation 
of  sulphuric  acid  and  ferric  oxide  requires  the  introduction  of  an  equal  weight  of  oxygen 
(120  parts  of  oxygen  to  120  parts  of  pyrites),  or  five  times  its  weight  of  air,  whilst  four 
parts  by  weight  of  nitrogen  will  remain  inactive,  and  in  the  removal  of  the  exhausted 
air  will  carry  off  the  remaining  nitric  oxide.  If  not  all,  at  least  a  large  portion  of  the 
nitric  oxide  may  be  collected  by  passing  the  escaping  air,  still  containing  some  oxygen, 
through  substances  which  absorb  oxides  of  nitrogen.  Sulphuric  acid  itself  may  be  employed 
for  this  purpose  if  it  be  used  in  the  form  of  the  hydrate  H2SO4,  or  containing  only  a 
small  amount  of  water,  because  such  sulphuric  acid  dissolves  the  oxide's  of  nitrogen. 
They  may  be  easily  expelled  from  this  solution  by  heating  or  by  dilution  with  water,  as 
they  are  only  slightly  soluble  in  aqueous  sulphuric  acid.  Besides  which,  sulphurous 
anhydride  acts  on  such  sulphuric  acid,  being  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  the  nitrous  anhy- 
dride, and  forming  nitric  oxide  from  it,  which  again  enters  into  the  cycle  of  action.  For 
this  reason  the  sulphuric  acid  which  has  absorbed  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  escaping  from 
the  chambers  in  the  tower  K  (see  fig.  50)  is  led  back  into  the  first  chamber,  where  it 
comes  into  contact  with  sulphurous  anhydride,  by  which  means  the  oxides  of  nitrogen 
tee  reintroduced  into  the  reaction  which  proceeds  in  the  chambers.  This  is  the  use  of 
the  towers  (Gay-Lussac's  and  Glover's)  which  are  erected  at  either  end  of  the  chambers. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


The  process  is  carried  on  in  a  series  of  chambers  (or  in  one  divided 
by  partitions  as  in  fig.  50,  which  shows  the  beginning  and  end  of  a 
chamber)  constructed  of  sheet  lead.  These  chambers  are  placed  one 
against  the  other,  and  communicate  by  tubes  or  special  orifices  so 
placed  that  the  inlet  tubes  are  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  chamber, 
and  the  outlet  in  the  lower  and  opposite  end.  The  current  of  steam 
and  gases  necessary  for  the  preparation  of  the  sulphuric  acid  passes 
through  these  chambers  and  tubes.  The  acid  as  it  is  formed  falls  to 
the  bottom  of  the  chambers  or  runs  down  their  walls,  and  flows  from 


FJO.  SO.— Section  of  sulphuric  acid  chambers,  the  first  and  last  chambers  only  being  represented. 
The  tower  to  the  left  is  called  the  Glover's  tower,  and  that  on  the  right  the  Gay-Lussac's  tower. 
Less  than  Tl6th  of  the  natural  size. 

chamber  to  chamber  (from  the  last  towards  the  first),  to  permit  of 
which  the  partitions  do  not  reach  to  the  bottom.  The  floor  and  walls 
of  the  chambers  should  therefore  be  made  of  a  material  on  which 
the  sulphuric  acid  will  not  act.  Among  the  ordinary  metals  lead  is 
the  only  one  suitable.65  bis 

For  the  formation  of  the  sulphuric  acid  it  is  necessary  to  introduce 

65  bls  Other  metals,  iron,  copper,  zinc,  are  corroded  by  it ;  glass  and  china  are  not 
acted  upon,  but  they  crack  from  the  variations  of  temperature  taking  place  in  the  chambers, 
and  besides  they  are  more  difficult  to  join  properly  than  lead ;  wood,  &c.,  becomes 
charred. 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN*  \VITII  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN     293 

sulphurous  anhydride,  .steam,  air.  arid  nitric  acid,  or  some  oxide  of 
nitrogen,  into  the  chambers.  The  sulphurous  anhydride  is  produced  by 
burning  sulphur  or  iron  pyrites.  -  This  is  carried  on  in  the  furnace  with 
four  hearths  to  the  left  of  the  drawing.  Air  is  led  into  the  chambers 
and  furnace  through  orifices  in  the  furnace  doors.  The  current  of  air 
and  oxygen  is  regulated  by  opening  or  closing  these  orifices  to  a  greater 
or  less  extent.  The  ingoing  draught  in  the  chambers  is  brought  about 
by  the  fact  that  heated  gases  and  vapours  pass  into  the  chambers,  whose 
temperature  is  further  raised  by  the  reaction  itself,  and  also  by  the 
remaining  nitrogen  being  continually  withdrawn  from  the  outlet  (above 
the  tower  K)  by  a  tall  chimney  situated  near  the  chambers.  Nitric 
acid  is  prepared  from  a  mixture  of  sulphuric  acid  and  Chili  saltpetre, 
in  the  same  furnaces  in  which  the  sulphurous  anhydride  is  evolved  (or 
in  special  furnaces).  Not  more  than  8  parts  of  nitre  are  taken  to  100 
parts  of  sulphur  burnt.  On  leaving  the  furnace  the  vapours  of  nitric 
acid  and  oxides  of  nitrogen  mixed  with  air  and  sulphurous  anhydride 
first  pass  along  the  horizontal  tubes  T  into  the  receiver  B  B,  which  is 
partially  cooled  by  water  flowing  in  on  the  right  hand  side  and  running 
out  on  the  left  by  o,  in  order  to  reduce  the  temperature  of  the  gases  enter- 
ing the  chamber.  The  gases  then  pass  up  a  tower  filled  with  coke,  and 
shown  to  the  left  of  the  drawing.  In  this  tower  are  placed  lumps  of  coke 
(the  residue  from  the  dry  distillation  of  coal),  over  which  sulphuric  acid 
trickles  from  the  reservoir  M.  This  acid  has  absorbed  in  the  end  tower  K 
the  oxides  of  nitrogen  escaping  from  the  chamber.  This  end  tower  is  also 
filled  with  coke,  over  which  a  stream  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  trickles  from 
the  reservoir  M'.  The  acid  spreads  over,  the  coke,  and,  owing  to  the  large 
surface  offered  by  the  latter,  absorbs  the  greater  part  of  the  oxides  of 
nitrogen  escaping  from  the  chambers.  The  sulphuric  acid  in  passing 
down  the  tower  becomes  saturated  with  the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  and 
flo«vs  out  at  h  into  a  special  receiver  (in  the  drawing  situated  by  the 
side  of  the  furnaces),  from  which  it  is  forced  up  the  tubes  It!  h'  by  steam 
pressure  into  the  reservoir  M,  situated  above  the  first  tower.  The  gases 
passing  through  this  tower  (hot)  from  the  furnace  on  coming  into  con- 
tact with  the  sulphuric  acid  take  up  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  contained 
in  it,  and  these  are  thus  returned  to  the  chamber  and  again  participate 
in  the  reaction.  The  sulphuric  acid  left  after  their  extraction  flows 
into  the  chambers.  Thus,  on  leaving  the  first  coke  tower  the  sulphurous 
annydride,  air,  and  vapours  of  nitric  acid  and  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen 
pass  through  the  upper  tube  in  into  the  chamber.  Here  they  come 
into  contact  with  steam  introduced  by  lead  tubes  into  various  parts  of 
the  chamber.  The  reaction  takes  place  in  the  presence  of  water,  the 
sulphuric  acid  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  chamber,  arid  the  same  process 


294  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

takes  place  in  the  following  chambers  until  the  whole  of  the  sulphurous 
anhydride  is  consumed.  A  somewhat  greater  proportion  of  air  than  is 
strictly  necessary  is  passed  in,  in  order  that  no  sulphurous  anhydride 
should  be  left  unaltered  for  want  of  sufficient  oxygen.  The  presence 
of  an  excess  of  oxygen  is  shown  by  the  colour  of  the  gases  escaping 
from  the  last  chamber  If  they  be  of  a  pale  colour  it  indicates  an 
insufficiency  of  air  (and  the  presence  of  sulphurous  anhydride),  as  other- 
wise peroxide  of  nitrogen  would  be  formed.  A  very  dark  colour  shows 
an  excess  of  air,  which  is  also  disadvantageous,  because  it  increases  the 
inevitable  loss  of  nitric  oxide  by  increasing  the  mass  of  escaping 
gases.60 

Nitrous  oxide,  N2O,67  is  similar  to  water  in  its  volumetric  composi- 
tion.    Two  volumes  of  nitrous  oxide  are  formed  from  two  volumes  of 

60  By  this  means  as  much  as  2,500,000  kilograms  of  chamber  acid,  containing  about 
60  per  cent,  of  the  hydrate  H2SO4  and  about  40  per  cent,  of  water,  may  be  manufactured 
per  year  in  one  plant  of  5,000  cubic  metres  capacity  (without  stoppages).  This  process 
has  been  brought^  to  such  a  degree  of  perfection  that  as  much  as  800  parts  of  the  hydrate 
H2S04  are  obtained  from  100  parts  of  sulphur,  whilst  the  theoretical  amount  is  not 
greater  than  806  parts.  The  acid  parts  with  its  excess  of  water  on  heating.  For  this 
purpose  it  is  heated  in  lead  vessels.  However,  the  acid  containing  about  75  per  cent,  of 
the  hydrate  (60°  Baume)  already  begins  to  act  on  the  lead  when  heated,  and  therefore 
the  further  removal  of  water  is  conducted  by  evaporating  in  glass  or  platinum  vessels, 
as  will  be  described  in  Chapter  XX.  The  aqueous  acid  (50°  Baume)  obtained  in  the- 
chambers  is  termed  chamber  acid.  The  acid  concentrated  to  60°  Baume  is  more 
generally  employed,  and  sometimes  the  hydrate  (66°  Baume*)  termed  vitriol  acid  is  also 
used.  In  England  alone  more  than  1,000  million  kilograms  of  chamber  acid  are  produced 
by  this  method.  The  formation  of  sulphuric  acid  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  was  dis- 
covered by  Drebbel,  and  the  first  lead  chamber  was  erected  by  Roebuck,  in  Scotland,  in 
the  middle  of  the  last  century.  The  essence  of  the  process  was  only  brought  to  light  at 
the  beginning  of  this  century,  when  many  improvements  were  introduced  into  practice. 

67  If  the  hydrate  HNO5  corresponds  to  N2O4,  the  hydrate  HNO,  hyponitrous  actdt 
corresponds  to  N2O,  and  in  this  sense  N20  is  hyponitrous  anhydride.  Hyponitrous 
acid,  corresponding  with  nitrous  oxide  (as  its  anhydride),  is  not  known  in  a  pure  state, 
but  its  salts  (Divers)  are  known.  They  are  prepared  by  the  reduction  of  nitrous  (and 
consequently  of  nitric)  salts  by  sodium  amalgam.  If  this  amalgam  be  added  to  a  cold 
solution  of  an  alkaline  nitrite  until  the  evolution  of  gas  ceases,  and  the  excess  of  alkali 
saturated  with  acetic  acid,  an  insoluble  yellow  precipitate  of  silver  hyponitrite,  NAgO, 
will  be  obtained  on  adding  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate.  This  hyponitrite  is  insoluble  in 
cold  acetic  acid,  and  decomposes  when  heated,  with  the  evolution  of  nitrous  oxide.  If 
rapidly  heated  it  decomposes  with  an  explosion.  It  is  dissolved  unchanged  by  weak 
mineral  acids,  whilst  the  stronger  acids  (for  example,  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric  acids) 
decompose  it,  with  the  evolution  of  nitrogen,  nitric  and  nitrous  acids  remaining  in  solution. 
Among  the  other  salts  of  hyponitrous  acid,  HNO,  the  salts  of  lead,  copper,  and  mercury 
are  insoluble  in  water.  Judging  by  the  bond  between  hyponitrous  acid  and  the  other  ' 
compounds  of  nitrogen,  there  is  reason  for  thinking  that  its  formula  should  be  doubled, 
N2H2O2.  For  instance,  Thoune  (1893)  on  gradually  oxidising  hydroxylamine,  NH2(OH), 
into  nitrous  acid,  NO(OH)  (Note  25),  by  means  of  an  alkaline  solution  of  KMnO4,  first 
obtained  hyponitrous  acid,  N2H2O2,  and  then  a  peculiar  intermediate  acid,  N2H2O3,  which, 
by  further  oxidation,  gave  nitrous  acid.  On  the  other  hand,  Wislicenus  (1893)  showed 
that  in  the  action  of  the  sulphuric  acid  salt  of  hydroxylamine  upon  nitrite  of  sodium, 
there  is  formed,  besides,  nitrous  oxide  (accqrding  to  V  Meyer,  NH3OH2SO4  +  NaN03 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN     295 

nitrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen,  which  may  be  shown  by  the  ordinary 
method  for  the  analysis  of  the  'oxides  of  nitrogen  (by  passing  them  over 
red-hot  copper  or  sodium).  In  contradistinction  to  the  other  oxides  of 
nitrogen,  it  is  not  directly  oxidised  by  oxygen,  but" it  may  be  obtained 
from  the  higher  oxides  of  nitrogen  by  the  action  of  certain  deoxidising 
substances  ;  thus,  for  example,  a  mixture  of  two  volumes  of  nitric  oxide 
and  one  volume  of  sulphurous  anhydride  if  left  in  contact  with  Mvater 
and  spongy  platinum  is  converted  into  sulphuric  acid  and  nitrous  oxide, 
2NO  +  SO2  +  H2O=H2SO4  +  N2O.  Nitric  acid,  also,  under  the  action 
of  certain  metals — for  instance,  of  zinc  68 — gives  nitrous  oxide,  although 
in  this  case  mixed  with  nitric  oxide.  The  usual  metKod  of  preparing 
nitrous  oxide  consists  in  the  decomposition  of  ammonium  nitrate  by  the 
aid  of  heat,  because  in  this  case  only  water  and  nitrous  oxide  are  formed, 
NH4NO3=2H2O-|-N20  (a  mixture  of  NH4C1  and  KNO3  is  sometimes 
taken).  The  decomposition  69  proceeds  very  easily  in  an  apparatus  like 
that  used  for  the  preparation  of  ammonia  or  oxygen — that  is,  in  a 
retort  or  flask  with  a  gas-conducting  tube.  The  decomposition  must, 
however,  be  carried  on  carefully,  as  otherwise  nitrogen  is  formed  frona 
the  decomposition  of  the  nitrous  oxide.™ 

=  NaHSO4  +  2H20  +  N2O),  a  small  amount  of  hyponitrous  acid  which  may  be  precipitated 
in  the  form  of  the  silver  salt ;  and  this  reaction  is  most  simply  expressed  by  taking  the 
doubled  formula  of  hyponitrous  acid,  NH2(OH)  +  NO(OH)  =  H2O-fN2H2O2.  The  best 
argument  in  favour  of  the  doubled  formula  is  the  property  possessed  by  hyponitrous  acid 
of  forming  acid  salts,  HNaN2O2  (Zorn). 

According  to  Thoune,  the  following  are  the  properties  of  hyponitrous  acid.  When 
liberated  from  the  dry  silver  salt  by  the  action  of  dry  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  hyponitroua 
acid  is  unstable,  and  easily  explodes  even  at  low  temperatures.  But  when  dissolved  in 
water  (having  been  formed  by  the  action  ,of  hydrochloric  acid  upon  the  silver  salt),  it  is 
stable  even  when  boiled  with  dilute  acids  .and  alkalis.  The  solution  is  colourless  and 
has  a  strongly  acid  reaction.  In  the  course  of  time,  however,  the  aqueous  solution  also 
decomposes  into  nitrous  oxide  and  water;  The  complete  oxidation  by  permanganate  of 
potash  proceeds  according  to  the  following  equation;  5H2N2O2  +  8KMnO4  +  12H2SO4 
» 10HN03  +  4K2SO4  +  8MnSO4  +  12H2O.  In  an  alkaline  solution,  KMnO4  only  oxidises 
hyponitrous  acid  into  nitrous  and  not  into  nitric  acid.  Nitrous  acid  has  a  decomposing 
action  upon  hyponitrous  acid,  and  if  the  aqueous  solutions  of  the  two  acids  be  mixed  to- 
gether they  immediately  give  off  oxides  of  nitrogen.  Hyponitrous  acid  does  not  liberate 
C02  from  its  salts,  but  on  the  other  hand  it  is  not  displaced  by  C02. 

68  It  is  remarkable  that  electro-deposited  copper  powder  gives- nitrous  oride  with  a 
10  p.c.  solution  of   nitric  acid,  whilst  ordinary  copper  gives  nitric  oxide.     It  is  here 
evident  that  the  physical  and  mechanical  structure  of  the  substance  affects  the  course  of 
the  reaction — that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  case  of  contact-action. 

69  This  decomposition  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  about  25,OQO  calories  per 
molecular  quantity,  NH4NOs,  and  therefore  takes  place  with  ease,  and  sometimes  with 
an  explosion 

70  In  order  to  remove  any  nitric  oxide  that  might  be  present,  the  gas  obtained  ia 
passed  through  a  solution  of  ferrous  sulphate.    As  nitrotfs  oxide  is  very  soluble  in  cbld 
water  (at  0°,  100  volumes  of  water  dissolve  180  volumes  of  N2O ;  at  20°,  67  volumes),  it 
must  be  collected  over  warm  water;    The  nitrous  oxide  is  much  more  soluble  than  nitrio 
joxide,  which  is  in  agreement, with  the  fact  that  nitrous  oxide  is  much  more  easily  liquefiefl 

•14 


296  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 

Nitrous  oxide  is  not  a  permanent  gas  (absolute  boiling  point  4-36°) , 
it  is  easily  liquefied  by  the  action  of  cold  under  a  high  pressure  ,  at 
15°  it  may  be  liquefied  by  a  pressure  of  about  40  atmospheres.  This 
gas  is  usually  liquefied  by  means  of  the  foroe  pump  7I  shown  in  %.  5i 


FlO.  51.— Natterer's  apparatus  for  the  preparation  of  liquid  nitrous  oxide  and  carbonic  anhydride. 
The  gas  first  passes  though  the  vessel  Y,  for  drying,  and  then  into  the  pump  (a  section  of  the 
upper  part  of  the  apparatus  is  given  on  the  left).  The  piston  t  of  the  force  pump  is  moved  by  the 
crank  E  and  fly-wheel  turned  by  hand.  The  gas  is  pumped  into  the  iron  chamber  A,  where  it  is 
liquefied.  The  valve  S  allows  the  gas  to  enter  A,  but  not  to  escape  from  it.  The  chamber  and 
pump  are  cooled  by  the  jacket  B,  filled  with  ice.  When  the  gas  is  liquefied  the  vessel  A.  is  un- 
screwed from  the  pump,  and  the  liquid  may  be  poured  from  it  by  inverting  it  and  unscrewing  the 
valve  v,  when  the  liquid  runs  ouj  of  the  tube  r 

than  nitric  oxide     Villard  obtained  a  crystallohydrate,  N206HaO,  which  wag  tolerably 
stable  at  0° 

71  Faraday  obtained  liquid  nitrous  oxide  by  the  same  method  as  licfoid  ammonia> 
by  heating  dry  ammonium  nitrate  in  a  closed  bent  tube,  one  arm  of  which  was  immersed 
in  a  freezing  mixture.  In.  this  case  two  layers  of  liquid  are  obtained  at  the  cooled  end, 
a  lower  layer  of  water  and  an  upper  layer  of  nitious  oxide.  This  experiment  should  be 
conducted  with  great  care,  as  the  pressure  of  the  nitrous  oxide  in  a  liquid  state  is  con- 


COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  297 

As  it  is  liquefied  with  comparative  ease,  and  as  the  cold  produced  by  its- 
vaporisation  is  very  considerable,72  it  (as  also  liquid  carbonic  an- 
hydride) is  often  employed  in  investigations  requiring  a  low  tempera- 
ture. Nitrous  oxide  forms  a  very  mobile,  colourless  liquid,  which  acts 
011  the  skin,  and  is  incapable  in  a  cold  state  of  oxidising  either 
metallic  potassium,  phosphorus,  or  carbon  ;  its  specific  gravity  is 
slightly  less  than  that  of  water  (0°  =  0-910,  10°  =  0-856,  35°  =  0-60, 
39°  =  0-45,  Villard,  1894).  When  evaporated  under  the  receiver  of  an 
air-pump,  the  temperature  falls  to  —  100°,  and  the  liquid  solidifies 
into  a  snow-like  mass,  and  partially  forms  transparent  crystals.  Both 
these  substances  are  solid  nitrous  oxide.  Mercury  is  immediately 
Solidified  in  contact  with  evaporating  liquid  nitrous  oxide.73 

When  introduced  into  the  respiratory  organs  (and  consequently 
into  the  blood  also)  nitrous  oxide  produces  a  peculiar  kind  of  intoxica- 
tion accompanied  by  spasmodic  movements,  and  hence  this  gas, 
discovered  by  Priestley  in  1776,  received  the  name  of  'laughing  gas.' 
On  a  prolonged  respiration  it  produces  a  state  of  insensibility  (it  is  an 
anaesthetic  like  chloroform),  and  is  therefore  employed  in  dental  and 
surgical  operations. 

Nitrous  oxide  is  easily  decomposed  into  nitrogen  and  oxygen  by  the 
action  of  heat,  or  a  series  of  electric  sparks  ;  and  this  explains  why  a 
number  of  substances  which  cannot  burn  in  nitric  oxide  do  so  with 
great  ease  in  nitrous  oxide,  In  fact,  when  nitric  oxide  gives  some 
oxygen  on  decomposition,  this  oxygen  immediately  unites  with  a  fresh 
portion  ol:  the  gas  to  form  nitric  peroxide,  whilst  nitrous  oxide  does 
hot  possess  this  capacity  for  further  combination  with  oxygen.74  A 
mixture  of  nitrous  oxide  with  hydrogen  explodes  like  detonating 

siderable,  namely  (according  to  Regnault),  at, +10°  =  45  atmospheres,  at  0°  =  86  atmo- 
spheres,  at  -10°  =  29  atmospheres,  and  at  —20°  =  23  atmospheres.  It  boils  at  -92°. 
and  the  pressure  is  then  therefore  =  1  atmosphere  (see  Chapter  II.,  Note  27). 

71  Liquid  nitrous  oxide,  in  vaporising  at  the  same  pressure  as  liquid  carbonic 
Anhydride,  gives  rise  to  almost  equal  or  even  slightly  lower  temperatures.  Thus  at  a 
pressure  of  25  mm.  carbonic  anhydride  gives  a  temperature  as  low  as  — 115°,  and  nitrous 
oxide  of  —125°  (Dewar).  The  similarity  of  these  properties  and  even  of  the  absolute 
boiling  point  (CO2  +  82°,  N2O  +  36°)  is  all  the  more  remarkable  because  these  gases  have 
the  same  molecular  weight  =  44  (Chapter  VII.) 

'3  A  very  characteristic  experiment  of  simultaneous  combustion  and  intense  cold 
may  be  performed  by  means  of  liquid  nitrous  oxide  P  if  liquid  nitrous  oxide  be  poured 
Into  a  test  tube  containing  eome  mercury  the  mercury  will  solidify,  and  if  a  piece 
of  red-hot  charcoal  be  thrown  upon  the  surface  of  the  nitrous  oxide  it  will  continue  to 
burn  very  brilliantly,  giving  rise  to  a  high  temperature. 

T<  In  the  following  chapter  we  shall  consider  the  volumetric  composition  of  the 
oxides  of  nitrogen.  It  explains  the  difference  between  nitric  and  nitrous  oxide. 
.Nitrous  oxide  is  formed  with  a  diminution  of  volumes  (contraction),  nitric  oxide  without 
contraction,  its  volume  being  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of  the  nitrogen  and  oxygen 
of  which  it  ia  composed.  By  oxidation,  if  it  could  be  directly  accomplished,  two  volumes  ol 


298  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY 


gas,  gaseous  nitrogen  being  formed,  N9O  +  H2=H2O  +  N2.  The 
volume  of  the  remaining  nitrogen  is  equal  to  the  original  volume  of 
nitrous  oxide,  and  is-  equal  to  the  volume  of  hydrogen  entering  into 
combination  with  the  oxygen  ;  hence  in  this  reaction  equal  volumes  of 
nitrogen  and  hydrogen  replace  each  other  Nitrous  oxide  is  also  very 
easily  decomposed  by  red-hot  metals  ;  and  sulphur,  phosphorus,  and 
charcoal  burn  in  it,  although  not  so  brilliantly  as  in  oxygen.  A  sub- 
stance in  burning  in  nitrous  oxide  evolves  more  heat  than  an  equal 
quantity  burning  in  oxygen  ;  which  most  clearly  shows  that  in  the 
formation  of  nitrous  oxide  by  the  combination  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen 
there  was  not  an  evolution  but  an  absorption  of  heat,  there  being  no 
other  source  for  the  excess  of  heat  in  the  combustion  of  substances  in 
nitrous  oxide  (see  Note  29).  If  a  given  volume  of  nitrous  oxide  be 
decomposed  by  a  metal  —  for  instance,  sodium  —  then  there  remains, 
after  cooling  and  total  decomposition,  a  volume  of  nitrogen,  exactly 
equal  to  that  of  the  nitrous  oxide  taken  ;  consequently  the  oxygen  is, 
so  to  say,  distributed  between  the  atoms  of  nitrogen  without  producing 
an  increase  in  the  volume  of  the  nitrogen. 

nitrous  oxide  and  one  volume  of  oxygen  would  not  give  three  but  four  volumes  of  nitric 
oxide.  These  facts  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in  comparing  the  calorific  equi- 
valents of  formation,  the  capacity  for  supporting  combustion,  and  other  properties  of 
nitrons  and  nitric  oxides,  N20  and  NO 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED 


1 


9IM 
SB^n 

ml 


