Brian Green, welcome to the show. Thank
you so much. The Elegant Universe turns
25 this year, just like me. Uh, I wish I
could say that about myself. I'd like to
get into what's changed, where we're at,
but I think it's going to require
starting with the question that I'm sure
you've never been asked before. What is
string theory? Yes. Uh, good question.
There are a number of ways of framing
what string theory is about, but perhaps
from the largest perspective, it's an
attempt to realize a dream that really
begins with Albert Einstein, which is
this idea that we have a single
universe. So, we should have a single
theoretical explanation for how that
universe works. And that single
explanation should be mathematical. And
so there should be some grand
mathematical formula, some mathematical
equation that would describe everything
in the universe. And Einstein sought
this so-called unified theory for
decades, but he never found it. And
string theory just may be the theory
that Einstein was looking for. Now, what
kinds of problems is the scientific
community faced with that leads them to
come up with something like string
theory? I mean we already had a lot of
ideas about what the universe was made
of the different constituent particles
and stuff. So where do we get this
vibrating strings thing? Yeah,
absolutely. So from my initial
description, it might seem like it was
more of an aesthetic or a philosophical
motivation to try to find this unified
theory. But it goes far deeper than that
because there are these two main ideas,
two main pillars that support physics as
we have understood it since really the
middle of the 20th century. And that is
quantum physics which describes the
smallest things in the world, the
elementary particles that make up matter
and Einstein's general theory of
relativity which really describes the
biggest things where gravity matters,
stars, galaxies, black holes, the entire
universe. And the problem is that even
though quantum mechanics works
incredibly well in the micro domain and
general relativity works incredibly well
in the macro domain, whenever you try to
put the two mathematical theories
together, it breaks down. When you do
any calculation that blends the math of
quantum mechanics and the math of
general relativity, you get one single
answer. And that answer is infinity. And
infinity might sound well that's kind of
you know cool and poetic sounding but
it's
nonsensical in the context of physics.
There's no quantity that you can measure
that's ever infinity. So infinity is a
diagnostic which basically the
mathematics uses to kind of grab us by
the lapels and slap us in the face and
say you are doing something wrong.
You've got to find a new description
that puts quantum mechanics and general
relativity together. And that is what
string theory does at least in principle
on paper. And I need to stress that this
is not a tested theory. We don't know if
it's correct. But mathematically for the
first time it does show a way of
bridging the gap between these two
theories. So does this tell us that of
general relativity and quantum mechanics
at least one of them is sort of wrong? I
mean people often talk about general
relativity is coming along to replace
Isaac Newton's understanding of gravity
and they say Newton was was kind of
almost there but but ultimately he was
wrong. Is that the same approach we need
to take of something like general
relativity as well? It is, but I would
caution to to see it in that historical
context that you've just made reference
to because it's a little strong to say
that Newton was wrong. I would say that
any physical theory that we ever write
down is meant to describe the universe
in a certain domain. Mhm. And when we
gain better equipment and when we make
progress, we try to extend the domain of
applicability of our understanding. And
when we do that, we almost always find
that the ideas from the earlier
generation, yes, they really work in the
original domain, but when you go beyond
that domain, you need to update them.
You need to replace them. And so Newton
did a wonderful job at describing the
orbits of the planets. General
relativity comes along and says, "Well,
actually, if you can go a little bit
further than just the orbits of planets,
if you want to understand more extreme
environments like black holes, then you
need these new ideas of the general
theory of relativity." And that is
indeed the process that we feel we're
likely recapitulating now because when
you try to put quantum mechanics and
general relativity together, you do find
at least in the string theoretic context
that general relativity has to yield to
additional terms, additional
mathematical constructs that Einstein
himself did not write down. And so yes,
as we try to go beyond even the domain
that Einstein successfully described,
when we try to put quantum theory into
the story, which Einstein did not do, we
do find that general relativity gets
modified. Now it could also be that
quantum mechanics gets modified. This is
an idea that people are talking about
today. So that would again fit into
exactly the same template. Earlier ideas
when you try to go further require new
concepts, new ideas, they have to be
modified. Do you think that there is a
sentimentality in physics where people
kind of want to cling on to these famous
revolutionary ideas because as well as
them being really impressive as as
theories, they're exciting. You're
familiar with them. And so when you're
faced with something that causes you to
abandon something so familiar, do you
think there is a psychological barrier
for a lot of physicists? I think it's
really depending on which physicist
you're talking about. So are there some
in the history of physics where you can
find reasonable evidence that they were
reluctant to take the new step because
they were so tied to the old way of
looking at things. Yes, you can even in
some way say that about Einstein in some
ways when quantum mechanics came along
and was suggesting that the best you
could ever do is predict the likelihood
the probability of one or another
outcome. very different from the
classical perspective that Einstein was
used to where you tell Einstein how
things are today and Einstein will tell
you how they will be tomorrow with 100%
certainty coming from the mathematical
equations when quantum mechanics began
to chip away at that picture yes is
there some evidence that Einstein
resisted it absolutely but I would say
that the dominant perspective of most
physicists including Einstein himself is
that it is so exciting exciting when
there is a radically new way of thinking
about the world. And so I would say the
dominant way in which physicists
approach their work is that they look
for the opportunity to take us to a new
place. And so while yeah I mean you know
we do get comfortable with certain ways
of thinking about things in the end of
the day most of us are all too happy to
be part of a revolution if that
revolution is well motivated by
experiment and theoretical calculations.
So string theory what are the strings of
string theory? Yeah. So when we get into
the details of this approach to put
quantum mechanics and general relativity
together, we find that historically the
essential move was to say look the old
paradigm is that matter is made up of
these little particles, electrons and
quarks, little tiny dotlike structures.
The new idea of string theory was to
say, what if they're not little dots?
What if they are extended little
filaments? What if if you took a
powerful microscope and you looked into
the heart of matter and you didn't find
a swarm of little dots, but you found a
swarm of little vibrating
filaments. And the motivation for that
came from the fact that with that move,
the tension between quantum mechanics
and general relativity went away. Mhm.
That little tiny move from dot to
filament was what you needed for the
mathematics of these two theories to
harmoniously meld together. So if this
picture is correct, the electron would
be a little vibrating filament and the
quirks, they would be little vibrating
filaments and the different vibrational
patterns like the different musical
notes on a musical string would
correspond to the different particles
that make up the world. So it's kind of
like the universe becomes this
microscopic cosmic symphony of vibrating
film. It's a very beautiful and poetic
picture that we can make rigorous and
mathematical and mathematically
beautiful as well. So I keep getting
told I'm not a mathematician. I couldn't
possibly vouch for it. But it does sound
a little bit like I mean you told me a
second ago that string theory hasn't
been proven. It's not been sort of
experimentally verified. I was under the
impression that the thing that was so
great about the scientific enterprise
physics is that we can do that. We can
we can have hypothesis. We can test
them. We make predictions and if those
predictions come true, that's how we
know we've got a good theory. This
sounds a little bit like it's working in
the opposite direction. We've got this
problem and here's a mathematical way of
thinking about it that will plug in
those gaps. But is that an appropriate
way to be doing science? Well, I would
say it's not really going against the
grain of what we always do. It's more
that the time scales involved for being
able to check the mathematical
predictions are much longer. Even in
this case, we don't know how long they
will be compared to things in the past.
So take Einstein and his special theory
of relativity. There was a real puzzle
that he faced which had to do with
properties of light and its motion. He
wrote down some mathematical ideas just
out of his head and thinking about the
data and the situation and very quickly
those ideas could be tested. In the
general theory of relativity 10 years
later he writes down equations to try to
gain some insight into problems to do
with the force of gravity. Within four
years you could test those predictions
through the solar eclipse of May 1919.
There's a four-year gap between the math
and say the confirmation. Here we are
with string theory and I don't know
exactly where you want to date the
theory from but give it sort of you know
30 years or something 40 years and we
haven't been able to test it. So the
time scale is longer. Will we test it in
50 or 100? I don't know. It really
depends on how quickly our mathematics
continues to develop and importantly how
quickly our technology continues to
develop. That's really part of the
problem here. any theory, I don't care
if it's string theory or loop quantum
gravity, another approach that people
have developed. If it's putting gravity
and quantum mechanics together, it will
distinguish
itself in realms that are incredibly
tiny or incredibly massive. That's where
the tension between general relativity
and quantum mechanics surfaces. And so
you're going to have to have experiments
that can probe incredibly small or
incredibly energetic realms. And we are
reaching I wouldn't say the limit but a
challenge to go beyond say the large
hadron collider in Geneva Switzerland.
We used to have small colliders bigger
bigger now we've got this 18 mile ind
you know circumference uh you know
accelerator. How much bigger can you
get? And we don't know that we can get
to the scales necessary to test these
ideas. Because if you naively look at
how big the accelerator would need to
be, it would need to be as big as the
galaxy. That's how much we've
leapfrogged mathematically. And that's
what distinguishes this situation from
say special relativity or general
relativity or the standard model of
particle physics. Well,
how is it possible in principle, even if
we did have some galactic, you know,
collider, how do we experimentally
confirm that all fundamental matter
breaks down into into vibrating strings?
How does that It's a key question. And
if you allow me to imagine that we had
arbitrarily energetic equipment,
arbitrarily able to probe to
increasingly small scales, or maybe we
talked to an alien civilization and
they've cracked this problem. Are there
tests of string theory? Yeah. String
theory says that if you were to slam
particles together at sufficiently high
energies, we would see things that
string theory predicts that you would
not see in more conventional approaches.
And we can write down what those
features would be. So in principle, they
would be testable. Those are like new
kinds of particles. New kinds of
particles. the way in which the
particles slam and bounce off of each
other, the so-called scattering
amplitudes, they're different in this
approach than they would be in a more
conventional approach. And so there are
diagnostic tests that in principle we
could carry out if we had this
arbitrarily powerful equipment, which we
do not have. We'll get back to Brian
Green in just a moment, but first, do
you trust the news? I don't. And a lot
of that has got to do with the bias that
inevitably seeps into reporting.
Wouldn't it be great if there were a way
for us as consumers of news in this
media landscape to navigate bias
objectively comparing the way that
different sources are reporting on the
same story. Well, luckily that is
exactly what today's sponsor, Ground
News, allows you to do. Ground News
aggregates thousands of local and
international news outlets all in one
place, so you can compare reporting
across the political spectrum. Try it
out at
ground.news/alexoc. Take a look at this
story about how 1ifth of pollinators in
North America are at risk of extinction.
On ground news, I can see that of all
the sources reporting on this story,
only 9% of them are right-leaning. This
means that if you only normally tend to
read rightle leaning news, you could
have missed this story altogether. And
Ground News even has a dedicated blind
spot tab which specifically seeks out
stories that you would otherwise missed
based on your specific reading habits.
Nowhere is doing news aggregation like
Ground News. Try it out for yourself at
ground.news/alexoc or by scanning the QR
code that's currently on your screen.
Use my link to get 40% off their
unlimited access Vantage plan. That
said, back to Brian Green. What do you
think Einstein would have made of string
theory? Well, I think at first he would
have resisted it a bit because it does
involve some pretty far out ideas. And
so, as you were saying, it does take a
while for even
psychologically people to acclimatize to
a different way of thinking about
things. But I have little doubt that if
Einstein took the time, and I think that
he would, to sit down and learn about
these ideas, the fact that it involves
his own general theory of relativity,
the fact that it does incorporate
quantum physics, which he resisted, but
ultimately recognized was a powerful way
of describing the world, the fact that
it involves extra dimensions of space,
an idea that Einstein himself spent some
time thinking about. All of these
ingredients I think ultimately Einstein
would find exciting and mathematically I
think he would be bowled over by the
beautiful way in which string theory
brings it all together. I do think he
would ask the very same question that
you did. How do you test this? How do we
know that this isn't just pure
mathematics? And that would take us into
a wonderful conversation along the lines
of the material that we just discussed.
So yeah, I think he would warm to these
ideas pretty quickly. Do you think we're
sort of in the realm of philosophy here?
One of the criticisms that I see of
string theory as somebody who doesn't
understand the first thing about it is
that because of this lack of
experimental
data, you can say that in principle it
could be tested. But there are all kinds
of philosophical theories that in
principle we could test. Ideas about
personal identity or Star Trek
teleporters and would the person still
be the same person if you reconstructed
all of their atoms. I can I can sort of
hypothesize a way to test that in in
principle, but because that is so
far-fetched, it's squarely in the realm
of philosophy rather than science. Do
you think that string theory for that
reason might belong there, at least for
now, too? Well, I guess two quick
things. One, there are some who would
view a
categorization of being in the
philosophical domain as somehow
denigrating the ideas. And I don't see
it that way at all. I mean if we are in
a philosophical realm
fantastic philosophy is wonderful up if
you ask me. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So you
know so I I don't view that as some kind
of a black mark against physical theory.
If it raises philosophical questions but
you're saying something slightly
different. You're saying because we
can't directly test it. Should it be
called science? Perhaps we can frame it
that way. And I think the answer to that
is absolutely yes. Because science is
not about ideas that can be put forward
and then tested immediately. Science
about putting forward ideas that solve
critical problems that can be tested at
least in principle at some point. And
that's really important because if you
put forward an idea that's meant to be
scientific, but someone can establish
you can't possibly in any way, shape, or
form ever test that idea, then it's hard
to see that it fits within the
categorization of science. But if you
put forward an idea which at least in
principle you could test if you had the
right equipment, then to me if it solves
certain key problems, if it advances
your understanding theoretically of
things like black holes and the big bang
and the nature of space and the nature
of time, which is what string theory
does, then it's absolutely worth your
investigating it. And it absolutely
falls squarely in the realm of science.
But it also raises certain problems as
well as solving problems, right? Yeah. I
mean, there are problems in the sense of
just counterintuitive implications like
I don't know how many dimensions is it
that we're supposed to believe in these
days? 11, 12, you know, 30. I think it
11's a good number. Yes. Depends who you
ask. Which
typically is quite difficult for people
to imagine um and to swallow. Although,
as far as I understand it, there's
something about the way that strings
vibrating in these dimensions. uh
there's something about that which would
produce the long sought after graviton
particle, right? And and so scientists
for a long time have expected that there
would be this particle called the
graviton which is like the the
fundamental unit of gravity. And if you
do the maths for string theory, you
predict this graviton. And so when
people say that string theory has no
predictive power, it's like okay, we
haven't made a prediction of something
that we don't know if it exists yet and
then found it. It does predict one
important thing which is the existence
of gravity because we've known that
gravity's existed for a long time but
right we haven't actually been able to
to find it in the way that maybe string
theory can. Right. Yeah. So I mean I'm
fond of taking that line of discussion
too but I think of it more as a
postdiction rather than a prediction for
the very reason that you mentioned.
We've known about gravity. Isaac Newton
wrote down a mathematical understanding
of gravity. But if you imagine a
counterfactual universe for instance a
universe in which there was no Einstein
and we did not have Einstein's general
theory of relativity and yet somehow
people came upon string theory and they
began to study the mathematics of string
theory within the math of string theory
a clever string theorist would extract
the general theory of relativity. Wow.
And so that feels very gratifying. Yeah.
That these ideas hold together with such
a rich and and powerful cohesiveness.
And you're absolutely right because
quantum mechanics is also part of string
theory. It wouldn't just be the general
theory of relativity. It would be the
quantum version of the general theory of
relativity which does involve these
particles called gravitons. So string
theory naturally does give rise to the
quantum mechanical carrier of the
gravitational force which is the
graviton. But look, I need to emphasize
no one's ever detected a graviton. It's
the smallest particle of the weakest of
all forces. So we're not surprised that
it's been a challenge to ever capture a
graviton and detect it directly. We're
not surprised by that. But it is a
beautiful thing that this idea that
predates string theory naturally yields
the very same structure when you study
the math of string theory. That's in the
maths. That's that's the interesting
thing. Now, one thing that I'm a little
bit confused about is how
something about these different
dimensions and the different ways that
they could could exist, the different
sort of structures that they could have.
I'm not sure if it's related to the
dimensions themselves or the shapes or
whatever, but I hear a lot of people
talk about how string about how string
theory points towards this explosion of
multiple universes, some kind of
multiverse picture. I don't know if it
produces like a a potentially infinite
number of universes or if it's like some
precise number of
700,046 when you actually do the
calculation, but something about lots of
universes. Yeah. So when I was a
graduate student way back in the 1980s,
long before you were born, and I began
to work on string theory, the aspect
that caught my attention was its need
for these extra dimensions of space. And
briefly, when you study the math of
string theory, there's an equation and
the equation cannot be solved if there
aren't these extra dimensions of space.
So that's where the idea does come from.
And when I was a graduate student,
people began to think about what those
extra dimensions of space might look
like. The idea is that they're very
small. They're crumpled. They're all
around us, but they're so tiny that we
can't directly see them the way we can
directly see, you know, left, right,
back, forth, and up, down, right? The
three dimensions of common experience.
And so if they're crumpled up, what's
the shape into which they are crumpled?
And in the 1980 mid1 1980s, scientists,
mathematicians wrote down five possible
shapes. And at that point, people
thought those might be the only possible
shapes that would meet the mathematical
requirements. So as a graduate student,
I started to study those shapes to see
what physics they might give rise to.
And that's what my doctoral dissertation
was all about. And that seemed kind of a
beautiful thing. a small number of
possibilities. Maybe we can either rule
them all out and get rid of string
theory or maybe one of them describes
our world and wow that would be amazing.
The problem is as you made reference to
as people began to study the math
further and further five possible shapes
grew to six grew to 10 grew to a million
grew to a billion grew to a trillion
grew to 10 to the 500. M that little
list of five possible shapes is now an
enormous list of possibilities. And so
what do you do with that? Well, one idea
that people put forward is maybe all of
them are real in the sense that all of
them are realized in the sense that
there are many
universes in which each of those shapes
constitutes the extra dimensions in that
universe. Yeah. And this is an idea that
really was spearheaded by Leonard Suskin
who was thinking about these ideas in
the context of inflationary cosmology
and in the context of a puzzle called
the cosmological constant problem. And
when he put all these ideas together, it
naturally should suggested that maybe
there are multiple big bangs yielding
multiple universes each with a different
shape for the extra dimensions. That's
where this multiverse comes from. And
that's because of the the possibility of
different ways that these dimensions
could be could be shaped and
organized to me. I mean, that that is of
course really interesting, but a lot of
people will listen to that and think,
what if there's just some other reason
why the dimensions are as they are in
our actual universe? I mean, the fact
that a bunch of other realities are
mathematically possible doesn't mean
that they actually exist. Yes. Is
positing that they just do exist just
sort of a convenient way to get around
the problem of explaining why the
universe is the way it is. Yes, that is
certainly a possible way that this story
might ultimately be told.
And it could be that there is some
mathematical equation that we've yet to
find. And when you look at that
mathematical equation, you solve it.
Maybe it says ah that's the shape shape
22,462. Maybe that will come out of some
fundamental mathematical calculation. At
which point we'll say all the other
shapes were speurious. They were
potential shapes when we didn't know
about this other mathematical condition.
But with this new condition, they're
gone and there just this one shape. And
that would be a very beautiful
resolution to all of this. We've yet to
find anything like that equation. Would
we have to rule out those possibilities?
Because s such an equation would say
that all of these trillions of other
potential ways of organizing the
universe actually can't obtain. Uh we
just didn't realize it before. Would we
have to show its impossibility in that
sense to show that it didn't in fact
exist? Or is there a world in which we
can prove actually they are all
definitely possible and yet we know that
they don't exist? Sure, it could just be
historical contingency. If we understood
the origin of the universe better and if
we understood the dynamical processes by
which the universe evolved from however
it began to its current state of being.
Maybe when we just look at that history,
we go, "Oh, oh, look, that shape is
picked out by the historical
progression. The others are possible.
They solve the equations. they're just
not realized because of the particular
set of steps that took us from the
beginning until today. That's another
possibility. But I do want to emphasize
that when when Suskime was thinking
about this, he was thinking dynamically
because when you look at this approach
to cosmology called inflationary
cosmology, you find within it very
naturally that our big bang was not a
one-time event. You find very naturally
from the mathematics that our big bang
would be one of many big bangs giving
rise to one of many
universes. And Suskin simply said if we
port that idea from inflationary
cosmology into string theory then very
naturally those distinct big bangs could
have distinct shapes for the extra
dimensions.
M man.
So, I'm thinking there's something quite
profound underlying all of this and all
of these considerations. And what's
coming to mind for me is that you talked
before a little bit about these
particles, these potential gravitons,
but also have quarks or quarks or
however you want to say it. And you've
got nutrinos and you've got electrons.
And part of the story of science is
trying to explain why that is the way
that it is. I mean, so much of science
is descriptive, right? like we we look
inside of an atom and we find that it's
made of protons, neutrons and electrons
and we feel that thereby we've sort of
explained something like we understand
the atom whereas as far as I'm concerned
all we've really done is just described
it in further detail and we haven't
really shifted the needle on the
question of why it is that way rather
than another. So when we look in the
quantum realm and we find these very
specific set of particles and not other
particles, they've got particular
weights and not other
weights. Why is that the case? Why not
some other set of particles with a
different set of properties? Yeah. And
and so it really comes down
to what do you want science to do? M
Neils Boore, the grand master of quantum
physics would say all you want science
to do is give you some mathematical
explanation for the readouts in your
equipment. You take a measurement, you
get a result. Can you explain that
number? You don't need to explain
anything about the nature of reality.
You don't have to tell a narrative of
how things are. Can you explain those
numbers? Now, many of us think that
that's a too limited way of looking at
science. I'm more in the camp that you
describe. I want to feel like I can tell
some coherent story that gives me some
understanding of not only how things
are, but why they are this way. Now,
we've been really good at the how so far
because we have the standard model of
particle physics that can describe the
results that come out of every
experiment at the Large Hadron Collider
gives us an understanding of the
structure of matter. Gives us an
understanding of how that matter can
ultimately coales when you put
Einstein's ideas together into stars and
galaxies and into planets. That's all
pretty good. But if you then said to me,
but in that theory you've made certain
assumptions. Yes, you assume there's
electrons,
neutrinos, why those particles and not
others. And that really comes down to
the question that Einstein really asked
in a way. Is there a unique universe
that somehow is logically required to be
and any deviation from that universe
would somehow be logically inconsistent?
Einstein said did God have any choice in
creating the universe? Could God
therefore, in other words, have created
the universe differently? Or was God's
choices fixed by some sort of master
logic that we've yet to
uncover? I would love if we find that
logic. We're nowhere near that. As of
today, is it possible logically and
mathematically that there would be a
universe that has vastly different
particles from the ones that we know
about? I think so. Is it possible that
we could be in a universe where it was
all Newton, no quantum mechanics. Is
that a logically possible? I think it
is. Now, people will argue about this,
but I don't think that we have any
criteria at the moment where we can say,
"Ah, the universe had to have quantum
mechanics. It had to have general
relativity, has to have electrons and
quirks." There's no other reality that
could possibly have been realized. We're
nowhere near that goal, but it would be
wonderful to get there. And ultimately,
frankly, we'd like to go one step
further and answer Linets's question.
Why is there something rather than
nothing? Nothing seems to be logically
possible, too. And by nothing, I don't
mean, and neither did Linets, empty
space. I mean nothing. No space, no
space, no time, no nothing. that seems
to be logically possible and yet clearly
we're not in that
reality. Why not? Yes, that to me is is
the foundational question in the sense
that it's really kind of naive and
simple like a kid can ask it but it's
also like the most profound
philosophical question that you come
back to regardless of how much study you
do. I am suspicious about the extent to
which science can inform a question like
that. An analogy that I've given before
is a bit like discovering a book. There
are some books on the table uh which are
also available on Amazon.com and
reputable book sellers everywhere. Um
but suppose it were a a book of poetry
on the table. I use the example of a
Shakespearean set a a book of his sets
and we just discovered this book and we
wanted to know what it's doing there.
What what is it? What's it made of?
Right? And so we start studying it. We
start looking inside and some clever
person begins to notice that it follows
certain patterns. At the end of these
things called sentences, there's always
a a period, a full stop, right? And
there are these big versions of letters
and little versions of letters. And you
discover this law of capitalization. And
then the really clever person realizes
that when you pronounce these words, it
follows this this
rhythmun dun dun. And they call it
iiamic pentameter because, you know, it
sounds fancy. But they've identified
this this law of amic pentameter that
everything everything
follows. And somebody says, "Look, we're
discovering all of these laws of this
book. Isn't it amazing?" And I'm still
left with the question of why is the
book there? Why does it follow those
laws? Why was it written in the first
place? And for somebody to say to me,
well, we don't know yet, but look at all
the progress we're making. Look at look
at how much we've discovered. Look at
how many laws we've uncovered. Surely at
some point we'll get there. That would
be a category error, right? Because
you're never going to push the laws of
literacy enough to understand the origin
of the text. And I wonder if there's an
analogy here when we look at the laws of
physics and we discover the way that
planets orbit each other and stuff and
we're finding all these wonderful
descriptions of how everything works. Is
it a category error to suggest that if
we just push that kind of thinking far
enough, we'll get the answer to the
origin of the universe? It could be. I
don't think it is, but I need to qualify
it in in two ways. Number one, I would
say what physics is about and how it
differs from your analogy with the
sonnet is that physics is about
finding a
description that involves far less input
and far less information than the things
that comes out of it. the ultimate
description of what's going on. So when
we look at quantum phenomenon, there is
so much stuff that happens in the
microscopic world. Particles slamming
into each other, joining together into
atoms and into molecules. So we can
describe the fundamental processes with
a few lines of mathematics. So that
complex amalgamation of processes is
reduced to a few symbols on a piece of
paper. It is ultimately just a
description of what's going on. But it
is a very efficient and effective
description. And it's so good that when
we use the math to calculate for
instance magnetic properties of
electrons, we can make a calculation to
14 decimal places and then we do the
experiment and it agrees digit by digit
by digit to 14 decimal places. You can't
help but think that that's more than
just a mere repackaging or a mere
observation about the patterns. you're
somehow finding something at the heart
of the patterns when you can make that
kind of a leap from mathematics to
predictions. But I would say that I do
differ from my colleagues in a way
that's relevant to the analogy that you
give which is the
following. The sonnet I think we'd all
agree is a human construct. Y the
description that you gave in terms of
capital letters, small letters,
periods,amic, pentameter, those are all
human inventions. You can use the word
that you did use discovering these
patterns. You are discovering them, but
the patterns were human inventions.
And I think that what we're doing in
mathematics is really just inventing
human inventions a language that's
really good at encapsulating the
patterns not found in a sonnet but the
patterns found in nature. And so I don't
think that we are discovering laws even
though in loose language I often do say
that. I think we are inventing laws.
We're inventing the math. We're
inventing the symbols. We're inventing
the operations and we are inventing the
equations and finding, wow, these
equations are really good at
encapsulating those patterns. In fact,
they're so good that we can use the
equations to make predictions about
patterns we haven't even yet seen. And
then we do go out and we see them. So it
is powerful, but ultimately I think that
what we're doing is inventing things. So
now back to your key question, could
that invention ultimately give us
answers to these profound philosophical
questions? And I think that they can
point the way because the equations are
good at finding the patterns,
encapsulating the patterns. And if you
believe that reality for reasons that we
don't understand does follow patterns,
did God infuse those patterns? Are they
somehow written into some ultimate
description of a universe that has to be
them? I don't know. But if you believe
that there are these patterns and we've
invented a language that's really good
at talking about those patterns, then
yeah, in principle, maybe that language
can point us toward the ultimate pattern
which may give insight into why there's
a universe at all. H patterns is a
really interesting way of describing it
because I wanted to know what your view
is on what a law of physics is. The
these words like laws, these words like
forces, the force of gravity, they're
thrown around without people stopping to
think about what they're actually saying
there. I mean to say that there is a law
of
physics, that word seems to imply that
there is this written rule somewhere
that everything is following. The
question that got me thinking about this
when I was younger was to ask like do
things fall to the ground because of the
law of gravity or do we have the law of
gravity because things fall to the
ground? And it seems more sensible to me
to suggest that like like you indicate
we are essentially describing patterns
that we see. And the great observation
of David Hume was to was to realize that
that is just something that we observe
and describe. He he looked everywhere he
could for the causal connection between
hitting a billyard ball and that
billiard ball going forward. And he
thought there's nothing in principle
logically like preventing me hitting
that billyard ball and it flying upwards
instead of forwards except for this
thing that we observe called you
causation. But he looked for it
everywhere and he just couldn't find it.
Yeah. But he said I still believe in it
though. I still believe in causation. I
just have absolutely no way to justify
its existence. And the problem for Hume
is that the way that Bertin Russell put
it was uh in this problem of induction
was to say like if you were a chicken
and every single day the farmer comes in
and throws your seed, right? And and so
the chicken develops this this
connection between the farmer coming in
and the food being given in the same way
that every time I've seen an object be
dropped, it's fallen to the ground. So,
I developed this idea of a causal
connection just because every time I've
seen it, that's what's happened. And
Russell's like, "Well, the chicken will
in the same way develop a causal
connection between the farmer coming in
and the food being given." But until the
hatchet comes quite right until the
hatchet comes and the chicken's dead and
we realized that the chicken was just
identifying patterns, but there was no
actual law. It feels ridiculous to
suggest that the laws of physics could
work in the same way because it's
happened so many times. Yeah. you know,
every single time we've ever seen this
kind of stuff. But like, is there this
thing called a law that that makes sure
it happens or are we just describing
patterns? And and look, so I would say
number one,
when I was younger, if we had this
conversation when I was your tender age,
I would sit here and say, "Yeah, there
are laws of physics." Yes. When we write
down these mathematical laws, they are
why the universe behaves the way it
does. And that was so naive as I look
back at my 25year-old self thinking that
way because number one obviously laws
that we write down change over time. So
so number one we have to recognize it's
all provisionals but even more deeply in
the end of the day what we humans do we
are able to access a tiny part of
reality. We find patterns in the part
that we have access to and we invent
this language that does a really good
job at describing it. And that's really
I think all that there is to it. But
having said that, I'm not precisely sure
the language and I always struggle at
this point to find the right words. I do
think that within the fundamental
architecture of reality, there are
certain inbuilt patterns that do guide
the dynamics that do guide the billyard
ball as it slams into another billyard
ball. I don't think it's Newton's laws.
I don't think it's the laws of quantum
physics. I don't think it's general
relativity. But I do within the
architecture of reality feel that there
is something that requires this kind of
regularity. Now is that a law? I'm not
sure if that's the right language any
longer because the universe just does
what it does. Particles move and bill
your balls slam into and they don't care
about quantum mechanics or the laws of
physics as we articulate them. They're
just doing their business and they've
been doing that business long before we
existed. and they will be doing their
business long after we are gone. And so
in that sense, the universe just is and
just does and just evolves. But I do
think there's a fundamental regularity
that guides how things progress. Do we
have access to that regularity? Is math
the right language for articulating that
regularity? I have absolutely no idea
and I don't have any reason to believe
that it is. I do know that it does a
really good job at approximating those
regularities, which is why we can make
predictions that so closely match
observation. But does that mean that
we've actually uncovered the true
fundamental regularities of reality?
That to me would be a miracle. Would
that be something material in your view?
I mean, you you I tend to agree with you
that there is something about the nature
of reality that I don't think gravity is
going to switch off in 5 seconds. But
then, you know, let's not tempt the
gods. I do think that there's something
pulling this all together. But if we're
talking about the thing that governs the
interactions of all material objects
essentially, does that governing thing
itself have to step outside of
materiality and we get into this realm
which physicists often dare not tread of
of talking about immaterial influence on
material things? Yeah. Look, well, two
three quick things. Number one, we've
looked at the universe by using powerful
telescopes way back
to few hundred,000 years after the big
bang. So say we've looked at it through
a 13 billion year
span. That may seem like a long period
of time, but we can extrapolate into the
far future and there's every reason to
believe that this cosmos of ours will
exist in one form or another for 10 to
the hundred years, if not longer, into
the future. Which means that we could be
like the chicken and for 13 billion
years we've seen the regularity but
maybe you know 10 to the hundred years
from now the hatchet comes and we
realize oh we were just confused by the
patterns that held true for such a long
period of time. So is it possible that
gravity will switch off? Probably not in
5 seconds but we're looking at a tiny
region of time compared to the entirety
that might happen. Number one. Number
two, do we step outside of
materiality? Look, I'm open to that
idea. I would be thrilled if that were
the ultimate answer. How remarkable if
there is some grand non-physical entity
that is responsible for the universe and
the fact that we're here. I would love
to learn about that and it would be
enormously exciting. The problem as a
physicist is I can't go any further than
that excitement. I can't analyze it. I
can't investigate it. I can't write down
mathematical equations. By definition,
it stands outside the physical, the
thing that a physicist focuses upon. So,
I don't find it that interesting. I
don't say it is impossible. It just
doesn't occupy my attention when I can't
go any further in the analysis. And so
my perspective has been to say sure
maybe but now I'm put that to the side
and see how far I can get just focusing
on the physical just focusing on the
tools that we have developed and the
fact that we've been able to go as far
as we've been able is is deeply
thrilling. M one of the most
celebrated descriptions of the universe
that has uh come
about of late and by of late I mean in
the history of the scientific enterprise
is this surprising fact that so much of
what governs our
universe the the strength of various
laws for example the mass of various
particles are so finely tuned that some
theorists do suggest the multiverse we
were talking about earlier to the extent
that like the only way to explain the
fact that it could have been so many
ways and is this way is that this is
just one of many
universes. Another suggestion for that
from that is to extrapolate and say well
there must be some kind of necessary
reason why these laws are the way they
are. That's the kind of thing that the
physicist is looking for. The third
option is this sort of supernatural
intelligence. Many people think that I
understand what you're saying that the
physicists can't go beyond the physical,
but we can like extrapolate explanation
from the physical data, right? Like in
the same way that if I were to look at
some evidence around me, if we all left
this room and somebody came in and saw
that there were some glasses on the
table and saw that there was a book
placed kind of in the middle of the
table and all this kind of stuff. They
didn't see any human beings. They didn't
see any agents, but they can just
extrapolate from the arrangement of of
the descriptions that they see of of the
way the room is. There must have been
somebody there. In the same way, the
physicists might not be able to sort of
look beyond the material. But can they
look at the strength of the of the
strong and weak nuclear forces and the
fact that if gravity was a tiny little
bit stronger the universe would have
collapsed in on itself and a bit weaker
and everything would have flown apart
and think I can't see any evidence of
design directly but I can extrapolate
from that that there must be some kind
of intelligence behind the universe.
Yeah. So bear in mind number
one often people do say that if you
change the value of the physical
parameters just a little bit the
universe as we know it goes away. The
problem with that is we can only do that
analysis if you change the parameters by
a little bit. If you allow the
parameters to change by a lot of bit,
not a little bit, and you allow many of
the parameters to change simultaneously,
nobody can really say what that cosmos
would be like. And so it's possible that
there are patches in parameter space
where you would get different kinds of
universes that perhaps would give rise
to different living systems. And then
each living system in its universe looks
around and says, "Wow, this universe is
so special. It must be that there's some
kind of, you know, grand design that got
us here." But they're all saying that in
their own parameter space because
they're all making this mistake of only
looking in a small neighborhood around
the point in parameter space where they
exist. So that's point number one. And
so part of it is we just don't really
know enough to if we turned up gravity a
little bit and left everything else the
same. I agree. But if we turned it up
like to 11 that that somehow right that
might Yeah. But what if you
simultaneously turn up the repulsive
force that might come from a universe
with charge? I mean you it's a highly
complex problem and there might be
something about turning up gravity which
necessarily also correlatively turns up
this repulsive conceivably. So, so it's
just a fairly complicated problem that
you don't want to dismiss too quickly by
saying it all goes away unless it's
precisely as we've seen. But it is the
motivation for the multiverse. Another
motivation because one explanation
simply would be there are many many many
many universes in which the parameters
of all different values across those
many
universes and in most of those universes
the conditions are not amendable to
living systems like human beings. But in
one of those or a small number of those
universes the conditions are amendable.
And of course, we're in one of those
universes because we could not exist in
any of the others because the conditions
are not correct. You know, the analogy
is if you go into a clothing shop and
you want to buy a sports coat and you
say, "I want to buy a sports coat." And
you see only one on the rack. And the
person brings it over and it fits you
perfectly, you're like, "Wow, that is so
fortunate that it was just the right
size to fit me." M but if you go into an
actual clothing shop when there's
hundreds of different sports jackets on
the rock of all different sizes when the
person comes and brings you one that
fits, you're not surprised. Of course,
there's one among the many that works
for you. And so if you have many
jackets, it's obvious why one will fit.
If you have many universes, it's also
pretty obvious why one will fit the
conditions necessary to our existence.
And so it is a natural way of avoiding
the problem that you're making reference
to. The specialness of this universe
goes away if it's one of a grand
collection of possibilities. Yeah. If I
went into a shop and they had a sports
jacket in just my size, I'd feel pretty
pretty special. I'd feel pretty chuffed
about that. If I discovered that
actually they'd gone into the back and
picked from a billion different possible
suit jacket sizes, uh, I'd be a little
bit I'd be a little disappointed by
that. I'd be kind of
upset. Do you feel a bit nihilistic at
the prospect that that it seems amazing,
everything is perfectly tuned for us,
and that actually maybe not. Maybe we
just happen to be in one of billions of
universes. I guess that's not where my
selfworth comes from. You know, I sort
of don't look at the specialness of the
universe or my place within that special
universe.
Rather, what fires me up is the fact
that a collection of particles called a
human brain, which is all that we are,
collections of particles, can coalesce
through an evolutionary dynamics to
yield a structure that can think and
feel and love and emote and create and
illuminate and figure out quantum
mechanics and figure out general
relativity and come up with the idea of
a multi verse and describe black holes
and predict the magnetic moment of the
electron. And that to me is the amazing
thing that matter not infused with any
divine force, not in my view structured
by some divine plan can through the bare
laws of physics come together and do
what it does.
It's it's definitely marvelous.
it I I do think it sort of doesn't offer
consolation in the way that that feeling
special does because I feel like
oftentimes people conflate the idea of
something being amazing with something
being like meaningful. You know, people
people like to say things like, "Okay, I
I I believe that there is just the
universe, but when I look at a beautiful
night sky, I'm filled with awe and
wonder." And that might be true, but it
doesn't fill you with that sense of of
belonging in the same way. If anything,
like one person looks at the universe
and thinks it's so grand and so
brilliant that man, I slot right into
this and they find their sense of
belonging. Whereas some people look at
the universe, they look at the same
thing and they say, gosh, this is also
also big and I'm just in tiny little
random neighborhood like, oh, I I I have
no place here. I'm just randomly here.
Like, which of those do you identify
with more when you look at the universe?
They're both true, right? Right? I mean,
I fundamentally believe that there is no
cosmic purpose. There is no cosmic
meaning. I do believe and I'm open as we
discussed to other ideas ultimately
replacing this perspective if it made
sense and if there was evidence but I
fundamentally believe that we are the
product of physical processes and that
we are physical structures and that
these physical structures just come
together for a brief moment of time and
then we disperse and for that brief
moment of time can I feel alone and
nihilistic yes can I feel connected and
thrilled? Yes. Can I hold both of those
ideas in mind simultaneously? Yes. And I
do. And so, yes, at times do I feel
completely at sea in this gigantic
cosmos crawling around on this
nondescript planet going around this
ordinary star in the outskirts of the
Milky Way galaxy? Yes. Can that make you
feel small and lacking some sense of
purpose? For sure. But at the same time,
when I think about the fact that we've
developed these mathematical ideas that
describe that reality, it gives me a
feeling of connection to that reality. I
feel closer to the universe when I have
a deep description that at least
approximates some of the processes that
take place. General relativity makes me
feel closer to the cosmos, as does
quantum mechanics. And so, yes, alone
and yes, connected all together in one
human mind that somehow is able to
grapple with these
ideas, this multiverse situation that we
were talking about
before, do we have good reason to think
that it might be the case outside of a
its possibility and b the way that it
kind of conveniently does away with the
trouble of things like fine-tuning or
the the trillions of ways that string
theory dimensions could be folded in on
themselves because like you imagined
walking into a jacket shop and finding
one that was perfect and I'm imagining
walking into a jacket shop and and and
and it's just like a tiny little little
store you somewhere in somewhere in New
York on like the second floor, right?
And it just has a few jackets and and a
few pairs of trousers and I try on this
jacket and it is like perfect. I mean,
it's the exact shade of blue that I was
looking for. I send it to my camera guy
and he does the little hex code and he's
like, "Man, this is like exactly the
right color temperature. The the sleeves
are the perfect length, like uncannily
perfect. Like everything is great." It's
even got like a name tag from the
previous owner that says Alex on it just
by pure. And I think, man, this is
absolutely unbelievable. I'm saying to
my friend, "This is unbelievable. I
can't believe every single time I look
at it, something new that just just
unfathomably coincidental." And the
friend says, "Okay, this is amazing. I
what must have
happened is that there are actually like
an infinite number of jackets that are
sort of sat in the back and every time
somebody comes into the shop they sort
of bring one out by chance and hope that
it's a match. And I suppose we must all
sort of have sort of existed in New York
for an infinite amount of time so that
this guarantees that at least once this
goes right. And of course, you're going
to be the one that gets it right because
otherwise you wouldn't be having this
amazing experience.
Compared to just what I naively
experience, which is like one room and a
jacket which fits perfectly. I would I
would basically ask that friend to give
me more reason outside of the
convenience of explaining this
coincidence to believe in that infinite
set of jackets to to think that it's
actually true, right? I I mean and then
in in the end of the day that's really
what we do. We try to explain the
confluence of data that seems to lock
together with such a gratifying and
impressive cohesion just like your
perfect jacket, you know, inscribed in
just the right way. And this is that
jacket. It's beautiful. I I agree with
our cameraman. And and so what we try to
do is to write down equations that will
give us some insight into how it could
be that there's a process that starts in
the big bang and results in the things
that we are now experiencing. Now are
there certain things that might be pure
coincidence? Like could it be pure
coincidence that the gravitational
constant and the electromagnetic force
have just the right values to yield the
qualities that allow us to exist? It
could be coincidental. It could be
really causitative. It could have been
had the values been different, they
would have caused something else. and
that something else if it had
consciousness might be in the same
quandry saying why were the constants
just the right value to allow me to
exist and yet they'd be different than
the constants that we have. And so you
have to be careful about seeing things
and being impressed at their uniqueness
when they might not be unique and
impressed at how they are designed when
they may not be designed. They simply
may be what they are and you are the
result of those features. They weren't
set in order to get you to exist. They
were set maybe by some random process
and you are the output of that random
process. What we do as conscious beings,
we tend to look at our environment and
try to explain it in terms that somehow
give us a a narrative, a story. And we
love stories that somehow have a
purpose. But these stories may not have
a purpose. It may just be random events
with random numbers that yield based on
their structure certain outputs. And we
may be the output of those random
qualities. So at risk of belaboring the
point because we're speaking quite
generally here in particular the
multiverse like I say outside of
this convenient explanation of of
certain phenomena but not in such a way
that it's like you know a predictable
testable hypothesis just this makes some
sense of of what we see do we have good
evidence outside of that for the
multiverse when I spoke to David Deutsch
he was firmly convinced I mean he said
he doesn't believe in the multiverse he
knows that the multiverse exists from
sort of a quantum perspective. He's a
many worlds interpretation type guy. So
very particular kind of uh of
multiverse, but he just thought that we
had this evidence. It wasn't just a way
of
explaining difficult quandries. Do you
believe in the same way that we have
like evidence for the multiverse or do
you tend to just treat it as a potential
hypothesis to to do away with these
problems? Yeah, I I absolutely do not
think we have evidence for the
multiverse and I believe I understand
David Deutsche's perspective. I I
actually never met him, but I have read
his books. And of course, I'm deeply
familiar with the many worlds approach
to quantum mechanics. And it is a
compelling mathematical framework that
we humans invented to describe these
strange processes in the microscopic
realm. Is it the only description of the
microscopic realm that we have? No.
There are other ways of talking about
the phenomenon of quantum mechanics
where you don't mention the word
multiverse. You don't mention many
worlds. And as of today, we don't know
of a way to experimentally distinguish
between these different approaches. So I
think it's far too early to say that the
many worlds, the multiverse version of
quantum mechanics is correct. And that's
only one flavor of multiverse. There are
many ways in which you come upon this
idea of many universes. You come upon it
cosmologically from inflationary
cosmology with multiple big bangs. You
come upon it in string theory with many
different possible shapes for the extra
dimensions. You come upon also within
string theory with something called
brain universes. So there are many
flavors of multiverse that science has
bumped into. Absolutely none of them are
at a level of understanding where we can
say yes there is evidence for the
multiverse. No, there is mathematical
motivation based upon our attempts to
understand things in the external world
but it is mathematical motivation for
thinking about the possibility of a
multiverse. Yes, I keep it in my toolkit
as an interesting possibility that you
break out when you don't have any other
way of describing what it is that you're
seeing. Yeah. Is that similar to how
string theory works though? Like I mean,
we were talking before about how string
theory is mathematically elegant and
makes sense of some phenomena that we
see like the graviton and this kind of
stuff, but we don't have any
experimental confirmation. the way that
you've just described the multiverse is
something you keep it in the back
pocket, but I don't think we have good
evidence to believe it's true.
Yeah. Are these sort of similar? I would
say it depends which pocket theory is
in. So yes, multiverse back pocket.
String theory is like right here, right?
And the reason and the reason for that
is to put quantum mechanics and general
relativity together. We know we've got
to do that and string theory does that.
You know, the idea that general
relativity, as we discussed, emerges
from string theory. It's a real powerful
way of thinking about why this theory
might be the way to put these two
together. It may be that general
relativity is intrinsically within
string theory from the get-go. And
there's another story just like that for
quantum physics within string theory.
So, that's why it's here. But yes, I
agree. That's your jacket pocket, not
the half. That's wrong. That's the
correct size. Yes, I did me in the jack
of pocket. Until you have experimental
evidence for mathematical ideas, they do
need to be viewed as provisional. But I
think I would put string theory one step
closer to connection with physics than
the general idea of a multiverse. 25
years ago, the elegant universe is
published, introducing a lot of people
uh for the first time to string theory.
How has your confidence in string theory
fluctuated since then? Yeah. So, look,
25 years ago, I would have thought that
the conversation we're having right now
would focus upon all the experiments
that have been done that connected to
some of the predictions of string
theory. Predictions about God. That's
right. That's right. you know,
predictions about super symmetric
particles and things like that. That
didn't happen. And yes, is that a
disappointment? I I'd have to say
honestly it is a
disappointment. But on the mathematical
front 25 years ago, if you ask me, will
we understand the fundamental exact
equations of string theory in any
domain? I say no. We'll only still have
approximate equations. We have exact
equations in particular domains right
now. Will we have a way of talking about
space and time in a radically new
language than Einstein's general theory
of relativity? I said, well, it' be
nice, but I I don't think we have that
language now that's emerging from these
studies. And I could go on and on with
the mathematical progress that exceeds
anything I would have imagined 25 years
ago. So that has certainly increased my
confidence in the capacity of these
ideas to really give us a rich
description of reality. But again, I
would have hoped that we would have the
observations that would at least
tentatively connect with some of the
ideas of string theory and that we've
not been able to do. It was going to
cancel out such that roughly speaking,
you're about as confident as you were
cuz it sort of sounds like string theory
is awesome and great, but like yeah, it
could be could be false. It's, as you
say, it's sort of in the jacket pocket.
Yeah. Is that where it was 25 years ago
as well? Well, again, I think part of it
is the psychological question of a
youthful physicist. Yeah. Looking at the
world as, you know, this
spectacular landscape of discovery
versus a somewhat, I'd like to think,
more mature perspective on reality,
which is a little bit more subdued. And
so yes, when you put those together, I
would say the level of confidence is
fairly close, but that's an amazing
thing in its own right. The fact that
these string theoretic ideas have been
subjected to an additional quarter
century of mathematical investigation by
some of the greatest minds that this
planet has ever produced. And I'm not
putting myself in that category. I'm
talking about string theorists as a
community. and the theory have stood up
to these mathematical assaults and has
yielded riches that are completely
unexpected and enormously gratifying.
That that is amazing. That is not
something that's minor. That is a major
step in the direction of developing an
idea that may well be the correct
description of reality. And if we wake
up tomorrow and discover that this is
the correct description of reality,
somebody has somehow experimentally
confirmed string
theory, what does that change? Does it
change much outside of just our
understanding? Hey, isn't that
interesting? Does it change the way that
I live my life? Does it change the the
clothes that I wear or what time of I I
get out of bed in the morning or
anything like that? It's always
difficult to answer a question like that
in real time. But I think quantum
mechanics gives us a beautiful case
study where we can look at it over a
longer stretch of time because if you
were talking to Erin Schroinger, Neil's
Boore right now it was 19 20 something
23 24 you say look if this quantum
mechanics thing pans out and it really
is experimentally confirmed will that
change my life will it change when I get
up in the morning? I think they would
have said, "Look, we're talking about
atoms and particles, and if that isn't
the kind of thing that determines how
you live your life, then probably
quantum mechanics will not have a big
impact on you." And yet, here we are
100red years later. And because of
quantum mechanics, we have been able to
control matter, harness matter on
microscopic scales, yielding the
integrated circuit, yielding all manner
of technological progress. The fact that
you have a cell phone, the fact that you
have a personal computer, the fact that
you have any kind of technological
device is because of the work of quantum
mechanics. So, has it affected how you
get up in the morning? Yeah. Now when
you say hey Siri 8:00 wakeup call that
is because of quantum mechanics
fundamentally speaking and so could the
same thing happen with string theory if
it's correct will we be able to harness
matter in new ways and do things that I
can't even imagine today yeah I can
imagine that possibility yeah that's
interesting people often probably
neglect to think about that when it
comes to the utility of of physics I
mean there's a big debate about how many
resources the government should put into
space travel or science or whatever. And
there is quite a myopic view that this
is not worth this particular project.
It's not worth this amount of time or
money to work out if you know this this
book is made of strings or particles.
Who cares? Forgetting that there are
always unforeseen consequences of these
physical theories. Yeah, absolutely. You
know, there's uh some calculations that
suggest, and it's pretty obvious if you
think about it, you know, a significant
fraction of the gross national product
of any
major nation on this planet can be
traced back to quantum physics. Mhm. And
so I don't like that as the main
motivation for doing science because it
then suggests that we should just do
applied physics applied because it seems
like that's the justification and the
motivation. Whereas even with quantum
mechanics, it was not applied physics
when people were developing Schroinger's
equation or Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle. It's the fundamental ideas
which later generations can take over
and then apply. So you don't start
applying, you start fundamental. But
yeah, can these ideas change how we
live? Absolutely. I wanted to ask you in
the time
remaining a a question which mystifies
me, which is what on earth the time
remaining
means. I I listen to people talk about
the discovery of particles and forces
and that somehow forces can express
themselves at fundamental levels as
particles. That to me seems kind of
strange that gravity can be a kind of
particle. But okay, I believe
you.
Time I just don't even know what it is.
I don't know if it's a if it's a force,
a particle, a substance. I don't know if
it exists.
when you think of time when you're
describing time to somebody just crudely
speaking what what image is in your head
like how are you conceiving of this
thing called time so the first thing I
should say is I also do not know what
time is and I don't think any of us do
is it something that we humans impose on
the external world just to organize our
perceptions into some coherent narrative
is time more than that is it
fundamentally stitched into the fabric
of reality ity. Are there realms of
reality where there is no conception of
time at all and it just exists in a way
that doesn't change in the manner that
we usually think of when we're talking
about dynamical changes through time? I
I don't know and nobody does. But how
then do I think about it? Pretty much
the way you think about it. I think of
time as something that allows for
change. Time is the environment within
which things can differ at one moment
versus another. And in fact, the way we
note that time has evolved is by
comparing things. Whether it's the
second hand on a clock, the readout on
your iPhone, or the color of my hair 25
years later compared to what it was when
I was much younger. That's how we mark
the passage of time by virtue of change.
But is time more than that? I don't
know. Well, most physical mathematical
calculations work in both directions,
right? Like if you take almost anything
and just reverse it as if time was going
backwards. It all works out the same.
So, it's very difficult to discover why
there is this arrow of time that that
takes us from from past to future. And
it feels like it does take us there. I
can get up and walk forward or back or I
can stand still, but I can't do that
with time. Even though I'm told time is
a dimension a bit like those other
spaces which I can I can manipulate. I I
find it impossible to to wrap my head
around. But also when somebody says
maybe time is just an illusion or
something we impose into the world, that
doesn't make sense to me either because
I think well to impose something is
something that's turned through time,
you know, and
so I don't I don't think I recognize
that possibility. The idea that that
that time is some kind of human
construction. Is is that what you were
sort of suggesting? It it it could well
be or it could be deeper. But the
problems that you're referring to are
real ones and we have made progress on
at least some of them. In terms of the
arrow of time, why does it seem to have
a direction when, as you rightly say,
the laws of physics as currently
constructed, they're agnostic between
what we call forward in time and
backward in time, they work in both
directions equally well. And we believe
it has to do with entropy, this idea of
disorder. And we believe that entropy
has this tendency to increase over time.
And we furthermore anticipate, we can't
prove that the big bang was a state of
incredibly low entropy, very high order.
And we have been living through the
degradation of that order for the last
13 billion years. So why when you drop a
glass and it
shatters, doesn't it unshatter? We
believe because the glass is carrying
forward that drive toward greater
disorder, it could unshhatter, at least
in principle. It's just so incredibly
unlikely because to go from disorder to
order is a very difficult maneuver. To
go from order to disorder, that's very
simple. Just drop the glass and it
shatters. And so that at least gives us
some insight into why there is this
direction to time. But if you step back
and say, but what about time itself?
Like why is there this thing called
time? And why is it different from
space? Why can we so freely navigate
through space? Left and right, back, it
doesn't matter. There's no constraint.
Why is there this constraint on time? I
can't really give you an answer to that
question. And you can conceive of space,
but you can't conceive of time in the
same way. It does make me wonder if
there is a similar kind of like
fine-tuning problem for time. Of course,
time ticks differently if you're near a
mass of gravity or if you're traveling
close to the speed of light, but
presumably there's some kind of like
ratio by which as the mass increases of
a gravitational object, the time
dilation increases. Yeah, we have a
formula for it. Presumably that is
something that you could also like tweak
in principle where as the mass
increases, you know, the time ticks
proportionally even more slowly than it
actually does right now. And so 1 - 2 GM
over C ^2 R. You I mean that's the we
actually have a formula for words out of
my mouth. That's right. Uh and and so I
suppose what I'm just wondering here is
when we talk about this like fine-tuning
argument for God's existence or like
multiverse type stuff, is time one of
those qualities? Because it seems to me
like unnatural to think of it in that
way because I think of time almost as if
almost as the space in which all of
that's happening. But is there also this
finetuning of the way that time works? I
think that gets closer to a
psychological question as opposed to a
scientific one in the sense of the
fundamental nature of time. I think we
beings have these structures and these
structures in our heads change on
certain time scales and those time
scales evolved and so were the mass of
Earth very different or if we were on
Miller's planet orbiting gargantua in a
black you know would it be perhaps that
we would evolve differently and our
sense of time would be different sure I
mean I mean to say that like the the
fact that if I so say say I
uh doubled say I'm orbiting a black hole
and I I then double the mass of the
black hole there will be some proportion
by which the time dilation increases I'm
imagining a world in which for that the
laws of physics are tweaked such that
when I double it time dilates in the
opposite direction let's say let's say
that when you go towards a a black hole
instead of time slowing down it speeds
up like I don't know if there's anything
in principle preventing the laws of
physics from having been that way but
presumably that would cause all kinds of
problems for the harmony of the universe
analogous to how if you turned up the
the strong nuclear force everything
would fall apart. Sure. I I think that's
absolutely true. But the one thing I
would emphasize is when it comes to
special relativity, time dilation, going
near the speed of light and time slowing
for you relative to somebody else or
general relativistic time dilation. You
go near a black hole and time elapses
slower for you than it does for somebody
far away. You don't notice that. Yeah.
Because it's time itself according to
these ideas that is slowing which means
that all physical processes that take
place in time slow down. So your watch
slows but your thoughts also slow. So
from your perspective nothing has
changed. And so yes could it be that you
would disrupt the structure of reality
if you had the qualities that you're
making reference to? Sure I can
certainly imagine that. But bear in
mind, it's not the individual that their
experience somehow changes. It's only by
comparison to two widely separated
individuals or widely differing in their
motion individuals where these
differences will emerge. The individual
doesn't realize it at all. Well, I do
seem to realize an increase in speed of
time when I'm having an enjoyable
conversation, and that is what has
happened over the past hour or so that
we've been talking. Brian Green, thank
you so much for taking the time. My
pleasure. If you enjoyed that
conversation, you might like my previous
episode with David Deutsch for more talk
on the multiverse. You can watch it by
clicking the link that's on your screen.
To support my work and get early adree
access to videos, subscribe to my
Substack at alexoconor.com.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in
the next