Most people think about cortisol as a
bad thing that you want less of. Is that
the right way to think about it?
&gt;&gt; Not at all. Cortisol has been labeled a
stress hormone and it is involved in
stress. We have a bout of stress. You
got a spike of cortisol so to speak. Um
cortisol like other steroid hormones is
bound to things and there's a a free
form of cortisol. That's the active one.
Um, you don't want your free unbound
cortisol to be chronically high. But we
need to really think about why it was
called a stress hormone in the first
place. And the main reason is cortisol's
job is to deploy energy sources for your
brain and body to be able to react to
things, think and move.
So cortisol naturally goes up a bit
during stress and it comes back again
provided you don't ruminate on that
stress too much on the stressor that is
the big eye opener for me was when I
actually went into the modern textbooks
on cortisol not the ones that most
medical students learn from but what the
endocrinologists the specialists really
learn from and what the circadian and
sleep biologists now understand which is
the reason you wake up every single
morning even if you have an alarm talk
is because of something called the
cortisol awakening response. So, if we
just step back from a a typical healthy
24 hours, it looks something like this.
Uh, a couple hours before sleep, your
cortisol is low. Your heart rate's low.
You're calm. Hopefully, it's dim in the
room. You go to sleep. Your cortisol is
then at its absolute lowest levels for
the entire 24 hours. And by the way,
this is the same time when melatonin,
the sleepy hormone, is at its highest
levels. After about four or five hours
of sleep and typically in that first
four or five hours of sleep is when you
get your most deep sleep, slowwave
sleep, non-REM sleep, many people
experience a transition into the sort of
last third of their sleep for the night
and they tend to wake up around that
time and often they use the restroom, go
back to sleep. Why did they wake up?
Well, it turns out that your cortisol is
starting to rise about twothirds of the
way through the night. I mean, it's
really creeping up throughout the entire
night, but it's gone from this nadier to
it's starting to climb. And then at some
point, let's assume you get back to
sleep or you slept through the night. At
some point, maybe 6:00 a.m., maybe 8:00
a.m., depends on who you are and what
your schedule is, you wake up. Maybe
your alarm clock goes off. You wake up.
You wake up because the cortisol level
reached a certain threshold. Is
literally the cortisol awakening
response. It is healthy. It is good. And
you if I were to measure your cortisol
at that moment and compare it to what
nor people might call like a stress
episode in the afternoon, you would say
it's much higher than what stress
induced. Okay. So then your cortisol
continues to rise and there's this
unique opportunity in the first hour,
maybe 90 minutes, but in the first hour
after waking where viewing bright light
can increase your morning cortisol
spike, as I'll refer to it, by up to
50%. Bright light can come from sunlight
ideally or from a bright artificial
light like a 10,000 lux artificial light
or even a very bright indoor artificial
LED or incandescent light. Okay, why is
this important? Well, we could explore
all the biology of cortisol and we can
summarize it by saying you have this
hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis that
sets off cortisol, self-regulates
negative feedback loop, etc., etc.
That's the normal regulation of
cortisol, which basically can be
summarized as it never allows you to
have your cortisol too high for too
long. It feeds back on itself and shuts
it down. However, in the first hour
after waking, your brain circadian clock
has a unique privileged pathway that is
separate from the HPA axis where it can
amplify cortisol only in that first
hour. So you say, why would that be?
This is nature's evolutionarily
hardwired mechanism for giving you the
opportunity to boost your cortisol so
that you have energy to lean into the
activities of your day. And when I say
energy, I'm not saying, you know, it's
not like we happen to be in California
at the moment, but not energy energy.
I'm talking about glucose mobilization.
If you're on a low carbohydrate diet,
you're going to you're going to mobilize
other energy sources. Your brain and
body wakes up because of cortisol. You
have the opportunity to boost that
wakefulness even further by viewing
bright light. Yes, you could exercise.
Yes, you could drink caffeine. Turns out
caffeine, if you're a chronic caffeine
user, such as me, such as you, doesn't
actually increase cortisol that much.
You could jump in a 40° Fahrenheit cold
plunge doesn't actually increase your
cortisol. All this nonsense going around
the internet about, you know, women
shouldn't do a cold plunge and if they
do, not as cold. Okay, maybe, but it's
always attributed to increases in
cortisol. Cold plunge reduces your
cortisol levels. You can look at the
data. The data show that it goes down.
Adrenaline goes up. Dopamine goes up.
Norepinephrine go up. So cortisol makes
you alert. It makes you focused. And
here's the key thing. Spiking your
cortisol in that first hour after waking
is so so important because that negative
feedback loop mechanism kicks in about 3
hours after you've been awake. And
that's why your cortisol then starts to
drop late morning, early afternoon,
later afternoon. And in the afternoon,
if you have a bout of stress, no
problem. you just have a little bit of
cortisol bump, adrenaline bump, and it
goes back down. If you don't spike your
morning cortisol, what ends up happening
is your cortisol system, essentially the
HPA axis, is primed for stress events to
give you big lasting increases in
cortisol later, which make it hard to
fall asleep, which make it hard to stay
asleep, which are part of the reason why
people have afternoon anxiety, all sorts
of things. So, you you're actually
supposed to feel a little stressed first
thing in the morning. This is normal.
This is healthy and it sets you up for
being more calm in the afternoon. Now,
none of this is tied to whether or not
you wake up at 8:00 a.m., 6:00 a.m.,
4:00 a.m., or 11:00 a.m. This is not
about chronoype. This is simply about
the first hour after waking, but after
about 90 minutes post waking, that
opportunity to spike your cortisol goes
away. So, if you can't view bright light
in the form of sunlight, get it from
artificial light. You would do well to
compound that with hydration, which by
the way, for reasons that still aren't
entirely understood, probably has to do
with some electrolyte balance, etc.
First thing in the day will also burst
your cortisol. If you can't get in
exercise right away, even just some
skipping rope, jumping jacks, this kind
of thing. Getting the body into a high
cortisol state early sets you up for
being in a low cortisol state in the
afternoon and evening. And any cortisol
that you might trigger through a stress
event will quickly subside unless you
what's called flatten your cortisol
curve by not spiking in the morning. And
and by the way, the the curve that I'm
describing high in the morning, lower
into the afternoon, low low as you get
into the first hours of sleep. This is
the healthy cortisol curve for men,
women, kids, pregnant women,
post-menopausal women. It tends to
flatten out a bit and they need to do
additional things to to get that spike
earlier. So, this is when I hear all
this stuff about don't coal plunge, it
increases, it doesn't increase cortisol.
And also, this notion that we're
supposed to avoid stress entirely. Not
true. You and I both generally agree on
that. But how you time your stress is
important. And the last point I'll make
is that if you were to do uh say a very
intense workout in the late afternoon,
evening, it's been demonstrated that
will triple or quadruple your baseline
cortisol levels for a few hours, not a
problem. You can take a hot shower
afterwards, do some slow breathing and
calm down, provided you didn't, you
know, fill up with caffeine prior, you
could probably fall asleep just fine.
But because you spiked your cortisol
late day, what you find is that the next
day cortisol is lower, which is one of
the not the only reason, but one of the
reasons why you're a bit more sluggish
the next morning. So, and this is why
people's if they exercise too late in
the day, their rhythm starts to shift.
When we talk about your circadian rhythm
shifting in response to light, it's the
cortisol peak that's shifting or
flattening,
which in turn adjusts your melatonin
peak and trough. But cortisol is the the
trigger.
&gt;&gt; Cortisol, think of it like the think
about this morning cortisol spike as the
first domino in establishing essentially
all the rhythms that you're interested
in if you want daytime mood, focus,
alertness, nighttime sleep. And so these
are things I've talked about for years
and that we've talked about for years,
but only recently has it become clear
exactly why cortisol is that first
domino in the chain. And we hear so
often about dopamine, epinephrine,
norepinephrine, all of which are
important, all downstream of of
cortisol. So chronically high cortisol,
Cushings disease, the things that give
people moon phase that cause memory
deficits, all these sorts of things,
that's when the cortisol curve is too
flat for too long, meaning too high in
the afternoon and evening. But there is
I won't say there's no upper limit to
how high cortisol can be in the morning.
There are people who have pathologically
high levels of cortisol in the first
hours of the day. Most people, even
people with Cushings, have
pathologically low cortisol early in the
day, pathologically high cortisol late
in the day.
&gt;&gt; They've inverted that.
&gt;&gt; That's right. And getting this curve
right is so critical. It predicts
longevity. It predicts recovery from
everything from chemotherapy to pain
relief. Uh you know, it's one of the
things that I'm You seem to be doing all
the right things. plus these sort of
outrageous uh outrageously um ambitious
health protocols as well. Although I
will commend you if you're going to
clean anything including your blood, I
do suggest doing in Austria or
Switzerland because those are very
clean.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful place to go and
&gt;&gt; Well, they're very clean countries.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh what about the relationship between
cortisol and burnout? Uh you know, you
talked about sustained chronically
elevated cortisol, but I've also heard
you talk about uh burnout as basically
being wrongly timed cortisol over time.
That's right. Stretched out. What What
have you come to learn about handling
burnout? Somebody feels that sense. Oh,
I feel like I'm sort of close to that.
What's going on? And and how can they
try to intervene in that? So, there seem
to be two general forms of burnout. One
is the I'm exhausted in the morning and
I just can't get into gear and then it's
like caffeine, caffeine, caffeine,
exhausted, exhaust. And then late day,
okay, finally, you know, the I caught
the wavefront and then I'm having
trouble sleeping and then the whole
thing repeats.
&gt;&gt; Wired but tired.
&gt;&gt; Wired but tired. The other form of
burnout is where people just it's like
their cortisol is like a square wave
function. Just up in the morning and all
day long. I It's sort of how I would
describe my graduate school years,
probably undergraduate graduate school
years, posttock, I think I hit a wall
during my posttock years. that was, you
know, uh that would be, uh, you know, 30
or 35. And then at some point, you
realize you just can't keep this going.
And I think most entrepreneurs feel that
way. At some point, you're just like, I
I can't do this. I mean, even the the
David Gogggins and the uh Cam Haynes is
they they they do sleep, right? They get
sleep eventually. So, I think the main
way to think about burnout and
exhaustion is to ask oneself, okay, if I
had total control, when would I
naturally wake up? When would I
naturally go to sleep? like what will be
my preferred times to do that? And then
whatever your wake up time is to really
treat that first three to six hours of
your day as go time and to do the things
bright light, hydration, exercise,
caffeine, etc. that really push you into
the day. But then really essentially
doing all the opposite things that you
do in the morning in the last ideally
four, but most people won't do that.
Last two hours of your day, dim the
lights, caffeine, forget it. They should
have halted that probably eight hours
before sleep. um limit your hydration,
right? Unless you're dehydrated, limit
your hydration. Um you know, long exhale
breathing, anything that can bring your
cortisol levels down and bring your
melatonin levels up, which is why we
we're so bullish about dimming the
lights later in the day. And you know,
we were talking about the red lens
glasses to block out shortwavelength
light, which by the way, a lot of people
um have said, well, you know, the
studies showing that screen light
disrupts sleep. Very variable between
people. People have different levels of
retinal sensitivity. So how how much
screen light will disrupt their sleep.
But it's not just about sleep. There's a
beautiful study published in Proceedings
in the National Academy of Sciences that
showed that people who sleep in a room
with an overhead light of 100 lux, which
is extremely dim, show abnormally
elevated morning glucose levels. Makes
perfect sense. Cortisol mobilizes
glucose. And this is through closed
eyelids. Okay? So you have to get the
light down to maybe one to three lux.
And you say one to three lux? Like it's
basically dark, dark, dark. a a candle
light very is very low. A bright full
moon where you say, "Oh, it's so bright
out." is actually only about 1 to five
lux. So, we think of these sources as
very bright, but nature set us up to
have bright mornings and dim dark
nights. And some people will say, "Well,
there's no light where I live." You
know, like, listen, you don't need to
see the sun as a as a delineated object.
If you compare how bright it is, let's
just say even in the dead of winter in
the UK at 9:00 a.m. walking uh in a
place with no artificial lighting
outside, no street lamps versus midnight
the night before in the same location,
you'd say you can navigate in the one
case without any artificial lighting,
without a what we call flashlight, you
call a torch. But in any case, the the
idea is that there's there are a lot of
photons coming through and you want all
of that early in the day and you just
want to do the inverse in the last part
of the day. So, I think to avoid
overwhelming people because people have
so much to do and think about, get the
first hour of your day right, get the
last hour of your day right, and you'll
greatly improve this morning cortisol
peak, late day cortisol reduction, which
is what you want, and you'll get your
natural clearing out of any melatonin
that happens to be in your system
because bright light quashes melatonin
through a different pathway, but that
also originates with the eyes, goes
through the superismatic nucleus and
couple other relays to your pineal,
shuts down melatonin production, And
then late in the day, you just make it
dimmer, darker, darker, darker, and you
bring up your melatonin, you bring down
your cortisol. But if you think about
what's happened with screens that it's
stimulating, I think late last night, I
made the mistake of I watched a extended
60 Minutes interview. I actually fell
asleep to it.
&gt;&gt; Is it the Petro one?
&gt;&gt; No, it was the Trump one.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; I was curious. I hadn't heard an
interview with him for a long time, and
it was it was sort of combative, but
there it was an interesting one, and I
was um curious to see how that would go.
and um I fell asleep in about the last
15 minutes, but that I wouldn't
recommend doing that. Normally, it would
be screens off in the last hour. I just,
you know, I got I got a little loose
with my protocols.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we've been I've seen you talking
about daylight savings, time changes,
and stuff like that.
&gt;&gt; This has been nearly a decade now since
uh Matthew Walker was first on Rogan. I
think it was near almost 10 years ago.
And I was still a club promoter at the
time. And up until then, I just assumed
that sleep was
&gt;&gt; it was just like this thing that got in
the way of me working. It was just this
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that was and honestly
&gt;&gt; when your 20s that's kind of true.
&gt;&gt; You're made of rubber and magic dude.
You know what I mean? Caffeine and big
dreams and cellar tape and cable ties.
You just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like strung together
with this stuff. Anyway, he came on and
&gt;&gt; basically did the scare them straight
equivalent. Do you ever have that in
school? Scare them straight. So they
bring a prison officer in and he tells
you about how horrible life is in
prison. All of the horror stories.
&gt;&gt; What how old are you when you
&gt;&gt; like 12, 13? And uh Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And he's saying, you know, they
put boiling water into um a cup and mix
loads of sugar in it and it's syrup and
they throw it on people and then they
have batteries and they put them in
socks and I remember he hit this sock
filled with batteries down on the table
and it made me jump and I was like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
like I really don't want to go to it.
Honestly, it worked for me my particular
psychological makeup that thing abs I
don't think I was the sort of person
that was probably going to go to jail
anyway. Um but yeah uh I learn sleep is
okay really really important. You've
been talking about daylight savings. The
more that I learn about it, the effects
of sleep deprivation are just
terrifying. It's just everything gets
broken. Yeah. I mean, sleep is the
ultimate reset. We could talk about some
of the newer data that point to exactly
why. I will say just, you know, for uh
people's peace of mind, if you don't
spike your cortisol for a couple days in
a row, you get one poor night's sleep
for a couple days in a row, you're going
to be fine. the the human body and brain
evolved under conditions that were
extreme, right? New parents will tell
you how difficult sleep can be. I mean,
you can pull it off. The the thing that
we call chronic stress is frankly when
that cortisol curve gets disrupted in
any number of ways, but typically it's
late day cortisol spikes that don't come
back down afterwards for three, four,
five days in a row. Your hippocampus,
this memory center in the brain, is
chalka block full of cortisol receptors.
And cortisol unlike adrenaline can pass
through the bloodb brain barrier. All
right? So it it has a number of docking
sites that allow it to engage the memory
system. You know what stress will engage
your memory system, but that over time
will start to deteriorate these
structures. So if somebody hasn't been
sleeping well, you know, I'm not just
saying this to make them feel better.
You don't want to send them into a
panic.
&gt;&gt; Um,
&gt;&gt; and all of these systems can be
recovered. Uh,
&gt;&gt; you know, when Matt went on Rogan, I
think it was an important like truly
important It was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'll say it was
seinal like he has saved that one
episode has probably saved
&gt;&gt; thousands of years if not hundreds of
thousands of years of combined human
life.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Oh, I agree. I mean I think that
the um the challenge and I think that
Matt would say this. I'm sort of
borrowing his words is that he
sufficiently scared everybody. There
were fewer things to offered to do to
promote good sleep at that time
&gt;&gt; and there were more of a lot of like
here's what happens if you don't sleep.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Yeah. The stress of trying to be
perfect will kill you more quickly than
your imperfections. That like
overoptimizer obsessor thing.
&gt;&gt; And you want to give people a sense of
of real agency, right? Yeah. Dimming the
lights if you're light sensitive in
particular and, you know, limiting
caffeine. I mean, all the things that
are sort of obvious to us now. The
morning sunlight thing, I think most
people don't tether to their sleep
because it's not obvious how doing
something in the first hour of your day
to be more alert and spike cortisol uh
creates a situation, you know, 14 hours
later where you are a better sleeper.
So, you know, over time, I mean, Matt's
started to adopt that. I mean, I think
he he also pointed out the detriments of
alcohol and cannabis on sleep, which I,
you know, which I echo. Um, I think also
if you think just back even 6 years, 7
years, we weren't aware of the number of
over-the-counter compounds that can be
helpful for sleep. You know, people were
still thinking about drugs, prescription
drugs for sleep, which, you know, have
their place for certain people, but most
people hadn't considered mag 3 and8,
theine, chamomile. Now, I would add to
that um saffron,
um tart cherry, we know can increase
&gt;&gt; epigenine,
&gt;&gt; epigenine and chamomile extract. Yeah,
similar um
&gt;&gt; lemon balm.
&gt;&gt; Lemon bomb, skull cap. You know, it
sounds kind of crazy, right? It sounds
like we're we're behind the counter at
some like amazing shop, right?
&gt;&gt; Eye of m and a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wizard tail.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Right. I mean, I didn't come
here to do an AGZ plug, but I basically
I've I've played around with a number of
different non-supplement things for
sleep over the years cuz I'm an
experimentter um in and out of the lab.
And um I mean I can tell you a wild
story from high school where the girl
sitting behind me, I remember her name,
it was Aaron Krenard. Um her her mom uh
had some tablets, some Chinese medicine
tablets, and I took one. She's cuz I was
having some issues sleeping and she gave
me one. And I the whole night I was wide
awake hearing music blaring from behind
my head and I think I was in a pseudo
sleep state.
&gt;&gt; Thought I was awake. I was like that's
really scary. But it I was like, "Wow,
there are compounds that really work for
for sleep." And then um you know there
are things like the the peptide pinealin
I experimented with a bit. Um not a not
a lot of human studies at all um some
interesting rodent studies may
regenerate the pineales in the in the
pineal it gives me like 2 hours a night
of REM sleep but I will say having
completely halted pineal and I did a
short run experiment with it. I will say
that the the formulation that's in AGZ
has me sleeping with double the amount
of REM sleep and at least a third more
slowwave deep sleep every night. And I
can only drink about 2/3 of that stuff
before it it's almost like too much. Not
because it's too much volume, but
because my any more in my drinks are
just too elaborate. And you know what's
magic about it? I think it's it has a
bunch of different things in it. So
again, I didn't come here to to plug
AGZ, but I think that they really nailed
it in the sense that in the last 10
years, the scientific community, the
health and wellness community has really
come to the conclusion that there are
things that can nudge your sleep in the
right direction. So just being told like
if you don't sleep, you're going to die
of dementia is scary. You want to give
people agency. In other news, if you're
feeling tired, you might not need more
sleep, you might not need more caffeine,
you might just be dehydrated. And proper
hydration is not just about drinking
enough water. It's about having
sufficient electrolytes to allow your
body to properly absorb those fluids.
Element contains a science-backed
electrolyte ratio. Sodium, potassium,
and magnesium with no color, no sugar,
no artificial ingredients or any other
BS. It plays a critical role in reducing
muscle cramps and fatigue. It optimizes
brain health. Regulates your appetite.
Helps curb cravings. And that's why it's
used by everyone from Dr. Andrew Hubman
to Olympic athletes and FBI sniper
teams. This lemon
Lemonade flavor in a cold glass of water
is how I've started my morning every
single week for years now. [laughter]
They've got no questions asked refund
policy. So, you can return it and they
won't even ask you to send the box back.
Plus, you can get a free sample pack of
their favorite flavors with your first
purchase by going to the link in the
description below or heading to
drinklement.com/modernwisdom.
There's no code.
I usually care about the box more than
that. drink
drinklement.com/modernwisdom.
What would you say to people who are
struggling to fall asleep that maybe
they've done most of the things sort of
through the day that you're supposed to?
They're not taking caffeine too late at
night. They're maybe having a hot
shower. The room's cool. It's quiet.
It's dark. They've seen some morning
sunlight. But calming down a racing mind
at night is a challenge that I think a
lot of hard charges will deal with.
&gt;&gt; What are some strategies for slowing
that down?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, one thing that I think is
really important is that if somebody's
very health conscious and a hard
charger, they're they're very likely
eating pretty clean. And one of the
challenges for many people, not all, uh
to falling asleep is that their starchy
carbohydrate intake is just not high
enough. you know, if you if you go on a
very low starch diet, like let's say you
just go, you know, meat, fruit,
vegetables, or you go pure keto, um
you'll have a lot more energy. Some
people who follow that kind of regimen
can sleep well. Some people like myself
find that unless I have some rice or
oatmeal at some point during the day,
especially if I'm doing resistance
training, it's actually very hard to
fall and stay deeply asleep. And if I
just add, you know, I guess you call it
porridge, we call it oatmeal. Um, but
have a a a small amount of starch in the
form of whatever starch is fine for you.
I I eat starches. I realize this is
heretical in the in the in the health
and wellness space, but um you'll have
some rice or some homemade pasta or some
sourdough bread or, you know, or oatmeal
or something. If you're having trouble
falling asleep, take a look at how much
starch you're having. I don't recommend
gorging yourself with starch late in the
day. But having some starchy
carbohydrates in your final meal, which
probably comes what 2, three hours
before sleep or something like that can
certainly help a number of people fall
and stay asleep. I've heard that many
times.
&gt;&gt; I certainly know I did meat and fruit as
a part of trying to fix my health
because u brain inflammation was really
high. I was getting a lot of brain fog,
memory loss. One of the things that I
found that could counteract that a
little bit was going very very low carb.
&gt;&gt; Mh. But that also impacted my sleep and
I felt wired but tired, very adrenaliney
all the time. Sure. Like sort of always
on as if I and my caffeine was limited
as well because I was trying to limit
stimulants and I always felt on edge
sort of ambient anxiety thing and it
impacted my sleep fragmentation was
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] horrendous and like well can I
have a rice cake or like two rice cakes
an hour before I go to bed to try and
sort of kink me into this a little bit
and experimented with a bunch of that.
Yeah, it's uh if you are carnivore, meat
and fruit, keto, um I wonder what the
net effect is when you account for
what's happening to sleep. And I'm sure
that many people can sleep well on low
carb of different stripes,
&gt;&gt; but
I I've one couldn't. And then I'm like
having to weigh this up like how how
many how much carbs can I have before
brain inflammation makes me feel a
little bit more slowation more tired and
I need to have some in order to make me
So that was a
&gt;&gt; yeah it becomes a little bit of a of a
devil's dance. I mean if we return to
our discussion about cortisol from
earlier cortisol's job is to deploy
energy into the body and for the brain
under conditions of stress or just
getting up in the morning. I mean the
transition from sleep to awake is a
massive state shift. It's a normal
healthy one, but it's a massive state
shift in terms of mobilization
requirements and thought requirements
and just the ability to linearize your
your thought, which is nerd speed for
the ability to think, not dream, right?
Or be unconscious essentially.
&gt;&gt; So, when you have low circulating
glucose or energy stores, cortisol's job
is to mobilize glucose. So, when you're
on a low carbohydrate diet, your
baseline cortisol is a little bit
higher. This actually has been examined.
Okay, so here's the deal. If you're on a
low carbohydrate diet for a period of
time, I think in this case it was 3
weeks or more, your cortisol curve that
high in the morning, low in the
afternoon and evening kind of normalizes
a bit. It's still a little bit higher at
every point than it normally would be.
But if you suddenly switch from eating
carbohydrates, when I say carbohydrates,
I mean starchy carbohydrates. Okay, well
let's leave aside sugar and fructose and
etc. which of course is a form of sugar.
But if you shift from a sort of standard
macronutrient distribution of you know
40 30 or whatever it is where you're
eating starches to a low carbohydrate
diet your cortisol levels go up
&gt;&gt; significantly. This has been explored
over time they normalize. So the I think
the important thing for people to
remember is when we talk about comfort
foods people have taken that that phrase
to mean uh junk foods pizza ice cream.
Uh-uh. Those aren't the comfort foods
that were originally described as
comfort foods. The comfort foods that
were coined comfort foods are starchy,
warm foods which guess what suppress
cortisol because when those foods are
available, your your brain and
essentially your adrenals know that you
don't have to mobilize from stored
sources. It's already circulating. So,
it makes perfect sense. So, I mean, this
is just one kind of uh you asked for
like what people could do. I think take
a look at your nutrition. Are you
exercising too late in the day? Can you
move that to the morning? Can you re You
never want to tell people reduce the
intensity because frankly, you know, as
Dorian Yates has been saying so
beautifully late uh lately, like reps in
reserve are results in reserve. You
know, we could talk about that. Uh um
but you know, I think most people are
probably not pushing hard enough, but
some people are just pushing way too
hard in the gym, way too late, and then
their cortisol levels are elevated.
Makes perfect sense why you couldn't
sleep. So, I would say look at look at
your diet. Make sure you're getting
enough starches at some point throughout
the day. maybe even taking in a few
starches in the couple of hours before
sleep and just see how your sleep does.
There's some interesting data although
you people should talk to their doctor
about taking very low dose 1 milligram
lithium uh I think it's the oritate form
um in order to encourage the ability to
fall asleep and get more deep sleep. But
of course we're talking about lithium
here. So people need definitely talk to
your doctor. Um there's some other
things too. you know, look at your
lighting environment, of course, but I
think for a lot of people, the major
issue with falling asleep is that they
can't forget about the position of their
body. And this is where the data becomes
super interesting. There are some
technologies that are being spun up
right now, some of which I've had the
opportunity to dabble with. Um, and I
have no financial relationship to, but I
sure wish I did because it is so cool.
Imagine a sleep mask that could put you
to sleep.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Okay. How would it do that? Well, it
turns out that eye movements are not
just present during rapid eye movement
sleep, but one of the prerequisites for
falling asleep is that you forget about
your body position. You're not like,
"Oh, this is uncomfortable. That doesn't
belong there." You shut down what's
called propriception, your awareness of
body position. So, there's actually some
interesting data and here I'm cluing
from a few places. I want to be fair
because what I'm about to say sounds
kind of kooky, but this works for many,
many people who are having trouble
falling asleep or getting back to sleep.
You can try this tonight. I do this
often. It works for me. You keep your
eyes closed or you close your eyes. You
move your eyes relatively slowly to one
side, then the other side, one side,
then the other side. Then you move your
eyes in a counterclockwise circle, and
then a clockwise circle, then up, then
down. And then you sort of do a kind of
faux crosseyed attempt. You sort of look
down towards the bridge of your nose and
you exhale, which is going to slow your
heart rate down. Now, what is all this
nonsense about eye movements? Did I just
do this as a joke to to uh see if you
would do it? The the truth is if you do
this when you're trying to fall asleep,
your vestibular system, which is
essentially in working in concert with
your eyes, uh, for reasons we could talk
about, but your cerebellum and your
vestibular system are essentially
transitioning from where you need to be
very aware of your body position and
make adjustments all the time to one in
which you're forgetting about body
position. And we know, and there are
great data showing that a very slow
rocking of a bed will help put you to
sleep. When you rock back and forth,
your body doesn't have like a little
metronome in it. It says, "I'm rocking."
It's your eye movements that compensate
in the opposite direction, which tell
your cerebellum, "Hey, we're rocking."
This is why if you're on a boat and this
and the horizon's going like this, your
cere you get seasick because you can't
orient to kind of dead zero for, you
know, pitch, yaw, and roll. And so,
anyway, I don't want to get too
technical here, but if you have trouble
sleeping, try what I just described a
few times. Many people find that it
helps them fall asleep.
because you stop thinking about your
body position.
&gt;&gt; And of course, bed coolness, room
coolness, all can help. But what I just
described can be very very helpful for a
number of people whose minds are racing
because if their mind is racing, you
also need need to give people something
to do with their mind. You can't just
say like don't think about it or stop
thinking or just go to sleep. That
doesn't work. You can say just wake up,
but you can't say just go to sleep.
There's a weird asymmetry built into our
autonomic nervous system that way.
&gt;&gt; It's so funny. Uh, two things that I
found because wide but tired has been
kind of the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] summary to the last
18 months for me uh fighting with the
health stuff. Uh, one from Matt which is
a mind walk. Do you take me through
this?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You go through a walk that you
you're very familiar with.
&gt;&gt; Has that been helpful?
&gt;&gt; Wonderful.
&gt;&gt; Oh, great.
&gt;&gt; One of the things that I found by doing
that uh so for the people that didn't
listen to the episode, they can go back
and listen to the one I did with Matt a
few months ago. Brilliant. Um, basically
you can imagine that you're going for a
walk somewhere that you know
unbelievably well and try and do it with
as much resolution as possible. So I go
to the cupboard. I open the cupboard
doors. I've got my shoes in there. I
take them out. It's my right hand that
reaches in. I put them on the floor. I
get the shoe horn. Everyone needs a shoe
horn. Left foot in. Right foot in. I get
the key. I know the sound of the key. I
close the doors. I turn around. I go
toward the door. I put it in. I turn it.
Like that's the feeling of the door. I
get outside. I feel a brush like all of
that stuff. Uh and what at least what I
found is when I'm falling asleep, the
sort of I'm on a journey, this is an
adventure thing is like reading fiction
and the I have problems to solve. This
is executive function is like reading
non-fiction. And for me, the former
helps me fall asleep way more than the
latter. So that's the first thing. The
second thing is resonance breathing. Uh,
I think this, if I was to pick, if I was
to flick a little bit of money onto the
roulette table of the next five years of
health, I think HRV resonance breathing
is going to be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] huge. Uh, and
there's a couple of products, one in
particular that I'm super super excited
about. It's this cool lamp. So, imagine
a a bedside lamp and on the top of it is
a little divot, like a little pocket,
and that's got a stone in it. You take
the stone out. The stone's got an FDA
HRV sensor. You just hold the stone in
your hand and you can either turn the
light of the lamp on or off and sounds
and all the rest of the stuff, but it
does 3 6 9 12 minute sessions with like
a super high fidelity sensor. And it
means if you're struggling to fall
asleep on a night time, you can just
sort of grab it, put it in your hand, do
the breathing based on a like a tactile
um vibration coming from the stone, too.
So, it can all be silent. So, if your
partner's in the bed next to you, you
can do that. And it knows when you hit
resonance as well when you get into that
maximum veagal tone and then you just
pop it back on the top and the top of it
is an induction charger for the stone. I
was like this is
&gt;&gt; the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sickest.
&gt;&gt; Who makes this?
&gt;&gt; It's a company called M Ohm. Uh it's
currently currently in dark mode I
think. M.alth.
&gt;&gt; Not anymore.
&gt;&gt; Uh well stole the world.
&gt;&gt; That's true. I don't even know if you
can buy I don't think you can buy them.
Um so but yeah Jay Wilds who's my sleep
coach from Absolute Rest. He's Andy
Galpins guy. Um Jay's a part of it and I
think I'm the first person outside of
the company to have got one and I was
like this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] rules because HRV
resonance breathing is great and makes
you feel really good. But if you're
going to use elite HRV and you've got to
put the like strap thing around your arm
or your wrist and then you got to press
it and you got to connect the Bluetooth
and it's got to be up to you and you got
your phone in front of you and all the
there's no just standalone pick it up
and go of this and the fact that it's a
lamp. It looks really beautiful. The un
all the rest of the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Anyway, uh
I've been using that. So between those
two, the mindwalk thing for me was was
very very powerful. Um but some days you
need a more like physiological
intervention
&gt;&gt; and uh the resonance breathing. Those
two things for me I think if I'm
struggling to fall asleep on a
nighttime. But the eye movement uh stuff
I think has got has got a lot of legs.
So So stack all of those together. I'm
going to be crosseyed imagining that I'm
going for a walk holding a stone in my
hand.
&gt;&gt; Excessively crosseyed. It's just more
like you sort of look it's like you're
sort of looking down and uh you know
there are these nuclei in the brain stem
that literally control levels of
wakefulness when you look up you it's
it's essentially activating the arm of
your autonomic nervous system which
makes you more alert is wild and eyelids
open. It's really interesting and and
when you look down and when and bring
your eyelids down you're act you're
actually pedaling on the on the circuits
that promote sleepiness or at least that
are more parasympathetic. I mean, it
makes it makes good sense.
&gt;&gt; In other news, I've been drinking AG1
every morning for years now. Dude, you
tried to fast ball me that. That was
down the plate and I've just show Otani.
I've been drinking AG1 for as long as I
can remember. It is the best all-in-one
drink that I've ever found and that's
why I'm such a fan of them and that's
why I partnered with them as well. I
have got my mom to start taking it, my
dad to start taking it, and all of my
friends as well. And if I found anything
better, I would switch. But I haven't.
Why do you keep throwing it at the mic?
Stop throwing at the mic. See? Anyway,
uh over 75 vitamins, minerals, and whole
food source ingredients. Got probiotics
and prebiotics. Also NSF certified,
meaning that even Olympians can use it.
And
in the throat. In the throat. How dare
you?
&gt;&gt; I hit the
[laughter]
I hit the
&gt;&gt; Ah.
Ah. This isn't even an ad read anymore.
It's just a war zone. Oh, okay. Okay.
Anyway, if you too want something to
throw at your friends or a tasty uh
blend of
75 vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and
whole food sourced ingredients designed
to drink first thing in the morning in
one scoop, it's here. Go to
drink1.com/modern wisdom
for stuff.
Thank you. Talk to me about this uh
raised head for glimpyatic clearance
thing cuz I've if you if anyone's got an
eight sleep with the mattress raising
functionality. One of the things it does
for sleep is it actually raises your
head a little bit. Is that
&gt;&gt; that's good
&gt;&gt; related to what we're talking about
here. You want head above feet. Head
&gt;&gt; I think they designed that for um for
snoring but it has other other benefits.
So um without doing an entire lecture on
the lymphatic system because we did a
solo on that recently in my podcast. I
mean, I'll just say the lymphatic system
is amazing. It's amazing. And I I liken
it to the microbiome where 10 years ago,
15 years ago, if you talked about the
microbiome, people were like, "That's
just crazy." Like fermented low sugar
foods, like this is like health food
lunacy. Now, I mean, they're probably
close to, you know, maybe 500 million or
a billion dollars even in federal
grants. Certainly in the US and around
the world looking at the microbiome,
it's important for everything. Mental
health, physical health, we just know
this, right? The gut is so important.
The lymphatic system, I think, is going
to follow a similar trajectory. And all
the stuff that we hear about rebounding,
you know, bouncing on a trampoline or
skipping rope and all of that stuff
turns out to be absolutely true. Or
lymphatic massage, which is essentially
a way of clearing the
&gt;&gt; I love lymphatic massage.
&gt;&gt; You know, it's interesting because
lymphatic massage for those that are
accustomed to deep tissue massage.
&gt;&gt; Feels like nothing.
&gt;&gt; It feels like nothing. But the lymphatic
the lymphatic vessels run so
superficially that if you press on them
too hard, you actually you you cinch
them off.
&gt;&gt; It feels like you're being stroked by
somebody. Yeah. So, I think they talk
about a light brushing and then that,
you know, maybe a little bit more
motion. There are deeper lymphatic
vessels that can take more pressure, but
people who are trained to do this do it
right. And there's some tutorials online
that there's a a a great account. I
don't know the guy, but he was referred
to me by uh Kelly Starret tells me the
the um stop chasing pain guy. He has
this big six. I don't want to describe
them here because I'll get them wrong,
but he has a number of videos on
Instagram and YouTube. The big six
describes ways that you can encourage
lymphatic massage. I always thought that
the the tapping here was kind of silly.
It's actually because the the lymphatic
ducts drain back into the um essentially
dump all the lymph that's been surveiled
by your immune system etc. uh back into
the the vascular system just below your
clavicles. Oh,
&gt;&gt; funny.
&gt;&gt; And as another point, then we'll get to
glimp clearance.
&gt;&gt; Um I gave a a shout out to someone I've
never met, don't have any association
with um you know, business-wise or
anything. This Anastasia beauty fascia
is this woman I think of Middle Eastern,
excuse me, is this woman of Eastern
European. um certainly not Middle
Eastern uh uh appearing of Eastern
European um origin talking about
non-surgical
non Botox
um interventions for facial um
augmentation you know for for you know
higher cheekbones and clearing away
puffy puffiness underneath the eyes for
men and for women but mostly what you
see there are women but what you find is
that the before and afters that these
people list off and they insist that I
think they take an oath or something
that they're not doing any injectables
or surgeries are striking and it's
lymphatic drainage from the face and
from the scalp and from uh around the
jaw and you go this is I mean it is
unbelievable okay so in any case the
glimpmphatic system
&gt;&gt; is glimpymphatic lymphatic is it the
same thing
&gt;&gt; so they're they're analogous so for many
many years it was thought that there was
no lymphat lymphatic system in the brain
it was thought that it was actually for
many years we thought that the brain was
immune privilege turns out that's not
true you have all sorts of immune genes
and proteins in the brain But it turns
out and this was discovered some years
ago 2012. It was actually discovered
prior but as science goes it was kind of
suppressed and then it was finally
discovered that the during sleep in
particular deep sleep the story goes the
spaces around the vascule of the brain
get bigger. Okay you have these little
cell types in the brain called
aststerytes. They're among the different
types of ga and they have these little N
feet and they literally push the brain
tissue out and away from the arteries
and vessels and capillaries allowing
more cerebral spinal fluid which is
circulating in your brain all day long
and collecting the waste from your
cells. And mind you, there's a lot of
waste from your brain cells because your
brain is the most metabolically active
organ. And then that needs to get washed
out and actually goes out near the
surface of your brain underneath what's
called the meningis. And then it flows
down and then and then drains into the
vascular system.
If people can remember nothing else
about lymphatic drains, remember this.
Muscular movement
clears lymph in the body. Okay? So, you
need to walk low-level muscular
contraction. It, you know, essentially
moves the the lymph up because it's
fighting gravity. These are one-way
valves. It brings it in from your limbs
and it essentially dumps it back
eventually into the blood supply.
Inactivity of the body is what drives
glimpmphatic clearance in the brain. now
and and so it's when you're essentially
immobilized during sleep that you get
the maximum amount of lymphatic
clearance. Sleeping on your side, right
or left side doesn't seem to matter with
the head slightly tilted does seem to be
the preferable position. So all you back
sleepers like me, you know, some people
um
&gt;&gt; you're a back sleeper.
&gt;&gt; I have been a back sleeper
&gt;&gt; with that neck,
&gt;&gt; huh?
&gt;&gt; With that neck?
&gt;&gt; Unless I'm spooning. I'm I'm a back
sleeper. Yeah, yeah, I'm a back sleeper.
So, um, but I've I've been working on
sleeping on my side and I heard actually
maybe Andy Galbin's involved in some
studies where subjects wear a fanny pack
so that they can't sleep on their back.
They have to sleep on their side.
&gt;&gt; He sent me from Absolute Rest this huge
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] off roll thing which looks like
soft furnishing couch.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I mean, this was it it's a
big roll that goes down the middle of
your back. So, there's no way that you
can be on your back at all. So that's
more
&gt;&gt; calling it a fanny pack or a bum bag is
a wild disservice to how like colossal
this thing is. It's a
&gt;&gt; you're just going to have to hire
somebody to spoon you, Chris. It just
means that you'll have to give into
&gt;&gt; I mean it's interesting that you
mentioned that [laughter] you sleep well
on your side because your own hubman
sleep doll.
&gt;&gt; Uh I like I like sleeping on my side. Um
and it does feel good to to uh hold
somebody. Um, I suppose if you're a back
sleeper, you know, I I do use the nasal
strips to open up my breathing.
&gt;&gt; Have you tried intake? What do you use?
&gt;&gt; I just I order some nose strips that
online I
&gt;&gt; Let me Allow me to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fix your nose
strip problem. Everyone has a nose strip
problem if they're not using it. So,
these guys, they've got patents on it.
Uh, instead of it being a flexible
disposable thing, this is a hard 3D
printed piece of plastic that's got
magnets attached on both sides and then
you put two magnet patches on the skin
of your nose and then you
&gt;&gt; But no magnets up my nose.
&gt;&gt; No, it's all on the outside. So, two
patches on the outside and then you snap
this non-disposable thing on and it's
I'm not kidding. It must be three times,
four times, five times stronger than the
normal ones. And that's like [snorts]
&gt;&gt; great. Yeah, because I have pretty good
um respiration through my nose, but
years ago I stupid accident actually in
a lab and I cracked a sinus stood up,
hit a freezer door and it was a there's
a whole story there sometime when you
talk about over not beers since neither
of us drink. Do you drink?
&gt;&gt; Uh intermittently. When did I have I had
beers recently. When did I have beers?
After the show. Thank you. I had beers
after No shame in that. I I haven't had
alcohol in a long time. But um but we
could talk about some of the you know uh
sto injury stories are always fun um
offline but um yeah I think that for
glimpymphatic clearance that the data
are very clear that you want to if you
can sleep on your side you're still
going to get glimpy clearance if you
sleep on your back have your head
slightly elevated not too much but keep
in mind that you know your body is
fighting the the lymphatic clearance in
your legs is fighting gravity so in
theory you want to be if you want to be
super a little bit bo but not too much
Right now, what we do know is that if
you sleep in a chair, these studies have
been done in various sleep labs. If you
sleep in a chair like on a on a flight
or something like that, you would think,
well, you must get a lot more um
glimpmphatic clearance. And you you
probably do, but you probably get a lot
more uh lack of lymphatic drainage from
the body. So, there's some really nice
pictures in in these studies. Every
mammal, it seems, puts its head down to
sleep. I think giraffes actually just
kind of like drop their forehead onto
the ground. Um, but there are no animal
no mammals that and someone will
probably tell me I'm wrong here and
they'll I'd love to see see the examples
because I love animals. But, um, the
argument that's been made in these in
these papers is that every mammal puts
its head down to sleep. And if you think
about take a picture of yourself
sometime before sleep and after sleep or
worse, take a picture of yourself after
one really terrible night's sleep. Just
look at your face. A couple of things
become clear. You look blo you'll look
bloated. the bags under people's eyes,
that's buildup of lymph,
&gt;&gt; okay? It's, you know, a couple hours
later that that's what that is. It's
buildup of lymph, which is why this
anesthesia beauty fascia thing is about
learning to kind of increase the portals
for lymphatic drainage. And it has a lot
to do with the fascia because um they
run so closely together. They of course
the vessels of course at different
depths relative to the fascia. But so
that's a lot of what um lymphatic
drainage for for aesthetics is. But um
look at yourself after after sleep. Your
brain fog, the the brain fog you feel
after lack of sleep, the buildup of crap
and is is within the cerebral spinal
fluid. It's all the ammonia, the carbon
dioxide, all the some protein fragments
that have built up during the day. And
the more active you are with your brain,
the more they build up and the more they
need to be cleared out at night. So it's
and then what's in equally impressive if
you ask me is take a look at that
picture of yourself sleepd deprived. You
get a good night's sleep the next night,
take a picture of yourself the next
morning, you look like a completely
different person, including the the
brightness of the eyes. So, it turns out
around the iris of your eye, that black
dot in the middle and and around it, you
can actually see when people haven't
slept well, there's actually a change in
color of the eyes that has to do with
the accumulation of lymph in the
anterior chamber of the eye. And the
posterior chamber of the eye, which is
where the light sensing tissue is, the
retina, actually shares the same
glimpmphatic clearance system as your
brain. And by the way, everything I'm
talking about for brain, for lymphatic
clearance, is true for spinal cord, too.
So for all this stuff about motor
learning and people are so concerned
about their spinal cord, all the
athletes are thinking, "Yeah, I need a
brain, but mostly need a spinal cord."
Just kidding. But you need both. But the
idea here is that when people look
tired, the eyes look tired. It's not
just in the eyelids being hooded. The
eyes look glassy. They don't look quite
right. and then they they sleep well and
their life comes back in the eyes. It's
because they've cleared the lymph from
their eyes.
&gt;&gt; Who knew that the ultimate looks maxing
solution was to just get a better
night's sleep and raise your head a bit,
&gt;&gt; right? Well, I think
&gt;&gt; is a pillow enough or
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. You don't have to. It's not
too much. What you don't want is your
head tilted back. And that's also of
course a risk for apnea, right? I mean,
this is, you know, why all the
bodybuilders and big guys drop dead in
their sleep, you know, often is because
of just basically esphyxiating
themselves. So, I do think fixing
snoring is important. Um, the nose
strips sound great. These nose magnets.
&gt;&gt; I'm about to try a uh mandibular device.
You like a special mouth guard to try
and adjust. Uh,
&gt;&gt; do you have apnea
&gt;&gt; a little? Yeah, it's remind induced
apnea. So, it only happens in
&gt;&gt; you and I should take a trip up to
Stanford um together. Seriously, that
there's a couple up there um Paul Erlick
who wrote the population bomb many years
ago. I think he would say it probably
didn't pan out. But and um and Sandra
Khan who's um uh I think is in cranial
facial surgery or orthodontics or
something. They were the ones that wrote
the book Jaws, not the Jaws with forward
by Robert Seapolski. Um Jared Diamond I
think wrote wrote the introduction.
These are heavy hitter serious science
academics and they were the ones that
talked about the you know the transition
to to soft foods to packet based foods
to baby food has created this kind of
massive explosion in the industry for
orthodontics and um
&gt;&gt; so was Nester's work downstream from
them James Nester's
&gt;&gt; yes yeah Nester's kind of the his book
was kind of the modern iteration of a
lot of what they were saying but you
know they are I think they're coming out
with another book that's really pushing
this thing that the nasal breathing
thing is real. The ability to I I can't
quite do this, but can you close your
mouth and put your entire tongue on the
roof of your mouth without having to
kind of curl it back behind your teeth?
Is there space for your tongue on the
roof?
&gt;&gt; A little my pallet I could do with a bit
of expansion because I had
&gt;&gt; six teeth removed as a kid.
&gt;&gt; Like four from the top and two from the
bottom, I think. So, I mean, Max, who
isn't here, uh uh my videographer
had uh really he's going through two or
three really serious dental procedures
and with one of them, he was trying to
do it through Invisalign, and it was a
slow pallet expander. Invisalign do a
pallet expander now. He's like, "Dude,
this is going to take like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] three
years for me to do this, but they can do
it a little bit more aggressively."
Sounds like he's a kind of extreme case
cuz Khan and and Erlic have this
association with um you know the the
mewing guy, you know.
&gt;&gt; Is that true? Is that real?
&gt;&gt; Well, the mewing thing is is it plays
into this notion of of getting your
nasal breathing right? It's like you
know close your you know like like close
your put your tongue on the roof of your
mouth and then can you swallow while you
know pushing the I'm describing this you
know coarsely you know that the problem
is you know anytime you get a figure
like that and I've never met him. I
think his name is Mike MW, right? Um MW
um anytime you get somebody who's
extreme off of the the normal thrust of
of a one branch of medicine, it's that
person um is either going to be
ostracized or they're going to have to
go through some serious gymnastics to
get acceptance. Look, my colleague David
&gt;&gt; Spiegel,
vice chair of psychiatry at uh at
Stanford, right? Very serious scientist,
clinician. His father and him developed
hypnosis as a tool for pain management,
smoking sessation, anxiety, even people
going through chemotherapy. And the data
are beautiful. They had
&gt;&gt; 25% of people that do hypnosis for
smoking sessation have it in one session
for life.
&gt;&gt; It's amazing. I mean, it's a brain
plasticity accelerator. But had it not
been David, right, who's um very
thoughtful in how he approaches these
discussions, how he frames it with
science, how he explains what's going on
and just his like and I'm not saying MW
isn't isn't this way? I don't know him.
Haven't haven't met him although I've
read some of his work, you know, but
David has a special gift of the ability
to frame what for many people be like
hypnosis, are you kidding me? As a brain
plasticity accelerator,
&gt;&gt; gentle convincing demeanor in David.
&gt;&gt; Yes. and also broad training in all of
psychiatry and in acceptance of other
branches of medicine. He's not saying
this is the way and this is the only way
and there's this problem with my
tribalism. I'm here to fix the field.
No, he's he's saying here here's one
tool in the toolkit and there are other
tools in the toolkit. He's also and
again I'm not saying anything about MW
in uh tacitly here. David Spiegel is
exceedingly smart. Like he he's he's on
a whole other level of intellect and yet
he doesn't talk over anybody. He's
extremely kind. So, you know, bedside
manner and how you bring your stuff
forward is very key,
&gt;&gt; especially if you're going to be a uh
revolutionary or somebody that's at the
sort of cutting edge, cutting frontier
of this stuff. No, I I I agree. I um
I've been thinking about this a lot this
year. What do we need to know about the
neuroscience of making habit setting
more easy? I imagine that there must be
some really interesting
&gt;&gt; Oh, man. [clears throat]
Uh, I just had James Clear on the
podcast and it's so interesting when you
sit down with somebody who's like the
habits guy.
Um, and you compare it against the
neuroscience and and so there there's
sort of two ways into this. Um, you
know, and James has done a magnificent
job of explaining things that people can
do to improve their habits and reduce
bad habits. The reason I'm so bullish
about people understanding a little bit
of mechanism behind the the checklist of
things to do is that I do think that
when people understand mechanism, it
gives them flexibility over the
so-called protocols. And I think it also
allows them to customize those things
for themselves. Let's face it, if you
want to go online now and just say,
"What are the top 10 things I can do to
improve my sleep?" And you get a list,
you put those on your refrigerator, put
them next to your bed. Why doesn't
everyone just do that? Yep. It's because
the the way that people go about
learning information strongly drives
whether or not they apply that
information.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, in fairness to to to James and
and the incredible work that he's done,
I'm going to just kind of look at this a
little bit through the lens of
neuroscience. And I'm really glad that
we're we're talking about this because
um one of the things that he said that I
think is so so true is that the thoughts
and by extension the emotions but really
the thoughts that you have right now
your ability to focus right now is
strongly driven by the inputs you
received in the preceding hours and even
days. So one of the things that's really
interesting about focus and attention
and a lot of habits have to do with I
don't want to procrastinate, I want to
do this. We can talk about exercise, but
let's talk about cognitive stuff.
It's very very clear that if you have a
hard time getting into a bout of work or
even um staying focused, there's a
there's a very good chance I believe
that your breaks between work and what
you were doing before work was too
stimulating. I'm a big advocator for
boring breaks and I'm a big advocator
for silence before and after bouts of
work for a couple of reasons. Let's
think about on the back end. Let's say
you're trying to learn something or read
a book or just do something that you
you're not reflexively doing. You want
to create this habit. It's very clear
that neuroplasticity, yes, requires
alertness, requires focus. You need
sleep later that night. I've been
beating that drum for a number of years.
It's also clear that reflection on what
you were doing at some later time, just
kind of like post-arning reflection,
walking to your car, sitting on the
plane for a second, thinking about a
podcast you did earlier or something you
heard or a discussion strongly
reinforces the memories and the ability
to work with the memories of new
information. And this is something that
we've given up largely because of our
smartphones. You're constantly bringing
in new sensory information. all the
data. I did an episode on how to best
study and learn. I went to the data to
find out because I have my methods, but
that doesn't mean they're the best best
methods. Reading, rereading,
note-taking, highlighting, it's all
fine. But it turns out the biggest lever
is to self- test at some point away from
the material. So testing is not just
something for evaluation of others. It's
a way that we should think, you know,
yeah, how much can I remember about that
conversation? What was tricky? Okay, I
don't remember that piece. I'm going to
go back and look it up. All learning is,
and this will sound like a giant duh,
but all learning is anti-forgetting. How
do we know this? Because if you have
people read a passage one, two, three,
four, five times versus one time and
they self- test. One time in self-
testing significantly better.
&gt;&gt; You ever had Peter C. Brown on the show?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Author of Make It Stick.
&gt;&gt; No, but I like the the title.
&gt;&gt; You need to bring Peter on. Peter was
episode I would guess like 30 on Modern
Wisdom. You'll be a,030. Um, and the
best synopsis that I got from him,
learning how to learn was learning is
repeated recall, not repeated exposure.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Beautiful. Right.
&gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] money.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; And that's that's the
&gt;&gt; exactly. And and this house forgetting
curve. That's
&gt;&gt; guys like him, guys like James Clear,
they have a real When I say unconscious
genius, I mean clearly they put thought
into and structure into what they teach.
But the neuroscience supports everything
you just said, which is what he just
said. And reflecting on what you were
trying to do or learn or solve, even if
you don't remember, even if you're still
puzzled by it, is so vitally important
to the anti-forgetting process. Okay.
Now, in terms of actually being able to
focus, actually being able to do work,
it's so clear that thoughts, and this is
the beautiful statements and work of a
woman named Jenny Gro, who's it's
spelled gr
at Duke University who's a
neuroscientist been studying sensor
sensory integration for a long time. You
know, I I've long thought about and I
think we now understand as a field what
sensations are. So sensations are the
physical stimula in the environment,
photons of light, mechanical pressure,
odor, volatile odorants in the
environment that lead to, you know,
sight, touch, smell, etc. How that gets
converted into chemical and electrical
signals in the brain, we understand as a
field. We understand sensation. We
understand perception. Perception is
which of those sensations you happen to
be paying attention to. Okay? We
understand emotions now more as a subset
of something that we think of more
broadly as states that are set by your
autonomic nervous system. how alert you
are, how not alert you are, and then
emotions are kind of layered on top of
that, right? Lisa Feldman Barrett has
beautiful descriptions of these and so
on. And there's some debate about what
emotions really are, but we we know what
they are neurobiologically and
psychologically and behaviors. We know
what they are, right? There's a
behavior, and then there's the don't go
behaviors, the suppression of behavior,
and then there are memories, right? But
for the longest time, it's been unclear
what are thoughts like like what are
they? Are they just like spontaneous
geysering up of of of memories or like
what's going on there? And Jenny Grow, I
think, has the absolute best description
of these. If and and this is based on
experimentation. If we seed some idea,
so let's say I say to you, let's not
talk about cats cuz I'm a dog person,
but I say, "Okay, okay, Chris, um, and
this isn't a trick question, I promise,
cuz it's always weird when people start
doing this. I'm not Oz Pearlman or
something. I'm not going to like tell
you your pin pin code." Um,
[clears throat]
think think about a dog. Okay. Um, what
kind of dog [clears throat] is it?
&gt;&gt; Golden retriever.
&gt;&gt; Golden retriever. Okay. So, as you think
about the golden retriever, like what
other
things come to mind about the golden
retriever?
&gt;&gt; It's got a little necker chief on.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Rednecker chief.
&gt;&gt; Great. Rednecker Chief. Uh, like what
else about Golden Retriever?
&gt;&gt; Fluffy.
&gt;&gt; Fluffy. Okay. So, there's a a tactile
thing. Okay. Um, anything else about
Golden Retrievers? This is very specific
to you.
&gt;&gt; Bouncing up and down, rolling on its
back, smells a little bit, but I like
it.
&gt;&gt; Great. Okay. So, there's a I like it.
You like that? Okay. So, Jenny grows and
others data point to the fact that
thoughts basically start with some seed
element, some noun, some pronoun, some
thing, some event. And then what the
brain does is it is essentially starts
to call on more and more sensations and
starts layering those in more and more
prior sensory events. It's red
handkerchief. Okay, Brandon, it's
fluffy. There's a tactile. And that
thoughts really are the layering on of
more and more sensory memories. And
thoughts are really a layering of the
senses in in abstract thought space.
Now, this is not meant to, you know,
make something from nothing. But it's so
important that we understand this
because you think what is the ability to
think? Well, the ability to think is is
constrained by the number of different
senses I'm trying to place on a bunch of
different things. And so that's what
that's how we navigate through
environments, which is what Jenny Gro's
main work is about. How you find
yourself in space. I can't look at
everything in this garage. I have to
focus on certain things. Find the
Phillips head screwdriver. Go over
there. And you're discarding all the
other information. Now, when you think
about sitting down to do work or to
learn something, prepare a podcast. It
is so important that you limit the
number of sensory inputs coming in not
just during that event but before
because the sensory um stimulus that
kind of sets off this cascade of
layering in more and more sensory
memories and understanding is begun
before you sit down to read your book.
This is why you read a portion of a book
and then like wait I I wasn't even
paying attention. You your brain is
still working with the sensory inputs
from before. It's not thinking about
them consciously. So this is vitally
important. If you go back and you look
at the history of attention and thinking
and I have you can find these incredible
pictures that they would give kids who
had trouble probably had ADHD or just
kind of rambunctious boys in most cases
and they literally gave them helmets
with two eyeholes so they couldn't look
at anything else. I couldn't hear anyone
else right used to be you know kid with
the hoodie on and the and the cap and
you and you'd write. Now what have we
done? The challenge is that we've
brought an infinite number of sensory
experiences into the thing that you're
looking at. Oh wow.
&gt;&gt; So we've cons we brought the we brought
all the sensory inputs through the
device that you're holding.
&gt;&gt; So the narrowing of your perspective
hasn't helped you to narrow the
distractions.
&gt;&gt; That's right. Cognitive space is still
infinite even though your spatial the
spatial limitation of where you're
placing your attention is very
restricted. So the fact that you have so
many competing thoughts has everything
to do with that and it also has
everything to do with what you were
doing in the 10 or 15 minutes before you
sat down to try to work. Now, in China,
they're doing some very interesting
experiments of having kids stale stare
literally at a at a focal point on the
wall for a number of minutes before
beginning their work. Sounds a little
extreme, a little military, but one
thing that I've been doing before I
prepare to do any writing, any
podcasting, any work, is I I try and
make myself as bored as possible. I try
and remove as much sensory input as
possible. I might think about my
breathing because it's hard to not think
about anything, but I really have
started to limit the amount of sensory
information coming into my space. I have
an entire floor of where I live now. I
live in kind of an odd structure now,
but uh the entire bottom floor is a no
phone zone. Once or twice I brought my
phone down there, but it's a no phone
zone. I'm going down the stairs, there
are no phones in there.
&gt;&gt; I'm trying to figure out how I can have
no internet there. I have this little
tent sauna that I use now with with
incandescent lights that I love because
I couldn't use my my barrel sauna where
I was at. It's a I think it's sauna
space. Makes these incredible. I like
them because they they get hot right
away and it's got the red light. I go in
there, it's in a in a it's it's grounded
and there's no Wi-Fi in there. The phone
goes dead the moment you go in there.
&gt;&gt; So, you're in a mini Faraday case.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I don't like bringing the
phone into the store.
&gt;&gt; Are you in the same place that I went to
or is this a new one now?
&gt;&gt; No. So, I actually converted a art
gallery into a living space. I've always
wanted to do this. So, now I have my No,
it's not the same space. I have my gym.
I've got an upstairs loft where where I
live. And then the downstairs is a is a
work space. I have I have an octopus
now. I have a tank with an octopus in
it. Although, it's a bit shy. So, I'm
probably going to
&gt;&gt; You're becoming increasingly esoteric.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Um anyway, uh and I have my my discus
fish and my gym and my uh been doing all
the illustrations for my books. I spent
a lot of time drawing down in the
basement. I mean, I've always wanted to
do this at some point. I was like, yeah,
you have to live in an art gallery at
some point if if you're able. Um you
know, and um and okay, so but that's my
unique kind of weird space, but doesn't
matter if you're in an empty box. If you
are not good at at clearing the slate
before you try and focus, you're going
to have a very hard time for
understandable reasons. In fact, I'm
amazed that anyone can think at all. I'm
amazed that anyone can focus at all. I
don't believe everyone has ADHD. I think
we've just not understood what thoughts
are built up from. And once you
understand, you go, "Oh, yeah, it makes
perfect sense. Am I supposed to walk
around with my eyes closed and not take
in any sensory input?" No. But am I
supposed to take in an infinite number
of novel items through this device? In
fact, Mike Easter, the author of The
Comfort Crisis, told me something super
scary
&gt;&gt; when he came on the podcast. He said
that the person who developed
these um algorith uh the people, excuse
me, who developed the algorithms for
social media um borrowed heavily from
the casinos. And I didn't realize that
some years ago slot machines were like a
small fraction of the total casino
income, maybe like 10 20%. Now it's 80%.
And it was one guy who watched his kid
playing video games who realized that
the kids would play video games for
hours and hours and hours and what they
were playing for was novelty. And so
they switched the slot machines in
casinos on his suggestion to instead of
just spooling numbers and fruit or
whatever it was because they're now
electronic, you can get a near infinite
number of combinations of of novel
items. And people will play while losing
for novelty and think they're winning.
the brain is tricked into thinking that
it's winning. And so at some level, like
I love social media, teach on social
media. I I I partake in it. Um as a
consumer and a creator there, but I
think we need to really scruff ourselves
and go, okay, I need to read this book.
I need to write this chapter. I need to
do this drawing. And you'll notice once
you drop into that trench, the brain has
these attractor states. It's like a ball
bearing on a flat surface. As you get
more into a thought trench or activity
trench, it's like that ball bearing
drops into what's essentially a a deep
valley and it's actually hard to leave.
You'll notice you you're walking out and
unless you pick up your phone, you'll
still be thinking about that. And this
is how the brain works. The brain is not
working in step functions. The brain
you're none of us are supposed to do the
same thing all day long. And none of us
are supposed to be able to think and
focus easily. You just have to ride that
that sort of layering on of thoughts
going from bored to sensory input to
deeper and deeper and then work for
bouts of you know 90 minutes or a couple
hours and then give yourself a little
bit of time pause reflect and it doesn't
mean you can't have a conversation but
people are like texting in between. It's
it's unbelievable what we've done to
hamstring ourselves against being able
to think. The good news is as Gogggins
would say nowadays it's very easy to be
spectacularly good in pretty much any
field. you just have to do what no one
else is doing. Now, he's an extreme case
and I I have immense admiration for
David. I mean, he's just so David, you
know, but if you want to be the best in
your class at anything, best in class at
pretty much anything, it's to become so
much easier now. You just have to not
constantly be projecting things out to
the world or paying attention to what
other people are doing. Before we
continue, if your sleep's been off,
taking ages to fall asleep, waking up at
random times, or feeling groggy in the
morning, Momenus' sleep packs
are here to help. They're not your
typical knock you out supplement just
overloaded with melatonin. Just the most
evidence-based ingredients are perfect
doses to help you fall asleep more
quickly, stay asleep throughout the
night, and wake up feeling more rested
and revitalized in the morning. That's
why I take these things every single
night and why I trust Momentsus with my
life or the very least my sleep because
they make the highest quality
supplements on the planet. What you read
on the label, it's what's in the product
and absolutely nothing else. And if
you're still unsure, they've got a
30-day money back guarantee. So, you can
buy it totally risk-f free. Use it and
if you do not like it for any reason,
they will give you your money back.
That's how confident they are that
you'll love it. Plus, they ship
internationally. Right now, you can get
35% off your first subscription and that
30-day money back guarantee by going to
the link in the description below or
heading to livemus.com/modernwisdom.
That's live momentous.com/modern
wisdom.
&gt;&gt; The bar has never been set so low.
&gt;&gt; It's so sad. And yet it's an exciting
opportunity for people.
&gt;&gt; Dude, I I get it. like the rampant
fragility that seems to be destroying
your classroom or your country or the
world with constant distraction and
people not being able to focus or deal
with a little bit of discomfort or
resilience is not great.
But from a selfish perspective, that
widespread fragility is your competitive
advantage. And if you're one of the
people, you're not going to be able to
change the world. Certainly not before
you've changed yourself. And that means
that the first step is ah this is an
opportunity for me. I can step into
this. So, you mentioned that you sort of
touched on some of the bad habits that
distract people. I've always been
interested in this from a
neuroscientific perspective. Is it truly
possible to deprogram
bad habits or once those neural pathways
are down, is that locked in for life?
Are you just creating deeper fishes
somewhere else uh in order to replace
those ones? How do you think about
getting rid of bad habits, the process
of of overcoming those? Yeah, I think um
you know if we look at the data on
neuroplasticity, it's much easier to
reactivate a pathway that was laid down
early in life even if it's been
suppressed. Here's a beautiful data of a
guy named who was actually my next door
neighbor in my lab before he retired
Stanford showing that you know if once
learning takes place those those maps
are forever there. Uh you can um unveil
those maps again later. The kind of like
never forget to ride a bike kind of
thing. But when you're talking about bad
habits and then you get into sort of
contingencies like rewards and and and
punishments, you know, um these days
because of my own um interests and
trajectory, you know, I think a lot
about, you know, the the seven deadly
sins and and the virtues, right? I mean,
if you look at any of the sins, okay,
they're all very hypothalamic in nature,
right? They're the extremes of
hypothalamic function. In fact, if you
could probably map the seven deadly sins
onto the hypothalamus and say that
nucleus, the ventromedial hypothalamus,
those neurons are responsible for rage,
for unbridled rage. Okay? Those neurons
are responsible for unbridled sexual
activity. I'm not talking about merged
with violence. I'm just saying
independent of that. Those are are
consummatory behaviors. So, eating,
hyperasia, these are anorexia, you know.
So, I mean, all about I have a question
on that because envy is the only one of
the seven deadly sins that doesn't feel
good.
Yeah. So you right and I hadn't thought
about that but you envy is probably not
easily mapped to a hypothalamic nucleus.
Um
&gt;&gt; isn't that an interesting insight? Envy
is the only one of the seven deadly sins
that isn't something that can be
enjoyable at low or high dose.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um our good friend Paul Ki talks
often about how much of the um ills of
the world are based on people's envy.
When people don't have um when they have
an uncomfortable feeling, they most
people will turn that into
self-destruction or destruction of
others. And people who are successful in
life transmute those uncomfortable
feelings into self-support and creating
things and supporting others. Same
feelings, divergent paths. Um and envy
uh you know Paul has said many times is
is the enemy of all of all personal
development right? You see something you
I always had noticed you know coming up
in science if um
if something bad happens to somebody we
we most of the time unless we really
dislike them but even then you kind of
go a sucks you know like really feel bad
but if something good happens for
somebody you know immediately how you
feel about that person. Are you happy
for them or or is there that feeling of
like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Yeah, exactly. You know
immediately how that's such a good
litmus test. Yeah. How do you feel when
this other person wins and when somebody
else loses? I I guess even with that
it's an interesting one like is there
sort of weird sense of satisfaction or
are you like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like I wish that
person was okay or whatever it might be.
Okay. Uh bad habits.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But with bad habits, I mean, so I
think about the, you know, the sins and
bad habits mapping to hypothalamic
nuclei because I'm me and that's my
nerdy perspective. But then you also
think about the virtues, right? And and
overcoming bad habits or the virtues,
they I mean I believe that most people
are inherently good. I do I it may be
true, young may be right that we have
all things inside of us, but I think
most people are inherently good. I think
there are a subset of people that given
the opportunity to do things and not get
caught, they would do really bad things.
But I don't think that's most people,
okay? Or most dogs by example. Cats I'm
still on the on the fence about.
&gt;&gt; Cats can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Sorry, cat people. I know some nice
ones, but um but in all seriousness, I I
think that the the bad habits thing
involves breaking bad habits involves a
lot of top- down control. Prefrontal
cortex suppressing the activity of these
hypothalamic and other subcortical
neurons. And how do we know this? Well,
we if you want to summarize how the
prefrontal cortex works, you'd say it's
the sh structure in the brain. It's the
no, don't reach for that cookie. It's
the no, don't say that thing. It's the
don't do the thing that your
hypothalamus
don't do the thing. It's the don't do
the thing that your hypothalamus and
other structures are um creating some
internal uh activation of the autonomic
nervous system. That kind of vibration
of you want to do it. It smells so good.
It tastes so good, you just want to I
don't know why I did it. This kind of
thing. So that top- down control can be
learned. And the beautiful thing, and
this answers your question more
directly, the beautiful thing is that at
some point that top- down control is not
required anymore unless you do the thing
you're not supposed to do and then it
requires top- down control again. Now,
the reason I'm so interested these days,
one of the reasons I'm so interested in
spirituality and notions of of God,
etc., is that you know the virtues also
I believe can start to arrive through
things that are outside of us. Now I
realize that sounds very unscientific
but if you look at the science around
religious belief or belief in higher
power or the notion that humans don't
have all the answers not even the
collective consciousness what you find
is that for everything from recovery
from addiction to recovery from immense
immense loss I mean the kinds of losses
that go way beyond uh you know a death
of a family member although that's
intense you know death of all one's
children for instance horrible things
that people have been put through almost
without fail. Moving through that with
any kind of um sense of
self-preservation and not engaging in
just self-destruction, which is what
most people do, almost always involves
some notion of top-down control from
outside. You know, being being um
encouraged or even instructed to do the
right thing, feeling as if something is
coming through oneself. Now, we often
hear about this in the creative process.
People like Rick Rubin and I'm a big
Twilight Tharp fan, the choreographer
will talk about, you know, it's it most
creatives will talk about sort of
downloading things from outside of them.
It kind of moves through them as opposed
to arising purely within them because of
all that sensory experience. But they
can get into kind of these higher realms
of spirituality. But when we're talking
about breaking bad habits, overcoming
immensely difficult scenarios that
normally would throw people into
complete self-destruction or just giving
up, which is a bad habit in in its own
in its own right, it it's as if the the
top- down control is so immense like the
going against oneself that's required is
so immense that when people hand that
over to God, whether or not it's Christ
or whether or not some other form of God
that they that they are, you know, that
they're attached to, you
It seems as if they get some relief from
the process and yet it's very effective.
And you can't deny this, right? Just as
a phenomenon. I mean, let's take off our
hats as scientists and people with kind
of parse things like the it how could it
be that the the thing that's hardest for
humans to do for themselves becomes far
easier when they stop trying to do it
for themselves? It's it's a it's a wild
mind that neuroscience doesn't really
understand. But but you know what we're
really talking about let's say this were
alcohol and I'm not an alcoholic
fortunately but let's say I had immense
difficulty in refraining from alcohol
and this would be the precise
environment in where this would where
alcohol would be attractive. The amount
of top down control that's required is
immense for somebody that's recently
sober. They have to you know hopefully
they're in 12step. They have to call
their sponsor. They it can be an jarring
anxiety. That anxiety eventually
subsides. I mean, alcoholics eventually
can hang out in bars and not have a
drink, but there's a long period of time
where they can, and many never will be
able to do that. But the notion of a
higher power is is central to almost
every alcoholic at least who goes
through AA getting sober. It's that it's
a it's a almost a prerequisite. And in
some sense, it is a prerequisite. And
it's so brilliant that it is because it
takes away the need for constant top-
down control. You give that over to
something else. this notion of a higher
power. For some people that's God. For
some people it's Christ. For some people
it's you know just general higher power
because 12step is very agnostic as to
you know what people consider higher
power. But
I think it is not a coincidence that the
Bible writes in these kinds of things
about sins and virtues and the need not
just good works but avoiding sin and
acknowledges in some sense that it's in
some cases near impossible for people to
do on their own. And yes, community can
help and yes, reward processes can help.
And yes, punishment can help. These all
work. We know this. You can see this in
animal learning studies where humans are
different is that they can as far as we
know humans are unique in their ability
to give this top-down restriction
process over to some other entity and it
makes it easier not harder and it makes
it more concrete somehow not more
abstract. The only abstract piece of it
is that you know you you can't shake
this entity's hand at least not in the
standard sense.
&gt;&gt; What do you think's going on there? I,
you know, as usual, you always ask the
question. Um, which is why I I'm
stomped, right? I mean, it's I mean, I'm
trying to parse what could be going on,
but it always lands me back in neural
circuits and neural structures. I mean,
I'm excited by some of the data that are
starting to look at how consciousness
might involve things from outside the
brain and, you know, maybe multiple
brains. And [gasps]
all I know is that um, having spent
nearly three decades
thinking about and researching and
talking about neuroscience that you know
we know a great deal about how
sensations, perceptions, thoughts,
memories, you know, emotions and
behaviors are constructed, right? What
we do and um and yet we don't know how
this piece comes about. But this piece
has been central to the human historical
perspective and human experience. And I
don't think we're any longer in a place
where we can even talk about human
evolution without this. Right? I think
humans evolved in the context of this.
And that's why I don't see them as
mutually exclusive.
&gt;&gt; Much more a part of our history than the
anterior mids singular cortex is.
&gt;&gt; Yes. In fact, no one needed to know that
the anterior midsulate cortex existed to
know that there's this thing called
tenacity and willpower. I think that the
fun twist is that um it's a highly
plastic structure that we can engage and
grow and um and that reinforces the the
sets of behaviors that are that are
involved and I think um adaptive, right?
But
I I absolutely think there's something
real there. And I say that completely as
a scientist, right? I mean, I'm used to
immunustaining for proteins and running
westerns and you know like recording
from neurons and you know looking at
neural circuits using any number of
labeling techniques. I mean I'm a man of
science. But there's just no doubt in my
mind that this process of giving over to
the understanding there's something much
greater than us and that we are not in
total control at least not in total
control that feels very comforting to me
because of the way it's I've seen it
help so many people and you know I don't
I won't be shy about it's helped me
tremendously. I mean I'm I'm in a very
serious prayer practice daily now every
night before I go to sleep without fail.
I'm going on a couple years now where
I've not missed a single night. I'll get
out of bed if I fall asleep and do that.
It's it's it's like a and then also just
prayer is a thing. Let's say it's just
purely neurobiological. Let's say there
there's nothing outside of us that you
know that in in the real sense. I don't
believe that. But let's just assume for
a moment. Well, then my neurobiology
seems to be responding to all this very
very well. And I don't think I'm alone
with that. In fact, I think there are
too many burdens in life for anyone to
be able to navigate life extremely well
without these notions of higher power. I
I don't think people can do it. And if
and you could show me the most
successful, wealthiest people in the
world and I would say um yeah, but they
are highly deficient in this area. Not
because I'm judging them, right? We all
deficient in some area, but um I I it
must be it has to be because there's
this huge gap in the in in the knowledge
set. I've never thought that. I've never
thought of that paradox. The fact that
for
a lot of people, billions of people,
relinquishing control, the exact
opposite of what it is that for most of
the habits, okay, we're going to
suppress the anterior midsulate cortex.
We're going to use our our cognition to
limit our distraction. We're going to
narrow our focus. All the rest of it,
it's intention. It's lean in. It's
agency. It's taking control. And then
there's this other bit that literally
billions of people and up until
a hundred years ago almost everybody did
assume was the seat of where their
motivations and their discipline and for
a while with the bicamal mind maybe even
the voice inside the head came from.
That was the thing that was real. That
was the that was the source of this.
&gt;&gt; We evolved in that in that context.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The brain
&gt;&gt; independently, right? This was
convergent evolution from a like 50
million [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] different corners of the
universe.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. And and and you know, it's
my you know, I love teaching science. I
I love learning and teaching science. I
hope that's obvious to people. I um but
it's my one wish for for people that at
some point in their life they at least
explore the possibility and um and get
morning sunlight. But the um [laughter]
but but you know,
&gt;&gt; be open to faith and get morning
sunlight. Like I I just hit 50 recently
and and I will say um if I look back on
my life I I sure I wish I had done
certain things differently. I mean who
who doesn't, right? This notion of like
no regrets like yeah I wish I had made
certain decisions not others. Um but by
and large I'm very very happy with the
decisions I made by and large. And I was
happy to discover resistance training
and running and neuroscience and you
know cuttlefish and ferrets. I had a pet
ferret and um I don't recommend bulldogs
and I have the the an amazing
relationship to family and friends and
I'm very blessed in my personal life and
my romantic life is feeling awesome
these days and and it's just like it's
overwhelmingly positive despite a lot of
strain and hardship. But the one thing
that I wish that I had done earlier was
to stop resisting the voice in my head
that said, you know, I think I think
there's a God and I'm going to pray. I
kept pushing that away. I was like
incompatible with my notion of what it
meant to be uh a scientist. It was it
was just incompatible with with things.
I just kept pushing down and yet at the
same time wishing for it. And recently
on my 50th birthday, I had to give a an
uncomfortable toast cuz believe it or
not, I'm somewhat introverted,
especially in large groups. I'm happy to
talk science and talk like this with
you. But um and I and I said it then and
I'll say it again now. Like I'm 50 and
for the first time in my life, my entire
life, I've experienced sustained
times of real deep peace like just peace
like just the like everything's okay
everything is as it should be not just
some little mantra that you say when
you're on the big sir coast like and why
I think it's because I stopped fighting
so hard to try and control everything
inside me
and in my life and as a consequence
everything has become much easier still
challenging but much much easier here
and it's 100%
because of giving over to notion of
higher power. I'm very direct about is
God higher power for me, right? Reading
the Bible, this kind of thing, prayer, I
mean these are practices. This isn't
just I believe in God. These are
practices. Those are faith-based
practices. And it's become a source of
of immense um intellectual stimulation
for me and also just relaxation. And
it's really it's my wish for anyone
that's like struggling or doing well
because I I'm certain that it it holds
so much power and again even if it turns
out and I'll never know but even if it
turns out that it's all filtered through
you know standard neurobiological
mechanisms you know um okay I'm good
with that but in the meantime like I'm
going to keep praying like and you can
look at examples all around and all
through history where people have said
similar things in in circumstances far
more challenging than mine and they'll
always point to the same thing. I mean,
people are are pretty um can be pretty
irrational, but at the same time, humans
are also pretty miraculous in what
they're able to build and develop. And
this whole thing of, you know, God and
religion has not been discarded. If
anything, it's growing, right? I mean,
you know the data on that better than I.
So, anyway,
I don't have a whole lot more to say
about that.
&gt;&gt; You said something to me uh over 3 years
ago now. Uh you said it's all internal.
Uh can we revisit that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I guess now I would say it's all
internal except for the stuff that's
coming from from outside the um
[clears throat] uh human human
awareness. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's all internal in the sense
that um good good on you for remembering
that. Um it's all internal in the sense
that,
you know, I think that the big mistake
that I made for a number of years was
trying to find the thing that comes from
outside that's going to change things.
And you know, Lord knows I love caffeine
and I love doing certain activities and
um and learning. But at some point
you realize that the the ability to um
like withhold
uh like reflect reflexes that you don't
want to have like you know getting your
temper sparked or something. You know
people say no one can make you feel
anything. Now you say that's crazy.
People can make you feel things all the
time. You know that the ability to not
speak from your first thought but your
second or your third. You know you hear
these kind of cliches right? But all of
that ability comes from inside. It's
from doing internal work. And it's kind
of amazing how much we can accomplish,
and I'm certainly not the first to say
this, how much we can accomplish by just
stopping and listening and going, "Wow,
like my brain's crazy. It's like all
these thoughts, all this stuff. Oh, too
much input coming into this." Like, I've
got to shut down this thought path. also
realizing that, you know, because these
thoughts layer on themselves, our
sensory sensory memories layer on top
and can feed our thoughts. I mean, that
Jenny Gro's description of how thinking
works makes you think that yeah, like if
if you're ruminating on something that
really bothers you, you you probably do
want to distract yourself unless you're
really going to work on that thing that
you really can feed thoughts like embers
and a fire. And it's important to not do
that if it's not adaptive. A quick
aside, if you have been feeling a bit
sluggish, your testosterone levels might
be the problem. They play a huge role in
your energy, your focus, and your
performance. But most people have no
idea where those are or what to do if
something's off. Which is why I
partnered with Function because I wanted
a smarter, more comprehensive way to
understand what's happening inside of my
body. Twice a year, they run lab tests
that monitor over a 100 biomarkers and
their team of expert physicians analyze
the data and give you actionable advice
to improve your health and lifespan.
Seeing your testosterone levels and tons
of other biomarkers charted over the
course of a year with actionable
insights to improve them gives you a
clear path to making your life better.
And unfortunately, getting your blood
work drawn and analyzed like this
usually costs thousands. But with
function, it's just $499 and you can get
an additional $100 off, bringing it down
to 399 bucks. Get the exact same blood
panels that I get and save a h 100red
bucks by going to the link in the
description below or heading to
functionhealth.com/modernwisdom.
That's functionhealth.com/modernwisdom.
Well, also as you said when we first
spoke, if you finish a marathon in first
place, nobody is coming along and
dripping dopamine
&gt;&gt; into the back of your brain.
&gt;&gt; That's right. It's all internal.
&gt;&gt; This is self-generated stuff. The
satisfaction that you get for finishing
a hard workout, the love that you feel
from being with the people that you care
about, the peace that you have for lying
in a hammock in a, you know, sunny
spring afternoon or whatever,
at no point are you being sort of
flicked different neurochemicals and
sensations like this is a part of your
system.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And if you hit the system hard
like you know like the thing I
absolutely um suggest people never do is
you know something like methamphetamines
right is going to what a thousandfold
increase in dopamine within moments. I
mean I is that what that is?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. As compared to or even more as
compared to cocaine which I think is
like 200 um you know like a 200x and I
mean it's a or maybe a doubling. I mean
I forget the exact numbers but there's
this chart that will often put up.
methamphetamine is going to you're
you're basically going to dump as much
dopamine as you ever could in that
moment and then the trough is obviously
proportional to that. It's kind of fun
too to think about how because of
conversations from me and you and others
and Matt Walker like the world kind of
understands dopamine now. Do they
understand the nuance of every little
bit of every one of the four different
pathways and there's probably five um
etc. No. Like but that's okay. Like do
they do people not understand everything
about cortisol melon? No. But I think
the world is is now armed with a lot
better knowledge of their own physiology
and psychology and how those merge. I
also think that we're starting to
understand actually on the way over here
my producer and close friend Rob was
talking about this that you know um
everything now is gambling. Social media
is a form of of essentially gambling for
dopamine. um you know likes and follows
um you know markets you know I mean my
team their team the politics I mean I a
good friend has said you know that all
addiction is gambling you know all
addictions maybe are gambling um in
different forms um I would say it all
boils down to the same neural circuits
of anticipation and and reward
anticipation and the scariest thing was
I have a good friend Ryan Suave who
works with addicts and and He's trauma
therapist as well. Incredibly talented
guy. And he said that um you know the
scary thing is he's known many gambling
addicts that get addicted to the shame
from losing.
&gt;&gt; Oh wow.
&gt;&gt; And he said that
&gt;&gt; you're not chasing the wins anymore.
You're chasing the losses and the way
that you feel about yourself after
you've lost.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's almost like the wins were not
big enough and so they're just chasing
the self-shame and the hatred and the
It's really sad. Gambling addicts
struggle big time.
Coffeezilla just did a a huge new video
um about gambling and and sort of how
endemic it is. And there's banking apps
that allow you to gamble inside of the
app now. And he's done
I learned an awful lot about gambling
from from watching a bunch of the videos
he's done in the past. And uh it really
is
kind of wild to me that it's legal. And
the only way that I can say I'm sure
like you we've been offered like an
unlimited number of gambling sports
betting partnerships and stuff like
that.
&gt;&gt; I like gambling actually a little bit
but I don't have a problem with it.
&gt;&gt; I don't have a problem with it either
which is exactly why it's [laughter]
&gt;&gt; we should go to Vegas. Um
&gt;&gt; but it's kind of it's kind of mad to me
that that those that that this is legal
and you know [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] don't hate the
player. You know, the game is is much
bigger than any individual person that's
contributing to it. Like, fair play, but
it's it is really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] destructive
for for some people, but then so's
alcohol. So's driving fast cars or
motorbikes or
&gt;&gt; the hypothalamus isn't going anywhere,
right? I mean, everyone's got one. And
so, you got to find the things that
allow you to be adaptive and functional
in life, not crater the things you've
created. And also, um, to feel like
you're in the hunt. I mean, the hunt was
the original gamble, right? Hunting for
animals, hunting for food, hunting for
mates.
&gt;&gt; Seeing that thing grow closer on the
horizon, working out the anticipation of
it coming towards you. I'm getting
closer. I'm getting closer. I'm getting
closer.
&gt;&gt; Surviving a storm probably felt like a
big win at some point. I mean, um, you
know, like the number of, uh, women who
used to die in childbirth and then they
were, you know, and then someone solved
that puzzle, right? Was it handwashing?
I think had a lot to do with it, right?
I don't know if this story is true, but
that the the story goes that um there
used to be a ton of of death and
childbirth. And uh some of the same
physicians who were trying to figure out
why were um
handling and dissecting the cadaavvers
of these these poor women who died in
childbirth and then delivering babies
the same afternoon without handashing in
between because we didn't understand
bacteria.
&gt;&gt; We didn't understand the importance of
handwashing. I don't know if that's
true. That's what's been reported. But
once they started washing their hands
between essentially doing autopsy and
delivering babies, uh, rates of death in
childirth went down.
&gt;&gt; So I I wrote this, uh, article about,
uh, the Cassandra complex. Do you know
the Cassandra complex?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Oh, dude, this is
&gt;&gt; And I don't know anyone named Cassandra.
&gt;&gt; Uh, well, let me uh, maybe you do.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. [laughter] Uh, allow me to
teach you about the Cassandra complex.
There are few feelings worse in this
life than being right but early. You
correctly predict a future catastrophe,
trend, opportunity for growth, or
important area of focus only to be
castigated for how short-sighted,
xenophobic, judgmental, outof touch,
leftwing, right-wing, or alarmist you
are. The Cassandra complex is when
someone accurately predicts a negative
future event or truth, but no one
believes them. And they're often
dismissed, ignored, or even ridiculed.
It's named after Cassandra, a figure in
Greek mythology. The god Apollo gave her
the gift of prophecy, but after she
rejected his advances, he cursed her so
that no one would ever believe her
warnings. She foresaw the fall of Troy,
warned everyone, and was met with scorn.
The city burned anyway. Rachel Carson in
her book 1962, Silent Spring, warned
about the environmental damage caused by
pesticides. She was mocked by chemical
companies and even some scientists, but
her work eventually led to the
environmental movement and the banning
of DDT. Ignes Samilewise in the 1840s
realized that doctors were transmitting
child bed fever from autopsies to
mothers by not washing their hands. He
begged his colleagues to adopt
handwashing. They laughed at him. He
died in an asylum. Decades later, germ
theory proved him right.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Let me give you this. I'm going to the
one the best example of the Cassandra
complex I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] love is the uh
comparison between Capernicus and uh
Galileo. So
obviously people that are right but
early get uh mocked, castigated, you
know, pushed to one side which is um
incentive for someone to not speak up if
they feel like they are telling the
truth but that the world is not going to
be sufficiently receptive to it. And uh
Capernacus and Galileo like so great as
an example of this. Capernicus in the
early 1500s quietly proposed something
radical. The earth orbits the sun.
Humans once the unmoving center of God's
design were now spinning through space
on a planet among many. But Capernacus
hesitated. He delayed publishing his
heliocentric model for decades. His
great work de la revolution came out
only as he lay on his deathbed likely to
avoid the wrath of the church and
academia. His truth was too disruptive
and so for most of his life it went
unheard. Galileo a century later took
that same Capernac spark and shouted it
from the rooftops. He saw the moons of
Jupiter, the faces of Venus, and the
imperfections of the moon's surface. All
evidence that the heavens were not as
fixed or divine as taught. The church
responded with fear. Galileo was dragged
before the Inquisition, forced to recant
under threat of torture, and sentenced
to house arrest for the rest of his
life. In retrospect, it is not
surprising that Capernicus kept his
mouth shut given how Galileo was
treated. This is a core truth of the
Cassandra complex. Being right isn't
enough, and being early can feel like
being wrong.
Wow. Yeah. I mean much lesser example
than what you just described, but you
know, the glimpmphatic system was
discovered many years earlier by a woman
at NIH. Um, oh, excuse me, at
University of Maryland. Um, a larger,
more powerful scientific group tried to
repeat the experiments, made a method
methodological flaw, couldn't repeat it.
Everyone believed them. there's no
lymphatic system in the brain.
Fortunately, she became an NIH program
officer, which is somebody who has some
degree of control over where funding
gets directed and funded the work that
later um verified her her findings. But
it it was purely by virtue of the fact
that the power structure was arranged in
a certain way. This happens a lot in
science. Yeah, I think you'd enjoy Chris
that, you know, everyone thinks of
Darwin and natural selection and um but
there was another guy, Alfred Russell
Wallace, who essentially discovered all
of it in parallel
&gt;&gt; um and should have been elected to the
Royal Academy and all of this stuff um
as well like like Darwin, but um was not
in the club in the in club and Darwin
knew it and actually was very from what
I understand very conflicted about not
sharing the credit. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um,
&gt;&gt; it was only because of that rivalry that
Darwin ended up pushing his study out,
his work out, right? I think he he had
it he sat on it for a while. He wanted
to work on it more. He had a little bit
of sort of hypervigilant uncertainty and
insecurity about himself and then
finally upon hearing, oh, I might not I
might be beaten to the punch published.
Is that right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Nobody associates Alfred Russell
Wallace with the theory of evolution,
natural selection. I mean, most people
don't even know who it is. I mean,
because my dad's a physicist and because
I grew up in science, I I um I know a
lot of these stories. I mean, I know a
story of I'll keep this intentionally
vague. There's a very very famous and
accomplished physicist that probably
should have won a Nobel Prize, but he
made one error, which is that he stole
the girlfriend of one of his graduate
students, married her. That graduate
student did reasonably well. It must be
very uncomfortable to work in the lab
where your girlfriend is now sleeping
with your boss. went on um he went on to
marry a Swedish woman um and uh let's
just say that guy that stole the
girlfriend never won a Nobel Prize. Uh
the Swedish community is very
close-knit, you know. So, I mean I mean
the number of sto I could tell you story
after story after story like that, but I
try and avoid those stories um even
though they're true. Um, I'd much rather
tell stories about the great scientific
discoveries that were made, right? So,
when stuff goes right, because, you
know, that stuff's very enticing. It's
the drama that we, you know, are drawn
to as humans, just naturally, we have a
proclivity for for that. But, but I
think that there there's so many stories
of people making incredible discoveries
through serendipity and hard work and
things like that. So, I mean, that's the
good stuff. And and so I always try and
if I mention a story like that, I like
to balance it out and remind people that
I do think that most scientists are
well-intentioned. I do think most
physicians are well-intentioned. I just
had a guest on the podcast, David
Fagenbomb, who's a physician
&gt;&gt; at UPUPEN
&gt;&gt; um and scientist. And you know, he was a
football player, big dude, Jack. He's
like 63 Jack. He's playing football.
He's in medical school and he gets this
Castleman's disease, which is a
cancer-like um disease of the of the
lymphatic system. He's told that he's
going to die. He He basically was near
dead. And then he decided to just start
trying all these already approved
prescription drugs that nobody thought
had anything to do with Castleman's or
cancer. And he's alive now 11 years
later.
&gt;&gt; And he's developed this not for profofit
called Every Cure where they is
completely not for profofit. and his lab
focuses on taking all the diseases that
we have like 14,000 diseases we have no
treatments for and taking existing
approved drugs that basically stand to
make companies very little money because
they're all in generic form now and
using AI and doing these things in
combination they've saved kids from
nonverbal forms of brain illness they've
saved people adults and and children
from um from cancers turns out that
women who have breast cancer surgery
that involves lidocaine as a local
anesthetic have a 30% less less chance
of getting a you know of having a
recurrence. Um different uses for
aspirin for colon cancer. I mean you
know and so repurposing old drugs for
&gt;&gt; exactly
&gt;&gt; current and so his belief as a physician
as a as a card carrying member of that
community is that the field of medicine
has many cures in hand and excellent
treatments in handin for the things that
people are struggling with you know. So
then when I hear this stuff about well
lowd dose lithium everyone's you know
maybe pinging that once a year for
offsetting the the potential for
Alzheimer's or now we're hearing a lot
about the particulate and certain air
pollution you know might be one of the
primary uh players in in causing
dementia you know when I hear this stuff
it's like we need to be testing existing
medication so the field of medicine the
fields of science you know as having
been in this field of science for a long
time although now I'm in public
education still faculty member at
Stanford The the key thing to understand
is that is it is a business of people.
&gt;&gt; It's there's a sociology to the business
just like there's a sociology of
podcasting in media which you know is a
a discussion into itself but this is
actually what really made me understand
Rogan a lot better. I remember at one
point some years back um I I asked him
I'm like where where does your kind of
like belief or skepticism in certain
things come from? And he just looked me
dead in the eye and he just said, "Cuz I
know people." And he, anyone that knows
Rogan knows he has a lot of different
kinds of friends and he interacts with a
lot of different types of people. He's
not narrow. He's extremely broad in his
interactions, not just on his podcast.
And I realized in that moment I was
like, "Okay, got it.
&gt;&gt; He casts this really wide net, but he
has a very
&gt;&gt; selective filter about what he
integrates." And it's because he
understands people the the you know good
and bad aspects of people. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And and I think that's the kind of
acumen that that is only developed
through life experience. And if you're a
scientist or you're a physician and
you're very entrenched in your field,
you can be the best oncologist, the best
opthalmologist, the best neurologist.
And if you're considered the best
because of your knowledge within that
silo or even multiple silos, but you
don't have life experience and know
people from different areas of life, I
guarantee you are not the physician I
want to be treated by or that I want a
family member treated by.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Because you have to understand not just
the information and the source of the
information in terms of paper and rigor
and laboratory. You have to understand
the motivations and almost the
personality types of the people behind
that work.
&gt;&gt; It's so true. I mean, this
was the beautiful baptism of running
nightclubs for so long. I met a million
people in person. Imagine
&gt;&gt; and their and their inhibitions are down
because they're they're
&gt;&gt; and their and some things are tuned up,
you know, aggression or or or uh
openness or their humor or, you know,
whatever it is that they're trying to
do. It really reveals and kind of I
guess uh exaggerates the who people are.
But [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like you become really really
good at judging people and really really
good at assessing this person's
motivations. How how sort of real is
this? It's been a couple of times on the
pod where I've sat down with someone and
I'm like I don't know what I think about
this person and after I've sat down with
them like I know and I know in one of a
couple of directions I'm like that was
good or whatever but like I
&gt;&gt; we're not you didn't believe what they
were saying. We're not going to go we're
not going to go fast.
&gt;&gt; I've I've had that experience. I won't
mention the guests obviously. I would
say 95% of 98% of our guests I've felt
that way. There was there's only one or
two instances that that I got any kind
of inkling that like they weren't as
sure as they sounded or something of
that sort. But but I think that that's
the that's the good thing about
podcasting is that it's not just an
interview, right? Like you can ping
people for ideas and you can ping people
around those ideas. cuz you're not
trying to you're not trying to catch
them in anything, but you really I mean
uh it's funny cuz we're sitting across
from it's it's like how you would get to
know anybody. You would sit across from
them and you would talk to them, right?
&gt;&gt; It's in the smallest I I use this
example of um watching musicians on
stage. So, one of the things that I find
coolest about anybody that does does
anything a lot is not them doing the
main thing, it's their transition
activities within the thing. So, for
instance, I spent a long time at
university. If you put a pen in my hand,
it just immediately starts moving
through my fingers. I can't
&gt;&gt; You're one of those. My students, if I
look out, I kind of blur my vision. I'm
not teaching in the classroom much these
days, although soon I will again. And um
it's like it's like watching a bunch of
propellers.
&gt;&gt; A Mexican wave of pen twirling. Yeah. I
I just because I did I put a pen in my
hand and I do that. Um one of my
friends, Zach, the way that he takes if
he bing if one of his guitar picks goes
while he's playing, he's warming up for
me on tour. um if one of his guitar
picks goes like the way that he [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
like just just seamlessly snags another
one like that's what's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cool
because that is this
moment of unconscious
betrayal of pattern would be a way to
think about it. Um a drummer that like
snaps a stick and you'll just see and
he'll switch seamlessly or he'll be
playing he was playing the uh high hat
with his right hand and his right
drumstick goes so he'll switch and
you'll see him move with his left and
then he And then it's back out and
you're like, "Dude, that's so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
cool." I love seeing people that are
the the way that the guys will set up
their cameras. Like, I'll see the guys
taking a shot and they'll need to change
something ding ding ding ding ding and
I'm like, "You just did six things in
two seconds."
&gt;&gt; It's like hyper proficiency.
&gt;&gt; It's so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cool, right? I think
that's so sick. Um, I I want to touch on
what you said before, which was sort of
the the fixation that uh people have,
groups, different groups have on stuff.
What do you make of the
attempt of legacy media to turn get more
high quality protein into a political
issue? I think this has been one of the
most interesting patterns to see that
like protein has become politically
coded somehow. And obviously this is
kind of for the health and wellness
industry kind of old hat now to talk
about like protein is prioritizing
protein is something that you probably
should consider or at least be aware of.
But yeah, what what do you make of the
fact that um protein consumption has
become politicized
&gt;&gt; and resistance training for a little
while? Although I think the wave caught
to stimulate the idea that everybody,
men, women, young and old, should be
resistance training. So you can no
longer like um kind of bro science
resistance training. [gasps] Although I
I I have to say even though I have
respect for certain elements of
bodybuilding, I do think that the the
body the the the bodybuilding culture I
think has kind of um distracted from
what's possible with resistance training
as a positive health stimulus. A lot of
people are still averse to it
&gt;&gt; because you look at people who are
bodybuilders and don't exactly see the
picture of health.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I think it's also the the way
that bodybuilding changes the entire
relationship to food in general and to
life in general. And it and and any look
anything that's so look I I I think
Darian Yates is an amazing athlete,
right? I can think of him as an athlete
and what he did and the way he did it
and I knew Mike Mener and he was the one
that
&gt;&gt; You knew Mikeens?
&gt;&gt; I knew Menser.
&gt;&gt; No way.
&gt;&gt; He was He sold me my first training
program by phone. I can tell you the
story. I'll I'll tell you that in a
moment.
&gt;&gt; New Mener, I write about him in my my
book that comes out uh later this uh
later next year. Um New Mener had a lot
of conversations about Mensor, not just
about resistance training, but also
about school and philosophy. He was one
of the people that really encouraged me
to get serious about my academics.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Mike Menser was part of your
origin story.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Mike Menser who I well I'll just
I'll I'll get back to the the trad
thing. But yes, I signed up for a
program. He he's the reason why still to
this day, you know, since I was 16, 50
now, as I mentioned,
&gt;&gt; still train three maybe four days a
week. Not one set to failure, but you
know, keeping set volume low. Um, one
thing that isn't advertised a lot, Mike
didn't talk about it in his seminars, is
that a lot of what determines total set
number is how well you can like really
direct the effort toward the muscle
you're trying to target. So, some people
are exceptionally good at that. I think
Dorian was other people like no matter
how hard they try and curl with just
their biceps and forearms and anterior
delts, like it's going everywhere, you
know? And so, a lot of it is about being
muscle connection. Oh, one thing he was
very clear about is that as you get
better at training, the neural component
of of contracting the muscles that
you're trying to contract, you actually
can get by with fewer sets because
you're able to direct more intensity to
those muscle groups. So, over time, I
found, yeah, I I probably do somewhere
between six and eight sets per muscle
group. But with two, I can not slaughter
the muscle, but I can I can get where I
need to go.
&gt;&gt; But I like training, so sometimes I'll
do more. But yeah, Mensor was great. I
signed up for this program. My mother
was like I was 16 year old maybe even 15
years old and she was like why is this
grown man calling the house because back
then you do like a phone consultation
and Mike didn't talk Mike barked he'd be
like listen and the only thing you know
and he would say he's like and the
number one thing is you don't want to
listen to anyone else besides me he told
me he said he said most people in gyms
are explicative morons he said they're
morons he kept saying these people have
the intelligence of a toad and he would
just like yell and yell and then he'd
recommend these
&gt;&gt; six sales call and then he'd recommend
these anaran books. And then the only I
even had some sleep issues when I was in
college cuz my dorm was really loud. You
know what you know the advice he gave
me? This is so wild. And I have a friend
from college who's now a fertility doc
here in in um in LA and he remembered
this story. Um Mener, this is terrible
advice. He said, "Get a jug of white
wine and just have like a half mug of
white wine. If you wake up in the middle
of the night, you'll fall back." Didn't
First of all, it doesn't work at all.
&gt;&gt; Okay, so like hit and miss for
&gt;&gt; Oh, listen. Mike Mike was an extreme
guy, but but he g he actually said he
says stay away from anabolics, which I
did. He said, "Enjoy learning to train
hard. Enjoy your training hard."
[snorts]
&gt;&gt; He said,
&gt;&gt; even though he wasn't a fan of cardio,
like get out and live life. And he said,
"And read books." And we he gave me this
book list. And and to that day, I still
follow the same. Yeah. Mike Mike was
amazing. And then when he died, I heard
later I was very was very sad. I mean,
we'd been touched a little bit because I
was in Santa Barbara and he was down in
LA at that time. Okay, so Menser, um,
&gt;&gt; protein politicization, what's going on?
&gt;&gt; Well, traditional media is like we'll
take anything at this point as an
attempt to gulp for air because they're
they're really struggling, right? I
mean, there are some decent journalists
in traditional media, right? There are I
think that they um but they'll not just
by quote unquote politicizing something
gives them something to say about it,
right? One gram of protein per pound of
lean or desired body mass is kind of the
the standard thing now. Some people
less, some people a little bit more.
Okay, fine. Fine. Um I think we all get
that. That's the goal. If you get a
little less, you're probably fine. If
you get a little more, you're probably
fine. If you get tons more, you're
probably not fine. You get tons less,
you're probably not fine. Animal protein
is clearly superior as a as a pro
quality protein to calorie ratio, right?
You give me an 8 oz piece of steak or
you have to eat half a jar of peanut
butter, which is not protein. It's a
bunch of fat with a little bit of
protein in it. Okay. So, why do they
policize it? Well, because
they're struggling. They're struggling
big time in terms of how to generate
revenues. I mean, people expect to get
their news. Two things have certainly
happened. I believe Ezra Klein on this
that people are no longer digesting
their news as local news as much. It's
more national level news and
international level news. And look,
putting your name in a title or Rogan's
name in a title or, you know, is going
to generate clicks. And if you and
saying great things about people, kind
things about [laughter] people generally
doesn't get
&gt;&gt; He's such a nice guy.
&gt;&gt; Doesn't Yeah. I mean, listen, I've had a
few nice articles written and some of
the health magazines will pull protocols
and things and I love it. and and you
know I would say things in the health
section of the New York Times very often
parrot what I've covered and other
people have covered and they do it
differently but you can often predict
what they're going to cover by looking
at the various health podcasts Peter's
Peter was just on 60 Minutes Peter says
I text I texted him about it and he said
uh
&gt;&gt; as he said uh nice to see nice to see
traditional media not um accusing me of
something unspeakable for once. Yeah, I
mean they seem to focus a bit much on
like how much he charges his clients and
this kind of thing as
&gt;&gt; I mean the fact that he said that that
was a sort of clean and fair interview
despite the fact that there is some
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] going on in there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it just goes to I mean
&gt;&gt; well listen they're they've to say
they're losing power is an
understatement. They've lost power.
&gt;&gt; They to some degree there's still some
trust there from a number of people. Um,
and to some degree, you know, every
topic, health topic in particular, seems
to go through the same arc. It's like
nobody knows about it except in niche
cultures. Let's just take the
glimpmphatic system. Nobody knew about
it. This one woman discovered it. It was
not suppressed, but it was kind of
knocked back. Then it came out as all
the rage then 20 a few years ago. The
study, not as much glimpy clearance as
we thought. And you you occasionally
someone say, "Oh, it's not a not a real
thing." One mouse study, one mouse study
didn't see it, right? Right? And I know
the history of the glimpmphatic
research. So it's very clear it's there.
Okay. So then the the arc is okay.
Exciting exciting exciting. Take
dopamine dopamine nation on beautiful
work. Then about 18 months later it's
well it's not you know it's just in my
listen creatine. The next look you can
guarantee that in eight weeks or six
months or whenever it is it's going to
be creatine not as important as we
thought for brain.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; There's just the natural arc, right? And
then it's the yes, the things that work
still work and the things that don't
don't. It's very rare for anything to
sort of capture and then just get get
completely obliterated.
&gt;&gt; Like I was talking about delaying
caffeine by, you know, 90 minutes or so.
If you crash in the afternoon, it's a
great thing to try. Then there was, so
it was got a lot of positive attention.
Then there was the push back, show me
the clinical trial, show me the
benefits. It's like, no, it's show me
whether or not you crash in the
afternoon. Try it if you want or don't.
Like, hey, easy. It's it's a suggestion.
It's grounded in me mechanistic science.
But even the [clears throat] even the
coffee accounts on YouTube were pissed
off about this. Listen, the big thing
that I guess the the direct answer to
your question is you're taking their
paycheck.
&gt;&gt; Do you know how much these reporters
make? You're taking their paycheck. The
irony of it is if you look at some of
the advertisements in traditional media,
it's like Fendy bags and like all these
like fancy things and and in some cases
dietary supplements. So they are our
competitors,
&gt;&gt; but and this is the critical caveat.
They're competing with us. I never think
about what they're doing. I never look.
I don't care if somebody's saying I'm
like, "Okay, I'm never going to modify
my content on the basis of what any of
these traditional media houses are
doing." They are in the chase position
now
&gt;&gt; 100%. Now does that mean that we will
always be, you know, leaders in the
space? No. one has to be very careful to
not assume that, right? There's some
kid, some guy or gal someplace who's
going to take my lunch someday. That's
the way, you know, and I'm not a kick
out the ladder from you. I don't give I
don't hop on an Instagram live and give
people a hundred suggestions about how
to get their content out more broadly
from based on what I know. I'm just not
that way. I was weaned in a culture of
science where you train people. My
students are now on the job market or
have labs, etc. That's the way it's
done. But traditional media are
competitors of podcast. That's why
they've started podcasts.
&gt;&gt; You and I are very fortunate that we
started podcasts in the in I wouldn't
say the first wave, but like if we were
making analog second wave punk based I
mean listen
&gt;&gt; when did yours launch?
&gt;&gt; Uh 2021.
&gt;&gt; Did it really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. January 2021.
&gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hell. I thought it was before
that.
&gt;&gt; In 2020 I was going on a lot of
podcasts. I went on like 30 podcasts and
prior to that I was starting to teach a
little bit on Instagram and that kind of
thing. But I mean podcasting is growing
like crazy. I mean, I I want to
encourage people to make content, but
the content that I think is most
important is not content about content.
This is the this is the really dangerous
hook for people. Content about content.
And also, you'll find that the people
who have very successful podcasts
tend to be people who are successful in
something else first. You certainly have
that. Lex, me, Rogan, Rick Rubin, I mean
Theo, Whitney, it goes on and on. I
mean, Tim Dylan, etc. like and there's a
bridge there's a natural overlap between
what people were trained to do and what
they're doing in their podcast but there
are very few podcasts I mean I'm sure
there there are some that are just like
someone decides like I'm a podcaster so
the the person who wants to be
influential for lack of a better phrase
in media they want to teach they want to
teach science they want to encourage
thinking and make a living doing it
encourage health practices make a living
doing it I would encourage them to go do
something else first that they really
enjoy because that the structure of that
and and and that very thing is going to
inform their content. Very few people
are going to like if they start giving
out degrees in in in media.
&gt;&gt; Um I in sort of social media I I don't
think it's going to be very useful.
Whitney Cummings got the best take on
this. She says in order for art to
imitate life, you have to live a life
&gt;&gt; so good. And it's one of the challenges
you get as people become more successful
that
their ability to generate new ideas
decreases because their life is
increasingly out of touch. It's the
comedian who only talks about dinners,
shows and airports and hotels on stage
because that's the entirety of their
life experience or their craft or or
sorry Gingro or their craft. I mean you
said I'm leading an increasingly
eccentric life. I mean the reason I have
a pet octopus I always wanted one. had
cuttlefish. I love aquarium. I'm draw I
have this art project with someone who's
a kind of
&gt;&gt; Are you going to try and justify buying
an octopus as like inspiration for
&gt;&gt; I'm going to teach an octopus how to use
an iPad.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And I'm going to decode what the
camouflage patterns of the octopus mean
for thinking.
&gt;&gt; Is that mimic octopus? What is it?
&gt;&gt; No. Well, right now I have a I have an
Indonesian octopus that's not very
interactive. I want a Pacific two spot.
This is a whole thing. It's going to
open up some some trauma for me. But
[laughter] no, I'm just kidding. I'm
getting a new new octopus soon. A
Caribbean Day octopus is is probably on
the way. But but the the the idea is
actually to use AI to try and deconvolve
what the octopus is thinking and maybe
even communicate with the octopus. They
are very smart. I had 40 cuttlefish in
my lab in San Diego. They are so smart
and they're also sephopods, cousins of
the octopus. So, but the reason I'm
doing that, the reason I have my art
projects, the reason I extended my book
for a year to add more studies is
because I like learning and I, as my uh
a friend of mine said, he's a very
intelligent guy. Um he's a tattooer
among other things. He's an exceptional
artist and he said, "People with
interests are interesting." Correct.
&gt;&gt; You know what's not interesting? Other
people's failures, other people's minor
wins. Like there's nothing more boring
than that. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It but it hooks in the short term. So
social media I think of as a very we
should go up to clouds rest sometime and
hike clouds rest in yosi it's beautiful
but there's this very narrow rock bridge
out to the top and on either side it's
slide to your death slide to your death
and so I'm always doing I don't get down
on all fours but it's it's uh it's
precarious but it's beautiful when you
get to the top and it opens up into a
big flat spoon you're above half dome
it's gorgeous I go there as often as I
can but on either side you fall to your
death and I always think of the internet
and much of life like this on one side
is the this fault to your death that is
numbing out by going online
&gt;&gt; and the other one is drama
&gt;&gt; like
&gt;&gt; like who's I mean I don't want to name
names cuz I don't want to give it any
like recently there was an online drama
in the fitness community and I was like
I unfollowed a bunch of accounts I was
like this is the most boring stupid
thing I've ever seen in my entire life
and this is seeding my thoughts
&gt;&gt; this is seeding my and like I got to go
back to reading good books I'm going in
my basement, you know. So, you're
allowed to unfollow accounts that you're
not learning from or that are pulling
you into either numbing out or drama.
&gt;&gt; The drama piece is very serious because
it gives the illusion that there's
something meaningful there. But you
realize this is just like it's it's
nothingness.
&gt;&gt; It is that's a fascinating way to look
at it. Uh it is kind of the empty
calories of the content world that you
leave this
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; having been given the sort of simulacum
of learning something. But if somebody
said okay after watching this 10-minute
half hour, 1 hour expose or
deconstruction, what do you know that
you didn't know at the start? you go
well I like know about what this person
and this person said to each other about
each other and how the interplay and
look deconstructing someone's
psychological profile understanding how
human motivations work I'm fascinated by
the way that sort of social interaction
hierarchy status games all of that stuff
but I'm not learning that I'm not
reading the status game by Will store
&gt;&gt; well you're a thinker I mean so when I
mention this rock bridge I mean that my
it's the visual I keep in mind when I'm
trying to get into solid work or solid
thinking or going on social media like
there's a narrow band of of very useful
things to learn and participate in. I
think that
&gt;&gt; infinity of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; you know numbing out or or drama on
either side the fall to the death um
little by little but what I what I think
is that because you are somebody who
thinks deeply about human nature I mean
I listened to your episode with Scott
Galloway and I'm not just saying this
what they call glazing on I we used to
just call it kissing somebody's ass so
I'm not trying to kiss your ass cuz but
like this is it was an awesome episode
and your command of of of statistics and
data and understanding your ability to
frame it and remember things it's it's
world class. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; And and you do that through hard work,
but also through life experience. So I
do think that living life in a way where
you're collecting data, so to speak, and
you're understanding things is
wonderful. But I guess what turned me
off to this one particular drama in such
a strong way was it's yet another
example of something I've seen thousands
of times before. There was no new
learning for me there except that humans
are just being humans. And so at some
level like there's at some point the
the novelty of life, the excitement of
life, the the enriching parts of life
are about new experiences. Sometimes
it's about experiencing the same thing
and go, "Oh yeah, this is a general
theme of me or of them or of life and
and understanding human nature." But at
some point you're like, "This is just
yet another drama on the schoolyard.
This is just this is reminds me of and
it's sometimes useful to make the
parallels. This is like in junior high
school when so and so said something
about so- and so do and so you go
there's no new data. This would be like
running you know I publish it some
papers I don't want to do those
experiments again
&gt;&gt; because if especially if I get the exact
same result right now if I get a
different result that's different but
I'm seeing the same thing again and so I
think in order to develop a healthy
relationship to social media which is
really a big slice of life now for many
people of [snorts] all ages
&gt;&gt; and a skill that's only been around for
10 years
&gt;&gt; right I mean I think you have to
be be extremely conscious of of like
when it got you and why you know I mean
you had a nightclub you couldn't you
might have to respond to a catastrophe
or something happening but like you can
enjoy yourself there too but you were
there to work you were able to navigate
that chaotic environment and get things
done
&gt;&gt; well a good example of this uh you know
postnut clarity uh after culation the
devil's laughter can be heard I think
Schopenhau said that um an equivalent is
postcontent clarity so after you've
finished consuming a thing how do you
feel do you feel uh enlightened,
hopeful, peaceful. Do you want to ring
your mom and say that you miss her? Do
you want to talk to your friends? Or do
you feel like the world's out to get you
and that there's less than is needed for
everybody and you shouldn't really trust
people and you're a bit sort of tight
and tense and your shoulders are up and
there's a ringing in your ears. Well,
here's my litmus test. After I spend a
bit of time on social media, I ask
myself later, do I remember anything
from being on there? you know, the the
reflection. Was there any learning? Did
I learn anything? Listen, I learned some
things from your discussion with Scott.
I still got a little bit more to go in
the discussion, so don't quiz me on it
just yet. But I intend to think about
it. In fact, this morning I went out for
a run. I listened to a podcast of
somebody that I'm not particularly big
fan of, but I wanted to get the their
perspective. And I thought a bit about
some of the things that you and Scott
had discussed
&gt;&gt; and I was reflecting on it, right?
because it's a that's learning and
that's the anti-forgetting process.
I can't recall something I saw on social
media yesterday that was very
stimulating. But I watched that 60
Minutes episode and it gave me some
ideas and insights about what's going on
in the world or what might not be going
on in the world. And you know, thinking
about your experiences is so critical to
placing value on them, making them
meaningful for you. What I'm not
interested in is just an endless deluge
of sensory input that goes nowhere,
especially if it impedes other things.
&gt;&gt; So, a little bit more reflection, 10
minutes, 1 minute, 5 seconds of just
asking, did I remember anything you
said?
&gt;&gt; Do I want to do that again?
&gt;&gt; As opposed to just the infinite wheel
you mentioned. I think this is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
great take. um the arc of something new
gets introduced, there is excitement,
there is reaction, there is criticism,
and then usually acceptance presuming
that this thing is like true or valid or
whatever.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, like creatine, right? It's been
around forever. I was laughing so hard.
&gt;&gt; That's what I want to talk about. So, um
what do you think is the next frontier
for public acceptance? Cuz I would say
vitamin D3 was
&gt;&gt; check.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that that's already done. It's
it's gone through the cycle. Correct.
It's out.
&gt;&gt; We should actually plot this out. It' be
fun to do a post. We should do a post
together, which is, by the way, um
public careers follow the same
trajectory. You show up, people are
like, "Who's this person?" Then it's
like, "Oh, you're very exciting." Then
then there's always a here's the flaw.
And then and then there's a very simple
equation as to whether or not that they
are going to continue and continue to
have popularity. Very simple equation.
Was the sort of event more useful or
interesting than what they contribute?
And if the answer is, yeah, that was
actually more exciting than any one
thing they'd ever said in terms of
usefulness, then they're gone.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. That owned by
&gt;&gt; they fade out at different rates, their
half life and it disappears. But if what
you're providing is useful, if the
person is if they still people still
want you around, so to speak, it
outlives that. I mean, this recent
drama, I don't want to dance around it
too much, but this recent drama, I was
like, this is nothing could be more
trivial or stupid. But I realized the
reason it's probably I'm not pretending
this and I don't wish ill on anyone, but
it's probably going to pseudo end the
career of this online person is because
it was much more interesting in its
drama than any value ad that they were
they had given. That's interesting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And and they and they had
projected a fair amount of arrogance in
their delivery of content and things.
And if you do that, you're setting
yourself up, right? That's a very that's
a big attractor early on.
&gt;&gt; Oh, people people like a a sort of
deserved downfall of the person who's
out of touch 100%.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. There's no coming back from that
in a real way.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, vitamin D3 been through the
cycle. Creatine is in the cycle, right?
Creatine is so vitamin I would say
vitamin D came first,
&gt;&gt; then protein,
&gt;&gt; right? Protein. And the protein thing is
politicized a little bit too because
there's something about meat that's
considered right which is um and then
&gt;&gt; creatine. You know the reason that
creatine I don't think is going to get
politically coded is it's been so
heavily pushed by women for women. Ronda
Patrick a lot of like Kelly Leesque if
you know her um
&gt;&gt; super hardcore femaleled audience.
&gt;&gt; It's important for women despite the
fact you're probably going to gain you
know three pounds of of weight. Mhm.
Water. Water weight.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Weight. Um you're going to scale
is going to be heavy. Maybe you're going
to look a little bit fluffier, but you
can get rid of it by stopping it, right?
It's, you know, it's like having a scale
that's off. It's like as soon as you
&gt;&gt; Curves are in.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. Um
&gt;&gt; one way in which things are not
mimicking the 90s when everything was
super wafy. I mean, I came up in the '9s
when it was like the the expectation on
women was really exceeding.
&gt;&gt; You know, the environmental security
hypothesis.
&gt;&gt; Sit back. Let me give you this one. So
um there is evidence to suggest that men
prefer thicker women during times of
economic downturn and thinner women
during times of economic uplift. So if
uh the study original study was done on
students that were in halls of residence
and they were eating at um uh you like
uh dinner time together where it would
be provided by the halls of residence
and they showed men images of women of
varying sizes uh before they ate and
after they ate. multiple iterations all
over the place. Before men ate, they
preferred the bigger women. After men
ate, they preferred the thinner women.
And you can track the um
&gt;&gt; there's an alternative interpretation.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Um you can track the
sort of uh public popularity of body
size, not shape, waist to hip ratio
always remains the same typically, uh
but of body size overall to how the
economy is doing. And it's called the
environmental security hypothesis.
Basically, the human behavioral ecology
stuff. Macken Murphy taught me about
this University of Melbourne. He's
brilliant. He's out of Candace Blake's
lab. And what it seems is happening is
if you feel secure in your environment,
you are not queuing for a mate or well,
she can survive a tough time of a famine
because times aren't that tough.
Resources are abundant. Therefore, I
don't need a woman who can signal that
she can get extra calories and is more
sort of metabolically uh well reserved.
You might be able to say uh the opposite
is also true. And this tracks, the
economy tracks with the preference of
body size.
&gt;&gt; Wild. Wild. I love I love your command
of this literature. It's awesome. I
mean, I just remember the '9s being a
time of very like wafy models and uh
because I was, you know, came up through
the skateboarding thing, you know, when
I departed from,
you know, biology before I went back to
it. And our I mean, they had models like
Kate Moss who were extremely thin. And
then um and actually and friends of ours
who were skateboarders in New York like
in Washington Square Park, our friend
Peter BC was kind of discovered in New
York and ended up in Calvin Klein ads.
He was like skinny skateboarder, right?
I mean he became a firefighter. So now
he's like he's Jack appears still around
a super good guy. But um and really into
his health now and stuff, but we can
kind of chuckle about the fact that like
in the '9s like that was the look,
right? It was the Kurt Cobain look and
it was that whole thing. And the larger
guys are like you it was it wasn't Mark
Wahlberg back then. was Marky Mark and
the Funky Bunch, remember? And he was in
the Calvin Klein ads with Kate Moss.
&gt;&gt; Look at his size now.
&gt;&gt; And he was and well, he was pretty built
then by by those standards. So, but now
compared to the sort of typical sort of
expectation of of muscularity in in men,
&gt;&gt; that big flation thing is huge. You
watch bigger, stronger, faster, Mark
Bell's thing back.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. It's a great movie. Watch it
some time ago. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's 20 2007 I think. Anyway, so uh D3
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; protein, right?
&gt;&gt; Creatine. Creatine's in it.
&gt;&gt; Creatine's made the cut. Although I
think because it's a powder and they're
trying to put in gummies and they the
flavored versions are really the
flavored Momentous version, by the way,
is awesome. It's like I always had
&gt;&gt; like the little pastel thing, right?
It's like a chewable uh
&gt;&gt; tastes like sweet tarts. It they taste
too good.
&gt;&gt; They've just Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh Jeff sent me. In fact, I had the
&gt;&gt; candy with creatine
&gt;&gt; with one gram of like a
&gt;&gt; one gram. Problem is I So I I've been
taking creatine since I was probably 15
16. I do a I actually do the loading
thing where I take like 30 40 grams a
day for a week and then cut back to 10
grams a day.
&gt;&gt; Um and then I do a wash out every 16
weeks or so where I stop taking it
completely. I know this is very
unconventional for a week and you drop
some weight. It's actually interesting
to see how much strength you hold on to
in that week.
&gt;&gt; This is what I am without the assistance
of 10 grams of creative.
&gt;&gt; I just do it for me. I I don't
&gt;&gt; Well, look, you're talking to the school
of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Mike Mensy. You're allowed to
do. Okay. What's What's next? What do
you think next? Magnesium.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Magnesium 3inate or bislycinate. I know
there are multiple forms, you know, you
malate for soreness, you know, etc.,
etc. Citrate, laxative, you know, I
would say um but bislycinate and and 3
and8 cross the bloodb brain barrier more
readily. Um I would say pre-leep, you
know, 30 60 minutes before sleep. But
you know I had our chair of
ottoarangology head and neck surgery at
Stanford okay came on my podcast
obviously studies the hearing system and
she said that magnesium is protective
against hearing loss first of all
hearing loss low-level hearing loss is
associated with dementia less sensory
input okay deaf people can be obviously
very cognitively strong but they have
other ways of of bringing in sensory
input but partial hearing loss strongly
correlated with with dementia
hearing loss very common after concerts
in industrial workers, things like that.
Magnesium protects against hearing loss.
Why? The endolymph in which the hair
cells that vibrate in response to sound.
The that endolymph is like a thick kind
of fluid, viscous fluid is magnesium is
is a prominent feature of that endolymph
and it gets depleted by very loud sound
to some extent. But encouraging more
magnesium in the endolymph is protective
against hair cell loss, which is hearing
loss, which is permanent. Even though
it's low level, it accumulates over
time. So magnesium, magnesium for
cognition, magnesium for sleep. The
whole argument that there's less
magnesium in the soil nowadays because
of the way farming is done. It's just
been depleted. So you can get less of
the
&gt;&gt; vro and the your kale of yesterday is
not your kale of today, [laughter] so to
speak. Um so I think magnesium
supplementation is going to go through a
wave of like h they're just talking
about that like Chris and Andrew are
talking about that on podcast. This is
bro then it's going to show up. Oh wow.
Like you know we've got the um you know
chair of autoangology head and neck
surgery at Stanford talking about
magnesium supplementation to offset
things like tinidis maybe a bit but also
protect against hearing loss etc etc and
then it's going to be like magnesium
everyone should be taking magnesium and
then you know what'll happen someow you
know it's only an 11% difference in this
population etc etc I think this is one
moment where revisiting just very
briefly the data on alcohol is
worthwhile it's been so many years of
alcohol isn't a problem then alcohol is
actually good for you one or two drinks
a night. As long as it's red wine, then
it's bad for you. And then recently it
was no, it's actually not that bad for
you. And then now finally Stanford,
Keith Humphre and and colleagues at
Stanford did an analysis of all those
previous papers and essentially found
that the control groups in those studies
that concluded moderate drinking is good
for you were completely off. They were
they were comparing sick people to less
sick people in one case. And it turns
out that when you when you normalize for
the for proper controls and you look at
all the studies, you do the meta
analysis without fail. Zero is better
than any one or two per week, you're
probably fine. Still do all the things
that you're supposed to to promote your
health. Moderate drinking is bad for you
in terms of elevating cancer risk.
Certainly disrupting sleep and
microbiome and a bunch of other things
that aren't good. If you want to drink,
drink. But we are now landed squarely in
zero is better than any. And those
aren't my data. Those are data from the
best people for analyzing
the large scale studies, the smaller
studies across the board. And that I can
refer you to the the the analysis of the
analysis. It's quite solid.
&gt;&gt; That Lancet article, that Lancet study
from what 2016 17. So, I the reason that
my company in the UK is called Six Month
Sober Limited is because the first thing
that I ever did before I even launched
the podcast was I was like, elective
sobriety as somebody who didn't have a
um drinking problem
was so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] beneficial to me as a
productivity strategy as a guy in his
20s that because Northeast of the UK
club promoter stopping drinking was
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] revolutionary a decade ago. like
wiied. Oh my god. Like he's crazy. It's
like the you know Brian Johnson [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
penis injections like the Ben Greenfield
crazy. Yeah. Yeah. It's like oh my god
like why are you doing this thing? Uh
now you know Lo and No is very sort of
common
&gt;&gt; and I was like I want to get other
people to do this. I think that would be
cool. And I was like if I can teach
people to go sober for 6 months that
would be [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sick. Uh, and instead
of registering it as like Modern Wisdom
Limited before I did Modern Wisdom, I
was like, I'll do I'll do six months
sober and like I'll teach people that
this is like real good for them. And I
was I onetoone coached four people
through I think six months of it to like
test whether or not my approach had
done. It was daily coaching and people
would follow this course and do all the
rest of it. But yeah, that Lancet thing
was like the my foundational
uh scientific justification, but it's
like okay, these are all of the reasons
that the outcome is good. As you said,
it's like just do the thing and see if
you feel better. Like do do push your
caffeine by 90 minutes and tell me if
you don't have a crash later that day.
Like easy experiment.
&gt;&gt; I don't need to explain to you the
mechanism if you can get the outcome
that you're looking for. The same thing
is I learned from you. What is it? Um a
a locomotion with lateral eye movement
on a morning walk downregulates anxiety
&gt;&gt; big time. And not if you're looking at
your phone.
&gt;&gt; I'd been doing that. I'd been doing
morning walk thing from maybe Mark
Bell's like postprandial thing for
&gt;&gt; as long as I can remember. Right. Like
my
&gt;&gt; Stan Efering has been big on this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. My total like obsessive bro era
when I had this ridiculously convoluted
morning routine which
like escape velocity me out of being the
adult infant I was as a club promoter
and like I'll do meditation and blood of
gratitude and all the rest of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And
I was like if I wake up and I'm on the
wrong side of the bed and I go for a
walk and I come back like
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] doesn't feel as hard as it did
before. So, I didn't need you to tell me
that it's because of the locomotion and
the passage of stuff moving past you as
your focal point stays the same and the
lateral eye movement down. I'm like, I
didn't. It's great that I now know the
mechanism as you said earlier on because
it sort of justifies the buy in. I have
this sort of odd kind of investment and
I'm almost more the fact that I found it
myself then it gets justified by the
science. I'm like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] yes. Like I
&gt;&gt; Well, I think there's an interaction
there. Look, I I mean the placebo effect
is very real. The mechanism underlying
what you're describing also very real
independent of placebo effect. I think
that what I'm referring to is the buyin
of people understanding a bit of
underlying mechanism for the things that
clearly work. Like, do you need to
understand that there are three forms of
of a stimulus for hypertrophy, you know,
damage to the muscle,
&gt;&gt; hypertrophy? Yeah. Do you need to do?
No. But can it inform better choices
about training? Yes. Do you need to
understand what those are in order to uh
to grow a particular muscle group? No.
But if you understand a bit of what's
likely happening under the hood, it
affords you tremendous flexibility. It's
also, look, I also believe that
knowledge and gaining knowledge, not
only learning, but learning and doing is
what humans thrive on. I I'm believe in
the pursuit of knowledge, in learning. I
mean, a lot of my podcast content, like
I'd love to tell you the protocol for
this, but it's actually just really
effing cool. And if you don't think it's
cool, that's okay. which is why you do
your essentials thing, right? Which is
kind of the stripped back
&gt;&gt; protocols only critical science
protocols only. But what you'll find is
that
&gt;&gt; people who do the buy in of learning a
little bit about how something works.
Hopefully they learn something about
cortisol and sunlight and these kinds of
things.
&gt;&gt; It starts to make sense as to why you
actually feel better when you you feel
more energized. It's not it's not a
placebo effect. What you're explaining
is why it's not a placebo effect. That's
a good So yeah, so you get more buy in.
What I think is for me is cool and you
you said it earlier on is if you know
why this thing works. You can be a
little bit more robust and flexible with
how your strategy uh goes. You're not
just do this thing. If you don't know
why you do the thing or what the
mechanism is even at a very basic level,
as soon as you don't do that precise
thing, you have no [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] idea what
you're doing.
&gt;&gt; Or when things don't seem to go so
right. So, for instance, if you exercise
late in the late in the day and then the
next morning you're like, I'm feeling
sluggish. Like, is there something? No,
actually, you had a cortisol bump last
night. It's a negative feedback loop.
Your cortisol is naturally suppressed.
Get a bit more sunlight. The mechanisms,
excuse me, the the protocols start to
bridge together. What to do in case A,
B, C, or D because you understand the
the principle below it, which is
cortisol at one time impacts cortisol at
another time through this thing called
the negative feedback loop. What Josh
Weightkin, the great Josh Weightkin of,
you know,
&gt;&gt; I love that episode. Dude, I text
&gt;&gt; you guys should sit down and have a
conversation.
&gt;&gt; I had to text you about it. I was like,
"This guy, me and George, my housemate.
Uh, I like have obsessed over Josh, the
art of learning." Um,
&gt;&gt; he's got another book in in progress. I
I'm going to connect you guys cuz you
guys would hit it off. I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] love it
so well. He comes to the States pretty
often. He lives out of out of Yeah. He
moved down to the jungle at one point,
but he talks about knowing like the
principles below the principles.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Or underneath the principles. So the
principles underneath the principles tie
&gt;&gt; then being a practitioner as well of
some of those principles, right? And
then being connected to people in your
field and related fields that deeply
understand a stack of principles as
well.
&gt;&gt; That's what expertise really is. And
this is why, and I'm not taking a dig at
doctors, but this is why, listen,
recently I had a weird medical thing. I
took a new prescription drug because
somebody said, then I had what I thought
was a vestibular thing. Turns out it was
low blood pressure. was diagnosed in one
moment by a superb physician. By that
afternoon, I was fine. But I could have
just chased gone down the rabbit hole of
I was getting all sorts of crazy
suggestions about what to do. The look,
just like they say in music, sport, I'll
say it for podcasting and in medicine
and science. There are levels to this
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Some people are way better because
they have principles understood and
underneath those principles are
understood underneath they understand
how they connect up and connect down and
they know people that it's it's one
thing for a physician to say this will
handle your cholesterol.
But more often than not, what a
physician in one siloed aspect of
medicine will suggest will create a side
effect that will create a a job someday
for another physician in a different
silo. And it's just the way the training
is done. And Fagen Bomb would say this
is also the way that drugs are
categorized. You know, this drug is for
this, this, and this, and therefore
nothing else. And you say, wait, no,
that drug could potentially cure or
treat many other things. And so he's
exploring that in a serious way. And so,
and and getting results, curing disease,
literally. So,
&gt;&gt; I think it's not to say that people with
degrees are idiots. It's that let's hope
not, right? I I spent a lot of time
getting degrees. It's that just having
degrees in some cases not always are
necessary but not sufficient but most
what is absolutely necessary and
sufficient is to understand the major
principles the principles below those
and how those connect and then to be
able to contact people and to talk to
people and to be a practitioner like I
it's very clear to me that your training
as a nightclub owner
&gt;&gt; informed you so strongly about human
nature also about biology and not just
because you were staying up late and
sleeping into the day but that those the
the the themes of what you experienced
and learned are carried forward in the
themes of every discussion that you
have. And that's what being a real
expert is. This is why Derek from More
Plates More Dates love him. The first
time I saw I was like, "What's this guy?
What's this guy's credentials?" The
guy's credentials are he's an he's what
he's an actual expert, a true
intellectual and a true expert
practitioner. Understand something at
every level of granularity.
&gt;&gt; And [clears throat] Derek is a really
good example. great example of uh uh
like
sufficient uh necessary but not
sufficient given that he's outside of
academia like he's not doing
&gt;&gt; the academics are now going to him.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Watch Peter Tia who's a physician
trained at Stanford and Johns Hopkins
asking Derek about hormone holding each
other holding each other
&gt;&gt; and Peter is a super smart guy and he
has his expertise and so what you saw
there was people who have different
stacks of principles connecting
&gt;&gt; so cool I All right I I got to ask you
this um you mentioned protein kind of
the or at least it's
&gt;&gt; vitamin D creatine uh vitamin D protein
creatine I think it's going to be
magnesium
&gt;&gt; but what about diet and if I was to put
my little bet down
&gt;&gt; from what I'm the whispers, as Rick
Rubin would say, that I'm hearing fiber.
I think like the push toward fiber
because it's kind of been the forgotten
element of diet. I think that that
I'm beginning to hear an awful lot more
about that. I think in a in a nuanced
way, I hope because here's the deal. I
had Mike Snder, our former chair or
maybe still current chair of genetics at
at Stanford. He talked about blood sugar
regulation. Incredibly smart guy. He's
really into biomarkers and he's almost
80. You got to look at it. He looks like
he's like 55. Incredible. Incredible
health. And he and I were discussing
that fiber, certain forms of fiber
[clears throat]
cause inflammation in some people. Why a
lot of people say they can't eat a lot
of vegetables and this kind of thing.
Some fibers inflame the gut and body of
certain people. Other fibers do the
opposite.
Justin Sonnenberg and Christopher
Gardner ran a study looking at low sugar
fermented foods versus fiber effect on
the gut microbiome. The outcome was very
clear. Eating low sugar fermented foods
decreases the so-called uh inflamm they
call it as opposed to genome etc.
Proteom. Okay. So reduces inflammation
bodywide. So eat low sugar fermented
foods. Sauerkraut, the brine, kimchi,
beer doesn't quite count.
&gt;&gt; Kefir,
&gt;&gt; what's that?
&gt;&gt; Keir, these sorts of things. Yeah. So
people can pick their favorite ones. I'm
not a big kimchi fan only because it's
it's cut too coarse. If they would shred
it, I would like it, but it's like the I
have a hard time chewing it. Maybe.
&gt;&gt; Dude, cafe Cafe is Cafe is the hack for
this.
&gt;&gt; Cavier is great. Uh I love the full fat
Bulgarian yogurt. I listen, I love Greek
food, but Bulgarian yogurt makes makes
uh
&gt;&gt; You're a Bulgarian supremacist when it
comes to the yogurt world.
&gt;&gt; Careful. You call me a Bulgarian
supremacist. It'll be [laughter]
um the Bulgarian people seem like very
nice people. I've known a few. Um but
the point was that it
Low sugar fermented foods reduce
inflammation. They support the gut
microbiome in a major way. The fiber
group was divided. Some people who
intentionally ingested more fiber had
reduced so-called inflammatory markers,
inflammation, and they looked at a lot
of markers.
The other half had greatly increased
inflammation. This is why I think people
like Paul Saladino and um forgive me
what's the the original carnivore MD um
uh big guy. Forgive me. Oh, darn it.
He's been on Rogan. He's he's big jack
dude.
&gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] He could be anybody.
&gt;&gt; He's just always eating a steak.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Oh, forgive me. I
&gt;&gt; [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Okay.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Anyway, shout out to him. I think
I think
&gt;&gt; Sean Dr. Shawn Baker when they talk
about vegetables causing inflammation,
right? I think some people do experience
inflammation from vegetables. I think
look so I think fiber is going to make a
big comeback but we're going to have to
discern between what and uh Mike Snder
really understands this best certain
types of fiber are going to help people
and harm others harm in the gentle sense
you know increase inflammation which
could be severe for some people
autoimmune conditions etc other forms of
fiber are going to be beneficial I don't
think there are any I don't think there
are any uh specific forms of fiber that
everyone is going to tolerate well so
this is going to be an issue if fiber is
the next thing. I do think fiber is
critical. Um I eat sauerkraut every day.
I drink the brine off the sauerkraut. I
actually drink the brine, then I put
water back in it, add some salt, put it
back in the fridge cuz I just like that
after I go for a run or work out. It's
just delicious, right? It's delicious.
And also, if you go buy these fermented
brines as a as a product, they're
outrageously expensive. And you're
supposed to have like this much. Okay?
I'm a grown man. I'm not going to have
this much of anything. Okay? Certainly
not food or drink. when I'm have like a
thimbles full of of brine. It's like,
no, I want to drink the whole thing.
Like, come on. So, you know, and it it
greatly supports the gut and the healthy
bacteria thrive in that environment. So,
yes, I think this is the way it's going
to go. If I were to say, okay, like what
other things? Um,
&gt;&gt; you know, melaton, we didn't talk about
melatonin, which I'm not a huge fan of
as you know, but melatonin had a run a
long time ago. It's like a hormone in a
supplement form and people were just
downing this stuff. It's amazing it ever
broke through. I mean, you can get 50
milligram, 20 milligram.
&gt;&gt; It's crazy. And it's it and people will
fight me all day on this and I'll fight
right back um until they quit because it
there are amazing animal data showing
that it can suppress the the
hypothalamic gonad axis like
&gt;&gt; doesn't delay [clears throat] puberty in
Yes.
&gt;&gt; adolescence. Yes. And and it's also true
that there's melatonin in all the cells
of your body that are not light that are
not suppressed by light but rather
stimulated by light acts as an
antioxidant. You don't want to be taking
large amounts of melatonin in supplement
form. maybe a tiny bit every once in a
while. I was told uh not a little
recently that after a flight a 5
milligram dose of melatonin was good and
I was like what what yeah it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
tons because 1 milligram is like pretty
much bottom of the U of effectiveness
right and then you get get over into
more like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] going on and I'm like
5 milligrams why and that was the reason
oh well you've been exposed uh when
you're flying typically you've been in a
little bit of a dangerous environment
inflammation anti like antioxidant I'm
like But is melatonin like the tip of
the spear of the antioxidant world?
&gt;&gt; I mean, it's a it's a player. I mean, as
long as we're on this, I think that
something that's not a supplement, but
is likely going to and hopefully going
to be in the main frame of discussion is
that it's clear that long wavelength
light, red light from sunlight,
infrared, near infrared light is
beneficial for us, right? It's low
energy, but it can pass into our body.
It does support mitochondrial health. It
charges the mitochondria. I recently
learned that the water surrounding the
mitochondria actually absorb the red
light the same way the ocean absorbs red
light and that's why the ocean appears
blue reflect.
&gt;&gt; They're like little mini oceans.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. And you know the
mitochondria were essentially got in
they're back originated as bacteria that
got into ukareotic cells.
&gt;&gt; No way.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. They have their own little genome.
Yeah. They were initially not part of
us. Some distant version of us. I
&gt;&gt; I got to interject here. Just hold like
keep that in your mind. No.
&gt;&gt; Do you know how you inherit
mitochondria?
&gt;&gt; Through through mom.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. She's the
&gt;&gt; How [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] wild is that?
&gt;&gt; Well, you want to know what you like the
You seem to um I can
&gt;&gt; sex
&gt;&gt; to be Well, you seem to like sex differ.
You're hyperfocused on mating and
reproduction. So, let me um You should
have kids, man.
&gt;&gt; I can't wait. I'm ready.
&gt;&gt; Kids are Well, you know, the two things.
one one of the the only challenges I
have with having you as a friend is that
I have to constantly uh tell women in my
direct messages that I'm not going to
relay messages to you. Coming here
today, I had several people [laughter]
not the most. Anyway, a lot of women try
to get uh to you through me. Um okay,
the the second thing is in terms of of
sex differences.
&gt;&gt; What were we talking about here?
&gt;&gt; Uh that uh your [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] mitochondria
comes
&gt;&gt; Yes. Sorry. different different brain
circuit turned on there. Um
&gt;&gt; there's something now happening in
England. Okay, this has been approved
for mitochondrial diseases. So there are
people who have mitochondrial diseases
and they want to have children, right?
And so they you know they don't want to
pass along these mitochondrial diseases.
The when the egg is fertilized the sort
of splitting of of the egg into you know
multiple cell types that forms the
blastois which just means balls of a
ball of cells which just be you know is
the early embryo etc. it the
mitochondrial DNA are intensely
important for the physical pulling apart
the spindles and things that pull those
apart they come from mom okay so it's
actually been solved that you can do
three parent IVF
&gt;&gt; to bypass
but this is now being done so think
about it as women age right and their
ovarian reserve declines right so does
the the quote unquote quality of the
eggs we talk about quality of sperm
because this is a definitely plays a
role in terms of what are called day
three crashes. You know, when the embryo
doesn't get doesn't even become a
blastois, it doesn't get past day three.
That's typically attributed to the
sperm. But a a lot of the process is
coming from the spindle and therefore
the mitochondrial DNA of mom. So there's
now a process where you get two parents
and let's say the woman has let's say
she has a mitochondrial issue um genetic
issue she doesn't want to pass on or
let's say that she's you know in her um
late 40s or early 50s or maybe even
mid-50s. They can take eggs, presumably
presuming she still makes eggs, take the
nuclear DNA, put it into the essentially
an egg that's had its nuclear DNA taken
out but maintains its mitochondrial DNA
and then fertilize with the milker
obviously with the sperm from the from
the father. You end up with a child that
has the nuclear DNA of the intended mom
and has essentially surrogate
mitochondrial DNA in the cytoplas. cuz
this is so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; that's actually being done. Okay, that's
that was being done actually fairly
often in from what I understand in
Ukraine prior to the war. There were
people in the United States traveling
there. It's not legal here.
&gt;&gt; They do it, I believe, in in some places
in the Middle East in Mexico and
certainly in England for mito for
mitochondrial disease.
&gt;&gt; So, this has been done. It works, but it
brings up all sorts of interesting
ethical considerations.
&gt;&gt; Who is this child? Well, the child has
the nuclear DNA of one mom and the and
the mitochondrial DNA of a different
mom.
&gt;&gt; Dude, this is so sick. Yeah, I only
learned about the uh mitochondrial only
comes from mom thing like three months
ago and I kind of not really been able
to stop thinking about it. The reason is
&gt;&gt; when you look at somebody and I'm going
to use Kanye West as my example for
this. Didn't think I was going to go
there.
&gt;&gt; You really want this podcast flag. We
might as well invite Lex and Kanye in
&gt;&gt; a sit down. Um,
what I think about and this I total like
the most bro science that we've done
today is if you have a person who has
the mitochondrial function of a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
V12 engine in a garage, mitochondrial
function of a V12 engine, but the
psychological chassis of a Honda Civic.
you have this sort of crazy out there
energy, but you don't necessarily have
the handling to be able to sort of
direct it.
&gt;&gt; You described a lot of of teenagers and
early 20s males.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah, of course.
&gt;&gt; Especially where I went to school in
Santa Barbara.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. With the testosterone pumping. Um,
but I just I thought about that when you
go, okay, well, you've got this
combining of psychological profile, but
this almost uniheritability when it
comes to mitochondria. Apparently, it's
like 99 something%. M
&gt;&gt; is [clears throat] that and I don't know
if the other percent comes from the
father or if it's like some weird like m
I don't understand um what was it mito
something I did a mitochondrial test um
so I've sent off a bunch of cheek swabs
which will be cool I'll get to see those
when I come back home anyway I I just
thought about mum could be like this
powerhouse or the opposite you could
have uh quite a low uh mitochondria
function however that presents energy
disposition all the rest of it but kind
of the psychological predisposition of
somebody that's like a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hard
charging go-getter, lots of
conscientiousness, industrious, highly
disagreeable, low politeness, all this
stuff. I thought I just thought it was
real interesting about how those
combine.
&gt;&gt; Well, you're still going to get it.
Absolutely. You're still going to get
genomic DNA from mom, right? You know,
um those 23 chromosomes. I mean, you're
going to get genomic DNA from mom and
from dad. What's really a mindbend, no
pun intended, is there's a woman whose
laboratory is at Harvard um named
Katherine Doolock who's a luminary in
the field of neuroscience who uh did
some beautiful experiments showing that
different brain areas are genetically
identical to mom or to dad. Even in you
and me, you have entire brain areas that
are 100% the genes from dad. It's not
it's a myth that every cell is a is a
50-50 mix of genes from mom.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Independent of the mitochondrial DNA
piece, right? We're talking about
genomic DNA. In fact, they did some
marking studies and you could actually
well, you see this two ways. You can do
it if you mark the cells and you know,
blue ones are mom and you know, etc.
They do those kind of the studies. The
more um convincing studies, of course,
are where you have genes that are passed
specifically through the Y chromosome,
right? And you can actually either
postmortem or in terms of the
requirements of of having a gene present
in a given brain structure, you can
realize that you have brains where a
given brain area carries the disease
mutation and another brain area doesn't
&gt;&gt; and even though it all came through dad
on the Y chromosome, it should be
everywhere. But it's not because you
have some structures that are
essentially purely xaxis
domains that
&gt;&gt; and they correspond to entire brain
structures that drive of all things
hypothalamic fat function. There's
there's a condition of hyperphasia of of
like um very obese kids they can't stop
eating. This kind of thing comes through
I forget if it's mom or dad. So these
things show up in the human genetics. Um
I mean human genetics is often more
complicated than we think about in terms
of mandelian genetics. You can get
hypomorphs where you have kind of
reduced gene expression as opposed to
just lacking a gene completely. This
exists and we could talk about this for
hours, but um so when people say see an
attribute and they say, "Oh, that you
clearly got that from your mom or from
your dad." That's actually could be
true,
&gt;&gt; right? That they're much more like their
dad in certain ways and much like more
like their mom in certain ways based
because we're never going to know, but
their brain is
&gt;&gt; entirely actually separated out. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it very well could be. It's gonna be fun
when your kids play with my kids and we
can, you know, Lex Lex, that's you.
That's
&gt;&gt; Lex and I have this play. Well, we're
not gonna have kids together. I don't
want to give people the wrong
impression. What I was referring to is
the fact that Lex and I always have this
discussion about timing uh the the
delivery of our independently generated
kids um
&gt;&gt; so that they can grow up together.
&gt;&gt; Well, he wants my he wants his kids to
beat up my kids in jiu-jitsu. Okay. Uh I
I have more a theory about um enrichment
of uh sort of the engineering uh
offspring versus the nurse.
&gt;&gt; You're much more pro pro-social than
him. He's very competitive in this
regard. I see.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I I mean I'm competitive in
certain things, but but mo mostly my
&gt;&gt; trying to compensate for
&gt;&gt; my interests are so you are so like uh
some I don't really find many people
looking at my collection of interests in
an overlapping way.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to beat him at octopus. the
octopus training or whatever it is.
&gt;&gt; Well, the octopus raising community is a
little people are a little guarded, but
um so so as a as a it's a whole thing,
man. It's a whole different podcast,
whole thing. But I did want to ask you
something. Um I want to make sure. So
you put out this video about your health
journey or I guess it's your sickness
journey and seek in search of you seem
really good. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um, can I wager a hypothesis
&gt;&gt; cuz I've experienced this myself at at
one point. Do you think that at some
point,
&gt;&gt; sounds like I'm leading the witness, but
that it's possible to like that in
pursuit of recovering one's health that
along the way, cuz I've done this, you
do something or take something that
layers in another health thing that
makes the like direction increasingly
confusing. Like I took this on the
suggestion of some conventional doc
recently. I decided to try and knock
down my apo a bit. It's a little high
&gt;&gt; and it created a whole set of
gallbladder issues for a couple days. I
stopped taking it. I feel fine again and
I probably don't need to take it in the
first place.
&gt;&gt; So I believe medications work. I think
they can be very useful. I also think
that some of them work so well
&gt;&gt; that they can drive the system in
directions we don't want to go. And so
when I hear about these blood cleansing
methods
&gt;&gt; or I hear, you know, I I worry as as
your friend, I worry a little bit that
um listen, I don't want you to struggle
with the symptoms of limes, but I do
worry a little bit because these things
are really extreme.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. So, the health documentary
that we put out, which is, you know, uh,
episode one, the reason that I did that
was I'd assumed at the start of last
year, the day that I got the diagnosis,
I knew that something was up. I knew
that I was tired all the time. I knew
that I wasn't recovered no matter how
long I slept. I knew that I had brain
fog and I knew that my mood was low. I'm
like, uh, you know, maybe this is just
getting older. Maybe it's something
whatever. And uh the day that I started
filming with my videographer was the day
that I got a hey we've done an EKO test
on your stool and it turns out that
there's a line. We don't know if it's
IGG or IGN. We don't know how prevalent
it is when you got it. Don't know if
it's Bella.
&gt;&gt; It could have been way back when you got
some almost certainly was vestigial. Um
all of the stuff all of the basic [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
that wasn't exciting I did right. I did
&gt;&gt; doxycycline.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Doxycycline minyc like all of the
usual treatments. This was not me
jumping straight to going to Tijuana to
have an intrajugular line put in and me
live in a hospital. It wasn't me going
straight to Vienna to get a a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
hypothermia treatment like teaser about
what the next episode is. Um, it wasn't
me going straight to those. I'd gone
through all of the standard. It's
Gabrielle Lion that's looking after me.
She's and she is as like great physician
western by the book as you're going to
get, but she's just a bit more like
integrative than most people would be.
So, we're trying to make changes to diet
and we're trying to make changes to
Well, my training had to get backed off
from like 10 out of 10 to 6 out of 10
for a while. And oh, well, maybe we need
to do and then I had a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] um a
migraine with aura that I thought was a
stroke. I thought I was having a stroke.
So, have you ever had a migraine with
aura?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Okay. You know what they are?
&gt;&gt; It's like a ring.
&gt;&gt; So, some people get it visually, but
other people get it all and I get it
all. So, I'm on an assault bike doing
Norwegian 4x4. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Ronda Patrick.
And uh I'm my heart rate's coming back
down. It's a minute 165, 165, something
like that. And it's coming back down.
And like it was as if someone shoved a
piece of burning toast under my nose.
Like that was all I could smell.
&gt;&gt; That worries me because normally when
somebody gets the sort of phantom smell
of burning toast, we worry about
temporal lobe seizures. And and and
&gt;&gt; so immediately I go immediately. That's
why I thought I'm like this is how I
die. I die on an assault bike in on it
gym Austin, Texas. This is how I [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
got Yeah, but I was doing super badass,
but it's it's it's in the right.
&gt;&gt; Is that how I got I got taken out.
&gt;&gt; You weren't just like on social media.
&gt;&gt; That's true. So anyway, I immediately go
and get a CT scan. No, it's not. I go in
to get a what is it? A a transient
eskeemic attack. TIA. Yeah. I'm like, we
go and do another one with contrast. So
now I've got [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] gatalinium in me
and I'm going to have to like detox the
gal.
&gt;&gt; You're giving people creatine after TAS
now.
&gt;&gt; It doesn't surprise me. neuroprotective
any so like the amount of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that
wasn't included in that vlog that I went
through like hundreds of sauna sessions
with colostyamine or char like charcoal
body wash as a binder to try and like
get the mold out of me and
&gt;&gt; so what you had mold and lime
&gt;&gt; oh the litany of things mold
&gt;&gt; I mean I saw that in the video but the
mold was confirmed
&gt;&gt; mold mold was through the roof I've done
uh who does total tox can't remember who
does the test anybody that's got it uh
total tox is kind of the gold standard
test
&gt;&gt; we're going to need keate our metals
after being in this garage.
&gt;&gt; That's true.
&gt;&gt; Smells like bumper in there.
&gt;&gt; Heavy metals are in there. BPA are in
there. But I mean, the the the
&gt;&gt; the problem is, and I said this in the
in the dock, if you do a huge battery of
tests, loads of shit's going to come
back and be out of whack. But if you
don't feel bad, it doesn't matter.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. If you have antibodies to
chocolate or strawberries or you
probably developed those as a kid, and I
love
&gt;&gt; dark chocolate and strawberries, but I'm
sure I make antibodies to them. That
doesn't mean I have a food allergy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Right. So you if you do a lot of
tests, stuff's going to come back and
what you're doing is you're basically
like a guess who Sherlock Holmesing your
way through a list of potential suspects
for why you don't feel good. And one of
the problems that I found and have found
since the doc came out, even though lots
of people, especially people from like
the MCFS
community, chronic fatigue syndrome
stuff, I had tinitus for a long while.
Like that that community was like,
"Fuck, like somebody is talking about
this and they're saying it's kind of a
silent like suffering that nobody really
appreciates." And this was met at least
in large part by people going Chris
looks fine. This is all psychosmatic.
It's in his head. It's because he's
pushing himself too hard. it's because
of blah blah blah.
&gt;&gt; That makes it worse, right? And and I'm
certainly not suggesting that. I mean, I
think you're doing an important public
health service by talking about these
things. Um, you know, I think I'm
hearing more and more lately from
&gt;&gt; people, young men who took drugs for to
avoid hair loss, post finansteride
syndrome.
&gt;&gt; You know, the medical [clears throat]
community, the standard medical
community thinks it's it's nonsense. But
you talk to these guys that are having
[clears throat] serious and at least
till now permanent. Hopefully some of
this stuff can be reversed. Sexual
sexual health issues, psychological
issues. I mean, it's cratered the lives
of a lot of young guys. And there's
actually a
scientist out at a scientist physician
out in Florida who I I may end up
posting on the podcast. There needs to
be more discussion about these things. I
always thought that you could kill lime
with high dose or just long last long
duration doxycycline treatment.
[clears throat] And you found it it
helped or didn't help?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it it's it helped. But there's
just when you start to get deep into
these things called fish tests. You do a
fish test for it. Um and I'm working
with like Dr.
&gt;&gt; like fluorescent in C2 hybridization.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. There's this uh Dr. Caren who is
German guy who's like the number one on
the planet. Matt Cook out of uh San
Francisco, San Jose is the guy that's
leading this like more name
&gt;&gt; forward thinking. He does like he does a
lot of stuff forward thinking sports
medicine doc who's now doing peptide
stuff and um
just not quite right and not quite
fixed. All of that is to be said I got
inverse pretty privilege which is you
look fine on the outside. You're in good
condition. You're a young dude that
seems to still be performing at an okay
level. But it's kind of the same as
saying to Usain Bold, "Oh, you ran a sub
10, you must be great." It's like, yeah,
but I should be running like 9 954s or
95s and I know where I'm supposed to be
at and I know where I want to be at and
I don't want to like
surrender to entropy in this way and
just accept a lower standard of living
for myself. And that was the the main
thing I wanted to people people to take
away was like there are so many people
who don't have the inclination, the time
or the resources like I do to be able to
text you or a tear or [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Rhonda or
whoever I want or or or Matt Cook or fly
to take time off to go to Mexico or do
all of this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that are just like
this is life now. This is my life now.
Yeah, I'm just a bit more forgetful. I
don't think I used to be that forgetful.
Yeah, I fall asleep at 8 p.m. I don't
think I used to fall asleep at 8 p.m.
Yeah, like my mood's a little bit low,
but maybe it's just because of and it's
explained away and explained away and
explained away by lifestyle,
environment, psychological disposition,
aging, something. And you're like, oh
no, you there are chronic underlying
infections that you've got
&gt;&gt; and to treat them is so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] complex
and so expensive. But the mold was the
co COVID and mold were the two things
that really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] pushed me over the
edge. And then when you get into
autoimmune, all you need for autoimmune
is genetic predisposition, permeable gut
lining, and environmental stressor. And
if you live in a house with mold for two
years, like I challenge anybody that's
got those two to do the third and not
get [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] by.
&gt;&gt; Is it true that that mold um is a
prominent issue in Austin? I hear this.
&gt;&gt; It's one of the highest Texas is one of
the highest uh states for in the
country. Is it the the you know hot
humid days and for some reason this
country decides your country
&gt;&gt; decides that it's going to build houses
out of wood. It's an organic material
but while it's being built out of wood
it's exposed to the elements. So it gets
wet and hot and wet and hot and wet and
hot and now the skeleton of the thing
that you live in is has been wet and hot
and now it gets covered in cladding
while it's been wet and hot and
sometimes it's wet as it gets cold.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean home design is something I
I think a lot about from the lighting
perspective. We didn't get into it, but
like, you know, we hear so much about
the benefits of red light, but, you
know, long wavelength light can really
offset some of the toxicity of of blue
light, but it's not just about sleep.
But, but going back to what you were
just uh describing. Um, do me a favor.
I'd love for you to talk to David
Fagenbomb, who cured his own Castleman's
through an intelligent approach of
taking these already approved drugs to
treat um, Castleman's. I mean, he cured
himself. He's alive 11 years now. He's
got kids. He's married with kids.
he was going to die like dead. But he
has this um not for profofit every cure
where they use AI and and hardcore
scientific methods basically. I mean not
to sound loose about the what exactly
they do, but he's a serious scientist
and physician to try and decode
different diseases and and try different
existing drugs to uh to cure them. So I
think it'd be worth talking to him. He's
very open-minded and he understands the
medical profession and he understands
that if the solution hasn't been handed
to you yet, um it's because people
aren't aware of it, but it's very likely
that it does exist.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, I think it'd be a good conversation
for you.
&gt;&gt; I like it. I mean, look, if if I was to
track my journey, uh we were here in
this location a little at a different
angle about 14 months ago or so, I
think. And uh just after that, September
of last year and sort of spring of this
year were the two worst times for
health. Brain was so slippery. I was so
forgetful. It was insane. It was like
trying to think through mud. Like I love
the agility of my own thoughts. And the
fact that that was taken from me
through, you know, no fault of my own.
Like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hell. Oh god. You you were
too hard charging. I focus on sleep. I
I'm in bed for like at least
&gt;&gt; Yeah, you're a vigorous guy. I I don't
buy the like you're just pushing too
hard. I mean there are there are ways in
which people push too hard but you're
&gt;&gt; like you said you're you have a you know
12-cylinder engine that's you you built
yourself that to that and you came into
the world presumably with some forward
center of mass I feeling like you were
born started nursing finished nursing
and got into the world and started doing
stuff.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, but that period, the last time
that we were here, you can even go back
and watch the vlog from after we've
recorded and I think I finish up with
Eric and I'm outside and I'm like half
asleep falling asleep on this couch and
uh it was if if I two and a half years
ago were a 10 if that was Chris at where
he's supposed to be.
14 months ago I was at a four or a five
and then the start of this year and for
much of the start of this year I was
like a three or a four. I would say I'm
up to now I swing between
uh seven and an eight and the fact that
I was able to do the live shows in New
York and Toronto last week and I've got
LA coming up and then Boston, Denver,
Boston, Chicago, Nashville and like it
feels like this color back in the world
cuz it felt very grayscale for a long
time. I mean, there's a it's I say it in
the dock, but there was a day when I
forgot how to tie my shoes. Like, I
looked down at my feet and there were
laces that were undone and I didn't know
the combination to tie my laces in to be
able to get them to be in a bow anymore.
And I'm like, I've gone from that, which
was like a three out of 10, to now I
feel okay and there's some color in the
world and I can have fun with my friends
and I can [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] send it like and I can
stay out after 11:00 without fearing
that the next day is going to be ruined
or not drinking. I'm 37. Should I be
should I be treating myself with that
much [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] fragility? No, I don't
think
&gt;&gt; probably. I mean, it's it's I mean, it's
almost like you're describing a kind of
having a sort of dementia for a while.
It felt like Have you ever taken an
anticolinergic?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; So, I took one. This is [clears throat]
funny. Uh during
&gt;&gt; I like to stimulate the conergic system.
&gt;&gt; Well, what you should do, but if you
&gt;&gt; I'm not a big nicotine guy, but every
once in a while,
&gt;&gt; if you have overactive bladder syndrome,
um which I and a lot of men developed
during COVID because we were right next
to our bathroom and we had nothing else
to do. So, we were drinking fluid and
going to the bathroom and drinking fluid
and going to the bathroom. And I was
like, I found myself urinating more
frequently when I didn't need to. And
I'm like, prostate problem. Like, this
is going to the doctor. I tell him and
he laughs. So in the UK in like 2020 he
laughs. I was like, "Is this funny to
you or what?" And he was like, "You
would not believe how many men I've seen
over the last couple of months that have
come in with this problem. My business
partner at the time in the nightclub
stuff, Darren comes around. We have a
meeting. It's the first meeting we've
had in ages after I ruptured my
Achilles. So my foot's up on this thing.
And while we're having this meeting, he
drinks half a glass of water and it's
still in the back of my mind, right?
Because I've just gone to see my doctor
that week." during the meeting an hour
and a half. He goes to the bathroom
three times and I'm like,
&gt;&gt; "Mate, are you uh you finding yourself
urinating more frequently than
&gt;&gt; That's not just from sitting too much."
Because certainly during the pandemic,
there was a lot of sitting
&gt;&gt; at a standing desk.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh anyway, you've drained the little
muscle in between the bladder and the
urethra to be like the sensitivity that
you're supposed to be at, which as a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] podcaster, right? Is one of the
primary things you need to develop
beyond your working memory is your
bladder. If you're going to be a
podcaster or a touring musician, you got
to learn how to you gota you learn how
to hold your piss.
&gt;&gt; So, one of the things that they give you
is an anticolinergic which gets that uh
little sense of things.
&gt;&gt; Then you probably feel like you're
floating.
&gt;&gt; It's horrible. I
&gt;&gt; that's what they used to give uh I mean
this was the whole thing of witches, you
know, like that to give them the they
would take it to uh give themselves the
sensation of flying. This taps into the
um muscerinic system different than the
nicotine colonergic system. So nicotinic
colonergic system, it's the stuff of
muscle [clears throat] movement and
contraction and focus and all the reason
people take nicotine. The muscerinic
stuff is what you took. Uh muscerinic
agonists are going to give you a
sensation that you're floating. Uh it's
going to make your pupil make your
pupils about this big, but you're
relaxed. Normally if your pupils are
big, you're more alert. You're going to
feel dissociated. This is this was
actually recreational witch drug use.
&gt;&gt; Dude, it [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sucks. You can't
remember [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] anyway. It felt like that.
And I remember I was I was talking to
Michaela Peterson at the time and I was
like, "I'm being forgetful and I've got
this thing." And obviously she was
experienced from dealing with her dad
and she was like, "Taken any new
medications recently?" And I was like,
"Um, yeah, like I've taken 10 milligrams
a day of this anticolinate." She was
like, rings me immediately. She's like,
"Stop taking that stuff right now."
&gt;&gt; Prescription drugs work very well to to
hit the mechanisms they're supposed to
hit, which is why they blast radius.
&gt;&gt; They often listen, some of them are
great. Some of them create real
problems. I mean, I'm Yeah, man. Anyway,
&gt;&gt; so it sounds like things were just
getting layered in and layered in
&gt;&gt; and you're fighting through this stuff
and yeah, you're right. As you try to
treat one thing, maybe something else
comes up like if there was H pylori,
candida, SIBO, uh le pylori treatment.
Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that's like four different antibiotics.
&gt;&gt; Correct. Ruthless. All timed with
different sequence, sequence, sequence,
sequence, sequence.
&gt;&gt; And you're a hard driving guy. So the
thing about autoimmune stuff is like a
lot of men, women too, but u a lot of
men who tell me like, "Oh, I'm like got
this weird skin thing or these like, you
know," and they freak out. It's cuz if
you're the kind of person who can push
and not get sick too often, often times
it means that your immune system can
really ramp up in parallel with your
kind of levels of drive and activity.
These the I don't get sick people who
always end up getting sick sooner or
later, but the just push push push push
push, you get high levels of interlucans
and things that you end up
you know, essentially deploying so so
much cortisol but also anti-inflammatory
molecules, right? It's not just cortisol
that you can start, you know, getting
skin conditions because your immune
system people get likened planis. You
really want to get scared. Look up
lychen planis is some scary photos like
a moss.
&gt;&gt; Well, they're like um you're right, but
it's it's an autoimmune condition where
the immune system because of stress and
excessively long days, etc. excessive
caffeine, push, push, push. People will
get um it's almost like looks like
bruising um on the wrists. They can get
them on their genitals, on the tops of
their feet. People get very, very scared
and it's actually just they're pushing
themselves too hard. Some relaxation.
Look, I think humans can tolerate a ton
of stress provide they get enough sleep
at night and sleep. Well,
&gt;&gt; let me give you this.
&gt;&gt; But but what you're telling me is you
you're looking down at your shoelaces.
You don't recognize them as shoelaces.
Even this is how I know I'm too sleepd
deprived. When I used to pull
allnighters and I'd work on grants and
papers really late, I'd look at the word
'the' and I go, "That's misspelled. That
has to be misspelled." Like I'm like,
"It's time to go to sleep." That was my
I mean, just to show you how
&gt;&gt; unhealthy perhaps I was is that was my
red lining when I when the word 'the'
looked [laughter] looked like I'm not
sure if that's spelled correctly. I'm
like, I'm sleep deprived.
&gt;&gt; I think I think I'm going too far. But
yeah, dude. I I have come to believe
that there is basically no such thing as
being overworked, only under rested. And
um I was resting. I was going to bed. I
mean, I can even show you my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
whoop data. And Andy's got it. All the
team have got it in terms of that. I was
Dude, I was in bed. I'm not kidding you.
I was in bed from 7:00 p.m. till 7:00
a.m. for like weeks, months at a time.
I'm like, I'm dedicating. So, and I'd
wake up having been asleep for all this
time and I'm like, I'm so drained. And
it's not. Anyway, I'm now moving between
like if it's a really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] bad one
like a six up to a seven and sometimes
up to an eight. And dude, when it's an
eight, like today's probably a seven and
a half. I woke up this morning the I'm
at the W in West Hollywood. I'm like
surrounded by I saw a homeless guy
literally pissing into a wine bottle
this morning and I'm like, "Hey, what's
going on? The sun's shining. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
shit."
&gt;&gt; The sun's always shining.
&gt;&gt; Go to a Dunkin Donut.
We have a serious um
homeless/mental/addicted
uh people.
&gt;&gt; The world just felt like color. I'm
like, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] this is so good. It's back
in technical. It honestly feels a little
bit like I like I kind of got a second.
It feels like I died a bit. Feels like
me, who I am, kind of died. And and now
I've been so gentle with myself this
year. I've gone to bed early and I've
restricted my diet and I haven't had any
fun and I haven't really adventured and
I've worked and I haven't got to do new
stuff. If I've just tried to hold on,
you know, my I used to have this I still
do this really long end of year review.
I had two goals for this year. Usually
it'd be a li meditation practice,
training, muscle gain, strength, all
this stuff. Two goals for this year. Fix
my health. Don't let the show drop. That
was it. If I got to the end of the year
and I hadn't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] the show and my
health was fixed, I'm like that would be
and as I come into land, you know, we've
got a few months left in the year. I'm
like, I think we might just sort of
bring this into land there. So, it's
been a real it's been a real sort of
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] adventure that I wouldn't wish
on anybody, especially the hopelessness.
Having hope, expectation, that being
dashed, that really uh that really
sucks. Like, that's the hardest part.
Um, that you think that things are going
to change or be improved and then they
don't and then you have to deal with the
expectation and then the the the
disappointment and the disappointment
was the worst thing. But uh if nothing
else in kind of Brian Johnson's on the
show later this week, Brian, very few
people want to be Brian, but appreciate
some of the things that he's learned by
the stuff that he's done. I'm like,
dude, if I can tell you 20 different
modalities that I think didn't move the
needle and two that did
that at least there's a bit of silver
lining on the fact and now obviously I'm
hopefully on the trajectory of being
back to being better.
&gt;&gt; Seems like sounds like it. I'm being
hopeful.
&gt;&gt; It feels it feels like that to me. And
uh you know I did to sort of round it
out I I did Pers Morgan show a couple of
weeks ago and Michaela came on and was
talking about dad and Jordan's having a
really [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] rough time.
&gt;&gt; How he's doing
&gt;&gt; super rough like just not good. The
answer is not good. And she finished up
with like um
so we think it's because of mold and we
think maybe because of this autoimmune
but then we also think that it might be
because of demons and like that was what
she left the conversation with. And then
Pier turns to me and he's like, "Chris,
you're [snorts] real. Think it's the
work of the devil?" And I'm like, "I Why
do I have to clean up this?" Like, this
is her claim. This
&gt;&gt; just said, "Yes."
&gt;&gt; Well, look, my point is I understand why
because it feels so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] cosmically
unfair after a while that you're like,
"This has to be a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] curse." Like,
this feels so much bigger and greater
and more painful than it should be. Uh,
I can only attribute this to like some
karmic retribution that is owed to me
for some past slight some something. And
that's when you start to ask yourself,
&gt;&gt; you mean excessively hard on I mean,
whatever the reasons.
Well, let me let me ask you a question.
Um, I mean, we're on a podcast, but in
all sincerity, how can I and your other
friends support you? And since we're
doing this as a podcast, I'll also say,
how can the people who listen support
you? I mean, like, but really, I mean,
do you want them uh I mean, I'll be
praying for you. I decide that. Do you
want people to pray for you? Do you want
um They will be, but do you want people
to send you suggestions? Do you want
people to not send you, you know, often
times when when somebody's struggling
like my or anyone's impulses be like,
I'm like, talk to Fagan Mom, do this.
you know, we we all want to do that, but
but I hear it's it's clear this is like,
you know, what started as lime has it's
opening up all sorts of doors and
cupboards and stuff in there. And um I
mean, I as your friend, I caution you
against exploring whether or not you did
something in a past life or did I I
think you're um my understanding of you
is that you're sufficiently in touch
with your mistakes and your uh good
choices.
&gt;&gt; Overly in touch with you.
&gt;&gt; No, no, I don't think overly. I think
you you you're a you're an introspective
person and and flagagillating yourself
is is certainly not going to help. But
um yeah, how can how can um how can I
support you?
&gt;&gt; You do already, man. You know, I had a a
close runin over this weekend, which
we'll we'll see whether or not that ends
up surfacing. Uh perhaps relevant to our
conversation about what's going on with
with mainstream media and how they are
uh
garnering momentum by attaching
themselves to industries and platforms
that have momentum. Very interesting
that it never happens before there's any
status associated with trying to unear
&gt;&gt; imagine that
&gt;&gt; something. Um, you are, dude. Like, I I
really cherish our friendship. Like, the
fact that I can tech, you're one text
away from like giving me a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
essay. You even sent me, this is to
break the fourth wall how good of a
friend you are. You knew that I was like
sad and worried this weekend. So, not
only did you give me a ton of different
bits of advice, you then decided to peel
off to give me like a miniature novel
about a black ferret who repopulated an
entire like female colony of ferrets and
this entire
&gt;&gt; He saved the species. save the and I'm
like
&gt;&gt; you're like Scarface. You're going to
save the species.
&gt;&gt; I appreciate you. I appreciate all of
the stuff that you do for me. That that
that's it. Um
&gt;&gt; I really do. I really cherish that
friendship. Uh
&gt;&gt; likewise.
&gt;&gt; When does the book come out? People want
to know.
&gt;&gt; September 2026.
&gt;&gt; Let's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] go, dude. 12 months later,
we're going to be back here. I can't
wait.
&gt;&gt; Would love to. Um yeah, I delayed it to
add some things, change some things, and
do some illustrations. And um I
apologize in a real way for the delay,
but I I'll make it worth people's while.
And um thanks for the kind words. I
you're an amazing friend, you know. I
mean, I've been so fortunate to be part
of this colleague set that we called,
you know, podcasters and the more or
less same vintage of podcasters,
although you got into it before me. Um,
I will be praying for you and I also
will do everything I can in terms of my
connections and resources in the medical
and scientific community to try and
figure out what's going on. I do think
you're on the on the recovery
slope now and um and I'll be praying
that that that continues and do anything
to support you. You're a equally if not
more amazing friend. How do you quantify
these things? Right. And um it's such a
pleasure to be in the same field, to
call you a friend, and you're going to
beat this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] thing. No doubt.
&gt;&gt; Thank you, man. Until next time. Thank
you very much for tuning in, and
congratulations for not being so Tik Tok
that you switched off partway through an
episode. Uh if you enjoyed that with
Hubman, you will love this one with
Ronda Patrick.
Come on.