[Music]
This is the fitness wisdom podcast.
This is a rebroadcast episode from Dr.
Alexis Cowan's Instagram. So, full
credit goes to her and of course Dr.
Jack Kruse for this incredible video.
Wanted to share with you guys because I
felt that this was incredibly important
information. The Bitcoin frog
uh I guess stage cuz I'm a little bit
too controversial. So, this year we're
going to be a little bit less
controversial. I'm here to talk to you
about the most valuable asset on the
planet that's not big. It's time.
So,
I'm going to Bible hack time for you in
a very interesting way. My slides have
nothing to do with what I'm going to
talk to you about. So, the slides are
also 21 hacks
for time for you to take and listen to.
And I'm going to give you 21 more. So
when you're finished, you'll have 42.
So the first one is to put time in your
bank account to get socks is A.M.
sunrise. You need to get 30 to 60
minutes if you're a tech user. If you're
not, I'm assuming everybody in this room
is. Um, you want to fix your mic. You
don't need to know how to do it. Just
get outside. You don't have to look at
the sun. You just have to be outside so
your eye can sense the sun. This will
fix a protein in your mitochondria
called CCO. You'll make a special type
of water that's really important to run
your app. It's probably
80% of the story that I'm going to tell
you now. If you can pull that off,
you'll have absolutely no problem
dealing with it. The second one is, you
know, that people in Europe like to
smoke. Not very popular in United
States, but I want you to go outside and
tell your boss that you smoke. But when
you go out, you're going to take light
breaks. So if you're doing heavy coding
or you're doing things in Bitcoin, every
2530 minutes and you're using power in
your head, I would like you to go
outside if you can. They have shirts
that are made now called full tan or
kicki. This happens to be one of them.
The sun goes right through so you get a
benefit. So go out as much as you can
when you're doing heavy work and put
some more time in your bank account.
The next one you can probably see on my
face. These are blue blocking classes.
This year the organizers of Bitcoin
Proud gave all the speakers here in
these classes. These are designed, the
ones I'm wearing, go all the way up to
500 for that ambient light. So, it
blocks all the terrible light that's
shining on you right now. It protects my
brain. What's the main goal for you guys
to understand? It protects melatonin in
your brain. Melatonin in your brain
makes you sleep better. You sleep
better. You renovate better. You heal
better. You don't need doctors. Doctors
are very expensive in the fiat world.
So, these glasses are one of the
cheapest hacks that you can find.
They're widely available in Europe. Now,
uh they're available just about on every
continent outside of Antarctica.
The next one is I want you to plan your
week for Sarah. What's the number one
thing for the room to do? I would like
you to change the light bulbs where you
work. So, in your room, you can find
specialty light bulb stores. Go back to
incandescent. If you can't find
incandescent, go back to hallogen. This
will extend your time. For those of you
who don't know, blue light and LED,
which is shining on you right now, what
is the major effect? It destroys
melatonin, but it dehydrates you. It
turns you into Mars and you're less like
an earthbound person. So, that's the
major effect. What are the secondary
effects? When you're in blue light, it's
like eating cheesecake without any food.
It raises your blood sugar. What else
does it do? It raises your insulin
level. So, this is the reason why screen
technology and light bulbs are a huge
problem.
The next one, I want you to bask your
tasks at jobs by energy level. So, for
example, if you are doing something for
your boss that is energy intensive,
after that or before it, I would like
you to go out and try to get some sun.
For those of you who live at high
latitudes in Europe, I want you to
understand the red light from the sun
still penetrates the cloud. So, even if
it's cloudy or rainy, the answer is you
go outside. Why? Every mitochondria in
your body responds to this red light. It
needs it all the time. So even a small
amount of time will improve your
cognition and will improve your
productivity. So this is very important.
The next one is really important to
become a first principal thinker. If
you're in the tech world, you're doing a
lot of work on Bitcoin. This stuff right
here, you're you have a big advantage in
the United States. This is called
container depleted water. This has a
isotope of hydrogen taken out. It's the
lightest water in the world. This one is
made in Romania. You guys can get it.
We'd like you to mix it with salt also
from Europe. This one is Florida salt.
It generally comes from places like
France, but I know that you guys can
find it out elsewhere. Just make sure
the salt has no fluoride in it. You can
put these things together when you're
working on your computers. Drink as much
as this as you want. The bigger type of
music you are, the more you need. This
will help you. Why is it helping you?
You can join my Patreon. I'll teach you
why. This is only about times.
Next one. This one should be pretty
obvious. I want you to really pay
attention to your use and abuse of EMF.
Why? Last year, if you came to Brock,
you heard I talked about Steve Jobs,
House Finny, and uh Paul out. These
people were all millionaires and they
were gone before 62, 63 years old. I
don't want anybody in our tribe to face
that event. So that's the reason why
Matai is asking to come back this year
to talk to you guys about time hacks
specifically how to avoid dying early
and limiting your EMF exposure is
important. The more time you can spend
in the sun less time in front of your
computer screen is big. You guys have
probably seen the guys poop outside
daylight computer. I was involved in in
that process. It's the only computer
that's ever been made in the United
States that has no blue light and no
flicker. So, this is really good for you
as well.
Now, this one, somebody upstairs asked
me this question about sleep. They
wanted a sleep hack. This is probably
the easiest hack that you guys can do.
All this fancy stuff on the side here.
All I want everybody to do to improve if
you have sleep a take your tongue, push
it to the roof of your mouth. Keep
practicing that. Right before you go to
sleep, all I want you to do is keep it
to the roof of your mouth. What that
does, it raises your tongue, opens your
airway, you'll improve, and you won't be
a mouth breathing. You'll get more
oxygen deliver.
Second half here, rubbing your eyes. If
you rub your eyes, you can also
stimulate the vagus nerve. So, rubbing
your eyes to do this. Okay, makes sense.
With uh the other big issue here is with
meals. Meals I want you to eat local for
your environment. So if you live in
Prague, eat what grows on the farm. If
you live in the UK, eat what grows
there. Do not eat what's in the
supermarket. Okay? The supermarket has
things that didn't grow in that
location. And food fundamentally is an
electromagnetic barcode of
photosynthesis. That's right. So that's
key.
Number nine, the key here is your tough
task. Many of you may not know that the
human brain works on circadian biology,
also a timing mechanism. So your most
difficult part of the day cognitively, I
want that to be 11 and 1. Those are the
times that you should be using most of
your brain power. Uh if you're a
creative, say you're like our last
person, the artist that you showed in
this movie, the time that you need to be
mindful is 9 to 11. Now, for most
everybody else in the room, all the
meaningless tasks you have in your life,
that's like talking to your boss and and
talking on email, that should be saved
for later in the day when your rate is
not as optimized.
The next one, this one is extremely
important. Uh, I have found the longer
that I've I've gotten, the older I've
gotten, uh, you have more money, you
have more Bitcoin, start to delegate
tasks. Right now, I don't do anything
that I consider superfluous.
My nurse is sitting in in the audience,
and she's probably mad that I'm saying
this, but I delegate all my tasks to my
nurse, but I do take good care of her,
so don't worry about that. But it's
really important to delegate low volume
tasks. Why? Cuz you have to employ via
negativity. You need to keep your brain
tight for the things that you need to do
so that you can put time back in your
bedroom.
Now, the boundaries, this one is
important, I think, for your colleagues,
your spouse, your bosses, the Zoom
meetings that you don't need, the
meetings you don't need. You need to be
pretty harsh with people. Your time is
extremely valuable and I only want you
to waste it on things that are highly
productive. So, anybody who's a time
vampire, you need to limit it. If your
boss tells you we need to meet, say
fine, but we're not going to do it on
Zoom, we're not going to do it on on
here and there, you can put the phone
down and walk away. This is really
important. I would tell you probably in
my life how big a deal this was. As a
surgeon, you know, most of the time I
start my cases at 6:00 a.m. I change my
whole surgery schedule. I go to start at
8:00 a.m. Why? Because the first 2 hours
of every day are my time. And I cut out
all this work for us. And it's really
important to me now that I'm older, I've
gotten even more crazy about this. So,
if I don't want to deal with somebody,
I'm just out. I I just don't It's not
going to happen.
Now, this is another one. This is what I
call bouldering. So if you have a big
task for the day, say your boss wants
you to code, you know, some other part
of the Bitcoin um development team,
things like that, I want you to take the
big task and break it into smaller tasks
and break it up. Why? Your brain tends
to work better. Multitasking is is total
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] from the productivity guys.
Your brain only has certain channels
that it works on. So take any big
project, break it up so that you become
more efficient because if you're more
efficient, you'll get the job done
quicker. You'll reserve more time for
yourself.
Number 13, this one, do not. I would
rather you use your cognitive power,
which is at its height, in the midday.
So this is 11:00 a.m. to 100 p.m. So if
you need to to snack, that's great. But
I would rather you not go out to lunch
if you can avoid it. Try to do your
hardest task of the day midday. Your
brain works the best at this time. So
that's the time that you want to
allocate so that you can get the task
done because you'll be much more
efficient if you operate this way.
Number 14, this one's a big one. When
you have a busy day, what's one of the
things that you can do to reset?
Everybody can stand up, take a deep
breath, and breathe in and breathe out.
If your office is next to a window, try
to get a window that opens. Europe does
a great job with casement windows.
United States, we're terrible at that.
Everybody should have a window. If you
don't have a window, then you run
outside and take your break. But I want
you to do everything you possibly can
when you go out maybe to get the time
manifesting that Daniel told you about.
Uh if you have one of the shitty lights
in your office and you just turn them
off, you can bring a red light from
outside and bring it into your office
and put the red light in there. This
will also help. Really good issue there.
Now
15. The lights that I'd like you to use
at home to reserve your time are candles
and fire. So, I want you to step back in
European times. I don't want you to use
LED lights. I want you to turn them off.
And I'd rather you go back the old way.
This will preserve your melatonin
levels. Why? Because I want you to do
very well. If you decide you want to do
your meditation, you want to do deep
breathing in, you know, you can use Irma
decor from France, wound, you can use
even whims technique for breathing, the
boutco method for breathing. Whatever
you choose to do, anything you can do to
reserve your oxygen for your time before
sleep is good. Decide you'd like to do a
cold shower before sleep also very
beneficial.
Now, this one uh may be a little bit
controversial for some people, but I
want you to ground. Grounding. Many
people may not believe that there's a
physics effect here. There's a huge
effect. The sun is a cathode ray. The
planet anode when the light hits it, we
knock free electrons off. We're the
silly talking monkeys on the planet that
have sweat glands on our feet. This is
why we wear socks. Turns out that you
have an ability to absorb those
electrons for free. So, it's free
energy. So, I want you to ground. If you
have stressful time at work, the same
thing. I'd like you to ground. Most
people see the slide up there. They say,
"Ask your doctor if marijuana is good
for you." You're going to be surprised
what I'm about to tell you. Marijuana
for people who are tech users actually
is beneficial. Why? It the endocanaboid
system. And when you're a tech user,
what are the two things that happen? It
decreases your microtubial function. And
it turns out that lowd dose use of THC
usually edibles, if you want to smoke,
I'm okay with that. You should smoke
outside in the sun, not inside in a room
like this. But edibles are probably the
best way to go. What this is doing, it
acts like spackle on a broken cortisol.
So that means you can improve your
function. You can improve your
microtubules. So yes, the neurosurgeon
is telling you, I don't have a problem
with marijuana.
Number 17.
This one is about cognition. And the
real main issue for cognition is I want
to make sure that you never take that
step over to dementia. That has also a
lot to do with why I told you about
marijuana. The papers are out now that
show that the more problems people have
with cognitive uh thought leads to some
of the neurodeeneration issues that my
generation is getting. Believe it or
not, the earliest patient that I've ever
seen with Alzheimer's disease is 27
years old who worked in the tech
industry. Wow. So, don't think this is a
boomer disease. If you are a real tech
user, protecting yourself from dementia
is a time hack. And all the things that
I'm telling you right now reserves your
time. And it's very, very critical for
you to do this.
Complete darkness when you sleep. What's
the other key thing? Circadian biology
works by light and dark. But what's the
other factor very few people talk about?
Temperature. Temperature. So, we have a
Bitcoiner. His name is Michael Shapiro.
He's made a cool pillow. He only sells
it for Bitcoin. You can find him on
Twitter. I'm a fan of them. What's the
other thing I want you to do? Cool
linens. Try to get away from all the
fake man-made fibers. I want you to go
back to use cotton. Okay. cotton
organic. Am I okay at night time? This
is the one caveat. Normally, I'm not a
big fan of air conditioning. I know that
we're abroad. Most people don't really
need air conditioning, but many of you
may not know I relocated from the United
States to El Salvador. It's really
freaking hot there. Okay. So, if you
live inside the tropics, am I okay to
use a fan or AC at night? Yes. Why?
Because that doesn't break too many of
the rules. So cooling is really
important for people who don't know
this. Melatonin works better when your
temperature part of your brain called
hypothalamus drops 3 to 4°. So I want
you to understand cooling plays a role.
If you're a true biom and you really
want to take the next level, get a
ziploc bag, put ice in it, put it on
either side of your corateed arteries.
You can cool your brain before. If you
want to use a cold plunge, I'm okay with
that as well. Let's go.
The next one, number 19, is meditating.
Now, many of you who don't know me
probably will be a little bit offended
about what I'm going to tell you next.
But we talk about sunning our balls,
sunning our ass, sunning the garden,
also sunning the ass, the ladies, the
breast, all these areas we have covered.
Take a look right now. Everybody in this
room has those areas covered. But I
challenge any one of you to go and find
a human born that is wearing what you're
wearing right now. The answer is mammals
don't do that. But we do. And that's
part of centralization, society, and
civilization. So I want you to
understand
when you're meditating, I'd like you to
do it outside in the sun. You pick the
time to do it, but I'd like you to get
those parts in the sun.
How much time depends how bad how untan
you are. I'd say a good rule of thumb is
15 to 30 minutes. I think for northern
Europeans, you probably need more 30
minutes this time of the year cuz today
is the summer solstice, the longest day
of the year.
The next one, this one is a good one. I
want you to go back to wearing cotton.
Cotton and linen allow the sun to go
through. The shirt that I have on today
is made by a company in Arizona called
Cool Tan. What is Cool Tan allowing to
do? The sun goes right through the
shirt. So, when I'm outside, technically
I'm naked. Ladies, there's a company in
the UK called Naked. K I N I K I. They
make bathing suits. One beast, two piece
of rats. When you go outside, it's like
you're naked. So, you can be naked even
in front of your friends. people in the
United States. We have another company
called Cool Tan. They also make bathing
suits. They make them for men. They have
shorts this way and they also have
shirts. So, I want you to go back to the
natural fibers so that when we're here
at Bitcoin meetings, we can still enjoy
the beautiful sunlight in.
And the last one, I would like you guys
to start a time journal. And a time
journal is really, I think, really
important so that you can begin to
understand how you're spending your time
or how you're wasting your time. And I
want you to do this for the first 2 or 3
weeks until you get a better routine
than what you've done in the past
because once you do that, it's
important. The other big thing is I was
going to put a slide up here about one
of my young Bitcoiners. His name is
Brandon. He's used a lot of his people
to buy a citadel in Riviera, Maya.
There's a picture of him on Instagram on
the roof. All you see is the the Mayan
Riviera jungle behind him. It's
beautiful, but he's standing right next
to a 5G tower and the solar panels on
the roof. So, here he did something good
in the citadel and then did something
bad. So, I want to tell you if you do
spend your Bitcoin, and I I do think
that's important, and you build your
citadel, build it wisely.
For those of you who want to do your
meditation and do your time drilling, am
I okay with sauna? Yes. But make sure
you do sauna the way the Scandinavians
do it. With stones, fire, and heat.
That's the best way to do it. Now
towards the end,
I want to read for you something I
wrote. Last year when I came to this
conference, I read the law that I wrote
for Na Kelly for medical freedom.
Today I write you a manifesto for
decentralized time.
Restoring vitality through time and
supply.
We the sovereign individuals declare
that time is the truest wealth. A
currency more precious than Bitcoin. For
a while, rich man's gift is fleeting. A
busy man's time is sacred offering to
the masses. In a world where centralized
systems, whether medical, governmental,
or technological, have shattered our
vitality, destroyed our truths, we
reclaim our birthight to health,
freedom, and the radiant energy of the
sun. It's inspired by the Hawaiian
wisdom from the people. Time in the past
means time in the future. We navigated
the truth of our origins to chart the
future unbound by tyranny. We reject the
false narratives of a culture that fears
the sun, worships, and sees power to
corrupt institutions. This manifesto is
a call to decentralize life, to restore
time as a gift to all, and to harmonize
our mitochondria
and symbols us to the heliosphere that
we are connected to. My country, the
United States, once a beacon of freedom
and liberty, has succumbed to a toxic
culture of scientific tyranny, of
governmental overreach. The Constitution
has been misinterpreted through false
narratives.
It has been weaponized to centralize
power. It stripped the people of our
natural rights. Centralized medicine of
which I used to be a part of is like a
yogurt left untouched for 250 years that
has failed to cultivate a culture of
healing.
Instead, it fosters a dependency on
entropy.
Technologies blue light and nonf
snares our minds. It creates an
addiction soon to be medicalized by the
insanity of the system that we've built
that are blind to our flaws. We now
stand at a crossroads, remain complicit
in this chaos, but we have to reclaim
our sovereignty.
I propose a radical act of defiance and
renewal. The decentralized time
manifesto is a movement to redistribute
time. a healing force for the ill to
reconnect with the sun's life-giving
race and live on our own terms. The
vision is rooted in the following
principles.
Time is medicine.
The ill time to heal, time to live, time
to thrive. We call for a decentralized
system where time is given to those
battling sickness. Not through charity
but through community. Volunteers
unovered by bureaucracy
offer their time to support to the ill.
Whether through companionship,
caregiving, or sharing of their wisdom.
A busy person's vote is a vote of time.
Coherence over chaos. A currency that
replenishes the soul.
We reject vampire light. Fear of the sun
propagated by centralized systems. The
heliosphere's rhythm pulsing through our
brain rewires our feet.
I urge all
to join this solar revolution. Walk
barefoot at dawn. Gaze into the dust and
let sunlight decalate your mitochondrial
harmony. Every ray of earth is a step
toward health and time. It's a rebellion
against the forces of enter. Bright
days, nights. This is the cadence of
vitality.
Do what you can right now.
Do what you can with what you have right
now. Where you are right now. Don't
worry about optimizing. Begin now. Now
is the only time you have.
Government exists by consent of the
people, not vice versa. Freedom is in
the air and that fuels the fire of
liberty. Yet centralized power has
abused our trust. We demand the return
of these seated rights for the corrupt
in the preamles true meaning.
We the people our posterity are not mere
subjects by sovereign creators of our
destiny.
Each of us is a unique snowflake. Our
mitochondrial DNA is a canvas painted by
the photonic software of our choices
around light. From the dust of our
ancestors, environments through the
light we embrace today. Our uniqueness
is enforced in all of these things.
Fall, rise, and claim your uniqueness.
Adapt, grow, and let modern nature's
extraordinary canvas be the backdrop to
your life.
The greatest wisdom is knowing how
little culture provides. The strongest
will not win life's lottery. The nimble,
the flexible, the adaptive.
Those are our tribe. Those are the big
words. Our mighty is an ensemble of
life's energy. We thrive on the
frequencies we emit.
Music, sunlight, authentic connection
that's happening here in this
conference.
We reject sympathy as a crutch. You walk
besides others with wisdom, not
affliction. Your life is a chocolate in
a box. Its secret center is awaiting you
by discovery of your curious mind.
The conclusion
decentralized time manifesto
is not a program. It's a revolution of
spirit.
It's a call to break free from the
centralized control, to give time to to
those who need it the most, and to
harmonize with the sun's eternal pulse.
We are not vampires. We are beings of
light. We're wired for resilience and
uniqueness.
Let us rise, adapt, reclaim our time,
our health, and our freedom. The
heliosphere sings. Will you dance to
this river? Sign we the people on June
20th, 2025.
Thank you.
[Applause]
You guys enjoy the topics and guests I
bring on the show. I would really
appreciate it if you left me a fivestar
review on Spotify and also subscribe to
Fitness Wisdom Podcast on YouTube as
well as this helps to spread the
knowledge and wisdom with the world.
Until next time, this is the Fitness
Wisdom Podcast.