Dr. Jack Kruse, thank you for making time
to be here.
&gt;&gt; No problem. Anytime.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Jack, what is the greatest lie
modern culture is told about the sun?
&gt;&gt; Everything.
Everything about it is wrong.
Everything they believe
is a lie
because it suits their agenda.
&gt;&gt; Can you say more?
I mean, I think that covers it.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; What is the sun? What is the sun to us?
&gt;&gt; The sun is what provides you a trickle
of electricity that runs every single
thing in your body.
I mean, it's the everything.
I I put a picture out all the time. It
says the sun is Tina. What does Tina
stand for? There is no alternative. You
don't run on anything else.
You may think you you run on food and
exercise, but you don't because all of
that comes from the sun.
That's that's the, you know, dirty
little secret of nature.
And when you understand just how
connected
that life is for 4.6 billion years,
you know what those centralized shills
tell you? It's just abject propaganda.
It's nonsense. It's so they can sell you
products.
That's it.
It's that simple.
&gt;&gt; What does the word enlightenment mean to
you? [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Depends on the context. Obviously, when
you you talk about this, it's going to
mean something different.
But to me, enlightenment is people who
actually put time into their lives
to become first principal thinkers. so
that they don't get drunk on their own
dogma.
&gt;&gt; What is light's role in enlightenment?
&gt;&gt; Um, goes back to what I told you about
the sun. It's pretty much everything.
Without the sun, without you embibing
information and wisdom from nature,
which is from mostly from light,
there is no enlightenment. It's
impossible.
And people fool themselves all the time
when they're in an environment
that is polluted with polarized light.
They may think they're enlightened,
but they're suffering from the Dunning
Krueger effect.
There is no enlightenment
um with man-made artificial light at any
level. And anybody who tells you
otherwise is also full of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Why is that?
because that's not light we're designed
to work with. Sunlight is unpolarized.
Every last bit of artificial light,
whether it's the electric or magnetic
field associated with it, is polarized.
That means it's suboptimal by
definition.
You may not like it, but physics and
nature could care less about what your
opinion is on it. These are like
axiomatic
truths. The problem is people don't like
axiomatic [snorts]
truths. But you know when you go and
fact check this you find out that I'm
right and that creates you know then a
different conundrum. That's why I said
enlightenment depends on the context you
bring it.
&gt;&gt; What do you know about MK Ultra and
tell me about it? I mean depends how you
want to discuss it. If you want to
discuss it from the way everybody else
understands it, uh you'll get a
different story. If you want to
understand it the way I understand it,
because I was involved,
I actually was able to find boxes
related to this program before they were
destroyed
uh in the basement of Charity Hospital.
Um, basically it's a program that
started originally with a guy named Meer
Lansky finding uh a surgeon from the SS
on the docks of the Brooklyn Navyyard at
the behest of Leslie Groves. They killed
most of the people, but they didn't kill
him. And the link, the reason why he
wasn't killed by the accountant of
Murder Inc. is because he said some
interesting things that shocked Lansky.
Namely that uh the Nazis were doing mind
control
u experiments and the one that they were
currently doing when he was caught was
they were using mex Mexican peyote
um to see if they could control
uh the minds of of people in Germany and
people they had captured. Um,
and that spared his life. And then that
information went straight up the command
chain to General Groves. What happens
from that time during the war to when MK
Ultra gets formalized in his CIA
doctrine? Eventually, a guy named
Stanley Gotautly runs the program and
they move from drugs
uh to
different drugs. the the one that's most
famous with Gotautle is he dropped acid
on the city of St. Louis in the 1950s.
Um they found that it didn't really
cause what they thought it would cause
and then they morphed into using other
different things on people for mind
control. Where did it eventually end? It
went through a guy named Delgato who
spent time in both Mexico, Spain, Europe
and for small parts of the time at
Twolane University in New Orleans where
they began to use light. What light did
they use? First they use electricity.
They got the idea from electric shock
therapy and then it morphed into
wireless
radiation. It first started with
wireless. They use wires plant implanted
in animals heads. When they found that
that worked, then [snorts] the next
logical question was what about
wireless? They were able to do that. And
then they magically landed on what light
allows us to control people the best.
And it wasn't just people. It was
actually a lot of animals they had
tested. And it turned out the answer was
blue light. And the reason why was
pretty simple. It's because it was able
to ruin the leptin melanoorton pathway
which they didn't know about at that
time but they knew it caused a dopamine
problem in the brain that they did knew
definitively.
And what did they do through empiric
testing? Uh MK Ultra got more refined.
uh MK Ultra moved from Washington
University where most of it was done in
St. Louis uh and then was moved to the
Stanford Research Institute.
Then a lot of the shady characters that
you heard about in the JFK
assassination.
Um some of the psychiatrists there that
go all the way back to Trosky. Um again,
Bolevik revolution played a huge role in
a lot of these scientists that came over
in operation paperclip. Um so much so
that Trosky's granddaughter still runs
the National Institutes of Drug Abuse in
the United States right now. She was
appointed by Fouchy in 2006. Her name is
Nora Vulc.
uh once it moved from Stanford Research
uh you had a lot of the tech bros um
specifically the the mother of the
Wajjiki sisters who I'm sure you know uh
that's Susan and an uh those were two
founders of Google. Um, the other sister
went on to uh great fame when she was
married to Sergey Brin, starting 23 and
me, which is something I'm sure you've
probably heard of. And um then it moved
to the brain health initiative when
Obama came in and then most of the
research was sent offshore. Why? because
they realized because of uh the tyranny
that went on with 9/11
and uh the Patriot Act that if this was
ever found on shore that and there was
any evidence
that potentially
uh people could be brought up in
treason. So they moved most of it to
South America. They picked South America
specifically because it was close to a
lot of the the CIA honeypotss and bases
that are present in Central and South
America because that's effectively what
the embassies are. And they needed to do
a lot of the the formal testing on brown
people. Um why? Because they found that
brown people are more resistant to
electromagnetic radiation than people
who have Fitzpatrick ones.
And that stuff has been borne out right
in front of your face without you
realizing it. If you remember um the
Navyyard attack in I believe it was
Virginia on the top of one of the guys
rifles that he wound up killing some of
his people that he was involved with in
his experiments. He had the word ELF RF
carved in the gun. He was black guy.
Second one that was famously happened
during the Obama second Obama term was a
black lawyer from Florida State
University who didn't kill anybody but
shot into the library at Florida State
and um he had told many of his friends
and family that there was somebody in
his head controlling him and um he also
at the scene knew that it was ELF, RF
and blue light radiation when he had no
way of really knowing any of this
because by training he was a lawyer.
So those those are the two latest issues
where the evolution of MK Ultra [snorts]
uh got fast forward in that time frame I
just gave you. There was many uh
patents. Several of them are
discoverable
uh through Google patents. Meta's got
some, but you can control people through
electromagnetic radiation through
screens. Those patents are out there.
They're well known. It's no longer a
mystery. Um I think uh many people think
it's a conspiracy uh theory until they
actually looked into it. But I always
tell people that there can be no
conspiracy theory when there's patents
associated with the technology.
&gt;&gt; What's up guys? I hope you're enjoying
this conversation. If you like what
we're doing here on the Align podcast,
one of the greatest ways you can be
supportive is simply pressing the
subscribe button below. It is more
healthy than you realize and you can
change your mind at any time. That's it.
Thank you guys so much for being here. I
appreciate you.
&gt;&gt; What is the directive of [clears throat]
mind control of people using blue light
and screens? What is the current term?
&gt;&gt; That's changed. That's changed a lot in
the military. But I think where it is
right now, it's for complete control to
get us back to the feudalist medieval
state so that we all do what the people
who are in charge. Those are the elites.
Those elites are the transhumanist
technocrats that run the big um tech
companies who work for the Department of
Defense and the military. The military
is who runs the United States. They're
the best way to put it. Uh they're the
original proletariat.
They're the Templars as same type of
evolution.
Uh [snorts] they're the people that hold
the knife behind the people that are on
your TV every night that you call
president, vice president, congressman,
senator,
you name it. Supreme Court Justice.
That's MK Walter in a nutshell.
&gt;&gt; What percentage of personalities on the
internet or politicians would be useful
idiots compared to knowing fraudulent
domestic terrorists, I guess you could
say.
&gt;&gt; Uh, I mean, based on what we know from
the programs, everybody's a useful idiot
if they understand they can be
programmed. I mean, I mean, if you've
done any homework on this at all,
probably
the most famous
place where the shark fin for this
program came up was in 1968
through 73
when the US uh embassy in Moscow was
bombarded by microwave radiation by the
Russians. And this was done to show the
world that this has a huge biological
effect. If you look back at history,
which anybody can do, we had four
straight ambassadors to Russia come down
with blood cancers. It wasn't until
um Kissinger, who was the secretary of
state with um Nixon at that time, he
ordered the military to line the entire
US embassy with tinfoil. Now, the only
reason that we know of this today, the
reason it's discoverable is because
anything who was on the Federal Register
got um kickback. And it wasn't really a
kickback. It was called hazard pay
uh for this time because it was obvious
that these people were sick. That was
the forerunner for Havana syndrome,
which you all heard about in Obama's
reign when the Cuban government did the
same thing to American journalists and
American scientists in Havana.
And the basic science of that came out
of the DARPA program that was present
when MK Ultra moved to Stanford. That's
called fry syndrome or microwave
um effect on the ear where you can use
microwaves and you can force people to
hear things in their head through an
acoustic microwave sound. Those papers
are all published in the literature.
Very well known. Uh no magic. There's
many people out in the uh internet world
who are what we call deed people. their
directed energy weapon injured.
Um, in fact, guy that I did a podcast
with, I would say two years ago,
actually had one of those guys on his
podcast. You could probably go back and
listen to exactly, you know, what he
talked about, but everything that he
said was factually correct about
actually how
um microwaves interact with melanin in
your ear to cause this microwave
microphone effect so that they can put
thoughts into your head. And these were
the same things that the guy who is uh
the Navy guy that had the ELF RF um
drilled into his phone, I should say,
drilled into his gun that he used to
kill people. And the same thing with the
lawyer at Florida State. So, this is,
like I said, fully [snorts]
discoverable.
Should be very obvious to everybody who
listens to this, but I know isn't, you
know, in the neck of the woods where you
are. I think you're still in California.
Um
&gt;&gt; I'm in I'm in Miami.
&gt;&gt; All right. So different place now. So um
the prison system in the 1960s before it
went right to Stanford, they used a lot
of the prisoners as how shall we say
uh volunteers to make sure this
technology could work. That's also been
discoverable. We found out a lot of that
stuff through the church commission that
went from 197475
through 77.
Um, and I think the
probably the most damning
uh state of affairs was probably the
psychiatrist that dealt with
um
Jack Ruby in the JFK assassination. His
name is Jolly West. He was also involved
with several other prominent people at
that time. He was an MK Ultra U
psychiatrist.
Um
he was found
uh to be heavily involved with uh Jack
Ruby's demise
but he also worked with other people in
there. Um, the gentleman who was his
direct superior
was the head of uh the CIA at that time.
I'm blanking on his name, but I can tell
you exactly where you can find his name
because Oliver Stone in the last frame
of JFK
put uh the story that MK Ultra was
effectively ended by this head of the
CIA. Why? Because he destroyed all the
files before the Church Commission. so
that none of them would be discoverable.
The only problem was they didn't know
about the ones in Louisiana.
Those are the ones I got into when I was
a resident. So that's how I know a lot
of the details that a lot of people
don't know about. And um the very
interesting part is the gentleman who
I'm referencing right now who I'm
blanking on his name uh he was put into
power by Dallasos and you probably do
know Dallasos airport uh is named after
John Foster Dulles and his brother his
brother both of them were CFR people.
These are the Fabians. These are the
people that were loyal to the crown.
They were both involved in the Treaty of
Versailles. Allan Dulles was famously
also head of the CIA. He was fired by
JFK.
Um John Foster Dulles was also a
prominent politician. He died before JFK
was killed, but Allan Dulles was very
involved in JFK's demise. he effectively
appointed the next head of the CIA
uh who was involved with the prosecution
of Klay Shaw in New Orleans. And that
was what Garrison,
he was the only person ever brought up
on on trial in the United States for the
assassination of JFK. And Jolly West was
involved in that investigation.
So MK Ultra was also involved not only
in the science part but also in one of
the greatest you know political
mysteries
of probably the 20th century and still
to this day uh most of those archives
uh are redacted the the parts that we
need to see we can't see even though
Trump released a lot of them that the
key pages
uh of the players that were involved in
MK Ultra CIA,
there's about a page and a half that
everybody's want redacted and nobody
will do it.
So, you know, as far as I'm concerned, I
just gave you a history lesson
um of kind of what MK Ultra is really
about. And anybody who thinks that MK
Ultra
um isn't active in a new evolutionary
format now
with algorithms, EMF,
blue light, and other parts of the
spectrum being used against
uh humanity at a global scale, then
you're just brain dead sitting behind a
computer. Where specifically is there a
a
resource of sorts that a skeptical
person could see in a simplistic,
concise, spoonfed way that would back up
these claims with evidence that someone
could see online?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I think everything that
I've told you, you should fact check. I
mean, I tell everybody the the the issue
with first principal thinking is that
you have to fact check everything.
Everything that I've told you today with
the exception of one thing is not
discoverable. Why isn't the boxes that I
found at Charity Hospital not
discoverable? Because Charity Hospital
was destroyed in 2005 by Katrina.
That's where the boxes were stored. And
um the one thing that you can find uh is
that CIA director
after Klay Shaw died, he died in 1974.
Five years later in 1979,
he destroyed all of the files that are
associated with with MK Ultra. The most
interesting part that was discovered in
1979 is on trial
um when Klay Shaw was asked was he a CIA
asset you know in this program he of
course denied it. Uh there was a lot of
evidence that Garrison had found that
wasn't the case. I found all the
evidence in the boxes in Charity
Hospital. But the interesting thing was
that that CIA director admitted in 1979,
five years after Shaw was dead, that he
was in fact a CIA asset.
So, I mean, everything I've told you is
fully discoverable. The only thing
that's not is the boxes in Charity
Hospital. But then you have to ask
yourself this question if you're a first
principal thinker. How the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] would I
know any of this if I didn't get in
those boxes?
because nobody else does.
And I was able to link everything back
to things that completely happened and
happened in the city that I happen to do
my residency in. None of that is
arguable at this point. Most of the the
basic research
was done at Twolane University in the
department of neurology and and
neurosurgery. That's also discoverable.
That's where why there's a primate lab
there. LSU also has a primate lab. Uh
that primate lab was well known to be
tied in the JFK story. Am I under a
state of mind control and if I am, how
would I know?
&gt;&gt; Well, you wouldn't. That's one of the
the key things about becoming a first
principal thinker. You have to question
everything. most people, especially
these days when you're online as much as
you are. I mean, I I not to be a dick,
but I mean, it's probably good for the
audience,
you know, to pick up this flavor. Before
we recorded, you asked me, "Jack, should
I wear my glasses?" Then when you asked
me the questions you asked me, you
magically put your blue glasses on. But
you didn't think I noticed it, but I
did. Why? Because there in lies the big
issue. because you became aware of
something that um you were like I didn't
know that I was going to talk to him
about and I didn't know he was going to
answer the way he answered but the fact
that I did you said well maybe it's a
good idea that I interrupt the
electromagnetic connection through
polarized light when we talk about this
stuff because if you want to know the
truth are the questions that you ask me
with and without the glasses on
different Yes. And if the programming
um like let's let's be hypothetical
here. Let's say Google knew that you and
I were doing this today.
Could they have easily went through
Zencaster
and done something to affect this
interview to get the answers they want?
The answer is absolutely no question
about it. Now, have I had something like
that happen to me in the last uh I'd say
the last 14 months? Yeah. I had the
internet t turned off when I gave a talk
at adopting Bitcoin in 2024.
And we know Google did it. So, you have
to ask yourself, why was that the case?
Because they knew they weren't going to
be able to control anything I was able
to say. It's why when you see me do uh
talks and podcasts, you never see me
wearing electromagnetic devices around
me. I'm very careful about what I do and
how I do it. So you you Aaron should
probably tell the audience what my
answer was to you when you said, "Jack,
should I wear these?" What did I say to
you?
&gt;&gt; Uh you said only you know about your
light environment.
&gt;&gt; Correct.
But do you really?
No, you don't. And see that in lies that
there's the Dunning Krueger moment for
you. But the interesting thing is you
became informed
by asking me the question and then you
started to think about it. And did we
talk about this? No. But I saw it
happen. So did the audience.
So you have to ask yourself,
what happens if you don't know about it?
Because your original question is how
many people do I think are affected by
this? I don't think there's a person out
there that isn't
except the people that understand the
capabilities of what's possible
and they can take effects. Is are there
ways to protect yourself from this?
There absolutely is. But are most people
in the daily course of their life in the
Western Hemisphere doing that? No. It
does make sense to me that it would be
very valuable to be able to control the
mind of someone, particularly for
something like the JFK scenario or
perhaps the recent Trump scenario. And I
have
resistance to saying certain words on
the internet.
And I think that's a reasonable thing
just because I'd prefer for this this
episode to get aired to hundreds of
thousands of people instead of hundreds
of people. Um,
but that would make sense to me that
that would be a very valuable tool.
Who is Lee Harvey Oswald? What's up,
guys? I hope you're enjoying this
conversation. I want to invite you to
try a breathing technique that I find to
be one of the fastest, most effective
ways to regulate my nervous system using
my breath. if that is of interest for
you to try. It is fast, is effective,
and it is a free, and the link for it is
in the description below. That's it.
Hope you enjoy the rest of the
conversation.
&gt;&gt; A pathy, he worked for the CIA, and um
he was a useful idiot in his time.
And in some ways, was he a patriot?
Yeah, he was. He actually foiled the
attempt on JFK's life in two cities. one
in Chicago and another one in Tampa.
Very few people know about that, but
there was people that were involved that
have the proof, at least as far as I'm
concerned. Not only is it published in
books they've written, but I actually
had that person come to my house with
the original documentation for me to see
it. Uh, once I verified it for myself,
I I I can tell you there's nothing about
me that thinks that Lee Harvey Oswald
was involved in a nefarious way with
killing JFK. And did Lee Harvey Oswald
know that he was going to be set up by
the people in the CIA
for this attack? Yes. Is it also true
that Lee Harvey Oswald was closely
associated with people who truly hated
Kennedy? Yes, that is also very true.
Um,
but the key thing is, was he the person?
No. Was Jack Ruby more involved
with the JFK assassination than Lee
Harvey Oswald? In my opinion, he was.
And he was taken out.
um very much I believe the same way Klay
Shaw was taken out. Most people don't
talk about Klay Shaw's death, but he
died in 1974
of lung cancer. What people forget is
Jack Ruby died of stomach cancer. And
what's brought a lot of this to light
lately is kind of the Danny Jones
podcast that I did when I talked about
MK Ultra the first time when I was asked
about it. And I made a comment there
that the people that had taken this new
distribution from the Department of
Defense that we called the
in time we would see the same type of
turbo
um cancers that we saw in the past
around the people that were involved
with the cutter incident, that were
involved with the original bioweapons
research that was done on mice and rats
and then eventually morphed into
primates.
Um,
all of that has been shown to be true.
The interesting thing is I thought
people when I originally did that
podcast would be very interested to see
how a new technology as Dr. Robert
Malone likes to talk about it have the
original problem from the polio in 1951
through 55 that it was, you know,
polluted with SV40 amongst other things.
And when that proof was definitively
shown uh through vials that Kevin
McCurin tested and then reconfirmed by
Philip Buck Holtz and now many other
labs, it's no longer conjecture or
conspiracy theory that these things
happen. The question that you have to
ask yourself as a podcaster and a
podcast listener, tell me how it is that
the SV40 promoter that we found out
about 75 years ago is also in some of
the newest technology that the
Department of Defense
was the main distributor. Wasn't big
pharma. We like to use big pharma's
names associated with this. But remember
who was the distributor?
That means proximal to big pharma. Big
pharma was just like a drug dealer. They
weren't the cartel. The department of
fence was the cartel.
So when you think about some of the
other people that I've been involved
with, you may know that Robert F. Kennedy Jr.,
his dad was killed by Siran Sirhan. also
discoverable that many people believe
that Sirhan Sirhan was part of the MK
Ultra uh program that was based out of
the Estelin Institute and also Bohemian
Grove. Again, all discoverable by you.
All you have to do is look into it. Um I
was the one that told Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on
Rick Rubin's podcast that the boweapon
actually had SV40 promoter in it. didn't
have the full genome, but it had the
promoter. And there was reasons that I
knew that. Bobby had never known that.
And immediately upon saying that, if you
look at his face on the podcast, he kind
of acted like you did when you put your
blue blockers on. He was like, he knew
exactly what it meant. It meant that the
same people that were involved in
killing his dad were now involved with
killing millions of people or
potentially killing them. but certainly
making them more controllable. And one
of the things that we do know in the MK
Ultra, the Sri and the Brain Health
Initiative, if we can cause any type of
mitochondrial damage, you become much
more programmable to electromagnetic
radiation. And the reason for that is
because it destroys endogenous melanin.
This also is not a shock to anybody
today. Why? Because your government
right now is trying to protect the
International Space Center and
astronauts that circle this planet with
synthetic melanin from what? The solar
wind. Is that not EMF? Yes, it is. So
all the pieces and parts are there. And
when this program found out that if we
destroy their endogenous melanin that
they become more controllable, what was
the second part of this study, Erin,
that you may want to uh fact check since
you're into the facteing thing today?
Um, you know who did the first uh paper
on the effect of electromagnetic
radiation raising blood sugar and
insulin? That was Norah Volcal, Trosky's
granddaughter that runs the National
Institutes of Drug Abuse who was
appointed by Fouchy in 2006.
So you have a psychiatrist
from the drug side from the Jolly West
family, okay, at a very high position in
the government
now telling you in 2011 that nonVMF from
a cell phone raises blood glucose and
blood sugar.
Guess what the ultimate cause of that
is? Destruction of melanin inside. So
this was DARPA getting things in the
literature so that other researchers
would understand
that here is the mode of how we do it.
So let's talk about how this was done at
global scale. Say from the time you were
a little boy or maybe when I was a
little boy that's when dermatologists
started recommending sunscreen for
everybody. Why would we do that?
Well, we would always give you the bait.
The bait is, well, the sun is bad for
you. That's what you started this
podcast with. But what's the hook of the
scops? I just gave you the answer. You
have to get rid of people's melanin to
make them more programmable. And guess
what? In the last 75 years, the American
centralized healthc care
program has become experts in making the
sun toxic.
Now you know the real reason why
they all got that original answer
when Lansky found Planin on the Brooklyn
docks. That's how it all started. Now
it's a big circle. Everything's
discoverable.
I guess my question to you is why the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] don't you know about it? Why the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] doesn't everybody know about it?
You know why? Because they brand guys
like me as a conspiracy theorist. So
remember what I told you. Can't be a
conspiracy theory when it's provable and
there's patents to back it up.
So now it's incumbent upon you and your
audience to do your due diligence and
become a first principal thinker and
find out a is this true and b what are
the implications of this for me and my
life right now
&gt;&gt; from your perspective who is Joe Rogan
in all of this if
&gt;&gt; Joe Rogan Joe Rogan is u part of the
industrial military complex He's funded
by people
uh that are linked to the largest
enemies of the American people. Um those
people
historically are linked back to the
Balffor Declaration.
Uh they're linked back to Theodore
Herszel. They're linked back uh to
Nathan Rothchild, Nelson Rockefeller,
the Trilateral Commission, the Council
of Foreign Relations.
They now are most of the transhumanist
and uh technologists that are in Silicon
Valley. Namely, the number one guy for I
think for most people is probably Peter
Teal with Palanteer,
but he's just the latest iteration. The
generation before him that was Paige and
and uh and Bin Larry Ellison from Oracle
is also in there. Um is Jamie Diamond
part of this? Yeah, the bankers are the
original
generation of this. This would be like
the 60s and 70s. But remember, most
people don't realize that Jamie Diamond
uh was basically propped up by Sandy
while of Travelers and eventually Croup
when they merged. He he learned
everything he needed to learn. And I
will remind you who banked Jeffrey
Epstein,
Jaime Diamond.
So, you know, anybody who's a good
sleuth, just follow the money. The money
will bring you back to the technology.
But remember, who else did JP Morgan
Bank, several of the transhumanist
technologists that I just mentioned to
you in this podcast, who I won't name
now because you'll probably never get
this on YouTube.
&gt;&gt; You believe Rogan is being
is under some state of mind control, or
do you believe someone like him?
&gt;&gt; I think Rogan is a useful idiot. I think
Rogan's a useful idiot. He doesn't know
what he doesn't know. Uh so the the
synonyms I would use for you here,
um
I would probably tell you,
um
Dunning Krueger is probably larger for
him than actually mind control. Do I
think he actually helps the people in
the elitist paradigm
control people they need to control?
Yes, that I think he does through his
podcast. No question about it. Um,
&gt;&gt; unknowingly.
&gt;&gt; Right. Unknowingly. I don't think he is
smart enough to know some of the things
that you and I are talking about now. Do
I think he's smarter than you think?
Yeah. Why? because he's had enough
people on that have gotten on the fringe
of this story. Uh, and probably the
number one guy that I would bring back
because he comes from the same layer of
the transhumanist technologist which is
Elon Musk. You know, when they talked
about Neurolink, anybody who understands
what Neurolink is, what's the goal? The
goal is to use a satellite to control a
device in your head to actually improve
your light. That's that's the worm on
the hook. But what's the real hook? The
hook is what Peter Teal is interested
in. Can we control people through
satellite technology, which is the
reason why the Department of Defense is
so interested in,
you know, electromagnetic radiation
because let's face it, what gets beamed
down, you know, to do this interview
through your iPhone, your cell phone,
GPS data, it's all electromagnetic
radiation. it. That's why it's to me
it's preposterous when you ask me the
question you asked me has no face
validity. Anybody who's not brain dead
should understand that the
electromagnetic radiation
electromagnetic spectrum is how
information is parsed and transmitted. I
mean that goes all the way back from
Morse code, you know, to what we have
now in Garmin data. But I also would
remind you because I don't think the
part that's really discoverable unless
you look for it is most people don't
know that a lot of the satellites are
now being protected with synthetic
melanin. That should raise a big
question. Say, wait a minute. We come
with biologic melanin and three
different types. What does this mean if
one of these or two of these or three of
these is destroyed? If we're trying to
protect electronics and astronauts,
cosminauts,
the ESA astronauts
in space from this stuff.
You know, that is a logical question
from a first principal thinker. But you
haven't heard too many people talk about
that on podcasts, have you? I will tell
you, Aaron, that that won't come up in
Joe Rogan's world. that won't come up in
Danny Jones's world because when it
does, guess what happens? It gets shut
down or you get deplatformed or no one
wants to talk about it. But I can tell
you, I happen to be one of those guys
that not only has an encyclopedia
knowledge about the history around this,
but also happens to know the physics
intimately
that this is all based on. And there's
many military types out there that know
about this. They don't give you the full
parts either because that's part
of the manual that the CIA developed in
prior to the Church Commission. They
don't have to tell you everything. All
they all they have to do is give you
bits and pieces of the story. When you
have a halftruth, it always leads to a
full lie. That's always been the CIA's
modicum. And if you know me well enough,
you've probably heard me say that many
times to some of the food gurus.
Many of the things follow the same way.
You never ever get told the full story.
And that's the reason why you need to be
a first principal thinker because when
you do it and you find out that things
are a little bit more nefarious than you
thought of and then you find out that
uh the industrial military complex and
the department of defense are really
where most of this comes from. You begin
to realize that big pharma um aren't
really your enemy. It's your government
that's the enemy. The politicians in
Congress right now, many people will say
they're the enemy. I wouldn't disagree
with that at this point, but I will say
to you that are they the real enemy? No.
Because they're holding the knife to the
necks of the politicians.
If you want to know the truth, the same
thing is true. Charlie Kirk. Why?
Charlie Kirk was likely going to be a
president down the road. Well, when they
realized that they couldn't control him
anymore, guess what happened? They made
his corateed artery bleed. That
magically happens many, many times
through history. Happened to Robert F. Kennedy Jr.'s father. Why? Because he was
mattered in hell and wanted to find out
what happened to his brother.
And you and I are sitting here 75 years
after that event and we still don't know
that answer.
You would think that would get a young
guy like you maybe asking better
questions
than talking about some other stuff, but
nobody seems to be interested in this
stuff anymore.
&gt;&gt; What are the what are the what are the
what are the questions that I'm asking?
Are asking those questions? I'm talking
about like talking about um you know
let's let's make it simple because I
want to make it so the audience
understands when people talk about food,
diet, exercise,
um meditation,
those things are all good but they're
really superfluous when you understand
this story. when you understand this
story fundamentally
that they're going after the control
grid that all these things operate with
and we should be much more interested in
that story. Um why how do we protect
people
from that issue? And to be honest with
you, you actually hinted at the real
problem, Jack. How many people really
can be affected by this? I'm going to
tell you, Aaron, do you know any people,
at least in your circle, that don't have
a screen, that don't are not using
wireless electromagnetic radiation at
some level in their life, either through
their car, their job. Um, I mean, look,
I'm pretty diligent about it and I can
tell you even I break that rule. You
know, every time I get in my car to
drive somewhere, it's an issue. And I
know it's an issue, but I don't have a
good answer for some of those problems.
The things that I can control, I try to
control. That's why, you know, I was
provocative with you earlier in the
interview. I was like, well, I think the
things we can control, we have a duty to
ourselves to do it. But the things that
we can control, I think those are the
things that we should talk about on
podcast and say, okay, what are the
implications of us not controlling it
and what potentially can happen? You
know, like something we haven't talked
about yet. Let's think about it like
this. If we have more polarized light
around all of us and we block the sun
via Bill Gates technology, via
geoengineering,
what could the implications that be?
More or less mind control. I think if
you listen to this podcast, you know the
answer implicitly.
Well, how come we're not talking about
that? Instead, what we're talking about
is who killed Charlie Kirk, why you
should owe Bitcoin and not Ethereum. Um,
why Emerald Robinson on TV is talking
about some idiot um, you know, who
cooked an election in Fulton County,
Georgia. You know, what
dominates your awareness
actually is what you focus on. And for
me, I mean, to me, this is some of the
biggest stuff that that I teach people
about. And I like talking about the
history. I want people to discover it.
But I have to be honest with you, I
guess why. I guess I'm a little bit
incredulous. Maybe I'm being a little
bit of a dick here. I don't know.
&gt;&gt; I don't think I know you any any other
other way. I I would just say to you,
[snorts]
we have now discoverable data
that shows that your government put SV40
in it and it makes you more control. Why
doesn't anybody why aren't we in the
streets? I mean, can you imagine telling
the story to Thomas Jefferson
considering what he wrote in the
Federalist Papers? Do you know what he
likely would have said? And then when
you think about the people that
bankrolled all this, the bankers, those
are the people that Jefferson and
Madison warned us about. But here we are
250 years later and you know what we're
doing? It's Plato's allegory of the
cave. And remember that was written way
before our government ever formed. So I
guess what I'm saying to you is um
there's bigger fish to fry. And I don't
know if there's a lot of people out
there that were going to want to fish
it. If you would have talked to me
probably three or four years ago, I
would have thought before this story
broke with Bobby, with Nicole, with the
transhumanist that people would have
been more engaged in it. And I guess I'm
on the other side of that mountain now.
And I'm kind of disgusted with humanity
to be quite frank with you.
&gt;&gt; Is there anything you like about
humanity?
Well, I like the people that actually
get pissed off about these kinds of
things. Why? Because I mean, let's face
it, the people that formed the United
States government, they did a pretty
good job. It took 250 years for the
Fabians to figure out how to take this
government apart.
And I think we're probably three to five
years away from complete abject total
destruction, which is part of the reason
why, you know, I'm in El Salvador and
you're not. It's part of the reason why
I'm a believer in Bitcoin and not
American money. Why? Everything that was
great about the United States went away.
We just had a president that told us,
you know, told me and you, let's make
America great again. I mean, who could
not get behind that? even if you're, you
know, a left-wing liberal, you're like,
"Okay, let's see what he's going to do."
And then literally in the last year, we
find out that make America great again
really is an acronym for Make Israel
Great Again. Well, who's that good for,
you know, in this story? Well, all all
those guys that are running big tech
companies in Silicon Valley, all those
people that are running money center
banks that we hear about on CNBC every
day. Well, I'm just that guy that's out
there saying, "When are we gonna do
something for Joe Smith in St. Louis
whose parents got popped with LSD from
Washington University? When are we going
to do something for the directed energy
weapon people that are wellknown and
documented out there? What when are we
going to put someone in jail? When will
Pam Bondi and Cash Patel put someone in
jail instead of putting people for
tweets in jail? You know, because they
said something against a group of people
that they didn't like.
Well, I think Aaron, what I'm saying to
you, because I don't think I'm being a
dick here, I think I'm actually pointing
out the obvious that there's something
radically wrong
in the world when these things happen. I
mean, if you don't know this, you
should.
13,000 people in Britain in the last
three months have been put in jail for
tweets. And this is supposed to be, you
know, a free country that you can say
what you want. I'll also have you know
that just about every Western government
has opened their borders to an invasion.
Why? Because they can't have the
military go and shoot at American. So,
what did they do? Let's get brown people
from the south, get them to come up
who've already been processed through
the mind control off and then we'll give
them social security numbers and free
money and let them drive the people in
the United States
get mad enough so you start a civil war.
You know what the whole goal Aaron of
this whole thing is? To start a civil
war to get rid of the constitution. Why?
The one thing that the transhumanist
can't handle is the first, the second,
and the fourth amendment. But if you
know anything about history and you
understand what they're doing, you
should look into the execution of
Charles I and Oliver Cromwell. Anytime
when the there's been civil war, what's
the thing that always is a collateral
effect? They change documentation.
They change the laws. That's exactly
what the people in in elite power that
are wielding this electromagnetic
um magic stick at all of us. We need to
do something about that. And they have
risks. Trust me, they have weak points.
Um we're not talking about those. I And
I would tell you I don't want to talk
about the weak points on a podcast. I
actually just mentioned this to a couple
of Bitcoiners that this is not a
discussion that I would like to have
publicly. It's a discussion that I would
like to have with you next to me when
all of your electromagnetic devices are
in a Faraday bag.
Okay? Just very similar to what Paul
River did before he blasted through
Lexington Concord. He didn't tell the
British that he was coming. He told
everybody in Massachusetts that they
were coming. We need to do the same
thing. When you are run by tyrants and a
criminal cabal,
you effectively have to decide what do
you want to do. So, I guess what I'm
giving you right now,
Uncle Jack's pretty pissed off. I'm
older than most of you. I've seen them
do it longer than most of you. It's kind
of what drives me to be pissed off.
Now, I'm kind of apathetic about it
because none of you want to do anything.
You just want to go and fact check
everything I'm telling you. Dude, this
factecking has been going on for almost
70 years.
And if you know anything through the
epic, the only unde undefeated people
through the epic are the conspiracy
theorists. They've turned out to be
right about everything. But we still
don't have I should I should I shouldn't
say that. I'll give Cash Patel his due.
He just put He just put a judge from
Milwaukee in jail for going after ICE
agents. Okay. One, but nobody that is
linked to the JFK assassination. Nobody
that's linked to MK Ultra, Stanford
Research, Brain Health Initiative. I
mean, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] we haven't even talked about
the biggest elephant in the room. Why is
it that Obama and Joe Biden went after
incandescent bulbs? Well, if you're
listening to this story, should be
blatantly obvious why they did. And that
effect goes to be permanent in 2028. Why
aren't we shooting at the government
over that? I think I think even the
brain dead in the audience will say, you
know, that is a problem. I don't like
LED lights because they give me
headaches or they give me migraines or
they're not good for me. I know they're
not good for me because I've had the
experience of living under them. And
here's what's the hook there. What was
the bait? The bait was you'll save in
energy bills. Aaron, can I ask you a
question? Have your energy bills gone
down since you started using LED lights?
The answer is no. So, the bait isn't
even good, but the hook is deep in your
epiglatus. No,
&gt;&gt; what would be the solution for an
individual
listening to this if
they're not in a place of of being
skeptical? If they're like, "Okay, I
want to entertain this. I want to do
some research and explore this for
myself and I want to address this um
within my own body biologically."
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I would I would tell them the
first thing I would do is probably
listen back to this podcast and start
numbering all the different things that
I said, fact check each one. At the end
of it, if you want to short or speed the
process up, go by Andrew Marino's book,
Going Somewhere, read that. That'll
probably blow your mind when you read
the con the congressional testimony that
he and Becker put in in the early 70s.
If that doesn't convince you that this
has been going on at global scale, then
you know what? I can't help you. This
podcast can't help you. You have to help
yourself. And I guess that's probably
what's the under the undercurrent of
this podcast is I think we're past we're
past the skeptical phase. It's now we
need to do something.
And if we don't do something soon,
this is not going to end the way many
the way many people like it's not at
all. And if you want to know the truth,
Aaron, I've already told you through
foreshadowing how I feel about it. Where
are you located? Miami. Where am I
located?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; El Salvador.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Why is that? Would would that
be would that be a wise choice?
Say, Aaron, based on all the things you
know for the last 20 years between those
countries, isn't that a really unusual
decision to make? Why would I do
something like that?
See, those are the kind of things
that you need to think about when you
listen to a podcast like this. And I
think when you do enough homework and
you decide, okay, I'm not going to be
apathetic anymore. I'm actually I'm very
interested in this. Then what you do is
then you start reading material. Then
you start finding, okay, tell me the
implications.
What are the what's the action plan?
What do you have to do? I mean, you
already saw the people that will be
watching this already saw the first
action plan. When you get in front of a
screen, you probably should have blue
blockers on. Okay, that's the bare
minimum. But are there other things we
can do? Obviously, you know, there are.
We talked about some of them already.
The US military, Henry Kissinger, put
tin foil in the inside of the US embassy
in Moscow to stop microwave bombardment.
Well, maybe you can do the same thing
with your iPhone. Maybe you can do the
same thing with your house. Maybe you
can learn about a Faraday cage. Maybe
you can learn about Faraday clothing.
Maybe you can learn about how to protect
yourself when you're in an airplane or
in a Tesla. Um, maybe you can go out and
buy EMF uh meters. You know, we have
Geiger counters for radiation. Remember,
radiation is ionizing, radioactivity.
That's part of the electromagnetic
spectrum. We also have little badges
that you see doctors wear in hospitals
that measure how much X-rays we get.
Well, we also have things that measure
how much RF you get and how much
microwaves you get, maybe you learn
those things. And instead of buying
useless [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] for Christmas this week,
you buy those and learn how to use them
and go, "Hey, look at that. Where I
live, there's a guy next door that has a
router that's right on the wall. Maybe
that's why my my mother can't sleep and
she's got Alzheimer's disease. Could
that maybe be a reasonable link?"
That's kind of what we need. We need to
take control back of our life. And the
best way for us to do that is not only
to be skeptical, but it's also to be
curious and feed your curiosity
with some of these things that are in
this podcast. And then realize that how
those things, those historical facts are
all around your life now. All the
current events in your life currently
right now, none of those things happen.
If what happened in the 50s and 60s
didn't happen, if you don't understand,
you know, how we went from Meer Lansky
to Roy Connie Epstein, you need to know
that. You need to know that who who
[clears throat] Roy Conn was when he
started. You may not know this. You may
not know the links, but Roy Conn was the
lawyer for Joe McCarthy. Who was Joe
McCarthy going after communism?
Guess what Roy Conn was? Roy Conn was a
guy that was a Fabian. And what did he
do? He actually took McCarthy apart.
Who did Roy Conn become, Aaron? He
became the first fixer for Donald J.
Trump and he was taken out in 1986.
Then other lawyers stepped up.
Now we have new fixers. Everything
always evolves, but guess what? The
story the story is always the same.
You know, you you saw it recently in the
attorney general. We had people outside
with binders. Oh, this is the Epstein
list. Look, we all have this. Then we
went to magically there is no Epstein
list. There was nobody that Epstein
harmed. We just had a former president
and his wife come out and say
there was nothing about us and Jeffrey
Epstein. You just heard that literally
this week. And then what happens? Then
you get a data dump that Cash Patel and
Bondi said we didn't have that show all
these pictures of all these people all
together. Ask yourself, my friend,
doesn't that sound a little bit about I
just remembered the guy's name, Richard
Helms. Uh, that's the CIA director that
ended the MK Ultra stuff. Isn't that
very similar to the story I told you
Richard Helms and destroying the boxes?
Isn't that very similar to what Hillary
Clinton did with uh Beach Blit when she
destroyed the servers about Comey with
the emails? Don't you find it kind of
interesting that how all these stories
kind of rhyme and they're not
duplicates, but they rhyme
and they're always tied to the same
thing?
So,
what I'm saying to you is I want you to
be more engaged. I want you to
understand how many of these biology
stories that people are interested in
um
are tied to this story. Like if you
think your breathing techniques,
your movement techniques improve you,
great. But remember, if you lose the
indogenous melanin in the body of
interlandal,
[snorts]
you're not enlightened.
Your movement's not doing [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Your
breathing techniques aren't as effective
as they could be. I want you to become
really effective. I want you to become a
savage.
And I want you to understand how the
things in our environment, the things
that are being done to us at a
submolelecular level below your ability
to perceive it are happening. And
they're affecting those things. And
they're doing it not just one way.
They're doing it literally in thousands
of different ways all to slowly wear you
down.
&gt;&gt; How important is it for a human being to
make
contact with the earth? How important is
grounding?
&gt;&gt; It's really important. Uh part of the
reason why it's uh critically important
has a lot to do with physics. So I like
to give people the uh idea that they've
already had the experience. Instead of
using a person on the ground because
that can the physics can be a little bit
hard for people to follow. I'd rather
use a coffee maker. If you go get a
coffee maker that has two prongs and one
that has three prongs and you get
voltmeters and things like that, you'll
find out that the one that has three
prongs is more energy efficient. I would
tell you the same thing about you when
you're standing on the earth with feet
exposed and there's no power lines or
water lines that have EMF below, you're
way more energy efficient. And if you
understand when you're m way more energy
efficient that means that you're not as
subject to the MK Ultra
SRRI or brain health initiative
programs. That's actually one of the
first things of you getting better. So
grounding is something it's free. It's
really hard for the government to
impact. The interesting thing is the way
they try to impact it is they're
allowing people to put you know that
stuff below ground and people don't
realize that that is exactly the same
thing as geoengineering above by
blocking the sun. So grounding is really
really important
&gt;&gt; if a person is in a highrise or they're
surrounded by non-native EMFs, Wi-Fi,
etc.
Is grounding almost like a form of
discharge in a way or how how does that
how does that work?
&gt;&gt; You could think about it, but it again
this goes very this goes really back to
the question that you asked me about
should I wear blue blockers or not. I'm
going to tell you when you're in uh a
big building, you have to realize you're
away from the ground. Now, can you
effectively ground yourself in a big
building if you know what you're doing
properly? The answer is yes. Here's the
problem that you don't realize is that
the higher you go up off the earth, EMF
gets bigger. So there's more polarized
light, say at the 30th floor, than there
is at the first floor. So the second
question I would ask you, even though
you're grounded, how much are you doing
for the EMF around you? And then you
have to ask yourself, okay, what are
those effects? So, like one of the
things that I can do as a neurosurgeon,
I can do an MRI on you looking for
melanin sheets in different parts of
your body to see if they've been
destroyed or not. You know, we'll see
little white matter plaques in different
places. So, if you tell me, okay, I
can't sleep or I'm having more trouble
meditating since I've moved to the 37th
floor in Miami than I did, say, when I
lived on the first floor, then we have
an actionable plan that we can fix. The
problem is, do you think most of the
people that you know and talk to are
that sophisticated? The answer is
they're not. And unfortunately, that's
the problem. And I need more of those
people, not less. Why? Because really
the battle that I fight both on the
biologic side and probably on the
thinking side is I need more of those
people to realize the most valuable
asset that they have is their time and
specifically their healthy time so that
the most amazing machine, this brain of
yours continues to work really well in
the future. though we don't allow people
in Washington DC to steal our time any
further because effectively that's the
greatest inflation I think that we face.
I think the inflation of our money is a
problem but it's probably not even in my
top three. The the top one is the
inflation of stealing our time and our
ability to think so that we become
useful idiots and you know economic
slaves in the paradigm that we're in. To
me that's a real big problem. And I
mean, I think you know this as as well
as the audience that the sicker you are,
the much more easy it is to control you
economically. But I've already told you
the reason why is because they're
removing melanin from the system. When
they do that, the things that they're
using are much more effective. And if
you don't believe that, remember who's
the other normal humans that are not
heavily melanated or mileelinated? Those
are children. And what do we know
already? Children who are around EMF are
much more subject to the detrimental
effects.
Um the same thing is true with adults
who have had, how shall I say, their
endogenous security system removed from
them without them knowing about it.
&gt;&gt; And who is what is the what's the name
of the uh the Satoshi? Satoshi Mia, how
do you say his name? Satoshi Nakamoto.
That's the guy uh who is um the boy.
&gt;&gt; Hold on. Let me let me let me [laughter]
I want to I want to specifically ask
you, how do you say his name? Satoshi
Nakamoto.
&gt;&gt; Satoshi Nakamoto.
&gt;&gt; Who is Satoshi Nakamoto?
&gt;&gt; Uh I've publicly come out in several
other podcasts. I believe that gentleman
was a guy named Len Sassimon, but he has
direct lineage back to Meer Lansky.
And the guy who's the middleman is a guy
named uh David Cham.
That's the the link. And um the link
used to be Meyer Lansky. You have to know
who and what he was. He was a Ukrainian
Russian immigrant that came over 1911.
He began to work for some of the
Zionists
um ones that you would know as Bronin
running liquor you know in in the
Midwest of the United States. And then
he is the guy that um we got the term
called money laundering. Why? because he
realized early on as a young man that
the best way to steal money and the
government couldn't see you from paying
taxes because remember the Federal
Reserve Act came in with also taxes in
1913. Lance was the guy that came up
with using laundry mats. That's why you
have the term money laundering. So he
was the guy that broke the original
system. And it turned out in this whole
story, he's also the guy that broke
the Rothschild and Rockefeller system in
banking in 1969.
He basically came back to the United
States after taking some solless in
Israel
uh and went back and told the United
States that he effectively had control
of the Blackburg, Virginia computer for
the IRS. He was always one step ahead of
the bankers. He hated the bankers. And
the reason that he hated the bankers is
because, as I told you, he found out
through his work with General Groves,
through the military, that the people
that were behind this whole thing were
the bankers. It wasn't uh the religion.
He was very upset as a Jewish man that
Zionists were using Jews as a human
shield. And he was really pissed off
about it. The one thing about Lansky as
a criminal, which makes him very unique,
he actually had uh morality.
He believed if you were stupid enough to
get screwed, then that was okay. But if
you had something happen to you that was
below your ability to see it, that that
wasn't that wasn't a good thing. And he
did he wasn't about that. So from 1950
all the way through 1969,
he devised a way to always be proximal
to the US Treasury, to always be
proximal to the IRS, to be proximal to
intelligence. And how do you how do you
know this to be the case? Who was he
historically that you can all find out?
He's the accountant for Murder Inc. He's
the accountant for the mob. all the
people that were involved in the JFK
assassination, he was the guy running
their money.
That's how successful he was. And when
he found out what was really going on,
uh he used a loophole in law. His his
attorney was a guy named Ira Malnik,
who's still alive, very close to where
you live now in South Florida. And um
Malnik told him that after Israel was
formed that if you have any Jewish blood
in you that you can go back and get a
passport and you can also seek refuge in
Israel and be protected by the
government. So who was going after Lansy
at that time? The FBI and intelligence.
Why? because they knew that Lansky had
taken some money from some of the
casinos in in Cuba during the Cuban
Revolution and they were going to go and
attempt
uh to bring him up on the same charges
that they got Al Capone on. Okay, which
was tax evasion. They never got Al
Capone on the things they wanted. So
that was the goal of Jay Edgar Hoover.
Why did Jay Edgar Hoover and the FBI
want Lansky dead to rights? Because
Lansky believed in controlling people
through blackmail and everyone knows
that J. Garoover was a flaming
homosexual. Lansky had him dead to
rights on everything that you could
imagine. And he Jay Edgar Hoover always
he was always afraid that Lansky was
going to drop the dime so to speak on
him. He never did. And that was one of
the codes that Lansky lived by that he
was not interested in owning assets. He
was interested in owning people. And he
was very interested in owning the FBI
because of his clients. Who was his
clients? Lucky Luchiano, John Gotti, you
know, those those types, you know, Carlo
Marsalo, the guys that you heard
involved in the JFK assassination.
And when Lansky
uh told the Israelis
the information that he had
because and I'll tell you exactly who it
was, the attorney general for [snorts]
Lyndon Baines Johnson and early part of
of uh Nixon
put out a subpoena to bring Lansky in on
tax evasion charges. That's when he fled
to Israel. Uh,
Lansky then decided to do something that
to this day I call it the Top Gun
offense. You want to know the truth?
This is where a Top Gun story comes
from. Um, he tells the Israelis, you
know what I'm going to do? I'm going to
go back to the United States and tell
them the truth. So, he literally walks
in in 1969
and tells them the story that I'm
telling you right now. And he said, "The
best way for you to stay one step ahead
of the bankers is that you have to have
programmable money. Everything has to be
computerized." How did he learn this? He
was the guy that told General Groves
when he set up the deep state outside
the military, they used uh 67 Unix
computers to do this. Lansky was the guy
that taught General Groves this. Then
General Gross was brought back into the
military in 1958 by Eisenhower. Why?
Over Sputnik.
Sputnik was the the military getting
that dressed down by the Russians
because the Russians were the first ones
in space. And the military knew exactly
what that meant that that they could
control things through electromagnetic
radiation. So Eisenhower, who hated
Gross from World War II, brings Gross
back in. That's how Lansky, Murder,
Inc., everybody gets back in. What
happens in 1959?
That name ARPA changes to DARPA.
That's where the deep state begins. What
also happens? The Cuban Revolution
happens the same year. What also
happens? That's where you get the SV40
story in the polio jabs. Like all these
things happen in history
um all at one time. And Lansky's
involved in it. And who's the guy that's
still trying to come after him? The FBI.
The FBI is going after Lansky because
they know he got money in the Cuban
revolution. They also know that he was
involved
uh in the JFK assassination at some
level. They don't know how,
but they figure if we can catch him on
tax evasion charges. So, what does he go
in and tell him? He said, "It's
impossible for you to catch me in tax
evasion." He goes, "I own the the
computer that you use." When the
Rothchilds and Rockefellers heard that,
they nearly [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
because they found there was a backdoor
in there. Lansky was using a back door
the whole time. So what magically
happens in US history, the Bank Secrecy
Act, which is the most illegal
governmental
law ever um
passed against Americans, but now banks
can spy on you.
Why was that? Because they wanted to
find out what Lansky knew. They knew
that American money was was absolutely
corruptible. Lansky told them the only
way to make money incorruptible is to
make it digital. That's where the idea
came from. What magically happens the
next year, Aaron? The nation shock.
That's when they closed the gold window.
In other words, US money is no longer be
backed by gold. In fact, it's backed by
the might of the US military. Why?
Because the government knows they need
to blow money up. because money is no
longer a safety harbor for the criminals
in the banking elite. What's happened
every year since then?
They have tried through their strong arm
in BIS, which is Belgium,
to make programmable money. You want to
know what the CBDC program is? It's the
original idea that Lansky gave them. But
Lansky warned them it was going to be
really, really difficult
to actually make programmable money. And
boy was he right because they told the
story in ' 69. They still haven't got it
right today. But what did Lansky also
plan to do?
He planned to go back and looked at the
Munitions Act of World War II. What was
magically in the munitions act?
Something that nobody could figure out.
Cryptography.
from Alan Turing from the Enigma
machine. Why was that listed as part of
the story? Because they use cryptography
uh to control the outcome of World War
II.
You didn't know that, but Lansky did.
And what did he do? He hired a computer
scientist that has no money. You can go
and look at this one, too. Magically,
that guy David Sham opened seven
international c uh companies all tied to
cryptography and making digital
currency.
So, Lansky was going to use the best
minds from Cal Berkeley at that time to
build his digital money that was better
than theirs. What did that eventually
become? It became good. But here's the
problem. When Lansky died in ' 83, David
Sham was running with Ira Malnik this
whole time and they were trying to
figure out how to do it. Magically,
this young kid who's a PhD student of
David Shons named Len Sassimon comes in.
Len Sassim is so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] smart, the US
government hires him to do the TCP IP
protocol that you use today on the
internet. He did that when he was 18
years old.
Okay,
here's the ultimate tie to the story. Do
you know what Len Sassimon died from,
Aaron? He died from a functional
neurologic deficit tied to non-native
EMF toxicity. Guess why? Because
everything he did was based on
digitization.
He was always around a computer.
So what happens in the time between Sham
and Sassimon? Bitcoin goes from a
project of Lansky and the accountants
that control the mob goes open source to
the cipher punks. All the people that
are tied that you know about Jack
Dorsey, Adam Back, Hal Finny. And when
it goes open source, guess what that
means? We get the greatest gift that
Meer Lansky could ever give us. It's
like him giving us herpes, the gift that
never stops giving.
But guess what the problem is? The
people in control do not like the fact
that you now have a Lloydial title
that's better than their CBDC.
And if you want to know what's been
going on the last, I'd say since 2008
since Sandy Wild trained Jaime Diamond,
that's it. There you go. The controlled
demolition of money has been going on
actively since 1971.
That's the life that you the bubble
you've existed in. So let's really zoom
out. When you said to me, Jack, how many
people are afflicted by MK Ultra? Aaron,
you don't know any of this story. So
guess what? You are. You didn't know it.
And it was the system is designed for
you not to know it.
And how did I know it? Because it's
discoverable. Because I kept following
the breadcrumbs.
Now the job as a guy like you to put
this all back together and say, "Wow,
this not only affects my money, but this
is actually affecting the health of my
friends, my family, and everyone else.
So maybe this is a bigger story. Maybe
maybe we need to do something about the
deep state. Maybe we need to do
something about surveillance technology.
Maybe now you understand why Peter Teal,
Elon Musk, and Reed Hoffman, the PayPal
Mafia guys, they're not totally your
friend all the time. You need to
understand that. Maybe you need to do a
better job thinking about why is Joe
Rogan so popular when he's just a
comedian.
You know, why is Lex Freriedman a
physicist doing a podcast?
You know, why why is Brett Weinstein, a
biologist who has no clinical training,
talking about the things he's talking
about? Why does his brother get on a
podcast and ask one simple question?
[snorts] I'd like to know why Jeffrey
Epstein was at MIT, at my university, in
the math department, in the finance
department. I'll tell you what, Aaron,
those are pretty good questions.
Pretty damn good questions. But guess
what? Your current government
redacted and whitewashed everything
else. Your current attorney general,
your current FBI director, they want to
make sure Aaron Alexander doesn't even
know how to say Satoshi Nakamoto.
Why is Trump and his son and much of
what seems like the people around the
government right now uh seem like they
are pro Bitcoin.
&gt;&gt; Well, they're pro Bitcoin because they
know that Bitcoin is better than the
CBDC.
So, they would like to back Bitcoin by
the failing money. In other words, this
is now an evolution of what happened in
69 through about 75 where the bankers
knew that their money had to be blown
up. But their goal has been to go to the
CBDC.
Who has Trump hitched his wagon to? No
longer the bankers. Remember, he's a
real estate guy. He's hooked his his
wagon to the transhumanist technologist
because what's the belief of the
technologist that they can control
people better than the bankers could?
Remember the banking idea famously is
linked to the Rothschild family through
the battle of Wateroo when they they
controlled the bank of England. How did
that happen? Uh, one of the Rothschilds,
I believe it was Nathan Rothchild
famously said,"I don't care who rules
England. Just give me the ability to
control the money and I control the
country." So that has been in operation
since 1812. When did that change? It
changed when John Po Dexter brought
Peter Teal into the Department of
Defense. Who whose administration was
that? That's Bush. And if you want to
know top five worst presidents for
probably Americans, George W. and George
H, two of the biggest criminals you can
imagine. I'd put Obama up there because
he's in the Bush crew, but you need to
understand that George W. Bush
um allows PO Dexter to bring Peter Teal
in. Peter Teal now is the enemy of the
banker. So, what are we really fighting
about? And what am I trying to talk to
you about today? I'm trying to tell you
the ultimate battle in our geopolitics
is the transhumanist technologist
against the banking elite. They hate
each other. That's the reason why the
transhumanist all like Bitcoin. It's
also the reason why the Jaime Diamond
crowd, the Elizabeth Warren crowd, the
Bernie Sanders crowd hate it. Okay? And
once you understand that, then you
realize if you're a modern Bitcoiner,
you have to understand some of the
people at our table at Thanksgiving, our
Uncle Peter, our uncle Elon, our uncle
Reed, they're not our friends. They just
happen to own Bitcoin. And when you
really understand Bitcoin and you
understand Meyer Lansky, you need
adversaries, Aaron, to actually own
Bitcoin. It's smart. Okay? You never
want centralized control of money in any
one place. So for example, I'll try to
make this really simple for you. If
you're a sovereign person and you know
you don't have sovereignty in the United
States, what would be another passport
that you'd like? Maybe an Iranian one,
maybe an Lebanese one, maybe a Russian
one. Is that the reason why Snowden is
in Russia and not in the United States?
Because you need an adversary to protect
you from the tyranny of your own
government. Well, the same thing is true
when it comes to money. So, while many
people who listen to this podcast may
not realize I'm playing 4D chess when
you're playing checkers, I want people
to understand even though I dislike
Peter Teal, I dislike Sergey Brand, I
dislike Elon Musk, I dislike Reed
Hoffman,
it's imperative that they're on our team
right now on the finance side. Why?
because we have to eliminate the banking
elite. The next level is we're gonna
have to eliminate the surveillance guys.
Okay? And that's going to be a tougher
task, but that's the reason why your
original questions to me in the
beginning of this podcast are so
important because those are biologic
questions. Those are energy questions.
Those are tied to AI. Those are tied to
things around Nvidia. If you want to
know the truth, this is the reason why
that MIT physicist was just killed last
week.
Yeah, these things are all tied
together, my friend. And that is part of
the reason why podcasts like this are
important because there may be only 5
10% of your audience that wants to put
all this together. But I will guarantee
you this, when you release it, people
will listen to this. People will go,
"Now, this is not something you hear
every day." And a lot of it begins to
make sense when you see it put together
this way. And what do I want you to do?
I don't want you to believe a godamn
thing that I said today. I want you to
fact check every last bit of it. And
when you find out that I'm right, I only
expect you to do one thing. Buy Bitcoin
and then start asking better questions.
Because when we do that, we're going to
have to change the world. We're going to
have to change the way we communicate.
We're going to have to protect our
melanin. We're going to have to start
taking duty serum depleted water uh like
a one a day vitamin. Those kind of
things are going to become really
important because then Aaron then we
become enlightened.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Jack Kruse, thank you so much for uh
making time to have this conversation.
&gt;&gt; No problem. anytime, my friend.
&gt;&gt; All right, I appreciate you, brother.
&gt;&gt; All right, bye-bye.
&gt;&gt; Thank you guys so much for watching. If
you enjoyed that episode, you might also
enjoy this episode over here, as well as
this one over here. Thank you for
subscribing. Appreciate you. I will see
you in the next video.