When you go from one in 100,000 to one
in 27,000 in Southern California with
autism, that should be a huge sign to
you that hey, this is a problem.
Do you think that the poor light
environment in uterero and then the
continuation of non-native EMF exposure
in these individuals is what's driving
these neurological imbalances? Or do you
think the neurological imbalances are
even a part of this? Whether you believe
in God or evolution, why the hell would
each box car of biochemistry have a a
barcode for light on it if light wasn't
part of the equation? You don't want to
live in New Jersey and you don't want to
live in California. Why? Because that's
the place where people get autism the
most. This is the most shocking part of
the story. It's not with food. You do it
with light. So, do you know what you
know what blue light does to oxygen? I
should say to iron turns it to a plus
three state. That's the reason why these
kids have a problem. You tell the
parents, you're going to get this kid up
and you're going to walk them on the
beach. You're going to get them out here
in the sun and and the worse the autism
is, the more they need to do. It's not a
biochemical problem. It's not a genetic
problem. It's a biofysical epigenetic
phenomenon caused by
Welcome to the longevity formula with
Dr. Brandon Crawford. Let's explore the
new era of wellness.
What if everything you've been told
about autism is downstream of the real
cause? Not just genetics, not just gut
health, not even just vaccines, but a
failure of light. According to
neurosurgeon Dr. Jack Kruse, autism isn't
a modern mystery. It's an ancient
glitch, a signal lost between the sun,
your mitochondria, and the way we now
build life in the dark. This episode
will change how you think about
medicine, biology, and maybe even your
own story. We're talking atism,
photobiomodulation, recursive light
loops, and why your red blood cells
might be better described as antennas
than oxygen shuttles. I've got Dr. Jack Kruse with me, neurosurgeon, quantum
biologist, systems disruptor, and
probably the only person alive who can
explain how sunlight, mitochondria,
circadian rhythms, and DHA are either
saving your life or slowly erasing it.
Welcome to the longevity formula, the
podcast where we explore a new era of
wellness through the pillars of faith,
light, movement, mindset, nutrition, and
science. I'm your host, Dr. Brandon
Crawford. So what happens when a brain
surgeon starts asking first principal
questions about autism, mitochondria,
and why red light might matter more than
red meat? None of this was ever
presented in my life. No, it's not. It's
not going to be presented, Brandon. And
the reason why is because you have to
realize this is your punch in the mouth
from science. They don't want you to
know this because you have to realize
something. The more of this we know, the
more you're actually uncovering the
paradigm that's out there. So, they're
trying to keep this under wraps. They're
not really interested in solving it. I
mean, all you have to do is look at the
numbers. When you go from one in 100,000
to one in 27,000 in Southern California
with autism, that should be a huge sign
to you that, hey, this is a problem. And
then let's let's extrapolate the numbers
further. What does this really mean from
an evolutionary perspective? If this if
this trend continues, the slope of this
line continues, this is cognitive
deevolution. So, as I mentioned to you
before you hit the record button, you
know, what autism is to everybody who's
in this field is a little bit different
story. And I find out that the flavor
depends on what has been uploaded in
their brain and they believe. See, I
don't believe anything you believe at
all. Why? Cuz I'm way past it.
and where where my perspective come from
as a neurosurgeon, I know what I was
taught to believe about autism 40 years
ago. Then I see how it's morphed and
then when I dove down the biopysics
ladder and started to realize that
there's a recursive loop in the brain
that works on light that's in in brains
that are like yours and mine. So then
you need to realize okay what happened
between say our nearest ancestor and us
in that period of time that we don't
really have any good data for well there
had to be a period of time when we went
from non-talking to talking in the
homminid species. So it would only make
sense that people that had problems with
neuralation in their phalamus had
another way to communicate. So when you
see humans that can't communicate
properly with their environment or with
other
species, meaning other people in their
own
species, this is a strong strong data
point that autism is an adivistic
effect. In other words, it's not what we
all think it is. And then you have to
ask yourself, okay, what is Archimedes
lever for evolution? And that's where it
gets into the discussions that I just
told you about that I had with Nick
Jolmes on his podcast where light is
Archimedes lever. But all of us that are
in healthcare, we're always taught that
it's a biochemical paradigm that
everything you learned in the
biochemistry book is actually how cells
work. And it's just not true. And one of
the easiest ways to prove it's not true
is when you open the biochemistry book,
realize that just about every
biochemical has an absorption and
emission spectra. Well, let me ask you a
question. This is very simple. Whether
you believe in God or
evolution, why the hell would each box
car of biochemistry have a a barcode for
light on it if light wasn't part of the
equation? That's that's really the
simple answer. So then it's incumbent
upon you, Brandon, as a guy that's in
this space to say, you know, I didn't
know about that. nothing in my
training actually even hinted that this
was an issue. That's a good sign for you
because then what are you doing? You you
this is when you need to become a first
principal thinker because you go from
the known to understand the unknown. And
unfortunately in the centralized
paradigm especially when it relates to
autism nobody does that. Everybody just
wants to say oh well it's the vaccines.
Well it's not. The vaccines are
downstream of this effect. Do they
definitely exacerbate the situation? No
question about it. Why? Because they're
mitochondrial toxins. Now, do a hard
stop. Where does this recursive light
come from? It comes from mitochondria.
We already know from the bioysics
literature, literally in Roland Van
Wick's book and Fritz Pop's work, these
are the two guys that have done the best
work in this space to give you the
basics that mitochondria through
metabolism creates ultraeak biophotons.
Well, then the question becomes, if
you're an autism guy, which it sounds
like you are, you're like, "Okay, what
is the spectrum of light that
mitochondria make with different
versions of autism?" Like, how does this
actually work? And then you ask yourself
the next question, well, I know that the
KB cycle produces more ATP than anything
else. And we also know that kids that
have autism tend to love carbohydrates.
They don't like fats. They hate
vegetables. it what's what would that do
to the light signature of these kids and
how does this affect neuralation like
there there's no mystery how the brain
forms all the cells that become the
neoortex come from the phalamus okay the
phalamus is the sensory center of the
brain so if there's a problem with
migration while this child is inside its
mother completely hypoxic and surrounded
by amniotonic
fluid. What kind of light signal is
being made actually in there? And it
turns out when you ask these questions,
you begin to realize where does autism
really start? And this was, you know,
Nicole's punching them out. It was
Sergey Brin and Nicole Shanahan's germ
lines that set the stage for the autism.
When Ekko got popped with the MMR after
she was postnatal, what did that do? It
rose the heteroplasm rate up changed and
that that that's a mitochondrial effect
that changes the recursive light signal
and then what happens then you have a
reversal of the neuralation that went on
in uterero and then you're back there.
Here's the good news of the bioysics of
that story that Doug Wallace has told us
if you can reduce the heteroplasm you
can actually fix the problem the same
way that it came. So if there is a
mitochondrial toxin, whether this be
aspirin, whether it be light, whether it
be pesticides from a golf course, you
name it, it doesn't matter what it is
because all stress in the human body
actually acts on the same pathway. It's
the two pathways between the autonomic
nervous system. And that's especially
true post-natally. It's different in
uterero. The the key is that we should
be teaching doctors how to treat that so
that we can take monkeys that don't talk
into silly talking monkeys again. And
the the interesting part of this this is
why all kids with autism have sensory
processing disorders. It's it's almost
you know most of the professionals in
this space they actually aggravate the
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out of me because this is basic
neuro anatomy. Everybody knows that the
phalamus is the center of all sensation
in the body. Well, it's clear that this
process is broken in these kids, meaning
their
mitochondria are a problem. And we
should be focusing in on those tracks.
Those tracks are birectional. And
remember what I told you, not only
birectional in terms of the neural and
the vascular wiring, but I'm telling you
there's a recursive loop between the
mitochondria and the outside world. Like
yes, when you say
telepathy, mitochondria clearly are
telepathic because they're the wireless
connection between the sun and the
colony of mitochondria and us. And
that's exactly what's happening. The sun
comes in, programs all the things in our
cell and then what does the cell do? It
emits biopotons at a very small scale
and that's actually what innovates life.
That's actually what drives all the
neuralation pathways that are in these
broken kids' brains or what whatever you
want to call them neurode divergence. I
don't give a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] what you call them. It
doesn't matter because the big thing
that people have to get right is the
100,000 foot view of actually why the
pathophysiology happens. It's not a
biochemical problem. It's not a genetic
problem. It's a biofysical epigenetic
phenomenon caused by a problem with
light. And and this is the part where
you know none of that was ever presented
to me. And I love this because what the
largest part of my training was looking
at neurological imbalances, right? And
so we can see in QEG coherence studies,
we can see in some fMRI studies where
there's certain areas of the brain in
autism that have not fully developed and
we see weak long range pro projections
in areas such as the right insular
cortex, specifically more in that right
hemisphere. However, in the left
hemisphere, we do see patterns where we
see this dominance, right? We see
increased short range projections, we
see higher densities, etc. And so, the
majority of my training was looking at
those things. And then in developmental
functional neurology, we look at, okay,
well, how does the brain develop? And
so, it goes all the way back to sensory
integration, primitive reflexes, and
these things, right? And so we've
developed this track in the rehab space
how to stimulate these physical
receptors and correct these imbalances.
However, while that works very well for
some, there's so many that that don't
respond like we would like. And then
when we started folding in using, you
know, photobiomodulation and talking
about circadian biology and fixing
circadian biology in these individuals,
our success rate went way up. I mean, it
made a huge difference. So I guess my
question to you is do you think that the
poor light environment in uterero and
then the continuation of non-native EMF
exposure in these individuals is what's
driving these neurological imbalances or
do you think the neurological imbalances
are even a part of this? I think what
you're doing let me try to give you this
analogy that I just used with Sabine
Hazen on another podcast.
You guys in your space are looking at
autism as the movie screen. Uncle Jack
looks at it as the projector that's
emitting the light. And your perspective
actually needs to change to understand
this. So when you say the baby's light
environment, people will listen to this
that are not sophisticated because
they're like, "Well, the baby's inside
his mother. There's no light there." But
that's the problem. There is light
there. And the baby is sensing the light
of mommy. But the real light that I'm
talking about is the light that's in the
mitochondria of the stem cells, sperm
and egg, before they unite. And then
after when we get through all the phases
that happen before we get to the branial
cleft levels, when you're starting to
see neurologic organization, that's the
light show that I'm interested in. And
because that's the light show that sets
up morphagenesis, it sets up
organogenesis.
And autism functionally is an
embryologic problem. So let me explain
something to you that most people don't
really know and spend a lot of time
about kids with
autism. Since autism is an addivistic
effect in my framework, my decentralized
thesis, that means that the kids myelin
levels are radically different than they
would be normally. Remember myelin in
the central nervous system is radically
different in the peripheral nervous
system. So when you have white matter
changes, why is this a big deal? What do
we know about the Cambrian explosion and
the great oxygenation event there's no
mileination prior to that in the first
two domains of life. When the two
domains of life come together and you
get ukariats, you get mitochondria, you
get chloroplast, what effectively
happens in the central nervous system of
complex life. One of the first effects
is you use the TCA cycle to create
myelin. What does myelin do? Two things.
what you learned about it's an insulator
for the action potentials but that's not
really the important part but it also
turns out to be a proton conductive
mechanism so that it increases ATP
efficiency guess what myelin is tied to
ATP efficiency so when you begin to
understand the bioysics of this that in
order to mileelinate a brain so that it
works perfectly well that you have to
have these things in order in the
embryo. They're already disordered in
the kids that have autism. Now, how bad
the disorder is, it's like a train
station in New York City that has 37
different stops. So, the kids that you
take care of and you have big wins
with, those are kids that the defect
isn't as bad in this energetic platform.
The ones that are really bad are
difficult to deal with. The reason why
you have found photobiomodulation works
is because guess what it does? It
actually improves myelination. That's
one of the key things. And what do we
know about neurilation? It depends on
myelination to operate perfectly. Okay,
that's a big key. So when you begin to
understand these basic concepts then you
go okay what's the other effect of
photobiomodulation on on the human body
it actually renovates hem proteins it
fosters heem to be in the plus2 state
what does that mean that means that
hemoglobin with a plus2 oxidation state
can carry oxygen do you know that
hemoglobin when it's in a plus three
state can't and do you want to know what
that means that means that the brain
doesn't get the blood it needs. Remember
something you learned very early on in
your training. The brain gets 20% of the
cardiac output whether it's inside mommy
or us. So what happens if you get the
20% cardiac output in utero but most of
the hemoglobin is in metmoglobin or or
can't carry oxygen. Well, do you think
neurolation is going to go off the way
it would go off in a regular brain? See,
you're already starting to smile now.
Now you're beginning to realize why this
is a big deal. And then when you parse
the next level of this, say, "Okay,
Jack, let's talk about the optical
density of hemoglobin." Well, it turns
out it's 250 to 600. We're talking about
light that's in the UV and just getting
into the red range. Hemoglobin has a
sharp cut off at 600. So, what does that
tell you? Is is hemoglobin the red light
story that you think it is? No. Turns
out it's actually the story of
controlling oxygen. And it turns out
when you're building a brain inside your
mama,
hypoxia is the key. Okay. What does
hypoxia mean to you when you hear it?
Generally, it gives you a negative
connotation. But it turns out this is
absolutely the key thing that the brain
needs to grow. Absolutely. Why is that?
This is something I know you don't know.
What did Fritz Pop and Roland Van Wick
clearly find in their careers that
oxygen is associated with UPE formation.
So what does that tell you that you need
in this neural relation standpoint when
you're building a brain? That the the
type of UPEs that the brain makes when
you're hypoxic inside your mother is
exquisitly important to get proper
migration. It also means that the
spectra is tight and it also means it's
more monochromatic than it would be like
what we're experiencing now outside.
So the light show that controls this
atistic effect, all you have to do to
change it is change that spectra. And it
turns out that's what epigenetics has
been telegraphing us since those Duke
studies in 2003. But people who are
working in your space don't know this
biopysics. They don't understand how to
link it to the embryology of the brain.
and they certainly don't understand
actually how cells truly work from a
stem cell perspective. So, for example,
I just did a consult with a patient
early this morning who was having
problems with fertility. That's why they
called me and they one of the questions
they asked me because they went and
spent thousands of dollars in Europe
about having this baby using stem cells.
I said, "Do you did the doctors that
were going to charge you these thousands
of dollars tell you what controls the
stem cell depot in humans?" And the
answer was no. The answer is nitric
oxide. So what does that mean? Nitric
oxide is created by generally violet
light, UVA light. That's what happens.
And it works at very small scales and
that's how you tap into it. So when you
think about the phalamus in that baby, I
don't know, say month one or two, you
have bursts of nitric oxide being made
from the mitochondria at that level that
are tapping those neurons to become
neurons and then migrate, you know, the
way the plan tells it to do. Well, if
that process is out, if that that
mother's mitochondrial DNA cannot make
UVA light properly at ultra weak
biopoton level, what would you predict
that you think the pro problem is when
you hear this framework that I'm giving
you go, okay, that makes total sense
why, you know, kids would have a problem
in their neurodedevelopmental delay.
When you realize that nitric oxide
doesn't act globally, it acts extremely
focally, then you begin to say from a
brain's perspective, make believe. Do
what Einstein did. Make believe you're a
neuron in that phalamus that's
neurolating. What happens if the zip
code for nitric oxide is different
everywhere? Won't you get all the kids
that you can help and can't help? In
other words, you get a random
distribution over a period of time
because it
depends on that recursive loop. And
remember that recursive loop also
changes based on where mommy and daddy
go, where they live. What do we know
clearly from Fritz Pop's work from first
principal thinking? You don't want to
live in New Jersey and you don't want to
live in California. Why? Because that's
the place where people get autism the
most. So then you have to ask yourself
the question, Brandon, why is that? And
then it's very simple. When you go get a
meter and you go to those places, you
find unbelievable amounts of
electromagnetic pollution. So, let's ask
the question that you should ask, Jack.
Do we have any first principal papers
out there that show that you can change
metabolism with light? Then I'll
introduce you to a lady named Nora
Vocal, who is Trosky's granddaughter,
who's the head of the NIDA, appointed by
Fouchy. She did a paper in 2011. Do you
know what it shows? When you put a cell
phone up to the side of your head, it
increases your blood glucose and your
insulin. No food needed. So, let me ask
you a question since we're going along
with this. Do you think if you had a con
constant source of glucose and insulin
in your body that it would change the up
frequency in cells? Absolutely.
Okay. So now ask the next question
because I'm telling you that's the level
of
sophistication that Uncle Jack operates
in. Why? Because I understand the
biopysics and I can link it to the
embryology. Why? Because what's my day
job? I'm a nurse surgeon. I know this
stuff inside and out. that the stuff
that I didn't know 20 years ago was
anything about Alexander Gerwitch,
nothing about Fritz Pop, and literally
nothing about Roland Van Wick. And what
did I have to do? Roland Van Wick's book
wasn't out 20 years ago. I spent over
$100,000 transcribing papers from Japan
and
Russia to figure this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out before
that book's out there. You, my friend,
can go by Roland Van Wick's book and
literally read from
1927 all the way to
today and see just how much you missed.
And then you'll go, so this is the
reason why I didn't really learn this
because guess what? The guy that
controlled the budget, Anthony Fouchy,
made sure we always focused in on RNA
and DNA, not the mitochondrial DNA.
That's why you never learned about UPES.
That's why you never understood this
recursive light. I I when I sit down and
talk to clinicians in this space, just
like I did with Nick, and I tell them
what I just told you, they look at me
like I'm an alien. Like everything I
just told them is not true. And then
when they go find out that it is true
and that everything alive emits ultra
weak biophotons, it kind of blows your
whole paradigm up, doesn't it? Because
you don't really know [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] But yet
you're the expert taking care of these
kids. But to your credit, what did you
find? This is the best thing that I
think that you've said in this podcast,
Jack. It's crazy. When I use
photobiomodulation, I
find that I can improve these kids. Why?
Because photobiomodulation increases
mileelination. Milination improves
neurologic function. The brain is still
plastic in these kids. So that means
that you can finish the process that was
never finished in uterero. Absolutely.
And not only that, but within photobi
modulation, it what I'm really
interested in now is you're talking
about sub600 nanometer wavelengths,
violet. And so we've started, we do
regenerative medicine procedures as
well. And I've started to incorporate
green in these procedures. And when I
did that, the results actually went up
again. And I'm curious now. Well, that
this is what I'm Tell me. Green light
stabilizes hemoglobin. It stabilizes the
alpha and beta chain. Yeah. Stabilizes
the alpha and beta chains and it
actually uh helps. So generally this is
something that the biohysics community
doesn't really know yet because I'm
actively fighting with them on Twitter
just about every day as well. They
believe that most nucleated cells, you
know, that red blood cells aren't
nucleated so that means they don't have
mitochondria. They're like, "Well, how
the hell does a mitochondria, I should
say, how the hell does a red blood cell
actually make biophotons?" But there's
papers out there that show and they all
they all stem from Fritz props work
because he did look at blood under photo
multipliers. Blood actually emits UPES
by itself. So it turns out when you
stabilize the alpha and beta chains, it
actually creates more ultra weak UV
biophotons.
So it turns out red blood cells the
reason why they're really special is
because they emit almost monochromatic
UV light and we do it in a different way
and it turns out the bioysics of the
alpha and beta chains actually is what
changes all of that light show. So for
example when you have somebody who has
cickle cell or you have somebody who has
stallmia or for argument sake say you
say have somebody that's got microitic
anemia due to an iron problem.
Okay, those biofoton signatures are all
different when you look at them under
examination in a lab. And that's the
information that needs to come out and
realize that what is a what is a red
blood cell fundamentally in Jack's
decentralized thesis for medicine. It is
the radio antenna that connects the sun
to your colony of mitochondria. Why? I
think everybody knows that red blood
cells carry oxygen. Oxygen is the
terminal electron receptor for your
mitochondria. That's what you're
designed to work best with. But it turns
out all the oxygen that you don't use in
metabolism, guess what? That's actually
what creates the light show. So when you
use the TCA cycle maximally and green
light is tightening everything up, that
tells you that the spectrum that you're
going to release into tissues is going
to be optimized so that you get perfect
neurologic function. And this should
make teologic sense to you because of
the things that you learned about the
brain. That one of the things that
separates silly talking monkeys from
everything else is that we get 20% of
our cardiac output. You know what that
tells you? That you better know a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
ton about red blood cell morph
embryology and really what and where
hemoglobin comes from hem proteins. And
that's why I had to take Nick to the
great oxygenation effect. Why? Nobody in
medicine knows about how the GOE really
sculpted us because that's where we
began to first be able to use light. And
when I say light sculpts life, this is
actually how it happened. And the guy
that's gotten closest to that story in
my opinion on the biochemistry side is
Nick Lane. He wrote a whole book on
oxygen. But the thing that he does not
understand, he doesn't understand any of
the bioysics. And the biohysics are just
coming out. And I understand it's really
hard to blow your own biochemistry
paradigm up. But the GOE is where you
have two domains of life and we come out
of that. So we have to have ways of
dealing with oxygen. And the real key
metric is understanding what Pac and
Roland Van Wick found. If you don't have
oxygen, you can't make ultra weak
biophotons. So what by first principal
thinking does that really mean? It means
that life sculpted complex life, right?
And that that's the reason why for 3.8
billion years life was either archa or
bacteria. It's not until we gain the
possibility of using this toxin in the
environment, namely oxygen, protecting
it enough so that we can create light
with it. And that light inside of us
actually then created another system.
That's the recursive system you and I
are talking about. And that explains the
reason why when you listen to what I
talked to Rick Rubin and Yuber about
what was the impetus for us ex
internalizing melanin inside. Well,
here's your answer. And when you begin
to understand myelin actually shows up
around the Cambrian explosion like how
do you build complex neural systems?
It's got to start with the basic
building blocks. And what is myelin?
is not only electrical insulator, but
it's also a source of light hydrogen
protons that you can use to feed the ATP
ace. The more that sucker spins, the
more complexity you build. Actually, it
tells you also you can use more oxygen.
Why? Because the faster the spin rate of
the FO head means you become more
effective using the TCA cycle. When you
begin to see that, you go, "Okay,
there's a thermodynamic answer here of
why life was able to become more
complex." And the reason why this is
important, I always tell people to go
listen to the tool song uh schism
because to understand what you and I are
talking about right now, you have to
understand how humans were built and how
they fall apart. And in my clinic, these
people are falling apart. So I'm reverse
engineering all the things that I know
happened between the first two domains
of life and us. And it turns out the
biggest mystery to this solution is what
happened in the great oxygenation event
because that is where we gain the
ability to truly use light and the
recipe that we're using is still being
worked out. I would love to tell you
that we know a lot about this process,
but to be quite frank with you, we don't
know enough. And the reason we don't
know enough is because people like Norah
Vulcan and Tony Fouchy have been the
gatekeepers of spending money on the
Watson and Crick side of biology and no
money on the mitochondrial DNA side
where this light is made. The the DNA
side is actually where the light is
stored. That's that we know. Oh, and the
recursive clocks that are there between
the storage of light in DNA ties to
methylation patterns, ties to histones.
That actually is the magic wand of
epigenetics. Again, a light story. Yes.
And we need to get science, basic
science to those levels. So, like when I
talk to a guy like Nick or Nick Lane,
like they think I'm an alien because
they don't even know this science
already exists. And this is basic
science. This is not this is this
doesn't even require you blowing six
neurons on understanding this stuff. But
the implications of this basic
cornerstone research begins to explain
to you bipolar disorder begins to
explain to you ALS begins to explain to
you all the imalination GBS. Why do
people get GBS after they get some
vaccinations? Well, you're probably
putting two and two together already.
Okay, it's pretty clear that if you
affect the inner mitochondrial membrane
and delta sigh goes down, the uppes
change, that's how you can get that
disease. Is that how you get transverse
myelitis, too? The answer is yes. It's
just like another train stop that you
see in the kids that are on the
spectrum. But the problem is where the
defect is, meaning the zip code inside
the cell and inside the organ determines
the phenotype. That's the key.
So essentially what what's the weakest
link in that individual, right, is what
you're saying, correct? And then reverse
engineer it. And what you what you
stumbled upon is one of the the key
things and you probably don't even
realize this. This was the key thing
that happened at the end of the great
oxygenation event. We innovated hem
proteins. What do he proteins do? They
bury oxygen in the plus two state. They
become able to carry it, right? the plus
three state they can't use it then they
have to do something with it that's how
we got
transferent that's how we got hptoglobin
that all these proteins catalace then
what what's the next layer of innovation
from the goe that's where we get super
oxide dismutases that work with
maganesees
magnesium and all the transition metals
why because we have to have a way to
protect us from the toxicity of oxygen
and oxygen is really toxic to us. If you
don't believe me, ask any doctor who
went back into ICUs and CO. This is the
reason why when we intubated people, we
harmed them because all of these people
had plus three shifted hemoglobin. And
if you have plus three shifted
hemoglobin, that means you should be
inside a uterus, not in an ICU. And what
did we do? We stuck a endotracheial tube
through the vagina into the uterus in
these people. And what was the ultimate
outcome? Not good. Remember, there's a
reason why the baby's in a bag of fluid
and it's hypoxic. Because it tells you
that when you're looking to maximally
grow, remember this is your question
about stem
cells, the environment has to be
hypoxic. So now I want you to think
about all these idiots to go to Cancun.
It is magically does Cancun have, you
know, hypoxy around? No. you you you are
absolutely showing the public that you
don't understand what you're
doing. And the problem is the public is
so stupid, they don't realize this whole
thing as well. I I said to Nick in the
podcast, how can people be so gullible
to go and get stem cells when you know
that the baby is surrounded in a bag of
fluid? I mean, you go from two cells to
trillions of cells in 9 months.
oxygen's not involved, right? But yet
the baby is created. There's not one
person that'll listen to this podcast
that doesn't get that. So the real issue
is what happens if you lose control of
oxygen in the phalamus during
nurilation? Could that lead to autism?
The answer is yes. Could that lead to
just about every other disease where it
happens like you said? Where's the
weakest link in the program? And is that
true also post-natally? The answer is
yes. So once you begin to understand how
the process works and how we regenerate
post-natally when the umbilical cords
cut the ductus arteriosis closes off,
the regeneration program is radically
different in modern adults than it is in
babies. That's when you have to use an
oxygenated regeneration pathway. And who
built that? Who wrote about that in the
1960s that DARPA buried? That's Robert
Obecker. What do we know about that?
That you have to use hem proteins to
create duty depleted water to hydrate
melanin sheets to create one trillionth
of 1 amp mirror of current that actually
turns a red blood cell into a stem cell.
It actually differentiates the atomistic
effect present. Something you learned in
in school that is physically impossible
because it breaks the modern rules of
biology. Becker did a series of studies
in the 1960s that proved that all those
dumb asses were wrong. Like we know the
answer now, but you know what the
problem is? We are blocked from that
answer because Becker's work has been
whitewashed from history. Why? Because
he's the guy that came out and said, "I
can explain to you why everybody in
Southern California and New Jersey has
autism, but you don't want to hear it
because you want to put these antennas
all around to track your your Trident
submarines." And they cancelled them.
And now we wonder how it went from one
in 100,000 to one in 27. I know, but I
know nobody else does because they don't
parse the research that's already been
done. It's out there. We know the story
is a light story. It's not anything
else. The only part that food plays a
role here, it changes the light story
that comes out of the projector and that
changes the phenotype. That's the story
that people need to focus in on and
study. And then I believe we can help
the kids that you're struggling to help
because I think we can fix them too,
even with severe autism. Do I believe
that there's an answer? I do. And I told
Nicole that. And when I explained to her
how this works, remember she gave $20
million to a guy named Francisco
Gonzalez Lima at the University of Texas
to study red light and autism. Then she
gave $5 million to Anen Kana to build
the the daylight computer. So, it's not
like this information for me hasn't been
passed to somebody else who understands
this plight because she's got a child
this way. She She knows that Ekko wasn't
born this way. But you do you think that
she likes that her mother and father
really programmed their stem cells to
set them up for this? And when you
realize the ultimate irony, she's the
patent attorney for Google and he's the
guy ahead of Google. They're actually
creating the one in 27 people. If you
don't think that that's a a huge burden,
it's a burden for her. It's not a burden
for him because he doesn't believe it.
Why? Because he's addicted to the
billions of dollars.
Yeah. So this right, so this is all
making sense to me, connecting dots.
Absolutely. And so essentially we're
using light what the way so I just
started teaching my staff and we're
going through you know how a brain
really develops and so we're going
through palm C we're going through the
leptin melanoorton pathway we're going
you know further back than you know
anyone in the field has ever taught as
far as developmental functional
neurology goes and so I was talking
around a lot of these subjects that you
were just bringing up and I brought up
the concept that red blood cells and
other cells are actually acting as
biological down converters, right? And
that's what I think what you were
describing there as transmitting
biopotons and whatnot. What we're doing
is we're taking sunlight, we're taking
sunlight and transferring it to Morse
code, which is the BC electric current
and light frequencies and we're using
specific light frequencies to turn on
and turn off different programs that are
in biochemistry. All of biochemistry
happens spontaneously, but it needs a
thermodynamic lever. Like I like to call
it Archimedes lever in order to get the
physiologic task done that it wants.
Like if you want the PPP to operate, you
have to use a certain frequency of light
to get it. When you want the TCA cycle
to operate, you have to make sure that
your hem proteins are in a
phenomenal position. And then I think
when you teach your staff about the
leptin malano pathway, you need to take
it all the way back even before
insemination understand that fertility
and ficcundity are controlled by leptin
by the leptin melanocorn pathway. And
here's the the big take. This this one I
think will really help you and your
understanding and really your staff
because you guys are interested in this.
What's the key thing that you need to
understand about leptin based on the
story Uncle Jack just shared with you?
There is a data out there that shows the
absorption spectra of leptin is 220
nanometer light. Just so you know, you
pull up na NASA's
database. The sun doesn't allow 220
nanometer light to the surface of the
earth. So that should pose a really
interesting question to you. If the key
hormone that controls
ficundity and fertility for man absorbs
220 light and the sun emits that but it
doesn't get through our
magneettosphere. Why would biology do
that? And the answer is you make the
light inside and you do make light
stronger than the sun. So then Brandon,
it comes incumbent upon you to
understand all this stuff about
mitochondrial DNA that we're talking
about because you need to understand
well yeah that's a big deal. And then
when you think about the things that we
now know that when we monitor
fertilization what happens there's a
huge burst of light. I I guarantee you
when we get photo multipliers that can
go that low, we're gonna find out that
that light is monochromatic right around
220.
That's rather interesting. Definitely
never heard that, but that that just
kind of blows my mind a little bit
there. So, one question I do have for
you, right? So, you're talking a lot
about hemoglobin and in different states
and oxygen. So, then that makes my mind
start to think about hyperbaric
oxygen. Is this okay? So, let's go into
that a little bit. Help me understand
use cases, non-use cases, you know,
should we use it? Should we not use it?
What's what's going on there? Should
never you should never use it with the
exception of understanding. So, let me
explain the biopysics. So, like you're
in third grade so you get it. So, I want
you to look at my two fingers. This here
is NAD. This is oxygen. So, I just
described to you the inner mitochondrial
membrane. What's this here? This is all
the cytochrome proteins. Okay, inside
these two pointer fingers is a 30
million volt charge. Okay, that's
normally what deltas is. What keeps that
charge in? That's the first question you
have to ask. Turns out he proteins
called CCO. So cytochrome C oxidase does
two things. What does it do? Creates
dutarium depleted water which is the
insulator around my fingers. Okay.
What's the other thing it does? controls
apoptosis. So when something comes
along, let's say an MMR vaccine does
this and the 30 million volt charge
leaks out. So it's like a lightning bolt
at the nano at or phento level. It
follows the electrical resistance in the
tissue to damage things distally. So
what's the goal? The goal is to renovate
the hem protein so that never happens.
That is the the key step that happens in
the great oxygenation effect the the
innovation and evolution of hem
proteins. So most people don't even know
that cytochrome c oxidase which controls
apoptosis because if you think about it
makes sense when this is broken that the
body wants to get rid of that cell right
away. Mhm. That's exactly the reason why
because when you let that charge leech
into the cell, you're discharging the
battery, you're damaging everything
distal to it. Do you think that that
cell can migrate from the phalamus out
to the cortex? The answer is no, it
can't. Well, what happens if that cell
never is taken out because apoptosis is
broken? Do you think that that might
affect other cells around it during the
process of migration? The answer is yes.
Why? How do we know that? Already in
mitochondrial biology, there's something
called the intrinsic and exttrinsic
pathways. Guess what? Apoptosis can
happen internally, but if another cell
adjacent to it sees that cells around it
are broken, they also undergo
apoptosis. Well, my friend, what does
that mean? If all the hem proteins in
the stem cell that got fertilized has
that
defect, voila, you have autism. That's
how it occurs because it affects
migration. And if you can't keep this
intact, can you mile myelinate? The
answer is no. It's impossible. You can't
use the TCA cycle. The TCA cycle has to
have optimal renovation of hem proteins,
which is the w reason why, if you've
been following me on Twitter, on my blog
long enough, what do I tell you is the
single most important thing to do for
your health? Sunrise. Why is that?
Because Sunrise has the highest quality
red light. That's the stuff that you're
using in your clinic. That's the fake
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I want you to use the real stuff
because guess what? When that happens,
you're constantly renovating every
single hee protein so that it can
effectively use oxygen. Well, so let's
do a hard stop. You ask me about HBO.
The only time I believe HBO is indicated
is in someone who has osteomiitis. that
is untreatable by any other method, then
I think it's okay to use. But when you
understand just about every disease out
there has this mechanism broken, what do
you think is the effect when you put
oxygen on there? Cuz I'm going to show
it to you right now. Remember this NAD,
this is oxygen. What does oxygen do?
It's
electrogative. So it pulls electrons
this way. If you have a broken bridge,
do you want to be pulling electrons
across this? Because what are you doing?
You're creating straight current
everywhere in your body. Okay, make
sense. It does make sense. So is there
that's the reason why anybody who says
ozone therapy, hyperbaric oxygen therapy
is indicated here, there there you as a
patient need to run away from these
people because they are telling you they
are telegraphing to you they do not
understand the biopysics of the inner
mitochondrial membrane. And this is
basics. Everything that I just told you,
everybody know that oxygen is the second
most electrogative atom on the periodic
table to florine. But it allows
electrons to move, which is why we use
it. What else is unique about oxygen?
It's paramagnetic. That means it's drawn
to magnetic fields. Why is it there?
What's right next to the ATPAS? CCO.
There's the ATP has a spinning head
creates a magnetic field. Oh, look at
that. Electromagnetism.
So that tells you that the amount of
oxygen in our system is quantized to the
light in the system. So if you go adding
oxygen, what do you think happens with
the light? You create huge amounts of
light. And what did Fritzpot tell us? He
told us it's very unusual. When I study
proariots, they emit 5,000 times more
light than ukareotic cells. Here's the
other interesting thing. When people get
sick, their cells emit more light, too,
just like a bacteria. Now you should do
a hard stop, Brandon, and go, "Well,
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Isn't a mitochondria used to be a
bacteria? Doesn't this make a lot of
biohysical sense?" It does. Voila. So,
when people tell me, "We don't know."
Oh, we know, bro. We know. First
principal is thinking, "We know." But
the problem is you didn't get that
curriculum in your schooling just like I
did. And there's a reason for that
because the people that created big
pharma don't want you to know this
information. Right? So is there a
scenario to where we could go about a
process to repair the TCA cycle, repair
the mitochondria and then use oxygen
safe after the regeneration is is fixed.
Once you fix the electrical wiring
diagram, remember we come out of our
mother's vagina, they smack us on the
ass, cut the cord, then we are we use
oxygen. But you have to be able to use
oxygen. I'm telling you that kids that
have neurodedevelopmental delay can't,
right? And this is the reason why
they're always drawn to carbs because
guess what? That runs other programs. So
what are they telling you? They have a
Warberg metabolism in their brain
because their brain cannot use and burn
fat. So, it's incumbent upon you to
understand that little wiring diagram I
just showed you and why it happens.
Okay? How do you change the oxidation
state of iron to be able to use the TCA
cycle? This is the most shocking part of
the story. It's not with food. You do it
with light. So, do you know what you
know what blue light does to oxygen? I
should say to iron turns it to a plus
three state. That's the reason why these
kids have a problem. Absolutely. That's
why their parents have a problem. Yeah.
Guess what red light does? It turns it
to a plus two state. So what you need to
do is you need to get their circadian
biology, right? Light and dark cycles
because that's how it starts. And then
what you do is you renovate their hem
proteins every day. Not with your light
in the clinic. You tell the parents,
you're gonna get this kid up and you're
gonna walk him on the beach. You're
gonna get him out here in the sun. And
and the worse the autism is, the more
they need to do. So it's not 15 minutes
for these people. Like you and me can do
15 minutes. Some of these kids need to
do three, four, five, six hours. So does
that mean the nuclear family may have to
break up and daddy has to stay home in
Southern California and New Jersey while
mommy goes down to the Riviera Maya or
Costa Rica or Mexico? The answer is yes.
Is that inconvenient? Yes. But you chose
to have the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] kid to begin with.
Sorry. That's that's the problem. I
always tell my members that it's always
about if you're not good enough for
yourself, who you good for? There's one
there's one correlary to Uncle Jack's
rule. When you have a child and the kid
has a problem, the child is primordial.
You need to do everything possible to
fix this problem. And when people tell
me that we don't know how to fix these
problems, it infuriates me because we do
know, it's just not well known. And
there's the difference. That's why I
tell people I I don't spread
disinformation. I spread missing
information. things that are absolutely
axiomatically known published in the
literature but nobody puts them in the
framework so that you can understand the
phenotype of the diseases that you see
in your clinic and I see in my clinic.
So I mean that that resonates with me.
So about 8 years ago I actually took my
family we did a sbatical in Costa Rica
and we were going to be there for a long
time. and we ended up being there for
about 3 months and then there was a
business project in the Middle East that
pulled me back. But so I've always had
primary hypothyroid and Hashimoto's when
I was in Costa Rica and literally every
day we were on the beach for hours. I
mean and we were typically like naked or
like very little clothes on the beach
and then if we weren't on the beach we
were running around hiking in the jungle
etc. I went into full remission that you
know why though? Do you understand now?
But then I did not. Right. Yeah. So,
just so you know, and most people don't
know this, and I'm glad you brought this
up because this is this is a beautiful
tie-in to the story that you really
wanted to talk to me about, which autism
is. People don't understand this.
Hypothyroidism is a preconditioned
state. If a woman has it, that she's
going to have an autistic baby. Why? Did
you know that hypothyroidism is
associated with demation?
say that, but I I didn't know that.
Absolutely true. There's papers out
about it. So, when you're already in a
demolinated state, do you think that
your stem cells are not picking up that
programming? The answer is yes. Now,
here's the other interesting thing is T3
is needed for neurologic function in
humans. What's the other big link is
everybody that has hypothyroidism has a
huge problem handling iron.
Wow. Now, doesn't that begin to fit with
what we just talked about autism?
Remember, this is a totally different
disease. And now, you just brought this
in. And I'm the reason I'm glad you did
this because this is the spectrum of
chronic medical
conditions. When you improve this, you
can avoid the autism. Why? Because can
you give a kid an injection if they have
proper nurilation and proper Yes, there
are there are people I know this is
going to offend many kids and families
that have autism. It's true. There are
kids out there that took all these jabs
and didn't get it. And the reason why is
because the process in them wasn't
broken. But I can tell you that number
is really really small. Back in the
70s8s the number was huge. Now it's
changed. Why? Because our environment
now is filled with blue light. Our
environment is filled with all the
things that Becker warned us about. So
what does that do? It's fundamentally
changed the oxidation state of iron.
This is the reason why you hear me on
podcast. In fact, I'm looking at it now.
My Robins Pathology book from 1986.
That's right on that shelf. In that
book, there's a a line in a paragraph
that says that Hashimoto's thyroiditis
is extremely rare cause of
hypothyroidism. since 1986. Today, it's
the number one cause of thyroid disease.
So, you have to realize that
hypothyroidism and autism should be
discussed all the time. And the fact
that you brought it up is a beautiful
thing because it explains exactly what
I'm trying to share with you. The the
lack of control of oxygen is tied to the
the bad bioysics of iron. And it turns
out hypothyroidism is one of the key
things to study to understand truly
what's happening at pe with people and
kids that have autism and you'll begin
to find out that that alters their
metabolic rate. I think you know this
that anybody who's got hypothyroidism
has a different metabolic rate. What
does that mean in the decentralized
framework that I just talked to you
about? Means that the UPE frequency and
and spectra is different. So, it's not
the same. So, why would you ever expect
anybody to not have a problem from an
epigenetic standpoint who's got this
disease? And the reason I love what you
just said is because you just proved my
point that if you go to a place like
Costa Rica at the 9th North latitude,
you're constantly around UV and IR
light, which does what? Renovates the
hem proteins and makes palm C and alpha
MSH.
You just built Becker's regenerative
current. So what did you do? You fixed
this problem completely, right? And you
did it with light. No, you didn't do it
with anything else at all. In other
words, this is offensive to the big
pharma answer because they don't want to
hear this story, Brandon. They they
don't want Brandon and Uncle Jack
talking about this and they certainly do
not want us talking about this when
we're talking about autism,
right? I I'll tell you I'll tell you
another link I'm going to tell you
another link another link to this story
that you'll probably really enjoy. Do
you know that the mileination problem
for hypothyroidism the most common
disease it it it links to is Parkinson's
disease? And then you know what else
Parkinson's and hypothyroidism links to
that nobody likes to talk about?
Melanoma. Do do you know that people
that have these diseases have defects in
their dopamine neurons and their and
their melanin? Everybody knows that. But
did you know the reason fundamentally
why? Because the iron incorporation into
melanin is blocked at a fundamental
level. That's how these people get this
problem. And it turns out that melanin
has a very very unusual
unconjugated atomic structure that
allows it to do the things that it does.
One of the key things that melanin does
for us, do you know that it makes ROS RO
actually increases ultra weak biophotons
in the UV range? That's actually where
our complexity comes from. So why are we
the silly talking monkeys that has
melanin inside our brain when our
nearest relatives have most of their
melanin on the outside of their body?
That's the reason they don't have
frontal loes. It's also the reason they
don't talk. So what does that tell you
about kids with autism? That means that
they have to have a fundamental defect
in iron biology, oxygen biology that
affects melanin inside of them. Because
it turns out the melanin directs those
neurons where to go in the brain, right?
And the same reason why you can't make
T3 and T4 is because the leptin melano
pathway which goes right through your
eye into that anterior pituitary. So
you're beginning to see how all these
things link and your your foray into
this is very very good because this is
the reason why people that have
Parkinson's disease have a milein
problem and most people don't realize
this. The more myelin or demolination
they get the worse their cognition is.
You know that people have Parkinson's
are very much like autistic people,
meaning that there's a spectrum of how
bad cognition is in Parkinson's. Some
people have zero problems with
cognition. Well, that tells you that
they don't have a big problem with
myelination. More of their problem is on
the melanin side than the myelin side.
So when you think about that, I want you
to think about kids with autism because
they have defects not only in the milin
side but also in pomsy as it migrates in
different places, right? And all you
have to do to get out of nature's way is
to put these kids in UV and IR
environments. If you take those kids out
of Jersey and out of Southern California
and you do the biohack that you did with
your family, you fixed a fundamental
milein, iron, oxygen problem using
light. That that's really my message,
Brandon, for most of the people that
deal with
neurodeeneration and
neurodedevelopmental issues. This idea,
where did I get it? the biology of the
great oxygenation event. Beautiful. So
the experiment of Brandon Crawford and
the thyroid and whatnot, it continues
because yes, I went into the literal
full remission. When I came back, I
started working again, working with
patients, doing consulting work, all
this kind of stuff. We came back, we
live in the Austin, Texas area. And
slowly over time, I've now now I'm
struggling again with Hashimoto's,
primary hypothyroid, etc. And I've been
curious because I do get outside a lot.
I do. Yeah, but it's Austin. Austin is
terrible. It Well, we're wait we're way
north, right? So, we're It doesn't
matter. You don't understand the EMF.
Austin is one of the cities that was
selected by DARPA and the DoD to be test
for 5G first. So, you've been living in
this environment for almost 15 years and
they've ramped it up. And then what else
has happened in 15 years in Austin? All
of California has moved to Austin. So
that's true. You you now have people
that have bad eggs, bad sperm mixing
with people in Austin while the military
has built this huge area around you. And
you may not know this, but the EMP
weapon depot is really close to you.
It's in where they blew up the what do
you call it? It's by Balor University in
Waco. Yeah. and the amount of EMF that's
coming from above from Elon Musk and all
the stuff around you, you've basically
created a Chernobyl situation. What does
that all do? If you look at my Twitter
feed and I think you look at Instagram
now, you could probably use this in the
show notes. There's there's papers out
there that show that 5G decreases
melanogenesis in humans. So, I want you
to think about that. If you're
decreasing melanogenesis, what do you
think that does to heem proteins?
Because remember, we know that he
proteins are key in making duterium
depleted water in our systems. Well, if
you can't make the water, you're
dehydrated. Can you ever make the
regenerative current? The answer is no.
Because to make Becker's current, you
have to take the current and
downregulate it to 1 trillion to 1
ampere. What do we know from DARPA about
melanin? They're now trying to use
melanin that's dehydrated up on the ISS
to create huge amounts of energy from
the sun. But that's not how we use it.
We hydrate our melanin because it turns
out we use the smallest currents to
differentiate ourselves to regenerate.
And when you have a kid that has autism,
you need to understand these basics
because it turns out once you understand
the basics, that's what is going to be
the impetus for you to stop
procrastinating, get up and move out of
Austin and do what Brandon did. Go to
Costa Rica for a period of time. Have
the experience that the defect for his
thyroid disease wasn't in Brandon. The
defect was in his environment. Because
guess what? That is a very
counterintuitive thing to learn as a
human because we we are not taught to
think that way. That's not the way the
central core of biology works. But
that's fundamentally really how we do
work. And I'm very appreciative that you
told the audience this story because it
makes my job way easier when I try to
explain how these processes work, you
know, in us because that effectively is
the key. Light is capable of changing
the oxidation state of atoms. So, we're
specifically in this podcast focusing in
on iron. Why? Because iron is one of the
key ones. But remember, there's a lot of
other atoms we haven't talked about yet
that play roles in different diseases.
And the biopysics is there. For example,
one of the ones that you may be really
interested in, especially for this
podcast, is there'll be people out there
that talk to you about lithium. And
should we be using lithium in autistic
kids? The answer is no. We shouldn't.
And the reason why lithium is atomic
number three, it has a very specific
electronic structure. Do you know that
lithium has been associated with
increased
mileelination? But you know what the
problem is? Yeah, a lot of people don't
know it. But do you know what the
problem is? That's the biochemical
pathway. The biohysical pathway, lithium
can cause
hypothyroidism. So guess why the body
doesn't Yeah. So guess why the body
doesn't use lithium inside the the
pituitary gland or the thyroid? Because
it has no control of the system.
Therefore, biology said, "No, thank you.
We're going to use a different atom."
So you now have this drug that's out
there and I challenge you to do this
because it's very important for you to
hear this. If you go in the the
biochemistry literature and the pharm
pharmaceia literature look for drugs
that have no
biochemical pathways known lithium is
one of them. Another one is metaphorin.
Another one is aspirin. Another one is
acetaminophen. Mhm. The reason why
there's nothing published in your PDR is
because all these drugs have biohysical
effects. So when you begin to understand
that lithium can have a huge effect on
people with bipolar disorder, realize
that when I do MRIs and do functional
MRIs on these people, I see that they
have decreased white matter changes. So
if they're not mileelinated, does that
have an implication when they're going
to go crazy? That does that have an
implication of how that talks? What do
you know about bipolar? That's tied to
your sweet spot with autism. Bipolar
disorder also affects the phalamus. It
affects the alpha waves in the brain.
Plus, these people are demolinated. If
they're demolinated, what does that
mean? They're more sensitive to
electromagnetic radiation on the
outside. So, now you're beginning to go,
wait a minute. So now I'm seeing
remnants of autism even in bipolar and
I'm seeing remnants of autism in
hypothyroidism. The point the reason I
bring this up not to be provocative it's
actually for your audience and you to
see that the mechanisms of bioysics the
reason why biology made a choice early
on never to use lithium in the system is
because biohysically it's dangerous to
do. Now can we use it as clinicians say
if we want to have a specific effect? We
would not use this in autism because
even though we want to reminate we
certainly don't want to cause
hypothyroidism because what are we
doing? We'd be like a dog chasing our
own tail. Makes no sense. Now are there
other drugs that we could consider? This
is probably going to blow at least my
tribe's head. They're going to learn
about this shortly. When 2011 when I
gave my TED talk that got banned, the
reason why I gave that TED talk is
because I was trying to warn people
about the GLP1 drugs that were coming.
That's why they canled the leptin
trials. This is something that Brandon
needs to pay attention to. One of the
interesting side effects of the GLP
drugs is that they can reminonate
neurons and and Yes. And they these
drugs all come with big problems. No
question about it. But do these drugs
have a lot of biofysical how shall we
say collateral damage? The answer is no.
Okay. Now are there other things?
Clearly you have captured the red light
story which I love. I just want you to
use more sunlight than that. But do I
think you should start parsing the
literature on the GLP1 drugs? Not for
any other reason except to understand
that it increases TCA dynamics so that
you can create that proton capacitor and
myelin that optimizes ATP function. Why?
Because do I believe that could be a
jump start kind of like AAA coming out
to these kids with autism so that we can
begin the process of remalination? I
don't believe it's something that we
would use chronically in these kids. I
think we just need to start the process.
But when we put their little coconut
tree in the sun, then the sun takes over
the rest of the program. So that's the
way I'm looking at these diseases. And
and I can tell you, I've never told
anybody what I just told you about these
kids with autism. I use this on my own
for farm members and our kids. And and I
told him, I said, "Look, I need to sit
you down to do informed consent because
generally I'm one of the guys on the
internet that absolutely hates these
drugs. But remember, when you're a
doctor, you take an oath to do no harm.
If I can find a mechanism that
potentially can help somebody with a
deminating disease, I'm gonna talk to
you about it and I'm gonna say, look,
you're not going to get any answers from
anybody else on these topics because
they're not even studying this stuff.
You know, they're looking to use this in
different ways, but there are answers
out there. And I think you've tripped
over a good one. I think
photobiomodulation is one of the big
ones because it supports hem protein
fixation or regeneration and that
actually
supports getting the kids to the
regenerative pathway but that requires
them to be constantly in UV and IR
environments which is the big mistake
that parents are making. They're not
once they get the first step
then they need to do other steps. For
example, duterium depleted water is how
I look at GLP-1 drugs and autism. Same
reason because what is it doing? It's
the electrical tape around the inner
mitochondrial membrane. And I think you
know you're a smart enough guy. I've
assessed that already in this podcast
when you told me what happened in Costa
Rica. I really like that. That's the
reason I decided to to tell you about
this. Normally, I would keep this stuff
under my hat, but I think it's really
important for a guy like you since
you've had this experience. I want you
to take your own biohack and understand
your patients that come through the
clinic because I really believe we learn
most from our patients. But just
remember, you are also your own patient.
Yes. You know, and you can learn amazing
things when you're paying attention, you
know, to things in you. And if that
gives you the insight to do different
things, you know, in in children that
have these problems and you can see
wins, to me, that's that's a win.
Absolutely. So, I'm curious because
there's a few different GLP ones out
there. Is there a is there a
preferred drug?
My answer to you is there probably is,
but do I know what it is yet? No.
Because you know what? They haven't been
out long enough. And to be honest with
you, not a lot of people who have these
problems will consent to taking these
drugs because they know. They're like,
"Jack, you're telling me that this is a
problem." And I try to use the analogy
we used earlier. I said, "Yeah, ox is a
toxin, too." But it turns out if you use
it the right way and you have the heem
protein protection, it actually leads to
optimization. And when you actually say
that, do I think the GLP-1 drugs
potentially can be used? Yes, I
understand they're a lot like lithium.
But from what I have gathered since
they've come out, because trust me, I've
studied these drugs probably more than
anybody you'll ever talk to because I
know where they came from from the
canceled leptin trials. They don't have
a lot of biohysical collateral damage.
Most of these are all biochemical
pathway. And I think that if you use
them properly to jumpstart the
remination process, to be honest with
you, the number one condition I think it
has a huge benefit in is people with
ALS. Why? Cuz the risk benefit ratio for
them is huge. They're going to die
anyway. So why wouldn't you give this a
try to see if this could help and then
get those people to a good environment?
The difference there is kids with autism
are easier to bring to the beach than
someone who's in a wheelchair, you know,
trying to get them in the ocean. But
believe it or not, I've had patients
down here who we've done that in and put
them in the ocean and they lived longer
than their cohorts, one year longer than
everyone else. So, I'm going to tell
you, if you have a a deadly disease like
that and you begin to see
changes, should this be things that we
talk about for people with
hypothyroidism? Should it be things we
talk about for people with
neurodeeneration? Should it be for
neurode divergence? Yeah, I think
everything should be on the table. Why?
Because no parent wants to have a kid
that's got a brain that's damaged. And
it's damaged not in the sense like we're
talking trauma. It's damaged from a
transgenerational epigenetic bad diet of
light. That's that's what it's from.
Absolutely. You know, when you were
talking about lithium, it reminded me,
and I'm probably going to butcher this,
and I you know, I don't have the actual
study or the reference for it, but I
remember reading about an event where in
a southern Texas town, they dumped a
bunch of lithium in the water, and it
was an experiment where they were seeing
if it would reduce crime rates, and it
did. And so then what did they do with
that information? I don't know. They
didn't really disclose it, but they
actually had this huge, you know, study
on it where it did it reduced crime
rates. And my correlation was, well, it
must have, you know, dampened frontal
lobe activation and, you know, made
people robots and so they didn't start,
you know, go off and kill and rob each
other. I don't know if you are familiar
with any of that, but now the whole
story makes sense. Yeah. Because they're
they're actually probably partially
reminated. Remember, and lithium will
have the biggest effect on the people
that have the shittiest redux. So, the
people that are demolinated, the people
that have poor action potentials, if you
can improve their ability to think,
which is what myelin does, people don't
realize when you're demolinated, you
actually physically have organic brain
damage. Like, people have MS are not
going to want to hear this. I don't
listen to anybody with MS. Why? because
I know that they're not good thinkers. I
want people who can fully milinate
because when you're fully mileinated,
it's an issue. And the analogy I give
you, Brandon, is I tell people this all
the time. Do you do you understand why
kids are not allowed to rent a car or a
hotel in the United States? Cuz their
brains aren't fully mileinated till 25.
So even even corporations understand
that kids are a little bit wild. Well,
the thing is we don't think about that
with people that have demolinating
diseases. Like, why do I care about your
opinion? Now, of course, people will
say, "Well, Jack, you're just an
asshole." But you don't realize there's
a biohysical reason why I say some of
the things I do, and I would tell you
hypothyroidism is also in my
decentralized thesis organic brain
damage. Why? Because I know that it
leads to demolination. Now, it's not as
bad as like ALS. It's not as bad as
autism. It's not as bad as bipolar
disorder, but it's a train stop there.
And it tells me that the person is in an
environment that's not good. So, it
doesn't surprise me if you just take a
little biohack and put lithium in it
that it's going to have an effect on the
people that perform crime. The sad part
is the same story is it may actually
cause problems in other systems like
thyroid or in in bone or in the heart or
in thinking because lithium to an excess
has massive problems as well. And this
is you can see this if you look at the
bipolar data and people that have been
given too much lithium they actually
have humongous problems. So, it's a it's
a drug that has a very very tight
therapeutic window and that's the reason
why it's so difficult to use, but it's
also the reason why I would not advocate
using it for demolinating conditions
like autism is one. Got it. Okay. I know
we're coming up on, you know, how much
time you have available. I wanted to
shift a little bit because in the
evolutionary story we've packed away a
lot of mitochondria in the brain and
that's what's given us a lot of the you
know humanistic abilities that we have
but we've also packed it away in the
immune system and I would like to kind
of segue a little bit and have a bit of
a discussion because autoimmunity is
high in the autism population. You have
pans, pandas, patans, all this kind of
stuff. We talked a little bit about
Hashimoto's, but can you help me connect
the dots with these neurodedevelopmental
disorders and why there's such a high
prevalence of autoimmunity? Yeah, this
one is probably the simplest question to
answer. The brain and the skin come from
the same level of the embryo which is
called neuroacterm. Your skin is the
largest organ in your body. Your skin
also has more immune cells in it than
any other place in the body. Okay. So
what do the skin what does the skin
effectively do? It contains most of the
T- regulator cells. Those are the cells
that will become all the different tea
cells and those will turn on the B cells
that make the antibodies that create the
problem. The flip side of that is if you
look at the diagram that I always share
with POMC, you'll begin to notice that
POMs gets cleaved into not only alpha
MSH but beta and gamma. and beta and
gamma are tied to the differentiation of
B cells and T- cells. So when you begin
to understand that the leptin melano
pathway and your skin are disregulated
on your skin right here, this is called
a topologic effect. So if you live in a
place like Austin, do you think the
signal on your skin is going to be the
same as it would be say if you were here
in El Salvador where we have 2G and 3G?
We don't have enough money to have 5G.
So the signal is different. That means
the UPE created from here is not bad
enough for you to get this condition. So
let me give you another example. If you
were to assess what's going on in
Austin, then you were to assess what's
going on in Minnesota and El Salvador,
you'll find something interesting. The
sheer number of kids with autism on
autoimmune conditions is much lower in
El Salvador than it is in Minnesota. And
then when you look at cities like
Austin, Los Angeles, New York, Orange
County, the latitude thing goes away.
Why? Because what have you done? You've
brought the EMF closer to the child. And
that light is what's programming all the
miscommunication with iron, the heem
proteins, the sods, all the things that
allow neural migration to happen. So,
even if you live in Orange County where
the sun is pretty decent at 33 latitude,
can you use that to actually get the
situation in? And and you're the perfect
example to prove my point. You live in
Austin, which is I think about 31 32
latitude, and you got Hashimoto's, which
is an autoimmune condition there. You
went to the ninth latitude and got rid
of it. So, what's the story here? The
story is that autism it's base case it's
aberarent light that causes the UP
signaling to go ary anything that alters
the uppe signaling autism effectively is
made worse by so that's where the
vaccines come in but what's the number
one problem my opinion blue light
non-native EMF that's the base case of
what drives the heteroplasm rate up and
then anything that's additive to that is
an issue. And the last thing I think we
should talk about since we knocked out
the autoimmune condition because nobody
ever talks about this in autism and I'd
be interested to hear what you have to
say after I tell you what I'm going to
tell you. You know that kids with autism
have dispiosis. Huge problem. And you
know that that's how Andy Wakefield got
cancelled. We have, you know, a little
collaboration going on with me and
Sabine Hayesin right now about autistic
kids. And I explained something to her
on a podcast that you probably haven't
heard of yet because it's not live that
if you understand the human gut, the top
part of it from the ales to probably
past the stomach is innervated by a
cranial nerve. Cranial nerve number 10,
the vagus nerve that stops at the
transverse misolon. Okay. Yes. What
takes over there is the lesser and
greater spank nerve. They're not as
mileelinated as the vagus nerve. Then it
gets even more interesting in the distal
gut where most of the problems for the
dispiosis for autism happens. This
occurs where the microbiome is 10 to the
14th meaning there's trillions. So that
means the light show there's huge but
the entic nervous system in humans
especially autistic kids is not
mileelinated at all. So what does that
actually tell you? That tells you that
the microbiome light signature is much
more powerful in the distal gut than the
proximal gut. And how do we know this
from first principal thinking? I went
over Dr. Hazen with the story of Barry
Marshall, which I'm sure you know about
the Australian doctor that won the Nobel
Prize for heliccobacctor. When I was a
young resident, we used to do
vagottomies on people that get ulcers
and that was like barber surgery. It was
crazy. But what Barry did is he proved
that if he drank the helicoacttor he
could get the ulcers. What he never
proved is that if you demolinate the
vagus nerve you also set the stage for
helicoacttor. What really happens when
you demolate the vagus nerve you open up
the lower esophageal sphincter and what
do you let in oxygen and that sets the
tone for helicoacttor. What do we know
about helilicoacttor now from 1995 that
we didn't know when Barry Marshall was
active is that it creates a huge ultra
weak bofoton signal UV. So guess what's
happening? You're creating UV light in
an organ that's not supposed to have it.
And what's the ultimate phenotype? They
get an ulcer. So you begin to realize
that the demolination of the vag nerve
is a big deal. So why do I say this to
you? Since you're a functional neurology
guy, you know that we're beginning to
use veagal nerve stimulators for a lot
of different cases, not only just
seizures, but also dispiosis for people
that have, you know, heart rhythm
abnormalities. Why? Because the vagus
nerve intervates everything in the
parasympathetic nervous system all the
way down to the transverse misode. And
it turns out the kids with autism, they
also have problems with the entic
nervous system. So here again, you begin
to see the milein story and you begin to
understand why the kids are going for
the carbohydrates. It's because the
whole entire system is broke down and
you can see the biopysics breaking down.
That means that the light that the the
microbes are making becomes how shall we
say disuse or noise not a highfidelity
signal and this is the reason why this
big case because one of the things that
Dr. Hazen has found because she
practices in LA where all these kids
with autism are and she takes care of a
lot of them. She's found that they're
missing certain bacteria. And I told her
on the podcast, the reason they're
missing that that light show, my bet is
those biophotons are going to be in the
red range.
And that fits to what you just talked
about why you're finding success using
photobiomodulation. Well, turns out the
microbiome actually is helping the
poorly myelinated entic cells there. But
what happens when that gets broken down?
the kids get disbiosis. That makes
sense. That makes a lot of sense. So
then what would happen if you just pour
a bunch of probiotics down them?
Nothing. Because remember remember you
you forgot the lesson Uncle Jack just
gave you. If the lees is open, does it
matter? Absolutely no, it doesn't. And
that that's the thing is that we don't
do that because we don't see results
with that. And we have kids coming in
all the time where they're spending
$1,000 a month on supplements and they
haven't gotten anywhere. And that that's
not a surprise to us. So, no, no child,
no child with autism should be on any
supplements at all. In fact, the number
one supplement you already
mentioned, probably PBM. I I can get
behind DDW, too. Those two things I
think are wise, but the best thing to do
is take your coconut tree that's got
small coconuts that's not working too
good and put it in a better environment
and watch what happens to this kid. You
will be absolutely stunned. And the
beautiful part of this story, it'll piss
some parents with autism off, but what
am I telling you? That you can fix the
problem you caused. All you have to do
is get out of your own way and
understand that the program is built
into you. You can still drive the
neuralation program postnatally as long
as you understand how it works. And it
turns out that that program works on
biohysics. It doesn't work on
biochemistry. And that's been the big
lie that's been sold to people. And I
understand that they want to blame the
vaccines. It's I'm okay with it because
it's definitely an adjunct that adds to
the mix by changing the ultra weak
biopotons. But if you never get to this
biofoton level, you'll never understand
why autism is a transgenerational
epigenetic effect of light. Your your
signal broke out just a little bit when
you were talking about the two things
that you may recommend. I heard duteran
depleted water. I didn't hear the other
thing. And photo photobiomodulation.
Perfect. Okay. Those are the two
supplements that I think that I think
everybody who's got autism should use.
Why? They're cheap. They're easy to do.
Ultimately, you know what I'm going to
tell them? I want them in the sun
because that's the best way to get back
to Becker's current to rejumpstart the
program to fix what didn't finish in
nurilation. Because when you do that, we
don't need to screw around with that
program. It's still active. We still
have
neuroplasticity. As adults, the problem
is the stimulus isn't as great. You're
not making the light that you would
normally make in a hypoxic uterus
because you're not surrounded by
amniotic fluid. Your ductus arteriosis
is open. You still have your umbilical
cord. What I'm telling you, that's the
reason why tropical environments are
usually important because the
regenerative program in post-natal life
uses UV and IR light. There in lies the
difference. That's beautiful. I I love
that. I could talk to you for probably,
you know, 36 hours straight. I know that
my viewers, my listeners, they're going
to want to learn more about you, about
your work. What's the best way that they
can dig in and start to learn more?
Well, I think the first thing you do
with me is you go on my website. My
forms have literally 10 to 15 years
worth of data that's all free. You just
have to sign up and then you can start
reading it. And then if you want to do
Uncle Jack DIY, I have Patreon blog.
That's a cost of coffee, a cost of a cup
of coffee a month. I will split your
head open with all these biohysics. But
remember, you're not going to get a lot
of Uncle Jack time. Then if you decide,
no, okay, I got the basics. Now I want
to talk to this guy. Then you become a
member. Silver, gold, platinum,
titanium. And then if you really are a
tool, then you want to hire me as your
doctor. Lots of luck. You know, it's
going to cost you a lot of money because
my time is very valuable. But do I have
that available for my members? Yes. Can
you hire me off the street? No. I rent
my brain out only to my tribe. and my
tribe are people that went through this
path that Brandon just went through. In
other words, I teach them the basics of
biophysics. So, they understand where
they're at. Because I believe that if
you don't understand the biohysics, you
are always going to procrastinate. And
the one thing that drives me crazier
than anything else is people think they
have more time than they do. Time is the
most valuable asset. And if you waste it
and you're not willing to move your feet
with Uncle Jack, I don't want to waste
my time on you. Absolutely. I completely
agree with that and understand it 100%.
We'll we'll put that information in the
show notes for everyone interested. Dr.
Jack Kruse, I am beyond grateful for your
time today. I am humbled and honored
that you came on here. Like I said, I've
been studying your work for a few years
now. So, I'm just so appreciative and
I'm so thankful for you and the work
that you're doing. Thank you so much. No
problem. It was a pleasure.
[Music]
We hope today's episode has inspired you
to take that next step toward your best
self. Remember, the path to longevity is
paved with small daily decisions. Your
journey is unique and every step, every
choice brings you closer to your
ultimate vision of a healthier, happier
life. For more insights, tips, and
resources, visit drbrandcrawford.com.
[Music]