In their introduction to dialectic of
enlightenment, Theodore Adorno and Max
Horheimer lay out their project quote in
the belief that without strict
limitation to the observation of facts
and the calculation of probabilities,
the cognitive mind would be over
receptive to charlatanism and
superstition. This system is preparing
arid ground for the greedy acceptance of
charlatanism and superstition. Just as
prohibition has always ensured the
admission of the poisonous product, the
blocking of the theoretical imagination
has paved the way for political
delusion. Even when people have not
already succumbed to such delusion, they
are deprived by the mechanisms of
censorship, both the external ones and
those implanted within them, of the
means of resisting it. The aporeia, the
puzzle which faced us in our work, thus
proved to be the first matter we had to
investigate, the self-destruction of the
enlightenment. We have no doubt, and
herein lies our peticio principi, that
freedom in society is inseparable from
enlightenment thinking. We believe we
have perceived with equal clarity,
however, that the very concept of that
thinking, no less than the concrete
historical forms, the institutions of
society with which it is intertwined,
already contains the germ of the
regression which is taking place
everywhere today. If enlightenment does
not assimilate reflection on this
regressive moment, it seals its own
fate. By leaving consideration of the
destructive side of progress to its
enemies, thought in its headlong rush
into pragmatism is forfeiting its
sublating character and therefore its
relation to truth in the mysterious
willingness of the technologically
educated masses to fall under the spell
of any desperatism in its
self-destructive affinity to nationalist
paranoia. In all this uncomprehended
senselessness, the weakness of
contemporary theoretical understanding
is evident. End quote. And further down
they continue, quote, the enslavement to
nature of people today cannot be
separated from social progress. The
increase in economic productivity which
creates the conditions for a more just
world also afford the technical
apparatus and the social groups
controlling it a disproportionate
advantage over the rest of the
population. The individual is entirely
nullified in the face of economic
powers. These powers are taking
society's domination over nature to
unimagined heights. While individuals as
such are vanishing before the apparatus
they serve, they are provided for by
that apparatus and better than ever
before. In the unjust state of society,
the powerlessness and pliability of the
masses increase with the quantity of
goods allocated to them. The materially
considerable and socially poultry rise
in the standard of living of the lower
classes is reflected in the hypocritical
propagation of intellect. Intellect's
true concern is a negation of
reification. It must perish when it is
solidified into a cultural asset and
handed out for consumption purposes. The
flood of precise information and brand
new amusements make people smarter and
more stupid at once. End quote. Theodore
Adorno is known as one of the formative
voices of the philosophical movement
known as critical theory and was a
member of the Frankfurt school. And
while Adorno has probably achieved a
higher degree of name recognition, Max
Horheimer, his co-author, was certainly
no less important as the director of the
Frankfurt School. Because of the taring
and feathering of critical theory in
general and the Frankfurt school in
particular, many on the right and even
many centrist liberals tend to avoid
these thinkers altogether, relegating
their influence to mostly leftist
circles. But nevertheless, there is a
throughine from Nichzche's thought to
the work of Horheimer and Adorno. And I
think it comes through very strongly in
this work, Dialectic of Enlightenment,
in spite of the fact that you can
probably tell uh from the name of the
book as well as these opening excerpts
that there's a very strong influence
from Hegel. Uh as in the quote we just
read, they argue that thought is
forfeiting its sublative character. That
the power of thought is its negative
power. That is literally the power to
negate to reveal the internal
contradictions in the concept. bring out
those contradictions and thus open the
way to subladating the contradiction.
And when we say sublating, I mean that's
one of Hegel's favorite terms. This is a
translation from Offheeong, which is not
a very it's not a very direct
translation. We don't really have a word
for it in English, but sublating means
cancelelling the previous concept. In
fact, cancelelling the whole dialectic
while at the same time preserving that
dialectic by lifting it to a higher
level of analysis. So intellect's true
concern is the negation of reification.
To reify is to make real. Reification in
this context refers to the
rigidification of conceptual frameworks.
Right? So the the power of the intellect
would be to negate those truths that we
believe to be solid and unchanging
because these are a reflection of the
current moment, the current zeitgeist.
And so in so many words, the the
intellect's real task is to critique to
attack and challenge those thoughts
which have become cultural assets. And
that is for better or for worse the
modus operandi of the critical
theorists.
Many again believe they took that
principle a bit too far. Nichzse
certainly had his own criticism in his
own day for the historical theorists who
were stuck in a critical mode. But
nevertheless, I mean Nichze himself was
a critic. That in itself is his
criticism. He has a negative or critical
period to his own philosophy as well as
an affirmative period. So there's a
value in critique and today we're going
to look at this critique of the
enlightenment itself from two of the
foremost critical theorists. Much of the
intellectual world as it stands before
us in the eyes of Horheimer and Adorno
is simply a world of these cultural
assets. Nze might call them idols. And
perhaps the central idol, the most
important of all idols in modernity is
the enlightenment. The enlightenment
wraps up within it so many of the core
values that we reify today. Liberalism,
democracy, republicanism, the rights and
dignity of man, equality under the law,
scientific advancement, and social
progress, and so on and so forth. These
concepts have all existed in various
latent forms in European society for for
millennia. But in the enlightenment,
they dawn into the zeitgeist and begin
to manifest real political consequences.
The French Revolution, the American
Revolution, the expansion of suffrage,
bills of rights, abolition of slavery,
and so on. We might consider thinkers
such as Emanuel Kant who outlined a
vision for perpetual peace and a union
of European states. And he explicitly
tied this project to the dawning of
enlightenment thought in Europe. And
with the enlightenment, we have a number
of movements like that, intellectual and
social, which begin to invest a great
deal of faith in the inevitability of
progress. We might consider the wigs as
one such group. uh all across Europe
even in monarchical states throughout
the 1800s democratic movements emerged
and furthermore socialist movements came
into being. The most successful strand
of course were the Marxists given their
impact on the the 20th century. Whatever
your feelings on Marxism, if we consider
the Marxists from the standpoint of the
mid 1800s and everything that had
transpired in the past couple of
centuries, we can see how Marxism fits
right in with that zeitgeist, the the
faith and social progress because the
Marxists believed that there was a
material dialectic that society itself
has this sublative character. That's the
materialist turn in Marx as it's often
called. taking Hegel's dialectic and
applying it to material reality. To
explain this, the short version is this
that Europe begins with very imperfect
relations of production, very unequal
relations of production, and they're
unsatisfying to all parties involved for
various reasons, but more unsatisfying
to certain parties than others. So,
first you have these empires with
slavery. That type of economic relation
is eventually overturned by feudalism.
The economic relationship in feudalism
is eventually overturned by capitalism.
You know, again, this is a a material
process that takes place over centuries
and millennia. And capitalism does
represent in the Marxist view a
substantial expansion of freedom,
rights, even the quality of life. But
this relation of production is still
imperfect. It still contains a
contradiction. Just as the boogeoisi was
the the contradiction, the central
contradiction rested with them in the
previous period, right? They became a a
revolutionary class during the French
Revolution. They had overthrown the
anchant regime. Now the proletariat, the
workingclass wage earners could also
become a revolutionary class. Why? Well,
again, this is an oversimplified
explanation, but it's largely because
the central contradiction of the system
is the exploitation of the proletariat
coupled with a reliance on the
proletariat. The system exploits them,
but the system's dependence on them
gives them power. And as this process
continues, eventually the Marxists
believed socialism will sublate
capitalism and then communism will
sublate socialism. And someday far into
the future, maybe uh maybe even the
state will be abolished and mankind will
establish a classless, moneyless,
stateless society. One in which there's
no exploitation at all and the rights
and freedoms of all are realized. Now,
obviously that hasn't happened. In fact,
the 20th century saw the emergence of
fascism, Nazism, repressive state
socialism from the Soviet Union. The
ways that Marxism ended up being
interpreted ended up depriving people of
their freedom in in many ways. In less
than a century, much of Europe would
seemingly actively rebel against this
inevitable march of progress as the
socialists had envisioned it. And in
fact, you could say, I mean, the
fascists were against enlightenment
society as such, even as most liberal
democrats imagined it. Furthermore,
rather than the workers developing class
consciousness in the most advanced
nations on the planet, which is what you
would expect if the move toward
communism was part of this inevitable
process of social progress. Instead,
communist states emerged in places where
the people had previously been feudal
surfs, like Russia and China. And
meanwhile, in the most advanced
economies like the United States, they
had cultivated a working class that was
for the most part conservative. Instead
of being radicalized into a
revolutionary class, the workers of the
west were largely satisfied with the
rise in their standard of living brought
about by capitalism. And uh socialism in
America largely became a dirty word. And
I know we can also debate about the
level to which this was brought about by
free markets or by social democracy and
government spending. The point is
America and the western world did not
proceed down this sublative path uh
closer and closer to communism. If
anything uh they produced something
closer to like a managed democracy,
managed capitalism, something like that.
In short, after the two world wars, a
great puzzle was placed before the
intellectuals of the west, particularly
those who had vested such a faith in
reason and in progress and above all the
unassalability of those principles of
the enlightenment. Now for those who
embraced romanticism
or who were critical of the entire
enlightenment project from the start,
people like Jonathan Swift or Friedrich
Nichze, it's easy enough to say, well,
that was all a mistake from the very
beginning. But this is precisely why
Horheimr and Adorno argue that one who
advocates for the enlightenment cannot
seed the ground for criticizing the
enlightenment solely to its enemies.
That is if you do believe as they do
that freedom in society comes from
enlightenment thinking and if you value
that freedom then we have to contend
with the fact that society as it exists
today is still imperfect. There's still
exploitation, oppression, profiteering,
unnecessary war, subversion of
democracy, even forms of slavery. And
the dominating ideology seems to be a
sort of status quo thinking. that either
apologizes for these things, makes
defenses of them, tries to obfuscate
them, or just simply says this is just
reality. This is the best we can do.
Progress stops here. And given, you
know, in in some ways, given the
increased power of the state today due
to technological advancements and
surveillance and uh advancements in
military technology and just all of
these things, repression of political
disscent is easier than ever.
So changing the system by revolutionary
force seems to be a fantasy that drifts
farther and farther into impossibility
every single day. So Adorno and
Horheimer are writing for those for whom
there is that puzzle. Writing for those
who think that we have gained valuable
things from the enlightenment and it
shouldn't be so glibly discarded. But at
the same time then we then have to
understand how it could be that the
rationalist society created out of
enlightenment thought could seem to
could have that attraction towards
regression. And so the enlightenment
must be critiqued if we are to
understand this puzzle. But it's often
misrepresented that that critical theory
is just about like tearing down,
deconstructing Western society. As is
probably clear from the statements
they've made, Horheimer and Adorno do
not have that goal. They're carrying out
this criticism with an eye to sublime
that we discussed a moment ago. They
proceed dialectically. Their goal is to
reveal the central contradiction in
enlightenment thinking. So we can see
how it is that the enlightenment could
both liberate and carry through the
relations of power and domination that
existed before in human society since
time immemorial and even in some ways
heighten or sharpen those power
relationships. Until we can even begin
to address that contradiction, we have
to make the contradiction known.
Understand the nature of that
contradiction. how it could be that the
essence of enlightenment in both
conception and in practice could
represent progress and regress at the
same time. That is its central
contradiction. And this is one of the
through lines from the thought of
Nichzche. Nichze also questioned whether
democracy was possible. Yes, he had he
had values level criticisms of
democracy, but he questioned the
viability of these democratic movements
and whether or not they were actually
going to attain the ideal that they that
they purported that, you know, one of
the uh passages that he has on
anarchism, for example,
he questions whether or not anarchism is
simply the prelude to the most extreme
regression to tyranny. He questioned
whether this attempt to make every
single person in society into a uniquely
valuable individual wasn't part of a
leveling process by which everybody was
ultimately deprived of their
individuality.
And Nietze in fact raises the point many
times that by inculturating and breeding
mankind to be more subservient as he
puts it. So that in modern times, you
know, even the president suggests, well,
I'm only a public servant, right? They
put that they use that language of being
a servant of the public. Everyone sees
themselves as a function.
When we do that, we're creating the raw
material for a doineering personality to
take hold of society. that when an
attistic person, a throwback, someone
like Napoleon who has the charisma and
the animal magnetism and the ambition to
take command of a state for his own
purposes, when that person arises, the
average person will be completely
prepared to simply obey because obeying
is all that he knows. and writing in the
wake of World War II and specifically
addressing themselves to the question of
how their country of Germany could have
embraced Nazism.
That type of prophetic statement by
Nichzche of the power of the autocrat in
the world shaped by this leveling
egalitarianism. That's very preient to
Adorno and Horheimer. And that's not to
say, by the way, that that fascist
leaders are the types of leaders that
Nze would have approved of. That's not
what I'm saying at all. Just notice the
underlying dynamic. We make everyone in
this democratic egalitarian world into
essentially, you know, people all of
equal worth or equal value. We're all
functionaries of the system. We're all
the same in some fundamental way. And
then the person who attains power, who
feels that he's not the same, who feels
that he has the the right even to
dominate the system, will find them as
putty in his hands. that democracy
prepares the way for fascism in many
ways. So in some sense the the critical
theorists arise in response to this
question. Why did the promise of
enlightenment ultimately prove
insufficient? Why does it seem to undo
itself? And you can't answer that
question through strictly Marxist
dialectical materialism or at least not
very convincingly because if you have to
amend the entire theory because the
theory didn't match the facts or you can
answer it as a reactionary but in that
case you're just trying to
unrealistically like turn the clock
backward trying to deny that there was a
real drive, a real desire, a real need,
a necessity that pushed people into
modernity. So what the critical
theorists do is they reenter
consciousness over materialism.
Marxists always had a theory of
consciousness. They believed that the
the material conditions would produce a
class consciousness for example in the
workers. And the critical theorists have
to ask why didn't this happen? And their
approach is to say because it's not
always at least that the material
conditions create consciousness.
The consciousness shapes the material
and political conditions. The
consciousness is important. It's
effective and it does manifest in real
terms. That the reification of certain
concepts and values does affect what is
politically possible. Now again this
might invite comparison with Nichzche's
thought and I think Nze would largely
agree with some very important caveats.
I mean Nichze's analysis of of history
and politics is material in that niche
is not an idealist. He calls the
consciousness a surface and sign world.
It masks a world of unconscious drives.
But NZ also gives a great deal of
importance to psychology. He does
believe psychology is physiologically
rooted. So there's something concrete to
it. um that the ideas that somebody will
hold ultimately derive from their
relatives health or sickness, their
success or failure in life, their
position in society and so on. I mean
the most famous example of this is the
master and slave morality. It's very
important for Nietz that the master and
slave morality come out of concrete
circumstances. It's not that the master
first got the idea, I'm going to go be a
doineering master. Rather, he has that
idea because of his perception of his
own power. Right? He he he realizes he
perceives that his own power is potent
specifically his power to requite and
all sorts of ideas flow from that
relative political and social position
which was established by a contest of
physical force. But nevertheless, what's
the real significance of the master
enslaved morality? Is it those concrete
circumstances from the past that gave
rise to these moralities which no longer
exist today?
Or rather is it the fact that those
ideas can take hold in the psychology of
people today who no no longer live in
those same circumstances who live in
very different circumstances. It can
still drive their motivations and their
values and thus their behavior. And so
for Nichze, a person of high political
power can still be at bottom a slave in
their values and in their actions or or
somebody who might normally who we might
expect to express healthy values might
be infected by the slave morality and
thus become resentful or guiltridden any
number of things. And so for Nietze the
consciousness proper is only a series of
symptoms but it nevertheless reflects a
broader psychological reality which does
refer to those valuations those
reifications those idols which exist in
the minds of human beings and motivate
their actions independently of their
current circumstances. Similarly,
Horheimer and Adorno would say the
average person in western liberal
democratic capitalist society is driven
by a series of ideals that they've
inherited from the enlightenment which
was the very movement that promised to
liberate mankind through reason. And
they may not even realize that they hold
these ideals. They may not even know
where they come from. The focus of
Adorno and Horheimer is the regressive
kernel within those ideas as they call
them. The regressive element inherent to
the entire project. What is that
project? Liberating man via reason.
There is something inherently regressive
about that that now threatens to undo
the whole society and return us to
barbarism.
So the ultimate conclusion must be that
the enlightenment will undo itself one
way or the other. and far from an
inevitability as to how this all plays
out. It's our decision whether that
undoing will come as our downfall and a
return to nature in the worst possible
way or whether that undoing will
represent the sublation of the
enlightenment carrying through the
spirit of its ideas as regards human
freedom and human flourishing and and
transcending the regressive element
inherent in that project. So where does
the enlightenment begin? When does it
begin? Adorno and Horheimer situated as
commencing with Francis Bacon. I know we
could have a like a postmodern argument
about the the arbitrariness of drawing a
neat boundary line as to where the
enlightenment begins, but I don't think
it's terribly controversial. I mean,
most would say the major figures of the
Enlightenment are Dickard and Bacon. And
Francis Bacon is of course a philosopher
of science, a philosopher of law. He and
John Lockach are the founders of
empiricism. Bacon even writes a nolla in
which there is a utopian society run by
scientists. So Bacon is like the perfect
encapsulation of the enlightenment
spirit, especially at its beginning when
it's still a possibility, something yet
to come. Bacon's new Atlantis is an
aspiration. Perhaps society one day
could be ruled solely by rational
experts. Many in contemporary times are
probably highly suspicious of those
ideas. But again, consider it from
Bacon's perspective and from his time
when all the heads of state are just,
you know, they're in power because
they're somebody's son. They're not
there because of merit or because of how
wise or virtuous or rational that they
are. And so Bacon stands as a
representative of this coming
intellectual movement that comes with
the enlightenment that man has to be
governed by reason. And obviously that's
a very old idea. I mean it's a Socratic
idea or a platonic idea but the reason
why it possesses such power for Bacon
and I think why it possesses such power
for Europe is because Europe was on the
cusp of these the scientific revolution
that then is followed up by this
industrial revolution and that is key to
how Bacon saw science by the way above
all what he recognizes as the
scientist's task his calling the
scientist's job is to give man the
ability to control and dominate nature
from the very beginning of the
enlightenment. Therefore, it was stated
by its its founder. At its core, it's a
pursuit of this mastery over nature.
Bacon writes, quote, "The sovereignty of
man lith hid in knowledge, wherein many
things are reserved, which kings with
their treasure cannot buy, nor with
their force command. Their spiel and
intelligencers can give no news of them.
Their seaman and discoverers cannot sail
where they grow. Now we govern nature in
opinions, but we are thr unto her in
necessity. But if we would be led by her
in invention, we should command her in
action. End quote. The experimental
method, the scientific method is
valuable because it gives us power to
command nature. We we are enthralled
unto her in necessity. So we must learn
the laws that nature sets down. But we
can be therefore led by nature in our
inventions in order to command her in
action. So we have to play by nature's
rules. But once we learn those rules,
then we can command nature in terms of
our actual activity. So the name for the
sovereignty of man over nature is
knowledge. That's the picture we're
getting here. Empiricism gives us
knowledge. But the utility, the value of
knowledge is precisely that we can take
rulership over nature and become its
sovereign. And importantly, knowledge,
this form of power cannot be obtained by
force or by purchase. It can only be
obtained by the man of reason. While the
scientific method is based on
observation, it requires rationality in
order to implement it. Right? in order
to quantize the world to put phenomena
into measurable and coherent categories
so that what is observed can be put in
the form of a mathematical equation that
can then be standardized and reproduced.
In short, what Bacon perceives at the
dawn of the enlightenment is the power
of rationality to conceptualize the
world in order to dominate it to make
nature reveal her secrets and be
therefore we can become her sovereign.
So therefore the first observation here
is that enlightenment never purely
sought truth if this is true that was
never its purpose. This is a Nietian
point as well by the way. Instead the
enlightenment project considered from
the history of consciousness is the
beginning really of a a kind of
objectification of the world i.e.
scientific rationalism that seeks to
turn nature into objects. Further, the
way that this operation is carried out
is not based on the standard of
correspondence to an absolute truth.
Right? We get all these theories of
truth from philosophers. But was that
was that pursuit of truth really the
thing driving this revolution in
thought? Horheimer and Adorno would say
no. I mean science objectifies according
to utility. Rationality turns everything
into something that can be used. And in
fact, I mean, in science, they don't
make even technically in pure
positivistic science, they don't even
make the pretention to trying to
discover the truth as such. And so with
the enlightenment, we begin to approach
the world from that standpoint of
calculation and utility. Again, things
that were always there, but the
revolution in thought makes these
totalizing in some way. uh again as the
promise of liberation in in in in
Bacon's case liberation from nature
right so we're not mastered by nature
but we become master of her another way
to put this a very vulgar way but a way
that I think conveys the point is that
knowledge is power the enlightenment
ultimately sought power not just
knowledge or like knowledge for the sake
of knowing things power through
knowledge and knowledge as power we
could broadly call technology ology at
least that's the that's the fruit of the
enlightenment approach to the world
that's what it produces is new
technology that's often how we can
objectively speak of the the increases
in the quality of life and thing all of
these things that the enlightenment has
done for us we look around and say look
at all the technology we've been able to
create you know and meanwhile you could
look at say the Ottoman Empire as a
counter example of a an empire that I
mean whether or not the Ottoman Empire
is part of Europe has always been a
contingent ious contentious issue
certainly at the time of the Renaissance
and then the the enlightenment. I don't
know if the Ottoman Empire certainly was
on the European continent, but I don't
think they considered it part of the
European civilization. That's neither
here nor there. The point is they have a
religious social movement that basically
calls into question whether or not
change and um philosophy, art,
technology, all of these things are they
always good things or uh should be be
more skeptical of them and they lean
towards becoming more skeptic skeptical
of change and progress and again vastly
oversimplifying the case. But the
Ottoman Empire stagnates because they
adopt an ideology of religious
conservatism and skepticism toward
technology and change. Whereas European
civilization in the enlightenment, the
age of reason throws themselves wholly
into change and uh technological and
scientific progress.
But Horheimer and Adorno are very keen
to reject the notion that social change
is driven by technology itself or that
you know technological progress and the
changes that it brings in and of
themselves are responsible for social
conditions. That would be a more Marxist
materialist view. I know not all
Marxists hold that view but you know it
would be looking to some sort of
material basis that sort of has nothing
to do with consciousness as an
explanation right that the the changes
in technology in themselves drive the
changes in consciousness they they the
technology shifts the relations of
production and consciousness follows
something like that and Adorno on the
other hand insist that we cannot just
view technology as an active force on
society separate from those who possess
it as if there's no wielder
Right? Like viewing the sword separate
from the hand who wields it is rather
absurd. In other words, the technology
itself cannot be blamed for setting the
social conditions because the technology
is in the hands of people who make
decisions of how to use it and what
technology would be best to develop. And
our desires and our motivations, our
ideals, right? The ideals of the
enlightenment that we all hold, the ways
that we wish to master nature and for
what ends. These determine how we
allocate resources to develop
technology, what scientific questions we
want to explore and invest grant money
into and how that technology will be
used in the market and by the state and
so on and so forth. But again, Horheimer
and Adorno don't see that as an just a
simply inevitable consequence of current
technology. It's a consequence of the
consciousness of those with capital with
the power the the the grease of the
wheels of modern society you know as
capital. So quote it is no longer the
objective laws of the market which
govern the actions of industrialists and
drive humanity toward catastrophe.
Rather the conscious decisions of the
company chairman execute capitalism's
old law of value and thus its fate. as
resultants no less compulsive than the
blindest price mechanisms. The rulers
themselves do not believe in objective
necessity even if they sometimes call
their actions by that name. End quote.
So the people who are wielding the
technology
in are enforcing a certain set of ideas,
a certain status quo and it is a
decision and Horheimer alleged they
don't even believe that it's actually an
objective necessity that their so-called
logic of the market is something that's
simply binding on them that they have to
abide by. So technology is developed and
it's applied for the sake of the ruling
power and the ideas of the status quo.
It also shapes the ruling power. It
should be said it's not a one-sided
dialectic. I mean that such a thing
wouldn't even be a dialectic. Technology
is relatively speaking compared with
dynastic power democratic which might be
a strange thing to say but it's in the
same way that capitalism is relatively
democratic compared with feudalism.
Right? You can say capitalism is
hierarchical and capitalism is
exploitative. But it's open to anyone
regardless of birth or station to to
succeed in capitalism. Now,
realistically, does everyone have an
equal opportunity to succeed? No. But
it's not as if, you know, like in the
old days of feudalism, you could become
as successful as you like, but you'll
never have an old name, a title of
nobility and blood and a and a right to
a certain status and dignity in society.
uh that at the very least that aspect of
capitalism it's meritocracy as we say in
modern times is more relatively
democratic quote unquote than the
situation under feudalism and so too
with technology I mean anyone who
applies themselves who learns the math
and the science right now is there an
equal opportunity to learn all that are
the the are the ability to learn and you
know all of these things equally
distributed no but again there's no just
as Capitalism is relatively democratic
compared to feudalism within the realm
of science and and technology. Anyone
who has the math, who has the knowledge,
can seize that power over nature. That
that that's really the key here that
nobody owns the math. Nobody owns the
knowledge. I guess I know people do try
to like patent knowledge and stuff like
that, but uh which is very absurd, but
uh and I wonder what Horheimer and
Adorno would have to say about that, but
nevertheless, I mean, you can't actually
patent knowledge. You can't stop other
people from knowing things that if they
happen to know them, right? Anyway, uh
that's all I don't want to get into too
big of a digression, but Horheimer and
Adorno address this. They write, quote,
"Knowledge, which is power, knows no
limits, either in its enslavement of
creation or in its deference to worldly
masters. Just as it serves all the
purposes of Bajgeois economy, both in
factories and on the battlefield, it is
at the disposal of entrepreneurs,
regardless of their origins. Kings
control technology no more directly than
do merchants. It is as democratic as the
economic system with which it evolved.
Technology is the essence of knowledge.
It aims to produce neither concepts nor
images nor the joy of understanding but
method. Exploitation of the labor of
others. Capital. What human beings seek
to learn from nature is how to use it to
dominate wholly both it and human
beings. Nothing else counts. End quote.
So the key point is that technology is
constantly seized upon by those
positioned to utilize it. This happens
not as a blind process of fate or as an
inevitability. Nor is there something
special or uniquely evil about those who
possess its power. Once again contained
within the premises of enlightenment
rationality is the domination of nature
and all things within nature including
human beings and eventually including
even thought itself.
Again does that remind you of any of
Nichzche's observations? I mean granted
NZ hardly ever talks about capital as a
doineering force but the claim being
made is that beneath the high-flying
idealism of the enlightenment its
universalism its movements of
egalitarianism or secular humanism
what really allowed for this revolution
in thought was the power that it it
afforded to those who embraced that
revolution. Those European countries
that most rapidly industrialized were
among those who would go on to largely
take over the world in the coming
centuries. And we can see how contained
in this development in that in that
meritocratic essence of technology the
dynastic value system is immediately
disrupted and destroyed because dynastic
power is ultimately irrational. So
whatever our ideals about the drive for
knowledge, that's what's really driving
the process that the structure of
rationality itself is thus to turn the
world into useful quantities to create
unities. And here we mean conceptual
unities, not for the sake of truth in
the revelatory sense, but truth in the
pragmatic sense. Quote, for
enlightenment, anything which does not
conform to the standard of calculability
and utility must be viewed with
suspicion. end quote. To return to a
question that we raised earlier about
the abandonment of many of the
enlightenment's ideals and the return to
what Horheimer and Adorno call barbarism
here, mostly referring to fascism or
national socialism.
Here we begin to sketch out one possible
answer that enlightenment as a
totalizing rationalism will eventually
turn against its own myths. And here we
mean its own image of life and its own
narrative about the meaning of life that
sort of came at the beginning of the
enlightenment. It's another central
contradiction that most of us would
would recognize that we we routinely set
enlightenment against myth as mutually
exclusive. Right? Enlightenment was that
which banished myth and superstition.
And we therefore see the return of myth
and superstition as the rejection of
enlightenment and a regression to
earlier modes of of thinking and
valuing. But one of the through lines of
dialectic of enlightenment is the notion
that myth and enlightenment are one and
the same. That they're two sides of the
same coin. That even in the earliest
myths of mankind, we already have a form
of enlightenment. What does that mean?
Well, because the personification of
nature into the form of gods and spirits
and the stories of these personified
natural forces were a provisional
explanation of the world and attempt to
name the things of the world, put them
into conceptual categories. And
therefore that represents in a way a
sort of demystification of the world
that also the rituals and sacrifices are
a way of attempting to bargain with the
world which however effective or
ineffective you may think that is that's
an attempt to take control of nature or
to negotiate with nature to have some
fornowledge of what's going to happen or
some assurances of what's going to
happen in nature and prior to myth and
ritual if such a state of being ever
existed
mankind I mean what what would that a
pre- mythic age. I mean that that would
be mankind as animals or just in a state
of what? Utter confusion about nature.
The attachment of names and stories to
the world to the external world. The
creation of of theodysies and rituals
and sacrificial traditions and these
things that represented the attempt to
theorize to make wild nature into a
conceptually explored territory.
Quote, "The Olympian deities are no
longer directly identical with the
elements, but signify them." In Homer,
Zeus controls the daytime sky. Apollo
guides the sun. Helios and Aeros are
already passing over into allegory. The
gods detach themselves from substance to
become their quintessence. End quote. So
even in myth what we have you know what
we have is a signifier a name that
creates a separation between the thing
itself or we might say nature itself and
the human name for it by which the mind
attempts to take possession of nature
but by the time we get to say Homer's
epics the sun god is no longer literally
the sun even right he's a deity that
controls the sun which means recognizing
on some level the unconsciousness of
actual nature and seeing nature instead
is perhaps guided by a a rational
principle, albeit, you know, governed by
a deity, a personified deity still. But
still, that's, you know, there there's
something going on in the mind as it's
making these conceptual separations and
and significations. And so, once again,
that's not just because we the ancients
wanted to understand nature for the sake
of of knowing the truth.
The myths of ancient Greece not only
related tales about the mastery of
nature, but they also give accounts of
God's instructing man to become the
masters of nature, just as gods
themselves are. And that's no less true
of Old Testament values. Yahweh gives
Adam and Eve dominion over all the
animals, over all the earth. God makes
man in his image, right? And God is the
ruler of the universe. And then it
commands man to take possession of the
earth. And so the ancient Greeks too,
they saw that themselves in the image of
of Zeus, right? They they honor Zeus as
ruling the heavens. But men are called
to, for example, administer justice over
all the cities, just as Zeus administers
justice over the heavens. And it's Zeus
himself who declares that all shall have
a share of justice. Quote, "In their
mastery of nature, the creative God and
the ordering mind are alike. Man's
likeness to God consists in sovereignty
over existence in the lordly gaze in the
command. Myth becomes enlightenment and
nature mere objectivity." End quote. So
this is the thing. This is the really
interesting and subtle point that
they're making that contained within
both myths and scientific rationalism
there they both reflect this desire in
mankind there since time immemorial to
master nature and specifically the claim
mankind either because he's made in the
image of God or because he's the
rational animal whatever it might be we
possess this faculty that's been given
to us or that we've attained that allows
allows us to take dominion over the
earth. That's been there since our
earliest myths and stories. And as we
know from the words of Bacon, that was
there at the beginning of the scientific
revolution and thought.
So, Horheimer and Adorno identify a
number of things, and this is where the
argument gets a little sketchier in my
view, but I'll still think it's worth
going through because there might be
something to them or something that
might fire off in your brain from
hearing this. But they identify a number
of things like scientific tendencies and
thought as they later manifest in the
enlightenment that were already present
in myth. So for example, atonement
everything that happens must answer for
why it has happened. We might also say
that that's a very the tendency behind
writing the cosmogynes and the the
theogynes were was to explain why it is
that everything that exists in the world
came into being. the the story of Deita
and Praphanany. Why does that why do we
have this changing of the seasons? So on
and so forth. The the changing of the
seasons in that myth answer for why they
have to happen. Repetition is another
element. So literal repetition of the
myths as stories for example in the oral
tradition. The dramatization and the
rituals uh the the ways of drumming the
myth into the mind which were were
thought to have a designated effect on
the mind. They also point out
identification. So again the the myth
becomes in another way a signifier with
which ordinary happenings and figures
can be identified. So the myth gives you
a sort of we might say uh one way to
look at this is a myth could give you a
series of types
and you might begin to see those types.
you know, the myth perhaps as the
archetype and then you can see those
types in ordinary people and it helps
you uh sort of make sense of ordinary
day-to-day happenings according to the
blueprint of that myth. And each one of
these things contains like the seed of a
later scientific tendency and thought.
So atonement they tie to the doctrine of
action and reaction or cause and effect.
So every cause must have an or every
effect must have a cause. It must answer
for why it has happened. Right?
Repetition, right? Obviously,
repeatability is one of the the main
scientific values. Identification,
right? The the signifier that conforms
disordered nature to the variable to the
X. So, myth, the argument then is like
there's all these things about myth that
are already preparing the mind to grasp
nature, not merely as a subjective
phenomenon
and to begin to regard nature
objectively.
And the myth does this both in content
and at in its practical manifestations.
And there's this notion of the mind
reaching out and taking possession as
part of a prelude of or maybe even part
of the same activity of the process of
physically or materially taking
possession. And that's also what
eventually technology does for us. It
allows us to reach out and take
possession to utilize nature as we will.
And the other side of this coin is that
enlightenment itself
contains myth or is also myth. So myth
is enlightenment. Enlightenment is myth.
And what are those myths of the
enlightenment? How is it that the
enlightenment contains myth? Well, I
mean the belief in reasons liberatory
power for one is largely an article of
faith or the equality of all mankind
which is you could almost call that a
superstition in terms of I mean if you
want to talk about equality of rights
that's one thing but uh in terms of all
men being created equal in the sense
that is in the Declaration of
Independence
again I mean there's a reason why they
cite God as a origin for that idea
because you can argue that that's that
descends from the idea that all men are
equal in the eyes of God. But it's not
obvious that people are equal in any
sort of physical or fundamental sense.
And so that dovetales then I mean if the
real important thing is their rights, we
could also question the the whole ideas
of human rights and and human dignity or
the ideas of popular sovereignty or due
process.
I mean, ultimately, it's very easy to
argue for any of these positions from
like the perspective of self-interest,
right? Uh just saying, look, when we
have all of these concepts or these
ideas, regardless of their absolute
truth, it produces a better outcome for
society to hold those views. But just
notice what's being argued there. you
aren't actually making the argument in
that case that there is like an inherent
value to human beings or that rights are
some sort of actual moral realist
eternal fact you're arguing for based on
utility based on generating the best
outcome. What kind of world do we want
to live in? It's very hard to make an
argument for all of these things as an
objective fact. I'm not saying it's
impossible or that people haven't tried,
but I would say that most people who do
make the argument for these things would
make it on the basis of utility, which
says something in and of itself, that
we're acknowledging that it's a myth,
but we need to hold on to that myth for
fear of the consequences otherwise.
People make these kinds of arguments all
the time, by the way. I've pointed out
how both uh Christopher Hitchens and
Jordan Peterson, two very different
figures, made very glib and flippant
arguments about free will that mostly
boiled down to the idea that we have no
choice other than to hold on to the free
will idea even though it's impossible to
prove it because it would just the
consequences would be too bad if if
people stop believing in free will.
the the point that Horheimer and Adorno
are kind of raising here is like you've
already demystified the myth when you
make that argument. You've already
capitulated to the standpoint of of
rational utility and calculability.
Right? That's the way that argument in
and of itself arguing for human rights
on the basis of utilitarian standpoint
is already the the destruction of myth
of the myths of the enlightenment by the
Enlightenment. It's your enlightened
rationality telling you I can only argue
for this as a sort of from a
consequentialist rational framework. Not
that it's actually an objective inherent
fact that human beings have value and
dignity because you almost have to rely
on some sort of supernatural claim to
make that uh kind of statement. And uh
so you know and on and we must notice by
the way that on the other hand there are
people who have in the modern secular
mechanized view of the world concluded
that human beings do not have inherent
value and even openly embraced that
fact. And so if one regards man strictly
as a species of animals among other
animals, we have to ask in a scientific
worldview, purely scientific, why would
we expect to find an objective basis for
human rights and freedoms, especially
when we don't afford such value, such
rights and freedoms to other animals,
right? So how could we apply that to
human beings in a in a rational sense?
So part of the danger of the
enlightenment this conceptual movement
in which rationality becomes totalizing
quantizing everything into useful
objects
technology here meaning knowledge is
power as we've defined it is harnessed
in the direction of creating utility
creating efficiency and so on and that
produces this mode of thinking that will
eventually deserize the world. It will
wipe out the myths of Apollo and even
eventually Jesus Christ. But it will
also wipe out the myths of human rights.
For example, human rights will appear in
this new mode of thinking to be just as
empty a concept as man's having been
made in the image of God. So Horheimer
and Adorno write quote boogeois society
is ruled by equivalence. It makes
dissimilar things comparable by reducing
them to abstract quantities. For the
enlightenment, anything which cannot be
resolved into numbers and ultimately
into one is illusion. Modern positivism
consigns it to poetry. Unity remains the
watchword from perminities to Russell.
All gods and qualities must be
destroyed. End quote. And uh that's one
helpful way of looking at the situation.
and the destruction of qualities at the
hands of quantities of quantized
thought. But that's what has to happen.
That's what always happens. It happened
before in myth. Myth, in fact, is part
of that same dialectical struggle that
culminates in enlightenment. They're the
same thing at different levels of
development. We might say the
enlightenment is another myth. It is its
own myth that negates itself. The divine
is eliminated. Qualities become
quantities. The individual becomes a
type category. Everything is objectified
according to use. All the ideals of the
enlightenment that that that premised
this project are steadily negated as the
as this dominating rationality fulfills
all of its necessary consequences.
I think uh if anyone is is is perplexed
at this point, it's very useful to be
familiar with at least the basics of
Hegelian dialectic to understand the
point that Horheimer and Adorno are
driving at because dialectic is not easy
to grasp. Uh as I've tried to explain it
in the past, it's based on a type of
reasoning that doesn't really follow the
law of non-contradiction that A can't
equal not A. Rather dialectic follows
the logical law of contradiction that A
must equal not A. That every concept
contains its own contradiction that
contradiction is inherent in the process
of reasoning. So one example of such a
contradiction that is revealed by
dialectically thinking about
enlightenment rationality would be that
rationality as power is the way that we
establish ourselves as master. That's
what the enlightenment brings. The way
that we do this is by rationally
objectifying the world.
That's the mode of understanding of
reality that allows us to take power
over the world. That in itself creates
the subject object split, the division
of the world into ordered logos like the
mind, the word concept, reason itself,
and the disordered mass of nature. And
so we thus estrange ourselves from
nature by conceptually taking possession
of it, which is counterintuitive because
you would think we would be bringing it
closer. We now have a map of nature in
our mind. Doesn't that bring nature
closer to it? But by making nature a
reflection of our own subjectivity,
really paradoxically, we separate it
from ourselves. To put this another way,
the tables of categories for organizing
the natural world serves the function of
making us feel distinct from the world
that we have categorized. That very
understanding makes us feel as though we
are a you know a neutral observer
sort of taking in the world but separate
from it. And so on the grand scale I
mean so that's that's one of the
contradictions right that might be
unexpected. It's a contradiction in the
concept of
uh what might we say objectifying nature
that the contradiction is that it
actually makes it part of your
subjectivity while simultaneously making
you subjectively feel separate from it.
Right? So it doesn't actually make it
objective. It makes it subjective and at
the same time the reputation of your
subjectivity or not the reputation of
just fundamentally not experienced as a
part of your subjectivity
but on the grand scale. Right? So the
great that's one contradiction. The
greatest contradiction is that myth is
this unfolding drive in human history.
The rational drive its true character.
Myth is just its incoet form. It will
eventually negate itself. Enlightenment
always is this element in myth that
turns against it and attempts to
dissolve it and disenchant the world.
Because the more the world is
disenchanted and and turned into
something ordered and structured and
calculable, the better it can be used.
And eventually that philosophy of
pragmatism, utilitarianism, whatever we
want to call it, is too rational to be
ignored. And so the enlightenment, you
know, the people who make the case for
the enlightenment today tend to sell it
according to the myths, but often times
they themselves are critics of the
actual reality that the enlightenment
has resulted in, but they can't can't
actually comprehend why that's happening
because they constantly just refer back
to like, well, we need to go back to the
ideals of the Enlightenment. and they're
constantly up against this wall that
those are myths that people can't
believe in anymore precisely because of
the enlightenment thinking that uh
creates corrosive rationality as they
call it right it's corrosive because it
it corrods it eats away at everything
else around it that the scientific
enlightenment is sold as the path to the
re realization of a certain myth and
what happens instead is that as a myth
it negates itself and the only thing
left is the corrosive rationality and so
in our society Today only the relations
of technological domination as they
happen to be established are really left
behind. It's become a totalitarian
authoritarian
collectivist mindset of domination.
Where do we see this mindset in the
culture? I mean in the initial essay
Horheimer and Adorno point in a few
directions. Um really it's like a
symptomology of of of all of what we've
been talking about of the
desacralization of the world. So these
are all very modern products. But
relativism,
the linguistic turn in philosophy,
analytical philosophy itself, the the
the quantizing
of the entire discipline into formulaic
form. positivism itself as an ideology.
These are all positions that we would
have to conclude are only possible at
the end of the enlightenment project. By
the way, it's not just that these ideas
are like they're not anti-enlightenment
in an incidental way. Um it it's not
that these ideas come out of the
enlightenment but turn about and
critique it. It's that they're not even
conceivable without the enlightenment.
Right? So the linguistic term, so
Vickenstein's claim that all
philosophical disagreements are just
linguistic misunderstandings,
right? That's the kind of rational
proposition you could only put forward
at this point in the dialectic of
enlightenment at Vickenstein's point or
BF Skinner's idea that human beings are
just machines that need certain inputs
to be happy. Right? such a thoroughgoing
mechanistic
view of life to where it becomes
totalizing
but it's like that comes after centuries
of mechanistic thought right or the
American pragmatists who think the truth
should just conform to what's practical
right the all of this notice all of
these are types of outlooks are are
somewhat hostile to absolute truth
claims really while at the same time
representing the culmination of the
truth seeeking project of enlightenment
philosophy because again all of these
thought movements are kind of
inseparable from the end of the
enlightenment the end that the
enlightenment has produced. So what
happens when the truth claim itself
becomes a mere concept? What truth
itself is just a linguistic expression,
right? A signifier and a signifier only.
Philosophy, what happens to philosophy
in that case? Well, it turns its focus
entirely to the calculable to a purely
mathematized science as analytic
philosophers have tried to do. Or other
philosophers begin to say all
philosophies are just expressions of a
power relation or or perhaps the
author's confession or something like
that.
Um so Adorno and Horheimer write quote
mythology itself set in motion the
endless process of enlightenment by
which with inelectable necessity every
definite theoretical view is subjected
to the annihilating criticism that it is
only a belief until even the concepts of
mind truth and indeed enlightenment
itself have been reduced to animistic
magic. End quote. So the radical claim
being made here and this is why I love
this book is that it's not a romantic
reaction against the enlightenment that
now threatens us like threatens uh you
know reasonable scientific views of the
world or something like that. It's not
those with openly, you know, like
outdated or addivistic modes of thought
that are the real threat to the
enlightenment's liberation of the
individual.
Rather, the threat to individuality
is itself a consequence of the leveling
of individuality that must come with
this corrosive rationality at the center
of the enlightenment which will
ultimately corrode all its other
aspects. The reduction of everything and
everyone to a quantity. That's what
makes mankind into a herd animal in the
in the modern sense of the herd. Right?
Obviously, there have been groups and
tribes throughout time, but Horheimer
and Adorno would see the kind of herd
animal that mankind is becoming now as a
very modern phenomenon, as something
that the Enlightenment itself created.
Quote, "Under the leveling rule of
abstraction, which makes everything in
nature repeatable, and of industry for
which abstraction prepared the way, the
liberated finally themselves become the
herd troop, which Hegel identified as
the outcome of enlightenment." End
quote.
And so, Horheimer and Adorno then
address themselves to that central
riddle, why the fascist regression? And
their conclusion is that the Hitler
youth is not a relapse into the old
barbarism. Rather, it's a triumph of
what they would call quote repressive
egalit
end quote. And that's not normally too
it's not normally a combination of words
you hear in leftist thought, but eal
given here in in French because that was
of course the the French revolutionary
cry for equality.
And you know throughout history
reactionaries like Deaestra and Nietz
would say you know in spite of how much
the classical liberals who see
themselves as the enlightenment's
advocates will criticize the French
Revolution
this revolutionary cry was demanded by
the values of the enlightenment as is
the French Revolution itself right
there's so much uh apoplelectic rage
over the French Revolution among
mainstream conservatives these days, but
every mainstream conservative today
would have been standing on the left
wing as advocates of republican
government against monarchy. So, uh and
and the thing is Horheimer and Adorno
would agree in in description with
reactionaries like Nietze and Demast
as would probably Marx to some extent,
right? But Horheimer and Adorno agree
the result of the enlightenment ethos is
an oppressive form of collectivism.
That that's what becomes necessitated by
egalite. That's how egalit sublates
itself. It begins as this notion of
equal rights for all. But corrosive
rationality gets rid of the myth of
rights except as a functional pragmatic
series of rules for you know helping
smooth along due process and ensure
order. It's not not something absolute
or God-given. It's just a pragmatic
reality, right? Which means that it
might be pragmatic sometime to suspend
human rights and not honor human
dignity, right? That's sort of the
problem with the pragmatic argument for
it. But um so, you know, if we get rid
of the rights part and equal rights and
that saying all that remains is
equality, right? Because rights are part
of the enlightenment myth. So all that's
left is equalization of everyone and the
quantization of everyone. Everyone
becomes conceived as a quantity or a
type. Equalize all the populace
together. Make every individual a
repetition of an abstraction. And we do
this all the time in average just
everyday language, right? The average
American is such an abstraction. You
know that uh what are some others? the
working people, the likely democratic
voter, the young urban professional.
It just goes on and on. It's a it's a
statistical view of mankind, and it's
often reflects this view of man as
homoeconomicus.
And furthermore, we've called into
question that whole idea of a of a self
with this negation of myths, right? How
can we even say there are individual
selves? We've eliminated individuals as
a cause in history. and have primarily
put forward the idea that it's forces or
historical factors, whatever those mean.
These are more abstractions, right?
We've eliminated free will, as we've
talked about. We see only impulses and
social factors and social drives and
causes and effects. And so, we can see
how the totalizing rational impulse
makes the individual a statistic. And in
some strange way, that's the final
outcome of that cry for equality way way
back in the 1700s.
So everything has to be given a
signifier. Everything has to be
subjected to mathematization.
The result is positivism. That's the
culmination and the negation of
enlightenment. And man in the present
day finds himself wellfed, well car
cared for but alienated from himself and
from the rest of nature. And that's
related to the subject object split we
mentioned earlier. By the way, part of
the human condition which is inseparable
from our modes of rational thinking. And
we find its origin in the appropriative
movement of thought. It's by taking
possession that man becomes alienated.
Right? But man is required to continue
taking possession because quote humans
believe themselves free of fear when
there is no longer anything unknown.
This has determined the past of
dethologization
of enlightenment which equates the
living with the non-living as myth had
equated the non-living with the living.
Enlightenment is mythical fear
radicalized.
The pure eminence of positivism, its
ultimate product, is nothing other than
a form of universal taboo. Nothing is
allowed to remain outside since the mere
idea of outside is the real source of
fear. End quote. And so, we're
constantly driven to continue to not let
anything remain outside the realm of the
mind's domination, right?
uh we don't want to have any unknowns,
any scary. That's like the primary
source of human fear is the unknown. And
so we're we're simply we're we're sort
of it seems almost impossible to say how
we could stop this mo this appropriative
movement of thought. And so the the
logic of enlightenment therefore says
that these conceptual signifiers have to
encompass the whole world. language,
mathematics, everything has to be given
a name or a designation, a uh become a
factor or
it must be in some way taken account of.
But what is language and what is
mathematics? I mean we know that these
are simply systems of science and
signifiers as was we touched on this
before. So Horheimer and Adorno write
quote as sign language must resign
itself to being calculation and to know
nature must renounce the claim to
resemble it. As image it must resign
itself to being a likeness and to be
entirely nature must renounce the claim
to know it. End quote. So to put this in
straightforward terms, we don't mistake
the equation for actually resembling
nature. It's understood as a signifier,
as a means of taking possession, but
it's not the thing itself. Obviously,
nobody would make that mistake. But
meanwhile, when we make an image, art or
poetry, something in the likeness of
nature, but without being encapsulated
in the calculability of enlightenment,
we treat it as untrue. And Horheimer and
Adorno that, you know, they go on to
bring up the anti-artic bent of Plato,
sort of bringing out how that's always
been there within the theoretical.
uh remember Nichch's assertion that the
whole modern world is in the grip of a
kind of Socratic rationalism, the
theoretical approach to life. So the
truth itself becomes calculability and
utility and power. And meanwhile, the
sincere or authentic portrayal of nature
found in art that uh you know might seem
to be intuitively or on a sentimental
level a representation of the truth that
becomes seen as falsehood or illusion or
something like that. And so art becomes
a little closed off sphere, one of the
last places safe from this rationalist
taboo, a magical space where special
laws prevail. And you know, we might say
science purports to mirror the mundane
world and art has become the the domain
of the super mundane. And so our images
and our representations of reality that
actually bear a likeness to it, uh, you
know, the the artwork depicting wild
nature or something like that, the
positivist might say that's unreal. I
mean, sure, it depicts the real, but
that's just art. It's just something
seen from an artist's perspective.
uh that's not as real as the biological
understanding of that species of you
know tree that can be encompassed in a
formula or something. The painting of
the tree is not as real as the
mathematized equation that describes it
or something like that. Even though we
know that that's only a sign and the
language for comprehending it. Um, you
know, again, I should make it clear I
don't fully buy all of these arguments
of or some of the generalities or the
ways that they put forward sort of like
the perspectives on art here, but I
think there are at least some people who
think like this in the modern age that
um, and we will get to, I think, far far
more substantive claims about the
position of art and its, you know,
relation to culture in a in a moment.
But uh in any case they do in to their
credit Horheimer and Adorno mention that
sometimes there have been philosophers
who have ranked art higher than
intellectual knowledge. So they mention
shelling. We might also think of Nietz
or Gerta. But the bgeois world they
argue was ultimately not persuaded by
these perspectives. Uh they argue that
this perspective just doesn't really
jive with the enlightenment dialectic as
we've considered it. it just wasn't
persuasive to the cultural consciousness
that art needs to be made calculable and
useful too or else it will remain
relegated to secondary importance. And
so to the extent that art exists and
thrives in this economy, it is
commodified. It's made useful. It's made
profitable. Art is widely consumed now.
More more widely consumed by the general
public than ever before. But it's
consumed in forms which are primarily
designed to give entertainment. And uh
we might say this is useful as its own
industry. It's also useful for providing
sort of recreation to the workers so
that they can continue to be productive
and keep working. It's a very uh
absorbing entertainment through mass
culture is a very sort of capitalist
approved form of recreation. Right? So
art has become a commodity
and because it's a commodity, those
market forces have pushed it to become
largely mere entertainment. That's what
most we live in a time where there's
like more art disseminated to the world
than ever, but most of it is just merely
entertainment. It barely deserves to be
called art at all, if even it does. And
above all, that's the main place, the
artistic world. So that it's a real
problem that this has happened to the
artistic world because that's where
we've placed subjectivity and passion
and drive and motivation right in the
realm of art which is ultimately we call
a realm of falsehood or we understand it
as a realm of the unreal. That's where
we've that's where you're supposed to
express all your passions and all of
your you know your motives and your
drive and your desire and your your
hopes and dreams and fears and
everything irrational is supposed to go
there supposed to be put in that box.
and spiritual too, right? Because the
irrational includes the spiritual and
the mythic and so on and so forth. We've
put it all, we've banished it all to
that closed off sphere because
Horheimer and Adorno argue there's a
good reason for this. Where we perceive
power is just not in passion. It's in
neutrality, right? In this new world, in
the impartiality of science and we might
say in the in the calm demeanor of the
type of the scientist, right? in in
calmness. That's how authority is
manifest in the modern world. Uh science
or at least the scientific rationalist
way of of viewing the world that becomes
a conservative mode of looking at the
world in that sense, right? Becomes
bound by the pre-established concepts
and signs
which it isn't invested in emotionally
so much as it has a rational certainty
in them. there it has rational certainty
or that that person of this mindset has
the rational certainty I know what
reality really is and we can see how the
scientific neutral way of speaking is
manifest in every domain of authority in
modern life we can see this in the way a
list of charges are read or a patient is
diagnosed it's presented as the
objective fact of their guilt or their
insanity so again all of this very much
resembles the theoretical type of
society that Nze criticized in birth of
tragedy the society established and run
as a system
society when it's understood in this
manner
um or when people who run society
understand their task in this manner
you could you could put it this way it's
almost a politics that seeks to
transcend politics because politics real
politique is contest or consiliation
sometimes But you know conflict and
cooperation ultimately between different
competing and interested parties, right?
The theoretical society attempts to
organize itself around disinterested
principles and attempts to make it so
that the personality of the one who
rules their individuality is no longer
to really be a question anymore because
the ruler himself simply follows the
rules. Right? So every official within
you know every functionary acts within
the limitations and dictates of his
office and when there's an exception to
the rules he goes to his superior who
makes a determination according to the
limitations and dictates of his office
and so on and so forth up the up the
chain until you get to the president who
you know has to look at the constitution
as the limitations and dictates of his
office. And you know, uh, you could
argue the higher you go in the
hierarchy, the more freedom and
individuality you have. But also, the
system's really good at at making sure
that the people who eventually reach the
top have been subjected for a long long
time to a an ideology of conformity. So
often times the people who would possess
the greatest ability to change make
changes to the system from their
individual ideas or actions are often
some of the most conformist people. So
um you know in in any case the political
and social decisions that are made are
often no longer even really decisions.
They're outcomes of an equation or a
flowchart or something like that. So
Horheimer and Adorno write quote thought
is reified as an autonomous automatic
process aping the machine it has itself
produced so that it can finally be
replaced by the machine. Enlightenment
pushed aside the classical demand to
think thinking. Fishta's philosophy is
its radical fulfillment because it
distracted philosophers from the command
to control practice. Mathematical
procedure became a kind of ritual of
thought. Despite its axiomatic
self-limitation, it installed itself as
necessary and objective. Mathematics
made thought into a thing, a tool to use
its own terms. End quote.
So, do we see what happened here? Right?
Enlightenment is supposed to be the
movement that elevates thought, but it
ends by turning thought itself into a
tool into another one of those objects
formerly disordered nature, right? That
can become orderly and understood and
named and formulized.
And why? I mean, well, the answer is
simple. So thought can be used. And I'm
reminded of George Bool. If you're
familiar with the term Boolean logic
that comes from the work of Ble, he
attempted to map human thought. And that
is to say that Bool attempted to
objectify the process of how humans
think like to write equations which map
out the human mind and account for the
operations of that go that are going on
behind thinking. And bull's work was
foundational as we first began to work
to create thinking machines as they said
in those days which we would now say
artificial intelligence.
And uh you know Bertrand Russell praised
Bull's work but he felt that he hadn't
accurately described how human beings
actually think. But I I guess the
significance of Bull's work was that was
another campaign into an unknown
wilderness of mother nature. another
campaign undertaken in the name of uh
rational domination. Right? So in this
case the wilderness that rationalism had
to subdue was thought itself. And the
thing of interest to me is not so much
of whether he was successful or not in
actually encapsulating how humans think
but rather that his work did have
practical applications.
So in some sense the objective truth
didn't matter as much as the utility of
the work and the fact that his entire
project of you know mapping the human
mind and putting it into equations.
That's an idea you would only have under
this totalizing rationalist framework.
Uh although it is interesting uh I guess
another kind of contradictory thing is
that bool thought that that uh his
insight had come from a direct
revelation from God. But uh I don't know
I guess we don't need to get further
into that. So what happens when thought
becomes another object? Uh in a way this
development of treating even thought as
a calculable quantity that can be used
it cancels that subject object divide
that we talked about earlier. Right? So
the consciousness of the subject is no
longer something special would be one
way to put it. The rationality that
takes possession over the whole world,
even the thought that produced that
rationality is another object that can
be taken possession of. So they write,
quote, the equation of mind and world is
finally resolved, but only in the sense
that both sides cancel out. The
reduction of thought to a mathematical
apparatus condemns the world to be its
own measure. What appears as the triumph
of subjectivity, the subjection of all
existing things to logical formalism, is
bought with the obedient subordination
of reason to what is immediately at
hand. Knowledge does not consist in mere
perception, classification, and
calculation, but precisely in the
determining negation of whatever is
directly at hand. Instead of such
negation, mathematical formalism, whose
medium number is the most abstract form
of the immediate, arrests thought at
mere immediacy. The actual is validated.
Knowledge confines itself to repeating
it. Thought makes itself mere tautology.
The more completely the machinery of
thought subjugates existence, the more
blindly it is satisfied with reproducing
it. enlightenment thereby regresses to
the mythology it has never been able to
escape. End quote. And uh you could look
at a passage like this as referring to
people who have maybe a capitalist
realist point of view. But you know this
could be in any type of society. Anyone
who just defends the status quo out of
incredul that we could possibly do
anything different or um have different
values in society or run things
differently. Um, this is sort of the
point of what's happened to thought over
the course of enlightenment. One of the
things that corrosive rationality does
is relegate everything that's not an
immediate certainty to the realm of
either again irrationality, superstition
or like mere hypothesis or something
like that. that there's a certain logic,
a certain uh approach to life again that
comes out of these enlightenment ideals
which ultimately leads us to completely
abandon the sublative element of thought
and just use our reason to justify or
rationalize to ourselves why things are
the way they are and make apologia for
why things are the way they are which
Adorno and Horheimer would argue is a
misuse of knowledge or a misuse of
thinking.
So in the same way that the cry for
equality undoes itself by equalizing man
at the same time it destroys the myths
of individuality and human dignity and
sovereignty. In the same way
subjectivity emerges from that moment of
separation of mind from nature as a
consequence of objectifying nature in
order to dominate it. And that
eventually concludes in the
objectification of thought in order to
dominate thought which means that
thought itself is not really the
operative driving force of
enlightenment. Right? Knowledge and here
specifically meaning knowledge as power
technology
escapes the power of thought in some way
which is a very strange notion. But an
easy example would be that
most people will accept a series of
knowledge claims in the modern day. the
claims that are agreed upon by experts
or or the consensus opinion or
something. But we don't as a society
necessarily encourage thinking about
these claims. Sometimes we actively
discouraged really thinking about them.
Right? And these would be the totalizing
rationality as ideals that we hold
sometimes without even being aware of
them. And so this is the destruction of
subjectivity at the hands of
enlightenment rationality.
And that's one of the ways another
self-negation, right? That the
enlightenment in some ways could be seen
as like pitched to us on the level of
self-preservation of the ways in which
more rational society
uh would better serve our needs and
desires.
But it ends up abolishing the self that
it intended to preserve on again not the
level of material reality but on the
level of consciousness it abolishes the
self.
Here we're again we're talking about
alienation and there's all these
theories about alienation. Horheimer and
Adorno focus on the alienation of the
self through the conceptual positivistic
world uh the worldview that is created.
the alienation of the self that happens
in consciousness. The the
self-preservation drive that perceived
its own interests in the enlightenment
that ends up enforcing quote the
self-alienation of individuals who must
mold themselves to the technical
apparatus body and soul. Enlightened
thinking has an answer for this too.
Finally, the transcendental subject of
knowledge as the last reminder of
subjectivity is itself seemingly
abolished and replaced by the operations
of the automatic mechanisms of order,
which therefore run all the more
smoothly. Subjectivity has volatilized
itself into the logic of supposedly
optional rules to gain more absolute
control. Reason's old ambition to be
purely an instrument of purposes has
finally been fulfilled. The exclusivity
of logical laws stems from this abdurant
adherence to function and ultimately
from the compulsive character of
self-preservation.
The latter is constantly magnified into
a choice between survival and doom, a
choice which is reflected even in the
principle that of two contradictory
propositions only one can be true and
the other false. End quote.
So the leveling and the disappearance of
the individual into the inescapable
logic of the system makes the relative
abundance meaningless. And it strikes me
how similar the critique here is to Carl
Jung's critique of modern society that
was more from a psychological angle in
spite of the fact that there are very
different political ideas driving these
thinkers right Carl Jung and Adorno and
Horheimer but they're all trying to
understand how a European civilization
blessed with the fruits of enlightenment
would have repeatedly chosen barbarism
Jung calls it almost a form of mass
psychosis and he was also responding to
the two world wars and then the the
Soviets had just uh crushed the
rebellions in Hungary and the Czech
Republic. So um it you know the
socialist dream had that was sort of the
moment when all the socialists realize
that their dream of subl the sublative
movement of history was actually going
in the wrong direction. And uh Jung
says, as Adorno and Horheimer also say,
this tendency, this regressive tendency
might even exist more strongly in
liberal democratic society, owing to
many of the same reasons that Horheimer
and Adorno bring up here. One of the
paragraphs in the notes and sketches at
the end of dialectic of enlightenment
reads, quote, "In Germany, fascism
triumphed under a crassly xenophobic
anticultural collectivist ideology. Now
that it has devastated the earth,
nations must fight against it. There is
no other way. But when all is over, a
spirit of freedom need not spread across
Europe. Its nations may become as
xenophobic, as hostile to culture, as
pseudo collectivist as the fascism
against which they had to defend
themselves. Even its defeat will not
necessarily break the motion of the
avalanche. The fundamental principle of
liberal philosophy was that it that of
both and. Today the principle of either
or seems to apply but in such a way that
the decision has already been taken for
the worse. End quote. And perhaps it's
here that I should bring in one of the
the most uh significant features of
Adorno's thought, which is negative
dialectics. We've been talking about
dialectics quite a bit throughout this
episode, but there was always this sense
again that this ablation would represent
a kind of transcendence. the way
remember the the Marxist account, the
dialectic materialist account of
sublation and how it works that I gave
at the beginning of uh this episode.
What if that sublation doesn't
necessarily proceed in a quote unquote
positive direction in terms of actually
transcending
what would we say actually transcending
the regressive kernel and keeping the
progressive elements because a if you'll
notice a lot of the dialectical
synthesis it's not a term from Hegel but
a lot of the the results of these
dialectical movements that we've
discussed
have resulted in a negation, but it's
more properly called negation, right?
Not sublation if we were to translate it
in English, what Adorno and Horheimer
are describing. So rather than the
concept or the material circumstance or
the the culture or the state of
consciousness
overcoming itself and moving on to a
higher level, you could just have a
self-negation that all comes to to not
to nothing.
And that seems to be the picture that
Warheimimer and Adorno give us of what
has happened with the Enlightenment.
Now, there's a lot of material in the
early chapters about Homer's Odyssey
that I've skipped over. We're going to
talk about that next week. I want to
finish out this episode by talking about
something that I think will be more
explanatory
by looking at some of the parts of the
chapter on the culture industry, which
Horheimer and Adorno call enlightenment.
as mass deception that can show us sort
of how this negative dialectic has
played out because much of what we've
discussed so far involves their analysis
of just the concept of enlightenment
which can be somewhat abstract but that
I think their reflections on the culture
industry will help bring these insights
into more concrete terms and just in the
very name the culture industry I think
so much is apparent about the character
of enlightenment consciousness that
Horheimer and Adorno are criticizing As
for what the culture industry is, I
mean, I think you can probably just take
the term in all its colloquial or
cliched meaning and you'll mostly
understand what they're getting at. In
the past, I mean, it would have been
Hollywood, major record labels,
publishing houses, television studios.
Today, many of those things still exist.
You could also throw in Tik Tok and
Facebook and YouTube and Spotify.
everywhere where mass cultural products
are consumed and are produced first and
foremost as products rather than
primarily as art. Now before we go
further I mean again let's situate
ourselves in this time and place
Horheimer and Adorno saw a striking
transformation of how culture was
transmitted and experienced during their
own lifetimes. I mean a 100 years before
say during the time of Gerta the only
way to absorb a symphony is at the
symphony. The only way to see a drama
was to go to the theater. But now
there's radio. Now there's film. And
these mediums don't just transmit art,
but speech. They transmit ideas and
values and judgments and political uh
notions and vibes and all of these
things. And you know, obviously with the
internet, it's an even more remarkable
transformation. And it's taken these
things much farther or we can transmit
vibes or memes or cultural products over
a much greater distance to far more
people. But I think the the trends that
are identified here were already
apparent in many of the early uh forms
of cultural commodification. It's just
that they're all the more powerful.
They've been sharpened and brought out
all the more powerfully today. So what
these technologies provide is the
ability to
refine art and entertainment and ideas
into products into commodities. Again,
it's not just like an inevitability.
It's the fact that we have the power to
do that now on a standardized
mass-industrialized scale just like all
other products. And that completely
changes the way that art and culture can
be engaged with because there's a real
interest by those who you know the
shareholders who own all these culture
industry institutions.
Uh that's how they choose to use that
power, right? Um and a lot of this comes
also with that whole rationalist
mindset. I mean, we can attach a
valuation now to what a symphony is
worth with more and more precision and
more and more quantized sort of uh like
a way to think about this would be you
have a limited amount of air time on the
radio and you can kind of keep track of
how much money you're making according
to advertising. And so like the air time
during say the Super Bowl, the
advertising that you're going to play
there uh is going to be worth like a lot
more money because of the amount of
eyeballs on it. So on and so forth. you
can kind of determine like h I don't
know how much the time spent listening
to you know a certain piece of music or
a certain talk show or whatever we can
attach all these valuations to it like
literal monetary valuations now we can
calculate the value of a film based on
you know the box office revenue and all
of these things and these cultural
productions can be distributed to more
people than ever as we've said which
means you can make more money on them
than ever drives a motivation to achieve
even greater distrib contribution, even
greater efficiency in turning out
cultural products. It's kind of a
vicious circle, uh, we might say. And,
you know, of course, people could point
out culture's always been a product in
some form or another. It's just that
again, it's like the industrial
revolution reaches the arts. Culture
becomes an industrial product. Uh, it
it's produced with regularity, with
consistency according to a standard
blueprint. And one of the interesting
points that Horheimer and Adorno make is
that to some extent the romantic
conservatism that sought to preserve the
patronage model of the arts, which is
the way the arts used to be supported in
which a wealthy lord or or a noble was
it became a patron of the arts and then
this this situation safeguarded the arts
from having to gain mass appeal or be
mass marketable or commodifiable on that
scale. And this was to the good of
society relative to what's happened now,
right? They don't imagine that we could
necessarily go back to the patronage
model. They're just saying now all
cultures sub subject to market forces.
That arrangement at least preserved art
for a time and that there was at least a
good reason for the patronage model,
even if it was always destined to wither
away in the face of corrosive
rationality. And why should it withered
away? Well, because, you know, why
should some noble decide what art gets
made? Right? I mean, we ought to open up
that decision to the masses, right?
Isn't that more democratic? Isn't that
liberation of the taste of the masses,
right? But how does that how does that
work in practice? Right? That's why the
culture industry is so instructive for
revealing the contradictory nature of
enlightenment. And leaving aside the
actual text for a moment and and sort of
jumping to the present day, let's use
the internet as an example. What was the
promise of the internet? If we look for
example to the words of the tech
optimists in the late 80s and early 90s,
they dreamed of a world where people
from every country could be joined
together in cyerspace,
where information could travel freely,
free exchange of ideas couldn't be
hindered or halted by authoritarian
governments. You know, uh, human rights
abuses and crimes against humanity could
be exposed and shared with the world.
And of course, just by exposing and
sharing those, that would fix the
problem, right? Corruption and
exploitation would be brought to light
and the public could put a stop to it.
And even if you don't believe such lofty
goals are realistic, at the very least,
you could just look at the whole
development of the internet as positive
and that it democratized the ability to
have a voice. Even if everybody in
practice doesn't have the same voice,
right? At least there's a platform for
everyone. Not everyone has an audience,
but everyone can say what they want to
say. Everyone can express themselves.
They can share their views. They could
share their art. And so you would think
in theory, you know, the internet should
represent the advent of a more free and
open society. Uh you would expect a
cornucopia of individual expression.
Now, I'm not going to say none of that
happened or there isn't an extent to
which that is true. It's hard to say
that the average person has less of a
voice now than say they did under, you
know, feudalism or even 50 years ago,
you know, prior to the internet. It's
very hard to say uh that, you know, for
whatever hurdles, whether it's big tech
censorship or simply the inability of
most people to find an audience, at
least the technology allows for more
expression to take place. But that
statement, I think, doesn't really
adequately describe the reality of
what's happened to the internet,
especially in the most recent decade of
its existence. Because we see how in the
same way that a movie that makes the
most at the box office will dictate the
types of films that are made. And not
even that, like just the tropes and the
types of characters and the vibes, these
all sort of mimetically spread through
society based on what's most marketable.
the type of content that gets people to
click the most will inevitably shape the
kind of content that is made. And you
could say, well, that's just market
demand. Revealing what the public wants,
what they desire. But is it? Just to use
one example. I mean, news stories that
make you feel afraid or angry are going
to get more people to click. And that
incentivizes the platforms to show you
more news and stories that make you
scared and angry. And more than that,
all of you keep clicking more and more
vigor vigorously and get more scared and
angry. Eventually, the algorithm becomes
a reflection of that. But is that
because you desired to be scared and
angry or is it because it's a sort of a
cynical manipulation of of human nature
um on an unconscious level almost,
right? And there there are people who
work in marketing who know all the
elements that will make a video go viral
and they try to make this happen almost
like a science. There's formulaic
methods of writing. Um you know this
happens in films. You know there's
formulaic methods of making action
films. So many blockbusters are carbon
copies of one another that are written
by committees.
Um, but that's true of all cultural
commodities. And that only accelerates
in some ways the more like democratic
quote unquote you make it. The more you
just make it raw popularity, raw market
force. And you know, again, that's not
an inevitability. That's a choice that
that's the only value we're going to use
to determine uh what kind of cultural
commodities are created. And so instead
of an explosion of individuality, what
happens over time is that what what
succeeds, what resonates, what what
dominates, what comes out of that whole
process of cultural production ends up
being homogeneous
because it's not actually like
individual or peculiar tastes that
govern anything. It's collective taste.
And that sort of has to be the case when
culture is just, you know, it's just a
result of productive forces of industry.
So, so I mean, and we see this
everywhere. It's almost hard. I'm making
all the logical arguments for why this
would be that are put forward in the
text, but it's almost hard to argue that
this isn't just what we see with our
eyes empirically. Like, we have this
abundance of cultural products now, way
more than anyone's ever had in any point
in history.
How many Star Wars television shows came
out in the last year alone? And yet
there's a homogeneity of all the
cultural products. I mean, I ask again,
how many Star Wars television shows came
out in the last year alone? They're just
milking existing intellectual property
forever because they're tried and tested
products. They're tried and tested
brands. And that's how we experience art
today. So, Horheimer and Adorno write,
quote, "Culture today is infecting
everything with sameness. Film, radio,
and magazines form a system. Each branch
of culture is unanimous within itself,
and all are unanimous together. Even the
aesthetic manifestations of political
opposites proclaim the same inflexible
rhythm. End quote. So this homogeneity,
I mean, you find that in pretty much any
industry or arguably. I mean, an
industry that tries to market itself to
the average consumer. Again, another
statistical abstraction, you find out
what the average consumer needs or what
they want, and you give them that. And
you don't really need too many
variations of it. You know, you probably
have some different flavors. Maybe you
have a cheap version, an expensive
version, a middle-of the road version,
and that's what's stocked on the shelves
in the average like shop, right? That
could apply to almost any product, by
the way. I mean we could be talking
about a radiator, we could be talking
about soda. The point is for any product
there's a certain limit of variety
beyond which it becomes too niche to be
marketable or else like you know
sometimes those niches are filled is a
very expensive sort of boutique market.
Right? What always dominates in any
industry is the brand or the version of
the product that most people can pay for
and find adequate to what they need. And
this is just a natural thing. It all
almost hardly doesn't even bear
explaining, right? You eventually get
one brand dominates the market and that
brand, you know, become like Kleenex was
a brand and then now that's associated
with the product itself because you
don't really need that many different
versions of it, right? So, um, Horheimer
and Adorno, however, uh, again,
another this is an a critique of the
consciousness. So, it's not just simply
well there's nothing we can do. it's a
demand of the market or there's nothing
you know there's no decision to be made
this is just the the technological you
know the logic of the current
technological relations of production or
however you might explain it but no uh
they don't buy this they say quote the
basis on which technology is gaining
power over society is the power of those
whose economic position in society is
strongest technical rationality is today
the rationality of domination for the
present the technology of the culture
industry confines itself to
standardization and mass production and
sacrifices what once distinguished the
logic of work from that of society.
These adverse effects however should not
be attributed to the internal laws of
technology itself but to its function
within the economy today. Any need which
might escape the central control is
repressed by that of individual
consciousness. End quote. So these are
the internal mechanisms of censorship
that they mentioned at the beginning.
Again it doesn't have to be this way in
their view. It's a societal decision to
produce culture this way. But that, you
know, when that's the way culture is
produced, that's what you're going to
have. You're going to have a
standardized mass culture. So then we
have to ask, why would you want a
standardized mass culture? Because
that's sort of the myasma that we're all
drowning in and want to get out of,
right? Why why do why would you want to
exist in this this culture that simply
transmits ideas and sentiments and
stories that end up violating the very
function of thought or of art right so
in the case of thought right the
critique of reification that's thought's
real value to adorno and horimer instead
thought becomes uh it becomes another
commodity it becomes another thing to be
objectified and used and to the extent
that the individual thinks he just uses
is thought to reify to do the opposite
to reinforce the standard mass
disseminated ideas and art instead of
active affirmative creation becomes the
work of the assembly line. It doesn't
take the consciousness outside of the
assembly line. In other words, culture
becomes ideology.
And this conformist ideology lurks
behind all the cultural productions. And
that's why Warheimimer and Adorno
believe this entire culture industry
exists to produce this conformity that
it's actually there's an intentionality
behind it. And they make a number of
arguments that I think are at least a
little bit questionable, but we'll go
through them. For one, even the worker's
leisure time becomes part of his
existence as a worker, right? It's a
form of work or uh one of the ways they
put it is the shadow of work. So the the
laborer becomes accustomed to this
rhythm. You know, you work for eight
hours, you sleep for eight hours, and in
the eight hours that remain, uh, you
know, any time that isn't eaten up by
commuting or chores and so on, you spend
in entertainment, entertaining yourself,
and then you repeat, right? And the
cultural intake has that effect. Not at
no point does it help in creating
individuality or independence of thought
or the liberation promised by the
enlightenment but instead it traps the
individual's subjectivity in a series of
cliches and stereotypes.
Importantly, it becomes a sort of duty
to consume the products of the culture
industry, right? Because otherwise, how
are you going to converse with your
peers with the latest cultural product?
How are you going to have an opinion on
the new Star Wars show they're making?
Right? uh you're you're not going to
understand the references, you'll be an
outsider, right? You won't be part of
the group. And again, as I've argued or
the argument that they put forward that
I've advanced earlier in the episode,
those who employ the workers kind of
want them to consume the cultural
products just as much as those producing
the cultural products want their product
to be purchased because recreation is
necessary for labor just as much as the
laborer getting a good night's sleep.
But it's no mistake that the products
that they want them to consume impose
this dominating rationality on the
populace. Um that that the system that
turns out these products of course the
products reflect the consciousness. It
reflects the ideology of the system. And
so the fact that the culture has become
homogeneous
is the point. The effect of the
homogeneous culture is uh to
intentionally impose that conformity.
and the mass culture, one of the
interesting points they make about it is
that it's not bereft of style, right?
It's oftentimes people will point to
slop and you know all of these things,
but I mean if you look at like the
technical mastery behind our modern
productions in film or in music, even
styles of writing and novels have come a
long way, right? I mean there there is
technical brilliance in making a modern
action film. Like the amount of computer
animation,
the amount of attention to detail and
precision that's put into those projects
by countless workers, the the scale of
these projects, it's really quite uh awe
inspiring. and the production levels on
a modern pop song and just how you can
sit and literally do have the vocalist
get multiple takes for every single
syllable and just make it absolutely
pristine perfect. Right?
So, one of the points I make is that
it's not that there's no style. That the
attention, the care, the precision, the
attention to style
to technical mastery in the modern day
out rivals anyone from the past or the
greats of all ages. The problem is the
substance or the lack thereof, the
complete lack of substance. I mean they
do Adorno and Horheimer do make a number
of arguments about how the the
conformity and the homogeneity is sort
of like imposed ideologically within uh
within the artwork but on some level the
substance itself the fact that it's
bereft of substance
really points to the fact that the the
inner content doesn't matter so much. Uh
often times the culture industry can
produce these these fantasies of like
extreme individuality, rebellion against
the the mass culture. I mean so often
the main character is an underdog or a a
rebel or something like that. But the
argument would be that these these
fantasies of rebellious individuality
often end up taking the form that
doesn't really indict the existing
system in any meaningful or substantive
way and usually ends up serving that
function as being a fantasy. And you
know it's sort of the the fantasy of
being recogni. It's often the fantasy of
my individuality is going to allow me to
be recognized by the system for the
worth that I have which is sort of the
myth of enlightenment from the very
beginning. And we sort of uh create a
cinematic fantasy for example of this of
the maverick or the rebellious young
intellect who proves himself or works
outside of the system or the rules and
you know changes things in order to
succeed.
um you know whenever there is a
criticism of the existing system it's
usually not very substantive. It's
normally in the form of other slogans
and because it all takes place in this
cultural fantasy realm.
Very very rarely rarely do you get a
cultural product that actually indictes
the system and advocates for some sort
of concrete change to it. Usually the
displays of individuality as Horheimer
and Adorno point out is actually like a
type. The character is really just like
a stereotype or an archetype. um it's
usually just sort of a repeated clichéed
fantasy of uh finally being recognized
for your individuality by the system.
and uh you know in so many words I mean
there's we're getting you know up to 2
hours so I don't want to spend too much
more time on this but I think they do
make a compelling point and you know one
way to get at this actually
um that just came to me if you want to
see a fictional story that expresses
what Horheimer and Adorno are getting at
with the culture industry I think this
is a perfect analogy watch the Black
Mirror season 1 episode I think it's
called three million merits
uh or 15 million merits, something
million merits, right? That's their
currency. It's like a digital currency.
It's like uh sort of like state vouchers
or something. It's a very obviously
centrally planned society. Anyway, it's
about this society where everyone lives
in their own little pod. Everyone spends
their days constantly absorbing mass
culture. They have a monoculture that's
very commodified and superficial and you
know uh there's no substance to
anything, right? But uh and and part of
the myth of that culture is like, okay,
you can go on like these game shows and
you can perhaps if you have a talent or
something that's special about you, you
can get picked up and be on one of the
networks that blasts out content that
everyone watches and you can be a
celebrity and maybe you could be an
influencer or something like that. And
you know, everyone gets their choice of
several different channels or different
games they can play while they're
working, different ways to individualize
their their little avatar, their PFP.
You know, they call it their altar, I
think. Um maybe that's a different
episode. I don't remember. But
ultimately, that's all the illusion of
choice. And none of that actually
amounts to individuality. Or rather,
it's consumer choice, right? It's choice
within the limitations of homogeneous
standardized mass production. and
everyone's lives are just dominated by
this constant slop that they're all
subjected to, but it's also clear that
this form of entertainment,
it's not just like an idol choice by
whoever's running the society. It's like
specifically designed to reify this
conformist culture. And you know, the
tragedy of that story is that that the
main character is genuinely rebellious.
like he somebody he loves basically is
ruined by this system and he wants to
take revenge on it. He's genuinely hates
the system
and you know he he he pulls this stunt
where he expresses in in his angry
hostility against the whole system on on
the national media, right? But then one
of the media figures recognizes that. He
says, "Hey, this is a marketable
cultural commodity." And so the main
character in expressing his rage and
hostility at this dehumanizing system in
the end he becomes an edgy angry media
personality because the financial
incentive is just better. His life is
massively improved. He gets a way bigger
pod. It's basically like a little
apartment of his own and he's allowed to
exist,
you know, within the culture industry
within that Black Mirror story for the
precise reason that even his outrage can
be tolerated so long as it's fitted into
that dominating logic of the system. It
it allows rage to be expressed in that
system. It allows even critiques or
hostility towards the system to be
expressed by say somebody buying an an
accessory for their altar, their avatar,
right? the way that somebody today might
put a Ukrainian flag in their username
on on Twitter or something like that.
Any number of other things. And so it's
almost like that example does a better
job than I can of like how just
everything within this like mono style
homogeneous monoculture even when the
substance sometimes appears to be
critical or revolutionary just always
has this effect of sort of uh channeling
everybody back into you know this
conformist absorption of culture as
managed as part of the entertainment
business. And the effect is to impose
the sameness. And the mass deception
they mean, part of that is the very
notion that that's just inevitable
development of technological or market
forces when there's a pernicious content
to this entertainment. Quote, "All are
free to dance and amuse themselves. Just
as since the historical neutralization
of religions, they have been free to
join any of the countless sects. But
freedom to choose an ideology which
always reflects economic coercion
everywhere proves to be freedom of the
same. End quote.
And you know another quote actually one
more uh how individuality is allowed but
it becomes commodified into what they
call pseudo individuality. Quote
individuals are tolerated only as far as
their wholehearted identity with the
universal is beyond question. From the
standardized improvisation in jazz to
the original film personality who must
have a lock of hair straying over her
eyes so she can be recognized as such.
Pseudo individuality reigns. End quote.
And uh Horheimer was massively critical
of jazz. He was a big classical music
fan. Sorry. Adorno was Adorno. There's
comments laced throughout this that are
very anti-jazz uh and very think it's
like a deconstruction of you know
musical theory and all of that. Uh
again, we won't get into that. It's just
sort of an interesting throughine that
he thinks jazz is part of the modern
culture that is uh you know, it's part
of the problem in so many words, but you
know, we've mentioned this before, but
individuals become types. Another way we
could say it is that they become brands.
They become it's funny now that people
there are memes online where people
about talk about brands or genres of
people, right? Like what's this genre of
man called? You know, and you know, one
of my final observations would be that
we all see this homogeneity and we all
come to expect this and we'll even
comment on it. You know, we know the
tropes of the detective show in which
the guilty man confesses when he's, you
know, presented the evidence that he did
it. You you can tell when the chorus is
about to drop, you know, and then on and
the pop song you've never even heard
before. And you know, you know the calm
and impartial tone of the politician.
You recognize the cliches he invokes
when he says, "But let me be clear." You
know, most of us can sing along to the
advertising jingles just like the
characters in Demolition Man do. So, you
know, and many people make apologies for
the sameness of culture that they
consume when they say, "Oh, come on.
It's just good fun. It's just a popcorn
movie. Just turn off your brain. Just
let people enjoy things. Just enjoy this
mass culture with everyone else." Right?
We self-consciously say, "I'm not going
to critically think about this. I'm
going to let this program me in whatever
way with whatever intentions of the
people who made this uh have and those
people uh are not they are self-evidedly
turnurning out culture as a product as
uh an industrial product. So it's very
odd that we would think that just
passively absorbing their products would
uh the ideology behind them would be
anything other than a reinforcement of
that system. And so this is the nature
of the mass deception that's invoked in
the chapter title and uh the the
stagnation the cause of that stagnation
and the apparently inevitable march of
progress. The stagnation happens in
consciousness on the cultural level.
It's why we're unable to conceive of
even fantasize about any alternatives to
the current economic or political order.
The the culture industry is such a
perfect example in the modern age to
reveal the dialectic of enlightenment to
reveal that central contradiction at its
heart because modern culture has been
blessed with technology that as as we've
said gave everyone a voice. It opened
possibilities for freedom of expression
and so on and so forth. Opened
possibilities for realizing the further
liberation of mankind. All of these
promises of the enlightenment. And yet
within the enlightenment from the start
was the rationality of domination.
Knowledge seeks to objectify the world
as the first step in dominating it. So
the promises of liberation made by that
rationality were always contradictory.
They were always false in some way.
That's the thing driving this dialectic
of myth and enlightenment. And Horheimer
and Adorno I think summarize this fairly
well. This is in one of the notes
included at the end of the volume.
Quote,
external pressure has forced human
beings to overcome their own inertia to
produce material and intellectual works.
Thinkers from democratist to Freud are
not wrong in believing this. The
resistance of external nature to which
the pressure can finally be traced back
propagates itself in society through the
classes acting on all human beings from
childhood onward as the callousness of
their fellows. People are gentle when
they want something from those who are
stronger and harsh when the weaker want
something from them. that has been the
key to the nature of the person in
society up to now. The conclusion drawn
by conservatives that terror and
civilization are inseparable is
wellounded. What could enable human
beings to develop the ability to master
complex stimuli if not their own
developmental exertions which have to be
spurred on by external resistance. The
resistance which drives them is first
embodied in the father. Later it grows a
thousand heads, teachers, superiors,
customers, competitors, the
representatives, and social and state
powers. Their brutality stimulates
individual spontaneity. That this
harshness might be moderated in the
future. That the bloody punishments by
which humanity has been tamed in the
course of centuries could be replaced by
the establishment of sanatoria seems no
more than a dream. Simulated compulsion
is powerless. culture has evolved under
the shadow of the executioner. Genesis,
which tells of the expulsion from
paradise and the suarees to Petersborg,
are in agreement on this. Work and
pleasure take place under the shadow of
the executioner. To contradict this is
to fly in the face of all science, all
logic. One cannot abolish terror and
retain civilization. Even to relax the
former means the beginning of
disintegration.
The most diverse conclusions can be
drawn from this. From the worship of
fascist barbarism to a flight into the
circles of hell, there is one other
possibility to scorn logic if it is
against humanity. End quote.
And so here in this note and at the end
of dialectic of enlightenment, not tied
to any particular essay, just sort of
their sketchy notes, we almost have a
sentiment that could have come from
Pascal or Kierkagard. But unlike
somebody like Pascal, again, one of the
enlightenment's enemies,
these are the words coming from its
defenders, people who recognize the
freedom that it brought, but also
recognize terror and civilization are
linked. that I mean this is the thing
for all of the again taring and
feathering of the critical theorists.
Have you ever heard a left-wing
intellectual make that kind of admission
about the levers of power and force that
govern society with that degree of
clarity and starkness or do they always
try and obuscate and hide it? That's one
of the things I like about Nichza is
that he's actually very upfront about
this of what society is based on. It's
based on bloody punishments and Adorno
and Horheimer actually recognize that.
So this whole analysis attempts to show
that rationality undoes itself through
its doineering tendencies. And so
ordered society,
civilization that operates according to
rational rules and limitations depends
on domination on a state monopoly on
violence for example in order to
function. There will always be these
hierarchies and these relations of power
and the most diverse conclusions could
be drawn from that inside. Some become
anarchists or communists. They decide
well then we have we do have to abolish
civilization. We have to abolish the
state. Some become fascists. They say,
"Well, if violence has to come with the
state, we might as well enjoy it."
Right? The possibility that Horheimer
and Adorno offer is to hold the good of
humanity as well myth. You could put
this, they don't really use this
language, but perhaps we need to
establish a new myth not on a rational
basis, but purely as a demand for a set
of values that centers human well-being
or flourishing rather than capital
efficiency. It's really that simple. We
make a new uh value determination.
But to do this, you'd have to be able to
envision something outside of that
rationality of domination, which seems
almost impossible in the modern day.
Certainly, the whole culture industry is
geared towards you not being able to
imagine anything outside of that.
Perhaps by revealing the way in which
consciousness was promised liberation by
rationality, but instead found itself
conditioned and subjugated by it. Maybe
we have a chance of reversing that
conditioning. And it might begin with a
refusal on the just on the individual
level. A refusal to be part of the mass
culture. I I'm going to subject myself
to this as little as possible. I'm going
to refuse to be the same. I'm not going
to absorb the sameness, at least not
uncritically absorb it. I'm going to
regard it critically. Everything that
comes from the mass culture, right? And
perhaps by giving oneself space from the
conformist ideology beneath all mass
culture by setting oneself apart for it,
maybe thought could start to regain its
true function, which is attacking idols
instead of propping them up. Maybe.
But that remains to be seen, doesn't it?
All right, that's all for this episode,
everyone. Join me next week for a
further exploration of this book
dialectic of enlightenment where we will
talk about Homer's Odyssey. We're going
to talk about dads Kant and Nietze all
from the perspective of Horheimer and
Adorno. I hope you'll join me then.
Signing off. If you enjoyed the Nichze
podcast or found it helpful, you can
visit us and support the show at
patreon.com/timeimelyrelections.
The link is in the description. or just
share the show with any of your friends
that you think might enjoy it or on
social media. Thank you for your
support.