Gateways to other dimensions. To the
Mayans, this represented the passageway
to another world. Hidden dwellings for
strange beings.
They were the first inhabitants of the
planet Earth. Secret vaults of cosmic
knowledge.
&gt;&gt; It's almost as though they're opening a
doorway to communicate with these divine
beings.
Since the dawn of man, caves have been a
source of great mystery.
But could the darkest recesses of our
planet really be hiding some mysterious
power?
And within their depths, might we find
evidence of extraterrestrial visitors?
In some ways, exploring the underground
cavern world of planet Earth
is the final frontier.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings. What if it
were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history?
And if so, might there be a connection
between aliens and the Earth's forbidden
caves?
Central. India. July 2014.
While exploring caves in the region of
Charama which are known to contain
prehistoric artwork dating as far back
as 10,000 years,
an Indian archaeologist J.R. Bagot makes
a stunning discovery.
The Indian government and and Times of
India had a major story about rock
paintings found recently in central
India that seemed to show these tall
beings and they do not seem to have a
nose or a mouth and nearby is this
three-legged disc.
The Times of India actually proposed the
idea what if what we have depicted here
are some type of extraterrestrials or at
least some type of flying craft because
the basis for much of the Hindu pantheon
of gods.
Ancient Hindu texts like the Vadas and
the Piranis record stories about
extraterrestrials existing on other
planets.
And the Mahabharata, one of ancient
India's two major Sanskrit epics,
contains stories about gods coming to
earth in flying machines.
Even the legends specific to this region
tell of a mysterious race of beings
known as the Roella,
who descended from the sky and abducted
local villagers.
Could the newly unearthed cave art be a
visual record that extraterrestrials
really visited here?
&gt;&gt; There was an obsession of ancient human
beings to depict things that they saw.
And I think they did it with carvings on
caves because that's what they saw.
But what is it about caves that made
them the ideal canvases for ancient
peoples to chronicle their experiences?
Caves are hugely significant in ancient
mythology and and legends, especially
about the gods. They seem to be kind of
a luminal point, a boundary place where
the gods and humans can meet.
There is a whole hidden underground
world of planet Earth that we are only
just now beginning to discover.
We don't know what's there. We could be
discovering all kinds of amazing things.
And it's possible that there are entire
cities under the earth, whole cavern
metropolises
that are talked about in legends.
But while ancient caveart often reveals
the type of animals our earliest
ancestors encountered and their means
for hunting them, there is a surprising
number of depictions of strangelooking
figures and objects that defy any
conventional explanation.
In Australia, the one Gina people, they
painted images on their caves, which
eerily looks like the so-called grays of
alien abduction law today.
&gt;&gt; You have the strange petroglyphs in the
Ahagar mountains of southern Algeria. Uh
you've got strange rock art too in the
American Southwest. And when you look at
it and even have the natives explain it
to you, they say things like, "Oh yes,
he's Martian god." Or, "These are the
star people coming from the sky."
How do we explain so many different
cultures across thousands of years and
thousands of miles producing such
consistent visual representations?
the ones that were discovered in some of
the African caves. It's too similar to
what has been discovered on every
continent for it to be complete
coincidence. So, it's this whole idea of
the spark of initial inspiration. What
is it that they witnessed? And could it
be that they witnessed
extraterrestrials?
One of the more intriguing aspects of
the cave paintings that seem to show
aliens is why are they inside caves?
This has sort of given rise to the
theory that maybe these aliens perhaps
have permanent bases on the planet
underground. Maybe ancient man saw them
coming out of some of these caves and
caverns and then realized there was a
relationship between the aliens and the
caves.
In ancient times, caves were places of
shelter. But is it possible our
ancestors were also using caves to
record and protect information about
extraterrestrial beings who played a
role in our existence?
Perhaps the answer can be found halfway
around the world in the American
Southwest.
The Grand Canyon.
This epic 277 m long, 1mm deep fisher
exposes millions of years of geologic
strata.
Imprinted onto this dramatic landscape
are petroglyphs that depict everyday
life as experienced by the first
inhabitants of the region.
But in one of the most remote corners of
the canyon is a small cave covered with
artwork that mystifies experts.
Some refer to it as the shaman's panel
because it appears to depict scenes of
the supernatural.
All around the Grand Canyon are unusual
sites and sacred sites.
And then you have the shaman's panel
there in the Grand Canyon which seems to
show these long tall extraterrestrial
type figures.
Like the strangelooking beings found in
the cave in Churramama, India, the
figures depicted on the shaman's panel
are oddly elongated and are also thought
to have been created as many as 10,000
years ago.
And just as in Churramama, the native
Hopi people here also have detailed
accounts of extraterrestrials who came
down to Earth
&gt;&gt; in the southwest. The PBLO Indians such
as the Zouri and and the Hopi believe
that there is an entrance into an
underground world and it is located in
the Grand Canyon and it's this
mythological underworld uh of caves and
extraterrestrials. The ant people,
the Hopi have this concept of the ant
people.
Uh the ant people are um very thin. They
have elongated heads
and the ancestral Hopy people did make
pictures of these ant people which still
survive today.
Is it possible the rock art found here
and elsewhere around the world is
evidence that the Earth's first
inhabitants had contact with other
worldly beings? And if so, might there
be some significance to the fact that
many of these strange petetroglyphs are
found in and around caves?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
suggest further evidence can be found by
examining the ritualistic practices that
continue to be performed inside caves
even to this day.
The Himalayas,
Northern India.
Every summer, hundreds of thousands of
Hindu pilgrims brave an arduous journey.
They cross many miles of deadly terrain
to reach the Amarnaf Cave, a place of
worship for thousands of years.
12,756
ft above sea level in the Himalayas
is the most revered holy pilgrimage site
for all of the people who follow the
Hindu faith.
People die because of a high altitude
sickness. There's a simply fall off the
cliff
and still people go there because it is
considered to be the most holiest uh
shrine.
According to local lore, this massive
cave is where the god Shiva revealed the
secrets of immortality and the creation
of the universe to his wife Parvati.
To honor Shiva, worshippers pay their
respects to a sacred relic inside
an ice lingum which they believe is a
physical manifestation of his generative
power.
To reveal the secret to transcending the
flesh, the secret to true immortality
makes that site of extreme importance to
the people in the Hindu faith.
To the Hindu faithful who risk life and
limb to reach the Amarnaf cave, this
story is a real account of an
otherworldly being who is at this exact
location here on Earth.
But why would Lord Shiva choose to
divulge his divine secrets in a cave?
Could caves really hold special
properties that have made them places of
worship throughout history?
Interestingly, the Amarnath Cave is only
one of hundreds of caves around the
world that have been at one time
considered sacred.
Archaeologists believe a 20 foot long
serpentine rock carving in Batswana's
Rhino Cave was the focus of religious
ritual as far back as 70,000 years ago.
And cave monasteries can be found in
France,
Russia,
Thailand,
Ethiopia,
and Hungary, just to name a few.
I don't think that this is a coincidence
that places of refuge, spiritual refuge
or inside caves. This is where one can
contemplate,
one can hear one's inner voice without
the distractions of the day.
One thing about caves is they're
underground. They're unseen. Well,
religion is about unseen things. Going
into a cave is going into holy ground.
Is the mysterious nature of caves enough
to explain why they have been revered as
sacred places by different cultures and
religions all over the world. Ancient
astronaut theorists suggest there may be
a more profound reason which can be
found by examining the stories behind
our ancestors rituals.
Yucatan, Mexico, 2008.
Mexican archaeologists exploring just
outside the capital of Merida make an
historic discovery. An aquatic
underworld full of mysterious offerings
to the Mayan gods, including human
sacrifices.
What they found was a system of 14 caves
and in them were stone temples and they
were all linked together and it was
thought that what they had discovered
was the Mayan underworld known as
Shabbala.
Some of this work is underwater. Divers
would have had to hold their breath and
go down and do carving underwater to
make this possible. They were very
devout to be sure.
Central to the heavenly Mayan
ritualistic society was the belief that
in order for them to rejoin the gods in
the next life, the dead must make their
way through a dark and perilous journey.
In the mythology of the Maya, we have
these incredible references to Jibalba,
which means the underworld.
And we can read about it in the Popul
Vu, which is the book of the Jaguar
priests.
Some historians believe that the caves
discovered in 2008 are indeed those
caves that represented for the Maya the
passageway to Jibala, the underworld.
But ancient astronaut theorists propose
Jibalba has a more cosmic connection.
One of the most famous codereers,
her name was Dr. Linda Sheiley.
She dealt with the Maya language all her
life. She is actually one of the people
who have suggested
that there is another meaning for Jibala
and that's the Milky Way.
To the Mayans who were very good
astronomers, this represented the
passageway to another world, Jabul,
the middle of the Milky Way.
So when they refer to the underworld,
they're actually referring to the sky
above.
This suggests that the cave could be a
portal
in which extraterrestrials
are actually able to come and go freely
from their plane of existence to our
own.
Is it possible that the Mayan stories of
Jibala were not describing a passageway
to the afterlife, but a portal to
another part of the universe?
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest that
caves have become places of ritual
because they have a direct connection to
extraterrestrials
and claim that further proof can be
found by examining the mysterious sky
caves of Nepal.
Chikoku Island,
Japan, the 8th century AD.
A young monk named Saiiki Mao was deep
in the mountains doing his spiritual
training when he decided to enter a
small cave called Makurudo and meditate.
While inside, he had an encounter that
he would later credit with bringing him
enlightenment.
and he emerged from the cave as Kukai, a
high priest who would become one of
Japan's most important historical
figures.
Many Buddhists have reported
enlightening experiences in caves and
one of the most famous stories involves
the monk Kukai.
He's the individual who brought esoteric
Buddhism, Shinggon Buddhism to Japan
from China. And according to his
autobiography, he was meditating in a
cave at Cape Maruto and he had fixed his
eyes on the morning star. The morning
star flew towards him,
entered his mouth and in front of him he
saw an image of the bodhic safa
akasagarba. And akasagarba in Japanese
is known as kokuzo bosatsu.
So we have this spiritual being
surrounded by light. Perhaps he even
used the light to travel there.
After this encounter, Kukai suddenly had
great wisdom, including the ability to
comprehend 85,000 Buddhist texts.
But what happened inside Mukulo Cave
that allowed Kukai to enter this
enlightened state? Kokuzo appeared to
Kukai in the cave when he was in his
trance and basically informed him that
he was a conduit to the universe and it
channeled through his body and he could
tell you anything about the stars, the
planet. It's almost as if he were tapped
into a database.
Some even perceive that the cave is
similar to a womb. So a human being
enters as a normal mortal. They engage
in aesthetic or meditative discipline
within the cave. And when they exit the
cave, they're no longer a typical
mortal, but they're more akin to a saint
or even a Buddha.
But could the enlightenment found inside
caves be coming from an extraterrestrial
source inside the earth?
Some ancient astronaut theorists say yes
and suggest evidence of this might be
found in the fabled nirvana known as
Shambala and the sky caves of Mustang in
Nepal.
Some say Shambala is a mythical city
that's located somewhere in the
mountains in the Himalayas.
Its inhabitants are supposed to be fully
enlightened beings who have access to a
great amount of technology which comes
from the enlightenment itself.
Buddhism has always seen caves as more
or less a conduit to altered states of
consciousness.
To other civilizations that may exist
inside the earth.
The sky caves in Wang are interesting
because there are hundred or so man-made
caves carved into the faces of cliffs
and are only accessible by these huge
vertical shafts.
And inside these caves we have huge
statues of Buddhas, bodhicattafas
and Buddhists are not alone in this
belief. Hindus also rever caves as
places where monks can go to find
wisdom.
The Sodto are Indian holy men who
basically leave a life of deprivation,
self-imposed exile in caves so that they
can enter these altered states of
consciousness. They definitely believe
that caves are a conduit to
communicating with non-human entities.
It's almost as though they're opening a
doorway into a spiritual consciousness
in which they're able to communicate
with these divine beings and hopefully
become divine themselves.
Other important figures throughout
history also attribute their
lifealtering epiphies to mysterious
encounters that happened in caves.
in the life of the great artist and
inventor Leonardo da Vinci. He had some
unusual but important experience at the
mouth of a cave.
Right after that he disappeared for 2
years and right after that he began this
spurt of creativity that was awesome.
In art and in science he invented the
first self-propelled vehicle and
imagined flying machines.
Joseph Smith wrote that an angel
appeared to him at the name of Moroni in
the year 1827
told to Joseph Smith he should go to a
certain little hill. He should put a
stone plate away and inside he would
find a cave and in the cave he would
find unknown writings.
As all good Mormons know, he found them
golden tablets which contained a vast
amount of data.
Why are there so many accounts of humans
having enlightening experiences inside
caves?
Is there something about caves
themselves that facilitate such
extraordinary experiences?
Could it be that these people are coming
into contact with an extraterrestrial
presence?
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest that
cosmic knowledge may be stored in the
very walls of these caves themselves and
that the proof can be found in Central
America, 1,000 ft underground.
Chihuahua, Mexico, April 2000.
Miners excavating 1,000 ft below the
mineralrich town of Nika
drill through a cave wall and make a
stunning discovery.
A glittering cavern full of giant
crystals that are half a million years
old.
The quas des cristales or the crystal
cave of northern Mexico is a very unique
site
and we're talking crystals as big around
as a car that stretch from the floor to
the ceiling of the cavern.
It's a remarkable thing to see.
The incredible cave of the crystals in
Mexico was just accidentally found
and the discoverers were completely
astounded with these giant gypsum
crystals.
It's fantastic and reminds a person of
the Fortress of Solitude of Superman
where all this information is encoded
into these giant crystals.
Now, the significance of this is
extremely important to the indigenous
people of northern Mexico. In fact, all
of Meso America in that the crystals
themselves were considered sacred.
They vibrated and they believed there
was also some properties involved in
crystals that would provide them a way
to communicate with the gods.
Many ancient myths tell us that there
are magical apparatus that are made out
of rock or stone or crystal.
If we look at the properties of many of
the caverns and caves, we see that
there's usually some type of lining of
crystal or quartz and we know that
crystal has a vast ability to store
information. Maybe some of these caves
are actually storing information and
that ancient people who meditate in
caverns are tapping into this knowledge.
Might caves that are rich in quartz or
crystal really possess some special
power that our ancestors were aware of?
Ancient astronaut theorists point out
that the scientists today are
discovering that crystals do in fact
have very unique properties.
Quartz and other crystallin structures
oscillate at incredibly well- definfined
frequencies when you hit them
mechanically and they can be activated
electrically through an effect known as
the po electric effect. So you can put
quartz in a watch and use it as a very
accurate timekeeping device. So quartz
could be used in conducting or
communicating certain signals.
In the Silicon Valley of California,
quartz is used to manufacture the small
integrated circuits found in computers
because of its strong semiconducting
properties.
Computer chips are also made with the
form of the mineral quartzite, which is
a highly condensed form of quartz.
Today, computer engineers are working on
how to physically manipulate crystals so
that digital data can be stored inside
them forever.
The media has dumped these hard drives
of the future, Superman memory crystals.
So, Superman is one of our superheroes
who came from outer space. He came from
the planet Krypton. It was in the
process of being destroyed. So, his
parents saved him and sent him in a
spaceship to our planet. One of the
interesting things in the Superman story
is that his father was able to program a
crystal that traveled with him that he
was able to use to construct the
Fortress of Solitude from. And it was
basically a crystal structure,
essentially a cave where he could both
get away from things and he could use
the crystals in there to get
information. So, one of the things
that's interesting in the Fortress of
Solitude is the way that the quartz
technology or the crystal technology
seems to be underlying everything. And
so, a future that we're looking at is
using light in computing. You have to
figure out ways to trap light and to
store it basically to create bits on and
off and have the light last long enough
that the signal stays there and the
memory is stored.
Was
the power of crystals something the
ancients not only knew about but
utilized by building structures that
would harness and transmit it? A lot of
the pyramids had either granite or some
type of crystalall lined surface. For
instance, Giza, those great pyramids
were topped with an obelisk made of
shiny granite crystal.
And when we look at an obelisk, it very
much resembles some type of power raw.
Maybe a Tesla coil.
Ancient times, the obelisk was always a
symbol of power. Maybe this wasn't just
emotional power, but actual physical
power that was being harnessed by these
objects.
Crystals are transformers. They hold
energy. And indeed, caves are thought of
as hot spots where you have earth energy
emerging from the planet.
If scientists today are looking into the
technological uses for crystal, is it
possible that there are extraterrestrial
civilizations that have already mastered
this technology?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
that the mineral properties found inside
caves have enabled some of the world's
most astounding miracles.
Bethlehem.
The Church of the Nativity built around
330 AD by the first Christian Roman
Emperor Constantine is one of the oldest
continuously operating churches in the
world.
Having survived invasions, regime
changes, fires, and earthquakes.
Many claim that the church is protected
by a higher power because it sits above
a cave that some Bible scholars believe
to be the true birthplace of Jesus
Christ.
There are many books about the story of
Christ's life, Jesus's life, which never
made it their way into the Bible. And
one of them was called the provangelium
of James.
And in that story, Joseph and Mary are
approaching Bethlehem and Mary says,
"I'm going to give birth." And he thinks
for a minute. He said, "Ah, I know a
cave near here." And they are met at the
entrance to the cave by a brilliant
light. And when the light dissipates,
there's Mary holding Christ in her arms.
And if you look at Byzantine painting,
the nativity is always represented in a
cave.
According to the Gospel of Luke, Mary
gives birth and places the baby Jesus in
a manger, but no actual location for the
nativity is given.
It is known, however, that caves at the
time were commonly used as shelter for
livestock.
Going back to the 3rd century, they they
started this idea that he was actually
born in a cave.
But then they also described the tomb of
resurrection as a cave, as a simple
hollowedout room that had this circular
stone at the entrance way. The Bible
does make a point that when Christ is
taken from the cross and he's buried in
a rock cut tomb,
&gt;&gt; there does seem to be a mystical
environment here. This idea of a cave
being a place where someone who is of
divinity comes and someone who is
divinity leaves. So it's almost as if
passages are happening in caves.
&gt;&gt; Constantine's building program of
churches in the Holy Land began by
building churches over caves associated
with the key mysteries of the faith. He
built a church over the site of Jesus's
birth. He built a church over the site
of Jesus's crucifixion where the church
of the holy supplr stands today. And he
built a church on the Mount of Olives
over a cave associated with the sight of
his ascension into heaven.
Is there some significance to the fact
that both Jesus's birthplace and
resurrection may have occurred inside
caves?
Some ancient astronaut theorists say yes
and claim there may even be physical
evidence that what happened within these
caves was something other than
miraculous.
&gt;&gt; The shroud of Turin is certainly the
most important relic of the
resurrection. This extraordinary imprint
of the crucified body on this cloth that
no one has ever been able to accurately
explain or reproduce. And Jesus was in
the tomb and some believe there was an
intense burst of energy which created
what we now call the shroud of Turin,
some form of radiation which was very
intense and powerful.
&gt;&gt; We know with 21st century technology
that the shroud of Turin is a first
century garment and we know beyond a
shadow of a doubt that it could not have
been painted or in any way created. So
the shroud of Turin gives us this
exceptional piece of evidence that
something powerful happened in that
tomb.
&gt;&gt; And when people came to see him the next
day to view his body, he was gone.
Two shining beings uh non-human beings
met these two witnesses outside the tomb
and informed them that Christ had risen
and that he had departed.
It's possible that that cave was acting
as a sort of a gateway or a portal
because in many of these stories, the
caves link earth and heaven.
Could the shroud of Turin really be
evidence that something of a
technological as well as a spiritual
nature took place in the cave where many
believe Jesus was resurrected?
Reports of humans encountering the
divine in or near caves come from all
corners of the globe going back
thousands of years.
We look at the prophet Muhammad at Mount
H. He's in a mountain in a cave. He's
praying and meditating. He hears the
voice of Gabrielkra.
Ikra, which means to recite, recite. And
so he recites the Quran.
According to the Hebrew tradition,
Prophet Elijah, who existed around uh 9
B.CE, CE lived in a cave.
According to Greek mythology, Zeus was
born uh in a cave
and caves are often understood in
religious traditions to be gateways to
the underworld.
So caves are worshiped throughout the
the Mediterranean
usually because a god is associated with
that cave. of a god is worshiped in a
cave or in a crot.
Could the stories of Zeus, Muhammad, and
even Jesus
be evidence that the world's
subterranean caverns might be portals
that connect us to other realms, as
ancient astronaut theorists suggest?
Perhaps the answer will be found with
new cuttingedge technology designed to
uncover secrets in cave walls not
visible to the naked eye.
Santa Monica, California,
2014.
Here at X-RES Studio, visualization
artists Greg Downing and Eric Hansen are
pioneering the use of photoggramometry
and special effects software to assist
archaeologists in the global effort to
decipher ancient cave art.
We use a combination of techniques from
the fields of computational photography
and graphics uh in order to help the
archaeologists reveal information
difficult to see just with basic vision
when you're there.
&gt;&gt; The team recently traveled to the Grand
Canyon to compile a massive in-depth
photographic compilation of the
collection of strange petroglyphs known
as the shaman's panel.
&gt;&gt; We were drawn to the panel for two
primary aspects. One was the rich
layering of the uh anthropomorphic
figures and two was the kind of
evocative uh surreal nature of their
composition.
This cave is maybe like five or 6 ft
deep. So by using a photoggramometric
technique we're able to get the detail
across the entire painting.
The nice thing about this technique is
we can separate the different dyes and
minerals that are used. And in this case
now we can kind of see the layering
expressed. We can see figures that are
simply lost by the naked eye.
Yeah, that brings it out. Yeah, that's a
complete difference.
Could
modern techniques one day uncover even
more details about what ancient people
really saw and hope to communicate with
rock art?
Some ancient astronaut theorists believe
one compelling clue that modern
researchers might be on the right track
can be found, oddly enough, in
contemporary America.
March 1945,
Amazing Stories magazine publishes an
article entitled, I remember Lamaria.
But according to the author, this is the
first piece to appear in the science
fiction magazine that is not fiction at
all,
but an actual account of his own alien
abduction.
Richard Shaver was a man who surfaced
decades ago with a story of underground
entities that were very hostile to the
human race.
Terrible creatures that would kidnap and
kill members of the human race.
They were the first inhabitants of
planet Earth. When the sun became
radioactive,
these people could no longer live on the
surface.
Some left in their spaceships, others
went underground.
Could Richard Shaver's account of
underground extraterrestrials abducting
humans be true?
Shaver proposed that the alien race that
once populated the earth had developed
highly specialized equipment that
allowed them to embed multiaceted
imagery into stones.
Richard Shaver believed that he had made
the greatest discovery in the history of
mankind about the true nature of
intelligent life on earth.
So this is an original shaver photograph
of a rock book. And this
multi-dimensional way of making images
in the rock books was something that
Shaver saw as a real sign of the
superior intelligence of the ancient
races.
And Shaver believed that these weren't
mere rocks with random patterns. That
these were actually deliberately
manufactured artifacts by the ancient
races who had been here 30,000, 100,000,
who knows how many years ago.
Might Richard Schaver have actually
discovered real physical evidence that
extraterrestrials have been here on
planet Earth and might still be here
today.
Whether or not Richard Shaver's stories
are true, it does dovetail with legends
across this planet of a race of beings
that either created humankind or were at
least our ancestors that had a superior
technology.
If we're looking for extraterrestrials,
ironically, the heavens above might not
be the best place to look. We should
perhaps even be looking deep below our
feet.
&gt;&gt; In some ways, exploring the underground
cavern world of planet Earth is is the
final frontier.
Is it possible that some of the world's
most mysterious caves really are home to
extraterrestrial beings? Could it be
that the knowledge of the universe has
been left for us to discover right here
on Earth once we have the technology to
unlock it? And might the crystals found
within cave walls not only tell us where
we came from,
but even provide the technology to
access the most distant corners of the
universe.
Perhaps one day we will find proof that
there is life beyond our planet by
searching deep within it.
Enormous man-made caves.
&gt;&gt; Nobody knows what on earth these things
are.
&gt;&gt; Unexplainable structures.
&gt;&gt; You ask them, "How did you build these?"
And they'll say, "We didn't build
these." and underwater discoveries that
challenge everything we know about the
past.
&gt;&gt; That's amazing. I'm convinced
something's going on down there.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible that an advanced
civilization inhabited the Earth
thousands of years ago? And if so, were
they human or something out of this
world? Extraterrestrials colonized
planet Earth thousands of years ago. The
more we uncover, it will all point in
one direction. We are not the first.
Since the dawn of civilization,
mankind has credited its origins to gods
and other visitors from the stars.
What if it were true? Did
extraterrestrial beings really help to
shape our history?
And if so, what might we learn from the
study of aliens BC?
Traverse City, Michigan. May 22nd, 2015.
At an undisclosed location in Traverse
Bay on Lake Michigan, author and
explorer David Childress has teamed up
with sonar technician Brian Abbott and
underwater photographer Chris Doyle to
investigate a series of strange
underwater rock alignments. They first
discovered in 2007.
&gt;&gt; So, you don't bring very many people out
here, do you?
&gt;&gt; No, you're one of the first we brought
out to this site. We try and keep it
kind of quiet and secret. Uh Chris has
been out here a few times. Well, it's a
pretty sensitive site, so we try to keep
traffic to a minimum.
&gt;&gt; Well, how did you find this site anyway?
&gt;&gt; Uh we were actually out looking for
shipwrecks and we put our sonar down off
the side and I started to see stones
line up on my rose compass.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And then you deploy this sonar and
and take a picture.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we uh we can get that done here
real quick. We can deploy the sonar off
the side and uh start getting some
images and show you what we got on the
screen.
&gt;&gt; All right, great. Let's do it.
&gt;&gt; Excellent. When I first found these on
the computer screen, I started to laugh
because it was like, "This can't be
true." But I jokingly said, "Hey, we
have our own Stonehenge underwater." And
everyone
and I said I started looking at it
farther and I'm going, "Wow, we might
have something here. Set the cable here.
We'll be all set." So, we'll take a look
at the computer screen. Okay.
All right. So, the sonar is spinning
around. So, as you can see in this uh
deployment location, we have we've got 1
2 3 4 5 six stones. And what's really
interesting about this is these stones
all measure the same distance across.
Yeah, this does look like an artificial
alignment. This stone circle and then
these this line of stones there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that was unique to me cuz as a
engineer, when I look at stuff that's
square or rectangular or circle in
nature, it it kind of makes it jump out
because mother nature generally doesn't
do things like that.
What I saw on the sonar looked a lot
like stone circles and stone alignments
that I've seen in England or Carnack in
France. And it makes me wonder what's
going on here in ancient North America.
&gt;&gt; So, have you actually uh been down here
and in a scuba equipment?
&gt;&gt; No, I haven't. But uh Chris has.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we went down and actually took
some still photographs of it and we
noticed on one of the stones there's
some really interesting carvings on the
surface of it. Some people have even
said that it appears to resemble a
mastadon.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Wow. Can we go down there now? And
&gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely.
&gt;&gt; Taking an underwater camera down to the
mastadon rock, Chris Doyle will send up
a live feed to a monitor on the boat.
&gt;&gt; As he descends, he's going to uh pick
out the stone here.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
What's that?
&gt;&gt; That's stone. This
&gt;&gt; is this the stone with has the carvings
on it?
&gt;&gt; Yes, it is. So, he's moving slowly in on
it.
&gt;&gt; So, you can see the head right through
there. There's a tusk. So, we have one
leg coming down.
&gt;&gt; It does look like the stone has been
carved. Uh yeah, you can see the legs
and a trunk on it.
&gt;&gt; Wow, that's amazing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it truly is.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I I'm I'm convinced. Uh,
something's going on down there.
Between 10 and 12,000 years ago,
Mastadons went extinct.
So, we've got a carving on a rock
formation and uh, you know, depth of
water that uh, you know, probably
shouldn't be here, but is here.
This rock is probably made out of
granite, which is very, very hard. And
if you look up close at these markings,
you can see that these were made by
percussion marks. These weren't just
scratched into the surface. That each
line was individually pecked out. That
rock looks like it has a carving of a
mastadon on it. And that would mean that
that carving was made before the
extinction of these mastadons.
So you have to wonder what was going on
here in North America at the time of the
last ice age.
The carved image of a mastadon,
an animal that has been extinct for over
10,000 years. But what is it doing at
the bottom of Lake Michigan?
Could it really be part of an
artificially created rock formation like
Stonehenge in England?
If so, it would have to have been
created before the end of the last ice
age when the lake bed was dry. over
12,000 years ago.
And that would contradict the currently
held belief that early humans were not
capable of erecting monumental
structures in North America or anywhere
else at that time.
&gt;&gt; You never know when something's going to
pop up that's going to totally change
your whole view of a of a period or even
of human development.
One of the main trends that I've noticed
in archaeology is that the dates for
things tend to go back all the time. The
earliest pottery in a place, the
earliest arrival of people in a place,
they always turn out to be earlier than
we traditionally thought.
&gt;&gt; Today, we know that there was a monument
on the site of Stonehenge at least
10,000 years ago.
This is not speculation. The
archaeologists are saying this today.
And the same thing seems to be going on
in other parts of the world.
&gt;&gt; New dating techniques done by geologists
on the Sphinx in Giza indicate that it
was carved before 10,000 BC.
So more and more as we make new
discoveries in archaeology, it's pushing
mankind and civilization back farther
and farther.
Earth has a much deeper prehistory than
what we read about in textbooks today.
You can read that Puma or Tionaku, for
example, was built between 500 and 800
AD.
Some archaeologists have suggested that
Puma Punku and Tionaku might date back
as far as 12,000 years BC. So around
14,000 years ago,
could it be that a sophisticated culture
existed on Earth thousands and even tens
of thousands of years ago?
But if so, who built it? What happened
to it? And might there still be remnants
of it standing boldly right before our
eyes? According to ancient astronaut
theorists, many of the answers can be
found by looking no further than the Old
Testament of the Bible.
Throughout the world, there are
incredible man-made structures that have
been found to date back thousands of
years earlier than archaeologists
initially thought.
Is it possible that an advanced
civilization really existed on Earth in
mankind's prehistory?
A close examination of the so-called Old
Testament of the Judeo-Christian Bible
suggests that although Adam and Eve are
presumably the first humans created by
God, their son Cain later went on to
marry and join a thriving community.
There are a number of biblical stories
which make us suspect that perhaps homo
sapiens were not the only species on
earth or even the first ones. Although
Adam and Eve had recorded in the Garden
of Eden as the first human parents that
when Cain went on his way after
murdering his brother Abel,
he comes to another city with other
beings living in it. Now, who are they?
What are they? According to ancient
astronaut theorists, several ancient
texts can be found that describe beings
that dwelt upon the earth before the
time of Adam and Eve. These are often
referred to as the pre-atommites.
There is a long and ancient history of
what today are called pre-atommites.
Now, who are they? What are they? This
is a subject of course of many legends.
Those legends tell us tremendous amount
of things. People's lives extended for
thousands of years. They allegedly
reached high levels of technology, even
traveling to the stars. And yet somehow
something went wrong in their
civilization.
The podamic civilization
fell. But some went to the stars and
they were told, ordered by God to watch
and to observe.
Let's assume for a moment that we had
this incredible planet and all of a
sudden extraterrestrials, other beings
came here and they had their own
facilities, their own monuments, their
own communities for at least some time
and then somewhere along the line they
took off.
Stories of a time when other worldly
beings occupied the planet can be found
in nearly all world mythologies.
For the ancient Egyptians, the dawn of
life on Earth is referred to as Zeppi,
the first time when the god Osiris
served as an earthly ruler.
The ancient Greeks called this period
the golden age when the Titans and the
Olympians dwelt on earth
and the ancient Samrian accounts detail
a time before the creation of man when
the gods were the sole occupants of the
planet.
The basic suggestion is that
extraterrestrials colonized planet Earth
thousands of years ago. And we're
talking not 10 or 15,000 years ago,
but hundreds of thousands of years ago.
But if an advanced, possibly
extraterrestrial civilization really did
exist here on Earth, why is there no
record of it? no apparent archaeological
or architectural evidence.
&gt;&gt; For most of the cultures studied by
archaeology,
we are bereft of probably the vast
majority of what they produce. This is
particularly true the further back in
time you go simply because anything
organic will will not survive.
The reason why most of the ancient
monuments were built by using stone is
because stone lasts forever. That's it.
And the reason why we have these
monuments today is because they were
calling cards. They were calling cards
of a pre-ivilization.
Mechanical engineers like Nquille Carr
study the deterioration, corrosion and
decomposition of various materials to
determine the approximate rate of decay
and structural failure.
By applying these principles to a
cityscape, scientists are able to
determine roughly how long it would take
the hallmarks of a sophisticated
civilization to disappear.
If civilization was abandoned, after 50
years, you would start to see u material
degradation processes take over. For a
skyscraper, for example, would see parts
of the external facade crumbling to the
ground.
For steel material, you're going to
start to see little pits form in that
steel structure.
After a thousand years, the soil may
begin to absorb the material and erode
the material itself.
Eventually, you're going to get to a
point where only stone materials,
natural stones are going to be around,
such as Mount Rushmore,
Kito, Ecuador.
Here in the grasslands of South America
are the remnants of the great Incan
road.
The sophisticated network of pathways
and trails covers over 25,000 m through
Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia,
Argentina,
and Chile.
The Inca built this vast roadway without
the use of the wheel, draft animals,
metal tools, or even a written language.
Yet, modern engineers have noted that
the roadway incorporates advanced
engineering principles.
The Inca road system was really one of
the most magnificent ancient
architectural feats ever made. One of
the things that made the Inca roads so
incredible is that they traversed the
Andes, these incredibly tall, steep
mountains.
They had to bore tunnels through
mountains. They cut narrow paths along
sheer cliff faces.
One of the most intriguing things about
the Inca road system is that there is a
major artery that goes from the
northwest to the southeast. And along
that we find almost every major
megalithic construction including
Tiwanaku,
Pumapunku,
Cusco, Machu Picchu, Oente Tambbo, and
Sakiwaman.
Many are starting to believe that these
megalithic structures are thousands of
years older than the Inca and therefore
parts of the Inca road system are as
well thousands of years older than that
civilization.
the Incas. So many of their great
structures, Kusco and their Royal
Highway. You ask them, "Who built these?
How did you build these?" And they'll
say, "We didn't build these."
Well, who did build it?
The Incas had elaborate legends of
coming through tunnel systems in the
earth, appearing on an island in Lake
Titty Kanka, and then coming to Kusco
and finding already a system of tunnels
and and ancient mines and structures. It
was a home of the gods where they lived
before they left.
Is it possible that the foundations of
the Inca super highway and the
megalithic sites along it are remnants
of an extraterrestrial civilization that
once colonized Earth?
According to ancient astronaut
theorists, the answer is a profound yes.
And to prove it, they point to a series
of stone carvings sent to depict
mankind's ancient ancestors.
southeastern Turkey.
Buried beneath 20 feet of sand,
archaeologists unearthed the world's
oldest temple complex,
Gobeclete.
Radiocarbon dating suggests that the
site dates back to at least the 10th
century BC, a time before the end of the
last ice age and 6,000 years before
prehistoric man was said to have
developed language.
Quebec is really one of the greatest
archaeological discoveries of all time.
There are very few finds in archaeology
that really changed the whole way we
look at the past and that is essentially
what has happened because our view of
hunter gatherers uh has changed
enormously. We now know they were
capable of coming together in large
numbers with under presumably some kind
of authority to cooperate on massive
projects such as Geeklete which involved
bringing huge pieces of stone from quite
some distance away carving it
beautifully setting these pillars
upright and doing this on a massive
scale.
&gt;&gt; The very first temples in the world are
at Gabbecape. Um, and this in many ways
changes everything because here we have
the smoking gun of a lost civilization.
It confirms to us absolutely that at the
end of the last ice age there was high
culture existing in the world.
There's no doubt in my mind that there
are question marks all around the
ancient world and Quebec
offers such a giant question mark
because according to mainstream science
we were sitting in caves munching on
bananas and clearly that isn't the case.
Although to date archaeologists have
only excavated less than 1 acre of this
22 acre site. What they have found is
astounding.
The remains of a complex of buildings,
massive walls, and T-shaped stone
formations,
some 9 to 10 ft tall, and weighing up to
50 tons.
Many of the stone pillars are covered
with relief carvings of animals,
reptiles, and insects.
Archaeologists have also found figures
at the site that appear to represent
humans with strangely stylized clothing.
&gt;&gt; We have no idea what these humans
represent. We suspect that these are not
just simple statues commemorating
people. They could be gods. They could
be spirits. They could be ancestors.
Something of that kind.
But perhaps most intriguing is a
life-sized statue found just six miles
away that has been dated to the same
period. The Uraman.
This looks like a person who has come
from an advanced civilization who's
wearing something that has much more of
a defined collar, possibly even some
sort of advanced space suit. What the
heck is he doing there? His face looks
strange. He's bald. His head, his eyes
look weird. There's something unusual
about this guy. And that could be a clue
that leads us into the mystery of an
anti-duvian or pre flood civilization.
Is it possible that the strange humanoid
figure found near Gobecley Tempe
actually represents an extraterrestrial,
a being from a lost civilization that
existed on Earth sometime before the
last ice age?
If so, does it give credence to other
ancient stories describing other worldly
civilizations that once existed here on
Earth?
There is this recessed courtyard in
Tijuanaku that has all these different
faces.
These stones were found underneath the
soil, meaning that some point some type
of event happened that buried these
particular stones.
Some have actually surmised that they
represent some type of a pre flood
civilization. that what we have here is
in fact a remnant that depicts that
society.
&gt;&gt; All over the world we have giant statues
and and carvings of people's faces and
heads. Some of them are giant colossal
heads like the met colossal heads.
Others are the Easter Island type
statues which are huge and depict people
who have elongated heads. They're cone
heads essentially. They were giants of
Europe with godlike powers. In my mind,
we would call them extraterrestrials.
In all of these places, the locals are
saying, "Yes, these are our ancestors.
These are the people who came before
us."
Might our planet really have been
inhabited by alien visitors tens of
thousands of years ago?
And might they have brought with them
advanced knowledge, incredible
architecture and technology that
virtually vanished without a trace, save
for a few stone carvings and monuments?
But why?
What catastrophic event might have
happened on Earth that would have wiped
out everything that wasn't made of
stone?
Perhaps further evidence can be found by
examining a number of massive man-made
caves recently discovered in China.
Xi Jang Province, China. June 1992.
A local villager pumping water out of a
pond in Phoenix Hill uncovers a man-made
cavern with stairs,
hallways,
and massive 10story tall pillars.
The Grotto is one in a series of 24
separate caverns, each with similar
proportions
and intricately carved walls, floors,
and ceilings.
Nobody really knows what on earth these
things are.
There's no trace of them having been
occupied or being used for storage. Uh
certainly not for burials. There's no
trace of anything like that.
There's a Swiss author by the name of
Luke Burgen who was first to take this
story outside of China in his book
China's Mysterious Cave Labyrinth. And
what he showed me convinced me that some
kind of advanced technology was used
here.
It's one of the most amazing things I've
ever seen where you enter this
subterranean world that clearly has been
heuned out of the bedrock with
artificial means.
It's almost as if there was some sort of
artificial mechanism that was grinding
and drilling all of the stone out. And
this suggests the possibility that they
may have had some sort of technology.
&gt;&gt; Archaeologists estimate that the
material excavated from the site would
amount to nearly 1 million cub m
approximately the volume of 400 Olympic
sized pools. Yet there is no evidence of
where this material would have gone. And
Chinese officials have calculated that
an endeavor of this magnitude would take
a minimum of 1,000 men working day and
night for at least 5 years.
There is no historical record uh of
these caverns having been excavated. So
there's no document explaining what they
were used for, who excavated them. And
this remains a very very frustrating
detail for historians.
We know that in China there are written
records that go back at least 3,000
years. They make absolutely no mention
of these caves. So, we must look much
further back in time for their origin.
But exactly how old are they? Are they
4,000 years, 5,000 years?
Are they even 10,000 years? We just
don't know at this time.
Some have suggested that they're up to
15,000 years old. In fact, Chinese
scholars are the ones who have proposed
that this cave system dates back to one
of China's first emperors, Wong D. And
Wong D, as we all know, descended from
the sky in nothing else but a fiery
dragon.
Somebody went to an extreme amount of
trouble to build an underground
civilization. Why would they do that?
Is it possible that something was
happening on the surface of the earth?
When we go back to the Icelandic
legends, we see this cataclysm that is
described as a cataclysm of fire called
the Ragnarok in which you have flames in
the air and rocks and gravel raining
down from the sky.
In the Icelandic Ragnarok legend, the
world is turned upside down.
A great fire is followed by a submersion
of the world in water, resulting in the
death of the Nordic gods and their
offspring.
Only two humans are left to repopulate
the earth. It is a tale much like that
of the great flood found in the
Judeo-Christian Bible. And similar
stories of a great deluge, one that
marks the end of an old world and the
start of a new one, can be found in the
histories of virtually every ancient
civilization on our planet.
&gt;&gt; Virtually every culture, every ancient
culture talks about floods and ancient
floods. Some people dismiss this as, you
know, myth without explanation. But what
we find geologically is in fact we would
expect flood legends.
&gt;&gt; In 2007, a consortium of geologists
publishes its collective findings
indicating evidence of a major meteor
event.
What they discover is a carbonri layer
in the geological record at various
sites across the globe dating back to
around 10,900
BC.
A separate study conducted by scientists
studying Arctic ice core samples finds
evidence suggesting a rapid glacial melt
at nearly the same time period.
The ice age ends very very dramatically
almost literally overnight. You see this
in the ice cores. All of a sudden there
are dramatic changes. Temperatures
rising,
torrential rains, flooding.
Could the geological record suggest that
the stories of a global cataclysm are
true?
If so, might the stories of a cleansing
of the Earth of other worldly beings,
leaving only humans to repopulate the
planet, also be true.
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
suggest further evidence exists in the
tales of a long-lost continent.
Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Here at the Minnesota Historical Society
are housed boxes upon boxes of notes,
letters, and research material detailing
evidence of an antidolivian or pre flood
civilization.
The collection is the culmination of an
exhaustive search for proof of a
prehistoric civilization conducted by
the 19th century US senator Ignatius
Donnelly.
&gt;&gt; Ignatius Donnelly was a very interesting
person.
He was a US congressman. Um he was a
writer. He was a a cryptologist.
And in 1882 he came out with his most
famous book Atlantis the antid-doluvian
world.
What he did was to propose the existence
of a mother civilization
a lost civilization that existed at the
time of the last ice age.
&gt;&gt; Ignatius Donnelly was fascinated by the
story of a lost civilization that was
destroyed
over 10,000 years ago.
He looked into all kinds of scientific
anomalies at the time, including the
extinction of mammoths and other
animals,
stories of civilization within the
Americas and in the Atlantic.
In his writings, Don Lake concluded that
not only did a lost civilization
actually exist, but that it was
destroyed due to a meteoric type event
that shifted the Earth's axis in the
distant past.
Donley believed that remnants of this
civilization could be found in the
Americas
and the ultimate evidence would be
located underwater in the Caribbean.
He was convinced that when Christopher
Columbus sailed west from Spain in 1492,
he knew this as well.
The explorer Christopher Columbus before
his epic journey to the new world was
very much aware of the stories of a lost
civilization.
It was something that was discussed in
the various European courts at this
time.
Ancient mariners, voyagers of the past
had maps which showed different areas of
the earth which they could not know
anything possibly about because they
hadn't even been discovered at that time
and were probably accessible to people
like Christopher Columbus before his
journey to the new world.
There were legends in the middle ages
that there was a land and a continent
across the Atlantic
and early maps started showing before
Columbus even a large island in the
Atlantic which they called Antila.
Columbus on his first journey to the new
world. As he neared the Caribbean, he
started seeing weird lights in the sky.
So, you have to wonder, were
extraterrestrials
purposely trying to help Columbus?
Perhaps some of the knowledge that he
had of maps and that he was really going
to find land across this ocean had been
assured to him.
Could Columbus have been purposely
guided to this area, not only by ancient
maps of unknown origin, but also by
extraterrestrial beings?
Although the secret maps and charts of
Christopher Columbus have been lost,
scholars attribute them as having been a
key source in the creation of one of
history's most enigmatic maps.
The Piri Reese map has been dated to
1513 AD, but what it illustrates
suggests geological knowledge that was
unknown until our modern age. A Turkish
seaman and admiral painted the map. His
name was Piri Race. Now, if you see the
map, you see the coastline of southern
part of France. Then you see Spain. Then
you see what is today's Gibraltara. Then
you see a part of Africa. On the other
side you see a coastline of South
America. But what is important on the
bottom of the map of Pirates you see the
coastline of Antarctica.
Now this coastline is covered today with
ice and snow. So somebody must have
mapped this before the ice age.
The continent of Antarctica was
discovered in 1820,
over 300 years after Piri Ree drew his
map,
and scientists have proposed that the
Antarctic coastline has been obscured by
ice for at least 6,000 years.
Could it be that the original source for
the maps of Columbus and the Pirase map
predates our recorded history?
If so, has evidence been left behind on
Earth to assure that we can piece
together the truth about this lost
civilization?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
claim further proof may be found
underwater
in the Bahamas.
Androse Island, the Bahamas. 2003.
Members of the Association for Research
and Enlightenment conduct aerial
searches for underwater structures that
might reveal evidence of a lost
civilization.
off of the coast of Andros,
they discovered an incredible platform
of rectangular and square stones that
stretched for several hundred yards.
And all the indications are that it goes
back to the end of the last ice age and
is probably around 11 to 12,000 years
old.
The search is part of a long-term
project working in conjunction with the
Casey Foundation.
Their quest is to locate remnants of the
lost continent of Atlantis,
which healer and psychic Edgar Casey
said would be located in the area.
Edgar Casey is arguably America's
greatest psychic. He was born in 1877,
died in 1945,
and he has documented over 14,000
psychic readings.
What's interesting is that Casey also
got into things like reincarnation.
Some of Casey's clients were told that
they had lifetimes in the so-called
mythical civilization of Atlantis.
In fact, Casey's reading said that the
people of Atlantis as a whole had mass
reincarnated as the people of America
and that America was in a sense a future
life carryover of Atlantis.
Casey revealed in his psychic readings
that the truth about the nature of this
lost civilization exists in a hidden
hall of records at three locations
across the globe.
In Egypt near the Sphinx,
underwater in the Bahamas,
and in the Yucatan Peninsula.
Any three of these areas apparently
would have all of the records that we
would need to completely rebuild our
history and understand how there may
have been much more widespread
extraterrestrial presence here on Earth.
Could recent archaeological finds in the
Bahamas confirm that Edgar Casey was
right about the existence of a lost
extraterrestrial civilization?
And if so, should we be concerned about
his predictions for the future of
humanity?
Casey was a cataclysmist and in his
readings he was constantly talking about
earth changes and pole shifts that
caused civilizations to be destroyed in
ancient times. And Casey said that we
were going to have another pole shift
around the time of the millennium.
Even a relatively small asteroid coming
in at the right angle,
not necessarily hitting Earth, but sort
of grazing the Earth could theoretically
change the tilt axis of the Earth
significantly. Now, if that occurred,
land and ocean would redistribute on the
Earth.
It seems as if history repeats itself.
And it may be that at this moment we are
exactly in the same situation that the
citizens of Atlantis were in.
Perhaps we will find out exactly what
had happened to this lost civilization
and learn from their mistakes and not
sink into oblivion ourselves.
The more we uncover it will all point in
one direction. We are not the first and
we never have been.
An extraterrestrial pre-ivilization
existed before our recorded history
and this truth will be revealed within
our lifetime.
Could the stories of a time when gods
and other worldly beings inhabited the
earth be more than just mythology?
And might the discovery of unexplainable
remnants from this lost civilization
reveal the truth about our
extraterrestrial origins as ancient
astronaut theorists suggest.
Perhaps we are on the verge of
uncovering the final piece of the puzzle
that will change our understanding of
Earth's history forever. But will we
uncover it before it's too late?
This gigantic pyramid in Antarctica
would be the oldest pyramid on our
planet.
&gt;&gt; It's possible that underneath the ice
will be keys for us to reclaim our
ancient past.
The Nazis were particularly interested
in Antarctica.
&gt;&gt; Saucers were coming up out of the water
and were shooting them with some sort of
beam, literally cutting ships in half.
&gt;&gt; Antarctica may hold lost remnants of an
extraterrestrial civilization that
existed there thousands and thousands of
years ago.
Since the dawn of civilization,
mankind has credited its origins to gods
and other visitors from the stars. What
if it were true?
Did extraterrestrial beings really help
to shape our history?
And if so, might the ultimate proof be
found when we uncover the pyramids of
Antarctica?
Heat.
Stretching over 5 million square miles
across the southernmost reaches of the
Earth lies the coldest and most isolated
continent in the world,
Antarctica.
because of its hostile climate,
including average daily temperatures of
-49°
F and wind speeds of over 200 mph.
Antarctica remains largely untouched by
mankind.
According to historical records, modern
man did not even set foot on the
continent until 1853
when ship captain Merkel Cooper landed
on what is now known as the Oats Coast
of Victoria land.
Today, anywhere from 1,000 to 5,000
people reside at the research stations
scattered across the continent, braving
the extreme conditions in hopes of
learning more about this mysterious
landscape.
thing about Antarctica
is that as much as 98% of it is covered
in ice
and just occasionally there are little
areas that stick out, mountain tops,
ridges, peaks.
Antarctica is the least explored of the
continents. Even the North Pole, which
is just ice, has been explored more and
it is a mystery and it's right here on
the Earth. It's perhaps the last big
unexplored part of our home planet.
&gt;&gt; Antarctica is a vast frozen world and we
know very little about it.
And in fact, the ice in Antarctica is up
to 3 m thick in certain places. And
what's beneath the ice is still largely
a mystery to scientists.
You just have to imagine this. The Sears
Tower is a little less under a third of
a mile tall. So you have to imagine that
you can stack nine Sears towers on top
of each other and they would still not
peek out from that ice sheet.
Most geologists believe Antarctica has
been completely frozen and uninhabited
for over 12 million years.
But in 2012, new photographs revealed
formations in the landscape that
challenged this notion.
Mysterious pyramid structures emerging
from the now melting ice.
Recently, there have been a number of
reports of pyramids being found on
Antarctica.
There are various photographs that show
what appear to be perfect four-sided
pyramids, very similar in design to
those at Giza,
Egypt, and perhaps other places around
the world.
While the photos were explained away by
mainstream scientists as nothing more
than natural land formations,
satellite imagery analysts like Joseph
White are not entirely convinced. In
March of 2013, he uncovered what he
believes is evidence of yet another
pyramid located just south of
Antarctica's remote Shackleton Mountain
Range.
I initially found the structure whilst
looking on Google Earth. I was in fact
looking at some of the rather strange
blank spots that you get in Antarctica.
When I stumbled upon this very large
square structure, which seems to be some
kind of building or perhaps even a
pyramid, but certainly very large and
very square. It actually lines up
perfectly with the coordinates of the
compass, north,southeast, and west. And
uh this dictates to me that it's
probably an intelligent structure
because uh random structures like
mountains are not aligned to the
compass. And another way we know that a
structure is not naturally occurring is
generally to look for symmetry. Things
like right angles and equilateral
triangles and shapes that you would not
normally find in nature. This structure
is is exactly uh 2 km square. uh this
corner to this corner is 2 km and this
corner to this corner is also exactly 2
km which would make this more than
double the size of any pyramid thus far
found on Earth.
While it may seem unthinkable that
pyramids could exist in Antarctica,
in recent years, archaeologists have
found pyramids all over the world that
had been lost for centuries, mistaken as
natural formations
or hidden in the most unlikely places.
They have been discovered in the plains
of northern Peru,
buried beneath dirt and rubble in
Indonesia, and one may even exist in Los
Angeles, California.
&gt;&gt; All the way around the world, we find
evidence of pyramid structures.
We should start looking at the
possibility that there was habitation on
Antarctica.
Was it a lost civilization?
Could it be ancient astronauts?
And just maybe the earliest monuments of
our own civilization
came originally from Antarctica.
If this gigantic pyramid in Antarctica
is an artificial structure,
it would probably be the oldest pyramid
on our planet. And in fact, it might be
the master pyramid that all the other
pyramids on planet earth were designed
uh to to look like. There has been
extensive research done on pyramids
throughout the world in terms of their
structure and what it is that they
really are. And one of the theories is
that pyramids are power generators.
And so if you have these pyramids
strategically placed around the world
generating this charge, it's possible to
create a general standing wave around
the world that is basically a wireless
transmission of energy.
It's been theorized that ancient ships,
extraterrestrials, and those with high
technology could use this interconnected
wireless energy system to navigate
around the planet. And it makes sense
that if there was some kind of worldwide
pyramid power grid like this that
Antarctica would have pyramids as well.
The whole idea of these pyramidal
structures. Where did it come from? It's
not an arbitrary thing and these
structures they exist worldwide. So you
know what was the impetus? What's the
origin? And even more fascinating, did
they originate on the Antarctic
continent?
Might the pyramid Joseph White claims to
have discovered near the Shackleton
Mountain Range and other pyramid-shaped
formations recently photographed in
Antarctica
provide evidence of extraterrestrial
visitation to our planet in the remote
past.
And if they are actually man-made
structures, how is such a thing even
possible in a place that has been buried
beneath the ice for over 12 million
years?
According to ancient astronaut
theorists, Antarctica may not have been
a frozen continent for as long as
mainstream scientists suggest.
And they say proof can be found by
examining a 500-year-old map depicting
the continent
without any ice.
Siberia
2013.
A woolly mammoth is discovered flash
frozen in the glacial ice. engulfed so
quickly that its blood and muscle tissue
are perfectly preserved.
It is just one of dozens that have been
found within the Siberian ice since the
turn of the 20th century.
Many seemingly caught in suspended
animation. Some with food in their
mouths and vegetation in their stomachs
that would only grow in a much warmer
climate.
The discovery of a woolly mammoth that
was flash frozen raises some interesting
scientific questions. Just something
happened very locally to the woolly
mammoth that it froze very fast. But it
does also raise the question of how
quickly can climate really change and
does it take some sort of cataclysm one
that's sudden and unexpected.
In 1958,
Charles Hapgood, a Harvard educated
scientist, published the book Earth's
Shifting Crust.
In it, he proposed that portions of the
Earth's crust experienced violent and
sudden shifts during Earth's geological
history.
His
theory, known as crustal displacement,
posited that both Siberia and the
continent of Antarctica were located in
slightly more temperate climates prior
to the end of the last ice age,
approximately 12,000 years ago. But then
some unknown catastrophe plunged them
into their current positions.
Professor Hackood came up with the idea
that the previous North Pole position
had been in the area of the Hudson Bay
and then it shifted to where the pole is
today.
And at the southern pole, he believed
that the area of Antarctica
had previously also experienced a
temperate climate and that this was
suddenly now thrust into this deep ice
and this harsh freezing climate. But he
believed the last time that this had
actually taken place was approximately
12,000 years ago.
When we think about earth crust
displacement theory and plate tectonics,
you want to think of the crust basically
floating on the magna and being able to
shift and move around on top of it. The
earth crust is not one solid piece. We
know it's made of individual pieces.
So you can look and see how the
continents probably used to fit together
and where they've moved and how they
move apart over a long period of time.
But the question is you know would
something the size of Antarctica shift
suddenly or is that too big?
&gt;&gt; These custal shifts according to hap
good actually could happen over a period
of even days and so if you had a
thriving civilization this crustal
displacement could have hit it very very
quickly and so it could have actually
been frozen over a very short period of
time.
Although Hapgood's theory of sudden
large-scale shifts of the Earth's crust
was not widely accepted, renowned
physicist Albert Einstein was
electrified by it and even wrote the
forward of Hapgood's book.
Hapgood would also find additional
support for his theory when in 1960
while combing through the Library of
Congress archives he unearthed an
unusual map published in 1531.
The map credited to mathematician and
cgrapher Arantis Finineas appears to
depict an ice-free continent remarkably
similar to today's maps of Antarctica.
It was not until as late as 1820 that we
had any real idea of what Antarctica
looked like. Yet here on the Arantius
Phineas map from 1531, here was
Antarctica. How the hell is it possible
that it could appear on this map?
Researchers are baffled as to how the
Artisas Phineas map could include a
continent that was not discovered until
over 300 years later and are even more
perplexed by the fact that it depicts
Antarctica free of ice.
If explorers somehow discovered
Antarctica in the 1500s, it would have
been completely frozen over.
Remarkably, the Phineas map shows not
only a detailed coastline free of ice,
but the entire continent, including
interior features such as rivers,
valleys, and mountains.
The map shows mountain ranges that have
rivers coming out of the mountain
ranges.
How could that be? It's frozen. It's
ice.
There's a NASA image of the continent of
Antarctica using radar so that mountain
ranges come through and can be seen and
you can see a mountain range on one
photograph and on the Orentus Phineas
map it's right there too. It's the same
mountain range.
According to climatologists, the
estimates of when this feature would
have been free from ice cover was at
least 6,000 years ago.
So, how is it possible that this map
exists? Did Phineas have access to an
older map, one dating back thousands of
years?
Perhaps more confounding, US Air Force
cgraphers that were sent the maps in the
1960s concluded that they were drawn
using advanced spherical trigonometry
with remarkable precision, especially
when considering the maps were made
hundreds of years ago. The fact that we
find something that's a reference to
modern day technology on a map that
dates back to the 16th century makes me
think, is it possible that some type of
advanced radar technology was used?
Because in order to produce a map that
would outline the areas we see, you
would have to be at an altitude of 80
miles.
So, how was that possible? Could it be
that the basis for these maps was
gleaned from maps that were cardographed
by extraterrestrial land surveyors?
&gt;&gt; The implications of all this and if you
now are able to add things like
pyramids, this would really indicate
that there was some kind of ancient
civilization in Antarctica and that it
would have been over 12,000 years ago.
And you've got to wonder what kind of
civilization this was. Is it possible
that it was extraterrestrials?
&gt;&gt; Could Antarctica have been inhabited by
extraterrestrials in the distant past?
Did they study this continent and leave
behind detailed information about its
landscape?
If so, just what happened to these other
worldly visitors?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe more
clues can be found in Egyptian stories
describing an earthaltering catastrophe.
Edfu, Egypt.
Located on the western bank of the Nile,
the temple of Edfu is one of the largest
and most wellpreserved temples of the
ancient kingdom, dating back to 237 BC.
The Atwood temple is of tremendous
importance. As you enter the temple,
it's like you're going inside a book.
It's literally full of texts. Every
wall, every column, every room, every
chamber is filled with texts. They're
known collectively as the adex. What is
very interesting is that the majority of
the text speak about the creation of the
world.
According to the texts, the earth was
created by powerful gods who came down
from the sky. And these gods first
established a place known as the island
of the egg.
two gods.
They created an island in the middle of
the eternal lake.
Creation started with that island.
The occupants of this so-called
primordial mythical world. Very strange
creatures. There is seems to be three
groups of people.
One called the sages,
one called the builders, and the other
called the ship tu. Nobody knows who
they are. These are the ones that are
very mysterious because they are said to
emerge from the water.
Then the Egyptians believed a series of
gods came and built the first temples.
It says that here the first temples were
were built, the first ones ever in the
world and that these became the
blueprint for every temple in Egypt.
Once all the creator gods have done
their job with creating the world, they
would meet with their big bird and
ascend to the sky.
Ancient Egyptians believed with all
their heart that everything listed and
inscribed on these walls are true, true,
true. If the walls say there's an island
in the middle of nowhere where gods
would go and ascend to the sky,
then ancient Egyptians, the devoted
ones, would believe that island exists.
According to the Edfu texts, not all of
the occupants left.
And after many generations, the island
suffered a terrible fate.
The texts are very different as to what
happens to the occupants. These strange
gods, they seem to once they have set
the scene, once they have built the
temples, they hand over their work to
the historical lineage and then they
depart. We don't know where they go.
There seems to be something very
interesting here. There seems to be a
war going on. The armies of these
divinities is led by this falcon god.
And he battles a kind of enemy
represented by snake.
In the skies appeared what was known as
the enemy snake. It had a name. It was
called the great leaping one. And it was
said that immediately it appeared there
was a time of darkness. And there was
suddenly floods that destroyed this
sacred island.
And when the waters receded, these
original beings who were known as the
ancient ones or the elder ones
were now no longer there.
Perhaps the great leaping one, this
enemy snake was the memory of the comet
that entered into our inner solar
system, broke up,
causing devastation and destruction.
Might the account of this ancient
catastrophe inscribed on the walls of
the Edfu temple be describing a natural
event? Or was it a deliberate attack? An
attack targeting other worldly
civilization existing on what we now
know as the Antarctic continent.
We need to take a second look at the
Edfu text in the story of the island of
the egg because it's the source material
from Plato's story. In his story of
Atlantis, he gives a very important
detail. He describes it as an immense
island the size of Libya and North
Africa combined. Now, the thing about it
is is that there's only one island on
the planet that's out in the middle of
the ocean that matches that description,
and that's Antarctica.
Curiously, the island continent depicted
on the Ortis Phineas map reveals a shift
of the South Pole of 7 and 12°
or nearly 1,000 m from what it is today.
Might this shift corroborate the
accounts of a major catastrophic event
in the remote past?
If so, could the creation myth recorded
at Edfu be describing something more
than mythology?
The cataclysm which would have shifted
Antarctica. This would have destroyed
the civilization that was there. And
then over time, whatever buildings and
pyramids that were there would be
covered with ice.
So the whole idea that Antarctica is
hiding beneath its ice some ancient
civilization is a very intriguing idea
and one that may very well be true.
Might there actually be evidence of an
ancient extraterrestrial civilization
buried under the ice of Antarctica?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
believe that this long history of an
alien presence there is precisely what
brought another occupying force to its
frozen shores,
the Nazis.
Hamburg, Germany. December 1938.
Four years into Adolf Hitler's reign as
furer, he is beginning to establish his
total dictatorship by taking direct
control of the German military.
But on the brink of World War II, Hitler
is also involved in much stranger
endeavors that are hidden to the public.
He is committing every remaining
resource to searching for ancient relics
that he believes could hold incredible
powers.
On December 17th, the German freighter
MS Schwabanlond sets out on one of these
top secret missions.
Its 33 member team is rumored to include
scientists, military experts,
construction crews, and key members of
the Thu Society, an elite group
associated with the Nazis that focused
on mysticism and the occult.
32 days later, they arrive at their
destination,
Antarctica.
&gt;&gt; The Nazis themselves were fascinated by
ancient civilizations and legends of
vanished super races.
They were searching for this lost Arctic
home that they thought that the Aryans
had come from. They were looking all
over the world and that included
Antarctica.
The fool society actually believed that
there were mystics or channels who were
able to communicate with these beings
who claimed to be either
extraterrestrial in origin or claimed to
belong to this civilization that lived
in Earth's interior.
They gave a lot of information about the
building of advanced aerospace vehicles,
flying saucers and I think this is where
uh Hitler's Nazi party got a lot of its
information about Antarctica that uh in
Antarctica there is this ancient
civilization or bases where they could
find a lot of these advanced
technologies.
During their time in Antarctica, the
Nazis were believed to have mapped huge
swaths of the icy landscape by air.
Ancient astronaut theorists believe they
also established an elaborate
underground headquarters known as base
211.
Hitler and the Nazis were particularly
interested in Antarctica. I think they
really believe that there were things
going on deep under the ice. And there
have always been rumors that the Nazis
with their submarines have underwater
caverns, small cities that they escaped
there after World War II.
&gt;&gt; When the Germans got to Antarctica, what
they found were massive cities that were
highly technological. And these
buildings were not just on the surface.
They went deep down underground. So they
began relocating a massive amount of
equipment and personnel to Antarctica,
repressurizing these ancient facilities
and reoccupying them.
In 1946,
one year after the end of World War II,
the US government launched its own
large-scale mission to Antarctica.
Operation High Jump deployed 4,700
troops, 13 ships, an aircraft carrier,
and a number of sea planes to
Antarctica.
Although the government denied it at the
time, it would later become known that
one of the operation's primary
objectives was quote extending the
United States sovereignty over the
largest practicable area of the
Antarctic continent.
Then the US Navy then sent what was
basically a flotilla of armed ships to
Antarctica in operation high jump. There
were stories that were quite strange
that ultimately came out of that
expedition which which ended quite
early. There were stories of craft
coming up out of the water around the
ships and of flying saucer type
vehicles.
Saucers were coming up out of the water
and were shooting them with some sort of
beam, literally cutting ships in half.
They were shooting planes out of the sky
and they traveled so fast that it was
almost impossible to visually reference
where the disc was going.
So, the American fleet had to limp back
to the United States, totally broken and
destroyed.
It's still a mystery all of the
activities that were going on in
Antarctica. You have to wonder if the
American military and other governments
too are aware of structures under the
ice, of pyramids beneath the ice, and
perhaps they know that there's some kind
of ancient civilization frozen beneath
the ice of Antarctica.
If in fact the Nazis were seeking
extraterrestrial technology in
Antarctica, is it possible that they
actually discovered it? And might the US
military have encountered this powerful
technology years later during Operation
High Jump?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe that
further proof of an alien presence in
Antarctica may be found in a prehistoric
lake buried under 2 mi of ice.
Lake Vastto, Antarctica.
Buried under two miles of ice, is a
4,800 square mile body of water. It is
by far the largest of the continent's
nearly 400 lakes that are entirely
covered by ice.
In 2001, pilots collecting data here
recorded unusual and extreme
irregularities in the magnetic field at
the southeastern corner of the lake,
spanning a remarkable 65x 46 mi. The
anomalous area is producing an unusually
high level of magnetic energy.
This anomaly was roughly uh 50 mi in
diameter and was something that would be
commensurate with the magnetic field
being generated by a city.
I have been to Lake Bosto several times
as part of expedition research and when
we were in the area we did pick up this
magnetic anomaly but we also found other
magnetic anomalies which are actually
transitioning from one place to another.
they were moving. Highly rare and
extremely unusual. We weren't able to
determine what was causing these
anomalies.
&gt;&gt; It's totally inexplicable. And of
course, this has given rise to theories
that perhaps there is something else
here. Perhaps it's a UFO. Perhaps it's
some kind of alien base. Perhaps even
the remnants of a lost civilization.
And now the NSA themsself have almost
put a blanket over any further research
and it's almost become a no-go area.
Vastto is not the only site with limited
outside access.
Seven different countries have claimed
territories in Antarctica.
Yet it remains one of the most
restricted locations in the world.
Currently, there are 68 international
bases here, many of which require
permits or special permissions to visit.
They are manned not just with
scientists, but also military personnel.
But why is it so restricted?
McMurdo Station, Antarctica,
located on the southern peninsula of
Ross Island. This is the largest
research station on the continent.
It was opened by the US government in
1956
and houses up to as many as 1,200
residents at a time.
In January of 2015,
a US Navy flight engineer who served
with the Antarctic Development Squadron
at McMmero for 14 years came forward to
investigative reporter Linda Moltonhow
with bizarre accounts of his time in
Antarctica.
&gt;&gt; In January of 2015, I got an email from
a retired naval flight engineer. He's
asked me to call him only Brian in the
world public.
And this is what he told me from about
1983 to when he retired from the Navy in
1997.
He was in all kinds of what they call
Antarctic Squadron expedition missions
that included rescuing people in and out
of various places. in all these trips,
nothing of a high strangeness had
occurred and then all of a sudden it was
one thing after another. During a
squadron mission in the trans Antarctic
mountains, the whole crew saw a whole
bunch of silver darting objects and they
are round. And he says they're doing the
strangest thing. They're going like to
this peak in a group, to this peak in a
group, to this peak in a group, and then
they'd all take off.
And not only did this happen once, it
happened over and over.
&gt;&gt; According to the informant, this was
just one of many strange mysteries on
the continent that he witnessed during
his time there.
&gt;&gt; They get an assignment not long after.
There's a medical emergency. They are
now under the gun. The clock is ticking
and a decision was made. They're going
over through the no-fly zone because
it's a medical emergency. And what do
they see
in the ice?
Like a huge entrance to a cave but
slanted going down. And he said, I think
it was at least lend to 200 ft in
diameter, a big hole in the ice. And he
said, "Our instruments are not
operating. We were losing electricity.
We had magnetic anomalies." And we
concluded, there's something about this
hole that is now causing these problems.
They do their medical recovery
and the next thing they know they're all
being chewed out by men in suits that
are not from McMurdo.
They appear to be from Washington DC and
he said they told us that we are never
ever to fly over that hole and we are
never to discuss it again. What is that
about? And does that have anything to do
with all these other pieces that keep
emerging that there might be something
archaeological
in Antarctica?
&gt;&gt; According to ancient astronaut
theorists, this was not the first time a
massive hole has been spotted in the ice
of Antarctica.
Famous polar explorer Admiral Richard
Bird allegedly reported seeing a massive
entrance to an underground world during
his 1947 expedition to the South Pole.
Admiral Bird made a lot of unusual
statements, allegedly talking about a
large opening at the South Pole that
went deep inside the Earth, ice free and
was inhabited by various sorts of
aliens.
And when Bird got back to the United
States, he was brought back to
Washington where he was questioned very
heavily about his statements. And
allegedly he was told to stop talking
about this.
You have to wonder, is the South Pole
some kind of extra terrestrial entry
zone? Some kind of portal that's so
important that it has to be controlled
by the military?
&gt;&gt; Is the United States government covering
up an extraterrestrial presence in
Antarctica?
And if so, could they be the same
otherworldly beings that once occupied
the continent thousands of years ago?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the
truth may be revealed when Antarctica's
ice finally disappears.
East Antarctica, October 2015.
Scientists at NASA announced that
despite years of thinking otherwise,
they are now finding that the ice in
this region is actually growing,
averaging 82 billion tons a year.
Snowfall is currently adding ice to most
of the continent. But at the same time,
glaciers are rapidly melting along the
coast of Western Antarctica.
Scientists calculate that since 2009, as
much as 60 cubic kilm of ice, the
equivalent of 70,000 Empire State
buildings, is disappearing into the
ocean each year.
But why is the ice here melting when it
is growing throughout much of the rest
of the continent?
We see these graphic pictures on
television of the ice caps melting and
falling into the sea, but it's actually
only in some areas that the ice caps are
actually melting. What's so strange is
that through various factors that the
ice in Antarctica might actually be
growing and extending.
This is very strange.
We can't rule out the possibility that
in certain cases there could be entire
cities that are built underground that
may even be actively maintained by
extraterrestrials now and that as those
cities are powered up or expanded in
size that they are giving off some kind
of heat and that heat in turn is melting
the ice above them.
If there are things buried under the
miles of ice at Antarctica, then that
would mean that had to have happened
before the last ice age. So, who knows
what we'll find there? Remnants of a
lost civilization, perhaps even tools
with which these civilizations were
built.
It's possible that underneath the ice
will be keys for us to actually save
ourselves and reclaim our ancient past.
We may end up in a situation where this
can't be covered up anymore.
Where visible ruins, gigantic pyramids,
gigantic obelisks start to peek through
the ice.
And at that point, it's game over. No
longer can this be swept under the rug.
There's no question that under the ice
of Antarctica, there could be
extraterrestrial craft. There could be
cities down there. Bottom line is it
will shock the entire belief system of
humankind. It will just change
everything we know.
What really lies beneath the ice and
snow in Antarctica?
Was this frozen continent once covered
with lush vegetation as well as pyramids
that predate those in Egypt?
And if extraterrestrials truly did
inhabit Antarctica, could these
otherworldly visitors still be hiding
out there today?
Perhaps one day soon, we will discover
what the ice of Antarctica has hidden
for thousands of years, and it will
finally expose the truth about our alien
past.