Unsiloed podcast is produced by
University FM, elevating the stories of
your institution.
Welcome to Unsiloed. This is Greg
Leblanc and I'm here today with Ian
Milgilchrist who is I guess a former
fellow at Oxford University currently. I
guess you have some emmeritus status and
I don't I mean Oxford doesn't require
you to have specialization in the way we
do in American universities but gosh you
are a neuroscientist a philosopher a
psychologist a doctor and at one point I
guess you taught literature is that
correct?
&gt;&gt; Yes it is. Yes it is.
&gt;&gt; And of course all of that combines into
your work. But probably the most famous
book of yours is this one called The
Master and His Emissary: The Divided
Brain and the Making of the Western
World, which was preceded by an earlier
work, The Divided Brain and Man's Search
for Meaning. And then this new Magnum
Opus, which I have to confess I have yet
I've yet to complete, is called the The
Matter with Things, and it's a
completely understandable
&gt;&gt; work. Our brains are delusions and the
unmaking of the world. Welcome, Ian.
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much indeed. Yes. Nobody
should feel that they have to work their
way through such a very long book. I I
do apologize, but I had a some subtle
things to say and they needed to be said
at some length. So, there we are. Well,
hopefully we can maybe dip into them,
but this book, The Master and His
Emissary, I mean, this is a phenomenal
work and I think probably anybody who
has read it would probably agree that
there's so much in there. And the
fundamental thesis of the work is that
there are these two ways of being in the
world. And these two ways of being in
the world have been recognized by
philosophers and by artists for
millennia. um but that they correspond
there's a physiological correspondence
to these two ways of being in the world
that
&gt;&gt; are manifested in the different
hemispheres of our brain. Now I think I
think those are two separate thesis and
I think at one point you said that even
if the physiological story
somehow turned out to be untrue this
recognition of these different ways of
being in the world is something that is
that is undeniable. Right.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And some people have said to me you
didn't really need to spend 30 years
looking at the brain because as you say
it's there in the history of philosophy.
It's actually also in the history of
wisdom traditions I think is the best
way to put it from around the world. So
it's an intuition about ourselves that
is very deep. But the fact is that it is
extraordinarily instantiated in our
brains and we can't disown our brains.
Our brains help shape the way we see
things. And so it is kind of important
that this actually is a reflection of
something we can now say is based in the
very structure and function of the
bipartite brain.
&gt;&gt; Well look for people like myself who are
in the judgment and decision making
literature and who teach courses on that
topic the idea of a dual brain is not
foreign to us. I mean we talk about it
all the time except that we have a very
different sort of dichotomy right we
talk about system one and system two and
I think the
&gt;&gt; physiological coralates of that are the
lyic system or kind of the the the rear
brain right and the the frontal and
parietal brain and so and then we also
think of this as almost an linear
evolutionary path right where we started
with the reptile brain the limbic brain
and then we started adding these layers
which make us more human but
&gt;&gt; your story doesn't line up that dual
brain story
&gt;&gt; no it's different I mean the the that is
a top there are three directions fairly
obviously three dimensions to the brain
and three ways or directions in which
you can divide it if you want to one is
roughly speaking top to bottom I think
that's what you've been describing but
there's also front to back and that
comes into it and but this the side to
side one and what I'm describing there
is is is distinct from that because both
hemispheres of the brain have built on
the reptile brain if you like to call it
that built in a history which is very
interesting from an evolutionary point
of view on earlier formations of the
brain in what we call lower creatures
and so they're both at a high level
they're not you One's at a low level and
the others at at a much higher level.
They are both at a high level. Although
um just to complicate things a little,
they're not entirely parallel in terms
of their ability and importance to us.
Contrary to everything that you think
you knew about the differences between
the two hemispheres, the right
hemisphere is the one that sees more,
understands more, is literally more
intelligent, and generally is the one
that should be calling the shots, not
the left hemisphere. So all the things
that people think they know about it
should be jettisoned because they're
they're they're wrong. And it was known
in the 80s and 90s already that they
were wrong. And so when I started
studying all this at around that time,
my colleagues who had my well-being at
heart said, "Don't go there. Don't study
because it's all known to be pop
psychology and wrong." And and what was
known or what was at any rate the
version that went into pop psychology,
you know, the left hemisphere is a
little bit boring, but it's down to
earth and it's rational and it's
linguistic and the right hemisphere is
given to painting pictures and being a
bit emotional. Um this is wrong. I mean
it's it's uh completely wrong. Um both
hemispheres are involved in everything
but they just approach the world in a
completely different way and that makes
all the difference. They attend
differently and how you attend to the
world changes what you find there. Mhm.
Well, you do tell a story, an historical
story almost like a I won't say
teological story because it doesn't
necessarily have a
&gt;&gt; you know it's it's not purposeful but
you do tell a story about
&gt;&gt; well yes
&gt;&gt; yeah I mean you tell a story about how
we have shifted over time but it's not
so much a story of progress as much as
it is a story of getting out of balance
and and you never use this term right
sofuna right or or balance or
proportion. But it seems like the
fundamental thrust of the book is that
you know we're moving from we moved from
a place of balance to a place of
imbalance.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And this has not happened just
once. It's happened three times in the
history of the west. And the second half
of that book, the master and his
emistry. The first half is the
neuroscience and the philosophical
implications of it. But the second half
of the book is the history of the west
from before the time of Socrates and
Plato and and Aristotle and coming
forward to postmodernism. And what I can
trace there is three times a
civilization has experienced a sudden
massive
burst of creativity, a great e
fluoresence of knowing and understanding
that has produced a rich civilization
involving yes maths and science but also
drama and poetry and music, law making,
mapping the heavens, you name it, it's
all there. and then over a period of
several hundred years drifting into a
decline and then the same thing happens
with the Roman civilization
over about the same time period and the
same thing is happening to us now since
say the 15th 16th century 15th century
in in Western Europe. So, and what what
happens in each case to put it in in
very simple terms is that the balanced
drawing on what both hemispheres can
offer which gives the richness at the
start invariably seems to deteriorate
into domination by the left hemisphere
which knows much less, sees much less,
understands much less and and therefore
the civilization simply becomes crude
and collapses. I believe that is what we
face now unless we're cognizant enough
of what is happening to steer away from
disaster.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Now, we as economists, right, we
like to think in terms of of trade-offs,
you know, we like to think in terms of
whether we're on the frontier or below
the frontier, right? So, I'm going to
want to talk about tradeoffs and but
before we go there, I mean, why is it
that we have a hemispheric organization
of the brain in the first place? I mean,
I think this has implications not only
for the design of a
&gt;&gt; of an organism, but also for the design
of an organization, right? Why might it
make sense to sort of have a division of
labor? And how important is it that we
kind of keep that those two
systems apart rather than kind of merge
them into a single entity?
&gt;&gt; Yes, exactly right. Well, the title the
master is emistry is drawn from this
fable about a wise spiritual master who
looks after a community and understands
what it needs but realizes that he can't
deal with everything and not only that
but mustn't get involved in certain
kinds of things if he's going to keep
that broad overview of what is
necessary. So he appoints a high
functioning bureaucrat basically to go
about and do his bidding and that
bureaucrat starts off fine but soon
begins to think I know all this stuff.
What does he know? I'm the real master
here. And because he doesn't know what
it is he doesn't know things fall apart
and the whole society falls into ruin
with the loss of both the master and the
emissary. So what is this about? It's
about the need for two entirely
different forms of attention to the
world. One is scrutinizing for details
that we need to get absolutely precise.
And this comes from obviously long
before business and and economics, but
comes from an animal or a bird's need to
very quickly target something that it
needs to eat. So if you imagine birds
trying to target a seed on the
background of grit or pebbles, it's got
to it's got to focus very carefully on
something and go and get it very very
quickly. So its value it has only one
value which is grabbing and getting and
and therefore having more having more
power having more utility.
&gt;&gt; Is that also why red seems to be a left
hemispheric's favorite color? How
interesting. Yes,
&gt;&gt; because you know you're going after
berries and and and things like that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that is a very very nice thought.
I do say in the book that yes, the the
right hemisphere prefers blue and green
and the the left hemisphere red. I think
it's partly because it has a largely
aggressive
stance towards the world. It's what can
I get? I mean, if you move from a bird
and a seed to an eagle and a rabbit, you
know what it is trying to do is catch
something and ingest it, destroy it for
its own purposes. So, I think that might
be be part of it. But, of course, if
that's the only attention a creature
pays, it won't last very long because it
won't see the predator that is looking
for it to make it its lunch while it's
getting its own. And he it will also
fail to look out for its mate and its
offspring which are obviously very
important for survival. So each creature
needs every living creature needs to be
able to do this
&gt;&gt; two things at the same time to pay a
kind of acquisitive attention to a
detail and a broad open sustained
vigilant attention to the whole picture
&gt;&gt; and I think coming back to your and
that's why there are two two loi in the
brain that can sustain consciousness and
attention to the world but in different
ways and all creatures that have brains
have this apparently wasteful u uh
structure. I mean after all it occurred
to me early on you know why have a
divided brain? Surely since the brain is
nothing but connections between neurons
if you had more connections you got more
power. So but there is a good reason for
this. It is important for survival.
&gt;&gt; Well this has to
&gt;&gt; coming back to sorry just to just to
finish to coming back to your your
question about organizations.
I think you're right that there need to
be people who are basically bureaucrats
but there need to be people who see the
big picture and these cannot be the same
people and the really important thing is
that the bureaucrats must serve the
overall picture of the organization and
there is a tendency I've seen this in
the two types of organization I've had a
lot to do with in my life universities
and hospitals
where bureaucracy has over my lifetime
um neoplastically
expanded and and taken away resources
from the host organization that it's
supposed to be serving and has begun to
tell the doctors, tell the professors
what it is they can do and should do. Uh
whereas the boot as it were should be on
the other foot. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; There are so many dichotoies which line
up with the dichotomy that you're
articulating and one of them that we use
all the time in business is this
dichotomy between explore and exploit
and and it seems like the right
hemisphere is the
&gt;&gt; explore half and the left hemisphere is
the exploit half. And we we talk all the
time in business about how organizations
ultimately drift towards exploitation
and that ultimately leads to their their
demise, right? Because they can't learn
new things about the world.
&gt;&gt; Very definitely. And two things spring
to mind. One is to do with um a nice
neurological vignette and and the other
is to do with what I've seen happening
in certainly in this country since the
80s. But to go to the the neurological
vignette, when the left hemisphere is uh
no longer subject to inhibition,
then the right hand that is controlled
by the left hemisphere starts to grab
things um pointlessly. So it may be
reading a book, it tries to grab a
picture that's in the book. It's going
down the corridor in order to go
somewhere and it starts to grab handles.
It's it's it's looking for things to
grasp onto
&gt;&gt; to apprehend from ad prehreendry in
Latin to grasp onto and that is a very
limited way of looking at the world. But
when the right hemisphere is not subject
to inhibition, the left hand which is
doing the bidding of the right
hemisphere is tentatively exploring.
It's going what's in this? It's
unfolding things and looking. So it is
it's more literal than than you could
have known. But that is that is exactly
right. And the thing that I I I've
noticed is that many very successful
organizations
were swallowed up into international
multi- I don't know what the word is
conglomerates.
And I'm sorry, this is this is not meant
to be a a rebuke to the American spirit,
but they were taken over by large
American corporations. And having been
very successful, which is why they were
grabbed, as it were, by these
corporations, they they ceased to be
successful and went bust largely because
the we call the men in suits said the
only thing that matters is the bottom
line. Well, nothing could be more
foolish. Everything matters if you're
going to have a bottom line that works
in your favor. And the the story I like
is that of Japan Airlines. You may know
this that Japan Airlines went bust and
they decided they'd have to think again
and brought in a man who was a Zen monk
in his 70s who had absolutely no
experience in business at all. And
within a year it was solvent again. And
in 18 months it was floated on the stock
exchange. It's a massive success story.
And when he was asked what his secret
was, he said, "If you want eggs, look
after the hens,
&gt;&gt; which is a quite different way of
thinking about what it is you're doing."
M
&gt;&gt; well in in business we we talk about
whether or not we should have a division
of labor between these two functions and
have specialized individuals or whether
we should just encourage everyone
&gt;&gt; within the enterprise to
&gt;&gt; incorporate or internalize both of these
these capabilities and and we genally
kind of keep them separate right we
generally keep them separate why why do
we have to keep them separate why can't
we integrate them.
&gt;&gt; Well, first of all, one kind of thinking
is very limiting to the other.
&gt;&gt; So, if you want mediocrity, this is a
way to go. If you if you're actually
thinking in that left hemispheric way
about getting precise statistics and
details and metrics and so on, you won't
be able to free your imagination enough
to listen. See, imagination is
misunderstood. It's not about
brainstorming and writing down every
silly thing that comes into your head.
Imagination is about seeing something
below the level that is immediately
accessible to the conscious mind and
listening to that and
responding to it and pursuing it and
allowing something to grow. Now that
requires patience, time and a continuing
maintenance of open attention. Once it
gets closed down,
you've lost it. So that's one reason
that it won't work. And the other is
that if you've got too many people
involved in the bureaucratic side,
that's not going to work well either.
&gt;&gt; It it these things need to there are
specializations and take the hint from
nature, they are so different that they
do need to be kept distinct if you're
going to survive.
&gt;&gt; But I mean, someone has to be in the
driver's seat, right? And so
&gt;&gt; I think many philosophers talk about
sort of practical wisdom, the ability to
orchestrate these different approaches.
And so
&gt;&gt; sure,
&gt;&gt; where is the locus of
&gt;&gt; orchestration, right? Do we have or I
mean I think you use the language of the
master and the emissary. Why isn't there
sort of a
&gt;&gt; a third part of the brain? You know, we
normally think in in the JDM literature,
we think of the the prefrontal cortex as
the sort of CEO
&gt;&gt; guiding the whole operation,
&gt;&gt; but you you you set up a sort of a a
different chain of command or a
different org chart in the brain.
&gt;&gt; Yes. I mean, I think maybe I'd pick a
hole in the idea of the the simple
linearity, the single hierarchy there.
The prefrontal cortex is in constant
dialogue with other parts of the brain
with the posterior parts of the brain
with the parietal and occipital loes of
course with the temporal loes and so
forth. Um and also it has ways of must
have ways of paying attention to what is
going on in the body at the same time.
So
I would say that the problem with this
image is that it is already mechanistic
and if you like mechanisms of the way
the left hemisphere tends to think in
linear chains of command whereas the
right hemisphere sees organism and
organism is quite different. the
organisms not just complicated but
complex systems and I know you'll know
what I'm the distinction I'm making
there that and these complex systems are
full of recursive loops re-entrant uh
elements that dialogue with one another
and are fundamentally unpredictable. So
of course the left hemisphere being the
locus of control or it thinks the one
that wants to control things to grab
them to get them to have them to get
power. It's his only values.
Interestingly in the world of business
the word value which to me means
goodness, beauty and truth means money.
I mean that's that's that's how debased
the thinking is. So the this way of
thinking is in itself wrong
and the right hemisphere is capable of
many things that you wouldn't think from
the sort of pop psychology version. For
example, interestingly the inhibition of
inappropriate emotion comes from the
right hemisphere, not from the left.
It's right hemisphere is absolutely not
the let it all hang out hemisphere. It's
the highly circumspect and intelligent
hemisphere. The left hemisphere is the
one that thinks it knows everything and
therefore is always mistaken.
&gt;&gt; You know, the
Dunning Krueger effect, the so-called
Dunning Krueger effect, which is really
just a piece of wisdom that anyone who's
lived for a while will understand
immediately that people who know very
little think they know everything, and
people who know a lot realize how little
they know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's interesting that in the JDM
literature, most of the irrationalities
or biases that they highlight, they come
from system one, right? And it's
actually the the rational part
of the brain that has the capacity to
recognize them and and override them.
And and yet I think you're making the
point that the the left side of the
brain which we might think of as quote
more rational tends to be the source of
a lot of these these biases including
overconfidence and so forth.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Let let us go to the neuroscience.
The first thing to say is that both
hemispheres are quite capable of reason.
They both contribute to reason and if
only one is contributing it won't be
very reasonable. And this is partly
because the left hemisphere is, and I'm
not just using a form of words here,
prone to delusion. I'm using I'm a
psychiatrist. I know what delusions are.
&gt;&gt; And in the matter with things, I look at
about 25 of the most extraordinary
delusional neurosychiatric syndromes.
&gt;&gt; Confab, right?
&gt;&gt; Well, there's confabulation, but there's
many, many kinds of delusional
syndromes. If you have time, that
chapter, I think it's probably chapter
three or four, the one on judgment is I
it's an amazing read for anyone who
doesn't actually know what you can see
in hospitals where
&gt;&gt; I think you said schizophrenics are
&gt;&gt; schizophrenics.
Let me just finish what I was saying and
then come to the schizophrenics. Um the
long and short is that when you look at
these syndromes in all but one case they
either always or much more commonly
consequent a deficiency a deficit in the
right hemisphere not the left. So the
left hemisphere on its own is dangerous.
It thinks it knows it all. And another
little vignette, there's a quite
well-known um popular neuroscientist
called Antonio Damascio and he gives a a
vignette of a patient called Elliot who
had problems in the right frontal lobe
and who is incapable of doing or
deciding anything and when he does makes
some very silly decisions for an
intelligent man. So we have to get rid
of this idea that somehow the left
hemisphere is a is is a good thing to be
listening to. is a useful tool. And here
I would refer to Einstein who said the
rational mind is a faithful servant. The
intuitive mind is a precious gift. We
live in a world that has that honors the
servant but has forgotten the gift. And
he didn't know he was talking about this
relation between the hemispheres but in
fact he is. But if you come to
schizophrenics,
schizophrenics are not people who are
irrational.
As GK Chesteran said, the madman is not
someone who's lost his reason. It's
someone who's lost everything but his
reason. And that case of Elliot would
would bear that out. But in the case of
say a person with schizophrenia, which
mimics a right hemisphere deficit
&gt;&gt; state of affairs in which the left
hemisphere is trying to make up for what
the right hemisphere should be doing,
but doesn't really understand what it's
doing. You know, typical situation for
somebody in with schizophrenia is they
hear a voice and it's very clear and
they look around there's nobody in the
room. How can that be? Well, I
definitely heard a voice. So, it's
coming into the room. But the only place
it could come into the room, the only
point of ingress into the room is that
plug socket over there. So, what does
that mean? It means the neighbors have
got into the electrical system that we
share and are sending me messages. It's
perfectly rational. It's completely
bonkers.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And you know the system, Can I just say
about the system one and two because you
keep mentioning and I think you're
probably referring there to Dan
Carnean's idea of system one and is sort
of the one that makes a quick decision
and system two is the one that's
deliberative and so on. Well,
interesting. People might assume that
the left hemisphere is is the system
too, but it isn't. right hemisphere is a
system too. The left hemisphere is quick
and dirty and as a result very often
makes mistakes. And if you think of this
in terms of evolution, it doesn't matter
too much if you mistake something that
you thought you were going to be able to
eat for something and you spit it out.
But you just need to go and get it
because if you don't go and get it right
now, somebody else will get it. So it's
it's an enormously crass way of
operating
and system. I've corresponded with
Cardman about this and what it's worth.
He agrees with me that we're slicing the
brain in two quite different ways and
he's not really talking about left and
right. He's talking about top and bottom
which makes sense.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, you also talk about will,
right? And it seems like your will is
divided. these different hemispheres,
they both have kind of a will of their
own, right? They're almost in a frenmy
relationship. And if the emissary has
its way, it it's going to topple the
master and sort of, you know, run off
and take charge of the of the operation.
&gt;&gt; Yes. I mean what one has to make clear
is that for most people most of the time
the brain is working as a whole which
doesn't mean that we can't will
incompatible things. Most of us do at
some points if not often. We want things
that will bring peace and and and so on
and we want things that will bring
reward or whatever and they're not the
same. And and so to have different aims
is is normal. But that the two
hemispheres have different wills is what
is revealed in cases where the so-called
spirit brain operation has been carried
out which in which the two hemispheres
are surgically separated and in the
aftermath it usually resolves after a
few months but in the aftermath of the
operation people find themselves
conflicted. So their right hand goes and
does one thing and the left hand takes
it away and does something else
completely different.
So
&gt;&gt; but I don't think we should draw draw
too much from that because it is a very
unusual state of affairs but it
nonetheless reveals something that which
is that they do have are capable of
different desires and different ways of
looking at the world. It's the different
ways of looking at the world that is
really the important thing here that
attention changes the nature of what it
is you're looking at when you look at
the world in really profound ways.
Well, and I think these differences
correlate to some degree with the
ancient Greek distinction between logos
and and mythos, right? Both of which
were seen as ways of understanding the
world.
&gt;&gt; One way.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes, that's right. I mean,
certainly the left hemisphere is not
good at understanding mythos. In ancient
Greek, mythos was what was required to
understand the great truths. Logos was
fine for logic chopping for, you know,
an argument in court. Well, I think he
owes me 30 whatever and but no, he says
20 and let's use logos. But to actually
understand what life is about and what
we're doing here and you know the
meanings that come to us through
experience, you require myths and
stories and the the right hemisphere is
able to understand that. It's
interesting that words that once were
neutral or actually pointed to the
greater truths have come in modern world
to mean lies. And that just tells you a
lot about the way we now think.
&gt;&gt; So myth used to be the great truths. Now
myth means something that isn't true.
Words like fable used to mean something
worthy to be spoken. A legend was
something worthy to be read. But these
are now thought of as mean as being
lies.
Well, metaphor of course is the the
domain of muos, right? And it's
impossible to understand the world
without metaphor, but scientific
discourse
&gt;&gt; is skeptical of metaphor or you know
metaphor might be an inspiration or it
may be a way of of communicating the
underlying message. But but logos
dominates in the scientific domain and
and it's really been logos that has been
&gt;&gt; what's driven progress, right? What's
driven scientific progress and economic
and material progress and certainly it's
a story of of
&gt;&gt; scientific discovery which is the world
of of logos, right? Which is the been
the story of the last 2,000 years.
&gt;&gt; That That's right. But first of all, may
I um disagree with you about metaphor?
Science is based on nothing but
metaphors.
&gt;&gt; It is entirely metaphorical
and that's not a mistake or a problem
because it can't avoid I mean the the
alternative would be to say nothing but
it has to say it's like this and
metaphor is saying this thing can be
understood by likening it to something
else. And the problem is that scientists
don't realize that they're using
metaphors and that their metaphors both
dictate what it is they can see and how
they see what it is that they do see. So
models which science can't work without
are simply elaborated metaphors. And the
the important thing here is that the
right hemisphere understands metaphor.
It understands everything that is
necessarily implicit. Whereas the left
hemisphere tends to take poetry, jokes,
puns, sarcasm, all the things where the
meaning is not the explicit but it takes
it literally.
It's it's quite extraordinary to see in
action when you see somebody who can't
actually use their right hemisphere to
understand. And it is the from the right
hemisphere that we get understanding,
not from the left. Understanding means
being able to see a whole lot of things,
including those things that haven't been
said.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Well, of course, this book was published
before the latest generation of
&gt;&gt; artificial intelligence tools. But it
seems like
&gt;&gt; yes the master is but it does seem like
the
&gt;&gt; our understanding of intelligence in the
world of of AI
&gt;&gt; is is limited to
&gt;&gt; the
explicit knowledge right I mean it's not
built on on the tacet knowledge it's
built on explicit knowledge it's built
on a view of language and and knowledge
which is
&gt;&gt; which is very much rooted in in the
logos
&gt;&gt; well absolutely it does a clever job of
surveying things that we have said and
done from the outside and trying to put
them together in a way without
contradictions if it can. That's really
all it does. But of course, almost
nothing is understood by being viewed
just from the outside and measured in
that way that science now says is the
only way to validate something. But all
the things that actually really matter
to us, love, friendship, sex, uh art,
music, poetry, religious faith, stories,
legends, rituals, these things that
actually enrich and help us to
understand what it is we're doing here
are all implicit in nature. And when
they they can they can be uh you can
attempt to put them explicitly, but when
you do, you you lose meaning. I learned
this when I was teaching literature. You
know that
what does something mean? Well, when you
take the meaning socalled out of the
context, it doesn't mean what it meant
before. It has almost no meaning. It
suddenly becomes just a platitude which
you could have got anywhere. So why
bother with the poem but because the
poem actually is a completely new
experience. It is unique. It is
embodied. It is not just a piece of
abstract something. And it is the
problem with AI and the problem with the
thinking like that that is beginning to
invade the human realm is that we miss
all the important things that give
meaning to life.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean this also lines up with the
I think in German we have vissen and and
kenan is
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; vissen more
left hemisphere and kenan more right
hemisphere.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And and similarly of course in
French savo and cornet and and in all
the romance languages and tutonic
languages for some reason in English we
only have the one word no. And I
sometimes think that a lot of the mess
we've got into in the anglophone world
is because we don't adequately
distinguish between these two kinds of
knowing. knowing the facts and knowing
from experience. You know, I know Savo
that Paris is the capital of France, but
I know connect Paris because I lived
there for a couple of years. So, it's
those things are so different and the
computer can have one but not the other.
&gt;&gt; And I think there's other distinction
that you point to which is the
distinction between
right having a body and and being a
body, right? where one is more abstract
and and one is more lived.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Exactly. And it's a distinction
between living in the body as though one
was in a car or a machine and living the
body. And and this has profound
consequences in in the way in which we
experience life
&gt;&gt; and in again other languages there may
be distinct words. So for example in
German there's both leip and ker and
leip means the living body and ker means
what you find on the dissecting slab. So
there are different kinds of body.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean in English we do have the
word corpse but we tend to refer often
to a dead person as you know their body.
So we also don't really
&gt;&gt; make that distinction as much in
English.
&gt;&gt; Correct. And also kera can be used of a
living body when viewed in as a sort of
mechanism.
&gt;&gt; So a lot depends a lot lot lot depends
on whether your vision of the world is
fundamentally mechanistic linear
sequential and pushing things from
behind forwards or whether it is
organic. In other words, seeing that
there are influences that lure something
in a certain direction, that modify
something else and so on. A much much
subtler living vision of what we're
doing here. Um, and it's a sort of
difference also between
superficial life skating around on the
smooth surface of the world. something
like the top of my beautiful Apple
laptop that I'm speaking you to on the
the this sort of smooth surface that
completely repels life and the living
business that I establish when I walk
out of my door into a landscape of
mountains and valleys and rivers and the
sea. Uh this is a completely different
kind of ground that I inhabit
&gt;&gt; and I increasingly people inhabit
something that is more like that
slippery surface. Are they really
embedded where they are or are they off
in their heads almost entirely?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Now should we be thinking in terms of
using more or less right these different
parts of our brain? I know when people
go around and say oh you're only using
10% of your brain people
point out that that's nonsense, right?
That makes no sense.
&gt;&gt; But so then how should we be thinking
about the the distribution of our
attention? I mean, if we are
&gt;&gt; using more focused attention, are we
necessarily using
less of our alert and vigilant
attention? Is that sort of idling? Is it
not being used? Is it sitting there and
it's available and and we're not using
it? Do we necessarily have to use less
of one if we're going to use more of the
other?
&gt;&gt; No. I I I I fear that some people think
that when I say that we've moved into
world highly
seriously severely dominated by the left
hemisphere, it means that somehow we've
evolved that our right hemisphere is not
working. It's there. You only have to
open it up and use it if you like. So
the analogy I have is like you know if
you slightly oldfashioned technology but
you you have a radio set and to begin
with you enjoy listening to a couple of
different channels that are your
favorite after a while you start
listening to only one but the other
channels still there you just need to
tune in. So
&gt;&gt; it's like that and everything in our
culture
steers it in the direction of grasping
attention. attention that is locked onto
the single task of getting grabbing and
making us powerful. And one of the
reasons that civilizations collapse is
that this kind of attention is required
as they become unwieldy large. They need
to be able to dominate another culture.
And in order to do that, they have to
sort of roll out very simplistic
procedures that are not appropriate for
doing what they are aiming to do. To
begin with, they're able to see this,
but after a while, they they cease to be
able to to see it. And so, you get a
kind of overdrive of the left
hemisphere. And all the faculties of the
left hemisphere can can bring to to bear
on the world are there. They just need
to be used.
&gt;&gt; I suppose you're going to ask me, well,
how do how do we do that? But
&gt;&gt; well, I was going to ask you, I mean, is
there some atrophying that takes place,
right? If so, if one doesn't use this
part of the brain, does it then
&gt;&gt; become unreoverable to some degree? I
mean, it seems, you know, think of
something like religion. It seems like a
one-way ratchet where people maybe when
they're young, religion is
much easier to acquire and it's and yet
if it's never instilled or if it's
disappears at some point in your life,
it you know it very rarely comes back.
&gt;&gt; Yes, I think that that is right. So
it is certainly true that there is a
constant dialogue if you like to put it
that way between the brain and the world
between our minds and the world. The
world influences the mind and the brain
and the mind and the brain having been
influenced in turn influences the world
around us. So we can get locked into a
vicious cycle in which we see things in
a certain limited way and we think
that's all that there is. And so that
feeds back to that is the only right way
to think. It is a terrible state of
affairs. But I fear that in the west
that is part of what has happened to us.
But it is never impossible to break out
of this. And and if one begins to think
critically about one's own assumptions
that is a very good starting point. What
is it that the way I'm thinking about
the world stops me from seeing?
And there are exercises of course that
one can do in which one deliberately
tries to shift a way of looking at shift
a mindset. But there are also ways of
helping us improve our ability to
sustain attention. You know, and it's a
very sad fact, very wellestablished fact
that now particularly young people seem
to very much lack the ability to sustain
attention for a period of time that's
required for anything that's deep. So
that instead they prefer immediate
stimulus but that will never do anything
other than acquaint them with the
surface with the superficial experience.
For it to go deep there has to be
sustained attention. So there are of
course practices that train one to be
able to to do that types of meditation.
I think actually prayer is also a way of
attending opening oneself one's mind to
be able to hear what is there for the
hearing but we won't hear it if we drown
it out with what they call monkey mind
in the east our own clever chatter oh I
know how that works and I know it's one
of those and all that kind of stop it
open yourself to the possibility there
may be something quite new in this
experience because the world and the
cosmos are very creative highly
creative. The one thing one can
definitely say about them is that
they're profoundly creative. They start
it all started from this very single
simple thing and has expanded into this
extraordinarily complex and beautiful
system. And this
this creativity is there around us and
in us if we're not stifying it all the
time.
&gt;&gt; So I mean it seems like there there are
a couple positive feedback loops here.
one having to do with the attention that
you pay to the world. It changes the
nature of the world for you and that
leads to your doubling down on that type
of attention. Exactly. But it also seems
like there's a there's a lateral
&gt;&gt; feedback loop, right, where we are
imitating one another within our our
culture. Um, and
&gt;&gt; whether it's through educational
processes or just simply being being
immersed in different communities, we we
learn how to pay attention to the world
and we learn what the world is. And so
that that means that does that mean that
we are
balance is very difficult to maintain
that we're going to see individuals and
cultures become unbalanced one way or
the other, right? inevitably.
&gt;&gt; Well, I don't know about inevitably, but
it certainly is the way things seem to
be going. And I think part of that
definitely has to do with the internet.
And
time spent in a system that feeds to you
what it is you already think and what
you already believe. Whereas before that
in the ordinary business of living in a
small town you would meet different
people from different walks of life,
different ages with different opinions
and so on. And interestingly in my
experience it would never have occurred
to me to sever a friendship because my
friend had a completely different view
on politics, religion or anything else.
I took it for granted that decent people
might differ very widely on many
subjects. But nowadays there's this
extraordinary thing that's crept in that
you you you cut off if somebody says
that they like or respect or have a view
of a certain kind that you don't. You
would rather discredit all the previous
experience you had of them than say oh
okay maybe I should think more flexibly.
What we seem to be frightened of is
thinking in any way flexibly or
differently. And this is, I'm afraid, a
very classic left hemisphere, right
hemisphere difference. The left
hemisphere likes what it is, what is
familiar. It only sees eventually all
that is familiar. Whereas the right
hemisphere is what Ramachand well-known
VS Ramachand well-known neuroscientist
says it's the devil's advocate. It's the
one that's saying yes, but hang on, it
might be something else. And it's only
through that that we learn.
&gt;&gt; And and it's that right hemisphere that
is the seat of empathy and and love. And
there's only the ability to take
alternative perspectives. Right. So
perspectivism is rooted in the in the
right hemisphere.
&gt;&gt; Up to an extent that is right. But the
left hemisphere can also do that thing
that's called theory of mind. It's not a
very good term, but we're saddled with
it by now.
&gt;&gt; And and theory of mind means the ability
to see that another creature, another
person
&gt;&gt; may know things that you don't know or
may not know things that you do know.
And and it's used to be said that it
wasn't really till the age of four that
humans, infants, children learned that
that was the case. They assumed
everybody else knew the contents of
their mind that was shared and and so
on. But we now know that actually many
animals are capable of this and that
elements of it are available earlier.
But the point I want to make is that it
has a different slant because the two
hemispheres have different drives,
goals, lures, values, whatever you like
to call it. So in the left hemisphere
this ability to see that another person
may not know something you do it leads
to machavellian
manipulation
because it means oh so I can have it
over that person because I know they
don't know this and so there is a sort
of perspective taking but it's a
malignant one whereas in the right
hemisphere it is more geared to empathy
to understanding that other person and
therefore being able to accept or
forgive or or understand what it is that
they're saying or how they're behaving.
So the left hemisphere is always trying
to produce extremes. It's either this or
it's that. It's so crude. It's
unbelievable. Whereas my experience in
life is almost never either this or
that. It's almost always well there's
something in both of these and let's see
if we can get the best out of holding
them together.
Well, you were a psychiatrist and so you
studied people who had neurological
damage, neurological defects, right? So,
pathologies that were normally caused by
some some damage. So, can one get this
kind of pathology without any kind of
physiological damage? Can your
environment lead you to have a
particular pathology which would
effectively
create a virtual lesion in your brain?
And if that's true, does that mean that
we can have a a culture, right, which is
pathological, which is behaving as if it
has some kind of physiological damage to
everyone's brain who is part of that
culture.
Well, I I'd come back to something I
said earlier, which is that the brain is
in a constant dialogue with the world
around it. So, when the world changes,
that inevitably has an impact on the
brain. It can't not. So, huge changes
like the advent of the internet and
social media and so on must change our
brains and there's ample evidence it
does. But our brains also then in turn
change the environment. So it's not that
it's a distinction between the brain and
the environment, the two in a sort of
constant dialogue,
&gt;&gt; pathological environment. I guess
&gt;&gt; you can have a you can have absolutely
you can have a pathological environment
and we are living in one. No question.
In my view, it has almost none of the
qualities that a sane, wise, productive,
creative
environment that we would wish for
ourselves. It has very few of those
qualities or or characteristics that
would lead to those qualities. It
maximizes conflict. It it incubates
extreme points of view. It robs us of
embodied and embedded wisdom that comes
from a culture and from proximity to the
natural world. All these things that
used to be taken for granted are now
robbed of us. And it it is no surprise
that the response is massive existential
anxiety, depression, suicidal thinking,
sense of hopelessness, complete loss of
meaning. It's a complete tragedy because
it doesn't have to be like that. We need
to break out of the prison we have made
for ourselves.
&gt;&gt; Well, I think you're describing a world
where the right hemisphere of the
culture has been damaged, right? What
what would it look like for the opposite
to be true? What would it what would a
society has there ever been a culture
where it's the the left hemisphere that
has been damaged?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm sometimes asked about that.
And what would it be like in a culture
where the right hemisphere dominated?
And the answer is extremely balanced
because the right hemisphere knowing
more, seeing more appreciates the need
for the left hemisphere. And you know in
the story of the master and his
chemistry, the emissary was appointed by
the master to do a certain job that it
didn't want to be doing. And that is a
has a sort of literal basis in in
evolution that the left hemisphere was
delegated to do this very particular job
and it's the one thing that it does
exceptionally well. But it it it the
price it pays is that it doesn't
understand the context in which it's
doing it. So we do need both of these
attitudes or or dispositions rather
towards the world. Um and
what seems to happen at the beginning of
a civilization is that the right and
left work together but under the eges of
the right. So there is a philosophical
vision, an artistic vision, a possibly
spiritual vision as well. I think
certainly a spiritual vision of what we
can do and what we can be and in
response to that everything flourishes.
you have this extraordinary eruption of
of creativity, but it's this narrowing
down to we can have more. We can control
this. And as soon as you start on this
path, you're destroying your own
happiness. You're destroying everything
that could give you true riches in
exchange for
what?
You know, I I've I I've had a lot of
different people in my consulting room.
I've I've looked after one of the
poorest parts of of London with many
poor immigrant people. I've also had
heads of business and people who are
massively successful and and and rich
come and see me. And I can tell you that
the people who massively successful and
rich are not that it hasn't made them
happy,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I mean, maybe they're the only the ones
that come and see me. Maybe it's self-
selected.
&gt;&gt; Selection bias. No, no. I think there
are a lot of studies that seem to
indicate that we haven't seen a
&gt;&gt; an increase in in happiness that
corresponds to the increase in in wealth
and knowledge progress.
&gt;&gt; Exactly the opposite. We've seen a
catastrophic decrease in mental health
over the last certainly the last 20
years, but it's been going on since the
end of the the last World War. So, I
mean, it's it's just getting steeper.
And what's interesting is that it's
affecting women more than men. It's
always been the case that men have
committed suicide more than women,
something like three times as many. So,
for those who say that men have it easy,
I think
Some of some maybe not. But in any case,
now the rate of suicide is increasing in
in in women faster than it's increasing
in men.
&gt;&gt; Well, there we go. That's that's that's
a move towards equality. But you know,
but I think um you also you you look at
at Nietze. Nichze talked about the
Dionizian and the Epalonian. And this
kind of some way lines up with the
dichotomy that you're discussing. And he
he
&gt;&gt; he kind of mourns the the death of the
the Dionisian perspective.
&gt;&gt; And I think for most people who are
products of the enlightenment like
myself, we're very suspicious of the the
Dionisian, right? We
&gt;&gt; we think that the triumph of the
Appalonian is is a good thing. But you
highlight how in 20th century philosophy
there has been a greater awareness. I
mean you talk about Husel and and
Haidiger and Meru Ponti a greater
awareness of the the dangers of the
exclusively Appalonian approach. Um so
how can philosophy it seems philosophy
has always been it seems a
&gt;&gt; project of the of the left hemisphere
right? So, how can philosophy or
language itself be used to illustrate
the the problems with philosophy and
language?
&gt;&gt; Well, it certainly wasn't in in the time
of Heracitis,
uh, who is my all-time favorite
philosopher, as far as I'm concerned,
more wisdom in Heracitis than any other
one philosopher. But also, of course,
this is true of Eastern traditions.
Perhaps they're not philosophical.
Perhaps there's something peculiarly
western about the idea of a philosophy
that is uh
separate from a a wisdom tradition that
takes into account a much broader view.
It's automatically more right
hemispheric. But I I don't think it it
it it has to be like that. I you know
one of my favorite philosophers is is
the early 19th century German
philosopher Shelling
and and to a large extent I'm I'm a
great admirer of Hegel and of course
nature with his admiration of the
Dionian was was also a philosopher in
the middle of the 19th century. So the
roots of this go back quite some way of
people seeing that something more than
this somewhat barren entirely schematic
rationalistic way of thinking is
required and you know the thing I have
to emphasize is that I'm not against the
appalonian but it's one-sided and there
needs to be the appalonian and the
dionian and I'm not against whatever it
is the left hemisphere does. It's It's
definitely inferior to the right
hemisphere, but we need it and it has a
place. It's just that when it thinks it
knows everything and starts to tell us
tell us what it thinks it it sees and
knows, we should not be paying attention
to it. We should not be saying, "Oh,
well, in that case, we'll follow you."
Meanwhile, the right hemisphere, which
is far more capable of of seeing things
in a nuanced way, is is talking to us,
speaking to us, but we're not listening
to it because the loud tyrannical
shouting of the left hemisphere. I'm
thinking here of events in the world
scene that have been going on over the
last few days, but you I won't unpack
that. But there tends to be this
tyrannical vision. And one of the things
that people say to me very very
commonly, it may be the most common
thing that people say when they write to
me is that you reveal to me things that
at some level I was intuitively aware of
but had no way of validating or even
expressing in language.
&gt;&gt; And so if I've done nothing more than
that, I've done something. M and and I
think it's it's not just of an
individual input because I think the
point is that once you see it the
awareness itself is the first step on
the path to recovery to seeing some a
way to do something new. People want me
to give them instructions. The more
detailed the better. But that of course
is the left hemisphere speaking and and
of course I can point them in certain
directions. But what I'm saying is that
what I can see and what I can offer in
terms of advice about things to do will
be limited by me. Whereas if you're able
to see the disposition, the point of
view, the way of attending to the world
that I'm pointing towards, then other
things will occur to you. And I don't
want to
&gt;&gt; to get between you and those insights.
Well, you also there's a philosopher
named Sheller who I was unfamiliar with
and he had
&gt;&gt; Max Shay. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And and he had I think he was
making the the point that the way you
attend to the world is necessarily
normative, right? And there's a
relationship between attention and
value.
&gt;&gt; He was very much more interested in
value than Haidiger. They they knew one
another. And Haidiger actually spoke at
Shayla's funeral and called him the most
important philosopher of his age which
is something coming from Haidiger who
was not shy of expressing a high opinion
of himself I think but um no doubt
justified but in any case the point is
Shayla
saw something very important about value
and
he realized that we value things not as
the outcome of a calculation
It's not a calculus we make. Oh, well
that makes it good or that makes it
beautiful. But it speaks to us as beauty
as goodness. And that's that's not an
intuitively easy thing to grasp.
&gt;&gt; But he you speak German from
as I understand it. So you probably know
that the word perception in in in German
is name which literally means
truthtaking. and he invented a concept
called vout neon which means value
takingaking and and we don't have a word
in English well they didn't have one in
German till he invented it but it's
normally translated by analogy with
perception as valueception
but it's an idea that sounds offputting
but is incredibly important and I just
want to share this with your audience
because I think it might be of interest
to them I had not heard of a man called
Minank Sharma Sharma but he wrote to me
one day saying, "You might be interested
in a paper I've written. I work for
Anthropic and I'm very concerned about
value and I see that although the
organization makes the right noises
about value, in practice, this is not
where it's going." and two days later he
hit the front page of newspapers
certainly in in this country having
resigned from anthropic because of his
concern about the direction in which AI
was leading them. So and I think that
insight that he had that what AI is
absolutely not able to do is to see this
I can calculate anything you like but it
doesn't really understand what goodness
beauty and truth and to me those are
very important. I'm I'm hosting a
conference in in Oxford on the 2nd and
3rd of May that people can join online
if they want to on those values.
Interesting lineup of speakers but
anyway there it is. Well, a great way to
make everyone in the room uncomfortable
at a faculty meeting is to mention the
good or the beautiful. I think you could
still talk about the true, but if you if
you start talking about the the good or
the beautiful, people will change the
the subject,
&gt;&gt; right? And so I mean has I mean art has
been a domain where we have
&gt;&gt; been encountering the the beautiful. Um,
but it seems like even in the world of
art, we we can't really talk about the
beautiful anymore. I mean,
&gt;&gt; what what's the what are the
consequences of of that? Do we do we
need to re do we need to re
&gt;&gt; kind of redo the whole world of art and
return to its origins in a way? Well,
perhaps not returning to its origins
except in the sense of reconnecting with
the the value of of beauty, but um in
fact, the only reason the word true it
doesn't make people uncomfortable
faculty meeting is that they think they
know what it is.
&gt;&gt; But I think truth is quite complex and
not necessarily the very narrow sense of
truth that they think it is, metrics and
things like that. I think truth is a
relationship one has with reality in
which one does one's best to be faithful
to what it is one is experiencing there.
In any case, in my lifetime, each of
these values has been subject to
degradation. You know, even when I was
an undergraduate, there was well, is
there really any truth or is it just
what I think? Um, in which case actually
there should be no universities and we
should all go home and and pack it up.
Indeed, if there wasn't any truth, there
was no point in having this conversation
or anybody saying or doing anything. And
then we've had the decline of goodness
into virtue signaling and belonging to
the right camp and ticking the right
boxes. Uh or and even in university
faculties of philosophy being reduced to
utilitarianism which is a horrendous way
of evaluating good from the outside
without allowing for the fact that
actually what makes something good is
the intent in the mind of the person
who's doing the act. And the same thing
has happened to to beauty with full
connance of artists and actually artists
leading the vanguard and saying no no no
we don't we're not interested in beauty.
But what is fascinating is what they
really want their art to be called is
powerful and power is the only value
that the left hemisphere understands and
art over the 20th century became very
left hemispheric. If you've read the
master in his hemisphere, you'll know my
last chapter, modernism and and
postmodernism. And that is the perfect
expression of of what would happen if
people had damage to the right
hemisphere. And interesting since that
book was written that there has been
published research not from any group
associated with me showing precisely
that that when people have damaged the
right hemisphere oddly enough they start
to mimic in their painting and so on
movements
that otherwise
&gt;&gt; they love conceptual art.
&gt;&gt; They love conceptual art
&gt;&gt; and that has lost perspective and lost
embeddedness and become flat and all the
rest. So yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, look, last question. You have
spent most of your life at a university
and you know, universities are very
quickly shedding non- STEM fields.
Humanities departments are shutting down
and
&gt;&gt; and even within humanities departments,
you know, the way in which they engage
the humanities has has changed. Should
we be thinking if we want to restore a
more balanced way of engaging the world,
should we be thinking about
changing our universities, right? Or
should we be thinking about sub saying,
"Okay, fine. Universities are the domain
of the last hemisphere. Let's build up
other
&gt;&gt; institutions or domains that can count
the universities." What's the role of
the university here?
Well, the key is in the name that it it
is panoptic. It is deciding not to
narrow down into one special area, but
to cultivate people who are able to see
bread. Nowadays, that is not um not
respected. It's annoying to people who
are simply living in a specialist silo.
And I know this is called a siloed. So I
want to get back to the idea that a
properly educated person knows about a
number of fields across quite a spread
&gt;&gt; and in a way you could say that somebody
who knows only about their particular
field knows little about that because to
understand it you have to put it into
the context of many other things that
part of the field of human knowledge. So
I I think it's lamentable that they are
shedding non- stems subjects with a very
very big exception. There are many
subjects that are now apparently
dignified as university subjects that
should never be that they things that
used to be studied perhaps as a
technical college. They in areas such as
may I say it business studies actually.
I mean I'm not sure that's a university
subject. It should be something that you
go on to after you've got an education
but isn't in itself an education. It's a
technical skill and then there are also
a lot of what are called you know people
like me call grievance studies. So which
really is not the business of an
education to be furthering breadth of
mind not narrowing down to something
that is basically a a cult way of
looking at things. So we need urgently
to return to what used to be the
humanities. And again the key is in the
name. If we really want to understand
what we're doing here, what we are and
where we're going, we need to to allow
once more the humanities to flourish.
And the humanities are not an easy
option. They involve some quite tough
thinking in in history in ancient
languages in in in uh uh well languages
full stop uh philosophy and um theology
too. These things are all part of and
literature the study of literature of
world literature and so on are all part
of educating a person and drawing out
from them things that are latent within
them. So we lose them peril. And I I
definitely agree with you. Well, I'm I'm
not sure we were putting it forward, but
you were asking me the question and the
implied answer was we probably should be
thinking differently about our
universities. And yes, we want to purge
them of all those nonsense subjects, the
sort of
the silly subjects. And we should re
re-emphasize the the true humanities
that were the part of making a rounded
educated person. And that's not to say
that the sciences have no place or
mathematics. Of course they do. They
were always part of universities and
they jolly well should be. But science
is not just once again a a technical
matter. Um there are techniques which as
an early stage you learn. But science is
much more than technique. It is also
thinking about what all this means. And
so of course they are an important part
of a university. But they are part of
university. They should not be the
dominant thing in the university. There
needs to be an equip between that and
what are broadly known as the
humanities. I feel this very strongly
and I'm in less than a month I'm going
to Savannah, Georgia where I've become
the chancellor of a new university,
Rosson College. It's only 3 years old at
the moment, but watch this space. It's a
very important institution. It's a
powerhouse that is returning people to
the roots from which commonal wisdom
came and to try and rediscover that. Not
to go backwards in time because one
can't do that, but to see what we've
lost. And sometimes you only see what
you've lost when you look back and see
what people used to know. It's very
educational. And you know the
Renaissance, which was the last great
moment when everything moved forward,
was a renaissance.
It was a rebirth and they looked back at
what they had lost in comparison with
the great age of the Greeks and the
Romans and came forward with something
quite new and different. Consonant with
it of course but nonetheless hugely new
and creative and vital and we must
emulate that way of being.
Well, Ian, thank you so much for joining
me. I have to say that if I were to put
together a short list of recent books
that exemplify the notion of unsiloed, I
would have to put your work right at the
top of the list. And so, this book, The
Master and His Emissary, is fantastic,
and I look forward to a nice long
vacation where I can consume the matter
with things. Thanks so much.
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much indeed.
Unsiloed podcast is produced by
University FM. Elevating the stories of
your institution.