something I haven't told too many people.
I haven't told this to Breedlove. I haven't told it to anybody.
do you know who the Trilateral Commission, hired to be their personal banker,
uncle Jack hit the motherlode when he was a resident And in there
I found out the story of MKUltra, JFK's assassination.
And this story of Monsanto and Melanin and chromosome two were all in these boxes.
they were worried that I was going
to release some of the information that I'm telling you right now.
we're not in a good shape at the moment politically, economically, socially,
the UK is either going to go fascist or is going to go socialist.
I've grown to really hate state, you need enough
people pissed off and of the belief that it cannot be fixed
from inside the system shit hitting the fan is coming soon.
Joining me today are the podcast powerhouse Peter McCormick
and the decentralized neurosurgeon doctor Jack Cruz.
In this episode,
we discuss a centuries old Fabian plot to reclaim absolute control,
expose the UK's dire situation, and uncover Epstein's hidden obsession
with the human genome.
Plus, in a surprise twist, Peter reveals some of his ongoing struggles
and Doctor Cruz has just the prescription.
it's incredible that it's coming out in this podcast
because I never thought we would ever go here.
All right.
Good morning, gentlemen. Thank you so much for joining us today.
I was really happy to have this conversation
to facilitate you guys coming together, because we're all part of the same team.
We're all part of Team Bitcoin now.
Doctor Cruz, don't put words in your mouth,
but I suspect there are some areas where you may disagree with Peter.
And you might think that you might
be missing some information, but I think you also view him
as a very critical messaging node for the Bitcoin network.
And that was, you know,
good reason to kind of had these conversations,
maybe share some information back and forth and hash it out.
And so even just to kind of kick off the conversation, Peter,
with you, I want to start by even just getting your
broad view sense of the state of England.
What is the state of UK politics at the moment and even beforehand?
So I know this is something that both,
you're aware of and Doctor Cruz talks about.
Could you tell us a little bit about what a Fabian is, the Fabian Society
and how you might view
that actually linking into what's going on in the UK right now?
Yeah, well, thank you, for arranging this, and.
Nice to meet you, Jack.
I don't know you, but, I've been away.
You've been talking about me quite a bit, so I thought it would be,
I guess, good to to meet and talk with people.
Perhaps you may have disagreements with most to see
if you can learn from each other and.
And, perhaps try and, work through some things.
So, Nathan had mentioned you'd been critical of me, so I was like,
okay, well, let's go, let's let's meet
and let's see if we can get to know each other.
In, in terms of the UK, we're we're not in a good shape at the moment
politically, economically,
socially, like a lot of, successful Western
liberal democracies, we've been running, running a number of experiments,
which I think the Anti-Federalists would have said were,
were always going to happen or was going to fail, which is that
we've centralized power, we centralized money, we've centralized,
everything around, a state
which, puts power ahead of the electorate.
And as such, we have a collapsing economy here.
We have been running a massive, mass immigration,
a diversity and multiculturalism experiment,
which some people are celebrating, but it's clearly failed.
And so I would say probably a, there's probably a similarity
with some of the problems
we're having here that maybe happened in Canada,
that happened in America and across to Europe.
And so we're really at a like a crossroads nowadays.
And some people are saying the crossroads is you like these, someone like
the UK is either going to go fascist or is going to go socialist.
It's like they're the choices people are trying to give us.
And I, I think it's a bit more nuanced, nuanced than that.
But we are we're are at a stage where,
I think we as a nation having to decide kind of which direction we want to go in.
And there are almost equal forces pushing us in different directions.
And so it's a really interesting time in the UK.
I am terrified,
but I'm one of the fortunate ones who can just leave if it gets too difficult.
But most people can't just leave,
and unfortunately they are governed by people who are don't even understand
basic economics.
And I'm not saying I'm an expert, but even today, our Prime Minister,
Scott Community,
noted by saying that inflation has drops and and alluded to price is dropping.
He actually got corrected that,
a drop in inflation numbers still means prices is going up.
And so that's the kind of sideshow we're dealing with here.
Now, you asked about the Fabians.
I don't know too much about them, but I do know there is a Fabian Society.
I do know that, a number of, politicians, especially labor
politicians, the members of it, and they're essentially communists.
Doctor Cruz, could I get your response?
Somebody remind me, Jacqueline. No better.
I was going to say, could you outline a little bit more
about your view of the Fabians
in the UK and maybe trying to penetrate into the US as well?
Well I mean, I think most people have listened
to the podcast that I've done, especially on this topic.
You know where they were four and five hours at a time.
Probably the, the best one was with Breedlove when it comes to Bitcoin.
They're a group that started off
when Queen Victoria first came to,
power in 1837.
And most of them
came from a place called Saxe-Coburg and Gotha,
which used to be where the royal family was based.
Most people know that Queen Victoria,
died in 1900 and 1901.
She tried to unify the royal family throughout all of Europe
through her marriage.
And that led to a should show with hemophilia, especially in,
in Russia.
But what was the real problem, with the Fabians?
Their, their goal was to slowly
change things like 1% a year
in order to get back to what they had
in medieval times, which was, you know, total absolute control.
And, their timeline was based
on, you know, hundreds of years,
where the power base goes.
What was going on with Queen Victoria at the time is
they had just lost the loyal title of the United States.
And this was a real big sticking point for the people in England at that time.
So the Fabians actually assisted the Crown initially
to try to help many of the most prominent,
Saxe-Coburg and goth, how shall we say
accountants and financial people wound up coming to the United States.
And some of those people became, how shall we say,
the precursor, the farm team, you know, as we like to say,
for what would become
the Zionist movement in the United States.
Many of these people were members of the Zionist party
in, in Britain at the time.
But these people, basically,
in the States at that time tried to start and foment the Civil War.
They were also tied to Lincoln's assassination,
with the goal, obviously, to get a loyal tail back,
because in the beginning part of the century, when Jefferson
was in power and Adams and Madison,
the Brits were not very successful and and trying to get back the United States.
What they lost.
So this goes all the way through to about the 1900s.
And, once she dies,
the show begins kind of with the royal family in World War one.
And where we're left in World War
one with the Treaty of Versailles.
The key, what I would call Fabians.
That link the United States and Britain, which is probably probably the reason
all three of us are Bitcoiners is actually,
John Foster Dulles and and, his brother, Allen
Dulles, who become much more famous later in the decade,
were part of the team
that was working with the Keynesian, folks
to come up with the Treaty of Versailles.
And if you understand
what the Fabian modicum is, that we have to do something to get it back.
I think Peter knows his history better than I do.
The during World War one, a loyal title to
Russia was also lost at that time.
So they now they've lost two big things.
So what were the terms basically set by the Fabians in Britain
and the Fabians in the United States, that we have to do something
to create a treaty that was unsettling for everybody
and would lead to another engagement which would come down the road.
What that engagement
was, I think most of you know, is World War two
and the mechanics of World War Two, in
my view, are not well known by the Bitcoin community. Why?
Because you guys have recency bias.
When I say you guys now I'm separating us as bitcoiners.
You're the young guys on the old guys.
I have a mastery of the history.
You guys really kind of start at 1971.
And what you need to know is at that time,
in 1917, specifically, November
2nd, the Balfour Declaration is given to the king.
The king signs off on it, because as part of the Ottoman Empire,
Britain gets Palestine the goal of the Zionist Federation.
That was first started by Herzl, who?
Herzl was also a Fabian.
He was an atheist.
They came up with the brilliant plan
to use Judaism as a shield for the Fabian Act.
So if you look, for example, in, I believe it's
the London School of Economics, even to this very day,
on the wall and stained glass is a picture of the Fabian.
How shall we say facade, which is a wolf.
Wolf in sheep's clothing.
And nothing could be better,
analogized by this, by what they did in World War two.
So the Zionist Federation, controlled by the Rothschilds and Balfour, then
set up a plan with, the Catholic Church and also,
the bankers with Adolf Hitler.
Now, the Fabians in the United States.
Who are they?
These were the leaders of industry, the big one,
that most Americans would know would be probably the leader of the Ford family.
And also, the people that are running GM, J.P.
Morgan, Westinghouse, you know, the
real capital intensive people in the United States.
What was the Fabian plan in Britain?
They came up with something called the transfer agreement.
The transfer agreement was designed
to take all the European Jews and move them to Palestine. Why?
Because the Nathan Nathan Rothschild specifically wanted to,
fulfill the prophecy that was written in,
you know, in, in the, in the papers to get things over there.
And a lot of people don't know this, but the British Fabians actually tried to talk
to the leaders of the Ottoman Empire before the war to buy Palestine from them.
And they refused to do that because they were planning on doing this plan anyway.
So what happens with the Fabians, then?
This transfer agreement is made
with, with, Hitler.
What was the basis of this?
Is financial benefit to power the war machine of Germany.
Well, they had control of this.
And this is where the system kind of goes awry.
The story Peter is told in, in his, schoolbooks was the same.
What I was told was that Turing broke the Enigma code and helped everybody out.
Well, it was actually the other way around.
Turing was keeping everybody,
tied up to make sure that the transfer agreement was going.
And then there was also a physical liaison,
which was, a cousin of the king of Spain, who would run
back and forth to keep each side appraised of what was going on.
Because, as most people know, at least in England, the Rothschilds had a 500 year
history in England of basically selling both so both sides of the war.
The same thing was true with the Fabians that were in the United States.
They were doing the same thing.
Who was the family that facilitated that act in the United States?
That's the beginning of the Bush family cartel.
That was Prescott Bush, who is the the father of George H.
Who was the guy who was the president
during the Gulf War who died, I don't know, two, three, four years ago.
What did he do?
He basically hid money.
Jeffrey Epstein, for the captains
of industry in both Britain and in the United States.
It was much more easy to do in Britain because you didn't have
too many layers to go through.
But it was very difficult to get through in the United States.
And they used a lot of the Wall Street banks to do that.
The specific one was Brown Brothers Harriman.
That's where Prescott Bush worked.
So, you know, the rest of the history.
And then we come to, you know, 1971,
where I think the Bitcoin story, for most of the people listening to this,
they'll know the part that I sat down with Breedlove and got into
was probably more, I think, American history
than it was British Fabian history, because the, the, the,
the American Fabians got in
a big tussle with Meyer Lansky and General Groves and Meyer
Lansky and General Groves formed the industrial military complex,
first in the United States.
Then it was thrown out of the government by Eisenhower.
Then the Russians brought it back in through the Sputnik issue.
And when it comes back in,
Lansky was the accountant for murder, Inc.
and also for General Groves while he was on the outside.
The key metric there was the company that he formed outside,
which was technically an American Fabian company
called Sperry Rand that eventually becomes Unisys.
Those Unisys machines were used
for probably in terms of Bitcoin.
One key thing this was how Lansky had planned to make
a parallel system to the Cbdc that you heard about later.
But the real big issue was Lansky came upon some information
during World War Two, where he realized that the people
who were Zionists, that he supported because he was a Ukrainian, Russian Jew,
he found out that these guys
were really dastardly and pretty bad.
So what did he do?
They became the mortal enemy of the Zionists that controlled Israel.
So how did that all turn out in America?
It turns out Lansky had control of the Blacksburg, Virginia computer.
So what did that allow him to do?
He was one step ahead of the Rothschilds and Rockefellers.
Who were the Fabians technically in the US.
And the craziest thing
in his whole story that he did that I laid out to Breedlove was that
when Nixon got in power after after LBJ left,
after Vietnam, they had killed JFK.
He actually fled.
On his attorneys advice to Israel because, as you know, Israel has this rule
that if you're a Jew, you can get, you know, safe harbor and get a passport.
And what was he fleeing from?
Use, fleeing from a subpoena
that Nixon's cabinet wanted to go after this $3 million payment,
for money that was taken
out of the Cuban casinos, and they wanted him to pay taxes.
They really wanted to put him in jail because they knew he was a bad dude.
And they couldn't get him on anything else
because this guy was the best account in the world, better than even those
that were employed by the Rothschilds, the Rockefellers or the Federal Reserve.
And, the plan by Nixon was to put him in jail
the same way they put Capone in jail for tax evasion.
So what does Lansky do?
He dodges the subpoena, goes
to Israel at 69, tells the Zionist
that he's going to go back and tell,
the United States government the truth.
And this is what I frame as the Top Gun, idea.
Believe it or not, this idea was where the Top Gun thing showed up in the movie.
Lansky goes back in, tells the United States government that he is corrupted.
Their money.
The Rockefellers are stunned.
All the families in the Federal Reserve is stunned.
What immediately happens?
In 1970, the single most
illegal Fabian Act ever.
Only
it's called the Bank Secrecy Act, basically, where banks are allowed
to spy on Americans with impunity
breaks every rule that we have in the Constitution.
And then what happens?
This is where I think we all come back on board with history.
We know they close the gold window with the Nixon shock in August 71st.
And what is the two parallel systems
that the Rothschilds and Rockefellers now know?
Money is corrupted.
Lansky tells them,
if you want to make your money great, you gotta computerize and digitize it.
He tells them. It's going to be difficult.
He tells them how he came up with this plan.
I told you guys, that's why this random walk through history is important
is if you look at the munitions from World War II, you'll you'll find
something very interesting in it that shouldn't really be there.
It's cryptography.
And that was the key to understanding
truly why Turing played a role here.
Peter knows better than I do.
In 1951 52, Turing was loaded
into a Masada honeypot.
They caught him getting his dick sucked.
They brought him up on charges of, homosexuality.
What was the punishment?
Chemical castration.
Great female chemical castration.
And this caused him to kill himself.
How did he kill himself?
He ate a cyanide laced apple.
That's how Apple Computer got its name.
Lansky
knew about all of, this stuff.
Obviously.
And he decides to use cryptography
against the
his new enemy, which became the banking elite.
So he told them, you got to go back to BIS and set up the Cbdc system.
But he warned them it was going to be difficult to do. Why?
Because he had tried to do things like that himself
for murder Inc for a long period of time, and he had a big jump start
on the banking cartel. Why?
Because he had General Groves Unisys computers that they had from Sperry.
Long story short, Lansky.
Remarkably, this is a part of history
that I don't think Peter would probably know.
Lansky, gets a complete pardon
from the Nixon administration in 73, but this was the best part.
The best part of the story is they let him go
because they say he's going to die soon.
Just so you know, he didn't die until 1983.
Lansky goes out and immediately
talks to his lawyer in Miami, which is a guy named IRA melnyk.
If you know anything about Lansky's history, his goal was never to own assets.
It was to own people.
So in that sense, you could see the early Bitcoin ethos
right there that you need to kind of like dial your shit down.
And the part of the story that began
to make no sense, when I was a younger man
looking into Bitcoin was how David Shaham got picked.
He's a Jewish guy from Cal Berkeley who graduates in debt.
If you go and do a deep dive on the financials of his family,
which I paid investigators to do, they had nothing, not a pot to piss in.
So what was happening?
And this probably will stimulate some conversation
for Peter since he's in the UK.
Peter, I'll ask you a question.
open seven companies in the UK right now,
would it cost you any money to do so?
I mean, yes,
just open them.
But very small amounts. right.
Well Sean does this
and these companies were up and running making money right off the bat.
The interesting thing about these seven companies,
they all have tie backs to Lansky's part in.
When he walked up, they all had tie backs related to the bank Secrecy Act.
What what was the number one thing that he did?
He started to use cryptography to try to make money.
He also came up with cryptography uses for voting machines,
which eventually morphs
into the latest story that's happening in my country right now,
which is the Dominion voting machine nightmare to stack elections.
And this is a Fabian thing that continues to go on even to this very day.
But the interesting part of the story is
sham is quite successful for Lansky.
He comes up with DG cash.
I think every bitcoin he knows that story. What happens?
It goes bankrupt.
But before it goes bankrupt, what did it have as a customer?
Two big key things.
First key thing is Deutsche Bank was one of its customers,
which is the central bank of Germany.
That should kind of fit in with the whole story.
But here's the part that Americans don't really know.
And I don't think a lot of Bitcoin is no other bank.
That was a customer.
Customers called the Mark Twain Bank in the United States.
Coin kite has been in the game for years, creating hands down the best
and most secure hardware when it comes to securing your Bitcoin.
The cold card queue is an absolute powerhouse
and my daily driver, and it's ideal for newcomers and advanced users alike.
The Tap Signer gives you a low cost, user friendly option for those
just getting started or for convenience when traveling.
You can head to coinmarketcap.com and use code BTC sessions for discounts,
or simply scan the QR code on the screen to get started right away.
One company I like pointing people to.
When they ask about Bitcoin, mining is abundant mines.
They were founded by Bo and Christine Turner after losing over
half $1 million to broken promises in the mining industry,
and they built their hosting model
to remove the usual headaches with abundant mines.
You own your own machines and keep 100% of the Bitcoin you mine.
There's no revenue share. No hidden skims.
Pricing is simple.
One flat monthly fee covers power, parts, labor and repairs.
They also guarantee uptime.
The machine goes down their hash rate, redirect system routes hash power
from their fleet. So earnings don't just stop
and every machine is insured at full replacement value.
Everything is hosted in the US, powered by hydro and mining equipment.
May qualify for 100% year one bonus depreciation.
Learn more at Abundant mines.com/sessions.
But here's the part that Americans don't really know.
And I don't think a lot of Bitcoin is no other bank.
That was a customer.
Customers called the Mark Twain Bank in the United States.
And why?
Why was the Mark Twain Bank important in this story?
This was a bank that was not tied to the Federal Reserve System.
This was, how shall we say, Meyer Lansky's back door for his customers.
And eventually that link goes all the way back to Swiss bank accounts
that were controlled by, let's say, after Lansky dies,
people like IRA melnyk and other people that you probably would know today.
So, Nathan, to put a bow on this long story,
I would like
you to know something I haven't told too many people.
I haven't told this to Breedlove.
I haven't told it to anybody.
I did talk about it on my blog today,
so I think it's fair game for you guys.
I want you to know, in 1993, when Lansky dies,
do you know who the Trilateral Commission,
which is controlled by the Rockefellers, hired
to be their personal banker,
Jeffrey Epstein, at the age of 30 years old.
Okay, so, you can fact check all this.
You'll find out that at that time, he had no financial history.
In fact, he looks a lot like David Shandor when he came out of Cal Berkeley.
And what a magically starts to happen.
The Zionists that are in the United States now
begin using him as their accountant.
And what are the things that they tasked him to do?
The ones that you guys know, are are being laid out in the wash.
Now, I've known about these things for a really long time,
but the ones that I cared about that I talked to my tribe about,
the ones that you wouldn't know, which is probably tied to why
I have a problem of Peter is actually the Rockefeller medicine side.
And what they did there is
they were very interested in the Human Genome Project.
That was one of the big things that Epstein was tasked with,
besides trying to corrupt, Bitcoin after is made, this one predates
the corruption of Bitcoin by almost 10 or 15 years. Why?
Because you guys remember
the Human Genome Project is in the middle of the Clinton administration.
Okay, what is the key thing that we find?
That is a death bell
to the Rockefeller empire of centralized Madison,
which I think all of you know, is generalized and globalized everywhere
in every country.
They find out they have this belief that the difference between
primates and, and humans should be 100,000 genes. Why?
Because we think we're more complex.
One of the dastardly things that the Human Genome Project tells us
that we basically have the same number of genes.
There's only about a between 300 and 700
if you look at a gorilla versus a chimpanzee and us.
But basically we're the same as a, fruit fly.
And this stuns the people in Rockefeller medicine,
because remember the the perception there that you guys have been told
your whole life is that it has to be all about biochemistry,
meaning the inside world and the genome, not the outside.
And Peter should know this because one of his country mates
is actually tied to this shit show story.
Why he's just come out in the papers in the UK.
James Watson is now dead. Who found DNA?
Why was Epstein so interested in this?
Well, it turns out.
The Rockefeller crew
did the same thing that Lansky did,
which, they went and hired cryptographers
from the NSA to hack the human genome.
And guess what they found?
Who was their middleman that was paying all these people off?
Epstein.
So if you look at the five key scientists
that were involved in the Human Genome Project, the one guy I'm
going to mention here publicly, is a guy named Eric Lander.
What do you need to know about Eric Lander?
He did all the key work and found out the most interesting
part of the story was tied to chromosome number two.
Turns out
the person who spent
20% of the money to get this information.
Genetic information about chromosomes.
Do you know who that was?
My friends, Bill gates, when he was
So now we have 5 or 6 scientists
all focusing on this area,
and the goal is to try to find out
what it is special about chromosome number two.
How do you need to know how this story came together?
Nathan, you probably know this better than Peter
because you probably listen to the Breedlove podcast.
I don't think Peter did,
but the MK ultra story that I put in Danny Jones podcast and read those podcasts
was all about Meyer Lansky finding that SS surgeon on the Brooklyn docks
that program war some drugs, Mexican peyote, all the way up to polarized light.
Polarized light is then used to do one thing destroy melanin.
Where's the gene that melanin it comes from?
Chromosome number two. It's called Ponzi.
Okay, what's the second thing that happens in Rockefeller world that neither
one of you know, in the 1950s, they fund the Green Revolution,
the green revolution basically leads to Monsanto, leads to glyphosate.
You know what glyphosate fundamentally does?
It's a competitive inhibitor of melanin.
Chromosome number two.
Okay, what's the next thing that happens?
The United States Fabians move the MKUltra program
to Stanford research, then move it to the Brain Health Initiative. Why?
The brain health initiative is in Central and South America.
This is where the Bush family cartel meets. Why?
Because the UK banking system offshore is in the Caribbean,
and Venezuela is the hub for the bush family cartel.
Okay,
the goal is to take people in
the 1970s, 80s, 90s and 2000
who are brown in the United States.
Deport them.
So when you go back and look at the history of Clinton, Bush
and Obama, you'll notice that they deported more people
than than, then Trump did in his first term.
The reason why is these people were going down
to be program through this Rockefeller medicine program.
Then they were sent back.
Those are the people that are now invading PETA's world.
They're invading our world.
They're invading Nathan's world as well. Why?
Because these people are set up perfectly.
What happens in this whole time frame?
All the research that Jeffrey Epstein does on chromosome number
two finds this very interesting thing.
In 1994, Jeffrey Friedman discovers this hormone called leptin.
Leptin is tied to melanin by a pathway in the brain.
And he specifically called the leptin Milano pathway
actually turns out to be the key.
Do you know where Jeffrey Friedman discovers
this 1994 and Rockefeller University in New York City?
Surprised,
What happens next?
The Rockefeller Foundation spends more money than any big pharma
company ever did, hires Amgen to do a synthetic leptin trial.
Guess what happens?
They shelve it because you know what they find.
If you use light, water, and magnetism, you don't need drugs.
So magically, uncle Jack as a young man
gets asked to do a TedTalk.
And guess what the name of the talk was?
Fill up the Milano court and pathway.
Turns out when I was a resident, I found the whole bunch of boxes
from MKUltra that weren't wanted destroyed from Richard Helms.
Richard Helms was the CIA director
who was told to destroy all MKUltra files.
The only reason that you guys know about this program today
is because 20,000 documents weren't destroyed, because they were,
filed in the United States government is financials.
That's the only way you even found out about this.
But uncle Jack hit the motherlode when he was a resident who was told to go
study this orthopedic surgeon named Robert Becker's work on bone by my boss.
And in there I found out the story of MKUltra, JFK's assassination.
And this story of Monsanto and Melanin and chromosome
two were all in these boxes.
This harken in 1989 to 1991.
So what did I realize was going to happen
when I got on the stage in Nashville?
I knew that they wouldn't be happy
if I told the whole truth and nothing but the truth.
So what did I do?
I spoke specifically about leptin and didn't talk about melanin.
So what do you two need to know?
The next week I had seven, three,
letter agencies after me state medical board,
NASA scientists, and also DARPA scientists
in my office in Nashville, Tennessee.
In fact, it led to the point where I was even,
harassed when I was given a talk to 3700 people on a cruise ship
where they put a fake tweet out
to get me pulled off the boat.
Okay. And this was done by people tied
because they were worried that I was going
to release some of the information that I'm telling you right now.
So what was the goal of Rockefeller Medicine?
The current Fabians?
They looked at the left and data from Amgen,
and they realized that if we can get, the target of the distal part,
what's the other gene that's on chromosome two that I haven't told you about?
It's called the glucagon gene.
I don't expect you to know this, but you'll know this part.
Do you know?
Do you guys know what the glucagon gene controls?
GLP one and GLP two?
You know what those drugs are?
Ozempic, Bec yeah. it.
So I think both of you know the impact of that.
So what was at risk when I got on the stage?
Trillions of dollars of GLP one drugs got it
because I knew the connection to chromosome number two.
And it turns out there's a third, or I should say a fourth
issue that's located on chromosome two that Jeffrey Epstein found.
That goes to the story that you guys
have been hearing about called Adrina Chrome.
Okay.
And blood, this is a regulatory, piece
that tells us how to control,
fetal hemoglobin versus adult hemoglobin.
Why is that important?
Because this ties in to Becker's research.
Becker found when bone was broken, that how it worked?
Melanin and water in a cell
made a current that was one trillionth of one amp year.
And that type of electricity, which is almost unfathomable,
takes a red blood cell adult
and makes it differentI go back in time.
And you guys may not know this, but a red blood
cell in US has no nucleus, Yep.
in time, it gets a nucleus and fetal hemoglobin has a nucleus.
And what do you need to know about fetal hemoglobin.
That it absorbs oxygen much better than adult hemoglobin.
And it turns out this is the reason why Jeffrey
Epstein started to collect children.
Everybody thinks it was about pedophilia.
But I have news for you.
That's not the whole part of the story.
They found out that you could actually make melanin very easily
from Adrina Chrome.
And what was happening before the shit hit the fan.
The reason why, Epstein
started to talk to some of the people in New Mexico
was that's what the Zorro Ranch was about, was about the genetic engineering
of chromosome two to figure out how to optimize
melanin biology for himself and for the Rockefeller clan.
What did the Rockefeller people do?
They weaponized the GLP one gene into Ozempic.
So what does that do effectively?
It ruins the signal in your eye
that sends a 220 nanometer light to the leptin receptor,
so that effectively, like Sharon Osborne and her daughter,
are kind of like a blue straggler
star that are getting ready to explode.
And when you understand
that this fits the modus operandi of Blue Light,
which was the original MKUltra story, then it also fits the glyphosate story,
which is the competitor inhibitor of melanin.
Now you have the glucagon gene.
They've had all three.
The adrenal chrome is the other part of this.
So that's where the story is. So sorry.
This was a long discussion, but why do I have a problem with Peter
Peters of Bitcoin.
He had a big fucking podcast.
He went out and told everybody he took a fucking job, okay.
To travel, which is about the stupidest fucking thing anybody could do.
Okay. But here's the problem.
This facilitates the program
that Epstein and Rockefeller want to do. Why?
Because this is the key.
What does Mellon and do?
Here's the real punch them out.
Melanin not only absorbs all frequencies
of electromagnetic radiation, but here's the key for evolution.
It absorbs metals. It's a metal key later.
And it turns out to control specific metals on the mitochondrial matrix.
I'll tell you what those are.
Iron, copper, molybdenum, manganese, deuterium, zinc and calcium.
Those are the big ones.
That's what the Human Genome Project was teaching Rockefeller and Epstein.
So where did gates, Epstein and then fit in?
What's the best way to give a kid who doesn't have a lot of melanin,
extra atoms that to overwhelm the melanin system?
Vaccines. What's another way? Fake food
supplements, drugs.
So what did they do over this period of 50 years?
They overloaded the system with those things.
What are you designing to?
What is the other thing the glucagon gene does?
It controls Ekron and exocrine glands in your body.
Just so you guys know, this is where the monkey hair went away.
We have sweat glands fucking everywhere.
Monkeys don't have it.
That is also on chromosome two.
What's the second big thing? What's an extra gland?
Most of you know you have bile.
You have, you know, snot that comes out of goblet cells in your gut.
What are they all designed to do to get rid of these metals?
Okay.
What happens when you take a GLP one drug?
Let me explain it to you.
When Peter went out and bought that really nice car he talked about on
Bitcoin Twitter a long time ago and he bought one for his dad.
This would be like Peter going
to the guy in London and say, cut my dad's tailpipe off and solder it closed.
How fucking long is that engine in that car going to last?
That's Sharon Osborne, that's her daughter.
That's what the GLP one drugs do.
So when I tell you, these motherfuckers don't give two fucks about any of us,
trust me when I tell you I know their DNA.
I know their story. I know how they roll.
So, Nathan, maybe now you can understand when Peter goes out
and tells our tribe, hey, I did this.
I don't want that
as the broadcast that bitcoiners know why?
Because we all made the smart decision to buy money.
You can't fuck with.
And that is the true out card to the banking empire.
Probably even going to be the out card
for the Palantir system that's being fought over.
But what?
The thing that we can't do, the reason I went to Prague stage
for two years in a row and specifically called McCormick out.
It's very simply, I didn't use Peter as the analogy because he's not dead yet.
Okay. But I use Hal Finney.
Are you Steve Jobs?
And I use Paul Allen.
Three guys who are billionaires that all died.
What good is your fucking money if you're dead?
So why is this a story that I think will resonate with?
Because I think it may have resonated with Nathan.
Bitcoin in nature are both decentralized networks.
Let me tell you exactly what that means.
It means they're costly in time and not in energy.
And nobody in fucking Bitcoin seems to understand that.
My tribe understands it.
On the biology side, why?
Because if you don't have time, what could your money?
But that's the reason why.
If you look at the Satoshi whitepaper, what did Len Solomon really do?
He took Adam Back's idea of proof of work, which is great,
but it's no fucking big deal.
Everybody wants to jerk them off.
And now we know he's a real jerk off.
Well, here's the key.
Sasson puts three bibliographies on there for time stamping.
That is actually what makes Bitcoin special
because it's costly and time.
And it turns out when you have ten minute
that gives you an immutable ledger.
That's exactly what we want.
So when Peter takes a job, what does it say to uncle Jack
as the decentralized neurosurgeon?
He just fucking
put a shit block into his human blockchain.
And I don't want that idea
going out to anybody in his audience and anybody in our tribe. Why?
Because we're some of the smartest people on the planet.
Because we fucking bought Bitcoin early.
And the thing is, as I told Marty, Ben six months ago,
we all are going to have to
fight these fuckers in Palantir once we get rid of the bankers.
So guess what?
It's important that we keep people who own Bitcoin understanding
that time is the most valuable asset, not fucking bitcoin.
Well, that we agree
on When I first got into bitcoin, I was overwhelmed.
The jargon, the security risks, the fear that one mistake could cost everything.
I remember staring at my screen and wondering, are my keys safe?
Did I do this right?
That experience is why I started BTC sessions for over a decade.
This channel has helped
millions of people like you learn how to use and secure Bitcoin.
But I realized something.
For many people, videos aren't enough.
Everyone learns differently.
Some need to ask questions in real time as an expert walks through their setup,
their goals, and their threat model, and certain things like advanced
cold storage, inheritance, planning, privacy, and node or mining
setups often can't be fully solved by watching another tutorial.
So I built BTC mentor.
I recruited the best Bitcoin educators on the planet to work with you one on one.
Real experts, real answers, personalized hands on guidance tailored
to your exact situation, whether you're brand new or building a complex set up.
We meet you where you're at and walk with you step by step.
By the end, you don't just hope your Bitcoin is safe.
You know it is.
If you're ready for that level confidence, then head to BTC
mentor Audio and book of call with us today.
and that we agree that that we agree on.
I talk about that with my son quite a bit in that,
there's two really important scarce items in the world.
One is Bitcoin.
One is time.
But the interesting thing about time is,
as you get older and it becomes scarcer, becomes more important to you,
but you don't actually know how much of it you have.
You may have 24 hours, you may have 24 years.
And then that becomes, once you start to understand that, I think
and I think I've started to understand that
recently I've been quite philosophical about my own life and decisions
over the last year or so because, if you chase career
and money and success,
you kind of realize it's a dead end.
It doesn't, you never actually reach a goal.
The goal just extends out further.
But you time moves.
Time moves pretty quickly when you're chasing something.
When you stop chasing time is pretty slowly becomes a little more enjoyable.
Like, like now I play tennis and read books and,
and tune out a bit more, but just just for some context for you,
Jack, I, I, I didn't know you, and I don't mean that disrespectfully.
I just didn't know you.
But I did keep hearing you called me out.
And you may not have seen that.
I've, like, quite publicly said, I got the entire Covid thing wrong.
Wrong. And just for
some context, is that when I got into this Bitcoin thing,
I was a proper little statist, believed in the government,
thought they cared about us and they were the truth.
And, and I would go to work and I get my money and come home
and have a holiday and look after my kids and follow that little path and,
and I guess what I've done is I've, I've been spent the last eight,
nine years,
like, learning about how the world really works.
And doing it publicly.
So every one of those mistakes, I've done it an audience of,
you know, hundreds of thousands, maybe millions.
And then I've had to acknowledge those mistakes in public.
But a lot of people have made the similar mistakes.
They just haven't done it in public.
And at no point
to ever make a decision on God, like I'm making a terrible decision.
I'm going to do this in public.
It's just that's the way I've had to do it.
So, yeah, I mean, I fucking regret the whole Covid.
I think the Covid thing was like the final straw where I was like,
yeah, fuck them, I hate them.
All right? The government.
Hey, everyone who works in the government
and shit, I wish I'd never taken that jab and said such stupid shit.
I hope that country.
thing that you need to know because you don't have this context.
You may not remember, but I used to visit clubhouse rooms with Hodl
Oh, a long time ago. Yeah.
those and we had a pretty good fight about this Covid thing, you and I.
Yeah, probably did.
it's that's where it starts.
I don't remember that. But we might be right.
Right.
Well, I know I'm right and so do they because they remember it.
And I'm going to tell you that, there's one thing you're going to learn about me,
when you have a bully pulpit, which you and Nathan
and Becky Sessions does, I did it in Bitcoin.
My bully pulpit is in science.
When I saw that, I said, I need to remedy that. Why?
Because when people have the bully pulpit.
It's not you, Peter, I, I
may come off sounding like a total jackass here, but No.
You're fine.
I really care about.
It's actually your fucking audience.
Oh, no. But I'm the same.
smart enough to fucking figure out really what the game is.
And if they think,
hey, well, Peter did it, why the fuck can I want to go travel to.
I want to go to Logan or I want to go to the beach.
I want to go to El Salvador and talk to Buckley.
But the the ultimate thing is, is
and I think this is all the platforms I'm talking about.
Nathan, I'll tell you,
the last time I was all with him, I fucking went nuclear with David Bailey.
And now that turns out it looks like it was pretty smart too.
But this is what I'm saying.
We have to get back to the ethos of Bitcoin.
The ethos of Bitcoin is what it is.
We all know what it is and and we don't need to questioning
the key is all the noise out there.
We need to keep the people on it
smart, healthy and wealthy.
They're linked.
People don't realize they're linked because of this.
What I told you before, it's costly and time.
And Peter, just so you understand this, because I do want you to hear it.
The reason why you have a different experience with time,
when you're older and younger, you're going to be shocked when you hear this.
Your mitochondria make water.
When your baby was born and came out of your wife's vagina,
that baby was 90% water.
Right now, here I am in in my
technically seventh decade,
but in my 60s I'm only about 5,055% water.
How we experience time is actually a combination of how
water and melanin work together.
Why you guys, what I told you earlier in my rant that Becker's work
found out that that 1 trillion to 1 amp hair, if water or melon are fucked,
that's what determines how we experience time.
So you remember when you were a kid?
It seemed like Christmas took ten years to come.
Now, when you're an adult and you got to pay the bills,
it seems like it comes every 2 or 3 months.
But that's the reason why it happens.
It's actually a physical reason why this occurs because we become less efficient,
both in creating melanin and making water through our mitochondria.
To do this.
And the reason why, I guess your job infuriated me
is because this played right into the Rockefellers plans,
because what have they done for 75 years?
They've done everything they possibly could to destroy water and melanin biology
through their policies and the use of their fiat money.
I mean, I know most Bitcoiners hate the Rothschilds
and rockfalls because of the Fiat side, but if you really knew the depravity
of these people, you know, just in Covid alone,
you know, I got on Danny Jones podcast with Mary Tolley about,
I estimated that the, the minimum death rate in
the United States was about 600,000 people.
Now, because that was two years ago.
Now, I know it's over 3 million, but worldwide,
we're over 20 million people dead from this policy.
And when I said this to Breedlove, he did something pretty remarkable
after he left me.
He said the United States spent $6 trillion on Covid.
And at the time he did the podcast, he said, that's about 2 million people.
We spent $6 trillion to kill 2 million people.
Think about
the money, the mechanics there.
And then when you think about why you got me so angry
because I know
in Bitcoin we may have 2 or 3 million people.
That makes up the the bulk of Nathan's audience, your audience.
Danny's audience.
You know, Reed loves audience. Those people.
We need to fucking take care of them, dude.
Like you can't I agree.
they're fucking idiot.
Yeah.
idiot, you still have a duty. Why?
Because, as I said to Nathan last time, you don't like everybody that you sit down
at the Thanksgiving Day table. That's fine.
You still have to put up with your uncle.
That's a pain in the ass.
But it's much easier to put up with somebody if you know
that they're looking out for your back and they don't
want you get taken out because we're going to need.
You may not be the person, Peter, that picks up the pitchfork
and fucking shoots the gun at the Labor Party.
But I got an issue.
It may be your kids. It may be their friends.
It may be those two little boys that I just did the podcast with in the UK.
We don't
know who it's going to be, but we need to be around
so that when the shit hits the fan and that shit
hitting the fan is coming soon.
We need people to be healthy enough to think,
forget about the fight, to think, how do we take Palantir apart?
How do we take carp apart?
How do we take the Zionists in the United States and Britain
and Israel apart so that we can get our freedom back?
Peter, if you can, I'd actually love to go into any update you have on the
I no longer consent project and what you're trying to achieve there.
And then maybe get Doctor Jack's response if that's in terms of a solution
for the UK.
so, I've grown to really hate
state, because,
it seems like everything they do is terrible,
evil and ruins everything for everyone, everywhere.
But I've just become really fucking hateful
of the state, and,
and it's very, you know, once you like, once you really see it,
it's a bit like,
with Bitcoin, once you have Bitcoin, you understand price signals a lot better.
You know, you see the world differently.
You see the wild things of price.
Once you start to really understand government, you just see that behavior.
You see the things they're saying and why they're saying it.
You know, whatever politician it is, whatever narrative they're selling for,
whatever special interest,
but they are really just rival gangs fighting for control of territory.
And so I've just become come to really hate it.
I've come to hate every politician.
The I've come to hate the mechanics of the state.
And I, you know, I, I think it's very difficult to get rid of government,
but I do think it's possible to make it small and as ineffective as possible.
If you have the right person who comes into power,
who they themselves hate the state or love people enough
to be able to
make the kind of the right policy decisions,
like ones which are based on their own power and objectives
and career goals, which is based on just protecting the people.
So I've come to really hate it.
And I just the I no longer consent with like, I just personally no longer
hate sentiments and as a lone person it means nothing.
I mean,
millions of people across the country deserve fucking had enough of this shit.
So I don't know anything to send and just refuse to comply with a system that only.
What?
Yeah, we look, they get that you get consent to the point of an election.
But really, consent
comes every day from millions of people going about their daily business,
contributing to the system, going to work, paying their mortgages,
paying the credit cards.
Like if you want to bring it down, just everyone stop.
Like everyone just stop paying their mortgages and stop going to work.
Some using their credit cars. Stop buying Starbucks coffee.
You can stop it for a day and see the impact.
Stop it for a week.
But you need enough people pissed off that and
of the belief that it cannot be fixed from from inside the system
that has to be an outside of that comes in.
So that's what I'm doing.
I'm just giving people
I'm just trying to make people realize,
you do not have to consent to this bullshit.
If you're pissed off,
I guarantee you voting for a different colored team is not going to change
fucking anything.
Like Jeff Booth has told us all the system relies on continual theft.
There's a continual transfer of wealth upwards to the asset
holders, of which I'm one of them, and I think it's vile.
But the
vast majority of people, the people allow the system to operate
and all the ones being robbed,
it's a very small minority who benefit from the system
everyone else is being stolen from continually, and it's like,
at what point you get sick of being stolen from
like what?
What you just stop consenting to being stolen from.
So yeah, that's really what the project did,
is to inspire people to go, I don't consent to this anymore.
We really are in charge if we want to be in charge.
We are the majority of the population.
We have to get enough people to stop believing in it.
And that's that is a challenge.
No, I'm fair enough.
Doctor Cruz, before I come to, I just want to point out, Peter,
I feel like you're one whiskey away from actually running yourself.
You know what?
Interestingly, at the moment, I've always looked for an anti-establishment option.
It was Malay who said the only person who should become a politician
is somebody who, like, absolutely hates the state,
who wants to shrink it as much as possible.
And we have one person at the moment in the UK,
I call Rupert Lowe, who is a single MP who was kicked out of reform, who recently
launched his party restore, and he appears to be an anti-establishment option.
And I've spoken to him, I've spoken to people who work for him,
like if they can answer the Jeff
Boothe question, which is, is technology deflationary?
Should everything get cheaper, better, faster?
Yes. If they can answer that question with a yes and then say, well,
is there a, is there a conflict here with a debt based economy?
If they agree? Yes.
And the only solution is a, hard money standard, of which,
Bitcoin is the answer to me, but I don't mind if it's gold.
It's a good starting point.
If they would come out with an agenda which repairs
which one country's done it where Jack is right now, which is.
Is that public? You're in El Salvador.
Yep. You don't need to edit that.
Like it's the only country that's done it. Look what's happened to El Salvador.
The first time I went there, there was still red zones and gangs.
And now the reason, like they have adopted the right monetary standard.
Yeah.
If they were to come out and say they were going to do that,
they were going to focus on a fix in this economic problem,
then they'd have my support.
Would I become an MP? I'm not sure.
I don't think I don't know, I don't know if I'm smart enough.
Sorry.
I think you put them on too high of a pedestal.
No, I think you put them too high on a pedestal.
I think you play yourself down and you're putting them way too high.
The fact that you're
holding a conversation right here with everything that we've covered.
Peter, you're not average, buddy.
You might think that you are, but you're definitely well above.
but but I my,
my role in always this in doing interviews is trying to get very smart people
to explain things somebody like me can understand
because the vast majority of the audience is more like me.
They're like, what the fuck's going on in the world?
And how do I navigate it?
You know, the vast majority of people aren't super intellectual.
And there are I would I would rather a government of very boring intellectual
people than than, you know, mouthpieces, you can win a personality contest.
And so I'm happy to sit in the background.
I'm happy to help write maybe a bitcoin slash crypto policy, because
you can't really have a Bitcoin policy without talking about crypto.
Not happily support that. But I don't know if I'd run.
I don't know if it's for me.
Weirdly, I'm I'm very tired these days.
You might have a good answer this Jack.
Jack has you over the last six months, all my ambitions gone and I don't know why.
I spent the whole life massively ambitious.
And it's just all gone.
I mean, I would tell you, the
single number one thing to get it back is to actually to plug back into nature.
I mean, you remember you were ambitious
with the podcast that you gave to Danny.
That's when you plugged into the first network,
which is manufactured, which is Bitcoin.
I would tell you now that you're older, realize what I told you, that
you need your melanin in your water battery tuned up.
What happens when this happens?
When you lose your ambition?
You ruined melatonin, dopamine and Gaba in your system.
And guess what that does?
Your brain browns out Yeah, I think, I think I've done that.
and that's kind of what happens.
And what I would tell you is remember, I'm much older than you.
I'm here and I'm fucking feisty, dude.
I'm, I'm I can no.
than when I was, you know, in my practice in Nashville.
And Dustin and I look at it this way, I think
the best way to lead is to sharpen steel with steel.
And I am fucking sick and tired of the postseason.
My fucking, profession,
you know, keep leading sheep to their slaughter.
And to be honest with you, that's kind of how I came to this.
When I came to Bitcoin,
it was to save one of our Bitcoin only guys, which was Dorsey.
And when you understand
the things that I said to you, I mean, he came to me with the same issue.
Like, dude, I'm brown and out. I need to understand.
Well look where he is now. He's in Costa Rica.
He's a next door neighbor to me.
I would tell you, you've got all this Bitcoin money.
Sell the fucking soccer team.
Get your ass down here.
I'm branding out.
I'm being honest with you, I think.
I think it's not only good for you, it's good for your family.
But when you really understand that, it makes it different.
So I would tell you, you know,
you don't have to do it right away, but what you would be smart to do,
and this the same advice I gave Jack Mueller's almost a year ago.
I said, get out of Chicago.
Come down here for like 3 or 4 months and see how it goes.
You know, Nathan may know this guy.
There's a pretty famous developer in Bitcoin.
Sam Parker is a good friend of mine.
Sam had huge problems.
You he's 31, 32 years old.
I invited him to come down and stay with me here in El Salvador
in three months.
He walked back and forth on my front yard for three months with no shirt on.
And he's from Canada.
And guess what? No shoes.
Everything that was bother him went away.
You. But that's the thing.
his life Nothing wrong.
Nothing's really bothering me.
Apart from, obviously, the state of our government.
I mean, but, like,
I used to wake up every day ambitious.
I want to build this.
I want to now.
I don't I want to go and go to the gym, play tennis, read a book,
cook a good meal and go to bed.
And maybe it's a good thing, but it's like
I'm so used to being full of energy and I'm.
And I'm not.
It's like, almost like I've gone from this.
a chain so you can make I've gone steady state.
turn back into your battery.
That's all.
You do it plug
network, which is nature that's fully decentralized.
I mean, I think you you owe it to yourself and your family,
at least to give it a try and see if it changes things.
Then if it does, that's when the tough decisions will come afterwards.
So, okay, what am I going to do with this now that I know that this is the case?
Okay, what do I do with it?
That's a totally different, you know, podcast,
you what what effectively are you doing?
You're actually making the statement.
Yeah.
My time is valuable.
And I need to do something to improve it.
Yeah, yeah. Fair.
Okay.
Peter, I would also I would also chime in that maybe, just maybe,
another contributing factor might be the fact that,
if I'm not mistaken, the kids are either at the point
of getting out of the house or near to getting out of the house,
which was, at least for me personally,
one of the most motivating things that ever happened to me.
So I suspect that might be also contributing
to a decline in ambition is that the bigger, broader mission
is kind of almost coming to a close here for a time being.
Yeah. Maybe.
I don't know.
I mean I think.
Yeah.
I think part of it is like
for me I was thinking like when I had like ambition for success
and money, I think I was chasing, I thought I was chasing something,
but then I think I perhaps realized I was running away
from something. Yep.
You know, like, because I thought
you reached this point and like, Sandy happy and it's like, it never
Oh, no.
It's like the it's like the Anthony Bourdain thing, right?
Like how unbelievably successful was that guy?
And then he goes ahead and he kills himself
is because not realizing that like the the meaning fulfillment and motivation
comes from one good health, but then also comes internally that
if you externalize a goals and ambitions, the problem is your brain is so.
And doctor, these criteria around
your brain is so goal oriented, it's actually paying attention.
When you're getting closer to the goals,
it's less concern when you actually get them,
which is why you need that next kind of dopamine hit.
You have to go to the next thing to like.
I think about we just had like the Winter Olympics, right?
I think about people that spend their entire life for that one goal
that they do achieve potentially in their youth.
Like just imagine everything about you
is trying to get a gold medal at the Winter Olympics and then you do it.
Now, what the fuck are you going to do now?
What that was?
That was the entire purpose of what you were doing.
It could really basically, you're left without without a mission or meaning or
something to pursue.
I Yeah.
said, Nathan. Except one thing.
I don't think at the end, board game killed himself.
I think he was
Okay.
You're not going to just drop that.
Tell me why. Yep.
Believe it or not, it's tied to
I completely believe it.
He and the, lady.
I'm trying to remember her name.
She the Italian.
the know the bag lady.
What was.
What was her name? Chantelle.
The one that sold the bags.
No. Spade, Kate Oh.
close to each other in New York, and,
they were both tied to this, story with, children abduction.
And this is not.
Or they knew a lot about this because he was in the same circles
as Epstein and all of his people.
And I believe that Kate Spade.
And you should know who Kate Spade was.
Her brother is David Spade, who is clearly, you know, in with,
most of the pedophiles and and crazy bastards in Hollywood.
She was
too close to the fire, just as Anthony was.
And I think they were taken out, as part of,
how shall we say, keep the propaganda quiet?
That's crazy.
Okay, I want to pivot back for one second to make sure we cover, we,
cover this topic as well, too, because we even start.
I'm asking about the UK we're talking about here situation.
You're encouraging to get out. Maybe.
Maybe Peter can get you to commit to go, go visit,
doctor Jack there for a week or two and see if you feel better.
I'm curious, in your opinion, doctor Jack, with even trying,
like Peter's admirable pursuit of trying to actually, exercise
political power through basically, like, I would just say, noncompliance
and growing the population, trying to wake people up to it.
Is the UK beyond saving, or can it is it possible
to actually wake up the savages and make something happen?
No. And I was going to interrupt earlier, but I didn't want to,
because I don't think Peter or you understand that
the Fabians in the United States made it so that this was what, Peter season.
What did MK ultra do at scale when you put polarized light around all of us?
Basically, what did you just do?
You destroyed your ability to make dopamine.
And I don't expect you guys to know this, but do you know how you make dopamine?
You make it from aromatic amino acids specifically l
tyrosine and L phenylalanine.
Guess what polarized light does?
It turns it to d tyrosine in DL and you can't make them out of it.
And then what happens?
Non-Native MF which is what MK ultra cuz
it takes melanin that's fully made and turns it back into dopamine.
So guess what happens.
You now have a way to drain your battery and this MK ultra program.
That's why it was extremely important
that the Rockefeller Foundation set this up.
Everybody is dumbed down, like what Peter just said
about his life as a guy in the UK.
High latitude podcaster plugged in.
He doesn't realize that there's a biophysical reason he feels this way.
He's being drained of water and melanin.
And what I'm trying to tell him this, this is not trying to be hyperbolic.
This is actually biologic.
And it's incredible that it's coming out in this podcast
because I never thought we would ever go here.
But this is happening to everybody, Peter, 8 billion people on the planet.
And what happens is the people that understand how to maintain
their entropy are the people that come to places like this.
That's what I've been saying to Marty.
That's what I said to Breedlove.
You know, I was very public with Breedlove on Twitter
when he couldn't have a baby with the girl that he's with.
I said, Robert, you're in fucking Miami.
You think it's good, but it's not.
I said, you have to realize things have to change and people
I think can look at it as criticism.
But I actually, you know, I can't say that I love Robert,
but I care about him because he's part of the orange family, Yeah. him do
well because I know his audience needs to see this as well.
I don't know who's going to be the next group of young Bitcoiners.
I just I just told Nathan I did a podcast with these two little 18 year
olds in the UK.
They could be it. I don't know.
But I have to tell you, Peter, you probably should go
listen to that podcast, cuz you know Yeah. Go.
those are the boys said to me that they want to leave the UK
and come to El Salvador, because when their mom goes and visits
to do all the art shows, you know, in the places,
every time she comes back from a place where there's an oasis
of sun, water and magnetism, she actually does better.
Like they see it in their own mother.
And you have to realize they're quantum entangled with the mother.
You know, from a biologic perspective.
So I think the problem that we have as adults, sometimes even our young kids.
Who are you know, little retards, they can actually tell us, hey,
there's there's something to this.
And I would tell you probably be the greatest gift that you could give
your family, you know, for you to be fully charged
and fully loaded, but also for them to be fully charged and fully loaded.
You know, if you want to go back to your life
once you get, you know, charged up, there's no reason you can't do that.
But I think the other thing I would remind you specifically, since you're a UK guy,
remember my country, we had people
that didn't want to pay a 3% tax.
They wanted to to, to worship God.
They moved to the United States.
They actually were able to change Britain from being outside the United States.
I'm going to tell you, I think that's Jack's program.
That's clearly isn't what Peter McCormack is on now.
But do I believe that
the Bitcoin country will have no borders,
but it's going to have all of us in it as MPs, Peter,
and we are going to legislate
what our tribes should be doing from wherever we are.
And I think the oasis is that I want you to be is places
where you can harness entropy and harness time
so that you can make the best decisions not only for your Bitcoin,
but also for your life.
And I think if we start to resonate that out in our podcast and our meetings,
you know, I told Nathan the last time I was all of them the most probably
uncomfortable thing is I
think some of the things that's going on in, in the Bitcoin world do it's meetings.
And David Bailey, we need to stop doing that.
Like we're putting targets on ourselves.
It makes no fucking sense to do that.
What makes more sense is for us to sit here on my TikTok,
open up a bottle of wine and have this kind of discussion I like it.
what. Yeah.
go and talk to each other, and believe it or not,
you know, Max, Max and Stacey or my next door neighbors,
they just had their big event here at the golf tournament.
That's kind of what happened.
And then I have my members event here in December,
and Max and Stacy came over and met you know, the mitochondria.
And he's beginning to see the synergy as well.
He's like, I'm beginning to get it.
Like I admonished both of them around Christmas time, I said, don't go home.
Why are you going? Oh, what's the point?
You know, you're busy here. Stay here.
This is the best place for you to be.
And I think that message
resonates best when you actually try it yourself.
It's great to give it lip service.
But, you know, in my banter, talk that was tied to this thing,
I've made a comment that still, I think my best quote ideation
without execution leads to deletion of every good idea.
So if you have a good idea and you don't execute it, what fucking
good is it?
I like it,
yeah, yeah.
Stuff to ponder on here. Now,
but I'm glad we flew.
Jack.
I think that's the perfect place to wrap it up there.
Maybe we'll be hanging out in that teak deck and having a bottle of wine.
Further discussing this a little bit later on.
down the.
I agree, I think that'd be a wonderful trip.
I think, I think I could use it, I think my wife could really use it.
I think I kind of have to at this point in time.
She's, she's been barefoot and pregnant for basically three in a row here,
so I think I think she probably deserves it.
think so.
Jack. I'm glad we got to meet.
All right, no problem.
Wonderful gentleman. Jack.
Tell everybody where they can find you.
Peter. Tell everybody where they can find you.
Me, doctor Jack Cruz on all social media platforms.
That's probably the easiest way.
If you want me, you'll find me.
And I'm Pete McCormack everywhere.
And my show is called The Peter McCormack show.
Hey, you! Yes, you.
Watching the Bitcoin price movements and the latest exciting news.
It's awesome to stay informed,
but the real power of Bitcoin comes from taking control.
Don't just watch. Take action.
Head over to BTC sessions aka
learn for free, step by step tutorials
that guide you through every major skill that you need to know.
Plus full video playlist for deeper dives on any topic you like.
And if you're ready for the ultimate fast track.
Scroll to the bottom and check out Bitcoin mentor.io
for premium one on one experience with my team of Bitcoin experts
to ensure you get it right the first time.
Don't wait.
Secure your Bitcoin future today.
Hit the link in the show notes or scan the QR code on the screen.
If you enjoyed this
episode with Peter McCormick and doctor Jack Kruse, please do like and subscribe.
It really does help out and check out the previous episode Professor David column.