One of the most important scientific
controversies of our time involves the
events at the end of the great ice age.
More specifically, a remarkable period
of time called the younger dus. A period
of extreme spasmotic climate swings, the
annihilation of megaponal species
worldwide, the sudden disappearance of
the North American Clovis culture, major
disruptions to human settlement patterns
around the globe, all preceded by giant
floods and rapid sea level rise. These
are the pieces of a puzzle that doesn't
fit into the standard model unless there
is a trigger mechanism. What caused all
these notable changes in the homeostasis
of our global system? In those orthodox
models, these data points have no common
cause or unifying connection. The fact
that they are all happening more or less
simultaneously is seen as simply
coincidental.
So, let's continue discussing the model
that unifies these issues with a single
causal link. Join me today as we square
the circle on the history of the younger
dus impact hypothesis and dig into the
evidence for extraterrestrial impacts
into an ancient ice age world.
[Music]
Well, here we are again. I'm Randall
Carlson and we're going to continue this
really interesting and important
discussion about events that occurred at
the end of the last ice age. uh events
that have probably been the most
profound in their effect on the human
species and the rise and fall of human
civilization since we modern homo
sapiens sapiens first began to occupy
this planet something like a couple of
hundred thousand years ago and in this
discussion and quest I'm going to be
joined once again by my friend and
colleague John Arthur so if he's there
he is
&gt;&gt; how the wings also our producer, fact
checker, co-ressearcher.
Um, I'm sure we could come up with some
other labels for him, but I don't know
if we would want to uh express that in
polite company, so we'll not do that
here. But in any case, hello John.
&gt;&gt; Howdy, Randall.
&gt;&gt; Howdy. So the younger dus
when did you first can you recall in
your life when you first became aware of
the younger dus? Well, so I really come
from a evangelical background and so all
of this body of evidence is something
that you know those who are in young
earth creation
uh uh science you know those who follow
that hypothesis there's a lot of shared
evidence that we all are looking at and
something doesn't fit the uh the model
but in the last few years I've become
more and more familiar with the younger
dus impact hypothesis and it's only been
in the past two to three years. So, it's
it's picking up a lot of traction and
it's a very interesting model. One
that's much better than the status quo.
&gt;&gt; Oh, absolutely. I I definitely agree on
that. I would have to say I first became
aware of it probably a little bit before
you. Um
I'm guessing probably the late 1980s.
When you say before you, you really do
mean before you, John Arthur. I'm a 94
baby.
&gt;&gt; Oh, so you weren't even in the world. My
god, it's hard for me to conceive of,
but it's the 94. So, yeah, I'm thinking
the late 80s, the early 90s. I could
easily look here and see. just in my
presentation that I think we looked at
the last couple of um episodes, we were
certainly a decade or two in front of
the famous 2007 paper by Richard
Firestone, uh James Kennet, Alan West,
and others. So, anyways, we're kind of
moving on. We we're it wouldn't hurt to
to refer back to that paper because they
really did lay out the argument. Um and
that was mostly the focus of the attacks
uh on the part of those who were
uh committed to discrediting the idea.
Uh they did not want to open the doors
to something um from outer space.
Basically
they didn't want that. Uh well, we've
learned a lot since 2007 and there's
been a bunch of new studies that have
extended the geographic range of this
phenomena probably to at least half the
the the world, half the globe now. Um
maybe more than that uh within the let's
see with this recent discovery in
Siberia, we may have pushed it even
further east than it had been. we, you
know, discoveries in Europe. I think
there's now even a discovery from a few
years ago in Antarctica, which we'll
look at uh as well and to see if that um
is uh substantial enough to accept it as
a proxy for a younger dus event. But if
it turned out to be the case that we
have YD boundary proxies in this
Antarctica,
well, we're clearly dealing with a
global event at that point, I would have
to think.
So, uh, we have a few papers that I
think are very interesting and important
in the history of the studies of the
younger dus. We're going to look at over
the next couple of episodes where we're
unpacking all of this research on the
younger drius. We're going to look at uh
a lot of what the critics have said as
well. Uh because you need to look at
both sides of of a controversy or an
argument. Now, I've done that and I've
done that quite extensively and I want
to share that with people because there
have been legitimate questions raised by
the critics. Don't doubt that for a
second. I think uh however though the
the proponents of the ET hypothesis have
done an admirable job of addressing
those questions and and criticisms posed
by the skeptics of the of the whole
idea. Uh and I think we could also show
that the uh that the initial response of
the skeptics or the critics in a lot of
senses was not really fair. It was more
there was a lot more of what we don't
like in pure science because there were
ad hominemum attacks. There were straw
men that were meticulously constructed
and then torn apart. Um there were red
herrings galore uh bringing in things
that weren't really relevant to the
question at hand. I'll give you an
example. One of the main red herrings
is, and of course ultimately ultimately
it's something you would want to um
factor in to the totality of your
understanding and that is a crater an
impact site, right? That has been one of
the ongoing criticisms. Well, in in in
some ways it has echoes of the critics
of Jay Harland Brett back in the 20s and
30s. Well, if you if you can't uh come
up with a a a an explanation for these
gigantic floods that you're talking
about, well, sorry, we can't buy it. You
know, the your floods, if you can't
explain those floods,
invoke and describe some kind of cause,
well, they didn't happen. That was
basically the attitude.
Well, here it's kind of similar. Well,
you've got the proxy evidence, right?
You've got nano diamonds, you got
microsphererals, you've got the the the
platinum group metals, you've got uh
melt glass, you've got a lot of this
stuff, and we're going to be exploring
some of that in this episode, right?
Well, okay,
we need an explanation for that. Now,
one explanation that seems to fit the
evidence uh uh more effectively than any
of the other any other alternative
explanations is some type of a cosmic
impact. And I say some type because
there are anomalies about the evidence
that that need to be explained that
don't fit a simplified model of some
kind of a homogeneous object single
object randomly hitting the earth. It is
definitely not consistent with that with
that scenario. Right. And and that is
one of the things that the critics were
resorting to is essentially invoking
this model of a single homogeneous
object randomly striking the earth.
Right? And and because that model was
found wanting then the whole body of
evidence that was was being amassed by
independent teams was being dismissed.
Okay. So uh let's see. We're going to go
up to one of the famous sites called
Murray Springs.
Let's take a look there at Murray
Springs and see where that is on the
map. We're taking a little bit of a
detour here to uh tell a story that I
think is going to be valuable. I was
coming down the stairs and I think
somebody just ahead of me had spilled a
little bit. My foot hit it, slid out
from under me and I tumbled down three
or four stairs to the bottom. I sure
banged up my left knee. It was painful
but uh I was very relieved to remember
that I had brought I happened to pack my
CBD from the god sav and I was really
grateful that I had remembered to do
that. So, I that night I put some of the
sav on, went to bed. Though, I've I've,
you know, being in the construction and
building industry, I've had many falls
and in uh injuries and stuff, and I
figured I'm going to be laid up with
this for a month. We drove home, I think
it was 3 to 4 days later. I continued
applying the SAV, and I would say within
a week, I was getting around pretty
good. I always bring the oil uh when I
travel and I I'm now after this episode
I'm like okay I'm always gonna have the
sav with me too. This is from the uh
this is our Wikipedia. So we've got
Murray Springs is located in southern
Arizona near the San Pedro River and
once served as a Clovis hunting camp
approximately 11,000 years before
present. The site is uh unique for the
massive quantity of large megapa
processing and extensive tool making.
Archaeologists identified five buried
animal kills and processing locations
and a Clovis camp location. Uh so yeah,
C. Vance Hayes who we've already quoted
in a previous episode in 1966
uh along with Peter Maringer Maringer of
the University of Arizona discovered the
site while extending the mapping of the
area of the Laner Mammoth Kill site 19
km to the south. Yeah, we visited that
one as well. Um the archaeologists
located two concentrations of mammoth
bones that day. They were convinced the
area was a Clovis site based on the
bones and because Murray Springs shared
the same geological characteristics as
the Laner site. Funding by the National
Science Foundation and the National
Geographic Society enabled excavations
from 1967 to 1971.
Some of the significant artifacts found
during the excavation included hearths,
a bone tool, projectile points, lithic
tools, and deotage. The bone to the bone
tool is believed to be a shaft
straightener. So anyways, uh that's the
site. The five buried animal killed and
processing locations contain bones of
mammoth, bison, horses, camels, canids,
you know, uh probably direwolves, I'm
guessing, and rodents. A worker found a
single pot shard on the surface of the
site that was associated uh to use
approximately 1300 to 1450
of the common era. So that was of no
relevance. That was a later uh thing
that ended up there. Um, archaeologists
noted peoples have used the spring over
an extended period. An analysis of the
site is interpreted as leaning against
the extraterrestrial impact theory of
the place to scene extinction. Now,
there we go. See? Okay. So, we're going
along, everything is cool, factual. Then
we get to this
uh because it says an analysis of the
site is interpreted as leaning against
the extraterrestrial impact theory of
the place to scene extinction. So there
we uh
Okay. So there we go. And they quote one
paper which we we're going to look at
when it comes time to examine the uh
efforts of the critics to uh dismiss
this idea. This is um going back to C.
Vance Haynes and others. It's entitled
the Murray Springs Clovis site placed
the scene extinction in the question of
extraterrestrial
impact. Uh
and that was in 2010
maybe as a response to this because uh I
have it right here. I have quotes from
it and this is interesting. Okay, so
here's the Murray Spring Clovis site
place to see extinction uh etc.
And uh what did they find there? Um
it says uh the Clovis occupation surface
at Murray Springs is a sharp
stratographic contact upon which rests
black organic clay the black mat.
Okay, it's I mean I've been there, seen
it. It's very prominent, very distinct.
You can see it. Uh but then it says it
is believed to result from an algil
bloom.
Uh
algae, a bloom of algae, but of course
that implies that the ground surface is
saturated wet.
The Murray Springs black mat covers and
preserves the Clovis age landscape.
Hundreds of Clovis stone art Clovis
stone artifacts in direct association.
This is a key. Indirect association with
skeletons of two mammoths, 11 bison, and
bones of a direwolf. Yeah. Okay. So,
yeah, a direwolf and horse were exposed
under the black map by archaeological
excavations.
Um, and that is significant because
they're not, notice they're not
mentioning that they're finding him
above the black man, only below.
Uh well then they found uh
oh well they found this from the same
paper they found uh let's see they were
using uh among the buried samples they
took samples
um and they analyzed those samples
and and the magnetic particles
82% of the total separated from each
fraction Magnetic particles are most
concentrated in the silt to fine sand
fractions. Examination under 100 scale
and 400 scale in both reflected and
transmitted light reveal okay revealed
what appear to be subangular dtridal
magnetite grains and rock forming
silicates quartzes and felspar with a
few silvery microspherals
ranging in size from approximately 10 to
70 microns. They look like microscopic
highly polished ball bearings. And here
these like highly polished ball
bearings. Are you seeing these? This is
a are photo microraphs of magnetic
microsphererals.
&gt;&gt; Yes sir.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, so now
notice they are finding these magnetic
micro microsphererals.
And what is the source of those? Let's
let's go to the next slide here. Um,
we already read this
and then but then they go ahead and they
say this. We retain the opinion that we
have yet to understand what happened
approximately 12,900 calendar years ago
that abruptly terminated the major
elements of place to scene megapa. The
ET impact hypothesis has sparked several
investigations that are leading to new
knowledge. And although our data from
Mary Springs and elsewhere do not
support it, neither do they preclude it.
Oh, well, now that's I would say is is
pretty fairminded,
right? Wouldn't you agree?
&gt;&gt; It's almost like it doesn't necessarily
lean against
the younger dus hypothesis.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. So, if we go back to
uh what they're saying here, uh yeah.
An analysis of the site is interpreted
as leaning against the extraterrestrial
impact theory of the place to see
extinction. Now, is that your takeaway
from he he's quoting number here?
Whoever wrote this for Wikipedia, it's
quoting the article we just read from.
Now,
did you draw the conclusion that they
were leaning? It said, "No, we it
doesn't prove it, but uh neither do they
preclude it."
They also said, "Yeah, the ET impact
hypothesis has sparked several
investigations that are leading to new
knowledge." They're they're
acknowledging that. And although our
data from Murray Although that's an
important qualifier word, although our
data from Murray Springs and elsewhere
do not support it, neither do they
preclude it. Okay, I read that and then
I read this final sentence here in this
description from uh Wikipedia.
An analysis of the site is interpreted
as leaning against the extraterrestrial
impact theory of the place. Now, if you
read this, you would think, "Oh, okay.
Well, but see then notice here that
nowhere in this article, the Murray
Springs Clovis site that's on Wikipedia,
do they even mention the magnetic
microsphererals. It's not even mentioned
here."
So, I mean,
&gt;&gt; and they certainly don't provide another
mechanism for those proxies. They
provide zero mechanism and they don't
mention them. And as we go through and
work through this material, uh, we will
learn that magnetic microsphererals are
one of the consistent accepted proxies
found in associate. Maybe if you
isolated it and you said, okay, there
could be an alternate explanation origin
for these magnetic microsphererals. But
if you find them in association with
nano diamonds or shocked quartz or melt
glass or platinum group metals or any of
the other things, well, yeah, then it's
a pretty good bet that those magnetic
microsphererals are the result of uh the
of a cosmic impact of some kind. I'm
going to pause for just a minute to talk
about our partners over at Shipo who may
save you a significant amount of
headache in your day-to-day business. We
sell a variety of geometry tools and
models like our beautiful platonic
solids here at Randall Carlson LLC. And
when it comes to managing shipping,
e-commerce, and returns, we've been
using Shipo for over four years now, and
we're very pleased with their service.
Shipo's interface is intuitive. The
primary order page is easy to navigate
and we have enjoyed stellar technical
support. If Shipo can help you with your
needs, please use the code below to
partner with a great company while
supporting our work here at Squaring the
Circle. Thanks. And now back to the
show. So that's the Murray Springs site.
And then we had this uh
the work of uh
a team out of let's see they are uh we
found we found uh Melissa Scrugs she is
with the uh department of geosciences at
the University of Minnesota
and her and how many uh colleagues
did an excavation in the Baja Peninsula
of California.
Uh and they begin this there and they
report this was at the North Central
Section uh 44th annual and southern
central section joint meeting of the
Geological Society of America.
And this was a presentation paper number
one presented uh and this this uh
meeting was uh occurred over April 11th
to the 13th back in 2010. Same year now
as this Murray Springs Clovis site we
just were quoting from. And the title of
this paper is investigation
of sediment containing evidence of the
younger driest boundary
impact event elazol
Baja California sir Mexico. So you I
think you just had a map up there. We
can see where this uh
yeah zoom out a bit. Yeah, there we go.
way down there in the bottom end of the
Baja Peninsula
is where this uh where this site is that
was examined by this team. Um
just is it right there? You got it
right. So must right there interestingly
in that little triangle
and okay then we have a what is that? A
Catholic church right there I believe.
Huh.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; I would assume it would be somewhere out
here.
in that outcrop.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, you're probably right. Yep. So,
uh, the younger dus boundary
extraterrestrial impact hypothesis
posits that one or more important
because I I'm convinced it was more than
one, but in 2010 it's still that's an
open question. I think the evidence
comes down pretty solidly on the favor
of it being a multi-impact event. But in
2010, in the early stages of really
discussing this seriously and
scientifically,
one was considered because of course
that was the standard model of virtually
all impact events, right? Uh one or more
extraterrestrial impacts exploded over
the Laurentide ice sheet 12,900
plus or minus 100 years ago. The event
is purported to have triggered the
younger driest stadium and coincides
with the rancher labraan termination and
the disappearance of the paleoindian
clovis sculpture. So let's back up. What
do we mean by a stadium?
What do we mean by that? Uh the younger
dus stadial. Okay, very briefly. I've
explained this before but it never hurts
to reiterate a little bit. Okay, you've
got let's go. So you got full glacial,
interglacial, full glacial, 15 to 20,000
years ago, 6 million cubic miles of ice,
temperatures 10° colder worldwide, etc.,
etc. Interglacial like right now. Okay,
now those are think of those as two
extremes. And we can see in the record
of climate change that um the climate
has oscillated between glacial and
interglacial
with wide swings. But there's also you
probably even more lesser swings where
it doesn't go to full interglacial or
back to full glacial where it swings to
the cold but doesn't go to the full
glacial. We're referring to that as a
stadial. So you've got a stadial and
you've got an interstadial. You've got a
glacial and you've got an interglacial.
And so you could almost think of the
oscillation like this. stayed
stadial interstate glacial interglacial
so it's really more I guess you could
think of it as a magnitude
function okay so that's the younger
destadial because what happened it
shifted back for 1300 years to to
glacial almost glacial cold maybe
glacial cold in which case maybe stadial
wouldn't be the appropriate term term.
But again, hey, this is 2010, okay?
What' they know back then? Okay, it also
coincides with the Rancho Labraan
termination,
the Labrao tar pits in out in LA where
all of the extinct megapona are trapped
in the tar that gave its name to this
particular uh epoch of or stage of of
mamalian life on Earth or in North
America, the Ranch Rancho Labraan. Um so
they called the ranchelan termination
essentially means the extinction of the
megapaa in North America. Okay. Uh and
the disappearance of the paleoindian
clovis culture. Evidence supporting or
refuting this hypothesis has great
implications uh for the fields of
geology, paleontology
and archaeology.
And here's some of the geochemical
markers of the YDB younger dice boundary
uh impact include magnetic and
carbonatous spheroids. Okay, so just
like they found at the at the Murray
Springs, they found uh magnetic
spheroids. Okay. Elevated levels of
radioactivity and aridium
and nanodiamonds and a special type of
nanodiamond called lans delight
which uh we should learn more about that
so we can distinguish between
nanodiamonds and lans delight. Uh and
lans delight if I recall is is our
cubicle structures. Let's see what it
says. It's named after I what's her
name? Uh she was a really highly
accomplished woman scientist. Uh
Lansdale I believe. Uh
this paper by Scrugs goes on says the
event horizon at sites across North
America is often overl
layer the black mat. Uh our field site
for testing the younger dest boundary ET
impact hypothesis is located on one on
the Elcarazol fault and you found that
we couldn't see the fault but maybe the
fault is represented there by that
outcrop. I'm not sure south of La Paz in
Baja California.
The site is situated along the uplifted
or southwest side of the fault within an
aoyo exposing pleaene holysine
transition sediments.
The presence of NC2 Rancho Rancho
Labbran Megapana fossils at Elcarazol
was independently verified by
investigators from the universadad
autonom de Baka California sir in Laaz.
Cranial and postcranial sections of
Mammoth Colombia Colombi which is the
Colombian mammoth
were excavated from the sampling site in
1997.
Sediment samples were taken from a
3meter stratographic section
so about 10 ft at El Karazol which
spanned the sediments where the mammoth
fossils were located. The section
included an anomalous greenish plastic
layer. What do I mean by plastic?
Basically broken rock. Okay. Uh or rock
that is contained. Think of it as chunks
like raisins in bread pudding. And the
raisins are the classs and the pudding
would be the matrix. Okay. Um,
so there's a greenish plastic layer at
approximately
138 plus or - 6 cm below the road
surface. This layer suggests a
correlation to the black mat stratum
noted at many other terminal sites.
Now here's the important part.
Preliminary and laboratory analysis
yielded magnetic spherical particles
under the 60 to 70 power magnification
and a peak in radioactivity was found at
a depth of 136 to 138 cm coinciding with
the lower part of the darker green
layer.
uh elemental analysis for aridium and
lons delight are currently underway.
So did you find lon delight?
&gt;&gt; So ln's delight is a hex hexagonal uh uh
structure unlike the typical nano
diamond which is a cubic structure
&gt;&gt; cubical structure.
&gt;&gt; Lans delight is named after Kathleen
Lndale and
&gt;&gt; she was what was she a geocchemist?
&gt;&gt; Uh yes. So, I
&gt;&gt; think you've got a little bio there on
there, don't you?
&gt;&gt; I do. Let me go ahead and pull it up.
This is courtesy of Wiki. So, here's the
lady herself.
And so, yes, she is a crystal.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Pacifist and prison reform activists.
This woman was busy.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Uhhuh. She proved in 1929 that the
benzene ring is flat by using X-ray
defraction methods to elucidate the
structure of hexamethylbenzene
&gt;&gt; is intight.
&gt;&gt; She was the first to use forier spectral
methods which yeah yeah while solving
the structure of hex chlora benzene in
1931.
So she was uh yeah fellow of the royal f
one of the first two women elected a
fellow of the royal society.
So she was no lightweight
&gt;&gt; first female professor at University
College London. First woman president of
the international union of
crystalallography.
I wonder what she would think if she
knew that her work is being used to
support the extraterrestrial impact
hypothesis.
So she died in 1971.
[Music]
Wonder if Lonsdale Lans Delight was even
being used then as a proxy or where did
Lons Lonzite first show up in a
laboratory or in nuclear testing or was
found in meteorites?
I know it was found in meteorites
and I believe
it was produced as a byproduct nuclear
weapons testing. Now I'm not sure of
that but uh
and there are probably
uh productions of it in in a laboratory
I'm guessing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Canyon Diablo is the is the the
Canyon Diablo iron meteorite fragment is
the first formation I believe that I can
find at the moment that has launched the
delight.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And and I I believe that makes
sense because this is actually you know
that's what's also known as Meteor
Crater
&gt;&gt; Arizona
&gt;&gt; 1891. So they would have found it at
that time.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So interesting. Okay. There's more
of a story here that I don't want to get
into in too much detail now, but um
that'll be good to know. So, you know,
Meteor Crater that we've what been three
four tours I think there now. I've taken
groups to there because it's such an
impressive big hole in the ground. But,
okay. So we can add another interesting
detail to the studies of this that that
was the first place that L's delight but
when it was probably not called L's
delight
when it was found in those meteorites in
the meteor fragments.
&gt;&gt; Kathleen Lansdale was born in 19 uh 1907
or 1903. Let me pull that up. Kathy
Lansdale was born
in 1903. So, it couldn't have been
called Lans Delight at the time.
&gt;&gt; No. Nope.
Okay. Well, there's an interesting story
there. Um, she sounds like a rather
interesting woman and no lightweight
&gt;&gt; and um
I could make some quasi political
comments about, you know, I'll bet I
have a feeling that she probably very
rarely complained about discrimination.
She was probably too busy with her
research and her studies and her work
and her extracurricular activities to
even think about that, I'm guessing.
&gt;&gt; Um, all right. So,
Lans Delight then is one of the proxies
that we would list in the in that list
of proxies that would include
nanodiamonds and magnetic
microsphererals of different kinds.
Magnetic grains,
uh, melt water, I mean, uh, melt glass,
uh, aridium, platinum, osmium, etc. Um
so now we're going to move that same
year 2010 interesting year for impact
studies. Uh a younger dest impact
studies this is William C Mahaney uh
David Kinsley and Voli Colm Calm Volley
Colm I don't know uh let's see we can
see who the affiliations are here. Um
this was published in the journal
sedimentary geology
2010.
The title of this paper by William C.
Mahaney who is with quaternary surveys
uh out of Canada. David Krinsley with
the department of geological sciences,
University of Oregon and Volley Orval
Kalm, Institute of Ecology and Earth
Sciences,
uh, Tartu University in Estonia.
Okay. didn't know anything about and
don't know anything about uh Tartu
University in Estonia.
But anyways, so you had uh you know
international trio here and here's the
title of the paper evidence
for a cosmogenic
origin of fired glaciuial beds. fired
glaciio
fluial beds.
Interesting. So glacia, we've learned
this term glaciofluvial.
When you have the effects of glaciers
and the effects of flowing water
combined, we use the term glaciofluial.
So here we have fired glaciofluvial beds
in northwestern Andes
correlation with experimentally heated
quartz and feld spar.
So let's see what this uh what this
study was all about. So in the Andes
okay so here we go. This is from the
abstract.
Fired sediment considered equivalent to
the black mat
impact of 12.9,000 years ago has been
located and analyzed in the Andes of
northwestern Venezuela.
The black mat refers to possible fallout
from the Anki comet air burst presumed
to have occurred over the Laurentide ice
sheet. We should pause there. The Anki
comet. The fact that he mentions that is
interesting. That is an hypothesis.
We don't have proof, but it fits the
bill pretty good. Now, Anki's comet.
What do we know about Anki's comet?
Is it associated with a meteor stream?
&gt;&gt; Yes, it is. Do you know, John, which
one?
&gt;&gt; I know you're going to tell me, Randall.
&gt;&gt; I was going to give you I was going to
let you have one guess.
&gt;&gt; One guess. It's not the Tora, is it?
Yes, it is.
&gt;&gt; Well, that's that's that narrows it down
pretty good.
&gt;&gt; It does. I knew you would get the answer
right. That's why I went ahead and put
you on the spot.
&gt;&gt; It's the relevant one.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Comet Anki is associated. It's
part of the Torid family of of meteors
and asteroids and pseudo cometary
objects um swirling about the sun out
there. And aky I think is 3.3 years.
One full elliptical cycle.
&gt;&gt; Sounds right. I had to look it up
because I was captioning one of the
videos. So, how do you how do you spell
Anki? So, I had to look that up.
&gt;&gt; Ah, E N C.
Yes, I had to look that up.
&gt;&gt; And that's different than the god Anki
from Sumerian mythology. Just let's be
clear on that. Okay. Ank
not named after the Samrian god. Named
after the astronomer that discovered it.
Okay. So this this though, okay, so the
Anky comet air burst. Now, we're going
to definitely come back to that why uh
the Tor media stream seems to be a prime
candidate. And I think the evidence is
lining up pretty convincingly
that that the Tor media stream is a
prime candidate for the uh the
progenitor of the younger Dus whole
series of events.
So presumed to have occurred over the
Laurentide ice sheet.
The impact spreading ejecta over large
portions of North America and Europe
making it an interheiser event of
considerable magnitude.
These possible equivalent beds in the
northern Andes first considered to
result from a lightning induced
conflration
adjacent to the retreating late
Wisconsin or Merida glaciation. ice are
now known to have undergone intense
heating upon impact to a temperature
much higher
than what would occur in a wet first
stage successional tundra.
Uh I will I want to back up for a minute
toot my own horn. You know presumed to
have occurred over the Laurentide ice
sheet. This was a scenario that I began
to ponder
at least by 1990.
I was pondering that and I have recorded
only audio record but I have an audio
recording of five lectures
that I gave uh at Warren Wilson College
in North Carolina in 19
95 or 96.
And I'm describing
uh a multi-impact event over the
Laurentide ice sheet. I do not call I do
not reference the younger Dus although I
give the date of there being something
exceptional happening around 12,900
years ago.
We should get a transcript of that. Uh
because it's I I kind of lay it out and
it's so very gratifying to me to see uh
the rest of these guys catching up.
Uh okay. So then uh
so they did look up FM
which would be a type of scanning
electron microscope. a field emission
scanning electron microscope.
&gt;&gt; So field emissions, does it give us a
little
&gt;&gt; Okay, it's an advanced type of scanning
electron microscope or SEM that utilizes
a field emission electron source to
produce a focus beam of electrons. This
allows for high resolution imaging of
surface structures and features of
materials. The fees is known for its
ability to achieve a higher
magnification and resolution compared to
traditional SEMs making it a valuable
tool for research and analysis in
various fields.
&gt;&gt; So field
&gt;&gt; emission
&gt;&gt; field emission field emission emission
electron microscope. So they used
Mahaney and his two colleagues uh did
their analysis using both standard
scanning electron microscopy and field
emission scanning electron microscopy.
And what they showed was massive
disruption,
massive micro disruption
on grain surfaces, fractures diminishing
with depth toward grain interiors and
carbon welded onto quartz and plagios
minerals.
The presence of copious monazite in the
carbonatous coatings is considered part
of the incoming ejecta monazite m o n a
zi t.
It's considered monazite in the
carbonacious coatings
is considered part of the incoming
ejecta. So you've got carbon welded onto
quartz and then because of the presence
of this copious monazite in the
carbonatous coatings it's considered
part of the incoming ejecta as it is not
a common indicator mineral in the local
mythology. So what did you find for
monzite?
&gt;&gt; So monozy is a phosphate mineral that
serves as a significant source of rare
earth elements and thorium. It's known
for its reddish brown color and occurs
as small grains in various rocks or as
monazite sand in uh uh placer deposits.
Monzite is commercially available for
its rare earth element content.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So what they're saying here there
was no monazite minerals in the local
mythology in the local rocks those kind
of rocks but there was copious monazite
in these carbon material that's welded
onto the quartz.
&gt;&gt; So it's foreign you could say not not
terrestrial
&gt;&gt; most likely not right.
Well, it goes on to say here, uh, oh,
wow. The intergrowth of carbonacious
black matte material with thermally
disrupted and fragmented quartz and
feltspar. And feltspar is what I think
the most abundant mineral on earth,
isn't it? Next to quartz perhaps.
So you have the intergrowth of
carbonatous black mat material
with thermally disrupted and fragmented
quartz and feld spar.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Feld spar is 60% of the earth's
crust.
&gt;&gt; There we go. Okay. So disrupted,
fragmented,
thermally disrupted from heat
and fragmented quartz and felspar. Okay.
So you've got the intergrowth of
carbonacious black matte material with
thoroughly thermally disrupted and
fragmented quartz and felt spar a welded
patina of 100 to 400 nanometer thickness
could only occur with temperatures in
excess of 900° centigrade.
The event interpret here interpreted
here to be of cosmogenic origin.
So this welded patina 100 to 400
nanometers in thickness
uh
there
could only occur with temperatures in
excess of 900°
centigrade. Uh convert that to
Fahrenheit if you don't mind.
So that would be 1652
in freedom units Fahrenheit.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So that would that would hurt if
you got burned by that
&gt;&gt; 1652.
&gt;&gt; Uhhuh.
&gt;&gt; Had to be at least 900. Could have been
hotter.
&gt;&gt; Okay. I've got a Here we got a picture
of Monzanite. Monazite.
So it's a rare phosphate mineral with a
chemical composition of we don't need to
get into all of that. We've got
lanthinum, neiadium, a thorium, but it
usually occurs in small isolated grains
as an accessory min mineral in ignous
and metamorphic rocks such as granite,
pegmatite, shist and nice. Monzite is an
important or for thorium, lanthanum and
serium. It is often found in plaster
deposits like you said India, Madagascar
and South Africa have large deposits of
monazite sand. Could that possibly
uh now I know South Africa has had some
major huge impacts
in uh several of them down there. Uh I
wonder if the large deposits of monazite
could be associated with that.
Uh, monazite is radioactive, sometimes
highly radioactive, and specimens are
often metamic. Okay. Well, that's a
picture of a monzanite crystal.
Okay, let's go on here.
Same paper. The reversal of global
warming during the all alar subcron and
the sudden onset of the younger driest
cooling event has been documented by a
number of researchers coinciding with a
large-scale Clovis age megaponal
extinction. It had farreaching
consequences affecting the geoecological
environment across North America and
Europe. Newly discovered sites in Europe
indicate the event was indeed
intermispheric
and may have affected the entire world.
And I think what we've learned in the 15
years since then is we can say with
almost certainty that it did infect the
affect the entire world. Although
clearly contentious as to as to proof
for and extraterrestrial origin of the
black mat, the one site location in the
northern Andes described herein and new
evidence from Patagonia point
tentatively to either an asteroid or
comet event that reached far into South
America, perhaps even to the Antarctic.
And what we have here is your thick
carbon coat on an unidentified
disrupted silicut showing heavily
fractured surface.
It looks like it's been broken along
these angles here. Thick carbon coat. I
guess that's what this smooth part is
right here is the thick carbon coating
on an identified unidentified disrupted
silicut
showing heavily fractured surface.
And here's your energy dispersive
spectrum
energy dispersive spectroscopy
spectrum which uh if you look up ads for
us look up energy dispersive
spectroscopy
eds is an analytical technique used to
determine the elemental composition of a
sample. It works by detecting the
detecting and analyzing X-rays emitted
from a material when it's bombarded with
electrons usually in a scanning electron
microscope. The energy of these X-rays
is unique to each element allowing for
identification and quantification of the
elements present.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, that's what we've got right
here. We've got an EDS energy dispersive
spectroscopy spectrum right here as an
example. And what we have here is uh
here uh this is your your uh kilo volts
uh which is the charge of these uh the
charges coming off when you when you
bombard the the sample and you're
getting the uh the spectrum. you're
analyzing the spectrum which is going to
contain peaks that are associated with
the uh with the frequency of those
particular elements. You can see here
you got the biggest spike interestingly
is gold.
You got a big spike of carbon there. So
that's what we were reading about those
the carbon. We've got some oxygen. We've
got aluminum, silicon, chlorine,
calcium, manganese, and iron.
Um, so this shows aluminum,
silica at 151 in that uh ratio 1.5:1
probably calcium plio clays with cosmic
aluminum.
The high carbon is from impact ejecta
and ignited terrestrial vegetation.
Interesting. So that's where the carbon
came from. Impact ejecta. So when that
impact slams into the earth, the ejecta
explodes outward and then it creates
secondary fires. That material is now
igniting the vegetation, the terrestrial
vegetation. So that's what you see here.
The high carbon is from impact ejecta
and ignited terrestrial vegetation.
Traces of manganesees and iron are
typical components of the black mat.
Origin of chlorine is unknown but might
originated might originate from a
comet/meorite
air burst.
I wonder if chlorine was found in
association with Tangusa.
Uh
so the database described herein does
not conclusively prove an ET impact air
burst at 12.9 for the black mat as we
have detected no irrefutable PDFs that's
planer deformation features which is a a
feature that occurs in quartz when it's
subject to shock pressures it forms a
network of fracture lines that are very
conspicuous when you look at them
through a microscope. If you look up uh
shocked quartz,
okay, uh
for the black matter, we have detected
no irrefutable PDFs shockmelted quartz
or radium or nano diamonds in the
samples analyzed thus far. But the data
described here highlight a mat of glassy
carbon sphirerals fused and welded onto
alovvium
firmly dated to within the younger dus
initiation window. So clearly something
happened. The carbonrich mat a nanometer
thick coating is encrusted on breiated
or broken fractured minerals of quartz
and felspar. The disrupted mineral
surfaces interpreted to result from mass
impact and extreme heat. In eight out of
10 occurrences, carbon is coated or
welded onto mineral grains. So, I mean,
clearly they're finding something. He
says it doesn't prove an ET impact, but
it certainly is indicative that
something happened involving pressures
and high temperatures and so on. Uh,
so what did you find for shocked quartz?
Oh, look at that. Very distinct. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And it's it forms a pattern.
&gt;&gt; Whit Whitman Whitman Stanton. I think
it's Whitman Stanton. Uh
pattern, but yeah, very distinct. Is
there any more uh
examples?
See here? I've got I thought I had one
more from this page.
So that was uh shocked horse found in
association with the KT boundary
&gt;&gt; uh with chithaloo actually.
&gt;&gt; Chickaloop. Yeah, that's the KT boundary
impact.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Interesting. Okay.
&gt;&gt; I've got you another one right. So
shocked quartz is considered to be one
of the major diagnostics for
high-pressure impact events. Yeah. There
you can see that same kind of a pattern
again.
&gt;&gt; Got two for you there.
&gt;&gt; Uhhuh. Yeah. Shocked quartz photo photo
microraph of shocked quartz grains uh.13
millimeter across from the that's from
the Chesapeake Bay impact crater.
Uhhuh. Okay. Okay. So, the Chesapeake
Bay impact crater is worth talking about
uh because it was associated it it
seemed to happen very occur very close
in time to an impact of roughly the same
size up in Siberia called the po Papa
and uh there seems to have been a
mortality event associated with it and
there was also tectite formation over
the southeastern United States from the
Chesapeake Bay impact.
And there's a there is a a display or
they used to have a display of
georgettites or Georgia tectites. Uh
Georgitites is what they were called,
but they have been found in Georgia uh
down just below min uh on the fall line
where the transition occurs from the
Piedmont to the coastal plane. And
there's an outcrop there of a of a late
eosene sand deposit that would have been
the surface of the ground when that
impact occurred in the Chesapeake Bay
roughly 35 million years that rain down.
Now it's now buried under dozens of feet
of accumulated sediment since then. But
at that horizon, if you go down there,
uh, like particularly after a heavy
rainstorm, sometimes you can find
tectites washed out of the embankment
there, right where that eosene allegine
strata is is exposed.
So, uh,
so like it says, this doesn't prove it,
but it's certainly consistent with it.
If this is not, if this evidence is not
from an impact, then what's it from?
Once again, is it just a coincidence?
Well, let's see here. If we go
Oh, let's see. To the Journal of
Glaciology.
Let's see. What's the date on this one?
H again, 2010. Big year. So this is the
paper discovery of a nano diamondri
layer in the Greenland ice sheet.
Uh let's see. Uh so this is in the
journal of glaciology
and you know I think some of these are
probably available on Google Scholar. A
lot of them are going to be behind pay
walls, but we can look and see uh if
listeners want to actually download some
of the original papers that we're
discussing here uh and and read them
yourselves. I would highly highly
recommend that. Um and don't be too, you
know, if you don't have the geological
training to understand all the lingo,
hey, it's all right there. Just sit down
at your computer, read the paper, and
when you come up with a term you don't
know, look it up.
And John is looking uh let's see the one
we just looked at was evidence for a
cosmogenic origin of fired glacial
fluial beds. Probably just evidence for
a cosmogenic origin
of fired
and uh if it is available on Google
Scholar it should say give you an option
for downloading a PDF. The Greenland ice
sheet is available uh via Cambridge.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Is that the paper uh by
uh William Mahaney?
&gt;&gt; Uh
let's see. September 2017
is what I'm looking at.
&gt;&gt; Okay. That would not be the one we were
&gt;&gt; It's not the same one that you just
looked at. It's using the same the same
uh graphics.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, I've got William Mahaney
for evidence of a cosmogenic origin of
fire glacial flu fluial beds in
northwestern Andes. So, that one's
available via sciencedirect.com.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, you know, guess what? You
can get it directly also from
cosmictusk.
&gt;&gt; Nice.
So, I've got there's a PDF link. I just
put in I got as far as uh evidence for a
cosmogenic origin of fired and that was
all I needed to put in. I clicked and
what came up was a a link to the 2010
sedimentary geology. And there our
friend George Howard has been kind
enough to put it up there and make it
available to people. You can go on there
uh and click it. It's also available in
PDF form uh from uh academia
academia.edu.
So it is available. You can get it's not
behind a pay
uh if you want to go in and uh download
it and read it yourself. So the next one
here uh this discovery of a nanodiamond
rich layer. I'm going to look that up
right now. and uh a lot of these.
&gt;&gt; So, Andre Kerbatov,
&gt;&gt; Kerbat Kerbatov. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, I have that on psu.edu for Penn
State.
&gt;&gt; Oh, okay.
Yeah. Discovery of a nanodiamond rich
layer. Uh there it is. Yeah. There's
several.
Yeah, there it is. PDUain
uh PDF
like the state.edu.
So it's there uh pdfescolarship.org.
So it's there.
Uh so again uh
people if you're listening you can you
can download a lot of these papers. Uh
so let's see here. Uh, let's see what
this one says about discovery of a
nanodiamond rich layer in the Greenland
ice sheet.
We report the discovery in the Greenland
ice sheet of a discrete layer of free
nano diamonds in very high abundances
implying most likely either an
unprecedented influx of extraterrestrial
material or a cosmic impact event that
occurred after the last glacial episode.
From that layer we extracted N diamonds
and hexagonal diamonds lawns to light.
So they got both of them. They found
them in the green night sheet. An
accepted ET impact indicator at
abundances up to about 5 million times
background level. 5 * 10 6 5 million
times background levels in adjacent
younger and older ice. The nano diamonds
in the concentrated layer are rounded
suggesting they most likely formed
during a cosmic impact though some
process similar to carbon vapor
deposition or high explosive detonation.
Well, carbon vapor deposition is just on
when you have temperatures high enough
that it's vaporized carbon and then that
cools crystallizes out and depo in you
know and deposits uh and so or high
explosive detonation. So clearly
something something here going on. This
morphology has not been reported
previously in cosmic material but has
been observed in terrestrial impact
material in Okay. So what he's saying
there is that cosmic material that's
constantly microscopically raining down
on earth. It's an ongoing uniformitarian
gradualistic process. Right? But he's
saying that the uh
this morphology has not been reported
previously in that kind of cosmic
material but has been observed in
terrestrial impact material. This is the
first highlyenriched discrete layer of
nano diamonds observed in glacial ice
anywhere and its presence indicates that
ice caps are important archives of ET
events of varying magnitudes. Using a
preliminary ice chronology based on
oxygen isotopes and dust strategraphy,
the nanodiamond rich layer appears to be
co-evil with nanodiamond abundance peaks
reported at numerous North American
sites in a sedimentary layer, the
younger dus boundary layer dating to
12.9 plus or minus 0.1,000 years ago.
However, more investigation is needed to
confirm this association.
Of course, once again, now, so we just
had the Mahaney
group in the Andes. This same year,
they're finding these microsphererals
and evidence of high temperature
uh phenomena. Right now, here in
Greenland, we've got this team, and this
is quite a quite a team. If I go back
here, I mean, this is a lot of guys
here. A lot of people, I shouldn't say
guys. There's Sharon B. Sneed. So, we
got some ladies in there, but a lot of
these guys I'm familiar with. Uh Allan
West, there's Douglas Kennet and James
Kennet, son and father. Ted Bunch, who
uh regrettably one of the leading lights
uh in geocs analysis of geocsmic
materials died I think it was last year.
Uh, who other name do I recognize?
Whiti. Uh, yeah, we've read papers by
him. Thomas Stafford. We almost got him
to take us out to a uh look at a cave in
Texas that were uh but he's he's quite
old now. Um, and I don't think he was up
for it. Uh, who else? Wendy S. Walbach.
She did a lot of work on firestorms at
the KT boundary. Charles R. Kinsey. So
there's there's some Adrienne Stitch.
There's some pretty
exalted names here within the scientific
community that would have the
wherewithal and the expertise to
determine if these are in fact impact
phenomena or not.
Uh
and what they're showing here, this is
interesting because this applies not
only to this uh paper, but die three,
that was where one of the early uh core
extractions took place, but as you can
see that it's very near the uh edge of
the ice sheet. Uh and same with camp
century up here. Uh so with this one
here, they were all near the uh edge of
the ice sheet. Well, the problem there
was the ice is a lot more dynamic near
its edge, flowing back and forth,
melting episodes and so on. It's much
more unstable near the the perimeter of
the ice sheet. So what they did in the
late 80s, they went to right up here,
GISP 2 and uh and Grim, European team
and American team, and they did took
five seasons to penetrate fully through
the ice sheet to get to bedrock. But the
reason they went, this is called the
summit, the summit core
uh expedition because they went to the
Greenland summit because there the ice
is the most stable and the uh the
preservation of the layers is is more uh
visible and organized to where so uh
so anyways let's see here they where did
they let's see recently scientists
reported an abundance peak of in nano
diamonds at multiple locations across
North America that is restricted to a
thin sediment layer. The younger dest
boundary which dates
onset as we've seen 12.9
uh peak and hexagonal diamonds lite was
also reported at the YDB in Arlington
Canyon, California.
The only known explanation for
terrestrial lawns delight is by arrival
inside extraterrestrial objects and or
by impact of such objects with the
earth's surface. This discovery begged a
prediction that a co-vo layer with high
nanodiamond concentrations should be
preserved in the Greenland ice sheet. No
layers of nanodiamonds have previously
been reported from the Greenland ice
sheet or any other form of glacial ice.
Consequently, we conducted a pilot
investigation on a section of the green
and ice sheet that potentially spans the
last deglaciatial
deglacial in search of a layer
containing an abundance of free nano
diamonds that might be co-evo with that
of the younger dus boundary. A study
that included both field and laboratory
components.
Ice samples of large volume were
necessary conduct to conduct these
investigations and sufficient ice from
deep cores. Uh okay. Greenland ice sheet
project 2, Greenland ice core project
and Northgrip are unavailable. Um
consequently we followed the earlier
approach of Ria and others in 2002 and
Petro and others in 2006 who sampled the
ice margin to obtain a stratographic
sequence over the interval from the last
delacio delacial through the holene. Let
me see I think we can yeah here we go.
So here you've got the dust layer and so
below you've got this. This dust layer
is the equivalent of the black mat
layer. Okay. So uh basically then this
is where that transition took place. So
you've got this trench upper section of
the trench at whatever kang showing a
gusty ice layer sand.
&gt;&gt; Can you see that one more time Randall?
Uh, that's probably Icelandic.
&gt;&gt; I believe it must be
&gt;&gt; and I believe it must I do I do not
speak fluent Icelandic.
I know that's a deficiency in my in in
my my
&gt;&gt; kangaroo is the best thing I can
imagine.
&gt;&gt; Kangangeruso, we'll go with that.
So, it's showing a dusty ice layer
sandwiched uh between clear ice. The
nanodiamond peak layer lies immediately
below the base of the dusty layer. Ah,
you see that right here, the red layer.
So, there's the nano diamonds.
And then on top of the nanodiamond layer
is this layer of ice that had a lot of
dust in it while it was being
precipitated.
uh preliminary data suggests that the
dusty layer may represent the younger
dus cooling episode. If so, then the
nanodiamond peak immediately predates
the base of the dusty layer marking the
younger dus onset.
So uh in cooperation with a PBS NOVA
documentary productions, we conducted
field work in late 2008
during which the a several authors
sampled at a margin site east of Kanger
Lusuwok, West Greenland, approximately 1
kilometer inland from the ice margin.
Our goal was to collect continuous
samples of ice extending from the end of
the last glacial episode through the
early holene including the 1300year long
yd cooling episode. One of the authors
JPS has considerable experience sampling
along the Greenland ice sheet margin and
he identified a candidate for the wide d
section based on visual inspection of
dust strategraphy. Our sampling was
guided by the presence of clear dustpore
ice of assumed early holysine age
stratographically higher than a sharp
visual change into dusty ice of inferred
younger dus age. Beneath which was
another sharp change into clear ice of
assumed balling allarode age that was
preceded by dusty ice of assumed late
glacial age. So let's go back and look
at the picture one more time here.
Whoops.
So the nanodiamond layer. So if you were
to chop, you know, go in from the margin
and take coarse samples, you would then
encounter this dusty layer sitting right
on top of the layer of nano diamonds.
Uh oh yeah, look at this. So here's your
estimated concentration of nanodiamonds
by depth and sample for the kanganger
loosewok section based on high
resolution
uh high resolution
uh hrem high resolution
that's microscopy. What
high resolution that's microscopy. What
is the e again? Let's look that up.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to learn all every one of
these things
&gt;&gt; by hook or by crook. Hrem. It's hard for
me to read that screen typically. Hm.
&gt;&gt; H EM.
&gt;&gt; So that's going to be high resolution
eposcopic microscopy.
&gt;&gt; There we go. Eposcopic. Say that again.
&gt;&gt; Eposcopic. High resolution eposcopic
microscopy.
&gt;&gt; Microscopy. Okay.
I think what we should do is I I think
we've got, you know, I guess we could
probably get somebody like Malcolm Lac
or or Dr. Steven Collins on here or even
even um uh Dallas Abbott who are very
knowledgeable in this and to help us to
really get a good thorough understanding
because I I have a vague understanding
of all of these technologies work but um
you know I I I like to get a little bit
more deep into things. That's just the
way I prefer. I'd let rather have a more
working knowledge of of all of the
various types of uh technologies being
used to enhance our
our ability to perceive and understand
things both on the microscopic level but
also the macroscopic level. But this is
interesting. Look at your depth. Uh this
is going down core, right? So look what
happens when you get down to sample
number 14 at 5.4 4 meters below the
surface.
What is that? Uh million bill. This is
over a billion. A billion414
million nano diamonds per uh per liter.
And then at 5.55
uh sample 13, there's a lot more than
the background.
Uh but boy, right here at this layer. So
right there layers 13 and 14 between
5.55 depth and 5.4 depth you've got
basically billions of nano diamonds. And
then look at your over here. This graph
is a interesting one. Here's your
aridium sample number
depth your meter. And here you can see
the spike.
Uh and notice here's your yeah here's
your uh here's your temperature graph.
Look what happens right here. Shifting
to the left is cold. So you've got this
deposition of the nanodiamond layer.
Then you've got the dusty area and
coinciding really looks almost exactly
precisely. You've got this major shift
to the left uh which means cold. So this
is your younger dest.
The beginning of it. And I'm guessing
then this is the 1300year period uh that
brings us out of the younger dus here.
But this spike in the middle is
interesting.
So that looks like it would come like
about halfway through that younger dest
1300 years. Um
so
&gt;&gt; is this the micro pulse that you were
talking about? two or three episodes
ago.
&gt;&gt; Probably
the final and preferred hypothesis is
that the Greenland nanodiamond peak
layer which appears to date to the onset
of the younger dus is the result of a
major impact event. In support of this,
the continentwide cretaceous tertiary or
KT boundary layer is accepted to contain
nanodiamonds that did not arrive from
space inside the impactor, but rather
crystallized from carbonri terrestrial
material during that hypervelocity
impact.
During our Greenland research, we also
examined nanodiamonds extracted from KT
sediments collected in Kavvaka, Spain
and Needles Point, New Zealand. The
impact layers at both sites display
substantial abundances of LN delight and
nano diamonds having the same morphology
and range of sizes as those found in the
Greenland samples. Now that to me was
extremely interesting when I read it
because I thought okay one of the
proxies that helped to confirm
the impact scenario at the KT was the
finding of this lawn delight and nano
diamonds in abundance.
Well, now come come ahead by 66 million
years and you've got the younger dest
boundary and it's almost like coming
full circle in a way because now here at
the younger dest boundary we're finding
the closest analog in terms of the lawy
and nanodiamonds to that famous impact
that wiped out the dinosaurs.
while background levels were at zero or
very low as they are in Greenland.
Likewise, nano diamonds extracted from
younger dest boundary samples collected
in North American Europe display the
same rounded morphology and range of
sizes as those found in the KT sediments
and in Greenland. Of course, it is
possible that the nano diamonds in
Greenland formed through some as yet
undiscovered natural process other than
cosmic impact. However, that seems
unlikely since intense diamond research
spanning more than a century indicates
that the formation of nano diamonds and
L's delight in particular requires
extraordinary temperature, pressure, and
redux conditions that rule out natural
processes that occur either on or below
the surface of the earth. Thus, since
the YDB is the only other known
continent Y diamond layer in the entire
tested geological record, other than
that at the KT boundary, the most
consistent hypothesis is that
nanodiamonds in the IDB formed during a
major cosmic impact event. Since lite is
only known to form during high
temperature high-pressure cosmic events,
its presence currently can be explained
in only two ways. Either the lans
delight arrived already formed within
meteoritic material or crystallized
during a hypervelocity impact with the
earth's surface. The rounded morphology,
range of allotropes and very high
abundance of nano diamonds in the
nanodiamond peak layer appears to
exclude the first possibility arrival
inside meteoritic material. Regarding a
possible impact event, the Greenland
nano diamonds are identical to those
found in the KT impact layers. So, the
presence of rounded nano diamonds and
lines of light in green ice suggests
that a large cosmic impact occurred and
further investigations are necessary to
determine the nature and scope of this
event. In summary, since continentwide
layers containing nano diamonds are only
known to exist at the KT boundary and
the YDB, then the existence of this
layer in Greenland ice appears
consistent with the occurrence of a
major impact event that correlates with
the nanodiamond rich YDB in North
America at 12.9,000
years ago.
So that was a lot of interesting
developments in the year 2010.
And there's more that we'll go through
in the next episode as we carry this up
to the most recent evidence and
research.
I had somebody there was one comment on
the uh one of the last postings we did.
Uh and oh, the younger dest has been
disproved. It was something else and
something else and you're just looking
you're not keeping you're not keeping up
with the latest science. Of course, he
didn't cite anything at all. No papers,
no work, no nothing. No references. Um,
nothing. Well, let's see. We talked
about
two two papers that are just published
right now as we speak. The finding in
Louisiana and the finding uh in Siberia
near the Alai Mountains. Well, those are
all right now, like within the last two
months. So, it's I don't think it's me
or us who's not keeping up with the
latest science.
Anyways, uh
I think that's probably a good place to
take a break for now, don't you?
&gt;&gt; I think so. We'll come back and we'll
sally forth.
&gt;&gt; We'll sally forth. Uh we'll move on
ahead. I see up there 2011 and then
there's some really good evidence coming
up and I want to look at some of the
critics as well. Uh because this is how
science is supposed to work where
somebody proposes a new idea, an
outrageous hypothesis, and you're
supposed to try to take it apart. And if
it comes through unscathed, you know, it
it is warrant it's worthy of inclusion
in the pantheon of at least hypotheses
that are worth of testing. So what what
I do want to show though is that how
some of the criticisms
have been in my mind very biased and
working from preconceived assumptions
and I think that's going to be important
too because I think we'll see there that
there's legitimate controversy and
debate that goes on in science and then
when you begin to see somebody who's
resorting to ad homonym attacks appeals
to authority
Um,
&gt;&gt; it's because they've lost.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; They've lost
&gt;&gt; because they're at a loss in the moment
or in total, they have lost. So, they
resort to that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The problem is that's fine except
that when scientific debate filters down
into popular media,
popular media is often times going to be
the worst when it comes to uh appeals to
authority. And you oftenimes will see,
oh, I'll show you like the media itself
saying, well, the experts have weighed
in and disproven the impact hypothesis.
And then you look at the credentials of
the experts and they're no more
uh expertise than the people who are
promoting, right? So, somebody is making
this decision. Well, these are the
experts and these guys over here are the
crackpots
proposing this idea and you're going to
see I mean it's yeah, we're we're going
to get in and we're going to look at
some of what the critics although and
again there are some valuable critiques
because there are things
this is not a cut and dried uh situation
here. There are things that just don't
quite add up and we'll talk about those
things. Um,
so on that note, I guess I'm ready to
call it a day.
&gt;&gt; We'll see you next time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we'll be uh recording another
episode soon.
&gt;&gt; Yes, sir.
&gt;&gt; Within a few days.
&gt;&gt; All right, John.
&gt;&gt; Good night.