Spaceships over Los Angeles.
Body snatchers controlling [music] our
minds.
ETSs making contact.
These and other alien-based scenarios
[music]
have been the plot lines of countless
science fiction movies and television
shows.
But what if extraterrestrial [music]
beings came to Earth tomorrow?
Would they signal the birth of a new age
of peace and prosperity or trigger a war
of the worlds?
The day that it's announced we're not
alone is the day that this planet
changes forever.
&gt;&gt; The very structures of government and
the very structures of religion will
crumble. Everybody wants to meet an
alien, but we have to start small. We
have to learn how to walk before we can
run.
&gt;&gt; Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
[music] by extraterrestrial beings. What
if it were true? [snorts] Did ancient
aliens really help to shape our history?
And if so, what might happen when they
return?
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; throughout. Throughout human [music]
history, man has gazed up at the stars
in awe and with wonder.
Our ancient [music] ancestors charted
their movements,
identified [music] constellations,
and marked time by creating
celestial-based [music] calendars.
The stars also became the source of
countless myths and legends.
Many of these [music] describe visitors
coming down to Earth from somewhere out
there.
Others speak of entire civilizations
[music] existing out in the cosmos.
The ancient Sanskrit writings of India
tell us, for example, [music] there are
400,000
humanlike species scattered throughout
the cosmos in different planets,
different solar systems, even different
dimensions. But where are these alien
beings?
Did they come to Earth in the [music]
past as the ancient astronaut theory
suggests and then leave?
If so, will they ever [music]
come back? Today, scientists around the
world have stopped waiting around and
[music] are taking steps to find
intelligent extraterrestrial life. Will
technology finally be able to [music]
prove what our ancient ancestors
believed thousands of years ago?
In 1960, astronomer and physicist Frank
Drake set up an unusual telescope in the
hills of West Virginia.
The strange device was made from surplus
World War II radar equipment.
But rather than containing a traditional
optical [music] lens, it housed a
directional radio antenna. Few simple
calculations showed that radio
telescopes have the [music] power to
transmit and receive across literally
interstellar distances. We're talking
many light years. So Frank Drake uh
turned a radio telescope on a couple of
nearby stars and tuned in to see if he
could pick up a message from the aliens.
So this was a sort of crazy thing to do.
Drake failed to pick up any sounds that
day, but the science of radioastronomy
was born.
If we couldn't see aliens in space,
maybe we could hear them.
[music]
The things we focused on in the past for
searching for extraterrestrial life is
really [music] passively trying to
discover signals on the basis that if
they were technologically advanced, they
would have some form of electricity like
[music] we do. And all electricity
generates radiation and it sends out the
signals and hopefully would detect it.
In 1961,
Frank Drake and a group of astronomers,
physicists, [music] and biologists
formed a privately funded organization
called SETI, the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence.
Their goal was to focus massive radio
telescopes [music] towards space and
listen.
Drake estimated the probability that
intelligent life existed out in the
universe in a formula that became known
as the Drake equation. The Drake
equation is like a bridge between
scientists [music] and non-scientists
because it explains what you would want
to know to give a number about how
common alien [music] life could be.
There are multiple uh factors within the
Drake equation [music]
like the fraction of stars that could
have planets and the fraction of those
planets that could be habitable and the
fraction of those that might have liquid
water and how many could have evolved
intelligent life. And then one important
factor is the lifetime of those
civilizations [music] and that is a big
unknown. Uh we only know of one that's
ourselves and uh how long are we going
to be around? That's to be determined.
Using his equation, Drake estimated that
over 100 million advanced civilizations
could exist in just the Milky Way
galaxy. Saidi presupposes that if you've
got an alien civilization capable of
traveling that's developed electronics,
they have a fingerprint.
That fingerprint is a repetitive signal.
A repetitive signal will tell them that
it's not just noise, junk frequencies
out there, but a real attempt at
communicating maybe not with us, but
with each other.
On August 15th, [music] 1977,
astronomer Dr. Jerry Eman was working on
a study project at Ohio State University
when he recorded an intermittent signal
coming from the direction of the
constellation Sagittarius.
The signal lasted [music] 72 seconds
before being lost. Eman believed that it
was of extraterrestrial origin.
But despite repeated searches and
increasingly larger telescopes, the
signal has never again been detected.
But what if SETI intercepts [music] a
transmission from another world? What
would happen next? According to SETI's
[music] post detection protocols, once
an extraterrestrial radio signal is
confirmed, news of the event should be
kept secret until the authorities have
been notified. The government will then
decide whether or not to try and make
contact. [music]
&gt;&gt; I think all bets are off because here is
this message could contain enormously
important information that would
transform our society and maybe
destabilize it. What is it going to mean
for the future of our civilization?
These are momentous questions.
Today, SETI continues [music] to scan
the vicinities of nearby stars for
artificially produced signals using
several of the world's largest
telescopes.
In the next several years, when it
becomes fully operational, SETI's new
Allen telescope array will allow for the
reconnaissance of up to a million stars.
&gt;&gt; SETI has to search a huge, huge area.
They'll tell you that now they have
searched the equivalent of like a glass
of water compared to the entire ocean on
Earth. They have a long way to go.
&gt;&gt; While SETI listens passively [music] to
signals from outer space, NASA has
attempted to contact alien life directly
through messages sent aboard its space
probes. [music]
&gt;&gt; It's a long shot, but there's no reason
in my mind not to expect that life
evolved elsewhere.
What's harder to predict or try and ex
understand is how likely is it that it
happened close enough that there'd be
someone we could actually communicate
[music] with.
In 1972,
NASA agreed to attach small [music]
plaques onto the outside of its twin
pioneer space probes, the first
human-built objects destined to leave
[music] our solar system.
NASA contacted Cornell University
professor Dr. Carl Sean to craft the
message. Carl Sean was one of the most
active astronomers in the search for
[music] life outside our planet.
He was a very prominent scientist. He
was an excellent astronomer and [music]
he really did a lot to help us
understand how we might contact other
life or detect life elsewhere in the
universe.
Sean along with SETI [music] founder
Frank Drake designed a gold anodized
aluminum plaque measuring roughly 6 by9
in that contained a [music] collection
of symbolic images representing humans
and Earth.
&gt;&gt; The man and the woman were nude and the
gentleman was holding one arm up like
this in what was intended to be a sign
of a sign of greeting. A schematic
design [music] of the solar system was
also shown with the planned trajectory
of the Pioneer spacecraft [music]
marked on it and a diagram of 14 pulsar
stars around the sun made a chart that
might help someone work out where the
craft originated.
We tried to give them an idea of where
we're located. And that's an interesting
problem is to figure out how you would
tell someone where you're [music]
located in space because you don't know
where they're going to find it. And it
was all in a very stylistic design, but
an attempt to hopefully communicate at
least some of these ideas.
5 years later, in [music] 1977,
Dr. Sean got a second chance at
designing an interstellar message when
NASA agreed [music] to attach another
one to the Voyager space probes.
This time, Sean created [music] a record
album made of goldplated copper along
with a series of basic [music]
instructions in how to make it work.
Sean estimated that the metallic disc
could survive in space [music] for at
least a billion years.
One of the challenges with technology
[music] is trying to figure out one that
can do what you want. So here you want
to encode audio and even some video
images, but do it in a way that almost
any other technologically [music]
advanced society could figure out. And
the advantage of a record player is it's
both mechanical and electrical. The
grooves are obvious. Um, and so they
actually put on the cover instructions
on how to play it. The recording [music]
included a wide variety of sounds.
A baby's cry,
wind,
surf and rain, animal noises, as well as
classical and cultural music [music]
from around the world.
One interesting song selection was Chuck
Berry's rock and roll hit, Johnny be
Good.
&gt;&gt; Music is a good choice cuz almost
anything vibrates and makes sound. So, I
would bet [music] that almost any
culture would develop music. I believe
it's Bach who gets the most time on the
record. I don't know why they picked
that to be honest, but he is one of the
more mathematical composers and that
might have been one of the reasons
because math is a more universal
language. Sean also included a wide
array of photographs of well-known
man-made structures and greetings in 55
different languages. I think the [music]
most important one is the Sumerian
language. Now, why would they include
Samrian on that record? Well, according
to the ancient alien theory, ancient
Samriia is the first place where we made
contact with an extraterrestrial entity.
At this point, we obviously haven't
learned anything yet about
extraterrestrial life cuz we haven't
been contacted back. Um, but I think for
our own purposes, anytime you try and go
and figure [music] out how you want to
communicate something, it pushes your
boundaries and understanding of [music]
communication itself.
&gt;&gt; We all want to find aliens. Whether it's
the planetary [music] scientists looking
for signs of life on another distant
planet, whether it's the ancient alien
proponents who want to find signs of
life of aliens who have visited in the
past, and whether it's people today who
[music] want to have experiences with
UFOs and aliens that have visited them
recently, all of us are trying to do the
same thing.
&gt;&gt; While the search for extraterrestrial
beings continues, a new space-based
telescope is hunting for planets that
may contain life.
Are there other Earths out there? And if
so, how will we find them?
&gt;&gt; Ignition.
Liftoff.
&gt;&gt; On March 6th, 2009, NASA launched a
Delta I rocket into space. On board was
a new telescope named in honor of German
astronomer Johan Kepler.
The space-based telescope was designed
specifically to discover the existence
of Earthlike planets [music] located
outside our own solar system.
[music] The Kepler search is focused on
a specific section of the Milky Way
known as Orion's Spur.
Kepler's job is to answer the question,
how common are other Earths?
And to do this, [music] Kepler is
looking at one part of the sky for three
and a half years. Imagine like keeping
your eyes open and staring at just one
part of the sky.
And what they're doing [music] is
they're looking at stars and then as a
planet goes around that star, when the
planet gets in front of the [music]
star, the starlight dims just a little
bit from our vantage point because it's
being blocked by the planet. And so you
look for that dimming of those stars and
then that's how you're able to detect
these planets.
So far, the Kepler telescope has
confirmed the existence [music] of five
planets outside our own solar system.
NASA officials expect to find several
hundred more exoplanets [music] like
these before their mission is completed.
Once a planet has been located,
scientists must then determine if it
might contain [music] water.
We know from Earth [music] that all life
on Earth requires liquid water.
[music]
So that is the approach that we've been
taking for looking for life elsewhere in
the universe.
Follow the water. And so that is the
step one
[music]
on Earth. Wherever we find liquid water,
we find life. And it's true. Life on
Earth can exist under an extraordinary
range of conditions.
Extreme organisms that live in the
scolding effluent coming out of the
Earth's crust deep beneath the ocean.
There are other remarkable organisms
living in the waste pools of nuclear
reactors and extreme radiation
environments and so on. But the one
thing that seems to be absolutely
necessary for life as we know it is
liquid water.
To determine if a planet contains water
and possibly life, scientists use
special telescopes to analyze its
[music] atmosphere.
&gt;&gt; We look at the light coming from the
planet and we split that light up like a
rainbow.
Now, if you look at a rainbow in the sky
and you look really, really carefully,
you will see some dark lines. You'll see
some colors missing from the rainbow.
And those colors are missing because of
absorption by gases in Earth's
atmosphere. So effectively, we're
getting a rainbow from another planet
and we're looking for dark lines that
tell us what kind of gases are in the
atmosphere.
&gt;&gt; To better understand how life affects
its atmosphere. NASA scientists study
microbial mats at California's Moss
Landing Wildlife Area.
&gt;&gt; Microbial mats are important to NASA for
a whole bunch of reasons. The organisms
that are in microbial mats have been on
Earth just about longer than any other
kind of organism. They make a number of
things which we call biomarkers which
are important in our search for life on
other planets. So there are textural
biomarkers. So when you pull up a piece
of microbial mat and look at the
surface, what does that look like? One
of the things that we're doing with
these microbial mats is we're measuring
the fluxes of methane. Methane is a gas
that's produced by certain kinds of
organisms that use the organic matter
that's in these mats. And when that
methane goes into our atmosphere, it can
be detected by other missions such as
Terrestrial Planet Finder is is one of
NASA's concept missions for looking for
gases that are produced by life on
exoplanets.
We [music] can look for the signature of
oxygen or water on a planet. And at
least that would give us an idea of life
forms like ourselves, ones that are
carbon based and use oxygen and carbon
dioxide cycles.
Our atmosphere is not stable without
living organisms, it would have
evaporated away [music] by now. And so
if you're looking out in space and you
detect around a star a signature of the
chemicals [music] that we know exist for
life, that's very strong evidence that
life is there. Now, it doesn't help you
know if it's intelligent life, but it
does give you an evidence for life.
&gt;&gt; With a universe literally full of
possibilities, planet hunters focus
their search on an area they call a
Goldilock zone.
&gt;&gt; The Goldilock zone for planets is the
place where a planet is not too hot, not
too cold, but just the right temperature
for life. Right [music] now, we know of
no planets like Earth in a Goldilock
zone. One planet comes close. It's
called Glee 581D.
But we're not entirely sure if that
planet is really in the Goldilock zone
or not.
&gt;&gt; In recent years, it's been recognized
that there's more than one Goldilock
zone. For example, there could be life
inside
icy planet decimals. These like small
planets or large moons.
moon of Jupiter. Europa is a very good
example. Europa is liquid [music]
beneath an ice cap. It's liquid
underneath because of tidal heating and
friction going on inside the planet. So,
it could be that there is life microbial
probably only deep down under the ice on
Europa.
&gt;&gt; It's a very challenging question if
there's life elsewhere in our solar
system.
You have so many components that have to
come together. We have to have an
understanding of the science. [music] We
have to ask the right questions.
I wish I had a triorder that I could
just go and like point and [music] would
say life or no life, right? But we don't
have that. So, we have to be smart and
we have to be clever and we have to
develop instruments that can actually
address the [music] questions we're
trying to answer.
It's inevitable. There's so many planets
out there. It's inevitable that we'll
find one in the Goldilock zone any day.
But while the Kepler telescope has only
just begun [music] scanning the horizon,
NASA is already planning the next step
in its search for extraterrestrial life.
The 2014 launch of the James Web Space
Telescope.
&gt;&gt; People always ask me, do you expect to
find an Earth in your lifetime? And I
say yes, absolutely.
When I was a student, there was almost
nobody prepared to argue that way. The
feeling back in the 60s and 70s was that
even if there were other Earthlike
planets, life is such an improbable
freak event that it would never ever
happen anywhere else.
Now, the prevailing view is yes, the
universe is teameming with life.
&gt;&gt; Everybody wants to meet an alien, but we
have to start small. We have to learn
how to walk before we can run.
The fascinating [music] thing for me is
that we're only 4 1/2 billion years old
in a universe that's close to 14 billion
years old. What would happen with some
of these Earthlike [music]
planets that had a 5 or 10 billionyear
head start on us? Gosh, you can only
imagine. But what if humans are not the
only intelligent creatures searching for
life in [music] the universe? What if
there are beings on other planets
conducting a search of their own? And
what [music] if in their search they
find us before we find them? Some
believe they already have.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; On October 30th, 1938,
radio listeners across the United States
sat stunned as a series of news
bulletins described Martians invading
Earth.
&gt;&gt; Martian cylinders are falling all over
the country. This is the end. Now,
&gt;&gt; while the broadcast sounded real, it was
a fictional production directed and
narrated by Orson Wells. Incredibly,
many of those listening believed it to
be true and panicked.
Newspaper reports described [music]
families fleeing their homes for the
mountains, while others armed themselves
with weapons and [music] prepared to
fight off the alien invaders.
If it was just presented maybe with a
brief introduction, saying [music] it
was not really happening, but from then
on it was played as if it was really
happening. Well, most people who heard
that thought that it was really
happening.
&gt;&gt; People became upset. Some of those
literally headed for the hills. They
drove places to try to uh pick up other
people, uh, family and friends. Uh, they
reported to the armory for duty.
&gt;&gt; The response to this fictional alien
attack resulted in many people preparing
for the worst. But if the public's
reaction to [music] a radio
dramatization resulted in a nationwide
wave of terror, what would happen if
they really came?
Los Angeles, California.
In the early months of 1942,
the city was on edge.
The recent surprise attack on Pearl
Harbor had propelled America into World
War II
and the threat of a Japanese invasion by
sea or by air kept the military on full
alert.
Pearl Harbor was a very recent memory
for people. People were in high [music]
alert. There was a great deal of
suspicion. Japanese Americans were being
put in internment camps.
There were German yubotats in the
Atlantic, Japanese submarines in the
Pacific, and people were very fearful.
In a wellorganized defense operation,
air raid wardens and the Coast Guard
were monitoring the [music] Pacific
shoreline as never before.
&gt;&gt; The war had started. I was a 13-year-old
kid.
And
this one night, which was February 1942,
the sirens started whailing in the
middle of the night.
Blackout,
and we'd had several blackouts before
this.
On February 25th, between the hours of
3:12 and 4:15 a.m., the 37th [music]
Coast Artillery Brigade in Los Angeles
fired off a barrage of anti-aircraft
shells at an unidentified [music]
flying object.
Watchers on the rooftop of the Columbia
Broadcasting Building in the heart of
Hollywood could plainly see the flashes
of guns and search lights sweeping the
skies in a wide arc along the coastal
area.
I think what woke me up initially was
the sound of anti-aircraft guns.
I jumped out of bed and my parents were
up. My father was an air raid warden. He
figured this has to be the real thing.
&gt;&gt; My mother was telling my brother and I,
"Get under the bed. Get under the bed.
Stay there." And of course, we got out
and we peaked.
There was all this firing. It was almost
like a Fourth of July.
&gt;&gt; I started hearing a lot of loud
explosions.
&gt;&gt; My brother and I looked out the bedroom
window, saw search lights
twisting and turning in the sky.
But what was the strange UFO that the
search lights were focused on?
Where had it come from? Japan or
somewhere from out of this world?
Could this incredible photograph
published the next morning in the Los
Angeles Times provide the proof? Could
ancient astronaut theorists have been
right all along?
was practically overhead. And I mean
overhead.
&gt;&gt; Retired anthropology professor C. Scott
Littleton was 9 years old and growing up
in Hermosa Beach when he spotted [music]
the strange object hovering right over
his house.
&gt;&gt; We saw what my [music] mother always
called a silver bug.
I'd characterize it today as a lozenge,
a long oval. It was something I'll never
ever forget.
It was caught in search light beams and
anti-aircraft shells were exploding all
around it.
It gradually went like this and then
began to lose altitude a little bit as
it moved over what had to have been
Redando Beach.
We lost track of it, but the banging
continued.
And very quickly afterward, I saw, we
all saw [music] a flight of planes
following the track of the object going
overhead, anywhere from [music] three to
five interceptors, uh, clearly
piston-driven US planes. No one has ever
[music] admitted that those planes were
in the sky.
Our
first [music] thought immediately was a
Japanese observation plane. Later, the
Japanese records definitively proved
[music] there were no Japanese planes
over Southern California that night or
indeed ever.
After ruling out the possibility that a
Japanese [music] plane had invaded
American airspace,
Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox
attributed the incident to war nerves.
But Secretary of War Henry Stimson
quickly refuted this explanation,
defensively [music] declaring that an
actual aircraft had been the target of
the assault.
To this day, no one seems to [music]
know just what or who was hovering over
Los Angeles that night.
Some claimed that the Los Angeles air
raid was nothing more than an elaborate
training exercise, a show put on by the
[music] military to keep citizens on the
ready in case of a real attack.
Others alleged that the unidentified
flying object was in fact a barrage
balloon that had broken loose from its
tether. But even that explanation
doesn't seem credible to those who
witnessed the actual event.
&gt;&gt; The one place where there were barrage
balloons that were anchored above the
aircraft plants in Elsagundo, Douglas,
North American, it would have to have
slipped its [music] tether, floated
north up to the Santa Monica Mountains,
and then back down this way. Barrage
balloons don't maneuver like that.
Regardless of the controversy, one fact
is undisputed.
An estimated 14,000 shells were fired at
the strange [music] object and shrapnel
rained from the sky for over an hour.
But what were the guns aimed [music] at?
Would the army really have put civilian
lives in danger for a drill?
&gt;&gt; Major panic. Six people got killed uh
due to car accidents and hit by falling
shrapnel.
&gt;&gt; A friend of mine said he witnessed a
piece of shrapnel go through his
neighbor's garage roof. So Oh yeah,
there were some some damage from falling
shrapnel.
&gt;&gt; The next morning
there was something in our backyard. My
mother told me to go roll up. It was
like a tarp or something. And when I
bent down or kneel down in the grass, I
cut my knee and I have my piece of
shrapnel. I've kept it all these years.
There's my shrapnel and it's very sharp.
by a process of elimination.
The most efficient, and I say this as a
scholar, the most efficient explanation
is that it was what we would call today
a UFO,
something not of this world, something
that belonged to another technology. If
that's true, then this event was one of
the largest mass UFO sightings in
history. Over a million people saw it.
But whether it was a UFO or not, the
memories remain vivid for those who saw
something in the sky that night. So
vivid, in fact, that many of them gather
each [music] year at Fort MacArthur in
San Pedro, California to reenact this
mysterious event.
The city went crazy. They thought it was
we were being attacked by Japanese
planes. Uh some theories said weather
balloon, others said uh you know, oh I
saw a plane. I know I saw a plane. And
others say no, no such plane.
&gt;&gt; Back then it was a scary thing. I think
to this day they don't know what they
were firing at was a weather balloon or
flying saucers.
&gt;&gt; But for those who believe they saw an
alien craft that night, one important
question remains.
What happened to it?
The rumor is that it finally crashed in
the water and was recovered by Navy
divers.
So maybe it was wounded and it crashed.
And this might explain why the military
was so quick to react to Roswell 5 years
later because they may already have had
at least some inkling of what they would
find there. Was Earth really visited by
an alien spacecraft on the morning of
February 25th, 1942?
And could the [music] global threats
posed by World War II have provided a
trigger?
Perhaps the idea is not as far-fetched
as some would think. Is it possible that
alien [music] spacecraft could have been
mistaken for enemy fighter planes in
Adolf [music] Hitler's Germany?
In his 1993 book, The Gods of Eden,
author William Braramley theorized that
extraterrestrials
played a part in nearly every
catastrophe in human history
and have even used war as a means to
control the growth of the human
population.
But while many are skeptical about
Bramley's claims, there is one thing on
which they agree.
that the number of reported [music] UFO
sightings always increases during
wartime.
&gt;&gt; In times of war, when vast civilizations
are in conflict and [music] in in
conflict so terrible that it seems as
though the civilizations will wipe
themselves [music] out, suddenly out of
nowhere,
UFOs appear.
While [music] skeptics and military
historians attribute these alleged
sightings to war nerves or stress, those
who believe in UFOs find the number of
instances hard to dismiss.
When World War II broke out in September
of 1939,
there were numerous reports of
unidentified flying objects [music]
spotted over Hitler's Germany.
Although the term UFO had not yet been
coined, the Allies believed the bogeies,
as they were then known, were new
fighter planes being developed by the
Nazis. [music]
But the first combat bomber jets, the
German measurement ME262, [music]
weren't deployed by the German Air Force
until 1943. [music]
It certainly doesn't escape notice just
how advanced the Nazi propulsion [music]
systems and their aeronautics technology
really was.
They had the first operational jet
fighter to see combat.
They were building [music] and test
flying aircraft that look incredibly
similar to [music]
UFOs that are reported even today.
They had greatly advanced rocket
technology. There have long been [music]
rumors about Nazi projects to build
aircraft using UFO technology.
At the end of the 19th century, there
was Ali Esester Crowley, HG Wells, Brahm
Stoker, who wrote Dracula, and Jules
Vern, who wrote from Earth to the Moon.
They were in a society called the Golden
Dawn. In that society, they actually
believed in the existence not only of
UFOs but extraterrestrials.
That culture influenced Hitler in the
late 1920s, early into the 1930s.
In looking for the origins of the Arian
race, they went all the way to India and
the Vic texts which talk about UFOs. So
Hitler in his own way was a UFO believer
and sought to develop his own version of
the UFO based on the Vic text to have a
dramatic Vundava, a wonder weapon that
would [music] end the war.
Although the Nazis never developed this
so-called wonder weapon, reports of
strange flying machines in German
airspace continued throughout the war.
But just what was it that the Allied
pilots were reporting
&gt;&gt; in the 1940s
as waves of American bombers were
literally obliterating
German cities,
Dresden,
Hamburgg,
Berlin.
In these raids, American fighter pilots
saw these balls of light coming at their
planes. They didn't know what they were.
They thought they were German secret
weapons at first. So they call them foo
fighters. The word f in French is fire
and these were balls of fire coming out.
So instead of f fighters, they were foo
fighters. They were seen in large
numbers over Germany and over western
Europe where they were described
variously as structured craft or simply
balls of light.
It was so important at the time that the
military began to notice it and they
began to investigate these things. There
are hundreds of cases. None seemed to be
very harmful to planes, but they were
all over the place.
Curiously, when the Foo Fighters
appeared, Allied aircraft would
sometimes [music] experience mechanical
failure.
And perhaps most mystifying of all was
that some pilots reported flying right
through the UFOs as if they had no mass.
[music]
It was never discovered what the Foo
Fighters were or where they came from,
but the theory that they were some sort
of German secret weapon was widely
accepted among Allied pilots at the
time.
But could the Third Reich have possessed
technology more advanced than even our
most modern aircraft? Some believe what
the Nazis had developed was an advanced
mechanism that scientists are still
working [music] on today. Mercury
powered anti-gravity technology.
This involves mercury being in a closed
system
like a glass ball. Once that mercury
becomes spinning in a gyroscopic manner
within a closed system that creates a
lift, it's electrified lift. It's also a
very bright light.
And in fact, many UFOs are described as
exactly that. Towards the end of World
War II, the Germans started producing
massive amounts of mercury. And in fact,
a number of the Ubot that were later
sunk, one was sunk near Singapore,
another in Norway only a few years ago,
they actually found it. And it's entire
cargo was Mercury. What the few
historians have actually written about
Foo Fighters and it which is still
apparently a secret today is that they
were a kind of mercury plasma ball. And
the purpose of the foo fighters
was to make a highly pulsed magnetic
charge and field around the bombers
which would then cut out the engines and
interfere with the electrical systems in
the planes.
Could Foo Fighters really have been
based on extraterrestrial technology?
If so, where did the Germans get it?
UFO theorists point to the discovery of
a flying saucer that allegedly crashed
in the Black Forest near Freeberg,
Germany in 1936.
Some believe German scientists repaired
the craft to test its energy and
propulsion systems and through reverse
engineering were able to replicate some
of these so-called alien technologies.
Did the Nazis take this craft and was
there some sort of a a pack that
happened there? Did the Nazis did they
retrieve bodies?
It's hard to pin down how much they had.
Was there contact? There's always been
that theory that they had a captured
craft and that they were reverse
engineering it. It's very possible they
were truly way more advanced than any
culture at the time.
Thank God for the American know-how
because we were combating them with our
own kind of knowledge and technology as
well. After World War II, there was an
exercise mounted by the Americans called
Operation Paperclip.
The allies had been confronted with all
this amazing technology from Germany.
The jet engines, airplanes, the rocket
engine airplanes, all these amazing
devices. To give you an example of some
of the material that was collected by
Operation Paperclip, right at the end of
the war, von Braonn and his team had
begun designing multi-stage rockets
capable of reaching the United States.
They also had plans for a space station,
the classic circular sci-fi space
station. And on this they had a huge
sunlight collector and mirror that was
designed to focus sunlight down on the
earth as a kind of death ray.
There were all these wild ideas coming
out of that team that turned it into a
very valuable coup for the United
States.
Ultimately it was von Braonn who built
the Saturn 5 rocket that took people to
the moon.
The story of the World War II Foo
Fighters, much like that of [music] the
Battle of Los Angeles, has been largely
forgotten or dismissed by traditional
historians. [music]
But an event that happened just 2 years
after the war had even the skeptics
wondering, what if [music] aliens really
did exist?
And could one of their craft have
crashed to Earth?
Mainstream [music] archaeologists have
long rejected the notion that
extraterrestrial beings had a hand in
creating the pyramids of Egypt.
Theologians and religious scholars
refute the idea that stories of the
Bible or the Mahabharata could be
describing [music] alien encounters.
And governments throughout history have
officially denied reports that the Earth
has been visited by flying saucers.
But on July 8th, 1947, [music]
a UFO sighting was reported that even
the United States government had trouble
denying. Why? Because this time the
report was [music] issued by the US
Army.
I'm walking on the Foster Ranch between
Corona and Roswell, New Mexico, not far
from what is called the debris field
right over that hill. And that debris
field refers to headlines [music] back
in July of 1947
about a disc, one of those mysterious
UFOs [music]
actually crashing right out here.
One night [music] in early July 1947,
a major thunderstorm rolled across New
Mexico.
The next morning, rancher M. Brazle went
out to check on the damage.
&gt;&gt; Matt Brazzle went out to make sure
everything was where it was supposed to
be, and he came across this really
extensive area of debris, stuff he had
never seen before. He brought it to the
local sheriff's office.
In 1947, Roswell was home to Roswell
Army Airfield.
The sheriff called the base. The base
sent Major Jess Marcel. And at that
point, it basically became a military
site as they gathered [music] up every
bit of debris they could find.
&gt;&gt; In their initial report, Army officials
made a vague claim of having started the
recovery of the debris sometime last
week.
But why didn't the Army report their
findings right away? And why were they
so ambiguous about the timeline?
You know, one of the biggest things we
have is the newspaper of July 8th, 1947,
where Colonel Blanchard issued a order
to Lieutenant Walter Hott, who was a
public information officer, saying
basically we have in our possession of
flying saucer being taken to Fort Worth
to hire headquarters.
&gt;&gt; Roswell was a real turning point for
Euphology. I think that was because the
military for the first time admitted
that they had a crash disc and because
it was admitted at the time, of course,
it caused a sensation.
Then July 9th, [music] General Remy
issued a press release saying, "No, it
was a weather balloon."
And that started the best documented UFO
cover up ever.
Army officials referred to the debris as
being part of a flying disc. Internal
memos even referenced the crash site as
having victims.
So why less than 24 hours later did they
suddenly decide that what they had
retrieved was nothing more than a
weather balloon.
Although Blanchard and Remy stuck by the
revised story, [music] Lieutenant Ha
stood by the contents of his initial
report his entire life. And those who
believe him think modern technology may
have recently provided the irrefutable
evidence they have been looking for.
When Major Marcel took the debris to
Fort Worth and General Ramy spread it
out to give this press conference that
it was a weather balloon, there was a
picture taken and in his hand is a piece
of paper.
It's a very little piece of paper. I
mean, and this has been blown up and it
is a memo. There is a leading researcher
in the field who is pulling the words
out of this and they include things like
team at Fort Worth forwarded victims of
the wreck pod or pan.
And so every year that the technology
improves, General Ramy may be the one to
solve it.
Bob Wood, a researcher in UFOs, had
received leaked documents in 1996
and shared them with me and a few
others. This document called the
Interplanetary Phenomena Unit with a War
Department stamp dated July 22nd, 1947.
The most disturbing aspect of this
investigation was that there were other
bodies found not far from landing zone
one, the Mac Brazzle site between Corona
and Roswell that looked as if they had
been dissected as you would a frog.
It does not define were those bodies
human, were those bodies nonhuman.
But suddenly for me, this electric jolt
that came into holding that document and
reading at the end of the 90s, what
would explain finally that our
government knew that extraterrestrial
biological entities from somewhere else
in the cosmos was interacting with our
planet for a very long time.
5 years after Roswell,
the United States Air Force coined the
term unidentified flying object or UFO.
In the decades [music] since, thousands
of UFOs have been reported.
&gt;&gt; Wa!
&gt;&gt; photographed and videotaped all over the
world.
&gt;&gt; Oh my god.
Perhaps one of the biggest, most
revolutionary pieces of technology to
change our view of UFOs and flying
saucers is [music] the video cam.
&gt;&gt; Wa! I'm getting a series of lights right
there. I got it. I got it. I got it. You
only have to look at what happened in
Phoenix, Arizona in March of 1997 when
these huge flying boomerangs
went right across Phoenix, right through
the whole valley heading south to the
Mexico border. These were all caught on
cameras. Network news caught these.
Local news caught these. You saw these
on CNN. You saw these on Larry King. Oh,
there it is over the left. Wow. And yes,
people call them flares. Of course they
did. But the fact is when you see
something with your own eyes.
&gt;&gt; Look, dude. Pat, you got it?
&gt;&gt; I see it.
&gt;&gt; Even if it's on a video camera, suddenly
your perspective changes. And that
middle one is moving quick. It's only
the beginning, you guys.
So now, according to recent polls, Galla
polls and roper polls, well over 50% of
Americans
believe that flying saucers exist.
And close to 50% believe that the
government knows that flying saucers
exist and that the government is hiding
that fact.
&gt;&gt; But why so many UFO sightings [music]
after Roswell?
Is it a coincidence? Or is the world's
growing [music] belief in aliens
providing cover for those who might
previously have been too afraid of
ridicule to come forward? Perhaps there
is another reason. Perhaps there are
more sightings because there is a
genuine increase in [music] alien
visitations.
Ever since the dawn of the space age,
&gt;&gt; there had been plenty of stories of UFOs
and aliens prior to that, a lot of
sightings. They weren't as widely
reported somewhat also because World War
II had been going on prior to that. But
because now we had a crash and there was
more room in the newspaper, so to speak,
I think that really helped the subject
take off.
If, as some suggest, aliens from other
worlds truly are among us and have done
their best to keep themselves [music]
hidden for thousands of years, will they
ever reveal their presence?
More importantly, what happens if they
do? And what if it is already happening?
In March 2010, a mysterious pulsating
light floated over Cleveland, Ohio for
11 [music] consecutive nights.
We're having a sighting right now over
the lake. I'm going to say 270° south.
There are uh two objects. [music] One is
coming up from the left. These are
extremely close to each other. There's
absolutely no way these are planes right
now. Uh what's happening is the initial
object that came out, it's sitting
there. It's hovering. It's getting
extremely bright. It's illuminating
different colors. And this second object
appeared from I'm going to say the top
left of it. And now what? It's looks
like it's moving around. It wow. They
completely just switched spots.
Oh my god, this is beautiful. It knows
we're watching. It knows we're watching.
&gt;&gt; The Cleveland sighting is one [music] of
thousands reported each year. And while
many are proved to be false alarms,
others are not so easily discredited.
&gt;&gt; Right below it, big bright white flash
just occurred.
&gt;&gt; In 1991,
Britain's Ministry of Defense [music]
assigned author and journalist Nick Pope
to track the hundreds of sightings
reported over England, [music] Scotland,
and Wales every year.
The Ministry of Defense has been looking
at the UFO issues since the 1950s.
And the whole uh reason for looking at
these UFO sightings is not necessarily
because the department corporately
believes in extraterrestrial visitation.
It's more to [music] do with keeping a
watchful eye on any unusual activity in
British airspace. Clearly, if there's
something uh there that's a little bit
out of the ordinary, we want to know
about it.
My beliefs when I was given this job
were I think what on earth have I let
myself in for here? I had no particular
knowledge or interest in the UFO
phenomenon. Certainly no belief in in
anything unusual. But the more I looked
back through the archive of old files
and the more I began to investigate the
ones that were being reported to me on a
daily basis, I began to change my mind
and realize that some of these UFO
sightings couldn't be explained in
conventional terms. [music]
&gt;&gt; It's definitely moving.
Many of the most intriguing cases
[music] Pope researched involved
eyewitness reports from pilots, police,
and military officers,
while others featured classified radar,
video,
or photographic evidence.
One case that was a particular turning
point for me was the so-called Kford
incident. [music] Now, Cosford is a
military base in the United Kingdom. And
on the particular night in question,
which was 30th of March, 1993, there was
a wave of sightings over a period of
about 6 hours. And there were many
police and military witnesses. And two
air force bases, Cosford and Shawbury,
were directly overflown by a vast
triangular-shaped craft.
Now, the meteorological officer at one
of these bases described this to me as
the size of a a jumbo jet hovering or
moving very very slowly and then
accelerating away to the horizon at
incredible speed. He he said many times
faster than a military jet.
And this was a man with 8 years
experience in the air force.
This sighting was thoroughly
investigated not only by private UFO
investigators but also by the British
government who were unable to explain
all of the sightings reported uh during
this incident.
Another intriguing British UFO sighting
[music] took place in December 1980.
US Air Force personnel stationed in
SuffK, England, reported seeing a
brilliantly illuminated spaceship that
landed in Randsham Forest on [music] two
consecutive nights.
&gt;&gt; It's coming this way. Definitely coming
this way.
There will never move down about. This
is weird.
&gt;&gt; What made this case particularly unusual
is that this was not vague lights in the
sky. This was a landed metallic craft
that some of the witnesses claimed
[music] they got uh so close to they
could actually touch the side of it. One
witness saw strange symbols on the hull
which he likened to Egyptian
hieroglyphs. He made a sketch of this in
his police notebook and took some photos
though he was subsequently told they
didn't come out. The Ministry of Defense
looked at this and the defense
intelligence staff assessed radiation
readings that had been taken at the
landing site as being significantly
higher than background. And that's a
direct quote from the government's own
assessment. The British government
generated a massive file of information
about this sighting report,
but at this date, it's very unlikely
that the actual truth about this
sighting will ever be known.
But in spite of the compelling [music]
eyewitness testimony, the Ministry of
Defense soon declared the case closed.
22 years later when the government
declassified files on [music] the
Rendlesshamrom incident, the evidence
was inconclusive.
But what stood out [music] was the
credibility of the main witnesses who
were trained military personnel.
Obviously, as a UFO hunter, I've met a
lot of people who've encountered UFOs.
just flying on a plane, for example,
you're on a plane and suddenly the pilot
comes out of the cockpit, and this has
happened on five separate occasions, and
he'll say to me, "I saw a UFO over
[music] Phoenix. I saw a UFO over
Texas." Half my crew saw a UFO. And
he'll say to the pilot, "Well, do you
report it?" And they say, "When the
flight controller says at the airport,
do you want to report a UFO sighting?"
And then bursts out laughing, what you
say is no. There are UFO sightings every
single day. Real people with real
sightings of real UFOs. It is very
prevalent as more and more people talk
about it.
Something is going on.
In terms of the government response to
all this, certainly in Britain, the
Ministry of Defense policy for many
years [music] has been to try and
downplay this subject. Not really in any
great sinister attempt to cover up the
truth about UFOs, whatever that might
be, but more out of embarrassment. There
are things in [music] our airspace. We
don't know what they are, and that's not
a good place for the government and the
military to be. On December 1st, 2009,
the British Ministry [music] of Defense
quietly terminated its UFO project,
citing that there had been no credible
evidence that [music] UFOs posed a
potential threat to the United Kingdom.
There are a number of aspects of this
decision that were particularly
controversial. Firstly, UFO sightings
are at a 10-year high in the United
Kingdom. So, it seemed the most
inopportune moment to pull the plug on
50 years of research and investigation
into the UFO mystery. The other point
that made this particularly
controversial was the way in which the
decision was announced. Uh there was no
proactive uh statement issued on this.
It simply said the department will not
respond to any inquiries on this subject
and will no longer investigate
sightings.
One hurdle confronting those in favor of
fully disclosing classified [music]
information related to UFOs is the fact
that most mainstream scientists [music]
believe that the study of alien
phenomena is little more than just
fringe science.
It is this fear of dismissal or ridicule
that keeps many scientists hidden in the
shadows. Our best scientists who
communicate with one another around the
world have rules of protocol
which include they cannot appear to be
religious. [laughter]
They cannot believe in flying saucers
and they certainly shouldn't hang around
with anybody who [music] believes in
flying saucers.
But it's all done, you might say, behind
closed doors because nobody really wants
to uh draw attention to it. You know,
that uh they understand, you know, that
there's a penalty associated with this
kind of research. And so consequently,
uh it's done it's done invisibly.
&gt;&gt; To be blockaded and stopped by worries
about peer reviews and so forth to me is
wrong. [music] We can speculate whether
there is life outside this plant. We can
speculate whether there's been a contact
with with with other civilization. Why
not?
&gt;&gt; But as more scientists openly embrace
the probability that there is
intelligent life existing elsewhere in
the universe, will the belief that
[music] alien beings are visiting us
also become more accepted?
What might be the reaction today if
extraterrestrials were to actually
arrive on Earth and make themselves
[music]
known to us?
Countless science fiction books and
films tend to portray aliens coming
either to warn us or destroy us.
Since the 1960s, people have been
thinking about, well, what do we do? Do
we have a day the Earth stood still
scenario? If aliens come, [music] do
they warn us that our planet's facing
disaster?
Do they attack us the way the Martians
did in War of the [music] Worlds? Well,
the answer is more complicated than it
seems. It's not just somebody landing
and saying, "Take me to your [music]
leader."
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; The general consensus today is that if
extraterrestrials were to show up
tomorrow, they'd be hostile and they
would want to enslave us and and battle
us and and and destroy us and all this
crazy stuff. In my opinion, [music] that
won't be the case because any
civilization that's mastered to travel
interstellar space would be benevolent
to a lesser advanced society.
Technologically speaking,
a simple statistic shows that if we make
contact with extraterrestrial
civilization, we are the new kids on the
block. We're the ones who are at the
back of the queue when it comes to
intelligence. So, uh they'll be teaching
us stuff. We won't have a great deal to
teach them.
There are wide range of benefits that
can be derived from accepting that we
have neighbors in the galaxy that are
visiting us. There are reports of
medical treatments that have been
performed for the benefit of several
people who have had contact. There are
advanced energy technologies. reports
are that some of these have been reverse
engineered already and are used in
military craft.
There are communications technologies.
So really any area of life that we have
could be beneficially impacted by
acknowledging that there are these other
people out there [music] that they have
information knowledge that they can
share with us that would benefit us.
&gt;&gt; It's going to depend how the discovery
comes about. If in fact it's a distant
radio broadcast, we might expect one
thing. Uh if in fact there's some type
of visitation as fits in with beliefs
about UFOs, uh that might be something
else. But on the whole, I think people
are much more [music] prepared for uh
should we say contact.
Many who believe contact with
extraterrestrials is inevitable suggest
governments need to prepare themselves.
It's a field of study known as
exopolitics. Exopolitics poses the
question, what should our response be to
that situation at a societal level? Not
necessarily at a governmental level, but
actually individuals. [music]
How can we reach out at the hand of
friendship?
Exopolitics has really been a grassroots
movement of people concerned and about
this issue and and want disclosure on
the UFO subject and also want to help
organize people [music] locally to get
the information out through their
governments and make it this big change
happen.
But if we reach out in friendship, what
guarantee do we have that it will be
returned in kind?
Many scientists, including famed
theoretical physicist [music] Stephven
Hawking, believe alien beings could pose
a threat and suggest we do everything
possible to prevent contact. If
extraterrestrials or aliens were
aggressive or warlike, and they came
here, is it a case where resistance is
futile? How do you wipe [music] out life
on planet Earth? That's easy. A plague?
Simple. No UFOs, no zorching beams from
the sky, [music] no explosions, no
Empire State Building collapsing, none
of that. We can do that. Why can't
aliens do that?
To think that we would be able to come
up with some type of a defense mechanism
or have defenses against interstellar
traveling society is ludicrous.
Whether they came as friend or foe, if
extraterrestrials did land somewhere in
the United States, it's possible the
aliens would be greeted by government or
military personnel wearing hazmat suits
and testing [music]
for harmful pathogens and radiation.
Many conspiracy theorists suspect the
government's next step would be to cover
up the visitation.
They site as evidence a reputed sighting
that took place over Washington [music]
DC in 1952.
In full view of the entire world, a
squadron of formation of UFOs buzzed
Washington and fought our own F93 jet
fighters. General [music] Samford
willingly and deliberately, maybe on
instructions from Harry Truman, who was
president, lied to the American people.
We have received and analyzed between 1
and 2,000 reports. Of this great mass of
reports, we have been able adequately to
explain the great bulk of them. His own
Captain Rupelt in his own book on flying
saucers says Samford was lying. We have
the letter from the Air Force to Dean
Condan saying deep six UFOs. So, have
UFOs come to planet Earth in full view?
have manifested themselves, have shown
themselves. Yes. Did we see it? Yes. Was
there a protocol for handling it? Yes.
That protocol was called deny.
But if an alien visitation proved
undeniable,
who might be chosen [music] to then
speak to those inside the spacecraft?
Who could best represent all the nations
and interests of Earth? If aliens do
land on Earth, I [music] think we should
send our best world leaders who are the
most open-minded and reasonable, but who
also have the ability to defend
themselves against those aliens.
In my opinion, that's one of the reasons
we have a United Nations. Yes, it
prevents wars and delivers food. But on
the other hand, just imagine the
Security Council itself convening to
deal with aliens, [music]
an image on a big screen at the United
Nations. The answer is, I think it all
happened back in the 1940s. And that was
one of the reasons that Roosevelt and
Eleanor Roosevelt pushed so hard for the
formation of a United Nations to replace
the League of Nations.
Somebody had to confront the aliens.
&gt;&gt; The notion that our leaders, elected or
otherwise, should speak on our behalf, I
don't necessarily think that makes
[music] sense.
There are a lot of people who might have
better ideas than the people who are in
government. I'd like to see a profoundly
democratic with a small D
unauthoritarian
interaction [music] with aliens.
Currently, there are no known official
protocols in place for an alien
visitation.
But there are those who think that
[music] contact with extraterrestrials
is imminent and that our world leaders
must plan for the event now.
&gt;&gt; We're not alone in the universe. We have
friends and relatives out there in the
galaxies,
and we need to [music] take on this task
one way or the other of just getting the
job done. and getting to the point where
we're considering the practical details
of interacting with these friends and
neighbors out there.
Who is responsible for that
relationship? Well, the State Department
isn't. The United Nations isn't. And I
think this is a very big problem. So,
there needs to be a diplomatic effort to
make contact with [music] these
interstellar civilizations in such a way
that it puts wiser people in charge of
that.
Even if you don't corporately believe in
extraterrestrials, if you think the
possibility of alien visitation is
vanishingly small, the consequences if
it does happen are immense and therefore
it's prudent to have something in place
to deal with it. Personally, I think it
would be very very exciting. I mean, it
would be just like the first time, you
know, the explorers came um from Europe
to the Americas and discovered a whole
new culture and they had to interact.
Hopefully, it won't work out as some of
the bad things that occurred then. and
it would be a more positive experience
and maybe we've learned from that and we
can go forward.
&gt;&gt; What would happen after [music] any
potential extraterrestrial contact is
open to much speculation. But most
people concede one thing. The world as
we know it would change dramatically.
[music]
The result would be that the
fundamentalist orthodox belief systems
of every organized religion on earth
would collapse.
meaning that it would really bring into
question the origins of the human race,
uh the Genesis stories and a whole lot
of other issues.
&gt;&gt; The very structures of government and
the very structures of religion will
crumble.
&gt;&gt; But in 2008,
a stunning announcement was made from a
very surprising source.
proof to some that miracles, [music]
like aliens, do indeed exist.
The Vatican, Rome.
This walled [music] enclave has been the
center of power for the Catholic Church
since the fifth century.
It's not only the Pope's residence, but
a place of homage for 1 billion
Catholics and represents nearly 2,000
years of Christian teaching and
tradition.
But in 2008, the Vatican [music] made an
announcement that some say might
threaten its own existence.
The chief astronomer of the Vatican
Observatory, Father Gabriel Funess,
acknowledged [music] the possibility
alien life exists on other planets.
They basically said that belief in
planetary life outside of Earth does not
negate one's belief in God. Now, 500
years ago, if the Vatican would have
said that, they would have burned
everybody on the stake.
The present Pope Benedict of course has
a very scientific bent and he respects
intellectual life in in a way that is is
quite extraordinary. He seemed quite
open to entertain the idea. What if
there is life in other planets? It's
certainly an interesting [music]
question for a Christian to approach it
scientifically and challenges your
belief of how much of this you attribute
to God.
Many [music] wondered about the church's
motives and timing.
&gt;&gt; Why, after centuries of belief in man as
God's supreme creation and the only
intelligent life in the universe, did
the Vatican make an announcement that
could turn Christianity on its head? Did
they know something the rest of us did
not?
This is something that is completely new
in the history of the church that the
extraterrestrial question is not only
addressed but at the same time it's
okay.
I mean that is a major change in
opinion, a major change in the status
quo.
And I ask why
would it have huge ramifications?
Of course. Does it change anything? Of
course. But at the same time, would
[music] that change religion or belief
in God?
Not really. Some people say, "Well,
Catholic Church must know something. Uh
maybe they're trying to get ahead of the
game here."
On the other hand, it may just be that
they're being very clever and and simply
trying to cover all the bases in [music]
case there is some great announcement or
discovery about alien life. Because make
no mistake about it, if it is announced
that alien life has been discovered,
people are going to look to their
religious leaders for some sort of
guidance about this. Whether it's
Christians, Jews, Muslims,
Hindus,
if extraterrestrial life was found, then
the church would react presumably as it
does with any data. See what there is.
I don't think there would be any
conflict in the way that we look on our
humanity.
What we would find [music] is that God
creates intelligent life in a variety of
ways. And I think what we would learn
from that is we can't restrict God to
any one mode of making intelligent life.
The idea that intelligent life exists
elsewhere in the universe [music] has
been debated by religious leaders,
historians,
and scientists.
But not everyone agrees how its proof
would affect human spirituality or the
many religious institutions. [music]
&gt;&gt; What would happen to our interpretation
of the book of Genesis?
Well, the book of Genesis looks at the
universe from the point of view of
Earth. We look at the sun. We look at
the moon. We look at the stars. [music]
So to realize that the earth is just one
small pale blue dot in this immense
universe but I think it would only
expand our interpretation of Genesis. I
don't think it would uh change it in any
fundamental way.
It's an interesting question for
Christianity in general since
Christianity would teach [music] that
salvation comes through Jesus who was
apparently an earthling. Um what do you
do if there are people on on Mars? Are
they saved? According to our viewpoint,
um I don't know.
Christians have always had this problem
that if there aliens out there, are they
not to be saved? It's not a problem for
Jews. It's certainly not a problem for
Buddhists or Hindus. But Christians are
in a particular fix for a very simple
reason that Christianity alone among the
world's religions has an incarnation.
And what they mean by that is that God
became incarnate in the form of Jesus
Christ in order to be the savior.
When you talk to Christians, they sort
of say, "Oh, well, there isn't a problem
really because, you know, we've
accommodated Galileo, we've accommodated
Darwin, why can't we accommodate ET?"
Uh, well, I think there's a big
difference.
I think science and religion have more
in common than perhaps the popular
perception suggests.
One hand [music] we have science which
deals with reason and fact. On the other
hand we have [music] religion which
deals with faith.
Science is an evolving proposition and
what we know today will almost certainly
be reformed and maybe even replaced
[music] at some point in the future. So
to think that science somehow provides
[music] the truth in contrast to
religion I think is a mistake.
While scientists [music] and religious
leaders may still ponder the notion of
aliens visiting Earth, ancient astronaut
[music] theorists claim that the
evidence exists in plain sight around
the world. But if this theory was
accepted, would we have to change
[music] our beliefs about our knowledge,
our history, and the very [music]
beginnings of human civilization?
For thousands of years, humans have
recorded [music] events that seem to
suggest other worldly beings came down
from the skies to visit Earth.
These ancient visitations
represent the foundations of those who
believe Earth was visited in the past by
advanced [music] beings from other
planets.
These sightings are also said to explain
many mysteries surrounding our past.
&gt;&gt; The most important was religion. [music]
The gods have descended to our ancestor
time. Now it enters into the holy books
into mythology. Now later people try
reasoned people try to understand this.
They [music] make out religions of it.
But the core is extraterrestrials have
come here. That was the beginning of all
the big religions.
&gt;&gt; There are two main components [music]
why we are who we are today as a
species. One, someone tampered with our
genetic makeup. And two, technology.
Because all of a sudden, we were doing
[music] and building things that we
would still have difficulties recreating
today.
And the ancient texts are very clear
that many of our achievements in the
past happened due to a direct
intervention of extraterrestrials that
arrived from the skies.
Ancient astronaut theorists [music]
also site as evidence the amazing
similarities between isolated cultures
[music] all over the planet.
Why did different civilizations build
immense megalithic [music] structures to
honor other worldly beings?
Why do so many ancient texts seem to
reference men flying [music]
in the sky?
And why do the ancient Egyptians, Hopi
Indians, and the Doon tribe of North
Africa all believe their ancestors came
from what we know as the constellation
Sirius? If the extraterrestrials wanted
to leave behind a message of where they
came from,
then it would serve them very well to
build those structures with a reference
to their location of origin. So, if we
have connections to [music] the Sirius
star system, well, it would lend us to
believe that here [snorts] we have a
reference of where they might come from.
The question of extraterrestrial life is
as old as civilization itself.
Ancient astronaut theorists as well as
many noted scientists [music]
point to the immense size of the
universe and concede that other beings
must exist [music] somewhere else
besides Earth.
But the question remains,
did aliens visit us in the past and is
it happening [music] again?
The way we look at history is very
fragile. Any discovery which is made
somewhere can change the way we look
upon history. I think if we were to
identify that an [music] alien presence
has been here on earth in the past, I
think there are two very important
questions. [music] Did ET just come by
and visit and then disappear or did
actually ET come stay and contribute to
civilization?
I think the second one is far more
important because it shows us far more.
It actually rewrites mankind's identity
[music] rather than just whether or not
you know some extraterrestrial being
came here on a holiday and then left
[music] without really leaving something
behind.
In all of the ancient texts,
there is one thing that is very clear,
and that is that these gods one day will
return.
But short of an alien spacecraft landing
on the White House lawn, ancient
astronaut theorists [music]
know there will always be skeptics.
People are always looking for an
ultimate proof of the existence of
extraterrestrial intelligent beings. But
I think a more useful and honest
question is how much and what kind of
evidence would be enough for you to
believe that they're out there, that
they've been visiting us.
I believe through the experiences that
shamans have been documenting and
reporting for tens of thousands of years
that uh we are in contact with entities
and beings that are not of this earth.
But precisely what those entities and
beings are remains to be established.
There is evidence that indicates that
it's possible that humans were visited
by extraterrestrials in the distant
past. And if we are too quick to discard
that possibility, [music] then we might
be shutting ourselves out from something
that might be really fascinating and
might take us to a to a next level that
we can't even imagine.
[music]
It's very possible that those
extraterrestrials who've allegedly been
coming here for thousands of [music]
years, I mean, they are us. They look
like us. And in fact, that's part again
of the Bible in that the God or the Gods
created us in their image.
I mean, we are to be like them. We are
to look like them. We are to have the
technology they have.
We're to go into space just like they
did.
I think there is life, simple life,
bacterial [music] life, microbial life
on other planets. I think we're going to
find that. And who knows, maybe one day
we'll find some other planet that's
capable of sustaining life that has
evolved people over a long period of
time that are also looking up at the
stars [music] wondering, is there
anybody else out there? Are we the only
ones? We are a species of explorers. So
ultimately we will come across some
other type of intelligence
and when [music] that happens
if that society technologically speaking
is primitive
we'll become ancient astronauts with
that culture.
Human history has become too [music]
much a matter of dogma uh taught by
professionals in [music] ivory towers as
though it's all fact.
Actually, much of human history is up
for grabs. The further back you [music]
go, the more that the history that's
taught in the schools and universities
begins to look like some kind of fairy
story.
We have logic. [music]
We have intuition. We have our senses.
And to limit ourselves through the
scientific route is a mistake.
We can send people on the moon. We can
plan journeys to Mars. We can make cell
phones. But we haven't [music] explained
the fundamental questions that we should
be dealing with. Where do we come from?
What are we supposed [music] to do here?
And where are we going? We really have
not come with the answers and [music] we
know no better than the ancients that
we're trying to explain.
&gt;&gt; Exploring the ancient astronaut theory
is the ultimate quest to find [music]
out where did we come from? How did it
all begin?
And most importantly,
who are we?
And the ancient astronaut theory has the
capability of answering all those
questions.
A great deluge
nearly wiping out every living thing on
our planet's surface.
Cosmic battles
waged over the skies of Germany
and geologic cataclysms
threatening the future of humanity.
For centuries, mankind has faced almost
every calamity imaginable.
But are we at [music] the mercy of
natural forces?
Or is there an even higher power at
work?
The aliens that apparently created us
had the ability and the desire to keep
human beings disunited.
&gt;&gt; They can control us and we cannot
control them.
That makes us a secondass species.
&gt;&gt; If anything, they may be more violent
than we are.
&gt;&gt; Millions of people around [music] the
world believe we have been visited in
the past by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history? If so, were they out to
control us, to exterminate us, or to
prepare us for the future?
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Tortougerro, Mexico.
Within this archaeological site lie the
ruins of a Maya city that once [music]
thrived from 250 to 900 AD.
Among the many artifacts discovered here
are examples of Maya script.
Also known as Maya hieroglyphs, a fully
developed written [music] language.
In April [music] 2006,
Mayanist scholar David Stewart
deciphered inscriptions that were found
on what's known as Monument 6.
Researchers believe the [music]
translated text provides further proof
that the Maya's longount calendar will
end on December 21st, 2012.
According
to Maya tradition, the gods will return
at that date
and you can read chisel in stone will
descend with glory god Bolon Yok.
Bolon Yok was one of the Maya creator
gods who created human intelligence.
[music]
The ancient Mayans were attuned to
higher wisdom, higher knowledge, and
their forecast of December 21, 2012, the
winter solstice, as a major marker in
the age of Earth was a true insight into
what's coming. It is a marker of a
change into a new age.
The Maya civilization established as
early [music] as 2000 BC produced highly
advanced architecture, agriculture,
mathematics, and astronomy.
But ancient astronaut theorists believe
the amazing accomplishments of the Maya
may be due in part to contact with early
extraterrestrials.
And the ultimate proof they say is in
the creation of the Maya calendar.
Scholars agree upon one date when the
calendar allegedly started and that was
the 11th of August [music] 3,114
BC.
In 3,114
BC, the Maya did not even exist. So what
compelled [music] them to start their
calendar in 3,14 BC? According
to the Chilam Balam book which is the
book of the Jaguar priests, at that time
the road to the stars [snorts] descended
from the sky and the 13 and nine gods
[snorts] came to Earth.
Right there we have a direct reference
to [music] someone that has arrived from
outer space.
The Mayans were one of the civilizations
that reported a very strong
extraterrestrial presence. Their alien
gods were very much involved in their
society in their sciences.
The thought here is that maybe this is a
prophecy that was put there by the
aliens through the Mayans in this
calendar that the world is going to end
in the year 2012.
Apocalypse,
Armageddon,
the end of days.
Embedded in numerous ancient cultures
and religions around the world is the
idea that civilization as we know it
will come to a tumultuous end.
Such apocalyptic beliefs are the driving
force behind the final chapter of the
Judeo-Christian Bible called the book of
Revelation. According to the text, an
angel [music] of God appeared to the
Apostle John on the island of Patmos and
shared with him visions of the future
that God would return in [music] end
times to pass judgment on all humanity.
The book of Revelation tells the future
of mankind where angels appear over the
earth and the angel will punish mankind
and earthquakes,
thunderstorm,
gigantic floods
and catastrophes on Earth.
Further evidence of a prophesied
apocalypse was found in 1947
in arid caves high above the Judean
desert.
Archaeologists discovered nearly 900
documents believed to have been written
in the time of Jesus. They are the Dead
Sea Scrolls.
Among them is one called the War Scroll
that spells out in chilling detail a
future apocalyptic war between the
forces of light and dark.
The Dead Sea Scrolls are talking about a
war between good angels and bad angels.
And invariably in almost every ancient
literature, you end up with these cosmic
fights between the forces of good and
the forces of of of evil.
The idea that somehow the gods have
different factions and they fight
against each other has sometimes given
rise to ideas like uh maybe there was an
ancient uh war between alien factions
visiting the earth that would have
provided the visual imagery and [music]
the basic ideas for some of the ancient
mythology
in Judeo-Christian and Islamic
tradition. [music] There's an idea that
there will be some kind of final warfare
when God defeats Satan once and for all.
That's been interpreted by some people
to say that the aliens will come back
[music] and they'll fight it out again
one final time.
But have [music] these warnings of
imminent war on Earth actually come from
God? Or could they have originated from
somewhere else?
And if the forewarned apocalypse were to
occur, might it simply be part of a
recurring cycle of natural phenomena?
The Toba super volcano, Indonesia.
75,000 years ago, this massive volcanic
lake erupted,
triggering a major climate change that
nearly obliterated mankind.
When you have one of these massive
volcanic eruptions, what you have to
worry about is the dust in the upper
atmosphere because that shields the
sunlight and the planet can cool. And if
that lasts long enough, you can really
mess with the life cycle of the
organisms that are around at that time.
&gt;&gt; Scientists [music] call this an example
of a genetic bottleneck,
a catastrophic event that [music]
dramatically decreases the genetic
diversity of a species.
At least twice, homo sapiens experienced
such a genetic bottleneck effect where
the worldwide population dwindled to
[music] as few as 3,000
homo sapiens
around the world.
Same patterns of history just keep
repeating themselves over and over
again.
And behind that pattern, we continue to
see possibly an alien influence causing
some of these events to happen.
The flood stories are really very
interesting. You find them in the Bible.
What they all say is that this
extraterrestrial race, the angels, the
gods, whatever we want to call them
today, they basically just got tired of
humanity.
They became noisy, rebellious,
and it was just time to wipe them out.
It's very possible that the aliens
decided that in order to cleanse the
planet, they needed to do things of huge
magnitude like the flood that the Bible
talks about as Noah.
God came down to him and said he was
going to punish mankind. And Noah, you
are good. And I want you to build this
massive ark and collect all these
animals, a male and female, and you put
them in this boat and you float away
and you start all over again.
When we come in the Bible and we see
Noah, we find that he somehow knows the
future whereas nobody else on earth
seems to know this.
But specifically, he has been given
blueprints, somehow a device whereby he
can survive this catastrophe. Now, that
is something very specific which singles
Noah out as being a person who might
have had exposure to ancient aliens.
Maybe the extraterrestrials created some
type of a catastrophe.
But it's also possible that the flood
itself
was a natural disaster
and extraterrestrials warned the local
population about this impending massive
flood.
Exaterrestrials
ensured our continued survival.
&gt;&gt; Could there be a reason why humans have
survived such disasters time and time
again? And is it [music] really possible
that the great flood and other
cataclysmic extinction events were
caused by extraterrestrials?
If so, who are these destructive beings?
And what is their ultimate purpose?
Indonesia.
2004.
A massive underwater earthquake produces
a tsunami
that [music] kills over 230,000 people
in 14 coastal countries.
It was one of the deadliest natural
disasters [music] in recorded history.
[music]
Geologists determined that the violent
movement of tectonic plates [music] on
the floor of the Indian Ocean created
lethal tidal waves measuring a height of
nearly 100 ft.
Tsunamis are basically super tidal
waves. And it really comes down to it at
at its simplest level is how much energy
is put into the ocean at the point that
generates the tidal wave.
And the water gets displaced and it
actually forms a wave that can be very
coherent and travel for large distances
and will eventually [music] hit the
shore somewhere.
But just days before the disaster,
several eyewitnesses reported seeing
strange unidentified [music] flying
objects to the India daily newspaper.
People were reporting seeing bright
lights in the sky prior to and during
that tsunami. Scientists think that
that's just maybe the tectonic plates
are rubbing each other and there's so
much friction that they're giving off a
glow
&gt;&gt; known as earthquake lights.
Mainstream scientists [music]
have been studying these phenomena since
they were first photographed in Japan in
the 1960s.
But although there are many theories
[music] as to their cause, there has
been as yet no viable explanation.
&gt;&gt; What is [music] becoming very apparent
is that UFO activity and tectonic
activity go hand in hand. Now there are
an awful lot of questions to be asked
here and science needs to answer an
awful lot of them. The central question
is this. Is this UFO phenomenon just a
byproduct of the tectonic activity?
Iceland. April 2010.
One of the country's largest volcanoes
[music]
erupts for the first time in nearly two
centuries.
In the aftermath of the blast, Sky News
captured footage of an unusual V-shaped
flying object amongst the plume of smoke
and ash.
An awful lot of video material was taken
of this volcanic eruption and some of it
clearly shows an anomalous object
hovering roughly around the volcano.
This object is clearly under intelligent
control. And from what we see on the
video, it's also apparent that this
isn't birds as some skeptics have
[music] been trying to argue.
According to scientists, volcanic
eruptions are natural [music] events
that occur when rocks deep within the
earth become so hot they melt and form
magma.
&gt;&gt; Basically, you build up a lot of
pressure in the magma in the location
where the volcano is and it has a point
where it [music] can release and then
that magma and the hot gases and the hot
lava all kind of erupt out through the
top.
Still, some researchers believe there is
a high correlation between catastrophic
events and the appearance of UFOs.
The fact that we have UFOs before and
sometimes during these events, whether
tsunami or earthquakes, clearly shows
that something is present. Now, the
question is, are they just monitoring it
or are they actually somehow involved
with it? Are they causing it?
Is there a way that you can trigger a
volcano? For example, let's say it's
sort of on the verge anyway. Is there
something you can do technologically to
[music] either trigger it or to make it
worse? We don't know. We just see this
apparent fornowledge of an event like
that happening. The UFO shows up. The
event happens. According to ancient
astronaut theorists, alien spacecraft
[music]
have been spotted at or near the sites
of so-called natural catastrophes
[music] since ancient times.
But why
is it possible extraterrestrials are
merely curious about geological events
on Earth? Or could there be another
perhaps more sinister motive for their
interest?
April 14th, 1561,
Nuremberg, Germany.
Citizens awoke at [music] dawn to the
spectacle of cylindrical objects
appearing in the sky from which red,
black, orange, and blue discs emerged.
According to eyewitness accounts [music]
reported in the Nuremberg Gazette,
tubes resembling [music] cannon barrels
also appeared and the objects began to
fight one another.
After about an [music] hour of battle,
the entities seemed to catch fire and
fell to Earth where they turned to
steam.
5 years later, Austrian architect
[music] Hans Glazer created a woodcut
detailing what he observed during the
famous event.
&gt;&gt; In that woodcut and in the eyewitness
reports, we actually see UFOs in battle.
They were reported actually fighting
each other, shooting each other down.
[music] If you look at the bottom right
hand corner of the woodcut, you'll
actually see a couple of circles in the
ground giving off smoke. They've
obviously crashed. they've been shot
down. That is very interesting because
it shows that the pattern of aggression
amongst the UFOs has been going on for a
long time.
&gt;&gt; To some [music] ancient astronaut
theorists, the 540year-old woodcut is
evidence of an [music] alien cosmic war.
And in fact, they claim similar hostile
events have occurred [music] in human
history for millennia.
The evidence from the record, from
eyewitness testimony, shows a connection
between the UFO and a thinning effort
[music] where there's apparently a
wanting intention to wipe out or thin
out the human race. For example, during
the plague years, there were a lot of
UFO reports uh about bright lights in
the sky that were spreading gas.
And people were reporting that these
gases were actually the cause of the
plague.
But could there really be a connection
between eyewitness accounts of alien
space wars and the recent sightings of
UFOs during Earth's so-called [music]
natural catastrophes?
And is there any proof that alien
visitors are involved in creating
cataclysmic [music] events in a sinister
effort to control or thin out Earth's
population?
Perhaps the [music] answer can be found
in Florence, Italy, among the diaries
and secret papers of one of the world's
[music] most brilliant and mysterious
men, Leonardo da Vinci.
2005
Florence, Italy.
Beyond a hidden staircase in the
Santiisma Anuniata Convent, researchers
from Italy's military geographical
institute,
discover the secret workshop of Leonardo
da Vinci.
He was the true archetypal Renaissance
man. Brilliant painter, brilliant
inventor, brilliant poet, ambidextrous,
could write with his left hand and his
right hand at the same time, wrote
backwards instead of forwards. A very
interesting guy. Though Da Vinci is
renowned for his public paintings like
the Mona Lisa and the Last Supper,
ancient astronaut theorists are more
intrigued by his private notebooks that
contain sketches of futuristic military
technology, including machine guns,
tanks, helicopters, and even submarines.
It clearly seems that Leonard da Vinci
was privy to a series of secrets that
had been handed down for many, many
thousands of years. [music]
Da Vinci may also have actually been
contacted by humanlike extraterrestrials
who either spoke to him in person or
perhaps telepathically and inspired him
to do so many different things.
We do know, for example, that one of his
inventions was a circular car. Looks
kind of like a UFO. Now, he's also into
inventing weapons. And did that come
from the fact that uh the UFO has
demonstrated basically some
aggressiveness?
And did some of that maybe in some way
rub off on him?
&gt;&gt; Were they trying to give him weapons
that could be used to destroy life on
Earth that could have been possible?
But if Leonardo da Vinci did have
knowledge of advanced weaponry, might he
have learned of it through observation
and study? Or was this knowledge [music]
given to him by another perhaps
extraterrestrial source?
There is this book of prophecies which
is a very rare book and in there are
some type of descriptions that could
indicate some type of an
extraterrestrial [music]
visitation.
There are references in which Da Vinci
himself says that he's had these
encounters these visions of God and
angels. And of course, [music] according
to the ancient NASA hypothesis, that
wasn't God. It wasn't angels, they were
extraterrestrials.
Is it possible that over the centuries,
extraterrestrials [music] have been
partnering with human collaborators,
human beings entrusted with the kind of
advanced scientific knowledge that would
allow mankind [music] to leap over
centuries of normal intellectual
evolution.
To ancient [music] astronaut theorists,
the fact that mankind had gone from the
horse and buggy to the moon in less than
100 years makes such a notion not only
possible but entirely probable.
In our development, all of a sudden,
we've made a quantum leap where [music]
we were sitting in caves munching on
bananas and the next thing we do is
we're building pyramids virtually
overnight. And so that quantum leap can
be explained with a direct
extraterrestrial intervention of our
past.
&gt;&gt; And the visitors are the ones who are
revered as gods who seem to come on
flying shields or silver boats or any of
the various descriptions of
extraterrestrial technology that you see
in [music] these ancient legends. And
they consistently are trying to
cultivate humanity in a direction that's
beneficial for everyone.
There are many who believe [music]
extraterrestrial visitors might have
provided intellectual inspiration to men
like Albert Einstein whose theories of
relativity opened the door for the
possibility of future travels through
space and time. J. Robert Oenheimer
whose research in the field of
theoretical physics resulted in the
development of atomic weapons.
Warner von [music] Braonn whose
innovations in advanced rocket
technology led to the modern-day space
program.
&gt;&gt; When we look into the lives and the
motivations as to Wavon Brown and to why
he wanted to take mankind into outer
space, we're confronted [music] with the
fact that he was absolutely convinced
that we had gone there before or that an
ancient civilization had come from there
to us.
These people were motivated and
specifically they wanted to take us to
space because they were convinced
[music] that somehow they would find
something which would completely change
planet earth.
&gt;&gt; Then there is Nicola Tesla whose
experiments with electricity [music]
led to everything from satellite
technology and robotics to what some
would term a death ray.
But the Tesla death ray, Tesla said,
could annihilate an army of 100,000
soldiers at once and could melt an
aircraft engine from 250 mi away. When
the FBI investigated Tesla's murder,
they found documentation
that the Tesla death ray was in
development at Wright [music] Patterson
Air Force Base in 1943.
Wright Patterson Air Force Base, 1943.
Where was the Roswell Flying Saucer
taken? Wright Patterson Air Force Base.
So, we have a connection to that weapon.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible [music] that Nicola
Tesla's scientific achievements could
have been influenced by alien
intelligence?
Might other human geniuses throughout
[music] time have served as human
gateways, allowing extraterrestrials to
jumpstart our technological advances?
If the answer [music] is yes, then what
are we being prepared for?
And might there be a connection between
mankind's [music] intellectual and
scientific advancements and the
so-called natural disasters that
threaten to wipe entire [music]
populations
off the face of the earth.
The Omo River, Ethiopia,
flowing south 400 miles into Lake
Turkana.
The banks of this river are rich in
homminid fossil fragments,
including those of chimpanzees,
gorillas, and early humanoids.
Here in 1967,
paleoanthropologist Richard Leaky
unearthed two partial human skulls. The
remains date as far back as 195,000
[music] years ago, making the fossils
the oldest evidence of modern humans or
homo sapiens. [music]
We are constantly still finding new
breakthroughs and either more complete
skeletons or a more complete site. If we
look at the fossil record at some point
eventually, you find common ancestors
with chimpanzees. [music]
You go back really close and you have
Neanderthal and Cro-Magnam Man and we
came out of Cro-Magnam Man and the
Neanderthalss die out and it's really
interesting mystery to try and piece
together. Why were we more successful
than they were?
We are the only one who came out of the
family tree with culture. Why? Evolution
says by coincidence we have adapted as
best. I say no. It was an artificial
mutation made out of the family tree.
And then overnight we were building
pyramids. [music]
Sumeriia was created.
All those different high achievements
were done [music] virtually overnight.
So this quantum leap in development,
this big bang of knowledge or
intelligence all of a sudden happened.
And the ancient astronaut theory
suggests that this is a direct result of
extraterrestrials tampering with our
DNA. So we're half human and half
extraterrestrial. We're hybrids.
We have an incredible wealth of
information in stone preserved from
ancient times that can lead us in a
direction of really knowing that the
ancient ancestors [music]
of modern humans were not simply born on
Earth but came here from somewhere else.
But if [music] extraterrestrials arrived
here in the distant past, who were they
and why did they come here? [music]
Ancient astronaut theorists believe
answers exist in early Sumerian texts.
In 1849,
British archaeologist Austin Henry Leard
discovered 22,000 [music]
clay tablets in the ancient Samrian city
of Nineveh in an area now known as Iraq.
The tablets [music] contain ununiform
script believed to be the earliest
writing system created by the Samrians
6,000 years ago.
Author Zechariah [music]
Sitchin spent more than 30 years
translating the Samrian clay tablets. In
his 1976 [music]
book, The 12th Planet, Sitchin claims
the ununiform texts [music] describe an
alien race named the Anunnaki, who came
to Earth from an undiscovered [music]
planet in our solar system beyond
Neptune called Nibiru. They explained to
the Sumerianss that through their own
rise to a technological [music] culture,
they damaged their atmosphere.
And they came here seeking gold and
precious elements to repair their
planet's dwindling atmosphere.
According to Sitchin, the Anunnaki
[music]
first visited Earth 450,000 years ago
during the age of Neanderthalss,
and they created Homo sapiens through
genetic engineering.
to create a species to work and mine
[music] precious minerals for them.
Our forefathers believed that they were
gods
and they were here on purpose. They
wanted [music] to make our primitive
generation at that time intelligence.
They wanted to plant curiosity into
[music] our brain.
and we become more developed in
technology, in astronomy, in every
field.
That's what they wanted. The question is
why?
When you look at the ancient creation
stories, you find that what they said
about our position as homo sapiens is
that we were created to be a slave race
or [music] a work race.
According to Sitchin's interpretation of
the ancient tablets, the human [music]
civilization ensumer was set up under
the guidance of the Anunnaki.
And to disguise alien manipulation,
human kings were inaugurated to provide
intermediaries between mankind and
[music] their socalled gods.
Then around 3000 BC, humans began
building stone monuments
such as Stonehenge and the Egyptian
pyramids. For mainstream [music]
historians, the physical ability and
knowhow to construct these megalithic
sites remains a mystery. But ancient
astronaut [music] theorists contend that
megaton stone monuments were erected by
human laborers aided with alien
technology.
And what do the ancient texts say about
ancient Samriia? That none of this could
have been possible without the help of
the gods or in their case the Anunnaki,
which means those who from the heavens
came.
Many cultures had a time when they
interacted with their living gods. So
who were those gods? In my mind, they
were misrepresented advanced
extraterrestrials and they brought forth
the technology to build the monuments we
see such as Giza or all across Bolivia,
Peru, and South America.
Sitchin's interpretations of the Samrian
tablets further claimed the ancient
Anunnaki astronauts carried out breeding
experiments [music]
to improve the species of laborers.
But to keep the human population at bay
[music] and correct genetic mistakes,
the aliens orchestrated so-called
[music] natural catastrophes.
And the Anunnaki saw the Neanderthal man
naturally [music] evolving here on Earth
and just decided to put their genetic
marker on it. Meaning they took 80% of
their genes and 20% of the homoid that
was here and created us in their image
and after their likeness.
And this was essentially when modern
humanity was born and starts to show up
in the fossil record. It wasn't until
75,000 years ago that you have this
super volcano that goes off in Lake
Toba.
In the aftermath of that, great
cataclysm. It appears that we went
through further genetic modifications.
Very, very powerful ETSs came in and
upgraded our DNA.
They probably figured, you know what,
there's something wrong with this
species. So, they [music] probably
create these disasters like the flood.
And then of course there's always that
biblical perspective and people believe
God did it. Well, God could have been
the extraterrestrials could have created
that somehow. Uh it's very possible and
very likely that in order to eradicate a
species that they may have genetically
altered themselves and screwed up with
that they needed to get rid of them and
start [music] all over again.
The ultimate proof for the ancient
astronaut theory will not be in a
megalithic site. It won't be finding a
crashed spaceship,
but it will be found deep within our
genes. And [music] that is exactly what
the ancient texts are saying, that we
were created in the image of the gods.
Though more than 20,000 genes have been
[music] identified in the human genome,
scientists worldwide have only begun to
understand the origins of man.
As geneticists continue to study our
DNA,
might they find traces [music] of an
alien species in our genes?
And if homo sapiens were genetically
engineered by aliens,
might they have [music] continued to
shape our existence.
[music]
Elbert County, Georgia.
Four 18 [music] ft tall granite stones
form a mysterious monument some call the
American Stonehenge.
Engraved in the giant stones in [music]
12 languages are 10 guides or
commandments suggesting [music] how to
rebuild civilization after the
apocalypse.
Known as the [music] Georgia Guide
Stones, the monument was built in 1979
by an unknown man going [music] by the
pseudonym RC Christian.
Some people have a theory that whoever
put those guide stones up was either a
Freemason [music]
or that the name RC Christian
was really a way to parrot the fictional
founder of Rosacrianism centuries
earlier. When you trace them back uh to
the ancient gods who wore the same
symbolic aprons, uh they were the
ancient aliens that we now talk about.
Was the monument secretly built by
followers of Rosacrushianism,
an ancient society of mystics and
philosophers who were inspired by the
religions of the Far East? If so, might
the stones contain coded messages
intended to prepare [music] us for the
imminent apocalypse?
Perhaps. But to some ancient astronaut
theorists, warnings of an impending
apocalypse are meant to caution human
beings [music] against the very real
prospect of an alien invasion or worse.
Perhaps the examination, vivisection,
and eventual annihilation of all human
life on our planet.
Since the late 19th century, modern
reports of [music] aliens abducting and
probing humans have numbered in the tens
of thousands.
Researcher David M. Jacobs [music] has
spent more than 40 years studying
so-called abductees and their alien
encounters through the use of hypnosis.
the prepundonderance of evidence of
person after person saying the [music]
same thing to me. Things that I could
never have imagined being thought up.
Then I began to realize, oh my god, this
is actually happening. And I was
dumbruck [music]
by the fact that this was convincing
evidence to me.
What Dr. Jacobs has reported is that
what the aliens seem to have been doing
for these last [music] 40 years, perhaps
longer, is that when they abduct people,
it's not just an experiment. They are
actually engaged in a very intense,
very involved program of genetic
breeding where they are breeding
hybrids.
The abductees that he's been talking to,
according to him, have gotten to the
point of this massive program of
creating hybrids where now the hybrids
look like us quite a bit, but
behaviorally, psychologically,
they are still alien.
Jacobs claims alien human hybrids can
communicate telepathically and dictate
human thoughts neurologically.
These beings can put ideas, images in
people's minds quite easily. Therefore,
what people describe is that they can be
controlled on a number of different
levels by the minds of these other
beings.
Since 2003, [music]
abductees have supposedly been reporting
to Jacobs that the hybrids [music] were
being integrated into society unnoticed
by humans.
To me, this is possible evidence of the
plan to do another thing to kind of make
room for this new
jump from modern homo sapiens to
whatever we're going to call this new
homo sapiens. That is the potential
future apocalypse involving the alien
presence. And that's where I see some
dangerous signs.
Some people think that these beings are
are benevolent, that that they are here
to help us, to stop war, cure cancer, uh
that they are here for reasons that have
everything to do with us and very little
to do with them. [music]
I don't see benevolence here. I don't
see malevolence,
but I see the furthering of an alien
agenda of which we do not know the
future.
Some people have uh theorized that the
creation of an alien hybrid race might
be a way of uh accomplishing a better
age on Earth. And there are some
abductees who even bring back uh
predictions that there will be a time
called the change when there will be
aliens and humans [music] living
together on Earth as if it were you know
a return of the age of paradise.
There are others who think that they are
coming [music] to create a better earth.
Some think they're coming to take over
the earth.
We really don't know the alien agenda.
We do know that they have been telling
abductees for a long time that soon
everybody will be happy. Soon everyone
will know their place. Soon we will all
be together.
This has been going on for thousands of
years with the creation of homo sapiens.
I mean, from the very get-go. So, to
suggest that now is the time where, you
know, a new hybrid extraterrestrial homo
sapiens will emerge in this new age of
consciousness.
No, no, it it won't. We already are
hybrids. We already are part
extraterrestrial and part human.
Human and alien [music] hybrids,
extraterrestrial engineering designed to
weed out excessive population growth, or
perhaps to exterminate [music]
inferior genetic strains?
Might geological catastrophes [music]
and meteorological calamities be the
work of unseen, perhaps alien hands?
For skeptics, the answer is a [music]
resounding no.
But with the end of the Mayan calendar
looming in 2012,
could all of our questions [music] about
the alien agenda finally be answered?
Perhaps only those of us who survive on
that date will ever learn the truth.
Zeus,
Surya,
Thor.
For thousands of years, ancient myths
have described gods who came down from
the heavens. Always you have someone who
is descending from the sky with loud
noise, with thundering, with fire, with
smoke. They would have come from the
most powerful and magical place possible
from the stars.
&gt;&gt; But just who were these mystical beings
that ruled the skies with supernatural
powers? You could wonder if these tales
of Zeus's thunderbolts, Thor's hammer,
if these weren't real weapons.
&gt;&gt; Did our ancient ancestors create [music]
the gods from their own imaginations? Or
did they simply report events they
believed to [music] be true? Our
ancestors misinterpreted
extraterrestrials as gods because that
was the only way that they could explain
away what they witnessed.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings. What if it
were true? Did ancient aliens [music]
really help to shape our history? And
were the gods of our ancestors actually
visitors from other worlds?
Heat. Heat.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Truva, Turkey. For over 150 years, this
small city has been the center of one of
the greatest archaeological finds in
modern history. the possible discovery
of the legendary city of Troy.
In 1868, [music]
amateur archaeologist Hinrich Schlean
set out to find what he believed was the
city that served as the basis for the
Trojan War, as described in one of the
greatest pieces [music] of classical
literature, Homer's epic poem, The
Iliad.
Written in the 8th century BC, Homer's
Iliad tells the tale of a great war born
of feuding and jealous gods.
While most scholars [music] believed the
story of the Trojan War was a work of
fiction, Schllean was [music] determined
to prove the myth was a reality.
[music]
Hinrich Schlean's discoveries rocked the
archaeological world. Armed with his
copy of the Iliad, basically
he just decided that he was going to
find Troy. And so he went and just dug a
big hole. And when he went, he
discovered the real Troy.
But if Homer's story of Troy was true,
what would it say about other Greek
stories [music] and myths? Might those
also be true?
Did powerful gods and goddesses [music]
actually exist?
And if so, where did they come from?
[music] Helis, also known as Greece.
Each day, thousands of tourists visit
temples [music] and monuments built to
honor the gods of another age.
The Acropolis,
Deli,
the Parthonon,
the Temple of Apollo.
These ancient sites reflect a powerful
reverence for beings [music] that
supposedly ruled the world thousands of
years ago.
When you look at in many of the
mythologies around the world, they have
these stories of gods coming down from
the sky.
There's a beautiful description of the
way that the gods move. Like when they
kind of come down [music] to the earth,
you get this sense of them gliding down,
but the way that they move is kind of
beyond time. It just kind of happens.
If the ancient Greeks invented the
stories of gods as a primitive [music]
attempt to explain their universe, how
can we account for similar deities found
in widely different regions and cultures
around the globe?
Was it mere coincidence? [music]
Or was there a common origin for these
gods who supposedly travel to [music]
Earth from the skies?
The earliest civilization we have 3,800
BC. The Sumerians actually give us
visual descriptions of these beings and
speak of this time that they lived
amongst their living gods. They called
their gods the Anunnaki. And that term
simply meant those who from heaven come
to earth. Mythology is chock full of
these episodes of gods coming down to
earth. I mean, because mythology is so
interested in the relationship between
gods and humans, there is necessarily
going to be a lot of communication and
communion between the two of them.
&gt;&gt; In his book, Odyssey of the Gods, Eric
Von Danakin argues that the world's
sacred [music] books are full of
descriptions not of gods, but of
supernatural beings interacting [music]
with humans.
Some thousands of years ago when our
forefathers were still primitive, some
extraterrestrials descended to our
planet and because of misunderstanding
lake of technology, our forefathers
thought that these extraterrestrials
must be some gods.
Mount Olympus,
Greece's highest mountain.
According to ancient myths, this site
was the home of the gods.
It was here on Mount Olympus that Zeus
sat on his throne and determined the
fate of mortal men.
Whenever we have references to Mount
Olympus, it is described to be this
magnificent palace on top of Mount
Olympus allegedly. [music]
And the temple walls were always
gleaming of gold or gleaming with silver
and a lot of little lights [music] that
they described as jewels.
Well, if you look at that from a modern
perspective,
what if that place, Mount Olympus,
wasn't necessarily the top of a
mountain, but it was in fact a
spaceship? Because it is described how
sometimes there was a big rumbling with
Mount Olympus and the entire top lifted
off.
But if Mount Olympus was home to alien
visitors, could Zeus have been their
leader?
According to both the Iliad and the
Odyssey, [music]
Zeus was often depicted as wielding a
lightning bolt.
It appears to be a very powerful weapon
because he could destroy whole cities
with this thunderbolt weapon of his.
Similarly, Zeus's brother Poseidon, the
god of the sea, was armed with a
trident.
&gt;&gt; He was able to create tsunamis, tidal
waves with this weapon. The trident
weapon of Poseidon seems to have been
something more than just a pitchfork.
So, is it possible that the lightning
bolt and the trident is some type of a
direct energy device?
Arguably one of the most important of
the Greek gods was Apollo
who rode the skies in his chariot of
fire.
&gt;&gt; Apollo first was the teacher of the
young Greeks living there. He teached
them how to make buildings on the
mountain on the hillside. He teached
them how to make roads. He teached them
in astronomy.
Centuries later, when Rome ruled over
Europe and the Mediterranean, from the
1st century [music] BC until the 7th
century AD, the Romans paid homage to
gods similar to the Greeks.
Zeus was now known as Jupiter.
Poseidon was called Neptune,
but Apollo was known to both the Romans
and the Greeks. Coincidence?
Or, [music] as most ancient astronaut
theorists believe, was it the historical
account of powerful beings that came to
Earth [music] thousands of years ago?
We know that the extraterrestrials more
than likely are the source of what they
call gods.
How did they get here? More than likely
in some type of craft.
&gt;&gt; What we map into our myths and our
legends are incredible stories,
incredible events. And any
extraterrestrial being, any ancient
alien who has come here on Earth will be
written down into this account because
it is such an extraordinary event that
it will be marked forever.
But if the stories of Greek and Roman
gods are true, can evidence of their
existence be found in other parts of the
globe?
[music] And if so, where did they go?
On the northwest coast of France, just
south of Britany, lies one of the most
important prehistoric sites in Europe.
At the seaside village of Cararnach,
over 3,000 megalithic stones are placed
in rows over 2 m long.
The Carnac stones were hewned from local
rock formations and erected between 4500
to 2500 [music] BC at the end of the
stone age.
They are the largest collection of
standing stones in the world.
Archaeologists are baffled by the many
megaliths at Carneak here. It's clearly
a massive construction project with
blocks of granite weighing 50 to 100 to
even up to 350 tons.
Legends here say that giants built
Cararnack.
But you have to wonder what is the real
purpose of these giant megaliths? And
why would prehistoric people have moved
all of these massive stones and placed
them in the many alignments? Here at
Carneak,
&gt;&gt; thousands of large stones have been
arranged [music] in very interesting
patterns. They're arranged in
intersecting lines that form triangles
that could only be visible from above
the earth.
These arrangements of stones may have
been a way of communicating [music] with
extraterrestrial beings.
The ancient Greek poet Pinder spoke of a
mystical land called Hyperoreia far to
the north where the sun shined 24 hours
a day.
Legends claim that Apollo visited
Hyperoreia, traveling in his chariot of
fire every 20 years.
Apollo would tell the Greeks, "Okay,
I've got to go see some other people.
I've got to go and teach them." And
they're like, "Well, where are you off
to?" And he's like, "Well, I'm actually
going to a place that's beyond where the
Northwind comes. It's the land of the
Hyperbururans."
Although mainstream archaeologists
speculate that [music] the Carnac stones
are most likely tomb markers, ancient
astronaut theorists believe these
[music] stones are intentionally laid
out in a unique geometric formation.
Many speculations existed since
centuries and only a few years ago in
France they started to photograph this
whole French Britany by helicopters. And
when he put the pictures together, all
of a sudden someone realized, hey, this
is not coincidence. The distances
[music]
of the lines are always the same. 2,860
m or exactly the half of 2,860
m.
The angles are always the same. It's
Pythagorean triangles.
It's all a gigantic geometrical pattern
from stone age which is impossible. Our
stone age people had no idea of
pitagoras triangles. Pagoras was about
420 BC.
Even though the geometric arrangement of
the Carac stones predates the
Pythagorean theorem [music] by more than
2,000 years,
one question remains.
Why were the stones arranged in such a
precise pattern?
&gt;&gt; The Carex stones are one of the few
things on the planet that can actually
be seen from space and they're a perfect
marker for any kind of aerial vehicle
[music] looking down on the Earth.
Many of the tourists [music] who come
here to Carneck claim that they can
actually feel the energy emanating from
these granite megaliths.
How did these ancient people know about
this energy? And is it possible that
they were able to use this energy to
even move and erect these giant stones?
I am of the opinion that they were made
on purpose.
The extraterrestrials told our ancestor,
do this and this. It's not the
extraterrestrials who made the stone
lines. It's the humans who made it. But
by the order of the extraterrestrials.
But were the Carac stones a signpost for
an ancient astronaut called Apollo
[music]
as he flew his spacecraft high above the
land?
If the Greek god Apollo was really some
kind of ancient astronaut, it's possible
that the stones here at Carac were a
directional finder pointing the way to
the far north, to the hyperoreia of the
ancient gods.
Over 1,000 miles north of Carnac [music]
lies Scandinavia,
home to an ancient people called the
Norse.
The Norse were tribal Germanic people
who lived in what is now known as
Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, and Norway.
Norse legends record the triumphs of
great warriors with advanced weaponry,
sophisticated combat [music] techniques
and navigational prowess.
Like the Greeks, Norse mythology
includes supernatural beings,
other worlds and powerful gods.
But like the Romans, could the Norse
[music] myths refer not to different
gods, but the same gods as those
depicted by the ancient Greeks?
&gt;&gt; There are a number of similarities
between Greek mythology and Norse
mythology and many of the gods are uh
almost identical and they do much the
same thing.
Descriptions of the Viking god Odin, the
god of war, death, and knowledge, and
the Greek [music] god Zeus, bear
striking similarities.
Zeus and Odin are both skyfather gods.
They travel through the skies in
chariots because they are akin to the
solar uh divinities. The precursor to
many uh religious beliefs is sun
worship. The ancients knew that life
came from the sun. So that is a great
mystery and a source of great awe.
What you're getting there is not just
some minor deity, but you really are
nailing it down to one of the chief
deities. This is a very important
character. And so, whoever is behind
Odin or Zeus is obviously a person or a
divine entity [music] which is shared by
these cultures. And it's clear that
whoever inspired the myth of of Zeus or
Odin is somehow somebody who had an
extremely important contribution to make
to both civilizations. So this entity
was definitely known throughout Europe.
Ancient alien theorists [music]
also point to similarities between the
sophisticated weapons possessed by both
the Norse and the Greek gods. Among
Odin's weapons [music] was a spear that
never missed its target.
The Norse god Thor, god of storms,
strength, and fertility, [music]
wielded a powerful hammer.
Right there, we have a correlation, a
connection, because not only does Zeus
have the thunderbolt, but what does Odin
have and Thor? They have a hammer. Thor
has a hammer with [music] which he can
smash things, destroy things. And you
know, the hammer idea is pretty close
with the description to the lightning
rod that Zeus has.
So, you have to wonder if these tales of
Zeus's thunderbolts, Thor's hammer, if
these weren't real weapons, just like we
have today where we have directed energy
beam weapons or are developing some kind
of literal thunderbolt coming out of a
spacecraft.
But such similarities are not limited to
the Greek and Norse myths.
In India, the ancient epic of the
Mahabarata
describes [music] visitations from gods
that possessed the advanced technology
of space travel. There you can read some
thousands of years ago gigantic cities
surrounded our planet. They used the
word cities because they had no word for
mother spaceship.
And all of a sudden out of these cities
smaller spacecrafts came out. Of course
in ancient Indian they had no word like
spacecraft. So they called it vimmana.
The ancient texts of the Hebrew Bible
also describes a prophet who traveled
the skies in a sophisticated machine.
Who is Enoch? He was the seventh anti-
Deluvian prophet in the Old Testament,
including in the Torah of the Jewish
community. Enoch is only described with
the two phrases, that's all. And it says
that the Lord took him away in a fiery
chariot into the heaven.
But technology was not the only
characteristic these ancient deities had
in common. According to legends, the
gods enjoyed intimate relations with
humans. But if aliens [music]
did choose human women as their sexual
partners, what was their motivation? And
just what was the outcome of these very
close encounters?
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Ancient myths are full of stories of
gods descending [music]
to earth to mate with humans.
According to many sources including
Norse mythology, Greek mythology and
even the Bible uh we have the stories of
these sons of god or actual gods from
Mount Olympus or Valhalla and they're
coming to earth. They find uh the
daughters of men attractive.
&gt;&gt; When all these encounters happened and
when women slept with those gods which
can [music] be found in multiple texts
all around the planet
that [music] those women actually had
sex with extraterrestrials, not with
gods, cuz gods do not exist.
According to Homer's Iliad, the citizens
of Sparta were renowned for their heroic
warriors and their beautiful women.
Zeus, the Greek god of the sky, [music]
admired a human named Lita.
One afternoon, while Lita walked alone
[music] in an orchard, Zeus changed into
a swan, enveloped her in his powerful
[music] wings, and made love to her.
Only later did Lita realize she had been
impregnated by a god.
&gt;&gt; When you look at Greek mythology and and
many of the mythologies around the
world, they have these stories of gods
coming down from the sky and have sexual
intercourse with these humans
and in a sense create a new breed of
human.
The offspring of these couplings were
described by the ancients as demigods
[music]
or half-gods.
Experts suggest demigods [music] were
supernatural hybrid beings of human and
alien origin.
Ancient Greeks believe these beings were
exceptional
and destined to perform extraordinary
feats.
It is a tradition in many civilizations
that there were certain human children
who were somehow not human but somehow
had a connection to the stars
to a realm [music] beyond earth.
And this specialness seems to be there
from birth and it somehow seems to
involve [music]
a DNA component which maybe science
needs to look at and needs to study.
Some of the oldest accounts of gods and
humans interbreeding can be found
[music] in ancient Hindu texts.
In the ancient Sanskrit writings of
India, we find this account. A queen
named Kunti [music]
mated with a celestial being, an
extraterrestrial who was known as
[music] the sun god. The product of this
mating was Cara, one of the heroes of
the Indian epic, the Mahabarata.
Perhaps the most famous demigod is the
Greek hero Heracles, also known as the
Roman Hercules.
Heracles was half man, half god,
conceived in the union of Zeus and a
mortal woman named Almi.
Mainstream scholars have often dismissed
[music] the tales of demigods as
fantasy,
but ancient astronaut theorists [music]
believe they reflect actual living
entities.
These types of accounts in the ancient
wisdom traditions have a modern
equivalent in accounts of alien
terrestrial hybrids
which is part of the modern UFO alien
abduction type of account.
It's remarkable that we find in these
modern reports exact equivalents in the
ancient accounts
that suggest that we're dealing with
realities here. We're not just dealing
with imaginary stories.
Ancient astronaut theorists say the term
star children is another way to describe
the offspring of humans [music] and
ancient extraterrestrials.
They claim that in the early traditions
of nearly every major world religion,
star children correlate to supernatural
beings known as gods.
Starchild is an often used reference in
ancient [music] texts when a woman had a
quote unquote divine interaction with
one of the gods.
Often resulting in a woman being
pregnant
without having slept with anyone.
You know is such a thing even possible?
Yes, it is. Today artificial
insemination that's what happens today.
you no longer have to have sex in order
to have babies. We have the exact same
description thousands of years ago where
women without sleeping with anyone all
of a sudden became pregnant. And the
question is how is that possible?
Did aliens [music] that came to Earth in
ancient times use advanced fertility
technology?
Within Greek mythology, you have many
strange stories of centaurs, uh,
cyclops, weird genetic, halfh human,
halfan animal creations.
And you have to speculate, at least to a
point, that there's a possibility of
strange genetic engineering going on
here
and creating what are literal monsters
in the past.
In some of the writings of ancient
civilizations, we see accounts of mating
between extraterrestrial beings and
humans
producing monsters [music] or giants or
other similar types of beings.
And why is that? I believe it's because
it has actually happened in the past.
Could these ancient tales of enormous
creatures, half human, half beast, be
rooted in truth? And if so, is there any
evidence these giant hybrids really
existed?
Lovelock, Nevada.
In the early 1800s, local legends passed
down by the Pyute Indians told of a race
of giants who were exterminated by their
tribe.
It is said this was done by trapping the
giants in a cave, shooting arrows at
them, and then starting [music] a large
fire at the mouth of the cave.
Evidence of [music] the slaughter lay
undisturbed until the early 20th
century.
Lovelock Cave was first discovered by
local ranchers who were looking for bat
guano to use in their fields.
In need of fertilizer for their crops,
the ranchers removed nearly 10 ft of
guanoenriched soil from the surface of
the cave.
And then they began finding human
remains.
They found up to 40 or 50 people inside
this cave.
One was allegedly 7 ft 7 in tall.
They all had long red hair and were
literal giants.
If these skeletons were the remains of
the legendary red-haired giants, were
they visitors from distant continents?
Throughout the 19th century, many giant
skeletons were allegedly discovered in
the Midwest, also in parts of California
and around Death Valley. And the
skeletons here found at Lovelock are one
of the few that were really excavated by
an accredited university.
Archaeologists from the Nevada
Historical Society and the University of
California [music]
believe the cave was occupied from
approximately 1500 BC until a few
hundred years before white [music] men
appeared in the Nevada territory.
75 mi from the cave site, a local museum
has preserved several skulls that some
believe are [music] recovered remains of
the giants.
Inside this cabinet here are three
skulls from the Love Lock Caves.
When you first see these skulls, they
seem to be pretty much normal looking
skulls.
However,
it's when we really start to compare the
jawbones
with this modern dental impression of a
normal adult male that we see that
these jawbones are unusually large.
And these are really the skulls of giant
people who were perhaps seven, even 8
feet tall.
One of the odd things with these skulls
is that they're not actually put on
display here at the museum and they're
kept hidden in this cabinet. Now, we
don't know if that's really uh just out
of um respect for the Native Americans
or whether there's really something
unusual about these giant skulls that
they don't want them to display.
Are the Nevada bones evidence of a race
of giants that existed all through early
human history?
If so, could the giants be the
descendants of extraterrestrials?
According to the Hebrew [music]
Testament, one such giant appeared in
the Valley of El 2500 years ago.
Each morning for 40 days, a Philistine
giant over 9 ft tall challenged the
Israelites [music] to a fight.
His name was Goliath.
David and Goliath is one of those
episodes in the Bible where you wonder
what is going on. Is it just a metaphor
or are we dealing [music] with a
fundamental interpretation? And in that
sense, Goliath has to be a giant
creature. The question then is, he
cannot be human. What is he?
David's stunning triumph over Goliath
was considered a mere fable until
archaeologists turned up evidence that
suggests this confrontation really did
happen.
On the outskirts of Tellesafath, Israel,
scientists discovered a moat that may
have once protected the Philistine
fortress.
Nearby, they [music] found shards of
pottery inscribed with the name Goliath.
Tests [music] indicate the pottery is
from the same time period as described
in the Bible.
Ancient astronaut theorists claim this
is unmistakable evidence of
extraterrestrial giants in biblical
times.
And they say there is much more.
The most common megalithic construction
known is the dolman. Believed to be
burial chambers, [music] they are found
throughout Europe, the Middle East,
South America, and Asia. Could these
mega structures [music]
be the ruins of giants?
&gt;&gt; Archaeology likes to use the word
dolman, but they were formerly known in
folklore as giants graves.
&gt;&gt; A dolman is shaped like the the Greek
letter pie with a top on it. And they're
made of enormous [music]
blocks of limestone. And even today it's
we are marveled that anyone could
construct those things and wonder how
they got the top on top of the
uprightes. And those were [music] built
during the middle bronze period which is
roughly 2,00 to500 before the common
era. So seeing things like that people
questioned [music] those must have been
made by giants. I mean ordinary people
could not have done that.
&gt;&gt; Are we dealing with metaphors or are we
dealing with hard evidence? are these
physical creatures which somehow roamed
the earth and I think on volume we have
to accept that some of these were real.
The question then is how did these
genetic freaks come about?
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; One of the main tenants of ancient
astronaut theory suggests that a long
time ago, extraterrestrials
changed our genetic makeup through a
targeted mutation of our genes
essentially in the lab. So they took a
couple of human beings,
altered their DNA, then reinserted those
people back into the population. So
through procreation, those people would
pass on those new genetic alterations to
the entire population.
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest the
evidence points to one conclusion
that aliens changed the genetics of
early human DNA.
For an alien being to work with DNA is
so easy that just creating a new type is
not at all that difficult. Even today we
have the capability to create new types
of animals. The question is were we
created as such as well?
But what reason could extraterrestrial
visitors have had for populating the
earth with mixed species and monstrous
hybrids? Were they the result of some
kind of scientific experiment [music]
gone terribly wrong?
Did ancient aliens have some reason to
experiment with human DNA?
The Gopagos Islands off [music] the
coast of South America are known for
their unique biodiversity.
In 1832,
a naturalist named Charles Darwin came
to these islands to observe and record
several species of animals not seen
before.
The result [music] of his studies formed
the basis for his controversial book,
The Origin of Species. In it, Darwin
proposed [music] his theory of
evolution, which held that all life
evolved over time through a process of
natural selection.
But even Darwin's [music] theories could
not explain the developmental gap
between apes and man.
There was, it was believed, [music]
a transitional species that had to
exist. One which became referred to as
the [music] missing link.
Homo sapiens have been around for 3,000
years. And only in a few thousand years
our brain size essentially tripled.
Now that does not jive [music] with
ordinary evolution. You need time a very
long time. However, today biologists
cannot quite put a finger on how our
brain volume tripled
in a very short time period. That is
still a mystery.
Could it be, as many ancient astronaut
theorists believe, that ancient aliens
had a hand in jumpstarting human
evolution on our planet?
Science has been unable to find the
missing link. And maybe that's simply
because Earth is unable to offer that
missing link. Maybe the missing link is
not of this earth. Maybe the missing
[music] link is somewhere outside
extraterrestrial.
&gt;&gt; In 1996,
medical science took a giant step
forward when geneticists successfully
cloned a sheep.
This revolutionary technology marked a
significant advancement in [music] our
understanding of DNA.
But could extraterrestrial visitors have
also possessed knowledge of genetics?
In the Sumerian records of mythology,
they explain how they genetically
engineered the first human being. And
so, it's very possible that
extraterrestrials did genetically
engineer us. More and more creatures are
being discovered as science goes along
in little caves or on little islands
whereby DNA evidence clearly shows that
something else has been happening. We're
probably going to get to hard scientific
fact that something interbred with
humans on certain occasions, certain
moments in time.
&gt;&gt; Could the giants and monsters [music]
described in the ancient myths be
examples of genetic mutations? And if
so, what purpose might they have served?
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; There are actually accounts in the
ancient Sanskrit writings of India of
how [music] in their original attempts
to produce
[music] living things in the universe,
the gods or the extraterrestrial [music]
beings made mistakes and produced
different [music] types of monsters and
giants and things like that.
Why should the so-called gods first make
such mixed creatures? What's the purpose
of it?
They observe a lion and they say to
themselves, why don't we mix the
strongness of the muscle of the one
animal with the heat expellent uh
[music] skin of the other animal to use
it at some other planet which is
different to earth. So they start to
make breedings.
They start to make mixed creatures.
Scholars and archaeologists generally
agree that sometime around 3000 BC
during the megalithic era, mankind took
a quantum leap forward with regard
[music] to civilization and use of
technology.
According to myths and legends, [music]
human beings gave credit to their gods
for giving them this knowledge.
But if the gods were in fact alien
[music] visitors, might mankind's
quantum leap forward have had a more
intergalactic origin.
It
&gt;&gt; is clear that something affected
multiple continents on this planet
around 3000 BC. The pyramids began to be
built at that moment in time. Why? What
was that imperative? Was it a global
imperative? Yes. Was it an imperative
which came from outside of this world?
Yes.
&gt;&gt; If aliens intervene to speed the
advancement [music] of human beings, is
it also possible that they have
influenced mankind at other critical
junctures in history? And if so, could
they have continued to monitor us even
today? It's very possible that if there
was some type of genetic intervention by
an extraterrestrial race on humanity,
they would be very interested to see
their experiment progress.
I'm often asked the question, is it not
ridiculous to believe that
extraterrestrials should in a way or
other look similar to us or even think
similar to us? No, the question is
wrong. They are not by coincidence
similar to us, but we are similar to
them because we are the product.
But if alien beings did interbreed with
humans, why was it to save their own
[music] species or perhaps hide the
genetic traces of their presence here on
Earth? Could there even be aliens living
among us?