&gt;&gt; From the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.
&gt;&gt; Sue Vita: Good evening, everyone.
Thank you for coming tonight.
My name is Susan Vita, and I'm the Chief
of the Music Division here at the Library.
It is my pleasure to welcome you tonight to the latest
in our ongoing collaborative lecture series
with the American Musicological Society.
This series has been going strong
since the inaugural lecture by Judith Tick
on Ruth Crawford Seeger probably 10 years ago.
And we are pleased to co-sponsor the series
which highlights research that was done
in the Music Division either in-house or online.
Tonight's lecture by Dr. Daniel Callahan will explore the
physicality of Leonard Bernstein's
conflicting practices.
Sorry, conducting practices.
Probably both.
And fits right in with the worldwide celebration
of Bernstein's centenary this year.
Somebody told me that there are 20 events celebrating Bernstein
this week, so I'm glad that you all chose ours, and --
as you know, the Library
of Congress holds the Leonard Bernstein Collection
which contains 400,000 items.
This AMS Lecture is part of a week-long series
of events looking at many different aspects
of the American icon.
We hope that you will join us for our other events as well
which include a screening of <i>On the Waterfront, </i>on Thursday,
a concert on Friday of known
and unknow Bernstein songs featuring Michael Barrett
and a fantastic team of young singers.
I'm just really looking forward to that,
and another all-day affair on Saturday,
which is not the Royal Wedding [laughter],
in which we will have six speakers and performers talking
about all things Bernstein.
We will also have a selection of the treasures
from the Bernstein collection that will be
on display all day long, and we hope to see you there.
While there is nothing like being there in person,
one great thing about the AMS Library
of Congress partnership is that we record the lectures
for future webcasts on the Library's website and YouTube.
And the lectures of the talented scholars selected
for the series are available for all to enjoy around the world.
Before Dr. Callahan speaks,
I'd like to introduce Martha Feldman,
the Mable Green Meyers Professor of Music and the Humanities
at the College -- in the College at the University of Chicago.
Professor Feldman is the President
of the American Musicological Society
and will be offering her greetings from the Society.
So thank you all again for joining us this evening
and please join me in welcoming Professor Feldman.
[ Applause ]
&gt;&gt; Martha Feldman: It's really an enormous pleasure to be here
and to be able to introduce an AMS Library of Congress Lecturer
at this amazing great institution
where I actually carried out dissertation research
as an avid, very zealous PhD student quite some time ago,
decades ago.
I won't say how many.
Like many AMS members, I've returned
to the Library's collections in music and have worked
in other areas of the Library many times over the years
in person, by correspondence, and now digitally as well.
So it's very, very rewarding to be able to participate
in this collaboration during my tenure as AMS President.
I want to thank very sincerely the staff who have helped
with this -- David Plyler, Kate Miller, Ben Walsh,
and, of course Susan Vita.
And with that, let me just say that I'm particularly happy
and honored to introduce tonight's speaker,
Professor Daniel Callahan, a valued colleague in musicology
and a dear friend as well.
Daniel earned his BA at NYU and his MA, M.Phil.,
and PhD at Columbia University, the last of those in 2012.
Since 2014, Daniel has been Assistant Professor of Music
at Boston College where he teaches courses that range
from Aesthetics, Empathy, and Ethics to Modernism in Dance.
Before that, he was the Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow and Lecturer
in Music in the Humanities at the University of Chicago,
a position into which I was lucky enough to have hired him
in 2012 when chairing my department,
that's before we were friends, and where he taught
for two years Undergraduate and Graduate Courses.
He taught wonderful courses on music video,
Soundies to YouTube, and Choreomusicalities,
and collaborations between different composers
and choreographers, and things that none of us were doing
and none of us had, in some cases, even heard of.
A cellist and dancer himself,
Daniel has given an extraordinary number
of professional papers on topics that stretch from Bernstein,
Copeland, and John Cage, to Mullermae [assumed spelling],
1930's cartoons, Maersk Cunningham, Nijinsky, Ted Shawn
and his Men Dancers, and in approaches
that suture together the concerns of music, dance,
and image with those of gay aesthetics and desire.
Daniel Callahan is the recipient of many grants, fellowships,
and awards in addition to the Mellon Postdoc
that I mentioned earlier.
He's won a Whiting Dissertation Completion Fellowship,
the Selma Jeanne Cohen Award from the Society
of Dance History Scholars, and various awards
from Boston College, Columbia, and AMS.
This summer we'll see the publication
of Daniel's ambitious and much anticipated article
for the <i>Journal of the American Musicological Society </i>entitled,
"The Gay Divorce of Music and Dance, Choreomusicality,
and the Early Works of Cage-Cunningham,"
which adduces new archival and performative evidence
for the early collaborations of John Cage and Merce Cunningham,
to argue that music and dance were not divided
in their early years but were interrelated intimately,
especially through gay critiques of heterosexual marriage.
Given that Daniel has established himself
in public presentations as an intellect to be reckoned with,
there's reason for great excitement about his book
in progress, <i>The Dancer From the Music, Choreomusicalities</i>
<i>in American Modern Dance </i>which is bound to set American music
and dance studies on a new course.
Please join me in welcoming Professor Daniel Callahan
in his AMS Library of Congress lecture entitled
"Bernstein Conducting Himself."
[ Applause ]
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Thank all of you for coming.
Thank you, Susan Vita, our Chief Librarian of Music Division,
thank you Martha Feldman
for that incredibly generous introduction.
I wasn't sure who you were talking about some part of that,
and also for your exemplary leadership as President
of the American Musicological Society, and for being a mentor
and friend to me for these past six years.
Words to not being to express how honored I am
to share my research with all of you today here
at the Library of Congress.
In September, 2011, during my final year
of writing my dissertation on music and modern dance,
I came to the Library's Music Division
to research what had then been a long brewing side project,
"The Complicated Gestation of Bernstein's Westside Story."
I had intended to stay in Washington, D.C. for just a week
and then go back to my dissertation in New York.
That was the plan.
The Music Division's Senior Music Specialist,
Mark Eden Horowitz, welcomed me.
He talked with my about my research and alerted me
that hundred and hundreds of letters
in the personal correspondence of Leonard Bernstein,
letters that had previously been sealed and unavailable
to researchers, had very recently been unsealed and were
in the midst of being processed.
Much to the chagrin of my then boyfriend
and my dissertation advisers my one-week stay turned
into three weeks.
Since that time, my side project has now turned
into a second book project.
For that I want to thank Mark Eden Horowitz,
who is one of the national treasures here at the Library
of Congress, along with the amazing staff
who helped make today possible, especially Kate Miller
and David Pylar [assumed spelling], and in the back,
Jay Ken Lock and Mike Terpin [assumed spelling]
on audio visual.
We had a near meltdown earlier and they saved the day.
Like the 90-degree weather in Washington, D.C. today,
Leonard Bernstein is hot.
You do not need a musicologist to tell you this.
Just look at my title slide's photograph of him
after a concert [laughter].
Backstage in 1951, a photograph taken by Ruth Orkin
and held here in the Library of Congress,
this massive Leonard Bernstein collection.
If that doesn't convince you, maybe he's not your type,
consider the myriad concerts and special events
that are taking place around the globe this year in celebration
of Bernstein's centennial.
If you are a classical music fan, the Bernstein
at 100 Events, which are occurring
at a local symphony orchestra near you, are not news.
If you are not a classical music fan, and perhaps joining us
on YouTube, and have just stumbled upon this,
you still might not be convinced that Bernstein is hot.
In that case, I look to Hollywood and I ask you
to consider the news that came out two weeks ago today --
"Jake Gyllenhaal Plays Music Icon Leonard Bernstein
in Cary Fukunago-Helmed 'The American'" We have a kind
of famous actor who really wants an Oscar who's also a bit
of a heartthrob agreeing to play Leonard Bernstein on screen.
On that very same day, May 1st, on Netflix,
former <i>Saturday Night Live </i>writer,
John Mulaney released his stand-up special <i>Cape</i>
<i>Gorgeous </i>.
Within six minutes into his routine, Mulaney relates how,
when he was 12 years old, his father brought up
and made Leonard Bernstein the center
of what might be the world's most mysterious sex talk.
Instead of butchering the joke,
I will just direct you to Netflix.
Finally, only a few days ago, it was announced
that Bradley Cooper will also star in,
and in this case direct, a Leonard Bernstein biopic.
So, the question is not whether or not Bernstein is hot.
The question is now, "Wer Wird Bernstein Besser
Spielen [laughter]?"
Who will be better at playing Leonard Bernstein on screen?
As two of Hollywood's leading men wish to embody him,
it's kind of not surprising.
Leonard Bernstein made embodying himself look
so easy, so smart, so musical.
Take, for example, this, my first clip
from a <i>Young People's Concert </i>, nationally televised
in 1960 called "Who is Gustav Mahler?
I like to imagine my mother back in Chicago,
age eight in Ukrainian village,
perhaps my first generation grandparents also watching
Bernstein in their living room.
So let's just watch this now.
[ Music ]
&gt;&gt; Now, was
that heartbroken-sounding music the real Mahler?
Or is the other happy sleigh bell music?
No, they're both Mahler.
They're the voices of the two different people inside him.
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan:
If the real Mahler had two different people inside him,
according to Leonard Bernstein, one might very well wonder,
how many different people were inside the real
Leonard Bernstein?
And how will any actor, even one as talented as Jake Gyllenhaal
or Bradley Cooper, play him and convey this on screen --
conductor, composer, pianist, writer, educator, activist,
television celebrity, husband to his wife, Felicia,
father to three children,
lover to countless men, and devoted friend.
Bernstein sought to be the best in all possible worlds.
Both during and after his life, critics
and biographers diagnosed him as a precocious genius
who squandered his talent because of an inability
to focus on a single activity.
In the past decade, multiple scholars have nuanced our
understanding of Bernstein,
focused most often on his compositions.
Today I'm excited to share some of my research
on Bernstein's conducting, an area that has not received
as much scholarly attention.
Like his other professional activities,
Bernstein's conducting has had a mixed reception among critics.
Considerable ink was spilled in newspaper reviews
for half a century, and among amateur lovers, both fans
and detractors of his conducting, have been vocal
from the 1940s up to the present, now 27 years
after his death -- 28.
Among critic practitioners of conducting,
Bernstein is often considered a first-rate showman
and a second-rate technician.
Take Gunther Schuller
who presents his scorched Earth perspective on a century
of conducting his his book, <i>The Complete Conductor </i>.
Schuller makes no secret of his preference for conductors who,
like himself, quote, "Respect rigorously the content
of a score," end quote, so much so that, quote,
"The score becomes a kind of sacred document," end quote.
Once one accepts Schuller's idealization of the score,
most of his large book seems logical enough.
Schuller's criticisms
of Bernstein most often regard temp beat.
Usually he's too slow.
For example, Bernstein once did conduct the andante second
movement of Brahms's <i>First Symphony </i>with the quarter note
at 24 beats per minute.
While that might be a flagrant and specific foul,
Schuller's criticism
of Bernstein is unflagging throughout his book.
For the most part he is concise,
never exceeding a phrase or sentence.
For example, quote, "Leonard Bernstein was Reiner's pupil,
but one of the world's most histrionic
and exhibitionistic conductors."
Or, Bernstein's interpretation
of Brahms's <i>First Symphony </i>has quote,
"too much of an oy-vay Weltschmerz
to be bearable," end quote.
And, quote, "Bernstein was one of the most overrated
and adulated conductors of recent times.
He rarely practiced what he preached, to work in service
of the composer, a sad fact,
given his enormous basic natural talent, musical
and conductorial-gestural."
Published in 1997, Schuller's feeling
that Bernstein was grossly overrated was obviously not
shared by the many classical music lovers
who had been doing all of that overrating for decades.
Critic John Rockwell remembers that as a teenager
in the late 1950s he had fierce arguments
in which he defended Bernstein again other teenagers
who labelled his conducting, quote, "flamboyant,"
a word that occurs throughout discourse
about Bernstein on the podium.
I don't think teenagers today are talking
about Bernstein's flamboyance.
Oh, this is the 1950s.
The understanding of Bernstein as better than his critics
and in need of defense against them was so widespread
that it could even provide a laugh in a primetime sitcom.
In "Everyone's a Critic", a 1999 episode of <i>Frasier </i>,
the character Niles Crane is named a music critic
for a magazine [laughter].
&gt;&gt; How did this happen, Niles?
&gt;&gt;I was at a party thrown by the publisher,
Olga Swardre [assumed spelling].
The pretentious fop who had the job before me was there too,
spouting sheer drivel about Leonard Bernstein.
Being polite, I kept my tongue sheathed [laughter],
until he referred to Bernstein's conducting as overrated.
&gt;&gt; I assume you pounced.
&gt;&gt; Like a ninja [laughter].
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Back to Gunter Schuller.
After 479 pages, throughout which Bernstein here
and there is consistently criticized for failing to adhere
to various details, Schuller finally offers, quote,
"a word about Bernstein," end quote.
It's actually over 500 words in a page-conquering footnote,
following yet another knit-picky critique
about Bernstein's Renickderstortions [assumed
spelling] and Measure 92 of [inaudible] Suite Number Two.
The rest of this footnote, outlined on the slide,
is devoted to a critique in which Schuller touches
on Bernstein's inability to focus
on a single professional activity as well as, quote,
"his ego-driven distortions, exaggerations, and histrionics,
his drinking, outrageous behavior, pursuit of the trendy
and chic, and his bisexuality," end quote.
Schuller concludes that Bernstein, quote,
"had very little discipline and no shame.
And that his podium antics and athletic exhibitionism,
although wonderful for audiences in television," end quote,
demonstrate that he did not put the score first.
Schuller wanted more Beethoven, less Bernstein.
For Bernstein and his fans, the distinction between Beethoven
and Bernstein was too blurred to matter.
Given Bernstein's celebrity status, it is not surprising
that discussions of his conducting
on stage were sometimes conflated
with his conduct off stage.
Histrionic podium antics and athletic exhibitionism,
to quote Schuller, "bothered him."
But so did the fact that Bernstein, his colleague
for decades, was a less than puritanical homosexual.
I should note that I will refer to Bernstein as gay
and homosexual, and not bisexual.
This is how his closest friends refer to him.
It is also how his wife, Felicia Montealegre, referred to him
in a letter shortly after they were married in 1951 or 1952.
This is in the Library's recently unsealed letters.
Quote, "You are a homosexual and may never change," end quote.
Schuller's criticisms betray a larger fear,
that fallible bodies
and performances can never do justice to ideal works.
A large part of any musical performance is not just a
musician's movements that result in a specific sound, say,
how tight or wide a cellist's bravado is,
but also bodily movements and facial expressions
that are often considered supplementary
to musical expression.
The distinction between movements that do and movements
that don't, result in a specific sound, become wonderfully blurry
when we consider the conductor.
And so what Schuller calls histrionics might be worth a
closer look.
Musicians who played
under Bernstein maintain contra Schuller
that he was not moving for the audience.
Quote, "He certainly does not act and gesticulate for the sake
of show," end quote, said Viennese Violinist Hans Novak.
"He jumps about during rehearsals
when he has no public behind him," end quote.
Bernstein sought to both lead the musicians
and become the music, music that was far larger
than his five feet eight inches and 140-something pounds.
For Bernstein, as for the music-loving scholar,
Roland Bart, every score became, quote, "a muscular music
in which the body itself must transcribe what it reads.
It is the scripter, not the receiver, end quote.
Bernstein, more than any conductor I know spoke and wrote
of music in just this way.
Bart. when he was fully involved in a work of music, writes that,
quote, "Every distinction between composer, interpreter,
and auditor is abolished,
so much so that the musical text becomes Bart's body."
Fellow musicologist and future AMS President, Suzanne Cusack,
has written of, quote, "the desire to know the music
as a means to physically be that music," end quote.
This is empathy.
Today we might think of empathy as being able to know what it's
like to be someone else, to stand into their shoes,
to know how they feel.
So we might think of people like nurses or Meryl Streep
or Former President Barack Obama.
The word empathy, however,
entered the English language only in the early 20th century
and then, as a translation of the German aesthetic concept
of [foreign word], which is the vitalization
of a non-living art object through the projection
of one's own kinesthetic self into it.
One projects oneself into the artwork in order
to experience the artwork dynamism,
its movement, and its form.
You basically say, I am you to a score,
or a sculpture, or a painting.
This concept was embraced in the 1930s by John Martin,
the first full-time dance critic in the United States.
He believed that modern dance offered its viewers the chance
to experience kinesthetic empathy with the bodies
of another engaged in choreography.
But before I come back to modern dance, a quick note
about some older dancing.
Whether in rehearsal or in concert,
Bernstein's body might remined one that the word
"orchestra" derives from the Greek "orchestra,"
orches meaning dancing place.
The part of the stage in ancient theaters
that was nearest the audience,
where the chorus danced and sand.
We might say that Bernstein's conducting is a kind
of bodily scripting of the orchestral music in front
of him, or literally <i>Orchesographie </i>,
the title of our [inaudible] 1589 Treatise
on the Relationship Between Dance and Music and Social Dance
as well as the word that would morph
into choreography two centuries later.
Although Bernstein and his fans often speak
of his spontaneity while conducting,
of his in the momentness, I want to propose that we think
of Bernstein's conducting instead as choreography.
What's more, by the end of this talk, I hope to show
that this choreography actually remains surprisingly consistent
from performance to performance, sometimes even across decades.
This is not just that there are certain standard gestures
in Bernstein's movement vocabulary,
but repeat across scores.
There certainly are.
But also that entire set patterns of movement repeat
with the precision that strikes me as uncanny and noteworthy.
A larger conclusion here is that Bernstein's body,
for all of its movement and supposed visibility
on television, on stage, has actually been taken for granted
and has never been that carefully observed.
One sometimes even encounters interpretations of the same work
that sound fairly different,
but in which Bernstein's conducting looks
nearly identical.
Bernstein's podium choreography for the "Rite
of Spring" is more consistent across years,
I realized in November of 2014,
than was that of conductor Andris Nelson's
over a three-concert-weekend at Boston's Symphony Hall.
This was surprising but what, if anything, did it mean?
Bernstein's choreography
on the podium registered his empathy with the score.
It is his shameless presentation of that empathy that represents,
perhaps, his most unique contribution
to the art of conducting.
For Bernstein, the podium was both a dancing place
and a safe space of sorts where, emboldened and legitimated
by a beloved score, he could become both the music and,
paradoxically, most himself.
From the beginning, reviewers noticed the nearness
between Bernstein's conducting and modern dance.
Consider Alan Downs's rave review
of Bernstein's breakthrough performance on Sunday,
November 14th, 1943, when famously Bernstein stepped
in for an ailing Bruno Walter
and conducted the New York Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall.
Downs writes, quote, "He conducted without a baton,
justifying this by his instinctively expressive use
of his hand and a bodily plastic which,
if not always conservative, was to the point,
alive and expressed of this music.
And so understood by the players.
Greater reserve will come later.
It would be ominous
if Mr. Bernstein had it now," end quote.
Note that phrase, "bodily plastic."
This refers to expressive movement practices, like dance,
that were widespread in the first third of the 20th century,
such as Dalcroze Eurhythmics here with some dancers
at an early program at Peabody
and then Bernstein on your right.
An expressive dance or free dance,
the craze set off by Isadora Duncan.
Although Downs doesn't use bodily plastic
in a directly negative way, he still suggests that this quote,
"not always conservative,"
unquote movement is just a phase.
Opportunities to conduct increased
when Bernstein was named the Music Director
of the New York City Symphony Orchestra in 1945.
So, too, the possibilities for him to be reviewed,
and these reverences to the choreographic nature
of his conducting would continue throughout the rest of his life.
For example, we hear at this chorybantic choreographies,
which include the miming of facial gestures
of uncontrollable states."
That's Virgil Thompson writing in '47.
And then Harold Schonberg who kind of had it in for one
of Bernstein, wrote, quote,
"Bernstein is the most choreographic
of all contemporary conductors."
And Schonberg again in 1953, quote, "He rose vertically
into the air, a la Nijinsky,
and hovered there a good 15 seconds by the clock."
The two references
to choreography here both suggest that,
as was true when the when the word began its wider circulation
in the early 20th century, that it was a term
that was only applied to the more outre modernist dancing
such as that of Nijinsky.
References to Nijinsky also portray an understanding
of Bernstein not only as saltatory, ready to leap
out of a window on stage,
but also as unconventionally masculine.
In his draft for his 1979 "Young People's Concert, Ballet Birds,"
which you can see online through the Library of Congress,
Bernstein was read to publicly address he fact
that he had been criticized for being too dancerly for too long.
He wrote, "Besides, after years of reading in the papers
about my own balletic movements on the podium,
whatever that may mean, I probably ought
to give myself some real ballet music to dance to,
so that the critics can feel justified.
Right?
Eventually either Bernstein or someone
on the Production Team decided that airing his grievance
with the critics and further drawing attention
to his style would not make for good TV for children.
Eventually, Bernstein developed a thick skin.
He was not the first conductor
on whose bodily movements the press became fixated.
Consider, of course, Gustav Mueller, the composer
who Bernstein famously championed.
He was also criticized for his conducting on the podium.
Just as some criticism
of Bernstein thinly disguises the homophobic sentiment beneath
it, so, too, did criticism and grotesque characterizations
of Mahler's body sometimes reveal antisemitism.
Over his career, Mahler's conducting gestures became
more reserved.
According to critics, he used less of the space around him
on the podium and his affected presentations were less dynamic
with time.
Bernstein's development
as a conductor took the exact opposite course.
At the Curtis Institute in 1939, Conductor Fritz Reiner tried
to instill in Bernstein a sense of discipline,
an obsessive attention to detail, control over all parts
of the score, and a relative economy of gesture.
This was the opposite of the more emotion
and motion-filled example
of the training Bernstein was receiving simultaneously
under Koussevitzky in summers
at the Berkshire Music Center, today Tanglewood.
But the real impetus for Bernstein's large,
very physical conducting came from the example
of Dimitri Mitropoulos.
Mitropoulos awakened in your Bernstein passions both musical
and sexual, even if they were never consummated
between the two men.
We can't be sure.
In January, 1937, during his sophomore year of college
at Harvard, Bernstein met Mitropoulos.
The conductor immediately saw something special
in the young man and invited him to his rehearsals
for his American debut with the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
By all accounts, Bernstein's own, those of his friends,
letters to others, the young Bernstein was dazzled
by Mitropoulos's conducting
which included Ravel's <i>Rhapsody Espanol </i>and Schumann's <i>Second</i>
<i>Symphony </i>.
Metropoulos took Bernstein and his friend Mildred to a café
after the rehearsal they were invited to watch,
and there he fed the young man an oyster off of his fork.
And then, the setting intimacy was followed
by Mitropoulos's just as sudden departure.
It all upturned the young Bernstein's world.
Over a year after their first meeting in 1938, Bernstein wrote
about his relationship with Mitropoulos,
but renamed him Eros Mavro [assumed spelling]
in a very thinly-veiled autobiographical short story
titled, <i>The Occult </i>.
Looking at that story, which he wrote for a writing course
at Harvard, what Bernstein seems to have seen
in Mitropoulos was a man
who used his body fully and without shame.
Carl, as Bernstein renames himself in the story,
observes the conductor in rehearsal and is stunned.
While conducting Eros Mavro rises up and falls back
down onto the stool on the podium.
He breaks the stool, but he never stops conducting.
Eros Mavro jumps up and then he crashes down again,
breaking the replacement stool yet again.
Then he takes Carl to lunch and feeds him an oyster off
of his fork [laughter].
The character Carl becomes obsessed with Eros Mavro
after he leaves town for his next engagement.
Carl repeats a mantra in his head.
Plato makes Eros the center of all emotions.
Carl latches onto the importance that the older man links
to the word "sympathetic."
And when Eros Mavro finally writes back,
it confirms all of Carl's wishes.
Quote, "Eros writes to him, 'I want you.
I dared not believe it before.
Come to me."' Considering the sophomore outing
in creating writing, literally sophomoric, I think it is okay
if we put aside the intentional fallacy for a moment.
The story, which Bernstein published in his collection
of writing findings in 1982, and which exists here at the Library
in the Leonard Bernstein Collection, demonstrates
that from Mitropoulos learned to be simultaneously spiritual
and highly physical nature of conducting,
an act involving the entire body.
He also learned the importance of feeling a real connection
with a fellow musician and fellow gay man.
Mitropoulos's influence can be seen not just
in Bernstein's leap-heavy conducting,
and here we see some slides
of Mitropoulos midair while conducting, but also in the way
that Bernstein conceptualized conducting and its relationship
to sexuality and erotics.
Materials in the Library
of Congress's Leonard Bernstein collection revealed the
vicissitudes of shame and comfort
with which Bernstein viewed his homosexuality and body,
and the relationship of these relationship of these feeling
to his career as a conductor.
From his college years throughout the 1940s,
Bernstein we now know had hundreds
of male sexual partners.
Although the majority of these relationships were casual,
Bernstein still saved his correspondence
with many of these men.
They were filed away by Helen Coates
who was Bernstein's first piano teacher
and then later his personal secretary and confidante.
One of the relationships that seemed more than casual was
with a man named Seymour Meyerson.
The two first met in 1945.
Helen Coates, in a letter
to Bernstein several years later would even question Bernstein's
decision to marry by brining up Meyerson as an example
of a partner who made Bernstein truly happy.
Coates, Meyerson notes in a letter to Bernstein,
would also confide in Meyerson
about Bernstein's very busy sex life
and how she tried to manage it.
Based on the letters available and trust which Bernstein
and Coates showed him, Meyerson seems to have been one
of the more stable relationships Bernstein had in the 1940s.
The two would continue writing
to each other even years after they separated.
Like Bernstein, Meyerson also married and had children.
And we wrote of the joys and trials of family life and asked
after Bernstein's wife, Felicia.
He would also recall their previous love for each other.
He wrote to Bernstein of how one night,
while placing an older sheet on the bed his wife
and he would shortly share,
he realized that it was the same sheet upon which he
and Bernstein used to regularly sleep.
Throughout the 1940s, Bernstein also planned
to compose a musical on James M. Cain's hardboiled novel,
<i>Serenade </i>, about a tenor who falls
under the dangerous influence of a gay conductor.
Kind of just ruined the plot.
I apologize.
By the end of the 1940s, as Bernstein's prospects
for a major conducting position increased, his datebooks
and correspondence here at the Library revealed
that he was seeing a psychoanalyst multiple times a
week in an effort to suppress his homosexual desires.
Yet, even after his marriage to Felicia Montealegre in 1951
and as late as 1954, Bernstein was still hoping
to make a musical on Cain's <i>Serenade </i>.
He couldn't let go of this link between sexuality
and conducting just as he couldn't let go of the photos
and letters of the men with whom he had casual relationships,
the vast majority of which are now available
to the public here at the library.
Bernstein's connection between conducting
and the erotic did make its way
into the public and on prime time.
Consider his third <i>Omnibus</i> Television Special on the "Art
of Conducting" in 1955.
After going over the elements
of musicianship a conductor must have, Bernstein moved
on to the intangibles.
And this is as published in his "IT Joy of Music .
He wrote, quote, "The conductor must make the orchestra love the
music as he loves it.
It is not so much imposing his will on them like a dictator;
it is more like projecting his feelings around him
so that they reach the last man in the second violin section.
And when this happens, when 100 men share his feelings, exactly,
simultaneously, responding as one to each rise and fall
of the music, to each point of arrival and departure,
to each little pulse, then there is a human identity of feeling
that has no equal elsewhere.
It is the closest thing I know to love itself.
On this current of love the conductor can communicate
at the deepest levels with his players, and ultimately
with his audience," end quote.
Bernstein called this focus on an identity of feeling
through empathy with the music throughout his life.
In outline, it is similar to the erotic as theorized
by [inaudible] critic Audre Lorde in her essay,
<i>Uses of the Erotic, Erotic as Power </i>.
"[Inaudible] the erotic quote comes
from sharing deeply any pursuit with another person.
The sharing of joy, whether physical, emotional, psychic,
or intellectual, forms a bridge between the sharers."
Lord continues writing the erotic is, quote, "the open
and fearless underlining of my capacity for joy.
In the way my body stretches to music and opens into response,
hearkening to its deepest rhythms, so every level upon
which I sense also opens
to the erotically satisfying experience," end quote.
As Bernstein aged and became increasingly comfortable
discussing his work and sex and sexuality without fear
of approach, he made it clear that, for him,
conducting was a kind of erotic transfer of power and pleasure.
Consider his words here.
&gt;&gt; There's a kind of closeness that can be developed
with members of an orchestra.
It is a love affair in which you
and a body are breathing together, closely together,
lifting and sinking together.
And I'm not making this sound too lurid or too sexual.
It is, sort of, sexual.
But it's with 100 people.
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Bernstein is clearly being a bit
of a bad boy there at the end of the quote,
but I think that his understanding
of conducting is earnest and honest and --
even if it's kind of playful here.
And if we take him seriously, as I think we should,
I want to now refocus on his body in performance
and see how it registers these ideas.
Now, an obvious place to go would be to a performance
of the Mahler <i>Five Adagietto </i>which we just heard
as underscore to Bernstein's comments.
Or perhaps to the final movement of Mahler's <i>Ninth Symphony </i>,
or as any diehard Mahler fan would suspect,
to the final movement of Mahler's <i>Second </i>.
And these are some photos
of Bernstein conducting Mahler's <i>Second Symphony </i>.
Looking at these photos, we might remember
that when Bernstein learned
that Mahler's <i>Tenth Symphony </i>had been edited
and completed the performance, he said,
quote, "I have one question.
Will it give me an orgasm"?
End quote.
Kind of a bad boy sometimes.
Today, however, I want us first
to consider Bernstein's conducting of Tchaikovsky.
Bernstein programmed
and performed Tchaikovsky's <i>Pathetique,</i>
<i>the Sixth Symphony</i> with increasing relish
from the early 1970s on.
In 1986, on tour, he partnered it on programs
with his own <i>Serenade for Solo Violin </i>after <i>Plato's</i>
<i>Symposium </i>.
Some critics noticed a newfound drama and level of commitment
in Bernstein's conducting of the <i>Pathetique </i>.
Others disagreed.
After conducting the New York Philharmonic
at UCLAs Royce Hall,
critic Martin Bernheimer described the Bernstein's body
as, quote, "Shrugging, jumping, sighing, soaring, gushing,
crouching, rocking, rolling, bounding, bobbing, leaping,
jiggling, stabbing, hunching, bumping, grinding,
and grunting," end quote.
Regarding the fire alarm
that interrupted Tchaikovsky's Symphony, Bernheimer wrote,
quote, "A managerial spokesperson refused
to confirm any connection
between the potential conflagration
and the flamboyant performance on the podium.
Nevertheless, this was an undeniably,
uniquely flamboyant performance," unquote.
Regarding Bernstein's affect during the symphony,
Bernheimer wrote, quote, "Emoting above
and beyond any call, Bernstein acted out a series
of virtuosic charades.
He wiggled in moments of agitation
as if he were auditioning
for the next Twyla Tharp extravaganza," end quote.
Bernheimer ends his review by comparing the concert's end
with post-coital affect.
Quote, "The Protagonist looked picturesquely spent, ecstatic,
euphoric, wrung out as he basked in the post climactic applause.
He also acted as if he and his symphonic cohorts had somehow
succeeded in scaling at least three Mount Everest's.
The exquisite ardor of the moment could be expressed only
in an ever increasing orgy of hugs and kisses.
I lift before the maestro embraced the stagehands,"
end quote.
Bernheimer's depicture of Bernstein as self-indulgent,
unnecessary, flamboyant, over-emotional, and excessive
in bodily actions seems to be motivated by more
than just the desire
to accurately cover the performance.
Not all critics agreed however.
For example, take Tim Page of the <i>New York Times </i>who wrote,
quote, "In the wrong hands, Tchaikovsky can sound blatant
and vulgar, and listening
to his music can be a faintly embarrassing experience,
like reading the intimate diary of somebody you don't know.
There was nothing embarassing
about Mr. Bernstein's <i>Pathetique </i>, although it was
as confessional
as any performance I have ever heard," end quote.
The pathetic symphonist's scores provided Bernstein an
opportunity to perform professional climaxes galore.
Bernstein was particularly convincing
when embodying late 19th century sequences such as the one
at Rehearsal O in the first movement
of Tchaikovsky's <i>Fourth Symphony </i>.
In this clip, from the first every <i>Young People's Concert</i>
Min 1958, "What Does Music Mean?"
note the way that Bernstein's whole body lands
on the beginning of each iteration
of the sequenced motive.
Each time he says the word "want" with an increasing sense
of attack and bigger bounce back, as if charged by the rise
of the sequence, so much so that by the last three wants,
he is throwing his head back as if in convulsions of desire.
This will make more sense as you watch the clip.
&gt;&gt; Okay, by saying that it has the feeling
of wanting something very badly that you can't have.
Did you ever feel that you wanted something more
than anything else in the world, and you said so,
and they said no, you can't have it.
And you said, again, I want it.
And, again, they said no, and again you said louder and
more excited, I want it, and again, louder, I want it,
until it seemed that something would break in your head
and there's nothing left to do but cry.
Well, that's like this music.
Listen.
[ Music ]
Finally something breaks in your head and --
[ Music ]
-- and you cry.
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Now
that we have seen Bernstein demonstrate his idea
of this music and the charmed smile it elicited
from one young viewer in the audience, let's compare it
to a filmed live performance 12 years later.
Here, I want you to know the same increased attacks
and the final throwbacks of his head.
But also three other things that occur
across Bernstein's conducting on the podium.
First, the tiny look of ecstasy signified by the open mouth
and the slump of the body at the beginning of the sequence.
Two, Bernstein's use of two hands on the baton
as he nears the climax of the phrase.
And, three, the famous Bernstein leap.
He gets airtime off of the podium at the arrival
of the interrupting stormy motive.
[ Music ]
Now that we've seen three common features
in Bernstein's movement vocabulary, and also the kind
of sense of his face registering the music on it,
you might even say that Bernstein faces the music,
meaning not that just he's conducting the orchestra,
but he's also reflecting the music on his face,
we can now turn to something else.
Presumably this is something
that only [inaudible] orchestra could see that's presumably not
for the audience even though he knew he was being filmed here.
As bassist Orin O'Brien, who was the first female member
of the New York Philharmonic who was not a harpist, as she noted
about watching Bernstein both from the auditorium
and the stage, she wrote, quote, "From the audience as an usher
at Carnegie, I found it difficult to take some
of Bernstein's gyrations and dancing around the podium.
Upon joining the orchestra as a bassist in 1966, however,"
she realized "his movements weren't put
on for the audience's benefit.
He was simply living music that he believed in so deeply."
In my remaining time with you,
I want us to consider a few moments
where Bernstein's conducting is clearly a set choreography,
one that repeats across years.
First, I'd like us to consider the end of part one,
"The Dance of the Earth," from Stravinsky's <i>Rite of Spring </i>.
I'd like to draw your attention to the three levels
of Bernstein's forward jabs.
You'll notice him doing this.
And then, the very, very dramatic kind of pause.
He's frozen at the very, very end of part one.
So let's watch this from 1966.
[ Music ]
And now, six years later, in 1972, the same passage.
[ Music ]
This is a very clear, I hope,
example of how exactly the movement repeats.
And this happens again in my next
and what will be my final example.
Bernstein might leave us almost fairly breathless
as we watch him conduct.
Bernstein himself also found himself increasingly breathless.
At Alan J. Warner's memorial service in New York City,
a bunch of Bernstein fans knew he would be there.
And they gathered and they held up signs saying, "We love you.
Please stop smoking."
And Bernstein, at the end of his life, wrote, quote,
"The great thing about conducting is you don't smoke
and you breathe in great gobs of oxygen," end quote.
This seems kind of funny and cute, but in August 1990,
Bernstein was to conduct the Koussevitzky Memorial Concert
at Tanglewood with the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
Because his emphysema was kind of progressing,
they had to actually line up oxygen tanks
and bring them backstage.
He was supposed to conduct everything on the program.
But because he was very, very ill, Carl St. Clair had to step
in and conduct Bernstein's arias and barcarolles
which had just been orchestrated by Bright Sheng.
When you read reviews of this final concert,
newspaper writers all kind of focus on the fact
that Bernstein was very clearly ill.
Several of them mentioned his coughing fit in the middle
of the third movement
of the <i>Seventh Symphony</i> which would be the last work
that he would ever conduct.
Having read these stories and also the biographies
if Bernstein, especially the great Humphrey Bearden biography
and Tim Page's Concert Review, and having not yet seen the film
that I will shortly show you, I was incredulous
when my colleague at Boston College, Sandra Hebert,
who was studying piano at Tanglewood that summer,
insisted to me that Bernstein performed his signature leap
at some point during the <i>Seventh Symphony </i>.
And I said, you know, Sandy, that's not possible.
He was coughing, he's conducting.
You were just imagining the great Bernstein,
which didn't square with everything.
Furthermore, I had heard the 1990 concert
on commercial recording multiple times.
It's a recording that I love.
And hearing it, I didn't believe that Bernstein --
the tempo was slower --
would have jumped in his final conducting appearance.
The concert was very, very special in 1990.
It marked 50 years since his first professional appearance
at Tanglewood in 1940.
He conducts Britain's [inaudible]
"Britain's Four Sea Interludes" from <i>Peter Grimes </i>.
This is very important as well
because Bernstein conducted the premier
of <i>Peter Grimes </i>in the U.S. at Tanglewood.
And he also -- the final work on the program
that he conducted was -- he conducted Bernstein's --
Beethoven's <i>Seventh Symphony </i>.
Beethoven's <i>Seventh </i>is one of the two scores
that Bernstein had to prepare for his audition
with Fritz Reiner at the Curtis Institute in 1939.
It was also Beethoven's <i>Seventh </i>programmed
for his first concert as a Music Director
of the New York Philharmonic in 1958.
It's a very -- a work that's very, very near
and dear to Bernstein.
I'm going to show you two sets of two clips.
The first will come from a filmed performance of Bernstein
with the Vienna Philharmonic in 1978.
And this is from the beginning of the fourth movement
of Beethoven's <i>Seventh Symphony </i>.
I want you to notice the nearly identical movements in this clip
and in the following clip.
And this suggests that Bernstein was really thinking
of conducting as a kind of choreography,
or at least performing it that way.
You'll notice that there's a lot of elbow pumping that he does.
It's kind of like a dance in the countryside imagined by someone
who lives in the city.
That sounds odd, but I'll just show you
and I think you'll see what I see pretty quickly.
[ Music ]
And now this is 12 years later
at Bernstein's final appearance at Tanglewood.
[ Music ]
You can see the same gestures here.
And I think that's pretty clear.
And then for my final example of the talk
and of the evening tonight, this is Bernstein's own score
of Beethoven <i>Seven </i>which the New York Philharmonic has
digitized and put online at the wonderful archives.
I wanted to use this final passage
of descending 16th notes.
We're going to watch Bernstein conduct it again
with the Vienna Philharmonic in 1978 and you'll notice that,
again, that there's this kind of wind-up,
a kind of pitch forward, a pitch up and down, and then it ends.
And you'll just see this right here.
[ Music ]
[ Applause and Cheering ]
And so again that same wind-up and then the kind
of punch forward, the up and down.
Here 12 years later in his final conducting at Tanglewood.
[ Music ]
[ Cheering and Applause ]
Though physically exhausted, and less than two months away
from his death on October 14, 1990,
Bernstein conducted Beethoven's <i>Seventh Symphony </i>that
afternoon with the same choreography
that he had been using for decades.
Like the dancers with whom he had personal
and professional relationships throughout his career,
like any musician, Bernstein relied
on muscle memory he had long internalized
after numerous performances.
Quote, "We are in a profound
and virtually inescapable sense prisoners of our bodies,"
notes Gunter Schuller in his book, <i>The Complete Conductor </i>.
Prisoners seems a bit strong.
If we take that out, it sounds less bleak and more obvious.
"We are in a profound
and virtually inescapable sense, our bodies."
Is the actions our bodies perform the constant iterations
that come to identify us as musicians and otherwise?
Then I suggest it is time we fully acknowledge.
In Bernstein's final performance, the vast majority
of the audience didn't recognize
that he was repeating the choreography long stored
in his muscle memory, a choreography predicated
on kinesthetic empathy with a series of notes
that has been dubbed "The Apotheosis
of the Dance" by Wagner.
Many in the shot at Tanglewood even missed his small jump
at the beginning of the fourth movement, but it was there.
The podium was still a dancing place that Sunday afternoon.
But Bernstein's body took up slightly less of it.
The podium also remained a kind of safe space,
the place where Bernstein could move shamelessly
in no small part because he could temporarily forget many
of his other identities, even if others could not, and focus only
on the music that he sought to become.
As the musical community celebrates Bernstein's 100th
anniversary in 2018, we might also fully appreciate his
conducting as both carefully choreographed
and instructively shameless.
Thank you.
[ Applause ]
I believe we now have time for questions.
There's a microphone at the back.
We ask that you wait for the microphone before asking
a question.
And if you could kindly identify yourself for the microphone,
that would be appreciated.
&gt;&gt; Hi. I'm Bill Black.
I live here in Washington.
My question is, with all of this energy and dance skill, did --
that he demonstrated with music, did he demonstrate
that in other parts of his life?
Did he literally like to go out dancing?
Did you see it in, you know, his leisure time, sports,
anything else like that?
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: You know, there's --
if you look through the photograph-like record
of Bernstein both here at the Library of Congress,
at other archives, if you plug in a Google Search,
you can see him that he's a -- he has --
seemed to have had a lot of energy.
People always say, oh, I'm too busy.
You know, I'm really, really busy.
Bernstein was really, really,
really busy in the 1940s and across his life.
And, yes, you see photos of him swimming,
running around with the kids and the dog in the backyard.
There does seem to be a lot of energy.
I probably need more film footage about him
on the dance floor, like a bar mitzvah or a wedding
or something to give you my full kind of appraisal of his dancing
and social situations.
But I wouldn't be surprised
if there was quite a bit of it, yes.
&gt;&gt; So as a non-musicologist, have a very basic question.
I'm sold on everything you've said.
I think it's terrific talk.
And I love the way it hangs together and everything.
Can you help me understand how other conductors --
because it seems to me, it would seem
that muscle memory would work for everybody.
So why didn't it work for others.
What were they responding
to at the time what they were responding, you know,
10 years apart, or why would
that be different than what he did?
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Good question.
So I don't mean to imply or sell as you say.
I'm a musicologist, but you are not.
I make no money.
I make a little bit, but not enough.
So I didn't mean to imply or to sell
that other conductors weren't doing this.
Yes. I think I even say that, you know, like any musician
in the final paragraph of my talk,
Bernstein relied on muscle memory.
However, there's this thing that happens, both with conductors
and when we see people who maybe do things with their bodies,
a certain dance move, whatever, that are kind of more out there,
that are not, that we're not used to, where we begin to talk
about the music, the movement, in this case conducting,
as if it is disordered or random or kind of outrageous.
My point here is that for all of the talk of Bernstein's kind
of flamboyance and largeness, there is a consistency,
one that we could kind of expect, I think,
from most musicians who have to get on stage
and give a performance in front of an audience.
There are some conductors who do seem --
I mean, of course there's many, many styles of conducting.
There are some who seem to kind of mix it
up from performance to performance.
I gave the example of Andris Nelsons
at the Boston Symphony Orchestra because my first month in Boston
or second month in Boston in 2014 I took a bunch of students
over three different nights to see him conduct.
And I was shocked at how different the conducting was
when he put his right arm back on the podium, when he went
up onto the balls of his feet, when he would do this kind of --
he does this kind of left-hand wave sometime.
And for someone who thinks about people dancing and moving
around a lot, that kind of stuck out to me.
And it was only then that I began to think, wow,
for all of Bernstein's supposed kind of craziness and dancing
around on the podium, he's actually pretty darn consistent.
So that's kind of the larger point and the context
for why I'm kind of saying.
It's also a great excuse to watch a lot
of Bernstein clips over and over again.
&gt;&gt; My name is Mather Feiffenberger
[assumed spelling].
I live here in Washington.
Perhaps an obvious question, but, yeah, very interesting.
You talk about how -- about Bernstein's consistency.
This was also, would you say, instinctive, unconscious?
I mean, if he were here now, would he say to us, oh, yeah,
I planned it that way, or would --
or you think he'd be surprised at what you had found?
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: While I've done a lot of research,
I feel no way able to speak
for Leonard Bernstein or what he thought.
I think that there, there is a --
for a lot of people there's a thing.
For example, the way you speak, the way you move in general,
where you do certain things kind of over and over again,
and you just get used to it.
And you maybe don't even think about it.
In my hide, you know, my voice sounds kind
of very specific and, you know, deep and rich,
and then I hear a recording of myself and I'm
like that's not what my voice sounds like.
And I'm not thinking.
I'm not trying to sound the way that I do.
It just is.
So I'm going to guess, if I had to guess,
I would say that it's probably partly just a matter of practice
and having run through a score so many times.
So that's like many things in life --
partly kind of done on purpose and cultivated
and probably learned, and partly in a way natural
or instinctive is the word that you just used.
&gt;&gt; And last question, have you been in touch, by chance,
with any of his children and presented this research
and gotten their reaction?
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Right.
So Jamie Bernstein, Bernstein's daughter,
who has a book coming out, or just out right now, I believe.
&gt;&gt; Coming out in June.
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Coming out in June.
I met her this past February in Colorado Springs,
Colorado because she, like her dad.
Is kind of in demand, especially this year.
She had to leave the morning of my talk,
but that night before the talk I went over the talk with her.
I discussed it with her over the a drink in the hotel lobby,
and I kind of focused on this idea
of Bernstein's muscle memory.
And I said, you know, it seems like, you know,
you dad would do a lot of certain things over
and over again, and people don't really kind of realize
that or give them credit.
And I say that partly because I didn't really realize that,
until I sat down and watched the videos over and over again.
And she said, that's the exact same phrase that I use
when I talk about my dad, muscle memory.
So, but, yes, I have met Jamie.
I've heard from Roger Englander
who was Bernstein's longtime producer whom I did a series
of interviews with, an oral history with, back in 2011.
That -- his son Alex is kind of wonderful, so I do look forward
to meeting more of the family as time goes on.
&gt;&gt; Kwon Kwon.
I'm a local resident.
I've got two questions.
You mentioned something about three levels
when Bernstein was conducting "Dances of the Earth",
Stravinsky's <i>Rite of Spring </i>.
Could you repeat those three --
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Oh, right.
So there's -- both here and in the day [inaudible],
I tried to pick examples [finger-snap]
that you could kind of very, very quickly grasp.
I know that many of you have not seen these videos.
None of you have seen them the 1990 film
of the final performance.
And you probably haven't been in front of the mirror
in your bedroom repeating what Bernstein does, like I do.
So there's a kind of thing in both of these where the kind
of place where you kind of -- when he's conducting,
he goes here, he goes down, he goes up, and the kind
of specificity with which this happens in both of these clips,
you see it again in the Beethoven.
It's the exact same sequence.
An audience member in Colorado Springs who was extremely lovely
and who I've been emailing with,
suggested that I might consider having the two clips
side-by-side and slowing down one of them.
I've done various work with video editing,
taking kind of silent film of modern dancers who were dancing
to a record, and then synchronized it.
She suggested I should do a split screen because --
especially to see the time kind of winding
down on the clock over here.
We're at 8:11 p.m. I kind of rushed through the end
of the talk a little bit.
My apologies.
But, so yeah, there's this -- there's a very kind of clear --
the kind of spots that he's hitting
and what a dance analyst would call his kinosphere.
If you imagine like the DaVinci circle.
He goes to the same spots.
And this is, you know, over a decade later.
So I hope that answers your first question.
&gt;&gt; Second question is, since he had his own choreography,
could he have choreographed something
like <i>West Side Story </i>?
No [laughter].
No. Because I could feel Jerome Robbins in the grave doing
like you better say no quickly [laughter], and put a box
around my name as it is in the contract.
No. He couldn't.
However, I would guess Ben Stein was intimate with, you know,
in working offstage with many, many dancers.
Robbins especially.
You see these great photos of Bernstein
at the piano trying things out of <i>West Side Story </i>.
And Robbins is literally --
has his hands on his shoulders touching him.
Dancers tend to be very, very touchy people, you know?
You're sitting around one moment.
[Inaudible] your dancer is braiding their hair,
giving massages.
I think that Bernstein was very, very comfortable
in this world because he had to be.
He was working with dancers a lot in the 1940s.
Do I think that being around dancers a lot --
I mean, I hand out with the dancers sometimes.
Does that mean that I can choreograph
like a Morris Cunningham?
Absolutely not.
So that's my best guess on that.
&gt;&gt; Merin Alsop frequently refers
to his experiences with Bernstein.
I wonder if you've ever had a chance
to compare notes with her and --
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: That's an excellent question.
I'm so busy kind of teaching and writing the book
that I'm currently writing that I haven't.
But if you look at the recently -- or not [inaudible] anymore.
The Bernstein, the last interview with Jonathan Cott.
There's this wonderful passage where Bernstein talks
about Merin Alsop and says that you really have
to look out for this one.
She's going to kick some ass.
And so -- and you also see Alsop in her own promotional materials
for Baltimore kind of promoting how active she is.
You see her in [inaudible] of the podium
but they had a video camera follow her into the gym,
and you see Marin on the treadmill kind of going because,
as she says, conducting his a highly physical art.
It's many things.
It's also promotional and dealing stoners
and programming with the orchestra.
But it is ultimately a body moving around trying
to create a certain sound from a 100
or so people in front of you.
So I would relish the opportunity
to interview Marin Alsop.
Marin, if you're watching on YouTube, please contact me.
So, yeah. Thank you.
Very great question.
&gt;&gt; A couple of comments and a question.
My first time to Tanglewood in 1972 was Bernstein conducting.
I have no recollection of what.
I just remember it was lovely.
It was magical.
And then I lived in Boston for a long time
and it was [inaudible] and the whole thing.
And just two weeks ago I went to the Ken-Cen for the [inaudible]
and the L.A. Phil, and I watched him
and I guess the Philharmonic was great, but I don't remember.
I watched him and his hair flew
and his tails flew, his baton flew.
He jumped several times and I was in love.
My question is, when you were here for your three weeks
and since then with the material that you've researched
at the Library of Congress, was there any great, wonderful,
magical moment of something that you found
that you didn't know before?
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Yes, a lot.
Yeah, a lot.
How much time do we have?
I mean there -- you know, at the beginning of the talk,
Susan Vita, Chief Librarian, said that there are, you know,
over 400,000 items in the collection.
This is a archivist's -- I worked in an archive in college.
One of my first kind of gigs was being an Archival Assistant
at the Arnold Schoenberg Center when I was younger.
Archivists often speak of the linear feet
when they describe a collection.
And it's only a small exaggeration to say
that Bernstein's would circle the globe twice here
at the Library.
The personal letters were amazing
because we have this very, very kind of polished presentation.
This is someone who really knows how to work a stage,
who knows how to work a camera, which I do not.
And, you know, seeing him talk kind of freely with people --
that was really, really amazing.
Seeing the archival video that I got
from the wonderful Bridget Carr
at the Boston Symphony Orchestra Archives.
That was a real aha moment.
I knew that there was video.
I knew it existed.
And it kind of confirmed in a really,
really beautiful, poignant way.
I mean, when I first saw that video I was sobbing, basically.
And then I realized this is actually wonderful.
I mean this is -- even at the very, very end, you know,
kind of, you know, dealing with his own, you know,
physical fitness at that time.
Ben Stein is like still on it, and is still doing
that same choreography.
So I think, yes, the first --
you know, when I was here looking at all those letters,
that was very, very overwhelming and kind of aha.
And then a few years ago, now, in the basement
of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, at the lower level,
their archives, seeing that film for the first time.
Those were both kind of bookend archival aha moments for me.
&gt;&gt; Hi. Susan Garfinkel.
I work here at the Library.
I guess a comment and a question.
And I'll follow up and say that -- like the last questioner,
I also went to Tanglewood in the '70s as a child with my family.
And just [inaudible] like Marin Alsop except that I did not go
onto become a wonderful conductor.
I dreamed of becoming a conductor
because of Leonard Bernstein.
And what's probably relevant to you is, as a, you know,
a student who was studying music, but was no, you know,
genius or anything, his conducting made perfect sense
to me and without knowing anything about any
of this critical discourse about it.
It didn't -- it never occurred to me that it didn't make sense
or that it wasn't related to the music.
It helped me understand the music
to watch him conduct the same symphonies that I was playing
at summer camp or in high school.
My question is, since you started your talk mentioning
that he was often criticized for doing too many different things
or trying to do too many different things,
and I don't want to put you on the spot too much,
but do you have an assessment of how successful he was
as a conductor compared -- I say that --
I think of him as a conductor first
because that's how I encountered him.
What is your sense of his conducting in relation
to his other activities, his television,
and his composing, and all that?
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: I can only answer --
I mean, this is not my musicological
expertise speaking.
This is just me as Daniel speaking.
For me, the -- it's hard to separate all the things.
Number one, number two.
It -- since -- if like you just put me on the spot,
if I had to pick which do I think he kind of excelled
at more between conducting and composing,
I would say conducting, and I would say that partly
because it was what he was doing [inaudible] so much of his time.
The man had to take a sabbatical from conducting
because he was conducting too much, and he wanted
to compose some stuff.
He had to say, New York Philharmonic,
see you later like in a year.
I need to -- I need some time to do other things.
I think because, just hours per day, so much of it was --
more of it was conducting than composing.
I would say that that in some ways he probably saw his own
achievement as a conductor rise more.
Of course there's tons of stories about Bernstein feeling
like he did not live up to these kind of impossible standards
that he set for himself about composition, you know.
He wondered why are more people not listening to my symphonies?
Why do more people not know the "Serenade for Solo Violin?"
You know, everybody knows <i>West Side Story </i>,
and which is how I first, you know,
came across Leonard Bernstein as a child when --
before I was imitating him conducting in the mirror
as an adult, as a child, I would imitate the sharks on the street
with that beautiful low shot on the Lego Lift.
So I guess partly because he was -- he just had --
he was giving it more, I would say, conducting.
That was a very long answer.
I don't -- it's like picking, you know,
your favorite child or something.
You don't want to do that.
But I would say conducting I guess.
&gt;&gt; I'm Steve [inaudible].
The examples you gave were a --
[ Inaudible Speaker ]
-- that there are differences
in the way you approached [inaudible].
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Very, very good question.
And one that I have not actually have had that known
or has actually asked me before.
I haven't -- to be very honest,
I haven't compared enough repeat performance
of him conducting the same things.
There is, of course, a lot of footage
of Bernstein conducting his own work.
For example, the recording
of <i>West Side Story</i> with Carreras.
There's that horrible scene where he has
to keep conducting the same passage over and over again.
I would not be able to use that to judge.
A very painful scene to watch in some ways.
So I guess my short answer is that's a very good question.
And I will get back to you if you email me.
And I kind of go through my file and think about it.
[ Inaudible Speaker ]
-- and I live in Washington, D.C. And I think of Bernstein --
[ Inaudible Speaker ]
All right.
My question is, was he more staid, more reserved
in conducting high or -- would something such as the "Surprise"
in the <i>94th Symphony</i> have surely caused him
to execute the Bernstein Leap.
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Right.
I would say that if you compare his conducting -- this is --
I did kind of maybe cheat a little bit
by taking a late 19th century work
and an early 20th century work,
both of which are very loud and big.
I would say that if you look at his conducting
of classical composers -- Mozart, Haydn --
that actually I don't --
it's not necessarily as a whole more reserved, actually.
Obviously you don't have the reason to do things like you do
at the conclusion of the "Dance of the Earth" at the end
of Part One of the <i>Rite of Spring </i>.
If you conducted Haydn like that,
there might be a slight mismatch
or you would get a very interesting sounding Haydn.
I don't know.
But in terms of the kind of engagement and the full use
of the body, I would say that kind
of occurs throughout the rep.
Yes. So, yeah.
Does that answer your question?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Well, I'd like to thank our speaker one last time.
If you could join me in that.
Thank you, Professor Callahan.
[ Applause ]
&gt;&gt; Daniel M. Callahan: Thank you.
[ Applause ]
&gt;&gt; This has been a presentation of the Library of Congress.
Visit us at loc.gov.