Rhonda, it is very nice to see you
again.
&gt;&gt; Likewise.
&gt;&gt; Thanks for making the time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm excited to be here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I was going back through the
archives doing my homework as I always
do, looking at our past conversations,
and it was such a trip down memory lane
because our first podcast together was
podcast number 12 of the Tim Ferrris
show, which is was in June of 2014.
And then preceding that by a few months,
April 2014 was when you had a guest post
on my blog called Area's the next big
performance-enhancing drug. So well
done. That's become quite the topic.
&gt;&gt; I know. I kind of like to take a little
bit of that, you know, claim to to
making sauna popular.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The fairy godmother of heat shock
proteins within the context of saunas.
And we are going to run out of time
before we run out of topics or questions
as always. And what's so fun about
having a conversation with someone like
you who is not only very scientifically
credible and literate, but who's
actively involved with the science,
tracking the science and have published
is that there's always more stuff to
talk about. Things change. There are new
developments. There are new discoveries.
There are revisions, which makes me very
excited to hop into the conversation.
And for people listening, we're going to
cover a lot of things that are very,
very actionable and practical. And I
just wanted to give people an idea of
some of what's coming. We may not cover
it all, but if you'll bear with me,
Random, just going to read some of these
because it's great. How to increase V2
max and why you should be looking at V2
max as a predictor of longevity with
highintensity interval training. What
type of exercise reduces heart aging by
20 years? Brain aging in the same
context or reversing brain aging. the
benefits of exercise, snacks on glucose
regulation, and mitochondrial function.
We're going to get a lot because this is
something that is a a perennial topic
for me, but I've been really doing a
deep dive on all things fasting related,
intermittent fasting, metabolic
benefits, if versus extended fasting
versus ketogenic diet, etc., etc. Daily
protein requirements and optimal timing
for protein intake. The role of vitamin
D in brain health and protection against
cognitive decline. How a low omega-3
index is as bad as smoking and what to
do about it. Benefits of creatine for
brain and muscle health and best
practices.
Microplastic exposure, the biggest
offenders and so on. It just goes on and
on. We could cover so much ground. And
the way this conversation came to be to
give people a peak behind the curtain is
we were texting about all sorts of
things including aging parents and what
we're trying and what we're thinking
about, what has worked, what hasn't
worked seemingly. And I thought we would
just start there if you're open to
sharing because I really gained from our
exchanges, enjoyed our exchanges. And
for instance, talking about creatine as
one example, right? There are potential
applications to
preserving or at least halting the
decline or slowing the decline of
cognitive deterioration, right? And
why don't we just begin with the
personal because I think that's the most
universal. and all of my friends of my
vintage um or younger, no one's getting
younger, so they're all contending with
aging parents and what to do with them,
how to help them. Can you speak to just
some of the circumstances with your
parents and what you have used as
interventions that have seemed to have
an effect?
&gt;&gt; I'm one of those people that, you know,
my parents, neither of them are really
physically active. My dad for many years
was physically active in the in the
sense that he played a team sport. He he
was a baseball player and he did it for
many many years all the way into his
early 60s and then he kind of just
couldn't do it anymore. So my mother
never really got into any sports and she
wasn't the kind of person that would go
out to the gym or go for runs or
anything like that and so physical
activity really wasn't part of the
equation
&gt;&gt; and neither is really a healthy diet. As
I started to do a lot of research into
these sort of what I think are
interventions that are lowhanging
fruits, things that are easy for people
to do that can have a pretty big outcome
&gt;&gt; in terms of the effect. You know, the
size effect is greater than what you
have to put in. So, examples of that
would obviously be something like a
supplement that you could take, right?
That's the easiest thing you can do is
kind of swallow a pill and hope that it
has a great effect. And this is where
both of my parents are taking a
multivitamin. And you might go, well,
multivitamin really, what's that going
to do? And I'll tell you, we've come
full circle. You know, 10 years ago,
there was a huge splash that was made in
the media. Big article came out and it
was called enough is enough.
Multivitamins are not only useless, they
may be harmful.
And it was a study that looked at a
variety of different studies. It's
called a metaanalysis that basically
said, well, you know, all these vitamins
that you're taking are useless and in
some cases they can be harmful because
they can allow cancer to to grow faster.
And I sort of debunked that, you know,
10 years ago. But over the course of
those 10 years, and as you mentioned in
the intro here, you know, science is
always changing and revisions are made.
We learn new things. And in that 10-year
frame, three different randomized
control trials have come out. And
randomized control trials are really key
because you are comparing you know this
intervention which in this case was a
multivitamin to a placebo because people
taking anything are obviously going to
want a positive effect and many people
do anticipate that and they can actually
change their biology. Place a real
thing.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So three trials came out looking at the
effect of multivitamins on cognition.
And I'm talking the multivitamin that
was used was the standard
run-of-the-mill. It was sententrum
silver.
&gt;&gt; Centrum. I knew it was going to be
Centrum. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It was the vitamin that you would go
that's the one vitamin that's not going
to have any effect. It's like the you
know, but actually it turns out it's got
over 40 essential nutrients in it and
it's also got some other nonvitamins. So
things that are like polyphenols like
luteine, zeazanthin, these are actually
really important for eye health but also
the brain.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And these three randomized control
trials were two years long.
And what they showed was that taking a
multivitamin for two years had pretty
enormous effects on cognitive aging.
These were in older adults. These were
adults were 65 years of age or older.
That's where my parents are. And after 2
years of taking the multivitamin, they
had improved cognition on a battery of
different tests. That equated to like
reducing global cognitive aging by about
2 years. And on top of that, they
reduced their episodic aging by 5 years,
almost 5 years. It was 4.8 years.
Episodic memory is the kind of memory
that's involved in remembering events,
things that that happen in your life.
And so that's a big effect. 5 years of
reduced
&gt;&gt; episodic brain aging, episodic memory,
brain aging.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And so I think that anyone that's
concerned about their parents, one of
the easiest things that you can do in
terms of improving cognition, now I
should mention these were older adults,
yes, but they weren't older adults with
ner degenerative disease. So these these
were older adults that were otherwise
didn't have any sort of neurogenerative
disease. That's also important because
&gt;&gt; once you get to a pathological state,
you you kind of have to do more things
to help improve cognition than just a
multivitamin. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That's what I have my mom and my dad on
a multivitamin. That's the easiest
thing. Vitamin D is also another
no-brainer. I mean, 70% of the US
population has insufficient levels of
vitamin D. Older adults are even higher
than that. So, you know, almost the
majority of all older adults are vitamin
D deficient. I mean, most people aren't
going outside. And even if they are
going outside, they're either wearing
sunscreen or just the fact that they're
older affects their their skin's ability
to make vitamin D3 from the sun, from
UVB radiation from the sun. And so
there's much less efficient at it. In
fact, a 70-year-old makes about four
times less vitamin D than their former
20-year-old self.
&gt;&gt; So vitamin D supplement is a low hanging
fruit. Is super easy to bring someone up
to level.
&gt;&gt; Can I ask you a question about vitamin
D? Because I know you love vitamin D. So
here's my question about vitamin D and
it actually relates to I believe this is
a publication you had in 2019. So we'll
see if things have changed or not but
APOE E4 and omega-3 brain delivery. So
my family
lot of benefits to having my genetics
also a whole bunch of bugs in the code
including quite a bit of APOE4.
I'm ApoE34.
And should that change how I consume
vitamin D or consume fish oil or
omega-3s
having that type of status?
&gt;&gt; Right. I would say the vitamin D there
hasn't really been any effect that I'm
aware of in terms of
&gt;&gt; having an AOE4 alil as you mentioned and
for people listening
&gt;&gt; or watching you know ApoE4 alil if you
have one of those it can double your
risk of Alzheimer's disease. If you have
two of them, you can go up to a t-fold
increased risk for Alzheimer's disease.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; When it comes to fish oil, particularly
fish oil, there does seem to be, and
this is where my publication came from,
but also there's a lot of evidence that
has shown people with APOE4 alles,
they don't tend to have as much DHA
getting into their brains brains as
people without the alals. And on top of
that, in in trials,
people with mild cognitive decline, for
example, if they supplemented with fish
oil and they had APOE4, they didn't have
the cognitive benefits that the people
that were not APOE4 had.
&gt;&gt; And so there was this big question in
the field as to why that is. And it's
still not entirely known. Although I
will say what my take on that is and in
fact I've you know talked to some of the
experts in the field as well is that you
have to have a higher dose of fish oil
for one.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And it's better if it's in phospholipid
form. So fish if you're eating fish it
is it's in phospholipid form. It's in
triglyceride form. So just for clarity,
if you're taking capsules, it may not be
the case, but if I'm eating my can of
sardines in the morning, then
phosphoipid form,
&gt;&gt; you're getting more phosphoipid form.
Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Now, if you are taking your supplement
oils, you can actually make phosphoipid
form, but you have to really you have to
get to that like 2 g dose range.
&gt;&gt; That's when your body is also converting
into phosphoipid form. And then the
other way around that is actually
consuming a phospholipid form of
omega-3. And so that's something that
can be done if you're supplementing with
either, you know, krill oil, which I'm
not a huge fan of because it's super,
it's not very concentrated, so you'd
have to really take a lot of it. Or you
could eat something like salmon row,
which is a really high phospholipid
concentration of omega-3 fatty acids.
&gt;&gt; And you might go, why phosphoipid form?
Well, it turns out the way your brain,
you actually get omega-3 into the brain.
&gt;&gt; There's two ways. The first way doesn't
require phosphoipid form. It's just this
omega-3 is sort of in a free fatty acid
form and it diffuses across the membrane
and gets into the brain that way. The
second way actually is through a
transport mechanism and that is
phospholipid form and that's why it
seems as though
&gt;&gt; people with APOE4
their free fatty acid form isn't isn't
going into the brain as well because
they have breakdown of the bloodb brain
barrier early on. APOE4 tends to lead to
early breakdown of the bloodb brain
barrier. And when your bloodb brain
barrier breaks down, it's hard for
things to kind of just passively diffuse
as well. I know that is
counterintuitive, but without getting
into all the crazy molecular and
biochemistry involved, just take my word
on that for the for the two different
forms of omega-3. Or you can read that
publication as well.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Okay, let's step back for a second
and just get into the parental specifics
and then we can zoom out and talk about
mechanisms and all sorts of stuff. But
if you just had to give a couple of
bullets on the things that you feel
confident in having your mom and dad
continue doing or taking, let's start
with the supplements cuz like you said,
it's sort of a
lowhanging fruit in a sense from a
behavioral change perspective,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; What do you have them doing? I guess
I'll kind of zoom out and talk about,
you know, I think you listened to a
podcast I did with Dr. Dr. Mark Matson
many several years ago and I had
mentioned that my dad was diagnosed with
Parkinson's disease
&gt;&gt; in 2017 and that's an important context
to consider like what sort of
supplements I'm giving my dad and also
the fact that you have to think about
compliance like what were your parents
do you have a parent that'll take a lot
of vitamins
&gt;&gt; actually do
&gt;&gt; or a few vitamins right so with my dad
knowing his disease with Parkinson's
disease multivitamin was in there
because that's already like so important
just to cover a lot of bases you're
getting a lot of different you know
vitamins and minerals
And then it was omega-3. And in fact, it
was a high DHA. And he's getting about 2
grams a day. And there's a lot of
evidence that omega-3 can help with
dopamineergic transmission, can help
with a lot of brain function,
particularly as it relates to
Parkinson's disease as well as
Alzheimer's disease.
&gt;&gt; So that was the second supplements that
he's, you know, taking. And then the
last one that I could really get him to
take was
ubiquininal, which is a reduced form of
CoQ10. Now, co-enzyme Q10 is actually
something that we have inside of our
cells and it's involved in mitochondrial
health.
&gt;&gt; So, having a depleted CoQ10 can lead to
mitochondrial toxicity. And so, taking
CoQ10, there's actually been some early
studies with even Parkinson's disease
patients showing that supplementing with
CoQ10 can be beneficial. And he's
actually taken those supplements for for
many, many years now. And very I would
say surprisingly but also I'm thankful
that his Parkinson's disease has
progressed very very slowly. So it's
been 9 years you know almost 10 years
and he's really essentially had this
Parkinson's disease limited to one
tremor in his hand.
&gt;&gt; So that's great and that's all I can say
is
&gt;&gt; yeah that's great news. It's great news
and you never really know at the end of
the day what is the reason for that. But
he's convinced I'm convinced, his
doctor's convinced that he should keep
doing what he's doing and that it seems
to be beneficial.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; My dad is one of those guys that doesn't
like to take a lot of pills. If he would
take more, I would give him more.
&gt;&gt; If he were willing to take more, what
would you give him?
&gt;&gt; I would also give him sulfurophane.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Definitely tried, but he doesn't want to
take more pills. So sulurophane is it's
a compound that is formed when you eat
cruciferous vegetables like broccoli,
cauliflower for example and it's formed
from something inside of it called
glucaraphin. When you break the plant
tissue when you bite it or you know chop
it up or whatever it forms sulforophane
sulforophane is not necessarily in the
plant itself. It just gets formed when
you break the plant tissue. That's a
technical thing. So I'm just going to
talk about sulforophane and call it
sulforophane as if it's part of you know
the plant but it's not. Just so you
know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Sulfurophane, like I said, it's
something that's formed in these
cruciferous vegetables. Broccoli
sprouts, the young young sprout of
broccoli actually is the best source of
it. It has 100 times more of that active
precursor glucaraphin than mature
broccoli. So that's the best dietary
source of it.
&gt;&gt; Are you growing your own broccoli
sprouts or are you doing off the shelf
now?
&gt;&gt; I'm off the shelf now. I used to. I used
to. It's work. It's not that much work,
but it is work. But you also like you
have to be very fidious about not having
it contaminated. And that's where the
real work comes in.
&gt;&gt; But I like it because there are people
that can't afford the supplement and
this gives them another another way to
to basically get it. Yeah. For cheap. So
the reason I really like sulfurophane
and why I want both my parents on it and
my mom has been taking it, we can talk
about that in a minute, is because it is
the most potent dietary activator of
this system that we have called NRF2,
which is this major system. It's a
basically a transcription factor that
activates a lot of different genes
inside of our body. And it activates
genes that are involved in stress. It
activates a lot of what are called
stress response genes. And these are the
kind of things that are activated when
you're doing stressful things like
exercise or you know if you're fasting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So you really want this pathway to be
active
&gt;&gt; because a little bit of stress right
it's like chronic overdose of stress bad
but little doses of stress has this I
guess what would you call it hormetic
effect.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Right. Am I getting that right? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You nailed it. So essentially
we're talking about what is sometimes
called ustress or good stress. It's
these small doses of stress where, you
know, your body's responding to that
stress by activating all these
beneficial pathways that deal with
stress. Whether we're talking about
antioxidant pathways, anti-inflammatory
pathways, pathways involved in clearing
out damage, you know, damaged stuff from
your cells like autophagy, just all
sorts of beneficial stuff, right? Those
pathways are activated for a longer
period of time than the acute stress
that you're giving it. So in this case
the sulurophane is a little bit of an
acute stress like polyphenols in general
are.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; The amount of time that you're ingesting
that polyphenol is very small and
digesting it. The reality is is that
it's activating these stress response
pathways that last you know on the
orders of like 24 to 48 hours sometimes
longer. So you're having this beneficial
effect
&gt;&gt; that's overall beneficial from that
little bit of stress. And so sulurophane
activates NRF2 and one of the main
pathways that it's activating is
increasing glutathione production and
it's been shown in a couple different
human studies that it increases
glutathione in both plasma but also in
the brain.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; glutathione is the major antioxidant
that we have in our body and it's very
important in the brain. super important
for not only preventing brain aging but
also for dealing with dysfunction in the
case of acute injury like traumatic
brain injury or in the case of
Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's
disease which are other types of injury
on the brain glutathione plays a big
role there and so I obviously would want
my dad to be taking sulfurophane and
there's a supplement out there that I
use that has been used in many like 12
or so different studies and so it's you
know been shown to be beneficial across
the board and that is something that I
do give my mom. Now the reason I gave it
to my mom well I was kind of hoping my
mom interestingly has two other types of
sort of brain dysfunction um problems
but they're not neurodeenerative in the
sense of Alzheimer's disease and
Parkinson's disease are it's kind of
like a something going wrong in the
brain and it it affects her motor
control. So she has tremors. She has
essential tremor and she has orthostatic
tremor. And I have secretly wanted the
increase in glutathione to
affect those tremors.
But when I gave the sulfurophane to my
mom, because I knew the placebo effect,
I did tell her that we were using it to
detoxify these chemicals that are
associated with plastic like BPA because
that's also been something that I'm I'm
using sulfurophane for because that NRF2
pathway does activate what are called
phase 2 detoxification enzymes. And it's
been shown to detoxify. Even if you're
living in like a city like New York or
LA where there's a lot of air pollution,
it's been shown to detoxify benzene.
Within 24 hours, people start excreting
60% more benzene from their body. Now,
benzene is something that is found in
air pollution. It's also in cigarettes.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Don't drink your own urine if
you're taking sulurophane is what you're
saying.
&gt;&gt; Definitely don't do that. But also, if
you're living in a polluted place, I
tell all my friends in LA, I'm like,
"You have to be taking sulfurophane.
It's a non-negotiable, right?" So I told
her to take the sulfurophane because I
wanted her to detoxify BPA because she
does eat a lot of processed foods and
stuff which are found in plastic.
Anyway, so she started taking it and she
came back to me and told me that it was
helping her tremors and that she wanted
more.
&gt;&gt; How long did that take?
&gt;&gt; Not long. It was actually I think within
a week or so, maybe maybe two.
&gt;&gt; It was very quick.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's wild.
&gt;&gt; And she is religious about it. I buy it
for her and I give her, you know, these
these bottles and
&gt;&gt; she she takes two a day and she takes a
certain brand called Avacol. I don't
have any affiliation with them. They're
a brand that again 12 different
published studies using their their
supplement
&gt;&gt; AV MAC.
&gt;&gt; That's right.
&gt;&gt; Amma.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And she takes two of their
advanced formula.
So she's taking that, she's taking the
multivitamin, the vitamin D, and she's
also taking the omega-3.
She's doing great. What's funny is that
I I was able to then get her into
CrossFit
and I don't know if it's because her her
tremors I think her her tremors have
lessened a bit and so she's been more
active and wanting to be more active
like she's out dancing more. My mom
likes to dance and I mentioned how I
really wanted to get her into a senior's
CrossFit class and she sees me do it. I
have a coach come to my house and do we
do CrossFit training at my house or my
mom has seen me doing it and she's been
interested in it and I told her that
there's a great senior's class and I
would be willing to you know pay for it
and get her in it. It would be huge and
she's been doing it now for a couple of
months maybe like three or four months
&gt;&gt; and she goes three times a week and she
loves it. She loves it. She's made
friends there.
Sometimes the coaches take videos and
she sends them to me. She sends them to
her friends. She's so proud. You know,
she's doing kettle bell swings. She's
doing wall squats. I mean, it's amazing.
&gt;&gt; Go, mom. That's amazing.
&gt;&gt; It's a very different type of atmosphere
than your usual CrossFit class would be,
right? You're aware that these are
seniors and so they're not doing, you
know, barbell like squatting like heavy
weights and stuff. There's they start
out with wall squats and then they're,
you know, squatting with just like a
really light bar and it's it's really
great. Let me hop in for a second here
and I want to know if there's anything
else to add to that, but we've talked
about this. You and I are texted a hell
of a lot about it that I have
Alzheimer's in my family. I have now
have multiple
relatives who are moderate to advance
with respect to Alzheimer's. Uh saw my
grandmother disintegrate.
Terrifying to watch and terrifying to
imagine yourself experiencing the same
thing. And also at least one of them is
APOE33
and I'm APOE34. So I'm like, well, wait
a second. If that is where they are
right now and I'm at hypothetically 2.5x
greater risk of developing Alzheimer's
disease AD, I should really double down
on paying attention to as much as
possible for myself, certainly for them
as well, but the earlier the
intervention,
the better the outcomes generally. So,
I've been looking at all sorts of things
and just to reiterate a few things you
said. So, on the omega-3 side of things,
just like with sulforophane, not all
brands are created equal, right? There's
a lot of garbage floating around out
there. Would you say neither of us have
any affiliation with this company, but I
know our mutual friend Kevin Rose had
this particular brand tested that I
guess it's 1 o
pure encapsulations. Is that what you
have your your parents taking or did you
use a different brand? So with my dad,
he is now taking the Zyogen brand, which
is also very good. And the reason for
that is because it's higher DHA.
&gt;&gt; I see.
&gt;&gt; Which is what I wanted.
&gt;&gt; My mom is taking the one.
&gt;&gt; Got it. Cool.
&gt;&gt; Both those brands, by the way, are
great. They both been third party tested
and have very high quality fish oil. And
I don't have affiliation with either of
them.
&gt;&gt; Yep. I've got my parents on those. I'm
taking those. You mentioned luteine and
zeazanthin which uh is is good for quite
a few things. Now for those people who
may be interested and this probably
won't help me with my particular
presbopia so age related visual decline
particularly with near work reading a
book let's say but a reds too people
could check out studies that have been
done on a reds 2 and two of the
principal ingredients are lutein and
zeazanthin
so there's that now also have been very
very curious about how to activate some
of the pathways that you mentioned.
Sulfurophane would be a good option for
that.
Also looking at, and we don't have to
spend a ton of time on this, but
exogenous ketones, right? Because
ideally, sure, I would have my parents
maybe do intermittent fasting or some
extended fasts. I don't think that's
going to happen for a million different
reasons, but perhaps exogenous ketones
and have looked at that. This is kind of
a work in progress. I'm I've been doing
and I know you have too. Lots of
self-experimentation. But there are some
case studies in the literature. One of
which you sent to me that are pretty
interesting looking at
administration.
In other words, giving an older patient
with Alzheimer's disease
oral exogenous ketones. They tend to
taste like jet fuel. They're not tasty.
But the effects of at least in these
case studies are pretty remarkable.
Now granted, with the monoester they use
in some of these, the offtheshelf cost
per day would be like $150 or something
like that, maybe even more. So there's a
sort of a cost question. But I'm just
going to throw a couple of more things
out there that are on my mind. So you
mentioned the exercise piece. This has
been so important
for me. So, I've hired a trainer and I
realized my parents are kind of sneaky
and sometimes a little I don't want to
say passive aggressive, but they they'll
say they're going to do something to
please me and then they won't do it. So,
getting the trainer to actually pick
them up at their house
is
is something that I decided to do
because there there are a lot of reasons
exercise is amazing. One of which is the
natural release of cloth. And people can
look this up. I'm hoping that you'll be
able to inject this in the next handful
of years. We'll see in humans, but K L O
T H O also worth checking out.
Anything else that you would add to that
or any commentary you want to sprinkle
in? Am I missing any criticals?
Multivitamin.
&gt;&gt; There's definitely commentary. There's
commentary, but we can get into that if
you want to go dive into the why the
ketone nesters are beneficial and
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; and why the exercise is beneficial. We
can go into that because I'm I love
talking about it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, this is going to be a
conversation, right, just between you
and me. That's how I treat all these
things. And I'm I'm very self-interested
because I think the personal is the most
universal. Maybe that's just an excuse
to make this all about what I want. But
we have been texting also because I told
you I've been thinking about doing a
14-day fast. And actually, I ratcheted
that back from doing a 30-day fast.
And I've done 10 days before water only.
I've done lots of 7 days. And part of
the reason is I think I would be better
equipped now to do longer fasts because
of the intermittent fasting I've been
doing. And this ties into the
conversation around the parents because
what I have noticed
is for instance doing 168 fasting which
was there's and I'm so sorry the
scientist you mentioned before whose
podcast interview I listened to on your
podcast what was his name again?
&gt;&gt; Dr. Mark Matson.
&gt;&gt; Yeah Mark Matson amazing amazing
scientist fantastic conversation lot of
seinal work related to intermittent
fasting. So 168 what does that actually
mean? I did this today. I've done this
most days now, which is basically eating
between, for me, it's like 2 p.m. and 10
p.m. There are arguments that it should
be shifted earlier, like noon to 8:00
p.m. or something like that. But
socially, just practically, again,
coming back to compliance, like the good
system you do being better than the
perfect system you don't, generally it's
like 2 to 9:00 p.m. is when I eat and
then I fast the rest of the time. And
for the first like 5 to seven days,
pretty grumpy, kind of pissy, I'm not
going to lie. You know, sent some emails
that I probably shouldn't have. But then
once I adapted, I did a recent set of
labs and they're my best set of labs
that I've seen. I can't solely attribute
it to the intermittent fasting, but the
best set of labs I've had in ages on
things that were very hard to move
prior. also did an oral glucose
tolerance test and my sort of insulin
sensitivity and glucose management the
best it's been in ages. So I was like,
"Okay, that's really interesting." The
last time I did a 7-day fast, it was
kind of brutal. I hadn't done one in a
few years, and I don't think my
metabolic machinery was ready for the
task. Very unpleasant, but I have some
chronic inflammation or at least chronic
pain in my low back. And after doing
that 7-day fast, I had 4 weeks of zero
symptoms. And that's the first time in 3
years that that's been the case. So I
was like, "Okay, that's pretty
interesting." And so I've ended up
harassing you with all sorts of
questions such as, "Well, what if I had
a little bit of heavy cream in my coffee
in the morning?" So it's kind of dirty
fasting, but if I did that, what am I
what am I accepting as a compromise or a
penalty, if anything? Because then I
think of say Longo's work and others
looking at fast mimicking diets where
I'm like well wait a second these people
are doing let's just say 5 days of fast
mimicking dieting per month for 3 months
straight and they seem to have all these
benefits that maybe of lower magnitude
but mirror water fasting on some level
but they're consuming a few hundred
calories let's just say for simplicity
per day of those 5 days of quote unquote
fasting. If you look at the actual meal
composition, it ends up being very low
calorie keto. Basically, very low
calorie keto with very low protein, like
10% or less, avoiding animal products.
That's the basic way that I've been
thinking of it. And
so I was like, well, should I do
something like Will Helmina in Germany
who have again quote unquote fasted
thousands of people, but they do give
them bone broth, a little bit of juice.
It's it's akin to the fast mimicking
diet, but they they'll do that with
people for 30, 60, 90 days, or am I
better off doing shorter water fasts or
maybe even a 14-day water fast. And a
lot of the questions came down to I know
this is a mouthful, but as you know,
I've been thinking about this non-stop.
I was up until 2 a.m. this morning
reading really really old stuff out of
the Soviet Union on on psychiatric
clinics fasting patients for
schizophrenia.
And so that tells you metabolic
psychiatry also goes back a long long
long time. Not to mention ketogenic diet
for epilepsy, right? So there are a lot
of similarities. But if I want the
benefits, as many benefits as possible
with the least pain possible,
which includes not losing a ton of
muscle tissue, which is not always the
same thing as lean body mass, what
should I do? Right? That's kind of the
open question.
And that is a huge, huge mouthful. Thank
you for coming to my TED talk. But where
is your current thinking
when it relates to all of this stuff?
And I I said earlier at the very
beginning that it ties into my parents.
Why is that? Because when we looked at
some of my relatives and I got my docs
to come in and do like a real proper
full work up looking at all sorts of
things that normally wouldn't be tested.
Absolutely. Some metabolic syndrome,
right? in the sense that they're highly
highly insulin insensitive, like insulin
off the charts. And it's like, okay,
well, this has been going on for years
to get to this point. And Alzheimer's is
sometimes called type 3 diabetes. And
it's like, okay, well, if I can't help
them, at least I want to try to help
myself and other people who might be
listening at an early enough stage. So,
how do you think about all this stuff?
Well,
there's a lot to talk about here and I
think we got to kind of
&gt;&gt; Yeah, chew on one bit at a time,
&gt;&gt; right? Let's chew on one bit of time and
zoom out for a minute and talk about
this intermittent fasting concept and
why do people want to do intermittent
fasting? What are the benefits that
they're looking for? Now, you mentioned
some metabolic benefits that you had
noticed after after doing your
intermittent fasting.
&gt;&gt; There's lots of different types of
intermittent fasting. You mentioned the
168. So essentially you're talking about
not eating food for a period of time
&gt;&gt; and that period of time can either be 16
hours, it can be 24 hours, it can be
longer in which case it would not be an
intermittent fast, it would be a more
prolonged fast which you also talked
about.
&gt;&gt; But with the with respect to the
intermittent fasting,
&gt;&gt; there are a few things that happen and
there are a few reasons why people like
to do intermittent fasting. First and
foremost, I think most people like doing
intermittent fasting is because they
want to actually lose weight. And the
weight that they want to lose is not
necessarily their lean body mass. They
actually want to lose their fat mass,
right? So, they want to lose fat. And
that's a big reason why people do
intermittent fasting.
&gt;&gt; Well, it turns out that intermittent
fasting is more of a tool for weight
loss. And what I mean by that is that
there have been multiple studies now
that have looked at different types of
intermittent fasting in sort of a a
community dwelling aspect where people
are just kind of free to eat the way
they're going to eat, but they are
supposed to be practicing intermittent
fasting. And what it's been discovered
is that naturally people end up eating
about 200 fewer calories per day when
they're doing some form of intermittent
fasting. So if they're eating all their
food within an 8 or 10 hour period, for
example, usually they'll eat their food
within a 10-hour period and then they'll
fast for 14 hours. If they do that, they
end up actually eating 200 fewer
calories. And so they end up performing
what's called caloric restriction, which
we know can lead to weight loss. And so
a lot of the weight loss actually comes
from reducing calorie intake.
&gt;&gt; But that doesn't necessarily mean that
everything that's beneficial from
intermittent fasting comes down to
calories, because it doesn't. But the
weight loss definitely seems to come
down to the calories because if you keep
calories the same and then have people
do intermittent fasting or not
intermittent fasting, they won't lose
the weight, but they will have a whole
host of metabolic benefits. You
mentioned glucose regulation
improvements. I mean, you know, fasting
glucose, postprandial glucose, HBA1C,
which is a long-term marker of glucose
regulation. they're, you know, lipids
are more favorable and then they have
improvements in blood pressure, for
example. That's another big one that
people get with a more of a longer type
of intermittent fasting. So, they're
they're fasting more like 18 hours and
eating their food within like a 6-hour
window.
&gt;&gt; Now, that's another benefit. Now, you go
even further, and I know this is
something you're very interested in. So,
beyond, you know, metabolic benefits and
people want to get then they want to get
into what's called ketosis.
&gt;&gt; They want to be making ketones. these,
you know, things that we're talking
about earlier with respect to taking an
exogenous ketoneester. Well, you make
something naturally when you start to
actually burn fat as energy. You start
to make something called beta
hydroxybutyrate.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; But it takes about 12 hours or so. It
depends on the person. It depends on how
heavy of a carb diet they eat or how
physically active they are. It can be a
range, right?
&gt;&gt; So, if someone's doing a more ketogenic
type of diet, they can actually deplete
their liver glycogen quicker than 12
hours. it might even cut it down to like
eight. If they're physically active on
top of that, you might go down to like
even six or something. So, there's
there's a big range here, right? But for
a standard person on like a normal diet,
they're they're going to take around 12
hours before they start to deplete their
liver glycogen and then start to
immobilize fatty acids from their
atapost tissue and use that as energy.
And when you start to do that, then you
start to get into ketosis. Your body
starts to then make beta
hydroxybutyrate, the major circulating
ketone. Why do people want that in their
system? because it's not just a very
energetically favorable source of
energy. What I mean by that is that you
can actually make more it takes less
energy to use beta hydroxybut butyrate
to make energy than it does to use
glucose for example takes more energy to
actually use glucose. So it's more
energetically favorable.
&gt;&gt; It's a clean fuel. Yeah. Also BHP the
beta hydroxybutyrate
as I understand it. I mean, highly
anti-inflammatory
effects as well, right?
&gt;&gt; Exactly. That was the next point I was
going to make is that it's called a
signaling molecule. So, it's actually a
way So, your body knows that it's in
this stress mode. Okay. There's no food.
It's food scarcity time, right? And this
is something that it's evolutionarily
tapped into our into our system into our
DNA
where times of food scarcity when we're
not eating our body switches into
ketosis beta hydroxybutyrates produce
and it signals to these other you know
genes to basically make more of
something beneficial. So it's been shown
to reduce inflammation. It depresses
something called the inflammosome which
causes inflammation. It's an HD DAC
inhibitor. So it's a histone diaetylase
inhibitor. So it's globally affecting
gene expression in in such a way that it
reduces genes that are involved in
making oxidative stress. It actually
activates brain derived neurotrophic
factor. That's the beneficial
neurotrophic compound that's made in the
brain. That exercise also activates as
well. So
&gt;&gt; it's doing all these beneficial things,
right? And
&gt;&gt; the other thing that it's doing is it's
getting into the brain. and it's being
used as a very great source of energy.
And so you have this sort of bypass for
glucose where the glucose can then be
shunted to be used to make glutathione,
that very important antioxidant I talked
about earlier that sulurophane
activates. Well, it turns out when
you're when you give your body
ketones or your body's making ketones,
your brain actually consumes a lot of
that. There have been tracer studies
that have looked at that. And what
happens is because neurons are now using
the beta hydroxybutyrate as energy,
glucose is no longer needed. And so that
glucose that is there is then used to
make NADPH, which is a precursor to make
glutathione.
&gt;&gt; And so it's called glucose sparing. You
get this glucose sparing effect.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And so that's another reason why people
are interested in intermittent fasting.
And then another main reason, and
there's many others, I'm not going to
like touch on everything, but the other
main reason is it activates repair
processes.
&gt;&gt; And what I mean by repair processes is
to be in repair mode, you have to be in
more of a catabolic state. And we were
talking about this earlier. People get
so freaked out by the word catabolism.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. Last night when I was walking
around New York City, we were talking
about this, right?
&gt;&gt; Catabolism.
And I think even over the last few
years, you intermittent fasting's kind
of gotten a bad rap because people now
equate it with, oh, loss of muscle mass.
I'm going to be catabolic. Well, in
order to be in a repair mode, you
actually do need to be in a catabolic
sort of mode. And these repair systems
are so important for cleaning up all the
garbage that's inside of our cells. And
that can be things like protein
aggregates. These are things that lead
to aggregation you know like
alphasuclean which is involved in
Parkinson's amaloid beta aggregates
which is involved in Alzheimer's disease
it's not the cause it's like the cause
and the symptom it's like both it's
involved in Alzheimer's disease and then
aggregates in our cardiovascular system
that play a role in cardiovascular
disease but it also cleans out even
damaged little or what are called
organels and so mitochondria or organal
And our organels get damaged. So you
want to be able to repair that damage.
And this process of autophagy is the
process that does that. And you know
there's lots of different types of
autophagy. So if it's a mitochondria
repairing damage to itself, it's mphagy.
But for all this stuff to be active, you
have to be in that more catabolic state,
which can be induced by not eating, can
also be induced by like heavy endurance
exercise as well. So talking about those
sort of outcomes that people are
interested in, those different end
points that people are interested in in
achieving, I think something that you're
specifically interested in is the
metabolic effects of intermittent
fasting as well as the repair processes
like the autophagy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, for sure. And that's why I was
asking cuz I don't really I look, I'm as
vain as the next person. I like looking
less fat if I if I can, but it's not my
main driver, right?
It's mental acuity and hopefully staving
off
on some level things like ner
degenerative disease and even cancer
possibly, right? which has been part of
the reason I've done a lot of these
extended water fasts, which is I realize
there are a couple of hops here in terms
of speculation, but seems plausible that
you might zap, you know, punch a couple
of precancerous cells in the in the nuts
by doing that.
&gt;&gt; Definitely, not only does autophagy play
a role in preventing Parkinson's
disease, but also Alzheimer's disease as
well. Again, this has been shown in many
animal studies. We know that autophagy
plays a role in clearing away the
amaloid beta plaques that are involved
in Alzheimer's disease. And yes, there
are some people that have amaloid beta
plaques that don't get Alzheimer's
disease. They may be the more resilient
non-APOE4 type of person. But we do know
that many many people do get Alzheimer's
disease with amaloid plaques. And in
fact, people that have again the snips
in what what's called the amaloid
precursor protein AP that leads to
amaloid beta plaque buildup, they get
early onset Alzheimer's disease. So
autophagy plays an important role in
clearing away those plaques. And I will
say what we don't have a lot of evidence
on is what's the minimal effective
&gt;&gt; fasting dose to activate autophagy.
Right.
&gt;&gt; God, I wish we had this.
&gt;&gt; I think what we do know in humans from
like some of these old studies is that
you do see some signal of autophagy
activation after 24 48 hours in humans.
Yeah. Now, does that mean that that is
the only amount of time that it takes to
activate autophagy? No. So, most humans
are probably doing anywhere between a 12
to 16 hour nightly fast, right? There's
a period of time when we're not eating,
and that is when we're sleeping a little
bit before bed, right? Autophagy still
happens in people. We just aren't
measuring it because we don't have
sensitive tools yet. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And so, it's not that I don't think a
16- hour fast doesn't act. I I believe
it does in I believe there's some
autophagy going on. It's probably not
that much,
&gt;&gt; but if you're if you go into that, you
know, 48 hour fast, then you're really
starting to get more robust activation
of autophagy.
&gt;&gt; Can I throw something else in here just
for fun?
&gt;&gt; Yes. So you mentioned sleep and I've
been looking trying to look at
Alzheimer's from every possible
angle and found literature looking at
disruption of sleep architecture in
patients with Alzheimer's disease and
the possible application of Zym I
believe it is which is another it's a
brand name in a bifurcated schedule for
GHB gamma hydroxybutyrate which you have
to be very careful with it's a party
drug. People die of it because it
suppresses respiration. The person who
bought my apartment in San Francisco
died of a GHP overdose. But it actually
is a tremendously interesting compound
for increasing I think it's it's deep
wave sleep specifically
which does what? It helps the cleanup
crew, right, to do its work and to
actually take out the garbage
cellularly. And so if I could wave a
magic wand, I would have my relatives on
something like Zyram. Might actually be
a different type of of sleep medication
like the Nora class. Nora might be DORA.
I would also look at and this is
something obviously
not suitable for most elderly people,
but potentially lower dose psilocybin or
psilocin. And there is some actually
very interesting I don't want to call
them speculative hypothetical
applications of that to Alzheimer's
disease which you can find on PubMed and
from a mechanistic perspective they're
they're super super interesting. So, I
just want to double click on the sleep
because that is such a a critical
component whether you're fasting or not
to try to ensure that your sleep
architecture is not hyper disrupted
which can be the case with lots of
different types of sleep medications
that you might take.
And if you have really bad insomnia,
it's like, okay, you can do all these
other things, but boy oh boy, it would
make a lot of sense to try to fix sleep
whenever possible.
&gt;&gt; Great. So true. This slow wave sleep
does activate the lymphatic system which
is cleaning out the amaloid beta
aggregates as well.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; And the last thing I kind of want to
mention is because you were talking
about the intermittent fasting and more
prolonged fasting and the muscle mass
loss or lean body mass which people
equate with muscle mass which it's not.
You there's a lot of things going on. So
the thing is when people are doing
intermittent fasting I mentioned they
eat fewer calories which means they're
eating less meals. They're eating fewer
meals. They're not eating as many meals.
And so what ends up happening is people
lower their protein intake and that's an
important signal for you know
maintaining muscle mass and certainly
growing muscle mass as well. So it
increases muscle protein synthesis which
is important. If people are engaged in
resistance training and doing
intermittent fasting they're not losing
muscle mass and in fact they can even
gain muscle mass
&gt;&gt; a little bit not much but they can gain
it too. So, I think the key here is that
if you're doing an intermittent type of
fast like an, you know, 168 where you're
fasting for 16 hours, that's really not
a long long fast. There's not a lot of
concern with losing muscle mass if
you're, you know, resistance training.
&gt;&gt; Now, a more prolonged type of fast,
you're talking about 14 days,
that's a long fast and definitely you're
going to be losing some muscle mass no
matter what. Now, how much you lose
depends on, you know, how I guess if you
can resistance train lightly while
you're while you're fasting, that would
be huge because you would be then
activating muscle protein synthesis
through another, you know, signal which
is not protein, it's mechanical force,
right?
&gt;&gt; So, that I think would be really
important for preventing the loss of a
lot of muscle mass. But what is
interesting is that you do lose lean
body mass, a lot of it, when you are
doing a prolonged fast like that. And
looking at, you know, the old literature
and some of the literature that's been
done, a lot of water up to 10 pounds of
like water rate, it's just crazy. You
lose that and your organs shrink. And
this is something that's been also shown
in animal studies and also by Dr. Walter
Longo many years ago. And he's shown in
in animal studies, prolonged type of
fasting actually causes organs to shrink
because a lot of the damaged cells, not
only is autophagy getting activated and
you're cleaning out damage within a
cell, but cells that are so damaged that
autophagy can't even fix them, they
actually undergo death, cell death. And
so you end up getting a lot of cells
that die. And then what happens is
during the refeeding phase and this is
key the refeeding phase is the growth
phase and this is when you regrow
organs. It's when your muscle mass comes
back. You can you know go back get your
muscle mass gains back. And so having
that refeeding phase is really important
and getting the right nutrients like
protein for example is is key for that
refeeding phase. But you also lose fat
during that fast and you're losing
visceral fat. And you had brought this
up last night when we were talking and
like did some reading on it because it
was like, "Oh, it made perfect sense."
Because your organs are shrinking,
you're losing a lot of, you know, cells
in your organs, you're also losing some
of the visceral fat that surrounds the
organs. Right.
&gt;&gt; And that can get mclassified.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. It gets mclassified as lean
body mass. And so you look at this lean
body mass and all you think about is
muscle. Well, it turns out muscle is a
small part of that.
&gt;&gt; There's a lot of other stuff that's
going into that lean body mass. It's a
pretty big undertaking, a 14-day fast.
Yeah. But I'll say this, and this kind
of like goes goes into what you
mentioned about the fasting mimicking
diet and perhaps even adding, you know,
cream. We can talk about that as well.
&gt;&gt; I do think I mean, the fasting mimicking
diet, you're not going to get the same
amount of autophagy that you would get
if you did a 5day fast.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Water fast. Because it's just
impossible. You're getting some protein,
you're getting some amino acids that's
activating mTor that shuts down
autophagy. You're getting energy, ATP.
There's a ratio called the ATP to AM
ratio which you want it to be low to
activate something called AMP kynise
&gt;&gt; for autophagy to happen. And so when
you're eating heavy cream or eating
whatever fill in the blank any type of
calories you're you're changing that
ratio and so that kynise is not getting
activated as robustly. Now the amount of
you know inactivation of those pathways
which then will inactivate autophagy
depends on how much you're feeding right
how many calories that you're eating how
much of that is amino acids
&gt;&gt; and specifically lucine right in the
case of longo like really trying to
minimize leucine as an activator of mTor
and so on.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. I think for the cream, if
you're trying to do 168, if someone is
trying to do 16A on a daily basis and
it's a non-negotiable for having an
earlier feeding window because social
just everything compliance-wise isn't
going to work and you have to do it
later, which means you have to wake up
and still be fasting in the morning,
right? Then you either like have to love
black coffee, learn to love it,
&gt;&gt; or try maybe MCT powder, MCT oil,
because then you're not getting
&gt;&gt; the amino acids in there. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; to activate the mtor, but you can do
like a small maybe like a tablespoon of
it and so you maybe just get a little
bit of depression of autophagy, but not
much. That would be my recommendation.
&gt;&gt; And I also want to clarify for folks
listening just to really make it
specific.
&gt;&gt; When I have had I just like saying dirty
fasting. I didn't realize that was an
expression. I just think it feels fun
like a dirty martini. Dirty fasting is
kind of cheating in this way. But
when I do that, which is not all the
time. I usually have black coffee or tea
or something like that. But it is heavy
cream,
&gt;&gt; which is almost entirely fat. It is not
creamer that you would just pull off the
shelf. It is not half and half. It is
heavy cream, which just from a
macronutrient perspective is very, very,
very different. And you can really
overdo it on the calories also. It's
just like liquid fat effectively. But
the MCT powder is a good idea. I tell
you what, if you're open to it, let's
shift gears a little bit. I will just
say I wish somebody, nobody's going to
do this, but would somehow get the
ethics board, IRB, etc. to approve
long-term human studies again in
fasting. That would be great because you
used to be allowed to do it. There are
case studies of people who literally
fasted for 300 plus days. I mean, like
fat, what is it? 9,000 calories per
pound. Like there's like you can do a
lot with that fat. So, we'll see if I do
14 days. If I can do 14 days, then I
might just go to 30. But then the
refeeding gets really tricky.
&gt;&gt; I think people are concerned with
gallstones. So, when you don't eat for a
period of long period of time, then
you're not stimulating the gallbladder
and the gallstone risk increases, which
is what I think is the big concern with
with the long long fasts. But I mean,
you know, if you're doing something like
that once a year,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; I don't know if it's that big of a deal.
&gt;&gt; I mean, that's why I was doing a 7-day
fast once a year for a long time. And
then I took a break for a few years and
I did a 7-day water fast and it was so
incredibly unpleasant and I had
orthostatic hypotension where I stand up
and I felt like I was going to fall over
and my, you know, vision started to get
funny and I was like, you know what,
maybe this isn't for me. But I think
it's because my machinery just wasn't
developed for that. Having seen really
stark differences in
my mental acuity and sustained focus
with the intermittent fasting, I'm like,
okay, I feel like doing intermittent
fasting, which part of my reason
behaviorally for my interest in that
also is that getting people to change
their diet is [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hard. meaning
their diet composition, the food they
eat. So if you can just say, "Hey, look,
keep eating whatever you want, same
thing, but you have to fit it within
this window, it's an interesting option
B that might be might work for people
who otherwise aren't going to follow a
paleo diet or whatever. But if you do
the IF and then what I've done is like,
all right, do the IF maybe if you have
some grains or in my case legumes and
stuff. Okay, fine. and then shift to a
mostly ketogenic diet for a period of
time. Then I feel like you're you're
pretty well teed up for a longer
water only fast. Maybe you supplement
with electrolytes. This gets into all
sorts of controversial territory, but if
you're okay with it, let's talk about
training for a minute because, and I'll
force a really awkward segue maybe,
which is one thing I noticed is that my
ability to do zone 2 training. Let's
just for simplicity sake say that for
people that's you're on a stationary
bike or a bike, stationary is just
easier to keep consistent. and you're
you're cycling for 60 minutes at a a
wattage and a speed that leads you to
the point where you could have a
conversation with someone on the phone
in short full sentences, but you don't
really want to, right? That's like the
talk test. Intermittent fasting plus
ketosis really helps my zone 2. And then
this leads into the question of just
training in general. So, I have to click
on this. What type of exercise reduces
heart aging by 20 years? Do you want to
start there or do you want to start with
V2 max?
&gt;&gt; We can start with V2 max maybe because
they kind of lead into each other.
&gt;&gt; Great. Let's do it.
&gt;&gt; So people might be, you know, going what
is V2 max? It's essentially a
cardiorespiratory fitness. It's measured
or calculated by V2 max, which is
essentially the maximum amount of oxygen
you can take up during maximum exercise.
&gt;&gt; And what's so fascinating about that is
it's a really important predictor of
longevity. So there have now been enough
studies that have come out looking at
the cardiorespiratory fitness in the in
the sense of V2 max and how people with
a higher cardiorespiratory fitness have
a 5year increased life expectancy
compared to people with a low
cardiorespiratory fitness. In fact, if
you have a low cardiorespiratory fitness
and you go anywhere above that like from
low to low normal, it's associated with
a 2-year increased life expectancy. And
people with a low cardiorespiratory
fitness actually have a higher all-c
cause mortality that's comparable or
worse than people with known diseases
like type two diabetes or cardiovascular
disease or smokers for example. So in in
other words, being sedentary is a
disease and we need to think about it as
a disease and we should be trying to
train to improve our V2 max and that is
something that should be in our minds.
And I say this because like just having
this conversation that you and I are
having right now, it takes about 11 mill
of oxygen per minute per kilogram body
weight just to have this conversation.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Now, just sit still and just breathe. It
takes about 3 milll of oxygen per minute
per kilogram body weight. And that's
important because as we're aging, we're
sort of heading towards this cliff of V2
max or V2 max goes down as we age just
naturally. Even if you're training and
doing everything, it goes down.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And once you get to that cliff,
&gt;&gt; everything becomes a maximal effort.
Like you talking, you're out of breath.
You know, carrying groceries to your car
from the store, you're just out of
breath. Everything is a maximal effort
and you don't want to be there.
&gt;&gt; So you want to like start from a higher
up point so that when you're going down
that cliff is much further away
&gt;&gt; and and that's where you know the
training comes in because you want to
sort of you want to find a training
program that's going to improve that
that cardiorespiratory fitness,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; And that's where you talked about zone 2
training and that's the kind of what I
would call moderate intensity exercise.
So you're able to sort of the talk test.
I like the talk test because heart rate
is so dependent on the person's fitness
level, but let's just say on average
generally people are they're not at like
75 or 80% max heart rate. They're kind
of below that on average. Now some
people may actually be above that, but
the talk test is great because you can
have a conversation. You're breathy. You
don't want to have a conversation, but
you can. So, we know that people that
are doing that moderate intensity type
of training, if they do the standard
guidelines of physical activity, which
are about 2 and 1/2 hours a week of
moderate intensity physical activity,
people that do that for 2 months, 40% of
those people still can't improve their
V2 max.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Just different gears.
&gt;&gt; Well, unless they actually add in
highintensity interval training.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; And that's where I kind of get into
this. I think people should be doing
vigorous intensity exercise. That's the
type of exercise where you're unable to
talk, right? So you you can't have a
conversation because you're going
harder. Your heart rate is about 80 85%,
you know, it's above 80% max heart rate.
&gt;&gt; That type of exercise has been shown to
improve V2 max, especially if you're
doing sort of what's called
highintensity interval training. as you
know, you've you've talked about this a
lot as well, but you're you're doing
sort of these intervals of going more
vigorous intensity exercise and then you
have recovery periods where your heart
rate goes down.
&gt;&gt; So, there's been a variety of different
protocols out there that have been shown
to improve the V2 max if you do them.
&gt;&gt; Generally speaking, what's happening is
you're putting a stronger stress on your
cardiovascular system, so on your
muscular system, even on your brain. So,
the adaptations are greater. And that
one of those adaptations is increasing
your stroke volume. So being able to
like basically transport oxygen to
tissues faster.
&gt;&gt; And that's an adaptation that happens
when you're going at a harder when
you're training at a harder intensity.
&gt;&gt; What do you do personally? What's what's
your hit look like?
&gt;&gt; My training is 3 days a week I do some
sort of CrossFit training that involves
highintensity interval training with it
as well. And the high-intensity interval
training will either be on a rowing
machine or it'll be on a stationary bike
or assault bike or it'll be like a skier
like those skiers
&gt;&gt; or jumping rope. And I also do longer
intervals. So I'll do the Norwegian 4x4.
So that's where I do on a stationary
bike or I'll do it on the rowing machine
actually as well. I do four minutes of
as hard as I can go and maintain for
that entire four minutes. So this is
obviously not an allout 30- secondond
sprint. this is, you know, I'm I'm just
working hard as hard as I can and
maintain that for for four minutes. And
then you recover for three minutes and
then you do it four times. I'm thinking
of a variation I do sometimes with my
husband. I recover for four minutes
because we're switching on the rower. So
I sometimes do a little bit longer
recovery. But that Norwegian 4x4 where
you're doing as hard as you can for four
minutes and maintain that, you know,
that intensity for the four minutes and
then you recover for 3 minutes, you do
that four times. That's been shown to be
one of the best ways to improve V2 max.
But you can also do 1 minute on, 1
minute off, which I've also done. So,
you know, you do that 10 times. It's
more like a 20-minut workout.
That's also been shown to improve V2
max. But also, even doing something like
20 seconds on, 10 seconds off, like a
Tabata
&gt;&gt; again has been shown. I do all of these,
by the way, and I do variations of them
depending on the week. Most of my my
exercise is highintensity interval
training, CrossFit training, which
incorporates, you know, it's more
dynamic. So, it's including like
strength training stuff, but it's more
high intensity.
&gt;&gt; Mh.
&gt;&gt; And then I do a couple of runs. I do
like two 30 minute runs a week,
sometimes three. So, and that's more of
my zone 2 stuff.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's a nice roster. I'll share
just for people who might be curious
some of my goals and program at the
moment. Right. So, I'm about to turn 48
and feel good overall,
but have realized that I really hate
endurance training generally speaking.
And so, I've neglected that and
specifically have neglected the stuff
that makes me think. I want to puke into
a bucket, i.e. V2 max training. The the
zone 2 is like listen to a podcast,
maybe have like a slightly breathy
conversation, like it's pretty chill.
watch something on the on Netflix, you
know, it's pretty straightforward. V2
max specifically chatting with Peter
Tia. I'm doing the zone 2, which I do
either on a stationary bike or on a
treadmill with typically with a rucks
sack at a lower incline. I found that
when I had the speed too high incline
too high, I ended up getting lower back
pain just from a like really long stride
with my lordosis and stuff. And then for
the V2 max doing the 4x4 that you
described. And I think I'm getting this
translation right. But the way it was
described to me was like all right for
each of those four minutes you have
these these four minute
work intervals and then you have three
or four minutes of rest and then you
repeat four times. It's like first
minute you're like wow this is a lot of
work. Second minute you're like wow this
really sucks. third minute you're like I
don't know if I I'm gonna make it. I
don't think I'm going to make it. And
then minute four is like I feel like I'm
going to die and I'm being chased by
wolves. So it's like when we say maximal
effort at least as it's been and and
those are not Peter's words but another
person I like a lot. It's a lot of work.
It's pretty pukey but I'm going to be
doing that given the the longevity
associations that you mentioned. Now I
would love just to get your two cents
and this relates to vitamin D2 a little
bit for me where I'm like in these
studies looking at V2 max as a predictor
or coralate of longevity
are there other possible confounders
that confounding variables that might
actually be the real McCoy. In other
words, because you could say, and I know
you know all this, but just for people
listening, it's like, okay, well, I'll
make this up. Like, women who do Pilates
in Manhattan
have, you know, four years of additional
lifespan. Okay, great. So, you could
conclude then we should all do Pilates
to improve lifespan. It's like, well,
wait a second. Pilates is expensive and
maybe they're also following some a
better diet and so on and so on and so
on. But are there any confounders that
might apply possible competitors to
these V2 max studies?
I'm assuming they're observational more
than experimental or u sort of
intervention based. So what are your
thoughts there? there's absolutely a
possibility for some sort of confounding
factors in any sort of observational
study including the ones I'm discussing
because you know yes they're going in
and measuring their cardiorespiratory
fitness which is better than a lot of
observational studies that or you're
going off a questionnaire right
&gt;&gt; so that's already sort of one at least a
oneup over other observational data but
you know at the end of the day you may
have someone that has undiagnosed cancer
or some kind of undiagnosed disease
because they're supposed to be
disease-free or if they have a disease,
it's like known, right? And so
everything's corrected for.
&gt;&gt; But there's always the possibility that,
you know, some people have some disease
and that's why they can't exercise very
well because they're diseased, right?
And it's the disease that's causing them
to have a higher mortality rate than the
the lower cardiorespiratory fitness is.
There are, you know, studies always try
to account for diet and all that stuff,
but at the end of the day, you can never
really establish causation, right? So
that is that is why we turn to
randomized control trials. And I will
say this is where the heart aging comes
in and also this type of training.
&gt;&gt; Can I ask you one more thing real quick?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Before we get to the heart aging real
quick. So when I've done V2 max
training,
my legs grow like my legs grow like
weeds. Like they adapt and get big. And
so along with the age related decrease
in V2 max, there's also sarcopenia and
age- related loss of muscle mass. And so
I'm like, I wonder if there's these
people who also have higher V2 max tend
to have a higher percentage of
lean body mass or muscle tissue, be more
heavily muscled than the people without.
I don't know. I mean, that's just I'm
just kind of poking at out of curiosity.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. So, the heart aging,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, so and you know this goes into why
randomized control trials are important
because you can establish more
causation, right, from an intervention.
And this study was done by Ben Levine
out of UT Southwest and Dallas. And it's
a really to me it's just it's seminal
ground breaking study that isn't talked
about enough. By the way, he's just a
phenomenal cardiovascular exercise
physiologist. I mean, he trained with
the biggest giants out there. And what
he did was he took him and his lab took
50 year olds that were sedentary. So
they're middle-aged, 50 years old,
sedentary, but otherwise healthy. So you
didn't have any other diseases besides
being sedentary, which I think is a
disease, but they didn't have any other
diseases like cardiovascular disease or
type two diabetes or hypertension,
right? So they were otherwise healthy,
just not active. and he wanted to see if
he could put these guys on a pretty long
2-year training protocol, how would that
affect the aging of their heart? So, as
we age, our hearts typically shrink in
size and they get stiffer and that
affects not only our cardiorespiratory
fitness and our ability to exercise. And
you know, I mentioned our
cardiorespiratory fitness goes down with
age, but it affects our cardiovascular
disease risk as well. And so the reason
our hearts get stiffer by the way does
come down to a lot of glucose. So the
more glucose stimulation, more glucose
is around in your vascular system, it
through a chemical reaction forms
advanced glycation end products. So this
glycation essentially stiffens the
collagen that surrounds your mioardium
and your paricardium. And so you get
like this stiffer heart that can't
respond to stress well, you know. So,
you want your heart to be very plastic
and malleable and flexible, right? You
don't want it to be stiff.
&gt;&gt; Doesn't sound good.
&gt;&gt; Just like you don't want your blood
vessels to be stiff. What he wanted to
do was see if he could change the
structure and the trajectory of these
these aging hearts. And so, he put him
on a 2-year training program which
involved the Norwegian 4x4, by the way.
And when you start someone out that's,
you know, not physically active and you
want them to do the Norwegian 4x4, when
you have them doing their interval,
their 4-minute interval, and this speaks
to you as well, or anyone, you don't
have to necessarily go as hard as you
can the whole four minutes. You just
have to be working hard that interval.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You do have to last four minutes,
right? So,
&gt;&gt; you have to last four minutes. And so,
some people even start off, they're just
briskly walking
&gt;&gt; because that's hard for them, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Totally.
&gt;&gt; So, it's all tailored to the individual.
And so, some people get really
intimidated where they're like, "Oh, I
just there's no way I could ever do
that." Well, actually, these people did
do it. And they started out doing
Norwegian 4x4, but they also did a
variety of other exercises, including
moderate intensity and some more
vigorous intensity exercise as well as
some resistance training. And the
control group was just this like yoga,
flexible training sort of stuff that
people were doing. By the end of the two
years, these people were working out
about 5 hours a week. And at some point
they were doing two Norwegian 4x4s a
week and then they went down to just
doing one a week. But you know over the
course of 2 years they did they were
getting a lot of exercise about 5 hours
a week.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And essentially at the end of those two
years the structure of their heart so
the stiffness of it and the you know
shrinking of it was reversed. So their
hearts grew and they became more
flexible
&gt;&gt; and it was reversed in such a way that
it was 20 years less aging. So their
hearts looked more like 30 year olds
than 50y olds, which is pretty
incredible.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that is amazing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's amazing. And I think it's
also like, well, you think 50 it's too
late to start exercising. Well, it's not
too late.
&gt;&gt; You can be in your 90s and get benefits.
I think that's another really important
sort of take-home with that story is
that, you know, you can reverse your
your aging of your heart by 20 years if
you really put in the effort. Five five
hours a week is about what I do. About
five or six hours a week, it's a lot of
work. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I didn't always do that, but I've
decided as I started to get into my
mid-40s, I'm going to spend less time
podcasting and more time exercising
because this is my health.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Foundational for everything else.
That's the base of the pyramid,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; All right. Let's park that particular
piece of training for a moment. Do you
want to piggyback on that and talk about
reversing brain aging with exercise? Is
it a different type of exercise or do
you get two birds with one stone?
&gt;&gt; You do get two birds with one stone. And
that's why I do like the vigorous
intensity exercise because
when you're kind of shifting into
working out harder, when you're getting
that vigorous intensity exercise, you
are shifting somewhat to anorobic
metabolism. So, you're working so hard
that you can't get oxygen to your
muscles fast enough to use mitochondria
for for the mitochondria to then make
energy. And so your body goes, I need
energy quick right now. There's not
enough oxygen here. And so you start to
use glucose outside of the mitochondria
as energy. And that's called glycolysis.
&gt;&gt; And you're not just only doing
glycolysis, by the way. I mean, even if
you're doing an allout sprint, you're
still somewhat using your mitochondria.
It's not like a black or white thing,
right? Is there sort of gray here? But
the reality is is that when you're not
going intense, you are not mostly you're
not doing anorobic exercise. And so what
happens is when you're doing that sort
of getting in that anorobic state, what
I mean is like you're not using oxygen
to make energy, you're just using
glucose. You actually make something
called lactate as a byproduct. And
lactate is what's essential for the
brain health. So there have now been a
variety of studies. This was pioneered
by Dr. George Brooks at UC Berkeley
decades ago. So many studies have now
shown this. Now, it's no longer a
hypothesis, but it used to be called the
lactate shuttle hypothesis, where when
you start to do this vigorous intensity
exercise, you get your lactate levels
higher than baseline. Baseline, you're
usually about.9 millmer or so lactate.
You start to go above that and well
beyond. You're getting 7 10 millmer, 15
millmer, right? The lactate gets into
your bloodstream and it's used by other
tissues. So it goes back into the
muscle. It's used for energy. Gets into
the brain. It gets into the heart, liver
quickly. It happens within 20 minutes.
You can do a HIT workout, see your
lactate go up to 15 millmer. Measure it
20 minutes later and it's back to
baseline. I mean, it's quick. It gets
consumed.
One of the major organs that consumes it
is the brain. This has been shown in
human studies.
Not only is lactate very much like beta
hydroxybutyrate, our favorite ketone
that we've been talking about, because
it's a energetically favorable source of
energy, lactate is used by neurons to
make energy just like beta
hydroxybutyrate is very similar. It's
energetically favorable. All that stuff
is happening. Same stuff. So you're, you
know, using the lactate, glucose is
being spared, you're making glutathione.
Lactate is also a signaling molecule. So
in the brain it's activating brain
derived neurotrophic factor which is
important for your you know growing new
neurons in the brain which has been
shown in human studies. So there have
been human studies that have done
exercise for even just one year and
shown that you can increase the growth
of the hippocampus by like 1 to 2% after
that year of training versus losing 1 to
2% of the hippocampus. That usually
happens as you get in older age. The
lactate is again a product of that
vigorous intensity exercise. It's
increasing norepinephrine in the brain.
Serotonin, it's a signaling molecule.
It's basically your body's your muscle's
way of communicating with the brain.
Hey, I'm really working hard. This is a
stressful, you know, time. Let's respond
to that stress, right? And so, your
brain is also working hard during
exercise and particularly vigorous
intensity exercise. It's stressful in
the brain. Anybody that's done it knows
that resistance training also increases
lactate and resistance training is very
stressful on the brain. And so it's like
this response to that stress your brain
is now being communicated from the
muscles by lactate which is the
communicator and saying hey make all
this good stuff so that we can like not
die right that's essentially the
adaptations that are happening that's
why I like to also incorporate vigorous
intensity exercise into my program
because I am also prone to ner
degenerative disease I have Parkinson's
disease on my dad's side I have
Alzheimer's disease on my mom's side so
I'm very very tuned in to
neurogenerative disease and wanting to
prevent it and do what I can and I do
think that vigorous intensity exercise
is part of that equation
&gt;&gt; because I want to get that lactate which
is so beneficial for brain health.
&gt;&gt; So let me ask you about two other things
related to brain health since this is on
on the mind
uh for the first is related to saunas
and the second one is vitamin D. So with
saunas, I was looking back and I think
this is
probably summarized by some LLM. So I
want to be very careful with citing
numbers, but I'm looking at a summary, I
believe, of the findings of a large
Finnish study published in JAM Internal
Medicine 2015 that followed 2,000
middle-aged men for 20 years. That's
wild. And it looks like, please correct
me if if from memory you can correct any
of this, but all callers mortality 24%
lower risk with two to three times per
week. This is sauna use. And four to
seven times per week was associated with
40% lower risk. And I'll just cut to the
one that's of greatest interest to me
right now. says, "In a follow-up paper,
using this on a four to seven times per
week was associated with a 66% lower
risk of dementia and 65% lower risk of
Alzheimer's." Now, at face value, if
those numbers are roughly accurate,
those numbers seem incredible, right?
And I guess what I'm wondering is how
should we think about those results?
Because if out of a 100 people, two
people were getting dementia and now
it's one person, it's less interesting
than other ways of interpreting the
data. How should we think about this?
And how do you personally use if you do
sauna or hot tub or heat stress at this
point?
&gt;&gt; Those numbers are accurate by the way.
They're spot on.
&gt;&gt; And there is a dose dependence there
which kind of strengthens the data,
right? So people that are using this on
a more frequently are having a more
robust effect. you mentioned 24% lower
all-c cause mortality and then 40% if
they're doing two to three times a week
versus four to seven times a week
they're they're having a 40% lower all
cause mortality and the dementia risk is
also extremely interesting to me and
this goes back Tim to like some of the
earliest experiments that I did as a
sort of budding young biologist at the
Sulk Institute where I was working with
these little nematode celegans worms and
injecting human amaloid beta 42 into
these worms arms and essentially
injecting it into their muscle so that
they become basically the amaloid beta
42 aggregates and forms these aggregates
as these worms age and it happens very
rapidly because their life expectancy is
only 15 days within like day or so they
start to become paralyzed where they
can't move their lower half of their
muscles their mus muscular cells are and
they can only move their nose to feed in
this little petri dish with ecoli
bacteria which is what they eat. I would
do these experiments and then I would
overact basically where you do a genetic
manipulation and you can make them
overexpress heat shock proteins which
are something that are robustly
activated upon heat stress as the name
implies and sauna has been shown to
activate heat shock proteins. If you're
in the 163° Fahrenheit sauna for around
30 minutes, you can activate your heat
shock proteins by 50% more than
baseline. So when I would add, you know,
heat shock proteins that would be
activated in these worms, it would
prevent this from happening. These
protein aggregates don't happen. And
that's because one of the things that
heat shock proteins do is they help
repair damaged proteins that are
misfolded and prevent them from
aggregating. And so you want to have
more active heat shock proteins if
you're wanting to prevent Alzheimer's
disease. Now, there's a lot of animal
studies that have shown this as well.
For example, you can take a mouse and
sort of give it Alzheimer's disease. in
this in a similar way and if they have a
lot of active heat shock protein genes
then they're not getting the Alzheimer's
disease it delays it right I remember
reading this study and it was like one
of the things I was thinking about was
of course you know the heat shock
proteins are activated upon the sauna
use that you would probably see a lower
incidence of Alzheimer's disease and
even dementia there's other things as
well cardiovascular health is really
improved with the sauna so sauna sort of
mimics moderate intensity exercise and
so if you're having improved
cardiovascular health that means more
blood flow go to the brain. Lots of
things are happening. Right. The one
thing I do want to mention, Tim, and
this is this study was I think it came
out in
2020ish.
I don't remember the exact year, but it
was not out of Finland. I believe was a
Polish study.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And that study looked at sauna use and
dementia risk. And there was very
interesting results there. So they sort
of looked at people that were using
saunas, but they also sort of
categorized them based on the amount of
heat. So how hot their sauna got.
&gt;&gt; So in the Finnish studies in Adam
Finland, majority of the people are
using the sauna at around equivalent of
174° F.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That's about what the average
temperature of pretty much any of those
studies that you cited, that's about the
average temperature that they're using
them. And they're in there for about 20
minutes.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Now, this other study looked at a
wide range of different temperatures,
that temperature versus like the really,
really high extreme end. So, people that
were doing like 200 degrees Fahrenheit
or more. And this is something that you
can see nowadays, like there's this sort
of,
&gt;&gt; you know, go all in, go hard or go home,
right? And so, people think that they
need to go in a 200° sauna, and if they
go in a 200°ree sauna, it's going to be
better than going in a 175 degree
Fahrenheit sauna, right?
&gt;&gt; Apparently not the case. In that study
again, you saw a protective effect of
people that used the sauna. And I think
it was also dose dependent, but I can't
recall. There was a protective effect,
but only if they used saunas that were
less than 190° F.
&gt;&gt; People that started going into the 190°
to 200° F range actually had an
increased risk.
&gt;&gt; Oh, no.
&gt;&gt; So, that was something that I don't know
that anyone talks about.
&gt;&gt; But, you know, I've done really, really
hot saunas before. I personally don't
like it. I get headaches actually. Yes.
&gt;&gt; So, you know, your head is in there and
you have to think about that your head
is getting heated up.
&gt;&gt; And so, I don't know that it's
necessarily good to go in a 212 degree
Fahrenheit sauna.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; You know, for your head. Now, I don't
want to say, you know, that with
certainty because there could be all
kinds of confounding factors, but it's
something to keep in mind. And why do
you have to go above 190? 190 is hot as
hell. Like, that's good enough. Like,
you don't have to go above that. My
default setting of my son is 194. So,
it's just kind of like, well, I guess I
set it some time ago. So, it's just been
set at 194. So, that's sort of my
default. So, maybe I want to maybe I
want to dial it back.
&gt;&gt; I think 190 is great.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; 190 is great. You asked about me and how
I use the sauna. Now, I should also
mention that hot tubs are are good as
well. And in fact, a study just came out
a few weeks ago showing that hot tubs
have, you know, comparable effects on
blood pressure regulation. All these
parameters that are looked at with sauna
use as well. And a lot of people ask
that question, you know, oh, what about
a hot tub or a hot bath? And I think,
you know, not everyone has access to a
sauna, not everyone has access to a hot
tub, but a lot of people have access to
a hot bath.
&gt;&gt; And I think if you can get a sort of
pool thermometer
and keep the temperature of your bath
104° Fahrenheit, which is what all the
studies use,
&gt;&gt; you have to keep adding hot water.
That's fine.
&gt;&gt; It's pretty hot.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's pretty hot. You stay in there
for about 20 minutes and you're going to
have comparable effects. You'll be
sweating like you're in a sauna. Don't
worry about it.
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; 104.
&gt;&gt; 104 is hot. And I actually do both. I do
a hot tub and I do sauna. I like to do
hot tub at night. It does seem to help
with my sleep. And sometimes, but
sometimes I'll do the sauna in the day
and I'll do it after a workout. It sort
of extends my workout. I particularly
like doing them after a workout like in
the winter when it's cold and if I work
out outside.
&gt;&gt; So that's kind of how I use the sauna. I
was doing hot tubs for a while like
every night. I don't do that in the
summer because it's just hot. I actually
shift more to cold doing cold exposure
more in the summer, which is kind of
funny. Pretty much the only time I do it
is in the summer. I'm such a wuss. I
like doing the heat a lot in the in the
winter.
&gt;&gt; I would be very curious to see if you
know they measured like sperm motility
and morphology for all the males who are
doing this and they're like, "Good news,
you have this incredibly lowered risk of
Alzheimer's. Bad news. You're
effectively sterile from all the heat on
your on your swimmers.
&gt;&gt; Good point. There's been studies that
have shown you do lower motility
for sure. The motility rates lowered and
that those changes are reversed after 6
weeks of abstaining. So, it is
reversible, but also don't use it as a
contraception method either because I
know some people that have tried that,
it it doesn't work. You can still get
pregnant.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's not not so smart. Do you
still use if needed
curcumin or
theumin or any of these products? I
think Mariva or Mariva
&gt;&gt; was one that you mentioned as a
formulation in place of NSAIDs like
ibuprofen or neproxin or is that
something that you may have changed your
mind on?
&gt;&gt; I actually just did it like a couple
days ago when I had a headache and I
didn't know why. That's the thing that I
go to still and I mean there's some
cases where it won't work. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; where it's just like I don't know this
is like a really bad headache. I don't
usually get headaches but if I don't
sleep well or something something going
on or my cycle I will get a headache and
I use it. I use four of the Mariva which
is a phytosomal curcumin which increases
the bioavailability of the curcumin. I
use the Thorn brand just because I think
the brand is reliable. No affiliation
with them but it works for me. It really
does. So it's I think 500 milligrams
of
curcumin per
capsule, I believe. And so I do four.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So I'm getting two grams.
&gt;&gt; Cool.
&gt;&gt; But I do still use it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Just don't take it right after
your workout. Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It doesn't have the same effect.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It doesn't have the same kind of
COX2 inhibition as the other guys.
Right.
&gt;&gt; It doesn't. And in fact, I think it
helps with DOMS, delayed onset mus
muscle soreness.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I'm sure.
&gt;&gt; And so sometimes actually I do use it
actually after a really like hard squat
workout.
&gt;&gt; All right. I'm glad I asked. Speaking of
not getting enough sleep, let's hop to
creatine
because I God, I don't know where I read
this, but that higher doses of creatine,
maybe like 25 grams, 20 25 grams, could
combat sleep loss or some of the effects
of sleep loss. What should we know about
creatine? Right? Creatine's been around
for a long time. There are dozens of
questionable sports performance,
athletic performance products come out
every year. Most of them are all
marketing, no substance. Creatine has
been used by athletes for a very long
time, but for at least the last 5 years,
I have been taking it typically five
grams a day more for the cognitive or
potential cognitive benefits, right? But
what what else should we know about
creatine because you what you put in
your newsletter not too long ago was
forwarded to me and then you told me via
text and I was like, "Okay, we should
probably talk about this."
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; So, h how should we think about creatine
and best practices for different
applications? Well, it's funny as you
mentioned, it's one of those supplements
that have been it was like in the gym
bro world forever and still people
associate it with that, but yet it's
been one of the supplements that's
actually stuck, right? It's worked and
there's been countless studies showing
its effectiveness, particularly with
respect to increasing exercise volume.
So, in other words, what creatine is is
it's essentially it's stored in our
muscles as something called
phosphocreatine. When you take a
creatine exogenously, it's stored in our
muscles as phosphocreatine and then used
for energy. And so it's a way to make
energy quicker. And so the more of it
you have stored, the the quicker you can
sort of make that energy. And so what
it's been shown to do is really help
with increasing exercise volume. In
other words, you can do one to two more
reps per set or sets. You know, you
could do an extra set or whatever
whatever it is you're doing, right? And
that leads to obviously if you're
increasing your workload, you're going
to have increased muscle mass and muscle
strength because you're increasing your
workload. It doesn't work like protein
in the sense that you can increase
muscle mass because it's anabolic. You
need to put the work in. So creatine by
itself isn't going to make your muscles
grow, but it is going to make you work
harder. It's going to be easier for you
to work harder. And so you end up
increasing your exercise volume, which
then has adaptations on your muscle,
right? And that's why a lot of people
like it because for one, they want their
muscles to grow bigger and stronger and
two, some people like to use it during
competitions or something because they
want to be able to increase that
exercise volume as well. It's also
really good for that explosive power
type of exercise again because you're
getting that quick mobilization of
producing energy.
&gt;&gt; And I'm just glossing over decades of
research and a lot of specifics here
because I want to get to the brain. But
it turns out creatine is something that
our liver makes a little bit. I think
like one maybe 1 to 2 grams a day. It's
also something that's found in dietary
sources, particularly animal products.
So it's high in like meat, poultry,
fish, dairy, not so much in vegetables.
So vegans and vegetarians actually end
up they can have lower creatine if
they're not supplementing with it
because they're not eating animal
products, right? Well, it turns out that
it seems as though if you're if you're
supplementing and eating a high meat
diet, you're getting a good amount of
creatine, five grams seems to be about
the point at which your muscles get
saturated at least over the course of
like a month or so.
&gt;&gt; So, if you've been using creatine for a
month or two, your muscle stores are
saturated and 5 grams a day is kind of
what's consumed by the muscle on a daily
basis to kind of maintain that. So, I
would argue that you might want to go
above that to get the brain benefits.
And here's why. Because your muscle is a
very, very greedy when it comes to
creatine. So, that five grams that
you're taking, I used to take five grams
a day until about last April or March or
something like that. So, the five grams
a day is what's been shown in countless
studies. That's probably why you take
it. I took it because it was countless
studies showing five grams a day was
like the the dose. That was the dose
that you needed to get the muscle
benefits. All these brain benefits now
coming out seem to be at higher doses.
And you mentioned one that was 25 grams.
I mean 20 to 25 grams, which is kind of
a crazy study where they did about 21
hours of sleep deprivation essentially.
They were barely sleeping at all. and
giving them the 25 gram of creatine, 20
to 25 grams depending on their weight,
seemed to not only negate the negative
effects of sleep deprivation on their
cognition, but it also improved their
cognition beyond what their baseline
normal cognition is when they were
sleeping.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And that's what was really intriguing to
me as well as some of the other studies
where older adults are given, you know,
20 grams of creatine and it improve
their cognition. We now have the first
pilot study in Alzheimer's disease where
again 20 grams were given to a very
small number of people with Alzheimer's
disease. It also improved cognition.
It turns out that when you start to go
above the five grams and you get into
more than 10 grams range, then some of
that creatine is getting into the brain
versus being all consumed by the muscle.
Right?
&gt;&gt; I personally use creatine now. I do 10
grams a day every day. And what I have
noticed, and this could be totally
placebo, but I'll tell you when I don't
do my 10 grams a day, what I have
noticed is that the the afternoon
sleepiness kind of slump I get is
completely gone if I take my 10 grams a
day.
&gt;&gt; 10 grams, I don't get afternoon
sleepiness. I miss it, I get it. So,
it's not like a stored up kind of thing.
It's like, no, if I miss it that day,
it's noticeable. If I travel and I don't
have it, it's noticeable.
&gt;&gt; I'm hooked on the 10 grams a day. If
it's placebo, I don't care. It works.
Right? On top of that, what I've also
been doing, ever since, you know, that
study came out with the 21 hours of
sleep deprivation, I take about 20 grams
of creatine when I'm traveling and I
have to give a talk or I'm doing a
podcast, particularly because oftent
times I'm traveling either to central
time or to Eastern's time and I'm, you
know, giving a talk early in the
morning, which is like 6:00 a.m. my
time. I got to be like on my game. So, I
take the 20 grams and I kid you not,
it's like you get this brain boost but
without like the caffeine. It's It's
hard to explain
&gt;&gt; without the creepy crawly ants on your
skin,
&gt;&gt; right? Without that like
&gt;&gt; jittery caffeine overdose,
&gt;&gt; jittery thing. And even that sometimes
the caffeine isn't enough. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; If you're really jet-lagged, you know,
it's just especially if you're going
across time zones.
&gt;&gt; Well, also for me, it's like I'm a
caffeine fast metabolizer. If I have a
cup of coffee, I'm on fire for 25
minutes and then I'm sleepy. I think
some of that is actually a glucose
response, but that's a whole separate
thing. Using glucometer when I was doing
all my ketogenic experiments and so on,
I'm like, "Wow, if I have too much
coffee, there is a huge, which is not
that surprising, spike in glucose and
then a very predictable subsequent drop
off." So it doesn't end up being net net
that helpful for me unless I'm doing a
20 minute sprint on something which is
probably never. So the creatine super
interesting to me. Let me ask some very
specific
maybe mundane questions but I think
they're practical which is
when these subjects were taking 20 or 25
g was that in one sitting was that in
multiple divided doses
when you take it is it in powder form is
it little sachets that you can take with
you on travel days is it encapsulated
what does it actually look
With respect to all the studies, I don't
remember if they were in one sitting. A
lot of studies are if they do like a 20
gram, it will be in one sitting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What I do is different. I do five gram
doses. So creatine monohydrate is the
form I take. It's the absolute
triedand-true,
&gt;&gt; the gold standard.
&gt;&gt; It's the gold standard.
&gt;&gt; It's been around forever.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. There's a lot of other marketing
out there that talks about other types
of creatine, but that's really the gold
standard. And I had Dr. Darren Kando on
my podcast. He's a creatine researcher
at the University of Regina in Canada
and like you know we talked all about
this and he really convinced me creatine
monohydrate is the way to go. I asked
him about like every type of creatine
under the sun.
&gt;&gt; But the way I take it is in five gram
doses. And so I do five grams first
thing in the morning and then I'll do my
workout and then I do another five grams
about 11:00 a.m. and that's my 10 grams
that I get.
&gt;&gt; Got it. When I'm traveling, I do have
these sachets that again, Thorne makes,
by the way, no affiliation. I mean,
there's like probably a million other I
like Thorn because their their creatine
is NSF certified and so it's
&gt;&gt; free of contaminants. I I really like
that. So again, find your own favorite
brand, but I like this brand and I like
they have sachets which are 5 g sachets
and so I will have my 10 g for the day
or again if I'm traveling for
workrelated purposes I will take I will
take 15 to 20 gram depending on how much
I need. In that case I will do two 10 g
doses. Like for me I can tolerate that.
I don't have any GI problems with it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I was going to bring that up.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, some people do. I think doing the
five gram doses is like pretty easy on
the gut. Most people don't have a big
problem with the five grams. It's when
they go above that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, five is fine,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I'll say a few things. So, the the NSF
certified is a pretty simple cheat code
just to use as a filtering mechanism for
a lot of supplements. And it is shocking
how inconsistent supplement contents
are. I mean, I've looked at lab reviews
of like 20 off-the-shelf melatonin
products, and it ranges from zero
melatonin up to like 20x the label
amount. It's just bananas. I use
momentous creatine, but it's passing the
same hurdle, right? And I will say like
good news,
you can reduce the likelihood of
cognitive deficit from sleep
deprivation. Bad news is you could
increase the likelihood of disaster
pants if you have 20 cramps at one
sitting. And I will say maybe from
personal experience, maybe I'm just
talking about somebody else, but if you
really want to increase the likelihood
of disaster pants, then you can do like
a bunch of caffeine like you double
espresso or black coffee with MCT powder
and then have your creatine around the
same time.
you're going to want to pack some
Pampers in your travel kit if you do
that. So, yeah, just be aware of the GI
stuff,
but I'm excited to up my intake because
the science that you cited in the study
or studies in your newsletter seemed
really compelling. And it's also one of
those supplements where it's like, okay,
look, we I assume this is on the grass
list, like the generally recognized as
safe. seems very well tolerated over
decades and decades of research
assuming you don't have some who knows
right like really outstanding kidney
dysfunction or something maybe so why
not in a sense it's also relatively
inexpensive right compared to a lot of
things let me ask you just because this
has been on my my mind with the
sulforophane
I mangled the pronunciation of it
sulforophane do you take that better on
an empty stomach better with food. This
has become an issue when I'm doing the
intermittent fasting sometimes, right?
Especially if there's something like the
A Reds 2, which I'm taking for the eye
health, which is supposed to be twice a
day. And I'm like, uh, it's part of the
reason why I've been doing like the
quote unquote dirty fasting with a
little bit of fat in the form of that
heavy cream in coffee was to try to
take supplements earlier in the day that
are benefited from some type of fat in
terms of absorption. So I sulforophane,
does it matter? I think if you can take
it fasted, that's great.
&gt;&gt; Y
&gt;&gt; some people find it kind of is hard on
their stomach and so they like to take
it with food and that's really the only
reason to take it with food is because
they get like upset stomach like GI
problem. So
&gt;&gt; I got
&gt;&gt; that would be again the only really real
reason that you would have to really
take it with food.
&gt;&gt; I want to loop back around just so
people aren't like Ferris you forgot
about vitamin D. I wanted to talk about
vitamin D. So, the vitamin D, I've taken
vitamin D forever.
Tend to take 5,000 IU a day. I
particularly in the summer get I would
say at least an hour in the sun without
skin protection. And I build up to that.
I'm not an idiot about it.
And yet, I am barely in my labs. I'm
always barely squeaking by on vitamin D.
And for almost all of my adult friends
who get labs, and this is also
race agnostic, right? Everybody is
deficient or just on the border of being
deficient, even if they seem to be
taking a lot of supplemental vitamin D
and getting a lot of sunshine. And I
have to ask myself, what the hell is
going on here? In what set of
circumstances is it possible that
everyone would be so deficient if they
seem to be getting a bunch of sunlight?
They're taking a bunch of supplemental
vitamin D. Can you shed any light on
this?
&gt;&gt; I can.
&gt;&gt; Or is there a problem with this
measurement in the first place? Which is
why I was talking about like proxies and
confounders and stuff earlier with
respect to some of the other studies.
Yeah. So please please educate me
&gt;&gt; the way vitamin D is measured. So
vitamin D actually gets converted into a
steroid hormone. And this steroid
hormone
&gt;&gt; essentially it's going inside the
nucleus of our cells where all of our
DNA is and it's activating 5% of the
protein encoding human genome. Many of
these genes it activates cloth by the
way you mentioned cloth. Vitamin D is
important for activating cloth. Nice.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So
&gt;&gt; very hugely important for dementia risk
which we can we can talk about.
to sort of answer your question. So your
vitamin D levels are measured by a proxy
and it's called 25 hydroxy vitamin D
which is the precursor to the steroid
hormone. So essentially vitamin D3 which
is made in your skin
&gt;&gt; or if you supplement with it exogenously
gets into your bloodstream
&gt;&gt; and that vitamin D3 then goes to the
liver and it's converted into 25 hydroxy
vitamin D. That's the major circulating
form of vitamin D.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. after it's, you know, 25 hydroxy
vitamin D is made in the liver, it then
goes to the kidneys and it's made into
the actual active steroid hormone which
is called 125 hydroxy vitamin D. Well,
it turns out the enzymes that are doing
the conversion of vitamin D3 into that
stable form that everyone gets, you
know, when they're getting a vitamin D
blood test, that's what they're looking
at requires magnesium to work. And there
have been studies showing that in with
low magnesium,
&gt;&gt; it doesn't happen readily at all.
Interesting.
&gt;&gt; 50% of the US population has
insufficient levels of magnesium. So,
you're talking about a coin toss here,
right? One out of two. One out of two,
right?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; 50-50 chance a person's not going to be
getting enough magnesium.
&gt;&gt; That's been shown to actually play a
role in circulating levels of vitamin D.
So, there have been studies and stuff
showing that people that are that have
low magnesium intake also have low
circulating forms of 25 hydroxy vitamin
D. So, that's one thing. M another thing
comes down to genetics. There's actually
a lot of people that have snips, very
common ones that probably came from more
southern latitude areas that don't make
as much vitamin D3 from the sun exposure
because probably they're getting so much
sun, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, essentially, there's the genetic
component as well. And I've seen a lot
of people's, you know, different snip
makeups. And I know quite a few people
that actually have to take a super high
level of vitamin D3 to actually get
enough vitamin D. And then the other
thing is that you mentioned earlier the
variation between supplements. So there
have been studies on vitamin D
supplements and it's the same problem
with melatonin. There's some vitamin D
supplements with a fraction of what is
stated in terms of concentration of
vitamin D3 on the nutrition facts
&gt;&gt; and then some of them have like 10 times
as much vitamin D. So there's just like
this huge variation where you're like it
says it has 5,000 IUs but it only has
500. There's a lot of different factors
that could be contributing to that as
well. So and then there's also in terms
of like people getting sun exposure. You
said you don't wear sunscreen. Some
people do. People that have darker skin
pigmentation have melanin. That's a
natural sun sunscreen. There have been
studies showing that. For example, out
of the University of Chicago, there was
a study that was published a few years
back showing African-Americans have to
stay in the sun six to 10 times as long
as a Caucasian to make the same amount
of vitamin D3 from the same amount of
sun exposure
&gt;&gt; because they have a natural sunscreen.
&gt;&gt; Y
&gt;&gt; melanin, which is that darker skin
pigmentation. It's a natural sunscreen.
&gt;&gt; It's also why their skin always looks
great as they're aging. You're like,
"Oh, you're 75. Your skin looks like
you're 30." I remember I won't mention
him by name, but meeting this this
African-American fellow and I thought he
was like 25 and he was 53 and had like f
and the way we got to that is I was like
oh you are you married and he's like
yeah I have five kids and I was like
wait what you have five kids you don't
look Mormon like wait what's going on
here and lo and behold let me dig into
some of this real quick so
recommended brands for vitamin D and how
much should someone like me potentially
be taking as a starting point because
I'm also wary of taking too much vitamin
D. I don't want to overdose on vitamin
D. It seems like there are some risks
associated with that. I maybe I'm over
overstating them, but how do you think
about that? And then in terms of this
rate limiting factor that you mentioned,
magnesium, what type of magnesium? How
much? How should I think about both of
these? First of all, we need to talk
about vitamin D levels and what the
optimal levels are. And that's really
important for someone to figure out how
much they should supplement with. I tend
to think anywhere between 40 60 to 80.
Like 40 to 80 nanogs per mill, you're
you're in an optimal range. I like 40 to
60. I think that's my sweet spot. And
and that's because there's lots of
studies out there showing all cause
mortality is lower within that range.
&gt;&gt; So, you know, if you're with like 50
nanogs per mill would be great. I mean,
that's a great place to be if you're
below, you know, 30. If you're about
just 30, you might want to try to get up
to 40.
&gt;&gt; Let's just say for argument sake that
I'm at 30. I think I'm probably closer
to 40, but let's say let's say it's 30
&gt;&gt; for someone that's at 30 Danograms per
mill is supplementing with 5,000 IUs a
day.
&gt;&gt; Five. Yeah. 5,000 IUs a day and getting
an hour of sun in the summer
&gt;&gt; without sunscreen,
&gt;&gt; you probably should be closer to 50
nanogs per mill. I would say if you're
taking that.
&gt;&gt; I'll check my last labs. I just had them
pulled two weeks ago, so I'll double
check.
&gt;&gt; So for someone in that case, you might
go up to 7,000 IUs and check and see
where you're at a month later.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And if you then are in the 40 to 50
range, then that's your optimal dose to
take. And this is an important
conversation to have. Tim, because it
really is there's an individual
component here and people just want to
at the end of the day they want to what
how much do I take? How much do I take?
&gt;&gt; Well, you have to get a vitamin D blood
test. This is one of those that you have
to really measure because as you
mentioned there's huge variation there
in terms of you know absorption and then
the magnesium issue right there's the
RDA for magnesium right so for men it's
about 400 milligrams a day for women
it's about 300 milligrams a day of
magnesium intake from diet or
supplemental sources if you're taking a
supplement and also if you're athletic
and sweating a lot and using the sauna
those requirements can go up between 10
to 20% depending on how physically
active If you are, if you're like the
endurance athlete, you're on the 20%
higher, you know, range. If you're more
just like the average, like I'm a
committed exerciser, then you might have
to go up 10% above that, right?
&gt;&gt; So, typically the best forms of
magnesium to take are the forms of
magnesium that are the organic forms.
So, that would mean it's bound to a salt
like magnesium citrate or magnesium
malate or magnesium tarate. Those are
more bioavailable than magnesium oxide
for example.
&gt;&gt; There's also magnesium glycinate which
is also a very bioavailable form. It's
the form that I take
&gt;&gt; as well. And dose range, you know, you
can take 300 milligrams a day and
probably not have any GI distress. And
so that gets you most of the way there
and then you get the rest from your
diet, right? You're eating some leafy
greens, you're eating maybe some almonds
or something which are really high in in
magnesium. If you're not getting any
greens at all, then you're going to have
to go up a little bit more to the 400
450 milligram range, especially if
you're if you're athletic.
&gt;&gt; If you're taking something like
electrolytes, you're getting some
magnesium there. So, you can figure out
how much magnesium is in your
electrolyte, and that's that can be
counted towards it as well. There's also
magnesium thrienate which is the
magnesium form that is
allegedly able to cross the bloodb brain
barrier better than other forms of
magnesium that I mentioned. And I say
allegedly because it's animal studies
that have shown that there have been a
couple of human studies that were
unfortunately there's a conflict of
interest. They were done by the makers
of the magnesium 3 and8 supplement. So
that's always important to keep in mind.
But they have shown that magnesium 3NA
could improve some cognitive scores if
you kind of pulled all the cognitive
scores together. And so I think that
there's no reason why if you're
interested in cognition and stuff trying
the magnesium 3NA. A lot of people like
it
&gt;&gt; as well. So that's another form of
magnesium. Although I do think you
should probably take some magnesium
glycinate along with that because you
don't want all the magnesium going into
your brain. You want some of it going
into your liver and activating the, you
know, enzymes that are converting
vitamin D3 into 25 hydroxy vitamin D,
right? So, so that is something to keep
in mind. If that form of magnesium
indeed is going into the brain more, you
want to make sure you're getting some of
the other forms to to cover the other
bases of other organs as well.
&gt;&gt; What brand of vitamin D supplementation
and magnesium glycinate do you use? Is
that also Thorn or are they other
suppliers?
&gt;&gt; I use Pure Encapsulations for the
vitamin D. I have some friends, mutual
friends of ours that like the Vesorb
vitamin D3. So people that are not able
to increase their vitamin D as well.
Vesorb really increases the
bioavailability of a lot of things
including ubiquininal the CoQ10 I
mentioned. I should have mentioned that
I buy my dad that's the form I get for
him because it increases the
bioavailability. Also some fish oil has
been shown to increase the
bioavailability. So, Vesor vitamin D3
can be found at Pure Encapsulations.
I don't have an affiliation with them
either. They also have a lot of clean
third party tested products as well. And
then I use their magnesium glycinate.
&gt;&gt; For the magnesium 3NA, I use Zyogen. I
like the Zyogen. Magnesium 3 and8.
&gt;&gt; Great. All right. Thank you. I will get
on the magnesium and I will also check
my last labs. I mean, I am very bespoke
about this stuff and to your point, you
got to check your levels, guys. You
can't just be shooting in the dark here.
It's not a good idea,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Where should we zigg and zag to next? Do
you want to talk about microlastics and
mitigation strategies?
&gt;&gt; It's really a big mess. And the
microlastics are now it's not just okay
well I'm not going to drink out of
bottled water, plastic bottled water. If
you can get any kind of water filter,
any kind of water filter is great.
Reverse osmosis is the best because it
filters out the smallest smallest
nanoplastics, which are the kind that
are actually crossing the bloodb brain
barrier and getting into the brain.
&gt;&gt; In the brain, they're associated with
Alzheimer's disease and all kinds of
things. But we now know they're in
chewing gum. So, anything with the word
gum base is made of a plastic polymer.
So, if you chew gum, it has to be
plastic free gum. And it's not the same.
I'll tell you that. Like, but it's in
gum. It's tea bags. Tea bags. If you
make tea with tea bags, all sorts of tea
bags, they're releasing just thousands
of microplastic into your beverage,
&gt;&gt; they're in essentially everything. And
the problem is is that it's very hard to
avoid. The best things that you can do
to avoid them is reduce exposure, which
would be the water filter. Try to avoid
drinking out of any type of, you know,
water that's in a plastic bottle. But it
turns out a new study just came out
showing it's also been found in glass
bottles. I know. It's like, are you
kidding me? Come on.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Apparently, the paint that's on the lid
of the glass bottle is like shedding
little particles into the beverage and
those are microplastics cuz the paint is
got plastic in it. Essentially, my
takehome from this is if you're
traveling and you and you have to choose
between a plastic water bottle with
water in it and a glass one to buy, I
would still buy the glass one because
the particle size is higher. It's larger
in the glass bottles. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And that doesn't get absorbed in the gut
very well at all, if any. You actually
excrete it through feces. And so I think
the next study that's going to be done
will be show this essentially. I'm sort
of speculating here, but because the
size matters, the size of plastics and
the plastic bottles are super small and
that's really absorbed well by the gut
epithelia and taken up into the
bloodstream and gets to the other
organs. Also, the plastic chemicals like
BPA are in plastic. They're not in the
glass. So, I still think that opting for
glass is the best option. Even though
that study came out, oh, glass has more
plastic than plastic bottles. It's like
a one of those sensational headlines.
&gt;&gt; The devil's in the details, right?
There's always like nuance there. And in
this case,
&gt;&gt; in this case, size matters.
&gt;&gt; This size matters in this case for sure.
&gt;&gt; When it comes to, you know, people want
to know, well, is there anything I can
do to sort of detox these microplastics,
right? That's the big concern that
people have. If it's impossible to
reduce my exposure because they're just
absolutely everywhere, then can I sort
of get rid of them? And unfortunately,
there's not a lot of evidence right now
out there that you can perhaps some this
electropharesis sort of thing where you
kind of filter your blood.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But like, who's doing that? Maybe you'll
do it.
&gt;&gt; That's not something that the public's
generally going to do. And I don't even
know that I'm going to do it. It's also
even if they were going to do it or
willing to do it, it's not readily
accessible or cost effective for people
to use.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Your best strategy here is
minimizing your exposure to them. And
the way to do that for one would be
obviously a water filter top of the list
because the water that's coming through
your tap through, you know, through your
sink does have microplastics in it and
that's a major major source of
microplastic exposure for many many
people. So if you can get any type of
water filter, again you can even get
countertop reverse osmosis water
filters.
&gt;&gt; Those those are great for filtering out
the majority of microplastics.
Big big big win. I wonder if the big
Burky
countertop filtration system
is effective at filtering out
microplastics. I don't know.
&gt;&gt; It is. It's effective at filtering out
microplastics. It's not clear about like
the nano nano like the super super small
size ones. It might it might not. I
don't know. The micro size ones, it does
filter out microlastics. So the the
thing with reverse osmosis is it's
really filtering out all like even the
nanoplastics as well. Of course, you
have to consider readding like certain
minerals and trace elements that are
found in water back to your water. And
some reverse osmosis companies do that.
You can have them put on a filter
that'll just add it back in after it
filters out all the microplastics,
but you can also just buy mineral drops
and put those in your water, or you can
take a mineral supplement that has some
of these minerals that are taken out as
well.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. The other thing I do want to
mention is that the plastic associated
chemicals are another concern and that
would be like the BPA, BPS.
These chemicals are endocrine
disruptors. They disrupt hormones.
They're also associated with Alzheimer's
disease. They're associated with cancer,
all sorts of things, right? And those
can actually I think this is a big
speculation on my part just based on
animal studies. I think sulforophane
plays a role in detoxing BPA
from from our system and that's because
of the whole situation where it
activates the very same enzymes that do
excrete BPA through urine. It does that
and it's been shown in animal studies,
animal studies that are given
sulfurophane and then given a high dose
of BPA, it completely blunts the
toxicity of the BPA which is pretty
interesting as well. The other thing to
keep in mind is heat. And this, I'll say
this, all the to-go cups that you're out
there buying when you go to a your
favorite coffee shop, fill in the blank
for the most part, with the exception of
the blue bottle coffee, phenomenal. Like
they're they're great. All these paper
cups are lined with plastic. And when
you add a hot beverage into the plastic
lining, it releases like all these
microplastics into your beverage and it
releases the chemicals like BPA into
them like like 50fold.
Blue Bottle Coffee, by the way, they
apparently line their cups with sugar
cane, polyactic acid,
&gt;&gt; and so they don't have any plastic. I
remember the other day I went into a
Blue Bottle coffee shop and I was like,
I really wanted to get a hot tea.
And I was like, you know, do you do you
guys line your cups with plastic? And
she's like, no, we line them with
sugarcane. I was like, yes. So, that's
something to keep in mind. You see a lot
of people drinking these to- go cups
everywhere and it's you're pouring a hot
beverage into it. It's a really really
major source of microplastic exposure
because you're accelerating the
breakdown of the plastic. Heat
accelerates the breakdown of the plastic
and essentially you're doing that in
real time like in an instant. Right.
&gt;&gt; Ditto for the tea bags, right?
&gt;&gt; Bring your own cup and the tea bags. So
you have to do loose leaf tea. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Which is what you know now I'm like
always it's got to be loose leaf. I'll
bring my own little I'll sometimes open
the tea bag out and I have I bring my
own little tea steeper thing with me.
&gt;&gt; The half globes that connect together.
Mine are the ones that you kind of like
squeeze on it and opens up and then
closes the clamps back together. I use
that because the tea bags again, you're
getting the heat on top of the plastic,
you know, polymers that are making up
the tea bag and accelerating to break
down the plastic. So, you're drinking,
you know, plastic beverage, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And all the there's all these health
consequences now associated with
microplastics. You mentioned the brain.
It's been found to accumulate 20 times
more in the brain than in other organs.
And people with Alzheimer's disease
have, you know, up to 20 times more
microplastics in their brain than people
that didn't have Alzheimer's disease.
And then the same goes for like
cardiovascular disease. There's been a
study that was published in the New
England Journal of Medicine about a year
ago showing that people that had
microplastics in their whatever aortic
part that they were doing surgery on,
those individuals like ended up dying of
a heart attack like within the next
three years versus ones that didn't have
any microplastics. Anyways, all sorts of
interesting stuff. We don't know enough
about it, but I think enough said, we do
know that they're not good and we want
to try to avoid them as much as we can
and that they are pervasive. They're
everywhere, right? It's ubiquitous.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And there's some simple things
people can do. I mean, this is not
necessarily in the same category, but
it's like look, the effects at least
seem to be I don't know if they're well
established. Maybe there are animal
studies on this, but certainly there's a
lot of seemingly compelling evidence
pointing to the effects of say phalates
on as endocrine disruptors on male
fertility.
And it's it's like look, if if you have
shampoo or soap with a really strong
fragrance, just stay away from it. I
mean, they're like very simple
guidelines for some of these things that
I I think can be can be very helpful.
Yeah, the microplastic stuff is is kind
of terrifying. I did not realize the
gum. I knew about the tea bags, the
water filtration. Did not realize the
gum. I don't chew a lot of gum, but one
of my relatives who has Alzheimer's has
chewed like four packs of gum a day for
10 years, right? And I was like, "Oh
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I wonder if that's a contributor."
&gt;&gt; Wow, that's crazy. I started chewing gum
when I learned about the research
showing that xylitol could, you know,
inhibit some of the smutagens, bacteria
that are involved in cavity formation.
&gt;&gt; And then a few years later, you're like,
god damn it.
&gt;&gt; I'm like, well, I was able to reverse
cavities multiple times and my doctor
was like, keep doing it. I'm like, yes,
the xylitol. And then it was like this
year I found this out, Tim. This this
year the study came out with the gum and
I was devastated. I mean, I've chewed so
much gum. So much gum. And I've let my
child chew it and it's like all I could
think about was how great it was for the
teeth. And and now it's like, oh my god,
this has like been a source of
microplastics that I had no idea.
&gt;&gt; I did thankfully find an alternative
xylitol source of gum that is
microplastic free. But
&gt;&gt; it's like chewing on bark.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Is it like chewing on
&gt;&gt; It's pretty much bark.
&gt;&gt; Tasteless bark.
&gt;&gt; It's actually made from bark. No, it's
made from like trees. Like some kind of
sap or something from the bark.
&gt;&gt; Like resin or something. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Sounds delicious.
You can't just do xylitol mints. You
have to chew it. I guess you have to get
it up.
&gt;&gt; You can do xylitol mints.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, you can do xylitol mints. I have
this as well.
&gt;&gt; Well, you know, just to on the same
thread of, you know, you don't always
don't always get it right completely
right. I was looking at some of the
research doc that I have in front of me
and there's one section that's I
highlighted which was each 3-hour
increase in nighttime fasting was linked
to 20% lower odds of elevated hemoglobin
A1C, right? This long-term marker of
blood glucose. And then one of your
bullets was the effects of alcohol on
the brain and cancer risk. And so I was
reading this document over dinner. I
sent this to you and my time zones are
all screwed up cuz I just got back from
Polynesia and so I'm eating at like 1000
p.m. first of all and then I had a glass
of wine. So I put the glass of wine on
top of my research document with all of
this text visible and I sent it to you
and I was like am I doing it right?
&gt;&gt; It's like you're not you're not going to
always get it right. But let's let's
talk do you want to talk about the booze
for a second?
&gt;&gt; Alcohol. Yeah. And especially since we
were talking about APOE4
&gt;&gt; just to depress people after the
microplastics.
&gt;&gt; I know it's like you can't have any
enjoyment at all if you want to live a
long healthy life. No, you need to find
a good balance. Obviously, alcohol is
&gt;&gt; it's a toxin.
&gt;&gt; It's also a lot of fun, right? I mean,
it's fun to drink and have a glass of
wine. Sometimes it helps kind of it
feels like you're lowering your stress,
lowering some inhibitions.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. It's fun to do with a group of
friends and stuff. It's not so great for
the brain though. And and certainly if
you're concerned about Alzheimer's
disease and dementia risk and I will say
that
&gt;&gt; there's been a lot of mixed research out
there looking at alcohol consumption and
dementia and Alzheimer's disease where
some of it says, well, if you're doing
moderate alcohol consumption, you can
actually have a protective effect
against dementia and Alzheimer's
disease, right? where it's like, you
know, this this idea that alcohol, like
a glass of wine a day is actually
beneficial for you, so you should be
drinking that.
&gt;&gt; I wonder if it's actually these social
interactions facilitated by alcohol
versus the moderate alcohol itself. I
wonder.
&gt;&gt; Well, there's a lot of things going on
here. Certainly, social interactions,
that's a confounding factor. Also when
people were then looked for their APOE
genotype it was found that it was
actually in the nonAPOE4 carriers that
you would find that benefit not in the
ApoE4 carriers and then on top of that
there's been all this research that
&gt;&gt; you know over the years has looked at
moderate alcohol consumption and
depending on the study that number
changes which is such a big bummer. It's
like well what does that even mean? In
some cases it could be you know seven
drinks a day
&gt;&gt; seven drinks a day. Sorry. A week? Oh my
god. No, in some cases it's seven
drinks. Obviously, a week for a woman,
but for a man it's like 14 drinks a
week.
&gt;&gt; Wonder who authored that study.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly. It's a big difference.
But on average, like moderate alcohol
consumption is more like a seven drinks
a week. Seven drinks a day would
definitely be heavy alcohol consumption.
That would be more like substance abuse,
you know, substance use or alcohol use
disorder. Let's cut the substance abuse
part out. Let's al alcohol use.
&gt;&gt; Why can't you say abuse anymore? Why do
these things have to keep changing? It's
so ridiculous.
&gt;&gt; And it's hard for me because I'm always
tripping on my words.
&gt;&gt; Use disorder sounds better than abuse,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I mean, what are the reasons behind
this? Do you know?
&gt;&gt; I guess it's politically correct
&gt;&gt; because I'm funding all this psychedelic
stuff and it was like abuse for a long
time and then all of a sudden, nope,
forot. Can't say that. Who knows?
Anyway,
&gt;&gt; it's funny. I've read so much of the
literature that I still say abuse
because that's what I'm familiar
reading.
But anyways, back to this what I was
saying, which is seven weeks. Sorry. All
right, we're going to cut this out, Tim.
Seven drinks a week.
&gt;&gt; How many drinks have you had before this
podcast, Rhonda?
&gt;&gt; Well, I did have some ketone esther or
there's a little bit of alcohol that
like is involved with that. It's
&gt;&gt; true. But watch out for the 13 butane
dial anyway.
&gt;&gt; Right.
There's something called the sick
quitter hypothesis which is essentially
a lot of these studies were comparing
people that are drinking this moderate
alcohol consumption with non-consumers
people that abstain from drinking
&gt;&gt; and it turns out that many many many
many studies did not account for the
sick quitter you know aspect which is
essentially is that English
&gt;&gt; someone gets sick
&gt;&gt; oh sick quitter I got it okay
&gt;&gt; sick quitter
&gt;&gt; okay
&gt;&gt; so essentially what it means is they get
sick.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And so they quit drinking alcohol.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And then when they're filling out their
questionnaire,
however many years later, whatever, they
are asked, "How many drinks do you have
a week?" And they say zero
&gt;&gt; because they quit. Y
&gt;&gt; but the question wasn't asked, "Were you
a former drinker?"
&gt;&gt; Disclose the prior drinking habit.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Very important. And now more
studies are when they're doing the
questionnaires are asking that question.
But many many many years and many many
studies did not ask that question. And
so it's very possible when you're
looking at these cohorts of people that
are comparing moderate alcohol
consumption to no alcohol consumption.
They're saying, "Oh, look at there's a
benefit. You have less cardiovascular
disease risk. You have less dementia
risk if you drink versus not drink." M
&gt;&gt; we don't really know if that's because
these people were former drinkers and
did so much damage already that that's
why they're getting dementia more
&gt;&gt; in the non-drinker
group.
&gt;&gt; In the supposed non-drinker group.
Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Quote unquote non-drinker group. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right. Which could have been a former
drinker. I think at the end of the day
when you look at alcohol and cancer it's
just unambiguous. Right. Alcohol is now
classified as I think it's a is it a
group one carcinogen where it's known to
play a role in causing cancer. There's
no gray area here and there's many many
different cancers that it's associated
with. So alcohol does get metabolized
into acetal aldahhide that is something
that can be a mutagen. It is a mutagen
&gt;&gt; can cause cancer, right? And so there's
a lot of different cancers associated
with breast cancer, colon cancer, for
example. Breast cancer is a big one
because women's lifetime risk of breast
cancer is already high. I mean, a woman
has a lifetime risk of one in eight of
getting breast cancer. So if you have a
room of eight people,
&gt;&gt; one of those women, if you're at a
dinner party and eight women are there,
then one of those women will come down
and be diagnosed with breast cancer in
her lifetime.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. When you add alcohol consumption
on top of that, if you're talking about
moderate alcohol consumption, that risk
can go to one in six,
&gt;&gt; which is very significant for lifetime
risk, right?
&gt;&gt; So, I do think that alcohol, I mean,
obviously like some people enjoy it and
you know, I don't know that there's any
amount that's actually safe, but if
you're really looking for a number, it
seems like one or two drinks a week
&gt;&gt; seems to be the safe spot. Uh, I mean,
the safest would be zero, right? Zero
drinks. But like if you're really not
wanting to to have the damage, the light
drinking, which is like the one to two
drinks a week, that's where you're
probably the best off talking about a
weekend, right? You have a weekend and
you're doing like a glass of wine maybe
Friday or Saturday night, right?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I think that's that's the safest if
you're looking for like some alcohol
consumption. If you're going above that,
just be aware there is there is
definitely a risk of increasing
dementia, increasing cancer risk.
However, there are other lifestyle
factors that also play a role here like
being obese and exercise. In fact, some
of the alcohol and dementia studies that
have shown an increase in dementia
incidents with alcohol consumption were
negated by people that were highly
physically active. So, I do think
there's other things to consider. You
can't just silo everything, right? Okay.
I mean, you got to look at the whole
lifestyle.
&gt;&gt; So, air squats before gelato and my
tequila shots.
&gt;&gt; Well, let me ask you, what is the
purported mechanism? Maybe it's known
by which alcohol increases the
likelihood that you will experience some
of these maladies like cancer, dementia,
etc. is acetal aldahhide acting as a
mutagen and therefore just [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up
your like smashing your DNA. So you have
these mutations that then proliferate
and turn into some type of dangerous
cancer
like is there more to the story of
mechanism of action?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean acetal aldahhide is one
aspect of it. It's an important one but
the alcohol itself is causing
inflammation. I mean it's causing
&gt;&gt; gut permeability essentially. It's very
hard on the gut and so what ends up
happening is you release inflammatory
factors into your bloodstream.
Lipopolysaccharide gets released into
the bloodstream. Inflammation gets you
know activated inflammation is a major
major cause of cancer and also brain
aging.
&gt;&gt; So the brain aging aspect is definitely
linked to the oxidative stress component
and the inflammation component. damage
is happening to neurons. And I think,
you know, one of the reasons why people
with APOE4 are a little more sensitive
to alcohol is because the repair
the repair processes in individuals with
APOE4 isn't as robust.
&gt;&gt; It's compromised already. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's compromised already, right? And so
they're not able to repair that damage
that's being generated from the alcohol.
Whereas people without the AO4 somewhat
can repair it a little bit better. And
then you add the breakdown of the bloodb
brain barrier on top of that and then
you're just getting more inflammation
into the brain and neuroinflammation is
a major cause in Alzheimer's disease. I
mean it's really a known factor now. And
you're disrupting mitochondria. You're
disrupting just everything you know
about to be important for health is sort
of affected by alcohol through a variety
of mechanisms.
&gt;&gt; Do you ever drink?
&gt;&gt; I don't drink very much. I used to drink
more. You know, sometimes I go several
months without having anything.
&gt;&gt; I do. So, I'm not like I'm not putting
you on the stand here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I don't drink all the time, but I'm just
giving you a little leeway.
&gt;&gt; I used to drink like at least, you know,
a couple times a week,
&gt;&gt; you know, where I would do like the
weekend thing,
&gt;&gt; but I don't I don't drink much anymore.
Once in a while, I'll have like a glass
of procco for a celebration. I do enjoy
it, but I definitely try to limit it to,
you know, certainly once a week. But
like I said, these days I'll go a couple
months without having anything and then
I'll have a social situation where I
like to do it. And the great thing about
that is I'm so sensitive to the alcohol.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; That I'm such a lightweight and it's
great because I I get like one glass of
procco and I'm like this is amazing.
&gt;&gt; I'll say what fringe benefit and this
could be
&gt;&gt; Can I mention one other thing, Tim?
&gt;&gt; Go ahead. Jump in. Yeah. Yeah. I forgot
to mention with respect to the dementia
risk and alcohol, you asked about
mechanisms, the sleep aspect, right?
&gt;&gt; Oh, for sure. That's a huge one.
&gt;&gt; Yes, it's a huge one because alcohol
does disrupt sleep.
&gt;&gt; That's massive. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; massive. I know people that use it
because it helps them fall asleep
easier.
&gt;&gt; So, it's definitely something that
decreases that sleep latency. people can
fall asleep easier, but it completely
disrupts so they have more w awakenings
in the middle of in the night and it
disrupts REM sleep. There's every reason
to definitely not drink and certainly
don't drink close to bedtime. You want
to kind of be able to get rid of the
alcohol before you go to sleep.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; going back to your picture, you were
doing everything wrong, but
&gt;&gt; Oh, that was Yeah. Am I doing it right?
Yeah, that was very much deliberate.
Rhonda, one thing and I'm so curious if
maybe you've heard reports of this. I
could ask my audience and figure it out.
Wasn't placebo effect because I didn't
expect it, but it seems like when in
ketosis like past 1.5 millmers, even
above like 1.2 for me, and I use a
precision extra device to track that.
I've tried a number of other devices
that are remarkably erratic. In any
case, I am much more sensitive to
alcohol. much much much much much more
sensitive to alcohol, which is great
because then I'm a cheap date, right? I
could have my one glass of messcal or
whatever and I'm I'm good. And I don't
drink super often. I might take like
three or four weeks off, but then it'll
be like this week I'm in New York City.
This is a city of drinking. A lot of
people have decided to do ketamine
instead, which I think is a fouian
bargain shitty trade for a number of
reasons. And then I'll stop. You know, I
have a party with my oldest friends this
weekend. I'm sure there's going to be
drinking. and then I'll stop for two
weeks and take a month off or two months
off or something like that. It's kind of
how I operate these days. But the
ketosis seems to sensitize me which is I
thought pretty interesting. I hadn't
noticed that before when I was in
ketosis probably because I wasn't
drinking dur during those periods. But
on the ketamine substitute, right? Oh,
this is what I'm using now as a
healthier alternative. I think the is
this risky question is often is this
risky or is this bad for me can be
answered in absolute terms but it can
also be answered in relative terms. So
the zero alcohol might be better than
two drinks. Seems pretty unequivocally
that's the case. But if you then ask in
relative terms as compared to what if
you're swapping in another behavior or
smoking after your dinner. I mean
smoking is a whole different kettle of
fish that we could unpack some other
time. Nicotine is pretty interesting but
lung cancer less interesting.
there is the
as compared to what when people find
another coping mechanism, right? So, I
just wanted to throw that out there as
just another question that I think is is
worth people asking. If they're going to
abandon something, that's great. if you
can just delete it without replacing it
with something. But if there is a
substitute, if there is an alternative
or something that you may end up adding
to your behavior or your consumption,
just to be aware of that because you
have to measure A versus B, not just A
versus lack of A. Just wanted to throw
that out there. I've seen so many people
unravel from ketamine that it's I feel a
moral responsibility to mention it
because it it can be so so incredibly
addictive. fast acting short duration
and even though it is very successfully
used to treat say treatment resistant
depression when it's administered in a
clinic at reasonably higher doses for
let's just say six infusions over two
weeks something like that John Crystal
Eel has done a lot of great research and
his his teams and co-authors
used recreationally actually increases
your predisposition to depression
&gt;&gt; I think psilocybin is a better candidate
when you when it comes to something like
that, you know, because it's really not
addicting.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; And I don't know if you saw this, Tim,
but this really, of course, people may
not be aware, but it's been shown to
treat depression as well.
&gt;&gt; Oh, for sure.
&gt;&gt; More than one study.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. The two major applications are
major depressive disorder and alcohol
use disorder as it stands right now.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. This study just came out like gosh
this like last two weeks or something
showing is an animal study that
psilocybin
increased life expectancy by almost 20%
in mice.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I saw that. I think that was
out of Emory. Am I making that up? I
think it was out of Emory.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think it was.
&gt;&gt; I remember looking at it because I was
like, wait a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] second. I think
they were giving something like five
milligrams of psilocybin to these rats
or mice. And I'm going to mess up the
numbers a little bit, but I was like,
wait a second. Cuz I've funded a lot of
the science. And for humans
who are walking around at one, let's
just call it whatever 125 to 200 lb,
it's 25 to 30 milligrams. So on a like
migs per kicks basis, are those rats
getting like the equivalent of 300 dried
grams of mushrooms?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; On a monthly basis, I was like, let me
look at that a little more closely. And
the metabolism is very different. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's still non-trivial. I do think those
little furry friends are probably
tripping balls. I do think the life
extension stuff is interesting. And I
would say just anecdotally looking at
people who have consumed in South
America, Iawaska for decades, like they
are
can't prove cause and effect, but almost
always sharper than the rest of the
people in their age cohort. Almost
always, which is interesting. I mean,
there raises more questions than it
provides answers,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; But the life extension stuff is
interesting. And I've been funding some
science that Chuck Nichols is doing
looking at the anti-inflammatory
applications of different psychedelic
compounds and they are profound really
profound and what makes it most
interesting is that it can be achieved
depending on the compound and he's
tested dozens of them with very very
trace quantities mean subperceptual
quantities.
You do not need any hallucination, any
sort of reality distortion to achieve
the anti-inflammatory effects.
&gt;&gt; So like a micro doing
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; a micro doing of it
&gt;&gt; even less than what someone would
consider a micro dose like a a nano
dose.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; It's remarkable. And part of my reasons
for looking at like the fasting, the
ketogenic diet, also looking at cold
exposure, and most recently, this is a
whole separate topic obviously for
another time. I'll be having a scientist
on this podcast soon, super credible,
very very wellsighted to talk about vag
nerve stimulation. But when you look at
how fasting, right, I was talking about
this old Soviet work looking at
schizophrenia. Okay, interesting ketosis
for epilepsy and also all sorts of
psychiatric conditions, but also things
like potentially rheumatoid arthritis or
any number of Crohn's disease, let's say
in the case of like vag nerve
stimulation. My theory also with
psychedelics is that in a lot of cases
the anti-depressive effects,
anti-depressant effects, the anxolytic
effects, this would be true for
exogenous ketones as well may be largely
I don't think it's a trivial piece of
the puzzle mediated by anti-inflammatory
effects addressing chronic inflammation
including neuroinflammation. Totally.
&gt;&gt; As you said, right, if you're
chronically suffering from
neuroinflammation does not bode well for
later life with Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's and things like this. So,
I'm trying to throw everything the sort
of the kitchen sink
at this to to see what these subjective
and then measurable objective effects
are. It's like okay if I did
intermittent fasting and I'm doing then
cold exposure which by the way past a
certain point does seem to shift from
sympathetic to parasympathetic
activation
particularly with certain breathing
patterns like okay if I did that during
the intermittent fast I'm taking the
sulfurophane right doing all that stuff
and then the exercise we talked about
and let's call it probably every quarter
I used to do a three-day fast I don't
think I'd do a seven-day every every
quarter that probably once a year just
looking at like okay and then like the
curcumin right if we threw four or five
at this problem and didn't get too crazy
go America like more is better like we
did the minimal effective dose but
recognize there might be a synergistic
effect like what happens and what can we
measure
so I'd like to do and for I'm in the
position where I could spend a lot of
money just to see like okay if we take
out my white blood cells and then look
at their ability to produce cytoines
right after certain interventions. Like,
oh, okay, cool. Like, let's spend the
money. Let's see what happens after you
do this stuff for a couple of weeks.
Very, very, very, very interested in all
this. Let's do this, Rhonda. Where can
people find you, find what you're up to,
get into all things Rhonda Patrick.
&gt;&gt; I have a podcast.
&gt;&gt; You can find it on Spotify, Apple
Podcast, YouTube. It's called Found My
Fitness. You can also just search Rhonda
Patrick.
&gt;&gt; One of the OGs. You've been doing you've
been doing it for a while now.
&gt;&gt; Doing it for a while. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And I've got a website,
foundmyfitness.com.
&gt;&gt; You can find all my stuff there. You can
follow me on Twitter or sorry, X.
&gt;&gt; I still say Twitter.
&gt;&gt; I still do it. I still do it. You can
follow me on X or Instagram. Found my
fitness. All one word. Or look, just
search my name, Dr. Rhonda Patrick.
&gt;&gt; And you have a newsletter.
&gt;&gt; I have a newsletter. Yeah. I send out a
weekly email that covers some
fascinating, you know, new either
science, health, fitness, nutrition
related study. And usually it's
applicable. Sometimes it's something
that's misunderstood in the in the media
and uh break it down every week. I sent
you the creatine one. Yeah. You know, we
covered a vitamin D dementia one as
well. I mean, a lot of different
fascinating studies. So, you can again
find that on my website,
foundmyfitness.com.
You can sign up for the newsletter
there.
&gt;&gt; Awesome. Yeah, I took so many notes. As
always, I always take a lot of notes
when we have our conversations, not
necessarily on the podcast, but also in
our text exchanges. Very actionable. I
so appreciate what you do in the world.
You've called a lot of things early.
Looking at our timeline, it's just been
wild to look back and I'm like, "Wow,
April 2014
talking about the stuff that now all the
fitness influencers are ranting and
raving about today in 2025." It's like,
yeah, you called you've called a lot of
things early, and I appreciate your
ability to simplify without mangling,
simplify without disfiguring the
science. I really respect that. It's not
easy to do. It is such a service to
people who care about being scientific
literate, but they also care about
and benefit from someone who can take
what could be impenetrable and translate
it without mistransating it into
something that they can test with
limited downside and
plausible or supported upside. I just
think it's it's such a tremendous
service. So, I appreciate you, Rhonda. I
really do.
&gt;&gt; I appreciate you, too, Tim. Thank you
for all you do and your podcasts have
been great. I've listened to them over
the years. You're one of the few
podcasts that I've listened to. You've
got great, insightful, thoughtful
questions and I've read your books, so I
appreciate all you do. So, the feelings
mutual and I'm glad we get to still have
conversations over 10 years later.
&gt;&gt; I know. I love it. Yeah, the long game.
It's fun to play the long game. So, nice
to see you, Rhonda. Everyone, we will
put links to everything. Rhonda Patrick
in the show notes. Check her out. You
will not be disappointed. And as always,
until next time, be just a bit kinder
than is necessary to others, but also to
yourself. And thank you for tuning in.