I believe that Bitcoin
is designed
perfectly well to do what Satoshi wanted
it to do. President Blly invited a
foreigner to his house to have this
discussion for 3 hours and asked me to
write the law. This is a great question
cuz you know what? I've asked myself
this since I had that dinner with
Michael Sailor and and Parker Lewis last
year. I think what's happened in CRM
that she was, you know, scamming the
Bitcoiners. That's really what I found
when I went down there. Not supposed to
really talk about it, but that's the
truth. That's it's a story of chaos. Um,
&gt;&gt; you lie those.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You mentioned Bitcoiners are scared of
you.
&gt;&gt; They can't figure me out.
&gt;&gt; Millions took the COVID vaccines.
&gt;&gt; What's your best advice to help them
recover and heal?
&gt;&gt; That one's simple. All views expressed
by the host or guests are solely their
own opinions. Nothing stated in this
podcast should be considered a specific
endorsement to make any particular
investment or follow any specific
strategy.
[Music]
Welcome to Bitcoin, Jack. I've spent
hours diving into your work and while
you have shared a lot about
decentralized medicine today I want to
focus on your path as a Bitcoiner.
Ready?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You call yourself a Bitcoiner. Why?
What's your definition of a Bitcoiner?
&gt;&gt; Someone who's a freedom maximalist who
believes the most valuable asset is
time.
&gt;&gt; And why do you call yourself a
Bitcoiner?
&gt;&gt; Because Bitcoin's a time machine. That's
what it's based on. It rejects the idea
of seconds, minutes, and hours for
10-minute blocks. And because it's
adopted Newtonian physics as part of the
algorithm, that's how you get cause and
effect. It's how you build a ledger.
It's how you solve the Byzantine
general's empire, I should say, problem.
And when you see that, you begin to
realize that there is no outard in the
Bitcoin algorithm. It is what it is.
Tick- tock. Next block. One of my
friends who's a Bitcoiner, he wrote a
book. I think it's beautiful. It says,
"Money you can't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with." And that's
really truly what Bitcoin is. And
anybody who's hardcore
who understands
how money is failing through inflation,
what is inflation? It's time theft. What
is mitochondrial problems? Time theft.
So, this is how decentralized health and
wealth are linked. They're linked
through time. And time determines how
energy flows in a system. And we know
that the energy for Bitcoin is through
the AC power grid, the DC electric
current that goes into AS6. But people
don't really look at Bitcoin, I think
fundamentally the way I do, I look at it
as a thermodynamic story that when you
have a decentralized network that
operates like this, external influences
can affect it. What makes me a Bitcoiner
is because it's a decentralized network
and I understand decentralized networks
really well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Are you a spiritual?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think so. I mean, I I'm in the
process right now of of writing some
very powerful blogs and in the LA in
this series that I'm in, I'm already up
to like 55
in decentralized medicine. But I've
used, you know, the picture that I've
used the most is the center panel of the
cysteine chapel when Adam reaches out to
man. I should say Adam reaches out to
God and the finger is not bent. And I've
made the comment
that everything about health and
everything about Bitcoin is in that
small little piece of white plaster.
&gt;&gt; Enlighten me.
&gt;&gt; Well, if you think about it, this is how
the power of light. If no matter what
religion you are, you know what the
story in Genesis is? Let there be light,
right? And it goes all the way down.
What What do you When you get to 115 in
Genesis, what are you left with? This
story is really great. I believe it. But
you know what the problem is? What's the
recipe? Like God doesn't tell you the
recipe. You have to figure it out. And
Bitcoin is the same story. We know the
end point of Bitcoin. But when you look
at Bitcoin in the beginning, it's
electricity that's also
goes into a semiconductor that turns
into light. And that light that we we
talked about that that's orange light.
That's the light that Max Kaiser likes
to be in. It's the light that Michael
Sailor likes to be in. And the point
that I would make to you that light is
fundamental to this story. And I enjoy
teaching Bitcoiners
that they're right about Bitcoin. They
made the right choice. But if you made
the right choice in the finance side,
but not in the health side, what good is
it to be wealthy if you don't have the
wisdom of nature also built into this
story? And where does that filter down?
Where do you distill that to? That's a
story of time. So I teach people
fundamentally
about time. If you want to know what my
job is as a Bitcoiner, my job as a
neurosurgeon is exactly the same thing.
I am a metronome. I like to teach and
talk about time. And every time I've
been to the Sistine Chapel,
I see Bitcoin. I see nature in that
little sliver.
And I use that over and over again to
explain to people that the story of
humanity is between those two
fingertips.
So I would tell you I'm spiritual
Christian, but I think the church is
just like the central bank,
&gt;&gt; the centralized. So no, I don't like
organized religion.
&gt;&gt; What's your Bitcoiny story? Who or what
put you in?
&gt;&gt; Uh, that's it's a story of chaos. Um,
&gt;&gt; you like those.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it was actually a couple of my
friends put the idea in my head in 2011
and I I reacted just the way Jack Cruz
would. You're crazy. You know,
&gt;&gt; 2011. That's pretty early.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. This is during the great financial
crisis. Why? because I saw a lot of
changes happening in my practice and I
was concerned about the tarp, all the
things that were going on at that time.
But I was lucky to have friends in the
financial community because I told you
the story with me growing up in New
York. So, one of my good friends works
for Goldman Sachs. So, him and I had
some very interesting discussions at
this time. He's the one that first told
me about Bitcoin. Uh, but the real
actor, the real person that got me
thinking about is Jack Dorsey. Jack
Dorsey, one of the cipher punks, he's a
a good friend of mine and he became, you
know, a follower and a member. He
follows everything that I do. Why?
Because with him being a technologist,
the technology got him sick. So, he
reached out to me to help him. And he
was the one that kept telling me and
telling me and I'm going,
I've got some of the smartest people and
the best people in my life telling me
about this and I'm acting like I'm
smarter than them. So then I jumped down
the rabbit hole and I started to read
and look because remember at that time
there was no videos on YouTube. There
was nothing. And uh that's when I got
into Austrian economics and I
fundamentally began to see a story
develop and I said, you know, I like
this. So I made the the first investment
and
just like every other Bitcoiner, we wish
we would have done it earlier, but it
was early enough. And um I credit my
friend at Goldman Sachs and Jack Dorsey,
&gt;&gt; okay,
&gt;&gt; as the reason they had the gravity in
their
experience
that got Uncle Jack to embrace the
chaos.
&gt;&gt; We have established that you are
intelligent and you have described
yourself as a smartass. What makes you
smart? first principle thinking like the
people that I admire the most in my life
are the people that actually put the
proof of work into their thinking. I
believe that the smartest people in the
world are the people that learn from
other people and their mistakes, but
they're also the people that don't make
the original mistakes because they use
the things that we know to be true to
figure out the unknown. And that process
really was my training as a doctor where
you know doctors they put a lot of facts
in your head but they don't really teach
you first principal thinking. My first
principal thinking happened
uh in the oral surgery residency and the
neurosurgery residency where they taught
me the value of thinking about different
scenarios. And it turns out when you
think about different scenarios to to
try to make how shall we say
probabilities
you have to start thinking about risk
and risk management.
It if you have a good unified theory
you can predict the unknown from the
known today. That's what first principle
thinking really is. And I will tell you
I am drawn
like a bug to a light to people who
think like that. Like to give you a
perfect example
so you know who I'm thinking about in
the Bitcoin space, uh Jeff Booth and
Larry Leard. Those two guys
I think are the best first principal
thinkers
in Bitcoin. I would have put Michael
Sailor in that group, but I'm a little
bit concerned about Michael Sailor
recently.
still think he's a great thinker, but I
think right now he's gotten a little bit
too high on his own supply. Meaning that
when you get 500,000 Bitcoin, it kind of
changes how you look at the game.
&gt;&gt; How would you explain Bitcoin to someone
who totally depends on institutions?
&gt;&gt; If their mind's not open, I'm not going
to have a discussion with them at all.
Have fun staying poor. Remember what
Satoshi said. I don't have time to
explain it to you if your mind's not
open. Now, I'm going to assume with your
question, the mind is open. I would use
a very simple analogy
and I make it for El Salvador. Four
years ago, if you went to Super Selecto,
you could fill the grocery basket up
very, very easily. Today, it's very,
very sparse. And you're in a country
that has both American money and
Bitcoin.
Now look at the difference of what
Bitcoin has done. When Boulli brought it
in, it was $41,000. Now it's $1067.
So in four years, you doubled your
money. So that means you have that
discussion with people and then you
lever it into other things like you
can't work for me unless you have a
wallet. When somebody comes to me and
says give me a bank transfer, I fire
them. So this is where I really
appreciate Jack Mullers. Jack Mullers
came out about a year ago and he goes,
"Look, I'm no longer on a fiat standard.
I am on 100%
Bitcoin standard." So if you want to
build a world that is Bitcoin, then you
need to act like Bitcoin. Michael
Sailor's come off of that. He's now
telling you, I'm going to custody my
Bitcoin with centralized entities. No,
no, no, no. the the single most
important thing for first principal
thinking in Bitcoin. If you don't
self-custody
the Bitcoin, that's a big problem.
Michael Sailor's kind of like this. And
the second big issue that he's kind of
like this, this is my friend Parker
Lewis who is, you know, the CEO of
Unchained Capital. We had a dinner
together, me, him, and Sailor about a
year ago about this very issue.
And Parker believes that Bitcoin is
money and it should be transacted. You
know that my friend Jack Dorsey has come
out recently and said the same thing.
Bitcoin is money and it will be money
someday. And anybody who tells you that
no, we're going to make the American
dollar king in the future and we'll just
back the bonds with it. Like that's good
for now, but that's not going to be good
for the world down the road. And we see
it a different way than the guy who owns
the most Bitcoin in the world. And the
reason why I'm smiling is because I hope
Bitcoiners hear this and see this. Just
because he's no longer your uncle Mike
that's doing everything you want, he's
still part of the family. Like you have
to realize there's people in your
family, you know,
I don't want to spend too much time with
them, but I enjoy this, that, and the
other thing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I was going to ask you um do you
see Bitcoin primarily as a store of
value or as a medium of exchange and
why? You told me already you see it as
median of exchange.
&gt;&gt; But both to be honest I think one goes
with the other. You know what I think
it's I the analogy I would give you and
hopefully you don't get too upset with
me. I think it's like sex. Can you have
good sex if one person can't have sex
than the other? It could still be good
but is it the best? No. And I think
Bitcoin is the same way that you have to
have both for it to truly do what it
does. Now, do I understand that when
Bitcoin is money that it can put strain
on the politicians like in the United
States who have a a hedgeimony, can that
also affect Belli here or say people in
Colombia who have a dollarized economy?
No question about it. But people don't
like to ask the flip side of this. See,
that's what our first principal thinker
does. If you only do it as store of
value, I tell you that's a halftruth.
And what does a halftruth always lead
to? A full lie down the road. And
remember, Bitcoin's got a story, a
future till 2140.
And I think when you understand that,
maybe right now the politicians of the
world are not ready for it to be money,
but as Jack Muller said, Bitcoin doesn't
care what you think. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And it's going to happen one way or the
other. And the thing that I love about
Bitcoin is that there's places for
Michael Seller. There's places for Jack
Dorsey. There's places for me. There's
places for you. There's places for a
dentist that has no Bitcoin who's going
to listen to this and go, you know, I
need to examine this.
&gt;&gt; What's the lesson that's taking you the
longest to learn?
You got to get rid of anchors in your
life early. Cut your losses early.
There's a saying called via negativa.
Cut the superfluous. Why? Sometimes
even people that you love, you have to
get rid of them. They will impede you
going where you have to go. And it's a
very difficult
thing to do. And unfortunately it was
very easy for me because of how I grew
up. See for me the lesson started with
my own family.
But the people who are in my circle of
six you know the other 12 eyes that I
rely on to watch my back when I can't
watch it
to see them go through
life and to see how the anchors affect
them. Ultimately, I tried to explain to
them that affects me indirectly because
you're in my circle of sex. And that's a
very difficult discussion to have with
people that you care about. Like I I
have it with my son. Uh my my son is
very smart like I am, but he's very
different because he's not a great white
shark
and he he trusts far too much. And I
told him it's good to be trustful if the
people are truly
thinking first principles. But when you
know somebody's not in first principles,
look, I can enjoy the time that we spent
together.
But if I get the sense that you're not
my kind of people, I'll be kind to you
and that's it. But I don't want to spend
time with you. The reason why is I don't
trust
a lot of people until I really vet them.
Like I can have an ambient awareness of
you from social media, even if you're
one of my paying customers, but until I
really know you, until I understand
the dynamics in you, I can't bring you
close.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I cannot.
&gt;&gt; Fair enough.
&gt;&gt; And this is this is something that I can
tell you I learned as a little boy in
New York. Like when you are poor and you
grow up in the richest city in the
world, let me tell you something. You
learn on the concrete the rules of the
jungle really fast. And I will tell you
that's the reason why I wouldn't trade
how I grew up for a million dollars
because it really has served me very
very well, you know, in my years. But do
I understand that when you look at that
sparkling diamond that it's not as
shiny? because I understand why people
like the vanity, like the facade, like
um
the surface story. I told you a little
bit about that when Mr. Stson sent me to
Barney's. So, I understand that and I
can empathize with you. But I am going
to force you to really look in the
mirror and say
first principal thinking is even more
important than that. And I will tell you
with my circle that is the toughest
lesson
to teach and it's really difficult
to have some of those conversations
especially when sometimes they're life
and death situations.
&gt;&gt; How come death or life situations?
&gt;&gt; Oh, I give you a perfect example. My my
uh my son uh was offered a job where he
could make a lot of money, but he had to
go to Canada. That means he had to take
a shot.
&gt;&gt; Uhhuh.
&gt;&gt; So, here's here's the decision tree for
a kid at the time. He was like 25 26. I
knew his brain wasn't fully milinated.
I'm a neurosurgeon.
Did I have confidence he was going to
make the right decision? No. But what
else did I have to do as a decentralized
savage? He was my little slave
all the way up when I was paying his
bills. The day that I stopped paying his
bills, he became a man.
So, I can't be his keeper anymore. I
have to know the lessons that I put in
my son that he makes the decision that's
best. If he makes the wrong decision,
am I not going to love him? No. I'm
still going to love him. But am I going
to be disappointed? Yes.
Um
decisions about family,
decisions about um where are you going
to live, decisions about um
you know, I I'll give you the toughest
one. The toughest one that I've had to
deal with in my life was with my
ex-wife.
divorcing her not because I didn't care
about her, because I knew she was going
to kill herself with the decision she
was making around technology.
From my wife's perspective, it was
devastating to her, the last wife, the
wife that I was married to for 25 years.
&gt;&gt; And what did she do for a living?
&gt;&gt; She basically took care of Uncle Jack. I
didn't let her work because I didn't
want her to work. That was my mistake.
Okay. Too much comfort.
And my daughter's engines come from her
mother. And her mother was falling
apart.
And I knew that I had to make a decision
because she wasn't going to change to
wake my daughter up. Why? Cuz at the
time my daughter was in high school. She
was 18 years old. And
&gt;&gt; but you told me that your ex-wife took a
decision related to technology
&gt;&gt; TV. Jerry Springer not going in the sun,
developing diseases she shouldn't have,
having surgeries that I don't know about
because of these decisions. That's what
I'm talking about.
Like, these are big things.
Really big things. And when you
understand that you see this person
falling apart and that person's engines
are in your baby and your baby loves her
mama to the degree that whatever her
mama says she's going to do,
that's when the great white shark has to
come out. You need to understand that.
I'm being very serious about that. You
don't have to work to have a technology
problem. You just have to go to
Starbucks and watch Netflix to have a
technology problem. And that is the big
risk for the Bitcoiners. Why? Because
they have all kinds of money. That means
they can do all kinds of toys and games.
Toys and games are what gets you in
trouble.
&gt;&gt; You mentioned Bitcoiners are scared of
you.
&gt;&gt; I don't think they're scared of me. No,
they can't figure me out cuz I'm I'm the
antithesis of what the millennials say.
I'm a boomer and I was in before them.
That pisses them off.
But the real big thing is the angle that
I come to them with is I'm pointing out
to them even though they think they're
in the right game and they make fun of
all the boomers are not in.
Then I point out to them the guy that
was in the beginning of Bitcoin, he's
dead. That's Tim Finny or Hal Finny, I
should say. And
I say to them, explain
you want to be like him cuz you're going
to be.
That's when people go, "Okay." And then
when they find out about my friend Jack,
he got sick off his own bag, Twitter
technology.
Now he's better. So why is Jack for me
a real big shining light? because he
used my science and he is train changing
the world in Bitcoin in Asia, Africa,
Europe. You see what he's done? He got
rid of Twitter, sold it to Elon. He's
100% all in Bitcoin. He got rid of the
biggest problem and everybody told him
he was crazy to do this. Was he really
crazy or was he wickedly smart? That is
the people that I want close to me. So
you want me to resonate that message or
do you want me to punch you in the mouth
about that message to wake you up? That
is the reason why Bitcoiner is like uh
Dr. Jack is like syrup of Ipiac. He can
make you vomit sometimes.
But guess what? No matter how I make you
feel,
I always tell you the truth. That's the
other thing people know about me. I
don't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] people. I tell them the
truth whether they want to hear it or
not. So when you hear me say I'm not
everybody's cup of tea, but the savages
in Bitcoin,
they like to drink my tea.
&gt;&gt; I would like to know what scares you.
Um,
well, I think the thing that scares me
right now is some of the people that I
care the most about, I don't think
they're equipped to make the right
decisions for the next 50 or 100 years.
I'm worried about them.
I'm really worried about them. So, I
think that in trying to help the world
with decentralized medicine and and
teaching people about these diseases, I
need to wake some of the people up in my
own network. Like, many of them listen
to me. They bought Bitcoin early.
They're very wealthy now, but they're
not making good decisions about other
things. And
I worry about them.
&gt;&gt; It scares you because you don't know how
to sort it out. No, I I I've already
given him the big punch in the mouth and
it still hasn't worked. So, generally
when you tell a great white shark this,
then the trauma gets bigger and bigger.
And I don't know if I want to go that
big. Maybe I need to do what nature does
or what the Spartan people did when a
baby was deformed and leave it on a rock
and walk away. But as I told you before,
sometimes that's hard with people you
care about.
&gt;&gt; What was your last major confrontation
with a Bitcoiner? Who was it with and
what was it about?
&gt;&gt; Maya Paribu in Cerninam.
Um, it's been well documented through
Bitcoin magazine. Uh, I think Frank
Corvo has done a good job exposing it.
Uh, I think what's happened in Surinom
since the elections come out proves my
point that she was, you know, scamming
the Bitcoiners. She's a young girl. Uh,
very nice. I mean, I I like her. I still
like her now. But this goes to the
Bitcoin ethos that you have to verify,
don't trust. So, I met Maya for the
first time and adopting Bitcoin
recently, very recently. And I spent
three hours talking to her and I said, I
find you very interesting. She told me
she's young. She wants to turn her
country around, make it a Bitcoin
economy. She wants to use the natural
resources. You know, most people don't
know Surinm has the largest forest in
the world. So, you know, I'm going to
love a place like this. Plus, it's low
latitude. Uh, so it's a good place. Uh,
it used to be a French colony, so the
colonist mindset is still with the
people. Uh, the Dutch really ruined this
place. So that means in that chaos, here
comes a lady knight in white armor. Her
father was involved with bad people in
the Colombian drug cartel. They killed
him. This to me was a beautiful story. I
seeing myself in her story and she was
going to make good on it. So right after
I met her, I decided uh to go take a
trip. I was invited by some of the
people in Argentina, the central bankers
to come down about my medical freedom
law and on the process of going to South
America when I came back, I didn't go to
that part of South America and I put a
tweet out and Maya sent why don't you
come see me. So I spent two weeks in
Cernam. Within 24 to 48 hours I found
out that Maya was lying to Bitcoiners.
No one in Cern uses Twitter. Everybody
uses Facebook. So the story on Facebook
and the story on X were different. And
she was looking to harvest people from X
who are Bitcoiners to get money to help
her to run. Uh she told everybody she
was running for president. Turned out
she wasn't. Uh she has deniable
plausibility
in many of her claims because of the way
uh surname is set up. I got to meet her
father or I should say her stepfather
who is a fine person. He explained to me
fully because he knew that I had a lot
of reservations about her. Um
and I talked to several of her friends
and then I also went around the country
myself to talk to people and I found out
that she does she's not well known at
all and I said this is a problem. This
is a huge problem. So the last night
that I was there,
she asked me to speak on her behalf on
national TV about something about
corruption. So I was like, "Oh, this is
right up my wheelhouse. I'm going to
talk about Trump and Bobby and
everything else." Which I did. Well, I
didn't realize that the party that she
was working for were the main
perpetrators of injecting people in
Cern.
So this message, like she didn't know
that I was going to lead with this
message, but she also never told me that
the MPS party were the main vaccinators
for the WHO in Cern and it actually
happened in the building that I was
being interviewed.
So of course, the guy who's the party
president had a huge problem. They
pulled me off the stage on live TV.
Okay.
When that happened, I said to my nurse,
"I can't get on the plane tomorrow fast
enough to get out of here." Because
once you verify that someone is not who
they say they are to Bitcoiners,
my belief is you have a duty to tell the
Bitcoiners what you found. like she even
invited me to go to Surinam. This will
show you how crazy she was. A guy like
me coming down there. You don't think
I'm going to be able to diagnose the
problem and figure it out? Well, I was.
And it ended the way it should end.
Maybe somewhere down the road she'll be
a candidate. In my opinion, she has to
have a personality change and a thinking
change. She's not a first principal
thinker, but there's so many broken ties
there that I don't think I I don't like
to say never because I believe in
redemption. I believe in second and
third chances.
And I do think there's a lot of
redeeming qualities about Maya that I
still like. But when you're a liar,
it's really hard to regain the trust.
surname. Uh, it's kind of crazy that
it's on planet Earth because when you go
there, you you feel like you're on a
totally different planet. What I saw
there was the most magical story ever.
The things that I found down there for
decentralized medicine, I think there's
answers in that jungle for people that
took the job.
&gt;&gt; You are a person that have traveled a
lot. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But still, you are quite taken by that
country. What's the situation? the
country. I would tell you if Bitcoin
ever did take over there, this would be
a great place to live. Why? Because it's
a forest. 93% of the country is forest,
untouched. The natural resources there.
They have tons of gold, tons of oil. I
mean, this would be a paradise. But the
monarchy
makes the colonist mindset and the
people. When the Dutch pulled out, they
imported in their history five different
groups of people to the country and then
walked away in the 1970s.
So, you know, this country has been a
mess since that time. So, this is like
when centralization pulls the plug, they
know that even though they're not really
in control, they still are because all
of the networks they still control. That
is still present to the day. If you want
to know the the real business of Cernin,
they launder money for the cartels and
send it to Netherlands. That's really
what I found when I went down there. Not
supposed to really talk about it, but
that's the truth. And the reason why the
government is going to be broken is
because the people in the government,
they're all criminals. They're they're
as big a criminals as the people we have
in DC, but they're more overt about it.
And it's more accepted down there than
it is in the United States. The people
are in the jungle, they don't have any
monarchy mindset. They've never been
ruled by the monarchy because the
monarchy didn't even know these people
existed because they were so far in the
jungle. You couldn't find them.
&gt;&gt; So, they are the solution.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I think so.
&gt;&gt; Millions took the COVID vaccines.
&gt;&gt; What's your best advice to help them
recover and heal?
&gt;&gt; That one's simple. What does it
fundamentally do? The Department of
Defense and the Pentagon engineered the
vaccine so that it has a positive charge
on the lipid nanop particles. That means
that that charge is drawn to your inner
mitochondrial membrane. So it creates a
short circuit like a scar. The damage
that it causes is a scar that you can't
see but you see it in the disease you
get like myocarditis or turbo cancer or
you know cognitive haze things like
that. That means that you need to
optimize light, water, and magnetism to
fix it. So what do you do? You live
inside the tropic of cancer or Capricorn
somewhere there and live in nature,
connected to the ground, connected to
the sun, connected to the darkness. You
eat the food that grows there. You turn
off all the news. You don't listen to
anybody out there. You buy Bitcoin. You
buy a convertible. Drive around in the
sun. You drink dutier and depleted water
and enjoy people in your life that add
time to your bank account. Subtract the
people out who are the anchors. That's
the answer.
&gt;&gt; You've mentioned Ivormectin and I also
heard of the Makulla protocol. How do
they work?
&gt;&gt; Well, the Makulla protocol in my view, I
gave him credit in the beginning that I
thought it was a good thing. Now I don't
believe that. Now the aftermarket data
is out. Uh getting rid of the spike
protein is a is a pipe dream. Uh you're
always going to have it. So that means
that you have to mitigate and understand
mitochondrial biology really well. Dr.
McCulla doesn't understand that as well
as I do. Not even close. But the the
real key with ivormectin, ivormectin
can help because it's one of the things
that diminishes that electric scarring
that can happen. So that's why it's a
benefit. It's also the reason why
hydroxychloricquin is a good thing. It's
the reason why for some patients even
methylene blue can help in in those
cases. But the doctor has to understand
the process that I just told you. It's
not for everybody. Is there a way to
know if you are free from the vaccine's
effect?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Um the the COVID virus itself the
way it was engineered by Bareric and
Fouchi uh your risks because remember
that virus if you had COVID like three
or four times you have to be concerned
uh because you're making spike protein
but from the virus. But compared to the
vaccine so we're clear it's 25 to 100
times worse if you took the vaccine.
Every time you take a vaccine, that
number goes up. Okay, so if you took
eight, you're in big trouble. Okay, what
should everybody do today? Labcore in
the United States, you can check your
spike protein levels. I think it's only
$69 at LabCore. I believe you can make
that test, get the number. When the
doctor gets the number, that tells us
what your risk is. Now, you have to
remember, we don't have a lot of data to
make a plot to know. So, what am I
telling you right now? This is my
speculation based on how well I know the
science, know the patents, know exactly
what the damage profile is. But
basically, the higher that number is,
the more risk to your mitochondria and
different parts of your body. So you
need to build up your internal redux.
What is that? Your battery. It's the net
negative charge in your body. Charge in
quantum mechanics is a conserved
quality. So that means the more highly
charged you are, the longer you can stay
away from the complications. So remember
before I told you that death is the
slowest form of health you create,
right? Same thing is true with this. So
the game for people who have been
vaccinated is you need to improve your
redux. The best way to do that is
through sunlight and water. The water is
dutyium depleted water and sunlight
obviously is stronger inside the tropics
which is why I told you you want to do
that. Plus you get light stability. You
know like when you're in Spain right now
sometimes it stays light out till 10:00.
That never happens in Salvador. We only
get maybe a half hour more because it's
12 hours of light, 12 hours of darkness.
And it turns out that light stability is
really important for you staying
healthy.
&gt;&gt; You wrote the Public Health Freedom Act
for the Salvadoran Constitution in 2023.
Can you briefly explain what it is and
whether it has been passed?
&gt;&gt; Everything that's wrong with the United
States is in that bill and that's the
reason Bobby Kenny was interested in it.
The problem was uh when it was given to
the government here, you'd have to ask
the government what they've done with
it. But from what I've heard through the
grapevine, they're not very excited
politicians, not meaning Blly.
When you use decentralized money, you're
giving power back to the people.
Decentralized medicine does the same
thing. You're giving freedom of time
back to people. When I gave it to the
president, I I told his brother, same
thing I'm going to tell you now. This is
my gift to the people of El Salvador.
You do what you want with it. Will I
feel any differently whether you pass it
or not? No, I don't care. But I thought
it was extraordinary
that President Blly invited a foreigner
to his house to have this discussion for
three hours and asked me to write the
law. No one in my government asked me to
do that. Bobby did steal the law, but he
never asked me to write it. He certainly
not asked my help. If I was in Maha,
there'd be a lot of bodies.
that I can tell you I would not put up
with this.
&gt;&gt; Can you briefly explain what it is
about?
&gt;&gt; The number one thing is lights
getting rid of LED lights and bringing
back incandescent.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; No fluidation of the water. We have no
fluidation here of water. Um why?
Because it's expensive. But also you
can't have the use of technology
anywhere around the school. So, there
are not going to be any screens, right?
People don't like that. There's going to
be books. We're going to go back to the
way it used to be. And you know that
President Blly likes to give kids
computers. And I told him, I said, "I'm
okay with you giving the kids computers
because I think you can still live with
technology well in El Salvador. Why?
Because it's 13th latitude. The kids can
offset that." Other changes, the vaccine
you can give up to six, okay, but it has
to be in consultation with the doctor
and the parent. Also, the child gets a
say.
Plus, the government cannot get involved
in the health care system. That I think
is the big problem for the law. Meaning
that if the World Health Organization
tells everybody to do this, there is a
decentralized loop built in that law
where the doctors make the decision, not
the government. And the government has
to live with the decision.
Okay.
&gt;&gt; How do you handle criticism and push
backs?
&gt;&gt; I think I handle it pretty good. I mean,
if somebody's got a critique, I always
listen. I learn the most from my
patients. So remember
many times that can be a critique too
and you filter it into your, you know,
your decision tree and then kick it back
out and decide, okay, was this a good
idea or not?
&gt;&gt; And what about disappointments?
How do you handle them?
&gt;&gt; It depends. For example, the thing right
now, the reason I'm smiling, I'm
thinking about like uh several sports
teams that I'm a fan of,
they keep failing because their
administration, their management is
terrible, but everybody thinks they can
keep changing the players and the
coaches and it will go away. No, the
problem is the person that owns the
team. You need to get rid of that
person. And that disappointment, you
know, when you sit there and watch the
same [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] show for 50 years, you go,
you know, it it becomes comical. So in
my sports life, I make the mistake that
I don't make in the decentralized
medicine. I let the anchor pull me down.
So that I would tell you that's why I
laughed. But that's not a big thing in
life, but it's something I can laugh at
now. But I guarantee you when the the
games are on TV, I'll be pissed off.
&gt;&gt; What's your view on Bitcoin's
oification? Is it necessary, inevitable,
something we should avoid?
&gt;&gt; This is this is a great question because
you know what? I've asked myself this
since I had that dinner with Michael
Sailor and and Parker Lewis last year.
Part of me believes oifying Bitcoin
is a good thing. But I'll tell you how I
define oification,
how Bitcoin was originally intended to
work. I don't think Bitcoin needs to be
anything except a store of value and a
medium of exchange. If it does that and
that's all it's good at, I'm okay with
it. All the other stuff like that,
Lightning's working on this and that, I
think that's like the whipped cream and
the cherry on top of the Sunday, meaning
having transactions on it. But I believe
that Bitcoin
is designed
perfectly well to do what Satoshi wanted
it to do. And I don't think we need to
really change that. I don't think we
need to make it or modernize it. Um,
you know, it's kind of like nature.
Nature hasn't changed her recipe for a
long time and it's very very successful
and ultimately
nature makes things that participated
bend to her rules and I actually think I
think the way Satoshi designed it is
pretty good.
&gt;&gt; What's one thing about Bitcoin that most
people think they understand but they
get completely wrong? how important
self-custody is and that putting it in
your head the seed phrases is the
stupidest thing ever. Like you need to
have a better plan. I don't think people
do a good enough job doing succession
planning.
um the like for example the attacks that
we just saw in your neck of the woods
you know in Paris when the girl you know
got beaten up in a world that's bipolar
meaning fiat versus Bitcoin we're going
to see more of those attacks and you
know that's another disappointment for
me because we're successful now we're
going to see more of those attacks you
know it's kind of like when you have
preppers in the United States say look
if you're the only guy that has Vienna
sausages in a can and nobody has food,
they're going to come get you. And I
don't think people look at it, like for
example, and I don't know if you went to
Vegas or not. People ask me, "Why didn't
you go to Vegas? It makes no sense to go
to any Bitcoin conference right now when
all the fish are in the barrel for
people, especially for the CIA, the FBI,
the governments, because you know, now
they tell you, "Oh, I'm Donald Trump's
son. I'm here to help you." No, no,
you're not. You're not.
&gt;&gt; What are you saying? that we shouldn't
go to conferences anymore.
&gt;&gt; No, I I think I think conferences in the
future
should be all online.
And the reason why is because think
about it, you're protecting your
sovereignty when you do that. There's no
reason to have meeting places. I think
if Bitcoiners want to meet, it should be
on our citadels. We invite the people to
our citadels because that way we
control, you know, what's going on. I've
been invited to go to a lot of
conferences and I'll be honest with you,
the older I've gotten, the less of a fan
I am of the conferences. It's not
because I don't like the people. It's
not that I don't want to interact with
them live. I just don't want to do it
that way. You have to be careful
how you live your life going forward. I
think in El Salvador, we're very, very
safe. I feel safer here than I do in the
United States. But to be honest with
you, I'm getting ready to travel over to
your neck of the woods. My attorney told
me, "Don't fly anywhere in Europe
&gt;&gt; because
&gt;&gt; they're afraid some of my tweets would
get me in trouble." They're putting
people in jail in London right now. You
know that, right? So, think about it. If
you look at some of my tweets that I've
mentioned about Stormer, King Charles
and and Mcronone and his husband, you'll
understand the reason why it's a big
issue. And do I think those issues
are going to be magnified in the future?
Yeah. Because you remember as you have
nation state adoption, the stakes of the
game go up. You know, you just move from
the blackjack table to the backarack
table. And you know, when the money is a
big deal, that's when the game changes.
You saw the other day on Twitter, the
CIA put a tweet out, the CIA is now on
X. What does that tell you?
I mean,
&gt;&gt; we're watching you. Yeah. You're
passionate about decentralized money,
army, medicine, and education. in your
world, is there still a place for
traditional centralized governments? And
if so, what role do they play?
&gt;&gt; Uh, I think there is. And I think those
are going to be the people that really
don't value sovereignty. In other words,
they're like Michael Sailor's story
about Bitcoin. Now, for example, I'm the
king of Spain. I have so much money. Uh,
if you want to centralize the
government, I'm okay with it. Okay.
Michael Sailor believes he's got enough
now that he sees the benefits of doing
it a different way. But that's not the
way people who are truly valuing freedom
see it. And in the world, the one thing
I love about the world, I look at every
country and every culture
very, very differently. like and living
in another country, I see it. I see
Latin women, the way in which they run
their families, there's so many things I
love about it because they're the mama
bear. They like they rule the house. And
if people step out of line, she gets
them back in line. That's something we
lost in the United States. And you don't
realize something until you miss it. I'm
okay with centralized governments, but
in centralized governments, there has to
be decentralized savages. Why?
They're like the First Amendment in the
United States. They're the feedback
loop. When the government gets too
crazy, the people that are some of the
wealthiest people, they have enough
money, they say, "That's enough." They
would be the police state. In other
words, they would be so powerful. And
when I mean police state, I mean this
metaphorically. They don't have to have
the guns, but if they need to go get the
guns, they got the money to do it and
they can take the government out. But as
I said to you before,
there's no past, there's no future,
there's now. Decentralized savages know
that humans have to make that
determination.
What do they want their government to be
right now in this moment? So for
example, people in France, people in UK,
they have chosen fascism, they have
chosen communism.
The the biggest irony, the best thing
about Europe now, and I was o my eyes
were open to this, I went to Bitcoin
Prague last year, and these are people
that were formerly communist. They are
the most freethinkers that I found in
Europe. I I found brothers from another
mother in Czech Republic. Why? Because
they know the problem.
because they lived through it for 70
years and they look at people in France,
Spain, UK and they laugh. They're like
these let these people you want to know
how they're going to learn become
communist. Go back to the monarchy. Go
back to feudalism.
You'll get your cure and you'll realize
that how much you have to fight to get
your freedom back. Am I okay that
there's people in Vermont that think
Bernie Sanders is a great guy? I don't
have any problem with that, but just
don't ask me to come and talk in
Vermont. I don't want to talk to people
whose mind's not open, who already
decided that it's okay to give the
government your freedoms for security.
No, I believe what Ben Franklin and
Thomas Jefferson said. You make that
trade, you always lose. I don't think
that we need to change governance. I
just think that we have to have a
freedom tool that people can default to
so that when it gets really bad, you can
pick your ball and go make a soccer game
somewhere else.
&gt;&gt; You said Bitcoiners are building
borderless countries with citadels to
protect ourselves and even a
decentralized army. How does this look
like in practice?
&gt;&gt; Well, um, for me, I'll tell you how I
see it. I see it the way the American
Revolution unfolded. A bunch of British
people who are misfits who wanted to
worship God their own way. They don't
want to pay tax. Wanted to come to the
new world and farm. And then when the
king said, "No, we want you to worship
our God. We're going to tax and we're
going to tax your tea." The people put
the pitchforks down and shot at the
king.
That is how I see Bitcoiners. Now, the
difference back then they used musketss
and they really shot the king. This time
the bullets, they're electromagnetic
bullets. They're orange.
They're Bitcoin. When you have enough
freedom, nobody can tell you what to do.
&gt;&gt; Okay, a few final questions. Your
favorite quote,
&gt;&gt; run your own race.
Don't live anybody else's life because
it's the total point. If you're not good
enough for yourself, who are you good
for?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. What keeps you grounded?
&gt;&gt; The way in which I think.
&gt;&gt; What do you want your legacy to be?
&gt;&gt; I don't care. Legacy is for the future.
That's for other people to decide. It's
not my job. My job is to do what I need
to do right here, right now. And it
updates every day the sun rises. When I
see the sun, it's a new day. That's
that's hitting the default button again.
Brand new life. What's one thing you
would like people to remember from this
conversation?
&gt;&gt; Off-the cuff, brutal honesty.
&gt;&gt; Thanks, Jack. I've learned a lot. Where
can people follow you and your work?
&gt;&gt; Uh, on social media, Dr. Jack Cruz.
There's a lot of scammers out there, so
don't get pulled in by them. If uh you
want to learn about decentralized
medicine on your own, you can do it free
on my website. I have a form. It'll take
you 10 years to read everything on
there, but it's free. And then if you
want uh how shall I say more focus, like
a magnifying glass, it's Jack Cruz DIY
on Patreon. And then if you want more of
my time, you pay. You become a member.
And if you really want a lot of my time,
then you pay me in Bitcoin to be your
doctor, and I will allow you to rent my
brain for your problem.
&gt;&gt; It's been amazing having you on the
podcast. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; No problem.
[Music]