everyone to the Tone Vase YouTube
channel for another stream related to
health and wellness. Can I please get a
confirmation on audio video in the live
chat before uh we're going to try to do
a three-hour interview in one hour with
the one and only Jack Cruz here in El
Salvador. Uh let me see what it looks
like on your end.
And I don't see us live yet.
I don't see anybody commenting. So,
work.
&gt;&gt; That won't be fun.
&gt;&gt; Boom. There it is. Uh, I'm also a little
concerned over the audio connection and
the the bandwidth connection. So, we are
going to need some confirmations, guys.
Okay. Audio is okay.
&gt;&gt; There you go.
&gt;&gt; Audio and video is good. Okay. Cool. All
right. We'll keep an eye on this. All
right. So, uh, let's do a brief
intro. This is the first time we've met
in person. And, uh, we did run across on
ran across each other.
&gt;&gt; Clubhouse
&gt;&gt; on Clubhouse.
And let me go to
window. I'm going to share this. Uh,
that is your website.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Perfect. All right. Uh Jack, go ahead
and introduce yourself. I'm sure most of
my audience are familiar with your work
so you can keep it brief and you have a
million other podcasts where people can
really find out about your history.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. My name is Jack Cruz. I'm a board
certified neurosurgeon. Spend most of my
time right now blowing up centralized
medicine and teaching people about
decentralized medicine.
&gt;&gt; Excellent. That was nice and brief. His
website is in the video description and
that is your book available on Amazon as
well. There is a link to his book and a
video description. 4.6. That's pretty
damn good
&gt;&gt; for Amazon. A,000 reviews.
&gt;&gt; Excellent. And there's his Jack's bio
right there. We're going to stop screen
share and uh let's
begin. All right. Uh we already did a
brief background. You also I also
watched this 4hour podcast where you
spent three hours talking about the JFK
assassination.
&gt;&gt; Uh that is listed in my video
description. Go ahead and check that
out. We are going to avoid that topic on
this show only because I care a lot more
about health and wellness than what
happened back in 1964 five
&gt;&gt; three
&gt;&gt; three. There you go. Uh things before I
was born. Okay. So, uh, Jack, um, can
you drop some names of publicly
available information of some of the
people you've helped that, uh, like Jack
Dorsey, which is public knowledge, also
uh, President Blly and a few others
because that's probably the best way to
explain what the kind of people that
come to you for help.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I would tell you Rick
Rubin's another one that speak up a
little bit louder. Rick Rubin Rick Rubin
is another and I have tons of
professional athletes NBA, NHL, NFL,
uh especially people overcoming TBIs,
traumatic brain injuries, uh also
recurrent injuries. Um
most of them I would say Pro Bowl
players, several Hall of Fame players.
&gt;&gt; All right. Uh and we're going to jump
right into it. So, I've watched about
three or four of your longer format
interviews of other uh podcasters
and um I have follow-up questions and
this is where we're going. We're going
straight to in your view the most
important thing to human health is
sunlight.
&gt;&gt; I wouldn't say sunlight I'd say it's for
decentralized health it's light, water
and magnetism. You have to have all
three. That's what decentralized health
is based on. So just to make this very
simple, remember circadian biology is
based on daylight, darkness, and
temperature regulation. So there's three
things, not one thing that control it.
Now, if you ask me what's the most
important of the three, light is the
most important of the three.
&gt;&gt; Let's elaborate on that. Let's uh talk a
little more about light, the different
types of light, when you're supposed to
take that light in, and how are you
supposed to take that light in. The most
important light is sunlight. The least
important light is manufactured light
from man. Uh the single most important
thing is the default state is at
sunrise. So if you take anything away
from this podcast to be honest with you,
you need to see the sunrise. The sunrise
is when you begin to renovate all the
proteins in your body that you need to
fix. The number one ones are the hem
proteins. Those hem proteins all have
red light chromophores in it. That's the
reason why sunlight in the morning has
much more red light than it than later
in the day. So that's the reason why you
want to do that.
&gt;&gt; Uh let's uh dive a little bit deeper on
that. How dangerous is blue light after
sundown?
&gt;&gt; It's probably the single biggest thing
that's caused all the chronic health
maladies in the world. So you tone was
not in my my panel I just did and I gave
an example that I want you to think
about. This is how important it is. What
I'm about to tell you you know to be
aimatically true but you have never been
able to explain it. Guy named Peter
Anger dug up the skulls of people that
built the pyramids. They were found next
to the Sphinx. What did he find? Perfect
dentitions, perfect skulls,
international table of skull. Perfect.
The same people both in your home
country and in my country, King Tut came
people that lived at the same time. They
have all the diseases that we see in the
United States today. Okay. What's the
difference? The Inubians lived in the
sun. The pharaohs lived inside in the
temples where there was no sunlight.
Yeah,
&gt;&gt; that's the problem.
&gt;&gt; Uh, on that note, uh, so, well, by the
way, guys, I've spent a lot I I kind of
retired, semi-retired. I'm back over
this stupid knots debate. Uh, and I am
now focusing on health and wellness. And
as crazy as it sounds, uh, I mean, I
always knew sunlight was important. I
didn't really know to what extent. Uh,
but I have I I've raised my vitamin D
level from 37, which it was a year ago,
to 65, which it was the last time I
measured it back in June, July. That's
that's that's United States scales.
Correct.
&gt;&gt; Correct.
&gt;&gt; Not European scales. Correct. Because
that would be really bad.
&gt;&gt; Uh, US scalees, I was down like at 37. I
checked it was 65. And I want to try to
get it closer to 80. Um, and I think
that's the more optimal over 100 is
probably off and I'm doing it naturally.
No supplements. We're going to get to
supplements a little bit later um, in
the interview. Uh, because I'm spending
a lot more time in the sunlight.
Um, and you know what? Let's stay with
the sunlight question. So, the first
thing I wake up, the first thing I brush
my teeth and after that I walk outside
grounding, catching the sunlight into my
eyes as early in the day as possible. I
try not to wake up with an alarm.
Sometimes it's 7:00 a.m., sometimes it
could be 6:30, sometimes it's 8:00 a.m.
if I happen to sleep in. That's the
first thing I do, get early morning sun.
And I heard that uh I also stopped
wearing sunglasses. Uh I try to get that
sunlight early in the day into my eyes.
I heard that the earlier in the day you
get the sun, the less likely you are to
burn later in the day uh from the sun.
Uh, so correct me if I'm uh if I'm
already everything's correct. So
&gt;&gt; the only thing I would tell you that's
incorrect, don't brush your teeth. Go
out in the sun first. Brush your teeth
later.
&gt;&gt; Brush your teeth later. Okay, great. Cuz
no, the reason is is because um I used
to do a little more fasting and now I
try to drink water early in the day and
I want to brush my teeth before I drink
water because I want a clean mouth so it
doesn't go down my throat. That's why
the the the sequence is like that. Um I
could also do all that outside. My
question is, uh, so the sunlight, no
sunglasses, um, allow the sunlight to go
in your eyes. That is not dangerous. I
heard that it helps with vitamin D
synthesis in your skin.
&gt;&gt; Oh, is that true or not?
&gt;&gt; That's not true.
&gt;&gt; That's not true. AM sunlight, AM
sunlight has mostly red and blue.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Red is doesn't do anything for vi does
blue light. You have to have purple
light, which is UVA, UVB. UVA light is
important for melanin which is the solar
panel you just
&gt;&gt; in the afternoon.
&gt;&gt; Correct. And depends on where you are in
the latitude. So let's just use El
Salvador as the example.
&gt;&gt; That's where we are.
&gt;&gt; When we wake up here the sun rise here
about4 to 6, you start making UVA light
here literally about 6:30. So that's
when you start the vitamin D issue. What
what you want to do with the red light
is you want to start to renovate the red
light proteins in you. So for example,
your mitochondria is loaded with red
light protein every part of your body.
So you want to be grounded. If you can
be at the beach with your feet in the
water, that's important. If you don't
have that, like in my place, I have a
place where you can ground in the water
and we use dutium depleted water to do
it with the sun there. There's several
people at this conference that are
staying at my house doing this with me
every day.
&gt;&gt; Next year I'm I'm in.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; Next year we're I'm definitely in on
that. Um, so these are actually supposed
to be grounding shoes. I have not tested
it with any uh electrical devices. Kind
of trusting the label. Uh, we're
standing on concrete, so we're not
benefiting from that at the moment. So,
but my my question to the vitamin D
through your eyes was more um not the
time of day, but is it true?
&gt;&gt; You're not going to make it. You're not
going to make it. You need your skin to
do it. Why?
&gt;&gt; You need your skin to do
&gt;&gt; skin has to be in the game because you
make it from cholesterol.
&gt;&gt; Oh, no. I I agree that it has to hit
your skin, but I again I heard that it
coming through your eyes helps
synthesize in the skin. No. True or
false?
&gt;&gt; That's false.
&gt;&gt; Okay. That that I needed that cleared up
because I actually such mixed reports on
that all over the internet.
&gt;&gt; True.
&gt;&gt; So, back to the sun. Some of us have a
bald head. This is supposed to be
covered with hair. You still have hair.
You're older than me. Uh hat. No hat.
&gt;&gt; No hat.
&gt;&gt; No hat. Let the uh bald head hit the
sun. Next, another I I usually try to be
shirtless all the time. I have a I
picked up some muscle, guys. And in
January, I'm probably going to start
taking my shirt off at some of these
health uh health conferences. On another
uh a lot of people give you crap about
uh not being in perfect physical shape,
but I heard if you have one hell of a
grip. Let's find out.
&gt;&gt; That's pretty good, actually. Mid60s.
Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, just I picked up some muscle.
&gt;&gt; So, this is what I will tell you though
because we just talked about this and
it's this is a fair criticism, but
people don't know five years ago I was
in really good shape. I made a decision
five years ago to go back into the
hospitals to find out what they did to
us. So, I started to go back and take
trauma call. I was already retired.
Bitcoin Bitcoin allowed that. So, when I
went back in to figure out what
happened, then I did some other things.
I got devices to send to researchers so
that you can find out some of the things
you're finding out now from Kevin
McCirin, from Jessica Rose. And to do
that, what did I have to do? Go back in
two times a month for a week and work
247
round the clock in ICUs.
That's the reason why the situation is
the way it is. Now, do I think that's
going to be that way permanently? No.
Because as of this conference, this is
the last time that Uncle Jack will be
talking about politics, be talking about
COVID, be talking about any of those
things. I'm not going to be an advocate
for that at all after this next talk at
4:00.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. I I went full-blown politics.
I was so pissed over the lockdowns, over
the vaccines, over the election 2020. I
attended January 6 protest. I'm still
proud of that. My first political
protest as an American. I'm so pissed at
what Trump's doing in his second term.
Uh I was happy with happy year in his
first term and I cover Russia, Ukraine,
Israel, Gaza. I'm gonna end the politics
talk. Uh because I kind of want to I've
lowered my cortisol levels. We're going
to I'm going to talk about that on
another podcast. So, one more thing on
sunlight hitting the body. Something
that I don't do, but I probably should
start. How important is it for the
sunlight to hit your entire body?
because there's a whole section down
there that never sees the sun. How
important is that?
&gt;&gt; It's important like Jets's junk
maintenance. So guy that you know, Frank
Zappa, Frank Zappa died from prostate
cancer. How about another guy um
Jamaican guy, Bob Marley, same thing.
Metastatic breast cancer. So what guys
need to understand, culture,
centralization keeps us with our clothes
on, keeps us those parts covered. As
long as you're able to get some of those
things in your lifestyle, Bitcoin allows
for a lot of that stuff because we have
more time in which to spend. So yes, you
want all your skin in the game. You
don't have to do it constantly because
there's a thing called the abscopal
effect of light. So even if you get
light on your chest, you get light on
your legs, will you effectively help
your prostate? Why? Prostate is an
epithelial organ. Epithelial organs all
respond to vitamin D. So if you have
enough vitamin D above 60 nanogs per
deciliter, the chance of you getting
Zappa's problem or Bob Marley's problem
drops dramatically. So even though you
don't have to, you know, sun your balls
or sun your ass all the time, always
check your vitamin D so that you know
what you're doing. And there's ways to
do that now. You can do blood test or
you can use vitamin D apps like D
Minder, things like that. I'm a big
believer the first time you start doing
this for about 18 months, you do it
every quarter. Find out what your D is.
is based on the location you're at and
then you can adjust your template and
your solar exposure going forward.
&gt;&gt; All right. Uh now, one word that has not
been mentioned, but I know it's super
important. Mitochondria.
&gt;&gt; Can you explain it like you're talking
to a 5-year-old?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, mitochondria means a lot of
different things to a lot of different
people. The centralized uh medicine
template, they know it as the the focus
of power and energy. And you hear ATP.
This is the interesting thing about the
centralized docs. They think be all end
all is ATP. The meatheads that you talk
to online, they think about ATP. Do you
know what they don't know? When you're
in UVA sunlight, do you know that it
decreases ATP production from you? In
other words, when you're in the sun, we
stop our mitochondrial function. Yet,
you're still able to do things. You
you've been to probably the beach here.
You've seen the the surfers out there.
Do they stop functioning on their
surfboard when they're in the sun and
the UVA light, the nitric oxide has
turned off ATP production? The answer is
no. So, what is that? The reason I'm
being provocative with you here since
you're
&gt;&gt; No, you're not. You're not at all. I've
seen you on the podcast.
&gt;&gt; Right. But what I'm what I'm saying to
you is I want you to understand that the
prevailing belief of what a mitochondria
is, you also need to question.
Mitochondria functionally what it does,
the exhaust fumes are huge. So that's
CO2, water, and the big one is ultra
weak biophotons. That is the real
purpose of what a mitochondria does. And
the problem is that gets us into optics.
It gets us into quantum biology. And
that's not something you're going to
find in a biochemistry textbook.
&gt;&gt; All right. So sticking with the
mitochondria. Uh so I am right now I'm
I'm testing out a few things. So I've
been doing methyline blue
&gt;&gt; for about a month.
&gt;&gt; How do you do it? Uh, I have a liquid
that I put in water.
&gt;&gt; You don't do that.
&gt;&gt; You know, this is what I was going to
ask. And I I don't feel any different.
I'm going to finish that bottle. I think
I'm almost done with it. Maybe another
three or four days it's going to be
gone. I don't know if I'm going to cycle
that again. And my the my biggest
problem with it is it's such an
artificial thing.
I just I I feel uncomfortable drinking
something that was created. Your
thoughts on me blue? I know. Uh Paul
Saladino is saying that no one should
use it. A lot of other uh pro-methyline
blue people have criticized Paul
Saladino for that. Again, I've heard
mixed things. Uh what are your thoughts
on methyl and blue? And and should an
average person use it? Who should use
it? And how should they use it if they
need to use it?
&gt;&gt; The number one thing you need to
understand is context. Who are the
doctors that are experts in using
methylene blue? Cardiovascular surgeons
and neurosurgeons. What's my day job?
I'm a neurosurgeon. Remember Paul
Saladino is a psychiatrist. They never
use methylene blue. So I want you to
understand what did methylene blue is it
really used for? It can be an
antimicrobial. So if you're taking it
this way, you're killing your gut
microbiome. The only way cardiovascular
surgeons use it and neurosurgeons use it
is IV. That's the only way it should be
used. And then it knows what they're
doing. So if you're a biohacker at home
and you follow like Dave Asprey, you're
doing everything wrong. If you take it
orally, you potentially can ruin your
microbiome. It's a great way to screw
things up and then you make the hole
deeper and then you won't know where to
go from there. So, my two cents, I have
a Patreon blog that tells tells you
specifically when and when not to use
it. I also believe that you need to have
a decentralized doctor under your care
to tell you whether it's a good thing
for your current template. that I never
use methylene blue orally.
&gt;&gt; Gotcha. That's uh uh this is why I
wanted to do the interview. It's uh uh
uh learning valuable lessons. Okay. So,
how would uh a person try to improve
their mitochondria because uh you can
always improve.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean one of the things that you
can do is sunlight. Remember what
controls mitochondrial biogenesis? a a a
a
very active neurosteroid that you've
heard of melatonin.
&gt;&gt; Where is 95% of melatonin?
&gt;&gt; Move your mic. I keep talking.
&gt;&gt; Where is 95% of melatonin made? It's
made in your mitochondria. Most of the
functional medicine guys tell you it's
your pineal gland or in your gut. It's
not true. 95% is in the mitochondria.
What does it control? It controls
apoptosis and autophagy. Those are the
two change programs. Autophagy is the
one where you recycle a bad engine using
the parts that are available. apoptosis.
You take the engine out and then you
make a new one from your stem cell. So
sunlight is the thing that drives that.
Why? What is melatonin made out of?
Aromatic amino acids that absorb mostly
in the UV range. So most people think
about melatonin is the hormone of
darkness. Turns out you make melatonin
from sunlight.
&gt;&gt; Well, the production of melatonin begins
the moment you get into the sunlight in
the morning. So your cortisol wakes you
up. Your cortisol peaks to wake you up.
And the moment you wake up and you step
out into the sun, cortisol goes down,
melatonin starts to rise and it peaks at
evening time when it's time to go to
bed.
&gt;&gt; And that's when it delivers its biofoton
mass to your tissues. That's the key.
Cortisol, what it does when you have
light at night, your cortisol is
flatlined in the morning. That's why
people feel like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] and they get
sucked into these plants to go drink
coffee, go use nicotine gum, and things
like that because you want your cortisol
high. And then you also have to realize
how this works in a brain in a body
you're trying to build. What does uh
melatonin and cortisol effectively do?
They also trim neural circuitry. So in
other words, melatonin stimulates it.
Cortisol will will do the trimming. But
what's the the the key metric behind
that? It's something called brain
derived nerve growth factor. Brain
derived nerve growth factor follows the
lead of cortisol. So if you have too
much light at night, you're going to
have a huge problem rebuilding your
brain. And this is fundamentally why
we've got neurodeeneration problems, we
got mileelin problems, we got, you know,
all kinds of issues with dementia. So
once you understand this, you begin to
realize that light and dark is
important. Why?
Because you can never appreciate how
beneficial the sun is without the
darkness at night. Reason why circadian
biology uses those two together.
Uh we're going to get back to the uh
what do you call them? the circadian
rhythm cycle towards the end because we
have more topics to cover. Let's talk
about food. Okay. Now, I've heard you
mention that the one of the more
important parts is not what you're
eating, but where the food comes from
that you are eating.
&gt;&gt; Also, and when you eat it.
&gt;&gt; I haven't heard you mention that, but uh
&gt;&gt; well, that's the basis of my leptin
prescription. Uh, so we're going to uh
I'm going to have you cover that as
well, but on where the food comes from,
right? So there are I'm going to it's
going to be a longer question and then
I'll let you uh try to explain it. You
have locally grown food by farmers.
That's always the best for many many
reasons. Uh obviously it's going to be
the the cleanest food. If you're getting
it from local farmers, you're supporting
supporting the local farmer. Now, you've
mentioned on many podcasts it's super
important for the food to be grown in
the same sunlight where you are.
&gt;&gt; Correct.
&gt;&gt; But let's uh expand that a little bit.
Do you mean literally in the same
location?
&gt;&gt; Same zip code.
&gt;&gt; Like same zip code.
&gt;&gt; Same zip code.
&gt;&gt; What about the same latitude?
&gt;&gt; Uh well, it depends. Uh I wouldn't say
the latitude is the key thing. It's the
local area you are. Why? Because this is
where the food gurus like Saladino made
this mistake when he wrote the carnivore
book, but he fixed it when he moved to
Costa Rica. And I'll explain to you why
this is important. What is the basis of
of the whole food web? Photosynthesis.
Is photosynthesis a story about food or
light? It's light and water come
together. Right? So this is what they've
all missed. And when you use first
principle thinking, which is what I try
to do to people, you begin to understand
what is food. Food is fundamentally an
electromagnetic barcode of the location
that you're in. So when your eyes see
the sun, your skin samples it. The the
message has to be coherent. If it's not
coherent with the food you eat, then
guess what you do? You make something
called chaos. What's the name for chaos
that you know? Inflammation. That means
you have too many protons that are
dutyium. Not enough that are electrons
in your body. What effectively happens
then? all the things that you hear most
the other gurus talk about, oh this goes
wrong, that goes wrong, but they don't
understand the fundamentals of how it
works. So the the other thing I want you
to think about too is when you look at a
biochemistry book and you open it up in
the mitochondria, do you see any place
where it says here's the carbohydrate uh
transporter, here's the fat transporter,
here's uh the the the protein
transporter? No. It's called
electronchain transport. Why? Because
what do we do? We break food down to
electrons and protons and those
electrons have light on them. That light
comes from the environment you're in. So
if you want to be quantum coherent, you
should eat the food from the environment
where the sun builds it.
So, uh, for with that example, right,
say you live in, uh, upstate New York
&gt;&gt; and you can, uh, buy locally grass-fed
cows, but you also have buffalo in
Wyoming at the same exact latitude,
&gt;&gt; but
&gt;&gt; three time zones away.
&gt;&gt; The local cow would be better than the
bison and buffalo from Wyoming.
&gt;&gt; It's not even
&gt;&gt; Not even close. Yeah. The reason why
it's going back to the stool light water
magnetism. Does the bison have the same
magnetic effect? Is the magnetic effect
in the super volcano in Wyoming the same
as upstate New York? Is there is there a
super volcano up there?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So that affects the spin on
electrons and protons. So that's one
reason. What's the other reason? Is the
water the same at both locations?
&gt;&gt; Absolutely not.
&gt;&gt; It's not. So right there is the reason
why you hear me say the controversial
things. But when you ask me the question
and I reduce it down for you go, okay,
this isn't crazy. What he's saying
actually makes some sense. Why? Because
we all know that the whole food web goes
back to photosynthesis. So why would we
want to make a mistake in this? This is
such a fundamental basic mistake. I
understand why we do it. Why? Because we
get food mostly from supermarkets and if
the food is in the supermarket, we think
we can eat it. Well, that's not the
case. That's not why how we're designed.
Uh, all right. Uh, I see, uh, people
already putting in questions. I will try
to get to some of them after I, uh, get
through some of mine. Um, anything else
you want to mention on the type of food
we should be eating?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think it depends on
&gt;&gt; Well, you said the time of the food.
Let's talk about that.
&gt;&gt; Well, I was going to say thing about
Paul Salino. He's taken a lot of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
from people like uh Biolain online
about, you know, robbing people for a
million dollars for his book on
carnivore and then he moves to Costa
Rica. He feels better. It happens.
&gt;&gt; It's not It's not just changed his mind.
What he realized is what I just
&gt;&gt; mind because he feels better.
&gt;&gt; Well, he changed his mind because he
moved and because he realized mangoes
and coconuts grow in Costa Rica, they
didn't grow back where he came from when
he wrote the book. And he realized that
his idea was incomplete. So instead of
you you never hear me scream at Paul
Saladino. I scream more at the
meatheads. Why? Because I think Paul has
gotten it more quantum correct, but he's
not done a good job explaining why he's
quantum correct. And that is important.
And that's why you'll never hear me say
anything to him. In terms of food,
timing matters. It has a lot to do with
what I told you before. There was uh for
20 years I told the paleo guys I told
the meattheads in carnivore that you
cannot use the TCA cycle the ura cycle
unless you renovate your heem proteins
in the morning. So a paper comes out in
science direct in 2021 and shows that I
was correct. And a guy that's been one
of my detractors on Twitter, his name is
HTW on Twitter, Henrik, he posted the
the paper and he goes, "As crazy as this
sounds, Cruz is right. If you don't see
the sunlight, you can't use the TCA
cycle or the URA cycle. So, say if
you're a guy that likes to eat steak all
the time. What happens if you don't see
the sunrise? What effectively have you
done? Are you giving the proper
information to your body? And I'm going
to tell you, the biggest mistake people
make is not understanding that fact. So,
why is that important? If you go out and
you see the sunrise, you can eat
anything. You're an omnivore. provided
those things grow in that environment.
That's the caveat. When should you eat?
30 to 60 minutes after sunrise. If you
decide you want to eat uh lunch or you
want to eat dinner, great. The axiom
that I think everybody learned, no
matter what country you're in, eat the
big breakfast, smaller lunch, and a
smaller dinner. Okay, that still makes
sense. When you're more quantum
coherent, when you got your circadian
biology totally dialed in, what are you
going to find? You're probably going to
eat a big breakfast. You're going to
have most of your carbs in the morning.
You're going to eat a small dinner.
You're probably going to wind up getting
rid of lunch. What is that mechanism? I
wrote something 20 years ago called the
leptin prescription. It's based on that
paper from 2020 in Science Direct. The
problem was from first principal
thinking as a brain surgeon. I figured
all this out before it was proven in
paper. But here's the most important
thing for you to understand as a new
influencer. Absence of evidence is an
absence of effect. Meaning that if it's
obvious from first principal thinking
it's true and you can reason people
through it, you don't need a paper to
prove it to you. And guess what? I
didn't need a paper. But the guy on
Twitter that was, you know, hawking my
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] he needed it. But now we know
it's aimatically true. So I just tell
people, you can do carnivore, you can do
the paleo diet. Just make sure you see
the sunrise because the sunrise in my
opinion is Paro's principle. You have to
see it 80%. You do that, you can get
everything else wrong. If you do that,
you're doing you're cooking with gas.
All right. Uh guys, in case you are
curious, so here's how my food um so
I'll tell you how I eat. Basically, I am
mostly carnivore uh with uh some fruit.
So, uh I was doing the carnivore plus
fruit before Saladino was. Uh, I
recently added a little bit of carbs.
Uh, I'm gonna talk about why, but that
carb is mostly sweet potato.
&gt;&gt; Um,
&gt;&gt; that's paleo.
&gt;&gt; That's uh Yeah, that that is paleo. I
used to do paleo, but I don't really eat
vegetables.
&gt;&gt; Uh, stay away from those. Now, I
&gt;&gt; That's also paleo.
&gt;&gt; Uh, well, no, Paleo eats vegetables.
&gt;&gt; No, they don't.
&gt;&gt; They don't. No, I thought they did.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Um, uh, so I used to be OMAD one meal a
day.
&gt;&gt; I was not able to build any muscle with
one meal a day. I had to switch to two
meals a day. I still try to keep my 16
to 18 hour fasting window and eat within
4 to 6 hours. Now, for social reasons, I
skip breakfast so I could eat an early
lunch after a workout and then dinner.
In a perfect world,
&gt;&gt; you would eat breakfast and lunch and
scrap the dinner. No, I I would tell you
in a perfect world, you're going to eat
a big breakfast and you're going to eat
a smaller dinner and you're going to
skip lunch.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And then you're really then you're
really going to be cooking with gas.
&gt;&gt; Trying to keep the window as small as
possible. But eight eight hours is my
max window.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But I would tell you I would tell
you where you're putting your window is
also a problem. Remember what the word
is called breakfast. You're breaking the
fast at night. So here's the other part
that we didn't talk about, but we need
to. When you get the leptin prescription
right, you're going to find that you're
always going to eat dinner while the sun
is still out. Now, you know, you've been
here for a couple days. You know that it
gets dark here at six o'clock this time
of the year. So, guess what that means?
I'm always eating my dinner
&gt;&gt; about four o'clock.
&gt;&gt; 4 to 5:00.
&gt;&gt; Right. Well, that would be my perfect
dinner, right? Right. Right. So,
&gt;&gt; then you don't eat again until
&gt;&gt; breakfast until
&gt;&gt; And that's going to be 6:30.
&gt;&gt; Right. Yeah. That that would be the
perfect uh way again.
&gt;&gt; And that's that's how you should do it
because that's how you're built by
nature. You're not built that way from a
new a paper. You're not built that way
from a food guru. You're built that way
by nature. That's the decentralized
nature of us. And if you stay to that
plan and understand like when you go
back to Russia, like the the time the
light preference in Moscow is radically
different than it is where it is here.
You know that. So you're going to adjust
that template there. That's when you may
say, "Jack, I'm going to do the
breakfast, but I'm going to eat lunch
and I'm going to do it at 1:00. Why?
Because it's going to get dark in Moscow
at 3."
&gt;&gt; Nope. That actually makes total sense to
me. Uh, okay. Let's uh let's move on.
I've also heard you mention, correct me
if I'm wrong, you're not a big fan of
Wimhof or did I get that wrong? I would
uh know a little more about your
thoughts on breath work and meditation.
&gt;&gt; I'm a big fan of Wimhof because he
brings people the CT uh which is called
thermogenesis, but his breathing method
I'm not a big fan of. Why? Because it
breaks the bore and how effects in
breathing.
&gt;&gt; Dig in on that for a bit.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean that's going to be
physiology where people's heads are
going to explode. I think you need to
understand the effects. They have a lot
to do with oxygen and CO2. This is what
I would tell you where Whim does this
where he got his claim to fame. In the
beginning, he was a vegan who lived at
high latitude with poor sunlight. And
the point the thing I try to point I try
to make to you, even though he was doing
a lot wrong, he still got a lot right.
Why? Because he was always in nature
doing his CT, which was really important
&gt;&gt; and probably eating a lot of local food
that's up there. like what are my seals
or whatever there.
&gt;&gt; He was vegan at the time and he used to
also smoke. So you have to realize back
in the beginning if you have a smoker
lecturing you on the boron halbane
effect and with his tumo breathing
you're much better off going with a
different breathing pattern. In fact one
of the country men that you have boutco
breathing is probably smart. My guy that
I like to use is Irwin Laor. He works
with moveat and he's a natural mover.
Walks around. He's big into doing
hypoxic training. Um, but the bottom
line is once you understand that
breathing is also an electric
electromagnetic phenomenon. Why? Most
people don't know this. In 2014, I got
thrown out of the Pasadena
um convention center by Dave Asprey for
giving a talk on oxygen. I told people
it's paramagnetic. What does that mean?
It's drawn to magnetic fields. So,
what's the magnetic field that you're
interested in in the mitochondria? It's
it's actually the spinning FO head of
the ATP ace. So the question you got to
ask yourself, Tone, based on what I just
told you, if you're in UV light and
nitric oxide's being made and it turns
off that FO head, do you need as much
oxygen? Uh the answer is no, you don't.
And guess what? Irwin got that right.
That's something Whim has never gotten
right. And he's never explain that to
that detail. Why? Because he focuses in
on what he knows. And my issue,
especially with you getting into this
industry, I want you to understand, I
want you to be correct for your
audience. So if there's some problem
with the quantum mechanics here, like
for example, most people don't even know
that oxygen is the only paramagnetic gas
on the periodic table. Well, you need to
know that how it affects things. Then
think about what we said earlier about
Wyoming. When you asked me about food,
do you think that oxygen tensions in
Wyoming are different than upstate New
York? the answer is absolutely true. So
when you begin to realize that and none
of these these uh how should I say
variables whim put into his program I
don't talk about the same reason I I
don't talk about solid is the same
reason I don't talk about whim they do
most of the things correct they're not
offending me terribly but when people
ask me direct questions about it I'm
going to tell you the reason why I
disagree with it
&gt;&gt; uh so who would you recommend for breath
work
&gt;&gt; Irwin the poor with movement
&gt;&gt; there you go guys look look him up Um,
all right. Next question. So,
let's move on. Uh, so
we'll sum it all up. What does, let's
say you're going back into retirement.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; What does a perfect week of Jack's life
looks like from effective? I'm sure not
every day is going to be identical. So
what are the main things you will do
every day
&gt;&gt; and what are the things you need to do
once or twice a week?
&gt;&gt; I would say the main thing every day is
getting up with the sun. Uh grounding
when you do it. Um then I try to spend
between six and 10 hours in the sun
every day. Uh so my office like in my
house when I'm seeing patients
everything's outside. Like I have no
walls on my house. Um the day is going
to depend on what I have. Do I have
patients? Do I have private patients? Do
I have to do desk work? So, that will
cause it to vary, but the food template
is always the same. Here, usually in the
morning, it's it's protein, mostly fish,
and probably meat. Um, do I eat a ton of
vegetables? No, I don't. Uh, do I eat a
lot of sweet potatoes? No, because
they're not really popular here. Um,
probably the number one carb that I eat
in uh, breakfast time is probably
berries. So, blueberries and
raspberries. I don't eat any.
&gt;&gt; Is there an order of food? Do you eat
the protein first, then the carbs? Is
there an order to it or no?
&gt;&gt; It doesn't matter. I mean, the one thing
you can do if you want to like say if
you're diabetic and you want to uh lower
the glycemic index, you always want to
eat the fat first.
&gt;&gt; The I I usually eat protein then fat
then carbs.
&gt;&gt; I would tell you it's better to do the
fat if you're a diabetic. protein or if
you're diabetic.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And then and that way you're
trying to reduce the the glycemic index.
But if you eat it when you're outside,
just remember sunlight reduces blood
sugar by 27%.
&gt;&gt; Also, when I make sweet potato or if I
go back to eating rice, I would freeze
it to turn it into resistant starch,
then eat it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But that's that's makes a
difference. That's all Paul uh what's
his name?
&gt;&gt; I even forgot his name. He's a huge
paleo guy back in the day that made the
resistant starch thing a big issue. I
think that's total [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Okay. I think I think if you're gonna
save me some time,
&gt;&gt; if you're going to eat the sweet potato,
you're going to eat the rice, I would
tell you put butter in it. Why? Because
then
&gt;&gt; I'll put butter in everything.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So then if you do that, then
you're doing it right.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Uh thoughts on fat. My favorites
are basically avocado besides the meat
fat. Uh I It's avocado and occasionally
olive oil. Uh what are your favorite
fats?
&gt;&gt; My favorite fats are way different than
yours. Animal fats from rendered
animals. So I'm tall.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. No, no. I said besides those.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I I'm not into avocado.
Mufas are not thing. I like poffas. So,
it's going to be seafood fats. Um
there's a reason for that. Your brain is
made with most of those. Um I do eat
avocados here in El Salvador because
they grow naturally here.
&gt;&gt; Uh I don't use very much olive oil here.
Why? Olive oil is not
&gt;&gt; from this area. Coconut oil is
&gt;&gt; uh palm oil is. So, those would be the
fats that I use. I also cook with a lot
of bacon grease.
&gt;&gt; I love wild caught salmon, but uh it's
going to be hard not to eat it because I
I I don't live up in Alaska. Neither do
I.
&gt;&gt; Very challenging.
&gt;&gt; Well, I don't I don't either, but we
here in El Salvador, we have great fish.
&gt;&gt; So, in Libertard, we have a seafood
market. I would tell you if you don't do
it this time, come next time. Come check
it out. You won't believe the the the
diversity of fish that are still here.
Why? Because in Mexico, in California,
all the fish, the fisheries are dead. We
still have wild fish here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, I never touch farm fish. I
avoid farm fish like the plague. Only
wild fish.
&gt;&gt; If you get a chance, I would also tell
you, um, the other thing that's really
good here, go to Monarch. It's a
restaurant. Try the pulpo, which is
octopus. Yep.
&gt;&gt; Spectacular. Also, fuagua here.
Spectacular.
&gt;&gt; All right. Uh, what's the rest of your
day looks like? So, your your food
cycle, you probably eat around 7:30,
8:00 a.m. First meal.
&gt;&gt; No, this morning 6:30.
&gt;&gt; 6:30. Second meal comes in around 4:00.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I haven't eaten yet. So, I got to
do a talk right now.
&gt;&gt; And you're going to eat right after that
talk?
&gt;&gt; Hopefully, depending if I get out of
here. [laughter] If I don't, then I
don't eat.
&gt;&gt; All right. Yep. Gotcha. Uh, and uh, you
try to be asleep by 10 p.m.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I'm I will tell you the night of uh,
Bitcoin Historical where we met the
first time, I was in bed that night at
6:30.
&gt;&gt; Oh, wow.
&gt;&gt; I was in bed and I woke up at sunrise.
&gt;&gt; Last night I went to bed at uh, 7:45 and
woke up at sunrise at 5:30. What are
your um tricks and habits to fall asleep
faster and get more deep and REM sleep?
&gt;&gt; I wish you talked to my nurse at this
point. She'd tell you I go to sleep in 5
seconds. She hates it. But it's the
sunrise. The more sunrise you get, I
just go to sleep. And the crazy thing is
in my room, I have uh you know, blackout
curtains.
&gt;&gt; As always,
&gt;&gt; as soon as I see the sun come up, the
light, it wakes me up. I don't use a
phone. I have no electromagnetic things
in my environment.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I started putting my phone on
airplane mode when I go to bed. It's not
&gt;&gt; Keep it in the living room. Don't even
put it around.
&gt;&gt; Turn off the router. No, no. I actually
want to build a house. And when I build
a house, I want to master kill switch in
my bedroom for all electricity in the
bedroom.
&gt;&gt; That's why I told you you should have
came to my house cuz you would have seen
a citadel.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh 100%. Next time I'll I'll hit
you up ahead of time and we'll set that
up. So that's where I'm going to be
staying. Okay. Um anything else?
something you do on a weekly basis. So,
cold exposure, heat exposure
&gt;&gt; all the time in the pool, in the water.
My pool is all set up for CT.
&gt;&gt; We also we also do lifting, you know, we
we never
do it in the gym. We always do it
outside
&gt;&gt; outside. Actually, I don't up at the
cabin. People usually watch me stream
all summer long outdoors there as well.
&gt;&gt; Most people are surprised when they meet
me. They think they have when they see
what I can move and the things that I
you're doing travel on a plane. I've got
a blog out there called the jet lag
prescription. Uh I wrote it a long time
ago. Anybody can download it. That's the
only time that supplements make sense
because it, you know, flying induces a
circadian mismatch.
&gt;&gt; Hold on. We lost on video, guys.
How's is my audio still working?
&gt;&gt; This says I'm live.
And uh try to switch hotspots to my
I'm going to turn on a hotspot.
One second.
I think we're back.
All right, guys. Good now. We're back.
All right, we didn't miss anything. I
think I caught it right on time. All
good now. All right, let's move on. Uh,
so no vitamins. Thoughts on vitamin C?
Some people think it's the most
important thing, but you eat a lot of
fruit. Issue with it. I don't eat that
much fruit, but need a ton of vitamin
C. You just need when I take care of
patients, do I use vitamin C when they
have colony failure? Yeah, but I don't
use it or you have two uh receptors that
deal with vitamin C, SVCT1 and SVCT2.
The the one that in your gut, you can
only tolerate 1 to two grams. That the
one in your blood, you can tolerate 10,
15, 20 grams. So when would I use
something like that? I would use that in
somebody comes in and gets a gunshot
wound head. Someone comes in and has a
subdural hematoma or a better one. Say
they're septic, they're having infection
and I'm doing say spine surgery on
that's when I would use something like
that. In other words, it's got to be the
person's equals one. If you're a
normally healthy guy, there's to go to
see a functional medicine doctor and get
hit with a Myers cocktail. A Myers
cocktail. You have colony failure.
You're you're not healthy.
Hey guys, in future episodes people are
saying it's not great, but okay. Okay,
we'll work with that. I am going to show
all my blood work stats. I'm also going
to show my genetic stats. So, I did a uh
use my genetics to get my health report.
So, apparently I'm the lucky one with
both parents giving me the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
gene MTF uh MTHFR.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. 67 677 or 1298.
&gt;&gt; So I have a problem relating B vitamins.
Now I have never taken a B vitamin. I
eat a a lot of meat. My uh is it
homosine
that's going to be high with that? It's
a little higher than it should be. What
are your thoughts on methylation?
Especially with someone like me that's
in the 13th percentile of double genetic
whammy on that one
&gt;&gt; doesn't matter you know how you what
sunlight that's the answer so that the
reason why that happened from an
evolutionary basis remember how we went
&gt;&gt; well both my parents are from Soviet
Union up high
that's the reason why that's why I'm in
that in that zone
&gt;&gt; and all you got to do to fix it is get
in the sun it's that simple
&gt;&gt; awesome that That was another good
question. All right, let me look at some
of the questions, guys, and see what we
got. I know someone asked about the eyes
and cataracts. I got to get the a
question. I've heard you go deep on that
with red light. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right into your eyes. I actually have a
red light sauna uh up at my parents'
place in New York because I don't have a
place of my own anymore. Uh so I use it
whenever I visit. Um so people with uh
older people with eye issues, what do
you recommend? Mo, I'm a big fan of
sunlight, but I think most people are
asking this question because they
probably know the story about my nurse's
father. He uh had a condition in his eye
called AMD. And AMD is known in
opthalmology circles that, you know, you
can't get it better. So, he leg fallen
off my roof taking care of my clinic in
Louisiana. And I put him in a one of
these big red light panels and he didn't
follow any of the rules that I told him.
He didn't wear the goggles. Then he went
to the opt in about six weeks and he
found out the AMD was gone. So the best
red light is is the stuff that's not
fake. Meaning not not from an LED. The
sun does it. What did he do after by
doing the red light? His eyes got
better. He also didn't have to have
surgery on his leg. He started cutting
my grass on a zeroturn lawn mower. Where
am I at? 28th latitude in the sun. So
there was red light and the sun that led
to his eyes getting better and his leg
getting better and he also was told that
he had a posterior cataract. Cataract
was completely gone when the
opthalmologist looked at him the next
time.
&gt;&gt; And just so you know, he was over 80
years old.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Some people are saying uh many people
can't afford your lifestyle. I'm going
to disagree with I do too
&gt;&gt; so much. You guys have no idea how cheap
life is at the equator.
&gt;&gt; It is Latin America
or Asia even places uh well I I would
really want to live in the Middle East
or uh different for different reasons.
Uh but you have Asia a little harder to
get Latin America a lot easier to get a
residency. um if you are retired which
is you probably need to do I know it's
important to do it when you're young but
it's never too late in retirement life
is cheaper here it's easier here if
you're able to work remotely there's no
reason why you couldn't be latitude like
this
&gt;&gt; and uh and you will feel so much better
&gt;&gt; there's another tradeoff
&gt;&gt; there's aspect you need to tell people
the older you get the more sunlight you
need because CCO makes more water. So
you have to realize like when just think
about this common sense when a baby is
born it's 90% water. My age 55 years old
I'm 50 55% water. What is the part of
the mitoch cytochrome coxidase? It's a
red light chromophore
has four red lights in it. Well do you
think that you're better than upstate
New York where your parents are? The
answer is so that's another reason you
need to be here. It makes more sense and
it's very cheap to live at a place like
this. I think the person that asked that
question, it's more like I don't leave
my family and my friends and do this
because their time preferences are all
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up.
All right. Um any
any other questions, guys? Um trying to
think what I got through my questions
fairly. We got Jack for about 10 more
minutes and then actually technically we
have you a little long, but uh I I
promised them we would only do it for an
hour. Uh, I'm usually great with
questions. Anything else you want to add
to help people live a healthier life?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I would tell you the other thing I
want you to do is become a person that
questions everything. When you hear
something on the internet, ask the
questions,
get different viewpoints, but understand
where that person's coming from. Uh, you
also have to vet experts really
properly, meaning who packs your
parachute. So if somebody really cares
about the truth, they can give you sites
like a blog that I write has a building
on. So I'm not giving you my opinion.
I'm telling you exactly what the reading
of the tea leaves is. If somebody says
something that you believe that I don't
believe, ask the question. Uh and don't
shy away from controversy. Controversy
is how we learn.
&gt;&gt; Oh my whole channel
controversy,
&gt;&gt; right? And books. I wear a big thing.
Build a So I'll give you five books.
Andrew Marino's Going Somewhere. Robert
O Becker's The Body Electric. Roland Van
Wick, Life Sculpts Life. Um Gerald
Pollock's book, um U the Fourth Phase of
Water. And then my favorite
mitochondrial book is Nick Lane, Power
Second Suicide.
I hope you guys wrote those down. Damn,
I forgot to locally record this. I was
going to just in case the video went out
but uh okay so let's I got more
questions fasting I actually did my
second interview of a health uh expert
my first one was a a Dr. August Dunning,
a former NASA scientist who wrote a book
on dry fasting and he recommends 7day
dry fast protocol to activate your stem
cells and all the stuff that water
fasting is supposed to do. In his
research, he's like the water fasting
claims are blown, but they're all true
if you dry fasted. Your thoughts on
fasting and indoor dry fasting? I think
again you have to realize the dealing
with astronauts. Astronauts are fit
people train wrecks. So if you take
somebody to drive fast for seven days,
they're going to [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] laugh at you.
They can't. They're calling can't
support it. Now does fasting
&gt;&gt; do it. I I I've done three to four days.
I'm going to try to do seven
right after New Year's. The
&gt;&gt; Here's the key thing. The fast that we
talked about before, breakfast, doing
that every day, I think is critically
important.
I do I do that now. I just eat later in
the day. My dinners are usually later.
So my breath
&gt;&gt; the more stress you have like you have
light stress circadian stress which is
what an astronaut has
&gt;&gt; then fasting has a bigger window. But
the problem is you have to have at least
a baseline of decent colony and
mitochondria function in order to make
that work. If you don't you're going to
Okay. Uh let's talk a little bit about
blood work. Uh your views on iron levels
and should people
occasionally uh donate blood important
for men than women because men the
ability to lose blood especially if you
eat a lot of meat. Making sure your uh
iron levels are never too high.
&gt;&gt; If you would have asked me this question
20 or 15 years ago I would have said
blood work is important. Now, I think
it's super. I think it's a total waste
of money. Uh, I think bleeding yourself
only makes sense if you have
hemocchromattosis. I don't care how much
meat you eat. If you have good kidneys
and good liver, you won't have a
problem. The real big issue with iron is
we failed the way same way stars do. You
may not know this, but when a star blows
up, become a supernova. It's because the
the fusion center becomes iron. The same
thing is true when your feradin level
goes up. That tells you that the blowing
up. And what are you doing? You're
creating light from your mitochondria.
That is a state of ill health. Okay? You
don't see any lab test that proves that
you're making upes from your
mitochondria. So why are you doing the
blood work? You know why you're doing
the blood work? I'm going to tell you
why. It's a fiat mind game that the
functional medicine and the alopath
doctors got on you. And what I'd rather
see you do is take that money, put it
into Bitcoin, come down here and buy a
Citadel.
All right. Uh interesting. Uh let's talk
about other important elements of the
body. The thyroid any comments?
&gt;&gt; Thyroid is the gas pedal. What is it?
What it's the key there? Starts with
tyrrosine and feloni and ends in what?
So that means when you live in a hypoxic
environment or you're in a hypoxic
state, say like you're a vegan that
lives in the Netherlands and you smoke,
you break down your endogenous melanin
to T3. That's the way you survive. Are
you designed to do that? No. You're
designed to be in the sun to take those
two aromatic amino acids and make T3 and
T4 from sunlight. Most people don't get
told that. They get told the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
that Ray Pete tried to teach people for
a long time, and it's wrong.
Uh, one more topic. I I know I know what
the answer is, so it's a little bit of a
leading question. I know a lot of people
in my life, especially uh thinking of a
specific person, it's probably not
watching. If a person is really really
depressed over their life, the best
solution is
&gt;&gt; sunlight.
&gt;&gt; Sunlight.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean I mean that's the big thing
that Rick and I have, you know, many of
his clients have serious
problem because they're in the music
business. Most music at night, too much
light at night. What's the key? Low
dopamine. Low dopamine is caused by low
sunlight. Why? Dopamine is made from
another aromatic amino acid.
means UV light. That's what they absorb.
If you get somebody, put them at the
beach every day. Similar to what we the
chance of them being depressed goes.
Anything else you want to add?
&gt;&gt; Nope. Just good meeting you. Seeing you,
come see me, Salvador, and come see the
uh There you go. See? Come on.
&gt;&gt; So, Tone, you know, now you felt me.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; All right, guys.
&gt;&gt; Look, here comes the wife. She's She's
telling me I got to go.
&gt;&gt; So much for watching. We're going to let
Jack go. Let me steal that microphone
off you.
&gt;&gt; And uh we got this done in 1 hour.
There's a clip there. There you go. We
got this done in 1 hour. I really hope
the video How was the video from your
end?
&gt;&gt; Look pretty good.
&gt;&gt; But the audio is the more important
part.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; audio was choppy.
&gt;&gt; No, audio was was good, but I didn't
really
&gt;&gt; All right, we're still live, actually.
So, let me let me wrap this up, guys. Uh
I hope the video and audio went well. I
really should have recorded locally. I'm
going to try and remember to hit the uh
record button locally next time. Um next
time I'm in El Salvador, I will stay at
Jack's house. We're going to do a lot
more content. Uh in this realm, uh I
find them very very interesting and uh
uh the way these interviews run is I ask
questions that I want to know the answer
to. A few of them I know what the answer
is going to be because I do a little bit
of research ahead of time. All right,
guys. Thank you all for watching. and
see you all on the next one. I am still
a believer in doing blood work. We'll do
a whole series on blood work and I'll
show you guys my blood work and what
elements of my blood work came in
subpar, too high, too low, what I've
been doing to try and change that. And
that's going to be a great great series.
All right, thank you all for watching
and see you all on the next one. this
thing off.
&gt;&gt; Uh, here we go.