prehistoric sculptures of reptilian
beings.
&gt;&gt; Something significant happened.
Something that would alter our
understanding of human history.
&gt;&gt; Weird elongated skulls, nearly 4,000
years old. It would seem that those
elongated skulls
were people who were somehow half alien,
half human.
&gt;&gt; And ancient myths of small gray beings
with large heads and black oval eyes.
&gt;&gt; There have been descriptions [music]
of gray beings going back hundreds, if
not thousands of years.
All around the planet, ancient evidence
points to strange otherworldly visitors.
This data suggests beyond a shadow of a
doubt that physical extraterrestrials
visited Earth in the remote [music]
past.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by [music] extraterrestrial beings. What
if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history? And if [music] so, might
science finally reveal the truth behind
the mystery of the grays.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Roswell, New Mexico,
July 3rd, 1947.
A flash of light streaks across the sky
and crashes in the desert near the
Roswell Army Airfield.
Rancher M. [music] Brazzle hears the
impact and investigates. The next
morning,
he reports [music] what he finds to
authorities.
The field of debris was like nothing
ever seen before.
And the rancher reported finding what
looked like initially foil-like material
that when it was scooped up and
collected, it had these strange
properties like memory metal. In other
words, it would resume its original
shape when it was crumpled up, if you
like. This sort of suggested possibility
that something very strange had come
down at Roswell.
&gt;&gt; And they find five alien bodies, alien
because they do not look human.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; using hermetically sealed smaller
coffinsized boxes. These bodies were
transported and looked at, medically
analyzed, and then shipped off to
various areas of classified research.
They're described as the classical gray,
3 and 1/2, 4 feet tall, black wrapound
eyes, slits for a mouth, long arms,
depending on which [music] description,
between three and five fingers.
At first, US military personnel
announced that they had recovered debris
from an unknown spacecraft,
but later they reversed themselves
because 24 hours later the military
completely changed its story and said,
"Sorry, we made a big mistake. It was
just a weather balloon." But of course,
no statement was made as to how trained
military personnel [music] couldn't tell
the difference between a flying saucer
and a weather balloon.
But why did the military change their
story?
Was it because they found something
else? Something otherworldly as ancient
astronaut [music] theorists believe.
People who claim to have been associated
with the crash at Roswell claimed that
there were several alien bodies
recovered. It's very strange that they
would talk about beings.
We also know that the mortician was
called and that they were asked to come
up with small little caskets.
Something obviously happened at Roswell.
What was it exactly? We really don't
know, but I think it was out of this
world.
&gt;&gt; This is kind of the core of the Roswell
legend. Our government, which is in a
democracy supposed to be of [music] the
people, by the people, for the people,
is covering this up. The second thing
that is implicit in this legend is of
course that extraterrestrials have been
visiting the Earth.
But if alien beings did in fact crash at
Roswell, who are they and what do they
want?
September 19th, 1961.
According to news accounts, Betty and
Barney Hill were driving through New
Hampshire late at night when a large
flying saucer rapidly approached them
and then hovered over their car. They
saw strange figures through the windows
of the craft.
And mysteriously, the couple also
reported complete memory loss of the two
[music] hours immediately following the
encounter.
No one really knows to this day what
Betty and Barney Hill saw. However, the
details of their case do reflect on
various other versions of alien
abduction.
I say alien abduction because some of
the pieces of information that they
discuss, the loss of time, seeing beings
that actually came out of this craft and
associated and interacted with them and
they weren't human.
Ultimately, under hypnosis, they recall
being brought out of the car and taken
aboard the ship, that it was a
legitimate abduction and that Betty
pleaded with her captors, if you will,
that not to harm her. uh as she laid on
this table and experiments were done on
her like a needle being [music] inserted
into her stomach. Barney relates a
number of skin samples and sperm being
taken from him.
The beings described by Betty and Barney
Hill fit the classic case of a gray.
Now, there are variations to size and
dimensions of these beings, but they all
seem to have the same [music]
characteristics. Slim skindindly bodies,
large oval heads, large oversized eyes.
[music]
The hills were the first documented case
of an alien abduction in modern time,
but it is not the last.
Since the 1960s, there have been many
more similar reports, including that of
Kim Carlsburg, a commercial
photographer, who in 1988 [music]
claimed to have been abducted by gray
aliens in the middle of the night.
&gt;&gt; We were living on the beach in in
Pacific Palisades and I walked up to the
window and I saw this light on the
horizon that I had never seen before.
You know, I'd lived on the beach my
whole life and [music] it wasn't a boat
and it wasn't a star. I just watched
this craft. The next thing I knew, it
jetted into the stars and disappeared
and I went to bed as usual.
I woke up in the middle of the night and
I was [music] not in my bed any longer.
I was naked and [music] I was paralyzed.
The beans I saw were about 3 and 1/2 ft
tall. They were naked. They were
off-white. They were not gray. They had
huge heads, huge wraparound black eyes,
tiny little bodies.
There are many stories of grays
abducting humans into their spaceships
and even of being inseminated [music]
with alien reproductive material and
then conceiving human alien hybrid
babies and having those fetuses removed
from their bodies and then grown on the
alien spaceships.
In some cases, people report going back
onto the spaceship and being able to see
these hybrid offspring.
I was being used for my DNA. They were
creating hybrid children from my eggs,
someone else's sperm, and combining it
with their [music] DNA and their sperm.
I would be implanted with an alien
fetus, and they would leave the fetus in
my body for a few months. Then they
would bring me back again later, and
then they would remove it.
It was horrific. It was terrifying.
You can't have so many people saying
that they've been abducted and not have
some possibility of truth with that.
I [music] think it's happening. I don't
know if it's a hybridization program for
these ETs or whether they're trying to
bring these hybrids back to this planet
one day when the environment changes.
But in my opinion, something very
strange is happening to these people who
claim to be abducted.
There's an overabundance
of testimony from just too many people
who say that they remember these types
of creatures [music] and having been
taken by them. Yeah, I think the grays
make perfect sense. Now the question is
where are they from?
So if you think about the gray alien
with the large head, small body, why are
these the aliens that are so often
projected
as a scientist, you really have sort of
two sides that you like to think about?
One is why do we project them that way
if you know they're just our projection?
And if they did really exist
hypothetically, would intelligent life
look radically different? [music] And I
think there the answer can be very much
yes.
But what can explain the similarity of
the grays [music] described by abduction
victims?
And why do recent descriptions match
ancient depictions of so-called sky gods
found all around the world?
Might they be from the same race of
other worldly beings as ancient
astronaut theorists believe?
Something can be said about a potential
presence of grays in the remote past
because there are some figurines and
some cave drawings that look like grays.
There are some statues in ancient
Sumeriia, but we can also find cave
drawings in Europe and for example in
Australia where the heads feature
[music] a triangular shape with the big
almond eyes.
[music] Cave paintings in the Kimberly
region of Australia, nearly 5,000 years
old, could be among the earliest
depictions of [music] grays ever
discovered.
According to local legends, the carvings
[music] are of ancient spirits called
the Wina, who appeared during dream time
to create the landscape and influence
its inhabitants.
Really what you have there is a typical
depiction of your gray alien being.
The almond shaped eyes, the almond
shaped heads, because quite often you
find in Rockart various strange
creatures there, but not necessarily the
grays. So to have in the Kimbley caves a
depiction of a gray is really
extraordinary.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; The WINA were beings that descended from
the sky and essentially jumpst started
civilization in and around Australia.
In fact, the Aboriginals of today still
pray to those beings.
And to me, that is significant because
what we have here is what I refer to as
living mythology. that these mythologies
have been kept alive over thousands of
years. And to me, there is no
coincidence in that.
Might alien beings known as [music] the
grays really have been visiting Earth
for thousands of years as ancient
astronaut [music] theorists believe.
Perhaps the answer can be found not in
the stars, but in man's earliest
depictions of sky gods.
Iraq,
a region once known as Mesopotamia.
[music]
Located on the east bank of the Tigress
River, opposite the modern city [music]
of Mosul, lie the remains of the ancient
city of Nineveh.
Here in 1849, [music]
6,000year-old Samrian clay tablets were
discovered that contain [music] the
earliest known form of written records.
Interpretations [music]
of the accounts engraved on the tablets
speak of an alien race called the
Anunnaki who settled in Sumer and bred
with humans.
The Anunnaki, which comes from Sumer,
our modern-day Iraq, speak of gods that
literally created us humans in their
image and after their likeness.
So when we go back to some of these
[music] Sumerian epics and various texts
that go back thousands of years, the
Anunnaki are [music] a great resource of
realizing these were actual beings that
existed. And the Anunnaki even [music]
worked with or had some relationship
with the grays
with the Anunnaki. What Anu really is a
description of the fact that they're
linked with their created deities. And
in this case, Anu is [music] linked with
the constellation of Orion. Very
specifically saying that these creatures
come from somewhere out there in the
[music] universe and have come from
there to us.
When you look at the evidence, it
appears that there was a number [music]
of different alien species that were
coming to this planet.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; You have the smaller, big-headed gray
aliens.
You have the very tall, literal giants
that were sometimes called the Anunnaki.
We have other alien [music] species that
allegedly look almost identical to us.
In the American Southwest, the ancestors
of the native Hopi Indians [music]
believed in deities from other worlds
and created illustrations of them on
canyon walls.
But in some cases, researchers believe
the depictions of sky gods match
modern-day descriptions of the grays.
In Hopi culture, there are spirits
called kacina that represent really
beings from the other world.
They really are a mixture of uh nature
spirits, earth [music] spirits. Some of
them also really take on almost aspects
of very powerful ancestors or gods.
These are other worldly creatures.
The translation for the word kacina is
very simple. It means teacher. [music]
The Kachacina were not a part of the
spiritual world, but they were in fact a
part of the physical world. They
descended from the sky in what the Hopi
referred to as fiery shields.
They would touch down on Earth, spend
time with human beings, teach [music]
them, give them knowledge, and then they
would use the same quote unquote shields
to fly back into the sky.
The cachas were physically living with
them. And at some point it is said that
the cachas took to the mountains,
specifically the San Francisco mountains
outside of Flagstaff. And then that
later they disappeared.
The cacas in the Hopi culture are known
as gods. And this term gods I use
loosely because we now look at the
information and wonder if they're
possibly extraterrestrials.
Now what's interesting is this theme is
replicated across many different
cultures. The gods come here and find
our human females attractive. So this is
the same thing reported by the Hopi
Indians.
But if gray aliens came to Earth in the
distant past and mated with humans,
where is the physical evidence of this
union?
Researchers point to numerous elongated
humanoid skulls found on several
continents.
Might such remains actually be of a
hybrid species, part alien and part
human, as ancient astronaut theorists
believe.
One of the things that you see around
the pyramids [music]
here on coastal Peru is that they're
associated with these skulls. It would
seem that those elongated skulls were
half alien, half human.
And in fact, some of the recent DNA
testing that's been done here in Peru is
indicating that these people are somehow
half human and half some other race.
Well, this uh enlong schools is a
phenomenon which is worldwide. [music]
We found them in Central America, we
found them in South America, you find
them in Egypt. So I think in the very
very beginning these extraterrestrials
they must have had longer heads than the
normal human brain.
They're found all over the globe. And we
have to wonder if this was some type of
either lost advanced civilization or
were these actually extraterrestrials
[music]
visiting various cultures and having
similar influences. Maybe some of these
elongated skulls are actually artifacts
to say beings existed at one time that
ancient man considered gods.
And it's once again cross-cultural. We
find it specifically at a very brief
period in time in ancient Egypt under
Akenadan. Then specifically in Peru, an
awful lot of excavations are happening
[music] where you see strange skulls uh
being uncovered, specifically these
skulls which are really larger than they
should be.
It seems very straightforward that
somehow the gods were visually linked
with elongated skulls.
Might elongated skulls, some estimated
to be over 4,000 years old, really be
evidence of the existence of gray aliens
in the ancient past?
And if so, could this be proof of
intermingling between human and alien
civilizations?
For ancient [music] astronaut theorists,
the answer on both counts is a
categorical yes.
Perhaps further evidence can be found
not here on Earth, but on the surface of
a nearby planet,
Mars,
July 31st, 2008.
NASA's Phoenix lander successfully
touches down on the Martian surface.
And while searching for evidence of
microbial life,
the robotic spacecraft [music]
finds trace amounts of water frozen
underneath the soil.
The [music] discovery of an element so
essential to life raises speculation
that Mars [music] may have been home to
alien life forms in the distant past.
Now, when we start scouring the solar
system for evidence of an alien species,
what we're really beginning to find out
is that Mars is by far the best
candidate.
Given that our local solar system
already has example of two planets, one
that clearly has life cuz we're here
and then one like Mars that [music]
could have had it started and then just
cuz it was in the wrong place or not
quite right, it didn't keep going. gives
hope that there really is more life
elsewhere in the universe.
&gt;&gt; Mars has a special place in [music] our
consciousness and our folklore going
back to the time of really the ancient
Greeks. And this becomes more important
as we get closer to the end of the 19th
century where you have reliable
astronomy, powerful [music] telescopes
that can see, for example, some of what
are called canals on the planet Mars.
People have begun to imagine a
civilization that perhaps existed long
ago on Mars, created these canals for
transportation or for other reasons. But
then something [music] cataclysmic
happened. That possibility of life on
that planet was destroyed
and so the denisens had to flee and
[music] go somewhere else.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible that Mars was once a
fertile planet like the Earth? And if
so, [music] might it have been home to a
species of beings we call the grays? As
some ancient [music] astronaut theorists
believe,
all mythologies consider Mars to be the
planet of war. So, you cannot exclude
that sometime in the past, this could be
10,000 or 100 thousand of years ago,
Mars had a civilization and the
civilization destroyed itself. whatever
the reason was and some of the winners
of the situation escaped to Earth.
&gt;&gt; Our ancestors were also convinced that
there was life on Mars. Mars has always
been singled out as this cosmic twin of
planet Earth. It's almost as if it's
somehow part of our DNA that somehow
tells us we need to go to Mars.
And if we did have a brother at one
point, the likely chance is that we're
going to find evidence of this brother
on Mars. [music]
Everything which we know about non-human
life contact in the past or [music] in
more recent times, it is somewhat
humanoid. And so to find out that this
species would have a base on Mars is, I
think, very much in the line of
expectations.
Any type of species on Mars today would
probably be subterranean. Now, this is
an interesting piece for the idea that
the grays occupy Mars. We know that here
on Earth, we do see evidence of
subterranean activity. Maybe the grays
actually came from Mars.
But if Mars might have once sustained
life and possibly intelligent beings,
might other more distant [music] planets
in the universe also have supported life
and perhaps even a thriving
civilization.
December 5th, 2011,
scientists [music] using NASA's Kepler
Space Telescope confirm that they have
found [music] two planets orbiting a
distant sunlike star that are in a
narrow range of space [music] within
their solar system called the habitable
zone in which a planet might have water
and perhaps sustain life.
So, there's been the recent [music]
announcements of the Kepler B and new
planets, and it's been a very exciting
period [music] for astronomy. Our
telescopes have gotten powerful enough
to finally find planets around other
suns. We have them around ours. Why
would we be unique?
Kepler 22b is an example. 2.5 times the
size of Earth, rotates on a 290day
orbit, very similar to our own
properties here on Earth, potentially
the grays or various other aliens that
have been visiting us come from other
worlds that we're now finally starting
to locate. And so what we're having here
is really a threshold. Science, NASA in
this case, has really made a lunge
forward in saying we have left the field
of possibilities. We've entered the
realm whereby the ancient alien theory
is no longer a theory, but is really
coming closer and closer and closer to
evidence, if not proof.
&gt;&gt; I think it's very possible that Kepler
will find more and more planets, some
Earthlike. They've already come up with
a theory that there are billions of
planets in our galaxy now. Some of them
are bound to have intelligent life.
If gray aliens did originate from
habitable planets like Kepler 22b,
is there evidence that their
intergalactic quest led them to Earth?
According to ancient astronaut
theorists, we need look no further than
the megalithic structures and pyramids
of Central America's ancient city of
Teayotiwakan.
The word Teayotuakan means where man met
with the gods.
The main reason why Teayotakan was even
built there was because at one point
some type of extraterrestrial contact
took place at Teotiwa.
According to researchers, Teayot
Tiwakan's three main pyramids were built
in precise alignment with the three
bright stars of the Orion constellation.
And astonishingly, the smaller
structures along the broad avenue were
positioned [music] to represent our
solar system.
Teotakan has a main road orientated
north south
and on this main road you have different
buildings mostly pyramids. Every
building has the position of one planet
in our solar system [music] and the
distances between one building and the
next correspond with the distances of
the planets in our solar system [music]
including the asteroid belt. You see in
our solar system we have in the center
the sun then comes Mercury, Venus, Mars
between Mars and Jupiter is the asteroid
belt. Then comes [music] Uranus,
Neptune, Pluto etc. But the constructors
of this could not have known this. Where
does this knowledge come from?
[music]
When you look at pyramids themselves,
they are a special geometric form.
In fact, the locations of many of these
pyramids can also be mapped out into
geometric grid patterns on the earth.
And you have [music] to think that
whoever is guiding such a precise
network of pyramids must have been a
very advanced culture, [music]
probably extraterrestrials.
These are strange structures and if you
look at them you you just say number one
how did they build this with primitive
tools if they had tools at all.
I think there's there's one of two
things going on here on this planet.
Either Earth is very old and life
started much earlier and human life
started millions of years before we
think they did or there was some kind of
extraterrestrial help.
We seem to have megalithic monuments and
[music] information crossultures around
the globe that seem to be coming from
some type of outside source. It goes
back thousands of years. We have
artifacts. For [music] instance, in
random places like Armenia, there are
actual reliefs of what look like gray
aliens.
Sumer, modernday Iraq. We find
figurines, little statues. They look
like gray aliens. The evidence that we
see here is that the [music] grays do
exist.
Does the discovery [music] of distant,
possibly life sustaining planets add
credence to the evidence of gray aliens
in [music] our recent and prehistoric
past, as ancient astronaut theorists
believe?
Perhaps further evidence can be found in
ancient stone carvings [music]
of strange creatures known as the
reptilians.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Chichinita Mexico,
VJ Anagara, India,
and the Forbidden City in China.
All across the ancient world,
are numerous pyramids and temples
[music]
dedicated to what the ancient
inhabitants referred to as sky gods.
But is it possible, as some ancient
astronaut theorists contend, that these
so-called sky gods were in fact another
form of gray alien
known as the reptilians.
All throughout Central and South
America, people worship this winged
serpent.
But it gets even better because halfway
around the world in ancient India we
find the stories of flying snakes.
Again,
they were very aware that snakes cannot
fly.
However, whatever it was that they saw
flying around in the sky could best be
described
as a winged serpent.
Whenever creatures are being
encountered, we are going to look
towards the animal kingdom to find
comparisons with what we are seeing.
And basically what that suggests is
really that the creature looks like us
but also has some reptilian features.
So when we're looking at creatures in
modern UFO mythology, specifically the
grays, what you have is interbreeding
between the grays and reptiles.
Some researchers believe that before
settling on primates, [music]
gray aliens may have viewed reptiles as
Earth's dominant life form,
one they could exploit for reproductive
purposes.
If so, might the grays have combined
their genes with the DNA of reptiles to
create hybrid reptilian creatures that
for a while coexisted with early
homminids on Earth?
And might this explain the numerous
ancient depictions of reptilian beings?
In ancient India, we have the Naga, half
man, half snake.
It was allegedly a creation by the god
Vishnu or Krishna. And who were these
gods?
According to the ancient alien theory,
the gods were nothing else but genetic
products of extraterrestrials.
[music]
The Shetty are an interesting subset of
the Hopi tradition.
They are quite reptilian in nature as
well because they are a species which
tend to go underground.
Now when we make comparison [music] to
UFO folklore, we quite often find or
hear that some of these entities prefer
the underground or live in underground
bases.
&gt;&gt; If you go back even to the biblical
days, the description of Satan is
somewhat reptilian.
It's very possible he was a reptilian
extraterrestrial and that the human
beings of the time just interpreted that
as something from the heavens.
There are various reports in South
America. Even in Asia, in China, we have
this similar reference of reptilians and
kings being denoted as a dragon symbol.
So there must have been some type of
global influence that took place from a
reptilian source.
In ancient Chinese culture, we have four
dragon kings and [music] they are the
deities of the sea.
And it is said that they had a crystal
palace underneath the ocean. But it is
not mythological in the sense that
[music] it is completely invented.
Somehow these weird creatures made
contact with the early Chinese and hence
were remembered in Chinese mythology.
&gt;&gt; Not only do they have reptilian
characteristics, but supposedly they
could shapeshift,
actually become another type of form of
a body, a human being. Alien versus
human. Now, a lot of these things are
hard for us to grasp and understand, but
throughout time, there are reports of
these reptilian creatures having amazing
abilities, even the ability to change
their shape.
Some researchers have also theorized
[music] that the reptilians may have
battled homminids for domination of
Earth,
resulting [music] in the near extinction
of the hybrid species
and forcing survivors to go underground.
It's clearly evidence that ancient man
were witnessing things, whether it be
extraterrestrials visiting us
or beings that lived maybe underground.
We don't know. But [music] there are
clear references of some type of
advanced humanoid reptilian being that
has influenced our cultures.
Might such legends and depictions of
reptilian serpents and dragons
have been prehistoric [music]
man's way of documenting their
encounters
with supernatural hybrid creatures
produced by gray aliens as some ancient
astronaut theorists [music] believe.
Perhaps the evidence may even show that
we are more closely connected to the
[music] graves than ever imagined.
Washington DC,
the National Institute of Health.
Here in 1990, scientists began [music]
the human genome project to identify
every gene in the human body and
determine [music] what makes up our DNA.
This scientific breakthrough may allow
us to manipulate human evolution and
alter [music] the human race.
But is it possible when we have become
masters [music] of human evolution that
we may finally understand the true
nature of gray aliens?
When you look at the physiology of what
we think the grays are, okay, large
head, huge wraparound eyes,
spindly body, you have to ask yourself,
does this make sense in an evolutionary
sense?
And the answer is no. But does it make
sense if these beings are bioengineered?
And the answer to that is yes. That's
what the grays really, I think, most
realistically are.
I believe that extraterrestrials found
on this planet a species that [music]
they were able to change the genetic
code that would allow them to interact
and secure the longevity [music] of
their species. We're the product of
that.
We're the genetic carrier, if you will.
One of the reasons why they're still
abducting us, that tweaking of the
genetic code is still going on.
The grays are our space brothers. I
don't think they're necessarily evil.
We're an ends to a means.
Could [music] extraterrestrials have
bred with humans? You sort of need two
things to have happened. One is the life
form would have had to be carbon based
[music] like us presumably cuz the
chemistry has to work. The second thing
is [music] you would need basically the
same genetic type structure. So you
could imagine if there was another
planet with fairly similar conditions
that gave carbon based life forms, what
would evolve there is a good likelihood
that you would get species like us. And
if they were close enough, then of
course they could interbreed with humans
on Earth.
&gt;&gt; Why would they be creating a hybrid
being? Is there something that's going
to happen here on Earth where our
genetic makeup maybe won't be able to
survive? Some type of solar activity or
something they need to genetically
modify us so that we can still survive.
Is it for our own good as humans? Or are
they doing it for their need as aliens?
If gray aliens interbred with humans,
might their biology and appearance be a
reflection of their more [music]
advanced evolution as a species?
And if so, might they provide a hint of
what humans may look like in the distant
future?
Even though the grays kind of look very
different to us, you know, the larger
heads, the smaller bodies, the big black
eyes, in terms of evolution, you need
hands, you need fingers and thumbs,
you need eyes, you need ears, you need a
mouth, you need to be able to
communicate
because you would need that type of form
to really advance yourself as a
civilization.
&gt;&gt; When you're a super technologically
advanced race, you don't really need big
muscles. You don't really need sex
organs if you're being genetically
engineered
biologically and cybernetically most
likely to function in the capacity that
they do here.
A super large head, for example, houses
a hell of a large brain, easily their
greatest asset. It's a brain that allows
them to have a cognitive capacity
probably vastly beyond what we're able
to have. It's a brain that allows them
most likely to have telepathic
capabilities that are beyond the
capability of most humans.
I tend to subscribe to the theory that
we are in their image.
Sounds like the book of Genesis, doesn't
it? But it's very possible that ETSs who
look like we do, or should I say we look
like they do came here, did a little
manipulation, genetically altered what
was here on the planet, created the Adam
and Eve, turned it into modern man, and
then left. For whatever reason,
there is a missing link. The missing
link is ET. They've changed our genetic
code eons ago. And through a process of
evolution, you have the human [music]
development to the point where we've
going into space. Our evolutionary
process [music] is a direct result of
genetic manipulation by ET.
But could an alien species such as the
Grays really travel to Earth from a star
system hundreds? Or perhaps thousands of
light years away? Or might the Grays
actually be time travelers from our own
future?
As some ancient [music] astronaut
theorists suggest,
&gt;&gt; I think what we have is a whole shift in
the imagination in the 20th and 21st
century. Alien grays are actually beings
from the future who are traveling in
time to the present time, which is their
past, [music] and they have evolved into
this strange, hairless, grayish, bugeyed
form.
&gt;&gt; I have to wonder if they're actually
interdimensional. I say this because the
evidence suggests they have the ability
to fold space and time with their
technology. Once we're talking about
interdimensional beings and what we're
finding is that today ancient history
and future I think are all the same.
That also explains why there are so many
time anomalies happening with these
events.
So it's very possible that they actually
come from a distant part of our future.
Will we ever know the truth about the
grays?
What is the secret to their mysterious
origin?
And why, if they exist?
Do they appear to [music] be so
interested in our world?
Are they here to study us,
to communicate with [music] us,
or are they really coming here to warn
us of our future?
A pattern of stars repeated in monuments
throughout the ancient world.
&gt;&gt; It's a global phenomenon. There might be
a celestial plan.
&gt;&gt; Coordinates for a celestial
constellation
mapped out 7,000 years ago in sand and
[music] stone. The builders clearly
possessed some advanced knowledge of the
constellations [music]
and clues that longlost civilizations
may have had contact with travelers from
this cluster of stars.
&gt;&gt; Orion is so important to all of these
ancient civilizations. Somehow this is
linked to where we came from and where
we're going.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited in the past
by extraterrestrial beings. What if it
were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history?
And if so, might they have left behind
signs revealing mankind's ultimate
[music] destination
in the constellation
of Orion?
January 11th, 2006. [music]
The Hubble Space Telescope captures a
never-beforeseen image of the Orion
Nebula.
A massive star formation 1,500 [music]
light years from Earth.
The panoramic photo [music] reveals more
than 3,000 stars in various stages of
life and gives researchers new insight
into the formation of celestial objects
and planetary systems.
According
to modern [music] scientists, it is here
in this mysterious cloud of dust and gas
that stars and planets may have been
created billions of years ago.
&gt;&gt; Astronomers usually refer to it as M42.
Not such a sexy name, but it's a stellar
nursery. It's where stars are being
born.
And so this part of Orion gets a lot of
study by astronomers.
You have this rapid star forming region.
You have these young stars and very
likely many many young uh planets that
also form out of that gas and dust that
collapse to make those stars in the in
the Orion Nebula.
&gt;&gt; Now stars being born obviously means
that certain things are happening there
on a level which we simply don't really
understand.
As seen from Earth, [music] the Orion
constellation is one of the most
prominent star formations in the night
sky and has been revered [music] by
ancient cultures around the globe for
thousands of years. Named after the
Greek [music] demigod Orion in the 8th
century BC, when connected, the stars
form the head, shoulders, belt, and feet
of a man.
Orion is probably one of the most
recognizable constellations in the sky,
maybe only second to the Big Dipper.
It's near the equator and in the
northern hemisphere. It's [music]
visible in the winter. It has a lot of
bright stars in a big square. That's the
body of Orion. The three major stars in
the constellation are Alnam, Alnitak,
and Mntaka. These are the [music] belt
stars of Orion. And most people
recognize the constellation by these
three stars right in a row.
According
to Greek mythology, Orion was a giant
born with superhuman abilities. [music]
A mighty hunter who killed animals with
an unbreakable bronze club.
When the Greek hero was eventually
[music] slain, he was placed among the
stars for eternity.
&gt;&gt; His father was in fact Poseidon.
So he knew a lot about oceans and Bosion
apparently taught Orion how [music] to
walk on water. There's another story
about him being so big that when he
walks through the ocean, his head and
shoulders are above the ocean. [music]
So get a sense of his size.
All of our astronomical bodies are named
after major figures from Greek
mythology.
We have these wonderful [music] texts um
that describe stars and how it is that
they got their names. To write about the
stars, to write about the heavens,
[music] to write about the bodies in
space is essentially to be talking about
the realm of the gods.
[snorts] Now, the constellation of Orion
in all traditions and particularly the
Egyptian tradition is usually regarded
as a striding man.
The Greeks saw him as a hunter. Many
other cultures saw him as a giant.
Sometimes we have him depicted [music]
as smiting the enemy. Sometimes he is
trampling across a serpent. But in each
case, we know that Orion is depicted as
a human being. It's entirely possible
that a character like Orion was based on
an actual human being. Because we have
to keep in mind that for the Greeks,
what they call mythology or myth, the
mythic [music] past was just older than
ancient history.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible, as ancient astronaut
theorists [music] suggest, that Orion
was named for an actual flesh and blood
being? Or might there be another more
profound [music] reason this demigod and
the stars that form his body were
worshiped?
Some researchers believe the answers can
be found by looking at the origin
stories of a civilization that thrived
in the Nile River Valley more than 2,000
years before the Greeks.
[music] According to Egyptian mythology,
the gods descended from the belt stars
of Orion and Sirius, the brightest star
in the sky.
The ancient Egyptians believe that from
Sirius and Orion came beings in the form
of humans, Ozirus and Isis and
instigated the human race.
Metaphorically, it very much matches
what we know from astrophysics. We know
that we are the product of stars. We're
really made of star stuff.
Sirius and Orion are critically
important because they represent Isis
and Osiris, the god and goddess from
which all of Egyptian civilization and
ultimately all of human civilization
supposedly sprang. So to the ancient
Egyptians, Osiris was Orion. That
constellation actually was a literal
living embodiment of the great god
Osiris who was always over our heads,
always looking down upon us and always
judging us because in the end he would
be the guy that would decide whether we
got eternal life or whether we were
recycled [music] back through the
spiritual mulch and had to start all
over again.
ancient Egyptians were very clear that
Orion was linked with creation,
specifically magic creation. And so if
we accept [music] what our ancestors
were saying, mythology all of a sudden
becomes more interesting because all of
a sudden we see the truth as to what
Orion really stands for. And it is all
to do with creation, magical creation.
And creation in those days was linked
with the gods.
Orion and Ozeris are the same in ancient
Egypt. The Egyptians believed that
Oziris will return from Orion one day.
Every culture in antiquity had the
knowledge of somebody who returns one
day. We are still expecting the return
of someone.
Are the creation stories of the
Egyptians actually documentation of
mankind's other worldly origins as some
ancient astronaut theorists suggest?
And if so, might they have left behind
more evidence perhaps written in stone?
According to the pyramid texts, a
collection of religious records carved
into the walls of pyramids dating back
to 2400 BC, the ancient Egyptian pharaoh
Unus,
ruled for 30 years before making his
final voyage to the star system Orion.
Unus, who according to the pyramid texts
apparently became great by eating the
flesh of his mortal enemies [music] and
then slaying and devouring the gods
themselves.
Some say that this was based on a belief
in contiguous magic whereby consuming
the flesh of great people would [music]
bring inheritance of their powers. After
devouring the gods and absorbing their
souls [music] and powers, Una's journey
through the sky to Orion.
Might the writings in the pyramid texts
actually be more than myth as some
ancient astronaut theorists believe?
And could the Pharaoh Unas [music]
actually have traveled into space?
If so, how?
When you listen to the ancient
Egyptians, they clearly tell us that the
purpose of the great pyramid [music] was
not as a tomb, but rather as a sort of a
womb of transformation. The pharaoh
would enter into it as a man and through
the the process of the technology
[music] that the pyramid is built for,
the pharaoh is transformed into a god.
So that [music] now he is an ascended
being who is capable of traveling into
the stars and also returning.
They seem to have wanted to create a
kind of an ancient launching pad, a sort
of Cape Canaveral of the of the
pharaohs.
The idea was to build the hardware in
order to somehow get the soul of the
king going to these stars.
Is it possible that the pharaohs of
ancient Egypt were able to [music]
travel back and forth to the stars of
Orion by using the pyramids?
According to [music] ancient astronaut
theorists, the proof can be found by
examining an elaborate series of air
shafts embedded [music] within the Great
Pyramid. Air shafts that point directly
to the stars of Orion and Sirius.
There is definitely [music] a lot of
scientific data that has shown that the
pyramid and the entire Giza plateau, the
alignments of the [music] air shafts
from the kings and the queen's chamber
are all pointing to Orion. And so that
may be a message to us that [music]
that's where uh these extra terrestrials
were from. The whole concept that the
three pyramids at Giza are in a special
alignment of Orion's belt is very
interesting. And this would seem to
indicate that Orion was the destination
for the Stargate that they were building
at Giza.
Why does the Great Pyramid have air
shafts that point to Orion? Is it
possible they served as a [music] kind
of intergalactic gateway between the
Earth and Orion?
And if so, might this be further proof
of our extraterrestrial [music]
origins?
There are those who believe clues can be
found in the middle of the Nubian
desert, where researchers have
discovered what may be the world's
oldest megalithic complex pointing to
Orion,
southern Egypt,
500 miles south of Cairo, on a desolate
plane. plane [music] in the eastern
region of the Sahara Desert lies the
mysterious archaeological site known as
Napla.
Discovered by a team of scientists in
[music] 1974,
researchers believe the megalithic
stones scattered here were once [music]
part of a vast and complex ritual center
for an ancient civilization that thrived
from 6,400 to 3,400 BC just before the
rise of the Egyptians.
We knew that there were many prehistoric
sites in the Sahara in this part of the
Egyptian desert. What Napla is different
is that it wasn't a settlement.
It was clearly a ceremonial site and a
very intriguing one and [music] it had
strange things.
One of the centerpieces is a circle that
has been called the mini stonehenge of
the desert.
&gt;&gt; For more than three decades, this
circular stone structure and its
intricate alignment to the belt stars of
the Orion constellation have baffled
archaeologists.
The builders of Napa
seem to be aware of a level of physics
and understandings of mathematics that
they interlined into these structures
which clearly say they possessed some
advanced knowledge of the
constellations.
Engineer Robert Bval and astrophysicist
[music]
Thomas Brophy have studied the
configuration of this mysterious [music]
monument for more than 10 years.
In their book, Black Genesis, they
suggest the stone circle is a star
viewing diagram that aligns with the
belt stars of Orion at the summer
solstice.
&gt;&gt; Counter circle is this uh smaller stone
arrangement and the megalithic
alignments point to stars. Now, the the
calendar circle we think represents a
diagram that teaches how the sky moves
long term.
What we're looking at right here is a
small mockup of the actual calendar
circle of Napa.
These actual stones would come up to
about your knee and the whole circle uh
would be about 12 ft across or so. And
there are these two sets of gates on the
outer parts of the circle. [music] And
this gate is pointing towards where the
uh summer solstice sun rises.
According to mainstream scientists,
radiocarbon dating indicates the site
was constructed nearly [music] 7,000
years ago. Taking this time frame into
account, Broofphy studied [music] the
positioning of the gates and the center
stones and discovered that it was then
in 4900 BC when three [music] of the
center stones lined up precisely with
three of the brightest stars in the
constellation of Orion. If we look up in
the sky at that time, these three stones
right here, they represent the Orion's
belt stars exactly as they were seen at
that time. So the idea is the stones
represent a map of the stars in the sky.
Is it really possible as some
researchers believe that the stones of
Napa correspond with the alignment of
Orion's belt as observed just before the
summer solstice [music] 7,000 years ago?
If so, why and how would ancient man
have created such an advanced [music]
diagram of this constellation?
Mysteriously, the inhabitants of Napa
[music]
vanished around 3,400 BC.
Some researchers [music] believe they
migrated 60 mi east,
where Egypt's Nile Valley civilizations
emerged in the 4th century [music] BC.
&gt;&gt; The astronomy from Lethia was exactly
the same astronomy that the pyramid
builders. So suddenly what we thought
was original to the pharaohs was pushed
back. Now to these prehistoric people
thousands of years before
we call them the star people with no
idea where they came from that lived in
the Sahara when it was fertile for
thousands of years before the [music]
pyramid builders.
We went to try and trace their origins
and we've taken [music] the track all
the way now to the extreme southwest of
Egypt.
We've actually seen those people,
believe it or not. They left us [music]
drawings in caves. Some of them look
pretty strange. They're very tall,
slender people with a very strange head.
Now, whether this is artistic
representation, I don't know, but
they're certainly very mysterious.
Who are the star people? And why was the
exact location of Orion so important to
them? Were they simply another advanced
ancient civilization lost to time?
Or could it be possible that the star
people of Napa were literally visitors
from another world? Perhaps a deeper
understanding of Orion can be found here
in the ruins of one of the most
astronomically advanced ancient
civilizations.
Central Mexico.
Just 35 miles northeast of [music]
Mexico City, lie the ruins of
Teayotiwakan,
an ancient city [music] that sprawled 7
square miles and was once inhabited by
more than 150,000 people.
Researchers believe the impressive
structures here, including two large
pyramids and a temple, were built by the
Mayans in the 2n century BC. And like
the Egyptian [music] pyramids of Giza,
the monuments point directly to the
three stars of Orion's belt.
&gt;&gt; And this is not coincidental. The layout
of the pyramids of Teotuacan are in the
formation of Orion's belt.
The Mayans are very specific about
Orion's belt. They say it is a point of
creation. It is said that in 3,114
BC, the gods came from the heavens to
earth in a convention. And this
convention occurred in Tutouakan.
You find many of these so-called Orion
correlations in many other cultures. And
surprisingly, some of these ancient
structures not only form the image of
Orion on the ground, [music] but they
are um based on units of measurements
that somehow correlate. There seems to
be some sort of link. It's a very
complex subject and it's very
intriguing.
&gt;&gt; But how could there be similar
structures pointing to Orion built
[music] by civilizations located
thousands of miles apart?
Was it just a cosmic [music] coincidence
that both the Egyptians and the Mayans
revered the same constellation?
Or could there [music] really be a
connection between Orion and the birth
of mankind?
&gt;&gt; There might be a celestial plan
developed by an ancient civilization
that's long gone. And that's why we find
all these Orion correlations in various
spots all over the globe because a
single source at one time distributed
this kind of mythological [music]
material all over the world.
It's possible that the structures that
we see on Earth that are aligned with
Orion were created that way because the
extraterrestrials that came from Orion
directed the builders to do that. They
would do that so that we would remember
the place where these beings came from
and also to align ourselves with the
energies coming from Orion.
Could these monuments [music] in Egypt
and Central America really have been
built to commemorate mankind's celestial
origins as some researchers suggest?
Or is it possible there is an even
[music] more profound explanation for
these advanced alignments?
Perhaps not only to honor our star
ancestors, but also to reconnect with
them in the future.
Ancient astronaut [music] theorists say
yes and that the ultimate proof can be
found half a world away in an area that
has become known as the cradle of
civilization.
Northern Iraq, 1849. [music]
On the eastern bank of the Tigress River
near the city of Mosul, a team of
archaeologists from the British Museum
discovers thousands of clay tablets
containing cunioform script they believe
to have been written [music] by
Babylonian priests in the 7th century
BC.
Among the tablets found were two
mysterious relics that have become known
as the Babylonian star cataloges.
According to translations of the ancient
text, these tablets describe the [music]
precise movements of various celestial
bodies, now known as the zodiac.
&gt;&gt; We know so much about the history of
Babylonia because of the the excavation
and deciphering of huge numbers of these
ununiform texts.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; They were steeped in a religious view of
life and intrinsic to their religion was
devotion to the gods of the planets,
different constellations.
So this was what we could call the
cosmic religion.
According to some researchers, [music]
these clay tablets provide proof that
the ancient civilization of Babylon
obtain celestial knowledge from star
travelers.
The Babylonian star cataloges are an
interesting collection of information
with [music] accurate mathematical
equations, distance between planets,
esoteric knowledge that a primitive
civilization really shouldn't have.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; It really starts to raise the question
as to how they got this information,
what they were using it for. Was it
possibly [music] given to them by
extraterrestrials that they claim were
gods?
Like many other ancient cultures, the
Babylonians describe Orion as both a
constellation and a supreme being. In
their [music] writings, Orion is
referred to as the loyal shepherd of
heaven and the chief god of heavenly
realms.
Might these records actually provide
more evidence connecting ancient man to
other worldly beings?
For the Babylonians, this constellation
of Orion was called Sepazi Ana, which
means the shepherd of Anu. And usually
we would translate that the shepherd of
heaven because Anu was seen as the god
of heaven.
If we go back even further, we find an
earlier depiction of Orion as in a
birdlike form and was referred to as a
messenger.
&gt;&gt; The figure of a bird was located on the
stones behind the figure of the
shepherd. His position may indicate that
he [music] was bringing messages back
and forth from Earth to Orion.
Now the real question is how did he do
this? Is this all meant to be taken
symbolically?
Is it possible that what we have here is
a very rudimentary description of a type
of interstellar communication device?
Are the Babylonian star catalogs
potentially [music] even documenting an
ancient extraterrestrial space station
orbiting the Earth inhabited by ancient
aliens who came from Orion?
Is it possible the Babylonian [music]
gods were actually extraterrestrial
messengers from Orion?
And if so, might these otherworldly
visitors have created mankind here in
the fertile crescent where civilization
historically started more than 5,000
years ago.
The Babylonians had a strong tradition
of the origin of human beings and the it
has some variations. But the basic
principle that you find amongst the
Babylonians is the gods wanted to sleep
a lot and they wanted to eat a lot and
they got tired of doing the farming
[music] themselves and preparing the
food. And so they created a group of
lesser beings, human beings is [music]
what it was to do the farming and so on
for them.
on the edge of Mesopotamia, the dawn of
civilization. This was one of the first
spots where ancient aliens came to begin
to seed civilization on the planet.
Civilization that grew [music] into the
civilization of Sumer and Babylonia. If
you look at the Samrian hieroglyphs,
the Egyptian hieroglyphics,
the stories of the Maya, if you look at
all these cultures, what you'll see is
the same story told in [music] different
ways in different languages.
Those who came from the stars came here
and they started human civilization.
Are the origin stories of Babylon
located in the cradle of civilization
the ultimate proof of our divine [music]
connection to the Orion constellation?
And if so, might there be a profound
reason the stars of [music] Orion's belt
are located above the navl, the place on
the body symbolically linked with the
origin of humans. As ancient astronaut
theorists suggest,
many ancient cultures point to the
Orion's belt as the gateway for life.
The Mayans, the Egyptians, all of these
various cultures [music] seem to
reference the beginnings of life and the
endings of life transferring or passing
through the Orion's belt. Is this
somehow some type of seeding of life
that's taking place here on Earth in a
connection with the Orion constellation?
It would seem that there was some
awareness for the ancient peoples that
they had a sense for Orion being at the
heart of our galaxy.
And I think the next question which we
need to begin to answer is this.
Is it possible that somehow this
birthing place of stars also allows us
to make a connection with other
creatures with intelligences somewhere
out there in the universe?
Considering the Orion Nebula is a
nursery of stars, is it possible the
belt stars of Orion literally mark the
spot in the galaxy where all life on
Earth began?
And if we came from Orion, as some
ancient cultures suggest,
might there be a way to summon the
return of our other worldly creators?
Ancient astronaut theorists [music]
say yes and point to evidence in an epic
alignment to the [music] stars of Orion,
located in the American Southwest.
Black Mesa, northeastern Arizona.
The Native American Hopi tribe [music]
has called these peaks of the Colorado
Plateau home for more than 1,000 years.
High above the Arizona desert, their
reservation, encompassing more than 1.5
million acres consists of 12 villages.
Ancient astronaut theorists have studied
these mysterious [music] sites for
years, discovering what they consider to
be countless pieces of evidence of
[music] extraterrestrial contact in the
ancient past. According
to their research, both the Hopi
landscape and the trib's mythology are
centered on Orion.
The Hopi migrated all over the
Southwest.
After a series of building villages
and abandoning these villages, they came
to these three primary meases in
northern Arizona. They call them first,
second, and third maces.
&gt;&gt; The Hopi masses shape Orion's belt's
image. And it is said that the Hopi
specifically came here because of the
shape. So, we know that the Hopi are
extremely interested in Orion's belt.
This is the center of their universe.
They say it is a place where they can
make contact with the gods.
According
to some researchers,
not only do the three meases [music]
represent the stars in Orion's belt, but
when connected to other Hopy landmarks
[music] throughout the Southwest,
the collective sites map the entire body
of the Orion constellation. [music]
Every major star of the constellation,
it corresponds [music] to a ruin site or
a village that the Hopi are currently
living in. For instance, [music] the
left shoulder of Orion is a place called
Wupaki. It's north of Flagstaff, [music]
Arizona.
And they built this ruin about 1120 AD.
They lived there for a century or so,
and then they abandoned this place.
There's another place called Homolvy
Ruin.
It's by Winslow, Arizona.
And this corresponds to the right
shoulder of Orion
and the star Beetlejuice.
The Hopi also settled up north of the
Messes. This corresponds to the star
Riel. And there's a whole complex of
villages that corresponds to the right
foot of Orion that the star is scythe.
So you have the star mirror as above so
below. That's what the Hopi were trying
to achieve when they built this pattern
which took about three centuries to
construct.
But how did the Hopi ancestors know to
align their homes and sacred places so
perfectly with the Orion constellation?
Is it possible that they received help
from star travelers as some researchers
believe?
According to Hoping myth, the creator
god Masau directed the tribe over
hundreds of years as they migrated
[music] to the three maces.
The place Masau instructed them to wait
for his return.
&gt;&gt; The god Masau was there at the beginning
waiting for the hopy. This is a very
spooky looking god. This god has large
round eyes and a round [music] mouth and
a big bulbous head.
He taught the Hopi agricultural ways.
He's frequently seen with a staff in his
right hand like the constellation Orion.
Msaw told the people where to build
their villages. There was also tales
about a certain star that the Hopi would
follow. Now, a star that moves across
the sky and and stops when the hope are
supposed to stop and build their
village. That that sounds like some sort
of extraterrestrial craft that were
guiding the Hopi across the desert.
This is Fajada but where according to
ancient Hopi legends
their god Masau descended from the sky.
At night, the Orion constellation would
[music] basically hang in the sky
right above this beute. And the story
goes that Masau landed on top of this
platform.
So my question [music] is, did some type
of an extraterrestrial visitor land on
top of this be right here in some type
of a craft? And the answer is yes.
Someone or something from the cosmos
descended.
Could the hopy god of creation, Masau,
actually have been an extraterrestrial
traveler from Orion, as ancient
astronaut theorists contend?
And if so, why did this god instruct the
Hopi to migrate around the southwest in
the pattern of this constellation?
Is it merely coincidence that the Hopi
aligned their cities with Orion just as
the ancient Egyptians did? I don't think
so. I think this is clear evidence that
they were instructed to do so. The Hopi
people were trying to pay homage to
their star ancestors,
the ancestors that came from the
constellation Orion
and gave them this information about the
constellation and the place that they
came from. And that's why they they
built this pattern on the Arizona
desert. It's more or less a way that the
Hopi could memorialize the origin of
their celestial ancestors that came from
Orion.
The hopes are saying that at each point
of creation, each cycle of time,
Msau makes contact with them and quite
often tells them that an end of a cycle
is going to happen. and then he
safeguards them from destruction. It is
felt that this creator deity is
intricately linked with Orion [music]
and somehow only allows communication
when somehow the geographical layout
resembles Orion's belt. So what they're
hoping for now is really the return of
Msau.
Is it possible, as ancient astronaut
theorists believe, that ancient Hopy
legends of the creator god Masau provide
further proof of contact with our
extraterrestrial ancestors from Orion?
And if so, might the Hopi have been
signaling for the return of these other
worldly beings through their epic
alignment to [music] the constellation?
Or could there be a more profound reason
their landscape points to the stars of
Orion? Perhaps one that will ultimately
guide mankind back to our celestial
birthplace.
Giza,
Teayotiwakan,
Napa, Playa,
Black Mesa. [music]
Could these ancient monuments, all align
to the stars of Orion, really be linked
to each other, providing clues to our
celestial beginnings?
Or is there perhaps another even more
profound connection between mankind and
the constellation?
&gt;&gt; So why is it that the most important
archaeological sites on our planet
resemble the constellation Orion?
I think it's not a coincidence. And so
the question is where did this come
from? Was there somehow some technology
available to us to our ancestors or did
somebody map at an ancient point in time
it for them? Were they given this
science and did they just treasure it
and maintain it until a moment in time
when it was clearly lost?
When you look at these Orion
correlations,
pyramids at Giza,
the beliefs of the Mayans, what it seems
to show is that Orion is where we came
from. It's where the extraterrestrials
came from. And if we were to go to
Orion, what we would probably find there
is a planet very, very similar to that
of Earth.
Is it really possible, as some ancient
[music] astronaut theorists contend,
there is a planet similar to our own in
the constellation of Orion?
And if so, what? Or perhaps who would we
find there?
&gt;&gt; If we did get to the Orion [music]
constellation and the stars that make up
Orion, especially around the Orion
Nebula, star forming region, we would
find a region of the galaxy that's kind
of similar to our own, but more active,
more stars with planets likely. There's
still a lot of room for opinion because
there there are still unknowns. Uh so my
own opinion is yes, life is probably
either extremely likely elsewhere or
else uh we don't have a clue as to what
life really is. So if we're looking for
life elsewhere in the galaxy, a good
place to start looking would be Orion.
&gt;&gt; Even with today's technology, traveling
to Orion would take hundreds of
thousands [music] of years. But might
there be another more profound
mechanism? perhaps from out of this
[music] world that would make such an
expansive trip in one lifetime possible.
In 1935, [music]
30 years after his groundbreaking
special theory of relativity, Albert
Einstein published a collaborative
[music] paper called the Einstein Rosen
Bridge. According to this [music]
theory, bridges or black holes exist in
the universe, allowing shortcuts through
space and time. Today, physicists refer
to them as wormholes.
It's 1500 light-year distant about to
Orion.
If we were somehow able to use [music]
wormhole technology,
then conceivably we could [music]
shorten the travel time or even make it
instantaneous.
Although the theory even of how
wormholes could work is still being
developed.
&gt;&gt; Almost anything that's possible
theoretically in physics exists
somewhere in our universe. So I believe
that wormholes exist somewhere but not
anywhere close to Earth.
Might advanced extraterrestrial [music]
beings have traveled here, not in a
spacecraft, but through an
interdimensional space-time portal, as
some researchers suggest?
If so, is it possible the Egyptian
pharaohs really were able to journey to
Orion through their pyramids? And could
there be a way for us to rediscover
[music] that other worldly knowledge and
return to our celestial birthplace?
Might the Orion constellation also be
mankind's [music]
ultimate destination?
Orion is so important to all of these
ancient civilizations. We know that they
were seen as points of creation. We know
that the ancient Egyptians use it in
[music] their passport to the afterlife.
And so we know that this is place of
origin, but also a place of destination.
They tell us that somehow this is linked
to where we came [music] from and where
we're going.
&gt;&gt; I think the prevalence of the myths
about Orion and the alignments with
Orion suggests that the extraterrestrial
beings [music] who came from Orion
infiltrated or instructed various
civilizations throughout time [music]
and left this as evidence of their
appearance.
Thousands of years ago, there were
extraterrestrials. We know this from
tradition. And before the
extraterrestrial disappeared, they told
[music] our ancestors, "Yes, we will
return." The humans could not understand
what this was. They looked up to the
sky. They saw the glittering shining
stars. This deep. This is endless. They
believed this is heaven. The gods are in
heaven and they will return one day.
Are the widespread creation tales
surrounding Orion really just myth?
Or might they be historical accounts of
extraterrestrial beings that visited
Earth in the distant past as ancient
astronaut theorists believe?
And is it possible the stars Verion
actually represent not only the origin
but the final destination for mankind?
If so, how will we get there? And what
or who will we find when we arrive?
Perhaps one day we'll unlock the mystery
of Orion and reveal a celestial [music]
origin within ourselves.
Ancient tales of strange otherworldly
creatures.
There was a time when giants were upon
the earth. Sumerianss were living with
their gods, the Anunnaki.
Legends of gods who came from the
heavens to create mankind.
They were in a sense extraterrestrials.
They walked the earth. They ruled
[music] people.
&gt;&gt; And clay tablets revealing an
extraterrestrial agenda.
potentially they kind of upgraded the
human race and used them as sort of a
slave species.
&gt;&gt; Did alien visitors [music]
really changed the course of humanity in
the distant past?
&gt;&gt; Our ancestors received help and that
help came from nowhere else but up
there.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have [music] been visited in
the past by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true?
Did ancient aliens really help to shape
our history?
And if so, might the proof be found when
we examine the Anunnaki connection.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Iraq.
April 10th, 2003.
United States forces make their way to
the capital city of Baghdad
just 3 weeks after the launch of
Operation Iraqi Freedom.
American troops attempt to create and
maintain order. But looters fill the
streets, ransacking museums and
destroying thousands of ancient
artifacts.
Lutters forced their way in to the
National Museum
and stole all kinds of artifacts,
including musical instruments and
ununiform tablets that told the history
of ancient Sumeriia going back 6,000
years or more.
The genealogies and [music] histories of
the gods were there and stories of the
flood.
But now, many of these texts are missing
from us.
Now, [music] it wasn't just people off
the streets smashing a window and taking
an artifact. There were people wearing
earpieces, a very coordinated event,
penetrating double locked doors, and
[music] stealing instruments and jewelry
and all kinds of artifacts that date
back thousands of years all the way back
to the cradle of our civilization.
But why would militants [music] destroy
such precious objects of the ancient
world?
Was it really just a consequence of war?
Or a deliberate [music] attempt to
obliterate forbidden knowledge of the
past?
Perhaps answers can be found by taking a
closer look at the origins of these
priceless lost treasures.
According to archaeologists,
many of the lost Iraqi [music] artifacts
dated back to the time of the Samrians,
an ancient civilization that most
researchers believe is the oldest in all
of Mesopotamia.
Mesopotamia means between rivers in
Greek, referring to the Tigress [music]
and Euphrates rivers in what is today
known as Iraq.
There were [music] four main kingdoms in
Mesopotamia.
Sumer was the oldest one followed by the
kingdom of Akad begun by Sargon the
first. Um after that you have Babylonia
and Assyria. And even though languages
changed and people changed to [music]
some degree, the culture that was
established by the Samrians really
continued throughout the lifetime of
Mesopotamia.
Ancient Samaria in southern Mesopotamia
is often cited as the most ancient
civilization, even the first
civilization.
It goes back to approximately 3,000 to
4,000 [music]
BC. And here we see writing in the form
of Kaoform tablets on clay and on stone.
The Samrians were the ones who invented
the kioform writing system. The word
koform means wedge-shaped. It refers to
a system of writing whereby scribes
would take a wedge-shaped stylus and
impress signs on wet clay [music]
tablets. Those tablets could later be
fired and hardened and preserve what was
ever written on them.
Deciphering these cunoifor tablets was
next [music] to impossible until a key
discovery of thousands of tablets at an
Assyrian palace [music] in March of
1843.
This new abundance of cunioform
inscriptions provided some of the first
tangible evidence of an ancient kingdom
that had [music] been believed to exist
thousands of years ago.
A French scientist named Paul Emil Ba
found this gigantic underground area
[music] in northern Iraq in Corsabad.
Opened up this incredible room filled
with statues of gods and kings, all
kinds of wonderful treasures
and many written inscriptions
all over the walls in the ancient
Samrian Kia form.
Within 10 years, archaeologists had also
discovered the ruins of the legendary
Samrian capital city of Er, home of the
biblical figure Abraham.
At the site, scientists unearthed the
great ziggurat of a step pyramid-shaped
structure that was the administrative
[music]
center of the city.
as well as cunioform tablets and tombs
[music] adorned in gold.
So here they had found this legendary
capital [music] of the Samrians with its
goldclad tombs and ununiform tablets,
[music]
something that they thought was simply a
myth until the actual discovery of it
proving that it was indeed historical
fact.
When we look at the ancient Sumerian
civilization, [music] we attribute them
with over 100 of the firsts for a modern
society. Things like agriculture,
science, medicine, mathematics, [music]
kingship, laws, courts, judges, schools.
Literally, all of this shows up in
Sumerian times 6,000 years ago, right
out of the stone age.
According to mainstream researchers,
was sacked by their waring neighbors,
the Elummites nearly 2,000 years BC.
But some [music] researchers believe the
Cuniaform texts reveal something much
more than evidence of an ancient race.
They point to descriptions of a group of
divine beings called the Anunnaki, the
so-called princely offspring of God, who
according to the Samrians descended
[music] from the sky.
The religious system of Mesopotamia was
polytheism, which means that they
worshiped hundreds of different gods,
both male and female, often depicted in
human form,
having personalities very much like
people do. And um these gods were
arranged in a kind of political
hierarchy that in many ways mimic the
political systems of Mesopotamia itself.
And what this means is that you had the
high gods uh the heavenly gods and you
also had lesser gods who inhabited earth
and the underworld. Now according to the
Samrian text the heavenly gods the
Anunnaki
were the supreme deities the higher
deities.
The Anunnaki [music] are among the most
mysterious and powerful beings of myth
and sacred tradition. The Samrians
described them as humanoid but
non-physical spirit beings who had the
capability of morphing or phasing into
human form. They came to earth on a
special mission to bring wisdom and also
to mine certain materials from the earth
plain [music] itself.
In ununiform texts, the Anunnaki are
described in great detail,
including how they lived for hundreds of
years. They had tremendous [music]
knowledge and power uh over the entire
world. They knew everything.
They had knowledge of all of the
sciences and arts.
Where they got this knowledge and where
they came from is a complete mystery to
archaeologists.
And you have to ask yourself, were they
in fact extraterrestrials?
Might the strange gods described in the
Cunapform texts really have existed? And
if so, might they have been
extraterrestrial [music]
beings? Ancient astronaut theorists
believe the answer is a profound yes.
And for proof, they point to an ancient
legend also found written on clay
tablets. A legend that tells of the
creation of man by ancient creatures who
came from the sky.
Ninevea, Iraq, 1849.
[music]
A treasure trove of ancient cuniform
texts is uncovered
detailing accounts [music] of the
creation of Earth, man, and the lives of
the gods.
In 1849, Austin Henry Leard made an
archaeological expedition to a city of
Nineveh, a city that's mentioned in the
Bible. [music]
And in his excavations he discovered the
palace of Snack ribb who's well known
from the Bible. This really galvanized
the interest of the world.
Well 3 years after this his assistant
found the palace of his grandson Asher
Banipal on the opposite side of the
mount. Now in both cases they found
archives and together the archives form
about 20 to 30,000 tablets.
Recorded on seven of the tablets is the
Babylonian creation myth called the
Enuma Elish.
Enuma Elish was probably composed in the
11th century BC, but almost certainly
this story goes back to much earlier
periods.
The tablets tell of a god named Marduk,
who took blood from the god Kingu and
mixed it with clay in order to create
the earth's first humans.
When the Anunnaki create the model man,
that person gets picked up as a story in
the Bible and he's called Adam. What I
find interesting is that the Bible left
out some of the most important details
[music]
and cut the story short. So the Sumerian
tablets, the Mesopotamian tablets have
the more detailed versions.
According to mainstream scholars, the
Enuma Alish is simply an example of an
ancient creation myth.
But ancient astronaut theorists believe
that the epic story is not fiction, but
based on fact.
Anunnaki is a term that means from
heaven to earth they came.
So the knowledge that came out from
Nineveh is a complete look of a
civilization that sprung up out of
nowhere.
Many of the tablets that were unearthed
in Nineveh describe nuances into the
actual mindset of the gods. These
Anunnaki and they describe being flesh
and blood beings just like us.
The Anunnaki themselves were physical
beings that came here in giant
spaceships that our ancestors thought
were some type of divine apparitions.
Our ancestors, especially the Samrians,
received help. And that help came from
nowhere else but up there.
According to ancient astronaut
theorists, the Enuma Alish vividly
describes [music]
not mythic gods, but other worldly
beings, alien visitors who possessed a
highly advanced knowledge of genetics.
&gt;&gt; The Anunnaki [music]
began to figure out how they could
create the docsil worker. So they took
genes from a female homminid and after
many many trials they [music] figured
out that they could blend genes together
and create the perfect being.
In a sense what these tablets are really
talking about is a genetic engineering
and the changing of the DNA within human
beings.
Clearly something happened where we went
from nothing to all of a sudden coming
up with the most incredible of thought
models.
So the question then is how was it done?
And according [music] to the ancient
alien theory, our ancestors [music] were
given intelligence
by a deliberate change of our DNA by
space travelers who came here thousands
of years ago.
Is it possible that the Anunnaki created
the human race using their own DNA?
According
to ancient astronaut theorists, [music]
startling evidence can be found in the
numerous similarities between the
Babylonian myths and the Judeo-Christian
Bible
and most notably in writings from
another ancient cuniform tablet [music]
known as the Samrian King list.
The Samrian King list was found on a
tablet in ancient Mesopotamia and dates
to somewhere around 2100 BC.
The list contains names of 140 [music]
kings.
What's most interesting about this list
is that the deities have enormously long
lives. [snorts] One king, for example,
ruled for 36,000 years.
And you have to wonder, how could people
have lived that long? But yet, we have
the same thing in the Bible. Methuselah
and Noah lived to be eight or 900 years
old, which seems so fantastic to us.
[music]
One explanation for why Noah and
Methuselah could live so long is that
it's possible that they themselves were
star seeds or seated by perhaps the
Anunnaki and contained their
extraterrestrial genes that prolonged
their lives.
&gt;&gt; And so clearly we can do one of two
things. pretend that this is all myth,
that this doesn't exist. Or take what
our ancestors gave us at face value and
then we're confronted with the
possibility that we are indeed talking
about incredible extraterrestrial beings
whose lifespan might have been normal
for their whereabouts, but definitely
were extraordinary [music] for planet
Earth.
Is it [music] possible that the Samrian
kings lived and ruled for hundreds, even
thousands of years?
And if [music] so, could these so-called
ancient kings have been our
extraterrestrial ancestors?
Alien beings who created man using their
own DNA?
There are those who believe that [music]
question was already answered more than
35 years ago.
New York City, 1976. [music]
Author and researcher Zechariah Sitchin
publishes his book, The 12th Planet,
introducing his revolutionary [music]
interpretation of the Anunnaki deities.
After studying Samrian cunioform tablets
for 30 years, [music] he asserts that
these so-called Samrian gods were in
fact extraterrestrials that landed on
Earth in Mesopotamia [music]
more than 450,000 years ago.
According
to Sitchin's translations, the Anunnaki
both created human beings and also had a
part in mankind's [music] downfall when
a great flood nearly destroyed all life
on Earth. But why?
What was the [music] purpose of the
Anunnaki's earthly visitations?
And why did they create the creature
known as man?
Zechariah Sitchin wrote a number of
well-received books on the anarchy which
he believed were basically
extraterrestrial entities from a planet
called Nibiru which he quite
controversially believed actually exists
in our solar system.
His theory was they upgraded the human
race and used them as sort of a slave
species.
Sitchin understood based on his
interpretation of the tablets that the
mission had to do with the failing
atmosphere around the planet Niburu and
that when they came they came to mine
gold.
The Anunnaki had damaged their
atmosphere and by using gold they found
that they could patch these atmospheric
holes becomes the story of our humanity.
The Anunnaki literally came to Earth to
mine the gold.
And when realizing it was such a toil to
do so, created us as a worker [music]
race to do that for him.
Zechariah Sitchin's hypothesis [music]
that the Anunnaki came to Earth to mine
gold and then created humans to perform
[music] the task was both bold and
controversial.
Needless to say, it was not embraced
[music] by mainstream scholars.
But many ancient astronaut theorists
[music]
believe that Sitchin's interpretation of
the tablets is not only correct, but
also provides compelling evidence that
the Anunnaki created mankind.
What if the whole Anunnaki story is a
global story of a non-human intelligence
that was manipulating genes all over the
planet that it wasn't just gold, it was
a planetary base.
The Anunnaki said that they came from
the Nibiru and they believe that Nibiru
is a star, a gate, and a crossing place,
opening up the possibility that the
Anunnaki are actually traveling the
stars through stargates and wormholes.
[music]
Do the descriptions of Nibiru actually
offer proof of the Anunnaki's
extraterrestrial origins?
And if so, might similar tales of other
worldly beings descending from the sky,
not only in Mesopotamia, but throughout
the world, provide further evidence
[music] that an advanced celestial race
came to Earth in the distant past.
Perhaps the answers can be found [music]
in the mysterious remains of an ancient
Sumerian queen.
1927
southeast Iraq.
During advanced excavations [music]
at the ancient Mesopotamian city of
British archaeologist Leonard Woolly
discovers [music] the remains of Queen
Puabi.
According to reports, the queen is found
with an unusually large skull similar to
that possessed by some Egyptian pharaohs
and mummies in Peru.
For many ancient [music] astronaut
theorists, the queen's skull provides
further evidence of mankind's
extraterrestrial [music]
origins.
&gt;&gt; The description of the queen was highly
unusual, a head that was huge.
She was not a normal human. She may not
have been full-on anaki. She could have
been a hybrid.
&gt;&gt; There is an effort underway to try
[music] to get genetic analysis of the
bones.
There [music] are characteristics that
elude to Anunnaki genes.
&gt;&gt; This is what the Anunnaki supposedly
look like with these [music] cone head
type skulls. So we would naturally think
that she is one of the original Anunnaki
or certainly a extraterrestrial human
hybrid. [music]
What's of interest of Queen Puabi is
that she's a first dynasty queen andor
priestess.
So the fact that she's first dynasty
means that she's very close to the reign
of the Anunnaki. This puts her in a very
unique position because she really holds
a key. She might be the evidence to
suggest whether or not the ancient
Anunnaki were physically real and that
specifically the Anunnaki interbred.
&gt;&gt; But if the unusual skulls found in
[music] Mesopotamia and elsewhere are
really evidence of the Anunnaki's reign
on Earth, might the legends about them
descending from the [music] sky also be
true? And if so, might the same be said
[music] for other legends that describe
similar beings found in ancient texts
all over the world.
Angels,
the flying serpents of Central America,
the star people of the Anazi.
The notion that other worldly beings
came to earth from the heavens is one of
the most common themes in ancient
mythology [music]
and religion.
Could the stories really have a basis in
truth? If we go back and look into
ancient history,
we find stories that sound very, very
similar. They're sort of all powerful,
magical, superior entities, and they
come from above.
When you go into mythology, when you go
into the star people tales, when you go
into the Anunnaki,
it is the sameness, the similarity
around the planet that makes you say
something has to be responsible for the
same dreams, the same mythology, the
same idea that life came from the stars.
All across the world, we find stories of
other worldly or extraterrestrial beings
coming [music] to Earth and influencing
humanity.
This raises a question. Are there
different races of beings coming from
the stars and influencing all these
cultures? [music] Or is it possible that
in fact it's one race of beings, the
Anunnaki, who influenced all of these
cultures [music] and they told the story
of the same beings?
Do worldwide legends of so-called gods
really helped to prove that ancient man
was actually in contact with
extraterrestrial beings?
And if so, is it possible that religious
tales of other worldly beings
interbreeding with humans support the
notion that the stories of the Anunnaki
are based on historical fact?
According to some researchers, the
answers may lie in the Hebrew Bible
story of the Nephilim. The Nephilim are
mentioned in the sixth chapter of
Genesis where we have the uh the sons of
the gods meeting with the the daughters
of men and producing therefore
superhuman folk.
The Nephilim are described in some
translations as being giants.
The relationship between the Anunnaki
and the Nephilim is really a story of
two cultures but are related. The
Anunnaki was the godcast who created
primordial men to enslave them. While
the Nephilim were the offspring of those
who came down and intermingled with
humans.
Now, these beings could be giant in
stature, but we're also told that the
Nephilim possessed extraordinary
supernatural knowledge that they shared
with certain portions of humanity.
In Greek mythology, Zeus, the ruler of
the gods, is said to [music] have
fathered two hybrid sons,
Hercules and Perseus, both with [music]
earthly women. And the apocryphal book
of Enoch describes beings known as the
Watchers,
angels who fell from heaven and
procreated with [music] humans.
Could these tales actually have their
origins in the ancient stories of the
Anunnaki? The story of the Anunnaki
might seem like something right out of
sci-fi, but when we compare the fact
that every culture around the world,
from the Hindus to [music] the Greeks,
the Romans, Egyptians, Mayas, all around
the world, we have a similar description
of these beings coming to earth from the
heavens
having offspring that were then one half
divine, one half human.
But if [music] legends of gods, angels,
and giants coming to Earth and breeding
with [music] human females are to be
believed, might there need to be some
evidence?
Ancient astronaut theorists say the
answer is yes, and believe that evidence
[music] exists in the countless
depictions of the Anunnaki as winged
giant creatures. Evidence found all
throughout the region, formerly known
[music] as Mesopotamia.
The Anunnaki, we can also see them on
different carvings or in cylinder seals
where they are depicted as having wings.
Sometimes [music] they have faces like
birds, with beaks, but they are also
very humanlike giant beings with
muscular bodies [music]
wearing things that look like wrist
watches.
Now, is this an exact replica of what
people saw?
Clearly, the evidence that we have here
in the Sumerian culture of wall
descriptions, the artwork, the esoteric
cuneaoiform script, they went to great
lengths to record this very momentous
information. We have to start to look at
this in a fresh new light and stop
thinking of it as just mythology.
Looking into the Samrian accounts, what
we're finding is that the Anunnaki are
described as special. Their age spans
are far longer than anything a human
being can have. And afterwards, whether
they disappeared into complete oblivion
or whether they somehow remained here on
planet Earth remains a question mark.
Might the similar images and [music]
descriptions of gods who descended from
the heavens to rule on earth be
something of a smoking gun? Proof that
the Anunnaki were actual beings who came
to Earth from another world?
But if so, why has very little evidence
of their time on Earth survived? Why are
they virtually forgotten?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe that
the answers can be found in the ancient
stories of a great flood.
Sherap South central Iraq 1931.
[music]
While digging at this ancient Samrian
city, archaeologists find what they
believe to be sedimentary evidence of
flooding from approximately 2900 BC.
According to accounts in the Samrian
king list, King Zeusra was [music] the
last Samrian ruler before a great flood
on Earth.
Excavations
of the great city of Shurupac began in
1931.
And it was from these excavations that
they began putting together the story of
King Zasudra.
At the city of Shurupac, we find
sediment deposits that appear to show a
flood that occurred in around 2900 BC.
This is one link that shows that the
biblical flood may in fact be genuine
and a way in which we can ultimately
prove that to be true.
Many ancient cultures have a story of
the flood which is intriguing.
The fact that the Mesopotamians had a
story of a flood is not surprising
because uh Mesopotamian history is
fraught with stories of trying to
contain the Tigers in Euphrates and make
them usable for agriculture. Until they
built the canal system, there were
regular floods that wiped out cities.
It appears that the story of Noah's ark
may not be an original Hebrew story. In
the Samrian text, we find a much older
story of Zasudra, who also survived the
flood, who constructed an ark and was
able to save part of his family as well.
Is this merely coincidence or does it
suggest that in fact the biblical tale
is based upon the Samrian original?
The similarities have caused many to
suggest that perhaps the biblical
account is drawn in some sense from the
Mesopotamian account.
My feeling is that most certainly the
biblical writers [music] adapted it for
their own theological reasons.
In the biblical account, the rationale
for the flood is human sinfulness. And
so what the biblical writer has done is
[music] used the flood account in order
to provide a theological rationale for
why the flood took place.
&gt;&gt; According to ancient Samrian legend, the
great flood was not a natural event, but
was directed by the god [music] Enlil,
who had grown tired of the noise of
humans.
The Anunnaki who came to Earth
essentially had two leaders. [music]
Enlil who was the legal legitimate son
of Anu the king on the planet Niburu and
his halfb brotherther Enki who was
actually the firstborn.
They were in charge of the Earth
contingent.
Procreation was out of control and Enlil
gets enraged. He decides he's going to
eliminate all the humans and created
what we know as Noah's flood.
&gt;&gt; Enl thought that humans should be
erased. They were too troublesome. And
Inky, like Prometheus in the Greeks,
took the side of the humans and said,
"No, they should be preserved."
According [music] to legend, Enki warned
King Zeasudra to build a boat so that he
might be saved [music] from the great
flood just as Noah was directed to build
an ark in the stories of the Hebrew
Bible. [music]
Could both stories have their origins in
historical fact
at [music]
other cities? We have evidence of
floods, major floods.
People have associated this with the
story of Noah's flood and there are
flood stories in other cultures. So I
think we have a trend here where over
and over people have doubted the myths,
have doubted the legends but in fact
[music] with more research we find that
they have a genuine basis.
&gt;&gt; Could the similarities of these two
tales be attributed to mere coincidence?
[music]
Or might the story of Noah be directly
based on the story of a displeased
Anunnaki god? A god who was bent on
destroying the hybrid creatures that
inhabited [music] the earth.
Enki, the Anunnaki god, told the Samrian
king Zeasudra
that there was going to be uh this
flood, the same flood of the Bible, and
that he needed to build a craft. we
would say today a boat to escape it.
However, it's quite possible that the
craft that he made to escape this flood
was actually a spaceship and that he
went into space in order [music] to
escape the flood and into orbit around
our planet.
If there's one thing that unites ancient
cultures all across the world is that
pretty much each and every one of them
have flood mythologies attached to them.
Deluji's great floods, you know, just
swamping and covering the entire planet
wiping out whole races of people. In
most [music] cultures, this is put down
to the work of the gods or a god
displeased with the human race.
Now, of course, today, you know, many
people place that in a UFO context.
[music] Other people place it in a
religious context, but many researchers
sort of view biblical accounts and
stories as having a basis in fact, but
of extraterrestrial origins.
Both the Bible and specifically [music]
the ancient Samrian accounts make it
clear that the flood was something which
the gods created.
The gods made this flood happen. And so
what we're seeing in the ancient
accounts is basically an interaction
[music] between the Anunnaki on the one
hand and our ancestors on the other
hand. The Anunnaki [music] basically
make sure that we as a species will
survive because sections of the Anunnaki
were intent on destroying everything on
this planet.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible that the Anunnaki were
responsible [music] for causing what has
been called the great flood?
And did the flood destroy virtually
[music] all evidence of the Anunnaki's
time on Earth?
Perhaps the [music] answer can be found
not here on Earth, but on another planet
more than 34 [music] million miles away.
[music] Gale Crater, Mars.
August 6th, 2012.
The Curiosity lands on the Martian
surface
to evaluate the suitability of the
planet for human exploration.
The one-ton rover will find signs of
surface water,
a key element for sustaining life. I
think one of the very fascinating things
from a biology point of view is
let's say Mars for a period in its
history was similar enough to Earth that
life could start to evolve. You could
ask the question, how far did it make
it?
What happened historically on Mars? When
did it start to say lose an atmosphere?
When was it not able to sustain it
anymore? And we can learn a lot about
the processes on Earth that were
successful by I think comparing it to
how far if at all did life get on Mars
and where did it fail?
But is it possible as some ancient
astronaut theorists [music] believe that
Curiosity's mission may also reveal
evidence that the mysterious beings
known as the Anunnaki also once
inhabited Mars?
Zachariah Sitchin theorized [music] that
the Anunnaki were coming from uh this
planet Nibiru and that Mars [music]
was a like a way station for them to
come from Nibberu to Mars and then to
Earth.
So you would think that if this is the
case that on Mars we would find some
kind of traces of this Anunnaki
civilization there.
Are we going to find pyramids,
giant dolmans,
huge constructions on Mars just like we
have here on Earth? I suspect we will.
&gt;&gt; If an extraterrestrial presence on Mars
can be found,
might a global awareness of our own
Anunnaki ancestry also be possible?
According to author and Samrian
researcher Zachariah [music]
Sitchin, Nibiru, the home of the
Anunnaki, is on an elliptical path that
brings [music] the planet into our orbit
every 3,450
years.
And the next visit is projected to be in
the year 2900.
Zachchariah wrote in the book of the end
of days about some of the prophecy of
the return. Next time the Bau comes
around, there should be another
appearance of Anunnaki.
Some of the Anunnaki may be really
excited and happy to see what developed
and what we have become.
Some may be upset that we've gone too
far.
Maybe we've overstepped our bounds.
They may pass judgment on us and it
could be good or it could be bad.
The ancient Egyptians spoke of the duet
which was basically the crossing between
this and another world
and Nibberu was the Samrian equivalent
of that
and it is a real which exists both in
this space
but also somewhere else.
It is basically a bridge a territory
whereby human beings can go from here in
life on earth to the realm of the gods.
According
to Sitchin's interpretation of the
Samrian texts,
Nibiru also played a major role in the
cataclysmic [music] creation of Earth
and the asteroid belt between Mars and
Jupiter.
If true, might a similar change be in
store the next time we come in contact
with the Anunnaki?
Human reunions with the Anunnaki
whenever they take [music] place almost
always result in the same thing. The
stimulation of human evolution. The
Anunnaki enter into [music] human
culture and consciousness bringing
wisdom, knowledge, and often technology.
So when we see a mass return of the
Anunnaki based upon the past, we can
expect that we will once again see new
technology, new wisdom and new ideas
being seated into human consciousness.
When we look at the story of the
Anunnaki and their involvement in the
Sumerian culture, we have to understand
that this is potentially a legacy of
information and looking at humanity's
record to interpret where we really do
come from.
There is one common denominator in all
of these stories of extraterrestrials
visiting us in the remote past and that
is their promise of a return.
How can we prepare for this return of
those extraterrestrials in the future?
It's very simple. Accept the idea that
we are not alone in the universe. Number
one. And number two, that they were here
in the past,
they will return in the future, and that
hey, it's okay.
Is it possible, as [music] ancient
astronaut theorists argue, that the
human race was jumparted
or perhaps even genetically created by
extraterrestrial [music]
beings in the remote past?
Might this really be the missing piece
[music] in Darwin's theory of human
evolution?
And does the notion of an
extraterrestrial [music]
presence on Earth also help to reconcile
the supposed conflict between science
and religion?
Perhaps such [music] a profound notion
is why the museums in Iraq were looted
and ransacked. Because the truth may be
too disturbing to contemplate.