This information that you are providing
is so so important because it's
addressing basically metabolism at the
foundational level and how the body's
actually operating and regenerating and
healing and detoxifying itself. I don't
think people actually realize that all
anti-cancer properties, all regeneration
properties are under circadian control.
And I've had many incredible guests on
the podcast who have talked about this,
but many people who are unaware about
circadian rhythms and who are hooked on
blue light devices and they are just the
modern human and they live life as it's
given to them now in this modern world.
Unfortunately, disease manifestation is
inevitable in my opinion, right?
It is if you don't understand truly what
photo repair is. The biophysics of photo
repair is complex. Circadian biology is
a big part of that, but you have to
understand the two key frequencies of
light that control it
are 380 nanometer UVA light and near
infrared light for the reasons that I
mentioned to you already in the podcast.
Uh because this optimizes
uh
the mitochondrial biogenesis. Um that's
the bare minimum. Let me be very clear
about that because I always show the
photo repair slide like on Twitter,
LinkedIn, Facebook, and also my Patreon
blogs, but I don't think people really
understand that slide really well. It
doesn't mean that there's no use for the
other parts of the UV spectrum for the
reasons I mentioned to you earlier
I will the big thing that is uh an
issue. I was just in a spaces yesterday
with uh Martin Picard and his wife
Nirosha Nirogan who's she's a
biophysicist, he's a biochemist.
His big problem is the same problem Nick
Lane has, the same problem that Michael
Levin has.
They start their PhD inside the
mitochondria and they think the
mitochondria is the be all end all. I
made the point to him yesterday in the
spaces what I made to you earlier. I
said, let's do a a step back. If
everything in the matrix was a problem
and you think lactate and pyruvate
are the key to this bioelectric problem,
why is it that the retina and Sertoli
cells use Warburg metabolism? So right
away, what did I just do? I got rid of
guys like Siegfried who are wrong. I get
rid of guys like Lustig who are wrong.
That's just the simple low-hanging
fruit. But then I said to Martin what I
said to you earlier.
I gave him four pathways that start
outside in.
I said, these pathways control the
inside.
And I said, you know I gave a talk in
2018 in Vermont
that said, in time it will be shown that
what happens at the surface is more
important than the biochemistry below.
In this podcast, I've laid that out for
you in detail. Everything I've told you
today
is not new to me. I've been saying this
for 20 years. You know what the problem
is? The problem is people need to
understand how my work connects all
these different angles. How biochemistry
and biophysics control it. What I'm
saying effectively to you and to all my
critics is biochemistry's downstream
of biophysics. Biophysics is by far the
most important part.
Yes. It doesn't mean biochemistry's not
important. It doesn't mean that food's
not important. It's just not
proximal to the story that I'm laying
out here. So if you focus in on the
downstream, how are you ever going to
fix the original problem? Imagine a
tablet that doesn't blast artificial
blue light into your eyes, disrupt your
sleep, or sabotage your health, but
actually uses sunlight to power the
display. If you've been listening to
this podcast, you already know how
damaging constant artificial blue light
can be on your circadian rhythm, your
sleep, and your overall health. That's
why I love my Paper Seven tablet by
Harber E-Ink. It's definitely one of the
most interesting devices I've used in a
while. The Paper Seven tablet uses
something called an RLCD display, which
means there is no backlight and
essentially no blue light. Instead, it
reflects ambient light just like paper.
So the brighter your environment, the
better the screen looks. And unlike
e-ink devices which are slow and stuck
in black and white, this gives you full
color, a smooth 60 Hz refresh rate, and
the ability to run all of your favorite
apps. It also comes with 8 GB of RAM for
smooth performance, a 7.8 inch display
that's perfect for both reading and
productivity. And at only 240 g, it's
easy to carry around anywhere. The
battery life holds up really well, too.
You're getting around 10 hours of active
use and up to 12 days on standby. So
you're not constantly thinking about
charging it. For me personally, I like
to use it a lot for writing,
researching, and preparing for my
podcasts. Basically, all of my
administrative work. And the best part
is I can do all of that outdoors in
natural light. So I can actually support
my biology while I work instead of
fighting against it. And because the
screen gets brighter in brighter
environments, it's incredibly easy on
the eyes even in direct sunlight. I've
also noticed that it naturally improves
my night time habits because indoors,
especially at night, the screen isn't
overly bright or stimulating since it
uses your environment to power the
display. So it kind of guides you
towards better sleep hygiene and
healthier circadian rhythms without even
trying. At the end of the day,
technology isn't going anywhere. So the
goal is to find tools that work with our
biology, not against it. And this is
definitely one of those devices. You
definitely want to hurry up and grab
yours today as they are extremely
popular and run out of stock really
fast. The link will be in the
description below alongside with a 15%
discount code. That's the point.
And when you understand
that I guess 100,000 foot view, you go,
okay, well maybe he's not that crazy.
Maybe he's seen something before and
he's pointing out to us. Mhm. It's true
what he's saying. You don't make nitric
oxide to inhibit
you know, the four cytochrome unless you
have UV light. That's how it happens.
Nobel Prize was given for in 1998.
You don't make Everybody knows you don't
make vitamin D without UV light. That's
different than 380 light. It's the light
that's about 312 to 320. So I don't want
you to think there's no need for that.
And then I you know, the other thing I
told you, you don't make melanin from
palm C without UV light. UV light is the
stimulus that causes the translation
of melanin.
And then when you think about leptin and
you put that slide up that I always put
out
that it acts at 220. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] that's even
below sunlight. Where's that light
coming from? Could it be that we make
that light
from the photoactive chemicals that come
from this downstream effect, which is
ROS.
Well, guess what? I'm no longer the one
only saying it.
Pop and Van Wick have proven it. Like
this is not like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] conspiracy,
dude. This is hardcore science that's in
journals and it's been sitting there in
front of us. But you know what the
problem is? Nobody wants to sit down and
do the hard thing of thinking. Why
did evolution or God build us this way?
And then when you think, damn, leptin's
right below our skin. This is crazy.
Another outside-in story. You start to
go and you go, wait a minute, but
leptin's 220. We don't ever get 220. How
does this work? And I'm going to tell
you, when you sit down
and see it all for yourself, you go,
this is amazing.
When you realize
how it all works
is so that I don't have to teach
rhinoceros, a horse, or a dog how to
live its life. This is the reason why
God and evolution built us this way.
Just go outside, live in the environment
you live, whatever grows there you eat,
you'll be fine. You don't have to work
it worry about it because
everything in metabolism is quantized to
leptin and and melanin. That's it. And
you know, if I tell you that story in
the beginning and you're a food guru,
you think I'm [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crazy. But when
you actually examine what I'm saying,
you go, wow. Because this is the reason
why my blogs are so detailed. Why? I
want all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] bastards out there
that tell me I'm wrong, come [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
prove it to me.
Because I got news for you. I've been
working on this for 25 years. And
if I'm wrong, I got a lot of good
company. Like Einstein, Fineman, whoever
won the the damn Nobel Prize in '98 for
nitric oxide.
Um there's a lot of people, even equals
mc squared. I mean technically, not to
believe that biophysics is really
happening means Gurwitsch is wrong.
There's so many people are wrong. And I
have to be honest with you. I don't
think these people are wrong. I think
that centralized medicine and
specifically biochemists have absolutely
poisoned the well of the truth.
And that's why I always tell people,
PhDs,
they know a lot about a little.
To discover what I've discussed with you
here in an hour and a half,
you have to know a lot about a lot of
different things. And then
you have to be wise enough to make sense
of it. When people think about energy,
sleep, and hormones, they think in terms
of fats and carbs. But your metabolism
doesn't run on macros. Minerals are the
foundation for your metabolism. And a
healthy and well-functioning metabolism
starts from your mitochondria. Every
single biological process inside your
body requires minerals. When your body
is lacking the minerals to run your
cellular metabolism, guess how that is
going to show up in your body. I'll let
you figure that one out. One of my
favorite ways to ensure that I get all
the minerals that I need on a daily
basis is through shilajit, a
herbo-mineral substance which is made
from the decomposition of plants and
bacteria, this process taking place over
thousands of years. It is primarily
harvested from the Altai and the
Himalayan mountains, some of the most
pristine locations on the planet. The
beautiful thing about shilajit, it comes
with high concentrations of fulvic acid.
This molecule actually drives the
minerals into the cells where they can
do their work. So basically, the
minerals come in their most bioavailable
form for your body to be able to use.
Unlike most supplements, which become
expensive urine, this one actually does
something without the hype. It's not
man-made. It's produced by Mother Nature
herself. Now, something very important
to mention is the quality of shilajit.
Not all shilajit on the market is
created equally. The one that I use has
been tested for heavy metals and
impurities, ensuring that you are
getting the highest quality shilajit.
So, if you want to explore the shilajit
that I use on a daily basis, make sure
that you visit the description below,
and make sure to use the promo code
attached for a nice discount on your
entire order.
And what I try to tell my friends when
they ask me how I figured this out, I
always come back to something I learned
about as a young boy when I was
interested a lot in Einstein's work. He
solved something that's very similar to
what we're talking about today.
Two guys, Hertz and Helmholtz, did
studies in 1870 through 1900, and they
found this thing in physics called the
ultraviolet catastrophe. Nobody could
figure out what the thing was, even the
best physicists of the day, like uh Max
Planck, nobody could figure it out.
So, here Einstein is in college,
you know, he wasn't very successful, but
he was sitting there at the Bern patent
office, and what did he do? He wrote
down the thermodynamic givens of the
ultraviolet catastrophe, and he looked
at the thermodynamic givens. He goes,
"How do these things all fit together?"
And what happens in his miracle year?
One of his four papers
is called the photoelectric effect.
Now, people like to believe that
everything should be simple, that you
could explain it to a third grader.
That's like Occam's razor. And I always
tell people when they say to me,
"There's no way this could be right,
Jack." I say, "Well, tell me, what is
Occam's razor parsimonious about the
photoelectric effect? That it only works
with UV light." In other words, red
light doesn't have anything to do with
it. Orange light doesn't have anything
to do with it. But, Einstein was able to
figure out 1905
that based on the work of Helmholtz and
Hertz, this is the only thing that makes
sense.
And he wrote the paper. Here's the
ironic thing. Einstein never did an
experiment, okay? The United States
hires a guy named George Millikan, I
think in 1920, 21, to prove Einstein
wrong. What does Millikan wind up doing?
He winds up proving Einstein was right.
He does all the experiments that prove
that the photoelectric effect explains
the ultraviolet catastrophe. And then
what happens in science? They give
Millikan the Nobel Prize before
Einstein. If that doesn't define
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] psychoticness
of centralized science, I don't think
anything else will. Because we penalize
people
for thinking. And that's the reason why
physics in the beginning of the 20th
century was held back for almost 40 or
50 years. I would tell you, the same
thing is going on in biology right now.
That's what I'm trying to explain to
you. But, I also think the same thing's
going on in physics right now
when you think about relativity and
quantum mechanics, because
what's the what's the new version of the
the 21st century ultraviolet
catastrophe? They can't figure out how
gravity works.
And they can't figure out why relativity
and quantum mechanics can't resolve this
problem.
And I've actually thought about that
problem. I'm I'm more interested in that
problem right now than the stuff that I
talked to you today, cuz I think I know
what the answer is. But, I know that I'm
going to have to spend another 20 years
doing the same thing that I did with
this melanin mitochondria story. And to
be honest with you, those that's the
things that I like to spend my time
thinking about when I'm out here.
But, I think the stuff that we talked
about today, as a doctor, I had 40 years
of seeing my patients fall apart.
And I believe that is actually the same
thing that Einstein did in the patent
office, where
he saw these thermodynamic givens, and
he had to make sense of it. I had to see
a lot of sick patients to really figure
out what was wrong with them.
And then when I figured it out and came
up with the leptin prescription, and I
started to see all these people get
better that couldn't get better, kind of
like your girlfriend,
I was stunned, cuz I didn't believe it,
either.
I said,
"We've got everything backwards, because
we keep looking inside out when the
story is outside in."
And
when you think about it like that, then
you then you start to realize nature was
a wise
uh theoretical biologist when she put
leptin underneath the skin
uh in us. And
when you realize that almost every
single animal on this planet, no matter
if it's GOE or not, has melanin in its
surface.
And the most complex ones tend to have
more melanin inside than on the surface,
doing very specific things. You know,
like the some of the things that you
asked me about,
about uh dopamine. I mean, most people
know that Parkinson's disease is tied to
neuromelanin destruction in the
substantia [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Um
and that story uh is not solved even to
this day in centralized medicine. I'm a
brain surgeon. I know a lot about this.
I've done a lot of these surgeries to
try to help people out. And what are the
surgeries all tied to? Putting a a hole
in your head, putting a wire down there,
put a DC electric current in there.
Well, that's exactly what melanin does.
And
it's amazing to me that we don't think
about that. We would rather spend, I
don't know, $100,000 doing this fancy
operation to put a wire in someone's
head than instead of telling them, "How
about you clean up your environment, get
melanin on the outside so you can suck
it on the inside, and you can fix your
own substantia nigra?" But, it turns out
people in New Jersey, people in New
York, people in Finland, they don't want
to do that. They would rather have a
hole drilled in your head and, you know,
put a device in there
to improve the situation. And and
functionally,
when you have the device in there long
enough, it actually doesn't work,
either. It's better than the drugs, but
it's still not better than how nature
built us. Guys, if you haven't already
smashed that subscribe button and the
like button, this is a small section
from the full podcast conversation. So,
if you want to find the full episode,
check the description below.