A  TALE  ENDLESSLY  RETOLD, 

A  VISION  ETERNALLY  BORN  ANEW 

Since  its  original  appearance  over  2000  years 
ago,  Ramayana  has  served  as  the  model  for 
poems,  stories,  folktales,  plays,  and  films  in 
India,  Burma,  Cambodia,  Thailand,  Indonesia, 
and  the  Philippines.  In  each  of  these  lands, 
writers  modified  and  built  upon  the  original 
epic  to  enhance  its  impact  and  meaning  for 
their  own  cultures. 

With  this  English  version,  Ramayana  may  truly 
be  said  to  have  reached  the  West.  As  B.  A.  van 
Nooten  says  in  his  fascinating  introduction, 
this  is  “an  extraordinary  accomplishment.  .  .  . 

In  the  minds  of  many  people  who  hear  the 
Ramayana  a  mystery  is  being  presented,  and 
slowly,  erratically,  parts  of  the  mystery 
unfold.  .  .  .  We  get  glimpses  of  a  higher,  purer 
reality  that  holds  out  hope  for  those  enmeshed  in 
the  sorry  state  of  mundane  existence.  Again 
and  again  [we]  experience  this  joy  of  discovery. 
The  struggle  between  good  and  evil  is  on  our 
behalf,  and  Rama  is  our  hero.” 

“A  fascinating  tale  of  adventure,  heroism, 
exciting  plots,  and  frightful  monsters." 

- BERKELEY  GAZETTE 

“Mythology  can  be  beautiful  literature;  the 
Ramayana,  and  this  particular  edition,  which 
I  like,  are  good  examples." 

- LOS  ANGELES  TIMES 

WILLIAM  BUCK  devoted  his  life  to  translating  the 
great  classics  of  India  into  colloquial  English.  He  died 
at  the  age  of  37,  leaving  as  his  legacy  the  Ramayana 
and  Mahabharata. 


MENTOR  Books  of  Special  Interest 


□  THE  SONG  OF  GOD:  BHAGAVAD-GITA  translated  by 
Swami  Prabhavananda  and  Christopher  Isherwood.  In¬ 
troduction  by  Aldous  Huxley.  The  timeless  epic  of  Hindu 
faith  vividly  translated  for  Western  readers. 

(#MW1590— $1.50) 

□  HOW  TO  KNOW  GOD:  The  Yoga  Aphorisms  of  Patanjali 

translated,  with  commentary  by  Swami  Prabhavananda 
and  Christopher  Isherwood.  A  supremely  enlightening 
work  on  the  theory  and  practice  of  Yoga.  This  brilliant 
translation  offers  the  most  lucid  of  all  English  render¬ 
ings  of  this  classic  text.  (#MY1382 — $1.25) 

□  THE  UPANISHADS:  Breath  of  the  Eternal.  The  Principal 

Texts  Selected  and  Translated  from  the  Original  Sans¬ 
krit  by  Swami  Prabhavananda  and  Frederick  Manches¬ 
ter.  Embodying  the  wisdom  of  ancient  mystics,  The 
Upanishads  form  the  core  of  India's  most  sacred  scrip¬ 
tures  and  constitute  the  highest  authority  for  Hindu 
believers  everywhere.  (#MW1589 — $1.50) 

□  VENDANTA  FOR  MODERN  MAN  edited  and  with  an 
Introduction  by  Christopher  Isherwood.  The  essays  in 
this  immensely  valuable  collection  are  by  leading  author¬ 
ities  from  both  the  East  and  the  West.  As  befits  a  re¬ 
ligion  that  preaches  endless  multiplicity  within  divine 
unity,  their  range  is  enormous.  Together  they  help  to 
illumine  an  age-old  religious  system  with  vital  relevance 
for  the  contemporary  world.  (#MW1180 — $1.50) 

□  GANDHI:  His  Life  and  Message  for  the  World  by  Louis 

Fischer.  The  deeply  moving  life  story  of  the  great  man 
who  led  India’s  struggle  for  freedom  and  preached  a 
philosophy  that  influenced  millions  throughout  the 
world.  (#ME1623 — $1.75) 


THE  NEW  AMERICAN  LIBRARY,  INC., 

P.O.  Box  999,  Bergenfield,  New  Jersey  07621 

Please  send  me  the  MENTOR  BOOKS  I  have  checked  above.  I  am 

enclosing  $ _ (please  add  500  to  this  order  to  cover 

postage  and  handling).  Send  check  or  money  order — no  cash  or 
C.O.D.'s.  Prices  and  numbers  are  subject  to  change  without  notice. 

Name— _ — -  —  - - - 

Add  ross_ - - — - ■ - - — - — 


City _ „ _ State _ Zip  Code^ 

Allow  at  least  4  weeks  for  delivery 


RAMAYANA 

KING  RAMA'S  WAY 

Valmiki's  Ramayana 
told  in  English  prose  by 

William  Buck 

WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 

B.  A.  van  Nooten 

FOREWORD  BY 

Ram  Dass 


<0> 

A  MENTOR  BOOK 

NEW  AMERICAN  LIBRARY 


TIMES  MIRROR 

NEW  YORK  AND  SCARBOROUGH.  ONTARIO 
THE  NEW  ENGUSH  LIBRARY  LIMITED,  LONDON 


NAL  BOOKS  ARE  ALSO  AVAILABLE  AT  DISCOUNTS  IN  BULK  QUANTITY 
FOR  INDUSTRIAL  OR  SALES-PROMOTIONAL  USE. 

FOR  DETAILS,  WRITE  TO 

PREMIUM  MARKETING  DIVISION,  NEW  AMERICAN  LIBRARY,  INC., 

1301  AVENUE  OF  THE  AMERICAS,  NEW  YORK,  NEW  YORK  10019. 

Copyright  ©  1976,  by  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 
Foreword  Copyright  ©  1978  by  The  New  American  Library,  Inc. 

All  rights  reserved.  For  information  address  the  University  of 
California  Press,  2223  Fulton  Street,  Berkeley,  California  94720. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  78-153549 

Cover  art:  The  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  Rogers  Fund,  1918, 
photograph  by  Otto  Nelson. 

Published  by  arrangement  with  the  University  of  California  Press,  Ltd. 


MBNTOB  TRADEMARK  REG.  O  R.  PAT.  OFF.  AND  FOREIGN  COUNTRIES 

REGISTERED  TRADEMARK - MAROA  BEGISTEADA 

HHCHO  EN  CUIOAGO,  O.S.A. 

Signet,  Signet  Classics,  Mentor,  Plume  and  Meridian  Books 
are  published  in  the  United  States  by  The  New  American  Library,  Inc., 
1301  Avenue  of  the  Americas,  New  York,  New  York  10019, 
in  Canada  by  The  New  American  Library  of  Canada  Limited, 

81  Mack  Avenue,  Scarborough,  Ontario  MIL  1M8, 
in  the  United  Kingdom  by  The  New  English  Library  Limited, 
Barnard’s  Inn,  Holborn,  London,  E.C.l,  England 

First  Mentor  Printing,  August,  1978 

123456789 


PRINTED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


For  Paul,  my  son 


Contents 


FOREWORD  BY  RAM  DASS  IX 
PUBLISHER’S  PREFACE  XV 
INTRODUCTION  XVii 
LIST  OF  CHARACTERS  XXVii 

PART  ONE 

THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA  I 

Bom  as  a  Man  3 

The  Thorn  in  the  World’s  Side  15 
Taste  This  Water  39 
The  Two  Wishes  49 
Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees  70 
Bharata  Returns  89 
The  Sandals  99 

PART  TWO 

SITA'S  RESCUE  III 

Dandaka  Forest  113 

The  Golden  Deer  132 

Hanuman!  143 

The  Search  163 

Hanuman’s  Jump  179 

Here  I  Am  197 

The  New  Moon  211 
vii 


viii 


CONTENTS 

The  Building  of  the  Bridge  226 
The  Siege  of  Lanka  239 
The  Invisible  Warrior  251 
Ravana  and  Time  265 

PART  THREE 

THE  DHARMA  WHEEL  289 

Here’s  Love!  291 
The  Wonderful  Return  305 
In  What  Dream?  318 

Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King  331 


Foreword 


In  the  winter  of  1967  I  found  myself  living  in  a  tiny  temple  in 
the  foothills  of  the  Himalayas.  This  was  the  culmination  of  a 
path  which  had  taken  me  through  western  psychology,  then 
psychedelic  chemicals,  and  finally  to  the  East  in  pursuit  of 
methods  of  awakening  and  stabilizing  expanded  awareness.  I 
had  finally  found  my  Guru,  a  man  who  I  was  certain  knew 
what  I  needed  to  know,  and  he  had  placed  me  in  this  temple. 

At  the  time  I  spoke  no  Hindi,  and  so  I  understood  little  of 
what  was  happening  around  me.  Each  day  many  people  would 
visit  the  temple  to  ring  bells,  make  offerings  and  do  obeisance 
before  various  statues,  and  receive  gifts  of  food  and  red  marks 
on  their  foreheads,  placed  there  by  the  priest.  Having  grown 
up  in  a  culture  where  idolatry  was  considered  profane,  I  felt  a 
discomfort  bordering  on  aversion  toward  these  alien  practices. 

However,  there  was  one  statue  of  a  monkey  called  Hanuman 
that  attracted  me.  The  statue  was  over  eight  feet  tall,  made  of 
cement,  painted  an  orangey-red,  and  was  crude  in  detail. 
Hanuman  was  depicted  tearing  open  his  chest,  and  in  the 
middle  of  his  heart  were  two  tiny  figures  depicting  Ram  (God) 
and  Sita  (Ram’s  wife).  Often  I  would  spend  an  hour  or  two 
during  the  cold,  clear  mountain  winter  days  sitting  on  the 
porch  before  this  statue.  I  would  meditate  upon  Hanuman  and 
ask  him  to  explain  himself  to  me.  Of  course,  interspersed  with 
this  one-sided  dialogue  were  thoughts  about  the  humor  of  the 
situation.  I  could  imagine  my  former  colleagues  from  the 
Harvard  faculty  finding  me  sitting  before  this  huge  monkey. 
Obviously,  they  would  think,  old  Dick  Alpert  had  gone  over 
the  edge. 

Though  my  sophisticated  western  mind  held  back  on  the 
periphery  and  watched  all  of  this  strangeness  with  some  dis¬ 
dain,  something  within  me  felt  that  I  must  be  missing  some 
crucial  link  in  the  chain  of  understanding.  For  my  Guru  was 
clearly  no  fool.  In  fact  he  was  the  wisest  being  I  had  ever  met. 
And  yet  he  allowed  the  statue  of  Hanuman  to  be  present  and 

ix 


* 


FOREWORD 


even  encouraged  people  to  do  puja  (prayers)  to  it.  And  one 
day  a  further  incentive  to  understand  was  presented:  my  Guru 
named  me  “Ram  Dass.”  The  meaning  of  the  name  was 
“servant  of  God”;  specifically,  it  was  another  name  for  Hanu- 
man. 

At  times,  as  I  looked  at  my  big  cement  namesake,  he 
seemed  to  look  back  at  me  in  a  certain  way  or  to  move  ever 
so  slightly.  But  of  course  that  was  all  my  imagination,  or  the 
result  of  my  keeping  my  attention  focused  so  steadfastly  on  a 
specific  object.  Certainly  such  an  inanimate  object  could  not 
really  move.  But  when  I  mentioned  these  occurrences  to  Indi¬ 
an  friends,  they  smiled  indulgently  at  my  rationalizations.  To 
them,  this  was  not  a  statue,  but  a  murti.  A  murti  is  a  statue 
that  has  been  consecrated:  it  has  been  invested  with  living 
spirit.  And  so  it  stood  to  reason  that  a  murti  could  manifest 
its  life  force  in  movement,  and  might  indeed  move  for  some¬ 
one  who  looked  upon  it  purely.  At  this  time  they  related  the 
following  incident. 

In  a  small  village  there  was  a  tiny  Hanuman  temple  to 
which  the  local  people  would  come.  It  is  a  practice  for  devotees 
to  bring  some  sweets  and  offer  them  to  the  murti.  The  priest 
takes  the  sweets  and  goes  into  the  room  that  contains  the  murti 
and  draws  the  curtain.  Then  he  offers  the  sweets  to  the  murti 
with  appropriate  mantras  (invocations).  After  this,  the  priest 
usually  takes  a  few  of  the  sweets  and  sets  them  aside  to  be 
given  later  to  the  poor  neighborhood  children.  The  remainder 
he  brings  back  to  the  devotee-donor  as  prasad  (i.e.,  conse¬ 
crated  or  offered  food),  which  the  devotee  then  eats  as  a 
blessing  from  Hanuman. 

It  so  happened  that  the  old  priest  in  this  village  was  called 
away  by  illness  in  his  family,  and  he  left  a  young  neighborhood 
boy,  who  always  loved  to  be  around  the  temple,  to  take  care 
of  it  while  he  was  away.  Soon  some  devotees  came  and  brought 
sweets.  The  boy  took  them  as  he  had  seen  the  priest  do,  and 
went  behind  the  curtain.  Now  he  had  never  been  with  Hanu¬ 
man  when  the  curtain  was  closed,  but  he  offered  the  sweets  to 
Hanuman.  Hanuman  didn’t  take  them.  The  boy  became  upset 
and  pleaded  and  then  demanded  that  Hanuman  accept  some 
of  the  sweets.  Finally  in  exasperation  he  picked  up  a  stick  and 
began  to  beat  the  murti.  Suddenly  all  the  sweets  disappeared 
from  the  dish.  The  boy  returned  to  the  devotees,  joyfully 
explaining  that  Hanuman  had  accepted  their  offering.  How¬ 
ever,  the  devotees,  who  were  used  to  receiving  a  portion  of 
their  gift  back,  concluded  that  the  boy  had  decided  to  keep  all 


Foreword 


xi 


of  their  gift  for  himself  and  so  they  beat  the  boy  and  sent 
him  away.  Later  the  old  priest  returned  and  was  told  about 
this  incident.  He  said,  “All  my  life  I  had  hoped  to  become  pure 
enough  so  that  my  offerings  would  be  accepted  by  Hanuman. 
But  I  have  not  been  thus  far.  This  young  boy  had  such  purity 
and  was  so  blessed.” 

The  web  of  my  involvement  with  Hanuman  was  deepening. 
I  read  and  reread  the  Ramayana,  and  more  and  more  my 
heart  opened  to  it.  The  hill  people  with  whom  I  lived  treated 
this  book  the  same  way  the  Bible  is  treated  by  Judaeo- 
Christians,  or  the  Koran  by  the  peoples  of  Islam.  For  them  it  is 
more  than  a  fantasy;  even  more  than  a  historical  event.  It  is  a 
sacred  message  written  upon  the  walls  of  time,  a  message  by 
God,  about  God.  It  is  grace  given  form  to  guide  and  strengthen 
faith. 

These  hill  people  were  good  people  whose  compassion  I 
trusted.  And  in  the  course  of  sitting  with  them  around  their 
braziers  or  fires,  night  after  night,  during  which  the  exploits 
depicted  in  the  Ramayana  were  sung  with  purity  and  love,  I 
found  their  deep  reverence  for  Ram  and  Sita,  Lakshmana  and 
Hanuman,  being  transmitted  to  me.  Slowly  I  came  to  the 
realization  that  in  this  story  lay  the  blueprint  or  map  for  my 
own  spiritual  journey. 

For  those  of  us  who  have  received  the  grace  to  touch  living 
spirit  within  our  lifetime,  the  challenge  that  confronts  us  is 
how  to  translate  this  spirit  into  worldly  action.  Or,  looked  at  in 
another  way,  how  to  live  our  lives  in  such  a  way  as  to  deepen 
our  spiritual  connection.  To  this  end  there  are  many  paths: 
paths  of  prayer,  of  study,  of  redirecting  bodily  energies,  of 
devotional  song.  But  for  many  of  us  the  path  that  draws  us 
is  the  path  of  service;  service  that  is  designed  to  alleviate  suffer¬ 
ing  of  our  fellow  beings,  service  that  is  in  harmony  with  the 
deepest  way  of  things  (what  the  Chinese  call  the  Tao).  Such 
service  when  guided  by  the  heart  feels  like  making  love  with 
God. 

It  is  such  service  about  which  the  Bhagavadgita  is  con¬ 
cerned.  And  this  too  is  what  the  Ramayana  is  about.  Each  of 
the  characters  within  the  Ramayana  represents  a  different 
aspect  of  service,  but  it  is  Hanuman  who  is  a  perfect  embodi¬ 
ment  of  all  of  the  qualities  of  selfless  service.  For  his  service  is 
done  with  purity,  with  one-pointed  love  of  God,  free  of  greed 
or  self-aggrandizement,  with  the  perfect  bravery  and  courage 
that  comes  from  knowing  that  one’s  acts  are  in  harmony  with 
the  deepest  pulse  of  the  universe,  and  with  the  vast  powers 


xii  FOREWORD 

that  are  reflected  in  Christ’s  statement  “Had  ye  but  faith  ye 
could  move  mountains.”  In  fact,  at  one  point  in  order  to  save 
Ram’s  brother  Lakshmana,  Hanuman  actually  does  indeed  lift 
and  carry  aloft  a  mountain.  But  then  are  not  all  holy  books 
speaking  ultimately  to  the  same  truth? 

Who  is  this  monkey  Hanuman?  Rama  has  let  him  loose 
in  the  world.  He  knows  Rama  and  Rama  knows  him. 
Hanuman  can  break  in  or  break  out  of  anywhere.  He 
cannot  be  stopped  like  the  free  wind  in  flight.  Hanuman 
can  spot  a  tyrant,  he  looks  at  deeds  not  words  and  he’ll 
go  and  pull  his  beard.  Disguises  and  words  of  talk  cannot 
confuse  a-mere  wild  animal.  .  .  .  Hanuman  will  take  your 
sad  tune  and  use  it  to  make  a  happy  dance. 

Rama  said,  “As  long  as  men  shall  speak  of  you,  you  will 
live  on  earth.  No  one  can  equal  you.  Your  heart  is  true; 
your  arms  are  strong;  you  have  the  energy  to  do  any¬ 
thing.  You  have  served  me  faithfully  and  done  things  for 
me  that  couldn’t  be  done.” 

“It’s  nothing,”  said  Hanuman,  “I  am  your  friend,  that’s 
all.” 

Hanuman,  the  work  of  the  world,  however  difficult,  is 
made  easy  by  your  grace. 

— from  the  Ramayana 

When  Einstein  was  questioned  about  his  work,  he  said,  “I 
didn’t  arrive  at  my  understanding  of  the  fundamental  laws 
through  my  rational  mind.”  Here  he  was  honoring  a  deeper  or 
higher  or  more  intuitive  mind.  Again  and  again  scientists, 
great  composers  such  as  Beethoven  and  Bach,  great  artists  and 
inventors  and  writers  such  as  Dante,  Blake,  Emerson,  and 
Whitman,  have  described  how  they  received  the  grace  to  enter 
into  nonconceptual  realms  where  they  experienced  a  oneness 
with  the  way  of  all  things.  Later,  when  they  returned  to  what 
William  James  referred  to  as  “normal  waking  consciousness,” 
they  described  a  tiny  bit  of  what  they  had  seen  or  felt  through 
whatever  concepts,  skills,  and  tools  were  available  to  them. 
Some  wrote  a  great  work,  others  created  a  building  such  as  the 
Taj  Mahal,  and  still  others,  great  religions.  These  manifesta¬ 
tions,  when  coming  through  pure  instruments,  have  the  ability 
to  take  you  into  these  higher  realms.  It  is  as  if  they  point,  not 
to  themselves,  not  to  the  words  or  brushstrokes  or  formulas, 


Foreword  xiit 

but  to  the  awe  and  grandeur  that  lies  beyond.  The  Ramayana 
is  one  such  work. 

There  are  so  many  levels  at  which  a  book  such  as  this  may 
be  read.  And  a  subtle  and  compassionate  teller  of  stories  such 
as  William  Buck  happily  leaves  the  reader  free  to  take  it  at 
whatever  level  is  most  comfortable.  It  is  a  romantic  tale  of  the 
battle  between  good  and  evil.  It  is  perhaps  a  veiled  account, 
distorted  through  oral  transmission  over  time,  of  an  actual 
historical  event.  It  is  a  symbolic  metaphor  for  the  battle  of 
sacred  and  secular  forces  that  rage  within  each  of  us.  It  is 
a  sacred  book  of  living  spirit. 

Perhaps  as  you  read  this  delightful  version  of  the  Ramayana 
you  will  allow  Hanuman  and  his  friends  to  come  into  your 
heart  and  be  your  friends.  And  just  perhaps,  such  friends  may 
refurbish  faith  where  before  there  may  have  been  cynicism, 
may  awaken  love  where  previously  there  was  dryness,  may 
deepen  hope  where  there  was  doubt  and  despair.  Of  course, 
you  may  think,  this  is  just  another  book.  That  too.  But  it  is 
also  an  incredible  statement  of  living  spirit  .  .  .  for  those  who 
have  the  eye  to  see  and  the  ear  to  hear. 

Ram  Dass 

Santa  Cruz,  California 
April  1978 


Publisher's  Preface 


In  1955  William  Buck  discovered  an  elaborate  nineteenth- 
century  edition  of  The  Sacred  Song  of  the  Lord,  the  Bhaga- 
vad-Gita  of  Lord  Krishna  in  a  state  library  in  Carson  City, 
Nevada.  Captivated  by  this  find,  he  plunged  into  a  study  of 
Indian  literature  which  has  resulted  in  this  rendering  of 
Ramayana,  a  retelling  of  Mahabharata,  and  an  unfinished 
manuscript  of  Harivamsa — unfinished  because  of  his  death  in 
1970  at  the  age  of  37. 

His  discovery  of  the  Bhagavad-Gita  moved  Mr.  Buck  to 
read  the  Mahabharata,  and  he  would  be  satisfied  with  nothing 
less  than  a  full  translation.  An  11-volume  set  was  then  being 
reprinted  in  India,  and  in  his  determination  he  subsidized  the 
reprinting  when  it  became  apparent  that  the  publisher  had  in¬ 
sufficient  funds  to  complete  the  task. 

Midway  through  his  reading,  Mr.  Buck  decided  the 
Ramayana  and  Mahabharata  should  be  rewritten  for  a  mod¬ 
ern  English-speaking  audience.  In  his  own  words,  “ Ma¬ 
habharata  was  about  5,000  pages,  and  Ramayana  much 
shorter.  When  I  read  these  translations  I  thought  how  nice  to 
tell  the  story  so  it  wouldn’t  be  so  hard  to  read.  We  talk  about 
all  the  repetition  and  digression  of  the  originals,  but  as  you 
read  all  that  endless  impossible  prose  a  very  definite  character 
comes  to  each  actor  in  the  story,  and  the  land  and  times  are 
most  clearly  shown.  I  wanted  to  transfer  this  story  to  a  read¬ 
able  book.” 

To  this  end,  William  Buck  began  years  of  reading  and 
rereading  the  translations,  studying  Sanskrit,  planning,  and 
writing.  One  of  his  approaches  was  to  decipher  and  list  all 
the  elaborate  appellatives  used  in  place  of  names  for  heroes 
and  gods  and  kings  and  princesses  in  the  original  text.  He 
then  used  the  qualities  of  these  appellatives  to  describe  the 
characters  in  his  own  renderings  and  thus  preserve  their 
mood  and  meanings.  He  read  all  available  English  versions  of 
the  two  great  epics,  but  said  of  them,  “I  have  never  seen  any 


xv 


xvl  PUBLISHER’S  PREFACE 

versions  of  either  story  in  English  that  were  not  mere  out¬ 
lines,  or  incomplete,  except  for  the  two  literal  translations.” 
He  always  kept  in  mind  that  the  epics  were  originally  sung, 
and  reading  aloud  from  both  the  original  translations  and 
Buck’s  own  work  became  part  of  the  Buck  family  life. 

William  Buck’s  vision  of  his  task  was  firm,  and  he  had  the 
balanced  form  of  each  epic  clearly  in  his  mind  as  he  worked. 
In  his  words,  “It  is  always  apparent  just  what  is  the  thread  of 
the  story  and  what  are  later  interpolations.  It  is  stuffed  with 
preachments,  treatises  of  special  interests,  doctrines  of  later 
caste  systems,  long  passages  of  theological  dogma,  but  these 
are  in  chunks,  and  only  slow  the  story.”  His  goal  was  to  tell 
the  tales  in  such  a  way  that  the  modern  reader  would  not  be 
discouraged  from  knowing  and  loving  them  as  he  did.  He 
wanted  to  convey  the  spirit,  the  truth,  of  the  epics. 

In  answer  to  a  critic  of  his  manuscripts  he  replied,  “I’ve 
made  many  changes  and  combinations  in  both  books,  but  I 
wish  to  have  them  considered  as  stories  which  they  are, 
rather  than  as  examples  of  technically  accurate  scholarship^ 
which  I  told  you  they  weren’t.  One  thing  however  is  true<. 
Read  the  stories  and  you  get  the  real  spirit  of  the  original 
once  you’re  done,  and  if  "they’re  entertaining  that’s  all  I  ask.” 
And  in  another  letter:  “Ramayana  is  one  of  the  world’s  most 
popular  stories,  and  it  is  part  of  its  own  tradition  to  be  re-told 
in  different  times  and  places,  as  I  have  done.” 

That  was  his  aim — to  make  it  possible  for  contemporary 
readers  to  know  the  Ramayana  in  terms  meaningful  for  mod¬ 
ern  times,  as  well  as  in  terms  of  its  origins.  Of  the  finished 
manuscripts  he  wrote,  “My  method  in  writing  both  Ma- 
habharata  and  Ramayana  was  to  begin  with  a  literal  trans¬ 
lation  from  which  to  extract  the  story,  and  then  to  tell  that 
story  in  an  interesting  way  that  would  preserve  the  spirit  and 
flavor  of  the  original.  My  motive  is  therefore  that  of  the  sto¬ 
ryteller.  I’m  not  trying  to  prove  anything  and  I  have  made 
my  own  changes  to  tell  the  story  better.  Here  are  two  great 
stories  just  waiting  for  people  to  read  them.  Based  on  the 
words  of  ancient  songs,  I  have  written  books.  I  tried  to  make 
them  interesting  to  read.  I  don’t  think  you  will  find  many 
other  books  like  them.” 


Introduction 

by  B.A.vanNooten 


Few  authors  in  world  literature  can  lay  claim  to  having  in¬ 
spired  as  many  poets  and  dramatists,  and  to  having  transmit¬ 
ted  moral  and  ethical  values  to  as  vast  and  receptive  an 
audience  in  nations  living  thousands  of  miles  apart  and  with 
radically  different  languages  and  cultures,  as  the  obscure,  al¬ 
most  legendary  composer  of  the  Sanskrit  Ramayana,  a  poet 
known  to  us  as  Valmiki. 

Valmiki  probably  lived  somewhere  in  northeast  India, 
where  much  of  the  action  of  the  story  takes  place.  Legends 
make  him  a  reformed  robber  converted  to  a  virtuous  life  by  a 
saint,  but  from  the  one  and  only  literary  work  that  remains 
of  him  we  recognize  him  as  a  poetic  genius,  a  man  of  refined 
and  aesthetic  sense  and  a  pure  instinct  for  moral  living.  The 
Ramayana  (literally  “Rama’s  Way”)  is  one  of  the  two  great 
epics  of  India,  the  other  being  the  Mahabharata.  It  is  a  long 
epic,  some  25,000  verses  in  extent,  and  tells  a  story  of  courtly 
intrigue,  heroic  renunciation,  fierce  battles,  and  the  triumph 
of  good  over  evil.  Prince  Rama  of  Ayodhya  is  the  hero.  He  is 
bom  into  a  noble  family  of  rulers,  but  treacherous  machina¬ 
tions  of  his  stepmother  force  him  to  abdicate  his  claim  to  the 
throne  of  Ayodhya  in  favor  of  his  half-brother,  Bharata. 
Rama  himself  withdraws  into  the  forest  for  thirteen  years  ac¬ 
companied  by  his  faithful  wife  Sita  and  his  devoted  half- 
brother,  Lakshmana.  Here  they  move  in  a  strange  world,  part 
mythical,  part  spiritual,  populated  by  gentle,  God-seeking 
sages,  but  also  by  grim  ogres  and  vicious  demons  who  try  to 
disturb  Rama’s  tranquil  life  and  thwart  his  noble  intentions. 
In  that  world,  a  conflict  develops  between  on  the  one  hand 
the  righteous  Rama,  a  scion  of  the  illustrious  ancient  solar 
dynasty,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  legions  of  the  dark,  the 
Rakshasas  or  demons  with  ugly,  menacing,  repulsive  forms 
who  stalk  the  forest  in  search  of  mischief.  Thanks  to  Rama’s 
gallantry,  he,  Sita,  and  Lakshmana  overcome  the  demonic 
powers  until  a  great  calamity  befalls  them:  faithful  Sita  is  ab- 

xvii 


xviii 


INTRODUCTION 


ducted  by  the  monstrous  demon  king  Ravana.  He  flies  with 
her  to  Lanka,  his  capital,  but  she  never  yields  to  him,  re¬ 
minding  him  steadfastly  of  her  vow  to  Rama,  her  one  and 
only  lord. 

Meanwhile  Rama  and  Lakshmana  search  frantically  for 
signs  of  life  from  Sita,  going  from  one  witness  to  another  to 
leam  of  her  whereabouts.  Finally,  they  ally  themselves  with 
an  army  of  talking  monkeys  and  bears  under  the  generalship 
of  the  mighty  monkey  Hanuman.  The  animals  discover  the 
place  where  Sita  is  kept  prisoner,  an  island  not  far  from  In¬ 
dia,  probably  prosperous  Lanka,  now  known  as  Ceylon,  or 
Sri  Lanka.  Hanuman  with  a  tremendous  bound  leaps  across 
and  visits  Sita.  After  setting  fire  to  the  city  he  returns  to 
Rama  who  decides  to  rescue  his  wife  by  force.  Thousands 
upon  thousands  of  monkeys  help  to  build  a  causeway  across 
to  the  island,  the  remains  of  which  are  still  visible — or  so  tra¬ 
dition  goes.  A  frightful  battle  ensues.  Hosts  of  monkeys  and 
demons  are  slaughtered,  the  heroes  use  not  only  conventional 
weapons,  but  also  divinely  inspired  arms  and  magic  tricks. 
The  demons  can  change  shape  at  will  by  virtue  of  their 
maya,  or  magical  power,  and  often  succeed  in  deceiving  the 
heroes.  Rama  and  his  allies  perform  feats  of  incredible  forti¬ 
tude,  lifting  up  huge  rocks  and  even  mountains  and  suffering 
injuries  beyond  comprehension.  In  the  end,  as  can  be  expect¬ 
ed,  the  good  are  victorious  and  it  is  at  this  point  that  Rama 
discovers  his  divine  antecedents.  He  is  an  incarnation  of  the 
great  god  Vishnu  who  has  come  on  earth  to  save  mankind 
from  oppression  by  demonic  forces. 

Rama  and  Sita  return  to  the  capital  of  their  country, 
Ayodhya,  where  Rama  is  crowned  king.  For  many  years  their 
rule  is  glorious  but  then  evil  tongues  spread  rumors  about 
Sita’s  abduction  by  Ravana  long  ago.  Was  she  really  as  pure 
as  she  professed  to  be?  Had  the  handsome  Ravana  really 
never  touched  her?  In  deep  sorrow  Rama  asks  Sita  to  leave 
for  the  forest  and  never  to  come  back.  No  just  ruler  can  live 
under  a  cloud  of  immoral  conduct,  even  if  it  is  no  more  than 
suspected  misbehavior.  Sita  goes  to  the  forest  and  gives  birth 
to  Rama’s  two  children,  Kusa  and  Lava.  The  great  poet-sage 
Valmiki  takes  care  of  them  and  in  time  teaches  them  the 
great  story  of  Rama’s  exploits,  the  Ramayana. 

About  the  Ramayana’s  date  little  can  be  said  with  certainty. 
It  is  a  major  work  in  the  Hindu  tradition  but  this  tradition 
concerned  itself  very  little  with  exact  historical  chronology. 
Roughly,  and  mainly  by  virtue  of  external  and  linguistic  evi- 


Introduction 


xix 


dence,  we  accept  a  period  of  a  few  hundred  years  between 
200  B.c.  and  a.d.  200  as  a  likely  date  for  its  composition.  It 
probably  grew  fairly  gradually,  with  the  beginning  and  the 
end  of  the  story  being  added  on  at  the  end  of  that  period.  So 
the  story  of  Sita’s  second  rejection  by  Rama  as  well  as  the  in¬ 
cident  of  her  being  swallowed  up  by  the  earth  are  later  addi¬ 
tions.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  Valmiki  (if  he  really  was  the 
composer)  drew  upon  a  number  of  popular  Rama  folk  tales 
for  his  epic  which  he  wove  together  into  a  great  frame  story, 
together  with  numerous  exotic  and  fabulous  incidents.  The 
conventional  techniques  of  Sanskrit  narrative  are  found  here 
also:  the  use  of  narrators  at  various  stages,  the  descriptions  of 
nature  to  suggest  the  mood  of  the  action,  occasional  divine 
interventions,  and  so  on.  It  is,  therefore,  a  traditional  Indian 
literary  work,  but  its  impact  on  the  people  of  India  has  been 
no  less  than  phenomenal.  It  has  inspired  the  themes  for 
hundreds  of  major  and  minor  literary  works  and  plays.  For 
two  thousand  years,  down  to  the  present  day,  Rama’s  exploits 
are  celebrated  in  religious  festivals,  temple  ceremonies,  public 
holidays,  and  private  ceremonies.  Places  where  Rama  walked 
are  now  famous  as  places  of  pilgrimage  where  thousands  of 
Hindus  flock  every  year.  People  in  the  villages  tell  their  chil¬ 
dren  the  story  of  Rama,  as  we  tell  our  children  fairy  tales. 
People  in  the  cities  can  watch  cinematic  adaptations  of  Rama 
episodes  and  read  abbreviated  forms  of  its  narrative  in  pock- 
etbook  editions.  Rama  has  been  transformed  into  an  object  of 
devotion  and  Rama  worship  is  still  a  powerful  religious  force. 
The  last  words  of  the  famous  statesman  Mohandas  Gandhi 
were  “Ram-ram,”  before  he  died  from  an  assassin’s  bullet. 

What  can  the  popularity  be  attributed  to?  Among  several 
factors,  perhaps  the  most  important  is  the  characterization  of 
the  Ramayana.  It  is  a  work  of  exemplars,  of  models  of  good 
behavior  which  people  in  distress  and  frustration,  when 
doubts  assail  them,  can  follow  and  imitate  with  beneficial 
results.  We  have  Rama,  the  noble  and  virtuous  prince  whose 
supreme  heroism  lies  not  so  much  in  the  fact  that  he  con¬ 
quers  his  enemies,  but  in  the  fact  that  he  stoically  and  dispas¬ 
sionately  endures  the  greatest  hardships,  including  rejection 
and  calumny  on  the  part  of  his  nearest  family.  Sita  too  is  a 
non-heroine:  she  is  the  constant  victim  of  fate  but  all  through 
her  tribulations  she  remains  faithful  to  her  husband*  and  does 
what  he  wants.  She  has  become  a  model  that  pious  Hindu 
women  attempt  to  copy  down  to  the  present  day.  In  these 
days  of  female  emancipation  these  are  unpopular  sentiments 


XX 


INTRODUCTION 


in  the  West,  but  there  is  a  perspective  on  life  in  which  this 
model  of  behavior  is  as  certain  a  way  to  liberation  as  the 
staunchest  rebellion — and  many  Hindus  have  that  perspec¬ 
tive. 

For  many  Indians,  especially  those  who  worship  God  as 
Vishnu,  the  Ramayana  is  mainly  a  religious  poem  describing 
the  avatar  a  (incarnation)  of  God  on  earth,  his  struggles  with 
the  powers  of  evil  and  his  victory.  The  incarnation  is  often 
unaware  of  his  divine  role,  but  his  actions  are  always  noble, 
his  regard  of  his  fellowmen  gracious  and  kind,  his  patience 
and  forbearance  of  other  people’s  slights  exemplary — until  he 
is  faced  with  the  embodiment  of  real  wickedness,  the  devil  in¬ 
carnate.  Then  his  righteous  ire  is  aroused  and  his  deter¬ 
mination  to  eradicate  and  kill  the  evil  powers  cannot  be 
stopped.  For  many  in  the  audience  listening  to  Rama’s  Way, 
that  constitutes  the  essential  story.  But  even  those  who  are 
not  particularly  religiously  oriented  appreciate  the  Ramayana 
as  a  fascinating  tale  of  adventure,  heroism,  exciting  plots,  and 
frightful  monsters.  It  lends  itself  to  bombastic  portrayals  in 
art  and  sculpture.  For  instance,  the  scene  of  thousands  upon 
thousands  of  frantic  monkeys  clashing  in  combat  with  hordes 
of  sinister-looking  demons  was  portrayed  on  the  wall  reliefs 
of  the  Cambodian  temple  of  Angkor  Wat  and  in  the  Ketjak 
dance  in  Bali.  There  are  romantic  and  emotional  scenes,  too, 
such  as  Rama’s  pathetic  departure  for  the  forest  with  Sita 
and  his  brother.  The  sorrow  Rama  feels  when  faithful  Sita 
has  been  abducted  is  hard  to  forget.  The  scene  of  Sita’s  suf¬ 
fering  in  Ravana’s  palace  in  Lanka,  in  the  midst  of  his  spite¬ 
ful,  haughty  wives  who  constantly  pressure  her  to  yield  to 
their  lord,  is  a  touching  example  of  her  unswerving  conjugal 
faith. 

The  question  may  be  raised  whether  the  great  battle  in  the 
Ramayana  represents  an  historic  event.  It  is  hard  to  answer. 
We  can  only  speculate,  as  others  have  done,  that  the  poem  is 
based  on  a  battle  of  great  antiquity.  The  oldest  Aryans,  the 
ancestors  of  the  Nordic  people  in  India  today,  descended 
from  the  Iranian  plateau  into  India  some  time  in  the  middle 
of  the  second  millennium  b.c.  They  met  speakers  of  Drav- 
idian  languages  who  now  mainly  live  in  South  India.  That 
meeting  ultimately  led  to  a  fusion  of  the  Dravidian  and 
Aryan  cultures  in  North  India  which  at  present  has  a  largely 
homogeneous  population.  But  the  Aryan  influence  came  into 
the  south  at  a  much  later  date,  perhaps  around  the  time  that 
the  Rama  stories  appeared.  So  speculation  goes  that  the 


Introduction 


xxi 


Ramayana  represents  a  glorified  account  of  this  excursion  of 
the  Aryans  into  southern  India  with  Rama  as  the  Aryan  cul¬ 
tural  hero,  and  the  Rakshasas  of  Lanka,  as  well  as  the  mon¬ 
keys  and  bears,  the  less  developed  races  encountered  by  the 
Aryans. 

This  theory  is  highly  speculative  and  probably  false.  As 
more  archaeological  evidence  is  uncovered  we  find  that  there 
have  been  flourishing  civilizations  in  southern  India  for  al¬ 
most  as  long  as  in  northern  India.  It  is,  therefore,  not  correct 
to  believe  that  the  Ramayana  is  a  poeticized  account  of  the 
Aryan  inroads  into  South  India.  It  is  similarly  incorrect  to 
think  of  the  figures  of  the  bears  and  the  monkeys  somehow  as 
contemptuous  designations  of  uncivilized  tribesmen.  On 
the  contrary,  they  are  respected  and  even  venerated  creatures 
who  embody  qualities  of  strength,  persistence,  and  enthusi¬ 
asm,  with  a  characteristic  trust  in  their  human  leaders,  which 
is  often  moving  to  observe.  Without  resentment  and  with 
blind  faith  they  hurl  themselves  into  battle  and  almost  certain 
death  because  they  believe  the  superior  human  creatures 
know  what  they  are  doing.  To  see  in  them  portrayals  of  hu¬ 
man  beings  is  a  matter  of  interpretation,  not  of  fact.  They 
are  monkeys  and  bears  capable  of  communicating  with 
people;  they  are  not  caricatures  of  human  beings. 

As  was  stated  earlier,  the  Ramayana  has  had  a  vast  dis¬ 
tribution  over  the  countries  of  Southeast  Asia  bordering  on 
the  Indian  Ocean  and  the  Pacific.  Burma,  Cambodia, 
Thailand,  Indonesia,  and  even  the  Philippines,  to  name  only  a 
few,  are  places  where  the  Rama  story  was  introduced  and 
where  it  was  accepted  by  the  people  and  incorporated  into 
their  own  cultures.  In  the  course  of  this  assimilation  changes 
were  oftentimes  made,  some  deliberate,  some  unconscious. 
Sometimes  the  court  poet  of  a  local  raja  would  celebrate  his 
patron’s  greatness  by  picturing  him  as  Rama,  the  hero,  the 
conqueror  of  the  world.  He  would  fabricate  a  few  scenes, 
omit  a  few  others,  and  so  compose  a  new  Rama  story.  The 
geographical  names  were  often  changed  to  agree  with  the  fea¬ 
tures  of  the  locale,  but  the  reverse  also  happened.  In  In¬ 
donesia,  for  instance,  mountains  like  Brama,  Sumeru,  and 
rivers  like  Serayu  still  attest  to  the  ancient  influence  of  the 
Hindu  epics.  But  the  literary  works,  in  addition,  often  had  a 
popular  version  that  was  passed  down  by  word  of  mouth,  by 
professional  storytellers,  or  just  by  merchants  and  travelers. 
In  these  popular  versions  the  influence  of  local  customs  is  of¬ 
ten  much  more  evident,  and  it  is  sometimes  even  difficult  to 


xxii  INTRODUCTION 

discern  the  original  Rama-Sita  plot  in  amongst  the  incidental 
local  stories.  Such  is  the  case,  for  instance,  with  the  recently 
discovered  Philippine  Rama  story. 

Against  the  background  of  this  cultural  adaptation  of  the 
Ramayana  we  should  view  William  Buck’s  translation.  It  is 
not  really  a  translation  but  more  of  a  rewriting  of  the 
Ramayana,  using  as  source  material  the  published  English 
translations.  For  translations  of  the  Ramayana  into  English 
do  exist,  but  none  so  far  is  very  satisfactory,  either  from  a 
scholarly,  or  from  a  literary  point  of  view.  William  Buck’s 
adaptation  is  an  extraordinary  accomplishment.  He  was  nei¬ 
ther  a  scholar  nor  a  well-known  author,  and  though  he  retells 
the  Rama  story  with  many  variations  of  detail,  he  has 
succeeded  in  capturing  the  most  important  characteristics  of 
the  Ramayana:  the  simple  religious  tone  that  pervades  the  In¬ 
dian  original.  We  find  in  this  rendering  of  the  work  the  same 
awe  of  divine  creation,  the  same  wonder  and  unquestioning 
belief  in  the  interrelation  of  natural  and  supernatural  events 
that  have  appealed  to  millions  of  people  who  in  the  past  two 
thousand  years  have  listened  to  the  recitation  and  reenact¬ 
ment  of  the  Rama  story.  In  the  minds  of  many  people  who 
hear  the  Ramayana  a  mystery  is  being  presented,  and  slowly, 
erratically,  parts  of  the  mystery  unfold.  If  we  are  fortunate, 
we  get  occasional  glimpses  of  a  higher,  purer  reality  that 
holds  out  hope  for  those  enmeshed  in  the  sorry  state  of  mun¬ 
dane  existence.  Again  and  again  this  revelation  causes  us  to 
read  and  rethink  the  epic  in  order  to  experience  again  this 
joy  of  discovery.  The  struggle  between  good  and  evil  is  on 
our  behalf  and  Rama  is  our  hero. 

It  is  pointless  to  enumerate  all  the  places  where  Buck’s 
Ramayana  differs  from  the  original,  but  a  few  of  the  more 
important  differences  should  be  mentioned.  One  of  the  most 
striking  concerns  Sita’s  reunion  with  Rama  at  the  end  of  the 
battle,  when  she  is  brought  before  him  in  the  crowning  mo¬ 
ment  of  triumph  after  a  nightmarish  war.  One  expects  Rama 
to  receive  her  graciously  and  tenderly  back  into  his  royal 
household  and  so,  indeed,  he  acts  in  the  story  recounted  by 
Buck.  But  in  the  Indian  Ramayana  there  is  no  such  happy 
episode.  Here  Rama  haughtily  rebuffs  Sita  when  she  appears 
before  him  led  by  Lakshmana.  He  believes  that  her  honor  has 
been  compromised  in  Lanka  and  that  she  is  unfit  to  become  a 
queen.  In  despair  Sita  threatens  to  immolate  herself  in  a  fire 
that  Lakshmana  has  lit  at  her  request,  but  as  if  by  magic,  the 
God  of  Fire  rises  out  of  the  pyre  and  refuses  to  burn  her.  He 


Introduction 


xxiii 


chides  Rama  and  then  the  two  are  reunited.  Buck  has  omitted 
this  controversial  episode  and  instead,  has  the  Fire  God  lead 
Sita  to  Rama.  Also,  at  that  time  Buck  produces  a  stone  letter 
sent  by  Ravana  posthumously  to  Rama  announcing  his  recon¬ 
ciliation.  The  Sanskrit  Ramayana  has  no  such  incident. 

The  Ramayana  epitomizes  the  spirit  of  ancient  India  with 
its  vague  but  grand  concepts  of  moral  rectitude  and  its  conse¬ 
quences  for  a  person’s  fate.  Both  Rama  and  Sita  are  por¬ 
trayed  as  following  their  dharma,  a  term  meaning  “personal 
duty,”  as  well  as  “law,  eternal  law”  and  personified  as  the 
God  of  Justice.  Adherence  to  dharma  secures  for  oneself  a 
more  agreeable  position  in  the  next  life  one  is  to  lead.  The 
concepts  of  reincarnation  and  karma,  the  inexorable  law  of 
retribution  for  evil  deeds  and  reward  for  unselfish  behavior, 
dominate  the  lives  of  the  people  and  semi-divine  creatures 
that  roam  the  earth.  As  in  the  Mahabharata,  another  Indian 
epic,  gods  sometimes  interact  with  human  beings.  They  are 
powerful,  immortal,  but  not  omnipotent.  Vishnu  who  is  usu¬ 
ally  represented  in  sculpture  with  a  discus,  mace,  conchshell 
and  lotus  in  his  four  hands,  a  mighty  god  who  wields  great 
power  over  the  fate  of  mankind,  is  nevertheless  compelled  by 
the  magic  energy  of  a  sage  like  Narada  to  yield  his  emblems 
of  divinity.  Likewise,  the  great  god  Indra  was  defeated  by  the 
demonic  Ravana  and  his  son.  By  performing  ascetic  practices 
(Sanskrit  tapas  which  also  means  “heat”),  a  human  being 
can  cause  Indra’s  throne  to  heat  up,  forcing  him  to  grant  a 
wish.  In  this  way  men  and  women  can  assert  their  will  over 
gods. 

Rama’s  Way  tacitly  assumes  that  we  are  aware  of  some  of 
the  conventions  of  Sanskrit  mythology  and  literature.  The 
world  as  we  see  it  is  the  product  of  a  long  evolutionary  cycle, 
subdivided  into  four  world  ages  ( yugas ).  In  the  first,  man¬ 
kind  is  perfect  and  dharma  “righteous  behavior”  goes  on  four 
feet.  In  the  second  yuga  it  loses  a  quarter  of  its  power  and 
mankind  becomes  less  perfect.  In  the  third,  another  quarter  is 
lost  and  in  the  present  fourth  yuga,  or  Kali-yuga,  misfortune, 
calamity  and  moral  degradation  are  rampant.  The  world  ages 
are  named  after  the  four  throws  recognized  in  the  Indian  dice 
game:  Krita,  Dvapara,  Treta,  Kali.  The  Ramayana  takes 
place  in  the  Treta-yuga.  In  each  yuga  the  Brahmans  consti¬ 
tute  the  upper  caste  of  four  classes  of  society.  The  three  up¬ 
per  castes  are  regarded  as  the  “twice-born”  in  the  society  they 
live  in,  once  naturally  and  once  when  they  receive  the  sacred 
thread.  The  sacred  thread  is  given  by  a  priest  to  the  young 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION 

boy  of  the  family  at  a  solemn  ceremony  which  takes  place 
before  puberty.  It  is  worn  next  to  the  skin  over  the  right 
shoulder.  Girls  do  not  receive  a  sacred  thread. 

In  other  places  in  this  work  we  meet  up  with  literary 
cliches  and  conventions.  Ascetics,  for  instance,  usually  wear 
their  hair  flattened  down  without  ornamentations,  in  contrast 
to  city  people  and  royalty  who  groom  and  style  their  hair. 
Rama  before  entering  the  forest  also  adopts  the  matted 
hairdo  of  the  wandering  mendicant,  but  when  he  leads  the 
army  into  Lanka  he  gives  up  the  wanderer’s  life  and  lets  his 
hair  flow  free,  again.  Another  convention  is  that  mountains 
used  to  fly  around  freely  until  Indra  shot  their  wings  off. 
Hence  Mainaka  Hill  is  said  to  have  possessed  wings.  Also 
certain  practices  are  sometimes  mentioned  which  have  no 
correspondence  in  our  literature.  Smelling  somebody’s  hair, 
for  instance,  is  a  common  manifestation  of  affection. 

At  times  Buck  has  inserted  some  Sanskrit  terms  by  way  of 
mantras,  “magical  spells”  endowed  with  supernatural  power. 
They  are  not  really  meaningful  expressions  so  their  trans¬ 
lation  has  been  omitted.  For  instance,  the  terms  rakshama 
and  yakshama  (Sanskrit  rakshyaamah  ‘we  shall  protect,’ 
yakshyaamah  ‘we  shall  sacrifice’  p.  20)  are  simplified  etymol¬ 
ogies  for  the  words  raksasa-  and  yaksa-,  semi-divine  beings. 
The  word  yaman  (p.  40)  means  something  like  ‘may  I  re¬ 
strain,  control’  and  is  a  convenient  etymology  for  the  name 
of  the  God  of  Death,  Yama. 

The  main  sequence  of  events  in  the  Indian  original  and  in 
Buck’s  rendition  is  the  same,  except  that  in  Buck’s  version  the 
story  begins  ten  thousand  years  after  the  war,  when  Rama’s 
children  Kusa  and  Lava,  unbeknownst  to  their  father,  have 
learnt  the  story  of  his  battle  from  Valmiki  and  are  reciting  it 
in  the  Naimisha  forest.  The  original  Ramayana  begins  in  the 
city  of  Ayodhya  with  the  events  leading  up  to  Rama’s  birth. 
Valmiki  was  called  the  Adikavi,  or  “first  poet”  of  Sanskrit 
literature  and  some  of  his  remarkable  talent  shines  forth  in 
this  English  rendering.  The  reader  will  find  pleasure  in  read¬ 
ing  it  aloud  to  himself  or  to  others.  In  that  way  he  may  ex¬ 
perience  the  fascination  the  epic  has  held  for  so  many  people 
for  such  a  long  time. 


List  of  Characters 


agastya.  The  forest  saint  who  gave  Rama  a  bow  and  arrow. 
agni.  The  fire  god. 

ahalya.  The  most  beautiful  woman  ever  created. 
airavata.  Indra’s  elephant. 

anusuya.  Atri’s  wife,  who  gave  Sita  ornaments  in  the  forest. 
angada.  The  monkey  prince. 
anjana.  Hanuman’s  mother. 
arjuna  of  a  thousand  arms.  The  Haihaya  king. 
aruna.  Charioteer  of  the  sun. 
aswapati.  Kaikeyi’s  father,  the  Kekaya  king. 
atri.  A  saint  dwelling  near  the  Vindhya  mountains. 
bharAdwaja.  A  hermit  of  the  woods  who  received  Rama;  he 
lived  on  to  become  the  father  of  Drona. 
bharata.  Dasaratha’s  son  and  Rama’s  brother;  no  relation  to 
the  namesake  of  the  Kurus. 
brahma.  Grandfather  and  Creator  of  the  worlds. 
chandra.  The  Moon. 

chitraratha.  The  Gandharva  king,  lord  of  heaven’s  musi¬ 
cians. 

dadhica.  An  ancient  warrior,  revived  by  Indra. 

dadhimukha.  A  monkey,  keeper  of  Sugriva’s  Honey  Park. 

dasaratha.  Rama’s  father. 

devi.  Shiva’s  consort. 

dundhuvi.  A  giant  buffalo. 

durvasas.  A  grim  ascetic. 

garuda.  King  of  Birds,  ridden  by  Narayana. 

gautama.  A  sage,  Ahalya’s  husband. 

guha.  The  hunter  king. 

hanuman.  The  monkey.  Son  of  the  Wind. 

hema.  An  Apsarasa,  Queen  Mandodari’s  mother. 

himavan.  The  Lord  of  the  Himalya,  Devi’s  father. 

ILVala.  A  cannibal. 

indra.  The  Rain  God,  King  of  heaven. 

indrajit.  Ravana’s  son. 


xxvii 


xxviii 


LIST  OF  CHARACTERS 


indrani.  Indra’s  wife. 

jamba van.  King  of  the  Bears. 

jambumali.  Prahasta’s  son. 

janaka.  The  Videha  King,  Sita’s  father. 

jatayu.  The  Dandaka  vulture  King. 

kadru.  One  of  Kashyapa’s  wives,  mother  of  the  snakes. 

kaikasi.  Sumali’s  daughter  and  wife  of  Nishrava. 

kaikeyi.  Bharata’s  mother. 

kala.  Time. 

kama.  The  god  of  love.  He  is  bodiless. 
kashyapa.  An  ancient  sage. 
kausalya.  Rama’s  mother. 
khara.  Demon  commander  of  Dandaka  Forest. 
kumbhakarna.  Ravana’s  giant  brother. 
kusa.  Rama’s  elder  son. 
lakshmana.  Rama’s  brother,  Sumitra’s  son. 
lakshmi.  The  goddess  of  good  fortune  and  Narayana’s 
consort. 

lava.  Rama’s  younger  son. 

mainaka.  A  live,  golden  submarine  mountain. 

Mali.  One  of  the  three  demons  for  whom  Lanka  was  built. 

malyavan.  Mali’s  brother. 

mandakarni.  A  sage  dwelling  in  a  lake. 

mandodari.  Queen  of  Lanka. 

manibhadra.  The  Yaksha  king. 

manthara.  Kaikeyi’s  old  nurse. 

maricha.  The  demon  who  became  a  golden  deer. 

matali.  Indra’s  charioteer. 

matanga.  The  saint  who  lived  by  Rishyamukha  Hill. 

maya  the  asura.  The  divine  artist  of  illusion,  a  magician. 

may  AVI.  Dundhuvi’s  son. 

meghanada.  Indrajit’s  birth  name. 

nala.  The  monkey  who  built  Rama’s  bridge  to  Lanka. 

nalakubara.  Son  of  the  god  of  wealth. 

nandin.  Shiva’s  white  bull. 

narada.  A  heavenly  sage  bom  from  Brahma’s  mind. 
narayana.  The  great  god  Vishnu  who  preserves  the  three 
worlds. 

parvati.  A  name  of  Devi. 
prahasta.  Ravana’s  general. 

pulastya.  One  of  Brahma’s  sons.  He  impregnates  Trina- 
vindu’s  daughter. 
puloma.  Indrani’s  father. 
pushpaka.  A  huge  aerial  chariot. 


List  of  Characters 


xxlx 


rahu.  The  Asura  whose  living  head,  cut  off  at  the  neck,  causes 
the  eclipse  of  sun  and  moon  by  swallowing  them  in  the 
sky. 

RAMA. 

rambha.  A  lovely  nymph. 

ravana.  The  demon  king. 

riksharaja.  The  first  monkey.  He  changes  sex. 

ruma.  Sugriva’s  wife,  queen  of  Kishkindha. 

sampatx.  Jatayu’s  brother. 

samudra.  Ocean. 

sarana.  Demon  spy  of  Ravana. 

saraswati.  Goddess  of  speech. 

sardula.  Demon  spy  of  Ravana. 

satrughna.  Rama’s  brother,  Sumitra’s  son. 

saunaka.  Who  hears  the  story. 

sauti.  The  storyteller. 

savari.  A  female  hermit,  friendly  to  Rama. 

shiva.  The  great  god  whose  third  eye  will  bum  the  universe. 

sinhika.  A  female  monster. 

SITA.  Rama’s  wife. 

subahu.  A  demon  killed  by  Lakshmana. 

sugriva.  The  monkey  king. 

suka.  Ravana’s  minister. 

sukesa.  Father  of  Mali,  Sumali  and  Malyavan. 

sukra.  Indrajit’s  preceptor. 

sumali.  The  third  of  the  three  Rakshasas  who  first  lived  in 
Lanka. 

sumantra.  The  royal  charioteer  of  Ayodhya. 
sumitra.  Mother  of  Satrughna  and  Lakshmana. 
surabhi.  The  cow  of  plenty. 
surpanakha.  Ravana’s  sister. 
surya.  The  Sun. 

swayamprabha.  An  enchantress. 

tara.  Wife  of  the  monkey  king  Vali. 

trijata.  The  Rakshasi  who  befriended  Sita. 

trinavindu.  Father  of  a  nymph. 

tumburu.  A  Gandharva. 

ucchaihsravas.  A  famous  horse. 

vaishravana.  The  treasure  king. 

vajra-danshtra.  Thunder-Tooth. 

valakhilyas.  Benign  little  deities  floating  in  the  air. 

vali.  Sugriva’s  brother. 

Valmiki.  Who  invented  poetry. 


XXX 


LIST  OF  CHARACTERS 


varuna.  God  of  the  waters  and  guardian  of  the  west  and  of 
the  worlds  undersea. 
vasishtha.  Dasaratha’s  priest. 
vasuki.  King  of  Serpents. 
vatapi.  A  cannibal  in  the  Vindhya  mountains. 
vayu.  The  wind  god. 
vibhishana.  Ravana’s  brother. 
vidyuj-jihya.  Lightning-Tongue. 
vinata.  One  of  Kashyapa’s  wives,  mother  of  Garuda. 
viradha.  A  long-armed  monster. 

vishnu.  The  great  god  Narayana,  pervading  the  universe, 
moving  in  the  waters,  preserving  and  restoring  life. 
viswakarman.  Heavenly  architect  and  lord  of  the  arts. 
viswamitra.  Who  took  Rama  to  protect  him  in  the  forest. 
yama.  God  of  death. 

yudhajit.  Bharata’s  uncle,  prince  of  Kekaya  and  Kaikeyi’s 
brother. 


Oh  Man,  I  am  the  demon  warrior  Indrajit, 
hard  to  see.  I  fight  invisibly,  hidden  by  enchant¬ 
ment  from  your  sight.  /  attack  behind  the  wild 
winds  of  evil  thought;  /  put  out  many  lights  left 
unguarded.  I  know  you,  and  good  deeds  done 
in  life  are  your  only  shield  when  you  must  die 
and  go  alone  past  me  to  another  world.  You 
may  hide  at  night  from  the  Sun,  but  never  from 
your  own  heart — where  lives  Lord  Narayana. 
The  entire  worlds  are  watching  your  deeds, 
and  therefore  forgiveness  is  Dharma. 

Valmiki  the  Poet  looked  down  into  water 
held  cupped  in  his  hand  and  saw  into  the  past. 
Before  he  looked,  he  thought  the  world  was 
sweet  poison.  Men  seemed  to  be  living  in  lies, 
not  knowing  where  their  ways  went.  The  days 
seemed  made  of  ignorance  and  doubt,  and  cast 
from  deception  and  illusion.  But  in  the  water 
he  saw — a  dream,  a  chance,  and  a  great  adven¬ 
ture.  Valmiki  trusted  the  True  and  forgot  the 
rest;  he  found  the  whole  universe  like  a  bright 
jewel  set  firm  in  forgiving  and  held  fast  by  love. 

Widen  your  heart.  Abandon  anger.  Believe 
me,  your  few  days  are  numbered;  make  one 
fast  choice  now  and  no  second! 

Come,  clear  your  heart  and  quickly  walk 
with  me  into  Brahma,  while  there  is  time. 


xxxi 


PART  ONE 

■ft 

THE  PRINCE  OF 
AYODHYA 


Om! 

I  bow  to  Lord  Narayana, 

To  Lady  Lakshmi  of  Good  Fortune, 
To  Hanuman  the  best  of  monkeys, 
And  to  Saraswati, 

The  Goddess  of  words  and  stories: 
JAY  A! 

Victory ! 


Born  as  a  Man 


Sauti  the  storyteller  told  this  tale  to  his  friend  Saunaka  in 
Naimisha  Forest.  Bending  with  humility  he  finished  the  won¬ 
derful  Mahabharata  in  the  evening,  and  the  next  morning 
Saunaka  asked,  “Lotus-eyed  Sauti,  who  was  that  monkey 
Hanuman  who  met  Bhima  in  the  Hills,  and  who  stayed  in 
Arjuna’s  war-flag  while  he  fought?  What  is  that  story  of 
Rama,  which  keeps  Hanuman  alive  so  long  as  it  is  told  by 
men  on  Earth?” 

Sauti  answered,  “That  story  is  Ramayana,  a  tale  of  ro¬ 
mance  and  love  and  of  wild  adventure,  the  very  crest-jewel  of 
poetry  and  a  legend  of  the  times  and  worlds  of  old.  Arjuna 
the  Pandava  is  gone,  and  Fire  took  away  his  bow,  but  some¬ 
where  Time  waits  to  rearm  him.  So  Time  is  beyond  Fire,  but 
Ramayana  is  beyond  Time.  Rama’s  days  have  long  gone  past; 
I  do  not  believe  there  ever  existed  before,  or  will  ever  exist 
again  such  days  in  the  world  we  know.  . .  .” 

Saunaka  said,  “Tell  me  again  an  old  story.” 

Sauti  said,  “Rama  ruled  the  Earth  for  eleven  thousand 
years.  He  gave  a  year-long  festival  in  this  very  Naimisha 
Forest.  All  of  this  land  was  in  his  kingdom  then;  one  age  of 
the  world  ago;  long,  long  ago;  long  before  now,  and  far  in 
the  past.  Rama  was  King  from  the  center  of  the  world  to  the 
four  Oceans’  shores.” 

Saunaka  said,  “I  never  tire  of  listening,  I  am  never  satis¬ 
fied.  If  you  know  more  stories  tell  them  to  me.” 

“Yes,”  answered  Sauti.  “If  you  would  hear  it,  listen  to 
Ramayana  as  it  happened.” 


Listen,  my  friend — 

I  love  this  Ramayana.  We  live  now  in  the  third  age  of 
Time,  and  Rama  lived  in  the  second  age  of  the  world. 
Ramayana  has  long  been  standing  above  other  stories;  you 
must  look  up  to  find  it.  Valmiki  the  Poet  put  the  deeds  of 

3 


4 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Rama  into  musical  verses;  he  clothed  them  in  the  sound  of 
singing.  Before  Ramayana  there  was  no  poetry  on  Earth. 

As  a  young  man,  Valmiki  searched  through  the  world  seek¬ 
ing  open  friendship  and  happiness  and  hope,  and  finding 
none  of  these  he  went  alone  into  the  empty  forest  where  no 
man  lived,  to  a  spot  near  where  the  Tamasa  river  flows  into 
Ganga.  There  he  sat  for  years  without  moving,  so  still  that 
white  ants  built  an  anthill  over  him.  There  Valmiki  sat  inside 
that  anthill  for  thousands  of  years  with  only  his  eyes  showing 
out,  trying  to  find  the  True,  his  hands  folded  and  his  mind 
lost  in  contemplation. 

Then  one  cloudy  winter’s  day,  at  noon,  the  heavenly  sage 
Narada,  the  inventor  of  music,  born  from  Brahma’s  mind, 
flew  from  heaven  to  Valmiki  and  said,  “Come  out!  Help  me!” 

“It’s  too  cold,”  answered  Valmiki.  “Away  with  the  worlds, 
where  a  little  pleasure  costs  a  lot  of  pain.  Don’t  make  trou¬ 
ble.” 

“Would  I  ever?  See  how  Life  goes  by,  with  every  creature 
doing  what  follows  his  nature.”  Narada  knelt  and  looked  in 
Valmiki’s  eyes.  “Master,  what  can  I  say  to  you?” 

Valmiki  said,  “Just  name  me  one  honest  man  and  I’ll 
move.” 

“Rama!”  said  Narada.  “Come  out  of  there!” 

“Who  is  Rama?” 

“Rama  rules  as  King  in  Ayodhya.  He  is  born  in  the  Solar 
race  and  a  descendant  of  the  Sun;  he  is  brave  and  gentle  and 
firm  in  fight.  By  Rama’s  command  his  adorable  Queen  Sita  is 
being  brought  here  into  the  forest  on  a  chariot,  and  though 
she  suspects  nothing  yet,  here  she  will  be  left  abandoned. 
Unless  you  comfort  her  she  will  drown  herself  in  Ganga  and 
kill  as  well  her  unborn  sons  by  Rama.” 

“What  did  she  do  wrong?”  asked  Valmiki. 

“Nothing,”  said  Narada.  “Sita  is  innocent  and  blameless. 
She  has  lived  as  Rama’s  Queen  for  nearly  ten  thousand  years; 
before  that,  Rama  saved  her  from  great  danger  by  wondrous 
and  incredible  deeds.  And  now  behold  one  of  the  terrors  of 
kingship,  that  Rama  must  let  her  go  because  his  people  talk 
against  her.  Get  up,  save  her  life,  and  let  her  live  here  with 
you  and  your  companions;  and  make  in  measured  words  the 
song  of  Rama,  and  teach  it  to  Rama’s  two  sons.” 

“I  have  no  companions  here,”  said  Valmiki. 

“You  have  now.  Coming  here,  I  sang  a  friend-gathering 
song.  Valmiki,  I’ve  seen  other  skies  than  these,  other  worlds, 
and  other  friends.  People  are  counting  on  you  .  .  .  and  I  can 


Born  as  a  Man 


3 


hear  the  chariot  from  Ayodhya  approaching  across  Ganga.” 

Valmiki  said,  “I  have  no  skill  in  any  craft,  even  in  words." 

“There  stops  the  chariot!  Right  now — here  they  come 
across  Ganga  in  a  boat,  or  will  you  also  give  way  and  forsake 
Sita  too  from  fear  of  other  people?  See!  She  has  discovered 
she  is  lost,  and  the  boat  is  launched  back  without  her.  Oh 
hurry — there  the  sunlight  comes  from  behind  the  dark 
clouds — there  Ganga  the  River  Goddess  begins  unseen  to 
whisper  spells  over  Sita  and  makes  her  swift-flowing  waters 
seem  a  warm  safe  home.  Act  now,  Valmiki;  call  out  and  the 
rest  must  follow .” 

Valmiki  stood  up  and  broke  free  out  of  that  hard  anthill. 
Suddenly  he  saw  all  around  him  many  houses  of  hermits  and 
their  families,  young  trees  carefully  watered,  a  retreat  cleared 
from  the  forest.  Four  boys  ran  up  to  him  from  the  river  and 
cried  “The  wife  of  some  great  warrior  weeps  by  Ganga.  She 
is  fair  as  a  Goddess  fallen  from  heaven  all  bewildered,  all 
alone,  never  seen  before,  with  child,  and  with  small  gifts 
from  the  city  tied  within  a  silk  cloth  beside  her.  Go  to  her, 
welcome  her,  protect  her. . . 

Valmiki  ran  to  Sita  on  the  riverbank.  “Sita,  stay  here  in 
my  hermitage,  you  have  found  here  your  father’s  house  in  a 
foreign  land,  we  will  care  for  you  as  our  daughter.”  And 
seeing  Sita  he  thought,  “What  a  fine  fair  woman,  how  beauti¬ 
ful!” 

Quickly  the  hermit  wives  surrounded  Sita  and  took  her  to 
their  homes.  Narada  had  gone.  Valmiki  went  alone  to  the 
clear  Ganga  waterside  and  bathed.  He  washed  away  the  ant¬ 
hill  dust  and  peeled  grey  bark  from  a  tree  and  made  new 
fresh  clothes. 

Then  he  sat  back  resting  against  a  stone.  He  watched  two 
small  white  waterbirds  in  a  tree  nearby.  The  male  bird  was 
singing  to  his  mate  when  before  Valmiki’s  eyes  an  arrow  hit 
him,  and  the  little  bird  fell  from  the  limb.  He  thrashed  on  the 
ground  an  instant  and  then  lay  dead,  and  blood  drops 
stained  his  feathers. 

Heartbroken  the  dead  bird’s  mate  cried — Your  long 
feathers!  Your  tuneful  songs! 

A  bird-hunter  came  from  the  forest  holding  a  bow.  Val¬ 
miki’s  heart  was  pounding  and  he  cursed  the  killer — 

You  will  find  no  rest  for  the  long  years  of  Eternity, 

For  you  killed  a  bird  in  love  and  unsuspecting. 


6 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


One  look  at  Valmiki  and  the  hunter  ran  for  his  life,  but  fe¬ 
ver  already  burned  in  his  blood;  he  died  that  day.  Valmiki 
turned  back  to  his  hermitage  thinking,  “This  is  truly  how  I 
remember  the  ways  of  the  world.”  Then  he  thought,  “Those 
words  I  cursed  him  with  make  a  verse,  and  that  verse  could 
be  sung  to  music.” 

For  days  the  words  ran  through  Valmiki’s  mind.  Whatever 
he  seemed  to  be  doing  he  was  really  thinking  of  his  verse.  On 
the  fourth  day  after  Sita’s  rescue.  Lord  Brahma  the  creator  of 
the  worlds  appeared  in  Valmiki’s  new  retreat.  He  looked  like 
an  old  man  with  red  skin  and  white  hair,  with  four  arms, 
with  four  faces  around  one  head,  holding  in  his  hands  a  ladle 
and  a  rosary,  a  waterpot  and  a  holy  book. 

Valmiki  greeted  Brahma,  “Sit  by  me,”  and  taking  water 
from  a  pitcher  he  washed  Brahma’s  feet,  and  gave  him  other 
water  to  drink.  But  after  that,  even  sitting  there  with  the 
Grandfather  of  all  the  Universe  watching  him,  still  Valmiki 
remembered  only  the  two  waterbirds  and  thought  to  himself, 
“What  a  crime!  There  was  not  one  bite  of  meat  on  that  little 
bird!  What  use  is  a  world  run  all  wrong  without  a  grain  of 
mercy  in  it?” 

Those  thoughts  were  as  clear  to  Brahma  as  if  Valmiki  had 
been  shouting  in  his  ear.  Bjahma  said,  “So,  by  a  river,  the 
world’s  first  verse  has  been  bom  from  pity,  and  love  and 
compassion  for  a  tiny  bird  has  made  you  a  poet.  Use  your 
discovery  to  tell  Rama’s  story,  and  your  verses  will  defeat 
Time.  As  you  make  your  poem,  Rama’s  life  will  be  revealed 
to  you,  and  no  word  of  yours  will  be  untrue.” 

Lord  Brahma  returned  to  his  heaven,  far  above  the  chang¬ 
ing  heavens  of  Indra  and  the  gods,  riding  on  his  chariot 
drawn  by  white  swans  and  snow  geese.  Valmiki  sat  every  day 
facing  East  on  a  grass  mat.  He  held  a  little  water  cupped  in 
his  hands,  and  looking  down  into  it  he  clearly  saw  Rama  and 
Sita.  He  saw  them  move,  he  heard  them  talk  and  laugh.  He 
saw  all  Rama’s  life  happen  within  the  water;  he  held  the  past 
world  in  his  palm;  and  part  by  part  he  made  Ramayana  de¬ 
lightful  to  the  ear,  pleasing  to  the  mind,  and  a  true  happiness 
to  the  heart. 

Not  many  months  after  Valmiki  began  his  poetry,  Sita’s 
twin  sons  were  bom.  Valmiki  named  them  Kusa  and  Lava. 
They  grew  up  resembling  their  father  Rama  as  the  Moon’s 
reflection  resembles  the  Moon  himself.  Kusa  and  Lava  were 
handsome  as  Kama  the  Love  God  disarmed  by  pleasure.  All 


Born  as  a  Man 


7 


the  hermit  women  loved  them,  and  watched  those  two  boys 
instead  of  offering  worship  to  the  gods. 

As  Valmiki  composed  Ramayana,  and  as  Kusa  and  Lava 
grew  old  enough  to  learn,  he  taught  it  to  them  by  memory. 
When  they  were  twelve  years  old  Valmiki  had  brought  his 
story  nearly  up  to  the  present,  and  Kusa  and  Lava  knew  ev¬ 
ery  foot  of  it,  and  sang  Ramayana  to  a  lute  and  a  drum,  like 
Gandharvas,  the  heavenly  musicians. 

That  year  King  Rama  held  a  year’s  celebration  in 
Naimisha  Forest  along  the  river  Gomati.  At  home,  Kusa  and 
Lava  rehearsed  their  song.  Deer  listened  from  the  wood  and 
birds  from  the  trees.  They  practiced  long,  and  many  forest 
men  came  to  listen.  After  each  day  they  brought  Kusa  and 
Lava  gifts  and  presents — a  waterjar,  a  bark-cloth  shirt,  a 
deerskin,  some  thread,  a  grass  belt,  red  cloth,  an  axe,  a  cord 
to  tie  firewood,  a  cooking  pot,  and  wild  food  they  had 
gathered. 

Then  they  all  went  to  Rama’s  festival.  People  had  come 
there  from  all  over  the  world.  Valmiki  kept  Sita  hidden,  but 
he  sent  Kusa  and  Lava  to  sing  Ramayana  in  a  clearing. 
When  they  started  to  sing  the  other  business  of  the  festival 
stopped.  They  held  their  hearers  motionless.  For  a  year  they 
sang  some  of  Ramayana  every  morning,  and  never  told  their 
names.  Everyone  gathered  round  them.  Every  day  King 
Rama  came  to  listen.  He  looked  long  at  his  two  sons  he  had 
never  seen  and  wondered  who  they  were,  and  beside  Rama 
stood  a  golden  statue  of  Sita,  for  Rama  loved  her  though  he 
had  sent  her  away. 

Kusa  and  Lava  began,  “We  sing  a  song  of  kingly  fame — 
Oh  Listen. . . 


Rama,  free  your  mind  from  malice  and  ill  will;  this  is  Val- 
miki’s  song. 

On  the  banks  of  the  Sarayu  river  is  Fair  Ayodhya,  the 
royal  capital  of  Kosala.  She  is  a  fabled  city,  famed  among 
men,  twelve  leagues  long  and  ten  wide,  with  Sala  trees,  filled 
with  grain  and  gold.  Heaven  is  fair,  Ayodhya  is  fairer; 
Heaven  is  cool  in  summer,  but  the  Kosala  hills  are  better. 

Majesty,  when  your  father  Dasaratha  was  alive  he  ruled 
from  the  tall  white  Ayodhya  palace  built  atop  a  rising  hill;  he 
was  Lord  of  the  Earth  and  the  Lord  of  Men;  he  was  a  solar 
King  bright  as  the  noonday  Sun.  In  those  bright  days  now 
gone  by  forever,  the  gods  from  the  air  saw  Kosala  to  be  clear 


8 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


as  a  mirror,  with  no  least  touch  of  evil  to  make  any  black 
shadow  over  the  land.  The  Kosalas  were  well-fed  and 
healthy,  the  Sarayu  was  filled  with  boats,  every  cow’s  horns 
were  covered  with  rings  of  silver  and  bands  of  gold.  Every 
man  could  keep  what  he  had  in  peace  and  gain  what  more  he 
wanted. 

The  young  people  wore  elegant  clothes,  and  life  was  joyful 
among  the  gardens  and  in  the  pleasure-parks.  Three-  and 
seven-storied  mansions  lined  the  wide  straight  streets.  The 
Kosalas  had  no  enemies  and  Ayodhya  was  unconquerable. 
Flowers  grew  all  over.  Long-tusked  elephants  walked  the 
streets  wearing  bells  on  their  necks.  There  were  rows  of  full 
shops  with  open  doors,  pale  white  palaces,  and  lordly  trees; 
rattling  chariots  drove  by  and  there  was  music;  foreign  cara¬ 
vans  came  bringing  merchants  and  rich  tribute  from  lesser 
kings. 

Fair  Ayodhya  was  filled  with  warriors,  like  a  mountain 
cave  filled  with  lions;  her  warriors  were  impatient  and  deadly 
to  foes.  Each  man  of  them  could  alone  defeat  ten  thousand 
chariots,  but  no  one  came  against  them.  They  kept  the  city 
safe  and  tried  to  right  whatever  wrongs  they  could  discover. 
Dasaratha’s  ministers  were  loyal  and  wise,  able  to  find  hidden 
motives  and  fight  with  words,  cautious,  never  binding  them¬ 
selves  to  a  lie,  acting  by  their  word,  and  sending  out  spies  to 
report  what  took  place  in  all  the  world. 

Fair  Ayodhya  was  a  matchlessly  brilliant  city  with  lots  of 
food  and  wood  and  water.  But  though  Dasaratha  was  an  old 
man,  sixty  thousand  years  old,  he  had  no  son  to  inherit  his 
kingdom.  He  called  his  priest  Vasishtha  and  said,  “Brahmana, 
I  always  long  for  a  son.  I  can  find  no  happiness  without  him, 
therefore  make  a  sacrifice  with  fire,  to  please  the  gods.” 

Vasishtha  said,  “Excellent.  Well  done.  You  will  have  sons 
after  your  own  heart.” 

Dasaratha  told  his  charioteer  Sumantra  Arrange  for  this. 
He  went  to  his  three  Queens  and  said,  “We  will  have  sons,” 
and  hearing  those  sweet  words  their  faces  shone  like  lotus 
flowers  opening  out  after  the  long  cold  winter’s  end. 

Sumantra  piled  provisions  by  the  Sarayu  and  Vasishtha 
chose  a  day  whose  ruling  stars  were  fortunate.  After  his 
morning  bath  King  Dasaratha  on  that  day  watched  Vasishtha 
light  the  holy  fires  by  the  river.  Vasishtha  began  then  to  sing 
spellbinding  mantras,  he  reached  out  for  a  flat  wooden  ladle 
and  dipped  it  into  clear  liquid  butter,  and  he  started  to  pour 


Born  as  a  Man 


9 


the  offering  into  the  sacrificial  fire — Indra  King  of  heaven, 
Come. 


In  heaven  above,  Indra  turned  and  sighed  and  hissed  like 
an  angry  snake.  His  fine  robes  were  burnt  and  torn,  his  face 
and  chest  were  covered  with  dried  blood.  He  was  angry;  he 
heard  Vasishtha’s  call  and  it  made  him  still  angrier. 

Indra  looked  about  his  heaven.  It  was  a  hopeless  ruin.  The 
once  beautiful  heavenly  garden  Nandana  was  uprooted, 
crushed  and  buried  beneath  soot  and  cinders.  Heaven’s  long 
golden  street  was  littered  with  slain  Gandharvas,  with  Ap- 
sarasas,  the  dancing  women  of  heaven,  lying  killed,  and  with 
the  corpses  of  Rakshasa  demons.  The  high  stately  pleasure- 
palaces  were  razed  to  broken  stones  and  tiles.  The  heavenly 
stream  of  Ganga  ran  red  with  blood.  Exhausted  thunders  and 
broken  lightnings  lay  underfoot,  drawn  Rakshasa  swords  were 
already  rusting  in  the  river,  lingering  fires  and  smoke  ate 
smoldering  holes  in  heaven’s  high  walls,  the  charred  Gate  of 
the  Gods  lay  split  and  wrenched  from  its  heavy  posts. 

Indra  had  just  fought  the  Battle  of  Heaven.  He  had 
proudly  stood  up  against  the  Demon  King  Ravana.  He  alone 
had  not  submitted  with  his  people  to  the  Rakshasas.  He  had 
fought  back  hard  and  lost,  he  had  been  captured  and  released 
and  now  stood  again  in  heaven. 

Now  Indra’s  eyes  filled  with  tears.  He  ground  his  teeth  and 
clenched  his  fists;  then  reaching  down  he  seized  a  chunk  of 
shattered  adamant  and  flew  with  it  up  to  Brahma’s  high 
heaven  beyond  change.  He  stood  there  before  Brahma’s 
palace,  and  with  tremendous  force  threw  the  stone  right 
through  the  beautiful  gold  and  jade  bars  of  the  biggest  win¬ 
dow.  Guards  ran  out  with  spears  and  swords.  But  when  they 
saw  Indra  they  hung  down  their  heads  in  shame  and  motioned 
him  to  enter. 

Brahma  sat  on  a  lotus  throne  of  sandalwood  in  a  room  at 
the  end  of  a  long  hall  and  through  a  doorway  set  three  steps 
beyond  the  end  of  the  Universe. 

Indra  entered.  “You  are  to  blame!  It’s  your  fault,  all  of  it!” 

“Alas,”  said  Brahma,  “it  is  my  loss  that  ever  I  created  any 
of  you.” 

“Ravana  the  Ten-headed  Rakshasa  King  has  wantonly 
slain  my  people!”  said  Indra.  “His  son  Indrajit  captured  me 
fighting  invisibly,  then  soon  freed  me  for  some  reason.” 

“I  arranged  that.” 


10 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Indra  frowned.  “And  you  have  also  arranged  it  so  that  no 
one  in  heaven  can  kill  Ravana!  You  set  him  over  us  all.  He 
asked  and  you  granted  it — look  what  you've  done,  you  old 
— ”  But  the  last  word  couldn’t  come  out  of  Indra’s  throat. 
Whatever  word  he  thought  of,  none  was  strong  enough  to  tell 
his  feelings,  so  he  couldn’t  speak. 

"An  old  fool!"  he  said  at  last.  “Why?  Why?  Just  tell  me 
why  you  grant  boons  to  demons?” 

“O  Indra,  it  was  but  an  elusive  impulse.” 

“This  time  you’ve  made  a  monster  invulnerable.  Ravana  is 
the  disgrace  of  all  Creation  and  a  reproach  to  the  worlds. 
How  can  we  withstand  him  when  even  the  gods  cannot  kill- 
him?  Are  we  to  live  under  evil?” 

Though  he  already  knew,  Brahma  asked,  “Where  are  the 
other  gods?” 

Indra  replied,  “Agni  the  Fire  God  heats  the  stoves  in  Ra- 
vana’s  kitchens;  the  rains  do  his  washing;  Vayu  the  Wind 
sweeps  the  yards  of  Lanka;  Varuna  Lord  of  Waters  supplies 
the  wines  for  Ravana’s  court;  the  Sun  lights  Ravana’s  halls 
and  the  Moon  his  gardens  ...  so  great  is  the  power  of  fear!” 

“Oh  Indra,  look  again.” 

Indra  looked  down  at  Earth  and  Lanka.  “Why,  those  forms 
are  false!  The  others  have  escaped. .  .  .” 

Brahma  held  out  a  silver  bowl  of  Soma  wine  and  Indra 
swiftly  drank  it  down.  Then  he  sighed  again,  but  smiling. 
Brahma  too  drank,  and  looked  carefully  at  Indra. 

“God  of  Rain,”  said  Brahma,  “let  the  pain  go.  Where  is 
Viswakarman  the  Architect  of  heaven?” 

“He  is  always  by  himself  somewhere,”  said  Indra. 

“Put  him  back  to  work.  Rebuild  heaven.” 

Indra  squeezed  his  arms.  “Besides  all  the  rest,  Ravana  him¬ 
self  enjoys  the  food  men  sacrifice  to  us  gods,  and  basks  in  all 
our  smoke.  Destroyed  are  the  gardens  in  heaven  that  once 
made  my  eyes  happy  and  my  heart  sing.  Now  there  is  no 
song  heard,  and  I  fear  even  to  go  down  to  the  sacrifice  of  the 
Ayodhya  King  Dasaratha.” 

Brahma  said,  “Remember  how  to  speak  the  old  language 
with  me  .  .  .  Ravana  is  careless  ...  he  has  long  been  care¬ 
less.  Stop  your  suffering  and  raise  your  head.  Dasaratha  will 
reach  his  desire.  Four  sons  will  be  his.  Take  the  Kosala 
King’s  offerings  and  no  one  will  stop  you.  Keep  out  of  Ra¬ 
vana’s  sight  and  be  patient.  Do  not  fight  him  again  and  how 
can  you  be  defeated?  Think  before  and  not  after  you  act.” 

Indra’s  weariness  was  gone.  He  said,  “Like  the  poor  Earth, 


Born  as  a  Man 


11 


my  heavens  themselves  are  now  proved  flawed  and  fleeting, 
fast-dying  and  stricken  by  devilish  demons.  Have  a  care  for 
my  world!  I  am  Lord  of  the  Gods.  I  am  not  weak  like  a  mere 
man,  I  am  Indra  of  a  Hundred  Sacrifies,  Destroyer  of  Cities, 
Indra  of  the  Thunder-Hand,  Lord  of  Paradise,  Lord  of  Light¬ 
nings!  And  a  demon  beast  overcame  me — ” 

“Indra,  be  ashamed!  Be  silent!”  Brahma  refilled  their  Soma 
bowls.  “What  can  I  do?  I  can  never  lie,  and  I  do  not  know 
every  answer.” 

Indra  asked,  “Who  knows  then?” 

“Go  to  Narayana,”  said  Brahma.  “Only  Narayana  knows, 
or  maybe  he  doesn’t.  But  for  myself,  where  can  I  find  the 
end,  where  the  beginning,  where  the  middle  of  all  this?  Ask 
Narayana — How  was  Ravana  careless? — then  obey  the  man¬ 
tras  of  Vasishtha.” 


Indra  went  to  Narayana,  the  Lord  Vishnu,  the  Soul  of  the 
Universe.  Narayana  sat  watching  Indra  approach.  Indra 
pressed  together  his  hands,  touched  his  brow,  and  bent  his 
head  low  to  Narayana’s  feet.  “Searcher  of  Hearts,  I  bow  to 
you,  namas.  I  have  still  faith  in  the  Good  Law  of  Dharma.” 
Indra  looked  up  past  Narayana’s  wide  dark  chest  crossed  by 
a  neckchain  of  sapphires,  up  into  the  great  god’s  joyful  black 
eyes  wide  as  lotus  petals. 

Narayana  in  his  yellow  saffron  summer  robes  smiled  down 
at  Indra.  “Yes,  a  good  enough  fight,”  said  Narayana.  “No 
fear,  Lord  of  Gods.” 

“How  shall  we  bring  down  Ravana?”  asked  Indra.  “Be¬ 
cause  of  Brahma’s  boon  is  the  Demon  King  strong,  and  for 
no  other  cause  of  his  own.  Help  me,  you  are  my  only  refuge, 
there  is  no  other  for  me.  /  will  gather  my  storms  again  and 
attack  Lanka,  give  me  your  permission  to  fight  Ravana  once 
more!” 

“Never!”  said  Narayana.  “Don’t  you  understand  that 
Brahma’s  words  are  always  true?  Do  not  falsify  the  three 
spheres  of  life.  I  would  not  have  let  you  fight  in  the  first 
place,  though  you  were  right  to  resist  and  Ravana  was  wrong. 
Ravana  asked  Brahma — Let  me  be  unslayable  by  every  crea¬ 
ture  of  Heaven  and  of  the  underworlds.  And  Brahma 
promised — So  be  it.  That  boon  is  unbreakable,  yet  will  I 
cause  Ravana’s  death.  That  is  the  truth.  Only  ask  me. . . 

“Ah,”  said  Indra,  “from  disdain  Ravana  did  not  mention 
men  or  animals,  and  took  no  safeguard  against  them.  He  eats 


12 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


men;  they  are  his  food  and  why  should  he  fear  them?  Lord, 
on  Earth  life  resembles  Hell  again.  We  need  you  again.  Look 
at  us,  see  us,  and  bless  us.  For  the  good  of  all  the  worlds. 
Lord  Narayana,  accept  birth  as  a  man.” 

“I  already  have.” 

Waves  of  happiness  washed  over  Indra.  “Dark  blue  Nara¬ 
yana  clad  in  yellow,  become  four.  Put  aside  the  shell  trumpet, 
the  razor-edged  chakra,  the  lotus  and  mace  you  hold  in  your 
four  hands.  Empty  your  dark  hands;  descend  into  the  bor¬ 
rowed  and  fanciful  world  of  men,  desperate  and  glittering. 
Become  Dasaratha’s  four  sons  bom  of  blood  and  seed.  Take 
your  Goddess  Lakshmi  and  let  her  be  your  mortal  wife.” 

“We  will  go  down,”  said  Narayana. 

“Lord,  kill  him,  kill  Ravana  forever.  I  hate  that  proud  and 
pampered  Rakshasa.  Favor  me  and  curse  him;  give  to  Death 
his  faces  tom  apart;  dry  away  our  fear  as  the  Sun  dries 
morning  dew.” 

“I  will,”  said  Narayana.  “Listen,  Vasishtha  begins  to  call 
you  to  Earth  with  songs,  to  Ayodhya  by  the  sleepy  Sarayu.” 


The  melted  butter  from  Vasishtha’s  ladle  fell  into  the 
flames.  Vasishtha  sang — Indra  be  my  bridge  from  high  to 
low,  do  my  bidding,  obey  me.  ... 

The  tongues  of  fire  danced,  and  Indra  came  unseen  in  the 
sky,  free  again  and  feasting  on  smoke.  Vasishtha  sang — 
Narayana,  we  take  your  protection.  Leave  your  home  a  mo¬ 
ment,  draw  near,  come  to  us.  .  .  . 

Vasishtha  threw  flowers  in  the  fire  and  quickly  stepped 
back  to  stand  beside  King  Dasaratha.  They  heard  a  ringing 
loud  noise,  a  fierce  clang  of  metal;  but  saw  nothing. 

“What  was  that?”  asked  the  old  King. 

“The  sharp  discus  drops,”  said  Vasishtha. 

They  heard  a  crash  like  a  falling  tree  and  Vasishtha  said, 
“The  huge  mace  is  fallen.”  There  was  a  hollow  rolling  sound. 
“The  shell  is  down.”  They  caught  the  sudden  scent  of  lotuses. 

Then  a  giant  black  man  rose  from  the  flames  in  a  stream 
of  smoke  and  a  burning  shower  of  sparks.  He  stepped  out 
from  the  fire  and  frowned  and  glared  with  menace  at  the 
King,  but  Dasaratha  faced  him  unmoved.  The  giant  wore 
crimson,  his  whole  body  was  covered  with  dark  lion’s  hair, 
his  belt  was  a  bowstring,  his  palms  were  marked  with  thun¬ 
der-signs  and  the  soles  of  his  feet  with  wheels.  He  had  a  thick 
glossy  beard  and  long  black  hair  on  his  head.  He  had  the  yel- 


Born  as  a  Man 


13 


low  eyes  of  a  tiger  and  held  out  a  steaming  golden  bowl  like 
the  Sun  with  a  silver  cover. 

Dasaratha  took  the  bowl  in  his  hands.  The  black  giant  said, 
“Feed  this  to  your  wives,  it  will  bring  you  sons.”  The  fire 
crackled  and  the  black  man  vanished. 

Inside  the  bowl  was  rice  cooked  with  milk  and  sweetened 
with  sugar.  Vasishtha  walked  three  times  round  the  fire  in 
right-turning  circles.  Dasaratha  felt  like  a  poor  man  who  has 
found  a  treasure  undreamt  of,  like  a  man  rich  in  happiness, 
like  a  lost  voyager  finding  the  way  home. 


Dasaratha  went  to  the  inner  rooms  of  his  palace.  All  the 
servants  of  his  three  Queens  were  smiling;  their  faces  lighted 
the  rooms  as  the  sky  is  flooded  with  the  lovely  beams  and 
rays  of  the  autumn  Moon. 

Dasaratha  gave  the  gleaming  bowl  to  his  first  wife, 
Kausalya,  and  said,  “Eat  half  of  it.”  When  Kausalya  had 
eaten  half  the  rice  he  gave  his  second  wife  Sumitra  half  of 
what  remained.  He  gave  his  youngest  wife  Kaikeyi  half  of 
what  Sumitra  had  left.  He  thought  a  moment,  and  gave  all 
the  rest  to  Sumitra  again. 

A  year  later  on  the  ninth  day  of  spring  Rama  was  first 
bom  to  Kausalya.  Later  that  same  day  Bharata  was  bom  to 
Kaikeyi;  then  still  later  Sumitra  bore  two  sons,  Lakshmana 
and  Satrughna.  Their  father  lit  their  birth-fires  in  jars  of 
Earth;  he  named  them  on  the  eleventh  day  of  their  lives,  and 
the  Kosalas  danced  in  the  streets  and  rang  all  the  temple  bells. 

Rama  grew  to  be  his  father’s  favorite  son.  Rama  was  not 
tall  and  not  short.  He  had  more  energy  than  the  Sun  and  a 
deep  voice.  He  had  colorful  green  eyes;  his  skin  was  cool  soft 
green  and  so  smooth  even  dust  would  not  cling  to  him;  his 
wavy  hair  was  dark  green;  he  walked  like  a  lion;  the  soles  of 
his  feet  were  flat  and  marked  with  royal  Dharma-wheels. 
There  was  no  hollow  between  his  shoulder  blades  on  his 
back;  his  arms  were  long  and  reached  to  his  knees;  he  had 
forty  identical  white  teeth  all  shaped  like  pomegranate  seeds; 
his  thumbs  bore  the  four  lines  of  knowledge  where  they 
joined  his  hands.  He  had  high  shoulders  like  a  lion,  and  a 
graceful  brow,  a  broad  chest,  three  folds  in  his  neck  at  the 
base  of  his  throat  like  the  spirals  on  a  shell.  He  had  deep  col¬ 
larbones  and  a  long  tongue,  a  sharp  nose,  heavy  jaws  and  the 
eyelashes  of  a  bull.  His  breath  was  lotus-scented.  Of  all  men 
only  Rama  was  born  knowing  his  own  heart. 


14 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Lakshmana  was  Rama’s  second  self;  he  was  Rama’s  own 
life  walking  beside  him.  He  always  kept  Rama  company,  and 
served  him  in  everything  before  himself.  Lakshmana  was  of 
golden  skin  and  measureless  strength,  his  eyes  were  blue  as 
wildflowers  and  his  straight  hair  was  golden-brown.  Lak¬ 
shmana  would  not  sleep  without  Rama  near  him  nor  eat 
unless  Rama  shared  his  food.  When  Rama  went  riding  on 
horseback,  there  rode  Lakshmana  behind  him  holding  a  bow. 

Prince  Bharata  was  bom  with  red  skin,  rosy  eyes  and  scar¬ 
let  lips  and  fiery  hair  red  as  flame.  His  brother  Satrughna  had 
dark  blue  skin  and  black  eyes  and  black  hair.  And  in  the 
same  way  that  his  twin  Lakshmana  was  drawn  to  Rama,  Sa¬ 
trughna  accompanied  Bharata  everywhere  and  thought  Bhar¬ 
ata  dearer  than  his  own  life  itself. 


When  the  four  princes  were  sixteen  years  old  the  recluse 
Viswamitra  came  to  Kosala  in  the  spring.  The  frontier  guards 
sent  word  to  Ayodhya  and  King  Dasaratha  met  him  there  on 
foot  outside  the  city.  The  King  held  flowers  and  water,  grass 
and  rice,  and  said,  “Welcome  to  you,  brahmana.  I  hope  your 
journey  to  me  went  well.” 

Viswamitra  answered,  “I  hope  your  land  here  is  peaceful 
and  your  kingdom  rich.  Are  all  your  friends  well?  Are  your 
warriors  obedient  to  you  and  defiant  to  your  enemies?  I  hope 
your  foes  are  dead  and  that  you  keep  well  the  duties  of  a 
King.” 

They  walked  together  into  Ayodhya.  The  priest  Vasishtha 
met  them  and  said,  “Viswamitra,  you  arrive  here  like  sum¬ 
mer  rain,  like  the  recovery  of  something  lost,  like  bright 
dawn  after  night.  By  our  good  fortune  we  have  gained  your 
company.  Today  our  births  have  borne  fruit  and  our  lives 
gained  their  goals.” 

When  they  were  seated  in  the  palace  Dasaratha  said  to 
Viswamitra,  “Why  have  you  come?  Whatever  you  want  I  will 
gladly  give  you.” 

“Promise  me,”  said  Viswamitra. 

“I  promise.” 

Viswamitra  said,  “Majesty,  that  promise  becomes  you 
alone.  No  one  else  would  make  it.  The  pathless  forest  where  I 
live  has  become  a  courtyard  of  evil  and  no  longer  is  there 
any  safety  from  the  Rakshasas  of  the  monstrous  Demon  King 
Ravana.” 


The  Thorn  in  the  World's  Side 


Where  1  have  been  there  is  no  light 
From  any  Sun;  we  have  no  Moon  nor  Stars, 

No  lightnings  like  these,  much  less  any  of  this  Fire. 

There  I  must  light  up  all  around  me. 

By  my  sight  all  is  illumined. 

Here  I  am  born  again  to  kill  the  Evil, 

And  like  a  black  she-leopard  going  with  me  in  my  shadow 
Never  does  Victory  leave  my  side: 

One;  one  only  and  no  second! 


Viswamitra  said,  “King,  for  years  I  have  tried  to  complete  a 
sacrifice  in  the  solitary  forest.  I  do  nothing  wrong  and  leave 
nothing  out.  I  never  daydream,  and  my  work  is  absolutely 
without  lapses  or  holes.  The  most  learned  Rakshasa  could 
surely  detect  no  entrance,  yet  when  I  speak  a  blessing  I  hear 
the  heavy  tread  of  countless  running  feet  in  the  air  above  me 
and  see  no  one.  Just  when  I  am  to  make  the  offering  and  end 
the  rites,  flesh  and  gore  fall  on  my  altar.  My  waterjars  break 
untouched,  my  figwood  ladles  warp  and  groan  and  my  fires 
go  out.” 

Dasaratha  said,  “How  have  Rakshasas  overcome  Brahma 
power?  Where  are  the  gods  who  should  protect  you?” 

Viswamitra  replied,  “Majesty,  we  are  living  in  the  second 
age  of  the  world,  and  the  quarter  part  of  Virtue  has  now  died 
among  men.  These  are  faded  days  and  Dharma  declines.  In 
the  first  age  food  came  by  wishing  and  grew  from  Earth 
without  tending.  No  one  wept,  nor  was  cruel,  nor  hurt  an¬ 
other;  and  there  were  not  many  gods  then  among  different 
men  but  only  one. 

“This  age  began  with  the  first  slaughter  and  sacrifice  of  an 
innocent  animal  to  some  lower  god;  men  started  to  take  ac- 

13 


16 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


tion  to  gain  objects  and  rewards;  they  gave  no  more  gifts  free 
just  for  the  giving,  except  rarely,  more  and  more  rarely  as 
years  pass.  This  is  a  time  of  scene-shifting  and  contrivance; 
men  no  longer  live  as  long;  there  are  all  about  us  arguments 
and  objections  and  ambushes  and  devious  cunning,  deceitful 
sorcery  and  craft  and  fraud  and  guile  and  trickery  and  lies 
and  many  devices.  King,  against  Ravana’s  Rakshasas  there  is 
no  help  in  the  forest  and  no  help  from  the  gods.” 

“I  pity  those  living  after  us,”  said  Dasaratha.  “Who  is  Ra- 
vana?” 

“He  is  King  of  Lanka,”  said  Viswamitra,  “a  piece  of  grit  in 
the  world’s  eye  to  make  her  weep.  Ravana  has  conquered 
Heaven  and  Hell.  His  brutal  helpers  hunger  for  me.  They  fly 
fast  and  change  shapes  at  will;  they  love  eating  hermits;  they 
feed  on  harmless  men  and  consume  creatures  like  Death  him¬ 
self.” 


Listen,  Majesty — 

By  the  light  of  very  ancient  history  you  will  learn  how  the 
three  worlds  have  fallen  prey  to  the  inhuman  race  of  the 
Night-Wanderers.  You  will  hear  what  the  hateful  demon  Ra¬ 
vana  has  done. 

At  the  last  beginning  of  Time  as  at  every  beginning, 
Brahma  the  Creator  of  the  Worlds  was  reborn  from  a  lotus. 
That  flower  grew  from  the  navel  of  Lord  Narayana  as  he 
slept  afloat  on  the  waters,  lying  on  the  white  coils  of  the 
endless  serpent  Sesha.  Brahma  saw  water  everywhere  and  he 
grew  anxious  lest  it  be  stolen.  So  out  of  water  he  made  four 
guardians;  two  mated  couples  male  and  female. 

Those  four  people  said,  “We  are  hungry  and  thirsty.” 

Brahma  told  them,  “Watch  this  water,  don’t  let  a  drop  of  it 
get  lost.” 

One  couple  answered  him,  “ Rakshama ,  we  will  protect  it.” 

The  other  pair  said,  “Yakshama,  we  shall  worship  it.” 

Those  couples  were  the  first  Rakshasas  and  the  first 
Yakshas.  Narayana  then  carefully  rescued  the  Earth  from  un¬ 
der  water.  Brahma  somehow  made  the  five  elements;  he  fash¬ 
ioned  the  worlds  and  made  food  and  other  races. 

The  Rakshasa  couple  lived  on  Earth.  That  Rakshasi  was 
pregnant;  she  was  filled  with  child  as  a  raincloud  is  filled 
with  water  by  the  sea.  Majesty,  Rakshasis  conceived  and  give 
birth  all  in  one  day.  She  went  alone  to  a  deserted  hillside  and 
bore  a  son,  then  she  left  the  baby  demon  there  abandoned. 


The  Thom  in  the  World’s  Side  17 

She  forgot  him  and  hurried  back  to  her  husband,  and  her 
newborn  child  put  his  fist  in  his  mouth  and  cried  slowly. 

Just  then  above  that  hill  in  the  sky  Lord  Shiva  was  riding 
with  Devi  on  the  back  of  Nandin  the  white  brahma  bull. 
Devi  heard  the  faint  little  cries;  she  looked  down  and  saw  the 
helpless  baby,  and  she  sent  the  great  god  Shiva  down  onto  the 
hill. 

The  terrible  Lord  Shiva  bent  over  that  child,  picked  him 
up  and  held  him  gently.  Shiva  Lord  of  the  destruction  pre¬ 
ceding  creation  wore  a  tiger’s  skin  still  dripping  blood,  the 
holy  thread  over  his  shoulder  was  a  mottled  serpent;  he  had 
In  his  hair  the  crescent  Moon;  he  was  in  form  a  pale  white 
man  with  white  ashes  in  his  hair  and  his  throat  was  blue,  and 
on  his  brow  was  his  deadly  third  eye  closed.  He  gave  that 
baby  his  mother’s  age  and  to  please  Devi  gave  him  the  power 
of  flight;  and  these  gifts  stayed  with  the  Rakshasa  race,  and 
their  children  grow  to  their  mother’s  age  the  day  they’re  born. 

That  Rakshasa  was  Sukesa.  He  was  charming  and  polite, 
and  welcome  everywhere.  He  married  the  daughter  of  a 
Gandharva,  and  her  company  made  him  happy.  He  had  three 
sons  and  named  them  Mali,  Sumali  and  Malyavan. 

Those  three  young  Rakshasas  wanted  a  better  place  to  live. 
They  wanted  their  earthly  homes  to  be  beautiful.  They  flew 
to  heaven  to  Viswakarman  the  heavenly  architect.  They 
found  him  forging  an  iron  axe  with  a  steel  hammer,  pound¬ 
ing  away  while  sparks  flew  burning  holes  in  his  leather 
clothes. 

Viswakarman  was  surrounded  by  tall  clay  jars  of  waters 
and  oils  for  tempering  blades.  His  anvils  and  firepits  and  bel¬ 
lows  and  dirty  charcoal  bags  cluttered  the  room;  long  leather 
belts  and  running  wheels  and  whining  wooden  gears  went  rat¬ 
tling  overhead  in  confusion;  round  the  rafters  hung  thunder¬ 
bolts  to  be  sharpened  and  spare  axles  and  chariot  chains; 
underfoot  were  metal  cuttings  and  pointed  scrap  and  curly 
shavings;  the  light  was  bad;  acid  fumes  and  coal  dust  filled 
the  hot  air;  and  clamor  and  din  never  ceased  in  his  work¬ 
shop. 

Malyavan  drew  near  and  said  in  a  loud  voice,  “Dear  Lord 
of  Arts. . . .” 

Viswakarman  stopped  hammering,  but  his  furnaces  still 
roared  and  the  gears  ground  on.  He  yelled  back — Is  it  made 
of  metal? 

Malyavan  shouted,  “A  home  .  .  .  beauty  .  .  .  for  us  .  .  . 
somewhere  quiet. .  . .” 


18 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Viswakarman  ran  his  grimy  hand  over  his  sweaty  brow 
and  brushed  some  filings  out  of  his  hair.  He  gestured  toward 
a  back  door — Come  follow  me. 

He  led  the  three  Rakshasa  brothers  through  that  door  into 
a  quiet  room,  light  and  clean,  ideal  for  an  artist.  The 
goddesses  and  wives  of  heaven  came  to  welcome  Viswakar¬ 
man  warm  glad  smiles  and  cool  drinks.  And  Viswakarman  no 
longer  looked  like  a  metalsmith.  Just  by  going  through  the 
door  he  had  changed  into  a  beautiful  sensitive  workman 
wearing  airy  clothes  and  remote  from  care. 

Now  Malyavan  could  speak.  “Prince  of  Artists,  you  have 
made  the  gods’  flying  chariots;  you  have  put  speed  into  the 
legs  of  horses;  you  have  given  the  strong  their  strength;  you 
have  made  husband  and  wife  the  one  for  the  other  from  be¬ 
fore  their  birth,  and  those  who  love  the  gods  got  that  love 
from  you.  When  your  daughter  married  the  Sun  and  found 
him  too  bright  you  put  him  on  your  lathe  and  shaved  him 
down  a  bit.  What  is  there  you  cannot  create  or  model?” 

The  goddesses  gave  Viswakarman  garlands  and  loving 
looks,  and  he  asked  Malyavan,  “What  shall  I  build  for  you?” 

“Build  us  a  home  grand  as  the  Halls  of  Shiva,  with  high 
painted  ceilings,  rich  in  ornaments  and  flowered  gardens.” 

Viswakarman  smiled.  “I  hear  that  Shiva  lives  in  a  drafty 
hut  that  every  moment  threatens  to  collapse  on  him.” 

Malyavan  fell  at  Viswakarman’s  feet.  “Oh,  we  are  truly  ig¬ 
norant  and  poor.  Make  us  a  fine  city,  a  fortress  where  we 
may  live.” 

Viswakarman  answered,  “On  Earth  the  Isle  of  Lanka  in  the 
southern  sea  is  vacant.  I  will  build  Lanka  City  there  for  you, 
on  the  brow  of  Trikuta  Hill  rising  to  the  clouds,  somewhere 
not  far  below  the  highest  of  his  three  summits.” 

Before  their  eyes  Viswakarman  changed  again.  He  became 
all-seeing  and  had  on  every  side  eyes  and  faces  and  arms. 
From  his  back  came  the  two  great  wide  wings  by  which  he 
fashions  all  forms  and  shapes,  fanning  the  air  and  blowing 
them  into  life. 

Viswakarman  took  a  staff,  went  outside  and  struck  the 
ground  of  heaven  hard.  A  golden  city  arose;  there  was  Beau¬ 
tiful  Lanka  of  golden  walls.  “Can  you  live  there?”  asked 
Viswakarman. 

“We  will  live  in  her  as  the  gods  live  in  heaven,”  said 
Malyavan.  “How  skillful,  what  an  admirable  artist  you  are!” 

The  city  vanished.  Viswakarman  said,  “If  you  like  the  plan 


The  Thorn  in  the  World's  Side 


19 


of  it  I  will  make  it  real.  First  I  must  cut  the  trees  and  mine 
the  gold  and  shape  the  stones.” 

“Have  you  no  helpers  for  that?” 

Viswakarman  turned  on  him.  “Of  course  not,  are  you 
mad?  When  the  master  carpenter  no  longer  goes  out  into  the 
forests  to  choose  his  own  tree,  when  he  no  longer  cuts  it 
down  himself  and  saws  his  own  boards  then  say  farewell  to 
the  arts!” 


So  Beautiful  Lanka  was  built.  The  race  of  Rakshasas  flour¬ 
ished  under  Sukesa’s  three  sons.  Sukesa  himself  lived  with  his 
wife  in  a  Gandharva  house  on  the  slopes  of  Himalya  until  he 
died,  a  courtly  old  demon  kind  to  all. 

But  as  they  increased  in  number  there  was  not  room  for 
every  Rakshasa  to  live  in  Lanka.  Some  left  the  others  and 
prowled  roaming  through  the  forests  across  the  sea  to  the 
north,  and  there  began  to  eat  the  raw  flesh  of  men,  as  they 
do  now,  striking  by  night.  They  would  murder  the  gentle 
teachers  in  their  retreats  and  avoid  the  well-armed  tribes  of 
hunters  as  though  picking  only  the  easy  ripe  fruit  from  a  tree. 

In  those  days  the  heavenly  sage  Narada  sat  in  the  sky  try¬ 
ing  to  play  a  song  of  music  on  his  lute  of  tortoise-shell  and 
yellow  wood.  When  he  was  in  a  good  mood  he  was  unreason¬ 
able,  irritable  and  cross  and  wondrously  disagreeable;  and  in¬ 
terruptions  infuriated  him.  He  could  not  even  tune  the 
lute-strings,  for  horrible  cries  rising  from  Earth’s  forests  filled 
his  ears.  Narada  set  aside  his  lute  and  soared  down,  and  in 
Dandaka  Forest  he  stood  angrily  before  the  first  demon  he 
saw  and  said,  “Be  quiet  or  else!” 

The  Rakshasa  said,  “Oh  Man  you  are  my  dinner  now.” 

“I  am  no  man,  I  live  in  heaven  and.  .  .  .”  The  Rakshasa 
had  swallowed  him  whole.  But  Narada  was  hot  as  a  barrel  of 
embers.  The  demon  spat  him  out  and  still  his  stomach 
burned. 

Narada  glared  at  him.  “Your  peaceful  days  are  gone!  I  will 
sing  such  a  song. . . .” 

Narada  flew  back  to  his  lute. 

For  I  will  play  in  your  despite, 

And  /  will  make  the  wrongs  all  right. 

For  I  will  do,  what  pleases  me. . .  . 


20 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


He  perfectly  tuned  his  lute  with  shaking  hands,  and  sitting 
inside  a  cloud  high  above  Dandaka  Forest  he  sang — Dark 
blue  Narayana  and  black  Rakshasas! 


The  awful  dark  shadow  of  the  giant  shell-trumpet  Pan- 
chajanya  fell  over  Lanka;  the  water-born  king  of  shells 
roared.  Narayana  came  oh  the  bird  Garuda  in  armor  bright 
as  a  thousand  suns! 

Sentries  ran  to  Malyavan  and  the  brave  Night-Wanderers 
rose  into  the  sky.  Their  chariots  and  elephants  came  racing 
through  the  air;  their  fast-flying  graceful  war-horses,  red  and 
white  and  pale  blue,  milled  and  pawed  the  sky.  Garuda  flew 
to  the  attack.  Narayana  was  hidden  by  swarms  of  demon  ar¬ 
rows  hard-hitting,  true-flying  and  thirsty. 

He  has  disappeared;  listen,  he  is  lost. 

He  is  lost,  but  do  I  hear 
A  crying  bowstring!  Do  I  hear 
Fear  to  the  demons! 


The  demon  horses  stumbled.  The  noise  of  Narayana’s  bow 
turned  their  elephants  to  stone;  they  fell  from  the  sky  and 
broke.  Wildly  swung  the  war-flags,  blood  poured  in  rivers, 
Lanka  was  measured  by  corpse-lengths.  Narayana  beheaded 
Mali.  Sumali  and  Malyavan  fled  wounded  and  burning  in 
grief  down  to  safety  in  the  underworlds  beneath  the  sea, 
through  a  door  under  Ocean. 

Garuda  shrieked  and  screamed  and  turned  in  the  air  like  a 
hurricane.  Narayana’a  arrows  flew,  white-hot  flights  of  arrows 
humming,  piercing  Dandaka  Forest,  raining  down  into 
Lanka.  The  Rakshasa  pride  was  fallen;  their  heroes  were 
dead;  the  southern  sea  was  stained;  the  Forest  ran  red  with 
Rakshasa  blood.  The  demons  fled  like  the  clouds  of  doom 
driven  before  the  black  wind  of  the  End  of  the  Worlds.  Their 
jeweled  necklaces  and  earrings  fell  over  Lanka  Island,  their 
dark  bodies  covered  the  waves. 

Narada  set  down  his  lute.  No  living  Rakshasa  remained  on 
Earth.  Lanka  City  was  empty. 


So,  Majesty,  were  the  demons  driven  away  once  long  ago, 
but  they  hoarded  their  possessions  and  hopes  far  underground 


The  Thom  in  the  World's  Side  21 

in  the  Naga  Kingdoms  and  watched  for  some  chance  to  re¬ 
turn. 

Pulastya  was  one  of  Brahma’s  Mind-bom  sons,  one  of  the 
inspired  forefathers  of  life.  He  lived  on  a  lonely  hill  of  the 
Himalyas,  alone,  looking  out  over  the  lowlands.  He  felt  no 
need  to  be  busy;  he  watched  the  world  go  by;  he  was  in  love 
with  the  quiet  of  the  high  hills,  with  the  pines  and  the  deo¬ 
dars,  with  Himalya  rising  to  heaven. 

That  same  hill  was  a  favorite  playground  for  Apsarasas 
and  Naga  girls,  who  ran  about  singing  and  laughing  together 
with  the  daughters  of  the  local  hermits.  When  they  disturbed 
him  for  the  hundred-and-eighth  time  Pulastya  told  them,  “If  I 
ever  see  any  girl  playing  around  here  any  more  she  will  be¬ 
come  pregnant  1” 

Fearing  that  they  stayed  away.  But  the  daughter  of  the 
hermit  Trinavindu  had  not  heard  this  curse.  The  very  next 
day  she  came  looking  round  Pulastya’s  home  for  her  friends. 
She  came  into  his  sight  as  he  was  singing;  he  only  glanced  at 
her  but  she  turned  pale  and  ran  to  her  father. 

Trinavindu  said,  “Why  are  you  no  longer  a  maid?” 

She  wrung  her  hands.  “Nothing  happened,  I  was  walking 
alone.” 

Trinavindu  centered  his  mind  and  in  an  instant  he  knew 
the  answer.  He  led  her  back  to  Pulastya  and  said,  “Take  this 
girl  as  alms  from  me,  for  your  happiness.” 

Pulastya  accepted  her.  Their  son  was  Vishrava.  Vishrava 
married  a  brahmana’s  daughter  and  when  his  son  was  bom 
he  called  him  Vaishravana. 

Vaishravana  was  a  happy  child,  good-spirited  and  friendly. 
He  stayed  on  his  grandfather’s  hillside  smiling  away,  greeting 
the  days  like  new  friends.  So  happily  did  he  live  that  he  for¬ 
got  to  eat  or  drink,  and  for  a  thousand  years  he  even  forgot 
to  breathe. 

When  he  did  that,  in  heaven  Indra’s  marble  throne  grew 
hot.  Lord  Brahma  had  to  come  down  and  ask  Vaishravana 
what  he  would  like  to  have  or  to  be. 

“I  want  to  be  always  generous,”  answered  Vaishravana, 
and  Brahma  made  him  Lord  of  Treasures  and  Riches  and 
Wealth.  The  Treasure  Lord  took  the  Yakshas  of  the  hill-lakes 
who  loved  water  for  his  treasure-keepers  and  made  their  king 
Manibhadra  his  friend.  And  from  Brahma  he  also  received 
the  huge  aerial  mind-driven  chariot  Pushpaka  made  by 
Viswakarman  in  heaven,  that  could  fly  with  horses  or  without 
them  and  was  big  as  a  small  city,  and  all  covered  with  flow- 


22 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


ers.  And  further,  Vaishravana  got  immortality  and  all  the 
wealth  of  the  three  worlds  and  kingdom  over  kings. 

But  Brahma  gave  him  nowhere  to  live.  Vaishravana  asked 
his  father  what  to  do,  and  Vishrava  sent  him  to  deserted 
Lanka.  The  Yakshas  carried  the  treasures  of  the  worlds 
across  the  southern  sea  or  rode  over  the  waters  in  Pushpaka 
chariot.  Vaishravana  made  Beautiful  Lanka  his  home,  and 
from  time  to  time  he  would  return  to  Himalya  to  visit  his 
parents,  floating  along  by  himself  on  rays  of  light. 


In  the  netherworlds  of  the  Nagas  Malyavan  and  Sumali 
were  still  alive.  Looking  up  through  the  saltwater  of  the 
southern  sea,  from  beneath  a  crevice  in  the  ocean  floor  they 
saw  Vaishravana  taking  his  riches  to  Lanka.  Malyavan  didn’t 
mind,  but  when  Sumali  saw  Vaishravana’s  wealth  gleaming 
and  casting  brilliant  lights  even  on  the  floor  of  the  sea  he  was 
hit  by  envy.  Unhappiness  fell  on  him  and  he  asked  questions 
and  learned  all  about  the  birth  of  the  Treasure  King. 

Sumali  told  his  daughter  Kaikasi,  “Go  to  Vishrava  and  get 
sons  like  that!”  She  cast  down  her  eyes,  but  fearing  to  dis¬ 
obey  her  father  she  went  to  the  Hills. 

She  stood  before  Vishrava  scuffing  the  ground  with  her  toe. 
He  looked  at  her  and  she  said,  “I  am  Kaikasi,  read  the  rest 
for  yourself.” 

Vishrava  took  her  for  his  second  wife,  and  when  she  gave 
birth  it  was  to  four  Rakshasas,  three  sons  and  a  daughter. 
First-born  was  Ravana.  Ravana  had  ten  hideous  heads  and 
twenty  arms;  he  was  blacker  than  a  heap  of  soot  and  fit  to 
horrify  the  Universe;  he  had  two  fangs  curving  up  from  each 
mouth  and  coppery  lips  and  twenty  red  eyes.  When  he  was 
bom  every  dog  in  the  world  howled  as  loud  as  he  could  and 
chased  his  tail  madly  turning  left  in  circles. 

Next  was  bom  the  giant  Kumbhakama  with  ears  shaped 
like  the  big  earthen  waterjars  that  stand  higher  than  a  man’s 
waist,  and  he  grew  up  in  one  day  to  stand  taller  than  a  high 
house.  Then  the  frightful  girl  Surpanakha  was  bom,  and  last 
of  all  was  bom  Vibhishana  the  good  demon. 

Not  long  after  their  birth,  Ravana  and  Vibhishana  saw  the 
Treasure  Lord  come  home  on  one  of  his  visits.  Ravana  be¬ 
came  sad  that  he  had  no  such  brilliance  himself.  Then  Ra¬ 
vana  made  the  colossal  Kumbhakama  stay  home  and  not 


The  Thom  in  the  World’s  Side 


23 


wander  over  Earth  eating  saints,  and  in  that  wide  mountain 
forest  the  three  brothers  sat  contemplating  the  absolute  im¬ 
mensity  of  Life.  In  contemplation  they  entered  Eternity. 

And  at  the  end  of  every  thousand  years,  Ravana  cut  off  one 
of  his  heads  and  threw  it  into  fire  as  a  sacrifice,  until  nine  of 
his  heads  were  gone  and  but  one  day  remained  before  he 
would  cut  the  last  one.  That  day  was  passing.  Ten  thousand 
years  and  Ravana’s  life  were  about  to  end  together. 

Ravana  held  the  knife  to  his  throat,  when  Brahma  ap¬ 
peared  and  said,  “Stop!  Ask  me  a  boon  at  once!” 

“I  am  glad  that  I  please  you,”  said  Ravana. 

“Please  me!”  said  Brahma.  “Your  will  is  dreadful,  too 
strong  to  be  neglected;  like  a  bad  disease  I  must  treat  it.  Your 
pains  make  me  hurt.  Ask!” 

"May  I  be  unslayable  and  never  defeated  by  the  gods  or 
any  one  from  any  heaven,  by  Hell’s  devils  or  A  suras  or 
demon  spirits,  by  underworld  serpents  or  Yakshas  or 
Rakshasas.” 

“Granted!”  said  Brahma  quickly.  He  gave  Ravana  back  his 
burnt  heads  better  looking  than  before.  They  rose  living  from 
the  ashes  and  settled  on  Ravana’s  necks.  Ravana  smiled  and 
smoothed  down  his  black  moustaches. 

Brahma  told  Vibhishana,  “Ask.” 

“May  I  never  forget  Dharma  in  peril  or  in  pleasure,  in 
comfort  or  in  distraction.” 

Brahma  said,  “Yes;  and  you  will  be  immortal  on  Earth  and 
exempt  from  death  or  oblivion;  and  my  truth  knows  no  turn¬ 
ing.” 

Lord  Brahma  turned  to  Kumbhakarna,  but  the  Wind  came 
to  him  invisibly  and  whispered,  “Grandfather,  give  him  noth¬ 
ing.  He  has  already  eaten  seven  Apsarasas  and  ten  Gandhar- 
vas  and  many  saints;  he  blunders  about  ruining  peace  and 
happiness.  Consider  what  he  did  with  no  boons,  and  with 
them  he  will  eat  everyone.” 

Brahma  thought,  “Saraswati  white  Goddess  of  Speech,  for 
a  moment  capture  the  words  of  Kumbhakarna.”  She  entered 
the  giant’s  throat  and  Brahma  said  aloud,  “Kumbhakarna, 
quickly  ask  and  quick  be  given.” 

Kumbhakarna  answered,  “What  I  really  want  is  to  sleep 
for  half  a  year  after  every  day  I  have  to  spend  awake  in  this 
stupid  world.”  He  no  sooner  spoke  than  he  fell  over  into  a 
deep  sleep. 


24 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Then  did  Sumali  come  from  under  Earth.  He  embraced 
Ravana  and  said,  “Now  why  fear?  No  god,  not  even  Naray- 
ana  can  hurt  us.  Lead  us  back  to  Lanka  as  before!” 

Ravana  sent  Sumali  to  Lanka,  and  the  old  Rakshasa  told 
Vaishravana,  “Go,  this  is  our  city.” 

Again  the  Treasure  Lord  asked  his  father  what  to  do. 
Vishrava  said,  “Don’t  fight  your  own  brother.  Leave  Lanka 
as  you  found  her,  move  your  treasure,  live  on  Kailasa  Hill 
north  of  these  Himalyas,  live  on  Silver  Mountain.”  So  Vaisra- 
vana  became  the  Guardian  God  of  the  North,  one  of  the  four 
Guardians  of  the  world’s  four  directions. 

Ravana  moved  into  Lanka,  and  the  millions  of  Rakshasas 
who  had  multiplied  in  exile  underground  came  there  with 
their  families  and  animals.  Old  Malyavan  stood  blinking  and 
smiling  on  Lanka’s  sunny  beach,  happy  and  proud  of  Ra¬ 
vana.  Rakshasas  went  over  the  lands  again,  dark  as  thunder¬ 
clouds,  with  earrings  of  bright  gleams  of  gold. 

One  day  Ravana  was  walking  alone  through  the  forests  on 
the  side  of  Trikuta  Hill  by  his  city.  There  he  met  the  Asura 
Maya  standing  under  the  trees,  holding  hands  with  a  beauti¬ 
ful  fair-skinned  girl.  The  Asuras  are  the  former  gods  of  old; 
they  are  from  before. 

Ravana  asked,  “Who  are  you  and  whose  is  this  fawn-eyed 
girl?” 

Maya  smiled.  “I  am  Maya,  a  poor  artist  struggling  to  sur¬ 
vive.  She  is  my  daughter  Mandodari;  Hema  the  Apsarasa  is 
her  mother.  I  lived  happily  in  love  with  Hema  for  a  thousand 
years,  but  then  just  after  Mandodari’s  birth  her  mother  left  us 
on  some  affair  of  the  gods.  Now  in  the  sorrow  of  separation 
we  live  in  grief  in  our  humble  home;  we  wander  sadly  in  our 
golden  palace;  through  tearful  eyes  we  watch  the  stars  at 
night;  we  languish  long  on  diamond  stairways;  we  sigh  by  sil¬ 
ver  curtains  and  fountains  of  nectar;  and  in  our  ten  thousand 
empty  rooms  we  hear  from  the  trees  outside  the  moaning  of 
our  singing  wind-harps  strung  with  glass  and  there  we  cry.” 

“I  am  Ravana  and  your  servant,”  said  the  Demon  King. 

“You  must  be  a  warrior.”  Maya  sounded  more  cheerful. 
“In  all  truth,  my  boy,  a  daughter’s  father  must  choose  be¬ 
tween  misery  and  dishonor.  I  spend  all  my  time  watching  her. 
She  has  got  to  be  given  away.  I  have  to  get  rid  of  her.  Long 
is  the  way,  for  someone  must  marry  Mandodari,  but  no  one 
comes  to  ask  for  her.  Her  youth  is  passing.  She  is  artless  and 
innocent,  but  who  knows  who  may  ask  for  her?  Unmarried 
she  puts  all  our  ancestors  in  uncertainty.  Ravana,  you  are  a 


The  Thorn  In  the  World’s  Side 


25 


handsome  fellow,  your  faces  quite  striking,  your  arms  very 
original,  your  faults  surely  not  worth  mentioning  ...  we  go 
out  walking,  but  always  I  must  bring  her  back  home  again, 
like  carrying  my  own  illusion  home  with  me.  . . .” 

Ravana  said,  “Brahma  himself  is  my  great-grandfather  and 
I  am  King  of  Lanka.” 

“Fascinating!”  said  Maya.  “Charming!  Take  her.  My  Lord, 
take  the  daughter  of  Maya  the  Master  of  all  Arts  and  Skill.” 


So  Ravana  wed  the  golden-skinned  Daughter  of  Illusion. 
He  lit  a  fire  and  married  her.  And  days  later,  there  stood  be¬ 
fore  Ravana  his  full-grown  son  Meghanada,  like  fire  released 
from  hiding  in  fuel,  set  free  to  burn.  Meghanada  had  a  voice 
like  a  cloud  full  of  thunder.  He  changed  his  form  and  ap¬ 
pearance  at  will;  if  he  had  a  true  form  only  his  mother  Man- 
dodari  knew  what  it  was. 

Then  from  the  Himalyan  hillside  Ravana  and  Vibhishana 
carried  Kumbhakarna  to  Lanka  as  he  slept,  and  Ravana  had 
built  over  him  a  huge  mansion  of  one  big  room  like  a  shed. 
He  chose  the  demon  Prahasta  as  his  General,  and  Prahasta 
gathered  soldiers  into  an  army.  Then  the  Demon  King  threw 
ten  arms  around  his  son  and  the  other  ten  round  his  General, 
and  they  began  to  fly  off  with  countless  soldiers  to  rape  the 
worlds  for  days  at  a  time. 

They  would  make  many  raids  into  the  Himalya  hills  and 
there  like  the  Wind  they  broke  down  trees  and  tore  the  or¬ 
chards  and  pavilions  set  along  the  paths  to  heaven.  Gandhar- 
vas  and  Apsarasas  visiting  on  Earth  were  captured  and  eaten, 
men  were  devoured,  Ravana  stole  fair  maidens  of  every  race 
for  his  warriors  in  Lanka;  and  then  refugees  ran  to  Vaishra- 
vana  on  Mount  Kailasa. 

Vaishravana  sent  a  Yaksha  to  see  Ravana  in  Lanka.  The 
Yaksha  said,  “The  noble  Treasure  King  hears  of  your  bestial 
attacks  on  the  innocent  and  asks  you  to  remember  right  and 
wrong  and  not  to  dishonor  your  family.  He  tells  you — Stop, 
brother,  for  I  live  near  heaven  and  I  hear  the  gods  wish  for 
your  destruction  and  seek  ways  to  kilF you.” 

Ravana  smiled.  “My  jewel-bellied  brother!”  He  drew  a 
sword  and  killed  the  Yaksha.  He  sent  him  to  the  kitchen  to 
be  roasted  and  served,  and  his  bones  made  into  broth. 

And  when  they  had  eaten,  Ravana  and  Prahasta  rose  into 
the  sky.  They  darted  north  over  the  sea  and  flew  over  cities 
and  streams  and  plains,  racing  to  silver  Kailasa. 


26 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Manibhadra  the  Yaksha  King  saw  them  come  and  ran  to 
stand  in  the  gate  of  the  Treasure  Palace.  Ravana  yelled  at 
him,  “Surrender  or  die!” 

“Where’s  our  messenger?”  asked  Manibhadra. 

“He’s  dead.  In  the  soup!”  cried  General  Prahasta. 

Vaishravana  heard  that  from  inside  his  palace  and  called 
out  a  window,  “That  does  it!  Kill  my  brother!” 

Yakshas  poured  out  the  palace  windows.  Manibhadra  flew 
over  the  walls  like  a  hawk,  followed  by  whirling  flame-crested 
Yakshas  spinning  in  the  air,  filled  with  the  energy  they  had 
stolen  from  careless  treasure-lovers  in  the  big  cities  of  men, 
and  crying  their  war-cries — Yes.  No.  1  don’t  want.  Let  me 
have.  More ! 

Prahasta  killed  a  thousand  of  them  and  Ravana  got  the 
rest.  But  Manibhadra  remained  under  the  gateway  arch  of 
gold.  His  green  eyes  were  shining;  his  blue  hair  was  tied  with 
strings  of  white  blossoms;  his  lavender  skin  was  steaming.  He 
was  very  strong;  he  frowned  and  stamped  his  feet;  he  waved 
his  powerful  arms  and  glanced  from  his  eye-comers.  He 
pulled  the  palace  gate  from  its  stout  hinges  and  flattened  Pra¬ 
hasta  with  it.  He  grinned  and  sailed  through  the  air  at  Ra¬ 
vana,  and  hit  him  with  his  fist  from  above  so  hard  the 
mountain  shook.  Manibhadra  drove  Ravana  right  down  into 
the  ground  like  a  post,  turned  and  saw  Prahasta  trying  to  get 
free,  and  with  a  magic  wave  of  his  hand  put  fear  of  loss  and 
hope  of  gain  into  Prahasta’s  heart  in  exactly  equal  parts  and 
so  paralyzed  him. 

But  where  is  the  straight  fair  fighting  of  the  Yakshas  and 
where  are  the  tricks  of  illusion  that  Rakshasas  use?  Ravana 
blinded  Manibhadra  with  darkness  and  hit  the  Yaksha  King 
on  the  head  with  a  steel  mace,  so  hard  that  ever  after 
Manibhadra’s  skull  was  dented  in  on  the  side. 

Manibhadra  fell  unconscious.  The  nine  invisible  treasures 
sent  their  spirits  to  carry  him  to  safety.  Vaishravana  came 
sadly  out  from  his  palace  and  told  Ravana,  “We  surrender. 
You  have  conquered  our  world  and  destroyed  our  friendship. 
Take  what  you  want,  for  nothing  now  will  ever  more  be 
freely  given  you.  I  won’t  fight  you  any  more  .  .  .  you  may 
take  me  for  a  coward,  afraid  to  do  wrong.” 

Ravana  pried  Prahasta  out  from  under  the  gate-leaf  and 
from  his  brother  he  took  the  giant  aerial  chariot  Pushpaka. 
All  by  itself  the  chariot  rose  into  the  sky,  and  riding  there 
with  Prahasta  Ravana  left  for  Lanka  thinking  himself  master 
of  all  and  everyone. 


The  Thom  in  the  World’s  Side 


27 


Indra  came  down  from  his  Heaven  and  said  to  Vaishra- 
vana,  “Your  slain  Yakshas  are  flying  through  my  sky.  Ravana 
is  your  brother,  but  now  I  turn  my  face  from  him,  I  curse  him 
forever.” 

Vaishravana  shook  his  head  in  wonder.  “He  will  not  stop!” 

“If  not,  he  will  be  stopped,”  said  Indra.  “He’ll  be  crushed!" 

Vaishravana  sighed.  "In  ignorance  he  drinks  poison,  in 
confusion  he  refuses  the  antidote.  He  plans  in  detail  his  own 
ruin  and  wastes  all  his  strength.  Straight-speaking  people  can¬ 
not  even  talk  at  all  with  one  so  outrageous  and  treacherous.  I 
could  not  even  talk  with  him  here.  . .  .” 


As  they  flew  south  in  Pushpaka,  Ravana  and  Prahasta  saw 
a  golden  reed  forest  held  in  nets  of  sunlight  on  a  mountain¬ 
side,  a  woodland  of  bamboos  and  canes.  They  were  taken  by 
the  sight  and  turned  the  chariot  for  a  closer  look,  when  all  at 
once  Pushpaka  came  to  a  jarring  halt  and  stuck  there  immov¬ 
able  in  the  sky. 

Prahasta  groaned,  “This  thing  won’t  work,  there’s  always 
something  wrong  with  everything.” 

But  then  they  saw  Nandin,  Shiva’s  white  bull,  grazing  be¬ 
low  them.  Nandin  looked  up  and  changed  his  shape.  He  be¬ 
came  a  yellowy-brown  dwarf  and  rose  to  stand  in  the  air  near 
them,  his  ugly  head  shaven,  his  limbs  too  short  for  his  body, 
his  chest  like  a  barrel.  First  he  just  looked.  Then  he  sniffed, 
then  he  growled  under  his  breath,  then  in  a  lordly  tone  he 
said,  “Turn  and  go,  turn  and  go,  Ravana.  Shiva  sports  here 
with  Devi,  no  one  can  approach  the  Wood  of  Reeds,  no  one 
can  ever  pass  me.” 

When  Ravana  saw  that  badly  dressed  midget  looking  down 
his  nose  at  him  he  yelled — Who  is  this  Shiva?  Ravana 
jumped  down  onto  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  but  there  before 
him  was  that  same  little  Nandin.  This  time  he  was  leaning  on 
a  stick  and  wearing  the  red  face  of  a  monkey. 

Ravana  had  to  laugh.  He  threw  back  his  heads  and 
laughed  as  loud  as  all  the  thunders  ever  made  rolling  together 
over  heaven.  But  Nandin  spoke  quietly,  “Demon  King,  you 
may  frolic  and  mock  my  face,  but  animals  looking  like  me 
will  destroy  you.  I  could  finish  you  off  right  now,  easy  as 
talking,  but  your  own  deeds  will  kill  you,  not  me.” 

Ravana  snorted,  “Little  cow,  I’ll  uproot  this  bump  of  dirt! 
How  dares  Shiva  play  here  like  some  special  king  with  no 
fear  of  me?”  Ravana  grabbed  the  hill  and  shook  it  like  a  rag. 


28 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


All  Shiva’s  twisted  goblins  and  speckled  imps  and  tiny 
gnomes  and  ghosts  rolled  tumbling  down  from  above.  On  the 
hilltop  Parvati  the  Himalya’s  daughter  trembled  and  caught 
hold  of  her  Lord  Shiva. 

Shiva  pressed  his  big  toe  gently  on  the  ground,  and  that 
mountain  struck  his  stony  roots  right  through  the  Earth 
round  Ravana,  and  bars  of  stone  held  the  Demon  King  a 
prisoner.  Ravana  pushed  and  fought  to  get  free  but  the 
strength  of  his  twenty  arms  was  nothing. 

Then  Ravana  began  to  sing  from  his  prison  under  the 
mountain’s  foot,  and  on  the  summit  Shiva  listened  from  afar 
with  Devi  on  his  lap.  The  great  Lord  Shiva  smiled;  those 
were  good  songs.  Shiva  sat  on  a  bench,  one  leg  bent  under 
him  and  the  other  touching  Earth,  holding  Devi,  holding  a 
trident,  wearing  rags  and  snakes,  drinking  wine  and  eating 
ganja,  his  hair  adorned  with  the  streak  of  the  Moon.  Ravana 
kept  singing  and  years  passed  by  as  though  they  were  mo¬ 
ments. 

For  the  beauty  of  his  songs  Shiva  set  Ravana  free.  By  that 
time  Prahasta  had  recovered  somewhat,  and  they  returned  to 
Lanka  in  the  immense  stolen  chariot.  But  Ravana  could  not 
remain  content.  As  soon  as  he  had  rested  a  little  he  again  set 
out  with  Prahasta  on  Pushpaka,  this  time  to  overthrow  the 
kingdoms  of  men. 


Ravana  stood  on  the  chariot  with  his  General  under  a 
royal  white  umbrella  of  a  hundred  ribs  of  gold  and  went 
from  city  to  city,  seeking  war.  But  all  the  kings  had  heard  of 
him  and  thought  Ravana  invincible.  They  all  said — We  are 
conquered — until  working  his  way  north  Ravana  reached  the 
capital  of  the  Haihaya  people. 

That  was  the  city  of  King  Arjuna  of  the  Thousand  Arms. 
King  Arjuna  had  ruled  there  for  eighty-four  thousand  years 
when  Ravana  landed  by  the  city  walls  and  sent  in  the 
message — Surrender  or  die! 

Four  of  the  gods  were  in  the  city.  When  they  heard  Ra¬ 
vana  had  arrived  they  took  the  disguises  of  animals.  Indra  be¬ 
came  a  peacock,  Yama  the  Death  Lord  turned  into  a  crow, 
Vaishravana  became  a  lizard  and  Varuna  the  King  Under 
Waves  chose  a  swan. 

King  Arjuna  was  out,  but  his  old  war  minister  came  to  the 
gate.  He  spit  out  some  red  betel  juice,  leaned  back  on  his 


The  Thorn  in  the  World’s  Side 


29 


heels,  looked  way  up  at  Ravana  and  said,  “Ah  how  fine  it  is 
to  rule  the  world  just  by  saying  you  do!  Great  Hero,  we  blink 
our  eyes  in  flattery  and  worship;  we  praise  you  for  defeating 
your  own  brother.  But  we  don’t  know  what  to  do.  We  have 
never  heard  words  of  challenge  like  yours  except  when  we 
say  them  to  others  in  conquest.  Our  King  is  not  here,  but  he 
bathes  in  the  Narmada  River  with  his  wives.” 

Ravana  went  after  King  Arjuna.  The  gods  within  the  city 
dropped  out  of  their  disguises,  but  still  those  four  living  ani¬ 
mals  were  standing  there. 

Indra  said,  “Peacock,  you  will  never  have  to  fear  snakes. 
Your  tail  will  no  longer  be  plain  blue,  but  will  have  a 
hundred  iridescent  eyes,  and  when  the  rain  falls  you  will 
dance  with  joy  remembering  our  friendship.” 

Yama  said,  “Crow,  you  will  never  die  unless  you’re  killed. 
In  famine  you  will  eat  before  the  hungry  men.  The  only  per¬ 
son  to  watch  out  for  is  someone  walking  alone  down  the  road 
past  your  tree,  who  bends  over  and  picks  up  a  throwing 
stone.” 

In  those  days  swans  had  blue  wingtips  and  their  breasts 
were  green  as  tender  grass.  Varuna  said,  “Swan,  become  the 
happiest  of  birds,  swim  white  and  peaceful  on  the  water  near 

II 

me. 

Vaishravana  the  Treasure  Lord  said,  “Lizard,  I  am  pleased 
with  you,  you  will  be  golden-gleaming,  your  head  will  shine 
with  gold.” 

In  the  Vindhya  Hills  Ravana  brought  his  chariot  down  to 
Earth  by  the  Narmada  river  racing  gladly  to  the  western  sea. 
He  decided  to  worship  Shiva  before  he  fought,  and  broke 
flowery  boughs  from  the  white  and  gold  blossom  trees  and 
carefully  set  them  out  by  the  water.  Ravana  then  bathed  and 
splashed  in  the  river  like  an  elephant,  then  put  on  a  clean 
white  robe  and  got  ready  to  sing.  He  held  his  twenty  hands 
pressed  together  two  by  two.  His  ten  heads  fanned  out,  his 
heavy  earrings  swayed,  he  bent  his  weight  over  and  stood  on 
one  foot  in  the  sand. 

Downstream  aways,  King  Arjuna  was  showing  off  for  his 
wives.  With  his  thousand  arms  he  dammed  up  the  Narmada. 
The  water  rose  in  waves  and  flowed  backwards;  it  came  up  to 
Ravana’s  knee  and  washed  away  his  every  flower. 

“That  must  be  Arjuna,”  said  Ravana.  “I’ll  handle  this  man 
alone.”  He  walked  downriver,  and  saw  the  Haihaya  King,  an 
immovable  hill  of  a  man  with  arms  outstretched,  red-eyed 
with  wines,  his  long  hair  afloat  on  the  water.  Two  soldiers 


30 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


came  and  saluted  Ravana.  “Your  Majesty,  our  King  is  drunk 
and  plays  with  his  women.  Be  our  welcome  guest  until  morn¬ 
ing  and  then  fight  him.” 

But  Prahasta  came  running  up,  barging  through  the  trees 
bringing  Ravana  his  steel  war-mace,  and  then  King  Arjuna 
cocked  his  ears.  King  Arjuna  stepped  out  of  the  river  and  the 
waters  surged  away.  He  didn’t  waste  any  time.  He  picked  up 
a  golden  club  five  hundred  hands  long  and  hit  Ravana.  The 
club  broke  against  Ravana’s  chest,  bits  of  burning  gold  went 
shooting  through  the  air;  and  Ravana  wept,  and  backed  away 
four  steps  and  sat  down. 

Arjuna  put  down  his  club  and  picked  up  Ravana.  He  held 
the  Demon  King  squirming  in  a  fifty-arm  grip,  and  roared 
like  a  tiger  clawing  down  a  deer,  so  loud  that  Ravana’s 
grandfather  Pulastya  could  hear  it  in  the  Himalya  Hills. 

Pulastya  went  to  save  Ravana.  King  Arjuna  welcomed  him, 
“Now  my  poor  river  is  better  than  heaven,  for  here  and  not 
there  do  I  meet  you.” 

Pulastya  said,  “Majesty,  Ravana  is  hard  to  bind  as  the 
Wind  but  you  have  done  it.  Now  his  glories  are  yours.  Be  sat¬ 
isfied,  free  him  for  me.” 

King  Arjuna  said  not  a  word  but  set  Ravana  free  at  once. 
Ravana  went  shamefully  back  to  his  chariot  and  drove  aim¬ 
lessly  away  in  disgrace. 

As  he  and  Prahasta  passed  over  a  deserted  forest  some¬ 
where,  they  happened  to  see  the  heavenly  sage  Narada  riding 
by  on  a  cloud.  Narada  came  close  to  them  and  said  in 
midair,  “Ravana,  you  are  unslayable  even  by  gods,  and  men 
are  mortal;  they  are  already  dead,  so  fight  a  worthy  enemy.” 

“Who?” 

“Men  are  made  of  straw,”  said  Narada.  “They  are 
worthless  and  frail  and  contemptible,  their  brief  lives  are 
loans  that  must  be  soon  repaid.  They  are  Death’s  subjects, 
Yama  the  Death  Lord  rules  them;  therefore  conquer  Yama.” 

Ravana’s  faces  brightened.  He  forgot  his  defeat  and  felt  as 
good  as  ever.  Narada  said,  “But  how  could  even  you  go  while 
living  to  the  Land  of  Death?” 

Ravana  said,  “Consider  it  done!”  He  pointed  Pushpaka  to 
the  south.  That  flowery  chariot  picked  up  speed  and  shot  past 
the  southern  horizon  and  dipped  down  into  Yama’s  kingdom 
like  a  rain  of  jewels. 

There  was  the  Vaitarani  River  running  with  blood;  down 


The  Thom  in  the  World's  Side 


31 


there  were  steep  black  barren  hills,  the  death-wind  moaning, 
hot  sands  and  shrieks  from  the  darkness.  Prahasta  flew  away 
in  fear  and  Ravana  was  alone.  And  in  the  ghastly  flaring  light 
of  Hell  Ravana  saw  a  corpse  shrouded  in  brown  sitting  on 
the  wasted  ground  and  looking  at  him,  grinning  at  him  like 
a  skull,  his  yellow  skin  streaked  with  cremation  ashes  and 
cemetery  dust,  skin  like  leather  stretched  taut,  bones  all 
showing.  There  were  red  fires  in  his  dried  and  sunken  eyes, 
and  when  he  breathed  it  sounded  like  the  death-rattle  of  the 
dying. 

That  person  looked  at  Ravana  and  said,  “Do  not  enter 
here  like  a  dog,  Rakshasa  King!” 

The  sword-bladed  trees  of  Hell  rang  in  the  wind.  Ravana 
narrowed  his  eyes  and  said,  “Where  is  Yama  the  God  of 
Death?” 

“What  do  you  want  with  him?” 

Ravana  said,  “I  have  taken  him  for  my  lasting  enemy  and 
I  take  you  for  the  same  whoever  you  are.” 

The  seeming  corpse  replied,  “Demon  King,  seek  for  Death 
among  the  living  and  not  here.  These  black  hills  are  the  fron¬ 
tiers  of  Hell,  Hell  that  bums  with  the  fire  of  deeds  done 
wrong.  With  the  fire  of  acts,  Ravana,  is  Heaven  brilliant  and 
Hell  aflame.  Do  you  believe  in  Hell,  or  will  you  play  the  fool 
in  my  presence,  until  it  is  too  late,  until  you  begin  to  learn 
but  it  is  all  too  late  .  .  .  cringing  and  whimpering  and  all  too 
late. ...” 

“Who  are  you  then?" 

The  corpse  laughed  a  dusty  laugh.  He  pointed  with  his 
wrinkled  bony  hand.  “Yama  is  that  way.  Oh  Ravana,  be 
gone,  I  am  Kala  ...  I  am  Time  ...  I  am  Time.  .  .  .”  And 
there  he  changed,  and  became  a  fair  young  man,  wearing 
fresh  flowers  and  smiling  with  all  his  life  before  him;  and  the 
sights  and  sounds  of  Hell  became  those  of  a  love-park  on  the 
fair  countryside  of  Earth. 

While  Ravana  was  talking  to  Time,  Narada  flew  to  Yama, 
who  was  sitting  at  home.  The  Death  King  turned  his  head  to 
see  him  with  his  immovable  eyes  and  said,  “Narada,  who  do 
I  see  you  here?  You  are  too  fond  of  strife  and  trouble.” 

“Listen,”  said  Narada,  “Ravana  comes  to  vanquish  you.” 

“Does  he?” 

Suddenly  before  Yama  stood  Death,  Death  who  wears 
many  faces,  Death  who  makes  nothing  of  all  this  world, 
standing  with  many  rods  and  maces  in  his  arms.  Narada 
shivered  and  Death  watched  him. 


32 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


“Sad  it  is,”  said  Yama  gently,  “to  have  an  enemy  like  this 
Death.  Therefore  try  to  make  him  your  friend;  you  have  met 
before,  and  come  to  you  he  must,  once  more  at  least.  I  have 
partly  veiled  him.  Do  right,  Narada,  tune  your  lutes  and 
cease  to  meddle  in  the  wonderful  universe.” 

Death  spoke  to  Yama,  “Let  me  go.  Great  warriors  in 
strong  armor  fail  and  fall  before  me  like  bridges  of  beautiful 
sand.  I  can  dissolve  anything;  it  takes  no  strength  of  mine.” 

Yama  said  quietly,  “Stay  still,  Oh  Death.  The  very  Sun, 
my  father,  does  not  boast  of  his  power;  in  fact,  he  manages 
to  be  silent.” 

“My  dear  Master,  release  me. . . 

“Hide  them,  my  friend,  hide  those  scapters  and  rods.” 

“My  patient  Lord  . .  . .” 

“Not  yet.  I  walk  to  meetings  slowly  and  on  foot,  I  do  not 
run.” 

“Let  me  but  touch  him _ ”  ' 

“ Yamam !  I  restrain  you!”  Yama  raised  his  green  hand,  and 
Death  vanished. 

Then  Ravana  came  and  bowed  to  Yama.  “Death  Lord, 
surrender  to  me.” 

“I  surrender  to  you,”  said  Yama  kindly,  “until  you  call  for 
me  some  day.” 

Yama  also  disappeared.  Ravana  turned  to  Narada.  “See,  I 
rule  over  the  Death  Lord.  Who  dares  deny  I  am  the  Emperor 
of  every  wide  world?” 

“Who  dares  deny  it?”  said  Narada.  “If  you  have  the  time, 
sit  down,  I’ll  tell  you  their  names.” 

“What  need?”  smiled  Ravana.  “I  will  visit  my  devoted  sub¬ 
jects  for  myself.” 


Ravana  found  General  Prahasta  hiding  somewhere  and  the 
two  of  them  returned  to  Lanka.  This  time,  there  Ravana  col¬ 
lected  a  small  Rakshasa  army  of  three  million  demons,  put 
them  all  on  Pushpaka  chariot,  and  with  his  son  Meghanada 
beside  him  drove  to  the  Naga  worlds  of  the  underground  ser¬ 
pents,  the  luxurious  underworlds  far  more  delightful  to  every 
sense  than  heaven.  They  stopped  by  a  palace  of  columns  and 
pillars  lit  up  by  brilliant  gems,  brighter  than  if  it  stood  in  sun¬ 
light. 

That  was  the  home  of  Vasuki  the  King  of  the  Serpent 
Tribes.  By  the  doorway  hung  a  plow  for  delving  Earth  and  a 


The  Thom  in  the  World’s  Side 


33 


pestle  for  grinding  ores.  Vasuki  came  out  to  see  who  was 
there,  in  form  a  man  from  the  waist  up,  a  snake  below, 
dressed  in  purple,  wearing  a  white  shell  necklace  and  a  tall 
tapering  crown  of  white  waxy  flowers.  He  hated  to  see 
strangers  in  his  home;  he  scowled  and  looked  around  as 
though  he  had  entered  another’s  cave  by  mistake. 

Oh  Dasaratha,  the  hooded  serpents  of  the  underground  are 
hard  to  frighten;  they  do  not  threaten  very  easily,  never 
knowing  when  to  fear.  Vasuki  advanced  to  within  striking 
distance,  joined  his  hands  together  and  said,  “Why  Ravana, 
you  didn’t  bring  enough  demons  here  with  you,  go  get  some 
more,  you  can  hardly  even  trouble  my  sleep  with  these  toy 
devils!” 

“Surrender  to  me,”  said  Ravana. 

Vasuki  answered  him,  “I  rule  the  Nagas,  but  we  are  all  the 
people  of  the  Water  King  Varuna,  our  Lord  Undersea.  See 
him.  I  hope  this  is  bad  news  to  youl” 

“Little  worm,  where  is  he?” 

Then  Vasuki  turned  himself  entirely  into  a  venomous 
snake.  He  spread  flat  his  hood  and  swayed  slowly  from  side 
to  side.  Weaknessss  to  you,  Ravana,  ssspare  me  your 
sneersss.  .  .  .  Vasuki’s  flat  glittery  head  was  weaving  back 
and  forth;  his  glassy  round  eyes  were  fixed  on  Ravana  and 
never  blinking,  first  one  eye  and  then  the  other,  their  irises 
yellowy  and  their  pupils  round  and  black,  round  black  circles, 
eyes  that  held. . . . 

“We  will  burn  you  like  fire,”  said  Vasuki,  “we  will  burn 
you  to  the  bones,  here  your  life  is  worthless  to  ussss  .  .  .  our 
Lord  Varuna  has  left  his  white  palace  running  with  streams. 
He  is  in  Brahma’s  highest  heaven  hearing  songs.” 

“Tell  him  to  give  up  and  I  won’t  harm  him.” 

“Oh  I  will  tell  that  to  Varuna!”  Vasuki  straightened  him¬ 
self  out  and  flew  away  like  an  arrow.  When  he  returned  he 
was  riding  with  Brahma,  calmly  coiled  in  the  corner  of 
Brahma’s  swan-chariot,  no  longer  angry. 

Brahma  said,  “Varuna  who  embraces  Earth  with  his  seas 
and  oceans  must  surrender  to  you  every  kingdom  below  the 
lands  and  under  waves.  Ravana,  how  have  you  lost  all  the 
goodwill,  all  the  love  and  kindness  that  is  the  heart’s  release?” 

Ravana  bowed  his  ten  heads  and  sighed.  Brahma  was  gone; 
Vasuki  was  gone;  everyone  was  dying;  no  deed  was  worth  do¬ 
ing;  old  age  was  dry  and  brittle. 

Behind  him  Ravana  heard  a  dry  cough.  He  turned.  There 


34 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


was  Time,  standing  behind  him,  letting  his  shriveled  shadow 
fall  over  the  Demon  King. 


Ravana  drove  Pushpaka  back  into  daylight,  and  still  with 
his  army  he  rose  up  into  the  sky  to  the  home  of  the  Sun.  Fast 
as  the  chariot  flew  it  was  a  long  trip.  It  was  twilight  when 
Ravana  arrived.  He  could  see  the  rays  of  Surya  the  Sun  shin¬ 
ing  out  from  cracks  between  the  stones  of  his  palace.  He 
could  smell  heat,  hot  iron  and  baking  stone;  he  saw  the  one¬ 
wheeled  golden  chariot  just  returned,  the  seven  white  horses 
harnessed  still  with  serpents;  he  saw  a  sky-road  with  no  sup¬ 
port,  a  long  road  and  no  turning,  a  going  forward  with  no 
help. 

When  Ravana  stopped  his  car  there  was  a  great  silence. 
Then  a  gatekeeper  came  from  the  palace,  crossed  the  fields  of 
air  with  his  hair  burning  and  his  fingers  covered  with  hot 
copper  gloves.  He  said,  “As  you  wish,  Ravana,  as  you  wish.” 

Ravana  took  that  for  a  surrender.  He  set  a  new  course  for 
the  lovely  bright  mansions  of  the  Moon,  eighty  thousand 
leagues  above  Earth  in  outer  space.  It  was  truly  cold  there, 
cold  as  winter’s  Moon  in  the  clear  frosty  night  high  in  the 
hills.  Cold  mists  turned  slowly  over  dark  lakes  in  the  dis¬ 
tance;  stark  black  trees  broke  leafless  from  the  barren  ground. 
There  were  white  freezing  glaciers  creeping  closer.  Ravana 
saw  only  cold  desolation,  cold  ice,  cold  stars;  and  felt  a  brit¬ 
tleness  like  glass  in  the  air. 

A  star  spirit  appeared,  casting  a  thin  shadow  behind  him 
from  the  bright  glory  of  his  beaming  face.  “Lord  of  Lanka, 
what  lunacy  is  this?  Do  not  oppress  my  Lord  Chandra  the 
Moon,  the  silver  King  of  Stars,  for  he  wishes  well  to  all.  Con¬ 
sider  this  your  home  . .  .  stay  here  with  us  forever. .  . 

Ravana  saw  General  Prahasta  already  looking  over  his 
shoulder  for  the  way  home,  and  said  quickly,  “I  accept  your 
surrender.”  Pushpaka  chariot  went  back  down  toward  Earth 
and  the  air  was  warmer.  Ravana  smiled  at  his  son  Meghan- 
ada,  “Nothing  to  it!”  They  turned  again,  rose  in  a  different 
way,  and  came  to  the  gate  of  Indra’s  heaven.  Ravana  looked 
in  at  the  immortal  celestial  city  of  Amaravati  built  along  the 
heavenly  Ganga  river.  He  said,  “This  won’t  take  a  moment,” 
and  got  out  of  the  car. 

A  five-crested  Gandharva,  some  musician  of  heaven,  stood 
leaning  by  the  Gate  of  the  Gods.  Ravana  went  up  to  him  and 
said,  “Summon  your  Master  Indra  to  admit  his  defeat.” 


The  Thom  in  the  World's  Side 


35 


“Who?” 

“Your  Master  Indra.” 

“Do  what?"  smiled  the  Gandharva. 

Ravana  drew  his  curving  sword.  “Who  do  you  think  you 
are?” 

“I  am  Chitraratha  the  Gandharva  King,  the  Lord  of 
Music,  and  I  don’t  run  errands  for  dirty  black  spiders!” 

Ravana  swung  at  him  with  his  sword  and  missed.  Suddenly 
in  Chitraratha’s  hand  was  a  long  Gandharva  wand  shimmer¬ 
ing  and  waving.  Ravana  had  a  terrible  sword;  but  Chitrara¬ 
tha’s  wand  was  tough  and  supple  and  springy  like  a  riding 
whip,  gay  and  colored,  cut  from  the  edge  of  a  rainbow,  so 
slender  that  twenty  hands  were  no  guard  against  it,  and  it 
sang  and  whistled  when  it  cut  the  air. 

“Get  out  of  our  sky!”  Chitraratha  jabbed  Ravana  in  the 
stomach  and  struck  him  across  the  fingers  so  hard  that  he 
dropped  his  sword.  Chitraratha  flew  away  and  the  massive 
Gates  of  Heaven  slammed  closed  behind  him.  The  latch  shot 
home,  the  bar  fell,  the  bolt  was  drawn  through  and  the  lock 
snapped  shut.  Ravana  heard  Chitraratha  singing  a  war-song, 
he  heard  thunders  mutter  and  the  iron  wheels  of  war-chariots 
turning  -and  heavenly  horses  running  in  armor.  From  behind 
heaven’s  pale  adamant  walls  Ravana  could  see  the  flashes  of 
lightnings,  and  flying  sparks  of  fire  tossed  in  the  winds.  The 
ground  quaked  as  heavy  thunderstones  rolled  into  place,  and 
shook  beneath  the  feet  of  elephants.  Storms  were  gathering  in 
the  air. 

Ravana  yelled,  “I  will  plunge  my  arms  into  these  dishwater 
gods!”  And  inside  the  walls  Chitraratha  flew  to  Indra  and 
said,  “I  hope  you  know  what  you’re  doing.” 

“Never  fear  at  any  time!”  Indra  drew  his  silver  sword  and 
the  day  grew  brighter.  He  drank  some  of  his  Soma.  “I  shade 
the  sun  himself  with  rain!  Find  some  shelter  for  the  dancing 
girls  and  the  quiet  spirits.” 

“They  won’t  leave  you,”  said  Chitraratha.  “Give  me  some 
of  that  juice.”  He  drank  Indra’s  Soma  bowl  dry  in  one  swal¬ 
low.  “The  beautiful  Apsarasas,  those  gems  of  women,  refuse 
to  go,  but  stand  armed  with  bows  and  brazen  knives.  The 
silent  writers  will  not  run  and  hide  now;  they  prepare  to  tell 
their  tales  in  someone  else’s  blood  for  a  change.” 

“Well  done!”  said  Indra.  “I  don’t  care  what  anybody  says, 
never  will  I  take  orders  from  that  overbearing  monster  Ra¬ 
vana,  that  evil  fraud — look  out!” 

The  old  Rakshasa  Sumali  came  charging  headlong  at  them 


36 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


over  the  wall,  throwing  out  maces  and  arrows  like  flagstaffs, 
chopping  down  the  Gandharvas  in  his  path  and  heading 
straight  for  Indra.  Indra  took  a  diamond  thunder,  made  in  six 
points  like  two  tridents  set  one  at  each  end  of  a  short  rod;  he 
gripped  it  at  the  middle,  took  aim  and  threw  it.  No  person 
but  Indra  may  bear  the  touch  of  a  thrown  thunderbolt.  It  hit 
Sumali  and  left  no  trace  of  him;  he  was  blasted  into  blazing 
light. 


Dasaratha,  so  began  the  Battle  of  Heaven,  a  year  before 
your  four  sons’  births.  Fatal  weapons  of  every  virtue  clashed 
in  the  air;  the  walls  fell;  the  warriors  of  heaven  gave  way, 
sinking,  embracing  each  other,  falling  like  a  river  cliff  under¬ 
cut. 

Ravana  knew  they  had  won  already,  and  he  raised  the  flag 
of  Lanka,  pure  cloth-of-gold.  But  too  soon.  The  storm  gods 
tore  it  away.  They  hit  the  demons  with  power  like  a  tidal 
wave,  like  the  summer  rains  beating  down,  like  the  lightnings 
streaming  from  the  clouds,  like  herds  of  elephants  stampeding 
downhill.  They  hit  the  demons  hard  as  the  death  of  a  friend. 
The  Rakshasas  were  a  mountain  of  dark  blue  ore  crumbling 
and  the  wild  winds  sang  through  their  spears. 

Then  Meghanada  brought  black  darkness  by  illusion  and 
blinded  gods  and  demons  all  but  himself.  In  that  bewilder¬ 
ment  the  old  A  sura  chief  Puloma  came  to  save  his  daughter 
Indrani  the  Queen  of  Heaven.  Puloma  came  darkly  dressed, 
darkly  adorned,  darkly  glancing.  He  plowed  untouched 
through  the  demons  and  took  Indrani  down  to  his  home  under 
sea,  and  he  also  took  brave  Chitraratha  with  him  to  sing  to 
comfort  her. 

Still  the  storm  gods  searched  blindly  for  Ravana.  Airavata, 
Indra’s  white  elephant,  swung  his  trunk  and  flapped  out  his 
ears,  he  stuck  out  his  tail  and  charged  at  a  terrible  speed 
trumpeting  and  tossing  his  head  and  guided  by  scent.  He  col¬ 
lided  with  Ravana  and  with  his  four  tusks  threw  him  down 
on  his  back.  Ravana  lay  with  armor  tom  and  drenched  with 
rains,  bruised  by  thunders  and  burnt  by  snapping  lightnings, 
battered  by  the  whirlwinds  filled  with  the  fragments  of  war; 
and  across  Ravana’s  breast  ran  four  deep  bleeding  wounds 
and  Airavata  stood  over  him  calling  in  rage  and  challenging 
all  Hell  to  War. 

Meghanada  thought — Father’s  dead!  He  bound  Indra  in  il- 


The  Thorn  In  the  World's  Side 


37 


lusion,  then  invisibly  he  approached  Ravana  and  shouted, 
“Are  you  alive?  I  have  Indra  captive!” 

Those  words  ended  Ravana’s  pain.  Every  might  and  power 
went  out  of  the  storms.  Then  followed  by  Ravana  and  all  the 
demons  still  alive,  Meghanada  carried  Indra  still  bound  to 
Lanka,  threw  him  prisoner  into  a  dungeon,  locked  him  in  and 
kept  the  key. 

Brahma  came  to  Lanka.  He  said  to  Ravana’s  son,  “Now 
call  yourself  Indrajit,  Indra’s  Conqueror.  Free  him  and  take 
something  from  me  in  return.” 

Indrajit  answered,  “Immortality.” 

“Prince,  I  cannot  give  that  gift  to  you,  if  you  have  asked 
for  it.” 

Indrajit  said,  “Grandfather  of  the  Worlds,  when  Ravana  is 
in  danger  may  I  call  up  with  offerings  from  the  fire  altar  a 
war  chariot  drawn  by  four  tigers  that  moves  at  will;  while  I 
ride  on  it  may  I  be  charmed  to  win  any  battle  against  any 
creature;  and  may  no  one  but  other  Rakshasas  see  me  when  I 
wish  to  fight  invisible.” 

“I  give  all  that,”  said  Brahma.  Indrajit  held  out  the  dun¬ 
geon  key  but  Lord  Brahma  will  never  touch  a  weapon.  By 
thought  Brahma  first  removed  from  Indra’s  mind  all  despair 
and  fear.  He  sent  the  idea — I  am  free — and  so  annihilated  the 
jail  walls. 


“Now  throughout  the  forests  Rakshasas  cruelly  torment  us 
like  men  in  Hell,”  said  Viswamitra.  “You  have  heard  what 
evil  has  befallen  Earth  and  all  the  worlds.  At  night  the 
demons  yell  to  one  another — 7  am  Narayana!  I  am  the 
Moon!  /  am  Everything!  These  are  their  more  meek  and 
modest  boasts,  what  can  I  say  of  their  serious  praise  and  sin¬ 
cere  drunken  flatteries?  The  Night-Wanderers  strut  and  swag¬ 
ger  and  pull  apart  Dharma.  Out  there,  Dasaratha,  beyond 
these  walls  of  Ayodhya  demons  range  over  the  worlds  like 
the  winds.  Two  of  them  especially  cross  me.  So  I  have  come 
to  Fair  Ayodhya.  I  must  have  a  warrior.  I  need  Rama  to  kill 
them.” 

“My  child!”  said  the  King. 

“I  will  not  use  up  any  of  my  hard-won  merit  to  curse 
demons,”  said  Viswamitra.  “I  have  come  for  Rama.  It  must 
be  Rama.  I  will  cover  him  with  blessings  and  fame,  though 
he  wears  still  a  boy’s  long  side-locks,  though  he  is  but  six¬ 
teen.” 


38 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Dasaratha  said,  “After  living  through  sixty  thousand  long 
years,  in  my  old  age  have  I  at  last  gained  a  son.  How  can 
you  take  a  tender  child,  my  firstborn  son,  and  lead  him  to 
Death?” 

“Very  well,”  said  Viswamitra,  “break  your  promise.  And  if 
you  are  doing  right  may  you  be  happy!” 

Vasishtha  said,  “Brahmana  keep  your  temper;  King,  keep 
your  word.  Observe  the  defects  of  this  world  and  do  not  add 
to  them.” 


Taste  This  Water 


Mother  Earth  laughed — 

/  quake;  the  Cities  of  Men  downfall. 
Yet  these  Kings,  these  mortal  puppets 
Are  willing  to  admit  they  own  me! 


Viswamitra  said,  “Majesty,  when  I  am  tired  in  the  evening, 
Desire  and  Wrath  whom  the  gods  cannot  tame  come  bowing 
to  me  and  gladly  rub  my  feet.  When  I  ask  anything,  that 
command  is  valuable.  Whoever  finds  the  chance  to  obey  me 
is  in  my  debt.” 

“Take  Rama  and  his  brother  Lakshmana,”  said  Dasara- 
tha.  He  called  for  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  told  them, 
“Arm  yourselves  and  serve  this'  brahmana.” 

“Do  not  fear  for  your  sons,”  said  Viswamitra.  “I  have  not 
run  from  demons  in  fear;  but  the  retreat  of  a  strong  man  is 
like  the  silent  drawing  back  of  a  fist  to  strike  a  blow!” 

The  old  King  held  his  two  sons.  He  embraced  them,  and 
smelled  the  hair  on  the  crowns  of  their  heads.  They  were  still 
round-faced  children  and  so  young.  But  Rama  and  Laksh¬ 
mana  expertly  put  on  their  bows  and  quivers,  donned  their 
swords  and  archer’s  gloves  like  men;  the  King  smiled  then, 
and  felt  no  more  grief  for  their  going. 

Viswamitra  led  the  two  boys  from  the  city.  Just  outside  the 
white  walls  of  Fair  Ayodhya  they  stopped  by  the  Sarayu 
River.  There  Viswamitra  sat  by  the  water  and  said,  “Princes 
of  Ayodhya,  because  Ravana  overlooked  men  I  have  things 
to  teach  you;  I  have  places  to  guide  you,  therefore  become 
my  students.” 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  shed  their  weapons,  and  they  each 
gathered  and  brought  to  Viswamitra  a  bundle  of  firewood 
sticks,  as  one  does  when  first  meeting  his  preceptor.  Then  in 
a  hermit’s  cup  made  from  half  a  coconut  shell  Viswamitra 

39 


40 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


dipped  up  some  water  and  told  Rama,  ‘Take  this  cup  and 
drink  it  down.  Drink  it  all  at  once  or  you  will  never  finish  it, 
and  it  will  do  no  good.”  Rama  drank  it.  Viswamitra  taught 
him  two  mantras,  one  for  strength  and  one  for  more  strength. 
He  refilled  his  cup  and  did  the  same  for  Lakshmana.  He 
taught  them  both  how  to  rightly  time  and  correctly  speak  the 
words. 

‘These  are  two  spells  of  Power;  they  are  the  daughters  of 
Brahma."  said  Viswamitra.  “Say  them  and  you  gain  wisdom 
and  good  fortune;  even  when  you  are  asleep  or  distracted,  no 
enemy  can  surprise  you;  tiredness  or  thirst  or  illness  or  hun¬ 
ger  cannot  get  to  you;  you  can  easily  find  the  answer  to  any 
uncertainty,  solve  any  secret,  end  any  argument,  reach  the 
True.  These  are  great  words,  they  are  Brahma’s  own.” 

They  went  on;  they  all  three  slept  the  night  on  leaves  and 
grass.  In  the  morning  Viswamitra  sang  to  the  Sun  and 
bathed;  they  followed  Sarayu  downstream  and  that  afternoon 
approached  the  deep  roar  and  thunder  of  the  meeting  of  the 
waters  of  Sarayu  and  Ganga,  in  Angadesha  Forest,  where  ev¬ 
er}'  tree  was  thousands  of  years  old. 

That  night  Viswamitra  taught  heavenly  weapons  to  Rama, 
beginning  with  the  dread  Brahma  weapon  and  working  down. 
They  sat  in  the  dark.  Rama  said  the  controlling  mantras  and 
one  by  one  the  weapons  appeared  before  him.  He  touched 
each  one  and  said.  “Return  when  I  remember  you.”  Some 
weapons  had  celestial  shapes,  some  were  like  live  coals,  some 
were  smoke,  some  looked  like  great  suns  and  moons.  They 
went  turning  round  Rama  and  vanished. 

The  next  morning  some  hermits  took  Rama  and 
Lakshmana  and  Viswamitra  across  the  holy  River  Ganga  on 
a  raft,  and  before  noon  they  were  at  Viswamitra’s  retreat,  a 
lonely  hut  of  canes  and  branches.  The  brahmana  unpacked 
his  traveling  fire  and  put  a  bowl  of  flames  from  it  onto  his 
sloping  altar. 

“Now  I  will  begin,”  said  Viswamitra.  “Stand  here.  Protect 
me  for  six  days  and  nights,  then  on  the  seventh  day  be  more 
alert,  especially  toward  night  as  the  sacrifice  draws  to  an  end, 
and  once  I  begin  I  will  not  speak.”  He  fell  silent.  Mentally  he 
called  Agni  the  Fire  Lord;  mentally  he  presented  him  a  place 
to  sit,  asked  about  his  journey,  mentally  offered  him  water  on 
which  flowers  floated. 

On  the  seventh  evening  Viswamitra  put  a  handful  of  jewels 
and  colored  rice  all  mixed  together  onto  his  altar,  and  a  few 


Taste  This  Water 


41 


flowers.  He  lit  some  incense  and  laid  out  green  and  white 
grass  stalks  and  a  bowl  of  liquid  butter. 

Then  out  of  nowhere,  like  two  black  clouds  the  Rakshasas 
Maricha  and  Subahu  swept  in  over  the  treetops,  and  on 
Viswamitra’s  altar  the  fire  flickered  in  terror.  Rama  took 
three  aiming  steps  backwards,  for  about  the  distance  of  a 
staff,  and  he  shot  three  arrows  at  Maricha.  The  three  arrows 
came  together  and  struck  Maricha’s  heart  all  as  one.  But  they 
did  not  kill  him;  their  force  carried  him  through  the  air  for 
hundreds  of  leagues  and  dumped  him  unconscious  into  the 
far  western  sea. 

Lakshmana  killed  Sabahu  with  one  shot.  At  full  dark  the 
sacrifice  was  finished,  and  Viswamitra  said,  “This  wood  is 
clear  of  demons,  that  was  my  desire.”  He  looked  at  Rama. 
“Prince,  they  were  off  guard.  This  time  it  was  light  and  easy 
for  you,  but  many  hard  things  are  easy  to  begin  ...  If  ever 
again  you  meet  Rakshasas,  do  not  move  your  mark,  do  not 
spare  them  from  kindness  again.” 

Viswamitra  said,  “I  dislike  lowlands.  I  was  here  only  to  do 
this  rite,  now  come  with  me  part  way  back  to  my  home  in 
the  Hills,  where  my  sister  is  a  river.  For  in  the  Videha  king¬ 
dom  of  King  Janaka,  the  Husband  of  Earth,  there  is  a  bow 
no  one  can  bend.  They  say  it’s  Shiva’s  bow.  It  hangs  within  a 
box  in  the  smoke  of  aloeswood,  decked  with  flowers.  Rama, 
you  must  see  that  bow.” 

When  they  reached  the  Videha  land,  walking  by  easy 
stages,  the  tigers  and  serpents  of  Angadesha  who  had  escorted 
Viswamitra  turned  back  as  an  army  will  disperse  when  the 
King  enters  his  palace  from  a  journey,  knowing  their  friend 
was  safe  in  Janaka’s  country.  The  hills  were  rising  and  the 
rivers  ran  swift  and  cold.  Not  far  from  Mithila,  the  capital  of 
Videha,  Viswamitra  stopped  a  little  way  off  the  road,  and  there 
in  a  grove  of  trees  Rama  saw  an  ancient  crumbling  stone  wall 
overgrown  with  vines.  The  wall  trembled  when  the  dust  from 
Rama’s  feet  touched  it,  and  it  seemed  to  be  almost  alive. 

“Where  are  we?”  asked  Rama. 

“This  is  the  empty  retreat  of  Gautama,”  answered  Viswa¬ 
mitra,  “and  for  long  it  lies  under  his  wrathful  curse.” 


Listen,  my  Prince — 

Using  his  mind,  Brahma  created  some  creatures  called 
Men,  all  the  same  in  color  and  speech,  all  absolutely  identi¬ 
cal.  Then  he  created  the  same  number  of  females  for  them. 


42 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


but  this  time  he  gave  all  of  the  beauty  to  just  one  woman  and 
named  her  Ahalya. 

Indra  saw  her,  but  before  he  could  speak  to  her  the  hermit 
Gautama  married  Ahalya  and  lived  with  her  here,  while  In¬ 
dra  waited  and  watched  for  his  chance.  Finally  he  took  Gau¬ 
tama’s  form  while  he  was  away  from  home  bathing  one  day, 
and  made  love  to  Ahalya.  She  was  not  fooled  by  his  disguise, 
but  she  consented  out  of  curiosity. 

And  after,  Indra  hurried  to  leave.  He  was  almost  out  of 
sight  when  Gautama  appeared  in  wet  clothes  and  saw  him. 

To  man  and  woman, 

Forbearance  is  a  becoming  ornament; 

Very  hard  to  do — 

Hardest  of  all,  to  forgive  a  god. 

Indra  lost  his  male  sex;  and  since  that  curse  of  Gautama 
the  rule  of  no  Indra  is  secure,  the  role  of  Indra  is  imper¬ 
manent.  Indra  fled  to  Agni.  He  hid  inside  a  firepit  that  was 
within  a  forge  that  was  inside  a  furnace.  In  the  presence  of 
Fire  Indra  said,  “Oh  I  took  from  Gautama  the  power  that 
threatened  heaven,  his  merit  is  gone  by  my  stirring  his  anger 
to  cursing.  All  for  the  work  of  the  gods,  for  your  sake  am  I 
cursed!” 

Agni  replied,  “Barely  escaped  alive,  and  already  the  bad  is 
changing  to  good  in  your  story!  I  restore  your  male  sex.” 

Agni  went  to  the  dead  Fathers  and  said,  “I  am  Fire;  only 
Fire  can  eat  anything  pure  or  impure;  I  am  Fire  burning.” 

The  shadowy  souls  replied,  ‘Take  the  impurity.  Bum  away 
from  the  sacrificial  rams  those  fleshly  parts.  We  take  the  rest; 
we  will  take  pure  watery  offerings  clean  as  a  new  life,  tran¬ 
quil  as  a  lake  deep  and  cool.” 

And  so  today  in  black  smoke  those  male  parts  of  rams  are 
lifted  by  Agni  to  heaven  when  we  offer  burnt  food  to  our  Fa¬ 
thers,  and  Indra  feeds  on  them  and  they  restore  him.  Here  on 
this  spot  Gautama  told  his  wife,  “Beauty  alone  caused  this. 
No  longer  will  you  be  the  one  fair  woman  in  the  universe.” 
He  took  her  beauty  and  scattered  it  to  others,  he  took  so 
much  beauty  from  Ahalya  that  she  became  invisible,  and  her 
spirit  lives  concealed  by  boughs  and  leaves  somewhere  by 
that  stone  wall. 

Ahalya  said,  “We  have  no  neighbors.  He  looked  just  like 
you.”  Gautama  could  not  retract  his  words  but  he  could  limit 


Taste  This  Water 


43 


them.  He  made  an  end  for  his  curse  in  the  future,  “When 
Rama  comes  to  this  grove  you  are  free.” 


“His  curse  expires  as  I  speak,”  continued  Viswamitra,  “so 
enter  there  this  ruined  hermitage,  and  deliver  the  divinely 
beautiful  Ahalya.” 

Rama  went  in.  There  was  a  shower  of  marigolds  out  of  the 
blue  sky  and  they  heard  Gandharva  music.  Ahalya  came 
gradually  again  into  sight  by  the  old  wall,  as  beautiful  then  as 
ever,  like  the  Sun  rising  reflected  in  rippling  water,  and  like 
the  Sun  she  could  not  be  looked  at  too  closely  or  too  long. 
Rama  saw  Viswamitra  waving — Come  away;  and  at  the  same 
time  Ahalya  the  Beautiful  swept  her  arm  gracefully  to  one 
side — Sit  as  my  guest. 

Rama  went  and  sat  by  her  a  moment  Ahalya  pressed  her 
right  hand  over  his  heart  and  smiled — From  the  Ancient 
World.  Then  Rama  rose  and  rejoined  Viswamitra  and  Laksh- 
mana.  They  all  walked  three  times  around  Ahalya,  keeping 
her  on  their  right,  and  they  left  her  there  behind  them,  sitting 
among  golden  flowers.  When  they  had  gone  on  aways  they 
looked  back  and  saw  a  beautiful  halo  of  all  colors  brilliant 
and  shining  through  the  trees,  and  saw  Gautama  in  a  flying 
chariot  return  for  her. 

Soon  they  saw  Mithila,  a  city  of  castles  and  spires,  and 
they  found  King  Janaka  coming  to  meet  them.  He  brought 
cool  water  to  Viswamitra.  “Blessed  are  we,  brahmana. 
Obliged  and  well-favored  are  we  with  your  visit.  But  why 
have  you  led  young  warriors  by  this  back  trail  to  my  city?” 

“These  are  the  Ayodhya  princes  Rama  and  Lakshmana,” 
said  Viswamitra.  “They  are  eager  to  see  your  bow.” 

“Long  since  did  Shiva  give  me  that  heavenly  bow,”  said 
the  King.  ‘To  bend  Shiva’s  Bow  is  the  dowry  of  my  daughter 
Sita,  whose  mother  is  Prithivi,  the  goddess  Earth.” 

Rama  asked,  “How  could  that  be,  Majesty?” 

Janaka  answered,  “Rama,  this  land,  this  kingdom,  all  this 
wide  world  under  the  curving  blue  sky  belongs  to  Mother 
Earth  and  to  no  one  else.  Only  in  a  flight  of  the  mind,  only 
in  a  dream  is  all  this  worldly  land  called  a  kingdom.  Four¬ 
teen  years  ago  I  was  plowing  in  a  clearing  beyond  the  city, 
when  turning  back  I  found  her  lying  in  the  furrow  I  had  just 
made;  I  found  Sita.  As  a  golden-skinned  baby  she  rose  from 
her  mother  Earth  and  sat  throwing  handfuls  of  dust  over  her 
feet.  I  consider  her  a  treasure  well-found,  well-revealed.  She 


44 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


is  a  delight  for  my  fields  and  hills.  And  Sita  is  beautiful,  a 
girl  more  lovely  than  any  garden,  half  divine  and  unmarried.” 

Rama  said,  “We  are  curious  to  see  the  strength  of  your 
bow.” 

King  Janaka  called  an  order,  and  five  strong  men  with  great 
difficulty  brought  Shiva’s  Bow  out  from  its  own  house  in 
Mithila,  drawing  it  along  on  an  eight-wheeled  cart,  that  held 
the  bow  protected  within  a  long  iron  case  covered  with  flow¬ 
ers. 

“You  must  understand,”  said  Janaka,  “that  Sita  has  the  fi¬ 
nal  consent.  Others  have  come;  none  could  even  lift  this  bow. 
I  passed  them  by,  I  have  used  this  jewel  of  a  bow  as  my  raft 
to  cross  the  sea  of  fourteen  years.  Now  you  have  come.  It  is 
sad  for  me,  but  it  is  time  for  her  to  marry,  and  I  am  a  poor 
man  about  to  spend  his  last  coin.” 

Janaka’s  minister  came  and  said,  “Here  it  is,  Majesty,  show 
it  if  you  think  it  worth  showing.” 

Janaka  said,  “Rama,  open  the  box.” 

Rama  raised  the  lid.  Sandalwood  dust  and  incense  ash  fell 
off  from  it  in  a  powdery  cloud.  Rama  looked  and  thought, 
“This  bow  is  beyond  men.  But  playfully  first  let  me  just  touch 
it.”  He  touched  it.  “Perhaps  I  can  try  to  hold  it. ...” 

All  the  Videha  men  had  come  out  of  the  city  and  were 
watching.  Rama  balanced  the  bow  and  lifted  it.  He  strung  it 
Then  he  drew  it  so  strongly  that  it  broke  in  two  above  the 
grip,  with  a  noise  so  loud  that  everyone  watching  fell  down, 
except  Rama  and  Lakshmana,  Viswamitra  and  King  Janaka. 

Janaka  shook  his  head.  “Who  would  have  believed?”  He 
helped  his  minister  to  rise.  “Ask  Sita.” 

The  minister  rubbed  his  ears.  “She  has  seen  him  from  her 
high  window  and  touched  him  with  her  eyes  and  fallen  in 
love  with  him  already.” 


Janaka  sent  a  fast-riding  herald  to  invite  King  Dasaratha 
to  the  wedding.  The  herald  came  to  Fair  Ayodhya  and  said, 
“Let  the  Videha  King  free  himself  from  his  promise.  Strength 
is  Sita’s  dowry,  so  let  Rama  marry  her,  and  come  with  me  to 
Mithila,  and  bring  your  priest  Vasishtha." 

Dasaratha  replied,  “Justly  is  Janaka  King.  A  gift  from  a  su¬ 
perior  must  be  accepted.” 

“Janaka’s  brother  has  also  three  daughters.  If  you  are 
willing  let  Lakshmana  marry,  bring  Satrughna  and  Bharata 
and  let  them  marry.” 


Taste  This  Water 


45 


Dasaratha  said,  "Excellent,  take  gold,  take  silver.” 

The  charioteer  Sumantra  arrayed  the  army  and  loaded  fat 
pack  elephants  with  presents.  King  Dasaratha  carried  the 
four  birth-fires  of  his  sons  onto  his  chariot,  and  seven  days 
after  Rama  had  broken  Shiva’s  Bow  he  reached  Mithila.  A 
plowed  royal  field  of  furrows  cut  across  the  road,  and  King 
and  soldiers  stopped,  and  Vasishtha  went  ahead  alone,  step¬ 
ping  carefully  through  the  new-plowed  land. 

Vasishtha  found  Janaka  and  said,  “The  Ayodhya  king  has 
come,  we  await  your  commands.” 

Janaka  asked,  “I  wonder,  who  is  the  warder  there  who 
makes  you  wait?  Who  follows  rules  when  entering  his  own 
house?” 

"Earth  herself  cuts  across  our  way,”  said  Vasishtha. 

“So  it  begins.  We  will  marry  them  outdoors,  in  that  field, 
good  fortune  to  you.” 

Viswamitra  joined  Vasishtha.  The  two  brahmanas  built  up 
with  shovels  a  wide  altar  of  Earth.  Over  that  they  strung 
from  poles  an  awning  thatched  of  grass.  They  built  a  fire  of 
buttered  sticks  in  a  clay  bowl,  lit  it  and  set  it  on  the  altar; 
they  set  out  flowers  and  golden  spoons,  waterpots  painted 
with  colors  and  trays  spread  with  ripe  grain,  shells  and  in¬ 
cense  burners,  cups  and  vases,  and  saucers  spread  with 
colored  parched  wheat,  and  a  bronze  bell-metal  milking  jar 
filled  with  milk  and  honey  for  the  gods,  and  put  down  carpets 
to  stand  on. 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  came  out  from  Mithila;  Dasaratha 
and  his  four  sons  stood  by  the  altar.  Then  Janaka  came  strid¬ 
ing  over  his  field,  smiling,  leading  four  maidens  like  flames  of 
fire.  Three  of  them  were  lovely.  But  the  most  beautiful  was 
Sita,  Sita  the  Star  of  Beauty  bom  from  Earth. 

Sita  was  a  fair  young  girl.  Her  dark  eyes  were  like  the  eyes 
of  a  doe,  her  lips  were  full,  her  long  dark  hair  was  falling 
down  her  back  clear  to  her  ankles  and  it  was  fragrant  from 
being  scented  over  incense  smoke.  She  had  a  red  brow-mark 
and  lines  of  red  and  white  sandalwood  paste  on  her  arms;  the 
soles  of  her  feet  were  dyed  red  with  lac;  she  wore  crimson 
robes  and  silver  veils  light  as  air,  belts  of  embroidery  and  fine 
chains  swaying  as  she  walked,  jeweled  diadems  and  bell  an¬ 
klets,  new  barley  shoots  behind  her  ear,  bridal  garlands  of 
jasmine,  and  seven  strands  of  pearls  around  her  neck  and 
falling  over  her  full  round  breasts.  But  who  describes  Sita? 


46 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


All  this  was  forgotten  when  she  looked  at  you.  When  she 
smiled,  what  else  existed? 

As  his  wedding  gift,  King  Janaka  tied  into  Sita’s  hair  over 
her  forehead  a  round  pearl  on  a  leaf  of  gold.  He  had  brought 
out  her  birth-fire  and  now  poured  it  into  one  earthen  bowl 
with  Rama’s.  He  led  Rama  and  Sita  to  the  altar  under  the 
awning  and  stood  them  near  the  mingled  fire. 

There  were  no  pretentious  brahmana  priests  in  Videha. 
Long  before  had  Janaka  got  rid  of  them.  First  they  told  him 
he  needed  them  to  make  offerings  to  the  little  gods,  so  Janaka 
broke  all  the  statues  of  the  lesser  gods.  Then  the  priests  said 
that  anything  a  man  did  for  himself  trying  to  find  the  True 
was  wrong  and  useless  and  only  they  knew  all  the  answers. 
Janaka  didn’t  argue.  He  put  a  hearty  curse  on  them,  their 
heads  fell  off  and  their  brittle  bones  were  stolen  by  thieves. 

So  King  Janaka  himself  married  Rama  to  Sita.  He  said, 
Ramachandra,  Rama  like  the  Moon,  take  Sita  as  your  com¬ 
panion  in  the  living  of  your  life.  Look  at  her,  never  see 
enough  of  her,  cherish  her  with  the  eyes  of  love.  Sita,  love 
him  well  forever,  walk  with  him  as  his  wife  and  follow  him 
like  his  own  shadow  forever.  I  marry  you. 

Janaka  brought  together  Rama’s  hand  and  Sita’s,  green  and 
gold  touching.  He  poured  water  over  them — So  overflows  my 
happiness.  Then  Rama  led  Sita  away,  a  new-married  man. 

Sita  knew  that  she  and  Rama  were  destined  lovers  for  all 
time  past,  will  be  so  for  all  future  to  come.  She  rejoiced  to 
meet  him  again  after  long  separation.  She  saw  Rama  closely 
for  the  first  time  and  thought,  “He  is  surely  Kama  the  Love 
God  .  .  .  yet  Kama  has  no  body  ...  he  can’t  be  seen  and 
Rama  can.  .  .  .” 

Before  Fire  for  a  witness  Rama’s  three  brothers  were  also 
married,  taking  their  brides’  hands.  Round  the  field  the  Vide- 
has  blew  shells  and  rang  bells  with  loud  hard  mallets  and 
beat  their  drums  and  sang. 

The  next  day  Dasaratha  said,  “Janaka,  best  of  men,  let  my 
sons’  wives  come  home  with  them  to  Ayodhya.” 

“Farewell,”  said  the  Videha  King. 

Viswamitra  was  also  leaving.  He  said  to  Janaka,  “I  will  go 
on  uphill.” 

“Keep  climbing  higher,”  said  Janaka.  “Do  you  have  a 
shield?” 

“I’m  not  a  soldier,”  said  Viswamitra. 


Taste  This  Water 


47 


“No  matter,”  said  Janaka.  “Take  Dharma  for  your  shield, 
brahmana.  Have  you  a  sword?” 

“What  sword?” 

“Take  Truth.” 


To  each  of  the  four  brides  Janaka  gave  two  great  Videha 
wolf-dogs,  an  elephant  ^and  sixteen  horses,  a  basket  of  gold 
beads  and  four  deerskins,  two  fine  yellow  woolen  blankets 
and  an  entire  chariot  full  of  turquoise  from  the  Hills.  Janaka 
told  Sita,  “Her  father  protects  a  maid,  but  once  she  is  wed, 
she  must  ever  take  the  safety  of  her  Lord.  You  leave  me 
now,  but  never  your  mother  Earth.”  He  embraced  his  only 
child;  he  held  her  gently  in  his  hard  strong  hands  that  were 
rough  from  a  long  lifetime  of  plowing  and  planting  and 
reaping.  Then  Sita  got  on  an  elephant  with  Rama  and  they 
rode  off  to  Kosala.  Janaka  followed  walking  behind  for  a 
short  way  and  turned  back  to  Mithila. 

The  Kosalas  met  Dasaratha  and  his  sons  a  day’s  journey 
from  Ayodhya.  Along  the  city  streets  people  waited,  eager  to 
see  the  brides.  And  in  the  high  white  royal  palace  overlook¬ 
ing  Fair  Ayodhya  the  three  Queens  welcomed  the  brides  with 
every  enjoyable  object;  happiest  of  all  to  see  them  was  the 
youngest  Queen,  the  joyful  slender-waisted  Kaikeyi.  The  four 
princesses  first  put  flowers  at  the  Ayodhya  shrine,  then  they 
bowed  to  those  who  deserved  it,  then  they  went  away  alone 
with  their  husbands. 

Rama  and  Sita  lived  in  Rama’s  black  stone  Palace  of  the 
Moon,  and  twelve  years  went  by  in  Ayodhya.  Little  by  little 
Dasaratha  turned  over  the  work  of  the  kingdom  to  Rama. 

Rama’s  nature  was  quiet  and  free.  He  didn’t  give  good  ad¬ 
vice  and  tell  others  what  he  thought  best  and  show  them  their 
mistakes.  He  knew  when  to  save  and  when  to  spend.  He 
could  judge  men  finely  and  keep  his  own  counsel.  He  could 
read  hearts.  He  knew  his  own  faults  better  than  the  failings 
of  others.  He  could  speak  well  and  reason  in  a  chain  of  elo¬ 
quent  words.  Half  a  benefit  was  more  to  him  than  a  hundred 
injuries.  Bad  accidents  never  happened  near  him.  He  could 
speak  every  language  and  was  an  expert  archer  who  shot 
golden  arrows;  and  he  didn’t  believe  that  what  he  preferred 
from  himself  was  always  best  for  everyone  else. 

Rama  was  kind  and  courteous  and  never  ill.  To  harsh 
words  he  returned  no  blame.  He  was  warmhearted  and  gener¬ 
ous  and  a  real  friend  to  all.  He  tried  living  right  and  found  it 


48 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


easier  than  he’d  thought.  He  collected  the  King’s  taxes  so  that 
over  half  the  people  didn’t  really  mind  paying  him.  He  was  a 
remarkable  prince  and  every  Kosala  loved  him  except  for  five 
or  six  fools.  He  was  hospitable  and  he  spoke  first  to  every 
guest  in  welcome  words.  He  was  a  quiet  strong  man;  he 
could  bend  iron  in  his  hands  or  fix  a  bird’s  broken  wing.  He 
would  not  scold  the  whole  world  nor  take  to  task  the  uni¬ 
verse,  and  so  his  pleasure  and  his  anger  never  went  for  noth¬ 
ing. 

Rama  would  not  work  very  long  without  a  holiday;  he 
wouldn’t  walk  far  without  stopping  to  greet  a  friend,  nor 
speak  long  without  smiling.  His  entertainments  and  dances 
were  the  best  in  the  world.  He  loved  Sita  well;  he  lived  his 
life  for  the  sake  of  her  being  a  part  of  it.  He  would  often  find 
a  new  gift  for  his  friends.  He  did  not  fear  to  pass  a  whole 
day  without  work.  Whatever  he  did,  he  ennobled  it  by  how 
he  did  it.  Rama’s  way  was  noble. 


HERE  ENDS  THE 

BOOK  OF  THE  BOYHOOD  OF  RAMA. 
HIS  YOUTH  IS  PAST. 

THE  AYODHYA  BOOK  BEGINS. 


The  Two  Wishes 


You  saved  my  life; 

/  love  you; 

Ask  me  twice  for  anything! 


Wide  grey  mountain  eyes  flecked  with  gold, 
Lined  with  black  and  innocent — 

And  now  tears! 

Oh  King,  be  careful! 


After  Rama  and  Sita  had  been  married  for  twelve  years,  in 
the  spring  Queen  Kaikeyi’s  brother  Yudhajit,  Bharata’s  uncle, 
came  riding  to  Fair  Ayodhya  from  the  hill  kingdom  of 
Kekaya  and  told  Prince  Bharata,  "Your  grandfather  King 
Aswapati,  the  Lord  of  Horses,  wants  to  see  you,  for  he  is 
now  an  old  man  who  has  never  seen  his  grandson.” 

Dasaratha  gave  permission,  and  Bharata  with  his  brother 
Satrughna  left  on  a  chariot  for  the  Hills  with  Yudhajit.  While 
they  were  gone  Dasaratha  all  at  once  felt  he  had  enough  of 
kingdom,  and  more  than  anything  wanted  to  see  Rama  rule. 
He  thought,  “Why  die  first?  Let  me  see  him  on  my  throne 
from  here  on  Earth,  not  looking  down  from  heaven.” 

He  called  the  Kosala  Council — the  lesser  Kings  and  the 
governors,  provincial  noblemen  and  the  brave  heroes,  the 
wise  and  the  learned  and  the  Kosala  judges  whose  just  and 
certain  eyesight  was  reason.  They  assembled  and  sat  in  a 
half-circle  looking  up  at  Dasaratha  on  his  throne. 

Dasaratha  said,  “I  have  grown  very  old,  I  have  reached 
great  age.  The  one  thing  remaining  for  me  to  do  on  Earth  in 
this  life  is  to  make  my  son  Rama  a  King,  if  you  will  approve 
that.  I  give  you  gifts,  I  welcome  you.  Tell  me  what  you  think 
of  my  son  Rama.  The  opinions  of  disinterested  men  are  dif- 

49 


50 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


ferent  from  the  beliefs  of  a  father,  and  the  Truth  may  some¬ 
times  come  out  like  Fire  from  friction  between  the  two.” 

The  assembly  cheered;  they  gave  the  full-throated  Kosala 
lion-roar  and  shook  the  palace.  They  said,  “Make  the  corona¬ 
tion  ceremonies!  Of  all  the  princes  among  men  Rama  is  best! 
Make  him  our  King  in  the  morning!” 

But  Dasaratha  said  in  anger,  “Be  still!  You  wish  for  Rama 
as  soon  as  you  hear  my  desire.  While  I  still  rule  why  do  you 
wish  for  another  King?” 

For  the  briefest  moment  the  chiefs  and  warriors  talked  to¬ 
gether,  then  Sumantra  the  charioteer  rose  to  speak  for  all  of 
them.  “We  say  this,  Majesty — let  your  son  Rama  ride  the 
huge  white  elephant;  let  us  see  his  face  beneath  the  white  um¬ 
brella.  Some  men  rule  themselves;  we  Kosalas  are  ruled  by 
excellent  kings.  Dasaratha,  you  follow  the  Dharma-path 
walked  by  your  ancestors,  and  thoughtless  of  your  own  hap¬ 
piness  you  protect  us.  We  know  you,  we  have  seen  you  teach 
to  Rama  all  royal  skill,  we  want  you  to  see  your  son  made 
King.  Give  away  your  duties  and  rest  without  burdens  now, 
for  old  age  has  fallen  on  your  mortal  body  and  Time  ap¬ 
proaches  you.  If  we  deserve  happiness  give  us  Rama  wearing 
the  crown  of  many  good  talents.  We  love  to  see  Rama.  When 
he  looks  at  us  our  doubts  vanish  and  our  debts  are  paid.  I 
have  seen  Rama  riding  by  the  fields  and  as  a  father  enquiring 
after  his  well-loved  sons,  he  will  ask  the  teachers — Do  your 
students  obey  you?  He  will  ask  the  preceptors  of  arms — Do 
your  students  never  walk  without  their  weapons?” 

Dasaratha  said,  “Do  not  let  a  father’s  fondness  deceive  an 
entire  kingdom.” 

“We  won’t!”  said  Sumantra.  “Follow  your  own  heart’s  true 
feelings,  Majesty.  Those  true  feelings  are  one  with  right  Dhar- 
ma.  No  one  ever  born  can  govern  Kosala  better  than  Rama, 
or  better  care  for  Fair  Ayodhya  and  look  after  her.  Our 
women  young  and  old  pray  to  their  gods  morning  and  night 
for  good  fortune  to  Rama.  Why  ask  for  anything  else?  While 
Rama  lives  here  what  can  go  wrong?  He  knows  all  our 
names.  He  would  gladly  spare  us  all  his  time  if  we  would 
take  it.  He  asks  of  our  shops,  and  wishes  well  to  our  sons,  to 
our  fires,  to  our  wives  and  animals.  I,  Sumantra  the  Chario¬ 
teer,  have  seen  him  weep  at  our  sorrows;  I  saw  him  laugh 
with  us  at  our  festivals.” 

“Are  these  your  reasons?”  asked  Dasaratha. 

“The  one  reason,”  replied  Sumantra,  “is  that  if  Rama  says 
something  to  me  I  can  believe  it.”  Sumantra  sat  down.  All  the 


The  Two  Wishes 


51 


men  in  that  court  audience  raised  their  hands  palms  touching 
to  their  heads,  and  King  Dasaratha  looked  out  on  those  joined 
hands  as  though  looking  at  a  pond  covered  with  unopened 
lotus  buds. 

Vasishtha  then  rose  and  said,  “Majesty,  though  Bharata 
and  Satrughna  are  still  in  Kekaya,  yet  tonight  begins  a  rare 
and  fortunate  meeting  of  the  Moon  and  stars  that  lasts  but 
one  day.  Let  me  install  Rama  as  our  King  tomorrow  for  the 
happiness  of  all  the  world.” 

Dasaratha  sat  upon  his  throne,  very  old,  his  hair  white,  his 
beard  white,  his  robes  white,  resembling  some  father-god,  his 
life  nearly  parted  and  gone.  He  blinked  his  eyes  and  tears  fell 
down  his  face.  “My  people,  I  am  very  happy.  My  influence 
with  you  is  very  great.” 


Dasaratha  dismissed  the  assembly  and  told  Sumantra, 
“Give  this  twice-bom  Vasishtha  whatever  he  needs  and  bring 
Rama  to  me  in  my  private  rooms.” 

From  his  window  Dasaratha  saw  Rama  quickly  climbing 
the  palace  steps,  Rama  his  son,  like  his  own  image  in  a  mir¬ 
ror  seen  rightly  adorned  with  youth.  Rama  entered  and  knelt 
and  bowed  low  to  his  father.  “I  am  Rama,  Majesty.” 

Dasaratha  reached  down,  held  Rama’s  hands  and  raised 
him  up.  “Oh  Rama,  no  longer  bow  to  me.  You  are  now  my 
King.  Listen — for  many  nights  have  I  dreamt  of  stars  falling 
to  the  ground  in  daylight  with  terror  and  noise.  The  region 
round  my  star  of  life  is  invaded  by  fatal  planets  and  my 
Death,  I  think,  rushes  swiftly  at  me.  So  my  thoughts  have 
changed  and  left  this  world,  for  ever-changing  is  the  mind  of 
man.  Rama,  to  me  the  sight  of  you  on  the  Ayodhya  throne 
will  be  cool  rain  coming  after  summer’s  life-draining  heat. 
Tomorrow  while  our  groves  blossom  take  this  Kosala  as  your 
inheritance.  I  have  in  my  lifetime  given  to  the  gods  hundreds 
of  offerings  and  sacrifices  and  so  paid  my  debt  to  them;  I 
have  studied  and  passed  on  what  I  learned  that  was  not  secret 
and  so  satisfied  my  teachers;  I  have  fathered  sons  and  so  paid 
off  my  ancestors;  I  have  given  gifts  to  brahmanas  and  to  other 
men  and  made  them  happy,  and  they  have  no  claim  on  me; 
and  by  enjoying  a  good  life  I  have  pleased  and  paid  my  debts 
to  myself.  All  are  paid.  I  will  rule  no  longer.” 

Rama  said,  “But  sir,  warriors  can’t  take  gifts,  rule  on, 
Majesty.” 

Dasaratha  smiled.  “My  son,  I  command  you,  tonight  keep 


52 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


fast  and  silent  watch  till  dawn,  and  let  your  friends  guard 
you  well — many  things  can  go  wrong,  in  the  dark  night  be¬ 
fore  a  King  is  made.”  The  old  King  sighed,  and  rubbed  his 
hand  over  his  eyes.  “Rama,  I  have  had  .  .  .  strange,  many 
strange  visions.  ...  I  don’t  know,  I  cannot  be  sure,  but  be¬ 
yond  Ayodhya  people  await  you;  they  will  offer  you  things 
that  are  really  yours  already.  These  things  .  .  .  take  them,  no 
fear  of  breaking  Dharma  to  you!” 

Rama  went  to  his  mother  Kausalya.  She  was  at  her  altar, 
wearing  new  white  silk  and  bright  bracelets,  offering  water  to 
the  gods.  The  other  Queens  were  there  with  her.  Kausalya 
said,  “Rama,  Rama,  I  am  so  happy!  Always  I  wanted  to  see 
this  day.” 

Sumitra  said,  “You  will  be  the  Best  of  Kings.” 

Kaikeyi  kissed  him.  “Now  your  father  will  not  have  to 
work  so  hard;  he  will  have  more  time  for  just  living  and  find¬ 
ing  joy  with  me,  with  all  of  us.”  She  smiled.  “I  would  like  to 
see  the  King  as  free  as  any  of  his  common  people,  able  to  lie 
in  the  parks  when  he  will,  free  to  come  and  go  and  let  the 
busy  world  just  pass  him  by.” 

Vasishtha  then  came  for  Rama.  Rama’s  three  mothers 
blessed  him,  and  Vasishtha  led  him  to  his  own  palace.  When 
Rama  and  Sita  had  bathed  that  evening,  and  said  their  twi¬ 
light  prayers,  Vasishtha  threw  strong  mantras  over  them,  and 
left  them  seated  on  grass  on  the  bare  floor  and  sworn  to  stay 
wakeful,  not  to  speak,  not  to  eat.  Then  Vasishtha  made  his 
way  out  of  Rama’s  black  palace  past  the  warriors,  past  the 
old  men  softly  singing  spells  to  the  stars,  past  the  guard  of 
tribesmen,  out  into  the  noisy  crowded  streets  of  Ayodhya. 

So  it  was  that  Fair  Ayodhya  seen  from  the  rooftops  be¬ 
came  a  blossom  of  colors  unfolding,  a  stream  of  lights  swim¬ 
ming,  a  lake  of  stars  in  motion.  The  Royal  Master  of  the 
Revels  smiled  and  put  on  his  vests  and  medals,  his  key  and 
chain  and  furry  hat,  and  unlocked  the  doorway  to  the  palace 
wines,  and  gave  out  drinks  of  kindly  kingly  cheer.  The  streets 
were  sprinkled  with  flowers  and  water.  The  taverns  were  full. 
The  beautiful  courtesans  threw  their  great  houses  open  to  all. 
Grand  officers  in  steel  armor  and  helmets  and  silver  shoes, 
wearing  silks  alive  with  colors,  wearing  leather  gauntlet 
gloves  and  black  belts  and  long  swords  were  in  the  royal 
palace  and  the  courtyards  of  the  King  helping  Sumantra 
make  everything  ready.  The  Ayodhya  marketplace  was  im¬ 
passable.  Music  and  cheerful  noise  poured  out  into  all  the 
streets  from  all  the  houses.  The  lame  broke  their  crutches  and 


The  Two  Wishes 


53 


danced;  sick  people  got  up  out  of  bed;  misers  gave  away 
gold;  the  King’s  kitchen  served  out  free  food,  butter  and 
roasts  and  steaming  rice;  and  the  young  women  came  out 
walking  by  the  flower  stalls  in  their  best  clothes,  armed  with 
Love’s  arrows  shot  from  the  glances  of  their  eyes  and  impa¬ 
tient  for  the  next  night  when  the  celebration  would  really  be¬ 
gin. 


As  evening  came,  as  the  lamps  set  on  branching  crystal 
trees  lighted  the  roads  and  crossings  of  Ayodhya,  Manthara 
the  hunchback,  Kaikeyi’s  old  serving  woman,  climbed  limping 
up  the  outside  stairs  of  the  royal  palace  white  as  another 
Moon  and  tall  as  Himalya.  Manthara  herself  came  from 
Kekaya;  she  was  Queen  Kaikeyi’s  old  family  nurse,  a  sin- 
seeking  hag,  sour  and  malicious  and  cruel,  bent  and  twisted 
in  her  heart. 

Like  an  old  furtive  turtle  she  blinked  and  peered  down 
through  the  hanging  gardens  at  the  festive  city.  She  entered 
the  palace  and  saw  a  passing  serving  girl  wearing  a  new 
bangle.  Manthara  grabbed  and  punched  her  and  screeched, 
“Where  did  you  steal  those  diamonds?” 

The  girl  backed  against  the  wall.  “Kaikeyi  made  US 
presents,  dear  Manthara.” 

“Eh?  What?  Never!” 

“Oh  happy  Manthara,  tomorrow  Rama  will  be  our  King!” 

Manthara’s  face  crumpled  and  collapsed  like  a  hill  of  poor 
worthless  stone  knocked  apart  in  an  earthquake.  She  ran  to 
Kaikeyi  and  yelled,  “Get  up!  Get  up!  Here  comes  the  high 
tide  of  misfortune!” 

Kaikeyi  was  lying  on  her  back  eating  mangoes.  Her  eyes 
had  dark  outer  comers  that  nearly  touched  her  ears.  She 
laughed  like  a  girl  and  threw  a  sack  of  rubies  at  Manthara. 
“Don’t  spoil  our  night  with  gloom.” 

Manthara  caught  the  rubies  and  threw  them  down.  “Oh 
Queen,”  she  whined,  “the  brighter  the  light  the  blacker  the 
shadows!  Here  comes  enduring  destruction!  Danger,  evil,  loss 
and  grief  . . .  Rama  will  be  King!” 

“I  know.”  Kaikeyi  tossed  her  a  bigger  bunch  of  gems. 
“Take  them  for  your  reward  for  welcome  news,  and  if  you 
can’t  be  happy  be  quiet." 

Manthara  frowned,  her  brow  was  like  a  cliff  of  folded 
stones.  “Tell  your  son  Bharata  never  to  return.  Think  of  him 
now  as  an  orphan  in  hiding.” 


54 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Kaikeyi  leaned  upon  her  elbow.  “You’re  still  angry.  After 
twenty  years  you  cannot  forgive  gentle  Rama  for  once  shoot¬ 
ing  a  play-arrow  at  your  hump.” 

“Don’t  you  know  your  lazy  days  are  over?”  said  Manthara. 
“Rama’s  mother  will  be  almight  around  here.  How  do  you 
think  she  really  feels  about  you?” 

“All  I  know  is  I  like  her  fine,”  said  Kaikeyi.  “Just  what  do 
you  mean  anyway?” 

“Kausalya  will  soon  have  you  as  her  slave.  All  will  look 
down  on  you.  And  with  your  fall  I  will  fall  as  well,  because  I 
am  so  loyal.” 

Kaikeyi  said,  “Rama  is  just  as  dear  to  me  as  my  own  son 
Bharata.  Ever  since  Rama  was  a  child  you  have  tried  to  lay 
on  him  your  own  vices,  which  are  indeed  truly  large  enough 
for  more  than  two." 

“Take  the  measure  of  your  enemies  and  destroy  them 
while  you  can,”  said  Manthara.  “You  can  be  Mistress  of  the 
World.  Or  a  slave,  take  your  choice.” 

“What  can  I  do  even  if  I  wanted?” 

“Make  Dasaratha  install  Bharata  as  King.  Use  your  two 
wishes.  Or  do  you  still  remember,  how  once  as  a  young  man 
Dasaratha  entered  as  the  gods’  ally  into  their  war  against  the 
Asuras  of  drought?” 

“That’s  when  I  drove  his  sky-chariot  and  saved  his  life,” 
said  Kaikeyi. 

“It  was  you  who  told  me  all  I  know  of  this,"  said  Man¬ 
thara,  “and  from  friendship  to  you  I  have  not  forgotten  it. 
He  promised  you  two  wishes  and  you  answered — My  joy  is 
great  enough  that  you  still  live.  What  do  I  want  but  your  love 
from  you  My  Lord?  Keep  the  two  gifts  till  I  ask." 

Kaikeyi  looked  at  an  old  white  scar  across  the  heel  of  her 
right  hand,  the  sign  of  a  deep  cut,  just  missing  her  wrist. 
“Oh,  he  was  badly  wounded,  Manthara,  and  the  wheel  came 
nearly  off  the  chariot  way  up  in  the  sky,  and  he  was  badly 
bleeding  ...  I  had  his  blood  all  over  me.  .  .  .”  Kaikeyi 
sighed  and  her  eyes  were  far  away,  she  was  seeing  again  the 
past.  “Alright,  I’ll  ask  him  to  give  Ayodhya  to  Bharata.” 

Manthara  said,  “You  must  banish  Rama  to  the  forest  with 
the  second  wish.  Send  him  away  for  fourteen  years,  then  he 
will  no  longer  be  the  people’s  favorite,  or  otherwise  he  will 
kill  Bharata  to  recover  the  throne!” 

“My  son,  Oh  my  Bharata!”  Kaikeyi  burst  into  tears,  seeing 
in  her  mind  Bharata’s  corpse,  his  skin  blanched  by  poison,  on 
his  face  a  frozen  dead  smile;  her  son  killed  by  treachery. 


The  Two  Wishes 


55 


Oh  King  Rama,  our  Master  Valmiki  looking  down  into  the 
past  world  held  in  his  hand,  looking  into  the  water  saw  Time 
cast  his  shadow  over  Kaikeyi’s  heart,  a  sight  hard  to  watch. 
The  dancing  feet  of  Ayodhya  stopped  dead. 


Kaikeyi  the  youngest  Queen  of  Ayodhya!  Her  breathing 
tightened  and  her  palms  perspired;  her  soul  was  all  dark;  her 
heart  pounded  and  Anger  pressed  his  mask  over  her  beautiful 
face.  She  hastened  to  take  wrong  for  right,  turned  the  wrong 
way  like  a  doe  running  to  the  trap  where  her  fawn  is  tied.  “I 
had  not  understood,  Manthara,  the  plot  against  me.  You  are 
bent  but  beautiful,  you  are  curved  as  a  flower  bowing  to  the 
wind.  Take  ornaments  and  your  beauty  will  challenge  the 
Moon’s.” 

Kaikeyi  ran  to  the  palace  anger-room,  slammed  the  door 
and  locked  it  behind  her.  She  broke  off  her  strands  of  pearls. 
She  lay  in  the  dark  thrashing  her  arms  on  the  bare  stone 
floor,  tearing  her  clothes  and  screaming — I  want  to  die! 

It  was  a  little  before  dawn.  Servants  awoke  Dasaratha.  The 
King  came  quickly  down  the  halls,  into  the  women’s  rooms, 
to  the  anger-room  door.  That  chamber  had  but  one  brass- 
bound  iron  door,  no  windows,  little  air,  no  light  unless  one 
were  brought  in — and  inside  Kaikeyi  lay  amid  her  broken 
pearls  and  flowers  and  jewels,  feeding  her  evil,  panting  and 
weeping  from  her  puffy  eyes,  fuming  down  the  comers  of  her 
mouth,  an  Apsarasa  fallen  for  the  sake  of  love  from  heaven 
and  abandoned  to  despair  on  the  Himalya  hillside  by  her 
lover. 

Dasaratha  was  old,  but  he  easily  shattered  that  door  by  one 
stroke  of  one  hand.  He  looked  around  for  some  enemy,  his 
face  flaming  in  wrath,  his  breath  hot  like  a  Naga’s.  Taking  a 
lantern  he  entered  the  room,  he  saw  Kaikeyi  lying  like  one  il¬ 
lusion  spread  out  to  capture  another,  and  pain  crossed  his 
face,  and  the  jewelry  broken  on  the  floor  glittered  like  stars  in 
the  sky. 

“Who  does  you  hurt?  Who  shall  mourn?”  said  Dasaratha. 
“Arise,  I  am  the  King  of  Kings  in  this  world,  all  the  land  that 
lies  in  sunlight  is  mine.” 

Kaikeyi  sobbed,  “No,  this  is  way  beyond  you.” 

Dasaratha  said,  “I  can  do  anything.  I  have  physicians 
well-paid  to  wait  for  times  like  these;  let  them  see  you.  I  tell 
you,  I  am  the  King!  I  can  fearlessly  please  or  displease  any¬ 
one.  I  can  disgrace  my  friends,  reward  the  undeserving,  pun- 


56 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


ish  the  innocent  or  promote  fools  to  high  rank.  I  can  raise  up 
a  poor  man  or  lower  a  rich  one  to  poverty.  I  can  seize  wealth 
and  contribute  it  to  charity  and  pay  for  priests  to  pray  for 
me!” 

“But  this  is  too  high  a  price  to  ask  of  you.  Majesty,”  said 
Kaikeyi.  “It  was  wrong  of  me  to  do  this,  forgive  me  and 
think  no  more  of  it.  I  fear,  I  am  shamed  I  came  here.” 

Dasaratha  grew  very  proud.  "My  Lady ,  what  is  it?  What  do 
you  want?" 

“I  want  my  two  wishes.” 

“Take  them,  whatever  you  want.” 

“Make  Bharata  King  and  not  Rama.  Send  Rama  to  the 
forest  for  fourteen  years.” 

“Change  your  mind,  Kaikeyi.” 

“Do  both  these  things  for  me  now.  Grant  me  my  two 
wishes.” 

“I  give  what  you  ask,”  said  Dasaratha.  He  looked  at 
Kaikeyi  as  though  she  were  a  stranger  to  him.  “I  will  honor 
your  wishes.  Why  are  you  uneasy  as  if  you  had  done  some 
wrong  in  taking  what  is  yours?  You  have  asked  me  to  redeem 
your  promises  from  a  Solar  King,  you  will  not  be  cheated  by 
me,  promises  must  be  true.  Yet  you  have  put  me  and  all 
Earth  in  ill-humor.  I  am  a  stag  facing  a  tigress,  a  snake  held 
within  a  charmed  circle.” 

“Then  you’ll  do  it?”  asked  Kaikeyi. 

“My  one  thought,”  said  the  King,  “is  but  to  see  Rama  once 
more  before  he  goes  away,  for  his  departure  will  kill  me. 
Kaikeyi,  if  you  somehow  married  Death  himself  you  would 
soon  be  his  widow,  I  think  you  would  kill  anyone!” 

Then  the  charioteer  Sumantra  came  and  approached  the 
anger-room.  “Majesty,  Night  has  fled  before  the  morning’s 
light,  and  the  wakening  Earth  filled  with  life  awaits  you.” 

Dasaratha  turned  on  Sumantra  in  rage.  "Charioteer,  this 
hound  from  Hell,  this  bitch  betrays  me!"  Sumantra  stepped 
back  in  fear  of  his  life.  “Sumantra,  from  happiness  I  slept  but 
lightly  till  I  was  summoned  here.  But  this  Kaikeyi  changes 
her  love  as  often  as  lightning  changes  her  path,  she  severs  af¬ 
fections  like  a  sharp  knife,  and  in  doing  wrong  she  is  swifter 
than  an  arrow.  I  curse  her!  Let  this  carnal  Queen  fall  to  dam¬ 
nation;  let  her  spend  the  rest  of  her  life  in  dread  of  the  next 
world!” 

“What?” 

Dasaratha  could  not  at  first  speak  more,  he  was  choked  by 


The  Two  Wishes 


57 


the  mist  of  grief  in  his  throat,  by  the  fumes  of  wrath.  Then 
he  said,  “At  once  bring  Rama  here.” 

Rama  came  with  Lakshmana,  stood  at  the  anger-doorway 
and  said,  “Victory  to  you,  Father." 

Dasaratha  faintly  said,  “Oh  Rama.” 

Rama  waited  but  the  King  said  no  more.  Kaikeyi  spoke, 
“Gentle  Rama,  let  Bharata  become  our  King,  and  instead  of 
the  throne  of  Ayodhya,  take  a  hermit’s  life  in  the  vast  forests 
for  fourteen  years.” 

Rama  said,  “Bharata  or  myself,  we  are  much  the  same. 
But  without  the  King’s  command  I  cannot  come  or  go  a 
single  step.” 

“But  these  are  my  two  promises!”  said  Kaikeyi. 

“That  is  between  you  two,”  said  Rama.  “You  had  no  need 
to  use  them,  I  would  have  gone  at  your  wish.  But  why  does 
Dasaratha  breathe  so  slowly,  and  stand  silently  weeping,  star¬ 
ing  at  the  floor?” 

"Rama,  have  I  done  right?”  asked  Kaikeyi. 

“If  you  say  you  have,  you  have;  I  will  believe  you.  But 
Mother,  I  cannot  leave  the  King  in  sorrow." 

“He  will  soon  recover.  Hurry  and  go." 

Rama  bowed  to  his  father.  “Sir,  I  am  Rama." 

Dasaratha  whispered,  “Child,  I  am  insane;  therefore  con¬ 
fine  me  and  become  the  King.” 

“I  would  never  make  you  lose  your  faith  and  honesty,” 
said  Rama.  “I  will  go  today  out  from  Ayodhya  for  fourteen 
years.  I  will  return  to  say  farewell  before  I  leave.”  Rama  rose 
to  his  feet  and  said  to  Kaikeyi,  “Dasaratha  never  takes  back, 
never  fails  to  carry  out  what  he  has  once  spoken.  Mother,  I 
am  like  my  father,  trust  me,  have  no  fear.” 


Rama  walked  away.  He  looked  just  the  same  as  ever,  but 
Lakshmana  was  stunned  and  followed  him  in  a  daze.  They 
went  through  the  palace  and  Rama  greeted  his  friends  as  al¬ 
ways,  he  did  not  look  wishfully  at  the  throne  nor  did  he  turn 
his  eyes  from  it.  The  clear  Moon  is  handsome,  and  slipping 
behind  a  cloud  or  waning  he  is  still  good  to  see. 

Rama  went  to  his  mother’s  rooms.  Kausalya  was  in  tears, 
she  saw  him  and  said,  “Were  you  never  bom  I  would  have 
but  the  one  sorrow  of  barrenness.  Do  what  you  want,  you 
don’t  have  to  obey  him.  Stay  with  me,  hide  here  in  my  room 
for  fourteen  years." 

Lakshmana  then  spoke,  “Even  the  King  hopes  Rama  will 


58 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


refuse!  But  a  wrong  thrown  at  Rama  seems  to  bring  out  no 
anger  in  him;  it  is  like  a  seed  thrown  on  stone.” 

Kausalya  sat  on  a  golden  couch  and  said,  “Sit  by  me, 
Rama.” 

Rama  only  touched  the  gold  frame  and  stayed  standing.  “I 
need  a  seat  of  grass,  I’m  a  hermit  of  the  forest  now,  I  want 
no  softness.” 

“I  sinned  greatly  in  another  life,”  said  Kausalya.  “Surely 
I  kept  children  from  their  mothers.  My  son,  my  heart  is  iron 
for  it  does  not  tear;  there  is  no  room  for  me  in  the  Land  of 
Death,  for  Yama  will  not  lead  me  from  life  though  I  desire  to 
go.” 

Lakshmana  looked  round  the  room  and  said,  “Queen,  the 
King  is  a  slimy  old  fish  who  eats  his  own  brood.  Why  allow 
him  to  put  us  all  in  another’s  power?  Wait,  I  will  just  go  kill 
my  father,  I  will  not  stand  this.”  Lakshmana  waved  his  golden 
arms. 

Rama  looked  at  him.  “Oh  Lakshmana.” 

Lakshmana  went  on.  “Brother,  leave  everything  to  me.  Go 
on  with  your  business,  when  I  unleash  my  strength  the  entire 
population  of  the  three  worlds  cannot  obstruct  you.”  He 
started  for  the  door.  “My  hands  are  for  killing,  how  has  he 
ruled  so  long?” 

Rama  held  him  back  and  turned  him  around.  “Be  still,  or 
you  may  yet  see  seeds  sprout  on  stones,  Lakshmana!” 

“I  am  also  your  parent,”  said  Kausalya.  “Rama,  I  com¬ 
mand  you  to  stay.  Or  else  I  will  die,  for  you  are  dear  to  me, 
and  the  King  makes  war  on  me  as  well.  Do  what  you  want, 
Ramal” 

“I’ll  go.  Mother.” 

“Do  that,”  she  said,  “and  Kosala  is  ruined,  I  am  dead, 
your  father’s  life  and  fame  are  gone,  and  out  of  all  of  us  only 
Kaikeyi  and  Bharata  will  be  happy.  You  will  fall  into  Hell 
for  killing  your  mother!” 

“Have  you  seen  Death’s  face,”  said  Rama,  “have  you  seen 
Hell  that  you  will  talk  of  it  so  lightly  and  use  it  for  your 
blame?  Kaikeyi  was  always  carefree;  this  deed  is  nothing  like 
her,  and  it  is  truly  not  her  doing  to  sadden  the  King.  I  wait 
patiently  for  you  to  open  your  eyes  and  see.  No  man  is  al¬ 
ways  the  same.  Worry  and  care  waylay  us  all.  Kings  will  mis¬ 
rule  one  day  and  bring  justice  to  all  the  next  Singers  will  fall 
into  the  pit  of  helpless  misery  for  no  cause,  and  then  may 
sing  their  happiest  songs.  Men  may  take  anger  against  all  in 
the  world  and  from  that  rage  do  great  kindness  and  fashion 


The  Two  Wishes 


39 


wonders  of  beauty.  People  who  think  they  care  for  nothing  at 
all  have  saved  more  lives  than  they  ever  knew,  yet  believe 
themselves  alone,  and  unloved.” 

Lakshmana  said,  “I  must  go  with  you.” 

Rama  said,  “Lakshmana,  I  bind  you  with  an  oath  of  the 
cruel  Kshatriya  Dharma,  as  with  chains,  to  go  with  me  and 
protect  me.” 

“I  promise.” 

“Queen  Kausalya,  I  bind  you  with  an  oath  of  Love’s 
Dharma,  as  with  happiness,  to  remain  by  your  husband  as  a 
warrior’s  wife  among  your  enemies.” 

“I  promise,”  said  the  Queen.  “I  bless  you  for  your  journey, 
both  of  you,  and  whoever  shall  go  with  you,  and  whoever 
shall  help  you  and  welcome  you.” 

Rama  said,  “Wait  for  my  return.  Wait  for  me,  everything 
will  be  all  right.” 


Rama  went  alone  to  Sita  and  said,  “The  time  will  quickly 
pass,  you  will  soon  see  me  return." 

She  answered  softly,  “It  is  very  strange.  My  Lord,  that  you 
alone  among  all  men  in  the  world  have  not  heard  that  a  wife 
and  her  husband  are  one.” 

“There  is  no  happiness  in  the  forest,”  said  Rama.  “There  is 
danger.  Lions  roar  and  keep  pitiless  watch  from  the  mouths 
of  their  hill-caves,  waterfalls  crash  and  pain  the  ears,  and  so 
the  wood  is  full  of  misery.” 

“Surely  your  fortune  is  also  mine,”  said  Sita. 

“Enraged  elephants  in  their  fury  trample  men  to  death.” 

“Kings  in  cities  execute  their  faithful  friends  at  any  hour, 
day  or  night.” 

“There  is  little  to  eat  but  windfallen  fruit  and  white  roots.” 

“I  will  eat  after  you  have  taken  your  share  of  them.” 

“There  is  no  water,  vines  shut  out  the  Sun,  at  night  there 
are  but  hard  beds  of  leaves.” 

“I  will  gather  flowers.” 

“Creeping  serpents  slither  across  the  trails  and  swim  crook¬ 
edly  in  the  rivers  awaiting  prey.” 

“The  wayfarer  will  see  flocks  of  colored  birds  fly  and  dis¬ 
appear  into  shady  trees.” 

“There  is  always  hunger  and  darkness  and  great  fear,”  said 
Rama.  “Scorpions  sting  and  poison  the  blood;  there  is  fever 
in  the  air,  fires  rage  uncontrolled;  there  are  no  dear  friends 
nearby,  and  so  the  wood  is  full  of  misery.” 


60 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


‘‘It  is  Ayodhya  that  would  be  the  wilderness  for  me  without 
you,”  said  Sita.  “Your  bow  is  no  decoration,  your  knife  is  not 
for  wood-chopping,  your  arrows  are  not  toys,  but  keep  me 
from  your  arguments.  We  will  be  together.  The  water  will  be 
nectar,  the  thistles  silk,  the  raw  hides  many-colored  blankets. 
I’ll  be  no  burden.  Rama,  I  depend  on  you.  I  cannot  be  cast 
away  like  water  left  in  a  cup.  Dear  Rama,  I  am  the  humble 
dust  at  your  feet,  perfectly  happy.  How  will  you  avoid  me?” 

“Then  come,”  smiled  Rama.  “You  love  me  and  I  love  you, 
what  more  is  there?  Without  delay  give  away  all  our  pos¬ 
sessions  that  we  won’t  take  with  us,  and  get  ready  to  go.” 


Sumantra  the  charioteer  found  the  priest  Vasishtha  in  the 
silent  street  and  said,  “Brahmana,  the  world  is  without  sup¬ 
port,  it  is  gone  to  Hell.  The  old  Kshatriya  Dharma  is  van¬ 
ished  forever.  Sorrow  will  kill  the  King,  shackled  by  lust  to  a 
vile  prostitute  posing  as  our  Queen.” 

Vasishtha  said,  “Truly  I  find  the  world  much  the  same  as 
ever.” 

“Hear  Ayodhya,  silent  with  blame!” 

“Let  go  anger,  abandon  violence,”  said  Vasishtha.  “Don’t 
you  know  anything?  Rama  is  the  Sun  of  the  Sun,  the  fame  of 
fame.  He  goes  with  Sita,  he  goes  with  Lakshmi,  he  goes  with 
victory.” 

“Ah  no,”  said  Sumantra.  “Clever  speakers  feign  piety  to 
deceive  and  tell  others  of  Dharma  in  rich  tones,  but  there 
was  a  time.  .  .  .” 

“Clever  profiteers  also  feign  foreign  wars  to  deceive  the 
simple  and  all  paid  liars  are  not  priests,”  said  Vasishtha. 
“Traitors  make  a  show  of  righteousness  and  holding  knives 
behind  their  backs  they  plead  for  peace.  But  my  place  is  to 
calm,  to  avoid,  to  soften,  to  look  before  walking  and  take 
thought  before  speaking.  Men  must  have  laws,  sometimes 
hard  to  follow,  but  harder  to  find  once  lost.  Dasaratha  will 
die,  so  let  him  die  in  peace,  for  your  life  too  must  end  one 
day.  Give  up  war’s  desires.  Throw  out  fear  of  fearful  things. 
An  hour  of  separation  cannot  be  avoided.  Let  the  King  die 
alone  in  a  room  as  an  elephant  badly  wounded  by  a  lion  goes 
to  die  in  peace.” 

‘The  gods  are  blind.  Brahmana,  how  will  Rama  who  never 
knew  misfortune  live  in  bark  rags  and  eat  bad  food?” 

“Sita  will  cherish  him.  He  will  eat  well  and  live  well.  Cease 
to  judge  men  by  their  outsides.  Store  the  coronation  supplies 


The  Two  Wishes 


61 


for  Bharata,  as  you  gathered  them  for  Rama.  Time  alone 
causes  change.  Kaikeyi  loved  Rama.  She  never  cared  for  gov¬ 
ernment  but  only  for  Dasaratha.  With  her  he  would  relax, 
she  never  forced  him  into  anything,  but  gave  him  love  and  let 
him  forget  that  he  was  different  from  any  other  man.  Time 
makes  her  press  relentlessly  for  Rama’s  exile  with  harsh 
words.  She  was  easy-going.  And  why  has  she  never  used  these 
wishes  before?  What  is  beyond  understanding — that  is  Des¬ 
tiny.” 

“Destiny?”  said  Sumantra.  “That  is  a  poor  frail  thing, 
where  all  is  lost  because  a  good  hour  passes  and  the  stars 
who  care  nothing  for  us  are  not  in  their  right  places.  Who  is 
Time  to  turn  his  back  on  us?  And  we  not  men?  But  now  soon 
Earth  will  be  a  widow,  the  King  will  die.” 

“Time  is  hidden  from  you,  charioteer.  You  can  only  see  his 
work,  not  him.” 

“I’ll  not  believe  that,  brahmana.  When  I  meet  a  roadblock 
I  break  it!” 

“Destiny  is  unthinkable,  how  can  you  regret  it?”  asked  Va- 
sishtha. 


The  Kosalas  came  pushing  through  the  streets  again, 
crowding  their  way  to  Rama’s  palace — Throw  down  your  in¬ 
ventions  and  your  plows,  go  see  Sita,  she  gives  away  riches. 
End  your  hard  work  to  feed  your  little  children! 

Vasishtha  and  Sumantra  followed  the  crowd,  but  when 
they  arrived  all  the  clothes  and  jewels  and  horses  and  ele¬ 
phants  and  chariots  were  gone,  and  Sita  had  given  the  palace 
itself  to  her  servants,  to  live  in  on  full  salary  till  their  return. 

Rama  was  there  and  Vasishtha  asked  him,  “What  do  I  get? 
I  am  idle  but  I  love  good  things,  that’s  the  mark  of  my  high 
birth." 

Rama  pointed  to  a  long  pasture  filled  with  grazing  cows 
that  ran  from  the  side  of  his  house  to  the  river.  “Sita  has 
emptied  every  room  here,”  he  said.  He  gave  Vasishtha  a  short 
heavy  staff.  “Those  cows  are  all  I  have  left,  and  they  are 
yours  as  far  as  you  can  throw  over  them.” 

Vasishtha  took  the  rod,  stood  in  the  yard,  quickly  tightened 
his  robe  round  his  waist  and  hurled  the  staff.  It  went  sailing 
far  over  every  cow  and  fell  clear  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Sarayu. 

Then  Vasishtha  smiling  held  up  his  two  hands  palms  out¬ 
wards  and  let  his  arms  fall  in  circles  to  his  sides.  All  fell 


62 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


silent.  Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana  drew  near.  Vasishtha 
knelt  in  the  sunlight  with  the  others  kneeling  round  him  and 
said — Life  is  short. 

“Truly  it  is  I  Rama,  now  no  one  sings  your  praises  to  wake 
you,  no  chariot  will  clear  a  way  before  you,  no  servants  will 
run  ahead  to  build  a  resting  place,  and  also  no  one  any  long¬ 
er  plots  against  you. 

“Rama,  Sita,  Lakshmana.  For  your  safety  I  give  the  gods 
flowers  and  smoke  and  praise.  I  place  you  as  travelers  in  the 
care  of  the  holy  mountains  and  the  sacred  trees  large  and 
small,  in  care  of  the  birds  and  the  Sun  and  Moon,  the  air,  the 
day  and  the  night,  the  lakes  and  islands;  and  let  them  all  lend 
you  their  strength.  I  throw  seeds  into  the  fires  for  the  Guard¬ 
ians  of  the  world’s  directions  and  ask  them  to  stop  the  breath 
of  all  who  are  hostile  to  you.  I  throw  flowers  up  into  the  air 
and  make  my  blessings  fall — No  fear,  no  grief,  and  follow 
me. 

“Depart  from  us  encircled  and  protected  by  the  heavens 
and  the  sky,  and  served  by  creatures  moving  or  immobile,  by 
the  planets  and  stars  and  by  Mother  Earth.  Return  when  the 
trees  blossom  again  for  the  fourteenth  time.  As  much  as  I 
can,  I  turn  aside  from  you  all  hurt  and  harm  from  homed 
beasts  and  every  injury  from  flesh-eating  animals.  .  .  .  May 
the  every  prayer  said  in  the  forests  by  the  holy  men  crown 
your  way  with  good  fortune.” 

“Rama,  Sita,  Lakshmana!”  Vasishtha  dropped  over  their 
heads  grains  of  colored  rice.  Sorrow  flees  from  you. 

Vasishtha  stood  over  them.  “Go  wherever  you  like.  I  will 
see  you  return.  And  on  that  day,  when  Rama  is  in  royal 
robes  I  will  gaze  at  you,  my  face  will  shine  with  joyl” 


Then  Rama  went  to  the  King’s  palace  to  say  goodbye  to 
his  father  and  Sumantra  fell  into  stride  beside  him.  They 
went  down  the  palace  halls.  There  the  weeping  Revel  Master 
took  off  his  finery.  He  shut  the  wine-vault  doors  and  locked 
them  closed  and  barred  them;  he  sat  there  dressed  in  forest 
clothes,  like  an  old  hermit.  He  threw  away  the  key  and  could 
see  no  joy;  he  sat  not  in  a  palace  but  in  a  death-waiting 
house,  he  was  a  pilgrim  come  to  die  at  some  holy  place  in 
one  of  the  little  stone-built  rooms. 

Sumantra  sighed  and  shook  his  head.  “So!  See  revealed  the 
poverty  of  gentleness,  that  cannot  help  you  who  always  use  it 
Rama,  be  forgiving  while  it’s  peacetime,  but  when  people 


The  Two  Wishes 


63 


come  against  you,  you’ll  only  win  by  force.  Reason  must  at 
last  resort  to  power,  and  compassion  is  feeble,  it  is  weak,  it 
trembles.” 

Rama  stopped  walking.  “Did  you  then  want  me  very  much 
for  your  King?” 

“You  know  I’m  right!”  said  Sumantra. 

“No,  only  truly  angry,”  said  Rama. 

“I  will  kill  Kaikeyi  cleanly,  a  warrior’s  way,  for  she  has 
murdered  my  King!” 

Rama  said,  “I  thought  you  were  a  real  fighter,  not  just  an 
edgy  old  man  who  kills  women,  boasting  beforehand  of  his 
sins  to  come.” 

“Has  that  bleating  ass  Vasishtha  stolen  your  manhood?” 
asked  Sumantra.  “Why  listen  to  his  pretended  talk  of  Time 
and  Fate?  What  real  man  meekly  bows  to  Destiny?” 

“Rama  does.” 

“Then  you  have  a  man’s  form  and  a  woman’s  deeds! 
You’ve  spent  all  your  courage.  Prince,  pay  Fate  no  regard, 
do  not  believe  in  good  and  evil!” 

Rama  said,  “Rust  will  come  to  bright  things,  fire  will  bum 
our  homes,  blight  will  consume  our  grain,  all  these  are 
sendings  from  Fate.” 

Sumantra  caught  Rama  and  banged  him  up  against  the 
wall.  “Little  green  Rama,  how  dare  you  adore  Time  while 
your  King  still  lives?  I  will  go  see  Dasaratha  now,  and  you 
will  wait,  and  you  will  not  tell  me  any  more  talk!”  Then  in¬ 
stantly  he  released  Rama  and  fell  to  his  knees.  “I  take  you 
for  my  King,  Rama.” 

“Must  you  see  him?  Rise,  my  charioteer.  With  more  abuse 
must  you  bum  him,  though  I  forbid  it?” 

“I  can’t  take  wrong  orders  from  anyone,”  said  Sumantra. 
“Majesty,  listen.  You  have  little  anger  now,  but  if  you  ever 
have  don’t  hide  it  in  your  own  heart;  let  it  fall  on  your  foes 
lest  your  heart  burst!  I  won’t  hurt  that  whore.  I  prefer  your 
company  for  one  moment  to  the  wealth  of  all  creation.  But 
in  my  mind  burns  a  summer  wildfire  of  grief  inflamed  by 
the  hot  gale  winds  of  your  departure,  fed  by  my  inflammable 
tears,  kindled  by  my  remembrance,  and  smoking  black.” 

“Never  match  strength  with  me,”  said  Rama.  “You  do  not 
have  to  drive  over  your  friends  and  injure  them.  Go  ahead,  I 
permit  you.” 

Rama  looked  away,  and  Sumantra  went  to  the  anger-room, 
where  Dasaratha  paced  back  and  forth,  and  Kaikeyi  sat 
frozen  in  a  corner.  Sumantra  said,  “Desire  bites  hard,  Dasar- 


64 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


atha!  Break  your  shameful  fetters,  let  this  hour  never  pass,  let 
Rama  never  leave.  Don’t  obey  this  woman,  she  has  no  whit 
of  decency.” 

Dasaratha  only  said,  “Those  were  my  promises,  Sumantra.” 

Sumantra  said,  “You’re  far  astray;  my  hurt  is  that  you  call 
it  Dharma  that  you  follow.  I’ve  known  you  all  my  life — and 
now  I  must  regret  it,  for  I  am  of  honest  ways  and  I  am 
yours.” 

“I  have  nearly  finished  my  life,”  said  Dasaratha.  “Will  you 
not  stand  as  my  friend  for  only  a  few  days  more?  Better  I 
died  yesterday,  for  I  must  drive  Lakshmi  of  good  fortune  out 
from  my  city.  Do  not  take  away  from  me  the  closest  friend¬ 
ship  that  I  ever  had,  and  the  best  regard  in  which  I  was  ever 
held.  I  deserve  from  you  a  better  end  to  life  than  that.” 

“I  will  not  take  them  away,”  said  Sumantra,  “That  I  will 
never  do.  Give  me  your  leave;  may  I  be  the  one  to  drive 
Rama  to  the  forest  if  he  must  go.  I  had  great  anger  against 
you,  but  it’s  gone.” 

Dasaratha  said,  “You  may  take  him.  You  are  Sumantra 
the  best  charioteer,  the  best  driver  ever  born  in  all  this  world, 
this  world  where  there  is  but  one  right  road,  where  the  direc¬ 
tions  and  the  ways  are  hard  to  see,  hard  to  find,  hard  to 
remember.” 


Sumantra  went  to  get  his  chariot  ready,  and  Rama  went  in 
to  see  his  father.  Dasaratha  stood  pressing  his  hands  together, 
sighing,  shaking  his  head  in  dismay.  Dasaratha  said,  “My  son, 
Sumantra  is  really  a  peaceful,  sober  man,  happy  to  sit  with 
me  and  remember  our  past  wars  and  our  ancient  battles  for 
the  gods.  He  is  right,  I  am  degraded.  By  a  petty  promise  I 
have  broken  a  greater  law  in  a  fit  of  madness.  I  have  violated 
fair  combat  and  chosen  lingering  murder.  Am  I  not  a  cow¬ 
ardly  assassin,  Rama?” 

“Not  to  me,”  said  Rama,  “never  to  me.  I  can  tell  an  enemy 
in  the  form  of  a  friend — you  are  my  father  and  no  foe  of 
mine.  Will  I  disobey  you  and  judge  your  commands  because 
your  motive  may  be  desire?  As  though  it  were  on  a  wheel, 
whatever  we  see  of  happiness  and  sorrow  all  turns  round 
Fate.  Fear  and  bravery,  freedom  and  bondage,  birth  and 
death,  love  and  anger  all  pivot  on  Time’s  wheel-hub.  Wise 
men  may  give  up  long  hard  training  all  in  an  instant,  things 
well-begun  may  be  hindered  by  unthought-of  accidents,  all 
from  Time.  The  Father  is  the  Master.  You  gave  me  my  life. 


The  Two  Wishes 


63 


So  end  Kaikeyi’s  alarm  and  find  peace.  Drive  out  bad 
feelings  as  you  banish  me,  I  will  see  you  free  from  debt  when 
I  return.  One  must  keep  promises  or  not  make  them.” 

‘‘I  think  that  is  no  longer  true,”  said  Dasaratha. 

Rama  said,  “If  I  disobey  you,  no  other  good  deed,  no 
wealth,  no  power  will  restore  my  good  name.  Keep  your 
word  and  preserve  the  three  worlds,  keep  us  safe.  For  every 
broken  promise  breaks  away  a  little  Dharma,  and  every  break 
of  Dharma  brings  closer  the  day  the  worlds  too  must  break 
apart.  When  Dharma  is  altogether  gone  the  three  worlds  will 
end;  they  will  be  destroyed  once  more.  If  man  breaks  his 
word,  why  should  the  stars  above  keep  their  promises  not  to 
fall?  Why  should  Fire  not  burn  us  all  or  Ocean  not  leap  his 
shores  and  drown  us?” 

“That  is  all  true,”  said  Dasaratha.  “Oh  Rama,  if  you  doubt 
something  be  careful,  for  when  you  once  speak  you  are 
bound!  Never  threaten  harm  to  an  enemy;  just  hit  him  hardl” 

Rama  said,  “I  ask  you  something.” 

“Ask  anything.” 

“Earth  Lord,  it  is  only  noble  to  be  good.  Do  right,  while 
you  can.  Change  your  curse  on  Kaikeyi.” 

‘Then  let  her  spend  but  the  wink  of  an  eye  damned  in 
Hell,  for  I  cannot  withdraw  my  words  completely,  or  I  would, 
Rama,  I  would  do  anything  for  you.” 

“Never  curse  her  again.” 

“For  now,  for  all  the  future  I’ll  speak  no  bad  to  her.” 

“Love  Bharata.” 

“I  love.” 

“Let  Sita  go  with  me.” 

“Once  given  as  your  wife,  she  is  yours  even  after  death. 
The  shade  of  your  feet  is  better  for  her  than  a  palace  roof 
alone  or  a  home  in  heaven.  You  are  Lord  to  her,  I  will  not 
sin  more  by  preventing  her.” 

“Let  Lakshmana  protect  us.” 

“I  let  him." 

“Goodbye,  my  father." 

“But  do  not  go  today;  stay  with  me  tonight  and  leave  to¬ 
morrow.” 

“I  said  I  would  go  today.  I  will  hold  your  feet  after  four¬ 
teen  years.  Farewell,  father.” 

“Farewell,  Rama.” 

Lakshmana  came  in.  “Great  King,  Maharaja,  rule  for  a 
thousand  years,  and  farewell." 

“Farewell,  Lakshmana.” 


66  THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 

Sita  entered.  “My  house  is  now  the  forest.  Farewell  my  Fa¬ 
ther.” 

“Farewell,  Sita.  Allis  lost!  A  ll  is  lost!" 


Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  Sita  met  Vasishtha  by  a  small 
back  door  to  the  palace.  Rama  and  Lakshmana  first  put  on 
their  impenetrable  armor  all  of  gold,  and  Lakshmana  put  on 
a  black  hide  belt  with  a  gold-handled  belt-knife.  Then  over 
that  they  put  on  the  two  pieces  of  soft  dyed  barkcloth  worn 
by  ascetics,  tied  on  belts  of  grass,  put  on  forest  sandals.  And 
Vasishtha  said,  “Rama,  never  forget  the  weapons  you  learned 
from  Viswamitra.” 

Sita  held  some  bark  clothes,  cast  down  her  eyes  and  asked 
Vasishtha,  “Brahmana,  how  do  hermits  dress  in  these?” 

“A  knot  by  the  waist,”  said  Vasishtha,  “but  throw  those 
down.  Wear  your  silks  and  ornamepts,  Kaikeyi  had  not  her 
eye  on  you,  and  the  wishes  say  nothing  of  this.” 

Then  Sumantra  drove  up  on  the  royal  chariot,  a  four-horse 
war-car  rattling  with  noise.  He  said,  “Prince  Rama,  I  feel  bet¬ 
ter  now.  I  will  drive  you  from  the  city,  but  the  streets  seem 
near  impassable.  Ornaments  clash  as  the  women  strike  their 
breasts,  and  the  men  cry — Who  ever  exiles  his  own  son? 
Rama,  they  consider  empty  the  life  of  anyone  who  will  not 
see  you  leave,  at  whom  you  will  not  look  as  you  go.  They 
consider  banishment  the  reward  of  virtue  for  every  man  now; 
they  set  at  nothing  the  world’s  comforts  and  the  highest  joys 
of  heaven  if  they  can  but  see  you.  The  Kosalas  cannot  with¬ 
draw  their  minds  from  you,  they  will  rush  after  you  like 
thirsty  travelers  sighting  water  in  the  desert.  All  the  forest 
guides  prepare  to  lead;  your  wrestling  partners,  all  your 
friends,  all  the  merchants  and  their  women,  all  the  little  chil¬ 
dren  and  the  dreadful  warriors  of  Ayodhya — now  all  of  us 
will  follow  you!” 

“But  why?”  asked  Rama.  “What  have  I  to  do  with  a  fol¬ 
lowing?  I’m  leaving  Ayodhya,  how  can  I  take  her  people? 
Who  keeps  attached  to  an  elephant  rope  once  the  animal 
himself  is  free?” 

Sumantra  smiled.  “But  this  will  be  a  great  departure 
indeed,  more  than  was  bargained  for!  Your  people,  they  call 
themselves.  They  leave  garden  and  field,  they  carry  every¬ 
thing  out  from  their  homes  and  now  dig  up  their  buried 
treasures,  and  load  all  onto  carts,  and  go  out  the  gates,  and 
line  the  roads.” 


The  Two  Wishes 


67 


“Not  now,”  said  Rama.  “Can’t  you  tell  them?  Charioteer, 
there  may  some  day  be  a  time,  when  all  may  follow  me — ask 
them  to  wait.” 

“But  you  departl” 

“No,  not  now,  later  I  may  truly  depart.” 

‘They  say  it  must  be  today.  From  this  day  forth  will 
Ayodhya  be  vacant,  her  dusty  yards  unswept,  her  cattle  gone, 
her  flags  torn  down,  her  wells  dry,  her  fires  dead.  Broken 
things  abandoned  will  clutter  her  streets,  and  these  broad 
ways  will  be  the  paths  where  wild  cats  and  owls  roam.  Rats 
will  crawl  and  cunning  snakes  will  slither  from  hole  to  hole. 
Nevermore  will  any  offerings  be  made  from  here  to  heaven; 
the  temples  of  Fair  Ayodhya  will  be  without  their  garlands, 
without  their  images,  abandoned  by  the  gods,  and  ominous. 
So  they  say,  Rama,  so  they  say.”  ' 

“What  can  I  do?  I  give  them  all  to  Bharata,  he  won’t  harm 
them.” 

“No  King  ever  yet  gave  the  free  Kosala  men  to  anyone,” 
said  Sumantra. 

“How  can  they  think  to  live?” 

“All  our  stores  of  food  have  been  loaded  onto  wagons.  In 
the  forest  the  Kosalas  will  kill  deer  and  elephants;  they  will 
drink  wild  honey,  and  see  many  rivers,  and  drive  the  lions 
back  here  into  Ayodhya’s  ruins.  They  will  forget  this  city, 
and  again  forget  her,  and  at  last  never  speak,  never  dream  of 
her.  The  Kosalas  will  make  new  fields,  cut  the  grass  and 
plant  grain.  They  will  leave  behind  the  golden  coins  and  sil¬ 
ver  bars  in  the  treasury,  let  Bharata  have  them;  we  have  bet¬ 
ter;  we  have  all  our  hopes  .  .  .  there  can  be  no  kingdom 
where  you  are  not  King  .  .  .  you’ll  see  the  forest  flourish  into 
a  city,  or  we  will  wander  homeless  with  you!” 

Rama  looked  at  Vasishtha.  “Brahmana,  help  me!  Fair 
Ayodhya  is  my  city,  don’t  let  me  hear  in  the  forest  that  she 
has  died  of  shame.  You  must  somehow  prevent  them.” 

Vasishtha  said,  “Let  them  do  what  they  want  today  and 
they  will  be  tired  tomorrow.  Rama,  the  people’s  outcries  last 
seven  days,  no  longer.  If  I  have  ever  said  anything  wrong  to 
you  from  familiarity,  or  given  you  offense  through  ignorance, 
forgive  me.  Rama,  I  salute  you,  I  bless  you.” 

Vasishtha  turned  to  Sita  and  said,  “You  do  not  forsake 
your  Lord  in  misfortune,  I  salute  you,  I  bless  you!” 

He  told  Lakshmana,  “Prince,  this  design  of  yours  to  serve 
Rama  is  already  a  great  blessing  to  you,  a  great  good  fortune, 


68  THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 

your  high  wide  way  to  heaven.  You  follow  him,  I  salute  you, 
I  bless  you.” 

Then  the  brahmana  Vasishtha  embraced  Sumantra  the 
Charioteer.  So  there  is  still  one  good  heart  in  the  Kosala 
Kingdom!  /  see  honor,  l  see  again  that  proud  warriors’ 
Dharma  of  kindliness  and  bravery  and  gladly  casting  off  the 
body  on  the  battlefield  of  war.  /  see  fairness  and  skill  and 
courage  once  more!  That  is  the  Kshatriya  Dharma  that  I 
remember.  It  is  good  to  see,  old  man,  good  to  seel 


Lakshmana  put  Rama’s  fire  inside  a  bowl  in  a  comer  of 
the  chariot.  Sumantra  put  bows  and  arrows  on  board,  and 
under  the  driver’s  seat  in  front  he  put  a  hoe  and  a  root- 
gathering  basket  bound  in  goathide.  Vasishtha  helped  Sita  get 
on  the  car;  the  two  princes  climbed  up;  Sumantra  got  on  and 
the  exile  began. 

Sumantra  held  the  reins.  The  four  horses  raised  their 
heads,  the  chariot  trembled,  it  seemed  to  come  alive.  Suman¬ 
tra  said,  “Go.” 

The  red  horses  ran.  They  were  out  of  the  back  palace 
courtyard,  through  the  palace  gates,  and  racing  wildly  down 
the  street  to  the  southern  gate  of  Ayodhya.  Then  Dasaratha 
cried  down  from  a  palace  balcony  behind  them — Stop!  Stay! 

“Go  faster,”  said  Rama.  “Later  say  you  did  not  hear  him.” 

Too  late,  Dasaratha  rushed  from  the  palace.  Too  late  he 
repented.  He  covered  his  face  with  his  hands;  he  could  not 
endure  the  sight  of  that  fleeing  chariot.  Stop  them! 

Sumantra  told  his  horses,  in  a  voice  not  loud,  “Go  on,  run, 
go  on.” 

The  gate  guards  heard  the  King.  Sumantra  came  too  fast 
at  them;  there  was  no  time  to  close  the  gate  but  they  swiftly 
formed  ranks  to  block  the  car. 

Sumantra  bent  over  and  took  up  a  war-whip,  a  whip  for 
striking  men  not  horses.  “Hang  on,  Sita!”  His  white  hair 
streamed  out  straight  back  from  his  head  in  the  wind  of 
flight.  Again  Sumantra  drove  with  his  warrior  behind  him, 
alone  against  a  hostile  army,  ready  to  fight  anyone.  Sumantra 
was  never  easy  to  stop.  The  red  horses  never  slowed,  never 
broke  stride.  There  came  the  gate,  the  hooves  and  wheels 
thundered,  the  gateway  rattled  like  dice. 

Sumantra  flailed  his  whip  to  this  side  and  that.  He  hit  back 
the  Kosalas  from  the  street,  then  with  blows  and  lashes,  hold¬ 
ing  his  breath  in  anger  he  struck  down  forty  rows  of  guards, 


The  Two  Wishes 


69 


and  in  terrible  confusion  broke  free  through  the  gate.  The 
chariot  dashed  away  from  Fair  Ayodhya  over  the  narrow  Ko- 
sala  road  going  south  in  the  evening. 

Wind-driven  black  clouds  swept  the  vault  of  heaven  like 
ocean  waves  and  covered  the  sky.  Along  the  road  the  tall 
trees  sounded  in  the  wind,  and  in  the  trees  the  still  birds  did 
not  fly  to  seek  their  food,  but  sang  piteously  begging  some 
help  against  disaster. 

Suddenly  the  rapid  raging  river  Tamasa  threw  her  dark 
waves  across  the  road  to  forbid  Sumantra.  By  the  riverside 
the  charioteer  uncoupled  the  tired  horses,  and  when  they  had 
rolled  in  the  dust  he  bathed  them  and  made  them  drink.  He 
fed  them  grass  while  Lakshmana  built  a  fire  in  the  high  wind, 
and  while  the  many  people  following  from  Ayodhya  drew 
near  in  the  night. 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees 


It  is  not  strange  to  me  nor  wonderful  that 
Indra  should  downpour  rain,  or  the  thousand- 
rayed  Sun  banish  darkness  from  heaven,  or  the 
Moon  bathe  the  clear  Night  in  his  rays,  or  that 
a  good  friend  like  you  should  bring  me  delight, 
or  that  whatever  is  graceful  should  be  harbored 
within  you. 


In  the  windy  night  the  old  men  of  Ayodhya  first  arrived 
where  Rama  was  and  said,  “We  so  commanded  the  dark  Ta- 
masa  River  and  she  obeyed  us.  Like  her,  we  throw  ourselves 
at  your  feet.  Friend  Rama,  we  beg  you  to  return.  We  put 
down  in  the  dust  our  shaking  heads,  our  hair  white  as 
cranes.” 

Rama  replied,  “You  are  old  in  years  and  honored  in  wis¬ 
dom,  and  the  merits  of  your  good  deeds  are  great.  But  you 
must  take  all  this  water  away  from  my  path.  I  uphold  the 
King’s  word,  and  you  cannot  use  the  streams  of  Earth  against 
Earth’s  own  Lord.” 

“Oh  Rama,  we  told  the  fleet  horses  not  to  go  on.  They 
have  ears  and  know  our  prayer.”  The  old  men  reached  out 
and  touched  Rama,  and  gazed  at  him  in  the  firelight,  drink¬ 
ing  him  in  with  their  sight.  “In  all  justice  you  must  be  carried 
into  Ayodhya  and  not  away  from  her." 

“What  cause  for  sorrow  here?”  asked  Rama.  “Bharata  will 
be  a  strong  and  gentle  King.  You  will  do  me  good  if  you  re¬ 
turn  and  cheer  my  father.” 

The  old  men  said,  “Oh  Rama,  look  back,  see  the  fires  that 
walk  following  you  on  the  shoulders  of  loyal  Kosala  men,  see 
by  their  glare  those  umbrellas  still  open,  tossed  by  the  wind, 
that  will  give  you  shade  when  it  is  day  once  more.” 

70 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees 


71 


Rama  sighed  and  said  no  more  to  them.  He  went  to 
Lakshmana  and  said,  “With  you  by  my  side  near  me  I  am 
easy  about  Sita’s  protection.  My  brother,  tonight  I  will  fast 
and  drink  only  water.  From  now  on,  do  not  let  your  mind 
dwell  long  on  our  past  happiness.” 

Lakshmana  made  a  bed  of  branches  and  leaves,  and  there 
Rama  and  Sita  slept  that  night.  Lakshmana  and  Sumantra  sat 
by  Tamasa’s  shore  among  the  trees  growing  from  the  water, 
talking  softly  together  about  Rama  until  just  before  the  first 
hint  of  dawn. 

Then  Rama  in  his  sleep  felt  the  air  change,  he  felt  Night 
depart  and  awoke.  He  saw  the  Kosalas  who  had  followed  him 
still  asleep  all  around.  He  quietly  awakened  Sita  and  told 
Sumantra,  “I  must  deliver  these  men  from  their  own  misfor¬ 
tune.  If  we  can  escape  they  will  have  to  go  home  where  they 
will  recover,  I  cannot  drag  them  after  me  into  my  exile." 

Sumantra  went  to  his  chariot  and  without  a  sound  pulled 
it  by  hand  out  from  the  sleepers.  By  a  small  noise  he  sum¬ 
moned  the  four  horses  and  hamessed  them.  He  drove  his 
three  passengers  down  the  midstream  of  the  river,  and  after 
awhile  let  them  out  across  the  river  to  wait  near  a  forest 
track,  and  filled  the  chariot  with  stones.  Then  returning 
through  the  water  to  the  Tamasa  camp  he  drove  ashore  right 
near  where  he  had  entered  the  river  and  went  back  toward 
Ayodhya.  And  finally  as  he  went,  he  threw  out  the  stones  one 
by  one,  and  the  lightened  chariot  gradually  left  no  path  on 
the  hard  earth. 

Then  he  told  the  horses,  “Run.”  There  was  not  one  little 
branch  broken  where  he  passed;  those  red  horses  had  years 
before  pulled  a  flying  chariot  through  the  air,  and  leaving  no 
hoof-marks  was  not  difficult  for  them.  They  stined  no  fallen 
leaf  and  made  no  sound,  and  swiftly  Sumantra  circled  back 
through  the  forest,  again  crossed  Tamasa,  and  met  Rama  be¬ 
fore  any  Kosala  had  awakened. 

For  a  moment  Sumantra  faced  the  chariot  north  to  invoke 
good  fortune  and  a  successful  journey.  And  Rama  stood  fac¬ 
ing  Ayodhya  and  touching  his  hands  together  he  said,  “Best 
of  cities,  I  will  see  you  again,  the  gods  guard  you  well.” 

Sumantra  said,  “Quickly  get  on.”  They  drove  away  from 
Fair  Ayodhya  to  the  lands  of  the  southwest.  The  forest  track 
soon  joined  the  south  road.  The  countryside  of  Kosala 
stretched  out  away  in  the  distance;  far  as  the  eye  could  see 
the  round  trees  rose  from  the  flat  plains.  All  day  they  rode 
through  the  kingdom  of  Kosala  stopping  only  for  noonday 


72 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


prayers.  The  villages  and  the  fields  grew  fewer  and  farther 
between,  then  in  the  late  afternoon  there  were  no  more  set¬ 
tlements.  They  saw  no  more  white  cattle  and  no  houses  or 
ponds — only  the  forest  closing  in  on  them.  Their  road  began 
to  fail.  It  turned  into  a  cowpath  and  then  vanished.  They 
were  crossing  the  southern  boundary  of  Kosala.  At  dusk 
Sumantra  stopped  the  chariot  by  the  Ganga  River  flowing 
from  heaven  through  Shiva’s  hair;  Rama  got  down  with  the 
others,  and  they  walked  a  little  way  and  stood  under  a  huge 
ancient  spreading  nut  tree. 


That  tree  marked  the  Kingdom  of  the  Far  Forest  and  the 
realm  of  Guha  the  Hunter  King.  Rama  and  Sita,  Lakshmana 
and  Sumantra  all  bathed  in  the  beautiful  Ganges,  where  bath¬ 
ing  a  man  may  wash  off  the  sins  from  his  heart  as  he  takes 
the  dirt  from  his  skin,  and  both  come  out  clean. 

Then  as  they  stood  in  wet  clothes  under  the  trees  of  the 
Secret  Forest,  they  heard  whistles  from  the  wood  and  looked 
in  their  direction.  They  saw  nothing  and  when  they  looked 
back  they  saw  Guha  come  to  welcome  them. 

Guha  was  a  little  thin  brown  man,  short,  with  soft  brown 
eyes,  with  a  beard  of  a  few  hairs  and  a  pure  white  grin.  He 
was  painted  and  tattooed  with  red  and  blue  lines  and  wore  a 
short  black  bearskin  skirt  for  his  only  clothes.  He  had  on  a 
necklace  of  tiger  teeth  and  a  belt  of  deer  hooves  laced  on  a 
thong,  musical  anklets  of  claws  and  pieces  of  ivory  and  black 
wood  tied  together,  bone  earrings,  armbands  of  braided  grass 
and  bright  spotted  beans  and  stone  beads  cut  with  corners.  In 
his  curly  hair  were  feathers,  red  and  yellow  and  green  and 
white  and  black.  Hung  from  his  belt  were  a  magic  rattle  of 
bone  rings  and  shells,  a  horn  of  honey,  a  bird  noose  of  vine 
and  a  worn  bamboo  case  that  held  tiny  poisoned  wooden 
darts.  He  was  Rama’s  friend. 

Guha  ran  to  Rama,  and  Rama  embraced  him  in  a  hug  hard 
enough  to  crush  a  bear,  and  the  savage  King  pounded 
Rama’s  back  with  friendly  stunning  blows,  and  laughed  like  a 
child. 

“Oh  Rama,  Rama!  Now  you  are  an  outcast  like  me!” 

“You!  You  look  more  outlandish  than  I  remembered  you!” 
laughed  Rama.  Guha  whistled  and  hunter-men  came  out  of 
the  trees  bearing  wooden  trays  of  hot  steaming  food. 

“Eat!”  cried  Guha.  He  threw  himself  on  Lakshmana  and 
thumped  Sumantra.  He  smiled  at  Sita  and  spread  down  a 


Lord  o )  the  Wild  Trees 


73 


blanket  for  her  and  his  men  put  down  the  food  and  drink. 
“Princess,”  he  said,  “I  know  your  mother  well  and  I  have 
known  Rama  since  he  was  a  boy.” 

“How  glad  I  am  to  find  a  friend  at  last,”  said  Sita.  She 
smiled.  “We  meet  you  here!” 

“That  smile  is  all  my  payment,"  said  Guha.  “Queen,  take 
food.  Tell  me  what  I  can  give  you.  Listen — demons  fear  me, 
men  fear  me,  dear  friends  dare  not  come  near  me  when  I  am 
out  of  sorts,  and  here  on  my  own  ground,  in  my  own  forest  I 
can  defeat  any  army  ever  created.” 

Sita  said,  “Oh  Guha,  we  have  had  such  a  bad  time!" 

“Eat!  Eat!  Today  is  over.  In  Ayodhya  men  are  driven  rav¬ 
ing  mad  by  too  many  laws  and  rules.  Freedom  for  me!  I  am 
a  man  of  action,  I  heard  what  happened  and  never  mind.” 

“How  did  you  meet  Rama  before  today?” 

“A  chase  led  me  once  to  Ayodhya,  and  there  I  met  Rama 
and  Lakshmana,  and  though  they  were  city  boys  I  cared  for 
their  friendship.  While  they  grew  into  men  I  met  them  again 
many  times  among  the  trees  outside  the  city.  I  taught  them 
forest  lore  and  hunting.  Lakshmana  learned  well.”  Guha 
smiled.  “But  Rama  I  could  never  teach  to  hunt.” 

Now  the  silent  dark  men  of  the  greenwood  came  and  made 
a  fire  under  the  great  nut  tree.  They  all  sat  around  it  and  ate 
from  banana  leaves  and  drank  from  horns.  There  was  meat 
and  fish  and  sugar-bread,  small  sweet  wild  fruit  and  eggs  and 
strong  blossom-wines.  Rama  had  fasted  one  night  looking  for¬ 
ward  to  happiness;  he  had  fasted  a  second  night  looking  back 
on  a  sad  day.  Now  he  ate  thinking  of  nothing;  he  breathed  in 
the  clean  air  and  the  firelight  lit  up  his  face  with  golden  light. 

When  they  finished  Guha  put  a  necklace  of  pink  seashells 
over  Sita’s  head.  “I  adopt  you  into  my  people,”  he  said.  “You 
are  in  my  family,  for  your  heart  is  free.” 

Sita  laid  her  head  on  Rama’s  shoulder.  One  of  Guha’s  men 
said  something  in  the  whistling  bird-language,  and  Rama  car¬ 
ried  her  to  the  bed  they  had  made  for  him.  Sumantra  relaxed 
and  lay  on  his  back  looking  up  at  all  the  stars  of  heaven 
through  the  trees;  then  he  was  asleep  and  Guha’s  people  cov¬ 
ered  him  with  many  thin  blankets. 

Guha  lit  up  a  fat  cigar  of  sandalwood  dust  and  nutmeg 
powder  all  rolled  in  long  leaves  and  held  together  with  goat 
butter.  He  leaned  back  against  the  tree  and  puffed  smoke  and 
looked  at  Lakshmana.  Guha  said,  “Bows  in  hand  we  will 
watch  over  them  through  the  dark  night  by  Ganga.  Oh  child, 
we  have  made  a  soft  bed  for  you  also,  lie  down  and  rest.  I 


74  THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 

am  used  to  being  awake  at  all  hours  but  you  deserve  com¬ 
fort.” 

Lakshmana  closed  his  eyes  and  crunched  a  candied  apple 
in  his  teeth.  “King  of  the  Wilderness,  with  Rama  asleep  on 
the  ground  and  in  misfortune  what  use  would  be  my  com¬ 
fort?”  He  sighed.  “I  remember  when  you  would  come  near  to 
Ayodhya  in  happy  days. . . .” 

“Then  I  challenge  you  to  a  drinking  contest,”  said  Guha. 

Lakshmana  threw  his  bark  back  off  his  shoulder.  “I  ac¬ 
cept.”  Lakshmana  chose  two  horns  and  tried  to  make  sure 
that  each  held  the  same  amount.  They  seemed  to,  and  he 
filled  them  with  wine. 

Guha  carefully  lined  up  five  full  wine  jugs  in  a  row  and 
took  one  horn  from  Lakshmana.  His  men  left  more  wood  for 
the  fire  and  retired  into  the  shadows  of  the  night  as  if  into 
nowhere.  “Prince,  do  not  worry  over  the  future,”  said  Guha, 
“or  try  to  outguess  fortune,  for  it  is  hard  enough  to  know 
what  one  is  doing  at  the  moment  right  now.  I  will  tell  you  a 
story.” 


Listen,  Lakshmana — 

A  busybody  cannot  sleep  in  peace  if  he  knows  of  one  man 
free  to  do  as  he  will;  he  cannot  tolerate  someone  who  likes  to 
live  alone,  in  his  own  way.  Did  you  never  wonder  how  I  got 
to  Ayodhya,  the  one  time  I’ve'  ever  been  inside  a  city? 

Your  father’s  priest  Vasishtha  decided  to  reform  me  and 
my  people.  He  sent  some  brahmanas  over  the  border  into  my 
forest,  and  by  Ganga  they  set  up  a  stone  image  of  Shiva,  un¬ 
der  the  branches  of  this  very  nut  tree  twenty  years  ago. 

Many  men  are  all  talk  and  no  deeds,  all  words  and  no  wis¬ 
dom,  and  what  they  don’t  know  of  they  think  does  not  exist. 
Those  pious  brahmanas  lived  in  fancy  tents  not  far  from 
here.  Morning  and  evening  they  brought  flowers  and  offered 
food  to  that  stone  Shiva  and  praised  him.  I  met  them  and 
gave  them  a  good  welcome  and  some  little  presents  of  gold 
birds  and  nine-headed  snakes  of  lead.  But  I  told  them — I 
•worship  only  God,  and  God  is  a  tree.  And  every  night  when  I 
returned  from  hunting  I  would  go  and  give  that  statue  a  good 
kick. 

Then  the  rains  came.  The  forest  floor  was  an  ocean  of 
mud,  and  Ganga  rose  in  flood  and  forced  those  brahmanas 
away  to  high  ground.  They  left  Shiva  all  alone  half  under¬ 
water  for  days  at  a  time.  Yet  every  night,  even  when  I  had  to 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees 


75 


wade  over  logs,  when  I  was  exhausted,  when  I  was  hungry  or 
sick,  every  night  I  went  happily  up  to  that  senseless  block  of 
stone  and  kicked  it. 

Shortly  after  the  rains,  one  night  when  I  was  going  home 
very  late  I  arrived  here  at  the  time  of  the  animals’  drinking. 
A  lean  wolf-pack  greeted  me.  Their  shiny  eyes  were  hungry, 
the  rains  had  starved  them.  My  arrows  were  all  gone.  I  had 
no  fire  to  frighten  them.  They  kept  me  from  the  statue,  but 
though  I  could  have  outrun  them  and  gone  home  I  climbed 
this  old  tree.  I  held  onto  a  limb  and  thought,  “One  way  or 
another,  before  this  night  is  over  I  must  kick  that  rock.” 

So  I  waited  in  the  tree  above  Shiva.  I  had  not  eaten  all 
day,  so  I  tried  to  eat  the  green  nuts  on  the  tree,  but  they  were 
so  bitter  I  could  not  even  swallow  one  bite  but  spit  it  out. 
That  annoyed  me  a  little  bit,  and  the  wolves  round  Shiva’s 
statue  snapped  up  at  me  with  sharp  white  teeth  trying  in  vain 
to  reach  me,  but  I  waited  for  my  chance  to  kick  Shiva. 

I  had  no  food,  there  was  no  place  to  sleep,  the  night  turned 
cold  and  the  dew  fell.  The  wolves  would  not  go,  and  I 
shivered  in  the  moonlight  so  hard  that  leaves  and  dewdrops 
and  bitter  green  nuts  fell  all  over  the  statue.  Finally  at  dawn 
the  wolves  ran  when  my  people  came  tracking  me,  but  the 
night  had  passed.  I  had  failed  to  greet  Shiva  as  he  deserved, 
and  I  was  so  passionately  angry  that  I  chased  the  brahmanas 
back  to  Ayodhya  where  they  hid  behind  Vasishtha’s  skirts. 

Dasaratha  met  me  there.  I  told  him,  “I  will  adore  only  the 
holy  trees!”  He  took  my  hand  and  made  me  a  King.  I  al¬ 
ready  ruled  this  whole  forest,  but  until  then  I  was  but  a  com¬ 
mon  man! 

When  I  got  back  here,  Lakshmana,  Shiva’s  image  was  gone 
somewhere  else  and  I  forgot  about  it.  I  went  on  hunting  and 
eating  and  drinking  until  one  afternoon  I  felt  ill.  A  little 
green  bird  sat  near  me  unafraid,  and  I  died  in  my  hut  after  a 
short  attack  of  fatal  fever. 

Yama’s  messengers  came  to  get  me,  four  ruffians  holding 
snarling  dogs  on  chains.  With  contempt  they  tore  my  soul 
from  my  dead  body,  bound  me  in  a  noose  and  started  south 
with  me  to  Yama’s  world,  all  done  in  an  instant.  I  could 
imagine  my  reception.  As  a  soul  I  was  no  bigger  than  a 
thumb,  but  still  I  struggled  violently.  But  that  death-noose 
could  not  slip  loose  even  in  a  dream. 

Then  as  we  came  round  a  narrow  turn  in  the  forest  path,  a 
small  mean-looking  dwarf  stood  in  the  way.  He  fixed  his 
round  brown  eyes  on  Yama’s  bullies.  He  snorted  and  said, 


76  THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 

“Unknot  that  noosel  Give  over  Guha’s  soul  to  me,  he  is  not 
to  die  yet.” 

The  death-spirits  laughed.  “He  is  already  dead!  Stand 
aside,  we  will  leave  you  now!” 

‘Try  it  and  I’ll  block  you.  I  am  Nandin  the  peaceful 
guardian  of  the  wild.  By  Shiva’s  order  release  him.” 

“This  is  his  death,  you  little  runt!” 

“Liars,”  said  Nandin.  “You  are  but  thieves,  it  is  not  time 
for  him  to  die.” 

“What  did  you  call  us?” 

“Have  a  kindness  to  the  small  and  the  weak,”  said  Nandin. 
“I  beg  you  to  let  him  go — ” 

Well,  that  did  it.  Yama’s  guards  released  their  dogs  and  ad¬ 
vanced  on  Nandin.  I  saw  that  surly  little  animal  scatter  the 
dogs  and  give  the  first  death-guard  a  stupendous  blow  that 
broke  his  head  in.  There  was  a  great  commotion  but  I  fell 
face  down  into  a  pile  of  old  leaves  and  could  see  nothing 
more. 

“Torment  a  poor  defenseless  animal  will  you?”  I  heard 
bones  breaking  and  dogs  yelping  and  running  feet  and  chains 
coming  apart.  Then  Nandin  gently  picked  up  the  end  of  my 
noose  and  flew  with  me  to  the  high  Himalya. 

There  he  came  to  Earth  and  changed  into  his  true  form, 
into  a  sleek  white  humpy  bull.  He  serenely  carried  me  hanging 
still  bound  from  his  soft  wet  mouth.  We  entered  a  flimsy  cot¬ 
tage.  Nandin’s  breath  smelled  of  sweet  grass  in  the  sun.  Nan¬ 
din  stopped  and  I  saw  Shiva  sitting  tall  and  fair,  his  two  eyes 
like  honey  looking  in  my  soul,  his  third  eye  closed  on  his 
brow,  his  hair  unkempt  and  wild,  wearing  an  old  worn  deer¬ 
skin  and  rags,  and  looking  at  me  and  looking,  with  Parvati 
the  mountain’s  daughter  on  his  lap. 

Then  Nandin  the  bull  and  Shiva  both  faced  the  door.  In  a 
moment  a  quiet  green  man  in  a  red  robe  entered  and  stood 
turning  his  head  to  see  this  way  and  that  and  looked  at  us 
with  his  dark  unmoving  eyes. 

Yama  joined  his  hands  with  fingers  touching  and  said  to 
the  great  Lord  Shiva,  “In  my  scribe’s  dusty  record  book  this 
Guha  is  a  killer  charged  with  crimes.  He  has  sinned;  his  life 
has  been  shortened;  his  time  is  up;  his  days  are  over.  Why 
did  you  take  his  soul  away  from  me,  and  leave  us  with  an 
empty  place  in  Hell?” 

The  wind  began  to  blow  through  Yama’s  long  black  hair. 
Shiva  said,  “Death  Lord,  Guha  was  the  one  person  faithful  in 
saluting  me  when  I  came  to  his  forest.  Before  he  died  he 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees 


77 


once  fasted  and  kept  sleepless  watch  for  my  sake  in  a  tree  all 
night,  and  offered  me  food  he  needed  for  himself,  and  show¬ 
ered  me  with  water,  and  gave  me  ornaments  of  leaves.  And 
he  took  such  rage  against  men  pretending  to  love  me  that  he 
threatened  their  lives  and  drove  them  out.  Therefore,  Oh 
Yama,  I  overreach  you,  his  soul  is  mine  and  not  yours  to 
take.” 


“Yama  smiled  and  left  us  without  a  word,”  continued 
Guha.  “Nandin  took  my  soul  back  to  my  body  and  I  re¬ 
turned  to  life.  So  when  even  the  Court  of  Death  cannot  tell 
right  from  wrong,  it  is  surely  very  hard  for  us  to  judge 
things.” 

Lakshmana  answered,  “But  certainly  our  father  did 
wrong.” 

“Who  told  you  that?  This  banishment  will  kill  your  father; 
it  is  simply  time  for  him  to  die.” 

“It  is  the  fault  of  those  promises.” 

“No,”  said  Guha,  “those  wishes  are  but  the  blind  instru¬ 
ments  of  Fate.  King  Dasaratha  was  not  such  a  foolish  man. 
Once  before,  in  my  presence  Kaikeyi  asked  him  for  one  of 
those  wishes.” 

“What  did  he  say?  What  did  he  do?” 

“That  was  years  ago,  before  you  were  born,”  said  Guha. 
'The  Ayodhya  King  came  on  a  hunting  trip,  and  Kaikeyi  was 
with  him,  and  he  stopped  to  see  me  and  ask  permission  to  use 
my  forest.” 


Listen,  Prince — 

I  gave  him  the  freedom  of  my  wood,  and  that  evening  I 
sat  with  Dasaratha  in  his  camp  near  by  my  house,  and  with 
us  were  Sumantra  the  charioteer  and  Queen  Kaikeyi.  The 
forest  was  noisy.  The  day-animals  were  speaking  before  they 
slept,  the  night-prowlers  were  talking  and  arising,  and  a  full 
Moon  beamed  down  on  us.  We  were  surrounded  by 
screeching  and  singing  and  howls  of  warning. 

Your  father  knew  the  animal  tongues.  Suddenly  a  stag 
barked  loudly,  another  stag  answered,  the  first  one  called 
again,  and  your  father  was  overcome  with  laughter.  Kaikeyi 
was  very  curious  and  asked,  “Majesty,  what  are  you  laughing 
at?” 

“It  would  not  be  funny  in  translation,”  laughed  Dasaratha. 


78 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


“You  can  tell  me,”  Kaikeyi  pleaded.  “If  you  love  me  what 
secrets  are  between  us?” 

“There  must  be  this  one,  for  you  cannot  understand  the 
animal  languages.” 

She  said,  “Teach  me.” 

But  Sumantra  replied,  “The  King  cannot.  If  he  reveals 
even  half  a  word  he  will  die.  That  is  the  agreement,  the 
price  of  his  friend  Jatayu  the  Vulture  King,  who  rules  Dan- 
daka  Forest  and  who  taught  him  this  speech.” 

So  Kaikeyi  was  still  and  said  no  more  right  then.  Awhile 
later  she  again  asked  for  that  secret  learning  and  was  again 
refused.  And  after  another  while  in  passing  she  mentioned 
her  two  wishes  but  never  pursued  the  subject,  and  I  would 
have  said  all  was  forgotten  when  the  King  and  Queen  retired 
to  sleep. 

No  one  knows  what  she  said  to  him  in  bed  that  night, 
but  in  the  morning  Dasaratha  came  from  his  tent  looking  de¬ 
plorable,  and  walked  by  me  in  sad  distress  saying  to  himself, 
“All  is  lost,  all  is  lost. . . . 

He  said  that  over  and  over.  He  ordered  his  own  funeral 
pyre  to  be  built.  He  planned  that  day  to  tell  Kaikeyi  animal 
speech  while  sitting  on  the  pyre.  By  the  terms  of  his  contract 
as  Jatayu’s  student  his  heart  would  then  burst,  and  we  were 
to  burn  his  body. 

I  didn’t  know  what  to  do.  I  had  not  yet  died  myself  and  so 
had  little  wisdom.  I  refused  to  help  make  the  pyre,  but 
Sumantra  did  it  anyway.  Kaikeyi  eagerly  took  her  seat  near 
that  stack  of  wood  and  I  saw  Dasaratha  come  out  of  his  tent 
in  white  funeral  clothes  and  walk  slowly  toward  her. 

But  he  had  to  pass  my  house  and  my  yard  where  I  kept 
many  wild  hens  and  a  red  and  green  and  gold  bantam  fight¬ 
ing  rooster,  and  also  several  ewes  with  an  old  short-tempered 
ram.  And  as  Dasaratha  went  by  the  ram  said  to  my  rooster, 
“How  can  this  pitiful  bungler  be  called  King  of  the  World?” 
And  the  rooster  replied,  “Why,  if  I  even  thought  of  spoiling 
my  hens  like  he  does  that  woman  I’d  be  out  of  business  here 
in  the  flash  of  an  eye,  teacher’s  curse  or  not!” 


“When  your  father  heard  that,”  said  Guha,  “he  went  back 
to  his  tent  shaking  his  head,  biting  his  tongue  and  smiling  to 
himself.  He  got  dressed  right  and  told  me  what  my  animals 
had  said.  He  refused  Kaikeyi  and  she  was  glad  of  it.  Do  you 
think  for  any  reason  that  he  has  changed  now,  other  than  his 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees 


79 


approaching  death?  Lakshmana,  if  we  live  long  enough,  it  is 
Time  that  wears  out  our  bodies.  Old  men  grow  tired  at  last, 
their  hearts  remember  the  past  more  than  the  present.  Death 
comes  nearer,  then  they  feel  they  must  rest;  they  are  about  to 
fall  asleep  after  a  hard  day.  Death  stands  behind  a  man’s 
shoulder,  he  touches  him  and  there  is  no  more  will  to  live, 
and  the  man  welcomes  him.  Try  what  he  will,  Lakshmana, 
through  no  fault  of  his  own  your  father’s  life  fails  at  last." 

Lakshmana  said,  “But  then  the  King  asks  Rama  to  do 
what  will  kill  him." 

“I  think  so.  He  sees  what  he  does  but  does  not  care.” 

“Why  does  Rama  go  along  with  this?” 

Guha  said,  “I  later  learned  bird  and  animal  talk  for  my¬ 
self,  and  listening  to  them  I  have  heard  that  once  the  Ocean 
talked  with  his  beloved  rivers.  They  described  for  him  the 
land  and  what  grew  there.  Big  strong  trees  he  had  seen,  car¬ 
ried  down  to  him  on  the  flood  waters.  But  he  had  never 
glimpsed  a  bending  cane  nor  seen  a  blade  of  grass.  No  river 
had  ever  washed  down  such  a  yielding  plant  to  him,  not  since 
the  world  began.” 

Guha’s  winejars  were  all  empty,  and  Lakshmana’s  eyes 
were  clear  and  bright  as  his  own.  The  drinking  contest  was  a 
draw.  The  sky  started  to  get  light.  It  was  near  sunrise,  the 
glorious  Sun  was  burning  hot  low  behind  the  eastern  hills, 
and  day  was  breaking,  and  our  blessed  mother  Night  was  de¬ 
parting. 

Rama  woke.  Sita  slept  with  her  arm  across  his  chest  and 
he  gently  moved  it  aside.  He  sat  up  and  stretched.  He  looked 
around  at  the  forest  and  up  at  the  sky,  with  eyes  like  some¬ 
one  newborn,  unafraid  and  accepting. 

Rama  smiled;  he  stroked  Sita’s  hair  and  woke  her.  He 
walked  over  to  Guha  and  said,  “Hunter  Chief,  we  will  cross 
Ganga  fast  washing  to  the  sea,  my  friend." 

Sumantra  came  and  said,  “I’ll  leave  the  chariot  and  come 
with  you,  and  I  will  carry  you  home  after  the  fourteen  years. 
All  that  time  will  be  an  instant  with  you  or  a  hundred  gener¬ 
ations  if  we  are  separated." 

Rama  touched  his  right  hand  lightly  on  Sumantra’s  shoul¬ 
der.  ‘Turn  back  to  Dasaratha,  we  will  continue  on  walking.” 

“Shall  I  go  back  with  an  empty  chariot  having  lost  a  life 
that  was  in  my  keeping,  as  though  driving  alone  away  from  a 
battlefield,  my  warrior  killed  and  fallen?  What  can  I  say 
when  people  ask  me  of  you?  Rama,  as  a  stingy  man  cannot 


80 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


enter  heaven  with  no  good  deeds  beside  him,  so  I  cannot  en¬ 
ter  Fair  Ayodhya  alonel” 

“Go,”  said  Rama,  “so  that  Kaikeyi  will  believe  that  I  am 
in  the  forest  and  not  mistrust  our  father.  And  Life  willing 
...  if  you  and  I  still  live  we  will  meet  again  someday.” 

Sumantra  said,  “You  must  never  cast  aside  a  faithful  ser¬ 
vant  who  lives  by  your  way  and  serves  you  well." 

Rama  said,  “Charioteer,  do  not  be  sad,  for  pain  and 
pleasure  must  come  in  their  turns  to  all  men  and  mortal  gods. 
Cheer  my  father.  Guard  him  and  keep  him.  He  is  very  old, 
he  must  be  protected  from  harm  like  a  child.  Tell  him — 
Lakshmana  and  Rama  and  Sit  a  are  well.  They  have  no  grief. 
After  these  fourteen  short  years  you  will  soon  see  them  re¬ 
turn,  and  may  that  time  quickly  pass  for  you  as  if  in  sleep.” 


Then  as  hermits  do,  Rama  and  Lakshmana  matted  their 
hair  up  over  their  heads  with  the  sticky  paste  made  from  ban¬ 
yan  bark.  Guha  gave  both  of  them  a  deerskin,  and  to  Sita  he 
gave  a  fine  feather  cloak  all  of  green  and  gold.  Guha’s  men 
brought  out  from  hiding  a  raft  of  logs  with  seats  of  fresh-bro¬ 
ken  leafy  roseapple  boughs,  and  took  the  three  across  Ganga. 
In  midstream  Sita  made  a  silent  prayer  to  the  beautiful  River 
Queen.  “Ganga,  protect  my  Rama.  Beautiful  bride  of  the  Sea, 
let  him  return  safely  to  his  own  Ayodhya.  Let  it  be  so,  and  I 
will  bow  to  you.  I  will  sing  songs  in  the  holy  shrines  along 
your  river  beaches. . . .” 

Then  they  were  all  alone  in  the  forest,  far  away  from  the 
smiling  fields  and  gardens  of  men.  There  they  felt  the  sadness 
of  no  one  being  near  to  care  what  happened  to  them.  They 
walked  in  single  file.  First  went  Lakshmana  holding  his  bow 
and  carrying  their  fire  and  few  possessions.  Two  quivers  were 
on  his  back  and  he  kept  watch  for  animals  and  pitfalls  and 
trod  down  the  thorns  and  sharp  grass.  Sita  followed  him  and 
Rama  came  last,  looking  down,  his  bow  not  even  strung,  just 
a  few  arrows  tied  carelessly  at  his  belt  and  in  his  mind  the 
mantras  that  could  make  those  arrows  countless. 

They  went  still  to  the  south,  walking  all  day  along  the  river 
Ganga.  From  inexperience  of  the  forest  they  could  not  go 
fast  nor  get  very  far  that  day.  They  wasted  their  strength  in 
many  ways.  When  evening  caught  them  Lakshmana  shot  a 
wild  sow  and  cooked  her,  and  they  could  eat  very  little. 

That  night  Rama  said,  “Lakshmana,  you’ve  got  to  go  back 
in  the  morning  or  else  Kaikeyi  will  poison  our  mothers.  Even 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees 


81 


Kausalya's  pet  parrot  would  try  his  best  to  defend  her  and 
bite  her  enemies,  but  I’m  of  less  use  to  her  than  a  gaudy  bird. 
I  am  sent  away  just  when  her  pains  of  motherhood  should  be 
rewarded,  and  my  mother  of  slender  fortune  must  lie  weeping 
in  the  dust.” 

‘‘Forget  it,”  said  Lakshmana.  “You’re  tired,  go  to  sleep 
with  Sita.  Don’t  tell  me  about  inevitable  things  that  displease 

M 

016. 

“You  are  right,  despair  is  a  bad  enemy,”  said  Rama. 
“Alone  or  with  me,  Lakshmana,  in  our  exile  always  guard 
Sita.” 

“I’ll  stay  with  you  right  through  the  gates  of  blazing  Hell 
as  long  as  you  want  me!” 

Rama  and  Sita  fell  asleep,  a  lion  couple  on  a  desolate  sum¬ 
mit.  Lakshmana  stood  guard  at  that  lone  place  in  the  wide 
forest.  His  blue  eyes  looked  into  the  black  night.  Truly,  he 
stood  guard  naturally;  he  had  no  fear  and  no  violence  in  his 
heart;  he  had  no  envy  and  once  he  had  sworn  by  Dharma  he 
obeyed  Rama.  He  never  doubted  Rama  was  right,  or  that  he 
was  right  to  obey  him. 

The  next  morning  was  sunny.  They  followed  an  uneven 
trail  and  soon  they  could  hear  the  meeting  of  the  waters  of 
Ganga  and  the  Yamuna  river  rushing  together.  On  the  land 
between  the  rivers  there  was  a  clearing  surrounded  by  deep 
green  banyan  trees  with  red  fruit  like  heaps  of  emeralds 
mixed  with  rubies.  Set  in  the  clearing  was  a  hermitage,  the 
home  of  the  saint  Bharadwaja. 

They  entered  and  bowed  to  that  old  ascetic  sitting  on  the 
grass,  and  Bharadwaja  said,  “I  have  heard.  I  see  you  after 
you  have  walked  long.  My  place  here  is  yours,  stay  close  by 
me  and  I  will  care  for  you.” 

Bharadwaja,  a  great  man,  washed  Rama’s  feet,  and  Rama 
said,  “We  cannot  stay  so  close  to  Ayodhya,  but  tell  us  some¬ 
where  good  to  live.” 

Bharadwaja  slaughtered  a  bull  for  their  dinner.  When  they 
had  eaten  he  said,  “Go  to  the  hill  Chitrakuta  ten  ear-shots 
distant  from  here.  Chitrakuta’s  peaks  are  clear  and  bright- 
colored.  There  deep  rivers  run,  there  live  birds  fair  to  view. 
From  there  many  saints  with  hair  white  as  skulls  have  gone 
to  heaven,  but  now  that  hill  is  deserted  by  men.” 

In  the  morning  Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana  crossed  the 
Yamuna  studded  with  islands.  First  going  south  a  way,  they 
then  turned  and  went  west  along  a  little  stream  flowing 
toward  them. 


82 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Two  days  later  they  reached  Chitrakuta  Hill,  standing 
alone  and  towering  above  them,  engarlanded  by  his  own 
flowering  woods  thick  with  flowers  of  red  and  gold  and  blue 
and  white  and  every  color.  He  had  crags  and  ridges,  round 
stones  and  giant  boulders.  Through  his  stone  ran  veins  of 
black  and  yellow  and  silver-colored  ore.  He  was  alive  with 
singing  birds.  He  was  like  the  garden  of  the  gods,  like  the 
Gandharva  groves  in  the  Himalya.  Clear  rivers  and  little 
streams  flowed  down  from  him  like  graceful  braids;  they  ran 
over  glittering  sands  and  dashed  their  loud-laughing  waves 
against  blue  rocks  of  lapis.  The  forest  floor  by  Chitrakuta  was 
wholly  covered  with  flowers,  the  paths  were  overarched  by 
joyful  blossoms  and  by  branches  bending  low  with  ripe  fruit, 
and  no  man  there  to  taste  them. 

It  was  all-colored  spring  in  the  forest.  The  bees  hung  their 
huge  honeycombs  on  the  high  limbs.  The  forest  trail  where 
Rama  walked  seemed  to  be  the  eternal  peaceful  pathway  of 
the  saints.  The  fine  trees  up  the  steep-sloping  hillsides  above 
were  a  gathering  of  clouds,  the  wind  played  through  them 
and  they  bowed  and  waved  their  leaves,  catching  gleams  of 
the  sun  on  them  and  smiling  as  clouds  smile  by  their  light¬ 
nings.  The  trees  grew  way  up  the  hill;  they  crowned  the 
heights. 

The  round  chakravaka  birds  who  cry  plaintively  in  the 
night  if  separated  bobbed  on  the  water  in  the  river  ponds  and 
swam  in  mated  pairs.  Ducks  were  afloat  in  the  streams  and 
herons  stood  among  the  waving  lotus  flowers  near  the  banks. 
Blackbirds  sang  to  the  Sun.  Timid  deer  grazed  in  meadows, 
and  tigers  and  lions  who  had  never  seen  men  watched  the 
newcomers  through  the  leaves. 

Sita,  that  beautiful  young  woman  blameless  and  beloved, 
looked  on  the  perfumed  trees  and  shrubs  never  seen  before. 
Rama  told  her  their  names,  and  Lakshmana  brought  her 
flower-shedding  boughs  and  bushy  branches  of  tender  green 
and  rosy  leaves.  They  found  a  homesite  on  a  tableland  of 
rills,  above  a  gentle  rise  on  Chitrakuta,  overlooking  the  level 
plain  below. 

Near  a  cave,  by  a  clear  sweet  mountain  spring  Lakshmana 
built  on  pillars  a  strong  house  framed  with  long  bamboos  and 
floored  with  grass,  whose  walls  were  of  woven  wood  tightly 
lashed  by  cords  to  keep  out  wind,  whose  roof  was  leaves.  It 
had  one  door  and  many  rooms  and  fair  windows,  and  seeing 
it  Rama  said,  “Surely  we  shall  live  here.  How  did  you  learn 
to  build  so  well  and  do  all  this  for  us?” 


Lord  o}  the  Wild  Trees 


83 


As  soon  as  be  finished  the  house  Lakshmana  killed  a  black 
deer  and  dressed  it  and  threw  it  into  a  fire.  When  it  was  hot 
and  well-done  Rama  took  the  meat  and  set  it  out  along  with 
grass  and  water  for  an  offering  to  the  hill  spirits.  Then  a 
household  god  came  to  live  in  their  home  filling  it  with 
gladness  and  warding  away  wrong.  Only  then  did  Rama  and 
Sita  enter  the  house. 

Having  like  Rama  gone  a  long  way,  the  glorious  Sun  was 
sloping  down  and  ready  to  depart  from  the  sky.  The  light-giv¬ 
ing  Lord  of  the  Day  carried  away  with  him  all  Rama’s  red- 
dyed  grief  at  leaving  Fair  Ayodhya.  The  loving  embrace  of 
blue  evening  made  even  the  Sun  renounce  heaven  and  leave 
the  sky. 

It  was  twilight  and  the  trees  stood  motionless.  From  all 
sides  came  the  enveloping  dark  veils  of  our  Lady  Night,  for¬ 
getful  and  restful.  Rama  and  Sita  beside  him  were  asleep  in 
their  house,  they  had  no  farther  to  go.  The  sky  slowly  turned 
above  with  stars  for  her  bright  open  eyes,  and  the  splendid 
mild-beaming  Moon  rose  to  dispel  the  darkness  and  touch  all 
hearts  with  his  glad  rays,  and  Lakshmana  watched  the  mid¬ 
night  gradually  pass  away. 


When  the  Kosalas  awoke  at  daybreak  by  the  Tamasa  River 
they  found  that  Rama  had  eluded  them.  They  saw  that 
Sumantra’s  chariot  was  gone  and  made  a  great  outcry — 
Shame  to  sleep!  How  could  he?  Our  lives  are  over!  Here  is 
deadwood  ready  for  our  funeral  pyres.  Alas,  all  is  Destiny! 

Then  they  cheered  and  rejoiced.  They  had  found  Suman¬ 
tra’s  false  trail  and  they  stubbornly  followed  it,  tracking  and 
looking,  undaunted  and  obstinate,  talking  and  waving 
and  swinging  their  arms  in  the  air,  trying  to  listen  for  noises 
and  telling  each  other  to  be  quiet.  They  lost  the  fading 
wheelmarks  within  sight  of  Ayodhya.  They  entered  the  city. 
They  were  tired.  They  spoke  quietly — What  else?  How  can  we 
men  defeat  the  supernatural?  They  went  home  again. 

The  great  grey  elephants  of  Ayodhya  wept  as  wild  ele¬ 
phants  weep  when  one  of  their  Kings  is  captured  in  the 
forest.  The  Kosalas’  faces  were  washed  by  warm  tears, 
their  hearts  subdued.  Everyone  thought  only  of  Rama,  Rama 
they  had  lost.  That  night  the  lamps  and  lanterns  burned  dim, 
strange  foreign  stars  clustered  overhead  and  no  one  could 


84  THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 

sleep.  In  Fair  Ayodhya  the  warriors  ceaselessly  burned  and 
sighed. 


So  passed  the  day  after  Rama  was  banished,  and  the  night 
after  that,  and  the  next  day.  Then  that  evening  Sumantra 
drove  up  to  Ayodhya’s  walls  at  dusk,  his  face  muffled  by  the 
end  of  his  upper  robe.  He  drove  to  the  palace  and  walked 
still  masked  through  the  halls.  He  found  King  Dasaratha  ly¬ 
ing  in  Queen  Kausalya’s  unlit  bedroom,  fanned  by  Kausalya 
and  tended  by  Queen  Sumitra,  kneeling  beside  him. 

Sumitra  rose  and  looked  at  Sumantra.  Her  eyes  were  wet 
with  tears  and  she  said,  “The  King  is  blind.” 

“Lord!” 

Sumitra  said  in  a  low  voice,  “Charioteer,  listen.  As  your 
chariot  sped  away,  grief  struck  down  strong  men.  The  King 
went  to  the  city  gate  and  watched  unmoving  in  the  direction 
you  had  taken,  and  Kausalya  and  I  stood  on  either  side  to 
support  him.  Again  he  cried  for  you  to  wait,  if  but  for  an  in¬ 
stant.  He  rose  up  on  his  toes  to  see  the  distant  dust  of  your 
car,  and  when  that  dust  was  gone  from  sight  and  the  south 
road  was  empty  of  you  four,  he  fell  and  pressed  his  ear  to 
the  ground.  When  he  could  no  longer  hear  the  running  horses 
we  helped  him  to  rise  and  led  him  slowly  back.  The  people 
came  out  past  us  to  follow  you.  We  told  Dasaratha,  ‘Do  not 
follow  far  one  who  will  come  back  to  you,’  but  he  heard 
nothing.  He  repented  as  though  after  burning  his  hand  in  a 
fire.  He  looked  down  at  the  straight  wheel  tracks  as  we  fol¬ 
lowed  them  returning,  and  they  beginning  to  be  blown  away 
by  a  doleful  wind,  and  the  sky  darkening  and  all  light  failing. 
Stopping  again  and  again,  he  said — The  last  trace,  the  last 
trace  of  my  son  that  I  will  ever  see! 

“Sumantra,  his  tears  soaked  the  ground;  they  bathed  him 
as  though  he  were  already  dead  and  being  washed  before  the 
burning  of  his  body,  and  our  grieving  people  were  his  mourn¬ 
ers.  We  came  to  this  room,  he  stumbled  and  fell  onto  that 
bed,  and  though  he  was  not  asleep  he  lay  not  moving  for  half 
the  night  with  his  eyes  shut.  And  when  he  opened  them  at 
midnight  he  could  not  see.  He  blindly  reached  out  to  Queen 
Kausalya  and  when  she  took  his  hand  he  said,  ‘Mother  of 
Rama,  touch  me  for  my  sight  follows  your  son  and  does  not 
yet  return.  Oh  Rama,  they  are  very  happy  men  who  will  see 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees  83 

you  return  and  embrace  you.  They  are  not  men,  but  blessed 
gods.’ 

“So,  old  warrior,  long  have  I  stood  here  never  leaving  him, 
well  pleased  by  my  sweet  son  Lakshmana  whom  I  love,  in  my 
mind  praising  his  wisdom,  bearing  my  hope  shining  within 
myself  as  the  only  flame  of  warmth  left  in  all  Ayodhya.” 

Sumantra  advanced  to  the  King.  “I  am  Sumantra,  covered 
with  road-dust  and  hiding  my  face.  I  touch  together  my 
hands  and  salute  you,  Majesty.  Will  you  not  speak  to  Rama’s 
envoy?  Arise,  Kaikeyi  is  not  here!” 

Dasaratha  whispered,  “What  did  he  do?  Where  is  he?” 

Sumantra  uncovered  his  face.  He  answered,  “I  left  them  in 
the  solitude,  walking  alone  in  the  forest.  This  morning  he  sent 
me  back  to  you  and  crossed  Ganga.  He  bows  to  your  feet, 
for  you  are  his  father.  He  claims  to  be  well.  What  I  was  first 
going  to  say  about  Kaikeyi  on  sudden  impulse  I  have  forgot¬ 
ten.  I  stood  there  speechless,  and  so  Rama  went  away,  and  so 
Lakshmana  left  me  behind,  and  so  Sita  disappeared  into  the 
trees. 

“Hoping  Rama  might  yet  summon  me  I  stayed  awhile  with 
Guha,  but  then  turned  back.  Your  favorite  red  horses  were 
slow  and  spiritless.  As  I  crossed  back  through  Kosala,  I  saw 
that  in  all  your  kingdom  the  trees  let  fall  their  leaves  and 
have  no  flowers,  no  scented  fruit,  no  new  buds.  In  your  land 
the  ponds  are  desolate,  the  streams  are  dry,  the  wells  are  bit¬ 
ter  and  silted.  Groves  wither,  no  creature  moves  or  speaks, 
beasts  of  prey  will  not  wander.  The  empty  woods  are  stricken 
dumb;  they  have  no  nobility;  they  stand  in  gloom  on  all  sides. 
Food  has  no  flavor  and  no  one  wants  to  eat  it  anyway.  Stones 
are  burnt  black.  Grass  is  faded  and  dead.  Crops  and  water- 
plants  perish.  Fish  and  gardens  die.  I  drove  a  cheerless  dreary 
road,  my  Lord.  Where  there  had  been  gardens  lean  birds 
were  drooping  in  the  leafless  trees,  their  bright  plumes 
stained.  No  fires  bum.  Cattle  give  no  milk.  The  air  has  no 
freshness.  All  sounds  are  faint  and  the  world  is  indistinct.  No 
one  moves  from  where  he  is  or  opens  his  eyes  once  closing 
them.  There  is  no  difference  between  a  dear  friend  or  an 
enemy  or  an  uncaring  man.  People  are  not  dead  yet  they  do 
not  live,  all  vitality  is  now  lost  and  gone  away. .  . 

The  old  King  tried  to  rise.  He  trembled.  “Charioteer,  if  I 
have  ever  done  any  good  thing,  drive  me  to  Rama!” 

“I  cannot,”  said  Sumantra.  “I  don’t  look  back.  I  don’t  know 
where  he  is.” 


86 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


They  left  Dasaratha  alone  with  Queen  Kausalya  close  by 
him.  He  slept  uneasily  for  a  short  time  but  soon  awakened. 
Kausalya  still  held  his  hand  and  said,  “I  am  here.” 

Dasaratha  said,  “In  my  sleep  I  have  remembered  what  I 
did  long  ago  to  cause  all  this  misfortune.  Gentle  woman,  as  a 
man’s  deeds  are  good  or  evil  so  are  the  events  which  follow 
them,  and  which  the  man  must  face  in  their  time.  I  have  cut 
down  sweet  fruit  trees  for  being  slow-growing.  In  their  place 
I’ve  faithfully  watered  the  rampant  gay-colored  trees  bitter  of 
fruit.  Excited,  mindlessly  lured  by  pretty  flowers  on  the 
branches,  I  came  to  expect  a  good  yield.  I  looked  forward  to 
happiness  but  all  the  while  I  coveted  delusion.” 

Kausalya  said,  “You  lived  a  good  life.  You  were  a  good 
man.  Why  do  you  blame  yourself  so?  If  you  can’t  change 
what  you’ve  done  wrong  don’t  dwell  on  it.” 

“But  the  season  has  come,”  said  Dasaratha.  “Even  when  I 
was  a  young  prince  I  leaned  on  a  staff  though  I  did  not  need 
it — and  now  I  am  old  and  have  never  stood  alone.  Asleep 
just  now  I  have  met  Truth,  I  tremble.” 


Listen,  Kausalya — 

When  you  were  a  maid  unwed  and  I  was  young,  my  Love, 
I  ever  lived  as  I  pleased,  I  never  denied  myself  a  thing,  I 
knew  not  any  sorrow.  I  was  a  great  marksman.  I  could  shoot 
with  bow  and  arrow  aiming  by  sound  alone  and  I  was  proud 
of  my  skill.  Then  once  in  the  rainy  season  I  rode  out  hunting. 
It  was  the  evening  twilight  and  the  water  had  stopped  falling 
for  awhile.  I  rode  along  the  Sarayu  and  the  river  twisted  by 
in  torrents  red  and  black,  dyed  with  ores  and  sands  from  the 
mountains  and  foaming  in  flood. 

I  stopped  and  waited  by  the  river,  planning  to  kill  any 
game  that  came  to  drink.  It  grew  dark.  I  could  see  but  not 
very  far.  Then  to  one  side  I  heard  the  sound  of  an  elephant 
drinking  and  I  sent  an  arrow  flying  at  the  sound.  The  arrow 
hit  and  I  heard  a  cry — Night,  who  has  killed  me? 

I  felt  cold  fear.  I  had  heard  not  an  elephant  but  the  sound 
of  a  filling  water  jar.  I  ran  to  the  voice  and  found  my  arrow 
piercing  through  a  young  man’s  heart.  He  knelt  by  the  river. 
My  bow  fell  from  my  hand  and  he  fell  over  partly  into  the 
river.  Blood  poured  from  his  breast  and  water  poured  from 
his  waterjar  lying  overturned. 

I  held  him  in  my  arms  and  he  looked  at  me.  “Prince 
Dasaratha,  what  have  I  ever  done  to  you?  You  have  also 


Lord  of  the  Wild  Trees 


87 


killed  my  old  blind  parents  who  are  lame  and  cannot  move. 
They  await  my  return  with  water.  Never  in  their  long  lives 
have  they  injured  another  even  for  a  good  cause  .  .  .  take 
out  your  sharp  arrow. . .  .” 

I  said,  “If  the  arrow  is  left  alone  it  pains,  but  if  it  is  with¬ 
drawn  Death  will  come.  I  will  go  for  a  physician — ” 

But  he  sank  in  my  grasp.  His  eyes  fluttered  upwards  and 
with  terrible  difficulty  he  said,  “No,  I  endure  Death.  I  calm 
and  clear  my  mind.  Do  not  hesitate,  it  was  but  an  accident 
. . .  boldly  release  my  life. . . 

So  I  gently  bit  off  the  arrowhead  where  it  came  out  his 
back  and  withdrew  the  shaft.  He  drew  in  his  limbs,  sighed 
once  and  died  watching  me  with  no  fear  in  his  eyes,  a  peace¬ 
ful  man  dying  in  victory.  I  straightened  his  deerskin  robe  and 
laid  him  along  the  river  shore. 

I  thought  long  how  to  mend  my  sin  and  at  last  very 
frightened  I  filled  the  waterjar  and  carried  it  along  a  narrow 
way  that  bore  his  footprints,  leading  to  his  parents’  home.  I 
thought  that  it  could  not  be  right  that  he  should  die  and  they 
know  nothing  of  it.  As  I  approached  the  end  of  the  path  I 
heard  an  old  couple  talking  about  their  son,  feeding  on  the 
hopes  I  had  destroyed.  Then  I  saw  them  sitting  like  birds  with 
broken  wings,  and  no  one  to  help  them  move  about. 

The  old  man  turned  his  blind  face  to  me.  “Your  mother 
feared  you  had  gone  swimming  at  night,  my  son.  Answer  us, 
do  not  be  angry  with  old  people  who  worry.” 

My  footsteps  faltered.  In  a  voice  of  fear  I  spoke  the 
hardest  words  I  ever  said.  “I  am  Dasaratha,  no  son  of  yours 
but  a  warrior,  a  butcher.  Without  knowing,  I  have  killed  your 
son  with  an  arrow,  thinking  him  from  sound  to  be  an  ele¬ 
phant  drinking.  Bum  me  with  your  wrath  like  fire,  for  he  has 
died  from  my  ignorance  and  from  my  sudden  wound.” 

They  were  silent  and  I  said,  “Command  me,  Oh  Ascetic.” 

He  said,  “We  were  unable  to  help  our  only  son.  We  are 
like  trees,  who  cannot  rescue  one  another  from  the  attacks  of 
the  winds.  Had  you  not  come  to  tell  us  this  your  head  would 
have  burst  into  a  thousand  pieces.  Had  you  given  him  even  a 
slight  wound  intentionally  you  would  by  now  have  fallen 
alive  and  screaming  into  Hell.  Not  to  mention  warriors,  I  can 
pull  down  Indra  himself  if  he  knowingly  hurts  a  harmless 
forest  man.  Carry  us  to  our  boy.” 

I  carried  them.  The  old  man  and  his  wife  fell  over  their  son 
and  their  blind  hands  went  tenderly  touching  his  corpse.  The 


88 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


old  man  said,  “Ah,  it  is  hard  to  get  a  son  like  you  in  this 
world,  and  you  are  dead!”  He  turned  to  me.  “Where  is  he?” 

I  looked  up.  At  first  I  could  not  see  what  path  his  soul  had 
taken.  I  searched  heaven  with  my  eyes.  I  answered,  “He  is 
waiting  by  the  door  to  the  heaven  of  warriors  slain  in  battle.” 

The  old  man  said,  “Prince,  by  your  permission.” 

I  said,  “Yes.”  Indra  opened  the  door  and  let  him  in. 

“Go,  my  son,”  said  the  old  man.  “Bom  in  our  race  you 
cannot  come  by  evil.”  The  parents  poured  the  death-water  for 
their  son  and  the  man  drew  me  aside.  “Kill  us.  Burn  us  three 
on  one  pyre.” 

“Yes,  I  will.” 

He  said,  “I  do  not  curse  you,  nor  does  my  wife.  But  I  fear 
for  you.  Be  careful  in  the  future,  be  on  your  guard  if  you 
should  have  a  son.  The  giver  receives  back  the  things  he  gives 
away.  Will  you  not  one  day  find  your  own  death  over  your 
own  lost  son?  Will  you  come  by  this  same  fate?” 

I  found  some  dry  wood  under  a  great  tree  where  no  rain 
had  gone,  and  I  killed  them  as  they  asked  me  to,  and  I 
burned  them  in  fire  that  burned  fiercely  powered  by  their 
sacrifices,  and  the  heat  and  flames  of  their  generosity  drove 
me  backwards. 


“Queen,”  said  Dasaratha,  “that  whole  crime  now  comes 
home  to  me.  If  Rama  could  touch  me  I  might  live,  but  I  have 
no  other  help.  I  cannot  hear  my  own  voice.  My  hand  grows 
numb.  I  can  hardly  feel  your  hand,  I  barely  speak.  My  death 
fast  approaches.  I  have  wronged  my  son,  but  he  has  done 
well  toward  me  .  .  .  Rama.  .  .  .  Where  are  you?  .  .  . 
Rama.  .  .  .” 

Yama  the  Death  Lord  softly  touched  the  locked  doors  of 
the  Ayodhya  palace  and  they  flew  open  for  him.  Death  hold¬ 
ing  his  maces  and  bars  in  his  hands  entered  unseen.  Yama 
walked  quietly  beside  him  along  the  well-guarded  halls,  going 
gently  to  the  King,  casting  sleep  over  Kausalya.  Lord  Yama 
reached  into  Dasaratha’s  breast  and  took  out  his  mortal  soul. 
Round  the  soul  he  put  the  diamond-wire  silver  noose  of  death 
and  slipped  tight  the  knot,  then  he  took  him  away. 

Two  fires  of  grief  past  and  present  had  dried  away  the  life 
of  the  Ayodhya  king.  When  that  night  was  sometime  passed 
he  all  unnoticed  breathed  no  more,  and  departed  this  life.  So 
did  he  die,  the  far-famed  King  Dasaratha,  a  warrior  with  no 
enemies  alive. 


Bharata  Returns 


An  orphan  lion  cub  with  his  eyes  still  closed 
shut  from  birth  was  given  milk  by  a  wild  ewe 
who  found  him  in  her  meadow.  He  grew  to  call 
a  ram  "Father."  He  grazed  with  a  herd  of 
sheep,  knowing  no  other  animals. 

Then  one  day  a  jungle  lion  roared  on  a  hill. 
Every  lamb  and  sheep  fled,  but  the  little  lion 
looked  up.  He  thought, 

“ How  could  I  have  run  with  sheep  so  long?” 


Lord  Rama — at  daybreak  in  the  Ayodhya  palace  the  royal 
singers  clapped  their  hands  and  sang  the  praises  of  Dasaratha 
and  his  ancestors  to  awaken  the  old  King,  and  all  the  birds  in 
the  gardens  sang  outside.  Serving  maids  threw  sandal  powder 
into  warm  water  for  Dasaratha’s  bath.  Menservants  came  to 
the  doorway  of  Kausalya’s  bedroom,  and  there  they  set  out  a 
golden  jar  of  Ganga  water  for  the  King  to  sip.  They  laid  out 
new-woven  cloth  and  new  bright  metal  mirrors  and  fresh-cast 
ornaments  and  many  new  things  of  good  fortune  and  excel¬ 
lent  virtue,  so  that  the  King  would  see  them  first  thing  on 
awakening.  So  long  as  the  Sun  did  not  yet  rise  they  awaited 
Dasaratha. 

Then  golden  sunbeams  poured  light  in  through  the  win¬ 
dows  and  the  King  did  not  appear.  The  serving  maids  entered 
Kausalya’s  room.  The  Queen  slept  beside  Dasaratha,  her 
hand  had  slipped  from  his.  They  first  spoke  quiet  words,  and 
when  Dasaratha  did  not  awake  they  touched  him,  and  he  was 
cold,  and  they  shook  like  water  grass  in  the  waves. 

Kausalya  awoke.  Queen  Sumitra  came  running.  Kaikeyi 
stood  at  Dasaratha’s  feet  all  forlorn  and  crying — Oh  Love! 
The  sounds  of  lamenting  for  King  Dasaratha  filled  every  cav- 

89 


90 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


em  on  Earth  with  sorrow,  and  carried  through  the  sky  to  the 
end  of  every  direction. 


The  charioteer  Sumantra  put  the  King’s  body  in  an  iron 
vat  of  oil.  He  sent  out  three  swift  horsemen  to  ride  to  the 
Kekaya  land,  to  summon  Bharata  and  Satrughna  home  to 
make  the  funeral. 

The  three  horsemen  rode  fast.  They  overtook  the  winds. 
Their  horses’  hooves  drove  dents  in  the  stones,  they  broke 
down  the  trees  they  passed  near;  where  they  crossed  rivers 
they  left  them  dry.  They  rode  three  black  horses  running 
abreast,  running  with  head  and  neck  and  flying  tail  all  in  a 
line.  They  pounded  through  the  forests  haunted  by  bird- 
ghosts,  they  raced  past  brahmanas  cupping  their  hands  to 
drink  water  from  Narayana’s  footprints  at  dawn.  They  went 
northwest  and  leapt  the  river  whose  waters  turn  to  stone  what 
they  touch.  They  darted  across  Panchala  and  by  Hastinapura 
the  Elephant  City,  never  stopping  day  or  night.  After  four 
days  a  wall  of  dust  appeared  at  Kekaya  City,  covering  the 
mountain  lakes  and  shrouding  the  sky.  The  sunset  burned  the 
dust  red.  Night  came,  and  midnight.  And  the  Ayodhya  riders 
came  from  the  dust  and  entered  the  city  like  thunder  over  a 
bridge  in  the  dark. 

Bharata  had  been  asleep,  but  an  evil  dream  had  awakened 
him.  In  that  dream  he  saw  the  ocean  dry,  saw  the  Moon  fall 
to  Earth,  he  saw  the  tusks  of  Dasaratha’s  elephants  shatter, 
and  the  fires  of  Ayodhya  go  out,  and  saw  smoke  come  from 
the  hills  of  Kosala. 

Bharata  awoke  in  the  night  shaking  and  frightened.  His 
grandfather  Aswapati  the  Kekaya  King  was  still  awake.  He 
tried  to  cheer  Bharata  with  light  happy  music  and  comic 
plays,  but  the  prince  could  not  smile.  Bharata’s  red  skin  was 
pale,  his  red  hair  was  dark  and  damp  with  sweat.  His  throat 
was  dry,  his  eyes  were  red  as  blood  and  he  couldn’t  sit  still. 

Satrughna  came  to  his  brother  and  stood  by  him  blacker 
than  Night,  and  the  gold  bracelets  on  his  dark  arms  flamed  in 
the  torchlight.  Bharata  said  to  him,  “I  feel  terrible.  Suddenly 
for  no  reason  I  hate  life.” 

Satrughna  said,  “Someone  has  died  but  I  don’t  know  who.” 

Then  the  Ayodhya  riders  entered,  showing  no  sign  of  sor¬ 
row.  King  Aswapati  and  his  son  Yudhajit  rose  to  meet  them. 
The  riders  told  Bharata,  “Hurry  to  Ayodhya." 

“Rest  a  moment,”  answered  Bharata.  “How  is  my  father?” 


Bharata  Returns 


91 


The  riders  said,  “We  cannot  linger.” 

“How  is  my  mother?” 

“We  cannot  rest.” 

“How  is  Rama?” 

“Do  not  delay.  Restless  fate  and  fortune  call  you  home.” 

Bharata  said,  “Grandfather,  give  us  Kekaya  horses  for  our 
chariot.” 

“I  give.”  The  aged  King  Aswapati  embraced  Bharata  and 
Satmghna;  he  smelled  their  heads  and  pressed  his  hands 
down  through  their  hair.  “Go,  my  children,  I  permit  you.  Tell 
my  daughter  Kaikeyi  that  we  are  all  well  here,  give  her  my 
love,  and  return  to  me  when  I  remember  you.” 

Bharata’s  uncle  Yudhajit  said,  “We  send  no  gifts.  We  are 
your  friends  in  any  threat  or  danger.  Call  us  if  you  have  the 
smallest  need.  Do  not  waste  time  on  the  polite  ceremonies  of 
leavetaking.” 


Driving  their  chariot  garnished  with  gold,  by  the  fiery  light 
of  sunrise  Bharata  and  Satrughna  saw  Ayodhya,  and  slowed 
their  mountain  horses.  They  looked  down  on  her  from  the 
soft-rising  hills  to  the  north.  They  stopped.  There  was  not  a 
sound  from  the  still  city.  The  countryside  was  strangely  quiet, 
as  though  Lord  Shiva  were  walking  abroad  in  the  dawn, 
among  the  trees  somewhere  near. 

Satrughna  frowned.  “The  streets  are  empty.  The  doors  are 
closed  and  shutters  drawn  against  the  windows.  This  is  a  sad 
'  view.” 

“Do  you  remember?”  said  Bharata.  “In  the  early  morning 
standing  here  we  could  always  smell  the  scent  of  wines,  and 
the  wind  would  carry  faint  perfumes.” 

Satrughna  said,  “Our  Great  Father  the  Sun  now  rises  and 
no  one  sings.” 

Bharata  said,  “Our  homes  are  burnt  out.  Those  are  but 
their  shells  remaining.” 

They  drove  into  Ayodhya.  Their  chariot  wheels  growled  low 
and  moaned  as  they  passed  through  the  Victory  Gate,  once 
guarded  like  the  gateway  into  heaven.  No  guard  stood  there. 
No  young  couples  drunk  with  Love’s  honey-wine  came  walk¬ 
ing  home  from  the  parks  at  dawn. 

They  didn’t  see  a  living  soul.  Satrughna  was  brooding.  He 
said,  “If  anyone  still  lives  here,  they  ought  to  leave  or  they’ll 
be  dead  by  tonight.” 

They  came  up  to  the  Ayodhya  palace  once  flooded  with 


92 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


light.  Bharata  said,  “Dread  of  what  awaits  me  hides  in  my 
heart  and  will  not  go!” 

They  entered  the  palace.  The  doors  were  half  open.  There 
was  rust  on  the  hinges  and  nothing  was  seen  as  it  had  been 
during  the  King’s  life.  Satrughna  went  to  find  Rama.  Bending 
his  head,  Bharata  walked  slowly  to  his  mother  Kaikeyi. 

Kaikeyi  rose  from  her  window  seat  and  Bharata  knelt  and 
held  her  feet,  then  he  stood  and  asked  her,  “But  where  is  my 
father?  Why  is  your  golden  bed  empty?” 

Kaikeyi  said,  “My  son,  every  marriage  must  end  in  sorrow 
unless  both  man  and  wife  die  together.  He  has  gone  to  the 
next  world  under  the  law  of  Time.  He  lives  no  longer,  he  has 
died.” 

Bharata  tore  off  his  headband  and  let  his  long  hair  fall.  He 
took  ashes  from  an  incense  dish  and  rubbed  them  on  his 
brow.  He  said,  “I  take  Rama  for  my  refuge,  I  take  Rama  for 
my  protection.  But  how  hard  to  bear!  What  did  Dasaratha 
say  when  you  last  saw  him?” 

“He  said — Who  will  see  Rama  again?” 

Bharata  stood  grave  as  the  ocean  and  still  as  the  sky. 
Smoke  rose  from  his  body.  His  eyes  burned  like  red  gleams 
of  Hell’s  light.  “Where  is  Rama  whose  soft  hands  brush  the 
dust  from  me  when  I  fall?” 

“Your  father  disinherited  Rama  so  that  you  could  take  this 
kingdom  without  a  rival,  and  he  banished  him  and  died  from 
the  grief  of  parting.” 

“Why?  Whose  wife  did  Rama  take?” 

“He  took  no  other’s  woman.  This  was  done  to  please  you.” 

“Whom  did  Rama  wrong,  rich  or  poor?” 

“No  one.  Why  are  you  not  delighted?” 

“What  did  Rama  steal?” 

“Nothing,  for  no  crime  was  he  banished,”  said  Kaikeyi.  “I 
used  my  two  wishes.  The  Kosalas  are  yours,  Ayodhya  is 
yours.  You  are  the  King!” 

“How  hateful!”  Bharata  ran  from  the  room. 


He  ran  to  Queen  Kausalya’s  room.  There  were  his  friends. 
Kausalya  and  Sumitra  were  there;  Vasishtha  and  Sumantra 
the  charioteer  and  his  brother  Satrughna  stood  by  them. 

Bharata  knelt  before  Kausalya.  “Mother,  we  return  from 
the  Hills  ...  I  did  not  know!  I’ll  never  take  it.  I  don’t  want  to 
rule  others,  I  don’t  want  possessions.  I  know  nothing. ...” 

“Enough,  you  are  innocent.”  Kausalya  laid  her  hand  on  his 


Bharata  Returns 


93 

head.  “You  are  the  one  injured.  No  one  blames  you.”  She 
held  him. 

Sumantra  said,  “I  left  Rama  in  the  forest.  This  is  a  bad 
world.” 

Bharata  said,  “The  whim  of  a  whore.” 

“She’s  your  own  mother,”  said  Vasishtha. 

“Not  any  more,”  said  Bharata.  “What  good  is  anything 
without  Rama?” 

Satrughna  said,  “Lakshmana  did  right  to  go  beside  him.” 

Bharata  said,  “True  enough.” 

Satrughna  said,  “How  will  father  look  the  gods  of  heaven 
in  the  eye?” 

Bharata  said,  “Death  will  be  small  comfort  to  him.” 

“Be  still  a  moment,”  said  Vasishtha. 

Bharata  asked  him,  “Brahmana,  why  did  she  darken  our 
fame?  We  all  loved  her  and  she  always  said  she  loved  us. 
Why  does  she  hate  us  now?” 

Satrughna  said,  “And  what  has  she  gained  anyway?” 

“Crushing  sorrow,”  answered  Vasishtha. 

Bharata  said,  “Surely  desire  easily  outruns  honor.” 

Sumitra  said,  “Everything  will  be  all  right,  Bharata.  My 
son  Lakshmana  is  with  Rama;  my  son  Satrughna  is  with  you, 
we  are  friends.” 

Bharata  smiled  at  her.  “Do  you  think  so?”  He  looked 
away.  “She  trapped  him  and  killed  him  like  a  deer  lured  into 
a  snare  by  a  sweet  song.” 

Sumantra  the  charioteer  said,  “Rama — ” 

“What  about  Rama?”  asked  Bharata. 

“He  commands  you  to  obey  your  father  and  not  to  take 
away  his  authority  in  his  old  age.  He  is  covered  by  the 
blessings  of  Queen  Kausalya.  Vasishtha  blessed  him;  he 
blessed  them  all.” 

Bharata  said,  “Did  he  promise?” 

Vasishtha  said,  “Prince  Bharata,  listen  to  me.  Rama  said 
he  would  go  away  for  fourteen  years.  He  will  never  break  his 
word.  We  need  a  King.” 

“What  for?”  asked  Bharata. 

Vasishtha  said,  “In  a  kingless  land  there  is  no  rain. 
Families  break  apart  in  shame.  Charity  cannot  be  kept. 
Kindness  goes.  There  is  no  law.  Then  who  sleeps  with  an 
open  door,  or  finds  a  safe  road?  Bandits  will  invade  Kosala. 
Disputes  will  arise  and  not  be  solved.  There  will  be  no  jus¬ 
tice.  Our  ancient  stories  will  never  more  be  heard.” 

“What  is  there  to  do?”  asked  Bharata. 


94 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


“Take  my  advice,”  said  Vasishtha.  “Rule  us.” 

“No,”  said  Bharata.  “For  my  part  I  will  go  to  the  forest 
and  bring  Rama  back.” 

Sumantra  smiled.  “I’ll  find  him  for  you.” 

Bharata  said,  “The  King  did  not  consult  with  old  friends 
like  you.” 

Vasishtha  said  again,  “Be  our  King  until  Rama  returns.” 

“Watch  it!”  said  Bharata.  “Do  not  sell  treasures  with  one 
hand  and  hold  back  happiness  with  your  other.  Or  I  will 
move  out  against  you.” 

“There  is  a  great  ocean  of  grief  to  cross,”  said  Vasishtha. 
“Regret  and  remorse  are  his  whirlpools  and  tears  are  his 
tides.  Kaikeyi’s  wishes  are  his  near  shore,  and  fourteen  years 
is  his  expanse,  and  the  shrill  words  of  the  hunchback  Man- 
thara  are  his  ravenous  sharks.” 

Satrughna  said,  " Whose  words?"  He  started  for  the  door. 

“Wait,”  said  Bharata.  “If  Rama  hears  we  have  killed  Man- 
thara  he  will  never  look  on  us  again.” 

Shrieks  of  crazy  laughter  rang  through  the  palace,  but  Sa¬ 
trughna  sat  down  and  ignored  them.  Vasishtha  said,  “By  the 
heavens,  multitudes  have  censured  Manthara  and  found  no 
peace  of  mind  from  itl  Bum  the  body  of  the  King,  Bharata. 
Do  this  much.  Free  the  people;  let  their  sorrow  come  out. 
One  may  fall  and  bear  being  kicked  by  another,  but  one  can¬ 
not  fall  and  bear  ever  so  little  sorrow.  Sorrow  deforms  our 
thoughts  and  our  reflections;  it  grows  within  and  smothers 
our  hearts.  Sorrow  has  made  Ayodhya  unbeautiful  to  see;  it 
has  dishonored  her.  Who  can  live  here?  What  is  life  without 
joy?  Don’t  let  sorrow  beat  down  the  Kosalas.  Make  the 
King’s  funeral  and  let  us  be  done  with  it!” 

“I  don’t  want  any  part  of  it.” 

“You  rightly  despise  the  clutter  of  this  world.” 

“But  here  I  am,”  said  Bharata.  “I’ll  bum  the  dead  King  in 
Rama’s  name.” 


Over  the  burning  ground  by  the  Sarayu  black  funeral  smoke 
hung  in  the  air.  Bharata  wept  like  a  hurt  boy  and  Vasishtha 
put  his  arm  around  him.  Atop  the  pyre  Dasaratha’s  face  still 
showed  as  if  he  slept,  a  little  pale.  The  rest  of  his  body  was 
buried  under  flowers  and  under  solid  perfumes  that  began  to 
melt.  The  flames  kindled  from  the  firechamber  of  Ayodhya 
then  reached  up  and  hid  the  King’s  corpse. 

That  burning  freed  Dasaratha’s  spirit.  It  let  him  come  out 


Bharala  Returns 


93 


from  Yama’s  shadowy  land  and  get  from  the  Moon  his  heav¬ 
enly  body,  and  in  celestial  robes  take  his  rightful  place  in 
heaven. 

Bharata  said,  “In  my  youth.  Time’s  true  nature  was  hidden 
from  me,  but  now  I  see  all  his  harmful  ways.  I’ll  never  for¬ 
give,  I’ll  never  forget  what  my  mother  has  done.  I  want  to  go 
away  and  never  hear  her  name.  Vasishtha,  how  will  she  be 
bom  in  future  lives?” 

“She  will  never  understand,  never  know  the  True,”  said 
Vasishtha.  “She  will  doubt  life  while  facing  the  Sun.  She  will 
be  a  mad  beggar  eating  dirt  from  a  skull.  She  will  be  a  miser 
living  alone  then  robbed  by  thieves.  She  will  be  a  poor  man 
with  a  large  family  in  a  land  ruled  in  fear  by  a  bad  King.  She 
will  be  a  great  teacher  who  forgets  all  his  learning  and 
shameless  turns  to  dice  and  women  and  puts  his  old  servants 
out  to  starve  in  the  streets.” 

“What  else?” 

“She  will  not  do  one  good  deed.  She  will  betray  friends 
and  hand  them  over  to  the  King’s  soldiers.  She  will  give 
wealth  to  unworthy  liars  and  dash  the  hopes  of  poor  men 
who  look  up  to  her  trustingly.  She  will  refuse  water  to  thirsty 
travelers  by  lying  that  she  has  none.  She  will  poison  wells. 
She  will  be  an  unwelcome  philosopher  who  quarrels  painfully 
over  points  of  view  and  she  will  be  bom  again  as  one  who 
listens  to  such  talk.” 

“What  else?” 

“In  this  very  life  she  will  not  live  to  see  Rama  return.” 

“Is  that  all?”  Bharata  sighed. 

Vasishtha  said,  “I  have  added  nothing  and  left  out  nothing. 
All  this  will  be  her  lot — unless  you  forgive  her,  Bharata.” 

Bharata  said,  “I  forgive.” 

Vasishtha  said,  “Compassion  is  great  enough  where  it  can 
have  no  effect.  Used  to  accomplish  something  it  is  supreme!” 

“A  son  comes  to  life  from  the  blood  of  his  mother’s  heart,” 
said  Bharata,  “therefore  he  is  dear  to  her.” 

Listen,  King  Rama,  our  Master  Valmiki  knows.  Once  tears 
fell  on  Indra  as  he  flew  in  the  sky,  and  looking  up  he  saw 
Surabhi  the  white  wishing-cow  of  heaven  gazing  past  him 
down  at  the  Earth  and  crying.  Indra  flew  to  her  and  asked, 
“What  is  wrong?  It  must  be  a  great  injustice.”  She  replied, 
“Lord  of  Gods,  I  mourn  my  sons  fallen  on  evil  days.  See  the 
two  of  them  below,  lean  and  sunburned  and  tired  from  plow¬ 
ing.”  And  Indra  stood  amazed  and  speechless,  thinking  how 
Surabhi’s  children  number  in  millions  and  fill  the  worlds,  how 


96 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


though  she  lived  in  heaven  and  was  herself  the  very  essence 
of  good  fortune  she  cried  over  two  of  them  as  though  her 
heart  would  break. . . . 


The  three  widowed  Queens  of  Ayodhya  said  watery  pray¬ 
ers  and  bathed  at  the  riverside.  For  eleven  nights  they  slept 
on  the  bare  ground.  Then  they  gave  away  gifts  in  Dasaratha’s 
name — food  and  drink  and  salt  and  homes,  goats  and  cows, 
cloth  and  gold,  silver  and  servants.  After  that,  Bharata 
gathered  his  father’s  bones  from  the  cold  white  ashes  of  the 
funeral  pyre,  raised  them  over  his  head  and  threw  them  into 
the  Sarayu  River. 

That  ended  the  mourning.  At  sunrise  the  next  day  the  Ko- 
salas  awakened  Bharata  with  loud  shell  trumpets  and  he  went 
to  them  and  said,  “Never  do  that  again,  I  am  not  the  King.” 

Bharata  told  the  charioteer  Sumantra,  “Only  the  son 
first-born  may  be  King  in  our  Solar  race.  I  will  take  Rama’s 
place  in  the  forest” 

Sumantra  first  asked  the  elephant-god  Ganesha — Remove 
the  obstacles,  widen  the  road,  smooth  our  way.  Then  he 
drove  Bharata  out  of  the  city,  passing  under  the  groves  of  the 
Sarayu,  under  the  flowers  violet  and  gold. 

Satrughna  came  next  driving  the  three  Queens  in  a  chariot. 
After  them  came  nine  thousand  war-mounted  elephants,  then 
six  thousand  chariots  carrying  light-handed  bowmen,  then 
many  horsemen  and  footsoldiers  running  by  the  roadsides 
bearing  shields  like  suns,  then  the  wives  and  families  of  the 
soldiers  came  last  leading  mule-carts  and  pack-animals. 

The  wide  road  to  Rama!  The  swift-rising  Sun  set  alight  the 
spear-points  like  a  curving  line  of  stars.  The  road  gained 
loveliness  as  they  proceeded.  It  was  tree-lined.  There  were 
fair  wells  with  resting  places.  There  were  fruit  trees  and  or¬ 
chards.  The  country  people  put  flags  by  the  roadside.  They 
moved  on,  the  people  came  all  following  Bharata,  like  the 
swelling  high  tide  of  the  sea  rolling  on,  like  the  entire  Earth  in 
human  form. 

They  halted  in  grand  tent-cities,  and  after  three  easy  days 
they  came  to  the  first  Sala  trees  of  Guha’s  forest  and  stood 
on  the  far  border  of  Kosala.  The  Sun  hung  aslant  and  low;  it 
was  the  hour  of  evening. 

Hidden  within  the  Secret  Forest,  Guha  looked  out  at  them. 
From  Sumantra’s  chariot  flew  the  flag  of  the  Kosalas,  a  green 


Bharata  Returns  97 

ebony  tree  shining  on  silver.  Guha  could  see  no  end  to  all 
those  people. 

He  sat  down  and  cleared  a  flat  space  with  the  edge  of  his 
hand.  He  took  nine  bird  bones  from  a  leather  bag  and  shook 
Them  in  his  hands  three  times  saying,  “Rama  is  my  friend, 
who  is  Bharata?” 

He  threw  his  fortune.  The  bones  said,  "Don’t  hinder  him.” 

While  the  Kosalas  made  their  camp,  Bharata  and  Sa- 
trughna  came  to  the  ocean-going  Ganga  and  offered  her  clear 
cool  water  to  their  father,  so  that  in  heaven  Dasaratha’s  spirit 
was  bright-shining  with  pleasure.  Bharata  bathed  in  Ganga 
and  was  no  longer  tired.  He  drank  her  holy  water  and  glad¬ 
dened  his  heart.  Then  he  sat  thinking  how  to  make  Rama 
come  back,  sitting  under  the  same  wide-spreading  tree  where 
Rama  had  been.  That  old  tree  threw  out  his  heavy  arms  in 
joy  to  the  sunset  starry  sky  above,  and  Bharata  said  quietly, 
“From  here,  I  bow  to  Rama  in  the  forest.” 

There  Guha  met  him  bringing  bread  and  butter  and  honey. 
Bharata  asked,  “Where  is  Rama?  Do  you  know  where  he 
went?” 

“All  those  people,”  said  Guha. 

“We  want  him  back,”  said  Bharata. 

Satrughna  said,  “Dasaratha  had  died,  now  Rama  is  our 
king.” 

Little  whistles  and  barks  sounded  from  the  dark  forest 
around  them.  Guha  grinned.  “They’ve  heard  you.  The  bird 
people  are  singing  of  your  fame,  the  deer  praise  you.  They 
say  you  are  an  unclouded  sky,  beautiful  in  the  daytime,  beau¬ 
tiful  at  night.  They  call  you  a  true  man,  a  real  friend,  they 
wonder  if  there  is  anyone  else  like  you  on  Earth,  who  would 
give  back  a  kingdom. . . .” 

Guha  clapped  his  hands  and  torches  gleamed  into  light  and 
came  carried  by  Guha’s  men,  out  from  the  trees.  “I  have 
hundreds  of  fisher-boats  hidden  along  the  river,”  said  Guha. 
“Leave  your  chariots  here,  tomorrow  I  will  take  you  and 
your  animals  all  downstream  to  Bharadwaja.”  Guha  took  a 
torch.  “See,  under  this  great  and  ancient  tree  the  hard  rough 
grass  still  shows  where  it  was  pressed  by  Rama’s  limbs.  Look, 
here  are  silk  threads  pulled  from  Sita’s  robe.  Here  slept 
Sumantra,  here  Lakshmana  sat.” 

“It  seems  incredible  to  me,”  said  Bharata.  “Oh,  had  I  not 
gone  to  Kekaya. . . .” 

“No,  no,”  said  Guha.  “Time  does  what  he  must,  powered 
by  the  past.  When  Time  does  us  wrong,  we  are  lucky  just  to 


98  THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 

live  on  and  get  another  chance  at  him,  and  what  harm  did 
you  intend?” 

“Then,”  said  Bharata,  “surely  if  Time  will  help  me,  Rama 
cannot  long  refuse  to  return.” 

The  Sun  had  gambled  away  all  his  splendor,  and  Night 
spread  over  Earth.  Then  as  a  smoldering  tree  already  burned 
by  forest  fire  will  show  only  by  night  that  it  still  bums,  so 
Bharata  sighed  in  the  dark. 


The  Sandals 


I  see  two  birds  on  the  same  branch; 
One  eats  the  sweet  fruit, 

One  looks  on  sadly. 

The  first  bird  wonders — 

In  what  prison  does  he  live? 

The  second  marvels — 

How  can  he  rejoice? 


With  noise  and  shouting  Guha’s  men  ferried  the  Kosalas 
down  the  River  Ganga,  showing  off  with  their  boats  in  fancy 
formations,  and  the  Kosalas  who  could  not  wait  their  turn 
floated  among  the  boats  hanging  onto  pitchers  that  were  up¬ 
side  down  in  the  water  and  full  of  air,  and  the  elephants 
swam  along  like  islands  come  to  life.  Guha  himself  took 
Bharata  and  Satrughna  and  the  three  Queens  on  board  a  ser- 
pent-prowed  boat  trimmed  in  gold  and  hung  with  bells,  and 
steered  them  down  to  where  Ganga’s  white  waters  met  the 
deep  dark  Yamuna  with  a  roar. 

When  all  the  Kosalas  had  been  landed,  the  hunter-men  and 
Guha  swept  back  upstream  in  their  boats  and  left  them  there. 
Bharata  kept  the  Kosalas  back  and  went  alone  on  foot  into 
Bharadwaja’s  hermitage,  plainly  dressed  in  a  single  robe  and 
unarmed. 

Bharadwaja  met  him  with  water  to  drink  and  water  for 
foot-washing.  They  sat  together  and  Bharadwaja  asked,  “How 
is  the  city  of  Fair  Ayodhya?” 

Bharata  said,  “Brahmana,  are  you  well?  I  hope  your  fires 
bum  as  you  want  them  to.  You  do  not  ask  about  my  father.” 

Bharadwaja  replied,  “I  know  the  King  is  dead.” 

“The  King  is  alive,”  said  Bharata.  “The  King  is  Rama.  I 
want  to  get  him  and  bring  him  home.” 

99 


100 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Bharadwaja  smiled.  “Do  I  not  know  you,  young  prince? 
But  why  have  you  left  your  people  behind  you  at  the  river¬ 
side?” 

“They  are  thousands,”  answered  Bharata.  “I  have  soldiers 
and  women  and  children.  They  would  make  holes  in  the 
ground  here,  and  hurt  your  trees,  and  put  mud  in  your 
water.” 

“Have  them  unpack  and  bring  them  here  for  dinner.” 

Bharata  looked  around,  and  saw  only  the  woodlands 
around  the  little  clearing,  and  Bharadwaja’s  small  hut  stand¬ 
ing  alone  by  a  trickling  stream.  “I  have  been  entertained  by 
water  and  the  sight  of  you.  By  your  words  have  you  well  re¬ 
ceived  us  all.” 

“But  you  are  too  easily  pleased,”  said  Bharadwaja.  “Tell 
them  to  come.  I  invite  you  all.” 


Bharata  walked  back  to  the  river  and  Bharadwaja  went 
into  his  house  and  sat  by  his  fire.  There  nodding  his  head  he 
sipped  water  from  his  hand  three  times,  and  rubbed  it  on  his 
lips  and  said — 7  will  entertain  my  guests. 

Down  from  heaven  came  the  architect  Viswakarman.  He 
stood  in  the  center  of  Bharadwaja’s  clearing  and  unfurled  his 
great  wings  and  swept  them  through  the  air.  He  turned;  he 
moved  his  hands,  and  the  trees  moved  back,  the  clearing 
grew.  He  built  a  dream,  he  made  a  garden  where  new  won¬ 
ders  grew.  Viswakarman  knows  all  worlds.  His  arms  shaped 
the  air;  he  spoke  names. 

The  south  winds  blew  scented  with  sandalwood.  The  rivers 
of  the  world  came  there  and  ran  with  water  and  wines  and 
milk  and  sugar  syrup,  ran  through  blue  grass,  among  the 
coral  trees  brought  from  the  wishing-f orests  of  the  Treasure- 
Lord.  Heavenly  Gandharvas  played  music  and  Apsarasas 
danced.  Flowers  fell  from  the  air.  Tree  spirits  were  tumblers 
and  dwarves,  and  the  vines  of  the  forest  were  beautiful 
women  all  dressed  in  flowers.  Food  appeared  and  buildings 
arose. 

Viswakarman  folded  his  arms  and  closed  his  wings  and 
was  gone,  and  the  Kosalas  entered  what  had  been  Bharad¬ 
waja’s  poor  hermitage.  Nagas  in  human  forms  met  them  and 
led  aside  their  horses  and  elephants.  The  Kosala  grooms  for¬ 
got  their  animals  and  the  animals  forgot  them  sooner.  Only 
Sumantra  the  charioteer  would  let  no  one  else  comb  his  red 
horses. 


The  Sandals 


101 


A  Naga  girl  waited  for  each  soldier,  took  his  bow,  untied 
his  armor  and  fed  him.  The  spirits  of  the  air  materialized  and 
poured  out  drinks;  the  Gandharvas  played  dances;  the 
Ayodhya  warriors  laughed  and  talked. 

That  was  Bharadwaja’s  welcome.  The  Kosalas  said — Peace 
be  to  Bharata.  Great  happiness  to  the  recluse  Bharadwaja. 
We  are  -within  a  vision  of  heaven.  Why  retreat,  why  advance, 
why  move? 


So  entertained  like  gods  the  Kosalas  passed  the  night  in 
good  cheer.  They  ate  and  drank  all  they  could  wish  for.  They 
fell  asleep  smiling  in  dreams. 

Then,  while  they  slept,  the  beings  and  spirits  who  had 
worked  for  their  banquet  went  back  to  where  they  had  come 
from.  The  stray  fruits  half-eaten,  the  heavenly  flowers  scat¬ 
tered  and  crushed  underfoot,  the  goblets  and  bright  dishes  all 
vanished,  and  Bharadwaja’s  grove  became  again  as  it  was  be¬ 
fore. 

Bharata  awoke  early  while  the  others  were  still  sound 
asleep  and  went  to  the  door  of  Bharadwaja’s  hut.  Bharadwaja 
came  out  and  asked,  “Were  you  pleased?” 

Bharata  answered,  “How  wonderful  it  was!  I  salute  you.  I 
think  ...  I  begin  to  learn.”  Bharata  looked  around  at  the 
Kosalas,  some  of  them  just  beginning  to  stir,  the  rest 
stretched  out  sleeping  like  the  dead.  “I  bow  to  you.  We  will 
go  on.  Look  after  us  with  a  friendly  eye.” 

Bharadwaja  said,  “Set  alone  like  a  colorful  jewel  in  the 
empty  forest  is  Chitrakuta  Hill  beautiful  to  behold.  Rama  lives 
there,  my  child.  A  river  flowing  in  waves  bends  around  that 
hill,  and  part  way  up  the  high  forest  slopes  above  the  river  is 
Rama’s  house  .  .  .  but  introduce  me  to  your  mothers,  let  me 
meet  them  before  you  go,  I  would  like  that.” 

Bharata  went  to  where  his  brother  slept.  “Get  up,  Sa- 
trughna,  why  do  you  sleep?” 

Satrughna  instantly  arose  and  Bharata  said,  “Bring  Queen 
Kausalya,  and  Sumitra  and  Kaikeyi.” 

Satrughna  and  Bharata  and  the  three  Queens  stood  before 
the  hermit  Bharadwaja.  Bharata  said,  “This  is  Kausalya,  she 
is  Rama’s  mother.” 

Kausalya  knelt  and  touched  Bharadwaja’s  feet.  He  said  to 
her,  “Rama  is  very  strong;  he  is  the  desired  guest  of  the  hills 
and  woods,  and  the  reasons  for  many  things  are  lost  in 
Time.” 


102 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


Bharata  said,  “This  is  Queen  Sumitra 

“She  is  ever  a  kind  friend,”  said  Bharadwaja.  He  smiled 
and  took  Sumitra’s  hands  in  his.  “Friendliness  and  love  and 
protection,  my  Lady,  I  call  that  good,  very  good!” 

Kaikeyi  hesitated.  Then  looking  down  at  the  ground  she 
walked  once  round  Bharadwaja,  and  stopped,  and  at  last 
looked  up  into  his  eyes. 

Bharadwaja  said,  “No  one  must  blame  you,  those  are  my 
words.  Sending  Rama  to  the  forest  will  truly  be  for  the  great 
good  of  all  the  worlds,  and  what  you  have  done  will  bring 
happiness  to  every  man  and  joy  to  heaven.  I  bless  you, 
Kaikeyi,  you  have  done  no  wrong.” 

Kaikeyi  smiled,  and  her  son  Bharata  put  his  red  arm 
around  her  shoulders  and  drew  her  close  to  him.  Then 
Bharadwaja  turned  and  bent  his  head  to  enter  his  small  house 
again. 

The  Kosalas  departed  from  Bharadwaja’s  retreat  and  left 
behind  them  Ganga  the  Queen  of  Rivers,  and  moved  slowly 
toward  Chitrakuta. 


The  springtime  trees  of  Chitra  were  perfect  as  a  scene 
imagined  from  a  storybook.  They  grew  short  and  tall,  thin 
and  spreading,  leafy  and  open.  Their  leaves  were  grass-green, 
blue-green,  yellow-green,  dark  green,  light  green,  crimson  and 
brown  and  yellow,  glossy  and  dull,  smooth  and  sticky,  round 
and  pointed  like  fingers,  fluttering  and  still.  The  barks  of  the 
trees  were  rough  and  smooth  and  furry,  grey  and  white  and 
green  and  black,  cool  and  warm.  The  flowers  grew  in 
bunches  or  grew  apart;  they  were  red,  yellow,  white,  pink  and 
honey-colored;  they  were  green  and  blue  and  purple 
and  orange  and  silver  and  gold  and  lavender;  they  were 
large  and  small.  All  among  the  trees  were  tapering  vines  and 
slender  creepers,  rushes  and  canes  and  reeds,  ferns  and  shrubs 
and  grasses  and  orchids  and  bamboo  and  moss. 

There  grew  the  climbers  whose  leaves  close  in  the  rain,  and 
the  trees  that  burst  into  blossom  at  a  woman’s  touch,  and  the 
water  lilies  that  open  when  deep  thunder  rolls  through  the 
blue  rainclouds  across  heaven  above.  And  to  Lakshmana  all 
these  plants  surrendered  the  supplies  of  a  rich  caravan.  He  got 
from  them  needles  and  thread  and  cloth,  food  and  cords  and 
soap,  cups  and  jars  and  medicine. 


The  Sandals 


103 


These  trees  in  flower 

Have  been  engarlanded  by  the  gods. 

This  forest  is  a  Garden, 

This  Hill  an  ornament  of  Earth. 

Rama  loved  the  deep  forest.  One  early  morning  he  and 
Sita  went  for  a  walk  above  their  house,  by  wild  rose  trees  and 
shady  lilac.  Hill  flowers  carpeted  the  meadows.  Sparrows  who 
lived  only  on  rainwater  sang.  From  the  soil  the  trees  had 
drawn  ores  and  minerals  up  through  their  roots,  so  that  on 
their  trunks  and  branches  there  were  gleaming  streaks  of  gold 
and  quicksilver,  and  bands  of  blood-red  ruby  dust  glinting 
from  right  within  the  bark. 

Sita  walked  holding  Rama’s  hard  arm  that  was  her  pillow 
at  night.  With  her  walk  Sita  rebuked  the  wavy  gait  of  swans. 
Wherever  she  went,  Sita  of  slender  waist  was  always  at  home 
in  Rama’s  heart,  sheltered  by  his  love,  as  the  path  they  fol¬ 
lowed  was  sheltered  over  by  the  trees. 

They  walked  along  a  stream,  past  waterfalls  and  little  is¬ 
lands.  The  water  ran  through  the  feet  of  herons  and  through 
the  drinking  pools  of  deer,  and  water  tumbled  over  the  rapids 
spilling  like  pearls  and  rolling  away. 

Rama  and  Sita  swam  in  the  river,  then  they  climbed  onto 
the  breast  of  Chitrakuta.  There  Rama  fell  asleep,  his  head  on 
Sita’s  lap  while  she  sat  back  against  a  tree  and  stroked  his 
hair. 

While  Rama  slept,  a  black  crow  flew  at  Sita.  She 
frightened  him  off  with  a  stone.  Rama  awoke,  looked  up  and 
saw  her  angry,  trying  to  push  back  the  robe  that  had  slipped 
from  her  shoulder,  her  face  glowing  and  her  lips  trembling. 
Rama  smiled  at  her  and  sighed,  and  went  back  to  sleep.  But 
the  crow  returned.  He  attacked  Sita,  beat  his  wings  against 
her  breast  and  tore  her  flesh  with  his  sharp  claws. 

Her  blood  fell  on  Rama  and  she  cried  out  for  him.  Rama 
instantly  awoke  and  saw  the  crow  with  red  claws  swiftly  dart 
down  inside  the  Earth.  Rama  put  the  Brahma  Weapon  on  a 
grassblade  and  threw  it  after  the  crow.  The  blade  burned 
with  fire  round  its  tip,  and  it  pursued  the  crow  wherever  he 
flew.  It  chased  him  through  all  the  heavens  and  under  all  the 
worlds  and  back  to  Earth.  The  gods  shut  heaven’s  doors 
against  the  crow  and  the  saints  looked  away  when  he  asked 
their  protection.  Even  Hell  was  locked. 

So  the  crow  flew  to  Rama  and  said,  “I  find  no  other  refuge 
against  him,”  and  bowed  at  Rama’s  feet. 


104 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


“Surrender  a  part  of  your  body  for  the  weapon  to  hit,” 
said  Rama,  “and  I  will  protect  your  life.” 

The  crow  surrendered  his  right  eye,  and  that  eye  broke 
from  his  face  like  shattered  glass  and  he  saved  himself.  The 
crow  flew  away  and  Rama  comforted  Sita. 

Returning  home  they  stopped  to  rest  on  a  ledge  by  the 
mouth  of  a  red-stone  cave.  Sita  embraced  Rama  like  a  vine 
twined  round  a  tree.  Rama  reached  down  and  touched  the 
red  dust,  and  put  a  mark  on  Sita’s  brow  with  his  fingertip. 

Then  they  walked  on  downhill  together.  A  monkey  sud¬ 
denly  ran  up  a  tree  right  beside  Sita,  and  she  jumped  into 
Rama’s  arms  in  fright.  He  held  her  and  her  red  brow-mark 
was  printed  on  Rama’s  broad  green  chest.  Sita  was  very  happy 
and  would  not  let  Rama  wipe  it  off. 

When  they  came  near  their  house  they  met  Lakshmana 
bringing  a  black  deer  home  from  the  hunt.  Sita  made  wild 
wheat  bread  and  Rama  gathered  honey.  They  ate  under  a 
golden  vine  by  a  clear  silvery  spring,  and  the  woodpeckers 
tapped  in  the  trees. 


The  Kosalas  caught  sight  of  lovely  Chitra  Hill  arising  out 
of  the  Earth.  They  all  had  flowers  in  their  hair  like  men  from 
the  south.  They  waited  by  a  stream  while  Bharata  went  on 
alone  up  the  hill. 

Bharata  found  a  trail  that  had  been  marked.  He  saw  white 
smoke  in  the  air  ahead  of  him.  Bark  garments  were  hanging 
out  to  dry  on  the  branches  of  a  tree.  By  the  path  were  stacks 
of  firewood.  Bharata  walked  out  into  a  clearing  on  the  moun¬ 
tainside  and  saw  Rama  standing  by  his  house. 

Rama  stood  very  still,  with  matted  hair  and  dressed  in 
black  deerskin.  Bharata  approached  and  knelt  before  Rama. 
He  looked  up  and  said,  “Oh  Arya  .  .  .  noble  Rama.  .  . 

Rama  bent  over  and  raised  Bharata.  “What  is  it?  Why 
have  you  come  here?” 

“Our  father  who  enjoyed  all  the  world  is  dead.” 

When  they  heard  that,  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  Sita 
took  some  cakes  down  to  the  river,  threw  some  of  them  into 
the  water  and  put  the  rest  on  the  grass.  Rama  held  water  in 
his  hands — May  this  reach  you,  may  it  be  so. 

Then  they  returned,  and  Rama  sat  with  Bharata  near  their 
house.  All  the  Kosalas  quietly  approached  and  watched  them 
sitting  together  and  wondered,  “What  will  Bharata  say  to 
him?” 


The  Sandals 


105 


Bharata  raised  his  hand  and  spoke.  “Rama,  peace  to  you:  I 
decline  the  ownership  and  possession  of  the  Kosala  kingdom. 
We  have  no  King.  Return  to  Ayodhya  with  these  people,  I 
will  replace  you  here.” 

Rama  said,  “I  think  a  father  may  divide  his  inheritance  as 
he  pleases,  and  surely  his  sons  will  obey  him.  Bharata,  a 
man’s  unbroken  word  is  like  a  bowl  of  clear  glass;  once  shat¬ 
tered,  no  one  can  put  it  back  as  it  was  by  any  art.  I  must  do 
what  I  said  I  would  do,  stay  here  for  fourteen  years.” 

Bharata  said,  “Your  absence  already  seems  unbearably 
long.  Father  died  soon  after  you  left.  Now  I  come  seeking 
you.  A  wife  ought  to  love  her  husband  more  than  even  a 
thousand  fine  sons.  Gentle  Sita  deserves  to  live  in  a  palace. 
What  unbeautiful  thing  has  she  ever  done?  The  eldest  son 
must  be  King.  Father  died  desiring  you  to  be  happy,  remem¬ 
bering  you.” 

Rama  said,  “Keeping  a  given  word,  Bharata  .  .  .  that  is 
more  important  than  Kosala  customs.  I  have  no  time  for 
kingdom,  Bharata.  I  have  no  time  for  any  useless  thing.  It  is 
not  for  me  to  do  the  work  of  others.  Our  father  Dasaratha 
was  a  wall  of  Dharma  like  a  mountain.  Death  is  at  last  found 
to  be  a  part  of  all  life,  and  never  can  we  escape  it,  and  Death 
does  not  change  a  promise  made.  At  the  end  of  life,  when 
this  body  is  burned,  a  man  takes  Brahma’s  way  if  he  has 
lived  well;  he  takes  a  good  way  well-wrought  by  men  of  the 
past,  and  looking  back  at  his  family  let  him  not  see  foolish 
sons  set  aside  his  last  wishes.” 

Bharata  said,  “Come  home.  Men  lose  their  sense  as  their 
Death  approaches.  Rama,  why  must  men  suffer  ignorance? 
Ignorance  will  surely  destroy  a  father’s  many  kindnesses  and 
a  mother’s  pains.  Why  do  we  waste  our  food  to  set  out  offer¬ 
ings  for  the  dead?  Do  the  dead  eat?  Who  do  we  feed?  Small 
animals  eat  it  all.  Such  blind  rules  are  wrong,  Rama.  Engage 
your  soul  in  happiness.  Men  are  born  for  joy.  Do  not  make 
ease  your  guide  and  do  not  follow  discomfort.  Do  right 
deeds,  forget  to  always  say  the  right  words.  In  land  after 
land,  one  may  find  wives  and  meet  friends.  But  I  can  now 
never  get  another  brother.” 

Rama  said,  “The  first  betrayal  may  be  easy  or  it  may  be 
hard,  but  after  the  first  betrayal  then  the  others  soon  follow. 
The  heart,  Bharata  .  .  .  keep  note  of  your  heart  and  don’t 
stifle  it.  There  lives  the  soul,  clear,  never  stained,  watching 
all  we  do  or  think  to  do,  so  let  a  man  be  still  and  find  his 
heart.  That  is  the  only  safe  rescue.  What  use  is  a  castle  or  a 


106 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


palace  or  a  great  stone  fortress  that  is  no  defense  against 
Time?  Since  we  have  come  together,  our  separation  some  day 
is  certain.  While  we  are  together  as  two  men  during  this  life¬ 
time,  let  us  keep  the  truth.” 

Bharata  said,  “It  is  true,  that  nights  gone  by  do  not  return, 
and  every  day  shortens  our  lives.  But  I  think  some  things  en¬ 
dure.  Surely  love  endures  beyond  our  brief  lives.  All  the 
Ayodhya  Kings  have  loved  their  City.  Our  fathers  have  left 
Ayodhya  shining  pure  white  in  her  fame  and  glory.  Now  our 
City  is  miserable;  she  is  an  unhappy  lake  without  a  guardian 
serpent,  unprotected,  ruined,  drifting  and  lost  as  an  aban¬ 
doned  ship  on  the  seas.” 

Rama  said,  “Death  keeps  a  man  company  and  after  going 
with  him  a  long  way  as  his  dear  friend,  Death  returns  with 
his  soul.  Man  suffers  scars  and  wounds,  his  hair  turns  grey,  his 
strength  departs  and  his  memory  flees;  he  seems  not  to  know 
even  his  own  children.  Life  is  passing  as  a  river  ever  flowing 
away,  never  still,  never  returning.  Life  is  changeable  as  the 
flashing  lightning,  a  pattern  of  as  little  meaning,  and  imper¬ 
manent.  Where  can  one  live  long?  Life  is  bright  and  colored 
for  a  passing  moment  like  the  sunset.  Then  it  is  gone  and 
who  can  prevent  it  going?  Therefore,  Bharata,  once  in  this 
perilous  body  deplore  your  own  condition.  Mourn  your  own 
self  and  do  not  lament  anything  else.” 

Bharata  said,  “Oh  Rama,  kingdoms  wash  over  you,  but 
you  are  calm.  You  know  the  mysterious  soul  and  the  life 
where  he  swims.  The  Sun  of  our  father’s  life  first  grew  milder 
and  then  set,  its  journey  done,  and  Night  begins  her  course. 
Night  is  starless  then,  and  then  is  water  frozen  to  ice,  and  our 
City  is  like  a  fair  woman  forsaken.  I  came  to  see  you,  ask  of 
me  whatever  will  please  you.” 

Rama  said,  “You  say  you  love  me,  will  you  not  wait?” 

“Yes.” 

“That  will  make  me  very  happy,  Bharata.” 


When  the  Kosalas  knew  that  Rama  would  stay  in  the 
forest,  they  were  proud  and  sad.  They  sat  on  the  Earth  and 
said — Well  said!  Well  spoken!  We  call  that  excellent,  well 
done,  well  done! 

Bharata  said,  “Give  me  your  sandals.” 

Rama  took  off  his  wooden-soled  sandals  that  had  colored 
flowers  painted  on  them. 

Bharata  took  them.  “Rama,  you  are  the  true  King.  I  will 


The  Sandah 


107 


go  back,  T  will  rule  Kosala  in  trust  for  you  for  fourteen 
years,  and  your  sandals  will  be  on  the  throne.  If  I  do  not  see 
you  on  the  first  day  after  those  fourteen  years  I’ll  walk  into  a 
fire  and  die.” 

Bharata  retraced  his  steps.  In  Kosala  he  put  the  sandals  on 
the  head  of  the  King’s  own  lucky  elephant.  Satrughna 
brought  the  royal  throne  out  from  Ayodhya  and  put  it  in  the 
little  village  of  Nandigrama  nearby.  Vasishtha  brought  all  the 
signs  of  royalty  to  Nandigrama,  and  there  Bharata  led  the  el¬ 
ephant. 

Bharata  put  Rama’s  shoes  on  the  red  and  gold  Ayodhya 
throne.  Over  them  spread  the  gold-ribbed  white  silk  umbrella 
and  the  white  yak-tail  fan  of  silver  and  emerald.  Bharata  and 
Satrughna  put  on  barkcloth  and  sat  at  the  foot  of  the  throne. 

Every  day  the  ministers  and  noblemen  of  Kosala  came  out 
from  Ayodhya  all  in  bark  like  hermits.  They  would  bow  to 
Rama’s  shoes  as  to  a  King.  The  warriors  were  dressed  like 
holy  wanderers  seeking  for  the  Lord  somewhere,  begging 
their  way.  Rama’s  sandals  lay  quiet  if  justice  was  done  before 
the  throne,  but  if  any  case  was  wrongly  judged  the  sandals 
swiftly  beat  together  their  loud  wooden  soles. 


In  Ayodhya  heralds  furled  the  bright  silk  flags.  For  four¬ 
teen  years  there  was  silence  in  Fair  Ayodhya  and  no  sound  of 
mirth  or  learning.  Many  days  the  Sun  was  clouded  because  of 
heaven’s  dark-hearted  sorrow.  Musicians  unstrung  their  lutes 
and  played  no  music,  because  there  was  no  music  in  the 
forest  where  Rama  was.  The  Kosalas  took  the  wheels  off  their 
chariots  and  walked  where  they  had  to  go,  because  Rama  had 
no  chariot  and  had  to  walk  in  the  woods.  The  Ayodhya 
women  alone  still  wore  flowers  and  fine  clothes  and  orna¬ 
ments,  because  Sita  went  to  the  forest  dressed  in  fashion.  The 
gardeners  kept  their  gardens  of  Ayodhya  alive  and  watered 
the  flowers  in  the  hanging  gardens  on  the  hillside  leading  to 
the  empty  royal  palace. 

Ayodhya  was  like  the  pools  by  the  seashore  when  the  tide 
is  withdrawn.  Where  once  the  waves  had  foamed  and  thun¬ 
dered  on  the  stones,  now  in  the  little  ponds  were  only  tiny 
silent  ripples  bom  from  a  gentle  wind  from  the  sea.  She  was 
like  a  mare  slain  in  war;  now  dead,  yet  an  instant  before 
alive  and  strong  and  in  motion  and  attacking. 


108 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


The  mate  of  a  young  bull  will  not  eat  grass  without  him 
beside  her.  In  summer  a  stream  will  dry  away.  Her  water  will 
turn  warm,  her  animals  will  be  lean  and  her  fish  will  die.  In 
winter  her  floods  will  drown  small  creatures.  After  many 
years  a  bamboo  will  flower  once  and  then  die. 

We  may  be  the  playthings  of  Fate.  We  cannot  breathe 
without  taking  life.  As  we  talk  here,  we  are  ourselves  the 
cause  of  the  deaths  of  countless  little  lives.  We  have  surely  let 
old  bodies  go  many  times,  as  though  changing  from  old 
clothes  into  new  ones.  We  may  have  died  more  times  in  the 
past  than  all  the  times  we  have  fallen  asleep  since  being  bom 
twelve  years  ago. 

Await  the  time.  What  use  is  impatience? 


Rama  went  barefoot  for  the  rest  of  his  exile.  He  thought 
Chitrakuta  still  too  close  to  Ayodhya.  One  morning  soon  af¬ 
ter  Bharata  had  come  and  gone,  Rama  and  Sita  and  Lak- 
shmana  set  out  towards  the  Vindhya  Hills,  south  into  the 
forests.  Late  in  the  day  they  came  to  a  large  lake  fed  by 
springs,  with  shores  of  soft  white  sands  shaded  by  trees. 

There  were  water-flowers,  red  and  yellow  and  blue,  and 
green  water-leaves,  and  plump  silver  fish  swimming,  all 
spread  out  like  an  elephant  blanket  of  many  colors.  There 
were  cranes  and  fisherbirds  and  floating  tortoises,  and  swans 
and  frogs  and  pink  geese.  Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana 
stopped  and  they  could  hear  from  within  the  water  the  sound 
of  singing  and  of  music.  They  heard  laughter  and  drums,  the 
ringing  of  ankle-bells  and  the  pouring  of  wines,  but  the  lake 
looked  clear  and  they  saw  no  one. 

They  entered  a  glade  of  green  grass,  and  saw  a  house  and 
an  old  couple  sitting  by  it,  and  in  the  late  sunlight  the  glow 
of  Brahma  power  stood  out  as  a  halo  around  the  old  people. 
That  was  the  home  of  Atri,  one  of  the  seven  oldest  saints 
in  the  three  worlds,  and  his  wife  Anasuya.  That  is  their  earthly 
home;  in  heaven  Atri  lives  in  one  of  the  seven  lights  of  the 
Bear  in  the  sky. 

Atri  welcomed  Rama  and  Lakshmana,  and  Anasuya  smiled 
and  rose  and  took  Sita  aside.  Rama  asked,  “What  is  that 
wonderful  lake  we  passed?” 

Atri  replied,  “That  is  Five-Apsarasa-Lake.  Long  ago  the 


The  Sandals 


109 


hermit  Mandakami  stood  there  beside  a  little  rain  puddle  and 
lived  only  on  air.  The  longer  he  did  that,  the  larger  the  water 
grew.  He  stood  on  the  edge  of  a  lake.  Indra  looked  down 
from  Heaven  and  saw  that  Mandakami  would  soon  drown 
the  Earth.  Indra  sent  five  beautiful  Apsarasas  to  stop  him. 
Mandakami  saw  the  five  dancing  girls  all  lively  as  lightning 
and  he  changed  his  life.  He  married  them  all  and  made  an  in¬ 
visible  home  within  the  lakewater.  He  had  won  enough  merit 
to  keep  himself  young  forever.  Mandakami  lives  happily 
there  and  his  five  wives  do  everything  to  please  him.  When 
they  drink  and  feast  and  dance  we  may  hear  their  dancing- 
bells  and  sweet  songs,  and  sometimes  their  fair-winged  words, 
and  even  catch  the  scent  of  their  five  celestial  perfumes.” 

Anasuya  sat  apart  with  Sita.  Anasuya  was  very  old;  her 
hair  was  wispy  white  and  her  body  shook  with  age  like  a  leaf 
in  the  wind.  She  said,  “Sita,  with  you  Rama  may  have  some 
pleasure  in  the  forest.” 

Sita  said,  “He  is  my  man.” 

“What  shall  I  do  for  you?”  asked  Anasuya,  whose  name 
means  Kindness.  “Take  a  gift  to  please  me.”  Anasuya  opened 
a  box  and  from  it  she  gave  Sita  a  never-fading  garland  of 
rare  loveliness,  and  put  it  over  Sita’s  head  next  to  Guha’s 
pink  shell  necklace.  Then  Anasuya  gave  Sita  gold  and  silver 
ornaments  that  never  tarnished  and  a  jar  of  sandalwood 
cream  that  never  emptied. 

Sita  took  the  ornaments  and  put  aside  some  of  her  former 
ones  she  had  worn  from  Ayodhya,  and  said,  “These  are  very 
beautiful.”  Sita  was  surprised  and  smiling. 

Anasuya  said,  “They  will  keep  you  beautiful  forever.  Oh 
Sita,  look,  the  Sun  has  set.  By  the  last  rays  of  daylight  the 
smoke  rising  from  our  fire  is  colored  red.  Open  trees  appear 
dense  with  leaves,  nothing  can  be  seen  at  a  distance,  and  the 
hermitage  deer  lie  by  the  altars.  Night  crested  by  stars  and 
robed  in  moonlight  has  come,  and  day  has  gone  from  the  sky 
and  the  Earth.  Stay  with  us  tonight,  dear  Sita.” 


The  next  day  Rama  and  Lakshmana,  and  Sita  wearing 
those  friendly  presents,  went  on  their  way.  They  went  west 
and  a  little  south,  walking  the  length  of  the  Vindhya  Hills  af¬ 
ter  climbing  their  northern  slopes.  There  Lakshmana  found 
many  places  to  build  a  home.  They  would  live  in  one  place 
for  three  months  or  eight  months  or  a  year,  and  then  would 


no 


THE  PRINCE  OF  AYODHYA 


move  on  to  another  place.  They  did  this  until  thirteen  years 
of  Rama’s  exile  had  passed  away,  and  it  was  late  in  the  four¬ 
teenth  and  last  springtime. 


THIS  ENDS  THE 
SECOND  BOOK  OF  AYODHYA 
HERE  BEGINS  THE  FOREST  BOOK 


PART  TWO 

SITA'S  RESCUE 


OM! 

I  bow  to  Lord  Rama, 

To  Sita  of  beautiful  fortune; 
l  salute  Hanuman  the  monkey, 
And  the  Goddess  Saraswati: 
JAY  A! 

Victory I 


Dandaka  Forest 


It  was  almost  the  fourteenth  summer  when  Rama  and  Sita 
and  Lakshmana  crossed  over  the  Vindhya  Hills  and  began  to 
walk  down  the  southern  slopes.  One  evening  after  walking  far 
they  entered  a  large  grove  of  trees,  and  many  clear  streams 
crossed  the  path  with  their  branches  of  water.  There  was 
woodsmoke  on  the  air,  and  Rama  said,  “We  are  coming  to 
the  home  of  Agastya,  the  brahmana  who  lowered  the 
Vindhya  Hills,  destroyed  two  demons  and  settled  here.” 

Sita  asked,  “How  did  he  do  that7” 

Rama  answered,  “Agastya  is  a  small  man,  but  what  is  im¬ 
possible  for  even  the  gods  he  can  do  easily.” 


Listen,  Sita — 

Long  ago,  the  Vindhya  Hills  were  jealous  of  the  Himalya, 
and  in  envy  Vindhya  began  to  grow  higher  and  higher. 
Vindhya  told  the  Sun  and  Moon,  “Circle  around  me  now,  for 
I  am  the  new  center  of  the  world!” 

Sun  and  Moon  would  not  do  that.  They  kept  going  around 
the  golden  hill  Meru  in  the  Himalya.  But  Vindhya  rose  until 
his  peaks  blocked  the  skies.  Surya  the  Sun  could  not  pass  to 
the  south.  The  stars  and  Moon  were  blocked  and  rainclouds 
and  Wind  could  not  go  where  they  wanted. 

Agastya  came  walking  from  the  north.  He  got  to  the 
Vindhya  foothills  and  saw  how  Vindhya  had  grown  impass¬ 
able.  There  were  no  trails  and  the  hills  were  lost  in  cold 
clouds.  Agastya  asked  Vindhya,  “Best  of  mountains,  I  must 
go  south  for  awhile.  Let  me  go  by  and  come  back  again.” 

Vindhya  said,  “Pass,  brahmana.”  Vindhya  bowed  low  to 
Agastya,  and  these  hills  decreased  to  their  present  height,  well 
below  the  sky-paths. 

Agastya  said,  “Don’t  rise  again  till  I  cross  you  coming 
back.”  Then  he  settled  here,  south  of  the  hilltops,  and  he  has 

113 


114 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


never  yet  gone  back  north,  and  Vindhya  obeys  him.  Vindhya 
still  waits  for  Agastya  faithfully,  with  his  head  bent  low. 

Then  men  could  cross  these  hills  and  travel  here,  but  they 
were  hunted  by  two  demon  brothers  named  Vatapi  and  H- 
wala.  Hwala  took  the  form  of  a  brahmana,  and  speaking  re¬ 
fined  language  he  invited  anyone  he  met  to  eat  with  him,  and 
led  his  guest  up  to  a  little  cottage  by  the  edge  of  a  wood. 

Inside  in  the  kitchen  Vatapi  took  the  form  of  a  ram  and  H- 
wala  cooked  his  brother  and  served  him  outside,  and  when 
the  guest  had  eaten  the  ram  Ilwala  would  say —Come  out 
shouting!  Then  Vatapi  bellowing  like  a  ram  would  tear  his 
way  out  from  the  traveler’s  body  and  kill  him,  and  Vatapi 
and  Ilwala  would  drain  and  drink  the  corpse’s  blood. 

In  that  way  they  destroyed  nine  thousand  men.  Then  one 
evening  Ilwala  met  Agastya  and  brought  him  home  and 
served  him  dinner.  Small  as  he  was,  Agastya  ate  up  every 
shred  of  the  roast  mutton,  and  sat  back  smacking  his  lips  and 
smiling. 

Ilwala  facing  him  took  a  deep  breath  and  said — Come  out. 
Come  out  shouting! 

Nothing  happened.  Agastya  washed  his  hands  in  a  bowl  of 
water  and  looked  at  Ilwala.  “Beware  of  the  Dharma-appe- 
tite,”  said  Agastya.  “I  have  digested  your  brother.  I  have  sent 
him  to  Death  as  my  delicious  well-cooked  dinner.” 

Hwala’s  fingernails  grew  into  blue  poisoned  claws.  He  leapt 
at  Agastya.  But  with  one  fiery  look  from  his  eyes  Agastya 
burned  him  dead  as  he  jumped.  He  burned  him  with  a  glance 
that  flashed  real  fire  and  real  flames. 

“We  have  met  woods-dwellers  before,”  said  Rama,  “but 
there  is  no  one  else  like  Agastya.  North  lives  Lord  Shiva, 
north  are  the  Himalya  hills,  and  Mount  Meru  the  center  of 
the  world,  and  Kailasa  Hill  of  silver,  and  all  manner  of 
weight,  and  Agastya  alone  by  living  here  in  the  south  keeps 
Earth  from  tipping  over.  He  is  very  powerful,  and  the 
heaviest  person  alive.” 

Rama  said,  “Lakshmana,  go  ahead  alone  and  greet  Agas¬ 
tya  and  tell  him  we  are  here.” 

Lakshmana  found  Agastya  clad  in  bark  sheets  tied  with 
a  belt  of  vines,  sitting  on  cut  holy  grass  that  was  blue  as  lapis 
stone,  his  feet  crossed  and  tucked  up  over  his  knees  as  though 
be  were  warding  away  some  evil.  Lakshmana  said,  “Command 
Rama  and  Sita  what  to  do  next.” 

“I  have  been  thinking  of  Rama  in  my  mind,”  Agastya 
looked  keenly  at  Lakshmana.  “After  a  long  time,  by  good 


D  and  aka  Forest  H5 

fortune  Rama  has  come  to  see  me.  Where  is  he?  Let  him  en¬ 
ter  my  home,  why  have  you  not  brought  him?” 

Rama  and  Sita  walked  past  the  flat  stones  where  Naga 
Kings  of  the  underworlds  and  gods  of  heaven  would  come  to 
sit  and  talk  with  Agastya.  Agastya  rose  and  greeted  them  and 
said,  “Sit  and  eat  supper  with  me.  The  host  who  won’t  feed 
his  friends  will  eat  his  own  flesh  in  the  next  world,  just  like  a 
false  witness.”  He  served  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  Sita  a 
supper  of  edible  flowers  and  bulbs  that  left  them  with  no 
slightest  thought  of  hunger. 

When  they  had  eaten,  Agastya  said,  “Rama,  let  me  see 
your  bow.” 

Rama  held  out  to  him  the  bow  he  had  brought  from 
Ayodhya  to  use  in  the  forest.  Agastya  glanced  at  it  and  set  it 
aside.  He  said,  “It  is  flawed,  because  the  man  who  made  it 
was  at  that  time  engaged  in  an  affair  with  another  man’s  wife 
and  his  mind  was  ill  at  ease.” 

Agastya’s  house  was  nearby.  From  within  it  Agastya 
brought  out  a  long  bow  and  a  covered  quiver,  and  gave 
Rama  the  bow.  That  bow  was  backed  with  diamonds  and 
curving  golden  plates.  Its  belly  was  smooth  and  painted  with 
colors  like  Indra’s  Bow  of  Rain.  It  was  covered  with  gold  on 
its  tips  and  its  bowstring  was  unbreakable. 

Then  Agastya  opened  the  quiver  and  took  out  from  it  all 
that  it  held:  two  arrows  made  from  long  grass  stalks,  and 
vaned  with  vulture  feathers,  one  bladed  with  brass,  and  the 
other  with  silver.  He  gave  the  silver  one  to  Lakshmana  and  the 
brass  one  to  Rama. 

Agastya  said,  “Rama  of  the  war-chariots,  take  from  me 
this  sweet-sounding  bow  in  exchange  for  your  old  one,  and 
take  this  arrow.  One  day  I  found  these  things  in  the  forest.  I 
think  they  have  fallen  from  heaven,  perhaps  during  the  con¬ 
fusion  of  Ravana’s  attack  many  years  ago.  This  bow  will  bet¬ 
ter  bear  the  weight  of  those  weapons  Viswamitra  taught  you. 
The  blades  of  these  arrows  have  never  needed  to  be  polished 
or  sharpened,  and  so  I  think  they  may  be  infallible,  shot  by 
the  right  person. . . .” 

The  evening  deepened  into  night  and  Lakshmana  made  a 
fire.  Agastya  said,  “Rama,  round  my  home  on  every  side  all 
the  waters  are  clear.  Live  here  with  me.  Harmless  deer  haunt 
this  forest,  bewitching  people  by  their  beauty.  Aside  from 
that,  there  is  no  menace  here.” 


116  SITA’S  RESCUE 

Rama,  said,  “Lakshmana  would  hunt  those  trusting  deer 
for  us  to  eat.  That  would  pain  you,  we  cannot  stay.” 


In  the  morning  Agastya  led  Rama  out  onto  a  spur  of  the 
mountains,  high  on  the  hillside  looking  south.  Below  them  the 
Vindhya  Hills  ended  and  the  thirsty  dry  jungles  of  Dandaka 
Forest  reached  out  to  the  south  as  far  as  they  could  see  over 
the  land. 

“We  are  far  from  Lanka,”  said  Agastya,  “but  the  edge  of 
Dandaka  is  the  frontier  of  the  Rakshasa  kingdom  on  Earth. 
For  the  most  part  Dandaka  is  a  huge  wasteland.  It  knows  no 
master  but  Ravana.  Whoever  goes  down  there  must  be  him¬ 
self  his  own  protection.  Oh  Rama,  Ravana  the  Demon  King 
believes  he  owns  the  universe;  what  are  men  to  him? 
Pleasures  distract  him  and  he  scorns  men  as  but  his  food, 
weak  and  worthless.  Men  live  surrounded  by  chance  and  dan¬ 
ger  and  they  cannot  tell  right  from  wrong.  Their  lives  are 
short  and  miserable.  They  are  prey  to  hunger  and  thirst,  dis¬ 
ease  and  old  age.  Unending  evils  overwhelm  them.  Behold 
Man,  ignorant  of  his  own  ways  in  the  world — now  merrily 
drinking  and  dancing,  now  blindly  weeping  all  in  tears. 

“Fourteen  thousand  Rakshasa  veterans  garrison  Dandaka, 
commanded  by  the  demon  general  Khara.  Away  to  the  south 
they  have  an  army  station  in  a  thistle  grove,  and  watchtowers 
of  stone  around  it.  And  in  the  jungle  Gandharva  sentinels 
sent  by  the  gods  watch  in  the  trees.  Serpents  arch  and  bend 
up  from  underground  holes,  guards  for  the  Water  Lord 
Varuna.  And  whirling  and  sparkling  in  the  night  are  the 
Yakshas,  placed  as  sentries  by  the  Treasure  King  Vaishra- 
vana.  Every  god  fears  that  Ravana  may  yet  move  farther 
against  him,  and  send  demons  to  enforce  his  evil  empire.” 

Rama  said,  “I  did  not  know  that  there  was  anywhere  on 
this  Earth  that  Rama  and  Lakshmana  could  not  freely  go.” 

Agastya  said,  “Strike  back  at  him.” 

Rama  smiled.  “I  still  have  a  year  to  wander.”  He  turned 
and  looked  behind  him  at  Agastya’s  hermitage.  That  grove  of 
trees  and  little  house  could  remove  any  weariness  of  body  or 
heart.  No  Rakshasa  could  enter  there. 

Agastya  said,  “There  are  still  a  few  pleasant  spots  here  and 
there  in  Dandaka,  but  for  the  rest  it  is  infested  by  blood-drink¬ 
ing  demons.  Be  careful,  especially  at  night.  Don’t  let  the 
Rakshasas  surprise  you  and  they  will  not  win.  If  you  meet 
them,  prevent  them  as  you  go.”  Agastya  embraced  Rama. 


Dandaka  Forest  117 

“That  is  the  path.  I  use  it  sometimes,  for  a  little  way,  to  gather 
sticks.  Rama,  demons  do  not  love  men,  therefore  men  must 
love  each  other.” 

Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana,  with  their  one  new  bow 
and  two  new  arrows  given  by  Agastya  and  with  their  arrows 
from  Ayodhya,  went  downhill  into  Dandaka.  The  morning 
Sun,  like  a  man  newly  rich,  shone  too  proud  over  the  forest. 
They  left  behind  Vindhya  of  a  thousand  summits  with  his 
caves  of  lions  and  falling  fountains,  and  his  crystal  rivers 
laughing  aloud  as  they  flowed  down  his  sides. 

The  trees  of  Dandaka  were  like  columns  of  wood  and  their 
branches  were  twisted  like  the  crooked  hearts  of  evil  men. 
Their  leaves  were  brittle  and  dry.  The  air  was  wavy  and  hot; 
there  was  a  hot  wind,  and  huge  hot  boulders  threw  back  the 
heat,  and  curled  shreds  of  bark  fallen  to  the  forest  floor 
rustled  as  the  Sun  got  hotter. 

All  Dandaka  was  creaking  in  the  heat,  warning  away  men. 
The  ground  was  uneven,  trackless  and  deserted,  overgrown 
with  hard  red  burr-bushes  and  brush  that  cried  out  underfoot. 
Every  pond  that  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  Sita  saw  was  en¬ 
circled  with  wavy  lines  and  blackened  grasses  that  showed 
how  the  water  had  receded.  The  wind  blew  in  gusts  and  they 
heard  screams  from  the  lines  of  dead  whistling  canes  bent 
down  in  the  wind.  Dandaka  stretched  before  them,  fearsome 
and  wild  and  wide. 

Past  stumps  and  trunks  Lakshmana  led  them  on  into  that 
hair-raising  wilderness,  and  Dandaka  grew  deeper  and  denser 
and  filled  with  noisy  chiming  crickets,  and  vultures  sat  on 
bare  branches.  Then  at  noon  they  saw  the  eighty-four  thou¬ 
sand  little  Valakhilya  saints  of  the  wood.  They  were  people 
smaller  than  a  thumbnail,  floating  in  the  air,  drinking  in  sun¬ 
beams,  looking  like  motes  of  dust  in  the  Sun. 

They  spoke  to  Rama  and  said,  “Oh  child,  we  are  meek  and 
unassuming.  Here  it  is  dreadful  and  lonely.  It  is  a  sadness  to 
live  here.  Rakshasas  prowl  for  flesh  by  night.  They  over¬ 
shadow  the  darkness  as  though  they  would  crush  the  moun¬ 
tains  down.  We  must  endure  demons  and  submit  to  them.  We  v 
have  seen  mountains  of  bones  from  the  victims  they  have 
slaughtered,  white  bones,  Rama,  white  bones _ ” 

Rama  said,  “Let  me  just  walk  on,  through  this  forest.  Give 
me  your  permission  to  see  who  will  stop  me.” 

“We  see  your  strength,”  said  the  Valakhilyas.  “Free  this 
ancient  forest,  deliver  us  from  the  Night-Wanderers.” 

Rama  answered  the  little  saints.  “I  have  strayed  from  the 


118  SITA’S  RESCUE 

Dharma  of  warriors  if  this  has  happened  while  I  was  near 
you.” 

The  Valas  said,  “We  hide  from  Rakshasas  of  Lanka  walk¬ 
ing  abroad  through  Dandaka,  in  form  like  hideous  charred 
corpses  from  some  cremation  ground.  They’ll  rush  at  you, 
Rama.  They  will  hit  you  from  behind  with  unfair  weapons.” 

Lakshmana  said,  “If  they  attack  us  by  day  or  by  night  we 
will  hunt  them  down  and  kill  them  all.” 

The  Valas  said,  “Oh  Lakshmana  and  Rama  like  the  Moon, 
they  cannot  bear  you.  More  than  anyone  they  will  resent  you; 
go  on  your  way  and  be  on  your  guard.”  The  Valakhilyas 
clustered  in  the  air.  “Oh  Rama,  we  are  peaceful.  We  don’t 
know  ...  we  think  ...  we  think  war  is  better  than  fear,  if 
you  will  fight  it  for  us. . . .” 

Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana  left  the  Valakhilyas  and 
went  along  south  for  awhile,  and  Sita  said,  “We  are  not 
forest  people.  Do  not  carry  war  with  you;  in  Ayodhya  once 
again  become  a  warrior.  Don’t  let  desire  make  you  do  wrong, 
do  not  kill  demons  without  cause  for  war.  I  have  heard  that 
Lord  Indra,  when  he  envies  the  merit  won  by  an  ascetic,  will 
take  on  the  guise  of  a  warrior,  and  go  into  the  forest,  and 
leave  his  fine  sword  with  the  hermit  for  safekeeping,  and  go 
away.  So  the  ascetic  will  keep  by  him  a  sword  sharpened  only 
to  kill  men.  Then  he  will  begin  to  carry  it  with  him  when  go¬ 
ing  from  home.  Then  he  will  one  day  draw  it.  He  will  kill.” 

Rama  said,  “I  won’t  start  any  war.” 

“How  can  you  tell?”  asked  Sita.  “Discard  Agastya’s  arrows. 
After  all  these  years  we  do  not  need  them  to  hunt  our  food, 
and  they  are  meant  only  for  killing  demons.  Do  not  carry 
war  with  you,  or  by  small  degrees  your  mind  will  alter.” 

Rama  said,  “Princess,  war  is  within  us,  it’s  nothing  outside. 
No  warrior  neglects  his  weapons.  He  never  gives  them  up.  It 
is  a  shame  to  me  that  those  saints  must  seek  my  protection 
that  should  be  theirs  without  asking.  Sita,  while  he  may  a 
warrior  like  other  men  enjoys  peace,  but  misfortune  and  peril 
make  him  flame  up  in  anger  and  resist.” 

“How  can  you  tell  what  is  right?”  asked  Sita.  “You  are 
only  doing  what  you  like.” 

Rama  said,  “Dharma  leads  to  happiness,  but  happiness 
cannot  lead  to  Dharma.  There  is  some  reason  for  all  this. 
The  Valakhilyas  have  great  power,  yet  they  have  done  noth¬ 
ing  against  Ravana.  The  Demon  King  must  surely  have  some 
strong  defense  that  can’t  be  broken  by  their  merit,  or  they 


Dandaka  Forest  119 

could  all  by  themselves  easily  destroy  all  Khara’s  soldiers  and 
suffer  no  loss  doing  it.” 

“Who  are  those  tiny  people?”  asked  Sita. 

“No  one  remembers  when  they  were  bom,”  said  Rama. 
“They  float  through  the  air  all  together,  like  a  cloud  formed 
from  streaks  of  light,  and  once  by  just  a  little  of  their  power 
they  created  the  King  of  Birds  Garuda.” 

Sita  asked,  “How  was  Garuda  born?” 

Rama  said,  “Garuda  is  the  mount  of  Narayana,  and  he 
lives  with  Narayana  in  a  great  heaven  far  above  the  realm  of 
Indra  and  the  lesser  gods.  He  carries  Lord  Narayana  on  his 
back  and  never  tires.” 


Listen — 

Kashyapa  is  like  Atri.  He  is  another  of  the  seven  sages  of 
old  who  live  in  the  constellation  of  the  Bear.  The  first  Indra 
and  six  of  the  gods  were  his  children.  Their  mother  Aditi 
then  retreated  into  the  infinite  heavens,  she  is  the  goddess  of 
the  unbounded  Universe  that  goes  on  and  on,  free  forever. 

Kashyapa  took  two  other  wives  and  planned  a  sacrifice  so 
they  would  bear  him  sons.  Indra  helped  him  prepare  and  of¬ 
fered  to  bring  firewood,  and  the  Valakhilya  saints  said  they 
would  do  the  same. 

So  Indra  was  flying  in  the  air  carrying  great  loads  of  wood. 
He  looked  down  and  saw  all  the  thousands  of  Valakhilyas 
walking  on  the  ground  and  staggering  under  the  weight  of 
one  dry  leaf,  dragging  it  around  the  water  pooled  in  a  cow’s 
hoofprint.  Lord  Indra  laughed  at  them  and  flew  by.  The  little 
Valas  saw  his  shadow  and  looked  up  and  said  to  one  an¬ 
other — He  won't  help.  He  wouldn’t  help  us! 

The  Valas  pulled  their  leaf  aside  and  crumbled  it  and  lit  it 
afire  right  where  they  were,  and  sang — Let  him  come.  Let  a 
better  Indra  cornel 

Indra  could  hear  them  chanting.  He  fled  to  Kashyapa  and 
said,  “The  Valakhilyas  will  replace  me  with  another  King  of 
Heaven.  I  take  your  protection.” 

“No  fear,”  said  Kashyapa.  Kashyapa  found  the  Valas  hum¬ 
ming  songs  over  their  smoking  leaf.  He  told  them,  “Success.” 

They  glittered  with  pleasure — As  you  say,  as  you  say. 

Kashyapa  said,  “Do  not  make  another  Indra,  but  make 
someone  else  instead.” 

Very  well  Sir.  The  leaf  was  all  burned.  From  its  ashes  the 


120  SITA’S  RESCUE 

Valakhilyas  took  two  seeds.  For  your  wives.  Sons  for  you 
then. 

Kashyapa  went  home.  He  told  Indra,  “Do  not  mock 
humble  people.”  He  gave  a  seed  to  his  wife  Vinata  and  a 
seed  to  his  wife  Kadru,  and  they  swallowed  them.  Then 
Kashyapa  left  home  and  went  away  to  be  alone  by  himself  in 
the  hills. 

A  year  later  Vinata  gave  birth  to  two  eggs  and  Kadru  gave 
birth  to  a  thousand  eggs.  They  put  each  egg  into  its  own  jar 
of  warm  butter.  They  put  the  jars  outside  in  the  sunshine  and 
rain,  in  the  day  and  night.  Time  went  by.  After  five  hundred 
years  all  of  Kadru’s  thousand  eggs  hatched  into  baby  Nagas, 
but  Vinata’s  two  sons  were  still  in  their  shells. 

Vinata  could  not  bear  to  wait  any  longer.  She  opened  one 
of  her  jars  and  took  out  the  egg  inside  and  cracked  its  shell. 
Inside  she  found  her  son  Aruna,  alive  but  not  fully  formed. 
He  had  no  legs  and  his  whole  body  was  translucent.  Aruna 
told  his  mother  not  to  disturb  her  other  son  for  another  five 
hundred  years.  Then  he  flew  away  up  into  the  sky.  He  be¬ 
came  the  charioteer  of  Surya  the  Sun.  The  light  of  dawn 
shines  right  through  Aruna’s  skin  and  bones,  and  so  the  dawn 
is  red,  as  he  first  drives  the  Sun’s  chariot  each  morning  on  its 
way. 

Vinata  left  her  second  child  alone  to  hatch.  But  Kadru 
thought  that  she  was  better  than  Vinata  because  she  had  so 
many  more  sons,  and  they  were  already  bom.  So  Kadru 
made  a  bet  and  cheated  to  win  it.  Long  ago  the  Ocean  was 
churned,  and  changed  from  milk  into  saltwater.  Many  things 
were  created  from  that  churning,  and  one  was  the  King  of 
Horses  named  Uchchaih-sravas,  an  all-white  stallion.  He  be¬ 
longed  to  Indra  but  during  those  years  he  could  come  to 
graze  on  the  Earth,  and  Kadru  and  Vinata  often  saw  him 
standing  on  a  hill. 

Kadru  bet  Vinata  that  the  horse  was  not  all-white,  and 
each  one  agreed  to  become  the  slave  of  the  other  if  she  lost 
the  bet.  Kadru  then  made  her  thousand  babies  change  into 
black  hairs  and  hide  in  that  horse’s  tail,  and  Vinata  lost  her 
freedom. 

Garuda  was  bom  from  that  second  egg.  He  struggled  out 
of  his  shell  and  began  soaking  up  the  sunshine.  He  grew  into 
a  giant  within  a  few  moments  of  his  birth.  Garuda  was  a 
huge  eagle,  with  golden  feathers  on  his  body  and  brilliant  red 
ones  on  his  wings.  He  had  the  head  and  wings  and  talons  of 


Dandaka  Forest 


121 


an  eagle,  but  he  also  had  the  arms  and  hands  of  a  man,  and 
his  torso  was  a  man’s  though  covered  with  gold  feathers. 

Garuda  looked  around  with  his  round  yellow  eyes.  He  saw 
that  his  mother  Vinata  did  all  the  drudgery  and  housework 
and  wore  ragged  sleeves  and  got  only  leftover  snake  food  to 
eat,  while  Kadru  lolled  around  in  ease  and  idleness. 

Garuda  asked  his  mother  why  she  was  poor,  and  when  he 
heard  about  the  bet  he  went  to  Kadru  and  offered  to  ransom 
Vinata  at  any  price. 

The  thousand  Nagas  were  long  since  grown  up.  They  all 
took  counsel  together,  then  Kadru  said,  “There  is  in  Indra’s 
Heaven  a  cup  of  amrita,  the  nectar  of  immortality,  churned 
from  the  milk  sea  long  long  ago.  Bring  it  to  us  and  we  free 
your  mother.” 

The  wondrous  fair-feathered  Garuda  opened  his  wings. 
They  spread  over  the  sky  like  a  wind.  Garuda  flew  to  the 
hills  for  advice  from  his  father  Kashyapa. 

Kashyapa  was  happy  to  see  his  son.  He  said,  “My  boy,  eat 
a  little  something  before  you  try  to  fly  to  heaven  and  steal 
amrita  from  Indra.  But  never  eat  a  man.  Remember  that” 

“Yes,  Father.” 

Kashyapa  continued,  “There’s  a  big  lake  behind  this  hill. 
There  live  two  big  animals  always  fighting  one  another — a 
tortoise  whose  shell  is  ten  leagues  around,  and  an  elephant 
who  stands  six  leagues  tall.  They  are  two  men  reborn.  They 
are  two  brothers  drawing  out  in  lowly  animal  forms  their 
senseless  quarrel  over  an  inheritance  that  began  when  they 
were  men.” 

“What  did  they  inherit?”  asked  Garuda. 

“Money  I  think.  Go  eat  them,  son.” 

“Father,  what’s  money?” 

“Money.  .  .  .”  Kashyapa  smiled  at  his  son.  “Money  is 
. . .  it’s  .  .  .  it’s  really  nothing.” 

“Yes,  Father.  Father,  what’s  a  league?” 

“A  day’s  travel  with  one  yoking  of  animals.  Remember 
now,  never  eat  a  man.  Man  is  Master  of  all  animals.  If  you 
swallow  one  he’ll  turn  into  fire  or  poison  or  a  razor.  Go  now 
with  my  blessing,  and  seek  your  fortune.” 

Garuda  blinked  his  eyes.  “Goodbye.”  He  flew  up,  then 
dove  down  at  that  lake.  The  animals  were  fighting  as  usual. 
The  elephant  was  trying  to  pull  the  turtle  onshore  and  the 
turtle  was  trying  to  drag  the  elephant  underwater  and  drown 
him.  They  had  been  trying  to  do  that  same  thing  for  ages,  an¬ 
noying  all  the  hills  with  their  yells  and  wails. 


122 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


Garuda  caught  one  beast  in  each  claw  and  flew  up  high 
with  them,  looking  for  somewhere  to  alight  to  eat  them.  By 
the  western  seashore  he  saw  a  very  old  banyan  tree,  one  of 
whose  limbs  went  way  out  over  the  water.  That  limb  was  so 
stout  it  would  take  ten  thousand  ox  hides  tied  end  to  end  to 
go  round  it,  and  it  went  out  over  the  ocean  for  one  hundred 
leagues. 

The  old  tree  looked  up  and  called  out  to  Garuda,  “Sit  on 
my  great  magnificent  branch.” 

Garuda  landed  there,  but  his  weight  broke  the  branch..  It 
cracked  off  right  near  the  trunk  and  started  to  fall  into  the 
sea.  As  it  fell  Garuda  saw  the  Valakhilya  saints  hanging  from 
it  upside  down  all  clustered  together.  He  didn’t  know  what  to 
do,  but  he  thought  they  might  be  men  and  he  ought  to  save 
them,  so  he  caught  the  falling  limb  in  his  beak  and  flew  up 
again  still  holding  the  two  squirming  animals  as  well. 

Kashyapa  had  kept  his  eye  on  his  son’s  first  adventure. 
Now  he  approached  Garuda  in  the  air  and  yelled  in  his  ear, 
“Fly  easy,  don’t  vibrate.”  He  dropped  down  and  talked  to  the 
Valas.  “Victory  to  light.  Forgive  my  son,  he  didn’t  see  you.” 

Oh  yes  Sir,  we  know  him,  we  know  Garuda.  The  Valakhil- 
yas  left  their  perch  and  flew  off  someplace.  Kashyapa 
showed  Garuda  a  barren  hill  where  he  could  drop  the 
branch.  The  great  high  forest  trees  bent  and  waved  and 
swayed  like  a  field  of  wheat  from  the  downwind  of  Garuda’s 
wings.  He  dropped  the  branch  with  a  universal  crash,  and 
then  he  sat  on  the  hill  summit  and  ate  his  breakfast,  and  his 
strength  was  doubled. 

Garuda  flew  up  toward  heaven,  slowly  flapping  his  wings. 
In  heaven,  Indra’s  yellow  marble  throne  got  too  hot  to  sit  on. 
His  thunders  sizzled  and  rattled,  his  arrows  attacked  each 
other,  and  a  dry  wind  arose  full  of  dust  and  grit. 

Indra  and  Agni  the  Fire  God  went  to  heaven’s  gate  and 
looked  out.  Indra  asked,  “What’s  that  golden  gleaming  fire 
down  there?  Are  you  trying  to  bum  us  all?” 

“That’s  no  fire  of  mine,”  said  Agni.  “That  is  Garuda,  King 
of  the  Birds,  created  by  those  little  Valas  you  made  fun  of.” 

“Some  unearthly  bird?”  smiled  Indra.  “Oh,  that’s  hard  to 
believe  ...  go  see  what  he  wants,  will  you?” 

Garuda  was  floating  like  a  hawk,  on  the  wings  of  the  wind 
from  beyond,  wondering  where  to  go.  Agni  put  on  a  cape  of 
fire  and  a  hood  of  flames  to  keep  himself  cool  as  he  ap¬ 
proached  Garuda.  Below  were  the  Sun  and  Moon  and  all  the 
heavens  were  above. 


Dandaka  Forest 


123 


Agni  sang  a  song  to  Garuda — You  are  the  elements  of 
form,  you  are  the  light  of  life;  Garuda  moving  in  the  sky,  we 
take  your  protection.  He  said,  “Garuda;  you  are  making  the 
ether  boil  and  warping  the  precise  circles  of  the  Universe. 
Diminish  your  energy  and  speak  to  me.” 

“Before  I  do  that,”  said  Garuda,  “I  need  some  amrita.” 

“Wait,  just  a  moment.”  Agni  went  back  to  Indra.  “Give 
him  a  little  Nectar  of  Life.” 

“Never,”  said  Indra. 

“He’ll  take  it  then,”  said  Agni.  “He’s  too  hot  for  you.” 

“What!  Let  me  see!”  Indra  looked  down  again.  “He 
doesn’t  look  so  great.  Summon  all  my  fighters!” 

The  amrita  was  kept  inside  Indra’s  palace.  Indra  set  rows 
of  heavenly  guards  around  the  building.  They  stood  fearless 
in  their  golden  breastplates  that  shone  like  suns.  The  spears 
they  held  started  to  smoke  and  their  axes  shed  sparks. 

Garuda  came  flying  up  over  heaven’s  horizon.  His  wings 
blew  up  too  much  dust  from  the  ground  of  heaven  for  the 
guards  to  see  anything,  and  the  winds  he  made  sucked  the  air 
out  of  their  lungs  and  they  fainted.  Behind  the  guards 
Garuda  found  fires  fed  by  hurricanes.  Garuda  changed  his 
form  and  grew  eighty-one  hundred  mouths.  He  fled  back  to 
Earth  and  drank  up  eighty-one  hundred  rivers,  and  came 
back  to  Heaven  and  quenched  all  the  fires. 

Then  Garuda  took  a  tiny  form,  with  just  one  head  as  be¬ 
fore.  He  went  inside  Indra’s  house,  and  broke  through  a  fine- 
mesh  net  of  steel  links.  Behind  that  was  a  block  of  adamant 
and  a  round  passage  bored  through  it  leading  to  the  amrita. 
A  fan  of  sword  blades  whirled  in  the  passage  with  no  room 
to  go  around  it,  but  Garuda  went  right  through  the  fan  too 
quick  for  it  to  cut  him  at  all. 

At  the  end  of  the  passage  was  a  room  with  the  cup  of 
amrita  in  it,  and  by  the  cup  were  two  angry  serpents  to  guard 
it.  Those  snakes  had  poisonous  breath,  the  glance  of  their  eyes 
would  turn  you  to  stone,  and  their  tongues  were  electric 
pieces  of  lightning  slickering  in  and  out. 

But  Garuda  was  going  too  fast  to  be  seen.  He  brushed  be¬ 
tween  them  like  a  ghost  and  took  the  cup  of  amrita  and  was 
going  back  out  the  passage  before  the  serpents  knew  he  had 
even  come  in.  Going  out  he  hit  the  sword-fan  dead  center 
and  smashed  it.  He  flew  outside,  grew  large  again,  and  took 
away  the  only  cup  of  amrita  in  all  the  worlds  held  in  one 
claw. 

Garuda  hurried  along  back  to  the  Earth,  not  drinking  a 


124  SITA’S  RESCUE 

drop  of  amrita  himself.  Narayana  met  him  as  he  went,  and 
speeding  on  fast  as  Time  they  talked  together  as  though  they 
stood  still  on  solid  ground. 

Narayana  the  One  Lord  said,  “I  make  you  immortal  and 
forever  healthy  without  taking  any  of  that  drink.  I’ll  put  you 
above  me,  on  my  flag  on  my  chariot.” 

Garuda  answered,  “Lord,  I  will  carry  you  on  my  back  when 
you  want  to  ride  me,  wherever  you  wish  to  go.” 

“Excellent,  I  make  you  King  of  all  the  birds  of  all  the 
worlds  for  all  Time.”  Vishnu  left  him  then. 

Near  Earth  Indra  was  hiding.  He  threw  a  thunderbolt  and 
hit  Garuda’s  breast.  With  that  strike,  all  knowledge  came  to 
Garuda.  He  knew  everything  that  ever  had  been  or  was  or 
will  ever  be,  knew  it  all  in  an  instant. 

Sita,  listen.  Indra’s  thunders  are  made  from  the  bones  of 
the  giant  Dadhicha.  Dadhicha  was  an  ancient  warrior,  the 
strongest  person  who  ever  lived,  tall  as  a  mountain.  All  men 
were  that  size  in  the  days  when  Dadhicha  was  born. 

Dadhicha  went  apart  once  from  the  others,  and  sitting  like 
a  sage  he  fell  into  a  trance  in  the  hills,  and  there  as  though 
asleep  he  outlived  his  time.  His  body  grew  weathered  and  had 
the  look  of  stone.  He  never  moved  and  seemed  himself  to  be 
another  mountain. 

Then  after  Dadhicha  had  been  that  way  for  countless 
years,  the  Asuras  made  war  against  Indra.  They  were  win¬ 
ning.  Indra  went  to  the  hills  and  kicked  the  ground  on  a  hill¬ 
side  in  anger.  But  Indra  was  not  standing  on  a  hill,  he  was 
standing  on  Dadhicha. 

The  giant  opened  his  eyes  and  looked  out  over  the  fields  of 
Earth,  and  saw  the  men  and  animals  there.  Dadhicha  asked 
Indra — How  have  men  grown  so  small?  Where  is  my  King? 

That  was  a  voice  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  Indra 
knew  nothing,  he  had  never  known  such  men,  or  such  a 
King.  He  said,  “I  don’t  know.” 

Dadhicha  asked,  “Who  are  you?” 

“I  am  Indra.  I  rule  heaven.  Nowhere  in  any  world  have  I 
seen  a  man  large  as  you,  nor  heard  of  any.” 

“My  King  has  died  to  you,”  said  Dadhicha.  “I  am 
Dadhicha.  My  people  have  gone  over,  they  have  left  and  I 
shall  follow  behind.  Why  have  you  come  to  me,  Indra?” 

“I  thought  you  were  a  hill.” 

Dadhicha  laughed.  “The  worse  for  you  then!”  Indra  smiled 
back.  “I  have  overslept,”  continued  Dadhicha.  “I  should  have 
died  long  ago.  I  miss  my  King.  So  farewell,  but  since  you 


Dandaka  Forest 


125 


have  come  to  me,  even  by  mistake,  do  not  go  without  some 
gift,  or  you  will  anger  me.  What  do  you  need?” 

“A  miracle,”  said  Indra.  “I  am  at  war.” 

“And  losing,”  said  Dadhicha.  “When  I  die,  take  my  bones; 
they  will  be  ready  at  once,  for  I  will  call  down  the  ages  past 
to  me.  My  servant  Time  will  age  me  to  your  eyes  and  you 
may  fashion  my  bones  into  bolts  of  thunder. .  . .” 

Dadhicha  began  to  age,  and  Indra  watched  amazed  from 
the  air.  The  giant  called  out — I’m  coming,  here  l  am!  Oh,  for 
the  Blessed  Land.  .  .  . 

Then  there  was  nothing  left  of  Dadhicha  but  his  bones.  In¬ 
dra  summoned  Viswakarman,  and  the  heavenly  architect 
made  thunderbolts  out  of  the  bones,  shaping  one  bone  with 
another,  for  they  were  the  hardest  things  he’d  ever  met.  Indra 
won  his  war  and  brought  his  rain  down. 

Now  from  respect  for  days  gone  past,  when  that  unbeara¬ 
ble  thunderbolt  hit  him  Garuda  dropped  one  feather.  The 
golden  feather  turned  over  in  the  air,  the  size  of  a  war-shield. 
Garuda  looked  to  see  who  had  hit  him. 

Indra  put  down  his  thunders  and  came  from  hiding.  “Let 
us  be  friends,”  said  the  Lord  of  the  Gods.  “Surely  you  can  do 
anything  .  .  .  but  if  you  won’t  drink  that  amrita  why  not  re¬ 
turn  it  to  me?” 

Garuda  told  Indra  why  he  needed  the  amrita  and  said, 
“My  bargain  is  to  bring  the  amrita  but  I  didn’t  promise  any¬ 
one  a  drink  of  it.”  He  went  on  down  to  Earth  and  Indra  fol¬ 
lowed  him  invisibly. 

At  home  once  more,  Garuda  said  to  Kadru,  “Here  it  is.” 
The  thousand  Nagas  all  came  up  and  crowded  around.  “Now 
free  my  mother  forever.” 

“She’s  free,  she’s  free!”  The  Nagas  brought  a  grass  mat. 
Garuda  put  the  Cup  of  Life  down  on  it.  He  gave  the  Nagas  a 
strange  look. 

“What’s  wrong,  what’s  wrong?”  they  asked  him. 

“It’s  just  .  .  .  oh,  it’s  nothing  I  suppose,”  answered  Garuda. 

“What,  what?” 

“Well,”  said  Garuda,  “/  wouldn’t  drink  this  down  like  a 
bowl  of  soup  without  washing  first.  After  all,  this  is  a 
treasure.” 

“Right!  Quite  right!”  Then  the  Nagas  and  Kadru  went  to 
wash  before  tasting  immortality.  Instantly  Indra  took  back 
the  cup,  and  when  the  snakes  returned  the  grass  mat  was 
bare.  Still,  they  licked  the  sharp-edged  grass  hoping  that  some 


126  SITA’S  RESCUE 

amrita  had  spilled  over,  and  ever  since  then  Nagas  have  had 
slit  tongues. 


“And  the  touch  of  the  cup  holding  amrita  also  gave  its 
power  to  our  sacred  grass  that  was  used  for  the  mat,”  said 
Rama.  “And  this  story  is  true.” 

Sita  smiled.  “But — ”  Suddenly  before  she  could  say  any 
more  a  long  hairy  red  arm  reached  out  from  the  trees  to  one 
side,  grabbed  her  round  her  waist,  and  withdrew  holding  her 
fast. 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  ran  after  her.  The  arm  that  held  her 
was  so  long,  that  they  couldn’t  see  where  it  came  from,  and 
as  they  ran  it  just  kept  pulling  Sita  away  before  them.  Rama 
and  Lakshmana  followed  on  and  on  through  a  thick  stand  of 
dark  spiny  trees  laced  with  dead  vines. 

Then  they  came  out  of  the  trees  and  saw  a  red  Rakshasa 
standing  holding  Sita.  He  was  very  tall  and  held  her  at  his 
waist.  His  body  was  covered  with  up-pointing  bristly  red  hair. 
He  had  ears  like  javelins  and  hollow  green  eyes.  His  mouth 
went  from  ear  to  ear.  He  began  to  howl.  In  his  other  hand  he 
held  an  iron  spit  that  had  impaled  on  it  three  dead  lions,  four 
deer  and  the  bloody  head  of  an  elephant  that  stared  at  Rama 
and  Lakshmana  with  dead  eyes  wide  open. 

“Scum!”  sid  the  Rakshasa.  He  stretched  out  his  arm  again 
and  put  Sita  up  in  a  tree.  “I  am  Viradhal  No  weapon  can  kill 
me!  You  travel  here  with  a  common  wife,  you  dirty  men,  HI 
drink  your  blood!  Then  I  marry  the  girl!”  He  advanced. 

Lakshmana  shot  Viradha  full  of  arrows.  They  were  stick¬ 
ing  out  all  over  him.  But  Viradha  yawned  and  all  the  arrows 
fell  off  him.  He  snorted  and  caught  Rama  in  one  arm  and 
Lakshmana  in  the  other  and  walked  away  with  them.  Soon 
they  were  out  of  sight  of  Sita. 

Then  Rama  broke  the  arm  holding  him,  and  Lakshmana 
broke  the  other,  and  they  beat  Viradha  down  to  the  ground 
with  blows.  Viradha  roared  and  yowled  until  Rama  held  him 
down  and  quiet  by  his  foot  on  the  demon’s  throat.  Lakshmana 
dug  a  deep  hole,  and  they  threw  Viradha  in  it  and  buried  him 
under  rocks  and  stones  and  killed  him. 

A  Gandharva  of  heaven  arose  out  of  that  burial  mound,  a 
handsome  drummer  dressed  in  silks  and  silver.  He  said,  “Oh 
Rama,  I  am  Tumburu  the  musician,  Lord.”  Tumburu  smiled. 
“The  Treasure  Lord  Vaishravana  cursed  me.  I  was  gone  from 


Dandaka  Forest 


127 


my  post  with  an  Apsarasa,  and  so  love  put  me  into  a  demon’s 
body,  and  violence  freed  me.” 

Music  was  in  the  air.  A  darkly  beautiful  dancing  girl  came 
out  of  somewhere  in  the  sky,  and  floating  above  Tumburu, 
and  let  fall  from  her  hands  a  long  drum  with  a  head  at  each 
end.  She  looked  at  Rama  and  gave  him  a  happy  smile.  Tum¬ 
buru  took  the  drum,  slung  it  round  his  neck  by  a  strap  and 
let  his  fingers  run  on  it.  Chitraratha  the  Gandharva  King  be¬ 
came  visible  in  the  sky,  sitting  holding  a  lute  with  lots  of 
strings,  playing  dreamy  tunes,  and  Tumburu  stopped  drum¬ 
ming. 

The  Gandharva  said,  “I  was  doomed  to  a  demon’s  life  till 
you  should  kill  me,  Rama,  and  then  bury  me  the  way  the 
forest  Rakshasas  bury  their  corpses  ...  I  have  reached  out 
my  arms  for  every  moving  thing  in  Dandaka,  hoping  to  find 
you.  Remember,  any  violent  death  in  this  Dandaka  forest 
leads  to  heaven. . . .” 

Chitraratha  changed  his  music,  it  was  time  for  the  drums 
and  Tumburu  tossed  his  head  and  flew  up  to  join  his  King 
and  his  girl,  and  they  went  higher  and  higher  until  they  were 
gone. 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  went  back  and  helped  Sita  down 
out  of  her  tree.  Rama  said,  “He  wanted  to  die,  and  so  he  told 
us  our  weapons  were  useless.” 


Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana  kept  going  south  through 
Dandaka  Forest  and  reached  the  Godavari  River.  Lakshmana 
built  them  another  house,  near  the  river  in  a  place  called 
Panchavati  where  five  whispering  trees  banked  the  stream, 
not  far  from  a  hillside  cave. 

One  morning  soon  after  they  arrived  they  were  all  sitting 
out  in  the  open  by  the  house.  Rama  was  telling  some  story  to 
Sita  and  Lakshmana,  when  out  from  the  forest  surrounding 
them  came  the  Rakshasi  Surpanakha.  She  was  Ravana’s  sis¬ 
ter. 

She  saw  Rama  and  desired  him.  Surpanakha  was  mis¬ 
shapen  and  mean.  Her  yellowy  skin  was  rutted  like  a  bad 
road.  She  had  a  pot  belly  and  ears  like  flat  baskets,  claws  on 
her  fingers  and  toes,  squinty  eyes  and  messy  hair. 

She  was  gnawing  a  raw  bone  but  she  threw  it  away  and 
leered  at  Rama.  She  pointed  at  Sita  and  said,  “My  dear,  why 
keep  that  skinny  girl?” 

Rama  stood  up  and  said,  “I  am  Rama.” 


128 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


“And  I  am  Surpanakha!  I  have  chosen  you  for  my  hus¬ 
band.” 

Lakshmana  said,  “A  great  gain.” 

Surpanakha  said,  “I’ll  take  you  to  the  broad  city  of  Lanka 
by  magic,  dear  Rama.  My  brother’s  wealth  will  let  us  live  like 
a  King  and  Queen.” 

Rama  smiled  at  her.  “You  see — I  am  already  married.  To 
a  proud  woman  like  yourself,  a  co-wife  is  misery.  Don’t  think 
more  about  it.” 

Surpanakha  looked  at  Lakshmana.  Lakshmana  quickly 
said,  “Don’t  take  second  best.” 

“Why  make  shy  excuses?”  Surpanakha  cracked  her 
knuckles.  “It’s  natural  to  marry.” 

“Bless  you,  maiden,”  said  Lakshmana,  “but  leave  us  alone. 
May  all  creatures  be  happy.  A  good  wife  is  hard  to  find,  may 
you  soon  be  wed.” 

Rama  said,  “My  brother  Lakshmana  is  also  married.” 

Surpanakha  cried,  “I  see  the  trouble!”  She  rushed  at  Sita, 
and  held  out  before  her  her  claws  curved  like  elephant  hooks. 
But  Lakshmana  caught  her.  He  took  the  gold-handled  knife 
from  his  belt,  and  swiftly  cut  off  Surpanakha’s  ears  and  threw 
her  down.  “Were  you  not  a  woman  you’d  be  dead!” 

Surpanakha  ran  away  bleeding  and  fled  to  the  Rakshasa 
garrison  commanded  by  General  Khara.  She  flung  up  her 
arms  and  fell  at  Khara’s  feet  like  a  stone  falling  from  the 
blue  sky. 

Khara  caught  his  breath  in  boundless  wrath.  In  a  voice 
deep  and  low  as  thunderclouds  he  said,  “Arise!"  The  Earth 
trembled  as  he  spoke.  Landslides  fell  down  from  the  hills 
around  the  Rakshasa  camp. 

“I’ve  been  attacked!” 

“Don’t  roll  on  the  ground!  Who  did  it?” 

“Two  men  and  a  woman.  As  if  I  had  no  protection!” 

“Sound  the  alarm!”  A  Rakshasa  soldier  smashed  a  big 
hanging  brass  plate  with  a  metal  mace  and  kept  on  smashing 
it  for  a  hundred  and  eight  times.  Khara  yelled  at  Surpanakha, 
“Where  are  they?” 

She  yelled  back,  “Panchavati!” 

The  alarm  stopped  and  the  Rakshasa  garrison  assembled, 
fourteen  thousand  strong.  Khara  stood  before  them  and  said, 
“Like  Death,  let  us  kill  the  three  humans  at  Panchavati  and 
please  this  lady!” 

In  Panchavati,  Rama’s  Ayodhya  arrows  started  to  smoke. 
His  new  bow  hummed.  Rama  strung  it  and  said,  “Lak- 


Dandaka  Forest 


129 


shmana,  we  have  sharply  angered  them!  For  a  moment  hide 
with  Sita  in  that  cave,  and  cover  the  mouth  with  trees.” 

Rama  stood  alone,  glancing  up  into  the  sky,  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  Surpanakha  had  gone.  His  green  hand  drew  back  his 
bow.  His  lips  shook  with  anger  and  his  eyes  were  red  with 
blood. 


The  Rakshasas  came,  flying  low  just  above  the  trees  and 
led  by  Khara.  When  they  saw  just  one  man  facing  them  they 
hesitated.  Rama  called  out.  “Stop!  If  you  value  your  lives!” 

Khara  replied,  “Surrender  yourself  then.” 

Rama  said,  “I  live  here  quietly.  Why  seek  to  injure  me?” 

“You  are  destroyed!”  answered  the  demons.  Rama  spoke  a 
mantra  and  he  took  three  steps  backwards  to  get  his  aim. 
Khara  looked  around,  saw  no  one  else  but  Rama,  and  waved 
his  arm.  The  Invincible  Legion  of  Dandaka  attacked. 


Rama  killed  them  all,  fourteen  thousand  Rakshasa  warriors 
and  General  Khara.  He  used  what  he  needed  of  the  mantras 
and  weapons  Viswamitra  had  taught  him.  Rama’s  golden  ar¬ 
rows  swept  the  sky  like  yellow  lightnings.  There  was  no  es¬ 
cape. 

Surpanakha  was  watching  at  a  safe  distance.  She  dove  into 
the  Earth  and  flew  by  Rakshasa  power  through  the  solid 
stone,  right  under  the  southern  ocean.  She  surfaced  in  Lanka 
just  outside  Ravana’s  palace  and  ran  inside  to  her  brother. 

Ravana  was  on  his  throne  holding  court.  Surpanakha  came 
in  wailing — Rama!  Rama!  Rama! 

She  ran  up  the  stairs  to  the  throne  and  grabbed  Ravana’s 
legs  in  a  grip  like  an  iron  vise.  Her  ears  were  gone.  The  court 
of  the  Demon  King  fell  silent  from  shock  and  Ravana  rose 
and  cried — Who  dares? - 

Surpanakha  said,  “Khara  is  dead.” 

“What?”  cried  Ravana. 

“And  all  his  soldiers.” 

Ravana  beckoned  with  his  ten  left  hands  and  Rakshasa 
physicians  hurried  forward.  They  snapped  their  fingers  and 
restored  Surpanakha’s  ears  and  gave  her  something  to  drink, 
and  let  her  see  herself  in  an  unbreakable  mirror.  Ravana  had 
her  sit  down  and  came  down  from  the  throne  to  sit  beside 
her  and  said,  “Now  tell  me.” 

“I  am  the  only  one  still  alive,”  said  Surpanakha.  “Like  Hell 


130 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


itself,  Dandaka  is  bathed  in  blood.  In  half  a  moment  Rama 
killed  Khara  and  his  legion  with  whistling  screaming  arrows 
of  dazzling  gold,  and  the  harmless  men  that  we  have  killed 
for  food  in  the  woods  watched  from  heaven  as  your  army 
died.  The  kindly  saints  and  hermits  now  may  mock  you  and 
walk  safely  through  dreadful  Dandaka.” 

Ravana  cleared  his  ten  throats.  All  his  eyes  were  looking 
all  around.  They  danced  in  his  heads  like  fiery  coals.  “Who 
did  it?” 

“Rama!” 

“Who  is  Rama?” 

“A  prince.” 

A  man?  Ravana  looked  closely  at  his  sister.  “How  many 
millions  were  in  his  army?” 

“He  had  no  army.” 

“What  gods  helped  him?” 

“No  gods.  Rama  fought  alone,  and  I  take  your  protection 
for  bringing  bad  news.” 

“Bad  news?  Why  ...  a  man?  He’s  drunk  poison.  He’s 
poked  his  finger  in  a  black  snake’s  eye!  He  is  pulling  lions’ 
teeth  inside  a  burning  house!” 

“The  Wanderers  of  the  Wood  are  dead  and  broken  on  the 
Earth,”  said  Surpanakha.  “Rama  looks  like  a  hermit,  but  it  is 
only  to  destroy  you  that  he  has  come.” 

“Me?”  Ravana  looked  tenderly  into  his  sister’s  face.  “If 
they  did  me  wrong,  I  would  kill  that  tyrant  Death,  I  would 
bum  Fire  and  smother  the  Wind.  Have  no  fear.” 

Surpanakha  said,  “Brother,  you’re  a  disgrace.  You’re  all 
muscle  and  brawn,  you  rule  by  brute  force  and  ignorance! 
Here  you  are  lost  in  pleasure,  idle  and  greedy  and  useless. 
You’re  not  going  to  do  anything,  are  you?” 

“Enough!”  roared  Ravana.  “By  all  the  demons,  Surpana¬ 
kha,  the  Earth  is  wide  and  who  cares  what  mere  men  do  on 
every  bit  of  her?  Dandaka  is  a  worse  wasteland  than  the  back 
of  the  Moon.  There’s  nothing  worth  having  there  anyway.” 

“You  don’t  know  Rama,”  said  Surpanakha,  “but  you  are 
merciful.  You  will  let  the  best  bowman  in  the  world  live  on 
your  land  with  his  brother  and  his  fair  wife  Sita.” 

“Sita?” 

“Whomever  she  warmly  embraces  will  outgain  the  gods  in 
happiness.  It  was  Rama’s  brother  who  cut  off  my  ears,  but 
when  Khara  tried  to  avenge  me  only  Rama  fought  us.  The 
three  of  them  can’t  do  much  harm  there.  At  this  very  mo- 


Dandaka  Forest  131 

ment  Sita  must  be  holding  Rama  lovingly,  and  healing  his 
wound  by  her  caress.” 

“Then  he  was  wounded!”  said  Ravana. 

“He  hurt  his  heel  as  he  backed  away  barefoot” 

“Then  he  retreated!” 

“He  was  aiming,  to  shoot  down  your  army.” 

“Go  on,  tell  me  about  her.” 

“She  is  more  beautiful  than  any  of  your  wives,  but  all  she 
thinks  of  is  Rama.” 

“Indeed?” 

“Her  skin  is  gold;  her  eyes  are  dark.  Her  fingernails  are 
round  and  red,  her  breasts  are  full,  and  her  waist  is  slender  as 
an  ant’s.” 

Ravana  said,  “Sita.” 

The  Demon  King  dismissed  his  court  and  retired  alone  to 
his  rooms.  Surpanakha  left  Lanka  and  went  to  the  Asura  un¬ 
derworlds  beneath  the  sea,  and  there  she  married. 

Early  the  next  morning  Ravana  went  alone  to  his  stables, 
armed  with  a  bow  and  arrows  and  a  sharp  sword.  He  got  in  a 
small  gold  chariot  that  was  pulled  by  asses  with  the  faces  of 
fiends.  The  chariot  rose  into  the  air  and  Ravana  flew  north, 
across  the  vast  ocean  and  then  across  our  continent  to  Go- 
kama.  There  in  a  hermitage  lived  his  uncle  Maricha,  whom 
Rama  had  shot  as  a  boy  but  had  not  killed.  Ravana’s  twenty 
hands  rested  on  the  chariot  rail.  From  the  center  of  the  rail 
hung  ten  ornamental  golden  arrows  tied  together  with  golden 
string.  They  were  Ravana’s  only  sign  of  Empire  and  Con¬ 
quest:  ten  arrows  for  the  ten  directions;  South  and  the  other 
three,  and  the  four  in  between  those  four,  and  up  and  down, 
all  was  Ravana’s. 


The  Golden  Deer 


Sita  of  great  beauty, 

You  are  a  woman. 

To  a  woman  everything  is  becoming. 
Every  one  is  her  own. 

May  I  be  yours. 


Maricha  the  Rakshasa  sat  alone  in  a  clearing,  clad  in  black 
deerskin.  Ravana’s  chariot  came  soaring  down  and  landed, 
and  the  Demon  King  walked  over  to  his  uncle.  Ravana  sat 
beside  Maricha  and  said,  “How  good  to  see  you,  my  old 
friend.” 

“Why  are  you  here?”  asked  Maricha. 

Ravana  said,  “The  Dandaka  demons  have  all  been  killed 
by—” 

" Stop! ”  Maricha  looked  around.  “Ravana,  if  you  wish  me 
to  live,  do  not  speak  that  name  in  my  hearing!  Fear  of  him 
has  made  me  a  hermit.” 

“Then  you  know  about  it,”  said  Ravana. 

“I  saw  Khara’s  legion  die  by  magic  sight.” 

“Magic,”  said  Ravana.  “That’s  what  I  want  to  talk  to  you 
about.” 

“Ow!"  Maricha  rubbed  his  knee  and  looked  painfully  at 
Ravana. 

“What’s  wrong?”  asked  Ravana. 

“Go  away!  Don’t  bother  me.  This  talk  pains  me.” 

“You’re  making  that  up,  Uncle!” 

“He  did  not  at  first  strike  to  kill  me,”  said  Maricha.  “And 
now  forever  will  I  see  him,  wherever  I  look,  dressed  like  the 
trees  in  bark,  watching  me  where  he  cannot  be.” 

“I  won’t  let  him  get  away  with  it,”  said  Ravana.  “His  dear 
loving  Sita  is  in  the  very  bloom  of  her  passionate  youth!” 

Maricha  looked  at  Ravana  as  though  he  saw  him  already 

132 


The  Golden  Deer 


133 


dead.  “Innocent  Sita?  I  have  abandoned  war,  Ravana.” 
Maricha  sighed.  “Happily,  here  I  see  so  few  fools  any  more. 
What  enemy  disguised  as  your  friend  mentioned  Sita’s  name 
to  you?” 

“Surpanakha.  They  attacked  her  unprovoked.” 

“No,”  said  Maricha.  “Her  heart  envies  you  your  fortune. 
She  will  ruin  you  by  your  own  hand.  She  has  spoken  the  one 
word  of  your  doom,  and  there  may  be  some  use  for  dust 
from  the  trodden  roadside,  but  useless  is  a  fallen  King.” 

“I  will  steal  Sita  by  deception  and  he  will  die  of  shame!” 

Mancha’s  eyes  did  not  blink  and  his  dry  mouth  hung  open. 
“Give  this  idea  away.  Let  the  Sun  and  Moon  stand  in  fear  of 
you  but  let  Sita  bel  Your  army  went  down  like  a  grainfield 
under  a  hailstorm.  You  will  be  nothing  against  him!” 

Ravana  said,  “That  was  an  accident.” 

“The  whole  world  may  well  be  an  accident,”  said  Maricha. 
“Forget  it;  let  it  go.  His  name  is  danger  to  me  and  to  you  as 
well.  As  a  clever  man  hits  on  a  secret  and  solves  it,  so  did  he 
eliminate  your  army.  He  hit  them  and  they  do  not  exist!  And 
his  brother  Lakshmana  is  just  as  strong;  he  is  his  own  second 
self.” 

“No  matter,”  said  Ravana. 

“You  have  everything  to  lose  and  absolutely  nothing  to 
gain.” 

“You’ve  got  that  backwards,”  smiled  Ravana. 

Maricha  said,  “This  is  the  severing  of  the  summit  of  the 
Rakshasa  race.  It  is  for  your  death  that  the  forest  hermits 
have  so  long  poured  butter  on  their  fires.  For  your  death  and 
not  Khara’s  did  they  direct  that  man  to  Dandaka.  Wherever 
your  soldiers  looked  they  saw  him  before  them,  and  for  all 
their  wrath  and  rage  he  easily  killed  them  all.  He  can  bring 
down  the  stars  with  his  arrows,  or  break  apart  the  continents 
and  let  in  the  sea,  or  raise  Earth  once  drowned  and  create  all 
Creation  anew.” 

Ravana  said,  “He  meekly  submitted  to  an  exile  in  the 
woods  when  his  father  banished  him.” 

“Many  quiet  men  are  strong,”  said  Maricha.  “Just  pray  to 
your  favorite  gods  that  he  never  notices  you.” 

“He  has  been  disgraced  once,”  said  Ravana,  “and  is  now  a 
delicate  failure,  a  false  hermit  with  a  holy  hairdo  yet  schem¬ 
ing  and  desiring  and  bearing  arms  and  tied  to  a  woman,  a 
laughable  weakling.  May  such  a  life  befall  all  my  enemies.” 

“Do  not  scorn  men!”  Maricha  shuddered.  “Ravana,  rare 
and  unpleasant  is  the  truth  to  an  idiot  King,  but  this  greed 


134 


SIT A'S  RESCUE 


will  draw  you  swiftly  to  your  doom.  Ravana,  be  peaceful  and 
content  yourself  with  the  wives  you  have.  They  love  you,  go 
home  to  them.  Think  of  our  people.  Do  not  destroy  them  by 
the  whims  and  envies,  the  vanities  and  glories  of  their  King. 
You  see  things  wrong.  You  imagine  that  man  as  someone 
small  and  weak.  You  think  of  Sita  as  harmless  and  inviting,  a 
delightful  woman  whom  you  may  play  with  safely  and  come 
to  no  harm.” 

“Uncle,  do  not  always  measure  things  and  count  them.” 

“Ravana,  listen.  Once  I  flew  where  I  wanted  over  the 
Earth.  I  was  swift  and  roaring,  cold  and  heartless  and  huge 
as  a  hill.  I  wore  a  golden  crown  and  was  strong  as  a  thousand 
elephants.  Viswamitra  kept  trying  to  make  a  sacrifice,  and  his 
hymns  were  faint  and  scratchy,  and  I  would  let  no  god  an¬ 
swer  him.  I  bullied  everybody  and  no  one  could  stop  me. 
Then  Viswamitra  brought  that  man,  but  he  was  still  a  boy. 
He  had  no  sign  of  manhood  on  his  face  and  he  wore  his  hair 
as  a  child,  but  he  protected  the  sacrifice.  He  was  the  soul  of 
all  the  worlds,  but  I  passed  him  by  and  went  for  the  al¬ 
tar.  .  . .” 

“Maybe  so,  maybe  not.” 

“You  are  still  thirsty  for  poison.  Try  doing  right  and 
people  will  be  your  friends;  many  of  us  care  for  you.  Or  else 
you  will  delight  all  your  victims  by  destroying  yourself.” 

Ravana  said,  “Cheer  up.  Pull  yourself  together.  I’ve  done 
all  right  so  far,  haven’t  I?” 

Maricha  said,  “If  it  is  not  your  Time,  again  and  again 
snares  of  all  kinds  may  be  set  for  you  in  vain,  but  when  your 
death’s  moment  comes  you  will  not  see  the  trap  that  catches 
you  until  too  late.  You  won’t  listen  to  me,  but  I  am  your 
friend.  However  strong  and  great  you  once  were,  you  are  a 
straw  figure  now,  falling  into  poverty.” 

Ravana  smiled.  “I  don’t  listen  to  criticisms  any  more,  just 
tell  me  the  good  parts.  Come,  delay  defeats  any  deed.  Change 
yourself  into  a  golden  deer  and  help  me.”  He  embraced  Mari¬ 
cha  and  went  on,  “Let  us  plan  this  kidnapping  with  more  de¬ 
light.  Let  iis  be  generous  to  each  other;  let  us  help  each  other 
through  this  life,  happy  and  carefree  as  Kings.”  Ravana 
waved  one  of  his  hands  over  the  ground  and  a  jug  appeared 
with  two  coconut  halfshells.  “Now,  a  taste  of  wine?” 

“Well,  I  don’t  know.” 

“You  lure  him  away,  out  of  earshot,  then  escape.”  They 
drank.  “Separate  Rama  and  Sita,  that’s  all  I  ask.  I’ll  do  the 


The  Golden  Deer  133 

rest.  I  can  handle  Lakshmana.  When  he  discovers  what  has 
happened,  Rama  will  die  of  heartbreak.” 

“Rama.  Rama!”  Maricha  rolled  his  tongue  around  his  lips. 
“I  can  say  it!”  Ravana  refilled  their  winecups. 

The  Demon  King  took  a  sip  of  wine  with  each  head,  one 
after  another,  and  wiped  his  moustaches.  “Kings  must  be 
adored!”  he  said  loudly. 

“Soft  welcome  words!”  cried  Maricha.  “Just  say  how  much 
you  like  the  idea  .  .  .  whenever  possible.  Look  for  faults  and 
you’ll  find  them!” 

“Precisely!  I  will  give  you  half  my  kingdom.  Half  my 
World  Empire.” 

“No.”  Maricha  put  down  his  cup.  “It  is  Death  that’s  paid 
me  a  visit  today.  Keep  your  kingdom  if  you’ve  got  one.” 

Ravana  yelled  at  him.  “Then  Til  kill  you!” 

“You?” 

“Yes,  don’t  you  fear  Death?” 

“What  for?  Why  should  I?” 

“But — ” 

“But  still,  Ravana,  it  is  better  to  be  killed  by  the  better  per¬ 
son.  I  won’t  escape  him  but  I  will  lead  him  away  and  let  him 
kill  me.”  Maricha  stood  up.  “I  will  go  if  you  will  promise  not 
to  brag  to  me  along  the  way.” 

“Of  course,  anything  you  say.”  Ravana  started  to  get  up. 

“Just  one  moment,”  said  Maricha.  He  sadly  tidied  up  his 
few  old  possessions  and  quickly  performed  his  own  funeral. 

Then  they  were  on  Ravana’s  chariot,  going  through  the  sky 
to  Panchavati.  Maricha  drew  in  the  fresh  air  in  deep  breaths 
and  stretched  his  arms  and  legs. 

‘There’s  always  just  a  chance,”  said  Maricha. 

Ravana  said,  “That  man  isn’t  worth  a  finger-flick.” 


Ravana  landed  the  chariot  some  distance  from  Rama’s 
house.  Ravana  crept  up  close  to  the  house,  leading  Maricha 
by  the  hand.  Ravana  said,  “There  they  are.” 

Maricha  became  a  deer.  His  face  was  of  living  blue  sap¬ 
phire  like  a  moving  mask  made  of  a  blue  mirror.  His  antlers 
were  ivory  tipped  with  moonstone  points  and  his  hooves  were 
1  glassy  black  flint.  His  lighted  eyes  were  violet  amethyst.  His 
golden  hair  grew  this  way  and  that,  and  there  were  silver 
spots  on  his  sides,  and  when  he  danced  like  a  deer  the  golden 
hair  ran  the  light  in  rays  over  his  body.  His  underbelly  was 


136 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


pale  pink  and  his  tongue  bright  red.  He  held  his  tail  straight 
up  and  arched  his  neck  a  little  and  ran  off. 

The  other  deer  scented  a  Rakshasa  and  fled  from  Maricha 
as  he  approached  Rama’s  house.  The  tigers  drew  back  and 
did  not  dare  to  roar.  Maricha  ate  grass  in  a  green  meadow  by 
the  Godavari  river,  then  ran  past  Rama’s  house,  then  stopped 
and  turned,  and  lay  down  nibbling  leaves. 

Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana  were  all  at  home,  and  Sita 
saw  the  deer.  She  called,  “Rama,  come  quickly.  Can  you 
catch  him?” 

Rama  said,  “How  beautifuL” 

Lakshmana  came  up  and  said,  “There  is  no  such  deer  on 
Earth.  That  is  an  illusion.” 

Rama  strung  his  bow  and  took  one  arrow.  “Wait  here  with 
Sita.  I’ll  try  to  get  him  alive,  or  else  I’ll  shoot  him.” 

Lakshmana  said,  “See  how  his  shape  seems  to  shift  and 
change  around  the  edges.” 

“I’ll  be  careful,”  said  Rama.  “If  that  is  a  Rakshasa  illusion 
I  will  destroy  it.” 

Maricha  got  up.  He  started  to  walk  right  for  Rama.  Then 
he  noticed  a  man  there.  He  backed  and  jumped  and  walked 
away  into  the  trees  just  out  of  bowshot.  He  stopped  and 
turned  and  gazed  at  Rama  with  his  ears  out. 

Then  Maricha  went  away  running  and  jumping,  taking 
long  leaps  with  his  forefeet  drawn  up  to  his  chest  and  his 
back  legs  straight  out.  Rama  went  after  him.  Maricha  didn’t 
seem  to  see  Rama  pursuing  him  and  so  Rama  didn’t  shoot 
him  for  a  long  time,  hoping  to  follow  the  deer  home  and  cap¬ 
ture  him  alive  later.  But  though  Marichi  now  and  then 
seemed  to  tire,  or  sometimes  lose  his  way,  he  tempted  Rama 
farther  and  farther  from  home,  and  Rama  began  to  lose  sight 
of  him. 

The  golden  deer  reappeared  and  Rama  saw  him  through 
the  stark  trees  of  Dandaka,  and  decided  to  kill  him.  Rama 
shot  a  gold  arrow  and  hit  the  lovely  deer  through  his  heart. 
Maricha  leapt  up  high  as  a  palm  tree,  then  fell  on  his  back, 
and  at  the  point  of  death  resumed  his  true  form. 

A  black  demon  lay  there  dying.  Rama  ran  up  holding  his 
diamond  and  rainbow  bow.  With  his  last  breath  Maricha 
shouted  in  Rama’s  voice — Help  me!  He  threw  back  his  head 
and  died. 

Mancha’s  cry  was  much  louder  than  any  man  could  shout. 
Rama  knew  they  would  hear  it  at  Panchavati,  and  could  not 
hear  him  from  where  he  stood.  Every  hair  on  Rama’s  body 


The  Golden  Deer 


137 


was  on  end.  He  made  sure  Maricha  was  dead  and  ran  for 
home  as  fast  as  he  could. 


Sita  heard  Rama’s  voice  cry  help  and  said,  “Lakshmana,  he 
is  hurt!” 

“That  is  not  truly  his  voice,”  said  Lakshmana. 

“How  much  has  Bharata  paid  you  to  betray  us?” 

“He  is  not  in  danger,”  said  Lakshmana.  “He  told  me  to 
wait  and  stay  with  you.  That  deer  was  a  demon,  don’t  you 
understand?” 

Sita  wept.  “Would  you  let  him  die?  Oh,  you  don't  care, 
you  don’t  care  I”  She  looked  wildly  around  then  started  to  go 
after  Rama  herself.  Lakshmana  held  her  back.  She  pleaded, 
“Let  me  go  . . .  Rama. . . .” 

Lakshmana  held  her  and  looked  her  right  in  the  eye.  He 
sighed  and  frowned.  She  was  breathing  fast,  she  said,  “Then 
is  it  me  you  want?  Take  me  but  save  Rama!” 

Lakshmana  covered  his  ears.  Real  anger  was  on  his  face. 
He  saw  red.  Red  Sita,  red  trees,  red  sky.  “First  you  have  sent 
Rama  away  to  fetch  you  an  illusion,”  he  said.  “And  now  you 
order  me  to  obey  a  false  voice.  Do  not  move!” 

Lakshmana  looked  out  into  the  forest.  He  said,  “Wrong 
words  are  nothing  new  for  a  woman.”  He  drew  a  circle 
around  Sita  on  the  ground,  with  the  tip  of  his  bow. 

“Do  not  step  out  of  this  circle  and  do  not  cross  this  line,” 
said  Lakshmana.  “Let  these  trees  witness  that  I  have  done 
right!” 

Sita  was  paying  no  attention.  Lakshmana  thrust  out  his 
lower  lip  in  anger.  He  took  his  quiver  and  entered  the  edge 
of  the  forest,  bent  low  a  bit,  went  under  a  branch  and  was 
out  of  sight 

The  Rakshasa  King  Ravana  watched  him  go.  Then  Ravana 
came  boldly  across  the  clearing  toward  Rama’s  house  covered 
with  the  disguise  of  an  old  holy  man,  like  a  treacherous  deep 
well  covered  and  hidden  by  tall  grass.  Sita  saw  him  coming 
and  dried  her  eyes. 

Ravana  looked  like  a  man.  He  wore  soft  red  silk.  There 
was  one  lock  of  white  hair  left  long  on  his  shaven  head.  He 
held  a  parasol  and  wore  sandals,  and  he  carried  resting  over 
his  left  shoulder  a  long  triple  bamboo  staff  with  a  waterjar 
slung  on  it.  Ravana  came  and  stood  silently  by  Sita’s  house,  as 
holy  men  do  when  begging  their  daily  food.  There  was  no 


138 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


sign  of  Lakshmana  or  Rama.  All  around  them  there  was  only 
the  forest  land  of  green  and  brown. 

Sita  stepped  over  Lakshmana’s  line  and  said,  “Worshipful 
brahmana,  be  our  guest.  Sit,  take  some  water,  wash  and  I  will 
bring  food.” 

Ravana  hummed — I  walk  the  sweet  Earth,  Lord;  I  see  you 
have  made  beautiful  creatures,  Lord;  how  fine  and  true,  Oh 
Lord  of  Love. 

He  spoke  very  fair.  “How  do  you  come  to  live  here  alone, 
my  girl,  in  perilous  Dandaka  land?”  He  stood  looking  at  her. 
“By  the  Book,  fair  are  your  jewels.” 

“I  am  Sita.  These  jewels  were  presents.  Don’t  fear  demons, 
for  my  husband  Rama  will  be  back  soon.” 

“Ah,”  said  Ravana,  “his  name  can’t  be  Rama,  he  must  be 
Kama!  You  are  Rati  the  wife  of  Love,  wantonly  hiding  in  the 
forest.”  He  smiled  like  a  father.  “Oh,  you  timid  girl,  of  slen¬ 
der  waist  and  tapering  thighs!  You’ve  had  a  lovers’  quarrel 
with  Kama.  You  belong  in  a  palace.  I  can  see  you  like  jewels 
and  luxury!” 

“Brahmana,  sit  down  and  what  can  I  give  you?  I  am  Sita, 
a  mortal  woman  and  my  husband  is  the  Ayodhya  King. 
These  jewels  were  gifts  from  Anasuya  and  this  necklace  came 
from  Guha.  Tell  me  your  name  and  family.” 

“Beautiful,”  said  Ravana.  “I  am  the  Rakshasa  King  Ra¬ 
vana.  I  rule  the  universe.  Come  to  me,  Sita.  I  will  take  you  to 
Lanka  with  her  engines  and  weapons,  and  I  will  put  you  over 
all  my  other  Queens.” 

Sita  laughed.  “Garuda  mating  with  a  goose?  A  firefly  court¬ 
ing  the  Sun?” 

“Seek  me!  Cross  the  ocean  with  me!” 

“A  gnat  trying  to  suck  up  a  bowl  of  butter!  Can  you 
swim?” 

“Don’t  play  around  with  me!” 

“I  won’t,  don’t  worry,”  said  Sita. 

“You  will  have  five  thousand  serving  maids.” 

“Never.”  Sita  looked  again  at  the  quiet  forest  and  could 
see  no  one. 

Woman,  I  am  Ravana  feared  by  the  Gods!  Ravana  clapped 
his  hands  and  his  disguise  fell  away.  He  was  tall  as  a  tree.  He 
had  ten  dark  faces  and  twenty  dark  arms,  and  twenty  red 
eyes  red-rimmed  like  fire.  He  had  yellow  up-pointing  fangs. 
He  licked  his  lips  with  sharp  tongues.  He  wore  golden  armor, 
long  heavy  gold  earrings  swaying,  gold  bracelets,  gold  arm- 
bands,  ten  golden  crowns  set  with  golden  pearls,  gold  belt- 


The  Golden  Deer 


139 


chains  crashing  and  gold  rings  all  over  his  fingers.  Fragrant 
white  flower-garlands  went  over  his  shoulders  and  around  his 
ten  necks. 

Ravana  had  a  long  ivory  bow  hanging  down  along  one 
shoulder,  its  back  rich  with  pearls,  and  by  his  hip  he  had  a 
supple  sword,  of  blue  steel  in  a  blue  case.  And  on  his  back  he 
had  a  long  quiver  formed  of  human  skins  stretched  over  a 
frame  of  men’s  bones,  and  the  outside  of  that  quiver  was 
painted  with  demon  faces  drawn  in  blood,  and  those  spectral 
faces  moved  of  themselves;  they  were  grim  or  laughing  at 
will,  changing  as  though  alive,  following  with  their  eyes.  The 
quiver  held  fifty  tall  blue-black  arrows  of  solid  iron,  vaned 
with  thin  iron  blades. 

Ravana  shook  his  heads  and  rattled  his  crowns  and  looked 
down  at  Sita.  Seeing  that  evil  one  revealed,  the  leaves  did  not 
flutter.  The  trees  of  Dandaka  did  not  move.  No  breath  of 
wind  dared  stir  about  in  the  woods.  The  fast-streaming 
Godavari  river  slackened  her  speed  from  fright.  The  glorious 
Sun,  who  every  day  looks  down  upon  our  world,  this  time 
dimmed  his  light  from  the  sadness  of  what  he  saw. 

“I  will  have  you!”  said  Ravana.  “Princess  Sita,  you  are 
half  divine,  why  mingle  more  with  men?  Rule  every  world 
with  me.  Sita,  I  stand  in  space  and  I  pick  up  Earth  in  my 
hand.  I  close  the  Moon  within  my  fingers  and  put  the  Sun  in 
my  pocket,  and  arrest  the  aimless  planets.  You  will  forget 
Rama  with  me!” 

Ravana  bent  down,  a  black  mountain  come  to  life.  Sita 
knelt  near  his  feet  hiding  her  face,  clinging  to  a  tree.  Sita 
wore  a  clear  yellow  robe  and  Anasuya’s  ornaments  and 
Guha’s  necklace.  Her  skin  was  golden,  she  was  like  sunlight 
in  among  the  trees,  and  Ravana  reached  for  her.  In  one  left 
hand  he  held  her  long  dark  hair.  He  caught  her  legs  in  two  of 
his  right  arms  and  lifted  her,  and  his  demon  chariot  came  to 
meet  him  through  the  air. 

Oh  Rama, 

After  the  theft  of  Sita  who  can  escape  Death  from  you? 
That  damned  Demon  might  walk  and  breathe 
But  be  dead. 

He  might  win  immortality,  drink  dry  the  Cup  of  Life  in 
heaven,  win  every  god’s  blessing 
And  be  dead. 


140 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Sita  cried — Rama!  Rama!  many  times  and  struggled  to  get 
free  but  it  was  useless.  Ravana  was  on  the  chariot,  holding 
Sita  like  a  fireball  in  his  bare  arms,  and  the  chariot  began  to 
move  south. 

In  her  mind  Sita  called  the  river  Godavari,  called  the  trees 
of  Dandaka  and  saluted  their  tree-gods,  took  her  refuge  with 
the  deer — Tell  Rama.  Tell  him. 

Then  Sita  saw  a  great  huge  vulture  asleep  high  in  a  treetop 
and  cried  aloud  to  him — T ell  Rama! 

The  vulture  awoke.  He  raised  his  neck  and  looked  hard  af¬ 
ter  Ravana’s  passing  chariot  with  round  green  eyes.  His 
breast  was  yellow  and  black  and  his  wings  were  grey.  Swiftly 
he  spread  his  wings  and  went  gliding  in  the  air. 

Instantly  he  overtook  the  demon  car  and  stayed  above  it 
balancing  on  his  still,  open  wings,  with  their  tip  feathers 
spread  like  fingers.  He  softly  spoke  to  Ravana,  “Brother  Ten- 
Necks,  I  am  Jatayu  the  Vulture  King.  I  rule  the  birds  of 
Dandaka.  While  he  lived  I  was  Dasaratha’s  old  friend,  we 
were  born  on  the  same  day.  F&ar  to  do  evil  in  my  sight,  Ra¬ 
vana,  for  I  know  the  right  ways  of  life.” 

“Go  back  to  sleep!”  said  Ravana. 

“I  am  King  of  the  Air,”  said  Jatayu.  “Do  not  harm  Sita. 
Free  her  or  die,  for  not  in  safety  will  you  carry  her  from  my 
land,  as  if  she  had  no  husband.  Demon  King,  I  am  sixty 
thousand  years  old,  in  my  age  peacefully  ruling  here  and  I 
forbid  you.”  Ravana  kept  on  going. 

Jatayu  said,  “I  am  too  old  and  tired  to  talk  any  more!”  He 
hooked  a  talon  through  Ravana’s  chariot  rail,  a  claw  as  long 
and  curved  as  an  elephant’s  tusk,  and  sharp,  and  hard  as  an 
iron  gate-bar.  Jatayu  easily  tore  the  rail  away  and  on  the 
wind  of  his  wings  he  gently  lifted  Sita  out  of  Ravana’s  hands 
and  set  her  down  unharmed  beneath  a  tree. 

Ravana  cried  out  in  shock  and  rage.  He  shouted,  “I  care 
nothing  for  you!”  He  turned  the  chariot  to  attack  and  flew  at 
the  Vulture  King,  holding  his  ivory  bow  and  aiming  an  ar¬ 
row. 

Jatayu  snapped  that  bow  with  one  bite.  He  clawed  the  ar¬ 
mor  from  Ravana’s  back,  and  with  his  beak  tore  out  the  hair 
from  the  Demon  King’s  heads.  With  his  wings  he  struck  Ra¬ 
vana  down  and  sent  him  falling.  In  blind  fury  Jatayu  ripped 
the  asses  that  drew  the  chariot  to  shreds,  he  shattered  the  car 
with  one  wing  stroke  and  the  golden  chariot  wheels  spun 
through  the  sky  like  two  suns,  the  iron  axle  smashed  down  on 


The  Golden  Deer 


141 


end  into  the  forest,  and  everywhere  fell  bits  of  gold  and 
crushed  wood,  and  a  rain  of  tom  flesh. 

The  old  war  king  Jatayu  screeched  in  triumph.  Ravana  lay 
on  the  Earth  faint  and  bewildered,  streaming  blood  and  only 
armed  with  the  sword  still  at  his  waist.  But  Jatayu  was  ex¬ 
hausted.  His  vision  faded  and  blurred  and  he  could  not  see. 
From  above  he  looked  for  the  Demon  King.  Ravana  saw  his 
blindness  and  rose  to  attack. 

Jatayu  struck  him  by  sound.  Jatayu  hooked  his  talons 
again  into  Ravana’s  back,  and  hung  on,  and  with  his  mouth 
wrenched  off  Ravana’s  ten  left  arms  one  by  one  and  let  them 
fall.  All  Ravana’s  faces  trembled  in  pain.  His  bones  shook  in 
agony,  but  those  ten  arms  grew  right  back,  and  Jatayu  could 
not  see  them  but  thought  they  were  destroyed  for  good. 

Ravana  drew  his  sword  with  one  left  hand,  and  he  cut  off 
Jatayu’s  wings  with  it.  The  Vulture  King  fell  dying,  and  Sita 
ran  to  him  where  he  lay  and  held  his  head  and  wept  over 
him. 

Ravana  roughly  tore  her  away  with  bloody  hands.  He  flew 
south  with  her,  very  fast,  as  though  driven  through  the  sky 
before  an  evil  wind.  Ravana  was  dark  and  Sita  was  golden, 
f  As  Ravana  went  past  he  seemed  a  dark  violent  cloud  holding 
lightning,  smoke  hiding  a  fire,  a  dark  hill  catching  a  sunbeam. 

The  loss  of  Sita  outraged  the  worlds.  Ravana  flew  over  the 
Earth.  He  passed  over  hills  and  the  hills  saw  him:  they  re¬ 
cited  charms  aloud  with  the  sounds  of  their  falling  waters: 
they  uplifted  their  waving  arms  of  green  trees:  in  anger  they 
yawned,  opening  their  valleys  to  the  sky.  Lakes  looked  up 
and  whirled  their  waters:  white  open  lilies  were  their  fearful 
eyes,  and  watery  foam  and  mists  their  robes  thrown  off  in 
grief.  The  waterfalls  wept. 

Ravana’s  shadow  raced  over  the  ground,  and  where  it 
passed  lions  and  tigers  ran  after  it,  and  clawed  at  the  shadow 
to  kill  it.  Ravana  held  Sita  round  her  waist  by  one  arm,  and 
he  ran  flying,  and  fled  for  home.  That  was  all  he  thought  of 
then,  to  win  home  to  Lanka.  Ravana  carried  Sita  south  across 
a  dark  river  and  looking  down  she  saw  two  monkeys  standing 
on  a  hill  by  a  lake  watching  them,  shading  their  eyes,  one 
gold  monkey  and  one  white  one. 

Sita  reached  down  her  hands  and  broke  the  anklets  off 
from  her  legs  and  let  them  fall  down  on  that  plain-looking 
hill.  She  took  off  her  earrings  and  dropped  them.  Sita  let  all 
the  ornaments  of  Anasuya  fall,  and  she  tied  Guha’s  necklace 
in  her  yellow  scarf  edged  with  gold  and  dropped  it  also.  Ra- 


142 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


vana  did  not  notice.  He  sped  away,  and  Sita’s  hair  streamed 
out  on  the  wind,  and  they  left  behind  the  two  monkeys. 

The  two  monkeys  watched  with  their  yellow-brown  eyes 
never  blinking,  while  Sita’s  gold  and  silver  bells  and  bracelets 
fell  ringing  down  and  crying.  The  yellow  scarf  flashed  down 
like  lightning;  the  silver  ornaments  were  the  Moon  and  white 
stars  dropping. 


Hanuman! 


A  real  deer  made  of  precious  stones  and  gold 
Never  yet  lived  in  this  world. 

Such  a  thing  cannot  be; 

But  Rama  followed  a  golden  deer 
And  lost  Sita. 

She  is  his  SHa. 

That  girl  born  again  and  again 
Like  a  flame  from  the  furrow. 

In  the  King’s  fields. 


Ravana  looked  at  Sita  and  he  thought — Mine.  He  brought 
her  to  the  back  of  his  palace  in  the  city  of  Lanka.  Ravana 
smiled  at  her.  His  faces  were  all  smiles  and  he  said,  “You 
will  not  see  Rama  again.  Here  you  are  safe,  you  have  no 
more  husband,  and  so  there  can  be  nothing  wrong  in  our 
love.” 

“To  Hell  with  you,”  said  Sita.  “You  took  me  like  a  thief. 
And  barely  made  it  past  an  old  vulture — .” 

“Quiet!”  Ravana  screamed  at  her.  Then  at  once  he  com¬ 
posed  himself.  “My  dear  .  .  .  capture  is  a  good  way  to  get  a 
wife  ...  I  want  your  love.  I  will  wait  for  you  to  love  me.” 

“Do  what  you  will  with  me,”  said  Sita,  “I  will  feel  noth¬ 
ing.” 

“When  you  get  to  know  me,  perhaps ...  we  shall  see,  my 
dear.  Come  inside  with  me  now,  change  your  clothes  and  eat 
and  rest.” 

“I  won’t  enter  your  kennel.” 

“Damn  you!  Hey,  Rakshasis!”  Female  Rakshasas  ran  up. 
‘Take  her  and  imprison  her  in  the  grove  of  tall  Asoka  trees 
back  behind  my  room  and  guard  her  day  and  night.” 

A  demoness  took  each  of  Sita’s  arms  and  led  her  away  to 
the  Asoka  grove.  Ravana  told  the  rest  of  the  Rakshasis,  “Use 

143 


144 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


hard  words  and  soft,  threats  and  gifts  and  temptations.  Break 
her  to  my  will  and  give  her  at  any  time  whatever  she  may 
ask  for.” 

Then  the  Demon  King  called  after  Sita,  “When  winter  be¬ 
gins  and  the  Sun  turns  north,  if  you  haven’t  come  into  my  bed 
I’ll  eat  you  minced  for  breakfast!”  He  went  in  the  building. 

In  his  high  heaven  Lord  Brahma  summoned  Indra  and 
said,  “Sita  must  not  die  or  end  her  life  in  Lanka.” 

Indra  asked,  “Why  me?” 

Brahma  looked  at  him.  Indra  said,  “I’ll  see  to  it,  Sir.” 

Lord  Indra  waited  until  night.  Then  taking  the  Goddess 
Sleep  for  his  companion  he  approached  Lanka  carrying  a 
bowl  of  heavenly  wheat  and  butter. 

Sleep  spread  out  her  arms  over  Lanka.  For  the  good  of  the 
gods.  For  the  downfall  of  the  Night  Demons. 

The  Rakshasis  guarding  Sita  fell  asleep.  Indra  entered  the 
scarlet  Asoka  grove  and  touched  Sita  lightly  so  she  awoke. 
She  was  not  afraid. 

“I  am  Indra,  the  Lord  of  Heaven,  good  fortune  to  you.  My 
Lady,  the  demons  sleep.  I  bring  you  food.  Eat  this  and  never 
will  you  hunger  nor  thirst  for  a  year.” 

“How  do  I  know  who  you  are?”  asked  Sita. 

“I  am  Indra,  and  you  know  me.” 

Sita  took  a  little  wheat  and  dropped  it  to  Earth.  “Whether 
Rama  lives  or  has  died  let  this  nourish  him.”  Then  she  ate. 

Indra  said,  “Don’t  fear  Ravana.  He  cannot  force  you,  for 
he  is  under  a  strong  curse,  and  he’ll  die  if  he  does.” 

“Who  cursed  him?”  asked  Sita. 

“While  Evil  lies  borne  down  by  Sleep  I  will  tell  you  what 
happened,”  said  Indra.  “Anyone  who  desires  an  unwilling 
woman  burns  himself,  and  he  who  loves  a  willing  one  will 
find  delight”  , 


Listen,  Sita — 

Viswamitra  the  hermit,  who  led  Rama  to  your  father’s 
land,  used  to  be  only  a  King.  He  spent  a  long  time  winning 
merit  by  austerities  in  the  Hills.  He  was  gaining  on  me,  and  I 
sent  the  divinely  beautiful  Apsarasa  Rambha  down  to  Earth 
to  tempt  him.  She  approached  him  on  Kailasa  Hill  but 
Viswamitra  turned  her  to  stone  for  ten  thousand  years. 

Viswamitra  never  stayed  long  in  one  place  and  soon  he  left 
Kailasa.  The  Yakshas  of  the  Treasure  Lord  Vaishravana 


Hanuman! 


143 


found  Rambha.  They  thought  she  was  a  statue  and  took  her 
into  their  palace  gardens. 

Years  passed,  and  the  spell  wore  off  one  day.  It  was  spring. 
Rambha  became  flesh  and  blood  again.  She  blinked  her  eyes, 
and  sighed,  and  turned  around.  She  saw  Vaishravana’s  son 
Nalakubara  walking  in  the  gardens  and  fell  in  love  with  him 
then  and  there.  They  met,  and  after  that  Rambha  came  back 
to  Heaven.  She  told  me  how  tired  she  was.  But  at  night  she 
would  go  down  the  path  leading  from  Heaven  to  Kailasa,  to 
visit  Nalakubara. 

When  Ravana’s  son  Indrajit  had  defeated  me  in  Heaven,  and 
when  Ravana  had  taken  all  creation  into  his  supposed  Em¬ 
pire,  the  King  of  the  Rakshasas  became  dissatisfied  with  hav¬ 
ing  only  one  wife.  So  he  made  Mandodari  his  chief  Queen, 
but  he  started  to  ride  all  over  on  Pushpaka  chariot,  capturing 
women.  Ravana  took  whom  he  pleased,  caring  only  for 
beauty  and  for  nothing  else.  He  had  hundreds  of  wives  kept 
guarded  on  the  huge  chariot — Naga  girls,  hermits’  daughters, 
mermaids  of  the  seas,  bird-maidens  of  the  northern  lakes, 
daughters  of  gods,  woodland  spirits,  the  wives  of  Kings  and 
common  men. 

Ravana  killed  any  one  who  tried  to  stop  him.  Hot  women’s 
tears  streamed  from  Pushpaka,  and  their  complaints  were 
very  sad.  Ravana  looked  them  over.  He  decided  he  had  to 
have  at  least  one  Apasarasa,  and  he  steered  Pushpaka  to  the 
Himalya  Hills  and  landed  near  the  silver  mountain  Kailasa. 

That  night  the  clear  rising  Moon  shone  brilliant  on  the  hill, 
and  from  the  Treasure  Castle  of  Vaishravana  came  song  and 
music.  A  cool  night  breeze  brought  the  scent  of  flowers,  and 
stirred  the  trees,  and  made  them  let  fall  a  silent  shower  of  pe¬ 
tals  soft  over  the  ground. 

Ravana  waited  near  the  summit,  hidden  in  the  black 
shadow  of  a  tree  that  grew  beside  the  narrow  way  that  leads 
up  to  heaven,  and  down  to  the  Hills  of  Earth.  He  heard 
someone  descending,  and  heard  ankle  bells  and  waist-chains 
ringing  and  swinging  in  step. 

Rambha  came  picking  her  way  downhill.  Her  body 
swayed;  she  was  barefoot  and  trying  not  to  step  on  stones, 
and  flowers  from  the  five  wishing-trees  of  heaven  were  in  her 
hair.  Rambha  the  Apsarasa  had  all  of  a  woman’s  artful 
graces  and  all  of  her  natural  beauties. 

Rambha’s  summer  robe  was  light  as  air,  her  eyebrows  were 
arched  like  bows,  her  thighs  and  hands  were  soft  to  touch. 
Ravana  stepped  out  in  front  of  her  and  slightly  bent  near  to 


146 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


her,  and  he  said,  "Where  do  you  go?  Whose  time  for  ecstasy 
and  bliss  has  come?  What  favored  lover  will  drink  the  nectar 
of  your  mouth?  Whose  hard  chest  will  touch  your  soft 
breasts?” 

Rambha  brushed  back  a  lock  of  hair  off  her  forehead. 
“You’re  Ravana,  aren’t  you?” 

“Rest  here  on  this  fine  grass,”  said  Ravana. 

“You  rule  even  over  heaven,”  said  Rambha.  “And  so  if 
you  are  my  King,  I  am  a  young  girl  to  be  protected  and  you 
are  my  father  and  my  guardian.”  She  stood  looking  down. 

“Love  me,”  said  Ravana,  “love  me  now!” 

“But  I  am  married,  in  my  heart,”  said  Rambha. 

“Apsarasas  don’t  marry!”  Ravana  threw  her  down  and 
raped  her.  Then  he  went  away  and  left  her  there,  and 
Rambha  went  on  to  her  meeting  with  Nalakubara. 

Rambha  wept  when  she  saw  Nalakubara  and  cried,  “You 
are  my  husband,  forgive  me  that  a  woman’s  strength  is  less 
than  a  man’s.” 

Nalakubara  called  servants;  he  sent  her  with  them  and  all 
alone  he  stood  on  a  bare  rock  and  he  cursed  Ravana.  First  he 
looked  as  far  as  he  could  see  in  every  way,  but  the  Demon 
King  was  gone.  Then  he  let  fall  from  his  eye  a  tear,  onto  the 
stone  where  he  stood,  and  that  boulder  shattered,  cracks  ran 
through  it. 

Nalakubara  the  son  of  the  Treasure  King  looked  south.  He 
got  a  branch  of  a  pine  tree  and  held  it,  and  it  burst  into  fire 
and  burned,  dropping  tears  of  fire  itself,  and  Nalakubara 
said — Ravana,  when  you  next  attack  a  woman  who  won’t 
have  you,  your  ten  heads  will  burst! 

Oh  Sita,  had  I  been  watching  Kailasa  that  night!  Those 
cursing  words  went  right  into  Ravana’s  ears  in  Lanka  where 
he  had  gone  with  his  chariot  full  of  captives.  They  heard  the 
curse  too.  Up  till  then  those  captive  women  had  lamented, 
but  now  that  they  knew  they  were  safe,  that  only  made  them 
love  Ravana.  They  felt  sorry  for  him. 

Rambha  and  you  are  the  only  women  who  have  refused 
themselves  to  Ravana  since  that  time.  Such  is  Ravana’s 
charm  and  appeal  that  some  of  these  queens  helped  Ravana 
to  steal  them,  and  one  lady  killed  her  brothers  who  would 
have  stopped  her,  and  drank  their  blood,  and  turned  to  Ra¬ 
vana  with  a  red  mouth.  I  think  women  are  more  cruel  than 
demons.  Very  often  they  are,  when  they  may  be  so. 

Yet,  Princess,  since  Nalakubara’s  curse  many  times  a 
madness  has  possessed  the  Demon  King,  and  proof  of  this  is 


Hanumanl 


147 


his  taking  you  although  his  wives  love  him.  He  has  again  hurt 
someone  weaker  than  he.  The  tears  that  Rambha  wept  that 
night  will  burn  him  down. 


“For  there  is  nothing  worse  than  the  tears  of  the  innocent,” 
said  Indra.  “Sita,  you  haven’t  on  your  body  any  sign  of 
widowhood.  Rama  will  rescue  you;  you  won’t  dwell  here 
long.  Those  monkeys  will  tell  him  that  they  saw  you.” 

‘‘And  Jatayu?” 

‘‘By  the  Gods,”  said  Indra,  ‘‘Jatayu  has  had  a  place  in 
heaven  for  a  thousand  lifetimes,  but  he  won’t  use  it;  he  won’t 
be  bora  anything  but  a  bird,  and  he  loves  Earth.  Over  and 
over,  again  and  again  he  gives  his  life  for  what’s  right,  never 
once  wondering  should  he  do  it  or  not,  nor  reflecting  will  It 
do  any  good,  nor  would  it  be  better  to  live  to  fight  another 
time!  Ah  Sita,  I  think  Jatayu  is  very  wise.” 

Sita  smiled  at  Indra.  The  food  he  had  brought  her  had 
taken  away  her  rising  hunger  and  sorrow.  The  Lord  of  the 
Gods  touched  his  hands,  knelt  before  Sita,  and  returned  to 
heaven,  taking  the  Goddess  Sleep  with  him. 


In  Dandaka  Forest,  Rama  running  for  home  met  Lak- 
shmana  running  towards  him  and  shouted — Go  back! 

They  ran  home  together.  They  found  their  house  empty 
and  looked  everywhere  for  Sita.  Rama  asked  the  river 
Godavari,  “Where  is  Sita?”  But  although  Sita  had  told  the 
river  to  speak  to  Rama,  Godavari  did  not  dare  answer, 
remembering  still  the  terrible  form  of  Ravana. 

Rama  spoke  to  the  trees,  “Show  me  my  Sita  slender  as  a 
bough.”  He  saw  a  glimpse  of  yellow  and  ran  toward  it.  But  it 
was  a  cluster  of  yellow  flowers  and  not  Sita’s  dress.  Rama 
looked  all  around.  He  called,  “I  see  you  therel  Come  on  out, 
I  can  see  you  I” 

Lakshmana  carefully  examined  all  around  their  home.  He 
went  where  Sita  would  go  to  bathe,  or  to  draw  water,  or  to 
pick  flowers.  He  found  the  forest  gods  were  gone.  Wildflow- 
ers  were  faded,  and  the  Earth  herself  looked  worn  and  very 
old.  He  found  a  huge  footprint.  The  highest  branches  of 
many  trees  were  broken.  Some  deer  came,  and  looked  at 
Lakshmana,  then  jumped  and  ran  south  looking  up  at  the 
sky,  and  back  at  the  house,  and  at  the  Earth,  and  they  were 
making  little  sounds. 


148 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Lakshmana  went  to  Rama  and  said,  “She  was  taken  in  an 
aerial  car  to  some  place  on  Earth  south  from  here.” 

Lakshmana  gathered  their  possessions,  took  the  weapons 
and  left  the  rest,  and  led  Rama  south  by  the  hand.  Lak¬ 
shmana  kept  down  his  eyes,  and  soon  he  knelt.  “Rama,  a 
strange  white  flower  lies  here  fallen,  holding  a  drop  of  blood, 
still  threaded  with  silk  from  a  garland.” 

Slowly  they  continued  on.  First  Lakshmana  found  broken 
bits  of  ivory  inset  with  pearls.  Then  he  discovered  a  sharp 
torn  piece  of  gold  armor;  then  a  belt;  then  a  sharp  bladeless 
iron  arrow,  feathered  with  iron,  eight  paces  long  and  stout  as 
a  mace;  a  long  quiver  packed  full  of  such  arrows,  the  whole 
thing  crushed  and  all  the  arrows  broken  inside;  then  a  huge 
vulture  wing-feather  crushing  to  death  beneath  it  two  asses 
who  wore  the  faces  of  demons;  an  axle  standing  on  end; 
yokes  and  tresses  hanging  in  the  trees;  the  wreckage  of  a  war- 
chariot  overturned  from  the  sky  and  fallen  in  many  pieces;  the 
ground  blooksoaked  and  raked  with  hooves  and  claws  and 
marks  not  human. 

Then  Lakshmana  found  ten  great  bleeding  dark  arms  tom 
off  at  the  shoulders.  Rama  looked  at  all  this  and  said,  “Here 
the  Rakshasas  fought  each  other  over  Sita,  and  they  tore  her 
apart  and  this  is  her  blood  all  over.  They  pulled  her  head 
off _ ” 

Lakshmana  said,  “These  are  all  left  arms.  The  hands  wear 
costly  gold  rings.  They  are  marked  on  their  palms  by  the 
royal  birth-wheels  of  an  Emperor.” 

“What  does  that  mean?”  asked  Rama. 

“The  Rakshasa  King  himself  was  here — look  there!” 

They  saw  Jatayu.  The  Vulture  King  lay  on  his  back,  barely 
alive.  Lakshmana  and  Rama  ran  to  him,  and  slowly  Jatayu 
said,  “Lord  Rama,  it  was  my  age  .  .  .  my  old  age  alone  kept 
me  from  killing  Ravana  to  save  your  wife!” 

Rama  said,  “The  plain  truth  is  that  there  is  no  end  to  my 
bad  fortune.  You  have  given  away  your  life  for  me,  and 
despite  that  my  life  herself  has  been  taken  from  me,  and  they 
killed  her. . . .” 

“She  is  alive.  Sita  lives!”  Jatayu  coughed.  “But  not  without 
cost  did  Ravana  go  past  me,  strong  though  he  was,  well-ar¬ 
mored  and  on  a  sky-chariot — .”  Blood  ran  from  Jatayu’s 
beak  and  he  died. 

Rama  said,  “See  how  in  every  race  of  creatures  live  the 
brave!”  Rama  and  Lakshmana  performed  Jatayu’s  funeral. 
They  burned  his  body,  and  Lakshmana  put  out  food  for  the 


Hanumanl 


149 


birds  of  Dandaka,  strips  of  meat  from  the  killed  asses.  To 
Rama,  the  fire  that  burned  Jatayu  was  cool. 


Rama  and  Lakshmana  went  south,  and  all  the  happiness 
and  life  had  been  worn  out  of  the  land  they  walked  on.  That 
was  the  ground  beneath  the  flight-paths  used  by  the 
Rakshasas  going  between  Lanka  and  the  garrison  that  had 
been  north  in  Dandaka.  The  Rakshasas  had  ruined  it  by  fly¬ 
ing  overhead. 

Empty  houses  sheltered  jackals,  and  their  yards  were  lit¬ 
tered  with  broken  things.  There  were  no  deer,  only  dogs  gone 
wild.  They  found  no  more  signs  of  Sita  or  Ravana  until  at 
last  they  came  to  the  southern  limit  of  Dandaka  Forest, 
crossed  a  dark-flowing  river  and  saw  a  lake,  and  a  hill  nearby 
covered  with  green. 

That  was  Lake  Pampa.  In  that  place  had  lived  a  hermit 
named  Matanga.  Once  when  he  was  too  tired  to  search  for 
water,  Matanga  had  brought  rising  from  the  Earth  the  waters 
of  every  ocean.  His  touch  took  away  the  salt  and  he  made  a 
freshwater  lake  and  lived  on  its  shore  with  an  old  woman 
named  Savari. 

In  the  year  that  Rama  was  first  exiled,  Matanga  had  died. 
But  his  virtue  lingered  and  the  waters  of  Lake  Pampa  kept 
the  country  green  and  fair,  and  Savari  still  stayed  in  their 
hermitage.  Rama  and  Lakshmana  walked  by  the  lakeside  and 
saw  her  house  in  a  clearing,  in  a  wood  of  coral  trees. 

Savari  was  very  old,  all  dressed  in  white  with  long  grey 
hair,  and  she  had  become  very  thin  and  short  with  age.  She 
was  sitting  beside  a  newly  made  funeral  pyre. 

Savari  rose  to  welcome  guests,  and  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
sat  down  by  her,  and  Rama  said,  “I  am  Rama.  Are  you  well? 
Do  you  use  little  food  and  little  anger?” 

“I  am  Savari.”  She  smiled.  “Favored  now  is  my  birth  and 
favored  my  long  service  to  Matanga  since  you  have  come, 
my  Lord  Rama.” 

Rama  asked,  “Where  are  we?” 

Savari  said,  “Ayodhya  Prince,  I  stayed  behind  to  receive 
you  when  my  Master  died;  we  knew  you  would  come  to  Ma- 
tanga’s  wood.  He  told  me.  Those  little  fires  burning  there  by 
the  edge  of  the  trees  were  kindled  by  Matanga  and  he  would 
tend  them,  but  since  he  died  they  have  burned  on  all  by 
themselves,  and  those  lowly  blue  flowers  growing  by  them  are 
from  drops  of  sweat  that  fell  from  my  Master  as  he  bent  to 


150 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


put  on  wood.  Those  clothes  of  bark  hanging  there  have  not 
dried  in  thirteen  years.  Everything  waits.  That  hill  is  Rishya- 
muka.  It  is  guarded  by  little  snakes,  and  over  it  Ravana  car¬ 
ried  Sita  away  through  the  sky.” 

“You  saw  them!” 

“Rama,  in  misfortune  seek  for  friendship.” 

“Where?”  asked  Rama. 

Savari  replied,  “On  Rishyamuka  live  the  two  monkeys 
Sugriva  and  Hanuman.  We  are  not  far  from  the  hidden  cave 
city  of  Kishkindhya,  the  capital  of  the  monkey  people,  and 
the  monkey  King  Vali  has  driven  out  Sugriva  from  there  and 
banished  him.. Only  Hanuman  remained  Sugriva’s  friend.  Vali 
tried  to  kill  them  but  they  came  here.  Vali  is  Sugriva’s 
brother,  yet  he  has  separated  him  from  his  loving  wife.” 

“Done  what?”  said  Rama. 

“Hanuman  doesn’t  know  his  strength.  He  and  Sugriva  fled 
in  fear.  Here  they  are  safe,  because  Matanga  cursed  Vali 
once.  Neither  Vali  nor  any  of  his  people  can  enter  this  wood 
that  goes  over  the  hill.” 

“Hanuman.”  Rama  looked  at  the  hill.  “Who  is  this  monkey 
Hanuman?” 

“That  white  monkey?”  Savari  laughed.  “Oh,  no  one  can 
equal  him.  He  is  Sugriva’s  one  loyal  friend.  He  is  brave  and 
kind.  He  is  the  child  of  the  Wind.  What  do  you  want  to  hear 
about  him?” 

“A  friend,”  said  Rama.  "Tell  me  everything.” 

“Then,”  said  Savari,  “I  will  tell  you  the  best  story  I  know.” 


Listen,  Rama — 

Mount  Meru  is  at  the  center  of  the  surface  of  Earth,  no 
man  knows  where.  On  Meru  the  Sun  will  appear  to  travel 
around  you.  Bright  sunlight  has  turned  that  mountain’s  soil 
into  gold.  The  whole  mountain  is  solid  gold,  but  because  the 
sunlight  changed  the  ground  so  gradually  none  of  the  plants 
were  harmed,  and  from  the  gold  still  grow  grasses  and  trees. 
Birds  and  animals  live  there  as  on  a  common  hill,  and  there 
is  water. 

Lord  Brahma  comes  down  to  our  world  of  Earth  when  it 
pleases  him.  Once  he  rested  on  Mount  Meru.  He  shed  a  tear 
from  his  eye,  and  where  it  touched  the  golden  ground,  right 
then  and  there  the  first  monkey  was  bom. 

Brahma  named  him  Riksharaja  and  stayed  on  Meru  to 
keep  him  company.  Riksharaja  played  on  the  hill.  He  wan- 


Hanumanl 


151 


dered  around  and  explored  by  day  and  ate  all  the  fruit  he 
wanted.  Every  evening  Riksharaja  returned  to  the  Grandfather 
of  the  Worlds  and  put  some  flowers  at  Brahma’s  feet. 

Early  one  morning  Riksharaja  saw  his  own  reflection  when 
he  bent  over  to  drink  from  a  lake.  He  thought  it  was  the  face 
of  an  enemy  trying  to  take  his  water.  Riksharaja  attacked.  He 
jumped  in  the  lake,  went  completely  underwater,  and  found 
no  one  .there.  When  that  monkey  came  back  out  onto  the 
shore  again,  he  had  been  changed  into  a  female. 

She  was  a  monkey  girl  so  beautiful,  that  as  she  stood  on 
the  hillside  of  Meru  both  Indra  and  Surya  the  Sun  fell  in  love 
with  her.  That  same  morning,  first  Indra  and  then  Surya 
came  down  and  made  love  to  her. 

The  gods’  children  are  quickly  bom.  That  monkey  girl  had 
two  gold-colored  babies,  and  that  afternoon  she  washed  them 
in  the  lake.  They  splashed  water  all  over  her  and  by  the  time 
they  were  clean  Riksharaja  found  that  he  was  again  a  male. 

Riksharaja  took  his  sons  to  Brahma.  They  named  Indra’s 
son  Vali  and  called  his  younger  brother  Sugriva.  Brahma 
gave  Vali  the  city  of  Kishkindhya.  Bfahma  made  more  mon¬ 
keys  and  populated  the  woods,  and  gave  them  the  friendship 
of  the  bear  people.  Vali  became  the  monkey  King,  and  Indra 
gave  his  son  a  victory-garland  of  little  lotus  flowers  cut  from 
gold. 

Riksharaja  stayed  with  Brahma  as  his  friend.  They  lived  in 
Brahma’s  heaven  and  Riksharaja  could  see  whatever  hap¬ 
pened  to  his  sons.  Vali  seemed  to  get  everything,  and  so 
Riksharaja  asked  Vayu  the  Wind  to  father  a  son,  a  monkey 
who  would  always  be  Sugriva’s  true  friend. 

Vayu  the  restless  Wind  went  to  Kishkindhya  and  looked 
around.  The  best-looking  monkey  girl  he  saw  was  Anjana.  If 
Anjana  took  human  form  she  could  have  the  love  of  any 
man.  She  was  walking  atop  a  green  mountain  near  here, 
when  Vayu  came  to  her.  He  gently  stole  away  her  clothes 
and  embraced  her  in  his  long  arms. 

That  same  day,  Hanuman  was  bom.  He  was  a  little  mon¬ 
key  with  white  fur  and  a  red  face  and  brownish-yellow  eyes. 
Anjana  was  married  to  another  monkey.  She  left  Hanuman 
all  alone  by  the  mouth  of  a  small  cave  on  that  hill  and  went 
home. 

Little  baby  Hanuman  was  hungry.  Night  came,  and  went 
by,  and  dawn  approached.  No  one  came  to  feed  him.  He  lay 
on  his  back  by  his  cave  looking  at  his  toes,  and  the  sky  grew 


152 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


lighter  and  lighter.  In  the  east  there  was  first  a  pale  grey 
light,  then  there  was  a  silver,  then  gold  and  rose. 

Hanuman  saw  the  glorious  Sun  rise  into  the  air  like  a  big 
ripe  mango  fruit.  Newborn  though  he  was,  he  knew  what 
fruit  was.  He  licked  his  sharp  bright  little  teeth,  crouched 
down  and  jumped  with  a  leap  and  a  bound  up  into  the  sky 
and  went  flying  straight  at  the  Sun. 

His  father  the  Wind  came  blowing  over  Hanuman  from 
out  of  the  north,  cool  and  fresh  from  the  snows.  He  saved 
Hanuman  from  being  burned  up.  Hanuman  drew  near  to 
Surya  and  the  Sun  beamed  at  him.  Hanuman  smiled  back  at 
the  Sun.  The  fire  of  daylight  was  burning  all  around  the  Sun’s 
chariot,  and  the  flames  sucked  up  the  air  and  pulled  Hanu¬ 
man  into  the  crackling  white  fire. 

There  Hanuman  tumbled  and  spun  unhurt  inside  the  Sun’s 
fire.  It  was  time  for  a  solar  eclipse.  The  immortal  disem¬ 
bodied  head  of  the  Asura  Rahu  advanced  to  swallow  the  Sun 
alive.  He  came  close  and  opened  wide  his  black  mouth. 

Hanuman  bobbed  and  swirled  in  the  updraft  of  the  Sun. 
He  was  trying  to  get  out  of  the  fire  and  fighting  against  the 
currents  of  air  and  flames.  Then  he  came  sailing  out  and  ac¬ 
cidently  put  his  foot  right  in  Rahu’s  eye. 

Rahu  went  to  Indra.  “Another  Rahu  is  eating  the  Sunl” 

Indra  said,  “Look,  are  you  sure?” 

“He  hit  me  in  the  eye!” 

“More  trouble!”  said  Indra.  He  got  on  his  great  white  ele¬ 
phant  Airavata,  who  was  wearing  fancy  hangings  and  was 
painted  with  leaves  and  flowers  all  over  his  skin. 

Rahu  led  the  way.  This  time  Hanuman  got  a  good  look  at 
him.  Rahu  was  just  a  round  head.  He  looked  like  a  bigger 
mango  than  the  Sun  did,  and  Hanuman  jumped  him  and  bit 
his  ear. 

Indra  cried — Stop  that!  Hanuman  turned.  He  saw  Airavata. 
The  biggest  fruit  of  all! 

Hanuman  attacked  Airavata  and  Indra.  He  came  at  them 
waving  his  arms  and  swinging  his  legs,  all  out  of  control. 
Airavata  stepped  aside  and  Indra  pushed  Hanuman  away 
with  the  flat  side  of  his  thunderbolt. 

Hanuman  fell  back  to  Earth.  He  broke  his  jaw  falling  on  a 
stone  by  the  mouth  of  his  own  cave.  Vayu  the  lord  of  the 
Winds  saw  this  and  was  angry.  He  went  to  his  son  Hanuman 
and  took  him  inside  the  little  cave,  and  held  him. 

The  Wind  hid  himself.  The  bodies  of  living  creatures  be¬ 
came  hard  as  wood  and  their  joints  stiffened  into  knots.  Like 


Hanumanl 


153 


a  banner  lowered  and  put  on  the  ground,  the  ever-moving  air 
moved  no  more  and  lay  still.  Vayu  looked  out  in  anger  at  all 
the  worlds  and  stayed  with  his  child,  and  that  was  the  vanish¬ 
ing  of  the  Winds. 

Lord  Brahma  came  to  Hanuman’s  cave  and  with  a  touch 
healed  his  jaw.  Brahma  said,  “Wind,  you  are  breath.  Having 
no  heavy  body  you  pass  through  all  beings.”  Still  Vayu 
silently  held  his  son.  Brahma  said,  “I  made  you  for  life  and 
for  life’s  happiness.” 

Vayu  said,  “Who  can  go  where  the  Wind  waits?” 

Brahma  said,  “Hanuman  on  the  lap  of  the  Wind,  shining 
white,  you  will  live  as  long  as  you  wish  to  live;  you  cannot  be 
killed.” 

Vayu  stirred.  Then  Surya  the  Sun  entered  the  cave,  dressed 
in  gold  and  jewel-crested  clothes,  wearing  earrings  and 
armbands  shining  in  colors.  He  smiled  at  Hanuman.  He 
blinked  his  eyes  and  there  were  blinks  of  black  in  the  cave, 
and  his  lighted  jewels  went  out  and  came  back  alight.  Then 
Hanuman  slept,  as  deeply  as  Night  sleeps,  and  Surya  the  Sun 
set  three  mangos  down  beside  him. 

That  pleased  the  Wind.  He  came  out  and  the  worlds  could 
breathe.  Hanuman  awoke  the  next  day,  ate  his  breakfast,  and 
met  his  father  the  Wind  outside  his  cave. 

Vayu  carried  Hanuman  to  Lord  Shiva.  Shiva  taught  Hanu¬ 
man  to  change  form  at  pleasure.  Nandin  the  bull  taught  him 
languages.  Hanuman  learned  poetry  as  well,  and  as  he  in¬ 
creased  his  skill  at  poems  Hanuman  discovered  that  he  had 
been  wearing  golden  earrings  all  his  life  without  knowing  it. 
No  one  else  can  see  those  little  gold  rings  except  some  person 
as  yet  unknown  to  Hanuman,  who  will  meet  him  and  be  his 
friend  and  master,  so  said  the  bull  Nandin. 

Hanuman  grew  up  and  lived  with  Sugriva  in  Kishkindhya. 
Vali  was  the  King.  At  first  Vali  was  well-liked,  but  he  soon 
became  petty  and  mean,  and  the  bears  withdrew  their  friend¬ 
ship. 

Vali  would  go  out  of  Kishkindhya  looking  for  fights.  He 
would  stand  on  top  of  hills  and  throw  their  peaks  into  the  air 
and  catch  them.  By  the  entrance  of  Kishkindhya  cave  there 
was  a  pile  of  the  white  bones  of  those  who  had  accepted  Vali’s 
challenges. 


Dundhuvi  was  a  giant  buffalo,  and  he  was  the  only  other 
animal  as  ill-mannered  as  Vali.  Dundhuvi  lived  in  the  under- 


154 


SIT A’S  RESCUE 


worlds,  and  whatever  anyone  said  to  him  he  took  offence  at 
it.  Dundhuvi  was  born  angry  and  impatient  and  all  set  to  do 
anyone  wrong,  and  as  he  got  older  he  got  worse,  and  he  left 
his  home  to  seek  new  enemies. 

Dundhuvi  arose  from  the  underworlds  through  the  ocean, 
swam  ashore,  and  stood  on  the  seashore  swearing  and  cursing 
and  pawing  the  sand.  He  looked  at  the  waves.  They  just  kept 
on  coming,  they  didn’t  seem  to  care  if  he  was  there  or  not. 

Dundhuvi  hooked  his  horns  in  the  surf  and  bellowed — 
Fight  me! 

Waves  swept  the  shore.  The  long  watery  arms  of  the  Ocean 
hissed  and  pulled  and  swirled  around  Dundhuvi’s  feet — Go 
back.  Go  back.  Go  back  or  drown. 

Dundhuvi  retreated  two  steps.  “Afraid  to  show  yourself!” 
he  yelled.  A  great  wave  arose,  foaming  and  rumbling,  coming 
closer.  Dundhuvi  walked  quickly  away  on  stiff  legs  with  his 
head  in  the  air. 

Then  he  saw  from  the  distance  the  snowy  Himalya,  a  low- 
seeming  row  of  hills  white  as  Shiva’s  smile,  a  lotus  white. 
Dundhuvi  climbed  up  into  the  Hills  and  battered  them  with  his 
homs.  He  broke  the  rocks  and  yelled — Coward!  You  coward! 

The  Mountain  King  Himavan  appeared  above  Dundhuvi, 
and  he  turned  his  rocky  face  to  look  down  at  the  buffalo. 
Himavan  stood  on  bare  metals  that  struck  out  from  the 
mountain.  He  was  clothed  in  a  white  robe  of  snow  and 
falling  water,  with  a  belt  of  ice  locked  fast.  He  resembled  an 
old  man  with  grey  eyes  and  long  white  hair,  but  he  was  very 
tall. 

With  slow  gestures  Himavan  touched  together  his  deeply 
lined  hands.  He  said,  “Do  not  bring  war  over  the  world’s 
edge.”  The  Himalya  summits  towered  away  into  heaven.  An 
avalanche  cracked  and  fell.  “Would  you  harm  my  men  of 
Peace . . .  ?” 

A  storm  came  blowing  and  the  black  pines  moaned,  the 
dark  deodars  cried  and  ice  broke  like  glass  from  their  boughs. 
It  began  to  sleet. 

Himavan  spoke.  “The  strong  are  not  angered  ...  we 
know,  and  you  do  not  know.  .  .  .”  Cloud  closed  out  the 
world.  The  Hills  and  Himavan  disappeared.  They  were  stand¬ 
ing,  hard  to  move,  lost  in  the  blasting  white  wind. 

The  frozen  snow  and  ice  tore  down  at  Dundhuvi,  biting 
and  whirling  along  on  the  screaming  wind  that  cut  over  the 
blades  of  the  sharp  ridges  above.  Dundhuvi  ran. 

He  ran  until  he  got  to  Kishkindhya.  There  he  stuck  his 


Hanumanl 


155 


head  inside  the  cave  city  and  roared  like  a  drum.  Vali  came 
out  on  a  balcony  of  his  palace.  He  had  his  arm  around  his 
Queen  Tara,  and  he  gave  her  his  wineglass  and  said,  ‘‘Don’t 
stay  while  you  can  still  go,  you  dumb  ox!” 

Dundhuvi  said,  “I’ll  return  when  you  are  sober.  Don’t 
worry,  enjoy  yourself!”  He  roared  again  just  to  hear  the  echo. 

Vali  said,  “But  I  am  only  drunk  at  the  sip  of  a  fight!"  He 
put  on  his  golden  garland  and  jumped  down.  Dundhuvi 
backed  off  outside  the  cave,  and  Vali  came  out  and  faced 
him  like  a  fire  placed  on  the  Earth. 

They  fought  for  a  long  time,  but  in  the  end  Vali  caught 
Dundhuvi’s  horns  and  broke  his  neck.  He  let  the  body  fall. 
Then  he  swung  the  dead  buffalo  around  by  the  tail,  and  let 
him  go. 

Dundhuvi’s  corpse  fell  right  there  on  Rishyamuka  hill,  and 
as  it  flew  overhead  through  the  air  blood  poured  from  its 
mouth  and  touched  our  altar  here.  Matanga  cursed  Vali  to 
die  if  he  ever  came  here.  He  gave  the  monkeys  who  lived 
here  one  day  to  leave,  and  then  he  put  the  curse  of  death  on 
any  of  Vali’s  people  who  would  enter  Matanga’s  Wood. 
Matanga  thought  of  this  forest  as  his  son,  and  the  monkeys 
would  tear  the  trees. 

Dundhuvi’s  son  was  the  Asura  Mayavi.  Mayavi  came  to 
Kishkindhya  for  revenge.  At  midnight  he  challenged  Vali. 

Sugriva  and  Vali  both  came  out.  They  chased  Mayavi  and 
saw  him  enter  a  cave  hidden  by  grass.  Vali  ordered  Sugriva 
to  wait  outside  and  entered  alone.  “I  don’t  need  any  help  to 
win!” 

Sugriva  waited  there  for  a  year,  then  blood  came  out  of 
the  cave.  Sugriva  heard  the  cries  of  Asuras.  He  went  just  in¬ 
side  and  called  Vali,  over  and  over.  There  was  never  any  an¬ 
swer,  and  Sugriva  could  hear  the  Asuras  of  the  underworld 
coming  up  and  their  noise  got  nearer. 

To  keep  them  from  attacking  Kishkindhya  Sugriva  left  the 
cave  and  sealed  it  with  a  stone.  Sugriva  became  King  of  the 
monkeys  and  bears.  But  Vali  was  not  killed.  He  spent  a  year 
down  in  that  cave  searching  for  Mayavi,  and  then  Mayavi 
and  many  other  Asuras  attacked  Vali.  Vali  killed  them.  He 
came  up  the  cave  passage  to  Earth  and  found  it  closed,  and 
kicked  apart  the  stone  Sugriva  had  put  there,  and  like  a  ghost 
he  returned. 

Sugriva  willingly  surrendered  the  crown-diadem  of  Kish- 


156 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


kindhya.  But  Vali  wrongly  exiled  Sugriva  for  treason. 
Vali  holds  Sugriva’s  wife  Ruma  a  prisoner.  Only  Hanuman 
has  stayed  with  Sugriva.  They  remembered  Matanga’s  curse 
and  came  to  live  on  this  hill,  after  many  wanderings. 


“Whoever  hears  this  story  of  the  monkey  Hanuman,”  said 
Savari,  “gains  his  every  desire.  Rama,  the  King  of  the  Mon¬ 
keys  and  Bears  cannot  be  a  thief.  He  can’t  take  the  wives  of 
others.  The  true  Monkey  King  is  on  this  nearby  Rishyamuka 
Hill,  and  the  quest  for  Sita  is  in  his  hands.  Oh  Rama,  Vali  is 
strong,  but  Sugriva  has  sunlight  in  his  soul,  though  Vali  has 
darkened  his  happiness.” 

Lakshmana  said,  “We  will  go  to  Hanuman  and  Sugriva  at 
once,  with  your  permission.” 

“Be  Sugriva’s  friend,”  said  Savari,  “for  he  knows  all  the 
worlds  in  fine  detail.  He  can  find  her  wherever  she  is.  Now  I 
wish  to  die. . . .” 

Rama  said,  “We  will  leave  you  now.”  They  left  Savari  and 
walked  on  along  the  lakeside. 

I  greet  my  Death. 

Yama,  come  my  Friend 

And  take  me  home. 

Savari  lit  her  pyre.  She  bowed  her  head  and  walked  into 
the  burning  flames.  Her  old  body  fell  from  her  in  ashes. 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  looked  back.  They  saw  the  golden 
flames  rise  and  saw  a  chariot  coming,  armored  in  silver  and 
drawn  by  ten  grey  horses  running  on  air. 

That  was  Indra’s  chariot  flying  gold  and  silvery  flags.  Indra 
came  to  Savari’s  fire.  Under  a  white  umbrella  hung  with  flow¬ 
ers  Indra  leaned  over  the  chariot  rail  not  far  above  the 
ground,  and  spoke  to  Savari. 

All  around  the  marvelous  chariot  were  the  Gandharvas  of 
heaven,  wearing  crimson  cloth  and  holding  drawn  swords. 
Across  their  chests  were  blazing  chains,  and  they  were  all 
twenty-five  years  old,  the  eternal  age  of  heaven. 

Savari  became  a  young  woman  in  a  golden  robe  standing 
in  the  fire.  She  rose  up  and  Indra  took  her  on  the  chariot, 
and  like  a  streak  of  light  they  went  away  up  through  the 
many  skies  of  the  world. 


Hanumanl 


157 


Matali  the  heavenly  charioteer  drove  through  the  stare, 
turned  through  those  fields  of  far  lights.  He  passed  above  In- 
dra’s  heaven,  and  went  by  the  sky-homes  of  the  saints.  Above 
it  all,  they  stopped  at  Brahma’s  realm.  Lord  Brahma  saw 
Savari  and  said — Welcome  home. 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  bathed  then,  in  the  waters  of  the 
seven  seas  in  Lake  Pampa.  Rama  said,  “How  shall  I  live 
without  my  Sita?”  They  climbed  onto  Rishyamuka  Hill  cov¬ 
ered  with  trees.  Sugriva  and  Hanuman  stayed  hidden  near  the 
summit  and  watched  them  coming  closer. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  FOREST  ENDS. 
THREE  PARTS  ARE  PAST,  AND  FOUR  REMAIN. 
HERE  THE  BOOK  OF  KISHKINDHYA  BEGINS. 


On  Rishyamuka  Hill  when  a  man  falls  asleep,  if  he  has 
bad  in  him  he  is  beaten  by  Asuras  in  a  dream,  and  wakes  up 
sore  and  bruised  all  over.  But  if  a  totally  good  person  sleeps 
there  he  dreams  of  gold  and  wakes  up  really  rich. 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  were  climbing  when  a  poor  wood¬ 
cutter  appeared  from  the  woods.  He  bowed  and  smiled  at 
them.  He  put  down  his  bundle  of  sticks  and  sat  on  it. 

“What  whim  has  led  the  Sun  and  Moon  to  visit  me  here?” 
The  woodcutter  wiped  his  hands.  He  smiled  and  nodded  his 
head.  “Are  you  truly  gods  walking  on  foot  through  the 
world?  Oh,  you  two,  you  look  at  me  like  lions,  my  boys!” 

Rama  smiled.  He  looked  around  the  hill,  as  though  he  had 
stepped  fresh  from  the  world’s  beginning  to  look  around  and 
see  what  had  been  done.  He  looked  at  the  woodcutter.  “Oh 
Hanuman  of  golden  earrings.” 

“Rama,  I  remember  you  now.”  Hanuman  shook  himself. 
There  he  was,  white  with  glossy  fur,  a  long  tail  curved  grace¬ 
fully,  long  thin  arms,  feet  like  hands,  a  red  face  and  white 
teeth  and  light  eyes  almost  all  yellow.  “Why  do  you  want 
Hanuman?” 

“Ravana  took  Sita.” 

“We  looked  long  after  her,”  said  Hanuman.  He  grew  big¬ 
ger.  “Get  on  my  shoulders,”  he  said,  and  took  them  on  uphill 
to  meet  Sugriva. 

Sugriva  had  gold  fur,  and  his  throat  looked  like  a  piece  of 


158 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


shiny  gold.  Rama  embraced  Sugriva.  There  was  a  small  fire 
and  Rama  and  Sugriva  walked  around  it  for  a  pledge  of 
friendship,  and  each  of  them  promised  to  take  the  other’s  joy 
and  sorrow  as  his  own. 

Then  Sugriva  and  Rama  and  Hanuman  and  Lakshmana 
sat  down,  and  Sugriva  the  Monkey  King  said,  “See  what  fell 
on  our  hill.”  He  brought  out  Sita’s  scarf,  untied  it,  and  all 
Sita’s  ornaments  were  there.  “A  young  goddess  whose  eyes 
curved  back  round  to  her  ears  was  carried  away  by  Ravana.” 

Rama  asked,  “Are  these  hers,  Lakshmana?” 

“Yes.” 

Sugriva  said,  “I  know  every  place  beneath  the  Sun’s  many 
rays.” 

Hanuman  said,  “Wherever  he  took  her  we  can  find  her. 
Yet  we  have  to  hide  on  this  hill,  and  Sugriva  must  suffer  for 
the  separation  from  his  wife.” 

Rama  said,  “Let  this  meeting  be  the  turning  point  of  your 
fortune.” 

Lakshmana  said,  “Truly,  a  friend  is  protection  against  in¬ 
jury  and  a  help  for  sorrow.” 

Hanuman  smiled.  “We’ll  keep  these  till  we  may  give  them 
back  to  Sita.” 

At  that  moment  elsewhere  in  the  world  Sita  felt  her  left 
eye  wink  by  itself,  and  the  same  thing  happened  to  Vali  in 
Kishkindhya,  and  Ravana’s  ten  left  eyes  also  winked.  That  is 
a  good  sign  for  females  and  a  bad  one  for  males.  Hanuman 
served  roast  fish  from  the  lake  and  water  in  lotus-leaf  cups 
shaped  like  boats. 

After  they  had  eaten,  Sugriva  said,  “All  Vali’s  other  ene¬ 
mies  are  dead  and  their  wives  are  widows.  I  don’t  know  what 
we  can  do.  Look,  over  there  is  the  immense  corpse  of  the 
buffalo  Dundhuvi,  and  Vali  threw  him  here  all  the  way  from 
our  city.” 

Rama  got  up,  and  went  over  to  the  corpse  and  pushed  it 
with  one  toe.  The  tough  dry  skin  and  all  those  bones  went  far 
over  the  horizon. 

“Ah,  now  it’s  light  as  grass,  but  Dundhuvi  was  heavy  when 
he  was  killed,”  said  Sugriva. 

Rama  opened  his  quiver.  He  took  out  a  war  arrow.  The  ar¬ 
row  was  gold  plated,  thicker  than  a  finger,  half  as  long  as  a 
staff,  marked  with  Rama’s  name  and  vaned  with  the  feathers 
of  the  fastest  birds  and  steel  tipped. 


Hanumanl 


159 


Rama  strung  his  bow  and  said,  “It  is  wrong  for  people  in 
love  to  be  separated!”  He  shot  and  his  arrow  went  through 
seven  old  ironwood  trees  stout  as  turrets. 


The  next  day  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  Hanuman  and 
Sugriva  went  to  the  mouth  of  Kishkindhya  cave  and  hid  in 
the  forest.  Sugriva  said,  “I’ve  run  in  fear  from  Vali  for  a  long 
time!”  He  tightened  his  belt  and  Stepped  out  in  the  open,  and 
called  for  Vali  to  come  out  of  Kishkindhya  and  fight. 

Inside,  in  the  monkey  palace  in  the  cave  city,  Queen  Tara 
said,  “Listen,  that  is  Sugriva.  Something  is  wrong.  Take  warn¬ 
ing,  there  is  danger.” 

Vali  replied,  “From  him?” 

“Our  people  have  seen  Rama  and  his  brother  nearby.” 

“My  brother’s  a  coward,  why  would  anyone  help  him?” 
Sugriva  called  again. 

“Don’t  go  out,”  said  Tara.  “Be  kind  to  your  brother,  and 
return  him  his  wife,  she  is  so  sad  here.” 

Vali  said,  “He  is  the  one  starting  the  fight.”  He  sent  for  a 
sentry.  “Who  is  with  Sugriva?” 

The  guard  said  he  had  seen  no  one.  Vali  said  to  Tara, 
"Rama  would  not  hide  to  harm  me;  he  would  never  break 
the  fair  rules  of  war.” 

Tara  laughed.  “Rules?” 

Vali  gave  her  a  pat.  “My  dear,  the  only  reason  to  consult  a 
woman  is  to  find  out  what  not  to  do!” 

“No  woman  advises  any  man  she  does  not  love,  even 
among  monkeys.  Be  his  friend.” 

“Oh,  I  won’t  hurt  him,”  said  Vali,  “111  chase  him  off,  that’s 
all.  And  it  is  actually  wrong  for  wives  to  command  their  hus¬ 
bands.” 

Lovely  Tara  tied  Indra’s  golden  garland  over  Vali’s  shoul¬ 
ders.  Vali  ran  out  of  Kishkindhya  like  the  golden  Sun  pop¬ 
ping  up  over  a  hill.  He  saw  Sugriva  and  grabbed  him,  and 
the  two  monkeys  were  wrestling  all  over  the  clearing  in  front 
of  Kishkindhya. 

They  were  moving  so  fast  they  both  looked  the  same.  At 
first  Rama  could  not  aim.  Then  one  of  them  was  winning, 
and  he  wore  gold  flowers  and  Rama  shot  at  him  from  the 
trees. 

The  bowstring  twanged.  There  was  the  arrowy  sound  of  air 


160 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


being  tom  like  cloth,  and  the  sound  of  a  blow.  The  arrow  hit 
Vali  and  went  right  through  his  heart 

Vali  lay  fallen  on  his  back  and  only  his  golden  garland 
kept  him  alive.  Rama  and  Lakshmana  stepped  out  of 
concealment  and  Queen  Tara  ran  out  from  Kishkindhya  with 
her  son  Angada.  Weeping  softly,  she  told  Angada,  “That  is 
Death  there  in  the  form  of  an  archer  leaning  on  his  bow,  and 
from  a  distance  he  has  killed  your  father  the  King.” 

Sugriva  and  Rama  and  Hanuman  and  Lakshmana  stood 
near  Vali.  They  were  pale  and  stared  aimlessly  at  the  ground. 
Sugriva  was  crying  and  his  tears  were  mixed  with  blood  from 
a  cut  under  one  eye.  The  Kishkindhya  monkeys  gathered 
whispering,  sad  whispers  like  the  night  wind  heard  by  a 
lonely  man. 

Tara  fell  like  a  star  and  embraced  Vali.  “My  Lord,  send 
away  these  people  and  turn  to  me.” 

Vali  looked  at  them  all.  He  smiled  at  Tara,  and  he  said  to 
Angada — My  son,  for  anger  I  die.  Help  Rama. 

Vali  the  shelter  of  hundreds  was  dead.  Time,  you  have  no 
friend  and  no  kinsman  and  no  family.  The  long-leaping  mon¬ 
keys  trembled. 


Hanuman  picked  up  the  golden  war  arrow  that  had  pierced 
through  Vali’s  heart,  and  turned  the  shaft  in  his  hands  and 
watched  its  mark — Rama  . . .  Rama  . . .  Rama. . . . 

Tara  touched  the  corpse.  “Why  won’t  you  reach  out  to  me? 
If  you  are  angry,  at  least  speak  to  your  son  .  .  .  Oh.  .  .  I” 
She  looked  at  Rama.  “Will  you  eat  your  kill,  noble  man?” 

Hanuman  spoke  to  Tara.  “Vali  has  left  us  on  a  long  jour¬ 
ney.  The  affairs  of  life  are  now  our  task.  We  live  on,  but  in 
heaven  Vali  will  win  the  hearts  of  the  dancing  women  in 
their  bright  robes  and  their  coronets  and  red  flowers.  Look 
on  what  was  his  body  for  the  last  time,  Queen.” 

“Give  me  that  arrow,”  said  Tara.  “Vali  was  my  mate.  I 
loved  him,  he  was  a  good  King.” 

“Here,  take  it.” 

“Hanuman,  I  am  myself  but  a  part  of  Vali.” 

“Oh  Queen,”  said  Hanuman,  “a  mate  is  this  world’s  best 
gift  to  anyone.” 

“They  say  that  Death  has  met  us  all.” 

“Many  times,  I  have  heard.” 

“When  a  weakling  has  been  abused  and  has  at  last  a 
chance  to  get  even,  he  is  allowed  to  leave  the  True.” 


Hanuman! 


161 


“My  Lady,  your  King  kept  my  King  separated  from  his 
mate.” 

Tara  said,  “Surely  that  is  wrong,  to  part  two  people  in 
love.” 

Hanuman  said,  “As  wrong  as  war,  my  Queen.  That  was 
not  right.” 

Queen  Tara  answered,  “Oh  Hanuman,  tell  Rama  I  forgive 
him,  I  forgive  his  murder — ”  Tara  drove  the  arrow  through 
her  own  heart  and  died. 

The  Monkey  Prince  Angada  looked  at  his  mother  and  fa¬ 
ther  and  looked  at  Rama.  Angada  said,  “I’ll  help  you.  Grief 
does  the  dead  no  good,  and  the  wives  and  sons  of  our  war¬ 
riors  never  lament,  not  by  day  nor  in  the  night.” 

That  evening  the  monkeys  brought  out  their  royal  hearse, 
like  a  war-chariot  without  wheels.  Monkeys  carried  it  on  their 
shoulders,  and  other  monkeys  dressed  the  dead  King  in  jew¬ 
eled  clothes. 

They  took  Vali  away  on  the  bier  covered  with  flowers,  only 
his  face  showing.  The  monkeys  went  away  from  Kishkindhya, 
up  toward  the  banks  of  a  hill  stream.  Some  walked  before  the 
hearse  breaking  apart  jewel  ornaments  in  their  hands,  and  let¬ 
ting  the  pieces  fall  to  Earth,  and  others  cast  down  broken 
pieces  of  shiny  silver.  Then  behind  the  corpse  came 
singers — Glory!  Glory  to  the  Moon.  Glory  to  Water.  We 
burn  Vali.  Vali  slain  by  one  arrow! 

When  they  had  gone  Hanuman  said  to  Rama,  “Come  into 
the  unconquerable  cave  city  of  Kishkindhya.  Tomorrow  we 
will  make  Sugriva  our  King.” 

“No,”  said  Rama.  “The  rain  is  coming.” 

Sugriva  said,  “Rama,  it  is  after  midsummer,  but  still  we 
have  a  few  days. . . .” 

Rama  said,  “King,  go  into  your  city.  Lakshmana  and  I  will' 
live  in  the  woods  somewhere  by  here.  You’ve  been  a  long 
time  away  from  home.” 

There  was  a  faraway  thunder.  Sugriva  said,  “People  can’t 
travel  in  the  rainy  season,  that’s  true  enough,  Rama.  When 
the  rain  ends,  I  promise  you,  we  will  find  Sita  and  obey  you.” 

“I’ll  take  you  to  a  good  place  to  stay,”  said  Hanuman.  “Fol¬ 
low  me,  my  Lords.” 

Hanuman  went  bending  low  through  the  trees,  up  the 
slopes  of  Prasravana  Hill,  the  hill  of  Springs,  and  led  them  to 
an  airy  wide  cave,  well  lit,  with  water  near,  and  he  touched 


162 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


his  hands.  “I  could  have  saved  Sita  by  now  more  than  once,” 
said  Hanuman. 

Rama  started  to  speak,  but  the  wailing  of  grief  from  Vali’s 
funeral  came  to  their  ears  just  then.  Rama  said,  “Leave  us 
alone,  Hanuman.” 


The  Search 


The  Truth  upholds  the  fragrant  Earth  and 
makes  the  living  water  wet.  Truth  makes  fire 
burn  and  the  air  move,  makes  the  sun  shine 
and  all  life  grow. 

A  hidden  truth  supports  everything.  Find  it 
and  win. 

As  Hanuman  turned  back  down  the  hill  the  rains  began* 
First,  Lord  Indra  opened  Heaven’s  gate  and  threw  a  thun¬ 
der-stone  tearing  and  crashing  through  the  dark  clouds  in  the 
still  and  heavy  air.  Then  another  thunder  came,  sloping  on  a 
shallow  path,  rolling  and  rolling  nearer.  Hanuman  ran  for 
home,  thunders  fell  crashing  closer  and  striking  down,  and 
round  black  clouds  grew  like  pavilions  in  the  sky  and  covered 
over  all  the  world. 

The  ever-moving  wind  half-blew  past  the  hills;  then  he 
swept  impatiently  down  on  Earth,  snapping  the  flags  of  the 
cities,  pressing  through  the  forests  and  over  the  hills,  driving 
the  dust  along  the  hot  fields,  throwing  himself  headlong 
against  the  world.  Peacocks  unfurled  their  tails  like  colored 
fans  dancing  on  the  mountain  in  the  trees.  The  sky  rumbled, 
and  over  Prasravana  Hill  a  golden  lash  cut  into  the  sky  and 
the  lightning  fell  and  the  rains  were  born.  The  Earth  shook 
and  the  mad  wind  sang.  The  sky  broke  open,  the  rain  down- 
poured,  and  all  the  world’s  water  fell  in  an  endless  torrent. 

The  cold  heavy  rain  fell  on  and  on  in  big  drops  from  In- 
dra’s  dark  blue  clouds.  Lightnings  blazed  and  thunders  ex¬ 
ploded;  the  violent  wind  whirled  and  rattled  the  bamboos; 
and  the  racing  air  sent  the  rain  streaming  up  and  around  and 
sideways  in  every  way.  The  rays  and  lights  of  the  Sun  and 
Moon  were  gone.  The  dust  was  slain,  and  Earth  with  all  her 
trees  was  soaking  wet,  in  the  night  and  in  the  storm.  All  light 

163 


164 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


faded,  the  long  dark  night  began,  and  the  wind  broke  down 
the  bamboos  so  their  pearls  fell  out  and  rolled  in  the  water. 

Soon  after  the  rain  begins,  the  sound  of  the  water  changes. 
Very  soon  the  brittle  dryness  of  a  year  has  gone,  and  all  is 
wet  through,  and  day  after  day  the  lasting  rain  falls  into  mud 
and  beats  down  on  wet  stones  and  breaks  the  leaves.  The  hill 
seems  made  of  water.  Then  all  things  reveal  that  they  are  but 
made  of  water. 

The  swift  hill-rivers  rushed  brimful  and  laughing  down  the 
hill,  dark  brown  in  flood,  roaring  and  foaming  with  white- 
crested  waves.  Water  ran  down  the  stony  trails  and  the  land 
below  disappeared  underwater.  The  world  was  an  overflowing 
lake  and  the  hills  were  islands.  The  heavy  dark  clouds  had  to 
rest  on  the  high  mountain  peaks  and  seemed  to  take  root 
there,  and  rows  of  white  herons  flying  in  the  wet  wind  were  a 
white  garland  for  heaven. 

In  the  dripping  forests  the  brahmanas  sang  the  holy  Veda, 
and  around  them  the  rivers  ran  like  sacred  threads  over  the 
shoulders  of  mountains,  ceaselessly  murmuring  with  water. 
Elephant  kings,  those  enemies  of  trees,  walked  themselves  like 
mountains  wrapped  in  dark  clouds,  and  turned  back  in  anger 
at  the  lightning  storms  and  the  cloudbanks  of  thunder,  tossing 
their  white  tusks,  waving  their  ears  and  trumpeting,  thinking 
that  some  other  elephant  hung  with  a  golden  chain  had  chal¬ 
lenged  them  in  a  deep  voice. 

Then  the  rains  relented  and  the  wind  withdrew;  you  could 
catch  the  fresh  breeze  like  cold  water  in  the  hollow  of  your 
hands.  The  wild  plane  trees  flowered  dark  red,  and  Autumn 
came  and  smiled  at  the  world.  In  the  evenings  the  sunbeams 
came  pale  and  yellow  through  the  clouds.  Hills  and  trees 
were  fast  asleep  shrouded  in  white  mist.  The  woods  steamed. 
The  pouring  red  rivers  that  had  washed  down  the  metals  of 
the  mountain  became  clear,  and  there  were  birds  again  upon 
their  waters.  By  Rama’s  home,  the  lovely  rivers  fell  downhill, 
and  the  weeping  boughs  of  trees  trailed  in  the  water  and  tried 
to  hold  them  back,  but  though  the  rivers  were  pleased, 
though  they  turned  back  a  little,  still  glittering  and  sparkling 
bright,  adorned  in  silver,  they  excitedly  approached  their  lord 
the  Sea. 

The  sky  would  open  and  show  the  stars  for  a  moment  in 
the  nights.  By  day  new  shoots  unfurled  and  the  buds  opened 
on  the  trees,  and  from  water-soaked  meadows  grew  green 
moss  and  green  grass  and  green  fern.  Full  waterfalls  cascaded 
and  plunged  with  noise.  Lions  again  walked  through  the 


The  Search 


163 


morning  dew  and  purred  softly  in  their  new  coats  of  fur,  and 
in  the  pines  the  birds  sang  to  shake  the  water  from  their  paled 
wings,  and  flew  out  from  their  homes  and  back  again. 

Then  the  Sun!  All  the  watery  drops  shone  like  rainbow 
jewels  fallen  on  the  grass  and  leaves  from  an  Apsarasa’s 
necklace  broken  in  love.  At  noon  the  Sun  felt  good,  he  was 
steadily  fleeing  far  to  the  south,  leaving  the  far  Himalyas  cov¬ 
ered  with  snow.  Fire  was  comfortable  in  the  cold  west  wind, 
and  the  night  hours  grew  freezing  and  long.  Roseapples 
ripened  and  then  fell,  waterflowers  opened  and  blackberries 
blossomed.  Then  the  lotuses  died  from  the  frost  and  left  only 
their  dry  stalks  above  the  water  that  was  so  cold  thirsty  ele¬ 
phants  like  cowards  withdrew  their  trunks  when  first  touching 
it. 

The  mild  yellow  Sun  took  the  cold  Moon’s  good  fortune, 
and  the  Moon  was  veiled  as  a  glass  breathed  upon,  and  dim. 
On  Prasravana  Hill  Rama  watched  the  white  moonrise  and 
thought — Earth  is  in  tears. 

Then  for  many  days  heaven  was  clear  over  all  the  world, 
and  the  river  banks  emerged  from  under  water.  In  the  north 
snow  came  at  night  on  fast  dark  winds.  On  the  warm  plains 
the  golden  grain  slightly  bent  its  heads.  The  peacocks  furled 
their  tails  and  gave  up  love  and  games.  Many-colored  snakes 
came  from  their  pits,  and  wide-winged  swans  returned  to  the 
lands  around  Kishkindhya.  Elephants  rolled  in  the  dust,  birds 
rose  in  flights  from  the  grainfields,  silver  fish  swam  in  the 
slow  rivers,  and  it  was  almost  Winter. 


From  within  Kishkindhya  cave  Rama  and  Lakshmana  could 
hear  the  monkeys  singing  and  dancing  to  drums,  and  still 
they  waited  for  Sugriva  to  come  to  them.  Monkeys  kill  no 
game,  and  all  round  their  city  the  small  and  harmless  deer 
were  unafraid.  Rama  felt  Sita’s  loss  the  more  when  he  saw 
them  so  secure  in  their  woody  homes.  New  flowers  began  to 
reappear.  Rama  saw  a  new  open  lotus  and  said,  “These  petals 
are  shaped  like  Sita’s  eyes.  .  .  .  When  Ravana  eats  her,  she 
will  cry  out  to  me  in  fear,  and  her  round  breast  once  colored 
with  red  sandal-paste  will  be  bathed  in  bright  scarlet  blood.” 

“Better  to  act  than  wonder  and  dream,”  said  Lakshmana. 
“I’ll  have  a  word  with  Sugriva.” 

Lakshmana  took  his  bow  and  set  out  for  Kishkindhya, 
thinking  over  what  he  would  say  and  knocking  trees  aside 
with  his  leg,  thinking  how  Sugriva  would  answer  and  break- 


166 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


ing  rocks  to  bits  with  his  feet.  He  entered  the  cave  and  saw 
Kishkindhya  city’s  bright  towers  rising;  he  jumped  over  the 
monkey  barricades,  leapt  their  moat  and  approached  the  wall. 
The  monkey  guards  looked  down  and  Lakshmana  stared  back 
at  them  and  sighed,  and  at  that  sight  the  sentries  ran  away. 

Angada  the  monkey  prince  opened  the  main  gate.  Lak¬ 
shmana  said,  “My  child,  announce  me — Lakshmana  waits  for 
your  promise  at  the  gate.” 

Angada  ran  for  Hanuman,  and  Hanuman  ran  to  the  king. 
He  found  Sugriva  sprawled  out  asleep  in  his  drinking  room 
and  grabbed  his  feet  and  shook  him.  Sugriva  awoke  with  a 
start  and  blinked  his  bleary  red  eyes.  “What  are  you  doing?” 

Hanuman  said,  “Get  up,  you  fool!” 

Sugriva  sat  up.  “Who  has  been  telling  you  tales  about  my 
imaginary  shortcomings?” 

“You’ve  been  drinking  for  over  three  months,”  said  Hanu¬ 
man,  “and  now  Lakshmana  is  at  the  gate.” 

“Oh  gods  of  heaven  give  us  a  little  peace  and  quiet  around 
here,  can’t  you?” 

“Are  you  still  drunk?”  asked  Hanuman.  “Get  up,  go  to 
him,  kneel,  fold  your  paws  together  like  a  family  man,  and 
bow  down  that  he  may  abuse  you  and  spare  your  life.  A 
promise-breaker  is  so  vile  no  beast  will  eat  his  body  when  he 
dies,  and  an  angry  friend  is  worse  than  an  enemy.” 

Sugriva  said,  “Cold  water,  Hanuman,  not  talk.  .  .  .” 

At  the  gateway  Lakshmana  grew  tired  of  waiting  and  en¬ 
tered  the  caverns  of  Kishkindhya  city,  walking  down  the 
sloping  outer  halls  where  beside  the  path  fresh  water  flowed 
down  stone  channels  to  the  city  within.  He  went  through 
rooms  and  past  flowery  gardens,  and  saw  many  monkeys  in 
their  robes  and  garlands,  and  they  greeted  him  silently  with 
touching  hands,  raised  to  their  brows.  He  came  to  a  wide 
road  watered  with  perfume  and  lined  with  sandalwood  trees. 
At  the  road’s  end  he  crossed  over  a  clear  river  on  a  foot¬ 
bridge,  and  went  through  a  golden-arched  gate  in  the  crystal 
walls  of  Sugriva’s  palace. 

The  tall  white  and  silver  roof  spires  rose  up  into  the  cave 
above,  and  one  long  tower  pierced  through  the  top  and  disap¬ 
peared.  Lakshmana  walked  through  a  grove  of  blue-flowering 
trees,  stepping  his  way  over  low  flowers  colored  like  gold 
melting  in  the  cool  shade.  He  entered  a  doorway  and  crossed 
seven  rooms  where  women  on  gold  and  silver  couches  were 
stringing  flowers.  Then  he  came  into  the  heart  of  the  monkey 
women’s  quarters — a  dancing  hall  of  marble  and  jewels,  with 


The  Search 


167 


soft  seats  round  the  walls  and  tables  for  banquets — and  stood 
guiltily  in  a  corner. 

Lakshmana  thought — I  don’t  belong  here,  where  shall  I  go? 
From  within  some  unseen  secret  inner  apartment  came  happy 
women’s  voices  and  music  and  the  jingling  of  bells  and  jewel 
belts.  Lakshmana  couldn’t  remember  how  he  had  come  in. 
There  were  fine-cut  window  screens  everywhere  in  the  walls 
and  too  many  doors.  Then  Lakshmana  pulled  his  bow,  let  go 
the  string,  and  the  bowstring  rang  out  like  the  snap  of  a 
whip.  Lakshmana  looked  for  some  escape. 

Nearby,  Hanuman  heard  the  bow-cry  and  he  jumped.  He's 
really  here! 

“Relax,”  said  King  Surgriva.  “He  can’t  get  out.  A  job  for 
the  Queen.” 

Sugriva  called  Queen  Ruma.  “Dear,  good  men  like  Lak¬ 
shmana  out  there  will  not  usually  hit  a  woman.  Go  to  him, 
read  his  heart  and  console  him.” 

The  good-looking  Queen  Ruma  went  before  Lakshmana 
with  many  downcast  looks,  her  feet  unsteady,  her  eyes  red 
with  wine,  her  golden  belts  flowing  about  her  hips.  She  said 
in  a  husky  voice,  “Oh  Lakshmana,  why  are  you  angry  with 
your  loving  friends?” 

Lakshmana  said,  “It’s  your  husband,  my  Lady.” 

“After  long  fear  and  shame,”  smiled  Ruma,  “he  is  lost 
again  in  the  early  springtime  countryside  of  happiness,  and 
led  astray  by  summery  love.  Carefree,  even  a  man  in  love 
forgets  who  he  is,  what  of  a  monkey?  Forgive  us  our 
pleasure,  be  not  angry  against  us.  And  he  is  still  true  to  you, 
come.” 

She  led  Lakshmana  to  Sugriva.  The  golden  monkey  King 
now  sat  on  a  rich  carpet,  and  rose  to  join  his  hands  together, 
wearing  a  gaudy  garland  round  the  ruff  of  gold  fur  that  was 
his  neck.  “Welcome,  Lakshmana,  welcome.” 

“Best  of  monkeys,”  said  Lakshmana,  “Vali’s  path  is  not  so 
narrow  that  no  one  else  can  follow  him,  also  killed  by 
Rama’s  arrows.  Remember  past  kindnesses  and  beware; 
there’s  nothing  that  can’t  be  accomplished  by  a  little  work.” 

Sugriva  smiled.  “But  we  care!  Climb  the  watchtower  with 

___  t* 

me. 

They  went  up  a  long  winding  stairway  of  silver,  out 
through  the  cave  roof  and  onto  a  balcony  high  above  a  hill¬ 
top.  Lakshmana  looked  out  at  the  valleys  he  had  just  left.  Ev¬ 
erywhere,  hordes  of  monkeys  and  apes  and  big  shaggy  bears 
covered  the  land. 


168 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Sugriva  said,  “Thirteen  days  ago,  I  laid  my  commands  on 
my  people,  and  I  asked  for  help  from  the  bears.  We  are  all 
aware  of  illusion;  we  are  versed  in  arts  and  the  law;  we  are 
strong  and  we  come  from  all  over  the  world.  Oh  Lakshmana, 
when  we  fight  we  hurl  entire  hills  and  rock  faces,  we  stamp 
down  the  forests  like  grass  underfoot  and  splash  the  water 
from  the  sea.  If  we  trip,  the  Earth  cracks,  if  we  want  rain  we 
capture  the  clouds  and  just  wring  them  out,  if  we  give  a 
small  celebration  the  noise  knocks  the  birds  stunned  right  out 
of  the  sky,  and  we  number  in  millions.  .  . 


Hanuman  went  to  tell  Rama  the  animals  had  come. 
Sugriva  and  Lakshmana  went  back  downstairs  from  the 
tower,  and  in  the  throne  room  of  Kishkindhya  they  met  Jam- 
bavan  the  King  of  the  Bears,  an  old  dark  bear  with  a  crown 
and  earrings  of  gold,  with  smoky  grey  eyes,  huge  paws  and 
long  arms,  who  stood  on  two  feet  or  on  four,  just  as  he 
wished. 

“Who  came?”  asked  Sugriva. 

“I  will  tell  you,”  growled  Jambavan.  “Outside  your  cave 
are  the  white  tree-dwelling  monkeys  who  change  their  forms 
at  will;  the  tall  blue  coconut  monkeys  strong  as  elephants;  the 
yellow  honey-wine  monkeys  with  sharp  teeth;  the  charcoal 
monkeys,  born  to  the  daughters  of  Gandharvas,  who  worship 
the  Sun;  the  grey  apes  from  the  woods  skirting  the  Edge  of 
the  World,  who  are  handsome  from  eating  only  berries;  the 
black  ones  with  snaky  tails,  from  the  caves  and  hidden  passes 
of  Ganga,  who  never  praise  themselves;  the  red  ones  with 
lion-manes;  and  all  the  great  bears  of  Earth  have  come  here 
dark  as  gloom,  brown  and  black  and  terrible  to  meet.” 

“Leave  your  families  here  with  ours  in  Kishkindhya,”  said 
Sugriva,  “and  go  out  to  find  Earth’s  daughter  who  has  been 
stolen.  Because  for  her  Rama  laments,  and  the  dark-eyed 
forest  people  weep  to  hear  him.” 

Sugriva  told  Lakshmana,  “Fleeing  from  Vali  I  have  come 
to  know  every  place  in  the  world.”  He  sat  on  his  throne  and 
sent  for  the  General  of  the  East.  An  old  grey  monkey  en¬ 
tered,  moving  slowly,  his  eyes  bright  and  round,  dressed  in 
hides  tied  fast  with  a  bowstring,  a  red  cloth  tied  round  his 
forehead,  white  bow  scars  all  over  his  arms.  He  looked  sharply 
at  Lakshmana  and  then  at  Sugriva,  and  said  nothing. 

“Search  the  Eastern  quarter  of  the  world  for  Sita,”  said 
Sugriva.  “Go  through  the  silver  mines  and  the  mulberry 


The  Search 


169 


groves  where  silkworms  feed;  search  the  mountains  and  the 
rich  cities  embraced  by  the  Eastern  Sea;  search  the  hillside 
houses  of  the  barbarians  whose  ears  fold  across  their  chins 
like  scarves,  those  curious  men  of  red  hair  and  yellow  bodies 
and  hard  round  faces  black  as  iron,  who  eat  men,  who  have 
but  one  foot  and  yet  outrun  the  deer.  Search  those  islands 
where  bristly  hunters  live  on  raw  fish  and  mermen  swim  un¬ 
dersea,  where  the  hillmen  run  on  four  legs  and  strange  fisher¬ 
men  never  leave  their  boats  all  their  lives.  Search  the  Gold 
and  Silver  Islands  whose  sharp  hills  pierce  heaven,  where  live 
the  swans  and  the  gods.  Go  through  the  wilderness  and  the 
deep  woods  of  stony  rills,  the  mountain  crags,  the  hermitages 
and  sweet  gardens  and  bowers,  the  farms  and  villages  and 
sandy  deserts,  the  bare  ocean  islands  cut  off  by  dark  waves 
and  storms  howling  at  sea.  By  the  Eastern  Sea  of  salt  beware 
of  the  huge  hungry  demons  hanging  head-down  like  mis¬ 
shapen  rocks  on  the  cliffs  over  the  surf,  who  die  every  day 
when  struck  by  the  sunrise,  but  fall  into  the  sea  and  revive, 
and  return  to  hang  again  on  the  cliffs.  Go  beyond,  to  the 
limit  of  the  world’s  land,  to  the  shore  of  the  primeval  milk 
sea,  whose  breast  ripples  with  white  milk  waves  like  strands 
of  pearls,  where  silver  lotuses  shine  with  filaments  of  gold. 
Stop  by  the  tall  golden  palm  tree  that  Indra  planted  on  the 
last  shore  to  mark  the  end  of  the  East.  There  through  a  crev¬ 
ice  cleft  in  the  Earth  you  can  look  down  and  see  far  below 
you  the  serpent  Sesha  white  like  the  Moon,  who  upholds 
Earth  on  his  coils,  who  has  a  thousand  heads  with  wide  lotus 
eyes,  who  is  clad  in  blue.  Farther  east,  far  out  to  sea  is  the 
submarine  fire  burning,  coming  out  from  the  mouth  of  a 
horse,  changing  the  milk  to  salt  seawater  again,  from  under 
water  boiling  up  steam  to  make  the  rains,  waiting  for  when 
the  world  ends  the  next  time  to  consume  for  food  all  this 
wondrous  universe  of  life  that  moves  and  of  creatures  immo¬ 
bile.  You  may  hear  from  afar  the  cries  of  feeble  ocean-beasts 
in  fear  of  those  flames,  and  across  that  lonely  sea  you  will 
dimly  see  the  beginnings  of  the  impassable  Mountains  of  A 
World  and  No  World,  the  boundary  hills  surrounding  the 
Universe,  their  far  sides  in  perpetual  darkness,  so  high  that 
all  other  mountain  peaks  would  lie  at  their  feet,  and  our 
noble  summits  would  but  form  their  base.  On  their  flanks 
trees  and  high  abodes  rise  up  beyond  our  vision,  nor  can  we 
ever  approach  them.  Over  the  milk  sea,  across  the  barrier 
Hills  of  A  World  and  of  No  World,  no  creature  can  go.  They 
encircle  the  universe.  Past  them  in  every  direction  is  eternal 


170 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


night — boundless,  treacherous,  without  Sun  and  Moon  and 
light.  And  again,  that  darkness  itself  and  all  the  cosmos  is 
held  within  the  white  shell  of  an  egg. 

“In  the  East  dawn  first  appears  bright  with  brilliant  glory 
reflected  from  the  sunrise  gates  of  gold,  and  people  living 
there  awhile  also  become  golden  colored.  Search  everywhere 
I  have  said  to  look,  and  wherever  I  have  not  named.  Stay 
away  no  longer  than  one  month  from  today.” 

The  Monkey  General  of  the  East  bowed  to  his  king,  turned 
on  his  heel  and  walked  stiffly  outside  the  cave  city.  One  quar¬ 
ter  of  the  monkey  soldiers  set  out  following  him.  Their 
weapons  blazed,  their  supply  wagons  rumbled  along,  the  dust 
from  their  march  trapped  the  sunbeams  in  the  sky  and  hid 
the  day.  There  was  a  bewildering  noise,  the  floor  trembled  in 
Sugriva’s  throne  room,  and  they  were  gone. 

Then  the  red-haired  monkey  General  of  the  West  entered 
before  Sugriva,  muttering  to  himself.  He  came  to  a  halt, 
smashed  his  brass  sandals  against  the  stone  floor,  swept  off  his 
iron  helmet  that  trailed  long  green  plumes  and  parrot 
feathers,  swirled  his  red  cape,  fell  to  his  knees  with  a  crash  of 
bronze  armor  and  cried — Victory  to  the  King!  Jaya!  Jaya! 

Sugriva  said,  “Explore  the  West  for  Sita.  Search  her  out  by 
force  and  by  skill;  discover  what  has  happened  to  her;  learn 
if  she  is  waiting  somewhere  on  the  way  West.” 

" Majesty /” 

“Listen  to  me,”  said  Sugriva.  “In  the  West  the  Sun’s  light 
ends  and  there  the  kind  Lady  Night  has  her  home.  Follow 
west  the  cool  forest  streams  that  flow  from  the  high  cold 
lakes;  search  the  wide  western  kingdoms  and  empires,  the  hot 
plateaus  and  tablelands,  the  natural  arbors  of  entangled 
creepers  and  vines  so  hard  to  penetrate.  Where  the  Sindhu 
river  falls  into  the  Western  Sea  is  the  Hill  of  the  Moon,  with 
a  hundred  crests  and  ten  thousand  ridges  lost  in  the  sky, 
where  live  those  giant  wild  birds  who  carry  up  to  their  nests 
whales  from  the  sea  and  elephants  from  the  land,  and  keep 
them  there  for  little  pets.  Their  nests  are  so  large  that  the  ele¬ 
phants  happily  roam  and  wander  within  them  eating  their  fill 
in  the  shade  of  huge  trees,  and  round  the  edges  where  the 
rain  collects  the  whales  swim  and  dive.  Search  this  place. 
And  near  here  as  well,  do  the  hermit  Gandharvas  store  food 
for  the  rains  and  keep  orchards.  Take  no  fruit  from  them,  let 
none  of  these  creatures  see  you.  Past  that  place  is  Diamond 
Thunder  Mountain,  a  steep  hill  of  blue  adamant.  Cascades 
run  all  through  channels  deep  within  it,  and  along  those  dark 


The  Search 


171 


swift  waters  boars  and  lions  roar,  forever  excited  by  the  din 
and  echo  of  their  own  voices.  Westward  of  that  hill  begin  the 
golden  flower  trees  that  lead  up  sixty  thousand  low  hills  of 
gold  which  surround  Sunset  Hill.  The  Sun  dispels  the 
darkness  of  the  world  up  to  this  point.  You  can  go  this  far. 
Do  not  go  beyond,  where  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  put  out,  and 
nothing  can  ever  be  seen.  Look  wherever  you  might  expect  to 
find  Sita,  and  wherever  you  would  think  that  she  could  never 
be.  Return  here  to  me  within  a  month." 

“Jay a  Sugriva  Raja  Maharaja  Jaya!”  The  General  of  the 
West  battered  his  way  to  his  feet,  touched  his  hands  together 
in  a  salute  and  left  the  room. 

The  white-furred  Bear  General  of  the  North  quietly  re¬ 
moved  his  satin  shoes  at  the  door  and  gracefully  entered  un¬ 
bidden,  and  knelt  to  the  monkey  king.  “May  you  be  pleased 
to  command  me,  Lord.” 

“Survey  for  me  the  northern  quarter  of  the  world,"  said 
Sugriva.  “Carefully  search  the  Bharata  and  Kuru  kingdoms. 
Go  on  into  the  bordering  deodar  forests  of  the  bird  tribes  in 
the  foothills,  and  cross  the  hair-raising  lifeless  desert  beyond, 
and  enter  the  enchanted  lands  of  the  Northern  Kurus.  Keep 
your  wits  about  you.  As  wild  animals  who  are  free  to  come 
and  go,  search  Kailasa  Hill  pale  and  silver  as  the  moon,  and 
got  through  the  palace  of  the  Treasure  Lord  Vaishravana, 
who  is  bowed  down  to  by  all  creatures  who  can  bend.  North 
of  that,  cross  the  Stone  river  where  Apsarasas  swim  and  play. 
Don’t  let  the  water  touch  you,  but  lean  across  by  using  the 
tall  bamboo  stalks  lining  the  banks.  Look  among  the  magic 
Wishing  Trees,  and  the  trees  that  bear  drinks  and  pearls  for 
fruit,  and  the  ground  vines  bearing  couches  and  blankets  like 
melons  on  stems.  Examine  the  passes  and  the  sloping  sides  of 
the  icy  Himalaya,  and  listen  there  closely  for  the  sound  of 
music  and  the  voice  of  sweet  song  and  happy  laughter;  be¬ 
cause  what  may  seem  to  the  eye  to  be  but  a  bare  mountain¬ 
side  at  first,  will  often  be  an  illusion,  that  hides  the 
playgrounds  of  the  Naga  serpents  beneath  a  spell  of  invisibil¬ 
ity.  Discover  these  hideaways  and  search  them.  Those 
Himalyan  Naga  people  are  blessed  and  fortunate,  they  are 
never  sad  nor  want  any  beautiful  thing,  and  every  day  they 
gain  marvelous  abilities  and  skills.  And  among  the  Hills  is 
Mount  Meru  the  center  of  the  world,  invisible  to  doubting 
people,  round  which  revolve  the  Sun  and  Moon;  indeed,  in 
half  an  instant  the  Sun  swiftly  passes  over  Meru  at  noon. 
Farther  north  are  treeless  hills  that  hold  the  homes  of  horse- 


172 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


faced  men  and  women.  It  should  be  dark  beyond  there,  for 
Winter  fast  approaches,  yet  in  many  vales  and  caves  live 
luminous  saints,  and  the  Northern  Kuru  land  is  visible  by 
their  bright  light  On  and  on  to  the  Far  North  stretches  that 
land,  eternally  silent,  shining  with  all  the  loveliness  and  reality 
of  any  ground  warmed  by  the  Sun,  though  there  are  few  ways 
for  moving  creatures  and  the  wide  sky  is  empty  of  stars  or 
clouds  or  light  from  heaven.  Go  on  if  you  can,  and  you  will 
reach  the  North  Sea  whose  waters  are  black.  Look  at  it  from  a 
distance  but  do  not  touch  the  surf  and  do  not  lose  sight  of 
Mount  Meru  behind  you.  Those  North  Sea  shores  are  made  of 
grey  stone  and  black  slate  and  shrouded  in  fog.  There  the  cold 
wet  wind  blows  onshore  forever  and  the  sea-spray  freezes  to 
salted  ice  in  the  air.  Waves  break  like  glass  on  the  shore, 
darkness  blots  the  air,  fire  will  not  burn,  each  day  and  night 
become  a  year  and  time  i9  lost  in  eternity.  Turn  back  quickly 
from  this  fearful  northern  border  of  the  world,  and  let  not 
more  than  a  full  month  pass  before  you  return.” 

The  Bear  General  of  the  North  touched  his  sword-hilt  and 
said — Yes.  He  rose  and  left  the  room,  and  so  out  from 
Kishkindhya  had  gone  three-fourths  of  the  animal  warriors, 
gone  to  search  in  three  of  the  four  directions,  when  Sugriva 
said,  ‘‘Summon  Hanuman,  bring  me  Hanuman.” 


Hanuman  came  in  with  Rama,  padded  over  barefoot  to  the 
middle  of  the  floor  and  sat  down.  The  golden  monkey  prince 
Angada  brought  some  rugs  and  also  sat,  and  Sugriva  left  his 
throne  to  join  them,  and  there  also  sat  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
and  the  towering  old  Bear  King  Jambavan. 

“Now  the  thing  is,”  said  Sugriva,  “we  saw  Ravana  fly 
South.  Lanka  is  South.  I  make  Prince  Angada  leader.  Oh 
Rama,  Hanuman  the  Son  of  the  Wind  will  surely  find  Sita;  if 
you  will,  stay  here  with  me  until  they  return,  and  let  Lak¬ 
shmana  stay,  and  let  Jambavan  go,  and  let  them  return  in  a 
month.”  Sugriva  stood  up.  He  withdrew  a  scroll  from  his 
robes  and  gave  it  to  Hanuman  and  said,  “You  know  what  to 
do  and  how  to  do  it  .  .  .  here  is  a  little  message  for  the 
Demon  King  if  you  should  chance  to  meet  .  .  .  don’t  lose  it 
before  you  memorize  it.  .  .  .”  Sugriva  smiled  and  returned 
to  his  inner  rooms  and  fell  asleep. 

Hanuman  joined  his  hands.  “Rama,  well  come  back  soon. 
Lanka  is  hard  to  reach  and  far  away,  but  I  know  every  prov¬ 
ince  and  city  and  puddle  and  footprint  and  demon  stronghold 


The  Search 


173 


in  the  world.  When  Vali  would  chase  me  and  Sugriva  we 
would  fly  so  high  that  we  saw  below  us  all  the  world  like  a 
picture,  clear  as  your  face  in  a  mirror.  We  saw  Earth  herself 
turning  in  space  with  a  strange  whirring  noise  like  a  firebrand 
swept  quickly  through  the  air.  She  was  like  a  wheel,  and  her 
cities  were  like  small  golden  coins  and  her  rivers  were 
crossing  like  threads.  Her  forests  and  meadows  were  tiny 
patches;  the  Vindhya  and  Himalya  Hills  all  covered  with 
rocks  looked  like  elephants  in  a  pond  as  they  rose  from  the 
flat  Earth.” 

Jambavan  the  bear  smiled.  “Sugriva  trusts  this  Hanuman, 
and  Hanuman  relies  with  even  more  confidence  on  himself, 
and  I  will  also  accompany  him.” 

Rama  gave  Hanuman  a  wide  gold  ring.  “This  is  mine  and 
she  will  know  it,  for  her  father  Janaka  gave  it  to  me  after  our 
wedding,  and  on  it  is  written  my  name  three  times — Rama, 
Rama,  Rama!'* 


So  with  only  one  thought  in  their  minds,  the  monkeys  and 
bears  fanned  out  from  Kishkindhya  into  the  four  quarters  of 
the  world.  They  gave  orders  and  ignored  them,  passed  im¬ 
passable  torrents  and  climbed  unclimbable  crags,  sifted  the 
sands  of  the  deserts  and  combed  the  meadows.  They  drove 
the  yellow  tigers  yowling  from  the  glens  and  the  butterflies 
flapping  from  the  gardens  and  the  village  cats  running  from 
the  fields  so  that  they  all  fled  together.  The  monkeys  and 
bears  rushed  along  and  shouted  in  high  voices  and  low — Step 
Aside!  Move  over!  Let  me  by,  it  won’t  take  me  long! 

The  animals  of  Kishkindhya  ran  up  along  the  narrow  ways 
that  lead  from  certain  holy  temples  to  the  hidden  side-doors 
of  heaven.  They  looked  into  sealed  royal  vaults  and  pawed 
through  secret  treasure-rooms  forgotten  from  the  past.  Dis¬ 
guised  as  men,  they  bumped  into  people  and  picked  their 
pockets;  posing  as  bandits  they  shook  out  the  tents  of  trav¬ 
elers  as  if  they  were  cleaning  rugs,  and  rattled  the  caravan 
wagons  like  dice  to  see  what  would  fall  out  from  them. 

The  monkeys  and  bears  asked  the  birds  a  thousand  search¬ 
ing  questions.  They  peeked  inside  closed  flowers,  talked  to  the 
wild  beasts  and  spoke  to  the  tame  buffalo.  They  listened  to 
leopards  in  the  quiet  jungle  and  to  men  in  the  city  bazaars. 
They  followed  streams  to  their  sources  in  the  hills  to  be  sure 
they  were  not  the  water  from  Sita’s  tears.  And  at  night  they 


174 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


slept  on  the  ground  under  fruit  trees,  making  their  beds 
beneath  their  breakfast. 

Hanuman  and  Jambavan  and  Angada  and  a  quarter  of  the 
animal  warriors  went  South.  After  half  a  month  they  were 
not  far  from  the  Malaya  Hills  where  sandalwood  forests 
grow,  when  they  entered  a  dead  forest.  Once  in  that  wood,  a 
hermit’s  son  had  died  when  he  was  but  ten  years  old.  His  life 
had  run  out  then,  and  for  that  his  father  cursed  all  the  land 
to  lose  its  life.  There  was  no  food  to  be  found,  not  even  a  bee 
lived  there. 

Angada  led  them  on  through  valleys  choked  with  thorns, 
through  twined  thickets  and  dense  underbrush  and  clumps  of 
thistles.  They  crossed  chasms  and  ravines,  and  the  Monkey 
Prince  made  them  every  one  stay  in  the  sight  of  another,  un¬ 
til  at  last,  tired  and  exhausted,  the  monkeys  and  bears  col¬ 
lapsed  under  the  dead  trees  to  rest,  lying  on  the  dry  grass 
curved  over  the  hills,  far  to  the  south. 

Then  round  a  hillside  flew  two  swans.  His  voice  faint  from 
thirst,  Angada  said  to  Hanuman,  “Let’s  look  around  there.” 
The  birds  flew  by  dripping  water  from  their  wings.  Around 
the  hill  they  saw  the  rocky  mouth  of  a  cave.  A  long  narrow 
lightning  scar  seared  the  stones  just  outside  it,  and  by  the  en¬ 
trance  grew  water-loving  trees,  and  they  could  feel  a  cool  wet 
breeze  when  they  looked  inside. 

But  they  could  see  nothing.  It  was  dark  as  a  black  night 
pouring  rain.  First  Hanuman  went  on  in;  Angada  grabbed  his 
tail,  someone  else  held  Angada’s  tail,  and  so  forming  a  chain 
all  the  animals  followed.  The  floor  led  down,  then  the  slope 
steepened  and  the  stones  underfoot  were  wet.  Hanuman  slipped 
and  started  to  slide.  Angada  stumbled  and  couldn’t  hold  him 
back;  then  all  the  animals  began  to  fall  after  Hanuman,  still 
holding  onto  each  other,  unable  to  stop,  falling  faster  and  fas¬ 
ter.  The  floor  become  the  wall  of  a  tunnel  leading  down. 
There  were  no  handholds  and  nothing  to  stand  on. 

They  fell  for  a  hundred  leagues.  Finally  they  saw  a  light 
below,  coming  up  to  .meet  them,  and  then  they  dropped  down 
into  the  bright  lighted  underworld.  They  fell  all  in  a  heap 
somehow  unhurt,  beside  a  wide  splashing  river  running  with 
cool  white  wine,  with  goblets  growing  from  silvery  rushes 
alongside,  flowing  in  a  channel  lined  with  delicious  little  oys¬ 
ters. 

It  was  a  large  cavern  lit  up  by  magic  mirrors  and  chunks 
of  gleaming  gold  set  in  the  walls  and  ceiling  high  above. 
They  all  had  a  drink.  Then  Hanuman  looked  around  and  saw 


The  Search 


173 


a  white  palace  with  gold  balconies  and  windows  screened  by 
nets  of  pearls.  There  were  pools  and  ponds  of  water  and 
wines  set  out  in  a  park,  and  playing  fountains,  and  petals  on 
the  paths.  And  in  that  park  the  living  fish  were  real  gold  and 
the  turtles  were  chased  silver. 

The  monkeys  and  bears  started  to  celebrate  their  rescue. 
But  by  accident  Jambavan  the  bear  broke  off  a  branch  from 
a  lovely  red  rosebush.  Blood  ran  out  from  the  break;  the 
roses  lost  their  color  and  were  drained  white.  Then  Hanuman 
made  everyone  be  still,  and  with  Jambavan  cautiously  ap¬ 
proached  the  enchanted  palace. 

A  beautiful  young  girl  dressed  in  a  soft  black  antelope 
robe  was  sitting  in  the  shade  of  a  bell  tree,  on  a  bench  of 
purple  lapis,  by  the  jewel  stairs  that  led  into  the  house  behind 
her.  One  by  one,  all  the  monkeys  and  bears  came  and  sat 
down  quietly  around  her. 

And  though  they  did  not  know  it,  that  marked  the  end  of 
the  month’s  time.  From  wherever  they  had  gone,  all  the  rest 
of  the  animals  came  again  to  Kishkindhya,  from  East  and 
North  and  West.  The  General  of  the  East  covered  his  face; 
the  General  of  the  West  sighed;  the  General  of  the  North  re¬ 
turned  covered  with  ashes.  Sugriva  said,  “Oh  Rama,  now  it  is 
only  Hanuman  the  Son  of  the  Wind  who  will  succeed  in  find¬ 
ing  Sita  . . .  but  the  time  is  past  and  where  is  he?” 


In  the  cave  where  they  had  fallen,  Hanuman  asked  that 
girl,  “Who  are  you  and  whose  home  is  this?” 

She  said,  “I  am  Swayamprabha,  a  mortal  woman,  though 
here  things  are  not  always  what  they  seem.  This  is  Maya’s 
Cave  of  Trees.  The  Asura  Maya  of  masterful  art  and  illusion 
built  all  this.” 

“How  did  you  get  here?”  asked  Hanuman. 

“Little  monkey,  I  am  a  dancer.  I  dance,  and  I  dance  so  well 
that  Apsarasas  from  heaven  come  to  watch  me,  and  in  this 
way  I  became  self-luminous  and  a  dear  friend  of  Hema  the 
Apsarasa.”  Swayamprabha  smiled.  “I’ll  give  you  mangoes  and 
bananas  and  honey,  and  will  you  not  tell  me  why  you  were 
going  through  the  desolate  forest  on  Earth  above  us?” 

“I  am  Hanuman.  We  are  looking  for  Sita.” 

“Oh,”  said  Swayamprabha,  “I  am  pleased,  I  am  well- 
pleased  with  meeting  the  quick-footed  monkeys  and  the  furry 
bears!” 

While  the  animals  ate,  Hanuman  asked,  “Where  is  Maya?” 


176 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


“He  could  be  here  right  now,”  smiled  that  winsome  girl. 
“Maya  the  Asura  is  a  true  artist,  a  magician  of  marvelous 
power.  Whatever  Maya  creates  is  perfect  and  complete,  while 
it  lasts,  before  it  changes.  All  is  illusion,  Hanuman  ...  he 
would  often  say — believe  it  and  make  it  true.  .  .  .”  Swayam- 
prabha’s  dark  eyes  filled  with  tears,  .  .  before  he 
died _ ” 

Hanuman  was  all  ears.  “What  happened?” 

“Indra  killed  him,”  she  said,  “by  the  mouth  of  this  very 
cave.  Hema  the  Apsarasa  inherited  this  place,  and  I  take  care 
of  it  for  her.  She  was  Maya’s  consort,  and  that  angered  In¬ 
dra.” 

Hanuman  said,  “Hema’s  daughter  is  Queen  of  Lanka.” 

“Yes,  it  was  soon  after  her  marriage  to  Ravana;  it  was  in  a 
storm  on  Earth  above  .  .  .  you  can  still  see  the  path  the 
lightning  made  blasted  into  the  stones!” 

“Still — ”  said  Hanuman. 

“You’re  right,”  said  Swayamprabha.  “Indras  come  and  go. 
Maya  is  a  true  genius,  the  Master  of  Time.  He  could  escape 
that  down-lighting  thunderbolt.” 

Hanuman  grinned.  “And  Indra  saw  it  hit?” 

“Absolutely!  He  saw  Maya  blasted  to  bits  by  thunder,  right 
below  his  very  eyes!” 

“All  one  thousand  of  them!”  said  Hanuman. 

“Indra  had  kept  Hema  closely  guarded  after  her  daughter 
was  bora,  and  Maya  got  the  child  somehow,  and  only  the  two 
of  them,  father  and  daughter,  stayed  all  alone  in  empty 
rooms.” 

“But  now  Indra  is  off  guard,  I  think,  and  in  some  beautiful 
home — ” 

Swayamprabha  laughed.  “The  Asura  Maya  is  a  consum¬ 
mate  actor;  they  never  found  his  body.  Who  knows?  He 
might  return,  he  might  be  very  angry  to  find  thousands  of 
monkeys  and  bears  in  his  cave. . . .” 

Hanuman  saluted  Swayamprabha.  “How  may  we  go?” 

She  answered,  “So  you  will  go  to  Lanka?  But  once  anyone 
enters  this  captivating  cave  of  illusions,  especially  by  mistake, 
he  can  never  return  alive  to  Earth  by  his  own  power.  But  I 
will  help  you,  call  the  others.”  She  put  on  her  dancing  bells. 

The  monkeys  and  bears  assembled.  Swayamprabha  said, 
“Fair  fortune  to  you.  Stand  still,  close  your  eyes  and  cover 
them.  You  must  not  look  until  I  tell  you.” 

The  monkeys  and  bears  covered  their  eyes  with  their  soft 
paws  and  hid  their  faces  in  their  hands.  They  heard  Swayam- 


The  Search  177 

prabha’s  dancing  bells  chime,  and  it  seemed  they  could  smell 
the  ocean. 

You  can  look.  They  looked  around  and  found  themselves 
facing  South,  standing  by  the  shore  of  the  Southern  Sea,  with 
the  coastal  Malaya  Hills  close  at  their  backs.  They  smelled 
the  sandalwood  trees,  and  from  within  those  hillside  forests 
the  southern  Nagas  watched,  coiled  in  their  serpent  forms, 
hidden  in  the  branches  behind  the  pointed  leaves. 


The  blue  sea,  far  and  wide,  vast  as  the  blue  sky!  A  light 
breeze  lifted  spray  from  the  wave-caps,  and  the  waves  fell 
lightly  ashore,  and  slipped  back  sighing  into  the  deep.  A  de¬ 
lightful  river  crossed  the  beach,  lined  by  trees  that  hid  her 
waters  and  islands,  and  veiled  her,  like  some  young  girl  going 
to  meet  her  secret  lover. 

Prince  Angada  shaded  his  eyes  and  stared  toward  the  Sun. 
Then  he  slumped  to  the  ground  and  cried — Hanumanl 

“What?”  Hanuman  ran  up  fast. 

“Look  where  the  Sun  is!  We’ve  lost  our  other  half  a 
month!  How  long  were  we  inside  there?” 

Hanuman  stared  at  his  shadow.  “The  month  is  up  alright 
.  .  .  I  thought  we  had  more  time.  Through  ignorance  we  en¬ 
tered  Maya’s  treeful  cave  underground  and  lost  all  the 
time. . . 

Angada  got  up  and  stamped  his  feet.  “We  were  tricked  by 
illusion!  Rama’s  work  isn’t  done,  the  King’s  orders  aren’t 
obeyed — oh,  happy  are  the  dead!”  He  turned  to  the  others 
and  shouted,  “I  won’t  straggle  home  a  failure,  I’ll  starve  my¬ 
self  to  death  right  here!” 

The  monkeys  and  bears  swung  their  arms  and  yelled,  “We 
will  die  with  you!”  Except  for  Hanuman  and  Jambavan  the 
bear,  they  all  sat  facing  the  south,  all  over  the  seashore.  They 
fell  silent  and  entered  meditation  and  resolved  to  die. 

Hanuman  and  Jambavan  turned  away.  They  walked  on 
down  the  beach  and  left  the  others  there  behind  them.  It  was 
a  beautiful  day,  in  the  early  afternoon.  It  was  quiet.  The 
waves  were  low  and  long  between.  The  river  ran  over  round 
rocks  and  spoke  in  whispers,  and  the  gentle  wind  blew  in  off 
the  sea. 

The  old  bear  Jambavan  shuffled  slowly  along,  and  the  sun¬ 
light  made  his  dark  fur  seem  to  glow,  tipped  with  reddish 
lights.  He  stretched  out  in  the  spotted  shade  beneath  an  an- 


178 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


cient  honey  tree,  and  Hanuman  lay  back  against  Jambavan’9 
soft  flank,  and  yawned,  and  began  to  daydream. 

Jambavan  snorted  and  blew  some  sand  away  from  his 
nose,  and  said  in  a  rumbly  voice,  “Monkey,  how  was  Sita 
lost?  Tell  me  Rama’s  story.” 

Hanuman  closed  his  eyes  and  put  his  hands  in  his  lap. 
“This  tale  is  full  of  peril  and  safety,”  he  began.  “It  will  armor 
noble  souls  with  courage,  and  bring  heart  failure  to  cowards. 
It  will  perplex  the  wise  and  baffle  the  foolish,  and  make  them 
both  follow  their  hearts.  It  gives  reasons  for  acting  in  every 
way;  its  chapters  haunt  the  mind;  its  verses  make  heroes  hun~ 
ger  for  glory.  Its  lines  shed  warm  love,  its  words  bring  smiles 
of  rage  and  tears  of  joy.  Oh  King  of  the  Bears,  this  story  is 
not  for  worried  ears  and  weak  nerves,  for  it  holds  dread  and 
rash  chivalry,  sweet  honor  and  elegant  danger,  and  graceful 
bravery  and  bountiful  generosity  beyond  knowing.” 


Hanuman's  Jump 


Look! 

The  Son  of  the  Wind  leaps  into  the  air, 
And  flies  through  the  clouds  with  a  roar. 
While  the  enemy  waves  on  the  green  salt  sea 
Splash  and  foam  below I 

Oh,  gold  and  silver  found  wild 
Are  better  than  coins  tamely  won; 
Treasures  found  on  a  hunt  are  as  good 
As  the  pleasures  of  fancy  in  heaven. 


The  little  wind  carried  every  word  down  past  the  other  ani¬ 
mals  and  up  into  the  Malaya  foothills.  Hanuman  said,  “Lis¬ 
ten  well,  Oh  Jambavan.  Once  in  Fair  Ayodhya  there  was  an 
old  King  who  had  no  children. . , 

Hanuman  told  of  Rama’s  birth  and  marriage,  of  his  exile 
and  his  father’s  death,  of  how  he  killed  the  demons  of  Dan- 
daka  Forest,  and  of  how  Ravana  made  a  golden  deer,  and  of 
the  theft  of  Sita.  The  monkeys  and  bears  around  Angada  be¬ 
gan  to  fuss  and  squirm.  They  strained  to  hear  the  story,  and 
began  to  wring  their  hands  and  sigh  and  exclaim  things  under 
their  breaths. 

Then  suddenly  a  flying  shadow  fell  over  the  beach.  Down 
from  the  blue  Malaya  hills  swooped  a  huge  vulture.  But  his 
flight  feathers  were  burned.  He  couldn’t  slow  his  fall;  he 
waved  his  wings  at  the  air  and  landed  heavily  on  the  shore. 
His  wings  threw  up  a  cloud  of  sand  that  buried  Angada  and 
all  the  suicidal  monkeys  and  bears  up  to  their  ears  in  grit. 

Hanuman  and  Jambavan  were  out  of  the  draft,  and  Hanu¬ 
man  went  right  on  with  his  story.  The  vulture  picked  himself 
up.  He  turned  his  head  and  looked  at  the  monkeys  and  bears 
he’d  buried,  first  with  one  big  round  orange  eye,  then  with 
the  other. 


179 


180  SITA’S  RESCUE 

“It’s  true,”  said  the  vulture.  “People  are  really  rewarded 
for  past  good  deeds,  for  here  are  fat  little  animals  all  set  out 
in  rows  for  me  by  the  kindly  gods.  They’ve  lived  all  their 
lives  just  for  my  dinner!” 

Then  down  the  wind  came  Hanuman’s  words,  and  the  vul¬ 
ture  heard  him  say,  “Great  was  the  deed  of  Jatayu.  Old 
though  he  was,  for  Sita’s  sake  he  nearly  killed  Ravana  before 
the  Demon  King  tore  his  soul  from  this  life.” 

The  hulking  vulture  turned  and  peered  under  the  honey 
tree  and  said — Who  speaks  of  my  little  brother  Jatayu,  King 
of  the  Air? 

Hanuman  replied,  “I  am  Hanuman.  This  is  Jambavan  the 
Lord  of  Bears.  The  animals  of  Kishkindhya  are  searching  for 
Sita.  Ravana  took  her  from  her  husband  Rama,  and  he  killed 
your  brother  when  Jatayu  tried  to  stop  him  in  Dandaka 
Forest.” 

“My  name  is  Sampati,”  said  the  vulture.  “If  I  could  still  fly 
I’d  go  to  Lanka  and  kill  Ravana  for  that!”  Towering  over  the 
beach  he  rubbed  one  leg  against  the  other,  like  scraping  a 
thousand  scythes  over  pieces  of  slate. 

Prince  Angada  jumped  up  out  of  the  sand.  Courteously  he 
introduced  himself,  and  said,  “Please  let  us  die  in  peace.  All 
is  vain.  We  can’t  find  Sita,  and  now  whatever  I  have  not 
seen  and  heard  and  done  must  wait  for  my  next  lowly  life.” 

“But  monkey  prince,”  said  Sampati,  “I  thought  you  knew; 
she  is  in  Lanka,  if  she  lives  at  all.” 

“How  do  you  know?” 

“My  eyesight  is  as  clear  as  the  good  Dharma  law,”  said 
Sampati.  “The  vulture  race  can  see  movement  from  afar,  for  a 
hundred  leagues.  We  have  magic  golden  eyes.” 

“Are  you  sure?”  asked  Angada. 

“Prince,  I  am  Sampati,  swift  as  the  wind.  Eight  thousand 
years  ago  Jatayu  and  I  went  flying  together.  We  went  over 
wood  and  forest,  streams  and  kingdoms,  and  higher,  and  over 
clouded  lakes  where  snow-geese  swam,  and  over  hills  of  grey 
stone,  and  always  higher,  until  we  went  so  high,  we  saw  the 
Sun  shining  near  and  large  as  the  Earth!  Then  the  heat  struck 
us  down,  and  I  fell,  shadowing  Jatayu  with  my  open  wings.  I 
fell  in  a  glare  of  light  that  made  all  the  worlds  seem  burning, 
with  no  shadow,  and  no  way  to  know  where  I  was.  Then  all  at 
once  I  lost  the  wind.  My  brother  and  I  fell  apart  from  each 
other.  I  found  myself  here  on  these  southern  hills  and  slowly 
my  memory  returned. 

“My  wings  were  useless,  and  after  all  these  years  I  have 


181 


Hanuman’s  Jump 

only  today  recovered  enough  to  rise  from  my  back.  And  this 
year,  this  summer  as  I  lay  helpless  I  saw  Ravana  fly  overhead 
with  Sita.  I  kept  him  in  sight  all  the  way  to  Lanka,  and  he 
has  not  left  the  island  with  her  since  then.  She  is  somewhere 
behind  the  city  walls,  over  the  sea. 

“None  of  my  people  knew  where  I  was,  until  one  of  my 
sons  found  me  yesterday  night.  He  was  very  sad  that  he 
could  offer  me  no  food,  and  said  he  would  bring  me  some 
later  today.  He  said,  ‘Father,  I  caught  nothing  today.  It’s  the 
first  time  I  have  failed  on  a  hunt  since  once  before  the  rains, 
when  I  prepared  to  attack  a  dark  demon  with  ten  necks  as  he 
flew  in  the  air  over  a  mountain  pass,  going  south,  not  far 
from  here.  He  carried  a  fair  woman,  and  peacefully  begged 
me — 7  admit  my  defeat  and  take  your  protection.  I  could  not 
attack  someone  who  had  surrendered  to  me  and  I  let  him  go 
on.  And  then  I  heard  the  sky-voices  saying — That  was  the 
doomed  Rakshasa  King  Ravana.  By  good  fortune  Sita  still 
lives,  and  passed  you  safely  by.  But  I  will  bring  you  food  to¬ 
morrow.’  So  it  was  her,  Prince  Angada,  and  there  are  two  of 
us  who  saw  her  carried  away.  Age  has  not  weakened  my 
mind  and  eye,  though  my  life  now  hangs  loosely  upon  me, 
for  I  have  not  eaten  since  I  fell  from  heaven.” 

The  animals  who  were  still  buried  in  the  beach  looked  wor¬ 
ried.  Angada  told  them,  “Stop  thinking.  Bring  us  some  vul¬ 
ture  food.” 

“Say  no  morel”  they  cried,  and  ran  to  the  mountain 
woods. 

Hanuman  said,  “Sampati,  Rama  himself  burned  Jatayu’s 
body,  and  now  your  brother  lives  in  heaven.  We  may  live  for 
thousands  of  years  and  never  hear  of  a  braver  deed  than  his. 
Had  Jatayu  been  even  one  day  younger  he  would  have  won. 
All  noble  creatures  love  Rama,  and  in  his  kind  service  will 
live  their  lives  for  him,  and  do  gentle  good  to  each  other,  and 
bad  to  Rama’s  foes.” 

The  food  arrived,  and  as  Sampati  ate,  young  new  feathers 
began  to  grow  from  his  wings  like  golden  down.  Then  Sam¬ 
pati  said,  “Ignore  your  time  limit,  for  truly  Ravana  took  Sita 
at  a  time  when  what  is  lost  is  soon  regained,  at  a  moment 
most  unfortunate  to  a  thief.” 

Angada  asked,  “How  far  is  Lanka?” 

“Just  about  a  hundred  leagues,  no  more,”  answered 
Sampati. 

Angada  looked  out  at  the  sea.  One  place  his  still  water  re¬ 
flected  the  image  of  all  this  world  and  all  the  sky;  elsewhere. 


182 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


blown  by  the  wind,  he  rose  in  playful  waves  as  high  as  hills. 
Angada  felt  waves  of  doubt  run  through  the  monkeys  and 
bears. 

“Who  will  leap  the  ocean  and  bring  back  news  of  Sita?” 
asked  Angada. 

The  monkeys  and  bears  answered,  “I  can  jump  ten  leagues 
.  .  .  I  can  go  thirty  .  .  .  seventy  ...  I  can  jump  a  hundred 
but  I  can’t  get  back.” 

Angada  said,  “I’ll  try  myself.” 

“You  can’t,’  said  Jambavan,  “you’re  our  commander. 
You’re  the  root  of  our  search,  it’s  we  who  must  resort  to  you 
and  serve  you.” 

“Then  there’s  not  a  hope.” 

“No  hope!”  said  the  old  bear.  “Oh,  there  was  a  time — ”  He 
turned  to  Hanuman  who  stood  beside  him.  “Listen,  little 
monkey,  are  you  going  to  stand  there  looking  at  us  like  an 
idiot?” 

Hanuman  said,  “What?” 

“You’re  young  and  strong,  what  have  you  done  to  help 
us?”  said  Jambavan.  “I  didn’t  hear  you  say  anything  just  now 
about  how  far  you  can  jump.” 

Hanuman  said,  ‘Til  do  it.” 

Oh  King  Rama,  Wind  is  Fire’s  best  friend.  Wind  shatters 
the  hills  and  moves  across  the  eye  of  heaven.  He  cannot  be 
seen,  but  only  the  heavy  things  he  moves  are  visible.  Hanu¬ 
man  is  the  son  of  the  fast-racing  generous  Wind.  He  equals 
his  father  in  flight.  To  enhance  the  sorrow  of  the  Rakshasas 
he  wants  to  leap  into  Lanka.  There  was  dismay  and  faint  sor¬ 
row,  and  it  was  time  to  be  strong.  Then  like  a  storm  Hanu¬ 
man  drove  away  low  spirits,  like  a  light  he  brought  courage. 


THIS  IS  THE  END  OF  THE 
BOOK  OF  KISHKINDHYA. 

HERE  FOLLOWS  THE  SUNDARA  KANDA, 
THE  BOOK  BEAUTIFUL. 


In  his  mind  Hanuman  had  already  crossed  the  sea  and  en¬ 
tered  the  demon  city.  He  climbed  one  of  the  Malaya  hills  to 
get  firm  ground  under  his  feet.  He  began  to  fill  up  with 
power.  He  grew  very  large  and  heavy,  and  his  tread  pressed 
down  the  hill  and  crushed  the  caves  of  serpents.  Out  from 
underworld  came  the  richly  dressed  Nagas,  bruised  and  hiss- 


Hanuman’s  Jump 


183 


ing,  their  hoods  spread  wide.  In  their  anger  they  rolled  on  the 
ground  with  tongues  flaming;  they  spat  fire  and  bit  the  rocks 
in  passion.  Their  venom  cracked  the  hill,  and  gleams  of  red 
metal  and  stone  showed  from  within  the  Earth. 

Hanuman  climbed  higher.  With  smiles  of  amazement,  the 
heavenly  Gandharvas  and  their  Apsarasas  rose  half-dressed 
from  the  hill  into  the  sky  and  looked  down  to  watch.  Hanu¬ 
man  climbed  up  through  their  hillside  parks,  where  Gand- 
harva  swords  and  bright-colored  robes  were  hung  on  the 
trees,  and  golden  winecups  and  silver  dishes  were  on  the 
ground  in  fair  shady  gardens  hiding  lovers’  beds  of  lotus 
petals. 

Hanuman  neared  the  summit.  His  feet  squeezed  water 
from  the  hill.  Rivers  tumbled  down,  rockslides  rolled,  bright 
fresh-broken  veins  of  gold  sparkled,  tigers  ran  off  and  birds 
flew  away.  The  tree  spirits  fled,  and  in  their  dens  the  wildcats 
yelled  in  a  frightful  chorus,  like  the  cry  of  the  mountain  him¬ 
self  through  the  voice  of  all  his  animals. 

Hanuman  stood  on  the  hilltop.  He  held  his  breath  and 
sucked  in  his  stomach.  He  frisked  his  tail  and  raised  it  a  little 
at  the  end.  He  bent  his  knees  and  swung  back  his  arms,  and 
on  one  finger  gleamed  Rama’s  gold  ring.  Then  without 
pausing  to  think  he  drew  in  his  neck,  laid  back  his  ears  and 
jumped. 

It  was  grand!  It  was  the  greatest  leap  ever  taken.  The 
speed  of  Hanuman’s  jump  pulled  blossoms  and  flowers  into 
the  air  after  him  and  they  fell  like  little  stars  on  the  waving 
treetops.  The  animals  on  the  beach  had  never  seen  such  a 
thing;  they  cheered  Hanuman,  then  the  air  burned  from  his 
passage,  and  red  clouds  flamed  over  the  sky  and  Hanuman 
was  far  out  of  sight  of  land. 

That  white  monkey  was  like  a  comet,  pushing  the  sky  from 
his  way  and  bumping  clouds  aside.  The  wind  roared  under 
his  arms  and  was  pushed  down  from  his  breast  as  he  passed, 
and  made  the  ocean  pitch  and  roll.  Sea  spray  rose  and 
steamed  up  the  Sun.  Beneath  Hanuman  as  he  went,  the  green 
salt  water  parted,  and  he  could  see  the  whales  and  fishes  like 
people  surprised  at  home.  The  air  around  Hanuman  became 
electric,  and  sheets  of  light  gathered  and  crackled — blue,  and 
pale  melon  green,  and  flickering  orange  and  red. 

Halfway  across  to  Lanka,  the  golden  mountain  Mainaka 
lived  on  the  ocean  floor,  and  from  under  sea  he  saw  Hanu¬ 
man  coming  and  thought  he  would  be  tired.  Mainaka  spread 
his  glistening  golden  wings,  rose  from  his  watery  bed  and  sur- 


184 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


faced  on  the  sea.  Water  poured  from  his  shining  sides  and 
looming  up  against  the  blue  sky  he  spoke  to  Hanuman. 

“Rest  awhile,”  said  Mainaka.  “Let  me  repay  my  ancient 
debt  to  your  father  the  Wind.” 

Hanuman  stopped  and  leaned  on  the  air.  “Who  are  you?” 

“I  am  Mainaka,  the  son  of  Himavan  the  Mountain  King, 
the  brother  of  Ganga  the  beautiful  river  Goddess.  I  have  long 
hidden  deep  in  the  ocean  from  fear  of  Indr  a.  In  return  for 
the  sea’s  faithful  protection,  I  have  stayed  as  an  outer  gate 
against  the  Asuras  from  under  Earth,  who  dare  not  approach 
me.  Come  down  onto  me,  land  and  rest.” 

Hanuman  asked,  “What  did  my  father  do  for  you?” 

Mainaka  said,  “In  the  olden  days,  long  ago,  all  the  large 
mountains  of  Earth  had  wings  like  I  do.  We  flew  where  we 
wanted,  but  when  we  landed  we  were  sometimes  a  little  care¬ 
less.  We  bowled  over  the  little  hills  and  flattened  kingdoms 
flat  as  a  floor.  We  got  a  bad  name  with  the  forest  men,  and 
they  complained  to  Indra.  Then  with  furious  thunderbolts  the 
Lord  of  Heaven  cut  off  our  wings,  till  out  of  all  the  hills  only 
I  could  still  fly.  When  Indra  chased  me  the  Wind  carried  me 
away,  and  here  I  took  refuge  of  the  sea.  The  wings  of  the 
broken  mountains  have  now  become  clouds.  So  blessed  be 
you,  gentle  Hanuman,  rest  and  continue  refreshed.” 

"Forgive  me,  but  I  must  not  break  my  flight,”  said  Hanu¬ 
man.  He  only  touched  that  golden  hill  with  his  fingertip  and 
sped  away  to  the  South. 

When  he  had  gone,  Indra  came  from  heaven  and  told 
Mainaka,  “Keep  your  wings  if  you  will,  for  you  welcomed 
Hanuman  and  you  have  cared  to  keep  him  from  danger,”  and 
Mainaka  went  back  below  the  waves. 

In  the  strong  sea-currents  that  lay  twenty  leagues  off  Lanka 
lived  the  old  Rakshasi  Sinhika.  She  saw  Hanuman  flying  and 
said,  “This  is  the  strangest  bird  I’ve  seen  in  eight  hundred 
years!”  She  swam  to  the  surface  and  seized  his  shadow,  and 
in  the  air  Hanuman  felt  himself  being  dragged  down  and 
held  back. 

Sinhika  stood  on  the  water  holding  Hanuman’s  shadow  in 
her  claws  and  looking  at  him  with  tiny  red  eyes.  She  opened 
her  ugly  mouth  and  bared  her  yellow  scaly  teeth,  and  started 
to  pull  at  his  shadow. 

"Watch  out!”  said  Hanuman.  “Beware,  I  am  on  Rama’s 
service,  and  his  kingdom  is  all  the  world. . . .” 

She  pulled  him  closer.  “You  can  never  escape  me!” 

“Oh  yes,  I  will  if  I  want  to!” 


Hanuman’s  Jump  183 

She  saw  how  large  Hanuman  was  and  opened  her  mouth 
wide  as  a  cave  with  a  long  tongue.  But  Hanuman  became 
quickly  small  as  a  thumb  and  flew  down  her  throat  like  a  tiny 
hurricane.  He  crushed  her  heart  with  his  sharp  fingernails, 
turned,  and  darted  up  out  from  her  ear.  Sinhika  threw  her 
arms  about  and  collapsed  on  the  sea.  Her  blood  burst  and 
spread  through  the  water,  and  the  fish  came  quickly  to  eat 
her. 

Then  Hanuman  regained  his  jumping  size  and  flew  on  in 
the  sky,  where  birds  fly  and  rainbows  gleam,  where  heroes 
ride  in  bright  chariots  drawn  by  miraculous  lions,  where  the 
smoke  of  fires  rises  and  the  rains  and  winds  live.  He  went  on 
through  the  pure  sky  embellished  by  planets  and  stars  and 
luminous  saints  and  by  the  holy  Sun  and  Moon,  the  support 
and  glorious  canopy  of  this  live  world,  the  sky  made  and  well 
made  by  Lord  Brahma  long  ago. 


The  green  hills  of  Lanka  Island  rose  from  the  horizon. 
Hanuman  saw  the  shoreline  of  warm  white  sand  and  scat¬ 
tered  stones  and  water  pools,  and  behind  that  many  tall  sway¬ 
ing  palms,  and  plane  trees,  and  forests  of  aloes.  He  saw  rivers 
meet  the  sea,  and  saw  where  pearls  and  cowrie  shells  and  fine 
corals  had  been  spread  to  dry.  He  flew  inland,  over  stacks  of 
gold  and  silver  from  the  demon  mines  that  lay  blazing  in  the 
sunlight,  and  then  he  saw  the  City. 

Beautiful  Lanka  was  built  on  a  level  place  just  below  the 
highest  summit  of  the  three-peaked  hill  Trikuta,  as  though 
built  on  clouds.  She  had  four  gates  facing  in  the  four  direc¬ 
tions  and  her  strong  golden  walls  were  the  color  of  sunshine. 
Preceded  by  a  little  breeze,  Hanuman  landed  under  an  over¬ 
hanging  cliff  on  the  hill  not  far  below  the  city,  amid  fruit 
trees  in  full  flower  and  bearing  fruit  as  well,  in  a  soft  scene 
like  heaven.  Blue  rivers  laughing  with  flowers  fell  running 
down  channels  and  stairs  of  ruby,  and  trees  of  every  color 
growing  uphill  reached  out  to  catch  the  faint  pink  clouds. 
The  warm  sea-wind  smelled  like  pepper  and  cloves  and  fra¬ 
grant  spices. 

Hanuman  ate  some  dates  and  thought,  “Not  a  hair  out  of 
place,  I’m  ready  to  do  it  again!  I  call  that  little  ocean  a 
puddle  .  .  .  not  like  other  people  .  .  .  I’m  better  than  any 
bird. . .  .” 

Carefully  Hanuman  crept  out  from  hiding,  just  enough  to 
see  the  main  highway  to  Lanka’s  north  walL  Around  the 


186 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


walls  ran  a  deep  moat  fed  by  a  mountain  river,  shark-filled, 
running  in  a  bed  of  iron  and  wearing  pale  floating  lotuses 
and  lilies.  The  tall  red-golden  gateway  panels  were  painted 
with  green  plants  and  twining  vines,  with  fish  and  trees  and 
flowers,  flights  of  birds  and  clouds  and  stars.  Elephants  stood 
under  the  stone  gate  arch,  and  Rakshasa  bowmen  looked  out 
from  the  crowning  roofs  and  turrets.  Seen  from  below,  Lanka 
was  a  lofty  city  moving  in  the  sky  and  built  on  air,  embraced 
by  clouds  and  held  by  sunbeams. 

“We’ll  have  to  kill  them  all,”  thought  Hanuman.  “We  can’t 
be  friends,  they  are  too  proud  to  approach.  They  would  never 
betray  Ravana.  They  can’t  be  bought  off,  they  are  too  bold 
and  strong.” 

Beautiful  Lanka  was  decked  out  like  a  maiden.  Waters  and 
woods  were  her  clothes,  bristling  spears  and  darts  on  the  wall 
were  the  ends  of  her  long  hair;  the  many-colored  waving  ban¬ 
ners  and  the  cloth-of-gold  war-flags  nearby  them  were  her 
jewels  and  earrings;  the  high  stone  missile  towers  were  her 
breasts  cleaving  the  sky.  She  was  Beautiful  Lanka  of  the 
Waves,  well-defended,  built  in  time  long  past  by  Viswakar- 
man  the  architect  of  heaven.  She  seemed  a  city  woven  from 
beauty,  made  by  the  mind  from  a  wonderful  dream  half- 
remembered. 

The  late  afternoon  shadows  lengthened,  and  Hanuman 
thought,  “I  will  first  meet  Sita  somewhere  in  there,  and  she 
will  tell  me  what  to  do.” 

Then  as  the  twilight  of  evening  came  and  Night  fell  black 
over  the  dark  world,  Hanuman  diminished  his  size,  and  took 
the  form  of  a  small  long-haired  silver  tabby  cat.  He  tied 
Rama’s  ring  round  his  neck  and  it  was  lost  in  fur.  He  hid  in 
a  ditch  and  said,  “If  they  see  me,  a  cat  roams  free  at  night, 
and  may  explore  wherever  he  is  curious  to  go.  Three  times  I 
take  refuge  in  Rama,  who  is  the  safe  shelter  of  all  who  flee 
for  help  from  any  thing.” 

In  the  dark  Hanuman  sprang  over  the  moat  and  walked 
away  from  the  road,  down  along  the  base  of  the  wall  to 
where  there  was  no  gate,  prancing  like  a  cat  on  four  feet,  go¬ 
ing  a  little  sideways,  his  legs  stiff  and  his  tail  like  a  plume 
straight  up  in  the  air.  Suddenly  a  dark-skinned  woman  ap¬ 
peared  from  nowhere  before  him,  her  face  crooked  in  an  un¬ 
lovely  smile,  flames  for  her  hair  and  a  bleeding  tigerskin  for 
her  dress,  standing  there  in  a  halo  of  glowing  lights  and  mov¬ 
ing  colors  that  looked  like  the  burning  clouds  at  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  all  the  three  worlds. 


Hanuman’s  Jump 


187 


She  looked  down  at  Hanuman  and  said  in  a  despicable 
voice,  “Now  be  careful,  be  on  your  guard!  Advance  half  a 
hair’s  point  farther  and  I  will  kill  you!” 

“Who  are  you?”  asked  Hanuman. 

“I  am  Lanka  herself,  surrounded  by  protections,  ruled  by 
the  hand  of  Ravana.  You  cannot  enter  me,  little  cat!” 

Hanuman  said,  “Gentle  goddess,  I  am  curious  to  see  your 
hidden  charms  and  attractions.  I  am  a  mere  monkey,  just  let 
me  take  a  quiet  look  around — ” 

“Never  till  the  end  of  Time!”  She  hissed  and  kicked  Hanu¬ 
man  hard,  but  he  didn’t  move  at  all.  He  sat,  and  fastened  his 
left  forefingers  into  a  fist.  Then  he  jumped  up  and  hit  her 
right  between  the  eyes.  Lanka  fell  on  her  back.  Hanuman 
helped  her  to  rise,  and  she  put  her  foot  in  his  way,  and  drew 
it  back,  and  stood  aside. 

"When  a  monkey  knocks  you  down,  know  that  a  fear  and 
a  curse  have  come  to  the  Rakshasas  ...  so  have  I  heard,” 
said  the  goddess.  “You  have  vanquished  the  realm  of  Lanka 
with  one  blow;  enter  if  you  will.” 

Hanuman  leapt  over  the  high  wall,  where  there  was  no 
door,  by  night,  and  landing  within  he  first  touched  the  ground 
with  his  left  foot,  putting  that  foot  on  his  enemies’  heads. 


Hanuman  went  to  the  shadow  of  a  tree,  and  knelt  and 
joined  together  his  hands.  “I  trust  in  Rama,”  he  said. 
“World-famous  Lanka  is  inconceivable  and  lovely,  a  fortress 
city  whose  moat  is  the  sea.  She  shines  in  her  glory.  No  one 
can  subdue  her  by  force.  She  is  guarded  by  Rakshasas  stand¬ 
ing  with  their  weapons  uplifted  in  their  upraised  hands,  yet  I 
have  entered.  I  remember  the  ancient  saints,  and  call  to  mind 
the  warriors  of  the  past.  I  trust  in  Rama,  I  trust  in  Rama 
.  .  .  he  is  very  strong — and  alas,  that  for  their  one  king’s 
wrong  this  noble  race  of  demons  must  perish!” 

Then  to  help  Hanuman,  the  small  clouds  withdrew  from 
the  sky.  The  bright  round  Moon  was  revealed,  the  friend  of 
the  sea,  reaching  his  long  silver  rays  over  all,  making  the 
shadows  blacker,  afloat  like  a  white  swan  in  the  clear  starry 
sky,  in  the  bottomless  lake  of  heaven.  The  Moon  was  full,  it 
was  the  last  full  Moon  before  winter.  Watching  Hanuman 
that  night  over  Lanka  was  our  Lady  Lakshmi  of  good  for¬ 
tune,  who  sometimes  wanders  on  Earth’s  high  hills  or  walks 
at  evening  by  the  seas,  standing  in  the  sky  beside  the  Moon. 

Hanuman  waited,  and  Heaven  turned  above  him.  The 


188 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Moon  gleamed  like  a  mirror,  like  the  face  of  a  king  gaining  a 
kingdom.  Midnight  came,  when  among  humans  couples  end 
their  quarrels  with  love  and  sleep  together;  and  among 
Rakshasas,  in  the  forests  the  hideous  Night-Wanderers,  aston¬ 
ishing  and  terrible,  go  out  to  eat  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of 
carnage.  In  Lanka  began  the  night-life  of  every  enjoyment; 
and  at  midnight  Hanuman  began  his  search  for  Sita. 

The  brick  streets  of  Lanka  were  lined  by  tall  adjoining 
houses  set  behind  trees  and  built  of  white  stones  marked  with 
a  thunderbolt  and  hook  by  Viswakarman  the  architect.  Be¬ 
hind  the  main  streets  were  gardens  and  alleys,  and  there 
prowled  Hanuman,  looking  in  the  lattice  windows  and  run¬ 
ning  over  the  roofs.  He  heard  the  sounds  of  every  indul¬ 
gence — lutes  and  horns  and  two-headed  drums  and 
late-at-night  laughter;  chattering  parrots  and  demons  clapping 
time;  running  feet,  and  here  and  there  droning  sing-song 
chants  from  the  holy  Veda. 

He  saw  many  a  fair  demoness,  and  some  of  the  Rakshasas 
also  appeared  much  like  men  of  good  height  and  form.  But 
other  demons  were  black,  or  a  ghastly  pink,  or  pale  and 
nearly  transparent.  Some  were  unbelievably  handsome,  others 
were  maimed  and  deformed,  repulsive  and  frightful  even  in 
their  splendid  clothes.  On  the  streets  carrying  torches  Hanu¬ 
man  saw  the  night  patrols  of  Rakshasa  warriors  from  every 
demon  nation,  clad  in  rich  and  regal  heraldry,  or  in  feathers 
and  quills,  or  wearing  rotting  raw  skins,  or  walking  naked 
with  shaven  heads.  They  were  armed  with  studded  bludgeons 
or  knives  or  blow-pipes  or  handfuls  of  holy  grass  enchanted 
into  spears  and  javelins.  These  were  the  warriors  who  had  con¬ 
quered  heaven  and  received  the  surrender  of  the  seven 
netherworlds. 

Hanuman  saw  many  things,  shamelessly  looking  in  win¬ 
dows  and  doors.  He  saw  the  royal  spies  with  matted  hair  like 
holy  beggars.  Their  plain-looking  hermit’s  staves  and  rods 
were  secretly  loaded  with  heavy  metal  cores,  and  they 
concealed  blades  and  razors  in  their  hair,  and  wore  mantras 
tied  on  their  arms  with  strings,  and  death-spells  were  hidden 
in  their  traveling  fire  jars  that  they  would  carry  innocently 
slung  over  their  arms. 

Hanuman  saw  demons  who  looked  wise  and  powerful  even 
when  drunk  and  asleep  with  wine,  with  women,  or  with  their 
arms  round  their  beloved  bags  of  gold.  He  saw  army  officers 
with  coppery  lines  of  sandalpaste  on  their  bodies,  talking  and 
waving  their  strong  arms,  stretching  tough  bows  and  looking 


189 


Hanuman’s  Jump 

disdainfully  at  maps  and  beating  their  chests  and  sending  out 
orders — Hurry  up!  Wait !  He  saw  violent,  swift  demons  who 
never  slept,  lying  in  the  dark  rolling  their  dismal  staring  eyes 
and  wearing  earrings  of  charred  bone,  all  alone  in  the  dead 
of  night.  He  saw  courtesans  entertaining  the  rich;  by  joyous 
smiles  and  long  slow  side-glances  of  their  eyes  they  trapped 
all  hearts  in  loveliness  and  glamor  and  made  all  life  a 
pleasure.  He  saw  young  new-married  wives  with  their  hus¬ 
bands,  held  by  bashfulness  and  bliss  both  at  once;  and  girls 
sad  for  separation  from  lovers  dear  to  their  souls,  weeping 
heartbroken.  And  over  all  the  wind  chimes  and  little  temple 
bells,  the  hum  of  mantras  being  chanted  grew  louder  as  the 
night  went  on,  the  very  sound  of  the  power  of  Lanka,  filling 
the  air. 

Hanuman  worked  his  way  to  the  center  of  the  city.  There 
a  lesser  wall  ran  in  a  great  circle,  made  of  sixteen  colors  of 
rose  gold,  enclosing  the  palaces  of  King  Ravana.  Hanuman 
jumped  over  it  and  landed  in  a  garden.  Bright-flaring  lamps 
burned  on  golden  posts  and  standards  of  silver,  and  the 
gravel  on  the  garden  paths  was  made  from  jewels.  All  around 
him  were  garden  temples  where  black  incense  burned,  se¬ 
cluded  libraries  and  detached  pavilions  and  arbors  and  re¬ 
treats.  And  rising  above  them  all,  in  the  center  of  the  great 
park  was  a  spired  palace  with  royal  golden  domes,  a  building 
clad  in  costly  gems  and  starred  with  diamonds,  a  mansion 
only  different  from  the  best  one  in  heaven  in  that  it  touched 
the  Earth  of  Lanka. 

Hanuman  slipped  past  hooded  watchmen  who  sighed  impa¬ 
tiently  into  the  night,  expecting  an  attack,  looking  forward  to 
stopping  some  invasion.  He  went  unnoticed  past  fanatical 
birds  set  out  in  crimson  amaranth  trees  and  trained  to  scream 
an  alarm  if  they  were  disturbed.  Hanuman  searched  one  side 
of  the  castle  grounds,  and  then  the  front  of  the  garden,  and 
then  he  entered  a  great  courtyard  on  the  third  side  of  Ra- 
vana’s  palace,  running  the  whole  way  from  front  to  back. 

That  courtyard  was  as  large  as  half  a  city,  and  there  filling 
it  entirely  was  the  huge  aerial  chariot  Pushpaka  that  Ravana 
had  stolen  from  his  brother  Vaishravana  the  Treasure  Lord. 
That  colossal  chariot  was  transcendently  beautiful,  a  car 
made  everywhere  of  flowers,  made  by  Viswakarman  in 
Heaven,  the  chariot  of  Spring,  driven  by  the  mind,  and 
lightly  resting  in  Lanka  two  fingers  off  the  ground.  Pushpaka 
the  Car  of  Flowers  is  a  field  of  treasures;  he  is  a  joyful  way 
to  travel,  a  vehicle  of  swift  vision  and  soaring  fancy;  he  rides 


190 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


as  smooth  as  the  transport  of  a  man  by  a  dear  wish  come 
true. 

Hanuman  got  on  that  car  and  searched  it.  By  the  light  of 
the  full  Moon  he  could  see  a  forest  of  flagpoles  like  rows  of 
tall  trees  against  the  night  sky,  and  from  them  flew  a  skyful 
of  flags  and  silken  streamers  and  pennons  bright  and  colored. 
Pushpaka  had  hills  and  green  lawns,  sweet-smelling  rosebeds 
and  ivory  benches  covered  with  brocade.  There  were  figures 
carved  out  of  gold  of  wolves  and  horses  placed  by  houses 
made  of  vines.  There  were  ornate  and  curious  iron  railings 
and  far-looking  balconies,  little  silver  doors  set  with  rubies 
that  led  somewhere  under  the  green  grass,  wind-nets  of  tiny 
silver  bells,  crystal  windows  and  secret  passages,  a  gallery 
showing  pictures  of  elephants  bathing,  silk  tents  and  a  the¬ 
ater,  fishponds  and  moss  gardens,  overgrown  paths  and  glades 
of  ferns,  and  a  swimming  pool  with  a  splashing  fountain 
whose  water  fell  over  a  stone  image  of  Lakshmi  standing  on 
a  big  open  blue  lotus  of  turquoise,  holding  in  her  hand  a  little 
red  lotus  bud  cut  from  coral. 

Viswakarman  the  Architect  of  Heaven  always  considered 
Pushpaka  chariot  his  masterpiece.  When  Pushpaka  flies  at 
night  with  his  running  fires  and  lights  on,  it  seems  that  all  the 
sky  moves  with  its  starbeams  and  planets;  bells  ringing  and 
flags  flying,  by  day  he  is  a  marker  for  the  Sun’s  path,  and  one 
may  look  up  and  see  how  all  his  chariot  hull  is  built  of  rain¬ 
bows  tied  together. 

Pushpaka  can  fly  behind  a  thousand  horses  or  without 
them.  The  materials  used  to  build  him  have  come  from  all 
the  Universe,  from  these  worlds  and  from  other  worlds.  In 
some  places  the  rays  of  his  yellow  topaz  garden  walls  will 
keep  day-lilies  open  at  night;  and  elsewhere  even  by  day  the 
night-lotus  is  ever  open,  held  in  the  rays  of  dark  emeralds 
that  stop  the  daylight  and  cast  beneath  them  a  deep  shade 
and  an  illusion  of  Night,  like  being  somehow  within  a 
lightness  heavy  raincloud. 

Pushpaka  chariot  is  Earth’s  ornament  embodied  to  view, 
and  a  gathering  of  all  wonderful  things.  He  goes  through  the 
air  in  infinite  motions.  On  him,  you  go  where  you  will.  You 
can  look  out  the  windows,  or  ride  out  in  the  open  air  under 
the  Sun,  standing  on  carpets,  among  jewels  all  around  you 
that  wink  when  the  great  chariot  turns  in  the  sky  and  the 
sunlight  moves  overhead. 

Hanuman  searched  all  through  that  vast  and  beautiful 
chariot  as  he  would  have  explored  an  old  climbing  tree  with 


Hanuman’ s  lump 


191 


many  holes  and  branches.  There  was  no  one  aboard.  Nothing 
moved.  Hanuman  stood  at  the  forward  rail  sniffing  the  air. 
At  first  he  could  still  smell  the  carved  sandalwood  of  Push- 
paka  and  all  his  flowers,  but  then  the  wind  turned  just  a  bit, 
and  brought  from  somewhere  the  scents  of  foods  fit  for  a 
King  and  of  well-mixed  iced  drinks,  and  the  smell  of  the 
costly  perfumes  palace  women  use  at  night  after  bathing. 

Hanuman  left  Pushpaka  and  followed  his  nose  to  the  side 
of  the  royal  palace  set  in  the  very  center  of  Lanka  and  sur¬ 
rounded  by  its  own  gardens,  and  he  caught  a  glimpse  of 
many  lights  as  he  approached.  Hanuman  thought — Find  the 
pleasures  of  the  senses,  and  there  find  the  Demon  King . 


Hanuman  went  into  the  palace.  He  went  bounding  and 
sniffing  past  a  thousand  enduring  pillars  and  columns, 
through  stately  chambers  and  long  rambling  halls  lit  by  hang¬ 
ing  war-shields  and  the  gleam  of  magic  bows  stacked  close  to¬ 
gether.  The  corridor  walls  were  made  of  deep  blue  tiles  and 
bands  of  bricks  glazed  crimson,  and  set  high  above  were  large 
windows  covered  by  networks  of  gold  and  crystal,  or  of  soft 
ivories  and  silver,  or  curtained  over  with  silks.  There  were 
rooms  of  precious  stones  and  serving  dishes  and  full  metal 
winejars,  and  of  these  many  rooms  none  had  been  built  by 
conquest,  all  were  made  for  the  asking. 

The  scent  of  food  and  wine  and  women  grew  stronger. 
Hanuman  went  on  over  alabaster  floors  and  up  a  stairway  of 
cool  lapis  and  burnished  gold,  until  he  reached  the  end  of  a 
silver-paved  hall  and  opened  a  tall  jade  door  with  a  cut  ame¬ 
thyst  handle  big  as  a  coconut.  Behind  that  the  doorway  was 
closed  by  a  hanging  woolen  curtain  colored  in  stripes,  a 
drawn  veil  shaped  like  the  Earth — four-cornered,  and  flat, 
and  as  wide  as  the  world  with  all  her  lands  and  people  and 
homes. 

That  was  the  entrance  to  Ravana’s  bedroom.  Hanuman 
ducked  under  the  left  comer  of  the  draw-curtain  and  stood 
just  inside  with  his  back  to  the  wall,  looking  out  at  a  huge 
floor  lit  by  flaming  lamps  of  gold  and  covered  with  sleeping 
women  so  tumbled  together  that  Hanuman  could  not  tell 
where  one  lady  left  off  and  the  next  began. 

There  was  hardly  space  to  step  anywhere.  Those  were  the 
countless  wives  of  the  Demon  King  asleep  in  disarray,  lying 
all  over  each  other,  women  beautiful  and  bright  as  flashes  of 
lightning  now  locked  fast  in  Sleep’s  embrace.  Hanuman 


192 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


thought,  “When  even  the  form  of  a  heavenly  star  is  less  than 
enough,  virtue’s  divine  reward  for  a  good  life  must  be  to  re¬ 
ceive  such  fair  shapes  and  lovely  limbs  as  these!” 

Once  arriving  in  that  room  of  women,  it  would  be  harder 
for  any  man  to  remember  who  he  was  or  where  he  stood  or 
why,  than  to  fly  across  the  sea  in  the  first  place.  And  though 
Hanuman  was  not  a  man,  still  when  he  looked  at  each  one  he 
thought  no  other  woman  could  be  fairer,  and  when  he  saw 
the  next  sleeper  she  was  in  turn  the  best  and  most  beautiful 
as  he  looked  at  her.  Truly,  among  those  magnificent  women 
the  rays  of  the  one’s  beauty  showed  off  the  charms  of  an¬ 
other;  they  slept  deeply  after  an  evening  of  drinking  and 
dancing  and  playing  music.  Their  fragrant  hair  was  loosened 
and  their  bracelets  scattered;  their  beauty  marks  of  sandal 
paste  were  smudged  and  their  colored  robes  unclasped  and 
their  waist-chains  ran  loosely  straying  to  the  side;  their  hazy 
garlands  were  disbanded  and  their  pearls  had  gone  and  their 
earrings  were  lost. 

Hanuman  feared  to  do  wrong  and  never  broke  a  good  law 
unless  he  had  to.  “It  is  surely  wrong,”  he  thought,  “to  gaze 
even  by  accident  at  another’s  wife  lying  unclothed  or  defense¬ 
less  or  asleep.  But  I  take  refuge  in  Rama,  I  take  shelter  with 
him.  The  mind  commands  the  eye  and  sends  out  sight  in  good 
or  evil  fashion.  By  Rama’s  help,  my  mind  will  not  change  by 
this  looking.  I  am  saving  Rama’s  life  by  seeking  for  Sita,  and 
surely  a  woman  may  be  found  among  other  women.” 

Even  the  bedroom  lamps  looked  openly  out  at  all  those 
women  while  they  had  the  chance,  as  Ravana  slept.  Hanu¬ 
man  picked  his  way  among  the  love-skilled  Queens  of  Lanka 
who  were  draped  over  the  floor  and  looked  at  their  faces. 
They  smiled  or  frowned  or  sighed  in  their  sleep;  their  pillows 
were  others’  arms  and  legs  and  laps;  they  pulled  each  other’s 
robes  and  wrapped  themselves  in  them.  With  their  eyes 
lashed  shut  in  sleep  they  were  desirable  as  closed  flowers; 
when  they  touched  each  other  they  smiled  and  drew  closer, 
believing  they  pressed  Ravana  with  their  breasts.  Even  asleep 
the  dancers  moved  enticingly;  the  girl  musicians  slept  em¬ 
bracing  drums  and  hugging  lutes  like  their  long-absent  lovers. 

The  golden  lamps  on  the  walls  watched  over  them  unblink¬ 
ing,  and  in  their  light  the  gold  and  jewels  of  those  Queens 
made  a  river  of  lights  and  colors  and  shimmering  waves  of 
gold  and  silver.  Their  pearl  necklaces  were  white  water-birds 
asleep  between  their  breasts,  rising  and  falling;  their  strings  of 
turquoise  were  families  of  blue  teal  and  their  hips  were  the 


Hanuman’s  Jump 


193 


waves  and  the  riverbanks;  their  faces  of  golden  or  white  or 
deep  blue  skin  were  the  lotuses;  when  they  stirred  sleepily, 
the  small  bells  sewn  on  their  silken  clothes  were  the  ripples 
moving  with  little  sounds;  and  the  bruises  and  scratches  of 
love  on  their  tender  breasts  were  signs  of  where  the  lion  and 
tiger  had  come  to  drink. 

Then  across  the  room,  in  a  corner  Hanuman  saw  a  crystal 
bed  raised  above  a  short  flight  of  jeweled  steps,  under  a  white 
umbrella  of  seven  tiers  fringed  with  colors.  Flame-red  Asoka 
flowers  hung  from  the  four  ivory  bedposts,  and  at  the  head 
and  foot  mechanical  men,  silently  driven  by  falling  water  in 
some  hidden  way,  gently  fanned  the  air  with  yak-tail 
chowries. 

Hanuman  drew  near  and  looked  up  onto  the  bed.  The  pale 
yellow  silk  sheets  were  trimmed  in  diamonds  and  the  many 
soft  pillows  were  covered  with  fleecy  ram  skins.  And  on  that 
bed  lay  the  Demon  King  Ravana  fast  asleep — heroic  and 
dark,  wearing  white,  with  twenty  arms  like  gate  pillars 
marked  with  cool  blood-red  sandal  paste,  with  ten  devilishly 
handsome  heads,  with  his  faces  aglow  from  long  heavy  gold 
earrings,  sleeping  like  a  deep-breathing  hill.  Ravana  slept  un¬ 
suspecting,  all  worn  out  from  love  and  wine.  He  was  the  dear 
desire  of  every  Rakshasa  daughter,  and  the  happiness  of  ev¬ 
ery  Lanka  warrior. 

Hanuman  shrank  back  in  awe.  The  back  of  Ravana’s  bed¬ 
room  opened  onto  an  outdoor  drinking  terrace.  Hanuman 
quietly  went  out  there,  and  climbed  onto  a  long  table  heaped 
with  savory  leftover  roasts  and  perfumed  rice  and  good  cook¬ 
ing  made  to  thrill  the  seven  thousand  nerves  of  taste.  Deli¬ 
cately,  still  in  the  form  of  a  cat,  Hanuman  padded  between 
the  plates,  and  there  he  sat  entranced,  looking  over  at  Ravana 
from  a  little  distance.  Hanuman  was  a  monkey  of  the  woods, 
he  did  not  desire  fair  women  and  he  ate  no  cooked  food  .  .  . 
but  he  could  not  take  his  eyes  off  Ravana  lying  asleep  there 
in  the  majestic  lamplight. 

Ravana  lay  like  a  collection  of  wrongs,  a  mass  of  harm 
and  injury  and  brutality  and  darkness  of  heart.  On  the 
Demon  King’s  broad  breast  were  the  old  curving  white  scars 
from  the  tusks  of  Indra’s  elephant  Airavata;  on  his  strong 
dark  arms  were  the  bums  of  thunderbolts  and  lightnings  and 
scars  from  the  bowstring;  around  nine  of  his  necks  ran  thin 
lines  to  show  where  he  had  once  cut  off  nine  heads  and 
burned  them  as  an  offering  to  the  gods. 

At  last  Hanuman  looked  away  for  an  instant,  then  back  at 


194 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Ravana.  As  long  as  he  stays  there — he  thought.  He  looked 
over  the  foods  on  his  table  and  poured  himself  a  drink.  Then 
Hanuman  ate  some  melons  and  peaches,  and  lapped  up  some 
cream,  and  began  to  purr  and  wash  himself,  just  like  a  cat. 
He  licked  his  paw  till  it  was  wet,  and  washed  down  through 
the  whiskers  by  his  mouth,  and  up  over  his  ear.  He  wasn’t 
thinking  about  anything  special  and  his  cat’s  eyes  roamed  idly 
here  and  there. 

All  at  once  he  stopped  washing  and  squeezed  his  arms  like 
a  monkey.  He  saw  Mandodari  the  Queen  of  Lanka  sleeping 
apart  on  her  own  bed,  very  beautiful,  the  mistress  of  all  the 
palace.  He  thought,  “Rich  with  youth  and  so  beautiful,  she  is 
Sita!  It’s  her!”  He  kissed  his  tail,  jumped  off  the  dining  table 
and  ran  in  gleeful  circles.  He  sat  and  slapped  his  hands  on 
his  knees  and  smiled  and  hummed  a  joyful  tune,  acting  just 
like  a  monkey.  He  ran  over  and  up  and  sat  perched  atop  one 
of  Ravana’s  bedposts. 

“Oh  no!”  Hanuman  had  another  thought.  He  sighed  and 
stopped  still.  “That’s  not  her.  What  a  shameful  apish  idea — 
Where  would  Sita  have  any  place  in  this  bedroom?  That’s  the 
Queen  of  Lanka,  the  daughter  of  illusion  .  .  .  though  Ravana 
may  well  wish  that  she  were  Sita.  First  taking  a  false  form, 
the  Demon  King  was  barely  able  to  steal  her  at  all.  Sita  will 
drink  no  Lanka  wine  or  ever  love  another  husband  .  .  .  when 
do  elephants  mate  with  hogs,  and  who  finishes  a  good  meal 
with  a  glass  of  vinegar?” 


Hanuman  jumped  from  Ravana’s  bedpost  to  the  bedroom 
terrace,  and  from  there  he  leapt  into  the  yard  behind  the 
palace.  Only  behind  Ravana’s  mansion  had  he  not  yet  looked. 

With  a  little  snap,  Hanuman  discarded  his  cat  disguise.  He 
was  again  a  white  monkey,  and  Rama’s  ring  was  on  his  finger 
once  more.  A  low  stone  wall  enclosed  a  grove  of  Asoka  trees 
behind  the  palace,  and  Hanuman  sat  on  that  wall  slumped 
over,  staring  blankly  ahead  at  nothing,  scuffing  his  heels 
against  the  stones.  The  little  leaves  of  all  the  trees  around  be¬ 
gan  to  stir  in  the  faint  wind  of  the  end  of  night. 

Hanuman  was  tired  out.  It  seemed  he  had  opened  and 
closed  half  the  doors  and  windows  on  Earth;  he  had  looked 
in  rooms  and  burrows  and  holes,  and  even  under  water  along 
the  bottoms  of  Lanka’s  lakes  and  ponds,  and  he  could  not 
find  Sita. 

Hanuman  held  his  breath  a  long  moment,  and  then  sighed. 


193 


Hanuman’s  Jump 

He  talked  to  himself  and  addressed  the  empty  gardens.  “She 
is  surely  dead,  for  the  vulture  Sampati  blinked  his  tired  eyes, 
and  missed  seeing  her  fall  from  Ravana’s  grasp  somewhere 
into  the  sea.  Or  Ravana  delighting  in  evil  has  killed  her.  He 
flew  so  fast  she  could  not  breathe,  or  he  crushed  her — Sita  is 
dead,  she  lives  no  more,  and  sadly  she  cried  out  for  her  Lord 
Rama  with  her  last  breath  I” 

Tears  dripped  from  Hanuman’s  yellowy  eyes  and  ran  down 
his  red  face.  His  words  grew  all  choking  wet.  He  wrung  his 
hands  and  shook  his  head  and  switched  his  tail.  “Ah,  how  un¬ 
happy!  What  heartbreak,  what  a  failure!  I  can’t  return  with 
nothing  to  answer  Rama,  never  again  will  I  laugh  and  play 
with  my  friends  of  the  forests  ...  or  run  through  the  trees 
...  I  have  lost  all  my  skill  in  searching,  my  fine  garland  of 
fame  has  expired — Oh  /  can’t  stand  it,  I’ll  die — ” 

Every  word  of  all  this  empty  talk  went  down  the  air  to  the 
long  ears  of  Vayu  the  Wind  Lord,  the  rain’s  lover  who  clears 
the  air.  Vayu  stood  behind  the  winds  of  the  worlds  and 
sighed,  and  stirred,  and  started  to  whisper  at  his  son  Hanu- 
man.  That  miserable  monkey  lay  draped  on  his  stomach 
across  the  low  wall,  sobbing  and  rubbing  his  eyes,  and  in 
from  the  ocean,  over  the  shore  a  little  wind  swirled  up  the 
flanks  of  Trikuta  Hill  and  into  Lanka. 

Hanuman  still  complained.  He  held  his  paws  over  his  face 
and  gave  a  last  gasp.  “It’s  suicide,  and  my  body  may  then  at 
least  bring  meager  happiness  to  some  poor  bug.  .  .  He 
went  limp. 

Then  from  afar  came  the  Winds,  nearer  and  nearer.  The 
million  flat  leaves  of  the  mountainside  trees  trembled,  they 
rustled  and  tried  to  speak  and  waved  like  dancers’  hands. 
That  was  the  first  time  since  Ravana  had  come  to  Lanka  that 
the  Wind  had  dared  to  blow  hard,  but  now  he  came  in  wild 
and  free  again  over  the  walls  of  Lanka  with  all  of  his  great 
might;  he  came  flat  out  like  an  ocean  gale  with  nothing  to 
stop  him,  daring  Ravana.  He  threw  down  the  rows  of  flags 
and  sang  through  the  catapult  wires;  he  banged  the  palace 
shutters  and  broke  off  branches  like  cannon-shots. 

Hanuman  heard  the  running  wild  Wind  speaking — How 
long?  How  long?  He  opened  his  eyes  and  peeked  out  through 
his  furry  fingers.  A  whirlwind  was  headed  straight  on  at  him, 
pressing  down  his  hair.  Leaves  and  flowers  sailed  past  him, 
twigs  were  snapping,  trees  were  waving,  and  from  Ravana’s 
garden  paths  loose  jewels  whipped  from  the  walks  and  flew 
singing  past  his  ears.  Vayu  the  Wind  took  a  deep  breath  and 


196 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


blew  his  son  right  over  the  wall — Away  with  you.  Oh  Child 
how  long,  how  long  will  you  seek  to  annoy  me?  Follow  the 
winds,  follow  the  winds.  .  .  . 

Hanuman  tumbled  and  rolled  under  an  Asoka  tree.  He 
picked  himself  up  and  brushed  the  dust  from  his  fur.  The 
wind  died  down.  Hanuman  was  in  Ravana’s  Asoka  Grove.  It 
looked  like  a  wood,  but  was  too  neatly  kept;  it  resembled  a 
garden,  but  it  had  grown  too  wild.  The  beautiful  asoka  trees 
had  round  crests  and  clusters  of  long  red  flowers,  and  with 
many  other  trees  and  plants  they  were  in  a  long  inward  park 
behind  Ravana’s  sleeping  rooms. 

Dawn  swiftly  approached.  After  a  hush,  the  awakening 
birds  and  deer  began  to  talk,  but  their  voices  were  strangely 
unhappy.  Hanuman  wondered,  “What  grief  can  there  be 
here?”  He  looked  around.  “Where  is  Sita?  She  is  somewhere 
faint  and  forlorn  as  the  misty  Moon,  hard  to  see  as  a  streak 
of  gold  covered  by  dust,  hard  to  find  as  a  bright  yellow  reed 
broken  grey  in  the  frosty  wind  and  lost  when  winter  comes, 
fading  away  as  the  red  scar  from  a  new  arrow  wound,  from 
the  fresh  cut  of  some  sharp  heavenly  weapon.” 

In  the  center  of  the  grove  Hanuman  saw  a  tall  overgrown 
Sinsapa  tree  of  golden  leaves  and  small  white  flowers  stand¬ 
ing  by  a  pond,  with  torches  flickering  round  it  but  no  one 
there.  And  as  Night  departed  and  the  Sun  rose  from  the  sea, 
he  climbed  that  tree  and  hid  in  the  leaves,  lying  along  a  stout 
limb  and  thinking,  “Sita  always  loved  to  walk  the  woodlands 
and  bathe  in  ponds  like  this  among  wild  creatures;  soon  she 
may  come  here  at  sunrise.” 


Here  I  Am 


All  Heaven’s  stars  may  fall 
And  Earth  may  break  apart, 
Fire  may  burn  cold, 

And  waters  run  uphill — 

But  Sita  never  turns  from  Rama . 


Oh  Rama,  the  pond  below  Hanuman  clearly  reflected  the 
world  in  the  calm  at  sunrise,  and  the  sunlight  traveled  swiftly 
into  Lanka,  down  from  the  top  of  Trikuta  Hill,  and  gleamed 
on  the  golden  city  walls.  In  the  still  morning  Hanuman  heard 
Rakshasa  priests  within  their  temples  singing  to  welcome  light 
to  the  sky.  Then  in  Ravana’s  bedroom  the  drums  started  to 
go  off  and  the  lutes  tuned  up,  and  the  bards  of  Lanka  sang 
praiseful  songs  to  awaken  their  King. 

Then  some  Rakshasis,  female  demons  acting  like  guards, 
came  from  among  the  asokas  and  put  out  the  torches  burning 
round  Hanuman’s  tree.  They  were  a  gruesome  ugly  group  of 
hideous  horrors;  they  bore  the  faces  of  rabbits  or  dogs  or 
owls,  swine  or  tigers  or  fish;  they  had  the  legs  of  cows  or  ele¬ 
phants  or  horses;  and  the  ears  of  buffalo  or  goats’  beards  or 
fangs  like  snakes.  They  were  a  small  host  of  furies  and  glut¬ 
tons  and  scolds  and  fiends.  Some  carried  sticks,  some  had 
three  squinty  eyes,  some  were  bald  and  some  had  ratty  stiff 
hair  like  a  mangy  camel.  They  wore  misfitting  clothes.  They 
had  hanging  bellies  and  blotchy  flapping  lips,  voices  like  rasps 
working  away  on  sheet  metal,  and  flat  crooked  noses  set 
askew  or  upside  down  on  puffy  faces.  They  were  leering  or 
grim,  dwarfish  or  tall,  and  most  still  drunk  from  the  night  be¬ 
fore.  Hanuman  saw  his  fill  of  low  brows  and  broken  nails 
and  bloated  faces.  And  it  seemed  not  one  of  them  had  ever 
bathed  in  all  her  life,  unless  she  had  been  caught  outside  in 
the  rain  or  fallen  into  a  river,  and  the  bloody  gore  of  past 

197 


198 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


dinners  and  murders  stretching  back  for  years  on  end  covered 
them  like  a  cloak  of  garbage.  They  made  Hanuman’s  eyes 
sore. 

The  first  thing  when  he  woke  up  every  morning,  Ravana 
the  Demon  King  thought  of  Sita  held  captive.  He  got  out  of 
bed  smiling  and  straightened  his  robe.  He  slicked  down  his 
hair  and  his  ten  moustaches  and  went  out  a  back  door  and 
through  a  gate  in  the  wall  around  the  Asoka  Grove,  blinking 
his  glaring  red-shot  eyes  in  the  sun.  After  Ravana,  came 
about  a  hundred  of  his  wives,  sleepy  and  stumbling.  And 
Queen  Mandodari  walked  beside  Ravana  giving  him  sips  of 
wine  from  a  bowl,  one  head  at  a  time. 

Hanuman  saw  that  Ravana  was  heading  his  way,  and  as 
the  Rakshasis  below  him  formed  perspiring  ranks  and  foul 
rows,  Hanuman  shook  himself  and  diminished  his  size  till  he 
was  no  bigger  than  a  hand,  and  fled  up  the  Sinsapa  tree  to  a 
higher  branch.  There  like  a  hidden  bird  he  watched  from  far 
within  the  dark  shadows  of  the  leaves. 

Then  he  saw  her.  Hanuman  saw  a  fair  woman  of  the  hu¬ 
man  race  arise  from  sleeping  in  the  dirt  under  another  nearby 
tree.  She  came  over  and  sat  with  her  back  against  the  Sinsapa 
tree,  her  legs  drawn  up  and  her  worn  dusty  yellow  robe  cov¬ 
ering  all  her  body,  her  glossy  black  hair  tied  in  a  long  braid 
that  fell  down  her  back  to  her  hip. 

Hanuman  thought,  “It  is  Sita,  much  changed  since  I  saw 
her  carried  away.”  But  he  wasn’t  sure.  She  seemed  bewil¬ 
dered,  lost  and  fallen.  Hanuman  kept  staring  at  her  and  look¬ 
ing,  puzzling  as  one  will  do  when  trying  with  learning  long 
unused  to  read  another  tongue.  Here  was  a  woman  im¬ 
prisoned  as  a  Naga  girl  held  on  her  way  by  staying  charms 
and  spells.  She  was  a  river  dried  away,  a  tom  leaf  from  a 
doubtful  book,  a  muddied  lake;  she  was  dead  love  and  disap¬ 
pointed  hopes.  Beneath  him  Hanuman  saw  an  inspiration 
thwarted  by  distractions,  a  reputation  lost,  a  just  and  royal 
law  disobeyed  and  a  prayer  unfinished. 

But  it  was  truly  her,  it  was  Sita  of  fortunate  looks,  thin 
from  grief  and  fasting,  lean  and  trembling.  That  was  the  robe 
she  had  worn,  and  there  below  him  Hanuman  could  still  find 
her  fair  brows  and  white  throat,  her  round  breast  and  red 
lips,  her  lustrous  black  eyes  with  curling  lashes,  large  and 
wide.  It  was  Sita  bom  from  a  furrow  in  the  Earth.  Even  in 
captivity  her  every  limb  was  lovely;  she  was  still  beautiful  to 
all  eyes,  as  is  crisp  Autumn’s  sky  after  the  rain’s  end. 

Hanuman  thought,  “Oh  Ravana,  we’ll  get  you  for  this! 


Here  1  Am 


199 


Here  is  Rama’s  joyful  Queen  fast  plunged  into  grief!  My 
master  Rama  is  truly  strong,  for  he  yet  breathes  without  her 
and  has  not  entirely  consumed  himself  with  sad  thirst  and 
longings.” 

Ravana  came  to  the  Sinsapa  tree  and  without  speaking 
knelt  and  bowed  his  heads  at  Sita’s  feet.  He  rose  and  smiled, 
“My  dear,  how  can  you  fear  me?  I  am  helpless  in  the  bonds 
of  Love.  Don’t  be  shy  .  .  .  how  does  it  become  you  to  lie  on 
the  bare  ground  when  you  can  be  Mistress  of  my  kingdom? 
Desire  me,  be  kind;  reward  my  love,  for  youth  is  uncertain 
and  passing,  and  beauty  will  not  last  forever.” 

Sita  put  a  grassblade  between  herself  and  Ravana.  “For 
your  own  death  you  touched  me,”  she  said.  “Ravana,  even  in 
a  picture  have  you  never  seen  black  Kalee  dance,  and  the 
horrid  skulls  of  her  necklace  laugh,  and  the  darkness  of 
Death  come  down  like  Night?” 

“But  every  god  serves  me  these  days!"  said  Ravana.  “There 
are  three  hundred  and  twenty  million  warriors  here;  if  I  need 
the  help  of  one,  a  hundred  come  forward.  Rule  over  my 
other  wives  and  my  city  as  you  rule  in  my  heart.  Why  hold 
yourself  back?  If  you  command  it,  I  will  do  good  to  all  the 
world.  Favor  me,  dear  Sita.” 

Sita  said,  “You  see  everything  reversed,  because  you  are  so 
near  to  your  own  death.  If  you  are  really  strong,  follow 
Dharma  and  take  me  back,  no  one  will  harm  you." 

"Forget  him!"  yelled  Ravana. 

“Why,  you  are  but  his  prey,”  said  Sita.  “Can  you  not  feel 
the  noose  of  Death?” 

“Oh  timid  girl  of  slender  waist,  enjoy  yourself.  Look  at  this 
wealth  around  you;  open  your  eyes,  it  will  all  be  yours.” 

“You  are  a  magician  selling  sunlight  as  if  you  owned  it,” 
said  Sita.  “Are  you  mad  to  tempt  me  with  wealth,  when  all 
the  treasures  of  Earth  belong  to  my  one  Lord?  I  am  his 
alone.  After  the  Lord  of  Men  has  held  me  I  can  never  seek 
another.  For  you,  I  am  a  red-hot  iron  image  awaiting  your 
embrace!” 

“The  nicer  I  am,”  said  Ravana,  “the  worse  you  treat  me!” 

Sita  answered,  “Then  know  me  for  the  daughter  of  a  real 
King  and  a  true  man’s  wife!” 

RRRrraarrR!  Ravana  gave  her  a  terrible  look,  he  roared 
and  shook  his  heads  and  hands.  His  twenty  red  eyes  went 
spinning  and  rolling  in  different-turning  circles  and  opposite 
ways.  He  ground  his  grim  teeth.  His  robes  swirled  like  the 


200 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


stormy  sea.  He  seemed  to  be  having  a  fit  and  up  in  his  tree 
Hanuman  nearly  jumped  out  of  his  skin. 

But  Queen  Mandodari  took  Ravana’s  arm  and  said,  “My 
Love,  pass  her  by  and  come  with  me.  She’s  not  better  than  I. 
She  still  loves  Rama,  for  one  insect  will  only  love  another  of 
its  kind.  Sita’s  thin  destiny  will  not  let  her  enjoy  your  grand 
company.  . . 

Then  Mandodari  full  of  love  turned  Ravana  around  and 
led  him  back  to  their  bedroom,  speaking  softly — Whatever 
you  will,  my  dear  Lord,  whatever  you  say.  And  as  they  left, 
behind  Ravana’s  back  his  other  wives,  daughters  of  gods  and 
of  great  kings,  consoled  Sita  with  their  eyes.  Then  they  left 
Sita  alone  with  her  guards  and  followed  the  Demon  King. 

Hanuman  tightly  held  his  tree  and  thought,  “Does  that  fool 
go  through  this  every  day?”  He  looked  at  Sita  and  bared  his 
teeth.  “For  this  Lady  were  the  demons  of  Dandaka  Forest 
slain,  for  her  was  King  Vali  killed  from  ambush,  for  her  I 
flew  the  ocean — it  would  be  entirely  right  had  Rama  for  her 
sake  overturned  the  Universe.  Like  the  waters  of  a  river  flow¬ 
ing  by,  Time  cannot  be  called  back,  and  so  Earth’s  daughter 
of  golden  skin  finds  herself  a  poor  prisoner  here;  yet  she  and 
Rama  are  never  parted  from  each  other’s  thoughts  or  they 
would  die.” 

The  Rakshasis  told  Sita,  “Our  unconquerable  King  stands 
in  a  regal  halo  of  white  glory,  and  for  your  good  luck  he  has 
fallen  in  love  with  you.  He  pays  you  court  politely  and  acts 
so  charming.  Why  cling  to  Rama  who  lives  with  animals?” 

Sita  replied  rudely  in  the  voice  of  a  lioness  who  talks  to  a 
little  dog.  “Don’t  be  too  bold  with  me.  I  would  never  even 
spit  upon  your  unwashed  king.  Fall  in  love?  No,  but  he  will 
truly  fall!  Asking  and  answering,  Rama  will  find  the  way  and 
come  to  get  me.” 

“Look,”  they  said,  “we’re  satisfied.  You’ve  acted  well.  But 
there’s  no  need  to  go  on  any  longer.”  Their  eyes  could  see  no 
more  there  than  a  prisoner  unarmed,  alone  and  powerless. 

Sita  looked  at  them.  “Shut  your  mouths,  don’t  menace 
me!” 

"What?’'  they  cried.  “We’re  just  too  kind  and  soft-hearted 
and  easy  going!”  Some  of  them  had  knives,  now  they  drew 
them  and  shook  them  at  Sita  gleefully.  “We’ve  put  up  with 
you  so  far  just  to  help  you!  Our  words  to  you  are  always 
well-meant,  it’s  for  your  own  good,  face  reality!” 


Here  1  Am 


201 


Sita  laughed. 

They  screamed,  “Be  happy!  Or  else!”  One  demoness  drew 
closer  and  cried,  “Or  else  we’ll  eat  you  up.  Liver  for  me!” 

Bones  to  crunch  and  snap,  blood  and  froth  to  lap!  The 
Rakshasis  started  pushing  and  shoving  each  other,  all  yelling 
at  once.  “Ravana  will  be  happy  again,  why  quarrel,  divide 
her  into  equal  servings.  Get  the  axe  and  kettle!  Lots  of  sauce! 
Let’s  dance!  Tom  ribbons  of  soft  flesh  for  the  crows!" 

Hanuman  crouched  into  the  shadow  of  the  tree  trunk.  He 
clicked  his  tongue  against  his  sharp  teeth  and  hissed  in  his 
breath;  he  curled  his  tail  and  darted  his  fiery  eyes  about;  he 
flexed  his  fingernails  and  got  ready  to  jump  down  fighting 
from  the  yellow  Sinsapa  leaves. 

But  just  then  the  old  Rakshasi  Trijata  hastened  forward 
and  stepped  beside  Sita.  At  first  glance  she  looked  like  any 
nice  old  woman  wearing  her  hair  in  three  white  braids,  but 
her  eyes  were  upside  down,  set  in  her  face  with  their  outer 
comers  touching  her  nose.  She  was  the  only  one  who  treated 
Sita  well. 

“Shut  upl”  Trijata  faced  the  others.  They  stopped  shrieking 
and  shouting  at  once.  “Be  still,”  she  said,  “for  last  night  in  a 
dream  I  saw  terror  and  the  overthrow  and  conquest  of 
Lanka.”  She  raised  her  two  hands  before  her  breast,  her 
palms  outwards,  saying  without  words — Peace  to  you. 

Trijata  turned  to  Sita.  “Princess,  I  will  tell  you  all  my 
dream,  so  you  may  save  us  from  death — 

“You  stood  wearing  white  atop  a  snow-white  hill  beaten  by 
white  sea-waves  round  its  base.  On  that  hill  I  saw  Lakshmana 
sitting  on  a  pile  of  white  bones,  drinking  milk  and  eating  rice. 
Then  Rama  came  to  you  riding  a  white  elephant  with  four 
ivory  tusks  bound  in  white  silver.  He  wore  white  flowers  and 
white  clothes  on  his  green  limbs,  and  he  sat  on  the  elephant’s 
back  on  an  ivory  throne. 

“Then  like  light  meeting  the  Sun  you  were  beside  him.  You 
embraced  Rama  and  were  on  the  elephant  with  him.  You 
raised  your  arms  and  held  fast  in  your  hands  were  the  Sim 
and  Moon. 

“Then  I  saw  Ravana  dressed  in  red  clothes  and  red  flowers 
riding  a  hog,  drinking  oil,  the  hair  shaved  off  all  his  heads, 
fleeing  Lanka.  As  he  rode  to  the  South  our  city  sank  into  the 
ocean  behind  him.  Ravana  was  demented;  he  shouted  insane 
words  and  laughed  and  wept  like  a  maniac.  He  rode  into  a 
dry  lake-bed,  and  there  a  dark  woman  wearing  a  red  shroud 
and  a  necklace  of  skulls  twined  her  dusty  arms  through  his 


202 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


necks.  She  pulled  him  to  the  Earth  and  dragged  him  away, 
always  South,  to  the  Land  of  Death. 

“Sita,  I  saw  our  Good  Fortune  running  North  like  a 
frightened  girl  weeping,  bleeding  from  many  cuts,  and  a  tiger 
fell  in  running  beside  her  to  protect  her,  and  guide  her  to 
safety.  They  ran  to  Fair  Ayodhya. . . 

Trijata  shook  her  head  and  looked  at  the  other  guards.  She 
said,  “Like  a  field  of  grain,  evil  ripens  slowly  in  time.  When  a 
fruit  is  ripe,  then  may  it  fear  the  fall.  Console  Sita  and  ask 
her  forgiveness.  There  is  no  unlucky  mark  on  her  body.  She’ll 
never  be  a  widow.  This  captivity  is  not  her  true  fate,  it  just 
seems  like  it,  and  I  have  seen  her  rescue  while  I  slept.  Even 
at  this  moment,  danger  comes  at  us  here  from  Rama’s  send¬ 
ing,  so  ask  her  pardon.” 

Sita  smiled  at  them  and  said,  “When  this  becomes  true,  I 
will  save  you  all.” 

The  Rakshasis  disbanded  and  went  to  guardposts  away  by 
the  Asoka  gates  and  along  the  walls,  and  Sita  sat  alone  under 
Hanuman’s  tree.  Hanuman  thought,  “Demons  can  take  any 
form;  how  can  I  speak  to  her  so  she  will  trust  me?  If  I  talk  in 
Sanskrit  like  a  brahmana  she’ll  think  I’m  the  Rakshasa 
King.  .  . 

So  in  a  quiet  voice  no  one  else  could  hear,  Hanuman  said 
in  the  animal  language,  “Rama — Rama — ” 

Sita  raised  her  head  and  listened. 

Hanuman  went  on  softly  speaking.  “ — Rama  killed  that 
false  golden  deer.  He  spoke  to  the  dying  Vulture  King  Jatayu. 
Rama  is  Sugriva’s  friend,  and  all  the  animals  of  Kishkindhya 
have  searched  for  you.  I  found  you,  I  alone  leapt  over  the 
sea.  I  am  Hanuman,  the  Son  of  the  Wind  .  .  .  here  I  am 
above  you.” 


Sita  looked  up  into  the  Sinsapa  tree  and  saw  a  white  mon¬ 
key  like  a  tiny  bunch  of  little  lightnings,  his  red  face  smiling 
down  at  her,  his  light  yellow-brown  eyes  shining  with  fires 
and  lights.  She  rose  and  held  a  low  branch  and  said,  “Who 
are  you?  Now  I  have  let  my  mind  slip  into  illusion.” 

Hanuman  came  down  to  that  branch.  “Mother,  it’s  me, 
Hanuman.  I  serve  Rama.  But  who  are  you?  Are  you  a  bright 
star-spirit  hiding  from  her  Lord  in  jealous  anger,  or  are  you 
Sita?” 

“I  am  Sita.”  Silently  she  began  to  cry  and  tears  poured 
from  her  eyes.  “What  star-spirit  sheds  tears  on  hearing  the 


Here  1  Am 


203 


name  of  a  mortal  King?  Oh  Hanuman,  every  sight  speaks  to 
me  of  him,  and  I  fear  you  are  also  only  a  phantom  in  my 
mind.” 

“Ah  no,  I  am  not!”  Hanuman  came  closer.  “Listen,  too 
much  crying’s  bad  for  your  eyes!  Everything’s  going  to  be  all 
right . .  .  very  soon,  Sita.  .  . 

Sita  looked  down  at  her  feet  on  the  Earth,  and  every  detail 
was  clear  and  distinct.  It  was  no  dream;  and  when  she  looked 
back,  by  her  own  heart  Sita  read  Hanuman’s  inmost  thoughts 
and  feelings. 

Hanuman  said,  “You’re  welcomel  I’ve  already  put  my  foot 
on  Ravana’s  ugly  heads!” 

“Oh  my  pretty  monkey!”  She  squeezed  him  and  ruffled  his 
fur.  “You’ve  come  like  medicine  to  a  dying  man,  at  the  last 
painful  moment.  Where  did  you  find  Rama?  How  have  mon¬ 
keys  and  men  met  as  brothers?” 

“Remember  when  you  dropped  your  ornaments  from  the 
sky  onto  a  hill  by  a  lake?” 

“Oh  yes!” 

“That  was  me  and  my  King  Sugriva.  We  were  in  hiding. 
We  saw  you  and  gathered  up  your  things.  Then  Rama  and 
Lakshmana  came  to  our  hill  of  Rishyamukha,  wandering  in  a 
beautiful  forest,  and  we  showed  them  your  jewelry.  Sugriva 
and  Rama  became  friends,  and  Rama  restored  Sugriva  to  his 
wife  and  made  him  King  of  Kishkindhya,  and  for  his  part 
Sugriva  will  rescue  you,  the  monkeys  and  bears  will  come  to 
Lanka.  . .  .” 

So  they  talked  confidingly  together,  Sita  standing  with  her 
head  near  the  golden  sinsapa  leaves  and  her  sweet  voice  soft 
and  low,  and  Hanuman  stretched  on  a  branch  that  began  to 
bend  a  little  from  his  weight,  as  he  started  to  grow  bigger 
again  from  the  happiness  of  his  success. 

“This  is  his  ring,”  said  Hanuman.  “Take  it.”  Sita  read  the 
name  on  the  wide  gold  band — Rama,  Rama,  Rama — and 
Rama  seemed  to  be  there  touching  her. 

“If  one  can  keep  on  living  somehow,”  said  Sita,  “real  true 
happiness  comes  to  each  of  us  once  in  a  hundred  yearsl  I 
remember  all  the  good  times  I’d  forgotten!” 

“Everyone  was  looking  for  you,”  said  Hanuman.  “We  only 
waited  out  the  rains.  Take  heart.  I  am  famous  all  over  the 
three  worlds.  I’m  hard  for  enemies  to  look  at  and  impossible 
to  stop.” 

Sita’s  face  was  beautiful.  She  looked  at  Hanuman  and 
smiled  a  luminous  slow  smile  bright  as  the  day-star.  Her  dress 


204 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


slipped  from  her  left  shoulder  a  little,  and  Hanuman  could 
see  part  of  her  arm  revealed,  he  saw  her  slim  muscles  under 
the  golden  skin  strong  as  steel  within  silk.  Hanuman  grinned 
at  her.  Then  he  fell  into  a  short  animal  trance  and  said  half 
to  himself — A  huge  black  woman  strikes  her  belly  with  her 
many  hands,  driven  to  anger  until  she  shall  devour  the 
Rakshasas,  impatient  to  reach  out  and  draw  them  into  her 
terrible  mouth.  .  .  . 

Sita  pulled  up  her  robe  and  caught  her  breath.  “What  are 
you  saying?” 

Hanuman  blinked.  “You  mean  about  the  rains?” 

Sita  smiled  a  sad  sweet  smile.  “Hanuman,  has  Rama  lost 
his  love  for  me  through  long  separation?” 

“He  hardly  eats  or  sleeps.  To  him  the  cold  nights  are  like 
flame  and  the  gentle  moonbeams  bum  him.  Get  on  my  back 
and  I’ll  take  you  home.” 

She  laughed,  “Here  again  I  see  your  monkey  nature!” 

Hanuman  said,  “My  first  womanly  insult.”  He  jumped 
from  the  tree  and  became  as  a  white  hill  eighty  spans  high. 
He  was  crouched  ready  to  leap,  with  a  coppery  face,  nails 
and  teeth  like  thunders,  yellow  lantern  eyes  like  dazzling 
brass  plates.  Then  before  anyone  else  saw  him  he  was  small 
again.  He  ran  back  to  Sita  and  up  into  the  tree. 

“I  believe  you!”  smiled  Sita. 

Hanuman  beamed.  “I  could  take  back  all  Lanka  with  her 
stupid  King  and  her  walls,  and  no  one  could  catch  me.” 

“No,  let  Rama  recover  me  if  he  will — but  now  that  beauti¬ 
ful  man  is  freed  from  a  wife  like  me.” 

“Princess,  if  Rama  sees  a  flower  you  once  liked  he  falls 
into  a  fever.  If  he  hears  your  name,  it  will  sometimes  comfort 
him,  or  else  will  worsen  his  pain.  Now  he  is  distracted,  but 
once  he  knows  for  sure  that  you  are  here,  I  swear  by  all  the 
delicious  fruits  of  the  forest,  he  will  come  with  a  large  army  to 
save  you.” 

Sita  was  both  sad  and  happy,  like  rain  in  the  sunshine.  She 
said,  “Blessed  are  the  gods  who  can  steal  a  look  at  Rama 
where  he  hides,  and  blessed  are  the  holy  men  who  never  love 
or  hate.  People  cannot  thwart  Time;  behold  all  of  us  so 
sad.” 

Hanuman  replied,  “When  Rama’s  hot  anger  breaks  over 
the  world  the  seas  may  well  boil  away.  Dear  Sita,  before 
Love’s  eyes  Time  does  not  lay  on  year  by  year  the  little 
heart-blinding  spells  of  age.  Before  true  Love,  the  maces  of 
Death  are  frail  stage-weapons,  fragile  and  useless  for  combat. 


Here  1  Am  205 

Death  gives  way  to  Love  and  has  never  dared  to  war  with 
him.” 

Sita  sighed,  and  her  breath  burnt  a  few  sinsapa  leaves  that 
hung  down  near  her  face.  “Soon  you  must  leave  me  and  re¬ 
turn,  my  Hanuman.  People  will  fancy  what  they  see  and  for¬ 
get  those  who  have  gone.  Shamefully  I  loved  a  jeweled  deer 
and  sent  my  man  away.  Here  there  is  no  cliff  to  jump  over.  I 
haven’t  any  knife  or  poison,  and  only  my  own  braid  to  hang 
myself.  How  is  one  better  than  a  slave  to  this  life  that  will 
not  end  when  it  is  over  and  done?  Often  I  weep  longing  to 
die _ ” 

“Destroy  your  sorrow,"  said  Hanuman.  “You’re  the  most 
beautiful  woman  I’ve  ever  seen.” 

"Oh  Hanuman.” 

“But  you  are,  you  are  supremely  fair.  Oh  Sita,  Rama  is 
like  a  fire-temple,  burning  from  his  own  fires  within.  Love’s 
shadows  and  his  darkness  are  really  lights.  Tell  me  what  to 
do  for  you.” 

“Does  Rama  remember  the  crow  that  clawed  me  when  we 
lived  on  Chitra  Hill?  Take  him  this  message — For  me  you 
sent  the  dread  Brahmastra  weapon  to  kill  a  little  crow,  so 
why  do  I  appear  to  have  no  protector  now?  Am  l  helpless? 
Have  you  enough  love  left  for  me  to  set  weapons  against  the 
demons?  On  that  day  far  from  care,  on  Chitraukuta  Hill  my 
red  brow-mark  was  printed  on  your  green  chest  and  near 
your  heart." 

“I’ll  tell  him,  I  promise,"  said  Hanuman. 

Sita  said,  “Stay  nearby  awhile,  rest  here  with  me  today.  I 
have  no  one.  When  you  leave  I  will  miss  you,  and  who  knows 
if  you  will  ever  return?  It  is  very  hard  to  enter  Lanka,  and  I 
fear  no  one  but  you  can  cross  the  sea.  Complete  good  for¬ 
tune,  and  a  friend  to  share  it  with,  is  very  rare  and  unlasting. 
My  monkey,  spend  this  night  with  m«  and  go  tomorrow.” 

Hanuman  smiled  a  sunny  smile.  “Why  would  King  Sugriva 
send  any  of  his  best  monkeys  out  on  an  errand  like  this?  I  am 
a  common  animal,  the  poor  child  of  the  homeless  Wind. 
Nothing  can  stop  the  monkeys  and  bears,  nothing  can  stop 
Rama  and  Lakshmana.  We  can  go  anywhere  as  fast  as  we 
want  to.  We  fight  on  the  ground  or  up  in  the  air;  our 
weapons  are  uprooted  trees  and  blocks  of  stone  broken  out  of 
the  mountains.  Let  me  go  back  and  bring  them  here  to  you, 
here  and  now,  this  very  day.” 

Sita  looked  at  that  remarkable  and  amazing  monkey  again 
and  again.  Her  sadness  had  come  and  gone,  as  clouds  will 


206 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


draw  across  the  clear  night  sky,  and  cover  the  moonlight,  and 
go  again.  “Faithful  Hanuman,  at  the  year’s  end  Ravana  will 
kill  me.  Speak  so  Rama  will  save  me,  let  him  do  it,  and  fare¬ 
well.” 

“Farewell,  it  won’t  be  long.” 


Hanuman  ran  unseen  to  the  wall  of  that  Asoka  Grove  far¬ 
thest  from  Ravana’s  palace.  He  got  all  set  to  jump  back 
across  the  ocean  when  an  instant  monkey  thought  crossed  his 
mind. 

He  looked  back  at  Sita.  Her  face  was  fair  as  the  Moon. 
His  eyes  brightened  and  he  thought,  “Will  I  leave  her  once 
more  in  danger  with  no  sign  of  good  cheer?” 

He  popped  over  the  low  wall  and  out  of  Sita’s  sight.  He 
got  bigger  again.  He  said  to  himself,  “I  won’t  hurt  Sita’s 
grove  and  I  won’t  touch  the  good  chariot  Pushpaka  .  .  .  but 
all  the  rest . .  .  right  or  wrong!” 

A  great  idea!  Hanuman  was  off  like  a  bolt  from  a  bow¬ 
string.  He  plowed  through  Ravana’s  lawns  and  flowerbeds 
and  pushed  over  his  pavilions.  He  threw  benches  and  bricks 
through  the  palace  windows  and  splattered  the  sentries  with 
wet  muddy  lotuses.  Horses  shied  and  elephants  stampeded, 
and  the  deer  stared  roundeyed  and  frozen  in  panic.  Dust  and 
leaves  fell  all  in  a  wind  over  Lanka;  and  standing  amid  the 
wreckage  of  Ravana’s  gardens,  Sita’s  Rakshasi  guards  saw  an 
infernal  monkey  crackling  with  energy,  growing  bigger  and 
bigger. 

That  was  a  wondrously  harmful  sight,  a  true  regret  to  their 
eye.  They  ran  to  Sita  and  asked,  “Lotus-eyes,  who  is  that?” 

“What  do  I  know  of  your  terrible  Rakshasa  magic?”  an¬ 
swered  Sita. 

Ravana  heard  the  racket  in  his  courtroom.  The  palace 
bodyguard  of  eighty  thousand  fighters  did  not  wait  for  any 
orders.  They  served  together  always,  and  knew  and  loved 
each  other;  in  full  armor  they  flew  out  the  tall  windows  and 
saw  Hanuman  sitting  on  top  of  the  big  main  gate  in  the  cir¬ 
cular  outer  wall  around  Ravana’s  home. 

Hanuman  cried  out — Victory  to  Sugriva  the  King I 

What  King? — shouted  the  regiment. 

Hanuman  grabbed  an  iron  gate-bar  and  stood  in  the  air. 
My  King!  He  beat  them  all  to  death  with  it  and  the  ground 
shook. 


Here  /  Am 


207 


On  his  throne  Ravana  could  hear  that  Hanuman  was  win¬ 
ning.  His  ten  heads  turned  here  and  there  and  his  eyes  roved 
over  his  court.  Then  commanded  by  a  royal  glance,  the  good- 
looking  young  warrior  Jambumali  arose,  the  son  of  the 
demon  General  Prahasta.  He  bowed  and  left  the  court,  and 
once  outside  the  door  he  broke  into  a  run. 

During  those  moments,  after  he  had  hammered  to  death 
the  royal  bodyguard,  Hanuman  pounced  from  his  gate  onto 
the  goldplated  Rakshasa  city  temple  across  the  street.  In 
back  of  that  building  priests  were  talking  senselessly  or  roll¬ 
ing  in  the  dirt  or  just  smiling  like  religious  idiots.  Inside  there 
was  an  image  of  the  goddess  Lanka  made  of  sapphire.  Hanu¬ 
man  stuffed  her  down  a  drain  and  slapped  his  armpits  so 
loudly  that  big  pieces  of  the  golden  ceiling  fell  blackened  by 
ages  of  incense  smoke. 

Hanuman  fled  outside,  broke  off  a  marble  column,  and 
flew  to  the  top  of  the  temple  roof.  Let  me  bless  my  beloved 
demons  one  by  one,  are  you  ready?  He  spun  the  pillar 
around  so  fast  that  it  caught  fire,  and  coals  and  flares  and 
sparks  whirled  up  in  the  air,  and  the  priests  ran  for  their 
lives,  the  temple  burst  into  flame  and  exploded. 

Jambumali  heard  it  blow  up.  A  piece  of  flying  stone  just 
missed  his  head,  with  a  sound  like  a  hummingbird  flying  by 
his  ear.  The  noise  awakened  everyone  in  the  world  who  was 
still  asleep  that  morning. 

Jambumali  got  on  his  light  two-wheeled  chariot.  It  was 
brightly  colored  and  drawn  by  three  white  mountain  ponies, 
as  curved  and  fanciful  as  the  toy  car  of  a  princess,  but  made  of 
adamant  and  armored  in  death-spells.  He  drove  to  where  the 
temple  had  been.  Two  pillars  still  stood  there;  on  one  of  them 
a  loose  plank  was  balanced,  and  on  that  plank  Jambumali 
saw  a  monkey  picking  cinders  from  his  coat.  And  though  his 
anger  grew  like  a  fire  fed  with  butter,  Jambumali  looked 
calmly  at  Hanuman  with  the  gaze  of  a  young  lion;  and 
Hanuman  looked  back,  thinking,  “How  young  he  is!” 

Jambumali  got  down  from  his  pretty  car  and  walked 
nearer  to  the  ruined  temple.  He  held  a  red  bow  curved  in  two 
curves  with  the  straight  grip  between,  decorated  with  solid 
gold  flowers.  He  had  a  soft  quiver  slung  over  his  shoulder, 
covered  outside  with  embroidered  silk  showing  colored  birds 
and  dancing  girls,  heads  of  ripe  grain  and  flowers;  inside  his 
arrows  scraped  and  swore,  and  their  tips  danced  with  light. 


208 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Then  very  quickly  Jambumali  shot  an  arrow  straight  up  in 
the  sky  and  cast  his  mantras,  whispering — Come  down 
falling!  Hanuman’s  plank  tilted  and  started  to  slip. 

It  was  a  perfect  quiet  morning.  Hanuman’s  board  stuck 
there  on  that  column  at  an  impossible  angle  and  did  not  fall. 
Hanuman  yawned  and  stretched  out  and  closed  his  eyes. 
Jambumali  stared. 

A  tremendous  piece  of  stone  fell  tumbling  down  out  of 
nowhere  just  missing  Jambumali.  Another  boulder  fell,  they 
were  falling  all  over.  Jambumali  cursed.  Those  were  grains  of 
dust!  Something  else  was  falling,  a  huge  long  tree-trunk.  The 
arrow  returning!  A  giant  long  shadow  growing,  too  fast,  a 
whistling  and  a  wind — 

Jambumali  was  crushed  and  killed,  there  was  no  more  sign 
of  his  body  or  bow.  Hanuman  himself  knew  some  small 
magic  also.  He  saw  Ravana  watching  from  the  palace,  and  he 
howled  like  a  metal  drum  so  that  the  windows  rattled.  Ramal 


Ravana  instantly  turned  and  walked  down  a  narrow  stair 
and  through  a  tunnel  under  the  city  wall.  He  came  out  a 
secret  door  into  a  grove  of  the  hillside  woods  that  was  hidden 
from  view  by  magic.  There  under  a  downgrowing  banyan 
tree  sat  his  son  Indrajit.  Indrajit  had  once  taken  the  god  In- 
dra  prisoner  in  war,  now  he  sat  pale  and  thin  beside  a  her¬ 
mit’s  waterbowl,  with  a  butterjar  for  feeding  a  little  fire, 
wearing  deerskin  with  a  grass  belt,  in  a  field  filled  with  the 
slaughtering  posts  and  altars  of  many  sacrifices. 

Ravana  went  to  approach  Indrajit  but  the  preceptor  Sukra 
stopped  him.  Sukra  had  come  from  the  Asuras  undersea  to 
teach  Indrajit.  He  said,  “Majesty,  do  not  speak  to  him  just 
now  or  make  him  break  the  vow  of  silence.  He  has  been  fast¬ 
ing  to  center  himself  in  the  spirit.  .  .  .” 

Ravana  said,  “What  identity  does  he  seek?  Is  it  well  done 
to  worship  my  enemies  the  gods? — I  do  not  understand  my 
son!” 

“King,  don’t  speak  of  what  you  can’t  understand,”  said 
Sukra.  “Do  not  say  ‘I  won’t  believe,’  for  this  is  real.  This  is 
the  final  hour  and  moment  of  the  five-day  rites  called  the 
Gift  of  Gold.  Every  power  that  Indrajit  has  just  won  by  med¬ 
itation  and  endurance  and  devotion,  he  now  offers  back  to 
Lord  Shiva.” 


Here  1  Am 


209 


“Why  do  that?” 

“A  small  gift  for  your  good  fortune,”  answered  Sukra,  “for 
against  you  will  come  Ramachandra,  Rama  like  the  Moon, 
and  you  will — ” 

“Silence,  brahmana.  I  need  him  now!  Let  him  study  war, 
not  mysteries,  and  return  to  my  side  here  in  this  world  of 
passing  sights  and  nets  of  pleasures  and  of  pain.” 

Then  Indrajit  arose.  “Father,  the  gift  to  Shiva  is  done  and 
I  am  ready.  Or  else,  why  would  I  part  from  Shiva  the  Lord?” 

Ravana  said,  “My  son,  bring  me  that  animal.  Beguile  him 
by  unreality  and  take  him  by  force.  Use  things  that  begin  one 
way  and  end  in  another.” 

Smiling,  Indrajit  said  in  a  gentle  voice,  “This  life  is  an 
echo  in  the  air  and  a  wave  on  the  sea.  That  is  Hanuman.  I’ll 
take  him  if  you  want  him;  war  or  peace,  it’s  all  the  same  to 

It 

me. 

Then  Indrajit’s  fairseeming  form  changed.  Gone  was  the 
friendly  lean  ascetic.  There  was  Indrajit  the  raven-haired  war¬ 
rior,  dressed  in  blue  and  yellow  silk,  his  skin  dark  red  like 
spilled  blood,  a  yellow  flower  in  his  long  hair,  his  eyes  sharp 
green  with  cat’s  pupils,  a  golden  chain  wound  nine  times 
round  his  waist,  a  white  spot  of  sandalwood  on  his  brow,  a 
great  round  blue  steel  shield  in  one  hand,  a  bow  backed  with 
gold  serpents  in  the  other,  a  full  quiver  slung  over  his  back 
and  a  sword  at  his  belt  in  a  silver  sheath. 

“Long  life  to  you,  my  Father.”  Indrajit  went  to  the  burnt 
temple  in  Lanka.  Hanuman  was  waiting  for  Ravana’s  next 
champion  to  come  against  him,  lying  there  on  his  unbalanced 
board. 

Indrajit  knew  Hanuman  could  not  be  killed.  So  on  an  ar¬ 
row  he  put  a  mantra  that  can  be  sent  but  once  at  anyone, 
and  never  sent  again.  He  shot  the  spell  of  Shiva’s  noose,  and 
Hanuman  fell  to  the  ground  tied  invisibly  hand  and  foot  and 
unable  to  move. 

But  before  Indrajit  could  reach  him  or  speak,  other 
Rakshasas  ran  from  hiding  and  in  the  blink  of  an  eye  they 
had  tightly  locked  Hanuman  in  chains.  Indrajit  bit  his  lip  and 
sighed.  For  the  binding  force  of  Shiva’s  noose  will  never  hold 
nor  return,  when  there  is  any  other  bond  laid  over  it. 

“Boundless  ignorance  again  takes  command,”  thought  In¬ 
drajit.  Cursing  and  kicking  Hanuman,  the  demons  dragged 
him  off  to  the  palace.  Indrajit  saw  that  by  no  sign  did  Hanu¬ 
man  show  that  he  was  free.  “Those  fools — I  bow  to  Shiva 


210 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


who  places  us  all  in  true  danger  now.  Oh,  let  lust  and  anger 
keep  their  distance,  let  all  this  unreal  world  be  far  from  mel” 
And  Indrajit  went  back  to  his  grove  of  meditation  without 
speaking  a  single  word  aloud. 


The  New  Moon 


The  footrest  on  your  high  throne 
Is  worn  smooth  from  the  crest  jewels 
of  lesser  kings, 

Bowing  their  crowned  heads  in  surrender. 

But  good  fortune  is  a  wanton  harlot, 
Going  where  she  will — 

Oh  Majesty,  is  she  still  yours? 


The  Rakshasas  pulled  Hanuman  into  Ravana’s  court.  There 
on  his  red  and  gold  throne,  in  a  better  hall  than  any  room  in 
heaven,  the  Demon  King  sat  like  threats  of  darkness.  Ravana 
had  earned  all  his  wealth  and  power  by  his  own  strength.  He 
was  fortunate  and  splendid  and'  rich.  Ravana  had  the  pa¬ 
tience  and  strength  to  protect  all  Creation  from  harm,  but  he 
did  just  the  opposite  and  took  the  worlds  for  his  possessions. 

Ravana’s  throne  was  covered  with  doeskin  and  was  set  in 
the  center  of  a  long  indoor  altar,  made  of  a  golden  frame 
filled  with  Earth,  a  low-banked  hill  running  on  each  side 
away  from  Ravana  to  the  comers  of  the  room.  At  each  end 
Rakshasa  priests  tended  fires  and  hummed  songs,  and  when 
they  made  their  offerings  they  could  choose  from  among  the 
spoils  of  the  Universe  and  the  treasures  of  the  three  worlds. 

The  entire  Majesty  and  Glory  of  the  Rakshasa  King!  The 
demons  carried  Hanuman  close.  Ravana  was  very  tall.  He 
wore  ten  crowns  of  flaming  red  flowers  and  gleaming  gold.  A 
gold  breast-chain  hung  from  one  ten-armed  dark  shoulder  to 
the  other,  forged  of  flat  heavy  links  from  which  were  hanging 
golden  devil-faces  with  amethyst  eyes  and  open  ruby  lips  and 
long  shiny  ivory  teeth. 

Ravana  looked  at  Hanuman  with  twenty  eyes,  and  from 
the  smooth  emerald  floor  Hanuman  in  chains  looked  steadily 
back.  And  the  Rakshasa  King  remembered  what  the  bull 

211 


212 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


Nandin,  wearing  the  face  of  a  monkey,  had  told  him  on 
Shiva’s  Hill  of  Reeds  long  before — Animals  with  faces  like 
mine  will  destroy  you. 


Ravana’s  younger  brother  Vibhishana  came  from  the  ranks 
of  courtiers  and  bent  over  Hanuman.  His  face  was  black  and 
his  eyes  dark  blue.  He  said,  “This  is  Lanka,  long  built  here, 
long  prospering.  You  have  killed  our  people  and  broken  our 
holy  temple.  But  good  fortune  to  you.  Do  not  fear,  but  tell  us 
the  truth.  Who  are  you  and  where  did  you  come  from?  Why 
are  you  disguised  as  a  monkey?” 

Hanuman  replied,  “I  am  a  monkey!  I’ve  a  message  for  Ra- 
vana.” 

The  Demon  King  leaned  forward  on  his  throne.  “Insensate 
animal!  What  message?” 

“Majesty,”  said  Hanuman,  “I  am  Hanuman,  I  am  Rama’s 
slave.  I  came  to  find  Sita.  Hear  the  words — In  the  cave  city 
of  Kishkindhya  your  brother  Sugriva,  king  of  the  monkeys 
and  bears,  asks  after  your  welfare.  Listen  to  his  desire:  in 
Dandaka  Forest  Sita  was  harmed,  and  1  have  promised  Rama 
to  find  her ;  therefore  do  not  confine  another’s  wife  but  return 
her." 

“How  did  you  get  here?”  asked  Ravana. 

“I  jumped.” 

“Don’t  make  me  laugh!” 

Hanuman  grinned.  “Don’t  worry,  I  won’t!” 

Ravana  opened  wide  his  eyes  in  anger.  “Unlucky  beast, 
you’ve  lost  your  weak  wits  from  seeing  the  beauties  of  my 
city.” 

“Lord  of  Lanka,  I  am  the  son  of  the  Wind,  fast  or  slow,  ir¬ 
resistible  in  my  course.  I’m  an  animal;  what  you  call  beauty 
won’t  turn  my  head.  I  crossed  the  ocean,  as  a  person  without 
attachment  to  worldly  desires  easily  crosses  the  ocean  of  exis¬ 
tence.  Withdraw  your  heart  from  Sita,  or  that  will  be  a  costly 
theft,  for  it’s  by  her  energy  that  I  jumped  over  the  sea.” 

“Impossible.  Vibhishana,  cut  off  his  head!” 

“No,”  said  Ravana’s  brother.  “You  can  brand  or  shave  a 
messenger  but  not  kill  him.” 

Ravana  said,  “What  good  are  you  as  a  demon?  I’ve  killed 
them  before!” 

Vibhishana  said,  “But  I  wasn’t  here  before.” 

“All  your  life  you’ve  been  timid  and  weak  as  a  woman.” 


The  New  Moon 


213 


“Just  the  same,”  smiled  Vibhishana,  “here  I  am  standing 
up  and  telling  you  no.” 

Then  the  Rakshasa  General  Prahasta  rose  from  the  audi¬ 
ence  and  said,  “Have  a  heart,  Ravana!  Give  us  a  chance.  In 
the  army  we’ve  eaten  your  food  and  spent  your  money,  and 
all  we  have  to  show  for  it  is  peace!  You  must  release  Hanu- 
man.  It  is  sweet  to  make  a  real  war  and  win!  Set  free  this 
monkey  who  killed  my  son,  because  if  he  does  not  return  no 
one  else  can  ever  find  Sita,  and  we  will  never  fight  against 
Rama.” 

Hanuman  lying  in  chains  said  to  Ravana,  “Are  you  bored 
with  your  great-seeming  wealth  and  do  you  wish  to  end  your 
life?  Whatever  happens  to  me,  how  can  you  believe  that 
Rama  will  abandon  his  beautiful  wife  and  let  Sita  be  taken 
from  him  and  not  recover  her?  Actually,  your  conquests  are 
uncertain  and  your  treasures  unnecessary.  Past  merit  still  pro¬ 
tects  you,  but  somehow  I  think  you  strangely  desire  death.” 

“No,  you  tiresome  little  monkey,  I  do  not  desire  death!” 
Ravana  swirled  to  his  feet.  “You  have  now  seen  us  both.  Tell 
me  truly,  how  Rama  compares  to  me.” 

“Truly,”  said  Hanuman,  “you  are  the  bright  Full  Moon,  the 
light  of  the  night  world;  and  my  Rama  is  the  New  Moon,  a 
thin  shred  of  light,  no  more.” 

“Excellent,”  said  Ravana.  He  summoned  a  band  of  grim 
demons.  “Monkeys  take  pride  in  their  tails.  Set  his  tail 
aflame,  carry  him  around  through  Lanka  and  then  throw  him 
out.” 


They  slung  Hanuman  on  a  couple  of  carrying  poles  and 
took  him  outside.  They  started  to  wrap  his  tail  in  oily  rags. 
They  wrapped  and  wrapped,  and  it  seemed  the  whole  length 
of  Hanuman’s  tail  wouldn’t  be  covered  by  all  the  cloth  in 
Lanka.  So  the  demons  just  bundled  up  the  end  of  his  white 
tail.  They  set  the  rags  afire,  lifted  the  poles  to  their  shoulders 
and  carried  him  around  the  streets  yelling — Look  what  hap¬ 
pens  if! 

In  the  Asoka  Grove  Trijata  told  Sita  what  was  happening. 
Sita  gave  her  a  cool  smile  and  went  to  a  little  shed  where  the 
guards  kept  a  tiny  flame  always  burning  in  a  clay  cup  filled 
with  butter,  to  light  their  nighttime  torches. 

Sita  looked  into  the  little  flame  and  said — If  I’ve  kept  faith, 
be  cool  to  Hanuman. 


214 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


The  fire  flamed  and  bent  to  the  right — Yes,  I  am  good  to 
him. 

So  Fire  let  the  Wind  be  cool  right  next  to  his  son’s  tail  and 
Hanuman  felt  no  heat,  though  flames  played  in  the  air  and 
burnt  the  oil  in  the  rags.  The  demons  carried  him  bouncing 
along,  and  Hanuman  thought,  “I’ve  seen  their  incredible 
King,  why  stay  in  chains?”  He  broke  loose,  lashed  out  with 
his  fiery  tail,  and  sprang  into  the  sky  like  a  lightning  streak. 

Hanuman  flew,  setting  fire  to  rows  of  mansions  and  houses 
with  his  burning  tail.  Flames  devoured  Lanka  like  a  crema¬ 
tion  yard;  smoke  blocked  her  roads  and  vultures  settled  on 
her  golden  walls.  Burnt  were  sweet  sandalwood  and  dia¬ 
monds,  corals  and  fine  silks,  golden  vessels  and  piles  of 
weapons,  furniture  and  ornaments,  ropes  and  elephant  cords, 
beds  and  perfumes  and  hides  and  armor,  all  burnt. 

The  carved  windows  blazed  and  bricks  melted  into  glass. 
Down  fell  roofs  and  towers  and  burning  beams.  The  water- 
bom  pink  and  blue  pearls  shattered  in  the  walls;  the  golden 
moons  and  silver  crescents  melted  away.  Along  whole  streets 
the  houses  collapsed  outwards  and  fell  over  aglow  with  fires. 
Gates  and  grills  snapped  and  smoked,  and  living  flames  blos¬ 
somed  alive  in  the  air.  The  demons  cried  alarms  and  jumped 
into  their  lakes  and  ponds,  fire  brigades  tore  past,  and  thin 
rivers  of  hot  iron  and  molten  bronze  ran  down  the  streets  like 
quicksilver. 

Hanuman  flew  to  the  very  top  of  Trikuta  Hill  and  looked 
at  what  he’d  done.  He  had  to  shade  his  eyes  from  the  heat;  it 
seemed  Lanka  was  flaring  brightest,  before  she  would  die. 
Even  the  restless  waves  of  the  sea  were  red  from  the  burning. 

Indrajit  had  been  brooding  in  his  grove  outside  the  walls. 
He  said,  “I  will  destroy  the  six  senses.  Eye,  I  will  pierce  you; 
mind,  I  will  cut  you. .  .  And  his  senses  answered,  “You 
will  pierce  only  yourself,  you  will  cut  only  yourself. . . .” 

Then  Indrajit  forever  wearing  different  forms  heard  the 
wails  of  woe  and  saw  the  fire.  The  Prince  of  Lanka  swiftly 
bathed  in  a  stream  and  put  water  in  a  bowl.  He  threw  aloes 
thorns  on  his  altar  and  lit  them,  and  sat  down  on  scattered 
grassblades.  He  spoke  to  Fire,  “The  grass  isn’t  even  woven 
into  a  mat.  The  time  is  long  ago  and  we  have  no  skills.  You 
are  not  the  fire  of  Lord  Shiva’s  third  eye  spreading  wide  your 
tongues.  You  are  not  Shiva’s  wish.” 

Indrajit  dipped  three  fingers  into  his  waterbowl.  Agni  the 
Fire  God  rushed  out  of  Lanka  and  a  cone  of  sparks  and  fire 
came  over  Indra jit’s  altar. 


The  New  Moon 


213 


“Heat  and  thirst!”  cried  Agni. 

Indrajit  said,  “Ashes!” 

“Smoke  and  anger!” 

Ashes!  Indrajit  sprinkled  water  on  his  aloes  fire,  and  Agni 
the  Fire  Lord  backed  off  a  little. 

Indrajit  said,  “I  hold  you.” 

“Fear  me,”  answered  Agni. 

“No,  my  Lord.  Never  are  you  patient,  but  always  you 
bum.  Never  are  you  filled  by  burning,  hard  are  you  to  stop 
once  grown.  Oh  evil  companion,  I  am  a  storyteller  myself,  I 
am  an  actor  too.  Now  I  send  you  away  and  I  watch  the 
doors  for  your  flames’  return.” 

Then  a  finger’s  depth  of  water  appeared  and  covered  all  of 
Lanka,  clinging  to  walls  and  ceilings  and  floors,  and  the  fires 
had  to  go  out.  Hanuman  sitting  above  the  city  quenched  his 
tail  in  a  mountain  spring  and  thought,  “Never  again!  What 
have  I  done?  I’ve  burned  Sita!” 

Hanuman  held  his  head  in  his  hands.  “A  fool  will  try  any¬ 
thing.  It’s  never  too  late  for  him  to  ruin  a  successful  affair. 
Any  kind  of  evil  can  be  easily  done  in  thoughtless  anger.” 
Back  he  jumped  into  Lanka,  through  the  clouds  of  smoke 
and  steam.  He  landed  on  a  hot  street,  ran  to  the  back  of  Ha¬ 
vana’s  palace,  and  headed  for  the  Asoka  Grove. 

Nothing  was  harmed  there.  Sita  was  safe  by  the  sinsapa 
tree.  How  could  Fire  have  burned  Sita?  It  is  she  who  can 
bum  Fire  if  she  will. 

That  amiable  woman  smiled  and  said,  “Oh  Son  of  the 
Wind,  have  you  returned  for  your  honors  and  decorations? 
We  praise  your  wit  and  wisdom,  your  brave  courage  and  fine 
knowledge  of  politics.” 

Hanuman  knelt  before  her  and  touched  his  palms  together. 
“My  mother,  I  salute  you  in  the  dust.  A  fool’s  excuses  are 
worse  than  his  crimes.  Blessed  are  people  with  good  sense.” 

“By  good  fortune  I  see  you  unhurt,”  said  Sita.  “My  Child, 
if  you  are  tired  after  all  this,  rest  by  me.” 

“Let  me  leave  while  I  still  can,”  said  Hanuman,  “give  me 
your  permission.  Jumping  the  sea  is  easy.  It’s  all  this  running 
from  guards  and  watchmen  that  tires  me.  I  will  come  back 
with  Rama.  Ravana  has  truly  already  been  slain  by  your  an¬ 
ger,  and  yet  awaits  only  Rama’s  strength  as  the  means  of  his 
death.” 

Sita  said,  “Monkey,  in  one  reckless  moment  one  can  kill 
the  innocent  and  boast  wrong  words,  forget  friends  or  lose  all 
the  harvest  of  pleasure,  profit  and  dharma.  You  did  none  of 


216 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


this.  They  set  your  tail  afire  and  you  burned  them  back!  So 
throw  off  your  care  as  a  snake  abandons  his  old  worn  skin 
and  leaves  it  behind  him.  Hanuman,  when  you  stop  to  think 
you  are  strong,  you  are  intelligent  and  good,  you  know  time 
and  place.” 

“I  feel  better  already.” 

“Listen,  Lanka  will  be  soon  rebuilt.  If  you  so  heedlessly 
destroy  these  demons  you  will  cloud  Rama’s  fame.  Take  this 
to  Rama,  get  him  to  act.”  Sita  untied  the  comer  of  her  robe 
and  took  out  the  pearl  mounted  on  a  gold  leaf  that  her  father 
Janaka  had  tied  into  her  hair  on  her  wedding  day. 

“How  did  you  keep  that  all  this  time?”  asked  Hanuman. 

“Head  pearls  are  common,"  smiled  Sita.  “Say  this — /  seem 
to  have  no  husband.  Rama  best  of  men,  seeing  this  gift  was 
like  seeing  you.  Now  I  part  from  it  and  keep  your  ring.  I  will 
live  on  here  for  a  month  and  not  longer.  Do  you  still  think  of 
me  at  all?  I  send  this  pearl  so  you  may  know — you  are  loved 
by  me,  you  are  loved  by  me.”  Sita  smiled  her  warm  white 
smile  that  had  never  an  equal  then  in  all  the  worlds,  nor  ever 
shall. 


Hanuman  hid  Sita’s  jewel  in  his  belt.  He  walked  round  her 
in  three  right-turning  circles,  bristled  up  his  fur  and  flew  off 
to  the  north. 

Hanuman  left  Lanka  behind  him.  He  flew  booming  along 
through  the  air  like  the  wind  through  a  canyon,  and  the  mon¬ 
keys  and  bears  waiting  on  the  seashore  heard  him  coming. 
They  ran  up  a  grassy  hillside  and  made  a  circle  holding 
hands,  and  Hanuman  landed  in  the  middle. 

“I  talked  to  her;  she’s  alive!”  Animals  encircled  Hanuman; 
they  brought  him  fruit  and  water  and  fresh  boughs  to  sit  on; 
they  came  up  smiling  to  touch  him;  they  sang  and  cheered. 

With  gold  bracelets  on  his  arms  and  wrists,  Prince  Angada 
embraced  Hanuman.  “No  one  is  like  you.  Can  we  go  get 
her?” 

“Don’t  do  that,”  said  Jambavan  the  Bear.  “We  were  only  to 
find  her.” 

“Just  leave  her  there?”  asked  Angada. 

Hanuman  said,  “You  usually  do  the  right  thing.  Prince.” 

Then  all  at  once  came  Angada’s  order — Return — and  the 
miraculous  monkeys  and  bears  leapt  from  that  hillside  and 
flew  home  to  Kishkindhya,  supporting  Hanuman’s  flight  by 
their  admiring  looks  and  glances.  Near  Kishkindhya  they  saw 


The  New  Moon 


217 


King  Sugriva’s  Honey  Park.  There  the  Monkey  King  kept  his 
finest  forest  honey  wines  under  guard. 

The  animals  smelled  ripe  warm  fruit  and  nectar  in  the  sun. 
They  looked  at  Angada  for  permission,  but  before  Angada 
could  answer  Hanuman  shouted,  “Let’s  go!  Follow  me!”  and 
landed  in  that  Wine  Forest. 

The  yellow  monkeys  and  the  sable  bears  said,  “All  the 
world  honors  Hanuman.  We’ll  follow  him  even  into  wrong; 
what  to  speak  of  perfectly  correct  things  like  this?” 

The  animals  descended  from  the  air.  Down  from  the  trees 
they  pulled  the  rare  and  ancient  honeycombs,  fermented  and 
dusty  and  venerable,  and  broke  them  open.  In  a  moment  they 
were  all  fearlessly  drunk,  staggering  and  lurching  along,  all 
talking  at  once.  The  monkeys  were  swinging  in  the  trees  and 
waving  their  tails,  and  the  bears  were  nodding  and  dancing. 

That  Honey  Park  was  guarded  by  the  elderly  peace-loving 
monkey  Dadhimukha,  who  lived  in  a  small  cottage  in  a  se¬ 
cluded  comer.  He  heard  people  breaking  his  trees  and  splash¬ 
ing  in  his  streams.  White-faced,  he  went  swinging  down 
through  the  trees  to  see  what  was  going  on,  and  came  to  a  mob 
of  bears  all  bristly  with  glee,  who  were  singing  and  imitating 
birds  and  thumping  their  feet  on  the  ground. 

Dadhimukha  dropped  from  the  trees  and  told  the  bears, 
“Stop  it!” 

They  laughed.  “We’ll  drink  to  that!” 

“Get  out!” 

“We  just  got  herel” 

Dadhimukha  sucked  his  teeth  dry.  Oh  yes?  He  furiously 
pulled  up  a  tree  and  swept  the  bears  away.  More  bears  came. 
Dadhimukha  struck  them  down  with  his  fists  before  they 
could  speak.  He  threw  them  here  and  there,  pulled  handfuls 
of  fur  from  their  coats  and  showered  them  with  insults  and 
blame.  But  they  just  laughed  and  kept  on  eating  great  gobs  of 
wild  honey.  Some  of  them  said,  “Catch  me  firstl”  and  ran; 
others  sat  there  and  said,  “Leave  us  alone,  help!” 

“Why  ask?”  yelled  Dadhimukha.  He  slapped  the  bears,  and 
they  didn’t  seem  to  feel  it.  Belligerent  drunken  bears  began 
side-arguments  among  themselves.  Still  more  bears  came. 
Some  of  them  started  to  weep  over  life,  and  others  with  stem 
authority  rebuked  them  for  crying  and  then  wept  themselves. 
Others  laughed  and  bumped  into  trees,  and  old  Dadhimukha 
was  swallowed  up  in  bears  and  chaos. 

Hanuman  whizzed  out  of  the  bushes.  He  had  orange- 
petaled  flowers  and  red  berries,  vines  and  blue-green  leaves 


218 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


and  buds  stuck  all  over  his  white  fur.  He  looked  like  Spring 
running  lightly  over  the  world.  “Father,  let’s  not  fight  over 
nothing — ” 

Dadhimukha  snorted.  “Repent,  world-famous  Hanuman!” 
He  kicked  Hanuman  and  sent  him  rolling  like  a  ball  into  an 
orchard.  Hanuman  banged  into  a  tree  and  juicy  fruits  fell 
down  all  over  him.  “Respect  your  betters,”  called 
Dadhimukha. 

Prince  Angada  came  running  up,  but  that  swift  old  mon¬ 
key  bent  down,  caught  the  prince’s  knees  and  threw  him 
over.  “Stop  right  there,  all  of  you!” 

But  it  was  pretty  hopeless.  Nothing  could  stop  the  pushing 
and  shoving,  so  Dadhimukha  flew  to  King  Sugriva.  Sugriva 
was  sitting  outside  Kishkindhya  cave,  with  Rama  and  Lak- 
shmana  on  their  hill,  awaiting  some  word  of  Hanuman. 
Dadhimukha’s  clothes  were  all  tom;  he  bowed  before  the 
Monkey  King  and  said,  “Lord  of  the  Forest 7” 

“Speak.” 

“Hanuman’s  army  has  fallen  on  your  favorite  ancestral 
forest  from  above.  I  tried  to  gently  reason  with  them — ” 

Sugriva  coughed.  “They’re  drinking  my  honey-wine?” 

“It’s  all  gone.” 

“I  forgive  them.”  Sugriva’s  tail  stuck  straight  up  with  joy. 
He  turned  to  Rama.  “He’s  found  her!  This  is  a  wonderful  re¬ 
turn.”  He  told  Dadhimukha,  “Why  make  such  a  fuss  over  the 
small  faults  of  my  children?  Arise,  calm  yourself  and  send 
them  all  here  to  us.” 

Dadhimukha  found  Prince  Angada  dozing  and  starting  to 
float  on  the  air  in  the  Honey  Park.  “The  King  awaits.  He’s 
with  Rama  on  the  hill;  go  to  him.” 

A  nimbly  sound  spread  through  the  wine  park  and  the 
bears  were  stirring.  A  wind  came  up.  Animals  ran  from 
Kishkindhya  Cave  to  get  a  sight  of  the  southern  search-party 
returning;  they  climbed  the  rock-rooted  trees  and  amid 
blossoms  and  leaves  they  waved  the  tag  ends  of  their  robes 
and  cheered. 

There  was  Hanuman,  flying  to  Rama’s  hill.  Whatever  the 
obstacle,  Hanuman  likes  strong  love  leaps  over  it  and  goes 
on.  The  high  forest  hill  danced  in  the  wind,  his  treetops 
swayed.  Wind  tossed  the  flowering  branches  together  in  col¬ 
lision  as  though  he  were  stringing  them  touching  on  a  gar¬ 
land-thread. 

Hanuman  landed  before  Rama  and  touched  his  hands  to 
his  head.  “She  lives!” 


The  New  Moon 


219 


Yellow  trees  like  lions’  manes  and  golden  crowns; 
Mangos  white  as  fame  like  dancers  on  the  hills: 

Love  has  weakened  you,  here  comes  the  swaying  wind. 
You’ve  run  out  of  fighting  Dharma; 

You’ve  slighted  your  warriors: 

What  will  you  reply  when  people  ask  of  Sit  a? 


Hanuman  and  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  Angada  and 
Sugriva  sat  on  a  wide  flat  stone,  in  a  smooth  meadow  high  on 
Prasravana  Hill.  The  other  animals  gathered  round  to  listen, 
and  with  a  glad  heart  Hanuman  said,  “My  Lord,  Sita  is  held 
prisoner  in  Lanka,  on  an  island  beyond  the  end  of  the  sea. 
She  is  within  the  city  walls  of  Lanka,  behind  locked  yards 
and  garden  gates,  in  an  Asoka  Grove  behind  the  lordly 
palace  of  the  Demon  King,  guarded  by  Rakshasis. 

“Ravana  has  threatened  her  death  if  she  will  not  submit  to 
him.  But  her  heart  carries  her  love  to  you;  her  thoughts  are 
the  well-bred  chariot  horses,  driven  by  her  spirit — Here  we 
will  go,  and  this  will  be  true.  She’s  true  to  you,  but  she  is  all 
alone,  like  a  tuneful  lute  without  a  player. 

“She  is  gifted  with  beauty.  I  saw  Ravana’s  bedroom,  and 
Sita’s  loveliness  makes  all  those  sleeping  consorts  seem  vile 
and  monstrous,  of  lurid  hue  and  form.  Her  dark  eyes  are  as 
wide  as  lotus  petals,  her  skin  is  golden,  her  breasts  are  close¬ 
touching  and  firm,  and  her  posture  bent  slightly  forward  by 
their  weight. 

"Her  waist  is  thin  as  a  swordblade,  her  brows  just  meet 
and  then  go  back  to  touch  her  ears,  her  hips  are  round  and 
smooth  .  .  .  and  her  soft  smile  .  .  .  though  she  is  there  with¬ 
out  any  ornament  at  all,  what  is  mostly  missing  for  her  is  the 
ornament  of  a  husband,  her  ornament  of  you.” 

Hanuman  looked  to  the  South  and  thought  of  Sita.  “I  gave 
her  your  ring  and  she  sent  you  this.”  He  gave  Rama  the 
wedding  pearl. 

“Emptiness,"  said  Rama.  “Echoes  and  emptiness  .  .  .  that’s 
all  I  have.” 

“Don’t  let  your  loss  make  you  lose  heart,”  said  Hanuman. 
“You  can’t  give  up  after  all  we’ve  done  for  you;  you  must 
bring  her  back  to  life  and  music!”  He  told  Rama  all  he  had 
seen  and  done  in  Lanka.  “Sita  herself  will  live  but  one  month 
inore  imprisoned.  She  says — I  love  you — and  tells  you  of  the 
time  you  sent  the  Brahma  weapon  against  a  crow,  and  of 


220 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


when  her  brow-mark  was  imprinted  upon  your  chest.  She 
kept  that  pearl  by  her  with  great  care,  and  I  took  it  for  you 
in  my  hands.” 

“I  begin  to  remember  our  love  and  happiness,”  said  Rama. 
“Tell  me  what  else  she  said.” 

“She  said,  ‘Hanuman,  blessed  are  you,  for  you  will  soon 
see  Rama  the  best  of  warriors.  Speak  to  him  so  he  will  act. 
Demons  cannot  withstand  Rama.  Let  his  life  return,  let  his 
heart  regard  me  again.  Speak  so  he  will  act.  Inspire  him  to 
kill  Ravana;  he  can  do  it.’  ”  Hanuman  fell  silent. 

“What  else?”  asked  Rama. 

Hanuman  twitched  his  tail.  He  stretched  his  fingers  and 
toes  and  his  white  fur  rose  on  end.  Then  he  said  to  Rama  in 
silent  mental  speech,  “Oh  Lord,  if  men  from  ignorance  still 
praise  you — sad  for  them,  it  is  a  lie.  If  your  spirit’s  broken  it 
was  weak  to  start  with.  Sita  was  fooled  when  she  wed  you, 
and  Shiva’s  long  bow  would  have  broken  anyway  just  sitting  in 
its  box.  Where  are  your  wits  that  you’re  not  suspicious  of 
despair?  Sita’s  never  thought  of  a  second  husband.  She  has  no 
one  else  but  you,  and  in  fear  you  left  her.  Like  a  coward,  like 
a  common  ordinary  stage-actor  you  traded  her  over  to  an¬ 
other.  You  told  her  to  go  to  him  though  you’d  long  loved  her. 
Why  do  you  serve  Ravana  as  best  you  may,  and  give  him  Sita 
for  his  pleasure?  You  forsake  her.  She  is  encircled  by  evil. 
You’ve  let  Ravana  throw  you  away  for  his  own  good.  Rama, 
do  not  be  a  meek  little  man,  fawning  and  unclean,  unholy  and 
afraid. . . .” 

Only  Rama  heard  those  silent  words  and  his  face  dark¬ 
ened.  “What  did  you  say?” 

“I  said  never  fear  to  love  well,”  said  Hanuman.  “If  you 
can’t  bear  it  who  will?”  t 

Rama  wept.  He  embraced  Hanuman  and  then  held  his 
shoulders  at  arm’s  length.  “It’s  alright.” 

Hanuman  said,  “Now  make  me  a  promise,  Rama,  an  un¬ 
failing  promise.” 

“What?” 

“Kill  Ravana!” 


THIS  CLOSES  THE 
BOOK  OF  BEAUTY. 

HERE  THE  WAR  BOOK  BEGINS. 


The  New  Moon 


221 


“Let  your  arrows  pierce  him  through,”  said  Hanuman. 
“Ravana  is  mighty  strong,  but  he  is  poor,  for  it  has  been  very 
long  since  he  stood  out  in  the  open  grass  under  a  green  tree 
he  did  not  own.” 

Sugriva  the  Monkey  King  said,  “Rama,  open-hearted 
people  like  you  suffer  more  in  sympathy  than  the  selfish  do. 
Your  heart  is  undefended.  Grief  undoes  good  fortune.  Good 
things  are  ready  to  happen,  do  not  prevent  them.”  He  swept 
his  hand  round  in  a  circle.  “Look,  here  we  all  are!  Make  a 
plan,  do  something  great!” 

Lakshmana  said,  “Who  approaches  close-guarded  Lanka  of 
the  Waves  and  returns  from  the  demons?  Who  even  ap¬ 
proaches?  We  cannot  cross  the  sea.  .  .  .”  He  looked  at  Jam- 
bavan.  “What  do  you  think?” 

“Get  out  of  my  way!”  answered  the  old  Bear  King.  He 
looked  at  Rama  with  a  deadly  gaze.  “Attack!  Don’t  think  and 
listen.  Act!  Call  out  our  animal  rage,  Rama,  release  our  vio¬ 
lence.  We  are  senseless  wild  animals — blood  all  over,  their 
blood,  our  blood — who  knows,  who  cares?  We  fight,  that’s 
all,  and  if  we’re  at  bay  we  fight  worse  than  ever,  we  fight  till 
we  die!  We  feel  no  pain  then,  and  when  have  you  ever  seen 
us  surrender?” 

“That’s  right,”  said  Sugriva.  “We  never  reason  and  think  if 
things  are  hopeless  or  not.  Rama-chandra  you  are  the  King. 
You  are  the  Moon;  does  the  Moon  go  out  because  dogs  bark 
and  howl  at  him?  Where  can  Ravana  hide  from  you?  Be 
brave,  do  what  you  think  best.” 

“I  will  stand  straight,”  said  Rama.  “I  will  never  bow  down 
before  sorrow  again.  Warriors  who  won’t  get  angry  can’t 
win.” 

Jambavan  the  bear  smiled  and  growled  low.  “Anger  is 
madness,  that’s  what  you  need  in  war.  I’ve  dealt  death — I 
smell  fear,  I  close  in  .  .  .  I’ve  felt  the  blood  spill  and  tasted 
it,  all  my  life.  .  .  .” 

King  Sugriva  said,  “Release  us  from  your  hold  and  let  us 
go.  Order  us.  We  will  gladly  enter  fires  for  you.” 

Rama  replied,  “We  will  cross  the  ocean,  and  once  beyond 
that.  Lord  of  Rivers  and  Streams,  we  will  lay  siege  to 
Lanka.” 

Rama  said,  “Let  Hanuman  tell  us  again  about  the  defenses 
of  Lanka,  for  he  has  seen  her  armies  and  walls.” 

Hanuman  answered,  “Beautiful  Lanka’s  wall  is  like  sun¬ 
shine.  There  are  four  heavy  wide  gates  facing  in  the  four 
directions.  Lanka  is  on  the  steep  brow  of  a  hill,  but  outside 


222 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


the  walls  there  is  enough  level  ground  to  fight.  All  the 
Rakshasa  soldiers  are  loyal.  There  is  a  moat,  and  at  three  gates 
drawbridges,  but  where  the  main  road  enters  at  the  North  the 
gate-bridge  is  immovable,  lined  with  a  railing  and  benches  of 
gold.  Set  on  the  walls  are  many  hostile  machines  and  engines 
to  repel  attack.  There  are  catapults  that  will  not  reveal  their 
aim  from  their  positions,  loaded  with  secret  weapons  bound 
in  cords  and  hooped  in  iron  that  when  fired  break  apart  into 
spikes  and  maces  and  kill  by  the  hundreds.  There  are  cannon 
that  spew  out  red  hot  nails  and  knives,  and  swords  strung  to¬ 
gether  on  barbed  chains,  and  burning  arrows  which  pursue 
their  target  though  he  twist  and  turn  to  flee.  There  are  patrols 
in  the  forests  and  many  ways  are  mined  with  traps  and  pit- 
falls.  Lanka  is  a  celestial  fortress,  a  joyful  city  of  heavenly 
beauty  taken  by  demons.  She  is  artificial  but  looks  natural; 
her  sentries  never  sheathe  their  swords;  she  is  the  jewel  mir¬ 
ror  of  arts  and  inventions  and  the  home  of  happiness  and 
comfort. 

“Against  us  are  Ravana,  and  his  son  Indrajit  who  is  in¬ 
visible  in  battle,  and  his  brother  the  sleeping  giant 
Kumbhakama.  General  Prahasta  desires  war  against  you;  his 
armies  are  calm  and  mindful  and  alert.  But  for  all  that, 
consider  Ravana  already  dead.  Rakshasas  can  overflow  the 
world,  the  Sun  can  go  backwards  across  heaven,  but  no  army 
can  frighten  old  Jambavan  and  his  bear  tribes,  or  resist  An- 
gada  and  our  people,  or  stop  Lakshmana,  if  you  will  yourself 
lead  us  to  save  Sita.” 

Rama  said,  “Tomorrow  Sita’s  birthstar  is  ascendant;  the 
planet  of  Death  will  be  in  conjunction  with  the  Moon;  we 
will  leave  for  the  South  at  midday,  at  the  fortunate  moment 
when  the  Sun  is  highest.” 

The  next  day  the  animal  armies  said  farewell  again  and 
left  their  families  behind  in  Kishkindhya.  They  began  to 
march.  The  brown  and  yellow  monkeys  went  first,  covering 
Earth  like  a  far-reaching  field  of  grain.  Angada  carried 
Lakshmana  on  his  shoulders  and  Hanuman  carried  Rama. 
Behind  them  came  Jambavan  with  his  dark  bears  and  white 
ones,  whose  faces  now  bore  war-marks  of  vermillion.  More 
and  more  apes  and  monkeys  followed  them.  King  Sugriva 
went  from  side  to  side  and  front  to  back,  urging  them  on, 
and  the  welcome  wind  blew  from  the  north  as  cool  as  the 
Moon  to  touch,  and  the  days  were  clear  and  bright. 

Advance  parties  made  a  roadway,  they  drained  swamps 
and  brought  water  to  dry  camps;  leveled  hills  and  filled  hoi- 


The  New  Moon 


223 


lows;  broke  boulders  into  gravel  and  cut  away  brush;  and  did 
all  their  work  under  lucky  signs,  at  good  hours  on  prosperous 
days.  In  three  days  they  first  began  to  smell  the  sea,  and  then 
sandalwood,  and  then  they  started  to  arrive  at  the  Malaya 
Hills.  Monkeys  and  apes  and  bears  crowded  onto  the 
mountains  by  straight  roads  and  side  paths.  They  went  down 
to  the  seashore  between  the  cliffs  overlooking  the  waves,  rais¬ 
ing  fine  clouds  of  colored  dusts  from  the  slopes  of  bright  metal 
ores,  waving  their  arms  as  they  talked  and  knocking  over  trees 
with  their  gestures. 

Rama  saw  the  deep-sounding  brimful  Ocean.  At  dusk  he 
took  his  bow  and  went  down  to  the  surf  with  Sugriva.  The 
crested  racing  waves  fell  over  the  rocky  coast,  and  broke  on 
the  round  white  stones  and  beaches  of  sand.  The  wind  blew 
onshore  and  carried  the  salt  foam  of  the  sea  onto  the  land, 
and  the  daylight  failed.  The  sea  became  like  the  sky  and  the 
sky  like  the  sea,  there  was  no  difference  between  them.  The 
stars  of  heaven  appeared  above,  and  from  far  within  the  sea 
sparks  of  light  showed  gleaming  out  from  the  Naga  castles 
under  water,  guarding  the  sea-doors  to  their  underworlds. 
Dim  grey  clouds  moved  under  one  corner  of  the  sky,  and 
grey  waves  ran  over  one  side  of  the  seawaters,  stirred  by  the 
winds.  Night  came,  and  the  Moon  rose  reflected  on  the 
Ocean’s  silver  breast.  Waves  caught  the  moonlight  and 
laughed;  they  rose  and  fell  and  came  forward  endlessly,  one 
after  another  forever. 

Rama  told  Sugriva,  “Camp  nearby  and  keep  a  watch  for 
strangers,  and  leave  me  here  alone.” 

Then  in  a  while  the  animal  talk  died  down  and  the  watches 
of  Night  began.  Rama  heard  the  silvery  waves — Who?  Who? 
Who  shall  cross  us?  He  thought,  “I  am  richly  gifted  with  mis¬ 
fortune.  When  will  I  ever  again  slightly  tilt  up  Sita’s  face  and 
when  will  we  embrace?  What  can  I  do?  I  am  a  lovesick 
stranger,  a  poor  man  all  alone,  wronged  and  begging  help.” 
His  hands  trembled — then  he  caught  himself,  he  remembered 
what  he’d  said — Dismay  and  sad  thoughts  I’ll  never  feel.  I  re¬ 
ject  you;  /  banish  you I 

Then  not  speaking,  Rama  touched  a  wave  of  the  Ocean 
with  his  hand  and  lay  down  with  his  right  arm  for  a  pillow, 
not  eating,  not  sleeping,  not  moving.  Ocean,  speak  to  me. 

The  Night  went  by,  the  light  of  dawn  appeared  and  the 
stars  were  going.  The  wind  diminished,  and  there  was  no  an¬ 
swer.  Rama  stood  and  strung  his  long  bow;  he  put  an  arrow 
on  the  bowstring  and  held  it  drawn  back  to  his  ear  and  said 


224 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


to  Ocean,  “Fools  mistake  patience  for  weakness.  Honor’s  for 
those  who  boast  and  victory  serves  great  heroes  who  bribe  the 
strong  and  attack  those  too  weak  to  fight!  You  would  disre¬ 
gard  anyone,  were  he  unarmed  and  quiet!”  The  arrow  flew 
hissing  and  tearing  into  the  waters.  Smoking  seashells  and  un¬ 
derwater  stones  flew  up  in  the  air. 

“Damn  you!”  Rama  brought  down  the  winds.  Loud  waves 
of  hesitation  rose  straight  up;  the  water  whirled.  Samudra  the 
wide-souled  Ocean  rose  from  his  dark  bed  below  and  sat  on 
the  waves  looking  at  Rama. 

Samudra  was  mild  and  peaceful  to  see.  His  dark  skin  was 
wet  like  a  cool  lapis  stone.  The  Water  King  wore  bright  gold 
bracelets  and  bands,  and  a  green  robe.  Seawater  poured  from 
his  long  white  hair  and  beard,  foaming  in  torrents  down  his 
smooth  chest,  carrying  a  flood  of  rolling  pearls  down  over  his 
shoulders. 

Sea-mists  and  clouds  were  behind  Samudra,  and  the  beauti¬ 
ful  rivers  of  the  world  swam  near  him  in  the  shapes  of  fair 
women.  The  Sea  Lord  touched  his  hands  and  bowed  his  head 
a  little  toward  Rama.  “I  am  the  sea.  This  is  another 
world.  .  . .” 

“Don’t  try  to  net  me  with  illusion,”  said  Rama.  “One  glass 
of  wine  has  a  lot  more  pleasure  than  all  your  tasteless 
waves.” 

“Oh  Rama,”  said  the  Ocean,  “the  worlds  are  made  of 
water;  it  is  my  eternal  nature  to  be  fathomless  and  uncross- 
able.” 

“You  are  very  large  and  know  not  my  power.  Let  us  by,  or 
dry  towers  of  dust  will  blow  through  your  bed  and  choke 
you.” 

“Oh  man,  I  drink  down  all  the  worlds  and  sigh.” 

The  sea  became  silent.  The  waves  died  and  the  air  was  still 
and  waiting.  There  almost  seemed  to  be  no  air  to  breathe. 
The  tides  stopped. 

But  only  for  a  moment.  Samudra  smiled.  “Blessed  be  you, 
Rama,  blessed  bel  I  am  immeasurably  old,  my  soul  is  wide  as 
my  waters.  What  is  wrong,  Rama?  Never  was  I  your  enemy 
but  only  your  friend.  Why  use  fear  on  a  friend?  The  Goddess 
Earth  and  myself.  Wind  and  Light — forever  do  we  four  keep 
our  nature  and  never  do  we  change.  Why  would  you  pass  me 
by?” 

“For  Love.” 

“Indeed,”  said  the  Ocean  Lord,  “my  heart  is  as  large  as  the 
sky  who  is  over  me.  I  will  help  you.  The  monkey  Nala  who  is 


The  New  Moon 


225 


with  you  is  a  son  of  Viswakarman,  and  he  was  bom  with  the 
imperfection  that  whatever  he  throws  onto  water  will  float 
and  not  sink.”  The  Ocean  King  smiled.  “I  will  support  on  my 
surface  any  foundation  Nala  lays  down.  Oh  Rama,  as  long  as 
you  wish,  for  you  I  will  be  bound  by  a  bridge.  .  . 
Samudra  of  the  Seas  vanished  back  into  his  own  depths. 

Rama  found  Nala  the  monkey,  and  Nala  said,  “Did  he  say 
that?  I  used  to  just  float  stones  for  funl  Why  then  I’ll  throw 
out  a  bridge.  . .  . 

“Get  everybody  to  help  me.”  Nala  set  to  work.  He  looked 
to  the  South.  He  looked  back  at  the  Malaya  Hills.  Then  he 
sat  in  the  sand  drawing  lines  for  a  long  time,  glancing  up  and 
out  at  Ocean,  looking  back  down  at  the  sand,  absorbed  in  his 
work  and  seeing  no  one  else  as  all  the  animals  gathered 
around  him. 

Nala  gave  his  orders.  First  the  animals  made  stakes  and 
lines  and  measuring  rods;  then  they  made  the  other  tools; 
then  they  collected  the  materials  from  the  hills.  Then  they  be¬ 
gan  to  build  a  bridge  that  would  be  a  hundred  leagues  long 
and  ten  wide  on  a  foundation  of  stones  and  boulders.  Over 
the  rocks  they  laid  down  a  roadbed  of  poles,  then  Nala  paved 
the  road  with  grass  and  wood. 

When  they  heard  of  that  bridge-building  the  little  people  of 
the  squirrel  tribes  came  to  help  Rama.  They  wet  their  fur  in 
the  surf  and  rolled  in  the  sand.  They  quickly  ran  out  onto 
Rama’s  bridge  and  shook  themselves,  and  the  sand  fell  into 
all  the  tiny  spaces  left  in  the  paving  and  made  it  firm. 

But  they  were  forever  underfoot.  Hanuman  scooped  them 
out  of  his  way  while  he  carried  big  stones  along.  The  squir¬ 
rels  ran  to  Rama  and  said,  “Master,  brutal  Hanuman  kicks  us 
and  hits  us  and  shames  us.” 

Rama  ran  three  of  his  fingers  down  their  backs  to  cheer 
them,  and  from  that  time  until  now  every  squirrel  in  the 
south  has  on  his  back  the  marks  from  the  fingers  of  Rama. 
The  squirrels  went  back  to  work  and  Hanuman  told  everyone 
else,  “Watch  your  step;  don’t  harm  the  little  tree  peoplel” 


The  Building  of  the  Bridge 


Do  not  let  the  ways  of  the  world 
Dismay  your  heart. 

Being  a  warrior. 


Lord  Rama,  on  the  day  after  Nala  began  that  bridge,  in 
Lanka  Ravana  called  his  council  of  noblemen  and  said, 
“Bring  your  minds  with  you  for  once.” 

When  they  had  assembled  Ravana  said,  “We  have  repaired 
the  damage  he  did,  but  yet  Hanuman  all  by  himself  invaded 
my  unreachable  city  and  will  return  with  Rama.  What  must  I 
do?  What  must  you  do?  The  superior  person  will  gladly  take 
good  advice  before  acting.” 

Those  empty-headed  Rakshasa  elders  replied,  “Yes,  we 
agree!”  They  said,  “Majesty,  you  rightly  rule  the  Universe. 
Everything’s  been  just  fine  so  far.  We  will  free  the  world 
from  monkeys.” 

Then  Vibhishana  stood  and  spoke.  “Rama  will  pardon  us  if 
we  return  Sita.  She  has  not  been  harmed.” 

“I’ll  have  no  more  of  thatl”  Ravana  was  as  angry  as  a  liar 
whose  word  is  questioned. 

Vibhishana  said,  “All  the  gods’  animals  are  running  looset 
They  are  building  a  bridge  and  plan  to  cross  the  sea  and  sur¬ 
round  Lanka.  You  want  war,  but  what  do  you  know  of  their 
strength?  What  protection  do  you  take  against  them?” 

“Are  you  trying  to  anger  me?”  snarled  Ravana. 

“Well,"  said  Vibhishana,  “to  tell  the  truth  I  don’t  have  to; 
it’s  an  angry  mind  that  won’t  understand  all  this.” 

“They  will  never  go  back  over  that  bridge!”  said  the 
Demon  King.  “I  find  nothing  to  fear  from  simple  animals. 
Have  you  no  shame  to  suggest  surrender?” 

“King,  no  one  else  dares  tell  you  the  truth;  you  have  no 
real  friends  left  but  me.  You  could  hide  in  the  veil  of  the 

226 


The  Building  of  the  Bridge 


227 


winds,  and  use  the  Sun  for  a  shield,  and  the  sky  for  a  wall, 
and  still  lose  to  Rama.  He  will  kill  you;  there’s  no  escape.” 

Ravana  said,  “What  do  I  care?  I  do  what  I  please!”  He 
motioned  with  his  hands — Sit  down,  you  have  finished. 

“No,”  said  Vibhishana.  Four  strong  armored  Rakshasas 
loyal  to  him  came  forward  and  stood  to  guard  Vibhishana, 
cradling  maces  in  their  arms,  facing  the  four  directions. 
Vibhishana  looked  around  the  royal  court  of  Lanka.  He  saw 
General  Prahasta  and  his  captains  of  the  demon  war-bands. 
Still  as  always,  priests  tended  the  palace  altar  to  each  side  of 
Ravana’s  high  throne,  setting  out  their  jars  of  curds  or  fire  or 
butter  or  rice,  gossiping  uselessly  in  the  comers. 

Vibhishana  said,  “I  blame  you  for  a  coward  long  loving 
evil.  You’re  a  sneak-thief — ” 

“Silence!” 

“What  will  you  hold  against  me?  How  can  you  stop  me? 
For  these  hard  words  I  deserve  your  praise.  Are  you  in¬ 
capable  of  reason?  Do  you  want  to  live  on  congratulations 
and  embraces  and  elegant  flattery?  For  the  second  time  I  warn 
you  to  give  back  Sita,  and  send  gifts  with  her.” 

"Do  you  think  I’ll  stop  and  change  my  ways  though  the 
whole  world  says  I’m  wrong?”  asked  Ravana.  “Kings  have 
nobility,  cows  have  milk,  and  kinsmen  have  envy  in  their 
hearts!  My  brother,  blind  with  selfishness,  would  betray  me! 
You  would  unfold  the  way  of  defeat.  It  truly  must  not  please 
you  that  I  am  Emperor  of  Creation,  and  for  myself  I  would 
rather  live  among  open  enemies  than  with  you  in  my  family.” 

“Open  your  eyes  and  mend  your  ways,”  said  Vibhishana. 
“Wake  up  and  do  right!  I  don’t  speak  just  to  talk;  I  have  for 
my  heart’s  purpose  the  rescue  of  the  Rakshasa  race,  but  I’ll 
not  go  on  repeating  myself  forever.  You  are  a  slave  and 
wrath  your  Master.  We  have  surely  been  through  this  all  be¬ 
fore  in  other  lives.  Consider  right  and  wrong.  For  the  third 
and  last  time,  give  her  back.” 

"Get  out!”  said  Ravana. 

Vibhishana  answered,  “Good  fortune  to  you,  now  I  go  far 
away.” 

Vibhishana  left  the  palace  with  his  four  knights.  They  put 
on  their  helmets  and  flew  across  the  sea,  north  to  Rama’s 
bridgehead.  Already  the  beginnings  of  the  bridge  struck  out 
like  a  line  parting  the  sea,  aimed  curving  at  Lanka,  pointing 
like  an  accusation  before  all  the  world. 


228 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Tm  not  an  actor  or  a  singer, 
Not  a  fair  woman  nor  a  clown; 
Then  what  have  /  to  do 
With  the  palaces  of  Kings? 


Sugriva  saw  Vibhishana  and  his  bodyguard  and  told  Rama, 
“We’ll  end  their  short  lives  today.”  But  Rama  said,  “Wait.” 

Vibhishana  stood  in  the  sky  and  looked  here  and  there 
with  his  dark-blue  crystal  eyes.  He  saw  Hanuman  and  beck¬ 
oned  to  him.  Hanuman  came  close  and  Vibhishana  said, 
“Ramal  I  take  Rama’s  protection,  I  take  the  true  King’s  shel¬ 
ter!” 

“Why  are  you  here?”  asked  Hanuman. 

“Ravana  rejects  my  words.  Except  for  that  I  could  save 
him.  It  would  be  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  give  Sita 
back.  But  now,  white  monkey,  I  must  try  myself  to  save  even 
a  part  of  our  race  on  Earth.” 

“Come  on  down.  I’ll  be  your  friend  as  you  were  mine.” 
Hanuman  led  Vibhishana  by  the  hand  to  Rama,  and  as  they 
went  the  monkeys  and  bears  drew  back  from  them.  But 
Vibhishana  smiled  at  the  animals,,  showing  his  handsome 
fangs,  and  swept  off  his  helmet  when  they  reached  Rama. 

Vibhishana  said;  “The  protection  of  Rama!  I  am  yours, 
may  you  be  my  safe  refuge  for  all  time.” 

Rama  said,  “No  fear  to  you  from  fearful  things.” 

Hanuman  said,  “Rama,  in  Lanka  this  Prince  Vibhishana 
saved  my  life  from  his  elder  brother  Ravana.” 

Vibhishana  said,  “I  will  help  you  when  I  can,  but  I  cannot 
fight  against  our  people.” 

Sugriva  the  Monkey  King  was  there.  He  said,  “He  came  to 
spy  and  kill  us  in  our  sleep.” 

“I  want  to  do  right,  that’s  all,”  said  Vibhishana. 

Hanuman  said,  “His  true  nature  will  show.” 

“I  don’t  believe  him,”  said  Sugriva. 

Hanuman  replied,  “King,  you’re  trying  to  make  me  mad 
again!  Withdrawing  from  Lanka  proves  his  wisdom.  Stop  for¬ 
bidding  things  and  saying  No  like  a  King.  Be  more  cheerful; 
like  an  animal  .  .  .  must  every  Rakshasa  choose  evil  just  to 
please  you?” 

“He’s  Ravana’s  brother  isn’t  he?” 

“Sugriva,”  said  Hanuman,  “this  is  only  because  you  have 
not  met  Ravana.  You  were  home  drunk  in  bed.  Therefore  in 


The  Building  of  the  Bridge 


229 


ignorance  you  can  talk  a  long  time  about  this  when  there’s 
really  nothing  to  say.  I  take  this  Vibhishana  for  my  own 
friend,  and  if  you  don’t  like  it . . 

Rama  said  very  evenly,  “I  will  fight  Ravana  but  not  the  in¬ 
nocent.  Vibhishana’s  face  and  gestures  and  words  are  open. 
He  has  done  no  wrong.  He  is  not  clever  or  busy.  One  must 
blame  the  blameworthy  and  favor  the  good  wherever  they  ap¬ 
pear.  Lowly  people  who  know  everything  may  follow  their 
suspicions,  but  when  someone  seeks  my  refuge  he  cannot  be 
slain,  he  will  be  saved  though  it  will  cost  my  life.” 

Vibhishana  said,  “I’ll  be  a  powerful  friend,  Rama,  I’ll  pay 
you  back  some  day. . . 

Never  murder  one  who  is  not  fighting, 

Nor  a  warrior  who  hides  or  flees  bewildered, 

Nor  any  one  wounded. 

Though  he  has  just  now  stopped  war, 

Though  his  cunning  hands  touch  over  a  proud  heart, 

His  betrayal  blocks  your  Dharma  like  a  frontier  barrier, 

A  wall  of  stones. 

The  monkey  King  said,  “Without  Dharma  there  is  no 
strength  nor  power.  This  is  no  wonder  for  you,  Rama.  Jaya, 
victory  to  you.  I  also  welcome  Vibhishana  as  an  equal 
friend.” 


On  the  first  day  Nala  built  his  bridge  out  for  fourteen 
leagues  over  the  sea.  The  second  day  he  built  twenty  leagues 
more,  on  the  third  day  he  added  twenty-one  leagues,  on  the 
fourth  day  twenty-two,  and  the  fifth  day  he  built  twenty-three 
leagues  more  onto  all  he  had  done  already  and  the  bridge 
touched  Lanka  Island.  Then  Rama  and  Lakshmana  discarded 
their  deerskins  and  unmatted  their  hair. 

It  was  a  slightly  curving  bridge  finished  in  grey  stone  and 
supported  by  arches  that  rested  steady  on  the  sea.  That  fifth 
evening  Vibhishana  and  his  four  knights  guarded  the  southern 
end  but  no  other  Rakshasas  appeared.  Early  the  next  morning 
the  animals  began  to  cross  the  wooden  pavement  from  the 
north,  running  so  swiftly  that  the  first  of  them  began  to  arrive 
on  Lanka  that  same  afternoon.  Sugriva  was  standing  on  the 
north  shore  ready  to  go  across  when  a  hawk  flew  in  from  the 
ocean  and  sat  on  the  branch  of  a  nearby  tree. 


230 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


That  hawk  was  Suka,  the  most  trusted  minister  of  the 
Demon  King.  Suka  said,  “Lord  of  the  Monkeys,  I  am  sent 
here  to  speak  with  you.  Listen  to  Ravana’s  words — Dear 
brother,  /  have  only  friendship  for  you.  Best  of  Monkeys, 
why  build  a  bridge  like  a  rail  of  anger  over  the  sea?  Do  me 
no  harm;  return  to  Kishkindhya  and  rule  the  forests  for¬ 
ever.” 

Sugriva  saw  Angada  stalking  that  hawk  from  behind  and 
answered,  “Why  tell  Ravana  about  our  little  bridge  and  dis¬ 
turb  him?  Just  don’t  pay  us  any  attention  and  we’ll  go  away 
. , .  after  all.  . . 

Prince  Angada  grabbed  Suka  out  of  the  tree  and  squeezed 
him  tight  in  his  paws.  Suka  gave  him  an  angry  look.  “Take 
care,  you  are  at  chance,  you  are  in  danger!  Kill  me  at  your 
own  peril — for  if  you  do,  the  fruit  of  the  countless  evil  deeds 
I’ve  done  from  the  night  of  my  birth  till  now — all  will  be 
yours!” 

“What’ll  I  do?”  asked  Angada. 

“Drop  him  quick!”  said  Sugriva.  Suka  flew  back  up  in  the 
tree.  Sugriva  told  him,  “Say  to  Ravana — You  have  killed  one 
old  vulture.  You  do  not  see  me  this  day;  you  do  not  know  I 
am  stronger  than  you.  Rama  rules  Earth  forever.” 

Suka  flew  home.  That  day  Hanuman  and  Angada  carried 
Rama  and  Lakshmana  over  the  bridge.  By  evening  Jam- 
bavan  and  Sugriva  and  most  of  the  animal  armies  had  all 
crossed  over,  and  on  the  Lanka  beachhead  they  sang  of  fame 
and  victory  in  their  camps  along  the  cool  wooded  streams,  and 
the  aloeswood  crackled  in  their  fires. 

The  next  morning  the  animals  climbed  Trikuta  Hill  and 
began  to  assemble  outside  Beautiful  Lanka,  on  the  western 
side  of  her  walls.  By  the  time  they  had  almost  all  arrived  it 
was  past  midday  and  those  golden  walls  were  sunlit.  Then 
frorp  the  battlements  the  Rakshasas  blew  blaring  shells  and 
glaring  horns  and  beat  their  drums.  The  animals  then  for  the 
_ first  time  knew  that  many  of  them  would  die  there,  and  fell 
silent  a  moment.  Then  they  yelled  back  twice  as  loud;  they 
roared  a  lion’s  roar  of  victory. 

Ravana  in  his  palace  spoke  to  Suka.  “Nobody  could  be¬ 
lieve  in  a  bridge  across  the  sea!  And  all  those  animals  unbe¬ 
lievable!  . .  .  but  send  someone  out  to  count  them.” 

“I’ll  send  two,”  replied  Suka.  He  called  the  faithful  spies 
Sardula  and  Sarana.  “Go  outside  the  walls,  count  the  enemy; 
find  out  their  plans  and  dreams,  and  return.” 


The  Building  of  the  Bridge 


231 


They  said,  “Victory  to  Ravana!”  Outside  Lanka  they  took 
monkey  shapes  and  mingled  with  Sugriva’s  army,  until 
Vibhishana  happened  to  glance  at  them.  Vibhishana’s  crystal 
blue  eyes  were  sharp-sighted,  and  he  kept  them  illumined 
with  black  kohl  dust  round  his  lashes.  He  could  see  clear  in 
shadowy  light;  he  could  see  a  still  black  ant  in  the  black 
shadow  of  a  black  rock  on  a  moonless  night.  He  could  have 
found  a  lost  hair  in  the  darkest  corner  of  a  lightless  basement 
vault. 

Vibhishana  saw  Sardula  and  Sarana  for  the  demons  they 
were.  He  snapped  his  right  fingers  three  times  and  broke  their 
disguises,  caught  one  under  each  arm  and  dragged  them  to 
Rama. 

Sarana  was  so  afraid  that  he  shrank  away  to  nothing;  he 
vanished  completely  and  was  never  seen  again  by  anyone 
anywhere.  Sardula  stood  alone  before  Rama,  despairing  of 
life  and  barely  able  to  breathe. 

But  Rama  only  said,  “If  you  have  discovered  all  you  came 
to  find  out,  go  safely  home.  If  you  have  missed  anything  see 
it  now,  Vibhishana  will  escort  you.” 

“No  thank  you,"  said  Sardula. 

Rama  said,  “Now  your  King  Ravana  may  use  against  me 
that  great  force  he  used  to  steal  my  wife!” 

“And  farewell,”  said  Sardula. 

Sardula  found  Ravana  on  a  high  balcony  overlooking  the 
ramparts  of  Lanka’s  wall,  facing  west.  The  Demon  King  said, 
“Why  are  you  pale,  did  they  catch  you?” 

“Alas,  I  am  covered  with  shame,”  said  Sardula.  “I  can’t 
count  them.  Some  are  still  at  the  bridge,  some  are  still  climb¬ 
ing  the  hill.  Sir,  Vibhishana  sees  through  us.” 

“And  you  call  yourself  a  spy!” 

“No  longer.  I  resign,  with  your  permission.” 

“Are  you  afraid?” 

“Well  no,  but  my  stomach  hurts!” 

“Yes,  you  may  go,  you  are  no  warrior,”  said  Ravana. 

Sardula  looked  at  the  King.  “I  will  point  out  and  name  their 
best  fighters  for  you,  before  I  go  to  live  with  my  wife  and 
family  in  the  Naga  lands  under  the  world." 

“Never  mind,"  said  Ravana,  “be  still.  This  goes  beyond  the 
making  of  a  report  and  the  declaration  of  this  and  that. 
Peace  be  to  you,  Sardula;  this  is  real.  What  you  can  see  from 
here  and  what  I  see  are  different  things,  and  I  am  master  of 
what  must  next  be  done.” 


232 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Then  Ravana  was  alone.  He  saw  the  broadshouldered  mon¬ 
keys  and  scowling  bears  climbing  uphill,  carrying  huge  rocks 
and  uprooted  trees.  He  looked  out  at  his  moat  and  thick 
walls.  He  saw  his  loaded  slings  and  firebombs.  And  he  saw 
the  animals  all  looking  up  at  him  with  their  ancient  eyes;  the 
ancient  eyes  of  the  animals,  the  first  friends  of  man  in  ages 
past.  .  .  . 

In  his  bedroom,  standing  by  the  back  door  to  the  Asoka 
Wood,  Ravana  summoned  his  two  magicians,  Lightning- 
Tongue  and  Thunder-Tooth,  and  said,  “By  spells  of  deception 
and  illusion  make  for  me  by  magic  the  severed  head  of 
Rama,  and  his  bow  with  an  arrow  set  on  its  string.” 

Thunder-Tooth  said  “Yes.”  Out  from  beneath  his  robes  he 
drew  a  bow  with  diamond  and  gold  on  its  back  and  many 
colors  on  its  belly,  strung  and  holding  a  golden  arrow  which 
was  marked — Rama. 

Lightning-Tongue  took  his  wand  from  his  belt  and  turned 
aside.  He  bent  down,  straightened  up,  and  held  out  in  his 
hand  a  gory  green  head,  bruised  and  dusty  and  stained  with 
dried  blood.  Ravana  rewarded  them  with  pearls.  He  took  the 
bow  and  told  Lightning-Tongue,  “Await  my  call.” 

Ravana  went  over  to  Sita  in  the  Asoka  Grove  and  said, 
“This  is  your  Lord’s  honored  bow  still  strung.”  He  snapped  it 
in  two. 

“Dear  Sita,”  said  the  Demon  King,  “Rama  arrived  on  this 
island  last  night  with  his  armies.  At  midnight  General  Pra- 
hasta  fell  upon  them  as  they  slept.  He  beheaded  Rama  with  a 
curving  broadsword;  he  turned  aside  a  little  and  fatally 
stabbed  King  Sugriva;  he  crushed  Hanuman  to  death  beneath 
an  elephant;  with  a  bloodwashed  axe  he  cut  off  Jambavan’s 
legs  and  broke  his  neck.  Prahasta’s  warriors  used  a  net  of  fly¬ 
ing  chariots  to  pull  the  traitor  Vibhishana  from  the  sky;  they 
left  Angada  rolling  in  the  dirt  and  tom  by  agony  and  arrows. 
Now  animal  corpses  cover  our  shores  and  litter  the  wooded 
hills  by  the  sea  and  float  drowned  on  the  red  tide.  They  lie 
hewn  and  mangled  in  caves  where  they  ran  to  hide  and  then 
to  die;  their  bones  are  broken,  their  sinews  severed,  their  ten¬ 
dons  tom  and  their  blood  spilled  out.  Dumb  and  speechless, 
stricken  and  badly  wounded,  Lakshmana  alone  ran  away 
and  fled  to  safety.  And  if  any  others  still  live  they  are  dying 
now.” 

Ravana  told  one  of  the  Rakshasi  guards,  “Call  out  from 
the  palace  that  cruel  Lightning-Tongue  who  brought  me 
Rama’s  head!” 


The  Building  of  the  Bridge 


233 


Ravana  said  to  Sita,  “Here,  I’ll  show  you.’’  Lightning- 
Tongue  approached  holding  that  head  of  illusion  by  the  hair. 
He  looked  at  Sita  and  slithered  his  long  forked  tongue  over 
his  thin  lips.  He  threw  Rama’s  head  down  right  at  her  feet, 
bowed  to  Ravana  and  swiftly  departed.  “Prahasta  killed  that 
mere  man  and  sent  these  relics  to  me.  See  for  yourself  the  fi¬ 
nal  sad  death  of  Rama  and  marry  mel” 

Rama’s  head  stared  up  at  Sita  with  dead  green  eyes.  She 
saw  the  familiar  brow,  the  long  dark-green  hair  tied  back 
with  a  war-cloth,  the  kind  mouth,  the  broken  emerald  war- 
earrings.  She  wept  piteously  and  said,  “You  foolish  man,  I 
was  really  your  death  and  never  your  wife.” 

Sita  sat  and  held  the  head  in  her  lap,  and  her  shining  tears 
fell  down  upon  it — You  died  to  save  me,  what  could  be 
worse?  Sita  began  to  let  go  of  her  life.  She  quietly  opened  her 
hand,  and  let  life  slip  and  fall  away  through  her  fingers. 

“Hey  Ravana!”  The  back  door  to  the  palace  banged  open, 
and  in  full  armor  General  Prahasta  came  swiftly  striding 
through  the  Asoka  trees  towards  the  Demon  King.  His 
bronze  armor  clanged,  his  sword  slammed  and  rattled  against 
his  iron-clad  legs,  he  waved  and  smashed  his  metal  arms 
against  his  sides — and  from  without  the  palace  wall,  from  the 
city  Sita  heard  the  deep  white-faced  drums  of  Lanka  pound¬ 
ing,  and  the  beating  of  the  brazen  gongs,  joining  in  one  after 
another  from  every  direction. 

“Victory!  Victory!  Excellent  success!”  shouted  Prahasta. 
“Aha,  it’s  War!"  He  cracked  the  fingers  of  his  steel  gloves 
and  smiled.  Elephants  were  trumpeting  in  the  city.  Lines  of 
lance-points  tied  with  colored  sashes  went  by  just  visible  be¬ 
yond  the  palace  walls.  The  gates  of  Lanka  swung  shut  on  dia¬ 
mond  pivots  and  closed  with  a  jarring  noise,  then  the  brass 
bolts  falling,  and  the  latch-guards  of  steel.  Chariots  clattered 
through  the  streets,  the  arsenals  and  armories  opened  their 
doors,  and  by  heavy  chains  the  three  drawbridges  of  Lanka 
were  raised  into  the  outer  walls. 

“Forgive  my  interruption,”  yelled  Prahasta.  “Did  you  see 
them?  The  sea  is  a  hundred  leagues  across  and  rough  with 
huge  breaking  waves,  yet  Rama  has  crossed  it  like  a  village 
cow-trail.  Rama  has  come!” 

The  ground  of  Lanka  shook.  Ravana  smiled  at  Sita  the 
best  he  could.  “You  must  excuse  me,  Princess,  there  seems  to 
be  something.  .  .  .”  Ravana  and  the  long-handed  General 
Prahasta  turned  and  left  the  Asoka  park,  and  when  Ravana 


234 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


had  gone  Rama’s  head  and  bow  melted  and  disappeared.  On 
the  big  city  walls  the  fire-machines  were  ignited.  Shooting 
over  the  sky  appeared  the  gleaming  reflections  of  many  colors 
thrown  from  squadrons  of  polished  Rakshasa  shields  and 
golden  chariots,  a  dire  luster  like  the  raging  wildfires  of  sum¬ 
mer. 

Sita  was  still  bent  over  weeping,  so  blinded  by  tears  she 
could  not  see  that  the  false  bow  and  head  were  gone.  The  old 
Rakshasi  Trijata  came  beside  her  and  said,  “Daughter  of 
Earth  you  are  no  widow.  What  you  hear  is  our  call  to  arms. 
Now  the  warriors  will  gather  to  discover  why  they  are 
called — Rama  is  right  now  in  a  field  outside  Lanka.  He  is 
alive!” 

Sita  could  not  understand.  “Kill  me,  let  me  fall  by  my  hus¬ 
band.” 

Trijata  reached  down  and  lifted  Sita’s  head,  so  quickly  that 
her  teeth  snapped  together.  Trijata  was  angry;  her  bare  toes 
made  the  grass  curl  and  smoke.  Disbelieve  it!  Disbelieve  it! 
Disbelieve  it! 

When  Trijata  said  those  words  three  times  her  speech 
broke  through  and  reached  Sita’s  heart,  like  welcome  rain 
falling  on  the  hard  dry  fields  of  Earth.  “Listen — ”  said  Tri¬ 
jata.  “ — are  you  listening?” 

“Yes _ ” 

“My  every  word  is  true — Rama  knows  himself  and  cannot 
be  surprised  asleep,  nor  can  Prahasta  so  easily  kill  those  ani¬ 
mals  as  Ravana  pretends.  Look,  that  head  and  bow  are  gone. 
They  are  wrong  and  untrue,  they  were  an  illusion  spread 
about  you,  a  momentary  glamor  and  a  passing  spell.” 

“What?”  Sita  was  bewildered. 

“Rama  advances  on  our  city  with  a  great  army  of  wood¬ 
land  animals.  They  may  well  deny  itl  Ravana  has  gone  to  a 
war  council.  I  take  refuge  with  the  Sun  who  makes  our  days 
and  gives  our  joys  and  grief;  I  swear  by  the  Sun  who  goes 
round  the  world  like  a  dancing  horse  round  a  circle — this  is 
Truth!” 

Trijata  continued,  “Out  in  the  streets  everyone  is  armed. 
Weapons  are  a  sign  of  fear  made  visible,  and  we  are  afraid. 
Hear  the  horses  neigh  while  their  hair  stands  on  end,  hear  the 
archers  calling.  Our  bloodthirsty  soldiers  flourish  their 
weapons  and  shake  them  at  the  sky,  to  bully  the  heavens  and 
terrify  the  serene  planets  and  stars  and  frighten  the  clouds. 
But  this  time  they  don’t  fight  gods!  The  creaking  high  saddles 


The  Building  of  the  Bridge 


233 


are  tied  upon  the  elephants’  backs,  the  horsemen  mount,  the 
jangling  chariots  are  harnessed.  Like  water  that  pours  into  the 
sea,  the  Rakshasa  warriors  rush  here  from  all  sides,  mailed 
demons  of  wondrous  forms,  all  doomed  to  die. . . 

A  Rakshasa  patrol  swept  by  overhead  armed  with  swords 
and  triple  spears,  their  cowls  and  capes  crackling  and  snap¬ 
ping  like  whips  in  the  air  behind  them,  their  shadows  tearing 
through  the  Asoka  leaves.  Trijata  smiled  and  said  again, 
“Lakshmi  embraces  you.  Your  sorrow  will  be  demolished. 
Dark-eyed  Sita,  I  can  take  any  message  to  Rama.” 

Rama  and  Lakshmana  are  your  help, 

Not  long  will  you  dwell  in  this 
Dreadful  demon  city. 

I’ll  wait  for  my  beloved, 

He  is  not  far  away. 

My  Rama  is  not  far  from  me, 

I’ll  wait  out  the  time. 

“Find  out  instead  what  Ravana  plans  to  do  with  me,"  said 
Sita. 

Trijata  became  a  wasp  and  flew  to  the  windows  of  Ra- 
vana’s  courtroom.  She  returned,  took  back  her  real  form  and 
said,  “He  won’t  free  you,  Rama  must  first  kill  him.” 

In  Ravana’s  war-meeting  was  the  old  Rakshasa  Malyavan, 
who  with  his  two  brothers  had  asked  the  heavenly  architect 
Viswakarman  to  build  Beautiful  Lanka  long  ages  before.  He 
sat  there,  and  he  thought  he  had  some  warning  to  give  Ra¬ 
vana. 

As  Malyavan  had  grown  older  and  older  he  had  come  to 
look  more  and  more  like  a  man.  He  had  lost  his  fangs  and 
teeth,  and  he  trimmed  the  claws  on  his  slender  fingers  till 
they  looked  like  nails.  His  short  hair  was  white;  he  was  very 
thin  and  dark;  he  dressed  simply  in  a  white  cloth,  with  no  or¬ 
nament  and  no  colored  borders.  Malyavan  had  eaten  but  one 
bowl  of  rice  a  day  for  many  years;  he  had  seen  his  brothers 
killed;  he  slept  very  little.  He  sat  against  walls  and  trees  out¬ 
side  and  smiled  with  his  eyes  open  and  his  head  leaning  back 
in  the  sun.  He  told  ancient  stories  to  children  and  awake  at 
night  he  watched  the  streets  of  Lanka. 

And  as  the  world  grew  dark  in  the  evenings,  Malyavan  had 
many  times  lately  seen  a  withered  man  with  his  head  shaven 


236 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


going  along  the  streets,  wearing  a  brown  worn  shroud,  cov¬ 
ered  with  dust  and  ashes,  coughing  a  dry  cough,  peering  into 
the  doorways  of  the  demon  mansions  with  his  hollow  eyes 
and  grinning  like  a  skull.  Beautiful  Lanka  had  been  built  for 
the  asking,  once  she  had  been  young  and  now  Time  walked 
her  streets.  How  had  those  dirty  monkeys  and  bears  come  so 
far  to  hurt  her? 

Malyavan  slowly  got  to  his  feet  in  Ravana’s  courtroom.  He 
stood  and  saw  all  the  assembled  officers  and  warriors  sitting 
silent,  staring  straight  ahead  and  awaiting  orders.  Then  for  a 
moment  a  memory  of  war’s  blind  anger  changed  Malyavan’s 
face,  and  as  though  he  were  young  still,  he  looked  at  them  all 
with  a  proud  and  evil  look  that  faded  right  away  again.  Ra- 
vana  watched  him  as  he  looked  around. 

Malyavan  tried  to  remember  what  he  ought  to  say.  In  one 
of  the  open  windows  behind  Ravana’s  throne  was  a  wasp  that 
was  really  Trijata.  Beside  the  wasp  stood  a  blue-and-green 
bird  eavesdropping  who  was  really  a  Rakshasa,  one  of 
Vibhishana’s  four  warriors,  staring  Malyavan  right  in  the  eye 
with  his  head  tilted  to  one  side.  There  was  something  impor¬ 
tant  to  say  but  Malyavan  had  forgotten  what.  It  seemed  to 
him,  all  this  had  happened  once  before.  He  smiled  a  wrinkly 
smile  at  the  king  and  raised  his  open  hands  before  him — 
Blessings  upon  you,  1  will  go.  Malyavan  shuffled  away  and 
left  the  room  without  speaking. 

When  the  war-meeting  had  ended  that  afternoon, 
Vibhishana’s  courtier  returned  to  him  and  said,  “Ravana  be¬ 
lieves  himself  already  victorious.  When  we  attacked  heaven 
we  had  altogether  fewer  warriors  than  now  attend  each  gate 
of  Lanka.  The  least  of  Ravana’s  soldiers  is  as  strong  as  ten  ele¬ 
phants,  and  every  warrior  now  paces  behind  the  wall  of  Beau¬ 
tiful  Lanka  saying — I  will  go  first.” 

Vibhishana  went  to  Rama  and  said,  “Even  if  he  knows  the 
difference,  Ravana  will  still  rather  do  wrong  than  good.  He 
will  fight.  There  stand  the  Rakshasas,  golden  in  their  armor 
on  the  walls,  like  a  second  wall  on  top  of  the  first  one.” 

Rama  said,  “When  we  fight  let  no  animal  change  shape, 
and  with  your  four  knights  be  with  us  in  Rakshasa  forms.” 

Then  Rama  told  Prince  Angada,  “Go  as  my  messenger  and 
ask  Ravana  once  more.” 

Angada  flew  into  Lanka.  He  saw  Ravana  walking  the  walls 
and  like  a  fiery  golden  ball  with  the  sunlight  in  his  golden 
fur,  Angada  dropped  from  the  sky  beside  Ravana  and  was 


The  Building  of  the  Bridge  237 

surrounded  by  dark  demons  pushing  forward  like  heavy 
clouds. 

“Who  are  you?”  asked  Ravana. 

“I  am  Vali’s  son,”  said  Angada,  “and  these  are  Rama’s 
words — Too  long,  Ravana!  Give  back  Sit  a,  or  bid  farewell  to 
your  friends  and  come  out  to  me,  I  am  waiting  to  kill  you.” 

"Ah,”  said  Ravana,  “I  will  not  blow  out  like  a  light  from 
windy  words.  When  I  win  this  battle  I  will  at  last  finally 
impress  Sita  and  she  will  love  me  back.”  Ravana  smiled  ten 
wide  smiles  and  his  twenty  eyes  laughed.  “Angada,  you  are  a 
good  messenger,  you  added  nothing  and  you  left  nothing  out 
Won’t  you  stay  to  dinner?” 

“Ravana,  all  your  wealth  is  wasted,  what’s  the  use  of  being 
rich  if  you  won’t  spend  your  gold  to  do  good  for  other 
people?” 

“Someone  said  that  already,”  replied  the  Demon  King. 
“Come,  make  yourself  at  home,  I  will  protect  you  here.” 

Angada  said,  “Majesty,  I  hope  you  don’t  think  I  believe 
that  for  one  moment,  do  you?  You  think  it’s  so  superior  to  be 
evil!  You  think  it  makes  you  better /” 

“You  are  yet  only  a  rash  child,  a  meal  time  visitor,  a  pleas¬ 
ing  presence;  but  keep  it  up  and  one  of  these  days. . . 

Angada  tossed  his  head.  “Shall  we  all  put  out  our  eyes?  Is 
the  Sun  dark,  because  some  men  are  blind?” 

Ravana  frowned.  “You  are  speaking  like  a  fool!  We  could 
all  die  at  any  time — ”  He  bent  down  and  thrust  his  ten 
faces  suddenly  snarling  close  before  Angada.  His  lips  were 
drawn  back  and  his  moustaches  quivered;  his  wide-rimmed 
red  eyes  were  aflame  and  veins  were  throbbing  on  his  brows 
crowned  by  diadems.  A  deep  low  growl  came  from  his  ten 
throats. 

Angada  was  faint  with  fear.  His  heart  froze.  The  blood 
drained  from  his  face  and  he  couldn’t  breathe.  Ravana  said, 
“Now  you  are  caught  in  the  meshes  of  war;  there’s  no  way 
out  of  this  for  you!  Fools  have  sharp  eyesight  and  they  stay 
forever  on  the  good  Dharma- Wheel,  but  the  wise  do  not  see 
so  well.”  He  reached  out  for  Angada.  Who  the  dark  Demon 
King  seizes  in  his  grip,  who  he  holds  in  anger  dies  crushed 
and  cursed,  he  never  lives! 

Then  Ravana  just  touched  Angada.  He  brushed  him  away 
like  a  little  piece  of  cloud,  and  off  Angada  floated.  . . . 

Ravana  called  after  him,  “Tell  Rama — Grief  to  you!  Men 
are  vile,  may  this  war  increase  your  pain  and  bring  joy  to  the 
demons!” 


238 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Angada  recovered  his  strength  and  backed  away  into  the 
air.  He  returned  to  Rama.  And  in  Lanka,  Ravana  rang  all 
the  brass  and  iron  bells,  the  great  bells  of  Lanka  rung  with 
swinging  logs.  From  the  ringing  mouths  of  bells  came  .  .  . 
daring  . . .  defiance.  .  . . 

The  crimson  Sun  set  behind  Sunset  Hill  at  the  western 
edge  of  the  Earth,  beyond  the  sea  horizon.  The  sky  grew  pale 
lavender  while  still  holding  light,  like  the  color  of  old  silver. 
Then  it  was  dark  and  the  stars  came  out. 

Angada  said,  “Ravana  will  not  listen;  he  cannot  clear  his 
mind.” 

Rama  answered,  “Then  where  will  he  escape  while  I  live?” 


The  Siege  of  Lanka 


This  perilous  Life  is  a  drop  of  water, 
A  hanging  raindrop  on  a  lotus  leaf; 
Soon  it  falls  back  in  the  pond  below 
And  is  lost. 

Indrajit, 

In  war  or  peace 
You  are  falling  away. 


Early  the  next  morning  Ravana  was  leaning  on  the  wall  over 
the  northern  gate  looking  out,  leaning  on  his  twenty  arms 
spread  side  by  side  by  side  along  the  ramparts,  under  the 
shadow  of  a  royal  white  umbrella.  He  patiently  watched 
Rama  and  his  army  while  two  demons  fanned  him  with  white 
chowry  fans  made  from  yak-tails  and  trimmed  with  peacock 
feathers.  He  wore  white  robes  like  fame  and  glory,  adorned 
with  rubies  red  as  blood;  and  for  a  long  time  he  quietly 
watched  the  animals. 

Ravana  saw  the  golden-haired  Sugriva  fathered  by  the  Sun; 
the  black-and-brown  bear  Jambavan;  Angada  with  his  long 
fine  yellow  hair,  pacing  with  his  arms  folded,  yawning  in  an¬ 
ger  and  slapping  his  tail  on  the  ground;  the  white  monkey 
Hanuman,  come  back  again  to  Lanka,  strong  and  gracious; 
and  beside  him  Rama  of  tangled  hair  and  dark  green  skin, 
holding  a  bow  whose  arrows  can  slice  the  Earth  or  pierce  the 
sky — Rama  King  of  the  World  whose  anger  is  Death,  sur¬ 
rounded  by  animals  all  willing  to  die  for  him. 

Sugriva  told  Rama  to  stay  behind  the  army  with  Hanuman. 
Lakshmana  walked  back  and  forth  in  front  of  the  animals, 
his  skin  like  pure  gold,  his  lips  swollen  with  wrath,  not  easy 
to  pacify.  Aaah  .  .  .  the  Rakshasas  on  the  Lanka  walls 
sighed  like  the  long-traveling  wind  storming  in  from  off  the 
sea.  They  flaunted  their  glorious  war-banners  on  shiny  golden 

239 


240 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


flatstaffs.  And  back  from  the  monkeys  and  bears  came  an¬ 
other  deeper  sigh,  deep  and  loud  as  weights  of  water  pouring 
through  a  broken  sea-wall.  Aaaaa. . . . 

Then  at  the  same  instant  Lakshmana  pointed  at  Lanka 
with  his  bow  and  Ravana  raised  a  mace  over  his  head.  In 
Lanka  the  Royal  Artillery  Commander  waved  his  sword.  Bat¬ 
teries  of  Rakshasa  artillery  roared  fringed  with  fire;  the  mon¬ 
keys  and  bears  closed  ranks;  the  big  north  gate  of  Lanka 
opened;  and  the  youngest  third  of  the  Demon  Army  came 
out  to  attack,  led  by  Prahasta  on  a  war-chariot. 

But  the  demons  could  not  win  in  daylight.  Bears  broke 
their  cars  and  killed  them  with  their  own  axles  and  flagpoles; 
long-armed  apes  caught  them  and  pressed  them  to  death; 
monkeys  flattened  them  with  uptom  trees  and  cliffs  and 
chopped  them  up  with  captured  axes  like  firewood.  At  noon 
Prahasta  ordered  a  retreat,  and  the  Rakshasas  poured  back 
into  Lanka,  and  the  huge  northern  gate  snapped  shut  like  a 
trap.  They  waited  for  darkness. 


Then  Night  fell,  increasing  the  strength  of  the  demons.  At 
dusk  the  War  Chief  Prahasta  and  King  Ravana  were  on  the 
wall  again,  and  the  darkness  grew.  Pale  silk  flags  and  stan¬ 
dards  crowned  Beautiful  Lanka  with  all  their  colors  fast-fad¬ 
ing  and  moving  in  the  twilight  wind.  Up  on  the  wall  the  air 
from  the  city  below  carried  the  scents  of  incense  and  the 
murmur  of  Rakshasa  prayers  to  welcome  Night.  Demon  sol¬ 
diers  were  everywhere  kneeling  before  fires  built  in  the 
streets,  stringing  their  bows,  tying  on  their  armor,  and  then 
putting  on  over  that  many  garlands  of  flowers  blessed  with 
mantras  of  safety.  And  on  the  battlefield  outside  the  animals 
built  many  fires  to  light  the  ground. 

Ravana  said,  “Let  the  young  warriors  rest.  Ann  the 
veterans.” 

‘That’s  what  we’re  doing.” 

From  a  stone  flask  Ravana  poured  out  a  glass  of  soma 
juice  somehow  stolen  from  heaven  and  gave  it  to  Prahasta. 
General  Prahasta  drank  it  down  and  ate  up  the  glass  along 
with  a  dried  string  of  red-hot  peppers.  He  crunched  the  glass 
and  chewed  on  the  pepper  seeds  and  smacked  his  lips.  Ra¬ 
vana  backed  away  from  him  a  little. 

Prahasta  said,  “I’ll  go  with  them.  I’ll  drive  way  the 
animals  and  isolate  Rama.  I’ll  entertain  my  friends  with  his 


The  Siege  of  Lanka  241 

flesh  I”  Little  flames  began  to  come  from  Prahasta’s  mouth, 
licking  over  his  lips. 

He  touched  his  hands  together  and  bowed  his  head  and 
saluted  Ravana.  Ravana  said,  “Be  careful.”  Prahasta  came 
down  from  the  wall  and  tied  back  his  flowing  hair  and  got  on 
his  chariot. 

General  Prahasta’s  chariot  had  two  wheels  covered  by 
sheets  of  gold,  that  turned  like  rolling  suns  and  rumbled  like 
the  clouds.  Steel  scythes  were  mounted  on  the  axle  hubs,  and 
a  long  iron  spike  pointed  forward  from  the  harness  pole  that 
was  all  painted  with  crescent  moons.  Sixty-four  mottled  green 
serpents  drew  that  car,  harnessed  by  unsolvable  knots;  the 
chariot  bristled  with  racks  of  swords  and  harpoons;  it  was  ar¬ 
mored  with  bullhide  warshields  and  metal  plates. 

Things  were  loaded  all  over  Prahasta’s  chariot.  He  had 
slaughter-sledges,  butcher  knives  and  meat-hooks,  chains  and 
claws  and  clamps;  he  carried  bombs  and  rockets  and  poisons 
and  appalling  jealousies;  delusions  and  bad  dreams,  diseases 
and  ambitions,  many  crises  and  confusions.  Wrong-way  road 
signs  and  false  maps  of  mirages  were  tied  on  with  broken 
promises.  Small  iron  wheels  spun  in  the  air,  their  rims  strik¬ 
ing  sparks  against  flint-stones  and  whirling  in  flames  in  the 
Night.  There  were  lights  and  shadows  and  lying  smiles, 
prisms  and  colored  lenses  and  crooked  brass  mirrors  and 
baleful  green  cats’-eyes.  There  were  puzzles  with  essential 
parts  missing  and  loaded  dice  and  heartbreak  and  many  first 
loves  lost. 

It  was  quite  a  sight  to  see!  From  a  high  flagstaff  in  the  cen¬ 
ter  of  the  car  flew  Prahasta’s  flag  showing  a  serpent  of  emer¬ 
alds  and  a  clawing  lion  of  topaz  stones  sewn  onto  blood-red 
silk.  From  that  central  flagpole  a  defensive  net  covered  the 
chariot  like  a  tent,  made  of  glowing  diamonds  closely  tied  on 
blue  steel  threads,  woven  tightly  with  spun  strands  of  adamant, 
guarding  Prahasta  as  he  fought  and  leaving  small  hidden 
ways  for  him  to  shoot  his  arrows. 

It  was  fantastic.  Still,  Prahasta  was  a  great  archer;  he  had 
never  turned  back  from  a  fight  on  Earth.  Prahasta  flexed  his 
twisty  bow  and  rolled  his  eyes.  He  leaned  forward  and  told 
his  charioteer — Take  me  to  War!  The  chariot  leapt  forward 
protected  by  hatchetmen  in  winged  demon  helmets.  Again  the 
north  gate  opened,  and  General  Prahasta  led  out  from  Lanka 
the  elite  veterans,  and  Grand  Army  of  the  Rakshasas.  The 
teeming  soldiers  followed,  riding  and  shouting,  bells  tied  on 
their  arms  and  legs,  mounted  on  chariots  drawn  by  running 


242 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


scorpions  and  toads,  riding  on  the  backs  of  porpoises  and 
camels  and  giant  goldfish,  on  lizards  and  pigs  and  huge  blue 
rats. 

The  Rakshasas  laughed  in  anger  and  blew  ten  thousand 
out-of-tune  shells.  They  came  onto  the  battlefield  and  charged 
at  the  monkeys  and  bears.  The  animals  fled  back  between 
their  fires  and  the  demons  cried — Easy!  Easily  done! 

But  it  was  a  trick.  In  one  motion,  all  of  them  together,  the 
animals  threw  great  stones  out  from  behind  their  own  lines, 
over  their  own  warriors,  over  Prahasta,  and  aimed  them  to 
fall  in  front  of  the  following  Rakshasas.  They  made  a  road¬ 
block,  a  strong  stone  wall  that  cut  off  Prahasta,  and  when 
demons  tried  to  fly  over  it  the  animals  beat  them  back  with 
trees,  and  closed  in  behind  the  General’s  chariot. 

Arrows  long  as  chariot  axles  flew  from  Prahasta’s  bow. 
None  missed.  He  struck  five  or  seven  animals  with  one  single 
arrow,  or  hit  one  monkey  with  seventeen  arrows,  or  pierced  a 
bear  with  twenty-seven  or  with  ninety.  The  monkeys  and  apes 
and  bears  gave  way  and  drew  back  from  Prahasta,  all  but 
Nala  the  bridge-builder. 

Nala  alone  faced  Prahasta’s  chariot.  He  dodged  a  thousand 
flights  of  arrows  and  rockets  that  flew  at  him.  Then  he  just 
stood  still  and  let  Prahasta  shoot.  A  big  brass  club  bounced 
off  Nala’s  head,  but  it  only  killed  a  mosquito  who  was  about 
to  bite  him.  Nala  stood  among  the  falling  missiles  and  arrows 
with  his  eyes  closed  like  a  proud  bull  standing  in  a  rainstorm. 

Then  Nala  opened  his  eyes,  narrow  in  rage.  He  watched 
every  move  Prahasta  made.  The  heavy  Rakshasa  chariot 
turned  and  bore  down  on  him.  There  was  noise  like  peals  of 
thunder;  the  ground  shook;  Nala  could  see  every  armor  plate, 
every  diamond,  every  stone  in  the  war-flag,  every  mirror 
flashing  lights.  He  almost  felt  the  serpents’  breath. 

Then  quicker  than  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  Nala  threw  his 
weight  onto  one  foot  and  Trikuta  Hill  lurched  off-center  and 
Prahasta’s  chariot  overturned.  The  serpents  who  had  drawn 
the  car  slipped  their  harness  and  dove  into  the  Earth.  The 
chariot  splintered  to  bits,  Prahasta’s  bow  broke,  his  protective 
net  fell  down,  and  suddenly  the  Demon  General  was  standing 
free  from  the  wreckage,  holding  a  mace  under  his  arm,  spit¬ 
ting  fire  from  his  mouth  and  rubbing  his  hands  together  in  a 
bath  of  flame. 

Prahasta  swung  his  mace  in  both  hands  and  struck  Nala 
twice;  swinging  out  he  hit  his  shoulder  and  on  the  back-swing 
gave  a  glancing  blow  on  Nala’s  hip.  Nala  pulled  one  of  the 


The  Siege  of  Lanka 


243 


golden  wheels  off  the  broken  chariot.  When  Prahasta  raised 
his  arms  to  strike  again  with  a  downwards  blow,  Nala  threw 
the  wheel  in  under  his  guard.  He  struck  Prahasta  over  the 
heart.  He  knocked  the  mace  from  his  hands  and  drove  the 
life  out  from  his  body. 

When  they  saw  Prahasta  killed  that  midnight,  the 
Rakshasas  bent  back  like  tall  trees  in  a  windstorm;  they  tore 
loose  their  hair  in  shame,  and  returned  leaderless  to  Lanka, 
looking  down  and  not  speaking.  On  the  war-field  west  of 
Lanka  Prahasta’s  chariot  was  smashed;  it  lay  bent  and  smok¬ 
ing  like  a  dead  bolt  of  thunder  fallen  from  heaven.  The 
charioteer  was  dead.  Prahasta  lay  on  his  back,  terrible  to  see. 
His  remorseless  eyes  were  open  and  from  his  mouth  little 
flames  still  darted  out  between  his  teeth  that  were  burned 
black  by  his  fury. 

Nala  stood  wounded  over  Prahasta,  one  arm  hanging  bro¬ 
ken  and  blood  on  his  leg.  Rama  approached  him  carrying  a 
torch.  As  Rama  came  near,  Nala  knelt  and  bowed  to  him. 
Once  kneeling  he  was  too  exhausted  to  rise,  but  looking  up  at 
Rama’s  face  his  eyes  still  glittered  and  glowed  like  the  eyes  of 
a  cobra  just  struck  a  blow  with  a  rod,  spreading  wide  hi$ 
hood. 


The  monkeys  and  bears  carried  their  dead  up  the  hillside 
of  Trikuta  and  laid  them  in  a  forest.  All  the  demon  arrows, 
stone-sharpened  and  hardened  in  fires,  were  removed  from 
the  dead  and  wounded,  and  broken  and  burned. 

The  demons  also  left  many  dead  behind  them  killed  by  the 
claws  and  teeth  of  animals,  but  to  conceal  his  losses  Ravana 
from  within  Lanka  spirited  those  corpses  away  into  the  sea. 
Prahasta’s  body  was  gone  without  a  trace. 

In  the  city  Ravana  called  his  minister  Suka  and  said,  “One 
must  make  his  own  good  fortune  wherever  he  goes.  Six 
months  have  passed — awaken  my  brother  Kumbhakamal” 

The  giant  Kumbhakarna  slept  for  six  months  after  every 
day  he  was  awake.  He  lay  stretched  out  on  his  back  inside  a 
huge  one-room  mansion,  the  largest  building  in  Lanka.  Suka 
told  the  demons  in  the  kitchen  to  start  Kumbhakama’s  break¬ 
fast,  and  with  many  servants  holding  torches  and  lanterns  he 
went  to  the  long  giant  house.  Cooks  arrived  driving  carts  full 
of  steaming  rice  and  vats  of  wine  and  crisp  roast  buffalo,  and 
Suka  opened  the  great  doors  to  let  the  scent  of  food  inside. 
Kumbhakarna  didn’t  stir.  Suka  entered.  He  fought  the 


244 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


windy  push  and  pull  of  Kumbhakama’s  breathing  and  drew 
near  his  ear.  Kumbhakama’s  hair  and  beard  were  six  months 
wild;  his  hairs  were  like  young  forest  trees,  and  when  he  was 
awake  and  felt  like  hunting,  that  giant  would  tie  a  boulder  to 
each  hair  and  go  stand  among  his  prey  and  shake  himself, 
and  crush  his  victims  under  stones. 

Suka  reached  in  his  robe,  pulled  out  two  big  brass  cymbals 
and  smashed  them  together  by  Kumbhakama’s  ear. 
Kumbhakama  yawned,  and  his  monstrous  throat  looked  like 
a  red  mine-shaft  leading  down  to  Hell.  A  team  of  eighteen 
trained  elephants  ran  in  through  the  door,  up  Kumbhakama’s 
side  and  across  his  chest;  there  they  made  a  line  and  sprayed 
his  face  with  cold  water. 

Suka  kept  battering  and  banging  his  cymbals,  and  Kum¬ 
bhakama  awoke.  Trainers  called  the  elephants  back  just 
in  time.  Kumbhakama  sat  up,  opened  his  eyes,  reached  out¬ 
side  for  a  vat  of  wine,  and  drank  it  down  and  sighed,  “Ah,  it 
is  full  Night!” 

The  food-wagons  drove  in,  and  Suka  stood  quietly  at  a 
safe  distance  until  Kumbhakama  had  eaten.  Then  he  ap¬ 
proached  and  said,  “Prince,  General  Prahasta  has  been  killed 
in  war.  Lanka  is  surrounded  by  Rama  and  his  armies.” 

“Rama,  Rama?”  asked  Kumbhakama.  “What  god  is  Rama? 
. . .  never  mind,  I’ll  help  you.” 

Suka  replied,  “Here  in  Lanka  you  alone  sleep  happily, 
knowing  nothing  of  our  fate.  Rama  is  a  man,  and  his  war¬ 
riors  are  monkeys  and  bears  from  across  the  sea.  Our  soldiers 
have  been  twice  driven  from  the  field,  and  Ravana  wants  you 
at  the  palace.” 

“No  fear,”  said  Kumbhakama,  “be  calm.  Behold  the  mag¬ 
nified  evils  of  being  awake  and  subject  to  reason.  My  only 
law  is  dreams.  .  .  .”  He  bent  his  head,  went  out  the  tall 
doorway  and  washed  his  face  in  a  lake. 

As  Kumbhakama  fully  awoke,  he  became  so  dark  and 
menacing  that  he  seemed  to  soak  up  all  the  light  from  Suka’s 
torches  and  from  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  by  a  sudden  fan¬ 
cied  dimness  in  his  courtroom  Ravana  knew  his  brother  was 
coming.  Rakshasas  lined  the  streets  to  the  royal  palace  and 
called  up  to  Kumbhakama — Don’t  step  on  these  fragile 
temples.  Houses  are  there,  here  stand  soldiers. 

After  a  few  steps  Kumbhakama  was  near  the  palace.  He 
sat  outside  near  Pushpaka  chariot,  where  he  would  have 
room  to  talk  with  Ravana.  The  Demon  King  came  outdoors 


The  Siege  of  Lanka 


245 


and  saw  his  little  brother  blotting  out  the  sky,  and  ran  to 
meet  him  with  ten  happy  smiles. 

Ravana  said,  “Scatter  my  enemies  like  a  strong  wind!” 

Kumbhakarna  asked,  “What  have  you  done  wrong  while  I 
slept  peacefully?” 

“I’m  at  war  with  Rama  because  I  took  his  wife  Sita,”  an¬ 
swered  Ravana.  “His  animals  have  killed  our  warriors  who 
were  never  before  defeated.” 

“Give  her  back,"  said  Kumbhakarna. 

“But  I  am  in  love  with  her,”  said  Ravana. 

“A  tremendous  mistake.  Stop  yourself.” 

“But  cast  the  blame  where  it  belongs,  it’s  not  my  fault  she’s 
so  good-looking  and  easy  to  see!  No  one  in  any  world  is  like 
Sita,  but  she  won’t  get  into  my  bed." 

“Best  of  Kings,”  said  Kumbhakarna,  “here  you  are  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  waking  world  of  impermanence,  of  suffering  and 
unreality.  Those  are  the  animals  of  Lord  Narayana,  and  this 
is  the  death  of  the  Rakshasas.” 

“I  won’t  believe  it,”  said  Ravana.  “What  I  don’t  like  I 
don’t  hear!” 

“Oh,  let  alone  the  animals,  Rama  can  himself  defeat  you 
all  alone.  Do  some  good  before  you  die.  They  are  eager  to 
kill  you;  why  won’t  you  make  peace  with  them?” 

“Not  for  fear  of  all  the  worlds!” 

“Majesty,”  said  Kumbhakarna,  “after  you’ve  done  this 
thoughtless  deed  full  of  flaws  and  holes,  then  you  call  on  me. 
You’ve  begun  at  the  end  and  ignored  the  beginning." 

“What  do  you  know  about  it  anyway?”  asked  Ravana. 

“I  know  forgetfulness,  and  sleep  ...  as  a  child  falling 
asleep  .  .  .  what  I  knew  then  years  ago,  as  I  fell  asleep,  I  still 
know.  Forget.  Sleep  and  forget  her.  .  .  .” 

Ravana  rubbed  his  eyes.  “Yes,  I  am  tired  and  spent — ”  But 
then  he  shook  his  heads,  took  a  deep  breath  of  the  night  air 
and  sighed.  “But  I  have  lost  myself  in  longing.” 

“Your  entire  education  was  a  waste,”  said  Kumbhakarna. 
“For  nothing  did  you  read  the  holy  Veda  and  throw  your 
heads  into  the  fire  when  we  lived  in  the  high  Himalya 
Hills." 

“Well,  it’s  done,  isn’t  it!  Why  must  you  tell  me  about  the 
aftermath  of  evil?  If  I’m  wrong  I  need  you  to  save  me  all  the 
more.  Ah,  if  you  could  only  see  her,  like  an  idol  of  gold,  the 
very  handwork  of  Maya  himself. .  . 

‘There’s  no  greater  wrong  than  stealing  another’s  wife,” 
said  Kumbhakarna.  “Lord  of  Night,  what  else  but  a  harvest 


246 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


of  misfortune  could  follow?  You  have  many  ladies  in  your 
own  house;  be  happy  with  them.  Enjoy  in  peace  your  honors 
and  kingdoms.  Keep  for  a  long  time  your  wealth;  preserve 
your  life.  Return  her  to  Rama  and  get  more  sleep.  A  King  is 
the  root  of  his  people’s  happiness,  and  if  he  is  wrong  their 
lives  are  in  danger  and  their  nation  will  die.  Your  ministers 
cannot  take  this  to  heart,  they  do  not  serve  you  well.  They 
plot  to  kill  you.  They  do  not  fear  your  anger.  Majesty,  those 
two  men  Rama  and  Lakshmana  are  the  flame  and  the  wind 
meeting — will  no  one  tell  you  this  except  me?  I  will  kill 
Vibhishana  for  not  caring  to  prevent  you  doing  this.” 

“Vibhishana  did  try  to  stop  me,”  said  Ravana,  “and  when 
he  failed  he  went  over  to  Rama.  He’s  out  there  on  the  field 
right  now.” 

“Now  he  was  right  to  do  that,  and  surely  it  was  wrong  of 
you  to  force  him  to  go.  Give  back  Sita.  You  have  no  gift  of 
protection  against  men  and  animals.  . .  .” 

“She  is  my  beloved.  .  .  .” 

“And  I  am  your  friend,”  said  Kumbhakama.  “Listen,  I 
have  an  idea.  Take  Rama’s  form  by  magic,  go  to  Sita,  and 
she  will  willingly  love  you.” 

“No,  I  can’t,”  said  Ravana.  “The  transformation  would 
have  to  be  complete;  I’d  have  to  take  on  all  Rama’s  virtues  as 
well  to  fool  her,  and  then  I  could  do  no  wrong,  I  couldn’t  lie 
to  her  and  say  l  was  someone  I  wasn’t.  Help  me  to  cure  my 
sorrow.  In  my  mind  I  am  sure  of  your  victory!” 

Kumbhakarna  smiled.  “Then  they  must  first  kill  me  to  get 
at  you!  Dear  brother,  have  a  good  time,  do  as  you  please.  Be 
merciful  while  you  may  and  think  no  more  of  Rama.” 

Ravana  was  very  happy;  he  beckoned  for  his  warriors  and 
told  Kumbhakarna,  “Consider  well  your  own  strength  and 
theirs,  do  not  go  out  alone.” 

But  Kumbhakarna  said,  “I  want  no  helpers.  Everyone  here 
who  has  been  awake  and  kept  silent  about  your  careless  love 
is  your  fawning  enemy.  The  simple  truth  is  that  Rama  and 
the  animals  have  outwitted  you  all;  they’ve  built  a  bridge 
while  you  sat  around  saying  it  couldn’t  be  done!  Let  these 
others  help  you  feather  your  conceits,  but  I  alone  will  kill 
Rama  tonight  and  drink  his  blood!” 

Ravana  felt  reborn.  Kumbhakarna  smiled  at  him  again  and 
went  back  the  way  he  came  to  put  on  his  war-clothes.  But 
though  he  seemed  in  good  humor  Kumbhakarna  thought  to 
himself,  “Dharma  is  the  root  of  all  good  fortune,  and  you 


247 


The  Siege  of  Lanka 

have  uprooted  Dharma;  the  happiness  of  others  is  light  for 
the  spirit  but  you  have  darkened  the  worlds.” 

Then  Kumbhakama  put  sympathy  aside;  he  put  his  heart 
into  the  stone  age.  He  donned  his  armor  of  bronze  and  his 
helmet  of  gold.  The  chains  of  his  belts  were  heavier  than  the 
chains  that  raised  the  drawbridges  of  Lanka;  his  bracelets 
were  like  the  metal  tires  on  chariot- wheels;  his  garlands  of 
flowers  were  as  long  as  a  day’s  journey. 

When  Kumbhakarna  had  dressed  he  drank  down  two  thou¬ 
sand  vats  of  war-wine,  and  from  his  long  house  he  took  out 
his  black  iron  spear  decorated  with  animals  inlaid  in  gold. 
When  Kumbhakama  touched  it,  deadly  blue  fires  burned 
round  the  spear-point  like  the  fires  at  the  birth  of  Time,  blaz¬ 
ing  for  a  moment  large  as  a  funeral  pyre.  Kumbhakama 
walked  to  Lanka’s  wall  and  over  the  western  gate  the 
Rakshasas  raised  his  flag,  a  black  banner  hung  with  crimson 
flowers,  showing  the  Death-Wheel  of  oblivion,  a  giant  wheel 
sewn  on  it  in  golden  thread. 


On  the  battlefield  that  Night  Rama  could  see  the  bearded 
Kumbhakama,  dark  and  startling,  visible  behind  the  high 
walls  like  walking  Death.  He  asked  Vibhishana,  ‘‘Who  is 
that?” 

“My  brother  Kumbhakama  has  awakened,”  answered 
Vibhishana.  “He’ll  make  one  mouthful  out  of  our  whole 
army.  He  is  the  very  crown  of  our  cruelty  and  the  banner  of 
our  strength.  Did  he  not  sleep  so  long  he  would  by  now  have 
eaten  up  all  Life  on  Earth.  If  he  can  reach  them,  he  will 
scrape  up  your  animals  and  swallow  them  like  little  grains  of 
rice.  .  .  .  But  tell  the  monkeys  and  bears  that  this  is  an 
uplifted  war-engine,  a  huge  machine;  for  if  they  know  he  is  a 
living  being  they  will  die  of  fright  at  the  thought,  whether  he 
touches  them  or  not,  and  we  will  swiftly  lose  this  war.” 

"I’ll  send  them  to  the  back.”  Rama  summoned  Sugriva  and 
told  him,  “Withdraw  from  the  field.” 

“No,”  said  the  Monkey  King.  “They  say  that  the  gateway 
arch  to  Kumbhakama’s  house  rises  so  high  that  every  noon¬ 
day  the  Sun  must  pass  under  it  on  his  way  around  the  Earth. 
They  say  that  giant  is  so  heavy  that  he  draws  in  the  flood 
tides  when  he  walks  near  the  sea.  But  people  talk  too  muchl 
Why  should  we  move  aside?  Why  give  way,  leaving  you  be¬ 
hind  us?” 

Kumbhakama  stepped  over  the  wall,  swinging  his  mon- 


248 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


strous  arms  in  anger.  Like  a  pillar  of  light,  his  spear-shaft 
caught  the  torch-beams  of  Lanka  on  its  golden  orna¬ 
ments.  Kumbhakarna  saw  the  monkeys  and  bears  and 
thought,  “Animals  like  these  were  always  the  innocent  orna¬ 
ments  of  our  gardens.  Rama  is  the  cause  of  this  war;  I  will  kill 
Rama  and  end  it!”  He  turned  in  Rama’s  direction  and  cried 
out  his  horrible,  unnatural  war-cry,  a  shuddering  sound,  so 
low  and  deep  it  could  be  felt  through  the  ground,  and  yet 
shrill  and  piercing,  and  getting  louder — 

And  that  cry  alone  broke  the  formations  of  the  animals. 
They  fell  unconscious,  or  lay  trembling  and  unable  to  move, 
or  ran  to  hide  in  quiet  places,  not  looking  back,  and  a  curtain 
of  dust  rose  from  their  feet  running  in  panic. 

Kumbhakarna  took  a  long  step  towards  Rama,  and 
beneath  his  foot  Earth  lurched  and  swayed  like  a  swing.  The 
animals’  war-fires  spilled  and  rolled  burning  over  the  land. 
Prince  Angada  tried  to  stop  the  fleeing  monkeys  and  bears. 
“Think  of  the  King,  think  of  your  good  name  and  famel 
Your  wives  will  scorn  you — ” 

Still  they  ran  past  him — Life  is  deart 

“Sound  an  alert!  Return!” 

But  each  animal  thought,  “He  is  after  me!”  In  an  instant 
the  army  had  fled.  But  Hanuman  came  from  somewhere  and 
stood  quietly  beside  Angada,  and  they  saw  Sugriva  not  far 
away,  and  Jambavan  the  sullen  Bear  King  had  stood  his 
ground.  But  between  Rama  and  Kumbhakarna  there  was 
only  Lakshmana. 

Then  from  where  he  stood  Hanuman  jumped  hard  and 
high  at  Kumbhakarna  and  bit  a  piece  out  of  his  ear. 
Kumbhakarna  whirled,  very  fast,  and  struck  Hanuman  down 
with  his  great  spear.  But  that  blow  broke  the  iron  shaft,  and 
as  Hanuman  fell  stunned  Kumbhakarna  threw  aside  the  piece 
he  still  held  and  advanced  on  Rama  unarmed. 

No  one  remained  except  Lakshmana,  but  his  arrows  could 
not  penetrate  the  stiff  coily  hair  that  covered  Kumbhakarna’s 
body  wherever  his  armor  did  not.  Kumbhakarna  looked  away 
down  at  Lakshmana  and  said,  “You  also  are  dead,  when 
Rama  dies!”  Then  he  stepped  over  him  and  quickly  advanced 
on  Rama. 

Rama  took  three  steps  backwards  and  aimed  an  arrow  with 
bent  knots  like  thunderbolts.  He  released  it;  it  flew  and  struck 
Kumbhakarna  in  the  chest,  right  through  his  armor. 
Kumbhakarna  paused  and  stood  still,  and  blood  poured  from 
his  wound. 


The  Siege  oj  Lanka 


249 


That  wound  alone  was  fatal,  but  his  hatred  for  Rama  kept 
Kumbhakama  alive  and  his  murderous  heart  did  not  fail.  He 
cried  out — /  am  not  Vali  the  monkey  shot  in  the  back ;  I  am 
Kumbhakama  poised  over  you! 

Rama  shot  a  straight-flying  arrow  with  a  broad  razor  head 
and  cut  off  Kumbhakarna’s  right  arm,  which  fell  crushing 
trees  and  rocks.  Still  Kumbhakama  kept  coming,  he  yelled — / 
tear  Earth  apart  and  pull  down  stars;  l  fall  on  you  like 
Doom! 

Rama  cut  off  his  left  arm.  It  fell  into  the  sea  and  bruised 
the  whales,  and  Kumbhakama  shouted — No  one  can  slay  me; 
no  one  can  stop  me! 

Again  Rama  twice  drew  back  his  bow,  and  with  two  thirsty 
arrows  cut  off  Kumbhakama’s  legs.  The  giant  fell  only  a  few 
bows’-lengths  from  Rama.  Still  he  managed  to  move,  some¬ 
thing  carried  him  on,  and  his  mouth  opened  and  closed — Let 
all  Creation  see  the  might  of  Kumbhakama  awake,  and 
tremble! 

Then  with  one  final  arrow  Rama  beheaded  Kumbhakama. 
The  giant  head  rolled  downhill  into  the  sea  and  sank  to  the 
bottom.  It  was  near  the  hour  of  dawn  and  Rama  stood  alone 
against  the  sky.  For  a  few  moments  he  kept  shooting  his 
gold-covered  arrows  up  through  the  air  and  into  Lanka,  and 
the  snap  of  his  bowstring  struck  terror  into  the  Demons’ 
hearts.  With  golden  arrows  Rama  was  scattering  the  Night. 
The  sky  lightened  behind  Lanka.  The  stars  faded,  caught  in 
the  skies  of  heaven  and  defeated  by  the  eastern  Sun  rising  all 
in  flames.  Soon  Rama  stood  in  sunlight  and  unstrung  his  bow. 


When  he  heard  that  Kumbhakama’s  life  was  lost,  the  hot 
fumes  of  anger  filled  Ravana’s  heart.  He  stood  on  the  wall 
and  saw  his  brother’s  body  and  limbs  blocking  the  fields  out¬ 
side  Lanka.  Smoke  swirled  out  of  his  ten  mouths  and  hung  in 
the  air  round  his  heads  like  a  dismal  shroud. 

The  old  Rakshasa  Malyavan  came  and  stood  beside  him  at 
sunrise,  and  Ravana  said — Truly  how  has  Rama  done  this? 

Malyavan  answered,  “He  did  it  with  glorious  arrows  light¬ 
ing  up  all  the  directions  of  Earth,  arrows  washed  first  with 
gold  and  then  with  blood.” 

“Grandfather,  as  you  look  at  me  I  am  defeated  although  I 
seem  alive.  All  is  truly  forever  chance  and  change.” 

Malyavan  said,  “Like  a  mirror  gleaming  through  from 


250 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


within  a  black  velvet  bag,  we  may  sometimes  glimpse  Reality 
shining  here  and  there  when  it  takes  us  unawares.” 

Ravana  said,  “Once  when  I  was  here  at  home,  the  cautious 
Wind  blew  cool  from  touching  the  waters;  the  waves  of  the 
surf  stepped  lightly;  the  careful  warm  sunlight  was  never 
burning  hot;  the  Moon  paled  from  dread  when  I  went  outside 
into  my  gardens.  At  my  command  trees  blossomed  and 
clouds  poured  rain  and  the  sea-tide  stopped.”  Ravana  sighed. 
“But  now,  when  talking  the  name  Rama  comes  out  in  my 
speech.  I  see  his  face  when  I  close  my  eyes.  Monkeys  have 
bridged  the  sea,  and  stones  float  for  them  unfairly,  against 
the  natural  laws,  and  what  never  yet  happened  in  the  world 
has  happened  here!  .  .  .  This  sad  peril  is  all  my  fault.  I  have 
banished  Vibhishana  who  was  my  conscience,  and  my  young 
brother  who  loved  me  is  dead.  Where  does  Kumbhakarna  go 
all  alone?” 

“He  is  in  the  bright  heaven  of  warriors  killed  in  war,”  said 
Malyavan.  But  he  could  not  console  the  King,  and  he  walked 
slowly  away  and  left  Ravana  alone. 

Ravana  hung  down  his  heads  and  wept  for  a  long  time. 
Then  he  said,  “What  have  I  to  do  with  Empire?  What  shall  I 
care  now  for  Sita?  I  must  avenge  you,  Kumbhakarna.  If  I 
cannot  kill  Rama,  then  Death  is  my  good  fortune  and  this 
life  is  useless  to  me!" 

Then  a  voice  behind  Ravana  said,  “Oh  King,  banish  sor¬ 
row!” 

Ravana  turned  and  looked  into  Indrajit’s  quiet  eyes.  “My 
son!” 

Indrajit  said,  “I  shall  make  my  sacrifices  to  the  Fire.  Sire, 
be  happy;  drink  your  wines  and  sleep.  Enjoy  all  pleasure,  for 
your  enemies  are  already  dead  and  Sita  is  about  to  become 
yoursl” 


The  Invisible  Warrior 


Do  not  complain  about  how  heaven  turns  above. 
For  heaven  will  endure  long  enough  without  you. 

I  am  all  this, 

All  this  Life; 
l  am  all  this. 


That  same  fell  Indrajit,  able  to  assume  shapes  at  will,  stood 
there  on  Lanka’s  walls  in  the  form  of  a  golden  young  man. 
His  hair  was  gold  and  his  eyes  were  flecked  with  all  the 
colors  of  gold.  His  skin  was  gold.  He  wore  a  golden  war-robe 
and  a  golden  belt  and  thin  gold-leather  shoes.  He  hid  behind 
himself  every  enchantment  and  he  was  beautiful  to  see. 

Ravana  said,  “I  am  in  a  deep  and  narrow  pit,  with  steep 
walls,  with  no  place  to  grasp  them  anywhere  .  .  .  and  no  way 
out.  .  .  .” 

“Father,  I’m  whoever  I  want  to  be.”  Indrajit  knelt  to  Ra¬ 
vana  on  one  knee,  he  touched  together  his  hands  and  said — I 
am  Fire  in  the  dry  grass. 

“Now  there’s  a  thought!”  Ravana  was  happy  as  a  man  high 
on  a  clear  hill  on  a  springtime  morning,  with  his  love  beside 
him. 

“Majesty!”  Indrajit  rose  and  pointed  to  Rama  far  away. 
“He  does  not  know  me,  so  he  comes  against  us.  Why  does  he 
stir  the  sweetly  sleeping  fire?  What  shall  I  do  for  you  on  my 
invisible  chariot  unswerving  as  the  Truth?” 

“Just  kill  Rama  and  Lakshmana,  that’s  all.” 

“Yes!”  said  Indrajit.  “Though  my  fire  is  an  illusion,  it  will 
burn;  the  water  will  drown,  it  is  no  more  false  than  Death  it¬ 
self.” 


Indrajit  went  outside  Lanka  to  his  hidden  grove  and  built  a 
smokeless  fire  on  his  altar.  He  raised  a  vessel  of  clear  butter 

251 


252 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


to  his  head.  The  fire  burned  in  seven  tongues  of  flame  all 
playing  about  in  the  heat-waving  air — one  tongue  black  and 
one  deep  red  and  one  starting  to  smoke;  one  swift  tongue, 
one  sparkling,  one  threatening,  and  one  having  all  brilliant 
forms  within  it. 

Indrajit  took  a  sip  from  the  bowl  of  butter.  He  poured  it  in 
the  fire  and  quickly  stepped  back.  The  flame  streamed  up  in 
golden  splendor  when  he  fed  it.  Lord  Brahma,  l  have  won 
from  you  one  hundred  and  eight  kinds  of  illusion;  I  have  won 
a  quiver  of  arrows  that  never  run  out,  and  an  invincible  bow, 
and  charms  bringing  darkness  and  ignorance,  and  the  power 
of  invisible  flight,  and  an  aerial  chariot  ever  victorious.  Give 
me  my  many  prizes. 

Up  out  from  the  red  flames  rose  Indrajit’s  dazzling  fire- 
born  chariot  drawn  by  four  tigers,  a  fire-hued  war-car  deco¬ 
rated  with  the  golden  faces  of  demons  or  of  deer.  It  flew  a 
red  flag  showing  a  lion  of  green  with  sapphire  eyes,  a  banner 
hung  with  gold  bell-bracelets  all  around.  It  bore  a  bow  and 
a  quiver  of  arrows  of  crooked  ways,  vaned  with  vulture 
feathers. 

There  were  all  Brahma’s  boons  given  Indrajit  for  freeing 
Indra.  The  cruel  Indrajit  smiled.  You  shame  me.  Lord.  Oh 
Brahma,  your  life  endures  while  /  exhale  one  breath! 
Then  Indrajit  got  onto  his  tiger  chariot  and  dressed  himself  all 
in  bows  and  arrows  and  swords  and  lashes  and  hammers,  and 
tied  back  his  hair,  and  whatever  he  touched  turned  all  to  gold. 
He  wrapped  himself  in  illusion  and  spread  enchantment 
around  himself  with  a  wave  of  his  arm,  and  vanished. 

On  the  battlefield  Vibhishana  frowned.  He  shaded  his  blue 
eyes  and  looked  up  into  the  blue  morning  sky,  where  a  few 
small  white  clouds  had  gathered.  He  told  Rama,  “Indrajit  ap¬ 
proaches  us  invisibly.  I  cannot  see  him  unless  I  know  just 
where  to  look;  even  Brahma  cannot  see  him.  For  combat,  he 
has  called  his  chariot  forth  from  the  fire,  and  while  he  stays 
on  that  car  he  cannot  lose  a  fight  to  anyone.  To  Indrajit  now 
the  thunder  of  heaven  is  but  a  whisper  and  Death’s  dread 
noose  a  bit  of  string.  Your  army  are  deer  sent  against  a  lion; 
there  is  nothing  he  cannot  do.” 

Clouds  spread  over  the  sky.  From  within  them  Rama  and 
the  animals  could  hear  the  creaking  of  Indrajit’s  chariot- 
wheels  and  see  the  flashing  of  his  gold  weapons.  They  heard 
the  flag-bells  ringing  and  the  four  tigers  growling — then  there 
was  a  sharp  noise  from  the  sky  like  iron  cracking  and  a  flam¬ 
ing  axe  came  from  the  clouds.  It  was  falling  fast  aimed  right 


The  Invisible  Warrior 


253 


for  Rama.  King  Sugriva  bravely  jumped  up  to  shield  him, 
and  that  axe  struck  through  his  bold  heart  and  killed  him. 

Indrajit  stood  firing  down  from  the  back  of  the  beyond. 
Down  came  a  rain  of  death.  Thirty-three  crescent  arrows 
killed  Prince  Angada,  and  his  blood  made  his  gold  fur  red. 
An  iron  hook  dashed  in  the  chest  of  Nala  the  bridge-builder; 
he  fell  coughing  and  choking,  and  died  strangled  and 
frightened.  Ten  diamond-tipped  arrows  pierced  the  bear  King 
Jambavan  and  he  fell;  a  barbed  bronze  spear  tore  through 
Vibhishana’s  shoulder  as  he  stood  beside  Rama  and  pinned 
him  to  the  ground.  The  frightful  cries  of  the  dying  filled  the 
air. 

Hanuman  flew  up  into  the  clouds.  He  couldn’t  see  Indrajit, 
but  he  saw  a  magic  sword  running  at  him  like  lightning,  all 
by  itself.  Hanuman  grabbed  it,  but  that  weapon  became  a 
fair  young  woman.  She  cried  in  fear,  “Let  me  go!  It’s  wrong 
to  hold  an  unwilling  woman!”  So  hearing  that  one  word — 
Wrong — Hanuman  released  her.  She  became  a  sword  again 
and  cut  him  down  from  the  sky. 

Indrajit’s  assault  covered  the  field  with  dead,  and  Rama 
stood  among  the  rolling  heads  and  broken  bodies  of  his  ani¬ 
mal  friends.  He  tried  to  aim  by  watching  where  Indrajit’s  ar¬ 
rows  appeared  to  come  from,  but  those  arrows  didn’t  fly 
straight,  and  their  sources  always  shifted  and  changed.  Rama 
shot  his  golden  arrows  out  over  the  whole  sky,  and  some  few 
of  them  fell  back  from  the  clouds  with  their  points  covered 
with  blood. 

Then  only  Rama  and  Lakshmana  remained  standing,  the 
two  best  men  of  all  this  world.  Indrajit  shot  his  arrows  at 
them  until  there  was  not  one  fingertip’s  space  left  unpierced 
on  their  bodies.  Their  gold  armor  was  no  use.  Those  many 
wounds  killed  Rama  first.  He  fell  dead.  Lakshmana  couldn’t 
believe  what  he  saw  and  wept.  He  tried  to  blink  the  tears 
from  his  eyes,  but  more  arrows  came  through  his  heart  and 
killed  him  before  he  could  see  again. 

And  at  mid-moming,  Indrajit  unbearable  in  war  returned 
to  his  grove  of  trees  outside  Lanka.  He  became  visible  and 
got  out  of  his  chariot.  The  car  and  the  tigers  disappeared  in  a 
ball  of  flame.  Indrajit  said  graciously  to  his  servants,  “Go 
through  the  underground  passage  into  Beautiful  Lanka.  Tell 
my  father — Have  no  doubt,  have  no  care.  Rama  is  dead,  I 
killed  him.” 

When  they  left,  Indrajit  sat  under  his  banyan  tree,  whose 
leaves  were  green,  whose  flowers  were  red  as  all  the  blood 


254 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


he’d  spilled.  Indrajit  laughed.  Then  he  said — Om!  He  leaned 
back  and  closed  his  eyes,  and  speaking  no  more  he  began  to 
breathe  slowly  in  and  out,  slowly  and  deeply,  centering  his 
mind  only  on  his  breathing.  He  made  himself  one  with  the 
breath  of  Life.  The  clouds  left  the  sky,  and  Indrajit  shut  him¬ 
self  away  from  the  world — 7  breathe.  I  breathe. 


All  that  day  the  battlefield  was  like  some  slaughter  yard  in 
the  sun.  But  when  the  ancient  goddess  Night  came  and  in¬ 
creased  the  power  of  all  Night-Wanderers,  Vibhishana  the 
Rakshasa  stirred  where  he  lav.  He  looked  up  at  the  stars,  the 
open  eyes  of  Night.  He  grasped  the  metal  spear-shaft  in  both 
hands  and  twisted  apart  the  tough  bronze  where  it  entered  his 
shoulder,  and  pulled  himself  up  leaving  the  spearhead  in  the 
ground.  He  sat  bleeding  and  trembling  in  pain,  but  he  joined 
his  hands  to  honor  the  weapons  Indrajit  had  used  and  spoke 
a  secret  mantra  that  healed  his  wound. 

Vibhishana  used  his  keen  night  vision  and  looked  around 
for  some  friend  alive.  From  the  back  of  Rama’s  army  all  the 
way  up  to  Lanka’s  walls  were  dead  monkeys  and  apes  and 
bears,  many  of  their  bodies  cut  into  pieces.  He  remembered 
that  Hanuman  can  never  be  killed  and  saw  something  white 
move  a  little  in  the  gloom.  Carefully  Vibhishana  got  to  his 
feet  and  went  to  see  what  it  was.  He  found  Hanuman  sitting 
up,  alive  and  covered  with  sword-cuts. 

Vibhishana  and  Hanuman  together  searched  among  the 
dead,  and  there  they  found  Jambavan  near  death  and  but 
faintly  breathing,  badly  injured  and  burning  with  hot  fever. 
Vibhishana  bent  over  him  and  gave  him  water.  “Riksharaja, 
King  of  Bears,  are  you  alive?  Have  these  sharp  arrows  yet 
spared  your  life?” 

With  great  effort  Jambavan  replied,  “Demon  Prince,  I  can¬ 
not  see.  Tell  me,  does  Hanuman  the  Son  of  the  Wind  still 
live?” 

Vibhishana  snapped  his  fangs.  “You  do  not  ask  about 
Rama.  You  do  not  show  such  love  for  anyone  else  as  you 
show  for  that  white  monkey  Hanuman.” 

“Hear  why  I  ask,”  said  Jambavan.  “While  Hanuman  lives, 
this  army  also  lives;  but  if  he  is  dead  we  are  truly  destroyed.” 

Hanuman  held  Jambavan’s  feet.  “Here  I  am  once  more!” 

“Lifel  Then  we  have  narrowly  escaped  with  life!”  Jamba¬ 
van’s  voice  was  weak  but  he  smiled.  He  asked,  “Indrajit?” 

Vibhishana  answered,  “Now  it  is  Night;  this  morning  In- 


The  Invisible  Warrior 


253 


drajit  killed  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  everyone  else,  except 
us  three.  He  left  and  has  not  returned;  he  must  be  hidden  in 
his  grove  of  trees,  in  meditation.  I  have  just  revived,  and  I 
found  Hanuman  alive.” 

“Then  this  is  not  the  time  for  grief  and  not  the  place,”  said 
Jambavan. 

Hanuman  asked,  “Old  bear,  what  do  you  mean?” 

“Only  from  you  have  we  any  hope  for  our  lives,”  said 
Jambavan.  "My  child,  there  is  no  one  else.  Instantly  go  back 
over  the  sea  and  north  into  the  far  high  Himalya.  At  night 
from  the  air  you  will  easily  see  the  glowing  Medicine  Hill  of 
Life,  crowned  with  annuals  and  herbs,  bright  and  luminous, 
long  ago  transplanted  from  the  Moon.  Those  fragrant  plants 
are  potent  to  heal  any  hurt  and  restore  life  to  the  dead  .  .  . 
bring  them  back  .  .  .  hurry — ” 

Hanuman  bent  his  back,  opened  his  mouth  and  jumped 
straight  for  the  snowy  lap  of  the  Himalya  Hills.  He  flew  like 
a  blazing  comet,  fast  and  generous,  speedy  and  bright!  He 
went  over  the  dark  sea  and  over  the  land.  Soon  he  saw  the 
River  Ganga  falling  from  heaven  into  Lord  Shiva’s  hair;  he 
saw  Shiva,  always  visible  to  animal  eyes,  tall  and  fair  and 
smiling,  with  a  new  moon  in  his  hair,  the  new  moon  like 
Rama.  .  .  ■ 

Ahead  on  the  horizon  Hanuman  saw  high  on  a  hill  the 
flickering  lights  of  many  luminous  plants  shining  with  their 
own  light  like  cold  white  flames  of  fire,  shining  in  the  clear 
night  like  silent  lightning.  On  that  Mountain  of  Life  there  is 
no  difference  between  day  and  night.  When  the  Sun  departs, 
lights  glitter  and  stream  out  from  those  medical  herbs  on  the 
high  summits  and  ridges;  their  new  leaves  sparkle  and  gleam, 
their  stems  glow  like  liquid  silver,  like  moonlight  on  the 
waves  as  they  bend  in  the  wind,  and  the  whole  hill  shines  like 
a  gem. 

Hanuman  looked  down  on  the  Himalyan  rivers  and  moun¬ 
tain  passes  and  caves,  the  icy  cliffs  and  dark  forests  and  the 
hidden  retreats  of  holy  saints.  But  the  glowing  plants  felt  him 
approach.  They  drew  themselves  down  under  the  ground, 
their  lights  were  hidden  and  they  were  lost  in  the  dark  night. 

There  was  no  time  to  dig  them  out.  Hanuman  said — You 
foolish  grasses  with  no  compassion! — and  in  three  shakes  of 
his  shoulders  he  uprooted  that  whole  entire  mountain  where 
they  grew  and  held  it  over  his  head  in  his  hands. 


256 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Hanuman  flew  back  to  Lanka,  so  fast  that  the  Hill  of  Life 
grew  very  hot  and  all  the  herbs  began  to  steam  and  bake. 
When  he  arrived  outside  Lanka,  Hanuman  could  see  nowhere 
to  set  the  mountain  down.  As  he  stood  on  the  air  wondering 
what  to  do  next,  the  scent  of  those  herbs  spread  over  the  bat¬ 
tlefield,  and  that  fragrance  alone  was  enough  to  restore  the 
dead  animals  to  life  and  heal  all  their  wounds.  But  the  dead 
Rakshasas  were  under  the  sea  in  other  worlds,  beyond  the 
reach  of  any  medicine  of  Earth. 

Jambavan  ran  over  and  looked  up.  He  saw  Hanuman  hold¬ 
ing  a  huge  hill  bearing  all  its  trees  and  stones  and  elephants 
and  colored  veins  of  ore  and  pockets  of  snow  and  falling 
rivers.  Hanuman  shouted,  “Where  do  you  want  it?” 

“ — Oh  Lord!”  Jambavan  laughed  till  he  cried. 

“What?  Where?” 

“Oh  blessings,  best  of  monkeys,”  said  Jambavan.  “We  are 
savedl  Turn  away,  put  it  back  again  where  it  belongs!” 

The  monkeys  and  bears  formed  into  a  guard  around  the 
battlefield.  They  held  trees  and  stones;  they  looked  calmly  out 
in  every  direction.  All  night,  when  even  a  straw  blew  past 
them  they  struck  it  down  lest  it  be  Indrajit,  or  some  Rakshasa 
magic. 

Sugriva  the  Monkey  King  washed  Rama’s  eyes  with 
palmfuls  of  cold  water  and  said,  “We  were  all  dead.”  He  told 
him  what  Hanuman  had  done. 

Hanuman  returned  again  and  landed  with  a  thump  beside 
Rama.  “My  Lord,  you  live!” 

Rama  embraced  Hanuman  and  said,  “Listen.  So  far  by 
good  fortune  I  see  you  all  alive  again,  but  were  I  to  lose  any 
of  you,  then  without  you  my  life  would  be  empty  and 
worthless.  Never  seeking  in  the  world  again  could  I  find  other 
friends  so  true.  Why  did  I  bring  you  here?  Go  home,  King 
Sugriva.  Take  your  people  and  no  more  of  dying.  Retrace 
your  steps  to  Kishkindhya.” 

King  Sugriva  said,  “After  all  we’ve  gone  through,”  and 
looked  at  Hanuman. 

Hanuman  answered,  “Dear  Rama,  we  are  indeed  your  old 
good  friends  from  long  ago,  and  your  companions  of  ancient 
days  come  here  to  help  you.  We  are  your  forefathers.  We.  are 
your  ancestors  the  animals,  and  you  are  our  child  Man.  As 
for  our  friendship,  why  we’ve  known  you  a  long  long  time, 
Rama,  and  the  number  of  those  days  is  lost  in  Silence. . . 


The  Invisible  Warrior 


257 


That  same  evening  just  after  nightfall  the  old  Rakshasi  Tri- 
jata  hurried  to  Sita  in  the  Asoka  Grove  and  said,  “Alas,  all  is 
destiny;  in  war  victory  and  defeat  are  all  uncertain!” 

Sita  asked,  “What  is  it?” 

“I  don’t  know,"  said  Trijata,  “I’m  not  sure.  Indrajit  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  killed  Rama  and  all  his  army.  They  say  he  has 
now  destroyed  the  root  of  this  war.  But  Ravana  has  been 
asleep  all  afternoon  and  no  one  has  seen  Indrajit  since  this 
morning.” 

“How  dared  they — ” 

“But  wait,”  said  Trijata.  “Indrajit  deals  in  illusion;  don’t 
be  enthralled  by  his  spells  of  doom.  Daughter  of  Earth,  I  went 
over  the  wall  and  I  saw  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  all  their 
animals  lying  out  there  riddled  with  arrows;  a  strange  sight,  I 
cannot  believe  it’s  true.” 

Sita  didn’t  cry.  Her  soft  black  eyes  grew  hard  and  there 
was  a  terrible  anger  in  her  face.  Trijata  said,  “Lakshmi  of  the 
Lotus  I  Oh  wait,  my  Lady — though  covered  with  arrows,  the 
light  of  Life  still  lingers  in  their  skin;  their  muscles  are  not 
slack,  nor  their  weapons  dull.  The  dead  do  not  look  so.  I 
speak  to  you  from  affection,  I  have  never  lied  to  you.  Set 
aside  your  anger  until  you  are  sure.  Throw  it  down  .  .  .  Sita, 
for  the  moment  forbear  ...  do  not  destroy  us.  ...”  - 

Sita  sighed  and  was  still.  Then  the  other  Rakshasis  came 
and  told  her,  “Come  with  us;  get  onto  Pushpaka  chariot. 
We’ve  something  to  show  you  on  the  battlefield,  you’ll  see!” 

Trijata  whispered,  “It  would  be  merciful  to  obey.”  Once  on 
board  the  giant  chariot  the  Rakshasis  said,  “Handsome  Rama 
lying  slain,  and  Lakshmana  dead  beside  him!” 

Then  by  thought  they  made  Pushpaka  start  to  rise  into  the 
air.  But  when  that  chariot  was  only  a  few  hands’  breadth 
above  the  ground  Trijata  cried,  “I  knew  it!  This  is  fine!”  She 
smiled  at  Sita  and  stopped  the  flying  car  so  he  would  rise  no 
higher. 

The  other  Rakshasis  turned  and  screamed,  “Welcome 
news!  It’s  plain  as  day,  they’re  dead!” 

“No  they’re  not,”  said  Trijata.  “This  proves  it’s  a  lie.  The 
flower  chariot  Pushpaka  will  carry  no  widow!” 

“What?  What?”  they  yelled. 

“Stop  it,”  said  Trijata.  “Be  silent  before  I  lose  my  temper. 
Why  me,  why  must  /  suffer  such  fools  all  the  time?” 

Sita  looked  up  at  the  northern  sky  and  asked,  “Trijata, 
what  is  that  huge  object  glowing  with  heat  and  racing  at  us?” 

“Hanuman  and  the  Hill  of  Life,”  answered  Trijata.  “Dear 


258  SITA’S  RESCUE 

Sita,  how  can  Hanuman  do  all  these  impossible  deeds  so  eas¬ 
ily?” 

Sita  smiled.  They  could  smell  the  fragrant  medicines.  “It 
must  be  by  the  power  of  his  wholehearted  love  for  Rama.” 

Trijata  brought  the  chariot  down  and  said,  “Sita,  your  sor¬ 
rows  are  long  and  I  wanted  to  comfort  you.  But  instead,  you 
have  brought  me  happiness,  and  though  I’m  born  in  the 
demon  race  you  have  won  your  way  into  my  heart.” 


Ravana  slept  all  night,  and  when  he  awoke  on  the  third 
morning  of  war  his  sentries  from  the  walls  told  him  how 
Rama  was  alive  again.  The  Demon  King  went  at  sunrise  to 
Indrajit’s  invisible  grove  and  sat  down  by  his  son  and  softly 
said,  “Help  me  once  more.” 

Indrajit  bowed  his  head  a  moment,  then  he  said,  “Majesty, 
for  everyone  there  is  the  choice  of  two  ways,  right  or  wrong. 
Look  at  Rama.  Regard  his  army.  See  his  bridge!  All  this  time 
millions  of  monkeys  and  bears  have  camped  just  outside  your 
Lanka — and  you  could  still  not  believe  you  were  in  any  real 
danger — but  even  if  Time  and  Death  themselves  overlook  you 
when  your  life  is  full  you  can  find  no  safety  from  Rama  if 
you  keep  his  wife.  There  is  always  a  choice,  Father — the  Way 
of  Life,  or  the  path  of  Death.” 

“Kill  him  for  me!” 

“But  I  did  that  once,”  said  Indrajit.  “Think  for  a  moment, 
remember  the  past.  When  you  were  young  you  grew  strong 
by  following  Dharma  and  by  sacrifice,  and  so  you  ruled  the 
worlds.  Yet  once  on  the  throne  of  power  you  slighted 
Dharma,  you  had  no  courtesy  towards  life.  You  drove  out 
kindness,  and  denied  freedom  to  the  Universe,  and  made 
Creation  suffer.  The  worlds  are  large,  but  your  selfishness 
overmatched  them.  Now  your  wrongs  devour  us.  In  the  far 
forests  your  intended  victims  drain  our  strength,  and  the 
smokes  of  their  offerings  spread  over  Earth’s  ten  directions, 
and  innocent  holy  men  have  promised  we  shall  die.” 

“What  of  it?”  said  Ravana.  “You  are  the  best  of  warriors. 
You  defeated  the  gods.” 

“Then  bring  on  the  gods!”  answered  Indrajit.  “However 
great  you  may  be,  do  not  live  hostile  to  every  other  soul.  The 
fear  and  anger  of  the  helpless  has  taken  on  the  form  of  an 
army  of  animals.  Death  has  led  you  on.  You  took  Death  on 
your  lap  the  day  you  stole  Sita,  and  Death  have  you  courted 
all  this  time.” 


The  Invisible  Warrior 


259 


“Why,  you  captured  Indra!” 

“Now  Dharma  is  on  Rama’s  side,”  said  Indrajit.  “His  army 
and  his  weapons  are  but  the  material  instruments  of  Time. 
Now  Rama  rules  Earth  with  all  her  creatures.  All  is  Dharma, 
Majesty;  there  is  no  second  thing  in  existence;  there  is 
Dharma  alone  in  the  world.” 

Ravana  said,  “My  son,  act  now!” 

“Then  I  will  sacrifice  to  Fire — ” 

“No!  If  you  love  me,  why  offer  more  smoke  to  my  slaves 
the  gods?” 

Indrajit  laughed.  “The  gods  are  no  one’s  property!”  He  got 
to  his  feet  and  put  on  a  sword.  “I  won’t  use  the  fire  offering 
unless  I  fail  again.” 

Ravana  arose.  “Fight  for  me  on  Earth,  as  you  did  in 
heaven!” 

“Yes,  we  seemed  to  have  conquered  heaven,”  said  Indrajit. 
“But  all  we  see  is  illusion.  All  is  illusion,  Demon  King;  loops 
and  nooses  of  deception  hold  us.  The  gods  of  heaven — all 
they  do  is  to  obey  the  Dharma-Law,  and  all  I  do  is  tell  the 
Truth  to  them  .  .  .  and  I  may  sometimes  use  it  for  a  control¬ 
ling  spell  because  it  is  so  rarely  heard.” 

Ravana  embraced  his  son  and  smelled  the  crown  of  his 
hair.  They  went  together  through  the  tunnel  to  Ravana’s 
palace  in  the  city.  Indrajit  left  his  father  there.  “They  will 
leave  us  in  peace,  don’t  worry.” 

Indrajit  went  outside  and  got  a  flying  Rakshasa  army 
chariot.  He  made  a  magic  figure  of  Sita,  lifelike  and  seeming 
to  live,  looking  sad  and  thin  and  very  beautiful.  Then  the 
chariot  flew  moving  low  over  the  Lanka  wall,  and  in  sight  of 
Rama’s  army  of  monkeys  he  caught  the  false  Sita  roughly  by 
her  hair  and  drew  his  sharp  sword. 

Hanuman  and  many  monkeys  were  near  Lanka.  Hanuman 
recognized  Sita.  The  Sita  on  the  chariot  cried — Oh  Rama!  Oh 
Lakshmana! — and  burst  into  heartbroken  tears. 

Hanuman  yelled,  “What  are  you  doing?” 

Indrajit  said,  “I  would  do  anything  to  give  you  pain.”  He 
smiled  and  raised  his  sword.  A  scream  cut  the  air  and  In¬ 
drajit  cut  Sita  apart.  He  struck  her  left  shoulder  while  he  held 
her  hair  and  cut  down  across  her  body,  carving  her  in  two 
along  the  line  of  the  sacred  thread  lying  across  her  breast, 
and  half  her  body  fell  to  the  chariot  floor. 

The  simple  monkeys  gasped  in  horror,  and  from  their 
throats  came  a  hopeless  cry.  Indrajit  wiped  his  sword’s  blood 
on  Sita’s  hair  that  he  held;  then  he  dropped  the  rest  of  her 


260 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


down  into  his  car,  turned  in  the  air  and  descended  once  more 
into  Lanka  and  out  of  sight. 

The  monkeys  all  ran.  Hanuman  tried  to  find  Rama.  He 
met  Jambavan  the  bear  and  Lakshmana  together,  and  rub¬ 
bing  tears  from  his  eyes  he  said,  “Indrajit  killed  Sita!” 

Lakshmana  was  speechless.  Jambavan  said,  “That  ends  the 
war;  Rama  will  die.” 

Out  of  nowhere,  Vibhishana  the  Rakshasa  suddenly  ap¬ 
peared  beside  them — Hanuman,  what  is  this? 

Hanuman  told  him  and  Vibhishana  said,  “That  was  an  illu¬ 
sion.” 

“Oh  no,  I  saw  it,  it  was  real!”  said  Hanuman. 

“It  was  false!”  Vibhishana  grimaced  and  his  face  shattered 
and  fell  in  pieces  at  his  feet.  His  eyes  broke  like  glass  and 
were  gone.  He  looked  at  Hanuman  with  empty  eye-sockets  in 
a  horrible  scar-covered  skull.  “Monkey,  thus  are  you  blind!” 

Hanuman  swallowed  hard  and  stared  at  him.  Vibhishana’s 
eyes  and  face  reformed  and  he  said,  “Take  my  word,  it  never 
happened.  Do  not  grieve  and  please  your  enemies.” 

“What  can  we  do?”  asked  Lakshmana. 

Vibhishana  replied,  “We  must  hurry.  Tie  your  armor  and 
your  hair;  get  your  bow  and  arrows.  Let  Jambavan  gather  all 
his  bears.  It  was  foolish  of  Indrajit  to  touch  Sita  even  in 
thought.  He  did  not  fight  or  remain  before  you  because  this 
time  he  did  not  have  his  tiger-chariot.  Without  it  he  has  no 
divine  protection  in  war,  and  cannot  stay  invisible  if  I  reveal 
him.  But  now  he  hears  us  talking,  he  even  knows  what  we 
think,  and  he  will  make  the  offering  in  his  hidden  grove 
unless.  .  .  .” 

Lakshmana  asked,  “What  hidden  grove?” 

“It’s  not  far  from  here,  outside  the  walls,”  said  Vibhishana. 
“I  will  make  it  visible.”  He  knelt  and  bowed  his  head.  Queen 
of  Dreamers,  King  of  Dreams — 

Friends  are  impermanent, 

Wife  and  child  are  unreal; 

The  world  is  untrue, 

And  sorrow  is  a  lie. 

Mother  Night,  we  are  shadows 1 
Mother,  show  me  my  brother  Indrajit! 


It  got  dark  over  that  mountainside  as  though  under  some 
huge  umbrella.  They  saw  Indrajit  near  the  southern  wall,  in  a 


The  Invisible  Warrior 


261 


grove  of  ancient  down-growing  trees,  in  gloom  and  dark 
shadow.  A  flame  burned  on  an  altar  of  Earth  and  Indrajit 
knelt  feeding  it  with  butter  from  a  double  ladle  of  black  iron. 
His  back  was  to  Lakshmana  and  Vibhishana.  Tied  to  a  stake, 
a  black  goat  lay  just  killed  in  a  pool  of  blood.  Indrajit’s  hair 
was  loose  and  he  wore  a  crimson  robe.  By  the  altar  were  piled 
many  armloads  of  javelins,  each  strung  with  a  hundred  little 
bells. 

Lakshmana  and  Vibhishana  watched  with  their  blue  eyes. 
Bears  surrounded  the  grove  at  a  distance.  Still  Indrajit  didn’t 
look  up.  He  made  a  mark  with  ashes  on  his  brow  and  spoke 
something.  Cracks  opened  in  the  ground  and  up  from  the  un¬ 
derworld  Naga  serpents  came  and  bathed  those  javelins  in 
their  venom. 

Indrajit’s  fire  danced.  He  filled  his  ladle  and  stepped  back. 
He  was  about  to  make  the  final  offering;  already  Lakshmana 
could  see  the  tigers  beginning  to  emerge  in  the  dark,  pawing 
the  air  from  within  the  fire;  he  could  vaguely  see  the  chariot, 
with  its  every  golden  face  forming. . . . 

Vibhishana  said,  “Ready?” 

“Always  have  been.”  Quick  as  a  lightning  flash  Lakshmana 
shot  one  arrow.  He  broke  the  iron  ladle  out  of  Indrajit’s 
hand.  His  bow  screamed  like  an  eagle,  and  the  Nagas  dove 
underground  in  fear  of  their  enemies,  looking  back  up  into 
the  sky  as  they  fied.  Then  Indrajit  turned  in  a  swirl  of  crim¬ 
son.  Then  he  knew  he  could  be  seen. 

When  Indrajit  took  his  eyes  off  his  fire,  Agni  the  Fire  Lord 
rose  from  the  sacred  flame  and  opened  his  mouth,  and  the 
seven  tongues  of  flame  came  from  his  lips.  He  looked  around 
for  Indrajit.  He  saw  Lakshmana,  he  saw  the  butter-ladle  bro¬ 
ken  and  Indrajit  distracted.  Then  in  surprise  Agni  turned 
away  with  a  smile,  and  his  form  faded  from  the  altar,  and  In¬ 
drajit’s  fire  turned  into  a  flaming  madness.  Burnt  and  gone 
were  the  tigers  and  their  war-car. 

Raven  locks  and  red  anger!  Indrajit  faced  Vibhishana  and 
Lakshmana.  He  looked  at  Ravana’s  brother.  ‘Traitor,  you 
have  revealed  me!” 

Lights  blazed  in  Vibhishana’s  dark-blue  crystal  eyes.  “Why 
spear  my  shoulder?”  He  lay  back  his  ears  and  snarled.  “War 
was  ever  all  you  knew  and  all  your  skill.” 

Indrajit  laughed  happily.  “May  your  new  masters  forsake 
you  when  all  your  old  friends  have  died!” 

“Say  what  you  like,”  said  Vibhishana.  “How  dare  you  de¬ 
fend  the  theft  of  Earth’s  daughter?” 


262 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Indrajit  tightened  his  belt  and  gathered  his  hair.  He  drew 
in  his  power;  he  stood  there  now  in  silver  armor  and  wearing 
a  sword,  firelight  glanced  from  his  silver  helmet;  he  held  a  sil¬ 
ver  bow,  and  a  quiver  of  silver  arrows  and  a  silver  dagger 
hung  at  his  side.  He  said,  “Lakshmana,  if  you  missed  seeing 
my  power  before,  see  it  now.  I  ask  you  for  the  gift  of  single 
combat.” 

Lakshmana  said — I  give. 

Indrajit  narrowed  his  eyes  and  dropped  down.  He  fell  onto 
his  left  knee,  held  his  great  bow  out  flat  before  him  and  shot 
a  thousand  arrows  at  Lakshmana.  Lakshmana  cut  them  down 
as  they  flew  and  mocked  Indrajit — They’re  sharp  and  strong 
as  lotus  stems!  Lakshmana  shot  seven  arrows  and  cut  In- 
dra jit’s  seven  armor  strings,  and  the  silver  mail  fell  down  like 
a  cluster  of  stars  spilled  out  from  heaven  at  night. 

So  fleet  and  swift  were  both  warriors’  hands  that  no  one 
could  see  them  notch  an  arrow  or  draw  their  bows,  just  as  no 
one  can  see  his  soul  behind  his  own  senses;  all  you  could  see 
were  the  arrows  flying.  Arrows  veiled  the  sky  and  made  it 
even  darker  below;  sparks  and  noise  filled  the  air  when  they 
struck  head-on.  Indrajit  seized  a  poison  javelin  and  threw  it; 
Lakshmana  with  arrows  cut  it  down  and  left  it  in  pieces  no 
bigger  than  fingertips. 

Indrajit  again  raised  his  bow,  but  this  time  Laksl.mana 
broke  it  with  an  arrow.  Indrajit  threw  an  Asura  hand-arrow; 
it  separated  into  a  spray  of  flint  darts,  and  like  a  swarm  of 
needles  they  wounded  Lakshmana  a  hundred  times.  The 
many  darts  that  missed  drummed  on  the  trees  and  tore  smok¬ 
ing  holes  through  the  leaves,  as  painful  to  meet  as  loud  angry 
words  from  a  friend.  Lakshmana  shot  back.  He  hit  Indrajit 
three  times  in  the  face,  and  pierced  his  body  with  five  arrows 
that  went  right  through  the  marrow  of  his  bones  and  came 
out  red,  and  flew  on  underground  into  the  Earth  covered  with 
blood. 

Indrajit  drew  his  sword  and  whirled  it  over  his  head.  That 
blade  groaned  and  flamed  at  the  cutting  edge,  but  Lakshmana 
shattered  it  like  glass  with  his  arrows.  Then  Lakshmana 
slowed  his  hand,  and  carefully  withdrew  Agastya’s  arrow 
from  its  pocket  in  his  quiver,  a  long  grass  arrow  with  a  silver 
blade.  He  put  it  on  his  bowstring  and  pulled  it  back  to  his  ear 
and  said — Kill  him!  He  released  the  bowstring  and  beheaded 
Indrajit. 

For  an  instant  Indrajit  seemed  to  stand  alone  in  light.  Then 
forward  fell  his  lifeless  head,  and  backward  fell  his  body.  The 


The  Invisible  Warrior 


263 


altar  and  fire  and  weapons  and  offerings  were  gone  and  the 
grove  was  no  longer  dark.  In  death  Indrajit’s  corpse  and  his 
head  took  on  their  true  forms.  Nothing  beautiful  remained. 
Seeing  his  look  had  long  since  made  Indrajit  abandon  the 
desire  for  unreal  and  temporary  illusions  that  depart  and  per¬ 
ish,  and  deal  for  himself  in  true  reality  and  freedom. 


Monkeys  and  bears  fell  into  each  other’s  arms,  and  Hanu- 
man  carried  Lakshmana  on  his  shoulders  to  Rama.  Rama 
said,  “That  was  a  deed  hard  to  do.  We  could  never  win  this 
war  while  Indrajit  lived;  all  Earth  is  grateful  to  you.”  He 
made  Lakshmana  lie  down,  and  using  herbs  and  moss  Rama 
stopped  his  bleeding,  and  did  not  let  his  brother’s  life  flow 
out. 

It  was  a  little  past  noon.  The  demons  on  the  walls  drew  In¬ 
drajit’s  remains  into  the  city  by  speaking  mantras,  by  magic 
nets  of  words.  They  covered  him  and  brought  him  along  the 
streets  and  carried  him  to  the  King’s  palace,  but  no  one  dared 
tell  Ravana.  At  last  the  minister  Suka  heard  what  had  hap¬ 
pened  and  quickly  went  to  Ravana.  He  found  him  alone  in 
his  bedroom  and  said,  “After  delighting  Lakshmana  by  the 
gift  of  many  arrows,  Indrajit  is  dead.” 

Ravana  bowed  his  heads  and  wept  burning  tears  that 
seared  through  the  floor — My  son,  my  son. . . . 

Ravana  sat  for  a  long  while  in  silence,  then  he  said,  “My 
loyal  brother  is  dead  and  now  you,  my  sonl  Now  I  begin  to 
think  much  more  of  Yama,  for  he  has  brought  you,  Indrajit, 
under  the  law  of  Time!” 

Suka  said,  “One  lives  while  others  remember  him.  Ravana, 
you  might  think  people  forget  but  they  don’t.  They  seem  to 
worry  over  their  petty  cares,  but  they  remember,  they  all 
remember  the  past  and  the  dead,  every  Night.  .  .  .” 

Ravana  didn’t  hear,  but  spoke  as  though  he  still  could  talk 
to  Indrajit.  “This  realm  is  empty  without  you.  Once  you 
crushed  the  proud  and  empty  gods  for  me.  Now  where  have 
you  gone,  leaving  your  inheritance,  leaving  your  father  and 
your  people?  The  old  should  die  before  the  young — why  am  I 
left  here  all  alone  to  make  your  funeral?” 

Suka  said,  “Majesty,  death  is  not  life’s  end,  and  when  the 
course  of  Time  must  bring  something  to  pass,  not  wealth  nor 
desire  nor  strength  can  make  the  smallest  change.  Ravana  my 
King,  this  is  still  the  way  of  warriors — He  who  dies  for  his 
King  wins  heaven.” 


264 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Ravana  said  aloud  to  himself,  “Yama,  Death  Lord,  come, 
tell  me  how  this  could  be?”  But  Yama  heard  only  that  one 
word — Come — and  stood  by  unseen  and  made  no  answer. 

Suddenly  Ravana  grabbed  a  sword  and  ran  for  the  open 
door  to  the  Asoka  Grove.  But  Suka  stepped  into  the  doorway 
first,  held  the  walls  and  braced  himself,  and  Ravana  ran  right 
into  him  and  knocked  him  down. 

The  Demon  King  stopped,  and  with  great  care  helped  Suka 
to  rise,  and  looking  closely  at  him  said,  “Suka  my  friend,  for¬ 
give  me,  at  least  I  must  kill  her.” 

Suka  held  Ravana’s  arms.  “Majesty,  do  not  draw  the  sword 
of  an  Empire  to  kill  a  woman,  or  else  you  let  anger  lead  you 
into  shame!” 

“Ah,  Suka — ”  Ravana  sighed.  “Has  Death  destroyed  my 
reason?” 

“Tonight  is  just  past  the  eve  of  the  New  Moon,”  said  Suka, 
“and  Night  will  be  of  her  darkest.  Fight  Rama  then.” 

Ravana  sheathed  his  sword.  “Yes.  I  accept  your  speech, 
those  are  good  words.  Let  us  quickly  burn  my  son’s  body. 
And  after,  I  will  go  out  to  war.” 


Ravana  and  Time 


Valmiki  the  Poet  held  all  the  moving  world  inside  a 
water  drop  in  his  hand. 

The  gods  and  saints  from  heaven  looked  down  on 
Lanka, 

And  Valmiki  looked  down  at  the  gods  in  the  morning  of 

Time. 

Oh  Sita, 

I  sing  this  song. 

Rama  will  untie  your  braid; 

He  will  free  you. 

Remember  his  love  for  you. 

My  poem  will  outlast  T ime; 

I  sing  this  song. 

Oh  Sita. 


When  he  had  finished  Indrajit’s  funeral,  in  the  late  afternoon 
Ravana  commanded  Suka  the  minister,  “Let  my  armies  at¬ 
tack  now  and  kill  the  animals.  At  dark  I  will  meet  again  with 
the  nobles  of  Lanka,  then  I’ll  kill  Rama.  .  .  .” 

Demon  warriors  crowded  into  the  streets;  their  chariots 
and  elephants  and  horses  filled  the  high  roads  that  led  to  the 
western  gate  of  Lanka.  Captains  rounded  up  their  bands  of 
soldiers  and  called  off  all  their  names,  and  the  battle-flags 
upon  their  tall  staffs  cast  long  black  shadows,  and  banished 
all  the  lovely  light  of  day  around  them. 

The  old  Rakshasa  Malyavan  was  dozing  in  an  alley  when 
the  noise  and  dark  shadows  awoke  him.  The  armies  of  the 
demons  were  marching  again  and  shaking  the  Earth  in  rhyth¬ 
mic  beats,  as  though  somewhere  nearby  a  giant  or  a  great 
god  was  beginning  to  dance,  jarring  the  ground  with  his  feet 

265 


266 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


as  he  took  the  first  steps,  starting  the  Dance  of  Destruction, 
timing  his  steps,  the  timing  strong  and  sure — 

Oh  Shiva  there  before  the  waters  were,  never  born,  never 
destroyed — 

And  Malyavan  remembered. 


The  shadows  of  Garuda’s  wings,  the  cry  of  Narayana’s 
huge  shell  trumpet,  the  days  of  Malyavan’s  youth  falling 
again  over  Beautiful  Lanka  of  the  Waves.  There  in  the  sky 
above,  the  dazzling  red-and-gold  Garuda,  and  on  his  back 
Lord  Narayana  tall  and  dark-blue,  wearing  saffron  robes,  a 
soft  round  jewel  on  his  breast,  his  dark  eyes  smiling,  murder¬ 
ing  the  brave  Rakshasas.  . . . 

Malyavan  ignored  all  the  war-noise,  he’d  heard  it  all  be¬ 
fore.  He  went  slowly  by  side-streets  to  a  corner  of  Lanka’s 
walls.  He  cast  a  dissolving  spell  and  went  through  the  stones, 
and  walked  through  Rama’s  army  unseen,  and  climbed  by  a 
narrow  pathway  up  onto  the  highest  summit  of  Trikuta  Hill. 

Standing  in  the  air  right  above  that  very  hilltop,  long  ago 
in  his  youth  Malyavan  with  all  his  strength  drove  a  black 
lance  into  Narayana’s  side  and  cried,  “I  swear  I’ll  kill  you!” 
And  how  easily  the  lance  entered,  it  was  not  hard  to  wound 
Narayana,  like  wounding  water.  But  the  bird  Garuda  wheeled 
on  the  winds.  He  missed  Malyavan,  but  his  talons  tore  off  the 
steel  chain  that  the  Rakshasa  wore  over  his  shoulders.  Arrows 
flew  like  rushing  comets,  and  Malyavan  fell  through  the 
shrieks  and  screams,  Mali  was  dead  and  Malyavan  ran  to  the 
world  Undersea. 

Old  Malyavan  looked  around.  Trikuta  Hill  looked  like  the 
otherworldly  landscape  of  Infinity  ...  a  place  out  of  the 
past .... 

Through  the  floor  of  the  Sea, 

Through  the  silent  doors  of  Eternity; 

Blessed  be  you, 

Blessed  be. 


Shiva  and  the  silence!  Fortunate  to  see,  gracious  and  auspi¬ 
cious  the  great  Lord  Shiva  stood  by  Malyavan,  and  there  was 
not  a  sound  on  the  hilltop.  Shiva  the  great  ascetic  seemed  a 
tall  fair-skinned  man,  with  four  arms,  wearing  deerskin  and  a 
snake,  holding  a  trident,  his  throat  a  beautiful  blue,  and  for 


Ravana  and  Time 


267 


a  moment  Shiva  looked  carefully  at  Malyavan,  and  saw  his 
heart,  and  his  eyes  never  blinked. 

Shiva’s  two  eyes  were  like  honey,  and  his  face  was 
wrinkled  with  smiles.  On  his  brow  his  terrible  third  eye  was 
closed,  and  the  new  moon  hung  in  his  hair,  low  in  the  eve¬ 
ning  sky. 

They  stood  there  all  alone.  Malyavan  looked  down,  and  at 
his  feet  he  saw  the  rusted  links  of  his  ancient  shoulder-chain, 
long-lost  and  eaten  by  Time. 

/  saved  your  father.  /  found  him  newborn  and  abandoned 
and  faintly  crying  on  a  lonesome  barren  hill.  Shiva  stood  still 
and  held  out  his  hand. 

Malyavan  remembered  his  beautiful  mother,  the  smiling 
daughter  of  a  heavenly  Gandharva.  A  little  wind  blew  by  his 
ears.  A  hundred  thousand  tiny  silver  bells  were  ringing  and 
ringing,  and  all  this  beautiful  world  dissolved.  . . . 

Come,  /  will  take  you  home  again. 


Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day  of  war,  the  Grand 
Army  of  the  Rakshasas  gathered  again  by  Lanka’s  west  gate, 
an  army  of  great  honor  and  loyalty.  Their  fires  flickered  and 
threw  off  dark  smoke  and  sparks,  and  their  hair  stood  on  end. 
Carrion  birds  wept  on  the  housetops,  facing  south  and  biting 
their  side-feathers;  and  by  Ravana’s  palace  gate  jackals 
barked  and  howled  with  live  flames  on  their  breath.  Clouds 
of  ashes  grated  harshly  in  the  sky  and  blew  low  down  the  city 
streets  showering  blood.  In  heaven  there  was  a  blue  stain  on 
the  Sun,  and  the  stars  attacked  him  although  it  was  still  day. 

Outside  the  golden  walls  there  was  a  great  explosion,  and 
Indrajit’s  enchanted  grove  was  destroyed  and  gone,  leaving 
only  a  crater  of  smoke.  Many  omens  appeared;  the  light  was 
dim  and  wrong  and  the  wind  was  dark;  high  things  were  low 
and  the  low  were  high. 

The  west  gate  opened  and  the  movable  bridge  dropped  like 
thunder.  Then  a  pale  headless  corpse  stood  in  the  gateway, 
and  with  his  wounded  arms  sadly  tried  to  push  back  the 
Night-rangers  of  the  Woods.  On  the  hillsides  by  the  city 
many  trees  fell,  and  birds  flew  over  Lanka  in  left-turning 
circles.  The  Rakshasa  warriors  stumbled  as  though  caught  in 
snares;  the  whips  fell  from  their  charioteers’  hands  and  their 
eyes  watered. 

The  demon  sentinels  looked  out  from  Beautiful  Lanka’s 
high  golden  walls,  and  out  on  the  battlefield  they  saw  the 


268 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


bears  watching  them,  staring  at  them,  sleek  and  dark, 
gathered  round  their  King  Jambavan  like  the  sending  of  fate. 
The  bears’  eyes  were  wide  with  wrath,  and  their  mood  was 
murder.  Behind  them  stood  wild  apes  and  monkeys  from  the 
highlands  who  had  already  grown  their  thick  winter’s  coats 
hard  for  weapons  to  bite  through,  with  many  grey  hairs  that 
made  them  look  like  long-murdered  ghosts,  or  seem  all  silver 
in  the  sun. 

But  the  bold  Rakshasas  were  not  afraid.  They  drew  their 
glowing  swords  with  a  noise  like  a  grindstone  grinding  iron, 
and  came  outside  the  walls — warriors  like  hills,  like  living 
flames,  very  strong  and  cruel.  Then  like  the  crest  of  a  wave 
the  front  lines  of  the  Rakshasa  army  rose  up  into  the  air  and 
threw  down  spears  and  maces  and  fires  on  the  animals.  The 
demons  advanced  through  the  sky  in  their  wondrous  waving 
robes  and  the  animals  died  by  thousands,  and  backed  away 
from  them  as  summer  clouds  will  fly  before  the  winds.  And 
all  unnoticed  in  the  havoc  and  ruin  of  war  the  many  house- 
gods  of  Lanka  followed  Ravana’s  armies  out  of  their  city, 
now  homeless,  looking  afraid  and  sad  to  leave,  and  not  know¬ 
ing  where  they  would  live  now. 

Only  Jambavan  the  Bear  King  did  not  back  off.  All  alone 
he  snarled  and  snapped  and  pulled  down  the  demons;  in  a 
terrible  rage  he  ripped  them  apart,  and  left  them  there  in 
small  pieces  that  a  crow  could  swallow  whole.  He  tore  open 
their  throats;  he  bit  and  shook  his  head  and  broke  them;  he 
clawed  out  their  hearts.  His  mouth  was  wet  and  red,  his 
claws  were  red  and  his  eyes  were  wild,  and  he  reveled  in 
blood  and  bleeding  demon  flesh. 

Tall  and  handsome,  wearing  the  war-crown  of  the  bear 
kings,  old  Jambavan  took  on  the  whole  army  of  demons.  He 
hugged  them  to  death;  he  struck  them  with  great  round¬ 
swinging  blows  that  tore  off  their  heads.  Jambavan  was  unbe¬ 
lievably  strong.  Whichever  weapons  the  Rakshasas  tried  to 
use  against  him  Jambavan  destroyed;  none  could  hurt  him; 
and  he  crushed  their  chariots  with  trees.  With  just  a  little  ani¬ 
mal  courage  he  badly  damaged  them  beyond  repair.  He  was 
Death  on  that  field. 

The  demons  thought — We’re  outnumbered! — and  there  was 
no  chance  in  that  fight  for  their  unreal  illusions.  When  they 
joined  hands  to  cast  a  spell  the  monkeys  broke  their  arms 
with  stones,  and  called  out  warnings  in  the  ancient  animal 
tongues. 

But  there  on  the  city  wall  were  the  two  magicians,  Light- 


Ravana  and  Time 


269 


ning-Tongue  and  Thunder-Tooth.  They  had  their  heads  to¬ 
gether,  talking  and  looking  at  Jambavan,  rolling  their  eyes 
and  licking  their  ugly  fangs.  Their  arms  started  to  grow  long¬ 
er  and  longer,  and  razor  blades  appeared  on  their  fingertips, 
and  they  stretched  out  their  hands  for  the  Bear  King. 

Hanuman  and  Sugriva  streaked  through  the  air.  The  two 
Rakshasa  magicians  drew  back  their  arms,  and  they  whis¬ 
pered  to  each  other — Just  wish  . . .  1  wish. . . . 

The  monkeys  were  too  quick.  Hanuman  cried — No  fear 
and  follow  me — and  struck  Lightning-Tongue  from  the  side, 
caught  his  throat  in  both  hands,  shifted  his  weight,  threw  him 
down  and  twisted  his  head  right  off.  He  threw  the  head  into 
Lanka  like  a  ball.  It  burst  into  a  hundred  and  eight  pieces 
and  the  brains  went  flying  out  in  fiery  sparks. 

Sugriva  made  his  fingers  into  a  fist  and  hit  Thunder-Tooth 
from  above,  so  hard  that  he  drove  the  magician’s  head  down 
into  his  belly  and  jammed  his  thighs  up  into  his  body.  But 
that  didn’t  bother  Thunder-Tooth  a  bit.  He  just  stood  there 
grinning  with  his  mouth  at  his  waist  and  his  eyes  on  his 
breast,  headless  on  stumpy  legs.  Then  he  winked  one  eye  at 
King  Sugriva  and  touched  his  tooth.  A  staircase  that  seemed 
to  lead  down  to  Hell  rose  out  of  the  ground,  and  Thunder- 
Tooth  ran  down  it  away  out  of  sight  and  the  whole  thing  disap¬ 
peared  before  Sugriva  could  follow. 

“Never  mind,”  said  Hanuman,  “let’s  help  Jambavan.” 

They  flew  back  to  the  Bear  King  but  there  was  no  need. 
Jambavan  was  humming  war-songs,  the  Rakshasa  attack  had 
failed,  and  it  was  nearly  evening.  Rama  called  back  the  ani¬ 
mals  and  stood  in  their  midst  as  though  within  an  impenetra¬ 
ble  forest.  The  light  was  fading  away  from  the  sky  and  the 
animals  carried  their  many  dead  up  into  the  hillside  forests. 
King  Jambavan  drank  some  honey-wine  and  said,  “Ah,  it  was 
nothing.  .  . 

The  few  remaining  demons  withdrew.  The  west  bridge  was 
pulled  up  and  the  gate  slowly  closed.  Then  as  before,  from 
within  Lanka  the  Rakshasas  removed  their  dead  from  the 
battlefield  and  cast  their  corpses  underwater  into  the  sea,  and 
the  tides  were  red. 

So  on  that  war-land  outside  the  city  there  were  left  only  a 
few  painted  iron  shields  and  brass  clubs,  some  supple  curving 
swords  like  clear  water,  curious  bows  and  arrows  with  glass 
points,  many  trees  and  stones,  torn  banners  and  broken 


270 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


wheels,  and  shiny  gold  bracelets  winking  like  fireflies  in  the 
dusk  fast  approaching. 


The  day  went  by  and  was  past,  and  the  sunset  quickly 
faded  from  the  west.  The  new  moon  set  and  in  Lanka’s 
streets  the  demons  lit  their  fiery  torches  made  of  burning 
bones. 

Ravana  sat  on  his  throne  in  the  royal  courtroom,  in  the 
center  of  that  long  indoor  altar  of  Earth  where  the  grass  had 
long  grown  green  from  the  lights  of  the  glorious  lamps,  and 
from  the  brilliance  of  the  weapons  hung  round  on  the  walls, 
and  where  two  holy  fires  still  burned  at  each  end  for  the 
blessing  and  good  fortune  of  the  Night  Demons.  Ravana 
leaned  back  comfortably;  he  closed  his  twenty  eyes  and 
smiled  ten  smiles. 

Then  leaving  their  chariots  and  animals  in  the  palace 
courtyards  the  nobles  and  elders  of  Lanka  entered  the  room. 
Each  one  courteously  bowed  touching  Ravana’s  feet  with  his 
head  and  took  his  place  by  rank.  The  greatest  sat  on  raised 
cushions  near  the  throne,  the  next  ranks  sat  behind  them  on 
grass  mats,  and  all  the  rest  sat  on  the  emerald  floor.  The 
smell  of  fine  sandalwood  and  incense  was  mingled  with 
patchouli  perfume  and  the  flower  scent  of  colorful  war-gar¬ 
lands. 

They  sat  gazing  up  at  the  faces  of  the  Demon  King.  Ra¬ 
vana  folded  his  hands,  ten  by  ten,  and  said,  “I  am  Ravana. 
What  do  they  say  of  me,  out  in  the  world?” 

A  herald  rose  from  the  ranks  dressed  in  silver  and  black 
and  answered,  “ You  are  Ravana,  King  of  the  Night-Wander¬ 
ers.  You  are  Lord  of  Lanka  on  the  Waves,  the  Protector  of 
Heaven  and  the  Guardian  of  Truth,  the  Defender  of  Love 
and  Enemy  of  Evil.  In  anger  you  are  a  dark  stormcloud 
threatening  all  that  is  wrong  and  moving  if  you  will  against 
the  wind.  You  have  jailed  lies  and  you  imprison  all  deceit — 
Majesty,  rule  right  forever!" 

Ravana  sighed.  “Yet  Earth  fears  me,  I  am  her  misfortune. 
I’ve  never  seen  my  armies  lose  a  war,  but  now  Rama  has 
come,  and  our  legions  swiftly  diminish  like  a  water  pond  in 
summer.  Rama  defeats  me  by  his  mere  presence,  what  to 
speak  of  his  arrows?  Tonight  I  am  going  out  to  fight  him,  and 
I  ask  you,  leave  Lanka  now  and  hide  somewhere  to  save  your 
lives  if  you  fear  for  my  defeat.” 

No  one  moved,  no  one  said  anything  for  a  long  while.  Ra- 


Ravana  and  Time 


271 


vana  asked,  “Will  anyone  wish  to  speak  here  in  my  council 
before  I  go?” 

Then  Suka  the  Minister  of  State  arose  from  his  comer  seat 
holding  a  winecup.  He  said,  “I  drink  to  knowledge,”  and 
drank,  and  looked  at  the  King. 

“Come  here,”  said  Ravana. 

Suka  went  before  the  throne  and  touched  his  hands  to¬ 
gether.  He  knelt  and  bowed  his  head.  “Majestyl” 

Ravana  smiled.  “Speak  quickly,  Suka.” 

Suka  stood  and  said,  “Soon  or  late,  a  King  must  hear  his 
people,  or  he  has  no  time  to  be  a  King.” 

“What  do  they  say?” 

“They  say — Why  is  Ravana  blind?  Why  won’t  he  hear? 
They  cry — Where  is  my  father?  Where  has  my  husband  gone? 
Where  is  my  son  now?” 

“What  else?” 

“They  ask,  where  are  your  wits?  They  ask  why  your  fat 
and  wrinkled  sister  had  to  see  Rama  in  the  greenwood,  and 
why  they  must  die  for  her  belly’s  lust?  They  ask  how  can  we 
fight  Rama?  It  would  be  good  to  take  the  shelter  of  Rama.” 

“What  do  you  think?”  asked  Ravana. 

“Oh  King,”  said  Suka,  “spare  me  from  fame  and  the  abuse 
that  goes  with  it!  How  can  you  come  to  your  senses  when 
your  senses  are  stolen  by  Love?  What  other  person  ever 
matched  your  sacrifices  or  received  soch  boons  as  you  got 
from  Lord  Brahma  long  ago,  in  those  days  long  past?  Now 
you’ve  lost  your  way,  and  what  is  surprising  in  that?”  Suka 
looked  around  him  and  shook  his  head.  “It  is  wondrous  and 
most  marvelous,  that  now  the  people  of  such  a  King  as  you 
must  face  defeat.  We  can  see  no  one  in  any  world  to  dry 
away  our  tears.” 

“What  would  you  do  yourself?” 

“I  don’t  know,”  answered  Suka.  “Your  brother  Vibhishana 
did  right  to  take  Rama’s  protection;  it  was  a  good  deed  for 
him,  well  done  at  the  right  time.” 

“Then  why  did  you  not  go  with  him?”  softly  asked  the 
Demon  King.  “Why  have  you  stayed  by  me?” 

Suka  said,  “Once  taking  you  for  my  King  I  think  it  wrong 
to  leave  you.  Majesty.” 

“But  you  could  live  anywhere  unknown;  you  could  easily 
escape.” 

“Oh  Ravana,  this  life  is  over  in  one  instant,  why  spend  it 
in  shame?” 

Ravana  held  out  a  long  scarlet  sash.  “You  always  freely 


272 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


chose  to  serve  me,  therefore  I  commission  you  my  messenger. 

Wear  this  and  carry  a  letter  from  me  to  Rama.” 

Suka  slipped  the  sash  over  his  shoulder.  Ravana  gave  him 

a  heavy  Rakshasa  letter  written  on  a  flat  stone  and  sealed 

within  a  stone  envelope.  “Deliver  this  in  the  morning.  Go  to 

where  Rama’s  bridge  touches  our  shore  and  wait  the  night 

there,  and  then  at  sunrise  take  it  to  him  in  my  name.  Fear  no 
»» 

one. 

Suka  took  the  stone  letter.  “Ravana,  the  like  of  this  citadel 
and  city  of  Beautiful  Lanka  as  she  was  during  your  long 
reign  was  never  seen  before,  nor  will  she  ever  be  seen  any¬ 
where  again.” 


Ravana  dismissed  his  council  and  went  walking  through 
the  halls  of  his  palace  swinging  his  arms,  with  garlands  of 
flowers  over  his  broad  shoulders,  and  the  jewels  on  his 
bracelet  and  armbands  swung  their  all-colored  lights  over  the 
shadowy  walls. 

Near  the  doorway  to  his  bedroom  he  met  Queen  Mando- 
dari.  Ravana  smiled  at  her,  and  held  her  gently  in  his  twenty 
dark  arms,  and  there  was  a  dream  in  his  eyes  then.  Ravana 
said,  “It’s  nearly  done,  everything  will  be  alright.” 

Mandodari  the  beautiful,  the  daughter  of  illusion  dressed 
all  in  silks  replied,  “When  I  first  saw  you,  you  captured  my 
heart.  You  have  brought  me  delight,  I  love  our  life,  I  always 
approach  you  in  joy.” 

“You  must  believe  me,”  said  Ravana.  “Put  your  hope  and 
faith  in  me  once  more,  just  one  more  time.” 

“Yes,”  said  the  Queen.  “You  are  my  Lord,  and  I  will  ever 
hold  this  thought,  near  to  my  heart,  like  a  treasure.  .  . .” 

Ravana  embraced  her.  “Farewell  my  very  love.  .  .  .” 


It  was  dark  outside,  and  Ravana  climbed  alone  onto  the 
top  of  a  watchtower  that  stood  near  the  palace,  and  from 
there  on  its  flat  roof  he  could  see  the  battlefield  and  his  city 
below  him,  and  above,  all  the  stars  in  the  black  sky.  Ravana 
laughed.  How  had  Lord  Brahma  the  Creator  dared  make  so 
many  starsl 

Ravana  saw  the  gods  gathered  in  the  sky  to  watch  his  war 
with  Rama,  and  the  Demon  King  looked  back  at  them  with 
his  fiery  red  eyes,  and  spread  wide  his  twenty  arms. 

At  that  moment  all  the  bells  of  Lanka  pealed,  the  great 


Ravana  and  Time 


273 


gongs  and  brass  drums  rang  out  in  the  night,  and  kept  ring¬ 
ing,  and  the  little  drums  raced  and  sounded  like  thunders, 
and  Ravana  lifted  up  his  dancing  foot  and  brought  it  down 
and  jarred  all  the  worlds  and  shook  them. 

Ravana  began  to  dance.  His  heart  beat  fast  and  he 
breathed  in  deep  the  fresh  clean  air,  and  in  the  heavens  the 
charioteers  of  the  gods  tried  to  calm  their  animals.  Ravana 
felt  he’d  just  broken  an  iron  band  tied  round  his  chest  for 
years.  The  night  air  was  cool  and  all  the  world  was  young 
forever. 

Stunning  thunder  and  noise  poured  out  of  Lanka,  and  Ra¬ 
vana  threw  back  his  heads  and  waved  his  arms  and  spun 
around.  He  called  down  the  Wind,  the  Wind  in  the  trees,  the 
long  dry  North  Wind  rising.  From  afar  out  at  sea  to  the 
north  there  was  a  little  whisper,  and  the  gods  saw  the  air  stir, 
and  saw  the  bright  luminous  wheel  of  the  rays  of  the  Wind 
rolling  towards  them,  violently  arising  and  rushing  aloud 
away  past  them  to  the  ends  of  the  worlds  and  beyond,  far 
beyond. 

Gales  came  in  from  the  storm-wave  ocean  and  tore  up  the 
side  of  Trikuta  Hill.  Ravana  heard  the  wild  Winds  running  in 
from  the  high  Himalyas,  booming  through  the  black  pines 
and  the  dark  deodars  far  away,  blowing  forever  across  the  ice 
and  snow.  Then  the  tiny  wind-bells  of  Lanka  sang,  and  the 
great  gold  walls  rocked  and  trembled. 

The  North  Wind  swept  flat  over  the  land  and  blew  out  ev¬ 
ery  fire  in  the  Universe  and  every  light.  Hanuman  bent  over 
Rama  to  protect  him  and  thought  to  speak  to  his  father,  but 
that  was  impossible;  they  could  hardly  breathe;  the  air  was 
swifter  than  thoughts,  and  it  was  as  if  they  were  falling  away 
with  a  speed  beyond  knowing,  and  all  the  Earth  was  falling 
with  them. 

Rama  and  the  animals  saw  Ravana  dance.  Blue  flames 
shimmered  round  his  form  high  above  Lanka,  electric  thun¬ 
ders  crackled  bright  in  his  long  loose  hair,  and  fiery  sparks 
streamed  downwind  from  his  arms  as  he  turned  and  moved 
in  waving  circles.  In  the  wind  and  in  the  Night  his  twenty 
dark  arms  opened  and  closed  like  the  petals  of  a  graceful 
flower  rising  and  falling.  And  Ravana  looked  out  at  Rama 
and  the  animals  as  though  to  consume  them,  as  though  they 
were  already  dead,  as  though  he  danced  among  charred 
corpses  in  some  horrible  demon  drinking-park  set  in  a  crema¬ 
tion  ground. 

Then  Ravana  clapped  all  his  hands  and  stamped  his  feet 


274 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


three  times  and  ended  his  dance.  It  was  full  Night.  He  drove 
the  storms  away.  The  Wind  fell  like  the  sounds  of  waves 
growing  softer  and  softer;  at  first  still  crying,  then  wailing  by 
and  weeping  away,  and  at  last  only  rustling  through  the 
leaves,  and  then  gone. 

There  was  sudden  silence  from  the  city  and  the  worlds 
were  clean  empty  of  sound.  Ravana  disappeared  from  view 
and  then,  as  he  came  down  the  winding  stairway  inside  that 
tower  the  Demon  King  met  Time  waiting  for  him  there, 
Time  wearing  a  body  so  shriveled  and  old  that  he  looked 
dead  even  when  he  moved.  The  way  was  too  narrow  to  pass 
and  Ravana  had  to  stop. 

“Oh  welcome,  Ravana.”  Time  looked  up  and  grinned  hap¬ 
pily.  “Now  at  last  your  life  is  over,  and  you  must  pay  me  for 
the  sins  of  a  lifetime.  You  are  about  to  die,  and  now  for  all 
Eternity  Hell  awaits  you,  and  even  your  memory  will  be  lost 
in  endless  years  of  silence.  You  will  never  again  meet  a 
friend  or  see  any  place  that  you  love.  Your  glory  and  sweet 
memories  will  be  lost  like  precious  golden  dust  blown  from 
your  hand  before  your  eyes,  and  the  wonderful  Earth  will 
vanish  from  your  sight  for  evermore.  Go  wear  your  best  jew¬ 
els,  for  who  will  wear  them  later?  Look  round  at  the  beauti¬ 
ful  world  of  life;  see  Lanka  well,  for  now  she  is  in  my 
keeping.  For  your  great  wrongdoing  I  have  fallen  in  beside 
you  all  unseen,  moving  where  you  move,  waiting  in  your 
shadow  for  the  moment — how  have  you  eluded  me  so  long?” 

“Indeed,”  said  Ravana,  “I  smile  at  your  folly.” 

Time  answered,  “Oh  do  you  think  so,  Ravana?  Do  you  be¬ 
lieve,  Demon  King,  that  I  only  control  others,  that  Time  will 
never  rule  you  but  only  others.  .  .  ."  Then  the  face  of  Kala, 
the  face  of  Time  took  on  the  cruel  look  of  someone  who  has 
lied  and  pretended  and  waited  his  chance,  and  is  at  last  in 
power  over  his  enemy.  “I’ll  have  the  last  word;  I’ll  humble 
you  and  kill  your  strength  and  spirit.  The  bright  golden 
dawns  of  future  lights  won’t  be  for  you,  I’ll  press  loneliness 
into  your  heart  and  chill  your  bones,  and  there  is  no  re¬ 
turn.  .  . 

Ravana  laughed.  “You  little  liar!” 

“What?  You  stole  Sita  and  you’ll  pay — ” 

Ravana  threw  out  his  arms  like  twenty  bars  across  the  nar¬ 
row  stair  and  looked  down  at  Time.  “Why  I  have  all  the  time 
there  is.” 

“What!” 

“You  are  the  thief  and  not  I,”  said  Ravana.  “For  a  few 


Ravana  and  Time 


275 


moments’  pleasure  you  take  whole  lives  in  payment.  And 
whatever  you  give  you  steal  back,  by  fraud,  from  hiding, 
when  you’re  not  watched.  Death  and  misery  are  your  good 
friends — but  you  are  yourself  unreal;  you  do  not  exist;  you 
cannot  steal  from  me.” 

“Do  you  know  who  I  am?”  cried  Kala. 

Ravana  answered,  “A  marketplace  of  sorrow,  a  well  of 
lies.” 

“Never!” 

“You’re  a  fraud  and  you  know  it.  Why  .  .  .  you’re  not 
looking  so  well.”  Ravana  smiled.  “May  you  feel  worse  tomor¬ 
row!” 

“Oh  take  care!”  said  Time  sharply.  “Watch  out,  injustice 
angers  me.  .  .  .” 

“That’s  a  laugh!  I’ll  faint  from  fear  just  as  soon  as  I  find 
someplace  to  fall  down,  alright?”  Ravana  twirled  his 
moustaches.  “Listen — 

When  my  dancing  footfalls  stopped, 

I  broke  Time’s  small  back 
With  my  last  step." 

Kala  said,  “Ravana,  you  are  mad.  There’s  no  help  for  it, 
you  are  doomed  ...  do  what  you  will  while  you  still  can  .  .  . 
your  old  home  is  empty,  your  friends  have  died,  and  all  the 
good  times  are  long  gone  by  .  .  .  things  can  never  be  still, 
nothing  can  remain  the  same,  all  must  change  and  die  and 
come  apart  ...  it  will  be  as  though  you  had  never  been.  .  .  . 
Time  will  pass  Ravana,  time  will  pass  .  .  .  now  be 
aware.  .  .  .” 

“We  know  better  than  that,”  said  the  Demon  King,  “Love 
is  eternal  and  we  are  beyond  your  reach.” 

“Just  a  moment!  Don’t  be  absurd,  you  don’t  believe  all 
those  old  stories,  do  you?” 

“Oh,  I  believe  them  just  enough — ” 

‘There  must  be  some  mistake!  No  one  is  beyond  my 
power.” 

“This  time  you’ve  made  a  mistake — you  have  wrongly 
faced  Ravana  who  has  gambled  his  life  for  love  .  .  .  and  al¬ 
ways  will,  I  guess.” 

“Never  try  to  cheat  your  fate,”  said  Time. 

“When  we  sleep,  where  are  you  then?”  asked  Ravana. 

“What?” 


276 


SITA'S  RESCUE 


“And  when  we  wake  from  a  dream,  you  are  pitifully  slow 
to  restore  the  scenery  of  the  world  around  us.” 

“Nonsensel” 

“All  loss  of  love  or  life  is  a  lie,  old  age  is  an  illusion,  and 
only  bad  things  perish.” 

“Really,  I  fail  to  see  what — ” 

“I’d  forgotten  you  had  that  problem,”  smiled  the  Demon 
King.  “But  I  must  be  on  my  way  now,  I  can’t  be  late,  and 
my  time  is  far  too  valuable  to  waste  on  anything  but  day¬ 
dreams.  Be  careful,  turn  and  go,  back  away  from  Ravana 
who  will  fight  and  die  for  love — for  Good  Love  never 
dies.  .  . 

“How’d  you  find  that  out?!” 

“Oh  Kala  stand  aside.  Pretend  to  rule  styles  and  fashions  if 
you  will,  but  don’t  talk  of  being  over  me.  You’re  but  a  poor 
slave  yourself.  You  mean  nothing  to  me.  I  command  you  to 

__  n 

SO- 

“No!  I  won’t!” 

"Aha!"  Ravana  swiftly  bent  down  and  looked  close  into 
the  wasted  eyes  of  Time  with  that  terrible  demon  look  he 
had.  The  muscles  on  his  arms  stood  out  in  knots  and  his 
hands  moved  round  Kala  like  a  cage.  “Do  you  dare  menace 
me?"  The  Demon  King  drew  back  his  lips  and  his  coppery 
eyes  glittered,  he  made  ready  to  seize  Time  and  crush  him 
with  his  steely  strength — and  Valmiki  the  Poet  safely  watching 
all  this  caught  his  breath  in  shock  at  that  threat! 

Then  Ravana  touched  Kala  but  lightly  with  one  hand  and 
stood  straight  again.  Time  started  to  sweat.  He  sneezed  and 
looked  around;  his  face  was  worn  and  battered  and  his  voice 
cracked  when  he  spoke.  “Why,  it’s  all  dusty  .  .  .  everything 
here,  it’s  all  covered  over  with  fine  dust. . . .” 

Ravana  stood  with  all  his  hands  on  his  hips  as  he  watched 
Time  fade  and  vanish  with  a  puzzled  look,  ever  still  trying  in 
vain  to  say  something  more.  Ravana  stood  on  the  empty 
stair. 

Valmiki  the  Poet  laughed  with  pleasure.  Oh  Ravana,  de¬ 
lightful,  beautiful — Well  done.  Demon  King! 


Ravana  hurried  to  war.  He  put  on  his  night-armor  finely 
woven  from  dull  black  steel  and  ten  dread  dark  helmets  that 
hid  his  faces.  Over  his  two-wheeled  war-car  he  raised  the 
battle-banner  of  Lanka,  a  cloth  of  gold  shining  bright,  and 
said,  “I  send  out  many  warriors  and  few  return.  Now  I  must 


Ravana  and  Time 


277 


go  myself,  let  Earth  take  warning.  .  .  And  he  thought  to 
himself,  “Death,  now  whirl  your  maces  and  rods  and  strike 
with  your  clubs — I  am  at  chance  this  day. . . .” 

On  that  chariot  Ravana  loaded  a  hundred  tough  horn- 
tipped  bows  as  hard  to  stretch  as  the  mind;  and  a  thousand 
quivers  of  his  own  arrows,  long  and  thick,  vanes  and  shaft  all 
made  from  one  piece  of  blue  iron;  and  a  long  straight  sword; 
and  an  irresistible  eight-sided  mace.  The  chariot  was  armored 
by  shields  and  plates  cut  from  dark  brass,  and  drawn  by  four 
white  horses.  Tied  loose  on  the  central  flagstaff  were  the  ten 
golden  arrows  for  the  ten  directions  of  his  Empire. 

With  his  many  hands  Ravana  needed  no  charioteer.  He 
leapt  like  a  lion  into  his  car  and  drove  out  from  his  palace 
into  the  city  streets.  His  horses  broke  into  a  run  and  the 
Rakshasa  people  along  the  way  yelled  and  cheered,  lining  the 
wide  streets,  changing  their  shapes  and  colors  from  their  emo¬ 
tions,  and  the  chariot  wheels  crashed  and  clattered  over  the 
yellow  bricks. 

Then  the  Demon  King  left  Lanka  through  the  fifth  gate,  by 
the  Gate  of  Illusion.  The  monkeys  and  bears  were  watching 
all  the  four  city  walls  to  see  which  one  would  open,  when 
Ravana  and  his  horse  and  chariot  winked  into  view  coming 
down  through  the  air  and  hit  the  ground  just  west  of  Lanka 
with  a  smash  like  a  mountain  falling  flat  upon  the  world. 

Ravana  stopped  a  little  way  forward  of  the  wall  and 
looked  out  across  the  plain,  where  at  a  distance  he  saw  the 
moving  golden  ends  of  Rama’s  bow  like  waving  torchlights  in 
the  darkness,  and  saw  Rama  facing  him  on  foot  and  un¬ 
afraid. 


“Look,  there  he  is.”  Rama  pointed  with  his  bow,  and  a 
lightning  flash  snapped  across  the  sky  though  there  were  no 
clouds.  “He’s  come  before  my  eyes  as  though  before  a  ser¬ 
pent  who  kills  by  looking.” 

The  monkeys  and  bears  all  ran  to  Rama,  and  many  of 
them  were  partly  hard  to  see  or  all  invisible  from  fright.  With 
one  hand  Rama  quickly  strung  his  bow.  He  turned  to 
Lakshmana  and  said,  “Let  my  animal  friends  of  the  woods 
take  cover,  and  you  with  them.” 

Hanuman  was  there  and  he  said,  “Don’t  worry  about  us, 
worry  about  fighting  on  foot  against  a  deadly  chariot.” 

Rama  smiled.  “Go  back  to  the  bridgehead.  It’s  midnight, 
and  from  now  on,  the  world  is  destined  to  grow  light.” 


278 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


“He  is  a  most  glorious  and  magnificent  king,”  said  Laksh- 
mana. 

“His  coming  here  is  my  good  fortune,”  answered  Rama, 
“for  now  before  me  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  and  the  only  one 
left  to  die  cut  on  the  edge  of  battle.” 

Then  they  all  left  Rama  standing  there  alone,  his  long 
green  hair  no  longer  matted  like  a  hermit  wears  but  tied  back 
with  a  green  silk  war-band;  but  still  he  wore  barkcloth  over 
his  golden  armor,  still  he  walked  barefoot  without  the  sandals 
he’d  given  Bharata — partly  seeming  a  wanderer,  partly  a  war¬ 
rior,  partly  a  King. 

Still  Ravana  waited  and  did  not  move.  Then  suddenly  a 
starlight  came  down  from  heaven  toward  Rama.  As  it  ap¬ 
proached  and  drew  near  to  Earth  Rama  saw  that  it  was  a 
brilliant  aerial  chariot,  a  silver  car  with  weapons  hung  in 
racks  that  shone  like  lanterns,  drawn  by  ten  silvery-gray 
horses  flying  abreast,  coming  closer  and  closer  with  many 
fan-blades  spinning  and  the  silver  wheels  all  flashing;  then  in 
a  cloud  of  dust,  with  a  rumble  of  hooves  and  wheels,  that 
chariot  landed  not  far  away  and  drove  full  speed  over  the  bat¬ 
tlefield  to  Rama,  and  stopped  before  him.  There  was  a 
charioteer  in  the  driver’s  box  but  the  car  held  no  warrior  be¬ 
hind  him. 

“A  friend  wishes  you  well.  I  am  Matali  the  heavenly  chari¬ 
oteer.”  Matali  stood  beside  Rama.  “Lord  of  Men,  this  is  In- 
dra’s  celestial  car.  Best  of  Kings,  these  are  his  cloud-horses 
shod  in  silver  shoes;  they  are  my  rain-steeds — the  sky- 
climbers,  the  star-jumpers,  the  misty  runners  of  the  sky,  and 
our  paths  are  everywhere.” 

"Welcome  to  you,”  said  Rama. 

“Solar  King,  we’ll  take  you  to  Victory!”  Matali  looked  at 
Ravana.  “Wherever  I  look,  I  seem  to  see  Death,  Death  wear¬ 
ing  many  flowers  waiting  for  him  . . . .” 

“I  haven’t  forgotten,”  said  Rama.  “I  still  remember,  we 
saw  you  when  Savari  told  us  the  tale  of  Hanuman — and  I 
had  lost  my  Sita — ” 

“Oh  this  is  a  wide  road  for  attack  and  no  place  for  grief,” 
said  Matali.  “Here  I  am  in  the  dark  in  my  cold  bronze  ar¬ 
mor,  and  I’ve  lost  all  my  patience,  and  there’s  no  escape  for 
him.  I’ll  thread  the  paths  and  follow  the  roads  to  win!  It’s 
hard  to  kill  the  Demon  King!  Get  on!” 

“The  world  will  be  without  me,  or  without  Ravana.”  Rama 
put  his  arms  on  board  the  car.  “Now  drive  straight  against 
him.” 


Ravana  and  Time 


279 


" Om !”  The  rain  horses  laid  back  their  ears.  Matali  and 
Rama  got  in  the  chariot  and  Matali  held  the  twenty  long 
reins.  He  looked  at  his  horses  and  glanced  at  the  ground  be¬ 
fore  them.  Then  his  hands  trembled  slightly  and  were  still, 
and  the  ten  horses  were  walking.  “Go!” 

They  went  a  little  faster,  at  an  easy  gait.  Then  they  quick¬ 
ened  their  step  and  they  were  half-running.  And  I’ve  been 
true — whispered  Matali — I’ve  been  true,  all  this  time,  run! 
And  at  last  they  went  full  running,  silver  shoes  flashing,  beau¬ 
tiful  horses  running  abreast,  beating  down  the  ground — 

Ravana’s  chariot  leapt  forward  to  intercept  them.  All  at 
once  the  two  cars  were  together,  and  the  golden  plates  on  the 
back  of  Rama’s  bow  among  the  diamonds  shone  like  fires  out 
among  the  stars,  all  up  close. 

Ravana  laughed  in  anger  and  lashed  Matali  with  a  whip. 
Matali  struck  back  at  him,  but  very  fast  Ravana  backed  and 
turned  quickly  and  couldn’t  be  reached. 

Ravana  shot  eight  bows  at  once.  Thirty  thousand  dark  ar¬ 
rows  struck  Rama.  They  tore  away  the  bark  he  wore,  and 
Rama’s  armor  all  of  gold  gleamed  out  in  that  night  bright  as 
the  Sun. 

The  brilliant  spires  and  towers  of  Lanka  looked  flaming 
and  afire  in  that  blazing  light.  The  glare  and  the  gold  came 
reflected  back  from  Lanka’s  wall  and  confused  Ravana’s  aim, 
and  Matali  drove  off  a  way  and  stopped. 

Fierce  and  furious  was  that  fight.  Oh  Rama!  Waves  were 
on  the  water  in  Valmiki’s  hand;  storms  swirled. 

He  saw  Sita.  In  the  clash  and  sting  of  war  she  loved  you. 

Now  hear  the  melody  of  our  sweet  song,  swiftly  plunged 
into  strife. 

Majesty,  it  is  Night,  and  people  change  at  Night! 


Swarming  at  Rama  came  a  million  arrows  with  iron  ar¬ 
rowheads  of  sharp  animal  faces — the  keen  faces  of  wolves 
and  eagles  and  sharks,  iron  teeth  that  closed  and  bit  when 
they  struck  flesh.  They  tore  down  all  over;  but  Rama  an¬ 
swered  them  with  flights  of  his  Ayodhya  arrows  again  all 
gold-covered,  bearing  his  name,  feathered  with  white  and 
blue  heron  plumes;  and  he  dropped  them  severed  from  the 
sky. 

Then  light-handed,  Rama  cut  off  Ravana’s  heads  with  ar¬ 
row-blades,  and  the  lifeless  heads  rolled  away  with  their  long 
earrings  and  shadowy  helmets,  dusty  and  bleeding  dark.  All 


280 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Fire-tempered,  Rama’s  arrows  with  sharp  heads  and  even 
knots  flew  howling  like  hurricanes. 

But  the  heads  grew  back.  Hundreds  of  heads  rolled  killed, 
but  there  was  Ravana  again,  never  turning  back  from  war, 
bearing  to  Rama  ill-will  and  weapons.  There  in  his  chariot 
stood  once  more  the  Demon  King  of  many  talents,  many  fel¬ 
onies,  many  evasions. 

Rama  squeezed  his  long  green  arms.  First  saying  the  Man¬ 
tra,  he  called  the  Fire-weapon  and  shot  an  arrow  straight  up. 
Down  upon  Ravana  fell  arrows  that  burned.  Their  bright- 
burning  points  were  windows  of  light;  heaven  through  the 
dark  was  full  of  windows  open  to  all  the  worlds  above. 

Ravana  spoke  the  rain-mantra  over  an  arrow  and  released 
it.  Clouds  came  out  of  nowhere.  Water  drenched  the  world, 
the  fire-arrows  went  out  and  blackness  fell. 

Rama  used  the  wind-weapon.  He  shot  an  arrow  into  the 
clouds  and  his  unbreakable  bowstring  rang  out  over  the 
whole  island  of  Lanka.  The  air  sighed  and  the  seven  winds  of 
heaven  swept  down  their  paths  moaning  and  whirling,  and  by 
the  bridgehead  rolling  breakers  trailed  white  on  the  grey  sea 
and  the  tall  palms  bent  their  heads  and  gave  up  their  old 
leaves  from  the  past.  Free,  sang  the  seven  winds,  Free  the 
world,  Free!  They  screamed  through  the  high  rocks  on  the 
summits  above  Rama’s  battlefield;  the  rainclouds  fled  before 
them,  the  sky  was  clear,  the  stars  sparkled. 

Ravana  fired  an  arrow  into  the  ground  and  from  Earth 
arose  steep  walls  of  high  mountains.  Great  solid  rows  of 
black  stone,  barren  and  lifeless,  blocked  the  sky  with  jagged 
ridges  and  peaks  and  stopped  the  Wind.  Those  were  the  bare 
black  hills  of  Hell,  baking  hot,  and  they  creaked  with  the 
strain  of  the  cool  night  air  until,  with  a  noise  like  a  salvo  of 
cannon,  deep  cracks  broke  through  them  and  red  canyons  of 
heat  glowed  from  deep  within. 

Rama  fired  Brahmastra,  Brahma’s  weapon,  and  shot  it 
arching  up  to  fall  on  the  line  of  hills.  The  arrow  grew  long 
and  stout  as  a  spear.  The  Wind  entered  its  feathered  wings; 
there  were  the  Sun  in  its  metal  blade,  skies  and  rainbows  in 
its  shaft,  and  all  the  worlds  in  its  weight.  It  reached  its  height 
and  began  to  curve  down.  In  a  burst  of  brilliance  it  scattered 
apart  into  180,000  rocketing  thunders.  Bolts  of  light  stabbed 
at  the  hills  from  above,  and  wherever  they  hit  they  turned  the 
brittle  stone  to  diamond.  The  Hills  of  Hell  shuddered  and 
dove  back  out  of  sight  below  ground. 


Ravana  and  Time 


281 


“Enough  of  this,”  said  Rama,  “there’s  work  to  dol  Now  I 
take  off  my  fancy  rings!” 

Matali  looked  over  his  shoulder.  “But  you  aren’t  wear¬ 
ing - ” 

“Charge!” 

“Alright!  And  here  he  comes — ” 

From  a  standing  start,  in  the  wink  of  an  eye  Matali’s 
horses  were  racing.  Rama  stood  free,  not  holding  any  sup¬ 
port,  not  swaying  or  even  a  little  off-balance.  The  two  war- 
chariots  drove  right  at  each  other.  At  the  last  instant  Matali 
turned.  The  cars  tore  past  each  on  the  other’s  left,  throwing 
out  clouds  of  dust  and  stones  from  their  wheels.  The  horses 
seemed  to  touch,  the  axle  hubs  just  missed,  and  Ravana 
wasn’t  fast  enough.  He  had  no  time  to  shoot.  Then  they  were 
by,  traveling  swiftly  apart.  But  just  as  Rama  passed  he  shot 
an  arrow  deep  into  Ravana’s  left  shoulders  and  the  Demon 
King  had  to  hold  onto  his  flagstaff  with  his  right  arms  to  keep 
from  falling. 

The  chariots  slowed  and  circled  round  facing  again.  Matali 
maneuvered  for  position  and  said,  “Now  I  begin  to  see  the 
end  of  Ravana’s  life.” 

And  far  north  across  the  sea,  the  harmless  woodsmen  of 
Dandaka  Forest  walking  in  the  silence  of  Night  under  the 
huge  trees  could  see  in  the  sky  violet  ribbons  of  light  from 
the  war  of  Lanka  in  the  south,  and  they  wondered — Rama 
. . .  Where  is  Rama-Chandra,  the  lovely  Moon  of  Night? 

Only  the  sky  will  cover  the  sea; 

Only  Rama  can  fight  the  Demon  King. 


Rama  and  Ravana  dueled  with  arrows.  One  after  another, 
Rama  broke  the  bows  out  of  Ravana’s  hands  until  ninety-nine 
were  gone  and  only  one  remained.  The  Demon  King  shot  ar¬ 
rows  long  and  short,  thick  and  thin,  quick  and  slow,  from 
close  range  or  far  away;  but  Rama’s  armor  was  hard  and  im¬ 
penetrable,  he  was  unharmed  and  many  arrows  melted  away 
when  he  saw  them  come. 

Ravana  seized  his  mace  of  iron  set  with  lapis  stones  and 
embellished  with  gold,  hung  with  iron-mouthed  bells  and  en¬ 
twined  with  red  blossoms,  for  years  daily  washed  with  blood 
and  now  smoking  and  straining  to  strike,  an  eight-sided  mace 
which  would  return  from  flight  into  the  thrower’s  hands. 

Ravana  drove  to  attack.  He  gripped  the  iron  handle  with 


282 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


four  hands  and  swung  as  the  chariots  met.  It  was  too  soon 
and  the  blow  fell  on  the  charioteer  and  not  Rama,  but  Matali 
knocked  that  mace  hard  aside  with  his  bronze  fist. 

Then  Ravana  drew  apart  and  stopped.  He  whirled  his 
mace  in  a  circle  rising  and  dipping  his  heads;  and  the  mace 
moaned — Woe  . . .  Woe . . .  Woe — 

The  mace  went  faster  and  faster.  Matali  drove  to  deceive 
Ravana’s  aim  and  Rama  reached  for  Indra’s  weapons-racks. 
He  took  a  spear,  held  it  in  one  hand,  slapped  it  with  the  palm 
of  his  other  hand  and  threw  it.  That  great  dart  went  at  Ra¬ 
vana  resonant  and  vibrating  with  sound,  with  a  noise  like  the 
thunder  of  a  rockslide,  a  loud  falling  noise  like  a  cliff  falling, 
the  dark  world  falling,  Ravana  falling. . . . 

And  the  Demon  Lord  let  go  his  mace;  it  sped,  and  Rama 
stood  in  its  way.  Ravana’s  chariot  turned  to  run. 

Rama’s  spear  broke  Ravana’s  flagpole;  the  cloth-of-gold 
war-flag  fell.  Rama  broke  the  ten  arrows  of  the  Rakshasa 
Empire,  and  when  he  did,  the  running  demon  car  lost  its 
rattle  and  clatter  and  its  wheels  turned  on  in  mournful 
silence.  The  flag  of  Lanka  lay  in  the  dust. 

Matali  couldn’t  outdrive  Ravana’s  mace,  but  he  dropped 
his  reins  and  stood  up  himself  in  its  path;  and  it  glanced  off 
his  broad  chest  and  knocked  him  violently  from  the  car,  and 
went  by  Rama  deflected  just  enough  to  miss  him. 

Rama  wept  and  bit  his  lip.  The  mace  turned  to  go  back  to 
Ravana,  but  Rama  threw  himself  from  the  chariot  and  seized 
it.  He  knelt  and  broke  it  like  a  stick  over  his  thigh — Good 
Fortune  to  you! — once,  into  two  pieces — Peace  to  you! — and 
twice,  into  four.  Deep  red  blood  ran  over  his  green  skin. 

The  four  pieces  of  the  mace  kept  pulling  back  to  Ravana, 
and  Rama  cried — Would  you? — and  hurled  them  at  the 
Demon  King.  Ravana  quickly  turned  aside;  and  as  he  had 
spumed  them,  the  four  angry  chunks  of  iron  tore  into  Earth 
and  vanished  noisily  underground. 

Matali  lay  on  his  back  unconscious.  His  heavenly  armor 
was  tom,  and  his  ten  horses  stood  still,  their  faces  near  his, 
looking  down  at  him.  A  flood  of  sorrow  filled  Rama’s  heart 
to  see  him  hurt.  Rama  touched  him  and  untied  his  breast¬ 
plate,  and  said,  “Here  indeed  your  loyalty  has  had  unjust  re¬ 
ward  I” 

Matali  revived  from  Rama’s  touch.  He  looked  up  and  saw 
Rama  bending  over  him,  saw  his  horses  raise  their  heads,  and 
•following  their  look  saw  Ravana’s  chariot  coming  again,  but 


Ravana  and  Time 


283 


'  moving  strangely  slow.  By  some  chance  he  yet  lived,  and  he 
felt  the  life  flow  back  into  his  body. 

Rama  brought  water  from  Indra’s  chariot,  and  some  cloth 
that  he  began  to  rip  apart  for  binding  Matali’s  wide  wounds. 
The  silver  car  was  stricken  and  dented.  The  horses  pawed  at 
the  ground  with  their  front  feet.  “Majesty,”  said  Matali,  “I’ll 
be  well,  there’s  time  enough  for  that  later." 

Rama  said,  “Good.  It’s  fast  nearing  dawn,  but  drink  just  a 
little.”  Then  after  Matali  drank,  Rama  sipped  water  three 
times.  “Lie  still,  I  don’t  need  the  car  now."  Rama  took  up  his 
every-colored  bow,  and  there  stood  Rama  the  great  archer, 
Rama  the  good  bowman,  the  friend  of  every  man. 

He  was  all  fiery  to  see.  Wild  little  flames  came  from  his 
skin,  his  green  eyes  gleamed,  then  swift  as  thought  Rama  shot 
his  arrows.  He  broke  off  one  wheel  of  Ravana’s  chariot  and  it 
tipped  over  and  left  the  Demon  King  also  standing  on  the 
ground,  holding  his  last  bow  and  a  sword,  facing  him;  and 
the  white  horses  ran  away  with  the  broken  car. 

Rama  opened  a  long  bamboo  case  at  his  belt  and  took  out 
the  brass-bladed  grass  arrow  given  to  him  by  Agastya,  and 
notched  it  on  his  bowstring.  That  arrow  could  rend  walls  and 
gateways  of  stone;  it  breathed  and  sighed.  Rama  pulled  his 
bow.  He  took  three  aiming  steps  backwards  and  held  his 
breath. 

Ravana  took  on  the  brilliant  form  of  Indra  the  King  of 
Heaven.  He  was  glorious  and  gracious,  all  illumined;  he 
could  scarcely  be  looked  at,  and  a  halo  of  radiance  and  en¬ 
ergy  danced  around  him.  Rama  was  dazed  by  Ravana’s  false 
figure.  He  could  not  bear  to  shoot  at  such  a  divine  form,  at 
such  fair  beauty. 

Matali  the  Charioteer  was  watching.  He  could  be  enchant¬ 
ed  by  no  beauty  but  a  fair  woman’s.  He  raised  himself  pain¬ 
fully  on  one  arm  and  called  out  to  Rama — Strike,  Strike, 
That’s  not  my  Master. 

That  was  then  the  destined  time  and  true  setting  of  Ra¬ 
vana’s  death.  Rama  thought — I  must  believe  it!  Oh  kill 
him! — 

Rama  shot.  The  bowstring  rang  out,  all  over  the  Universe. 
That  arrow  first  broke  the  sword  and  bow  Ravana  raised  to 
ward  it,  then  it  hit  Ravana’s  breast  and  struck  through  his 
heart,  stealing  his  life,  and  never  stopped,  but  came  out  from 
his  back  and  entered  the  Earth. 

Down  from  Ravana’s  hands  fell  his  broken  bow  and  sword. 


284 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


and  the  Demon  King  of  Lanka  fell  dying  in  his  own  dark 
form. 

At  first  Rama  didn’t  move.  Then  he  first  unstrung  his  bow 
and  put  it  aside.  Then  he  lifted  Matali  into  Indra’s  rain- 
chariot  and  the  misty  horses  rose  running  through  the  sky 
and  were  gone. 

At  daybreak,  at  dawn  Ravana  died.  He  was  a  fire  not 
burning,  an  ocean  still  with  no  tides.  He  could  no  longer 
speak.  He  could  not  know  whatever  might  happen  around 
him.  He  could  not  move;  he  grew  cold;  he  had  no  thought; 
he  did  not  breathe. 

The  Rakshasas  who  had  watched  the  war  turned  away  in 
fear  from  the  walls  and  hid  in  Lanka.  And  darkly  the  Kings 
of  the  four  quarters  of  the  world  glanced,  but  none  saw  what 
way  Ravana  went  then. 


That  last  night,  Suka  the  Rakshasa  Minister  stood  by  Lord 
Rama’s  bridge,  wrapped  in  his  night  cloak  and  holding  Ra- 
vana’s  stone  letter  under  his  arm.  All  night  he  watched  the 
garish  lights  and  signs  of  war  up  on  Trikuta  Hill,  and  Lak- 
shmana  with  the  animals  stood  watching  him. 

Then  at  sunrise  the  first  long  rays  of  light  reached  the  three 
summits  over  Lanka.  Suka  dropped  his  cape  behind  him,  and 
wearing  the  scarlet  sash  of  a  messenger  he  walked  slow  and 
easy  toward  the  city,  and  the  animals  made  way  for  him. 
Only  Prince  Angada  opened  his  mouth  to  speak,  but  Sugriva 
the  Monkey  King  put  his  hand  on  the  young  prince’s  arm 
and  pulled  him  back  and  Hanuman  stepped  in  front  of  him. 

Suka  stepped  into  the  air  and  flew  back  up  the  slopes  to 
Lanka,  and  she  was  golden  in  the  morning  when  he  stepped 
on  the  ground.  The  sunshine,  coppery  and  yellow  and  red 
aijd  white,  touched  her  like  melted  metals  from  a  mountain. 
It  was  still,  and  silent,  and  Suka  thought,  “I  remember  this 
silence,  the  silence  over  all.  .  .  .”  Suka  felt  free.  It  was  al¬ 
most  as  though  Ravana  had  sung  again  there  on  the  battle¬ 
field  the  lilting  songs  that  had  won  him  his  freedom  from 
Shiva’s  prison,  and  Suka  had  also  been  released  from  some¬ 
where. 

Suka  walked  straight  for  Rama.  Rama  stood  alone  over  the 
corpse  of  the  Demon  King.  There  was  no  one  else  about, 
nothing  stirred.  And  where  the  wreckage  of  war  was  in  his 


Ravana  and  Time 


285 


way,  Suka  by  a  look  from  his  eyes  blasted  it  silently  aside 
and  made  his  path  clear. 

He  came  to  Rama  and  handed  him  the  sealed  letter.  “For 
you  from  the  Dead  King.” 

And  as  he  spoke  of  him,  Suka  looked  down  at  Ravana. 
Suka’s  hooded  eyes  were  half-closed,  no  expression  crossed 
his  face,  yet  for  a  moment  Suka  seemed  to  grow  ominous 
and  tragic;  he  seemed  to  darken  even  while  standing  there,  in 
the  sunlight. 

Rama  cracked  open  the  stone  envelope  in  his  strong  hands. 
He  looked  at  the  letter  awhile,  then  turned  to  Suka.  “Ah  my 
friend,”  said  Rama  fondly.  “Listen — ” 


Lord  Narayana,  you  are  the  witness,  you  make  the  Moon 
walk  in  brightness  and  the  stars  vanish  in  the  daylight. 

Dear  Rama,  Lord  of  the  Worlds — Think  and  remember, 
how  you  promised  Indra  to  kill  me  forever.  Nothing  is  for¬ 
ever  except  yourself.  Except  dying  at  your  hand,  how  else 
could  I  make  you  take  me  into  your  own  Self? 

I  was  only  a  Rakshasa,  and  you  were  very  hard  to  ap¬ 
proach.  Yet  seeking  wisdom  I  learned  many  things.  You  do 
not  know  who  you  are  again.  I  knew  it  all  along,  but  even  still 
you  do  not  know.  Nothing  you  do  ever  fails,  one  glance  of 
yours  and  people  sing  again  the  good  old  songs. 

I  took  no  protection  against  men.  You  go  everywhere,  and 
know  every  thing  that  ever  has  or  ever  will  be  done.  How 
was  I  careless?  I  was  nowhere  careless  I  Oh  Narayana,  Lo,  I 
looked,  I  marveled — Men  are  mines.  Men  are  precious  mines. 
Oh  Rama,  did  you  think  that  dark  was  bad? 

You  see  whatever  happens  and  you  support  all  creatures.  I 
saw  that  heaven  was  impermanent  and  Hell  itself  did  not  en¬ 
dure;  I  discovered  that  the  time  of  every  life  is  one  day  full; 
and  I  found  how  all  creatures  that  are  separate  from  you  are 
ever  and  again  reborn,  over  and  over,  always  changing.  I  do 
not  love  things  that  come  and  go  and  slip  away  with  Time, 
and  Time  himself  I  hate.  I  warned  him  when  we  first  met 
that  I  took  him  for  my  enemy,  I  told  him  so. 

Best  of  Men,  there  are  many  kinds  of  Love,  and  I  never 
hurt  her.  I  kept  Lakshmi  to  lure  you  here.  I  offered  you  my 
life  and  you  accepted  it. 

You  are  Narayana  who  moves  on  the  waters.  You  flow 


286 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


through  us  all.  You  are  Rama  and  Sita  bom  out  of  Earth  and 
Ravana  the  Demon  King,  you  are  Hanuman  like  the  wind, 
you  are  Lakshmana  like  a  mirror,  you  are  Indrajit  and  Indra, 
you  are  the  Poet  and  the  Players  and  the  Play.  And  bom  as  a 
man  you  forget  this,  you  lose  the  memory,  and  take  on  man’s 
ignorance  again,  as  you  will,  every  time. 

Therefore  welcome  back  your  Sita.  The  war  is  done,  and 
so  we  close  our  letter. 


The  two  of  them  stood  there  by  Ravana,  still  as  statues  in 
the  new-risen  sun.  Then  Suka  took  off  his  blood-red  scarlet 
sash  and  folded  it  and  laid  it  down  on  Ravana’s  breast. 

Rama  sighed  and  smiled.  He  broke  the  letter  and  threw  it 
away.  He  said  quietly,  “Go,  go,  I  do  not  care  what  all  this 
means.” 

“I  never  dreamed  of  such  a  thing.”  Suka  was  smiling  and 
smiling.  “Oh,  after  all  this  long  way  around.  . . .” 

There  was  a  soft  whisper,  and  Suka  became  a  rising  wisp 
of  smoke;  he  spread  and  dissolved  in  the  air,  in  surrender. 
For  many  years  he  lived  peacefully  alone  in  the  forests  across 
the  sea,  and  no  one  ever  saw  him  sad. 

This  is  an  ancient  tale. 


We  choose  the  god-like  splendor 
Of  the  best-loved  Sun 
To  inspire  us; 

May  the  shining  Sun 
Brighten  your  Life I 

We  sing  Valmiki’s  song. 

Oh  King  Rama,  grand  and  glorious,  the  all-seeing  Sun  of  a 
thousand  rays  lives  in  the  sky.  He  is  the  Lord  of  Day  and  the 
eye  of  the  world.  He  gives  Life.  Every  morning  he  wakes 
people  from  sleep,  and  goes  his  way  alone  through  the  heav¬ 
ens  above  and  through  the  heavens  in  the  heart.  Salutations 
and  greetings  to  the  Lord  of  the  Sky  and  Maker  of  Days. 

Praise  and  victory  to  the  good  and  friendly  King  of  Light 
who  moves  our  thoughts  and  our  blood  within  us  and  opens 
our  senses  by  his  beams.  He  is  mighty  strong.  He  is  golden 
bright  and  his  seed  is  golden.  We  can  see  no  evil;  we  see  no 


Ravana  and  Time 


287 


men  who  get  no  sunshine.  Therefore  shower  gold,  spend  and 
be  generous  to  those  you  love.  For  your  sake  spend  your 
bright  yellow  gold,  give  gifts  while  you  can  and  do  good, 
choose  your  deeds  well.  You  are  wealthy,  you  have  unlimited 
gold  to  draw  on. 

I  don’t  respect  the  floating  borders  of  Earth, 

/  travel  where  I  will, 

I  love  everyone. 

My  friend  the  Moon  has  known  this  for  long  lifetimes, 

I  am  the  Sun, 

All  the  same. 

Ancient  stories. 

Ancient  Sunpoems. 

Every  morning  you  are  new.  My  Lord  Sun  I  am  asleep, 
my  body  is  like  a  corpse,  until  you  come  and  raise  me  to 
Life.  You  reveal  all  things  to  me;  you  show  me  what  they 
truly  are.  I  look  out  on  a  happy  world!  I  see  you  in  your 
chariot  behind  your  seven  horses  and  you  bring  every  kind  of 
happiness.  Dear  Sun,  behold  me  here  below  you,  a  Man,  to 
myself  the  center  of  all  these  worlds. 

You  feed  us  all;  every  garden  grows  by  your  light  All  our 
energy  is  yours.  I  bow  to  the  Eastern  Mountain  where  you 
rise,  I  bow  to  Sunset  Hill  in  the  west  where  you  go  down,  set¬ 
ting  low  above  the  waters,  in  flame,  all  in  gold. 

You  unfold  the  flowers  of  day.  You  are  bright  and  beauti¬ 
ful.  If  there  are  clouds  you  are  always  behind  them.  You  are 
the  handsome  ornament  of  all  the  heavens.  Your  heart  is 
wide,  it  is  immeasurably  wide.  How  can  I  not  speak  of  this? 
Why  be  silent  about  you?  Take  my  song  and  give  me  light 

How  can  I  be  sad?  Am  I  blind?  The  Sun  shines  on  me. 
This  very  instant  have  I  won  brilliance  for  my  wealth. 


Oh  Rama,  it  is  Truth,  we  think,  that  moves  the  Sun  across 
the  sky.  Oh  Lord,  look  up  at  him,  so  joyful  and  fine! 

Whoever  sings  this  song  or  hears  it  sung,  he  comes  by  no 
misfortune.  When  he  is  in  peril  of  his  life,  or  is  ill,  or  is  in  a 
lonely  place,  or  in  any  fear,  this  bright  tune  will  bring  him 
victory.  No  thief  can  touch  him,  he  will  never  dare.  This  song 
is  named  Heart  of  the  Sun.  It  is  warm  and  safe  and  strong.  It 
makes  troubles  go.  It  is  supremely  good.  If  you  are  afraid  in 
the  long  dark  night,  remember  it. 


288 


SITA’S  RESCUE 


Ayodhya  King,  our  preceptor  the  Poet  Valmiki  saw  all  of 
this  war  gliding  already  into  the  past,  becoming  a  wonderful 
tale,  a  beautiful  story. 

May  all  creatures  be  happy.  We  sing  Valmiki’s  song. 

“Trust  and  be  True: 

Serve  Right  as 
I  serve  You" 

— says  the  Sun. 


PART  THREE 

W 

THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


OMI 

I  bow  to  the  great  Lord  Narayana, 
And  to  the  blessed  Lady  Sita; 

I  salute  you,  faithful  Hanuman; 
And  Saraswati,  Goddess  take  my  gift: 
JAYA! 

Victory  to  you I 


Here's  Love! 


And  so  the  War  of  Lanka  was  ended  on  the  morning  of  the 
fourth  day,  just  past  the  first  night  of  the  New  Moon,  near  to 
the  solstice  of  Winter  when  Spring  dares  begin  again,  and  the 
Sun  turns  in  his  sky  to  come  back  to  us.  Rama  took  off  his 
armor  and  the  day  grew  warm.  Surya  the  Sun  was  pouring 
out  bright  silver  and  fine  gold.  He  threw  his  beams  down 
cordially  over  that  morning  world — a  fine  reliable  figure  of 
light,  a  handsome  person,  a  happy  sight — indeed  a  part  of  the 
world  well-made,  very  well  done,  all  of  it. 

Hanuman  and  the  Rakshasa  Vibhishana  and  his  four 
demon  knights  came  swiftly  to  Rama’s  side.  Vibhishana  held 
a  bundle  and  said,  “Dear  Lord,  wear  these  clothes  Lak- 
shmana  sends  to  you  now.” 

“They’re  not  Rakshasa  robes?” 

“He  carried  and  kept  them  somehow  throughout  all  your 
wanderings.”  Vibhishana  smiled.  “They’re  from  Ayodhya.  I 
don’t  know  how  he  did  it.” 

“Fair  Ayodhya!”  Rama  dressed,  and  saw  that  Hanuman 
also  held  something.  “Monkey,  what  have  you  got  there?” 

“All  the  ornaments  she  let  fall  upon  our  hill.”  Hanuman 
looked  at  the  dead  Ravana.  “Master,  is  he  really  dead?  What 
did  Suka  say?  What  else  happened?  When  can  we — ” 

“Oh  enough,  Hanuman!”  Rama  looked  round  at  the  world. 
“Long  love  is  now  remembered.  Be  still.  I’ve  recovered  her, 
we  are  reunited  and  all  the  old  lovely  colors  return  and  come 
again  into  my  view.  Go  to  her,  tell  Sita  we  have  won!” 

“I’mgonel” 

Vibhishana  said,  “We  ask  permission  to  make  Ravana’s  fu¬ 
neral  inside  the  city.” 

“Why  is  it  so  quiet?”  asked  Rama. 

“Every  soul’s  already  left  Lanka  but  for  a  few  who  will 
soon  go.” 

“I  had  not  wished  harm  to  your  beautiful  city;  now  she  is 
desolate.” 


291 


292 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


Vibhishana  laughed.  “How  many  times,  Lord?  You  know 
how  we  love  to  disappear,  but  I  will  stay  here  when  I  may.” 

“Is  there  any  water?”  One  of  the  four  knights  gave  Rama  a 
waterjar.  “Kneel,  Vibhishana.”  Rama  poured  water  over  the 
Demon  Prince’s  head.  “Arise,  Lanka  King.” 

Vibhishana  stood.  “Our  folk  will  return,  but  don’t  fear  us. 
We  Rakshasas  are  the  guardians,  we  are  the  protectors;  so 
were  we  created  by  Brahma.  We’ll  guard  the  temples  and  not 
harm  good  men,  and  I’ll  hide  Lanka’s  golden  beauty  and 
keep  our  home  from  others’  eyes.  All  will  be  well  with  us  al¬ 
ways.” 

“What’s  keeping  that  fool  Hanuman?” 

Vibhishana  answered,  “It’s  been  but  a  moment!”  His  four 
Rakshasa  knights  carried  away  Ravana’s  corpse.  The  west 
gate  of  Lanka  opened  for  them  and  they  entered.  “They’ll 
bum  him  quick.  You’ll  soon  meet  Sita.  I’m  here;  I’m  going  to 
be  your  wish-protector.” 

Rama  asked,  “What  will  happen  to  Queen  Mandodari? 
What  will  she  do?” 

“Ah,”  said  Vibhishana.  “The  Daughter  of  Illusion!  Our 
people  all  have  other  lives  beneath  the  Sea — but  Mandodari’s 
father  is  the  Asura  Maya,  the  great  Artist.  And  if  he  still 
lives  he  will  come  to  her  here;  he  will  take  her  home.  Maya! 
Maya!  All  is  illusion  ...  All  is  illusion  ....  Maya  the  an¬ 
cient  architect,  Maya  the  builder  of  young  dreams  might  take 
her  back  to  his  Cave  of  Trees,  and  who  will  meet  her  next  no 
one  knows.” 

Vibhishana  and  Rama  stood  silent  awhile,  then  the  Good 
Demon  Lord  of  Lanka  said,  “Queen  Mandodari  would  have 
restored  Sita’s  clear  yellow  robe  for  this  day.  It  will  take  her 
time  to  dress  for  you  as  well.” 

“I  don’t  care  what  she’s  wearing!” 

“There’s  the  smoke,  that’s  Ravana’s  pyre  burning  behind 
the  walls.  I  wonder — I  would  marry  Mandodari  myself  if  I 
only  found  her  somewhere,  someday — but  even  Time  can’t 
ever  find  out  too  soon  what  Maya  the  Asura  wants  concealed. 
Who  knows?” 


When  she  saw  Ravana  dead,  the  fair-skinned  Queen  Man¬ 
dodari,  dressed  all  in  white,  ran  to  him,  and  in  the  quiet  city 
she  held  his  hand  in  hers  and  bent  over  him  silently  weeping, 
shedding  tears  of  sorrow,  disconsolate  with  grief. 

A  Rakshasa  priest  approached  her.  “Faultless  Queen,  no 


Here’s  Love! 


293 


one  must  mourn  a  warrior  slain  fighting,  so  say  all  the  an¬ 
cient  preceptors  at  arms.  .  .  He  put  his  arm  round  her 
shoulder.  “But  I  also  am  very  sad  this  was  his  end.” 

Very  swiftly  some  Rakshasas  built  a  pyre  of  red  and  white 
sandalwood  logs,  and  laid  a  soft  deerskin  on  top,  and  they 
put  Ravana’s  corpse  on  the  deerskin.  They  washed  the  blood 
from  his  body  and  put  a  new  gold  thread  over  his  left  shoul¬ 
ders  and  across  his  chest.  They  laid  a  new  bow  and  sword  by 
him  and  put  garlands  of  marigold  flowers  over  him  there,  and 
covered  him  with  a  golden  cloth  bordered  with  blue  deer. 
From  brass  ladles  the  priest  poured  butter  and  buttermilk 
over  Ravana,  and  then  he  lit  the  pyre  from  Ravana’s  birthfire 
brought  there  in  a  burning  jar. 

All  in  a  few  moments  the  Rakshasas  burned  Ravana’s 
body.  The  few  remaining  Rakshasas  of  Lanka  walked  by, 
throwing  into  his  fire  black  aloes  sticks  and  incense,  handfuls 
of  pearls  and  broken  sea-coral,  and  the  fire  burned  fast.  Ra¬ 
vana’s  earthly  body  returned  again  into  the  five  elements  it 
had  been  made  of. 

Then  Mandodari  went  alone  to  a  mountain  streamside  in  a 
park  and  bathed  in  her  wet  white  robes,  and  set  down  by  the 
waterside  some  seeds  and  sacred  grass  as  offerings  to  the  an¬ 
cestors.  She  still  had  tears  in  her  wide  eyes.  But  so  late  in  the 
year  the  water-lotus  stalks  should  not  have  flowers.  She  shut 
her  eyes  and  wiped  her  tears  away,  and  looked  again  to  see 
more  clearly. 

“Father!” 

There  stood  the  Asura  Maya,  the  Architect  and  Astrono¬ 
mer  of  the  Olden  Gods,  and  he  gently  touched  her.  Do  not 
cry.  Do  not  cry. 

But  Mandodari  only  wept  anew.  “Come,”  said  Maya,  “I 
conjure  you,  speak  to  me.” 

“Oh,”  she  said,  “they  may  burn  his  body  but  never  his 
heart  that  he  gave  me  years  ago.  What  is  now  left  to  Ravana 
of  all  his  Empire?  His  body  was  happy  and  graceful  in  love; 
he  was  hard  to  look  at  in  anger.  I  loved  all  his  brows  and  his 
smooth  skin  with  handsome  scars — and  now  no  more  on 
Earth,  or  any  world!” 

“Are  you  sure?”  Maya  sat  down  beside  his  daughter  and 
watched  the  water  flow  past.  He  said,  “I  liked  it  best  when  he 
whirled  his  twenty  eyes,  when  he  came  crunching  down  the 
garden  walks,  when  he  drank  and  sang  and  wore  all  his  flow¬ 
ers.  .  .  .” 

‘They’ll  pay  for  this!”  cried  Mandodari. 


294 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


“But — Why?  What  has  happened?” 

“What  shall  I  do?”  asked  the  Queen.  “Which  way  is  there 
to  go?  Where  are  all  my  people?” 

Maya  replied,  “Why,  what  people  did  you  own?” 

‘The  people  of  this  city!  I  am  their  Queen!” 

“Who  would  believe  it?”  smiled  Maya.  “What  city?” 

“It’s  fading!  Father,  stop  it,  you  can  stop  it.  .  . .” 

“Come  to  our  peaceful  home;  you  are  never  alone  and 
friendless.” 

Mandodari  sighed.  “Oh,  let  Lanka  go,  what  good  is  she 
without  my  husband — ”  Tears  filled  her  eyes.  “A  husband  is 
most  dear  to  a  woman.  With  many  sons  and  millions  in  gold, 
she  cannot  be  happy  without  her  husband.  She  is  but  a  poor 
widow.  ...” 

“I  enchant  you  not  to  cry,”  said  Maya.  “Can  you  remem¬ 
ber  how  to  walk  with  me  again,  as  when  you  were  very 
young,  as  in  those  maiden  days?” 

/  am  the  Asura  Maya,  a  great  Artist,  the  Master  of  Illu¬ 
sion.  I  will  show  you,  my  wonderful  palace  is  still  where  it  al¬ 
ways  was.  I  have  food  for  all  my  family,  and  wine  for  you 
also. 

“Father,  tell  me,  why  would  my  Lord  forget  our  vows  to 
always  live  together,  and  go  apart  along  the  unknown  way, 
and  leave  me  behind  like  a  poor  wayside  beggar,  and  not 
comfort  me?” 

“Did  he?”  asked  Maya. 

“Oh  Time  destroys  things  so  easily!” 

“Does  he?”  Maya  laughed  and  got  to  his  feet.  “Come  on!” 
She  stood  by  him.  “Leave  here  everything  that  is  Lanka’s, 
and  take  away  only  your  own  deeds.” 

And  besides  that,  only  Love  may  go  beyond,  along 
with  us. 

See  the  world  through  my  sight. 

See — 

All  that  magic I 

All  yours! 

Then  hand  in  hand  they  began  to  walk  down  a  long  hall  of 
shady  trees  unfamiliar  to  the  Queen,  and  Mandodari  was  like 
a  little  girl  beside  her  father  Maya.  Her  dress  was  blue  and 
pink  and  silver;  her  shoes  were  gold  and  she  smiled  up  at  her 
father.  Ahead  of  them  there  was  an  open  door  where  sun¬ 
shine  entered. 


Here’s  Love l 


295 


Maya  the  Asura  said,  “Your  mother  has  come  back  to  us; 
our  home  is  happy.  Soon  we  will  be  like  some  story  once 
heard  as  a  child  long  ago,  hard  to  remember,  the  bright 
shadow  of  what  perhaps  never  was. . . .” 

He  led  his  beautiful  daughter  of  illusion  out  through  that 
garden  door  and  far  away. 

Believe  it  and  make  it  true.  We  are  safe.  Your  love  is  here 
for  you. 


Thus  Death’s  long  evening  shadows  grew  and  reached  to 
touch  Ravana  lying  fallen  in  the  dust.  Life  is  very  uncertain, 
and  even  royal  fortune  fails  at  last,  and  turns  away  from  the 
greatest  kingdom.  Ravana  was  lordly  and  his  dark  arms  were 
strong;  he  bound  the  worlds  in  ropes  of  illusion;  so  did  he 
die. 

What  can  one  count  on,  except  that  whatever  one  has,  it 
will  soon  be  gone?  Better  to  do  right. 

Ravana  boasted  and  made  good  his  boasts.  He  broke  apart 
the  sacrifices  in  the  forests.  He  had  a  beautiful  wife,  but  lust 
veiled  his  eyes  so  that  he  could  not  see,  and  he  went  falsely 
to  steal  Sita.  He  courted  Death,  or  else  what  was  he  doing? 

Ravana  is  gone,  so  forgive  him.  His  flesh  and  bones  were 
consumed  by  Fire,  and  his  ashes  were  scattered  by  the  winds. 
And  yet  men  say  that  pyre  still  burns  and  that  flame  never 
perished,  and  long  afterwards  it  sometimes  can  be  seen  at 
night  high  on  a  hill  on  Lanka  Island,  shimmering  through  the 
spells  that  hide  a  golden  city  somewhere  there. 


Hanuman  flew  like  a  flash  to  the  Asoka  Grove  behind  Ra- 
vana’s  palace,  his  white  robes  streaming  out,  his  white  fur 
ruffled  with  joy.  He  found  Sita  alone  under  the  golden  Sin- 
sapa  tree.  But  now  she  was  dressed  as  a  princess.  Her  dress 
was  new;  she  wore  a  woven  crown  of  fresh  and  fragrant 
wildflowers  and  new  leaves,  and  her  braid  had  a  ribbon. 
There  by  her  tree  were  a  bronze  comb  and  mirror,  and  san- 
dalpaste  and  dark  dust  for  brow  and  eye. 

Oh  blameless  Sita,  you  are  the  fairest  woman  in  all 
Creation,  and  no  goddess  can  compare  to  you.  Your  face  is 
bright  as  the  Moon,  you  are  more  giving  and  forgiving  than 
your  mother  Earth,  more  beautiful  than  Lakshmi,  if  that  may 
have  been.  And  Rama,  what  is  the  use  our  singing  of  her 


296 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


charms  when  you  and  she  have  sung  your  two  songs  to¬ 
gether? 

“Well,  this  makes  sense  for  a  change!”  Hanuman  greeted 
the  doe-eyed  Sita,  so  bold  and  beautiful.  “This  is  the  first  nice 
day  there’s  been  for  a  long  time  on  Old  Earth!” 

“Oh,  it’s  perfect!”  Sita  smiled,  and  her  smiles  were  forever 
warm  and  loving;  they  would  carry  anyone  away,  intoxicate 
him  more  than  any  wine,  and  leave  him  floating  on  the 
waves,  in  the  air  high  above  himself.  “Now  I  leave  all  sorrow 
behind  me.” 

Hanuman  hit  his  tail  on  the  ground  and  tipped  his  head  to 
one  side  and  laughed.  “Mother,  we  are  all  well.  Thanks  to 
you  we  have  won.  Ravana  is  killed  and  you  must  have  no 
fear,  for  you  will  soon  be  in  your  own  house  with  Rama.” 

“Good  betide  you,  Hanuman!  My  white  monkey  child 
dearer  to  me  than  life,  I  am  so  proud  of  you!  What  have  you 
got  there?” 

The  tip  of  Hanuman’s  tail  curved  up.  “Look!” 

“That’s  my  yellow  scarf!” 

Hanuman  said,  “Guess  what  else,”  and  opened  his  pack¬ 
age. 

“How  heartwarming!”  said  Sita.  “My  ornaments  from 
Anasuya,  and  my  pink  shell  necklace  from  Guha  the  Hunter 
King.”  She  put  them  on,  earrings  and  anklets  and  bracelets 
and  necklace.  “How  do  I  look?” 

Hanuman  only  smiled.  Then  he  said,  “Ask  Rama.” 

Sita  grew  quieter.  “How  is  he?” 

“Come  and  find  out!”  Hanuman  looked  around  with  his 
clear  red  eyes.  “Where  is  everybody?” 

Sita  smiled,  and  drove  out  even  the  name  of  care  from 
Hanuman’s  monkey  mind.  “What  have  you  to  do  with  them 
now?” 

“Right,  it’s  all  finished  and  done.” 

“Thank  you  for  your  graciousness  and  true  generosity,” 
said  Sita.  “I  have  no  fit  reward  for  you — but  Hanuman,  Son 
of  the  Wind,  you  will  always  know  and  remember  the  True. 
You  will  always  be  strong  and  faithful,  noble  and  wise  and 
daring!  Always  excellent  powers  will  grace  you  and  crown 
you,  and  I  give  you  my  real  love  forever!” 

“Oh,”  said  Hanuman,  “What  else  are  treasures  but  your 
good  words  and  love?  They  are  rare  and  precious  jewels.  It’s 
like  finding  a  lost  way,  like  lighting  up  a  lamp  in  the  dark, 
like  picking  up  what’s  fallen  down  or  showing  what’s  been 
hidden.” 


Here’s  Lovel  297 

"So  promise  me  to  pardon  the  race  of  demons  now,  and  go 
tell  Rama  I’m  ready,  I  await  him.  Where  is  he  anyway?” 

"Yes.  The  war’s  over.  I  promise,”  said  Hanuman.  “And  I 
think  he’s  waiting  for  me\”  He  leapt  into  the  air  and  flew 
back  to  Rama’s  side. 


Now  we  return  to  Rama,  Lord  of  the  World.  Gradually 
the  monkeys  and  bears  came  back  to  the  field  outside  Lanka, 
friendly  to  each  other  but  fearless  in  war,  and  Hanuman 
found  Rama  there  among  many  friends,  embracing  the  ani¬ 
mal  kings  Sugriva  and  old  Jambavan. 

Hanuman  said,  “Go  to  her.” 

But  Rama  spoke  to  Vibhishana.  “Lanka  King,  bring  Sita 
here.  Let  her  be  seen.” 

Vibhishana  obeyed.  He  went  and  told  Sita,  “I  come  from 
your  own  Lord  Rama,  with  a  glad  heart.” 

One  of  Vibhishana’s  courtiers  said,  “My  King  and  I  myself 
.  .  .  we  bring  our  best  and  kindest  wishes  for  you  and  all 
your  friends,  that  is  .  .  .  for  you  and  for  the  entire  popula¬ 
tion  of  Earth.  .  . 

Then  Sita,  whose  waist  could  be  clasped  round  by  Rama’s 
fingers,  came  out  of  Lanka.  The  monkeys  and  bears  drew 
back  to  let  her  by,  thinking — Oh  yes,  this  is  from  the  old 
times  back. 

Then  as  Sita  walked  to  Rama,  her  gentle  face  aglow  with 
love,  King  Vibhishana  beside  her,  all  the  animals  and  Lak- 
shmana  also  bowed  to  her.  They  were  all  kneeling  in  a  circle 
around  her,  and  they  did  not  move. 

Vibhishana  the  Rakshasa  shaded  his  face  with  his  dark 
hand  and  looked  up  at  the  sky  with  his  blue  crystal-clear 
eyes.  There  were  two  chariots  in  the  air,  gleaming  bright,  un¬ 
wavering.  Voices  in  the  sky  sang  the  praises  of  Rama  firm  in 
fight,  and  fragrant  flower  petals  fell  from  heaven.  The  rav¬ 
ages  of  war  all  vanished  and  the  last  omens  cleared  away. 

Agni  the  Fire  God  then  appeared  by  Sita,  and  touched  to¬ 
gether  his  huge  webbed  hands  shining  with  ornaments  and 
rings.  Agni  said,  “Rama’s  father  Dasaratha  is  in  that  other 
chariot;  he  is  very  happy  for  you,  my  Lady.”  Then  in  his  red 
robes,  with  his  black  curly  hair  and  beard  Agni  took  Sita’s 
hand  and  led  her  to  Rama. 

The  Fire  Lord  said,  “Rama,  from  the  portion  of  gentleness 
in  you,  people  call  you  a  part  of  the  Moon.  A  king  is  the  eye 


298 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


of  his  people,  therefore  Lord  Narayana  take  back  your  Sita. 
Take  her  away  with  you;  you  have  won  her  again.” 

Rama  smiled.  “Why  call  me  by  a  great  god’s  name?” 

“But  ....  But  my  Lord — ”  Agni  looked  at  him  in  amaze¬ 
ment.  “You  mean  you  don’t  remember?” 

“I  am  Rama,  a  mortal  man.” 

Agni  grinned,  and  shook  sparks  from  his  bare  arms.  His 
golden  rings  and  hand-ornaments  melted.  “Have  you  any 
idea — ?”  Agni  was  all  immersed  in  Fire  there;  he  was  a  joy¬ 
ous  furnace.  “Oh  Rama,  I  dwell  within  all  life.  I  am  the  true 
witness  never  deceived.  Again  and  again  you  have  forgotten 
your  secret.  Sita  has  not  the  smallest  fault,  and  she  is  inno¬ 
cent.  Lakshmi  of  good  fortune  is  your  wife,  and  she  loves 
you.”  Gold  melted  and  fell  from  the  Fire  God  in  heavy 
smoking  drops  of  metal,  and  his  jewels  shattered  and  crazed, 
his  eyes  were  blazing. 

Indra  the  Rain  Lord  came  into  view  on  the  other  side  of 
Sita.  He  wore  a  thin  cloak  of  fine-spun  mist  that  was  trimmed 
with  dancing  stars,  and  under  that  his  old  battle  armor  of 
worn  leather  hard  as  stone  and  unbreakable.  He  stood  bare¬ 
foot  a  finger’s  width  above  the  ground.  He  was  slender,  and 
cast  no  shadow,  and  never  blinked  his  deep  black  eyes.  His 
straight  hair  was  long  and  black;  his  skin  was  fair  and  white, 
and  smooth  as  a  girl’s,  except  where  his  slim  hands  were  cov¬ 
ered  with  the  old  crossing  lightning  scars  that  were  whiter 
still. 

Indra  King  of  Heaven  said,  “Narayana,  Searcher  of 
Hearts,  what  is  this  amusement,  what  is  this  play  of  yours? 
You  have  killed  Ravana  and  freed  people  from  fear.” 

Agni  breathed  out  words  from  a  furnace,  like  speech  from 
an  open  burning  hearth — Remember  her! 

Indra  said,  “The  closing  of  your  eyes  is  the  Night  of  the 
World’s  End,  and  your  awakening  from  sleep  is  Time’s  begin¬ 
ning.  To  favor  men  you  are  born  as  Rama,  so  let  no  one 
think  men  are  weak  and  alone.  It’s  heaven’s  own  truth!  It  is 
you  alone  who  gave  to  me  the  kingdom  and  rule  of  heaven.” 

Rama  said,  “That  cannot  be,  how  could  I  do  that?” 

“Oh  forget  it!”  said  Indra.  “I  mean — ” 

Agni  said,  “I  am  myself  your  anger;  the  universe  is  your 
whole  body;  the  Moon  is  your  delight.”  He  pressed  his  hands 
together  before  his  wide  chest,  so  the  fiery  muscles  stood  out 
on  his  arms.  “I  can  test  the  True.  Only  beside  Truth,  the  lap¬ 
ping  flames  are  dull  and  cool.  Here  is  Sita.  Here’s  Love.” 

Rama  said  in  a  happy  voice,  laughing  as  he  spoke,  “I’ve 


Here’s  Love I  299 

won  the  war,  what  more  do  I  need  to  know!  Give  me  her 
hand.” 

Agni  placed  Sita’s  hand  in  Rama’s,  then  drew  back  his  own 
arm  quick  as  a  serpent’s  tongue.  Rama  had  burned  him! 

Sita  said,  “With  excellent  joy,  with  delight  cast  looks  on 
me.  I  am  a  fair  free  woman,  I  surrender  to  you  of  my  own 
will,  command  me  anything.” 

Rama  tied  Sita’s  wedding  pearl-leaf  back  in  her  hair  and 
unbound  her  braid.  “Now  you’re  mine  again,  with  Fire  for 
the  witness.” 

The  Fire  God  was  happy.  Indra  shook  his  head.  He  had 
lived  a  long  long  time,  but  now  he  had  come  face  to  face  with 
something  older,  some  power  immeasurably  old,  from  before 
....  Indra  looked  helpless.  He  said  to  Sita,  “We  all  serve 
you,”  and  both  gods  vanished.  And  Vibhishana  the  demon 
also  told  Sita,  “I  too  will  always  protect  you  wherever  you 
are!” 

Sita  held  Rama.  1  am  near  to  you.  She  ran  her  fingers 
down  his  face  and  shut  her  eyes  and  slightly  parted  her  lips. 
Oh  my  love,  my  lover — Oh! 

Still  all  the  kneeling  figures  on  that  plain  did  not  look  up  or 
move  or  rise.  Vibhishana  looked  away  and  the  love  of  Sita 
washed  over  Rama.  I  love  you.  Oh,  it’s  all  summer,  and  all 
roses — it’s  all  gold  and  all  you.  . .  .  She  wept. 

Vibhishana  said,  “Rama,  Lakshmana  made  you  a  house 
downhill.” 

“Let’s  go,”  said  Sita. 

Rama  smiled  in  a  daze.  “What?  Oh!” 

Sita  put  Rama’s  wide  gold  ring  that  Hanuman  had  brought 
her  back  on  his  finger.  She  whispered  more  words  like  honey 
in  his  ear,  and  at  midmorning  they  walked  away  down  the 
hill  hand  in  hand,  and  Rama  soon  dropped  Sita’s  hand  and 
held  her  round  her  waist  close  to  him  as  they  went. 

They  reached  a  leafy  cabin  built  by  Lakshmana,  and  Sita 
sat  and  put  Rama’s  head  on  her  lap,  and  saw  that  he  had 
hurt  his  leg  fighting  for  her. 


On  what  had  been  the  battleground  the  animals  and  Lak¬ 
shmana  stirred  at  last,  and  got  to  their  feet  smiling.  Hanuman 
asked  Vibhishana  the  Demon  King,  “Why  are  the  Rakshasas 
so  quick  to  burn  their  dead  or  cast  them  undersea?  Why  do 
your  weapons  rust  so  soon?” 


300 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


“Come,  Hanuman,”  answered  Vibhishana.  “Come  with 
__  .  >1 
me. 

Vibhishana  led  Hanuman  into  Lanka,  along  the  empty  yel¬ 
low  brick  streets  to  the  royal  palace  where  they  entered.  They 
went  through  a  small  side  door  in  a  plain  room  and  descend¬ 
ed  many  narrow  stairs.  For  a  way  their  path  was  lighted  only 
by  cut  jewels  set  gleaming  in  the  walls;  then  at  the  bottom  of 
the  stairs  candles  burned  in  branching  silver  trees,  and  they 
walked  again  along  a  level  hall  that  widened  and  heightened 
and  grew  bright. 

They  stopped  where  the  hallway  ended  at  a  storeroom 
door.  There  were  locks  holding  it  closed,  locks  strange  and 
ornate  and  curious,  and  of  those  locks  there  were  ten  thou¬ 
sand  and  one.  And  though  the  keyholes  were  all  of  different 
shapes,  Vibhishana  opened  them  all  with  the  same  key, 
sweeping  his  hands  to  touch  them  and  they  opened  to  him. 
The  demon  pushed  back  the  door  and  they  came  into  a  huge 
well-lit  room  with  no  other  entrance  to  be  seen. 

On  golden  chains  from  the  ceiling  hung  globes  of  glass  that 
held  lights  within  them.  The  air  was  fresh  and  sweet,  and 
scented  with  musky  perfumes.  The  whole  room  was  cut  out 
smoothly  from  the  heartstone  of  Trikuta  Hill.  On  the  far  wall 
Hanuman  could  read  written  in  letters  of  gold  inlaid  on  blue 
lapis  stone — Please  yourself.  Tell  the  truth  and  be  tranquil. 

“MiraculousI”  Hanuman  saw  shelves  and  racks  all  over 
holding  cool  fine  linens  of  every  color;  beautiful  patterned 
silks  and  folded  skins  of  tigers  and  leopards  and  lions  and  sil¬ 
ver  wolves;  rows  of  magical  books  and  love  potions  and 
secret  treasure  maps  and  formulas  and  ore  samples  and  deli¬ 
cious  recipes;  books  of  numbers  and  dictionaries  of  languages 
and  stars. 

There  were  perfumes  and  jewels  and  musical  manuscripts 
and  medicines  to  heal  illness  and  sorrow  and  all  wounds.  On 
the  walls  were  paintings  in  plaster  and  on  hides;  there  were 
bins  of  irreplaceable  wines  and  unknown  scrolls,  piles  of  gold 
and  silver,  and  on  the  floor  priceless  musical  instruments  sat 
perfectly  tuned  in  long  rows;  and  over  the  vaults  of  the  ceil¬ 
ing  and  on  the  upper  walls  were  polished  copper  balls  and  sil¬ 
ver  stars,  brass  suns  and  bronze  faces,  golden  leaves  and 
moons  of  ivory  and  flowers  of  cold  dark  iron  and  blue  steel. 

Vibhishana  pointed  to  the  far  wall.  “That’s  the  motto  of 
Viswakarman  the  Architect  of  Heaven,  who  first  gave  beings 
their  names  and  created  them,  who  built  Beautiful  Lanka  for 
the  race  of  demons  long  ago.  You  are  the  only  outside  person 


Here's  Love I  301 

who  will  ever  see  this  room.  These  are  the  ancient  timeless 
treasures  of  our  race. 

“Narayana  drove  us  out  of  Lanka  and  Vaishravana  the 
Lord  of  Wealth  lived  here  but  he  never  knew  of  this  room. 
The  bird  Garuda  watched  sharp-eyed  lest  we  return  in  those 
old  days,  but  from  here  unseen  doors  lead  down  and  down 
underground  and  we  are  ever  careful  of  our  possessions.  We 
don’t  throw  things  away  or  lose  them  or  forget.  We 
Rakshasas  protect  many  good  things.  We  know  a  lot.  We  are 
strong.”  Vibhishana  smiled  with  his  long  fangs.  “Hanuman, 
by  the  good  Dharma  law,  the  Rakshasa  knowledge  may  not 
perish.  My  friend,  there  are  such  powers  of  protection  over 
this  room  that  no  thief  would  ever  survive  if  he  were  but  told 
all  their  names!  These  are  the  powers  we  draw  on  as  guardi¬ 
ans!  But  for  you — if  you  need  anything  here,  anytime,  for 
anyone  help  yourself.” 

“Why  will  you  do  this  for  me?”  asked  Hanuman. 

“You  are  my  first  and  best  friend  of  another  race,”  replied 
Vibhishana.  “You  are  faithful  and  very  wise,  when  you  stop 
to  think.  You  put  your  whole  heart  into  what  you  do;  and 
you  don’t  think  twice  when  you’ve  made  up  your  mind,  nor 
seek  for  any  gain,  so  I  call  you  my  friend.” 

“I  am.” 

“I  know  you  are!  In  these  vaults  lies  all  the  lore  of  old, 
gathered  here  since  Time  began  again.  People  meet  in  this 
life  and  pass  by  each  other  like  pieces  of  driftwood  afloat  on 
the  wild  and  stormy  sea,  touching  seldom,  and  ones  meeting, 
gone  and  parted  again.  Therefore  a  friend  is  also  a  treasure. 
Now  you  and  Rama  and  all  your  armies  will  go  from  here.  I 
am  immortal;  I  will  rule  Lanka  forever,  and  the  Rakshasas 
will  one  day  return  who  have  now  hidden  themselves  beyond 
your  sight.  I  will  cover  Lanka  and  make  her  invisible  from 
this  time  on,  but  you  are  always  welcome  here.  For  you  I  will 
reveal  whatever  you  want  to  see,  here  on  this  island  amid  the 
great  Ocean. 

“And  so,”  said  Vibhishana,  “if  you  find  a  friend  hold  him 
if  you  may.  And  giving  gifts,  giving  to  the  poor  and  to  oth¬ 
ers,  that  is  always  right;  or  else,  what  you  save  is  spent  to  buy 
a  homesite  for  you  in  Hell.  So  here’s  a  present.” 

Vibhishana  went  to  a  shelf  and  took  down  a  dusty  book 
covered  with  the  shastra  marks  of  the  Law,  long  shiny  palm- 
leaves  tied  at  the  sides  with  faded  string  between  wood  cov¬ 
ers.  He  opened  it  carefully.  “By  throwing  them  into  the  sea 
and  by  swift  burning  we  have  set  our  own  war  dead  beyond 


302 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


the  reach  of  life  and  death,  of  which  they  had  grown  weary. 
We  long  endure  while  we  wish  to,  or  we  may  sometimes  es¬ 
cape  life’s  wheel — and  then  our  weapons  rust!  Here,  learn 
this  verse.  Speak  it  correctly  aloud  on  the  hillsides  where  the 
dead  animals  lie,  and  they  will  again  revive  as  they  did  be¬ 
fore  when  you  brought  that  Medicine  Hill.” 

Hanuman  learned  those  Mantras  of  Compassion  and 
Vibhishana  replaced  the  book  where  it  had  been.  They  locked 
the  treasure  room  and  retraced  their  steps.  Hanuman  stood 
on  Earth  outside  Lanka  and  said  the  words,  and  brought 
back  to  life  all  the  dead  monkeys  and  apes  and  bears.  And 
from  then  on,  wherever  any  of  those  animals  lived,  no  matter 
what  the  season  the  trees  would  flower  and  unveil  before 
them  and  the  land  bear  ripe  fruit  and  all  springs  give  water, 
full  and  clear. 

Whoever  was  in  Rama’s  army  has  all  benefits  and  mercies. 
This  is  true  because  with  Rama  there  is  no  fear,  and  no  de¬ 
feat,  but  instead  great  kindliness  and  victory. 

However  they  had  died,  burnt  or  broken  or  cut  or  crushed 
to  die,  all  the  animals  awoke  from  death  unhurt,  and  they 
asked  in  great  wonder,  “What  blessing  is  this?  How  are  we 
restored?” 

Once  morel 

Live  and  grow,  live  and  grow: 

Let  me  see  my  friends,  my  many  friends. 

Let  me  look  on  you  again. 

You  left  your  homes  behind  for  me, 

You  cared  nothing  for  Death, 

You  lie  pale  and  slain. 

I  remember  you, 

1  remember  all  of  you; 

1  want  you, 

I  want  you  whole  and  strong! 

Once  morel 


In  the  rainy  summertime,  the  men  and  women  of  Fair 
Ayodhya  light  many  candles  outside  the  temple  doors,  big 
brass  bowls  filled  with  sand  where  a  hundred  candles  may 
bum.  And  then  the  rain  may  fall  and  drench  the  Earth,  and 
the  wind  may  blow  strongly.  But  the  candle  flames  won’t  go 
out;  they’ll  sputter  and  bum  right  on  through  the  storm  and 
the  night.  Fill  me  and  fulfill  me,  body  and  soull 


Here’s  Love! 


303 


The  next  morning  there  was  Rama  in  the  camp  of  his  huge 
and  famous  army,  and  Sita  was  there,  and  he  had  unbound 
her  braid,  her  sleek  dark  hair  was  combed  out,  free  and 
scented,  and  her  skin  was  again  like  warm  gold. 

Rama  looked  into  the  faces  of  all  his  animals,  over  and 
over.  He  said  to  Vibhishana,  “Soon  it  will  be  springtime  and 
the  fourteen  years  of  my  exile  will  be  full.  If  I  am  late  my 
brother  Bharata  will  enter  a  fire  and  die.  Lanka  King,  have 
you  any  way  for  us  to  return  to  our  homes  that  seem  so  far 
away  and  hard  to  reach?” 

“Good  fortune  to  you,”  said  Vibhishana,  “take  the  stolen 
chariot  Pushpaka.  But  stay  here  as  my  guest  for  a  few  days.” 

“You  must  consider  that  already  done.  We  will  rest  on¬ 
board  that  car,  and  go  easily  flying  home.” 

“Then  wait  here,”  smiled  Vibhishana.  He  entered  Lanka 
and  returned  walking  on  foot  with  that  vast  and  flowery  car 
following  along  behind  him;  Pushpaka  of  a  thousand  wheels, 
like  a  small  city,  lightly  riding  just  off  the  ground  except 
when  he  rose  all  by  himself  to  clear  the  golden  wall. 

Pushpaka  came  over  the  hill  slopes.  There  he  was,  that 
grand  and  glorious  chariot  glittering  with  gold  and  silver, 
made  by  Viswakarman  the  heavenly  builder,  adorned  with 
clear  sapphires  and  golden  rooms,  with  blue  blossoms  and  red 
flowers  and  silver  pavilions  and  nets  of  pink  pearls,  with  his 
flags  all  flying  and  his  wind-bells  softly  ringing:  He  was  the 
immense  mind-driven  chariot  taken  from  Vaishravana  the 
Treasure  King,  easily  able  to  carry  any  number  of  riders  any¬ 
where  they  would  go.  There  were  the  great  rainbows  tied  into 
beautiful  colored  knots  and  smoothed  to  make  Pushpaka’s 
frame,  and  bathing  Vibhishana  in  colors  and  lights  as  he 
walked  in  the  shadow  below  the  car. 

Pushpaka  was  painted  in  colors  with  trees  and  swarms  of 
birds  and  stars  and  pictures  of  rivers;  he  had  saffron  canopies 
and  lotus  flowers  strung  over  summerhouses  of  carved  wood 
and  wooden  hills  planted  with  grass  and  latticed  windows;  he 
had  altars  and  upper  rooms  and  dining  halls  and  white  flag- 
staffs,  set  in  crystal  bases;  he  had  benches  and  beds  and  cov¬ 
erlets  and  good  things  to  eat  and  drink. 

Vibhishana  arrived  with  that  aerial  chariot  like  a  hill  and 
said,  “Climb  on,  it’s  here,  what  more  shall  I  do?” 

Hanuman  flew  onto  the  chariot  and  untied  Pushpaka’s 
many  ladders  and  steps  and  let  them  down.  Soon  the  animals 
were  standing  among  the  flowers  and  along  the  railings,  lining 
the  galleries  and  paths,  running  through  the  parks  and  cool 


304 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


fountains.  With  the  sunlight  pouring  through  his  golden  fur. 
Prince  Angada  leaned  over  and  let  down  a  big  basket  on  a 
rope,  and  drew  up  Rama  holding  Sita.  Then  came  Lak- 
shmana  carrying  all  Rama’s  weapons  and  his  own. 

Rama  looked  over  the  edge.  “Vibhishana,  give  me  your 
permission  to  go,  Majesty.” 

Vibhishana  replied,  “There’s  lots  of  room  on  that  thing.  It’s 
a  fine  large  carriage.  I  want  to  see  you  made  King  of  the 
Earth;  take  me  along  with  my  four  ministers.” 

Rama  heard  something  thumping  next  to  him.  He  turned 
and  saw  Hanuman  switching  his  tail  against  the  wooden 
walkway  floor,  with  his  arm  round  Jambavan  the  bear.  Hanu¬ 
man  smiled,  “King  Rama,  we  want  to  stop  at  Kishkindhya 
for  our  families,  and  then  we  all  of  us  want  to  see  all  the 
people  from  the  strange  lands  at  the  limits  of  the  world,  who 
will  gather  to  see  you  made  the  Ayodhya  King.  We’ll  greet 
your  mothers  and  bow  to  your  friends  and  go  through  all 
your  royal  forests  and  gardens.” 

“Yes,”  said  Rama.  He  looked  back  down.  “Climb  to  Fair 
Ayodhya,  Rakshasas.” 

When  everyone  was  aboard,  that  huge  chariot  arose  with  a 
great  noise  like  fireworks  and  waterfalls;  then  silently  high  in 
the  sky  he  turned  north  in  a  wide  climbing  curve,  carrying 
Sita  who  had  been  lost  and  found  again,  and  two  mortal 
men,  and  five  demons  and  twenty-three  million  monkeys  and 
bears  sitting  there  at  their  pleasure  in  the  free-flying  gardens, 
facing  the  fresh  morning  wind  as  if  they  owned  the  world. 


The  Wonderful  Return 


On  the  hillside  in  the  Sun, 

The  King  is  home,  his  war  is  done. 
The  fountains  play  and  I  can  hear 
The  Master  of  the  Revels  cheer, 
And  singing  soft  and  music  clear. 

The  flowers  in  their  colors  there 
Are  falling  down  beside  the  stair, 
And  Fair  Ayodhya  at  my  feet. 
And  all  along  her  silver  street 
My  friends  l  find,  my  loves  /  meet. 

A  nd  this  is  how  my  world  shall  be; 
My  days  are  bright,  my  ways  are  free. 


Rama  rode  with  Sita.  He  said,  “Look  down,  there  are  the 
heavenly  flowers  marking  where  we  fought  and  won  you; 
there  is  the  shore  and  our  bridge  thrown  across  the  sea;  there 
is  Ocean,  seeming  endless  with  no  farther  shore,  and  that 
bridge  seems  to  go  off  into  the  sky  over  the  edge  of  Earth.” 

Vibhishana  approached  them.  “Lord,  free  the  sea  as  my 
gift.”  Rama  smiled,  and  as  they  watched,  the  waters  stopped 
holding  up  the  bridge  stones.  The  long  bridge  broke  and 
sank;  it  was  gone.  The  waves  danced,  leaping  unbounded. 

Pushpaka  went  on  flying,  and  Rama  continued,  “There  you 
can  see  gleams  of  gold  far  underwater,  coming  from  Mainaka 
Hill  who  still  has  his  wings,  the  golden-winged  Friend  of  the 
Wind;  now  there  is  the  northern  seashore — see  how  far 
Hanuman  can  jump!  Smell  the  sandalwood  scent  of  the 
Malaya  Hills;  they  look  blue  from  here,  and  those  lakes  look 
green.  There,  through  that  spreading  countryside  below  we 
marched  from  Kishkindhya;  it  will  be  an  early  spring  this 

305 


306 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


year.  I  think  your  mother  Earth  rejoices,  and  doesn’t  count 
the  time.” 

Pushpaka  started  to  descend.  “There  is  the  mouth  of  the 
cave  city  Kishkindhya,  and  there  is  Prasravana  the  Hill  of 
Springs  where  I  spent  the  rains,  and  I  didn’t  even  move  out 
of  the  way  when  snakes  crawled  over  me,  I  was  so  lost  with¬ 
out  you,  and  in  that  garden  I  killed  Vali.” 

Sita  said,  “You  are  my  Rama.  Whatever  you  do  is  right.” 

Hanuman  and  Sugriva  and  King  Jamba  van  were  listening 
to  Rama  together.  Hanuman  sighed  and  said,  “I  wish  I 
hadn’t!” 

“Hadn’t  what?”  asked  the  Bear  King. 

“I  wish  we  hadn’t  drunk  up  all  Sugriva’s  wild  honey  wine.” 

The  two  Animal  Lords  smiled  at  each  other.  Pushpaka 
came  in  for  a  landing.  Sugriva  said,  “Just  get  ready,  monkey!” 

“You  mean?  Where  is  it?” 

Jambavan  gave  him  a  swat.  “That  monkeyll  I  don’t  see 
how  we  ever  made  itl” 

“And  it’s  not  easy  being  a  king,”  said  Sugriva.  “Remember 
that  the  next  time  you  call  me  names.” 

Pushpaka  caressed  the  Earth  and  was  still  and  solid.  All 
the  monkey  and  bear  children  ran  out  of  Kishkindhya  cave 
as  fast  as  they  could.  “What  a  car;  can  we  ride?!” 

Swiftly  the  animal  wives  and  mothers  and  sisters  dressed 
in  all  their  best  clothes  and  came  to  meet  their  men.  Animal 
people  were  flying  and  running  and  jumping  all  over  each 
other.  Rama  said,  “We’ll  stay  here  overnight.” 

Hanuman  was  yelling,  “You  can  ride  tomorrow,  all  the 
way  to  Ayodhya!” 

“There’s  Queen  Ruma,”  said  Jambavan.  “Sugriva,  go  to 
her.” 

“Beautiful,”  said  Sugriva.  He  turned  to  Rama.  “Come  in¬ 
side  with  us  until  tomorrow.” 

Rama  looked  at  Sita.  Sugriva  was  turning  his  ears  like  an 
animal  to  hear  where  every  sound  came  from.  Down  on  the 
ground  bears  sat  playing  with  their  own  children  and  holding 
baby  monkeys.  Kishkindhya  monkey  people  were  leaping  and 
raising  dust  from  the  green  forest  trees.  The  whole  world  had 
gone  out  of  its  mind. 

Jambavan  gave  a  roar  from  deep  in  his  throat  and  threw 
himself  into  the  air.  Hanuman  plunged  over  the  railing. 

Sugriva  started  to  twitch  his  tail  but  our  Lady  Sita  buried 
her  fingers  in  the  thick  golden  winter’s  ruff  round  his  neck. 

Sita  laughed  like  an  angel.  “We’d  love  to!” 


The  Wonderful  Return 


307 


Then  on  the  next  day  they  all  flew  to  Ayodhya.  Rama  told 
Sita,  “I’ll  show  you;  see,  there  is  Rishyamukha  Hill  where  we 
met  that  Hanuman;  there  is  desolate  Dandaka  Forest,  now 
free  from  harm,  and  there  is  where  we  burned  the  Vulture 
King  Jatayu.  Here  come  the  Vindhya  Hills  and  Agastya’s 
hermitage.  There  is  Chitrakuta — ” 

“Chitrakuta  Hill  in  springtime!”  Sita  laid  her  head  on 
Rama’s  shoulder.  “Remember?  And  the  birds  all  singing!” 

“There  flows  the  Yamuna  river.” 

“From  way  up  here  the  trees  are  like  a  carpet  and  the 
rivers  are  small  as  threads!  How  wonderful!” 

Rama  said,  “By  the  grinding  rapids  of  Yamuna  and  Ganga 
is  Bharadwaja’s  retreat.  Let  me  invite  him  to  Fair  Ayodhya 
to  repay  the  feast  he  gave  Bharata.” 

Pushpaka  landed  where  Yamuna  meets  the  Ganges.  Rama 
met  Bharadwaja  and  asked,  “How  is  Bharata?” 

Bharadwaja  embraced  Rama  and  smelled  the  crown  of  his 
head.  “He  is  fine.  But  send  him  word  you  are  safe.” 

“I  will.  Ride  with  us  and  be  our  guest;  let  us  return  the 
welcome,  the  feast  that  you  gave.” 

“Oh  Rama,  a  good  dinner  is  as  much  a  duty  as  fasting  and 
not  eating  could  ever  be.  Blessings,  Majesty!  I  must  be  here 
where  the  two  rivers  change  their  colors  and  join — white 
Ganga  and  deep  dark  Yamuna!  Blessed  be  you,  Rama; 
blessed  be!”  Bharadwaja  knelt  before  Rama.  “I  know  all  that 
has  happened  to  you  and  all  that  you  did.  Now  you  must 
stay  at  home  and  live  among  your  friends  with  Sita.  Do  as  I 
say.” 

“Yes,  I  understand.”  Rama  summoned  Hanuman.  “Go  to 
Bharata  and  tell  him  we’re  coming  home.  I’ll  take  the  chariot 
to  the  Secret  Forest  of  Guha  the  king  of  hunters  for  the 
night.  Read  Bharata’s  expression  and  his  looks,  and  if  he 
wants  to  keep  Kosala  as  his  own  he  may  have  her.” 

“He’ll  be  the  same,”  said  Hanuman,  and  flew  away. 

Pushpaka  chariot  left  Bharadwaja’s  hermitage  and  soon 
landed  in  a  clearing  in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Far  Forest,  near 
the  Ganges.  Wherever  he  flew,  there  was  always  space  there 
for  Pushpaka  to  land  when  he  arrived. 

Rama  and  Sita  and  Lakshmana  got  down  and  walked 
through  the  forest  trees.  They  heard  whistling  like  a  bird, 
then  Guha  came  running  at  them.  He  fell  on  Rama  and 
threw  his  arms  around  him.  He  looked  as  weird  and  outra¬ 
geous  as  ever.  He  squeezed  Lakshmana.  He  smiled  his  white 
smile  at  Sita.  “Freedom!  Freedom  to  you,  my  friends!”  There 


308 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


he  was  again,  the  king  of  the  wild,  painted  with  yellow  and 
green  and  red  and  blue  all  over  his  brown  skin,  wearing 
feathers  long  and  waving  in  his  curly  hair. 

“You’ll  stay  for  supper,”  said  Guha.  “Where  did  you  get 
that  flying  city?” 

“It’s  a  magic  chariot,”  said  Sita.  “Can  the  King  of  Lanka 
eat  with  us  too?  Our  animal  friends  have  their  own  food  on 
the  car,  and. . . 

“Yes,  we’re  hunters,  it’s  true.  Vibhishana  is  welcome.” 
Guha  whistled  and  a  forest  man  came  bringing  a  new  feather 
cloak  for  Sita,  green  and  gold,  just  like  the  one  he  had  given 
her  fourteen  years  before.  “Welcome  to  your  tribe,  princess. 
You  are  still  my  daughter.  I’m  glad  you  wear  my  necklace.” 

“It  helped  to  save  me,”  smiled  Sita. 

Guha  said,  “I  sometimes  take  wild  fruit  to  Bharadwaja  the 
holy  man.  He  often  sent  his  students  invisibly  by  air  to  the 
south,  and  from  him  I  know  most  all  you’ve  done.  Before,  I 
didn’t  like  to  see  you  three  enter  the  forest  alone.  But  now 
the  demons  who  ate  unarmed  men  are  gone  from  the  woods 
as  if  they  had  never  been.  Oh,  that  was  well  donel  Was  that 
Hanuman  we  saw  fly  past?” 

“Yes,”  answered  Sita.  “We  have  an  army  of  monkeys  and 
bears.” 

“An  animal  army.  Yes,  they’re  good  fighters,”  said  Guha. 
“Then  that  is  the  chariot  stolen  from  the  King  of  Wealth.  It’s 
all  true!” 

“Come  to  Ayodhya  with  us  tomorrow,”  said  Rama. 

“No,  I  have  the  wild  forest  in  me,  I  can’t  go  into  a  walled- 
up  city.  I  ran  there  once  and  came  right  back,”  said  Guha. 
“Sumantra  the  Charioteer  and  the  three  Queens  are  well.  Get 
Vibhishana,  and  come  and  eat  now  under  that  same  big  nut 
tree.” 

Vibhishana  joined  them  and  those  five — the  demon,  and 
Rama  and  Lakshmana,  and  Sita  holding  Guha’s  hand — 
walked  along  the  river  to  that  old  tree,  and  the  silent  dark 
hunters  appeared  to  serve  them. 

It  was  evening.  The  running  lamps  on  Pushpaka  were  lit, 
and  he  was  like  a  city  suddenly  appearing  complete  amidst 
the  forest.  Shadows  fell  under  the  trees  and  Guha’s  men 
came  out  with  torches.  Rama  and  Lakshmana  and  Sita 
washed  in  the  river.  Then  on  blankets  round  a  fire,  under  the 
ancient  tree  where  they  had  been  fourteen  years  before  they 


The  Wonderful  Return  309 

ate  with  Guha,  and  with  them  Vibhishana  first  tasted  the  deli¬ 
cious  wilderness  cooking  and  ate  a  savage  forest  feast. 


Hanuman  flew  over  Kosala.  He  saw  the  roads  coming  to 
Ayodhya  from  many  countries,  the  fields  and  farms,  the  flag¬ 
flying  temples  and  holy  bathing  places  along  the  rivers,  the 
great  white-walled  city  of  Ayodhya  seeming  empty — and  an 
earshot  beyond,  the  little  village  of  Nandigrama  crowded 
with  people. 

Bharata  sat  there  dressed  in  barkcloth  at  the  foot  of  the 
red  and  gold  Ayodhya  throne,  and  on  the  throne  were 
Rama’s  two  wooden  sandals  painted  with  flowers.  Every  royal 
officer  looked  like  a  hermit  all  dressed  in  bark  or  skins,  his 
hair  matted  into  knots,  his  armor  hidden  as  Rama’s  had  been. 
Satrughna  sat  nearby  on  the  grass.  In  all  Kosala  no  man  wore 
good  clothes  or  any  color,  but  the  women  dressed  as  they 
would,  because  Sita  did  not  leave  her  robes  and  ornaments 
behind  to  go  into  the  forest. 

Hanuman  dropped  from  the  sky  like  a  bouncing  ball.  He 
bowed  first  to  Rama’s  sandals  and  then  to  Bharata.  “Rama 
sends  me  to  greet  you.  I  am  Hanuman  the  Son  of  the  Wind. 
Is  your  kingdom  well?  Is  there  Dharma  and  Justice  in  Ko¬ 
sala?  I  hope  lovers  are  not  kept  parted  and  young  men  re¬ 
spect  the  old,  and  do  the  rich  not  ignore  the  poor?” 

Tears  of  happiness  ran  down  Bharata’s  face.  “Rama’s  land 
of  Kosala  is  well;  Fair  Ayodhya  is  waiting.  I  give  you  a  thou¬ 
sand  cows  and  a  hundred  villages,  and  sixteen  wives  of  noble 
birth,  young  and  beautiful  with  skin  like  gold.” 

Hanuman  laughed.  “I  touch  them  and  give  them  back.”  He 
looked  at  Bharata  with  all  the  playful  insanity  of  a  cat. 
“What  are  you  doing  here  like  this?  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
washed  their  hair  out  days  agol  He’ll  meet  you  tomorrow  by 
the  city.” 

Bharata  having  truth  for  prowess  said,  “Set  the  signal  fires 
to  the  villages  and  all  the  countryside.”  Satrughna  set  wine 
and  fruit  down  by  Hanuman.  Everyone  was  smiling. 

The  priest  Vasishtha  approached  and  said,  ‘The  fourteen 
years  are  full.  The  trees  are  in  blossom.” 

The  Kosala  men  were  changing  clothes  and  bathing,  light¬ 
ing  fires  and  trimming  their  hair  and  beards.  Hanuman  had  a 
drink  and  ate  three  peaches.  Bharata  sent  runners  to 
Ayodhya  to  say — Tomorrow,  and  evening  fell  on  the  little 


310 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


village.  In  the  reflecting  firelight  silver  and  gold,  armor  and 
rich  silk  were  shining. 

“Will  you  stay?”  asked  Bharata. 

Hanuman  said,  “Surely.” 

Sumantra  the  old  charioteer  came,  and  many  people  sat 
circled  round  Hanuman  and  Bharata  and  Satrughna.  Cooks 
brought  fine  food,  a  real  dinner  after  fourteen  years  of  eating 
hermit’s  food,  fourteen  centuries  of  grass  and  plain  water  it 
seemed. 

Hanuman  feasted  on  fruit  and  nuts,  and  Bharata  said,  “If 
we  can  hear  it,  unfold  to  us  all  that  happened  these  many 
years  to  Rama.” 

“Well,”  said  Hanuman,  “Ravana  stole  Sita  and — ” 

“What!”  said  Sumantra.  “How  did  that  happen?” 

“We  saved  her.  We  fought  a  war  and  won.” 

“Ah,”  said  Bharata.  “The  animals  .  .  .  bless  them 
all.  .  .  .” 

“Now  Ravana  is  dead,”  said  Hanuman,  “and  Rama  is 
tonight  in  Guha’s  kingdom.” 

Satrughna  said,  “Hanuman,  we  saw  you  fly  over  holding  a 
red-hot  mountain  a  few  nights  ago.” 

“We’ve  heard  this  and  that,”  said  Bharata,  “and  we  waited 
for  Rama’s  call  to  aid  him.  You  must  tell  us  everything.  Af¬ 
ter  a  long  time  our  desires  are  fulfilled.” 

Hanuman  settled  back  contentedly  and  the  people  grew 
still.  “I  will  tell  you  Rama’s  story,  filled  with  loneliness  and 
love,  romance  and  glamor.  .  .  .  Listen,  Prince — I  am  Hanu¬ 
man,  the  son  of  the  far-going  Wind,  and  one  day  on  a  hill¬ 
top.  .  . 


Let  all  cares  be  forgotten, 

Let  your  worries  fly  away: 

For  the  Master  of  the  Revels 
Will  rule  the  land  this  day! 

It  was  early  morning.  The  Revels  Master  stood  up  and 
slowly  brushed  fourteen  years  of  dust  and  ashes  and  sand  out 
of  his  old  clothes.  He  found  the  wine-key  he’d  thrown  away 
still  on  its  chain;  he  found  his  vests  and  ribbons  and  his  fur 
hat.  The  royal  palace  had  been  astir  all  night.  He  opened  the 
king’s  wine-vaults  and  broke  the  seal  on  a  tall  dusty  crock, 
and  poured  himself  a  cheerful  cordial  drink.  The  Master  of 
the  Revels  smiled  again. 

In  Ayodhya  the  gay  silk  pennons  and  streamers  were  un- 


The  Wonderful  Return 


311 


furled.  Musicians  restrung  their  silent  lutes;  drivers  put  the 
wheels  back  on  the  Kosala  chariots.  They  dressed  and  painted 
the  royal  white  elephant,  and  Fair  Ayodhya  threw  open  her 
gates  and  waited  for  her  Lord  Rama. 

Behold  1  Fair  Ayodhya!  the  city  of  my  dreams;  Ayodhya  of 
many  dreams  and  gardens.  No  war  was  there;  the  war-songs 
were  made  into  dances,  and  the  marches  were  for  parades  for 
the  children.  In  Ayodhya  you  could  walk  anywhere,  anytime, 
free  and  unafraid.  You  could  love  openly,  and  couples  em¬ 
braced  in  daylight  in  the  gardens. 

She  was  in  the  low  hills,  the  breathing  hills  of  home,  and 
she  was  the  most  beautiful  city  ever  made  by  man,  with  her 
hanging  stairway  gardens  and  her  sprays  of  flowers.  Her 
homes  were  my  dream  houses;  I  knew  that  when  I  first  saw 
them  in  the  bright  clear  sunlight.  Purple  petals  fell  on  the 
green  barefoot  grasses  by  the  stairs  outside,  and  vines  of  spicy 
sweet  flowers  seemed  growing  from  her  housetop  roofs,  and 
her  flowering  trees  in  blossom  scented  the  air.  The  colored 
flower  gardens  fell  down  her  slopes,  holding  ferns  and  green 
things  and  small  tame  wild  animals.  Her  side  streets  were  like 
long  green  tunnels  overarched  by  old  trees  touching  from 
each  side.  The  leafy  trees  swayed  in  the  gentle  breeze  of  the 
Kosala  hills,  and  I  walked  below  through  spotted  sunlight  and 
moving  shade. 

Hearts  are  young  in  Fair  Ayodhya,  and  all’s  forgiven  now. 
Her  streets  are  sprinkled  with  sandalwood  water.  She  has  fish¬ 
ponds  and  splashing  fountains  lovely  to  hear,  where  flights  of 
white  birds  play,  graceful  and  happy.  Bushes  of  ripe  black¬ 
berries  look  like  bees  swarming.  Her  gardens  are  the  flowery 
shelters  of  my  childhood.  Fair  Ayodhya — won’t  you  be  mine, 
till  the  end  of  Time? 

There’s  nothing  I  have  to  do,  I’ve  done  it  all.  It’s  time  to 
relax,  time  to  have  a  good  dinner,  and  to  be  peaceful.  From 
peace  in  my  own  heart  peace  will  go  out  to  my  courtyard,  to 
my  city,  my  kingdom,  to  all  the  world. . . . 

The  wine  flows  free,  the  music  calls; 

1  smile  within  the  dancing  halls.  .  .  . 

I  spend  my  days  with  my  friends  doing  nothing.  Sometimes 
the  grey  river  mist  comes  in  off  the  slow  Sarayu  river  where  I 
swim,  and  the  tops  of  the  tall  trees  are  lost  in  the  cool  fog.  It 
makes  the  trees  like  low  clouds  themselves;  it  is  wet  under 


312 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


them  and  nowhere  else;  and  I  hear  the  boatmen  calling  out  on 
the  river. 

Fair  Ayodhya,  my  old  home;  the  city  I  love,  my  own  free 
city;  you  are  very  dear  to  me.  You  are  the  home  of  friend¬ 
ship  and  alive,  gleaming  with  lamps  at  night.  You  are  where 
the  great  roads  cross,  and  people  traveling  often  stay  here 
and  go  no  farther.  Fair  Ayodhya,  my  love  to  you  where  the 
food  is  good  and  no  man  poor. 

She  was  my  city;  I  loved  all  of  her,  by  day  or  night,  and 
all  her  people.  They  were  my  family  and  my  friends,  where  I 
belonged — good  words  and  loving  homes — cozy  and  warm, 
or  easy  and  cool,  just  as  I  wanted.  She  was  my  Innocent  City. 
Everything  was  all  right  there. 

Beyond  the  end  of  every  Time 
You’ll  find  Valmiki  makes  a  rhyme; 

The  blue  Sarayu's  flowing  by, 

And  butterflies  like  flying  flowers 
Pass  me  by, 

I  lie  in  bowers. 

Oh  Rama! 


Ayodhya  was  dancing,  shining  with  decorations;  and  in  the 
palace,  men  gathered  the  coronation  supplies  and  women 
went  in  rustling  dresses  wearing  gold.  Shrill  pipes  and  homs 
played  in  the  street  and  shell-trumpets  sounded  from  the 
temples.  Royal  musicians  and  courtiers  smiled,  and  the  danc¬ 
ing  girls  caught  their  breath. 

People  lined  the  wide  streets  and  the  rolling  hills.  Children 
were  eating  candy  from  gold-paper  wrappings.  The  houses 
and  doorways  were  all  white  and  there  were  flowers  in  the 
streets.  Rama  had  already  spent  a  night  awake  in  silence 
thinking  of  all  those  years  before,  and  that  when  he  came 
home  now,  he  would  be  king  without  waiting. 

Bharata  and  Satrughna  and  Hanuman,  followed  by  the 
whole  village  of  Nandigrama,  went  to  a  field  outside  the  city 
with  Rama’s  sandals  on  the  white  elephant’s  back  beneath  a 
white  umbrella.  Out  from  Ayodhya  rode  the  Kosala  warriors 
on  a  thousand  horses  with  jingling  rings  and  chains,  carrying 
shining  spears  and  long  lances. 

Then  Pushpaka  came,  flying  with  colored  banners  in  the 
sun.  He  landed  in  that  field  and  his  riders  crowded  to  the 
rails  high  above.  The  ladders  came  down,  and  Bharata  led 


The  Wonderful  Return 


313 


the  elephant  over,  and  took  the  sandals  from  him.  He  was 
pulled  up  onto  the  chariot  and  fell  into  Rama’s  arms.  And 
while  all  Ayodhya  watched,  Bharata  knelt  and- swiftly  tied  the 
shoes  back  on  Rama’s  feet. 

Bharata  stood  and  smiled,  looking  level  into  Rama’s  eyes. 
He  ran  his  hand  through  his  red  hair  and  said,  “Majesty!  I 
return  to  you  all  your  kingdom  left  in  my  care — how  good  to 
see  you  I”  He  faced  Lakshmana.  “Blessed  is  my  birth  since  to¬ 
day  I  may  see  all  of  you  safe  at  home.” 

Bharata  told  King  Sugriva,  “You  are  our  brothers.  Friend¬ 
ship  grows  from  kindness  and  giving  help,  not  from  close  ties 
of  blood.” 

He  told  Jambavan,  “Lord  of  Bears,  I  am  your  servant.”  He 
said  to  Vibhishana,  “Lord,  take  the  freedom  of  Fair  Ayodhya 
as  our  guest  forever;  you  have  made  this  possible.” 

The  animals  and  the  five  demons  descending  from  Push- 
paka  were  met  by  Kosala  men  and  women  and  welcomed 
and  led  to  houses  and  lodgings  all  over  Ayodhya.  The  stories 
about  a  faraway  animal  city  were  true,  Hanuman’s  story  was 
true — it  was  all  true! 

Then  Rama  stood  on  the  ground  and  the  four  brothers  em¬ 
braced,  and  Vasishtha  led  Sita  to  Sumantra’s  car  to  be  driven 
to  see  her  three  mothers. 

At  arms’  length  Bharata  put  his  hands  on  Rama’s  shoulders 
and  said,  “A  child  cannot  easily  pick  up  and  carry  the  bur¬ 
den  set  down  by  a  man.  We  have  survived  only  by  the  power 
of  your  sandals.  Take  this  land  back,  my  king;  take  her  back 
from  me!” 

“In  a  moment,”  smiled  Rama.  “Let’s  walk  into  town.  I’m 
not  used  to  all  this.” 


At  last  Dasaratha’s  four  sons  were  walking  together, 
through  Fair  Ayodhya  to  the  white  royal  palace  on  a  hill, 
and  the  Kosalas  stood  quiet  along  the  roads  waiting  to  know 
what  Rama  would  do.  Rama  and  Lakshmana  entered  alone 
to  see  the  Queens.  They  were  combing  Sita’s  hair  with  silver 
combs  and  Rama’s  mother  Kausalya  said — We  are  well;  by 
good  fortune  we  see  you  again  with  all  your  enemies  dead. 
Then  she  hugged  him. 

Vasishtha  came  in.  He  said  to  Kaikeyi  the  youngest  Queen, 
“By  your  doing  were  the  worlds  saved  from  tyranny.” 

He  told  Queen  Sumitra,  “Your  son  Lakshmana  is  the  silent 


314 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


support  of  Rama;  Satrughna  is  Bharata’s  quiet  companion; 
you  are  yourself  the  good  friend  of  these  two  Queens.” 

He  said  to  Kausalya,  “We  have  lived  to  see  this  day!” 

And  he  told  Rama,  “Rule  as  long  as  the  world  endures,  as 
far  as  the  world  extends.” 

“Yes,”  said  Rama. 

Vasishtha  said,  “These  hours  and  days  are  fortunate.”  He 
went  to  a  window  and  shouted,  “He  will!” 

A  Kosala  lion-roar  came  back  from  the  street.  The  palace 
trembled  with  noise,  incredibly  loud.  The  first  Ayodhya  fes¬ 
tival  in  fourteen  years  began,  and  the  best  celebration  she  had 
ever  known.  The  people  were  dancing  again,  and  men  and 
monkeys  and  bears  all  jammed  into  the  wineshops  shoulder 
to  shoulder,  trading  drinks  and  stories  and  lots  of  loose  talk. 

“I’ll  get  ready,”  said  Vasishtha,  “and  make  you  King  to¬ 
morrow.” 

Sugriva  found  Hanuman  wearing  flower  garlands  piled 
round  his  shoulders  up  to  his  ears.  The  Monkey  King  gave 
Hanuman  a  golden  jar  and  said,  “For  a  present  to  Rama,  fill 
this  with  water  from  each  of  Earth’s  five  hundred  rivers.” 

“Say  no  more!”  said  Hanuman. 

“And  don’t  try  to  fool  me  with  well-water,  because  I  know 
the  taste  of  every  sea  and  stream.” 

“Well,  they  won’t  let  a  monkey  taste  the  Ayodhya  King’s 
waterjars!”  laughed  Hanuman. 

“And  if  you  see  any  fair  or  beautiful  thing  that  may  be 
brought,  bring  it.” 

The  Kosalas  gave  the  animals  and  demons  new  clothes  and 
fine  ornaments,  and  when  Bharata  served  free  food  from  the 
royal  kitchens  Ayodhya  maidens  carried  tasty  treats  to  mon¬ 
keys  and  bears  lying  on  soft  beds  or  on  grass  in  the  parks. 
For  Fair  Ayodhya,  all  the  sorrow  in  the  world  was  used  up. 
People  poured  into  town  from  the  countryside;  they  danced 
and  heard  music  and  gambled  and  watched  tumblers  and 
plays  on  the  street  corners. 

The  holy  trees  were  hung  with  ribbons  and  brahmanas 
blessed  everyone.  In  the  early  evening  countless  candles 
burned  outdoors  like  blossoms  of  light  and  incense  rose  into 
the  air.  Lanterns  glistened  and  torchlight  burned.  The  night 
was  warm  and  the  stars  were  clear. 

Then  late  at  night  Sita  sat  by  a  fountain  in  the  palace 
while  Rama  slept  on  a  bed  in  an  open  room  nearby,  and 
Manthara  the  hunchback  came  to  her.  Manthara  knelt,  “For¬ 
give  me  for  remembering  those  two  wishes.” 


The  Wonderful  Return 


315 


Sita  was  beautiful.  She  answered,  “Not  only  men,  but  even 
the  gods  have  been  freed  from  fear  of  Ravana.  Death  had 
surrendered  to  the  Demon  King;  the  Moon  and  Sun  were  his 
subjects;  and  Indra  King  of  heaven  was  a  captive.” 

“Lord!”  said  Manthara. 

Sita  said,  “Rama  killed  Ravana  only  because  of  what  you 
did.” 

Manthara  smiled,  and  sat  beside  Sita.  “Queen  Sita,  I  am  al¬ 
ways  your  faithful  servant.” 

“Yes,”  said  Sita. 

After  fourteen  years  awake  and  watching  over  Rama  every 
night,  Lakshmana  slept,  held  fast  in  sleep  beside  his  loving 
wife. 


The  night  passed  quickly  by.  Soon  the  sky  grew  light  and 
the  morning  Sun  rose  red  for  Rama  to  see  him.  Bharata  had 
brought  the  Ayodhya  throne  from  Nandigrama  village  to  the 
royal  park  by  the  palace  so  everyone  could  see  Rama  made 
king. 

Rama  came  out,  like  a  lion  coming  out  of  his  cave,  and 
girls  tossed  fragrant  flowers  from  windows  and  rooftops.  He 
walked  to  the  park  with  Lakshmana  holding  a  seven-tiered 
white  parasol  over  him.  White  cows  were  tied  all  along  the 
way.  Bharata  and  Sugriva  the  monkey  King  stood  behind  the 
throne  holding  white  yaktail  fans.  Rama  sat  on  the  throne 
facing  east,  and  Sita  sat  on  a  lower  chair  beside  him,  on  a 
deerskin  cover  trimmed  in  gold.  The  animals  and  demons  and 
men  gathered  there  sat  down  on  the  grass. 

Virgin  maids  brought  spotless  white  cattle  with  gold-plated 
horns,  and  unthreshed  heads  of  grain  for  Rama  to  touch. 
Then  Vasishtha  entered  the  park  holding  a  hollow  horn 
wrapped  in  silver  wire  and  a  little  dipper.  First  the  priest 
stopped  by  Hanuman  and  dipped  some  of  the  river  water  of 
all  the  world  into  the  horn.  Four  brahmanas  unsealed  four 
brimful  stone  jars  of  seawater.  Four  Ayodhya  girls  set  before 
Rama  a  handful  of  jewels  and  one  of  seed,  a  handful  of 
herbs  and  one  of  sea  pearls. 

Vasishtha  put  some  of  the  waters  of  the  Eastern  Sea  in  his 
horn  from  the  first  stone  jar.  Four  more  girls  came  forward 
and  put  before  Rama  a  jar  of  honey,  parched  grain  dyed  with 
saffron,  a  bowl  of  milk  and  some  incense  unlit. 

Vasishtha  dipped  water  out  of  the  Western  Sea,  whose 
waters  smell  like  camphor.  Four  more  beautiful  maidens 


316 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


brought  Rama  turquoise  and  blue  water  flowers,  a  lump  of 
silver  and  a  dish  of  curds. 

Vasishtha  added  the  black  seawater  of  the  cold  North  Sea; 
and  the  last  four  maidens  set  down  by  Rama’s  throne  a 
fresh-loomed  cloth  unbordered,  and  corals,  and  beautiful 
seashells  and  white  garlands.  Then  Vasishtha  took  water  from 
the  Southern  Sea  water  jar. 

Finally  at  noon  Vasishtha  stood  by  Rama  and  emptied  the 
water  over  his  head,  and  made  him  King  and  Lord  of  Earth; 
the  Solar  King  of  Fair  Ayodhya,  the  Kosala  Lord,  and  Sita 
was  his  one  Queen  with  him. 

Rama  gave  many  presents — horses  and  cows,  earrings  and 
bracelets,  rings  and  bells  and  a  silver  crest  for  Sugriva,  and 
round  Sita’s  neck  he  fastened  a  smooth  pearl  necklace.  Sita 
held  the  strands  in  her  hand  and  looked  at  them,  and  looked 
at  Rama,  and  looked  at  the  animals. 

Rama  said,  “Give  those  pearls  to  whom  you  please!” 

Lotus-eyed  Sita  gave  them  to  Hanuman.  He  knelt  before 
her  and  she  put  the  pearls  around  his  neck  and  smiled  at 
him.  The  necklace  seemed  to  glow  like  little  moons  nestled  in 
his  white  fur.  “This  gift  is  for  your  courage  and  strength, 
your  valor  and  bravery  and  skill,  and  for  your  faithful  serv¬ 
ice.” 

Rama  said  to  all  his  people,  “I  am  pleased  that  you  have 
gathered  here  to  welcome  me.” 

They  cheered  back — King  Rama !  Rule  forever! 


The  Ayodhya  throne,  all  red  and  gold,  was  carried  into  the 
King’s  palace,  and  the  coronation  was  over.  All  afternoon  the 
animals  and  men  ate  their  way  through  hills  of  food  and 
drank  up  lakes  of  Rama’s  wines,  and  there  was  not  one  per¬ 
son  without  some  gift.  Evening  came  and  the  Sun  set  as 
Ayodhya  sang  her  twilight  prayers.  Then  Night  veiled  the 
worlds  as  Rama  went  into  the  inner  rooms  with  Sita. 

So  passed  the  first  day  of  Rama’s  long  reign  of  eleven 
thousand  years.  Rama  could  discover  the  truth  of  things,  and 
men  resorted  to  him  from  all  over  Earth,  as  the  rivers  of  the 
world  all  flow  to  the  sea.  Rama  was  well-honored  and  well¬ 
loved.  His  presence  filled  the  heart. 

Rama  was  strong  enough  to  support  all  men,  and  gentle  as 
the  new  Moon’s  beams.  Fame  and  Wealth  never  left  him. 
When  he  was  king  men  were  long  in  life,  and  lived  surround¬ 
ed  by  their  children  and  grandchildren  and  all  their  families. 


The  Wonderful  Return  317 

The  old  never  had  to  make  funerals  for  the  young.  There  was 
rain  and  fertile  Earth;  indeed,  the  Earth  became  bountiful. 

Peace  and  Rama  ruled  as  friends  together,  and  bad  things 
did  not  happen.  Men  grew  kind  and  fearless.  Everyone  had 
about  him  a  certain  air  and  look  of  good  fortune. 

A  King  like  Rama  was  never  seen  before  and  nowhere 
remembered  from  the  past  in  any  kingdom,  nor  did  any  like 
him  ever  follow  in  the  later  ages  of  this  world. 


THE  END  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  BATTLES. 
HERE  BEGINS  THE  SEVENTH  AND  FINAL  BOOK, 
THE  UTTARA  KANDA,  THE  LAST  BOOK. 


In  What  Dream? 


At  the  end  hear  the  first  words.  .  .  . 


After  a  month  in  Ayodhya,  early  one  morning  before  it  was 
light,  while  the  Kosalas  still  slept  with  closed  eyes,  Vibhishana 
and  Sugriva  met  Rama  in  the  palace  gardens,  and  the  Mon¬ 
key  King  said,  “Majesty,  we  have  all  seen  you,  now  we  shall 
go  home  to  our  deep  forest  and  far  countries.” 

“Blessed  are  friends  like  you,”  answered  Rama. 

“Farewell,”  said  Vibhishana.  He  bowed  his  head,  then  with 
his  four  knights  he  flew  to  Lanka,  going  swiftly  through 
the  sky  with  a  sound  of  thunders  and  gleam  of  lightnings. 

Rama  went  outside  the  palace  courtyard  and  looked  out  at 
the  monkeys  and  the  dark  bears  all  gathered  in  the  streets. 
He  embraced  Hanuman.  “It  seems  you  have  been  here  but  a 
moment.” 

“Farewell,  Lord  of  Earth.”  And  then  with  all  desired 
things  given  them  by  Rama,  the  animals  of  the  greenwood  re¬ 
turned  to  dwell  in  their  homes,  blinking  their  eyes  and  half 
unwilling  to  leave  Fair  Ayodhya. 

It  was  still  very  early,  and  as  Rama  walked  alone  back  to 
his  palace,  through  a  grove  of  trees  with  fair  new  leaves  in 
the  morning,  he  heard  a  voice  call  from  above  him — Rama, 
Rama,  Rama — and  he  found  he  stood  in  a  long  wide 
shadew. 

Rama  looked  up.  There  were  the  giant  rainbows  over  his 
head.  “I  am  Pushpaka  chariot,  the  spring  flower  car.  By  your 
leave  I  will  return  to  Vaishravana  the  Treasure  Lord.  Give 
me  permission  to  live  on  Kailasa  Hill,  and  I  will  come  back 
to  you  if  ever  you  need  me,  whenever  you  want  me.” 

Rama  said,  “Welcome  to  you,  best  of  chariots.  Go  where 
you  will.  Be  not  sorry  for  our  separation.  May  your  ways  be 
smooth  and  good  forever.”  Then  Pushpaka  rose  and  flew 

318 


In  What  Dream 7  319 

north  to  the  silver  hill  Kailasa  from  where  Ravana  had  stolen 
him. 

Indeed,  when  Rama  was  King  many  creatures  and  created 
things  could  speak  to  men  sometimes.  When  deer  ate  the 
crops  the  Kosalas  would  speak  with  the  deer  kings  in  good¬ 
will,  and  those  kings  would  withdraw  their  people  to  the  wild 
grasslands.  If  one  wished  to  hear  stories  of  past  times  he 
could  speak  with  an  old  sword  about  ancient  battles,  or  hear 
the  old  tales  told  by  the  trees  and  stones. 


Rama  ruled  from  Fair  Ayodhya  and  all  the  world  saluted 
him,  and  time  went  by  until  his  reign  lacked  only  twelve 
years  and  a  few  months  of  being  ten  thousand  years  long, 
when  one  winter  evening  Rama  met  Sita  wearing  a  beautiful 
robe,  and  saw  that  she  was  with  child.  Knowing  of  the 
strange  longings  of  pregnant  women  he  asked  her,  “Is  there 
some  wish  of  yours  I  may  give?” 

Sita  smiled.  “I  want  to  go  again  to  the  retreats  along  the 
Ganges,  just  for  a  day  or  two,  to  eat  the  fresh  wild  food  and 
sleep  once  more  on  grasses.  And  as  we  first  went  away  from 
Ayodhya,  thousands  of  years  ago  I  promised  Ganga  to  visit 
her  ...  let  me  go  now,  my  Lord. . .  .” 

Rama  said,  “Go  tomorrow  if  you  want  to,”  and  he  em¬ 
braced  his  Queen  with  great  love  and  happiness. 

And  with  those  kind  and  innocent  words  sorrow  again 
came  into  Rama’s  life. 

We  look  at  man’s  life  and  we  cannot  untangle  this  song. 

Rings  and  knots  of  joy  and  grief,  all  interlaced  and  locking. 

Later  that  night  Rama  met  with  some  of  his  ministers  and 
in  passing  he  asked  lightly,  “What  do  my  people  say  of  me?” 

“Majesty,”  answered  the  minister  Bhadra,  “they  speak  good 
of  you  as  King,  and  in  their  homes  tell  stories  of  your  war 
against  Ravana  long  ago.” 

“The  king  is  the  refuge  of  those  who  have  no  shelter,  so  I 
must  be  without  fault.  People  tread  in  their  king’s  footsteps, 
so  I  must  avoid  even  the  report  of  any  wrong.  Hide  nothing 
from  me,”  said  Rama. 

Bhadra  joined  his  hands.  “They  say — today  men  stand  at 
a  ruined  pier  hung  with  colored  rags  on  the  far  south  shores 
and  dream  of  a  bridge  a  hundred  leagues  long  across  the 
dancing  sea,  where  the  ocean  breaks  in  luminous  waves.  Rama 


320 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


did  a  deed  unheard  of.  Ravana  was  unconquerable.  No  man 
ever  brought  the  wild  animals  of  the  wood  into  his  armies  be¬ 
fore — and  so  they  talk  of  many  things.” 

“What  else?” 

“Majesty,  Kings  must  hear  good  news  and  not  think  on 
mistakes.  Don’t  seek  wisdom  from  coarse  common  people, 
but  forget  their  talk;  pity  them  their  ignorance  and  trust  in 
things  to  turn  out  right.” 

Rama  said,  “Those  who  live  uneventfully  at  home  with 
their  wives  and  families  may  alone  really  know  life.  No  king 
can  ignore  what  his  folk  say  of  him  ...  do  not  refuse  to  tell 
me. 

Bhadra  said,  “Rama,  we  must  obey  you.  They  also  say — 
The  King  desires  Sita  although  Ravana  touched  her.  How 
could  he  forget  she  lived  with  another?  And  the  Queen  must 
also  remember  the  Demon  King — so  speak  the  lowest  men.” 

And  the  other  ministers  of  Kosala  lowered  their  eyes  and 
sadly  said,  “Lately  this  is  true.” 

Rama  left  them  there  without  a  word,  and  sent  a  message 
to  Lakshmana — Come  to  me  at  once. 

Lakshmana  and  Rama  met  in  a  private  room  of  the  palace. 
Rama  stood  alone  by  a  window.  His  face  was  pale,  his  hands 
trembled  like  leaves  in  a  wind,  the  lights  of  his  eyes  were 
gone  as  though  clouded  over. 

Lakshmana  frowned.  He  looked  and  saw  no  enemy,  he  felt 
no  threat.  Lakshmana  harshly  threw  the  end  of  his  robe  back 
over  his  shoulder,  and  knelt  and  asked,  “Who  dares?” 

“Arise,”  said  Rama.  “Promise  to  obey  me.” 

Lakshmana  walked  back  and  forth.  “The  threads  of  that 
design  1  Who  told  you?” 

“A  king  must  be  blameless.” 

“Such  words  pierce  my  heart,”  said  Lakshmana.  “Fire  him¬ 
self  proved  her  innocent.  She  is  fired  gold,  poured  into  golden 
fire!” 

Rama  said,  “Lakshmana,  consider  what  is  a  king.  Kings 
cannot  afford  blame.  Ill  fame  is  evil  to  kings;  they  above  all 
men  must  be  beyond  reproach  .  .  .  see,  into  what  a  chasm  of 
sorrow  a  King  may  fall. . . .” 

Lakshmana  said,  “Gradually  everything  seems  to  change 
again,  and  even  an  Emperor  must  pay  his  way  through  life.” 

Rama  faced  his  brother.  “It  must  bel  It’s  all  the  same, 
can’t  you  see?  Where  there  is  growth  there  is  decay;  where 
there  is  prosperity  there  is  ruin;  and  where  there  is  birth  there 
is  death.” 


In  What  Dream 7 


321 


Lakshmana  sighed  hopelessly.  “Well,  what  will  you  do?” 

“Sita  expects  to  go  to  the  forests  tomorrow.  Let  Sumantra 
the  Charioteer  drive  you  both  there,  and  when  you  arrive  by 
the  river  Ganga  abandon  her.” 

“She  will  die.  Your  child  will  die!” 

“No,”  said  Rama.  “I  command  you!  Not  a  word  to  any¬ 
one.” 

Lakshmana  said,  “Surely  a  king  is  remote  and  lonely,  and 
very  far  from  reason.  We  cannot  speak  to  you.  . .  .” 

Rama  said,  “Each  person  can  be  told  what  he  will  under¬ 
stand  of  the  nature  of  the  world,  and  no  more  than  that — for 
the  rest,  take  my  word.” 

“I’ll  take  it,”  answered  Lakshmana.  “Just  .  .  .  leave  her 
there,  alone?” 

“Yes.” 

Lakshmana  looked  around  the  room.  “Rama,  since  we 
were  young  children  I  have  followed  you;  now  I  will  still 
serve  you.  For  right  and  wrong  are  very  subtle  and  hard  to 
tell  apart,  and  the  Dharma  Law  is  difficult  to  know — and,  it 
is  inconceivable  to  me,  that  /  should  ever  willingly  disobey 
you,  Rama." 


The  next  morning  Sita  took  some  little  presents  for  the 
hermits’  wives  of  the  forest,  tied  them  in  a  silk  cloth,  and  got 
on  Sumantra’s  chariot  with  Lakshmana.  Sumantra’s  four  red 
horses  went  out  of  Fair  Ayodhya  and  down  along  the  Ta- 
masa  riverside,  through  plumes  of  morning  fog. 

They  stayed  that  night  in  the  woods  meeting  no  one,  and 
continued  their  way  the  next  day.  It  was  cloudy;  the  Sun  had 
fled  from  having  to  see  Sita  betrayed.  They  came  to  the 
mouth  of  the  dark  Tamasa  where  she  meets  Ganga,  and 
Sumantra  found  an  ancient  abandoned  fisher-boat  drawn  up 
onshore  and  said,  “Come  across  Ganga  and  we  may  meet 
someone.” 

At  that  instant,  in  the  city  of  Lanka,  Vibhishana  the  King 
felt  danger  to  Sita.  He  went  outside  and  looked  far  in  every 
direction  to  see  what  was  amiss.  His  far-seeing  blue  eyes 
gleamed  and  his  black  face  darkened.  He  wrapped  himself  in 
a  blue  cloak  and  flew  to  heaven. 

By  the  peaceful  stream  of  the  heavenly  branch  of  the  holy 
Ganga  river  he  saw  the  sage  Narada  leaning  back  against  a 


322 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


tree  with  his  eyes  closed.  Vibhishana  gently  knelt  on  the 
ground  of  heaven  and  touched  Narada’s  shoulder.  “Wake  up. 
Get  moving!” 

Narada  opened  his  eyes,  saw  Vibhishana’s  face  with  his 
long  fangs  and  decided  he  had  a  bad  dream.  He  shut  his  eyes 
again.  But  King  Vibhishana  gripped  Narada  hard  as  steel  and 
said —  For  the  protection  of  Sita,  the  Demon  King  calls  on 
any  power!  Awake  this  instant,  she  is  in  danger!  Get  up!  Do 
right! 

“Sita!”  Narada  was  on  his  feet.  “Where?” 

Vibhishana  said,  “Down  on  Earth,  oh  Minstrel,  across 
from  where  Tamasa  flows  into  Ganga  below,  where  inside  an 
anthill  sits  the  lone  hermit  Valmiki.” 


Sumantra  and  Lakshmana  took  Sita  across  Ganga  in  that 
old  boat  and  helped  her  out  on  the  other  side.  Then  Lak¬ 
shmana  looked  at  her  and  wept. 

“What’s  wrong?”  asked  Sita. 

Lakshmana  could  not  answer  her,  and  Sumantra  the  Chari¬ 
oteer  replied,  “We  see  bad  signs,  Earth  to  us  is  sad,  we  are 
restless  and  empty  of  happiness.” 

Sita  said,  “You  miss  Rama,  but  when  we  see  what  hermits 
we  will  find  and  give  them  my  gifts  we  may  all  go  back 
home.” 

Sumantra  sighed  and  bent  low  his  head,  and  looking  down 
he  said,  “This  is  the  work  of  destiny  that  cannot  be  over¬ 
come.  I  was  angry  when  Dasaratha  banished  Rama,  but  this 
time  I  made  no  protest,  for  this  is  fate.  This  was  foretold, 
and  I  overheard  it  long  ago.” 

“What?”  asked  Sita.  “What  are  you  talking  about?” 

Lakshmana  replied,  “In  fear  of  scandal,  like  a  coward 
Rama  now  uses  this  journey  as  the  pretext  to  abandon  you 
here  in  the  woods.”  He  turned  to  Sumantra.  “This  is  clearly 
unjust.  I  cannot  understand,  what  can  we  gain  by  doing 
wrong  to  please  a  fool?” 

“Then  suspend  your  reason  and  get  a  glimpse  of  Eternity.” 
Sumantra  looked  at  Ganga’s  waters  flowing  by.  “This  is  in 
part  ancient  history  beyond  men’s  knowing,  and  in  part  what 
I  have  heard  was  to  happen.  Rama  will  live  alone  from  now 
on,  apart  from  you.” 

Sita  wept,  “Oh  why?” 

“My  Lady,”  said  Sumantra,  “all  the  universe  is  but  a  sign 
to  be  read  rightly;  colors  and  forms  are  only  put  here  to 


In  What  Dream? 


323 


speak  to  us;  and  all  is  spirit,  there  is  nothing  else  in  existence. 
War  and  peace,  love  and  separation  are  hidden  gateways  to 
other  worlds  and  other  times.  Let  us  not  grow  old  still  believ¬ 
ing  that  truth  is  what  the  most  people  see  around  them  .  .  . 
Oh  Lakshmi  of  the  Lotus,  Daughter  of  Videha,  we  are  fit  ob¬ 
jects  of  blame  for  all  men  by  leaving  you.  But  banish  your 
sorrow  over  what  must  be.” 

Sumantra  silently  spoke  a  spell  that  all  forest  creatures 
might  protect  Sita,  and  as  he  began  to  speak  aloud  again,  the 
dark  blue  clouds  settled  lower  on  the  hills  around  them. 

Sumantra  said,  “Dasaratha  and  I  knew  part  of  our  future, 
and  I  have  never  told  this  story.  Now  I  am  an  old  man,  and  I 
remember  long  times  ago,  and  I  break  secrecy  to  tell  you 
how  it  was,  that  Kaikeyi  won  her  two  wishes.” 


Listen,  my  children — 

It  was  in  the  olden  time,  long  before  your  births,  when 
your  father  Dasaratha  and  I  were  young  men  ...  it  seems 
now  to  have  been  in  another  age  of  this  world.  Little  remem¬ 
bering  your  father  as  an  old  man,  little  looking  at  me  now 
can  you  see  the  brave  young  prince  and  the  lucky  charioteer 
of  those  days,  who  fought  on  the  side  of  the  gods  themselves 
against  the  Asuras  of  drought.  With  Indra  and  others,  and 
helped  by  Jatayu  the  young  vulture  prince  who  made  our 
friendship  then,  we  tried  to  unlock  the  clouds  where  all  the 
rain  was  imprisoned. 

Then  I  fought  alone  as  a  warrior  and  did  not  drive  Dasara- 
tha’s  car  that  flew  through  the  air  by  grace  of  Lord  Indra’s 
spell,  pulled  by  the  same  four  red  horses  I  have  used  all  these 
years  since.  There  was  a  better  driver  than  I  to  take  your  fa¬ 
ther  against  the  demon  strongholds  in  the  black  clouds — there 
was  Princess  Kaikeyi,  nine  years  old  and  unafraid. 

The  demons  armed  the  clouds  with  artillery  and  turned 
them  into  fortress  cities.  They  shot  many  of  our  warriors 
from  the  sky.  We  never  saw  the  Sun.  It  was  hot  and  stifling. 
At  night  lights  flashed  overhead  as  gods  and  demons  fought; 
by  day  we  saw  the  shadowy  giant  warriors  and  heard  the 
charge  of  horse  and  chariot  and  the  clash  of  arms.  Indra’s 
white  elephant  called  and  trumpeted;  he  threw  down  the 
demon  walls  and  many  black  stones  fell  on  Earth.  They 
broke  our  lands  and  the  fields  lay  parched.  That  was  dread 
fatal  war:  we  faced  famine. 

Those  days  gone  by  seemed  brighter  and  of  more  glory 


324 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


than  today,  or  darker  with  more  sorrow.  In  the  countryside 
our  cattle  shifted  and  lowed;  the  deer  burst  running  through 
the  forest  like  horses  driven  from  a  battlefield.  The  clouds 
were  black,  and  dry,  and  rimmed  with  red;  the  world  was 
dark;  all  daylight  was  gone.  There  was  forever  confusion  in 
heaven,  and  our  warriors  who  returned  from  flights  above  the 
clouds  at  night  told  us  how  the  stars  and  planets  swerved  and 
could  not  hold  their  paths  from  fright,  but  went  in  fearful 
uncertainty  blocking  heaven’s  ways,  striking  against  each 
other,  a  terror  to  mind  and  sight.  Flames  burst  like  blood 
from  the  stricken  stars. 

Your  grandfather  Aja  was  King. ‘He  helped  Indra,  and  we 
fought  back  against  the  demons  guided  by  our  flares  and  fires 
high  in  the  windy  sky.  We  battled  the  drought  demons  with 
Indra’s  thunderbolts.  I  have  myself  thrown  many  brilliant 
thunders,  made  by  Viswakarman  for  Indra,  and  for  that  we 
wore  a  thick  glove  of  wet  green  leaves,  and  bits  of  fires 
scarred  our  arms. 

Kaikeyi  never  failed  Dasaratha.  She  could  feel  an  enemy’s 
shortcomings;  she  felt  when  to  draw  near,  when  to  stay  and 
when  to  turn  away.  She  ran  her  four  red  horses  through  the 
celestial  skies  and  ruled  them  by  some  miraculous  power  of 
friendship.  Behind  her  was  a  seven-layered  white  umbrella 
with  slender  ribs  of  silver  over  the  warrior’s  station  on  her 
chariot,  and  to  each  side  of  it  a  chowrie  fan,  gold  on  the 
right,  silver  on  the  left,  and  there  stood  your  father  fighting 
for  rain. 

One  night  high  in  the  air,  the  demons  attacked  that  car 
with  conjurations  on  a  hundred  sides.  Your  father  was  sadly 
wounded.  Part  of  a  comet  tore  through  his  side,  and  a  flying 
fragment  of  his  shattered  armor  cut  Kaikeyi’s  hand  deeply. 
And  at  the  same  moment  a  demon  arrow  snapped  the  bolt- 
end  off  the  right  axle  and  the  wheel  started  to  slip  off. 

Dasaratha  was  unconscious  and  saved  from  falling  to  death 
by  Kaikeyi.  She  drove  the  chariot  so  it  did  not  overturn  in 
the  air,  and  kept  that  wheel  on,  and  brought  her  horses  and 
the  car  softly  down  to  Earth. 

Kaikeyi  wore  shimmering  armor  made  from  green  silk 
threads  and  fine  steel  interwoven,  a  green  cloak  like  winter’s 
grass.  It  was  strong,  but  she  loved  your  father  and  tore  away 
a  strip  of  it  to  bandage  Dasaratha’s  wounds,  and  her  hand 
bled,  their  blood  mingled.  She  nursed  him  for  many  days  as 
he  recovered  slowly,  and  he  told  her — You  restored  my  life 


In  What  Dream?  325 

that  my  enemies  had  taken  from  me  .  .  .  ask  me  twice  for 
anything  in  return. 

Then  one  night  Indra  came  to  Ayodhya.  We  met  him  as 
comrades,  we  drank  from  the  same  cup.  He  healed  Dasaratha 
completely,  and  would  have  taken  the  scar  from  Kaikeyi’s 
hand  but  she  refused  him.  We  went  to  a  field  outside  the  city, 
and  there  were  all  the  gods  of  heaven,  and  they  thanked  us 
for  our  help.  The  gods  were  cheerful;  they  had  just  received 
the  promise  of  aid  from  Lord  Narayana. 

We  heard  it.  Out  in  the  night,  from  far  far  away  came  the 
call  of  Narayana’s  battle-shell.  We  felt  the  first  winds  of 
Garuda’s  approaching  flight.  Our  torches  were  blown  out;  the 
shrill  winds  screamed  around  us.  There  was  a  great  loud 
sound  as  of  many  old  trees  straining  and  creaking  in  the 
Wind,  and  that  was  the  drawing  back  of  Narayana’s  bow. 
There  was  a  hum  and  rattle  and  groan  of  metal,  and  that  was 
the  razor-edged,  diamond-naved  discus  whirling  madly  on  its 
pole.  There  was  a  terrific  loud  snap,  and  the  bowstring  of 
Narayana  was  loosed  and  spoke  death  to  the  drought-demons. 
We  grown  men  shielded  our  eyes  and  covered  our  ears  from 
the  wind  and  noise,  but  young  Kaikeyi  stood  looking  up  into 
heaven,  standing  beside  Lord  Indra,  holding  his  hand  and 
smiling,  a  child  fearless  beside  heaven’s  Lord. 

The  rain  spilled  down  onto  the  land,  and  fell  spraying  into 
our  rivers.  It  came  down  on  the  mountains  and  fell  into  the 
seas.  And  with  the  rain  fell  down  demons  covered  with  red 
arrows  and  mangled. 

Then  through  the  night  dark  forms  ran  past  us  into 
Ayodhya.  They  were  demons  and  we  followed  armed,  but 
they  were  not  invading;  they  sought  refuge  from  Narayana. 
They  came  to  an  old  brahmana’s  house  and  his  wife  gave 
them  shelter.  That  old  couple  had  never  taken  life,  and  al¬ 
ways  saved  others  when  they  could;  and  now  they  accepted 
the  demons’  surrender  in  the  name  of  King  Aja,  and  sent 
word  to  the  royal  palace. 

Running  to  Ayodhya,  we  were  thrown  down  and  Garuda 
swept  past  us  screaming  like  a  thousand  eagles,  flying  low  be¬ 
tween  the  high  towers  of  Ayodhya,  shearing  our  city  gates 
and  his  claws  tearing  through  our  treetops.  Riding  on  his 
back  we  saw  Narayana  enraged.  His  dark  blue  skin  gleamed 
and  his  yellow  robes  flew.  He  killed  that  brahmana’s  wife 
when  she  faced  him,  without  letting  her  speak,  and  in  terrible 
anger  he  broke  that  sanctuary  and  beheaded  the  helpless 
demons. 


326 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


There  was  great  turmoil.  Down  the  street  came  King  Aja, 
furious  at  the  Lord’s  treason,  that  his  protection  and  name 
had  been  ignored.  The  old  brahmana  wept  over  his  wife’s 
body.  Then  standing  a  little  apart  I  overheard  Vasishtha  the 
priest  speak  an  unbearable  curse  on  Narayana  the  Lord.  In 
hot  anger  Vasishtha  threw  down  his  staff  and  cursed  Nara¬ 
yana  to  be  born  on  Earth,  in  a  royal  family  rich  and  wise,  a 
family  most  honored  and  kind,  and  once  bom  to  be  parted 
from  his  wife  as  he  had  broken  that  brahmana’s  marriage. 
Vasishtha  said — So  will  it  be!  He  is  a  man  of  ours  you 
harmed ! 

King  Aja  drew  the  royal  Ayodhya  sword  and  spoke  defi¬ 
ance  and  threats  to  Narayana  and  ordered  him  from  our 
kingdom,  but  Narayana  was  departing  as  he  spoke.  Aja  ap¬ 
proached  us,  men  and  gods,  and  told  us,  “Can’t  you  kill 
fairly,  or  must  you  enlist  the  aid  of  giant  cowards?  By  heaven 
fight  fair  next  timel” 

We  put  away  our  lances  and  spears,  our  lightnings  and 
swords.  The  Asuras  that  lock  away  rain  were  defeated;  it 
rained  for  days,  and  then  we  saw  the  Sun  again. 

Vasishtha  was  appalled  that  he  had  cursed  Narayana.  But 
the  words  of  a  holy  saint  prove  adamant — and  we  knew  what 
must  happen.  All  is  destiny,  all  is  change  and  what  endures? 

Vasishtha  told  me,  “Be  silent  about  this.  But  remember: 
Lord  Narayana  will  never  take  man’s  life  without  accepting  it 
all.  He  will  have  the  adventure;  he  will  take  all  the  gain  and 
all  the  loss.” 

For  days  Vasishtha  sat  alone  in  seclusion.  When  he  left  his 
meditation  he  said,  "Her  large  eyes  are  tearful  and  her 
ringlets  are  dark  ...  I  can  discover  no  more;  we  must  wait.” 


“No  one  knew  what  that  meant  until  now,”  said  Sumantra. 
“Sita,  I’m  a  chariot  driver,  a  good  guide,  and  you’ll  get  back 
to  Rama  only  by  entering  this  forest  now.  Try  to  remember 
us  well.  This  world’s  life  is  like  vapor  from  breath  blown  on 
a  mirror,  it  does  not  last,  therefore  summon  patience.  We’ll 
tell  no  one  where  you  are.” 

Sita  said,  “Goodbye,  Sumantra.  You  have  touched  my 
heart.” 

Sumantra  said,  “Farewell,  Sita.  The  light  of  our  lives  is 
gone,  and  this  ends  all  that  we’ve  known.  May  I  see  you 
again.” 

“Goodbye,  Lakshmana.” 


In  What  Dream?  327 

Lakshmana  said,  “I  cannot  go,  this  is  a  lonely  wood  and 
Rama  is  not  here.” 

But  even  as  he  said  that,  Lakshmana  was  going.  Sumantra 
led  him  back  to  their  boat  and  they  recrossed  Ganga,  and 
drove  away  in  the  chariot  looking  back  many  times. 


It  was  noon.  The  Sun  came  out  and  Ganga  flowed  spar¬ 
kling  by.  Sita  stayed  by  the  riverside,  all  alone  with  her  small 
gifts  of  needles  and  thread  and  combs  and  mirrors  and  per¬ 
fumes  on  the  ground  in  a  package  beside  her,  and  all  the 
wood  was  silent  but  for  the  cries  of  peacocks  far  away. 

Ganga  the  beautiful  river  goddess  spoke  softly  from  within 
her  moving  waters — What  price,  what  price?  Let  life  go 
with  love  and  not  outlive  it,  cut  the  bonds  when  happiness 
goes.  .  .  . 

Ganga  whispered,  ‘‘There  is  a  home  for  you  now.  I  am  the 
curtain  to  pass  through,  beyond  me  golden  rooms  are  yours 
forever.  Come  home,  come  home,  dive  into  me  . .  .  ." 

Sita  was  entranced.  She  stared  at  the  shimmering  water. 
Then  four  hermit  boys  appeared  from  out  of  the  forest,  and 
saw  her,  and  ran  off.  Then  a  wild  shaggy  man  ran  to  her, 
covered  with  dust  from  an  anthill,  with  hair  and  beard  long 
as  eternity. 

“I  am  Valmiki.  Make  my  hermitage  your  home.” 

Sita  looked  at  him  bewildered  and  Valmiki  said  again, 
“Make  this  your  home,  stay  here.”  He  smiled,  and  many  her¬ 
mit  wives  led  Sita  away.  And  so  a  hermit  who  became  the 
first  poet  led  the  Queen  of  Ayodhya  to  safety. 

The  women  took  Sita  to  a  quiet  glen,  into  a  new  house  of 
leaves  in  Valmiki’s  retreat  that  had  just  been  created  by  one 
of  Narada’s  songs.  She  stayed  there,  and  when  her  time  was 
come,  there  her  twin  sons  were  bom.  It  was  at  night  in  the 
summer,  and  midwives  awoke  Valmiki  and  said,  “Poet,  pro¬ 
tect  the  newborn.” 

Valmiki  grabbed  an  armful  of  shiny  fresh-cut  kusa  grass, 
the  pale  long  grassblades  used  for  sacrifice  and  ceremonies. 
He  went  to  where  Sita  lay  and  rubbed  her  twin  newborn  sons 
with  it.  He  rubbed  the  firstborn  with  the  grass  tips  and  named 
him  Kusa.  He  rubbed  his  brother  with  the  cut  grass  ends  and 
named  him  Lava. 

For  twelve  years  Sita  and  her  sons  lived  with  Valmiki 
while  he  composed  this  Ramayana.  He  taught  Kusa  and  Lava 


328 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


every  verse  over  the  years  and  they  learned  to  sing  this  story 
to  the  music  of  a  lute  and  drum. 


When  Kusa  and  Lava  were  twelve  years  old,  Rama  had 
ruled  in  Fair  Ayodhya  for  ten  thousand  years,  and  once  on  a 
summer  night  that  was  neither  hot  nor  cold  he  spoke  with 
Lakshmana,  and  said,  “I  will  declare  a  gTeat  public  festival,  a 
happy  gathering  somewhere  in  the  countryside,  a  peaceful 
celebration  that  will  be  long  remembered  and  a  year’s  giving 
of  gifts  to  all  the  world.” 

"A  King’s  wife  must  be  present,”  said  Lakshmana. 

‘‘Happiness  I  want  now,”  said  Rama.  “My  heart  must  no 
longer  hurt.  I  have  made  a  golden  statue  of  Sita  that  will 
stand  beside  me.  We’ll  have  food  and  music.  We’ll  make  it  a 
thanksgiving  for  what  good  fortune  we  have,  a  long  and  ex¬ 
cellent  ceremony  where  all  will  be  well-received,  and  let  it  be¬ 
gin  next  month.  We  will  invite  everyone.  In  Naimisha  Forest, 
along  the  river.” 

Rama  sent  Kosala  riders  to  Kekaya  to  invite  Bharata’s 
uncle  and  to  Videha  to  invite  King  Janaka,  and  to  all  the 
kings  of  the  world.  Some  went  to  Kishkindhya  to  invite  the 
monkeys  and  bears,  and  from  there  Hanuman  carried  them 
to  invisible  Lanka,  and  Vibhishana  was  asked  to  come.  And 
everyone  that  these  horsemen  met  was  told  of  Rama’s  fes¬ 
tival. 

Rama  sent  his  brother  Satrughna  into  the  forests  to  invite 
the  holy  saints  and  hermits  dwelling  apart  from  men.  Sa¬ 
trughna  rode  a  black  horse  with  a  red  mouth  and  the  first 
person  he  met  was  Guha  the  hunter.  He  and  his  savage 
people  accepted  the  invitation,  for  that  yearlong  festival 
would  not  be  held  inside  any  city. 

Satrughna’s  last  stop  was  at  Valmiki’s  hermitage,  and  he 
knew  nothing  of  Sita’s  living  there  or  of  her  two  sons. 

Valmiki  was  all  smiles.  “Prince,  welcome  to  you!  By  the 
Gods,  that  was  a  deed  well  done  by  Rama,  when  he  killed 
Ravana!  He  freed  all  the  worlds  .  .  .  .”  Valmiki  embraced 
Satrughna  and  smelled  the  crown  of  his  head.  “Rest  here  with 
your  men,  take  whatever  you  want  as  some  small  gift  from 
my  love  for  all  of  you  .  .  .  .”  And  Valmiki  in  his  old,  holy 
hermitage  talked  with  great  gratitude  of  the  battle  of  Lanka, 
as  if  it  had  happened  just  before  his  eyes,  and  not  ten  thou¬ 
sand  years  before. 


In  What  Dream? 


329 


“I  invite  you  and  all  your  people  to  Rama’s  festival,”  said 
Satrughna. 

“I  accept,  we’ll  be  there.” 


Late  that  evening  Satrughna  lay  half  asleep  with  his 
companions  in  one  of  the  huts  of  Valmiki’s  retreat.  And  there 
in  the  night,  from  somewhere  among  the  dark  forest  trees 
around  him,  he  heard  verses  and  parts  of  a  musical  song — 

.  .  .  Only  the  starbeams  showed  it  then; 

Rama  the  refuge  of  the  world, 

And  all  my  hopes.  .  .  . 

Satrughna  heard  Earth’s  first  poetry,  two  high  voices  sing¬ 
ing  a  true  song  telling  everything  just  as  it  had  been.  Kusa 
and  Lava  were  running  through  pieces  of  Rama’s  story  in  the 
dark  wood,  and  Satrughna  lay  still  and  listened  until  they 
stopped. 


In  the  land  of  King  Janaka 
Is  Shiva's  bow  no  man  can  bend, 

Even  in  a  dream.  .  .  . 

Then  they  changed — 

Out  from  the  land,  out  from  the  land, 

There  goes  Hanuman  swift  as  the  Wind 
Racing  to  Lanka  over  the  Sea, 

And  Ramrfs  ring  gleams  gold  in  his  hand. 

Satrughna  closed  his  eyes.  The  voices  sang,  and  he  saw 
Naga  serpents  with  jewels  shining  in  their  heads  at  night,  saw 
the  Demon  King  and  a  golden  deer,  heard  the  screams  of 
Jatayu  the  Vulture  .  .  .  was  the  past  happening  again  before 
his  eyes?  Is  this  really  Dandaka  Forest  again? 

When  silence  returned  the  Kosalas  were  stunned  and  quiet 
a  long  time.  They  had  tears  in  their  eyes,  they  were  breathing 
fast.  Then  they  said,  “We  hear  in  song  the  past  of  long  ago 
made  alive  again,  as  though  happening  right  now.  An  excel¬ 
lent  song,  we  see  it  all  around  us.  It  is  a  wonder,  a  precious 
treasure!  Words  like  these  were  never  heard  before.  Where 
are  we,  in  what  dream?” 


330 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


They  asked  Satrughna,  “Find  Valmiki,  discover  whose  song 
this  is.” 

But  Satrughna  said,  “After  a  long  time  the  old  memories 
return  to  my  mind.  It  is  wrong  to  pry  into  a  saint’s  life. 
There  are  many  mysteries  here,  and  it  is  not  for  us  to  speak 
of  them  at  all.” 

In  the  clear  bright  morning  Satrughna  departed.  Once 
more  returned  to  Fair  Ayodhya  he  walked  with  Rama  outside 
by  the  palace,  under  the  falling  blossom  petals  like  white 
snow,  and  said,  “I  went  far  away  and  came  back-  Majesty,  I 
will  never  more  travel  away  from  you.” 


Farewell  Again, 

My  Lady  and  My  King 


Rama,  only  you  deserve  the  gift  of  this 
first  poem. 

Valmiki  the  Morning  Star  of  Song! 


And  so  it  was,  Saunaka,  that  in  this  very  Naimisha  Forest 
where  we  are  now,  Rama  gave  a  celebration  and  festival  one 
age  of  the  world  ago.  The  Kosalas  cleared  a  great  field  by  the 
river,  long  and  wide,  and  built  guesthouses  of  brick.  All  work 
was  begun  at  the  right  hours  on  the  right  days,  and  in  a 
month  a  fairground  stood  complete. 

It  was  less  than  a  day  from  the  city,  but  it  was  in  the  fair 
countryside  among  the  wild  roses,  among  the  flowering  trees 
of  gold  and  red  like  smokeless  fires,  and  the  honeysuckle 
vines,  and  lotus  ponds  of  red  and  white  and  blue  where  weep¬ 
ing  trees  bent  trailing  their  leaves. 

Rama’s  guests  arrived  through  welcome  archways  and  gifts 
were  given.  Brahmanas  remembered  the  rules  to  make  things 
right  in  other  worlds,  and  for  this  one,  there  were  everywhere 
hearty  feasts  and  a  wonderful  hospitality.  There  were  salons 
for  beautiful  courtesans  and  homes  for  ascetics,  taverns  and 
baths,  stables  and  theatres.  And  at  dawn,  at  the  end  of  a 
warm  night  under  the  stars,  King  Rama  and  Prince  Laksh- 
mana  rode  from  Ayodhya  to  Naimisha  Forest  and  opened 
the  festival  park. 

They  found  Vasishtha  the  brahmana  and  Rama  said,  “Let 
it  begin;  let  no  barrier  block  my  thanksgiving;  let  no  flaw  oc¬ 
cur.” 

“Majesty,  follow  me.”  Vasishtha  led  Rama  apart  and  the 
King  bathed  at  sunrise  and  spent  the  morning  alone.  He 
bathed  again  at  noon  and  all  over  the  forest  ground  the  fires 
were  lit  and  fed  with  butter,  and  brahmanas  called  the  gods 
to  take  their  shares  and  offerings.  Then  Rama  entered  and 

331 


332 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


stood  by  his  royal  forest  pavilion  and  rooms  receiving  people, 
and  beside  him  as  his  partner  in  the  merit  of  that  feast  and 
sacrifice  was  a  golden  image  of  Sita,  dressed  in  gold  cloth 
and  wearing  gold  flowers. 


Sita’s  father  King  Janaka  came  from  Mithila;  Viswamitra 
the  brahmana  came  down  from  his  hills;  Guha  the  hunter 
king  and  his  people  came  from  the  Secret  Forest;  Vibhishana 
and  the  old  Rakshasi  Trijata  and  many  demons  came  from 
Lanka;  King  Aswapati  with  thundering  running  horses  came 
from  high  Kekeya;  Sugriva  and  Hanuman  and  Jambavan  the 
bear  and  all  the  animals  were  there;  the  vulture  king  Sampati 
came  from  ruling  Dandaka  Forest;  Sumantra  and  Bharata 
and  Satrughna  and  the  three  Queen  Mothers  arrived;  eighty 
thousand  Kings  came  from  every  land  in  wonderful  pomp 
and  splendor,  riding  slowly  through  the  smiling  people;  and 
the  Poet  Valmiki  with  his  household  also  came,  and  in  a  soli¬ 
tary  corner  of  Rama’s  clearing  they  all  made  little  cottages  of 
vines  and  boughs  and  lived  in  them,  away  from  crowds  and 
near  the  water. 

Peace  and  good  fortune  be  unto  brahmanas  and  cows! 
First  King  Rama  gave  away  all  the  world  to  the  brahmanas, 
and  Vasishtha  spoke  for  them,  “We  cannot  rule  Earth’s  four 
quarters.  Lord.  We  have  no  time  away  from  our  lonely 
thought  and  study.”  And  Rama  bought  back  the  world  from 
them  and  gave  out  her  price  in  gold  and  cattle.  King  Janaka 
the  husband  of  Earth  looked  on  smiling  to  see  land  bought 
and  sold  by  mortal  men. 

There  in  Naimisha  everything  good  was  gathered.  Monkeys 
and  demons  gave  out  gifts.  Everyone  had  a  good  time — the 
old,  right,  good-time  ways  I  The  world  was  all  nice,  for  a 
change.  Rama  and  the  Kosalas — they  were  indeed  great  men. 

At  that  celebration  no  one  was  judged  and  need  was  pro¬ 
vided  for  and  loud  words  softly  answered.  Men  were 
transported  by  wine  and  carried  away  by  women;  the  women 
were  clothed  in  excitement  and  bright  new  robes.  People  sat 
by  lovely  easy  stairways  on  the  riverside,  feasting  under  um¬ 
brellas  and  fans.  Village  girls  danced  with  the  dread  royal 
warriors  no  longer  grave  and  serious,  and  Hanuman  and 
Jambavan  chased  animal  children  through  the  trees  and  streets, 
and  they  almost  caught  them  eight  hundred  and  thirty-seven 
times,  and  the  celebration  really  started. 

King  Sugriva  stood  in  the  kitchens  among  the  meats  and 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  'My  King 


333 


spices  and  steaming  savory  sauces  along  with  Vibhishana  and 
many  monkeys  and  bears  and  demons.  The  two  kings  said, 
“Receive  and  serve  our  friends  and  please  them.  Be  peaceful 
and  be  generous.  Cherish  our  guests.  Don’t  be  careless,  don’t 
throw  presents  and  shove  food  at  people.  You  will  be  pouring 
out  the  treasures  of  Ayodhya,  and  beware  lest  their  mere 
touch  make  you  greedy.” 

When  all  had  arrived  Rama  thanked  them  for  coming  and 
housed  them,  and  brahmanas  blessed  him  by  a  three-sided 
brick  fire-altar.  Then  throughout  the  clearing  priests  set  up 
twenty-one  ornamental  stakes  carved  of  fine  woods,  each  tal¬ 
ler  than  a  man,  with  eight  sides  and  hung  with  bright  strips 
of  colored  cloth  and  flowers  and  jewels  like  stars. 

Among  those  stakes  strutted  the  proud  and  powerful  Kings 
and  Emperors  of  the  world  drinking  from  winejars  and  talk¬ 
ing.  They  said,  “Rama  never  came  to  us  to  fight  Ravana,  or. 
it  would  have  been  over  just  like  thatl  Just  right!  That’s  the 
whole  truth — lucky  for  the  demons!” 

Hanuman  was  stuffed  with  apricots  and  apples  and  he 
heard  them  from  where  he  sat  with  Jambavan  the  bear 
against  a  tree.  He  finished  some  wine  and  strolled  grinning 
into  their  midst,  and  bowed  low  to  the  Great  King  of  the 
East  and  to  the  Lord  of  the  Western  Tribes.  Then  he  looked 
up  at  them  with  a  really  silly  smile  and  answered,  “Oh  Lords 
don’t  think  you’re  useless — we  were  but  the  blind  instruments 
of  Ravana’s  death  ...  he  was  really  killed  by  your  fatal 
strength  of  tongue!”  And  Hanuman  rolled  laughing  and 
laughing  in  the  dust,  till  the  towering  bear  king  came  and 
gently  picked  him  up  and  carried  him  away  in  his  furry  arms 
still  laughing  and  kicking  his  feet  in  the  air.  And  old  Jamba¬ 
van  smiled  and  growled,  “Why  in  the  old  days  . .  . .” 

And  also  later  on  that  first  day  of  Rama’s  festival,  we  two 
began  to  sing  this  song  Ramayana,  and  everyone  grew  still 
and  quiet  around  us,  and  the  King  came  to  listen. 


Now  we  have  done  this  every  day,  for  the  year  of  this  fes¬ 
tival  here  in  Naimisha  Forest.  And  today  is  the  last  day  of 
your  celebration,  Majesty. 

These  will  be  the  last  verses  of  this  song  of  our  teacher 
Valmiki. 

Oh  Rama,  well  done!  We  are  delighted  to  see  you  and  to 
meet  your  courtesy.  After  walking  over  Earth  of  many  fields 
and  ways  we  arrived  here  with  some  people  of  our  hermitage, 


334 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


and  came  along  aisles  of  food  and  wines.  Your  demons 
scared  us  a  little,  for  though  we  have  often  sung  of  them  yet 
we  had  never  seen  one  beside  us. 

Lion  among  Kings,  we  have  spoken  with  the  wise  men  of 
the  forest  who  see  all  things  as  Brahma.  They  have  seen  the 
gods  come  here  each  day  in  the  smoke  of  offerings  and  return 
much  brightened  to  their  heavens.  You  have  given  away  a 
whole  year’s  gifts  and  your  treasury  is  still  full.  This  is  how 
things  truly  are,  Rama.  There  is  in  you  some  grace  that 
warms  the  hearts  of  all  who  know  you,  and  without  knowing 
why,  men  find  that  their  lives  and  fortunes  are  good,  when 
they  are  by  you. 

A  year  ago  when  we  came  here,  Valmiki  the  first  Poet  in 
the  world  brought  with  us  a  basket  of  ripe  mangoes  from  a 
hilltop  by  our  hermitage.  He  poured  them  out  on  our  small 
cottage  floor  and  said,  “Eat  these  right  now,  and  your  voices 
cannot  fail,  your  memory  cannot  stray  for  the  rest  of  your 
lives.  Both  of  you,  sing  my  Ramayana  to  the  King.  Today  af¬ 
ter  bathing,  go  to  an  open  place  near  Rama  and  start  to  sing. 
He  will  hear  his  name  and  come;  sing  well  for  him  as  you 
have  done  for  me.  Sing  in  parts,  a  little  every  day.  Take  no 
reward  for  it;  of  what  use  are  riches  to  hermits  living  in  the 
wild,  eating  roots  and  wearing  skins?  If  Rama  soon  asks  of 
you  your  names,  say  that  you  are  my  disciples.  But  each  day 
before  you  start,  first  bow  to  the  King  as  to  a  father,  for  he  is 
the  father  of  all  the  living  people  in  his  land.” 


“Indeed,”  said  Kusa  and  Lava,  “now  the  time  is  the 
present  and  we  have  finished  all  the  sections  of  Ramayana .” 

Then,  Saunaka,  the  two  boys  stopped  singing,  and  Kusa 
held  straight  out  his  open  hand  and  turned  it  over,  saying — 
This  is  all  my  story. 


Sauti  the  storyteller  said,  “But  a  thousand  years  later  Val¬ 
miki  composed  the  last  part  of  Ramayana .” 

Saunaka  who  lived  in  the  forest  said,  “Then  there  is  more!” 

Sauti  smiled.  “At  Rama’s  festival  this  would  have  been  a 
song  of  the  future.  Rama  never  heard  these  last  verses,  and 
they  tell  of  the  rest  of  his  life.” 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King 


335 


Listen,  my  friend — 

After  Rama’s  great  departure,  and  a  thousand  years  after 
his  festival  here  in  Naimisha  Forest,  those  after  years  of 
Rama’s  life  were  revealed  to  Valmiki  as  before.  He  taught  his 
later  verses  to  Kusa  and  Lava  and  they  first  sang  them  as 
grown  men,  there  in  Valmiki’s  hermitage  to  a  forest  audience. 

Kusa  and  Lava  welcomed  the  poem  with  great  joy,  and 
when  they  had  learned  it  they  tuned  the  lute  and  tightened 
the  drum.  Under  the  blue  skies  of  many  mornings  they  sang 
a  little  every  day.  Their  voices  were  deep  but  they  had  lost  no 
skill  nor  art.  Kusa  and  Lava  began  to  sing  and  many  listeners 
gathered  round  them  and  Valmiki  smiled.  All  the  forest  ani¬ 
mals  were  hushed  and  still,  and  birds  flew  to  hear. 

They  sang,  “Be  at  your  ease,  free  your  mind  from  ill-will 
and  all  unkindness.  Let  go  of  anger  and  hear  us  ever  without 
malice.  Now  hear  the  end — We  sing  a  song  of  kingly  fame, 
Oh  Listen. . . 


Now  oh  Father  you  begin  to  know  who  we  were  there 
singing  to  you,  and  why  you  have  looked  at  us  thinking  to 
know  us  and  wondering  who  we  were  .... 

When  Kusa  and  Lava  sang  Valmiki’s  song  to  King  Rama 
every  day  for  a  year  at  his  feast  in  the  forest,  people  gathered 
round  in  a  circle  from  every  nation  all  over  the  world.  The 
desert  men  and  the  people  from  beyond  the  hills,  the  silk- 
merchants  and  men  from  the  Land  of  Gold  all  listened. 
Rakshasas  and  monkeys  and  bears  listened,  many  figures,  all 
still.  At  other  times  there  was  mirth  and  merry  cheer,  men 
were  tired  with  elaborate  pleasures,  or  did  their  jobs  and  fol¬ 
lowed  their  crafts.  But  when  those  two  boys  sang  they 
stopped  to  hear. 

There  were  gathered  the  King,  old  men  of  science  and 
young  mothers  holding  their  children,  actors  and  palm  read¬ 
ers  and  fat  cooks,  grim  philosophers  who  could  answer  every 
question  but  the  one,  and  young  warriors  fearless  of  harm 
from  all  men’s  armies.  Their  hair  stood  on  end,  their  hearts 
were  ravished,  each  one  was  drawn  into  the  music  and  story 
of  Rama’s  Way  as  though  it  were  the  tale  of  his  own  life,  un¬ 
rolling  there  before  him  in  great  beauty  and  with  great  praise. 

The  audience  were  breathtaken  and  delighted  with  the 
charms  of  those  verses  of  Valmiki;  they  were  entranced  and 
spellbound  in  rapture,  surprised  and  wonderstruck;  they 
laughed  and  cried  aloud.  Every  day  when  Kusa  and  Lava 


336 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


quit  singing,  ascetics  snapped  their  fingers  and  waved  their 
upper  garments  in  the  air  and  shook  their  waterjars,  and 
noble  kings  threw  their  heavy  bracelets  into  the  circle.  But 
Kusa  and  Lava  would  let  all  such  treasures  lie  and  touched 
none  of  them. 

Ramayana  is  a  fabulous  and  wonderful  tale,  an  old  well¬ 
loved  story  of  the  younger  age  of  the  world.  And  now  it  ends 
with  this  farthest  last-following  part.  It  will  be  the  inspiration 
and  give  themes  to  poets  of  the  future,  for  this  story  of  Rama 
will  endure  forever  in  this  world. 

Ramayana  will  gain  the  bearer  long  life,  health  and 
strength  and  a  good  and  beautiful  wife,  every  merit  and 
profit  and  success  and  skill.  He  will  have  children  and  riches 
and  good  friends,  and  all  his  desires  will  be  won.  He  will  get 
over  every  trouble  and  have  good  crops.  The  gods  will  be  de¬ 
lighted  with  him. 

This  book  frees  a  house  from  evil  spirits.  May  good  betide 
you.  In  our  bodies,  there  is  inside  the  heart  a  spirit  living  qui¬ 
etly,  and  if  a  man  will  be  victorious  let  him  be  tuned  and  at 
one  with  this  quiet  person,  and  that  brings  happiness  to  the 
gods  and  good  to  himself. 

I  am  Valmiki’s  song; 

Valmiki  made  me; 

Ever  true; 

Just  for  you. 


The  greatest  excellence,  the  one  thing  that  made  Rama’s 
festival  so  wonderful  was  the  singing  of  Kusa  and  Lava,  their 
good  music  and  fine  words.  Those  two  young  boys  sang 
Ramayana  to  a  silver-stringed  lute  and  a  two-headed  drum. 
They  sang  in  unison  or  at  intervals.  The  drum  beat  along 
swift  as  rainfall  or  lingered  in  silence.  The  lute  sang;  it  cried 
and  warned.  It  fought  through  perils,  through  chance  and 
sorrow;  it  triumphed  and  rejoiced. 

On  the  last  day  of  the  festival  Kusa  and  Lava  ended  all 
Valmiki’s  verses  of  that  time,  and  Vibhishana  the  demon  said, 
“Wonderful  it  is,  after  a  long  time  the  old  recollections  come 
again  to  my  mind.  All  you  have  said  is  true.” 

Sugriva  the  Monkey  King  told  them,  “Sunlight  and  glory, 
song  and  wine!  We  must  always  feed  the  storytellers  and  give 
them  presents.” 

But  Kusa  and  Lava  took  up  their  lute  and  drum  and  set 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King 


337 


out  for  their  cottage  as  they  did  after  every  day’s  singing. 
And  Rama  looked  after  them  and  thought,  “They  are  just 
like  me,  boys  just  as  I  was  then.” 

Rama  told  Lakshmana,  “The  longer  I  hear  those  two  boys 
sing  the  more  I  love  to  listen;  the  longer  I  look  on  them  the 
more  I  want  to  see  them.  Go  follow  them  and  give  them 
whatever  they  want.” 

Lakshmana  caught  up  to  Kusa  and  Lava  and  said,  “We  are 
never  satisfied  hearing  your  song.  Blessings  and  long  life  to 
you.  Blessed  be  you,  blessed  bel  Beautiful  is  Valmiki’s  story, 
beautifully  have  you  sung  and  ended  it  The  King  offers 
you — ” 

“No,  no,”  answered  Kusa  and  Lava.  “Thank  the  King,  and 
we  must  go  to  our  master  Valmiki.” 

Lakshmana  returned  to  Rama,  “They  refuse  all  reward  for 
that  tale  whose  words  are  touched  by  song.” 

,  "Those  twin  brothers  are  my  two  sons,”  said  Rama.  He 
called  Hanuman  and  said,  “Son  of  the  Wind,  find  Sita  in  Val¬ 
miki’s  house.  Here  and  now  this  very  day  will  I  take  her  back 
home  with  me  before  all  my  people.” 

Hanuman  soon  returned  with  the  Poet  Valmiki.  Valmiki 
said,  “Majesty,  good  fortune  to  you.  A  husband  is  a  wife’s 
lord,  and  Sita  will  come  to  you.” 

“She  is  here!” 

“Rama,  I  will  bring  her  to  you.  Those  two  boys  are  your 
sons  Kusa  and  Lava.  They  were  bom  in  my  retreat.” 

“I  know.”  Rama  smiled  and  put  his  hand  on  Valmiki’s 
shoulder.  “You  have  brought  verse  in  to  the  world,  and  now 
anyone  can  start  a  poem,  but  you  have  brought  yours  to  a 
blazing  wonderful  finish.  You’ve  brought  it  all  together;  you 
did  it  right!” 

-  Valmiki  asked,  “Did  you  like  it,  Rama?” 

“It  is  excellent,  Valmiki,  I  say  it  is  excellent.  I  shall  never 
forget  those  verses.” 

“Oh  Lord!” 

“Poet,  you  have  brought  happiness  to  us  all  ...  I  loved  it 
well.  Surely  you  knew  I  liked  it?” 

“No,  I  didn’t  ...  if  you  don’t  tell  me,  how  will  I  know? 
You  have  to  say.”  Valmiki  smiled. 

And  Rama  said,  “See  how  the  world  flowers!  All  good 
things  have  come  to  men.” 

Then  Valmiki  waved  his  arms.  “Lord  Rama  like  the  Moon, 
you  are  a  mortal  man.  She  loves  you.  The  bounty  of  Earth  is 
not  your  doing,  Majesty.”  Valmiki  knelt  down.  “For  ten 


338 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


thousand  years  you  lived  with  her,  and  for  twelve  she’s  been 
away.  The  ten  thousand  years  were  the  rich  ones.  King,  with 
your  permission  Sita  will  meet  you  this  day.” 

Tears  flowed  down  Rama’s  face  from  his  green  eyes.  “Rise, 
Poet.” 


That  afternoon  everyone  at  the  festival  assembled  outside, 
sitting  motionless  in  a  circle  around  the  Ayodhya  throne 
in  the  clearing  where  Rama’s  sons  had  sung  his  story,  holding 
their  breaths,  not  talking.  Rama  sat  on  his  throne  and  the 
people  left  wide  room  around  him.  The  golden  statue  of  Sita 
had  been  carried  away. 

Then  the  crowd  parted  and  Sita  came  there  following  Val- 
miki.  She  was  beautiful;  she  walked  looking  down,  but  glanc¬ 
ing  up  at  Rama  many  times.  Valmiki  stopped,  and  Sita  stood 
alone  by  Rama  within  that  circle  of  people,  dressed  in  bright 
gold  and  scarlet. 

Thtn  into  that  circle  stepped  King  Janaka,  Sita’s  father  the 
Videha  lord.  Janaka  had  swift  wide  wisdom  like  a  sharp  keen 
blade;  he  opened  locked  doors,  he  found  treasure  and  the 
True.  In  his  youth  Janaka  fought  a  hundred  battles.  He  took 
hard  blows  and  gave  harder.  But  then  he  changed.  He  was 
Earth’s  husband,  and  never  more  put  his  heart  away  behind 
armor. 

Earth’s  forests  and  furrows  confused  his  enemies  and  his 
kingdom  was  safe  in  the  foothills.  Janaka  took  all  men  for 
brothers;  he  ever  watched  for  a  stray  life  to  save.  Passing 
pleasures  called  him,  in  forms  quite  beautiful,  but  Janaka  did 
what  he  knew  was  right  and  forgot  the  people  who  said  he 
was  wrong.  And  being  free,  having  nothing  to  hide  however 
small,  he  found  the  far  sweetest  pleasure  of  speaking  out  his 
mind  to  any  man.  He  wed  the  Earth  and  loved  her. 

Janaka  thought  it  all  out  for  himself,  and  fought  for 
Dharma.  He  warred  on  the  loss  of  love  through  unkindness 
and  the  fetters  of  wrong  desire;  he  fought  for  freedom  by 
blasting  off  the  chains  of  attachment;  he  killed  deceptions 
with  words  that  released  the  spirit.  It  was  a  hard  fight,  and 
Janaka  told  his  warriors — I  give  up  owning  the  world’s  gear. 
I  give  up  thirst  for  things  to  find  true  love,  that  never  fades. 
And  his  best  guard  of  warriors  answered — We’ll  keep  your 
word,  we’ll  obey  our  King.  We  put  down  our  swords  and 
take  the  robes  of  harmless  men.  What?!  Shall  we  have  faced 
all  our  wars  together  and  not  go  into  this  fight  beside  you? 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  'My  King 


339 


Janaka  said  to  Rama,  “There  is  no  blame  for  this.” 

Rama  answered,  “Forgive  me,  and  forgive  us  all.”  The 
people  pressed  forward  around  that  circle. 

Janaka  raised  his  voice,  “Ring  this  circle!”  And  his  un¬ 
armed  warriors  stepped  forward  from  the  crowd,  wayfarers 
to  the  True,  and  they  joined  their  strong  hands  and  arms  like 
iron,  and  formed  an  inner  wall  that  held  everyone  back. 

Janaka  said,  “King  Rama,  I’ll  give  you  ten  million  pieces 
of  gold  if  you  will  abandon  your  throne,  and  use  your 
strength  in  my  service.” 

Rama  was  startled.  “I  can’t  do  that,  Janaka.” 

“Then  I  offer  you  nine  million  pieces.” 

“But  I  cannot,  it  is  wrong,”  said  Rama. 

“But  I’ll  give  you  five  million  in  gold.” 

“No.” 

“One  million  then,”  said  Janaka. 

“No.” 

“A  thousand  to  serve  mel” 

“Janaka,  what  are  you  doing?”  asked  Rama.  “In  the  world 
of  men  one  offers  more  and  more  of  money  for  what  he  can¬ 
not  get  at  first,  but  you  have  swiftly  lowered  the  price.” 

Janaka  answered,  “So  quickly  does  your  life  pass  by!  Now 
men  may  live  many  thousand  years,  but  what  do  you  think? 
Is  that  long  to  put  off  what  must  be  done?” 

“It  seems  but  a  short  while  to  me  also.” 

“How  long  might  it  truly  be  then?” 

Rama  replied,  “It  is  really  but  the  time  of  one  day.  A 
whole  lifetime  may  seem  to  have  been  very  short  as  it  closes, 
like  a  morning  and  an  afternoon  spent  in  the  sunlight  as 
Night  comes.” 

“No,”  said  Janaka. 

“It  is  but  an  hour,”  said  Rama. 

“No,  not  even  an  hour.” 

“A  lifetime,  that  is  the  time  it  takes  to  fill  a  waterjar  at  the 
riverside.” 

“You  have  not  understood  me.” 

Rama  said,  “All  our  life  is  but  the  blink  of  an  eye.” 

“Yes,”  said  Janaka,  “now  you  understand.  Make  haste  to 
follow  the  good  Dhanna  law;  hurry  to  do  right  while  you 
can,  before  it’s  too  late.”  Janaka  embraced  his  daughter  Sita. 
“I  sowed  seed  in  Earth  and  tended  her,  and  she  bore  you  to 
me  from  a  plowed  field.  I’ve  loved  you  all  your  life,  though  I 
let  you  marry  and  go.” 

Janaka  left  Sita  alone  with  Rama,  surrounded  by  specta- 


340 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


tors.  Sita  looked  at  Rama  and  smiled.  She  looked  out  at  the 
people,  and  smiled  at  Sumantra  the  Charioteer,  and  at  Trijata 
the  old  Rakshasi,  and  at  Lakshmana.  Then  her  smile  widened 
bright;  she  saw  Hanuman  the  monkey  there  in  his  best 
clothes,  wearing  the  pearls  she  had  given  him,  his  white  hair 
finely  brushed  like  a  halo  round  his  head. 

Hanuman  smiled  happily  back  at  her,  and  when  he  did  a 
scented  cool  wind  blew  lightly  through  Naimisha  Forest.  That 
was  heaven’s  wind,  come  down  to  Earth  as  a  witness.  Vayu 
the  Wind  Lord  threw  gladness  ani  joy  over  all  of  them  there, 
like  a  wealthy  king  scattering  jewels  and  flowers  with  aban¬ 
don  on  all  his  friends.  As  when  the  world  was  newfound, 
when  Earth  was  young,  a  springtime  wind  blew  again  once 
more  through  heaven  and  Earth  and  sky,  all  one. 

Sita  was  forever  beautiful.  Wearing  her  ornaments  she 
turned  slowly  around  and  looked  at  every  person  there. 
“Rama,  let  me  prove  my  innocence,  here  before  everyone.” 

“I  give  my  permission,”  said  Rama. 

Then  Sita  stepped  a  little  away  from  him  and  said, 
“Mother  Earth,  if  I  have  been  faithful  to  Rama  take  me 
home,  hide  me!” 

Earth  rolled  and  moved  beneath  our  feet.  With  a  great 
rumbling  noise  the  ground  broke  apart  near  Sita  and  a  deep 
chasm  opened,  lighted  from  below  with  bright  lights  like 
lightning  flashes,  from  the  castles  of  the  Naga  serpent  kings. 

From  underground  rose  four  tall  Nagas,  like  great  cobras, 
the  treasure  guardians  of  Earth’s  riches;  their  hoods  were  flat 
out;  they  were  hissing  and  weaving,  swaying  and  spitting  fire, 
turning  their  red  eyes  at  the  people;  they  were  all  dressed  in 
jewels  and  rippling  silver  scales  like  moonlight  on  the  ocean’s 
waves  at  night.  That  opening  widened,  the  serpents  were  one 
at  each  comer,  and  from  below  rose  up  a  throne  carved  of 
stones,  and  wrought  of  roots  and  set  with  diamonds. 

On  that  throne  sat  Mother  Earth.  Earth  was  not  old,  she 
was  fair  to  look  on,  she  was  not  sad  but  smiling.  She  wore 
flowers  and  a  girdle  of  seas.  Earth  supports  all  life,  but  she 
feels  no  burden  in  all  that.  She  is  patient.  She  was  patient 
then,  under  the  Sun  and  Moon  and  through  the  rainfalls  of 
countless  years.  She  was  patient  with  seasons  and  with  kings 
and  farmers;  she  endured  all  things  and  bore  no  line  of  care 
from  it. 

But  this  was  the  end  of  her  long  patience  with  Rama. 
Earth  looked  at  her  husband  Janaka  and  smiled.  Then  she 
stretched  out  her  arms  and  took  her  only  child  Sita  on  her 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King 


341 


lap.  She  folded  her  beautiful  arms  around  her  daughter  and 
laid  Sita’s  head  softly  against  her  shoulder  as  a  mother  would. 
Earth  stroked  her  hair  with  her  fair  hands,  and  Sita  closed 
her  eyes  like  a  little  girl. 

The  throne  sank  back  underground  and  they  all  were  gone; 
the  Nagas  dove  beneath  the  ground  and  the  crevice  closed 
gently  over  them,  forever. 

The  gods  spoke,  “Well  done,  Oh  Sita.  Praise  to  you.”  And 
every  person  watching  Sita’s  descent  into  Earth,  and  all  living 
creatures  in  the  world  were  very  happy.  For  a  moment  the 
whole  Universe  was  everywhere  equal.  Happiness  and  great 
delight  spread  over  the  three  worlds.  Men  cried  aloud  in  jo^; 
or  were  silent  and  held  still  by  their  happiness,  unable  to 
move.  The  wild  animals  of  Naimisha  Forest  watched  motion¬ 
less  from  the  trees  as  flowers  fell  from  heaven  above — yellow 
and  red,  blue  and  white  and  orange  gold  .... 

Rama  smiled.  “I  am  King  and  Lord  of  Earth,  but  she  has 
taken  my  wife  away  before  my  very  eyes.  I  will  never  meet 
Sita  again  while  I  live  as  a  man.”  Rama  sighed,  and  still  he 
was  smiling.  He  turned  to  King  Janaka.  “Indeed,  it  is  a  brief 
life  given  to  Man — but  the  Dream,  the  Dream!” 


That  festival  and  sacrifice  was  finished.  It  was  excellent;  it 
destroyed  big  and  little  sins,  it  brought  heaven  to  everyone 
there.  The  guests  departed,  the  foreign  kings  went  home,  and 
the  ground  shook  with  the  tread  of  elephants  and  horses  and 
the  chariot  wheels. 

After  the  others  had  departed,  Janaka  and  Rama,  Laksh- 
mana  and  Hanuman  sat  on  the  bare  ground  and  drank  wine 
in  the  afternoon.  After  one  cup  Lakshmana  held  his  head  and 
covered  his  eyes  and  fell  over  asleep.  After  a  second  round 
Hanuman  dropped  off.  Janaka  and  Rama  drank  a  third  cup 
and  Rama  rubbed  his  eyes. 

“What  drink  is  this?” 

“Varuni,  the  Goddess  of  Spirits,  made  this  palm  wine  to 
bring  sleep.  Overcome  her,  drink  her  down.” 

Rama  leaned  back  against  a  tree.  “Janaka,  why  am  I  here? 
What  am  I  doing  here?  Can  you  tell  me  why?” 

“Whatever  you  have  done,  you  did  it  to  serve  the  good 
Dharma  Law.”  Janaka  filled  the  winecups  and  once  more 
they  both  drank  deep,  sitting  in  the  cool  shade.  “Rama,  may 
you  have  love  for  us  so  we  may  find  some  place  in  your 
heart.” 


342 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


“I  have.” 

“The  honors  you  have  given  and  the  good  words,  these  are 
natural  to  you.  You  are  Rama,  you  are  my  safe  refuge.  We 
do  not  know  what  more  to  say  to  you.  Lord,  we  have  gone 
far,  and  we  find  you  there  still  farther  beyond  us.”  Rama 
slept,  and  Janaka  got  to  his  feet  and  walked  away. 

Viswamitra,  who  had  first  taken  Rama  from  Ayodhya  as  a 
boy,  and  King  Janaka  walked  together  back  to  Mithila  city  in 
the  Videha  land,  just  the  two  of  them  going  by  back  roads 
and  woodland  trails.  After  a  few  days  they  began  to  climb 
into  the  foothills,  and  they  could  see  Janaka’s  city. 

They  walked  across  the  rich  fields  of  Videha,  through  the 
new-plowed  dirt,  and  Vishwamitra  said,  “Remember  them? 
They  were  sixteen,  and  everyone  loved  Rama  even  then.” 

“See  those  trees?”  asked  Janaka.  “They  grow  from  frag¬ 
ments  of  Shiva’s  bow,  thrown  under  Earth  when  Rama  broke 
it.” 

“With  one  pull,  after  all  the  world  had  failed!”  Viswamitra 
the  friend  of  all  stood  leaning  on  his  mendicant’s  staff. 
“Rama  is  a  heart-winning  man.  He  freed  Ahalya  the  Beauti¬ 
ful,  and  she  pressed  beauty  into  him  with  her  hand.” 

Janaka  said,  “There’s  no  other  person  as  brave  as  Rama.” 

Viswamitra  answered,  “There’s  Sita.” 

“There  is  no  one  else,  only  Rama!  If  you  tell  such  lies  get 
out  of  my  ancestral  kingdom.” 

Viswamitra  smiled.  “I  obey.  Where  is  your  kingdom? 
Where  do  your  lands  end?  What  are  the  limits  of  your  realm, 
and  where  is  the  dominion  of  another  king?” 

Janaka  looked  around,  this  way  and  that.  “Well,  my  king¬ 
dom  is  not  these  fields,  it  might  be  the  city.” 

“Where?” 

“No,  I  see  nothing  of  mine  there.  Surely  then,  my  own 
body  must  be  my  kingdom,  and  I  will  look  . . . 

“What  do  you  find?”  asked  Viswamitra. 

“You  may  go  or  stay  anywhere  as  long  as  you  like,”  smiled 
Janaka.  “Even  this  body  is  not  mine,  this  I  am  not.  It  is  no 
part  of  me.  Or  else — I  rule  all  space,  for  I  do  not  hold  onto 
the  sounds  that  enter  these  ears;  I  rule  all  land,  for  I  desire 
no  scents  but  let  them  come  and  go;  I  rule  the  waters  for  I 
do  not  grasp  at  any  taste;  my  eye  does  not  cling  to  lights  and 
colors  and  so  I  rule  all  fire;  I  care  not  for  any  touch,  nor  do  I 
avoid  it,  and  so  I  rule  the  air  and  winds.  .  .  .” 

Viswamitra  said,  “Janaka,  no  craving  nor  thirst  have  you. 
You  have  found  the  everlasting  Dharma  wheel  and  truly  set 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King 


343 


it  turning,  set  it  rolling  out  of  the  hills  and  past  the  reach  of 
Death  and  beyond  the  rule  of  Time;  beyond  rebirth;  beyond 
old  age,  beyond  sickness,  beyond  death  again — the  glorious 
Wheel  of  the  Good  Law,  the  Dharma  Law  a  man  may  win 
for  himself  as  he  wins  a  battle,  with  a  lion-roar  of  victory 
and  a  shout  of  great  joy!” 

Janaka  reached  down  and  held  the  rich  dark  Earth  in  his 
hands.  “Dissolution  is  the  end  of  all  things  compounded  out 
of  the  elements  and  each  man  fares  according  to  his  deeds.” 
He  crumbled  the  soil  and  let  it  fall  through  his  fingers.  "Sita 
has  died  to  this  world.  May  all  beings  everywhere  be  happy 
and  safe!  May  all  creatures  bom  or  seeking  to  be  bom  have 
happy  minds,  may  none  wish  another  ill!  May  loving  kindness 
wash  over  the  worlds!” 


Naimisha  Forest  was  deserted  and  the  jungle  quickly  grew 
back  over  Rama’s  clearing.  Kusa  and  Lava  and  the  poet  Val- 
miki  returned  to  their  forest  home.  Rama  ruled  in  Fair 
Ayodhya  for  a  thousand  years  more,  alone  without  Sita, 
keeping  her  golden  statue  by  him  in  her  palace  rooms. 

After  a  long  time  Queen  Kausalya  died  looking  on  Rama’s 
face.  Then  Sumitra  and  Kaikeyi  followed  her  to  the  peaceful 
land  of  the  dead,  then  to  the  Moon,  and  then  wearing  robes 
of  light  to  heaven  where  they  were  all  three  united  with  King 
Dasaratha,  and  where  no  one  is  old. 

Then  one  spring  morning,  after  those  thousand  years  were 
full,  Time  in  the  guise  of  a  hermit  came  quietly  to  the 
Ayodhya  palace  door  and  told  Lakshmana,  “A  powerful 
King  sends  me  as  an  ambassador  to  Rama.” 

Lakshmana  led  the  hermit  inside  to  a  private  room  and 
brought  Rama.  Rama  asked,  “Whose  message  do  you  bear?” 

“Maharaja,”  said  Time,  “let  us  talk  alone.  Lion  among 
Kings,  good  fortune  to  you.  Oh  King  of  the  World  and  Lord 
of  Men,  Oh  Rama  order  the  door  to  this  room  closed  while  I 
am  here  with  you,  and  promise  me  that  anyone  who  shall  see 
us  together  or  overhear  our  words  shall  die.” 

“I  promise.  Lakshmana,  shut  the  door  and  stand  yourself 
outside,  and  prevent  anyone  from  entering.” 

When  they  were  alone  Rama  said,  “Speak  freely.  Who 
sends  you  here  to  me?” 

The  hermit  faced  him.  “Father,  I  am  Kala,  I  am  Time.  I 
bring  Brahma’s  words.  But  to  speak  first  for  myself,  you 
stand  always  beyond  me,  you  are  forever  older  than  I,  and  so 


344 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


I  call  you  Father.  Whatever  goes  beyond  me,  you  make  it  go. 
But  even  for  you  strength  and  youth  pass  away,  and  I  flow  as 
a  river  with  no  obstacle  in  her  bed  and  nothing  to  hold  her 
back,  once  gone  by  never  to  return.  Spend  me  or  waste  me  as 
you  will,  I  can  nevermore  turn  back  to  you.” 

Rama  said,  “Your  end  is  your  beginning,  you  start  when 
you  finish.  Long  since,  my  child,  did  the  Sun  and  Moon  and 
stars  appear,  and  Time  began  to  run  again.  You  are  my  own 
dear  son  and  my  good  true  servant.  You  open  the  spring 
flowers  and  unite  lovers.  You  forgive  all;  you  hurt,  then  you 
heal.  Time  will  always  tell.  Sooner  or  later  you  reveal  all 
secrets,  and  you  are  wise,  all  the  lore  of  all  worlds  knowing.” 

Time  said,  “I  bring  love,  I  marry  men  and  women,  I  keep 
the  little  babies  alive.  I  make  the  moon  rise  and  I  give  food 
and  wealth.  Do  you  speak?  ...  I  let  you.  Do  you  do  good? 
.  .  .  My  hand  guides  yours.  When  you  meet  a  great  new  day 
...  I  made  it  come.  It  is  all  one,  Rama,  all  the  time  that  ever 
was  or  will  be  is  all  one  .  .  .  end  and  beginning  are  hard  to 
see  and  they  are  one,  Rama  .  .  .  .”  Time  smiled.  “And  oh,  I 
lie  a  lot,  Rama  ...  I  must  admit . . . .” 

Rama  answered,  “Time,  you  have  taken  dear  parts  of  my 
life  and  put  them  beyond  my  reach.  I  have  lived  through  so 
many  cold  winters  and  scented  springtimes,  so  many  days 
and  nights  that  I  cannot  believe  there  will  not  always  be  more 
and  more  of  them.” 

“Ah,”  said  Time,  “there  you  overreach  me,  I  know  nothing 
of  poetry.” 

“What  are  Brahma’s  words?” 

“Listen.  The  Grandfather  of  the  worlds  tells  you — 

You  killed  Ravana.  Your  promised  time  is  full.  Oh  Nara- 
yana,  Lakshmi  awaits  you,  so  have  I  heard.  I  send  Time  to  re¬ 
mind  you.  Return  to  yourself,  my  friend,  we  have  not  seen 
you  for  a  moment  in  heaven. 

Rama  replied,  “Those  are  good  words,  I  am  pleased  with 
your  coming.  I’ve  not  forgotten.  I  remember  all  of  you. . . 


And  as  Rama  and  Time  were  talking  a  while,  the  short- 
tempered  brahmana  Durvasas,  a  grim  self-denying  ascetic,  a 
sky-clad  hermit  walked  quickly  up  to  Lakshmana  at  the 
door  and  said,  “My  time  is  passing!  I  need  food,  take  me  in 
there  first  to  see  the  King.” 

“Great  saint,  Rama  is  busy,”  said  Lakshmana.  “Command 
me  what  to  do  and  I  will  serve  you.” 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King 


345 


Durvasas  wiped  some  ashes  from  his  brow.  “I’ve  just  fin¬ 
ished  my  fast  and  after  many  years  the  King  must  feed  me! 
Admit  me  to  him,  I  am  impatient.  Or  I  will  curse  all  Kosala 
to  burn  if  you  do  not  announce  me  this  instant.” 

“Those  are  dreadful  words.” 

“Every  soul  will  die.  My  anger  is  rising,  I  cannot  restrain 
my  growing  wrath!” 

“Forsake  your  ill  will.  My  own  death  is  better.”  Laksh- 
mana  pulled  open  the  door.  Time’s  iron  staff  fell  from  his 
hand  and  clanged  on  the  stone  floor,  and  that  noise  rang  in 
Lakshmana’s  ears  like  the  pealing  of  bells. 

Lakshmana  went  in.  “Durvasas  needs  to  see  you,  Rama.” 

Rama  said,  “Lakshmana,  you  must  die  for  entering  here.” 

Time  and  Lakshmana  looked  at  each  other,  and  Laksh¬ 
mana  said,  “Yes.  Great  halls  are  silent  after  Time  has  visited 
them,  and  dark  and  hidden  is  this  person’s  course.” 

Time  said,  “Say  not  so,  Lakshmana,  say  not  so.  I  know  the 
old  deeds  dimly  remembered,  the  youthful  deeds  of  past 
lives.”  Time  looked  into  Lakshmana’s  blues  eyes,  blue  as  wild- 
flowers,  and  backed  away  toward  the  door.  “Oh  people  all 
like  to  abuse  me,  but  I  always  politely  wait  my  turn,  I  never 
crowd  in.  Rama’s  heart  is  boundless,  above,  below,  and  all 
around  him.  I  take  away,  I  take  away  all  the  things  I’ve 
given,  but  no  more  than  that.  You  four  brothers  have  all  the 
same  nature.  You  will  only  go  home  first.  Just  as  you  are, 
you  have  won!  Well,  I  must  be  moving  on,  Lakshmana,  I  can 
never  stand  still . . . 

Rama  said,  “Kala,  go,  I  dismiss  you.” 

Oh,  the  Dharma  Wheel,  like  a  rolling  golden  Sun! 


Then  Rama  fed  the  recluse  Durvasas,  until  after  a  hundred 
dishes  he  was  full,  and  without  a  word  that  brahmana  turned 
his  back  on  the  king  and  went  away  into  the  forests  some¬ 
where. 

Rama  looked  at  Lakshmana.  “Farewell,  my  brother.” 

Lakshmana  made  no  answer.  He  walked  three  time9 
around  Rama,  and  left  the  palace.  He  went  half  a  league  to 
where  the  Sarayu  river  swiftly  flowed. 

Lakshmana  sat  by  the  running  river.  With  open  eyes  he 
looked  around  him  and  saw  all  things  as  Rama,  thought  of 
them  as  Rama.  He  rinsed  his  mouth  with  the  clear  water  and 
stopped  his  breathing.  The  luminous  person  within  Laksh¬ 
mana’s  heart,  the  soul  no  bigger  than  a  thumb  made  ready  to 


346 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


leave  this  world  behind.  The  life-centers  stopped  spinning  and 
went  out,  and  Lakshmana’s  energy,  the  fourth  part  of  Lord 
Narayana,  rose  step  by  step  up  along  his  backbone,  seeking 
flight  out  the  crown  of  his  head  where  the  skull  bones  join 
their  seams. 

Lakshmana  shut  his  eyes  and  watched  the  lights  of  his  life 
slowly  die.  The  lights  of  war  long  ago,  the  lights  of  his  first 
love  and  marriage  .  .  .  the  lights  of  his  childhood  ....  And 
he  thought,  “.  .  .  it’s  like — something  that  I  made  once  .  .  . 
all  of  us.  .  . 

In  heaven,  Lord  Indra  heard  empty  stone  vault  doors  clos¬ 
ing  one  after  another  in  echoes.  Sight  was  closing,  hearing 
closing,  mind  turning  away.  Spirit  was  rising  and  leaving 
empty  rooms.  The  ether  space  within  the  heart  was  empty, 
fires  and  lamps  turned  off,  locks  and  threads  snapped  and  un¬ 
tied,  and  all  released. 

Indra  swept  across  Kosala  invisibly.  He  took  Lakshmana’s 
soul  into  his  own  heart  and  flew  to  heaven  carrying  him  and 
bearing  light.  Indra  the  bright  King  of  the  Sky  took  him 
away.  Lakshmana’s  body  fell  into  the  water  and  was  gone. 


Shiva  the  great  god  divided  this  romance  into  three  parts, 
one  for  heaven,  one  for  Earth,  and  one  for  the  underworlds. 
He  had  one  section  left,  and  divided  that  into  three.  He  had 
one  verse  left,  and  divided  that  as  well.  Shiva  had  one  word 
left,  that  he  kept  for  himself — the  word  Rama — as  being  the 
essence  and  heart  of  the  whole  thing. 

One  who  sees  Rama  even  for  a  moment  gains  heaven.  He 
is  Narayana,  identical  with  the  souls  of  all  creatures.  He  is 
the  Ocean  and  the  forests  and  the  air  I  breathe.  He  is  more 
subtle  than  an  atom.  He  goes  everywhere  by  illusion,  without 
beginning  or  end,  unchangeable,  unconquerable,  holding  a 
shell  trumpet  and  a  wheel,  a  mace  and  a  lotus  flower.  So  let 
us  remember  him  when  we  are  in  any  difficulty,  from  inside 
or  out. 

Tomorrow  won’t  always  be  like  today.  Now,  while  there  is 
time,  today  take  this  Ramayana  to  your  home  before  the 
great  world  ends  for  you.  Tune  your  senses  to  Dharma,  say 
Rama  while  you  have  a  chance,  and  make  your  heart  a  lov¬ 
ing  holy  place,  lighten  it,  clear  it  of  good  and  evil,  or  high 
and  low. 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King 


347 


Very  happy,  or  near  to  tears;  — 

So  keep  this  book,  and  live  your  years. 

Oh  Rama! 

Thunders  rolled  over  Ayodhya  although  the  sky  was  clear. 
The  white  houses  rocked  and  Earth  shook.  The  brahmana  Va- 
sishtha  was  with  Rama,  and  Rama  said,  “Where  is  my  life  and 
where  am  I?  I’m  going  all  the  way  on  through  to  my  own 
home  now.  I’m  going  back  around  by  going  forward,  and  I’ll 
be  again  as  I  was  before  being  born  into  this  world. . . 

Vasishtha  said,  “Look  out  at  your  city.  The  people  kneel 
outside  their  homes;  they  lower  their  heads  and  do  not  move, 
or  lie  like  corpses.” 

Goodbye,  Rama;  goodbye  Father,  goodbye,  goodbye  .... 

Bharata  and  Satrughna  entered,  and  Bharata  said,  “Fair 
Ayodhya  is  ended  as  we  have  known  her.” 

Vasishtha  said,  “Majesty,  I’ll  leave  you  now.  I’ll  go  alive  to 
heaven  for  awhile,  and  rest  and  tend  the  cow  of  wishes  in  her 
peaceful  pasture.”  And  he  left  them  there. 

I  think  the  Fair  Ayodhya  that  Rama  knew  must  now  be 
sought  for  elsewhere  than  on  this  Earth.  Those  were  other 
days.  But  though  I  must  dream  or  die  to  do  it — I’ve  been  to 
Fair  Ayodhya  and  I'll  go  back  there  again. 

Rama  asked  his  brothers,  “What  can  I  do?” 

“Don’t  forsake  us,  don’t  leave  us  behind,”  said  Bharata. 

“That’s  all  we  ask,”  said  Satrughna.  “Now  all  of  us  will 
follow  the  Well-Farer.” 

Rama  asked,  “Why  will  you  go  with  me?” 

“Near  you  is  ever  all  my  happiness.” 

“Whoever  will,  let  them  come.  Then  go  and  send  the  Ko- 
salas  who  wish  to  stay  behind  on  Earth  to  places  far  from 
here.  Give  them  wealth  and  chariots  and  elephants;  let  them 
leave  me  and  go  into  the  woods  or  to  the  seas,  or  into  the 
snowy  hills.” 


Then  learning  somehow  of  Rama’s  great  departure,  that 
very  day  to  Ayodhya  came  the  monkeys  and  dark  bears  of 
the  forest,  and  the  Lanka  king  Vibhishana  from  over  the  sea. 
They  spoke  among  themselves,  “Now  the  waiting’s  done,  now 
the  day  has  come.  Who  would  not  be  ready  to  follow  you? 
.  .  .”  The  animals  stood  along  the  streets  beside  Kosala  men 
and  Gandharvas  of  heaven,  beside  Nagas  from  the  under¬ 
world  and  hermits  from  the  empty  wood,  all  still  and  silent. 


348  THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 

waiting  by  the  palace  walls  and  gates,  and  along  the  roads  to 
the  Sarayu  River. 

The  Kosalas  told  them,  “Lakshmana  is  lost  for  a  flawless 
promise.  Dasaratha’s  four  sons  are  dead.  We  follow  Rama.” 

Vibhishana  the  dark  demon  said,  “Set  out  the  great  bril¬ 
liant  umbrellas  along  the  northern  high  road  to  the  riverside.” 

Hanuman  said,  “That  will  look  well,  but  if  you  want  a 
high  road  to  heaven,  just  say  Rama." 

Rama  came  walking  on  the  streets.  He  wore  thin  green  silk 
and  held  in  his  right  fingers  a  sheaf  of  grass.  He  turned  to  the 
north,  humming  some  of  the  song  Kusa  and  Lava  had  sung  a 
thousand  years  before.  Our  Lady  Lakshmi  of  the  Lotus 
walked  on  his  right;  Mother  Earth  went  patiently  on  his  left. 
And  behind  him  walked  many  weapons  in  human  forms, 
sharp  spears  and  arrows  and  huge  bows,  merciless  swords  and 
heavy-set  maces  and  the  howling  knives  of  war,  and  many 
tears  of  blood  ran  from  their  hard  eyes. 

First  Vibhishana  wearing  gold  approached  Rama  and  said, 
“Let  me  also  go  through  the  open  gates.” 

Rama  replied,  “Lanka  King,  you  are  immortal.  Death  will 
never  touch  you,  while  my  memory  lives.  As  long  as  the 
Moon  and  Sun  and  Earth  shall  exist,  as  long  as  the  moun¬ 
tains  and  rivers  continue  on  Earth’s  face,  as  long  as  the  sea 
beats  with  his  eternal  waves  against  the  solid  land,  so  long 
shall  my  wonderful  story  of  Ramayana  remain  in  the  world.” 

Then  Sugriva  the  Monkey  King  came  to  Rama.  “I  give 
Kishkindhya  to  Angada.  I  will  go  with  you.” 

Rama  said,  “Yes.” 

Jambavan  the  bear  bowed  to  Rama.  He  did  not  speak, 
Only  a  low  growl  came  from  his  throat.  Rama  blessed  the 
Bear  King  and  said,  “You  will  live  while  Valmika’s  Rama¬ 
yana  is  heard  on  Earth.”  He  bent  close  and  gave  Jambavan  a 
charm,  a  present,  something  precious.  “And  Hanuman  also 
will  live  so  long,  where  is  he  now?” 

Hanuman  came  bounding  down  from  the  sky.  He  hit  the 
ground  with  a  thud  like  a  thunderstone.  He  was  right  close  to 
Rama,  smiling  at  him,  laughing  and  gay. 

“Oh  Hanuman!” 

“My  King  I”  Hanuman  knelt  before  Rama. 

Rama  said,  “As  long  as  men  shall  speak  of  you,  you  will 
live  on  Earth.  No  one  can  equal  you.  Your  heart  is  true;  your 
arms  are  strong;  you  have  the  energy  to  do  anything.  You 
have  served  me  faithfully  and  done  things  for  me  that 
couldn’t  be  done.” 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King  349 

“It’s  nothing,”  said  Hanuman.  “I  am  your  friend,  that’s 
all.” 

Rama  wore  a  rare  golden  bracelet  set  with  gemstones  on 
his  right  arm,  a  costly  irreplaceable  ornament  inherited  from 
among  the  wealth  of  the  Solar  Kings  from  ancient  days.  He 
said,  “Best  of  Monkeys,  take  this  as  my  gift,”  and  gave  it  to 
Hanuman. 

Hanuman  snatched  the  bracelet  from  Rama  and  started  to 
turn  it  over  and  around  in  his  white  furry  paws,  looking 
closely  at  it.  Then  he  bent  and  broke  it;  he  twisted  the  gold 
and  pulled  out  the  jewels,  and  put  them  between  his  hard 
teeth.  He  bit  down  on  the  priceless  gems  and  broke  them  like 
nuts,  and  carefully  searched  over  the  pieces,  looking  every¬ 
where  for  something. 

Rama  asked  him,  “Monkey,  at  a  time  like  this  why  are  you 
still  difficult?” 

Hanuman  answered,  “Lord,  though  this  bracelet  looked  ex¬ 
pensive  it  was  really  worthless,  for  nowhere  on  it  did  it  bear 
your  name.  I  have  no  need  of  it,  Rama.  What  do  I  want  with 
anything  plain?” 

Vibhishana  sniffed  at  that.  “Then  I  can’t  see  what  value 
life  has  to  you.  Why  don’t  you  destroy  your  body  as  well?” 

Then  with  his  sharp  fingernails  Hanuman  tore  open  his 
breast  and  pulled  back  the  flesh.  And  see!  There  was  written 
again  and  again  on  every  bone,  in  fine  little  letters — Rama 
Rama  Rama  Rama  Rama  .... 

Rama  put  down  the  grass  he  held,  and  with  his  two  hands 
he  pressed  together  Hanuman’s  parted  flesh,  and  the  wound 
over  his  beating  heart  came  together  leaving  no  scar  at  all, 
not  even  one  big  as  a  grain  of  dust,  or  the  tip  of  a  hair. 
Rama  drew  off  his  hand  his  broad  gleaming  gold  ring  that 
said  Rama,  the  ring  that  Hanuman  had  carried  to  Sita.  He 
put  it  into  Hanuman’s  wet  bloodstained  paw  and  gently 
closed  the  monkey  fingers  over  it. 

Who  is  this  monkey  Hanuman?  Rama  has  let  him  loose  in 
the  world.  He  knows  Rama  and  Rama  knows  him.  Hanuman 
can  break  in  or  break  out  of  anywhere.  He  cannot  be 
stopped,  like  the  free  wind  in  flight. 

Hanuman  can  spot  a  tyrant,  he  looks  at  deeds  not  words, 
and  he’ll  go  and  pull  his  beard.  Disguises  and  words  of  talk 
cannot  confuse  a  mere  wild  animal.  Hanuman’s  rescue  of 
brave  poets  in  any  peril  may  be  had  for  their  asking,  and  that 
monkey  will  break  the  handsome  masks  of  evil  kings. 

Hanuman  will  take  your  sad  tune  and  use  it  to  make  a 


350 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


happy  dance.  We  have  seen  that  white  monkey.  Strong  is  his 
guard.  Especially  take  warning,  never  harm  a  free  Poet. 

The  Son  of  the  Wind.  The  warm  dry  night  wind,  and  all 
the  trees  swaying!  I  don’t  care  for  love  or  death  or  lone¬ 
liness — here  comes  the  high  Wind,  and  what  am  I . . .  ? 


Vibhishana  and  Hanuman  and  Jambavan  the  bear  flew 
away.  Rama  stood  speechless  and  bright  and  brilliant,  like  the 
lighted  Sun. 

Rama  walked  on  to  the  Sarayu  River,  and  whoever  saw 
him  pass  followed  him.  Many  stones  wept  that  they  had  to 
stay  behind,  leaving  streaks  and  marks  one  can  still  see.  The 
tall  trees  swayed  and  bent  creaking  after  him,  and  water  ran 
along  beside  Rama’s  road.  Some  birds  called  out  to  him — 
Stay  right  there,  stay  right  there — while  others  said — go  far, 
go  fast!  Go  fast!  We’ll  follow  you,  you. 

The  deer  came  crashing  noisily  up  through  the  brush  and 
onto  the  road.  Dumb  beasts  were  walking  along  beside  great- 
minded  men.  Little  animals  never  seen  in  the  city  were  going 
with  Rama.  Whoever  breathed  tried  to  follow  him  .  .  .  chil¬ 
dren  skipped  and  ran,  and  women  walked  together,  talking  to 
monkeys  and  bears. 

It  was  just  afternoon,  and  they  all  passed  between  colored 
rows  of  Ayodhya  umbrellas.  Death  was  watching.  Death  wept 
with  joy  to  see  those  beautiful  colors,  all  like  a  glorious  sun¬ 
rise. 

Oh  Rama,  nobody  knows  all  of  you.  But  here  by  Sarayu’s 
water,  we  will  step  through.  Lord. 

By  the  river,  in  the  saffron  shade  of  the  last  umbrella  stood 
Guha  the  hunter  king,  and  Sumantra  the  old  charioteer 
beaming  in  joy.  Sumantra  had  freed  the  four  royal  red 
horses,  but  they  followed  him  and  stood  there.  Wild  hunters 
wearing  skins  and  feathers  knelt  barefoot  and  waited,  resting 
their  long  bamboo  spears  pointing  up  to  the  sky. 

Animal  and  human  people  touched  and  reached  out  to 
each  other  up  and  down  that  riverside  then.  A  green  hand 
and  a  red  one,  a  bear  paw,  deer’s  hoof,  little  birds’  wings, 
black  skin  and  gold  and  brown,  all  touching,  and  the  water 
flowing  by  like  Time.  Bharata  gave  Rama  his  birthfire  and  his 
brothers’  all  mixed,  and  Rama  threw  them  into  Sarayu.  The 
fires  stopped  burning  and  were  peaceful. 

Trust  the  Truel  The  King  took  a  broad  jump  and  went  first 


Farewell  Again,  My  Lady  and  My  King 


351 


in  through  the  water.  He  went  on  through  to  the  other  side, 
winning  all  time  past  and  all  to  come  .... 

The  four  red  horses  leapt.  Wild  birds  flew  out  of  their  trees 
and  dove  down  through  the  river,  men  and  animals  and 
women  followed,  the  timid  forest  deer  threw  themselves  out 
from  the  riverbank  and  went  in  shooting  curves  under  the 
water  swift-flowing  to  the  sea  with  rising  waves. 

Chitraratha  the  five-crested  Gandharva  King  stood  by 
heaven’s  open  massive  gate,  singing  the  old  true  songs.  He 
looked  out  at  the  sky.  It  was  the  evening  of  a  day  in  heaven. 
The  air  was  velvet  dark  below,  and  the  stars  of  spring  hung 
swaying  on  their  ropes  of  wind.  Sparkling  souls  were  coming 
up  from  Earth  along  the  distant  sky-paths,  and  drawing  near 
were  flights  of  heaven’s  songbirds  soaring  over  the  oceans  of 
space,  and  the  innocent  heavenly  deer  were  leaping,  brilliant 
as  gods. 


Kusa  and  Lava  sang,  “This  ends  our  Father’s  Way,  the  tale 
is  done  at  last.” 

All  the  twenty-four  thousand  verses  were  finished,  sung  in 
their  melody  and  measure.  This  story  has  been  told  for  a  very 
long  time,  it  will  be  told  long  into  the  future.  All  life  is 
pleased,  and  well  pleased  with  you  for  hearing  it  now. 

Hearing  or  reading  Ramayana  you  will  get  from  Rama 
what  you  wish  for,  so  be  aware!  Don’t  ask  too  little.  Good 
fortune  to  you  all.  This  is  the  world’s  first  best  poem. 

In  the  first  age  of  the  world  men  crossed  the  ocean  of  exis¬ 
tence  by  their  spirit  alone.  In  the  second  age  sacrifice  and  rit¬ 
ual  began,  and  then  Rama  lived,  and  by  giving  their  every  act 
to  him  men  lived  well  their  ways.  Now  in  our  age  what  is 
there  to  do  but  worship  Rama’s  feet?  But  my  friend,  the  last 
age  of  this  world  shall  be  the  best.  For  then  no  act  has  any 
worth,  all  is  useless  .  .  .  except  only  to  say  Rama.  The  future 
will  read  this.  Therefore  I  tell  them,  when  all  is  in  ruin 
around  you,  just  say  Rama. 

We  have  gone  from  the  spiritual  to  the  passionate.  Next 
will  come  ignorance.  Universal  war.  Say  Rama  and  win! 
Your  time  cannot  touch  you! 

Remember  Indrajit.  Guard  yourself — against  the  real 
things.  Everything  counts,  and  so  be  kind.  Do  not  dare  to  lie 
politely  with  casual  unmeant  promises,  for  Indrajit  always  be¬ 
lieves  that  you  will  mean  what  you  say  to  him. 

Narayana  was  back  in  his  heaven,  with  Lakshmi  an  instant 


352 


THE  DHARMA  WHEEL 


later.  The  four  dark  hands  picked  up  again  the  shell  and  the 
lotus,  the  discus  and  the  mace  .... 


Sauti  the  storyteller  said,  “Rama’s  name  alone  brings  vic¬ 
tory.  Oh  Saunaka  my  friend,  whoever  tells  Ramayana  to  oth¬ 
ers  becomes  free  and  does  not  have  to  labor  painfully  for  his 
food.” 

Sauti  sat  facing  Saunaka  in  Naimisha  Forest,  by  Saunaka’s 
woodland  home.  Sauti  continued,  “I  carry  the  name  Rama 
sealed  within  an  amulet  when  I  travel  over  the  world,  and  I 
keep  it  in  my  house  when  I  am  home.  It  lets  me  go  in  peace 
and  return  safely  to  those  who  love  me. 

“Fair  Ayodhya  was  empty  of  men  for  many  long  years, 
and  much  of  her  wealth  and  beauty  was  lost  forever  to  the 
trees  and  vines  that  buried  her.  Kusa  and  Lava  had  sons,  and 
their  sons  had  children,  and  later  there  were  Kosala  kings 
again  in  Ayodhya.  But  today  she  is  a  city  much  like  any 
other. 

“Still  today,  high  in  the  pine  forests  lives  Hanuman,”  said 
Sauti.  “He  will  always  be  listening  wherever  Rama’s  name  is 
spoken;  he  will  listen  endlessly  to  his  old  adventures  and  his 
own  true  stories.  So  take  care,  he  is  here.  Now  you  know 
who  Hanuman  is.” 

Saunaka  said,  “Imagine  that!”  Then  he  saw  Hanuman  lis¬ 
tening, a  white  monkey  sitting  there  behind  Sauti  and  smiling. 
“What  you  say  is  all  true!”  He  looked  into  Hanuman’s  eyes. 

Sauti  turned  to  Hanuman,  then  back  to  his  friend.  “I  told 
you  so.  Valmiki  was  seeking  the  True  before  he  ever  was  a 
poet,  and  when  it  all  was  done  he  sang — 

Fm  still  myself,  Tm  me. 

Here  is  the  True,  have  no  fear; 

This  is  for  you,  for  you  are  dear 

To  me;  Fm  still  myself." 

Sauti  said,  “Here  we  close  our  story,  good  fortune  to  youl 
Rama!  Rama!  Rama!” 

Again  the  Players  come. 

Love  to  all  men. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  RAMAYANA 


