Okay. So, I want to impose my theory on
you and you tell me what you think. So,
for the past 15 years, I've been
watching the feds, the FBI, the DOJ try
to destroy you. And I've watched as
no group of gatekeepers or whistleblower
protectors or journalistic, you know,
ethics guardians have defended you on
First Amendment grounds, which is pretty
shocking. But the question's always
been, why are the feds so intent on
taking you out? And here's my theory. So
the summer of 2001, you go on TV
timestamped and say they're going to
someone's going to fly planes to the
World Trade Centers. They're going to
blame Osama bin Laden, call the Bush
White House, warn them. You basically
called 911 in detail. You're the only
one who did. And we can prove that. It's
not a guess. We have the tape. I've
played the tape. 911 happens in
September. or there's a 9/11 commission
immediately impanled. They go and
interview a bunch of people in the US
government and outside and ask like were
there signs this was happening. They
don't interview you. You're the one guy
who predicted it in public. You're the
only guy who predicted in public and no
one calls you to ask how the hell did
you know that? Which is the obvious
question. Then they said about trying to
destroy you rather than like hailing you
as a prophet or at least asking the
question, how the hell did Alex Jones
know in detail this was coming? Like how
did you know? They never even asked you.
And then they they mobilize DOJ and FBI
against you. And I I think there's a
connection between those two facts.
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
Well, there certainly is. Uh I'd already
been researching false flag attacks, not
just by our government, but other
governments throughout history. The Gulf
of Tonkan to get us into Vietnam in ' 64
that was later declassified to have been
staged. And of course the USS Liberty um
between uh Israel and the Lynen Baines
Johnson administration wanted to get us
into full war with Egypt but the ship
survived became the most decorated ship
in US history because of the valiance of
the crew and operation Ajax where the
CIA and Kermit Roosevelt in 53 overthrew
Muhammad Mosedc who was a reformist and
really pro- west but he wouldn't give
them all the oil and they use radical
Islamists to overthrow him and then put
the Shaw in and then overthrew the Shaw
over and over again. There's just
hundreds and hundreds of historical real
case examples of that being done by our
government and other governments. And I
saw a lot of pre-programming in the
news. Oh, someone bin Laden's going to
get us when he gets us. We we need to
give up all of our rights and it'll be a
new America and we've got to set up this
police state. So, so I saw a lot of
pre-programming and but you called the
specifics. You called the specifics of
9/11. I just can't get past that. And
I've asked you in public and private,
how did you do that? I've never gotten
really a straight answer. I doubt I will
now. But the fact remains, the
incontrovertible fact, the provable fact
that you called it and then they began a
campaign against you. And it's not
because you're a racist. You've never
been a racist or an anti-semite or a
crazy person. Actually, you've never
spewed hate, but you have for, you know,
30 years said the foundations of our
system are actually kind of fake and
rotten. And it's but it was 911 that's
when they decid that's when they really
decided this guy has to be stopped and
and just basically eliminated the first
amendment to stop you. Well well just to
be clear it's not that I'm dodging how I
knew it. That was 24 years ago. And I I
remember what I was covering and what I
was doing at the time. And everybody's
seen the July 25th uh where I went into
detail, but but actually my crew using
Chad GBT scanning through all my old
shows found shows in April and even
before that in March where I get more
specific and I said the CIA is going to
fly planes into the World Trade Centers
uh and blame it on Bin Laden. So, I just
think that's the most amazing fact I've
ever heard in my entire life that you
called that and and we again we can
prove it cuz it's on tape with
timestamps and everyone's like, "Oh
yeah, okay. Alex Jones is crazy. I hate
her." Okay, whatever. I don't think
that's true. But you called 9/11 and no
investigator ever called you to ask you
how you called that, how you knew that.
Not one. No. No one from DOJ, Philip
Zelico of the 9/11 Commission, never
called you. No. And why? And I mean
obviously because certain segments of
our intelligence agencies with other
foreign intelligence agencies were
tracking the supposed hijackers. They
were being trained at US military bases.
They were being given government money
from our government and other
governments. They were being protected.
Then two of their magic passports and
all that rubble and hundreds of millions
of pieces of paper were found the next
day uh to then connect them to it. It
was all laid out. than the bin Laden
family was thrown was flown out of the
country in the days after and that was
basically shut down in the news and that
was covered some locally uh here in
Florida. So I knew that Bin Laden had
been CIA going back to really the Mujadi
being set up by Zabna Bzinski and Jimmy
Carter and then Reagan took that over
and then they kind of build that as
blowback. But even recently you've seen
the US aid information and and other
documents come out and the Institute for
Peace where they're directly paying
massive amounts of money to Taliban to
al-Qaeda to ISIS even in the last few
years. Oh yeah. And they use them as
these proxy armies. So, so that was well
known in the research circles uh that
that that that bin Laden was basically a
multinational cutout used by Western
intelligence agencies to destabilize
areas but also be a boogeyman. Then you
see CNN in a mountain cave magically
being able to find him, but the US can't
kill him and nobody else can. And I knew
that CNN is literally the, you know, CIA
broadcasting system for sure. total
mockingb bird thoroughbred and there
were hundreds and hundreds of points
that went in but okay bin Laden's work
for the CIA and you got CNN interviewing
him and and and they're all scaring us
saying he's about to attack us and then
I remembered how Ahmad Salam who was an
Egyptian intelligence agency uh
operative working for the FBI and CIA
was hired to build a bomb in the early
90s to blow up the World Trade Center.
But then when they said build a real
bomb, he started recording them because
he started figuring out it was a setup.
And then he had that press conference
where he played it and I interviewed him
a few times where where the FBI said no,
just go ahead and let it go forward. And
so you start adding all that together.
They'd already tried to hit the World
Trade Center before. Uh the World Trade
Center had a lot of uh issues in it with
asbestous and also some of the
structural issues. So they were already
wanting to have a plan to get rid of it.
And then you have the CIA and FBI in the
Solomon Brothers building um building 7
uh the 47story skyscraper. Uh you have
that right next door. So I looked at all
of it and I thought where would the new
Pearl Harbor be and the year before in
uh the Project for American Century
headed up by Rumsfeld and Dick Cheney.
Dick Cheney wrote in there that we need
a new Pearl Harbor event to launch the
pox americana. But it wasn't an American
empire of freedom and liberty and
justice like Trump's trying to, you
know, launch. It was a globalist empire,
military enforcement and tyranny. And so
there was a lot of other data points um
that uh went into it. Cheney also writes
in that same document, we need to look
at, you know, race specific boweapons to
to have control and bring in our power.
And that was actually picked up in the
newspapers. I But I Okay, so these are
not minor issues. The this is these are
like the biggest things happening in the
world. the most important things
happening in the world and the end of
one system ushering in of a new system.
Millions in the end died because of all
of this. Millions and what you're on
like cable access in Texas figuring this
out. Like where is everybody
else? I don't understand like I don't
where I worked at CNN at the time. I
don't we had a as you said Peter Bergen
went and interviewed Bin L. attacking
Peter Bergen, but like how come you were
the only one who figured this out? Yeah,
by that time I started out in '94 as a
guest on Access TV and had my own show
by 95, but I I was on local talk radio.
I just started getting I've had been
syndicated a few years then, but I Okay,
but but I mean but you're right. I was
on Access TV as well and and and that's
where the you were like way out of the
fringe and all the people at the very
center of our business journalism like
they didn't see or didn't talk publicly
about any of this like none of this.
Well, I saw Gary Hart on with another
guest uh Gary Hart the former
presidential candidate senator from
Colorado. I think it was the heart
rubbing commission. Yeah. Uh I uh saw
him in Congress
uh with testimony earlier that year and
also saw him on I believe it was CNN or
maybe it was Chris Matthews MSNBC but
but the clip's famous and they say the
world's about to change. There's about
to be big things happening. You big big
attacks. When when was this? It was it
was in early July. Uh it was before 911.
Uh yes. And and that's and they were
very specific. Somebody should find that
clip. can crowdsource that. And that was
the final catalyst because they were
basically telling the establishment very
thinly veiled what was about to go on.
So I sat back, I looked at it and I
thought years later, how did I come up
with that? So I don't just say a bunch
of stuff then most of it doesn't come
true when I'm very specific on
predictions and almost all of them have
come true. I thought that it was the
spin-off of the XFiles. I wasn't even an
XFiles fans, rarely watched it, called
The Lone Gunman that it turns out had
come out in the spring of uh 2001 that
that I didn't even learn about because
there wasn't, you know, Facebook and
Twitter and X back then. So, if you
didn't watch those entertainment shows,
you didn't know about it. And then 6
months or so after 911, listeners start
saying, "Have you seen this?" And I had
listeners send me VHS, you recordings
off Fox TV of this episode where a
criminal group in the US government
hijacks a jumbo jet in New York to fly
it in the World Trade Center to blame it
on a Central Asian terrorist so that
they have a pretext to take over
domestically with a police state and
launch wars uh in the Middle East. Wait,
this was on the X-Files? Yes, this was
on the X Files. And and so later I
thought maybe I got it from that. Uh but
then we found tapes even earlier a month
before that came out where I was already
had put it together on the radio. But
but here's what's crazy. Then I got
reached out by by some of the host of
the XFiles saying, "Hey, uh Chris Carter
told us that the CIA came to him with
the plot of this and asked him some of
the scripts that they would ask him as a
favor to put this in as a TV program."
And then later I corresponded some with
Chris Carter via email. He talked about
this in the uh news like in in
entertainment publications about oh Alex
Jones O's really good guy and when they
rebooted in 2016 again he talked about
the talk show host characters based on
me. So I've talked to him some of his
crew but he said no I don't know why the
CIA you used to interview him you came
to me and and said here's the script for
this show. So so it wasn't just Alex
Jones saying that a government agency
was going to hijack a jet and fly the
World Trade Center. the XFiles uh
spin-off, the Lone Gunman, one of its
main episodes was about that specific
story. This is just crazy. So, I often
get, you know, people I know say, "Oh,
oh, and they remote control and hijack
the jet, the good guys, and keep it from
crashing the World Trade
Center." So, why would why would the CIA
come to Chris Carter and say, "We want
you to write this." And then, and then
it's released months and months before
911. So, so I'm not the only one. It was
in the collective unconsciousness. Uh, I
mean I I mean I don't know. Um, but I
mean I said two weeks before they shot
Trump in Butler, I I went on air and I
said they're going to try to shoot him
at at a rally. I mean that was that's
obvious to see how desperate they were.
The lawfare didn't work. I mean a lot of
this is just studying how they operate.
But but so much of it now is John
Podesta in u August 2020 the New York
Times wrote about it had a big war game
with the top Democrats and they said if
Trump wins if they weren't able to steal
it in my view uh then then we're going
to have civil war conditions we're going
to have blue states secede blue cities
and we're going to use social issues to
fment a rebellion that we're going to
basically frame as racial George Floyd
on steroids you know 10.0 know and then
we're going to drive from from office.
Well, they were able to steal it in my
view. The evidence I think is
overwhelming. So, they didn't use that
plan. Well, they started talking about
that plan again in the months before
this last election uh last year. So, so
so much so much of what I'm able to
predict isn't really prediction. They
admit it. I mean, the UN said for 20
years, we're going to use disease acts
to bring in a global system, a global
central bank digital currency, a global
social credit score, a global uh vaccine
ID that'll be used as the global
internet ID, global taxation ID. That's
official. Bill Gates, the UN, all these
big bodies preparing how they'd roll
this out. You know, the Rockefeller
Foundation with Operation Lockep 2010,
2011 describing locking down the sports
stadiums, locking your houses 6 feet
apart, wearing masks for fear. I mean
that's and then Bush George W had that
and the bio shield program that passed
in 2005 where they sent out kits
millions of them to everybody to the Red
Cross with the six feet apart with the
mask with all the stuff but they didn't
launch the the bio attack scare that
they had I think locked and loaded then
they waited till 2020. So basically
you're just taking them at their word.
You're just paying. You're doing what I
don't do enough, which is listen to
people I disagree with and sincerely try
to assess what they're saying. I mean,
Fouchy just said last week a much worse,
way higher morbidity. It's respiratory.
It's coming. And you got hotels. Oh,
don't worry. Trump's going to have a big
problem. It's going to come crashing in
on him. We'll see how he tries to reboot
the economy. And then you know then you
learn Fouchy and all of them are
involved with with Obama and Chapel Hill
and North Carolina creating CO 19. It
was a big scandal 2015 gain of function
SARS and then they move it to Wuhan.
Plausible deniability so they can kind
of blame the Chinese if they want. I'm
not saying the Chinese are good. The
communist Chinese are terrible. Uh and
it was kind of a joint project and and
and then then they roll it out. Then
they've got their so-called shot that's
mRNA. I mean it this stuff is all very
well planned. And so when you see him up
there lying going, "No, Senator Paul, it
is you that is wrong. No gain of
function." Then it's in all his emails,
this is gain of function. And he has
public symposiums in defense of gain of
function. I mean, he's Mr. Gain of
Function. If he was a superhero, he
would just, you know, have gain of
function on his chest in the back of his
cape. And he's like, I don't know
anything about that. And so, I mean,
these guys just treat us like children.
And so, they kept saying, we're going to
use a virus. We're going to use a scare
to bring in our global government. I
mean, I mean, I remember Blue Dobbs in
Judicial Watch 2006 sued uh to get North
American Union documents and in it
they're meeting up at B Canada and
they're like, "We're going to use
collapsing migration flow from a virus
to flood the West and use that crisis to
bring a new Marshall plan. We're going
to use a disease X to, you know, finally
get the world to accept this global
government." So, they're just scheming
constantly. They have event 2011, but in
public. In public, they have the sparsed
uh war game 2025, 2028 that came out a
few years before 2020 and the viral
release that is actually set in 2020 to
2024 and it rolls out how they're all
going to do it. The tweets that are in
there are almost word for they just
changed the name uh uh SPARS to CO 19.
So, so it's a blueprint and and then
they get caught. Oh, it's not a viral
attack plan. Oh, it's just a war game.
But the war game matches the exact roll
out of the attack. So they're all on
script. So in a normal world that
rewarded, you know, excellence and
precience, you'd be a billionaire
because of your predictive powers. I
mean, huge companies, governments hire
people who can piece together fragments
of evidence to create an accurate
picture of the future. That's that's a
huge business. I know a lot of people in
that business, George Freriedman, guys
like that, really really smart people.
Um, but you've got the best track record
of all. And I think it's so telling that
rather than reward you for this or call
you up and be like, Alex Jones, you're
like, "What do you think's coming next?"
They're like, "No, we must like
eliminate our own First Amendment to
destroy your life." Which is what
they've done. Um that that seems like a
pretty clear indicator of their guilt to
me. Well, what they don't want is
compartmentalized good people in
industry and government, not just around
the world, to listen to what I'm saying,
go check it out for themselves, find out
everything I just said is on record.
Anybody can just type anything I said.
It's it's it's from their own documents.
And then people will basically put the
glasses on like they live and see it for
themselves that I'm not telling them
what to see like the corporate media
does. Brainwashing people and and and
selling them a lie that two men can have
a baby and there's no X and Y
chromosomes and communism is great and
you know open borders are wonderful. No,
I mean I'm simply saying see this for
yourself. I liken it to those hidden
image paintings and and when you first
can't see the hidden image, you're like
I can't see. Once you do see it, you
can't unsee it. So, I'm only trying to
get people to go look at what I'm
pointing out and find out. I liken this
whole thing to like you have the adult
table with the CFR and the Club of Rome,
the WF and the UN, the think tanks, the
Rand Corporation, and they're at the
adult table at Thanksgiving and the
general public and even a lot of the
politicians are compartmentalized and
naive. We're over at the kids table uh
and we'd actually listen to what the
adult table because that's their
arrogance. They admit 99% of this in
their own battle plans as if we are too
lazy or stupid to ever go look at it.
And that's part of a confidence game
they have with their own people, their
own corporate intelligence operatives,
their own government intelligence
operatives, uh their own networks where
they just basically admit all this stuff
out in the open. I mean, it's like uh
you know, mud from the CIA on CNN saying
Foggy Bottom's going to kill this guy.
We're going to kill Trump.
And then Trump had called me. This is
back in his first administration. I
said, "Listen, you need to watch out.
They've got Phil Mud and all these other
guys on CNN, MSNBC saying they're going
to kill you." He goes, "Just a moment."
He goes, "I'm going to have the Secret
Service call you." And about an hour
they call. They go, "What's going on,
Alex? Trump told us to call you." And I
said, "You don't know about this, this,
this, this, this, this." So he goes,
"Here's our email." And I sent the
Secret Service this as if the Secret
Service doesn't know. They were all over
TV saying we're going to kill Trump. So,
so I mean it's possible they caught
that. Yeah. Yeah. And then Trump didn't
catch it. So, so and and I mean now
they're everywhere. You've got this new
Rutker study out where 55% of Democrats
liberals are are asked, you know, do you
support Trump being killed? They're
like, yes, we want him dead. We he
should be assassinated. This is like
this week and came out what over the
weekend. And they asked him, so do you
see yourself as part of a assassination
culture? And they said yes. So, but then
if you say, "Oh, the Democrats are
fommenting violence." I mean, the view
says all the time, "He's killing people.
Elon's killing people." They don't say
how. He's they're stealing your social
security. They're killing old ladies.
And so, we need to be ready to fight and
die to take this guy out. Those are
quotes. And and and then they just sit
back and go, "Oh, no, no, no. We're not
calling for violence with Crockett and
all of them, but but they're not going
to do it. They want lone nuts to do it
because their other windup operatives
like crooks and the other uh guy in
Florida failed. But I mean they are they
are crazy. And if the establishment or
what's left of it is falling apart
thinks killing Trump is going to help
them. They're delusional because if you
look at all the scenarios that come out
of that, it's much worse for them. No, I
agree. I absolutely agree that not all
sleep aids are made by pharmaceutical
companies. You probably heard about
eight sleep by now. They developed the
country's most innovative products for
sleep. Almost everybody in our office
uses something they make called the pod
and they love it. And there's a reason
that professional athletes and lots of
other smart people do too. You add the
pod to your mattress like a mattress
cover and it helps you get a better
night's sleep and fill with vitality at
the start of each day in an intimidating
way almost. It's amazing. How does it do
it? Well, it uses advanced technology to
track your sleep and automatically
adjust the temperature of your side of
the bed to what's perfect for sleep. And
temperature makes all the difference.
It's backed by over 600 million hours of
data. They've also used those insights
to create their new product, Sleep
Elixir, to help you get quiet before you
go to bed, fall asleep faster, and stay
knocked out longer. No groggginess, no
weird side effects, just better deep
sleep. So, if you're ready to take sleep
and recovery to the next level, go to
eight.com/tucker to get 350 bucks off
your pod4 ultra full refund for 30 days
if you don't love it. It works. Before I
ask
you what you think the signs are
pointing to now, like what are your
predictions for the next 5 years? And
then I ask you how your battles with the
US government are going um in its
attempts to silence you. How do you like
if you have this ability which you do
I'm not sucking up it's just again it's
provable to put together a picture
extraordinarily accurate picture of what
the future holds like what does that do
to you how do you sleep and how do you
live and like why haven't you totally
destroyed yourself like that's not those
are kind of not thoughts that most
people including me are burdened with
and don't really want to be burdened
with like how do you turn off the
visions of the future in your head well
I I mean I appreciate you saying nice
things about me and and obviously God
gives us all different gifts and I do
have some gifts, but I think a lot more
people have these gifts than than really
realize it. But you can prove it. That's
why I've obviously we're friends and I I
like you as a as a man, but you can
prove it in a way that others can't
because it's on tape. So, it's not
really debate. Has Alex Jones had, you
know, more accurate predictions of the
future than any living person in the
world that I know of? We can prove that.
We don't have to argue about it. I've
got the freaking tape. So again, it's
not even a compliment. It's just an
observation. And I don't know why I seem
to be the only person who's obsessed
with this. Like, how did this guy
predict this? No, everyone's like, "Oh,
he's great." Okay, maybe he's crazy, but
he predicted this. So my question is
like, what does that do to
you? I mean, it is stressful the
responsibility of constantly researching
and and looking at all, you know,
culture, pop culture, that's where a lot
of the real brainwashing's at. That's
where a lot of the predictive
programming and manipulation goes on.
Yes. But also in so-called news, but but
I I mean I did get to where I drank way
too much, ate too much, got really
unhealthy because I could, you know, go
home at night and and have some drinks
and, you know, and eat half a key lime
pie and just kind of dial out and forget
about uh reality. But but things have
gotten so intense and so dangerous that
about the last nine months I haven't
drank and I've been exercising every day
and I've lost 63 pounds and I feel great
and I've just embraced uh the
responsibility. Plus we're alive right
now really in the great great awakening
where more and more people are piecing
things together and and and and deciding
to really get informed and engaged. And
so I'm I've always said I want to become
obsolete where people really start
understanding how the world really works
to such an extent. There are so many
other journalists and researchers and
pundits and just private citizens and
people in business and in academia and
life and and and in you know the
ecclesiastical circles that they really
realize that this globalist system is
transhumanist. It is evil. It is a
spiritual battle at the end of the day.
And people need to really choose a side.
And and so I think choosing the side and
and saying, "Hey God, I I I can't do
this. you know, I'm I'm weak. I'm
imperfect, but you know, through you, I
can and really praying and asking God to
lead God and direct you and give you
discernment. So, to really answer your
question,
um I'll have all this data in this
research and so so that my feeble human
mind can understand really what God
tells me. And uh then it's that final
little ingredient of being sure about
something that that's what they're
intending to do. But we have real
agency. You know, good has more power
than evil. They always say the devil's
greatest tick trick was convincing the
world that he didn't exist. I think
that's his second biggest trick is that
he doesn't exist and he does. His
biggest trick is convincing people that
there is no good out there and that and
that and that there's not That's right.
and and that God doesn't exist. So, you
know, for me, um, so much of it again is
in the old days, the globalists, the the
the Western propaganda after the end of
World War II, and since then when we won
World War II, had pretty much total
narrative control. And so, anything they
were pre-programming and preparing and
hyping the people for, they pretty much
always got what they wanted. So, it was
easy to follow those trend lines out and
see what the probable main scenarios
were. and then things would almost
always come true that I predicted
because they were still in charge. Now
that the globalist are really collapsing
and a new international order and system
is forming coming from the grassroots up
politics is downstream from the the
grassroots. Uh and because Trump is such
a uh chaos bringinger to their system
which is good but with it also you comes
danger but it's it's better than living
you know you know on our uh knees and
and then ending up having our souls
basically taken. It's it's it's it's
better to fight and die on our feet. But
in my experience, people that fight on
their feet live a lot longer and have
better lives than people that try to
live on their knees. People that live on
their knees actually die on their knees
a lot more often than the people that
die on their feet in my experience. So
now is really the global revolution.
It's a spiritual revolution. The
information, the culture, all of that
comes out of that. And so now there's so
many possible futures and and so many
developments because there's been so
many good people that actually care and
want to stabilize civilization and
thrive and have a future and and who are
not based on conquest mindsets but but
are based on renaissance uh concepts,
the great reset versus the great
awakening. uh that right now anything is
possible because America still has the
world reserve currency, still has the
biggest best military, still has the
best energy system for raw energy and
still has a spirit that is being
rekindled that was the apple of the
world's eye and really the flower of the
renaissance that that that that we're
now rebooting. It's powering back up
right now and that window is closing but
we're we're acting on it right now. And
if we're just not weak and and and and
cowards like Trump has said and and and
if we don't become panakans but remain
Americans uh then really anything uh is
possible because as Elon has said if
America falls the central pillar in
western civilization and western
civilization falls it all falls. Yes. Uh
and so for me this I don't do this out
of courage. I do it out of direct
self-preservation for myself, my family,
and by extension everybody else because
we're all interconnected. And people
need to understand the true urgency that
the globalist said they were going to
collapse the world economy and use that
for social control as Larry Finch said
to control our behavior and we're going
to build something extremely hellscapish
and and and dystopic in their own
admissions. All the horrible stuff we
see is just the leading, you know, edge
of it. Uh and and so so to me there's
really even no choice but to fight it
with everything I've got. You said this
is a you said two things that really
struck me. One that anything is possible
right now that this could go in in an
infinite number of directions. Some
hellish and and some blessed. And so I
think that that feels right to me.
Second, you said this is a spiritual
revolution. What are the signs that you
see of that? What do you mean by that?
Well, if you read the Bible, Old
Testament, New Testament, it's all
there. And then I see it happening. Uh,
you know, it says that during these big
times of change, uh, that that that
you'll see the best out of the good
people and the worst out of the bad
people. And some people you thought were
good are going to really activate and
show you their real cards, that they're
really your servants of evil, are really
slaves of evil. And then you're going to
see some people you thought weren't good
that are going to be touched and make
the decision to be strong for liberty,
that'll be some of our greatest
champions. Yes. Uh, and that you're not
going to really see people in the middle
anymore. That big middle of people
passing the buck. God said, "You were
hot and cold. You were lukewarm. I spit
you out of my mouth." And so, we're
going into really the beginning. It's
going to get way more intense in my
view. Uh, I mean, of any prediction,
it's it's that people think things are
wild now and tumultuous. It's the this
is going to be seen as the column before
the storm. And so, so there's going to
be nowhere to be in the middle. People
are going to have to choose the side.
And those that have chosen evil, chosen
the establishment, chosen the satanic
world order, uh are are going to get
deeper and deeper into their devotion,
their hysteria, their violence trying to
prop it up because deep down uh they're
they're scared and they have a form of
Stockholm syndrome where they go to the
abuser and think if they prostrate
themselves before it, somehow they'll be
given deliverance when really they just
need to repent and ask God to come in to
their heart and cleanse them and and
then rise them up uh to be a soldier
against this evil in this key time. But
there'll be no room for anybody in the
middle in the time we're in. And I'm I'm
talking to so many people that weren't
even Christian or weren't even religious
or weren't even spiritual uh who are
saying it's it's good versus evil. And I
talked to so many people I know that are
professionals and they you know Austin's
full of a lot of uh you know you know
particularly rich people and uh women
you know just becoming demonpossessed. I
mean, literally saying they're
demonpossessed and and and I'm hearing
about all over the country, all over the
world. What is that? It's so noticeable
and I I'm so blessed to be surrounded by
mostly by women who are just the
opposite who are wonderful, but I who
are the rock. I mean, they're just the
best. However, what you just described
is just on display everywhere. Well, and
and it's men, too. You're about the
soccer coach that just kidnapped the
little kid and took him and killed him
and threw him in the woods, reportedly
allegedly. I mean it's just I mean it's
men too but normally in history it's men
that do the really openly satanic stuff.
Exactly. And and women you know 2% of
violent crime. Now it's they're it's
because it's a crisis and women
particularly but men as well buy into
whatever they see as the power
structure. That's a survival mechanism
generally. That's exactly right. But
when the power structure is a death cult
by increment they get deeper and deeper.
You look at these leftists and them in
the hundreds of photos where they took
their shot and they or they or they had
their abortion or you know they want to
kill Trump and you look at it or they're
worshiping death in some way.
Absolutely. And you could see it. They
all look super unhealthy. They look
totally insane in the eyes. They all
look like Charlie Manson. And so so it's
it's I'm seeing more and more love in
people's eyes, more and more spiritual
connection to God. uh more and more of
that quiet place of just serenity and
people and then I'm seeing more and more
of the satanic energy. So it's it's
really a parting of the sea here. Yes.
So to just linger on the first
observation that you're seeing more of
the serenity, the peace from God in
people that is including people in your
orbit, people you know personally. Yes.
But it's very paradoxical. I'm seeing
just
godliness, peace,
understanding, and then I'm seeing
confusion and hysteria. And I mean, what
we're seeing is evil writhing around
trying to take us with it. It it it gets
senses that humanity is waking up and
that all of its carefully laid plans to
keep us in a trance, keep us sleep is is
is burning away. Do you is there any way
to predict well I'll just say my view
which is I I've been really shocked by
people on both sides there are people
who seem totally seized by hysteria and
rage and hate and the desire to commit
violence or never expected they would be
that and then there are other people who
I'm equally shocked to see filled with
the kind of serenity you're describing
who are filled with love and
understanding and I just I couldn't have
predicted who those people are in some
cases. Do you feel that? Absolutely. I I
mean I've always had a lot of berserker
energy and and and true and you know in
the fight but it was always focus and
and and and I wouldn't say it was
demonic but it was you know of the flesh
but also had a big connection to God.
Now more and more uh I'm just have
serenity, focus, clarity and I'm more
effective at breaking things down not
acting like a Tasmanian devil. And so in
my own life, I'm seeing more and more of
that serenity. Uh just really really
intense the last few weeks. Um and I
pick up on that being around you and
your crew and you know folks here in in
in this little hamlet we're in. And then
it really does make you feel sorry for
people that serve evil. I mean they
torture us and they attack us and they
want to bully us
and but at the end of the day you you
actually realize that's on them. It is
so sad that they live like this. They're
being destroyed, too. They're being
destroyed, too. That's like one of the
main insights I've had in the past five
years. I come to things really slowly
because I'm not a genius, but I always
kind of felt hate toward the destroyers
in our in any society. I hate
destruction. I like building and
creation. And but the destroyers always
were I felt my enemies. And my whole
life I felt this. And then it was only
in the last couple years I realized
they're being destroyed also. Like they
are suffering. They're not getting out
of this unscathed. Like they think that
they're getting power or whatever they
money, whatever they think they're
getting. Um but in but they're like in
agony. Well, a lot of them are cowards,
too. And they
think survival of the finish is being as
ruthless and mean as possible is what
they have to do to win. And then when
you no longer hate them and I and I
because I was never driven by hate as my
main force, you know, it's the old
saying, you don't fight an enemy
attacking your people because you hate
them. You fight them because you love
the people you're defending. Exactly.
But still, I would always hear no, no,
forgive them. Still fight them. Still
expose them, but but but really forgive
them. That removes a spiritual
connection that you have with them. And
you see it when Christ says, you know,
be kind and pray for those that
persecute you. It'll it'll heap burning
coals on their head. Stalkers, you know,
down at the kind of the low level. I've
learned like once I didn't care about a
stalker and I've had plenty and you just
forgive them. They just freak out and go
away. When they're getting to you,
they're enjoying that energy. So, you
still fight them with more energy than
ever, but you do
it from a position of just removing a
damaged collapsed, you know, poor victim
of the devil. Uh that you have a
responsibility to protect yourself and
your family from, but you don't give
them the energy of being angry back at
them and and seeing them as powerful
because they're not. They're pawns. And
these people that are influenced by
satanic energy by literal spiritual
forces, demons, they are the slaves. And
when they're not out doing evil and
persecuting people, they don't even feel
like they're alive and and they're
desperate and they're scared and and and
they're lost. And then they get driven
forward, you know, by this dark force to
to like it'll be all right once you just
go out and once you take these people
out. You know, it's the good people that
are making you feel bad. It's it's them.
destroy them, then you'll have peace.
And and and that's the deeper
understanding I've had of how this
satanic system works. So clearly true.
And and if you ask if there's anyone
that you've really like focused on, I I
don't know, George Soros or Larry Frink.
I mean, just the other day I was talking
to someone who knows Larry Frink really
well and I was saying I think Larry
Frink is like I don't know, I've never
met Larry Frink, but boy, he's
responsible for a lot of suffering from
my perspective. And you know, this
person said, "There's no one more
unhappy than Larry Frink." Like, nobody.
And I was just with him in a car. He was
like screaming at someone on the phone.
This guy's made billions of dollars and
personally tormented. And I know a bunch
of people cuz I know a lot of the of the
people involved in things that I think
are really evil. And there's not a happy
one among them. Not one. And and beyond
the fact that he's got billions, he's in
control of more than anybody. You know,
we're always hearing Elon Musk, the
richest guy in the world. Well, he's a
guy that has been good at keeping the
companies under his control. So, he
independently is the most powerful
person uh corporate science
communications titan, but then they spin
it like, oh, he's the establishment. No,
Trump, as you know, has a very small
orbit of independent billionaires that
are defending him because they want to
stabilize civilization
uh for everybody's good. But when you
look at the international power and the
large s it's been against Trump more and
more they realize they're losing because
the people are with Trump and we were
just talking last night. Hope you would
repeat that uh because you were asking
me with some folks we were talking to
about what my view is basically on the
geopolitical new landscape and I laid my
my view and you said no I think that's
dead on and then you said basically if
you feel like repeating it that that we
need to sell it very clearly you're on
this team or you're on that team because
it really is team Chaom EU globalist new
world order that's that's what's left
you know the UK don't trust them who
runs it but they're trying to come in
under a US alliance and America in the
world needs to understand there's a new
international system forming. The old
one fell and we better decide what this
new system is going to look like and
who's going to be in charge of it
because that's the way it is. So think
about how you'll feel when you achieve
your biggest goals of all. Whether it's
starting a business, paying off your
mortgage, sending your kids to college,
having the money to pay for it, you'll
be pretty proud when you've met these
essential life goals. And you should be
proud, all of us are when we do that.
But what do you do next? So getting to
the goals is one thing, but protecting
them is an entirely different thing and
maybe a bigger thing. And this is where
life insurance from Policy Genius comes
in. Now, Policy Genius makes finding and
buying life insurance really easy. You
probably want life insurance, but it's
expensive. And how do you even get it?
Policy Genius makes it simple, and it
means that your family has the safety
net it needs to cover expenses and to
face the future. Nearly half of
Americans look back and wish they'd
gotten life insurance earlier. It can
change everything if you have it because
you don't know what the future holds
honestly. So with Policy Genius, you can
find policies starting at just 292 bucks
per year for a million dollars of
coverage. And some options are 100%
online. And that means no unnecessary
medical exams for you, which is a win.
You can pair quotes from top insurers
side by side. You talk to licensed
agents. You secure your families
tomorrow with peace of mind today. And
it makes it super easy on Policy Genius.
And it's all transparent. You know
exactly what you're getting. So you head
to
policygenius.com/tucker or click the
link in the description to get your free
quote. That's
policygenius.com/tucker. Yeah. And you
hope that the you know questions like
that are almost never resolved without
big wars unfortunately. Um you can't
think of too many examples or really any
in history where they you know have just
sort of evolved
uh gracefully. it's you a lot of people
die and that's you know the point you
know Rome falls in the fifth century new
system or whatever and um I really hope
that we can escape that and I I'm very
opposed to violence and war so I um you
know I think we should all be working
toward that but it's but it's the big
things that matter and you have the rise
of this superpower in the east and
that's the main fact of the moment that
we live in is that the west is falling I
think it's been undermined from within
by people like Larry Frink and many any
others. And um but it's being replaced
by this by this by this threat from the
east. And I I don't hate the Chinese at
all. I think they're acting in what they
think is their best interest. They're
not Christian. They hate Christianity.
Um so they've got a totally different
worldview. And I'm not mad at them about
it. But I think we should be honest
about what it is, right? It's not we're
not going to have like, you know, the
United States and Russia and Iran and
Malaysia, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia,
China, all sort of acting in their own
spheres. That's not the way it works.
And and and as you said last night, all
these countries want to be on team
America. I think that's right. And and
for people that don't know this, I'm
surprised. I mean, Trump knows,
understands that you do, but this needs
to be
everywhere. The globalists went in in
the ' 80s, '90s. They made a deal with
Communist China. You get the
manufacturing rare earth minerals, but
you don't expand your military into the
South China Sea. Well, they started 20
years ago expanding everywhere. And then
it took Obama till about 14 years ago to
figure that out. We had the Asia pivot,
but but by then it was too late. that
infiltrated Congress. They were
financing all this destroy America
wokeism and bragging about it. And then
people like Bill Gates and others
continue to be totally aligned with
China. No, it's right. And the CFR
saying America's over. And you know,
Larry Frink making jokes about it just
three or four years ago. Haha. You know,
you five years ago Trump thinks he'll
bring America back. Haha. He hasn't seen
China. I mean, very arrogant. And now
that China's even double crossing the
globalist and saying, "We don't even
need you." And Xi Ping's like, "We're
going to pay people to have kids. We're
not doing your one child policy more."
They're breaking with the transhumanist,
you know, angle, but but using the
control grid, the cashless society,
social credit score that the West helped
them set up to now project that around
the world. And so the globalist are
being destroyed by their own
Frankenstein monster. And then the EU's
decided to ally with China. And again,
the UK is at least on the surface acting
like no, they want to be in a, you know,
new, you know, Angophile alliance with
the quote, you know, US empire. And
again, the US has a limited window to
get everybody on board with us. and then
our alliance easily with you know the
key countries in the Middle East, Saudi
Arabia central among it uh and some
other alliances and then obviously an
open economic alliance with Russia who
wants an economic alliance and has more
resources than any country in the world.
I mean that is the real chessboard and
that's why the left and the globalists
want to drive America and Russia apart
because geographically Exactly. and also
militarily and then also scientifically
and then just raw material. That is the
obvious. If you're if you're if you
believe Russia is their greatest enemy,
if you are working full-time to divide
the United States from Russia, you are
acting against the interest of the
United States. You hate the United
States, you hate the West, you want to
see it fall, they hate Russia because
it's a white Christian country. That's a
fact. Why Russia? Um, and all of this
once you take three steps back makes
perfect sense. like we have a lot of
people in our country working actively
for the destruction of the west of
Christian civilization. So that's just a
fact. Um it stands in the way. Sorry
they don't you know people don't like it
when you say that but they don't like it
when you say it cuz it's absolutely
true. And the farther you get from the
United States that's one of the great
benefits of travel the more obvious it
is like you can't you don't know you're
married to an alcoholic until you go on
vacation without that person. You're
like oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I'm married to an
alcoholic. Like you can't see any of
this when you're in the middle of it.
But when you leave it's like oh my gosh.
Um so okay I just want to go back a
step. So you um have made reference a
couple of times to the rise in violence
the acceptance of violence which is of
course the you know the purest
distillation of evil in my opinion most
obvious for sure.
And there are signs that it's you know
we're entering a violent stage. I pray
that we're not but it feels like we are.
You just had a longtime employee
assassinated. I don't know the extent to
which you want to talk about that, but
what was that? Is it a harbinger of
things to come? Well, a month ago, Jamie
White, a great reporter, great guy. We
were working up there Sunday night till
about 9:00. I left. He went home and
then got shot through the corateed
artery, one shot through his neck and
then out the back and then he bled to
death. By the time we got to the
hospital, about 15 minutes later, the
police got there very How old was he? uh
he was uh 36
and he was on the Ukraine hit list along
myself and you and a bunch of other uh
people and everybody getting the SWAT
calls the SWAT team sent to their houses
and their families has been on that list
as well. Just basically everyone you
know. Yes. And then then of course you
know Ukraine tortured American
journalist Gonzalo LRA to death and then
celebrated
that. And so and and and of course we
have the the the would-be assassin down
in Marago who was a big leftist
connected all these intelligence
agencies recruiting hundreds of fighters
for Ukraine an America and then he comes
back and tries to kill Trump. So, I
think uh I mean you've seen uh Alexander
Dugan's daughter uh blown up in front of
him in um 2022 in Moscow by the
Ukrainians in Moscow. Murdering a guy's
daughter, applauded by Ann Applebomb and
all the rest of the ghouls in the United
States effectively because they don't
like Alexander Dugan's ideas. So, it's
okay to murder his daughter with the you
know, well, that's the new I mean,
that's the clearly the help of US intel
agencies. I mean, let's stop lying about
it, right? CIA. Absolutely. I mean, I
said three plus years ago when the war
started, I said the US is running all
the targeting of course with the
weapons. That's just a fact. And with
their soldiers on the ground, because I
know some of the people whose sons are
there when it all started were really
nervous. They didn't give me details,
but they're like, "Yeah, our sons are
there special operations." And there's
been a lot of US military personnel
fighting Russia in Ukraine. Absolutely.
I mean, I'm on record three years ago
saying that. And then two weeks ago, New
York Times, the US has been running the
war and been there the whole time. And
oh, get a pullet surprise. So that that
was all known.
And so uh now Trump is trying to
rightfully end it. I mean people that
don't know I know your audience knows
but we have Victoria Nuland we have
Soros back we can still talk on Fared
Zario on CNN saying oh yeah we went
there with state department money and
overthrew their government 15 years ago
and we did it again and we're finally
going to break up Russia and I'm going
to be the ZAR of Russia 5 weeks ago they
had the deputy head of the unelected EU
Commission say oh we're going to keep
this war going for decades and we're
going to bankrupt Russia with it and
we're going to break Russia in five
parts. So they're on the news saying,
"We want peace. We want love. Oh no,
Ukraine will never join NATO, which is
why Putin went in and the weapons being
brought in on to his border." And then
separately, Zilinski is always no ide.
And and and and so again, the West
started this war. Imagine if Russia I'm
aware. Yeah. I I know you know more
better than anybody probably. Uh no,
it's just hasn't circled. I mean, you
Yeah. I mean, any American journalist,
you've been everywhere. You you've
documented it. And it it's just we are
starting the fight. These crazies are
dragging us in to what's really already
World War II conventionally that every
escalation moves us closer to nuclear
war. The doomsday clock with the atomic
energy scientists, you know, was the
closest it's ever been. And so this is
really fundamental. And so any concern I
have about being sued or lawfared or
attacked doesn't even hit my
psychological, spiritual, mental radar
because the big threat is so big of what
these megalomaniacs are doing.
So, one thing I I don't one fact I don't
think has penetrated um the brains of
policy makers in Washington is that we
just lost a war with Russia. The US was
running that war, the US military, the
Pentagon, State Department, CIA running
the war against Russia. It was not was
never about Ukraine. No one in
Washington cares about Ukraine or the
hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian men
destroyed. The fact it'll be populated
by third worlders. I mean, Ukraine, we
just eliminated Ukraine. Nobody cares.
This was a war against Russia. to hate
Russia for a lot of reasons, mostly
spiritual, but we lost. And my concern
is because nobody will say that out loud
that we're overstating our power. And in
the same way that you sometimes see like
divorced 60-year-old guys hitting on
young women and don't realize that a
young women think this is like absurd.
You're like an old man. Why? You really
think I'm going to sleep with you? But
the 60-year-old guy hasn't readjusted to
the reality of his present condition.
and he still thinks he's 25. Do you see
what I'm saying? And he humiliates
himself. That can happen at the level of
nations where, you know, you think you
can affect outcomes that you actually
don't have the power to bring about. And
so that's called hubris. And that's how
empires get destroyed and populations
vaporized. And I'm really afraid of
that. Like why can't we should know that
we were not able to win a conventional
war against Russia, period. So, like,
what does that say about our power? And
maybe we should readjust our
expectations a little bit. I don't want
that to be true, by the way. I want I'm
rooting for I'm American. I'm not
leaving. My family's buried here. But
like, don't you think that we run the
risk of thinking we're capable of things
that we're not capable of doing? Well,
as an example, Hillary had a lot of
fraud baked in, but Trump won in such a
landslide, he beat her. And then a lot
of Republicans and conservatives and
populists thought Trump was going to win
for sure, so we'd have as big a turnout,
so they were able to steal uh 2020. But
there was such a giant landslide this
time. It it overrode
uh the mail-in ballots, you know, the
dead people, the illegal aliens voting,
all of that. They ran out of bullets. Uh
but that's a perfect example of how the
the Democrats were sure they were going
to win in November last year and they
were sure they were going to win in
November in 2016 and they didn't. So
they had this incredible hubus and this
incredible
arrogance and and so many of them are
actually militarily ignorant themselves.
They just put on this big imperious act.
And and of course there's the clip of
Shan Pin saying, "Well, I don't think
nuclear weapons should be off the table.
We shouldn't be afraid to use them
because that gives Russia an advantage."
Well, it's called mutually assured
destruction for a reason because anybody
that uses them is insane. Uh, so I mean,
well, they got in the middle of the war,
this just come out the other day, the
Pentagon wrote an assessment saying that
they calculated that if we gave weapons
to Ukraine that allowed the Ukrainian
military or our military using Ukraine
as a proxy to hit targets within Russia,
they judged the likelihood of a nuclear
exchange at 50%. And they did it anyway.
At that point, like, you should be in
prison for the criminally insane. Well,
that's right. If Russia moved,
you're risking nuclear war. Like, you
should be locked up. I don't like that's
the I couldn't even believe that. I
mean, I of course intuitively knew that.
And say that again cuz it's not
interrupted. That's important to sink in
for people that the that the Pentagon
under Joe Biden assessed like cuz they
assess the likelihood of everything or
they g you know, they guess they sort of
work out how they think things will
progress. But in every scenario
globally, they do this. This is what
they do at the Pentagon. And they
assessed that if we gave certain
weapons, weapons that allowed the
Ukrainians to strike targets within
Russia, if we did that, which we did,
the chance of a nuclear exchange,
nuclear holocaust that killed everybody
on Earth, would be 50%. And they did it
anyway. So imagine the brain, imagine
the evil, like you would have to be
controlled by like supernatural forces
to do something. I think there's a 50%
chance every person on Earth could be
killed in a nuclear exchange, but I'm
doing it anyway. Like why aren't you how
are you still walking free? I'm serious.
No. And and I'm glad you brought that
assessment up because I I've really
tried to get people to focus on that and
I agree I agree with that assessment. I
mean let's let's boil that down. Imagine
if Russia had the equivalent of attacks
and storm shadows in Canada, in Mexico
on our border that they can fire above
the trees that can't be shot down that
are nuclear capable. And Putin said
this, he said, "If you shoot a few
missiles once it started, we'll we'll
just shoot them down. But if we see a
large aerospace attack with a whole
bunch of these, we have to believe it is
a first strike to take out our nuclear
deterrent. And so when we see a large
signature of a large aerospace attack,
be it cruise missiles, be it glide
bombs, be it a mix of aircraft or all of
them, we will do a total commitment."
And then Russia and TV said, "Here's the
government uh, you know, scenario." And
it showed nukes hitting all the NATO
countries and submarines, you know,
hitting on from there. And we're talking
about world destroyed in 30 minutes,
folks. For sure. Submarines off our
coast, 2 minutes, New York's gone. You
know, 5 minutes Dallas is gone. Uh, this
is uh real. What would happen if Russia
was bombing uh DC with
conventional bombs uh with large heavy
cruise missiles that that they're
droning the capital as the US did
through the Ukrainians. They droned the
Kremlin. You were there once when you
saw one? I was there. I was there. I was
actually driving by when I was over
there last winter to interview Putin. I
was driving by the Kremlin just like on
the street in downtown Moscow. smoke
coming out of the top of the of the
Kremlin. And so I called the like the
guy at the press office who I was
dealing with for to set up the Putin
interview from the vehicle and I was
like, "Think your Kremlin's on fire."
And he's like, "Oh, no, no, no, it's
not." I was like, "I'm right there. I'm
looking at it." Russians never want to
admit that they have been unable to
defend their capital city. So they, you
know, a lot of murder has taken place by
the Ukrainians of Russians in and of
attempted murder of Americans, by the
way. And just think about the
provocation here. And but the Russians
in every case are like, "Oh, that's not
happening." They don't want to admit it
because for a bunch of reasons, but it
would force them to respons. But anyway,
I called up like, "I I think you guys
just got droned." No, no, didn't happen.
But it did happen. I saw it. I
personally saw it. So, like, there's
been a ton of that stuff. What would we
do if the Russians droned the US capital
or the White House? Like, that's so
freaking crazy.
Russia knows it's a provocation. The
globalists want to reset. Their
financial system is going down and
they're willing to roll the dice and
they think a nuclear war is survivable
as you know as the Pentagon has said. So
it it's complete madness. Nuclear war is
not survivable. That that's a fact. It's
not. By the way, nuclear weapon explodes
over a nuclear power plant. What
happens? Anyone know? Massive meltdown
that makes Fukushima look like a And we
have a lot of nuclear power plants
around the world. So there's over 450
that we big that are big industrial,
thousands of small ones. And when
society breaks down, they all melt down
in different ways. Much worse than
Fukushima and Chernobyl combined. I
agree. And it makes the whole surface of
the earth, that's mainline science,
unlivable for hundreds of millions of
years. I agree. And I know everyone's
for nuclear power, and it's like obvious
we need nuclear power. I I don't Okay,
I'm not against nuclear power in theory,
but until someone can answer the
question you just posed, like, what
about that? Plus, they're never run
right. They always have scenarios where
they're not going to leak. Basically,
they all leak. You see all these stupid
conservatives like the answer is
nuclear. You want more AI data centers,
which I don't. The answer is coal. Of
obviously, but I don't understand why
everyone, this is such a sidebar, and
I'll stop in one sentence, but like
those of us who grew up in the 70s and '
80s remember that all the opponents to
nuclear power were like, you know, furry
armpit dumb people and, you know, all
the Greenpeace people. And so you're
just like, "Oh, shut up. Nuclear is
obviously the solution." Like, you just
don't understand science. How can you be
against climate change and also against
nuclear power? I've said that myself
like a hundred times on TV. But it's not
about the spent fuel rods. What do we do
with nuclear waste? That's easy. Put it
in Yucka Mountain. It's about what if
these things are untended? What if
they're, you know, the subject of a
conventional or nuclear attack? And you
look at all the mismanagement, massive
vulnerability. Like why doesn't anyone
mention that before we put nuclear power
plants all over my country which I think
a lot of people are psyched to do cuz
they want to get rich from AI. Like they
should answer the question. Like that's
really freaking scary. No. Well, you
have to also ask why do they build so
many in here and in like Japan the
plants ride on fault lines. I mean
there's a real we see a lot of
ineptitude in industry and things. So
you don't want to have things that have
the potential to be so dangerous. And
when coal creates carbon dioxide that
plants breathe and the earth used to
have a lot higher carbon dioxide than it
does now and it makes plants live
longer. Yields are up. It will green the
planet. All the studies show it. We're
actually terraforming the earth to make
it better. It's it's like god-given.
When you actually look at the real
studies and talk to the real
climatologist and people, they'll tell
you, "No, no, no. It's great that we're
bringing this old carbon back up and
putting it back in the atmosphere. This
is fabulous. More carbon is good.
carbon, carbon dioxide, oxygen, water,
and sunlight are the four ingredients of
life on this planet. And the globalist
created a way to tax and regulate one of
the four pillars of life on this planet.
It is good. And again, they're trying to
convince us that cows methane is bad.
You actually look at the carbon
equation, it all turns right back into
the gases it came from. It's a good gas.
But again, if the cows are bad, well,
what else releases methane? We do. We're
the carbon that they want to reduce.
They want to teach us to hate ourselves,
teach us not have a life force. And
their new religion is they will give us
all these indulgences and all these
flagagillations and all these things we
have to do to atone for how bad we are
to the priest class that is the big
satanic green church. So the threat of
nuclear war overhangs any conflict with
a country that has nuclear weapons. Of
course, you push someone far enough, you
know, you don't know what could happen
and it could result in the extinction of
humanity. So that's like the main fact.
That's why people want Iran, not to have
nukes, right? Um, obviously.
So, with that in mind, what do you make
of the public repeated public statements
by bunch of European leaders,
particularly Stormer, um, in the UK and
and the president of France, um, that
they're ready to like continue the war
against Russia with their own feeble
armies. Like, what that seems crazy to
what what is that actually about? And
they've said that now they're sending
their troops. % if they get killed, then
that's direct war with NATO. Uh they
admit that the EU population-wise is
collapsing, those they've brought in,
most of them, 80% never even get jobs.
Uh that all the different ministers,
defense ministers, as you know, the last
few years have said our business model
is a 20-year war. They think they can
continue that and somehow bankrupt
Russia and again break it up into five
parts. So, they've made it existential
for themselves. They made it existential
uh for Russia. And you go back to the
Pentagon assessment that was public that
50% chance that if we start bombing and
that's the West doing it, mainly the US
inside Russia that they would strike
back with nukes. And then Putin
clarifying, well, if we see a large
launch, it could be a sneak attack with
nukes. So we're going to have to go
ahead and nuke you at that point. Please
don't do that. So at least they limited,
you know, to to four or five big cruise
missile attacks a day and then, you
know, maybe a 100 drones a day going
into major cities and attacking their
nuclear bases, their nuclear bomber
bases. I mean, extreme provocation,
testing the line and not playing Russian
roulette where you have a sixsh shot
revolver and you put one 357 Magnum
casing in round in. Uh, but this is
three out of six. And they're like,
well, that's a safe bet. Let's roll the
dice, spin the cylinder, and then click
it to our head every day. Uh, it just
goes the fundamental insanity that you
see escalating. I mean, if you go back
to the but actual ins like actual
insanity, not you know, I don't know,
will tariffs work or you know, whatever
you could argue, but like risking
nuclear war. I mean, that's so [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
crazy that I hardly believe it's real.
That's a good point. They say Trump
saying our surrender to these one-sided
trade deals, which is totally true and
de-industrialized us and destroyed our
morale and is a huge national security
issue, that he's rolling the dice there.
No, no, it would be rolling the dice the
dice with nuclear war. Again, I think
you should be in prison for even having
that kind. That's like the craziest
thing I can imagine. Well, remember
Biden just two years ago said, "We can't
send F-16s to Abrams tanks because that
escalates the threat ladder of the rank
corporation. That's World War II." But
they went ahead and did that. Then they
went to the bombing inside. So, I the
reason I went back to that, I'm glad you
raised it is the EU is refusing to end
the war. We're trying to drag us into it
fully. Uh they're arresting their
political opposition, Colleen Gescue in
Romania. Uh they're not letting him run
in the new election. He's an amazing
man. I just talked to him the day before
yesterday. And then Marie Le Pin uh that
is super popular in the head
presidential poll. So they have a judge
find her guilty of nothing and take her
off the ballot. You have the State
Department under Biden admittedly
working in Brazil uh with Lula to take
Balsinaro off the ballot because he's
popular and then indict him. And they're
talking about doing it in Hungary.
They're talking about doing it in
Poland. uh they said if AFD won, which
they almost did, that the EU commission
might cancel that election. Uh so the EU
is really taken off the mask. And people
that don't know, it was set up in 56 as
a steel deal tree of Rome and they got
the nations over time to sign away their
sovereignty to it. And I remember and an
unelected commission uh with
Vanderladen, you know, up there running
all of this. And she even came out, as
you know, on Monday and said, "Well,
Trump's blown up the international
order. he's he's defeated the new world
order. And she said, "Okay, we're going
to go ahead and agree at least in
principle uh to what Trump is saying."
And that's because the trade is
completely one-sided. So again, Trump's
move isn't just the perfect move. It's
perfect in that it's the only moves we
have left for us and for global
stabilization. That's why anybody that
cares about self-preservation for the
whole planet should be fully behind uh
Trump's policies uh that are very
popular around the world and and are
seen as sane. And again, the world this
this huge alliance of nations wants to
join that team. And the good news is
Trump's polls are the highest ever. I I
I I know the American people are
understanding that and getting that. The
concern is it is kind of crazy that his
number I mean I'm getting t you know
because I live in a rich people world
for part of the year. I know a lot of
rich people and boy they're really
upset. Um and I share their instinctive
concern about any chaos. My parents got
divorced. I hate chaos, right? So I get
that. But but from my perspective, I'll
just admit it. Like on my phone it's
like I voted for Trump. What the hell's
going on? You know, and I get it. I'm
not, you know, criticizing anyone. But
then his numbers go up. Well, I like it.
shows you that you can even I I really
make a big effort to like live in
different places, know different people,
not be a captive of my surroundings, not
just live among rich people with like
dumb rich people attitudes. I really try
to be bigger than that. And I always
flatter myself that I succeed. But even
I am like I guess kind of captive to
that cuz then I see the numbers and I'm
like people really like this. His
numbers went up after the tariffs.
That's correct. Right. Absolutely. Wow.
Well, I'd like to talk to folks out
there saying Trump is is is being a
destabilizer. The globalist order was
collapsing by their own corruption and
mismanagement and their alliance with
China being double crossed. And so that
old order was already being collapsed by
them. And and Trump's coming in very
pragmatically with a a good, fair,
freedom based meritocracy
uh competition based system. But you
know two to two to two to two to two to
two to two to to to people that want to talk
about destabilization starting the war
with Russia. Total destabilization
uh dissolving the borders and all the
human smuggling and the fentelact total
destabilization uh in in engaging in all
this overspending and and and the
country basically being bankrupt if we
don't grow our way out of it. Total
destabilization and then wink wink the
attempted assassinations of Trump. What
do they think would have happened if
Trump really would have gotten killed uh
in Pennsylvania in July of last year or
a few months later in Florida? I if you
look at the scenarios there, they run
from bad to worse. So, the real
destabilization and bad for the people
behind it, like clearly those
assassinations were not lone gunmen.
They were part of a much much larger
conspiracy. Obviously, everyone knows
that. But those people behind those
attempted murders would have been in
bigger trouble had those murders
succeeded. Attempted murder succeeded.
Correct. Absolutely. And and if they
somebody's able to kill Trump now,
people better hope he doesn't get struck
by a bolt of lightning because the bad
guys will get to blame.
And that's why so many people that have
kind of been on the fence the
establishment but were working with the
globalists because that was the system
are enthusiastically joining Trump and
Elon uh because they understand that
this is the only game in town for people
that aren't delusional. Uh but you have
that megalomania and I think that's so
true. Yeah. You have that megalamania
historically when elites have never lost
before and are losing that they just
continue to accelerate and intensify.
And and I know you've covered this. A
lot of the people don't seem to know
that in in August of 2020, I mentioned
it earlier. There was a big article in
New York Times with John Podesta
covering a war game they just had that
if Trump was able to win, they were
going to have blue states secede and
blue cities secede and then create civil
unrest and civil war conditions. And
then when they knew Trump was going to
win because the poll numbers were so
incredible a few months before the last
election last year, uh, Rascin,
Carville, Podesta, all of them said
civil war conditions. We're going to
need to have uprisings. Carville said
that. Uh, Trump's coming to kill you. We
got to rise up. Carbal said and others.
And they are clearly escalating with the
Tesla attacks and the swatting attacks
and the calls for violence. The 55% of,
you know, liberal Democrats in a study
want Trump killed.
They are embracing, you know, real
terrorism, real domestic terrorism. And
that's building towards what I believe
is in the cards because you see the
Democrat pundits and their operatives
everywhere before the election and after
it in the last 78, you know, days or so
saying once he got in office, Trump and
Tom Hman are going to kill migrants and
when they do, uh, there's going to be an
uprising. And well, Trump's not going to
go mow down people at the elite alien
demonstration. Uh, you also have them
saying Trump supporters are going to
attack black people. Well, where would
black people be alone in big numbers? A
church, university, uh Trump supporters
are going to kill black people. And we
know a lot of the globalist groups have
been funding white supremist groups and
domestic terror groups and basically run
them historically. So, the last piece of
all the pre-programming I've seen is
that to have these uprisings, you're
going to need something much bigger than
George Floyd, much bigger than Jesse
Smalllet. Uh, and so I am predicting on
the current trajectory of what they war
game before and what they said, the
final piece they need for this
destabilization that they'll label a
racebased civil war that will then crash
the markets and be used kind of like the
predicted programming in the movie that
came out last year, civil war, to have a
bunch of states and the main military
join them uh in a military operation to
remove Trump when the Trumpian figure in
the movie is killed, you know, executed
inside the
inside the Oval Office. Uh, and so
that's their dream. That's their backup
plan. And you have the two camps, uh,
you one camp is is kind of the Chucky
Schumer, completely evil, but isn't
particularly publicly pushing that,
though. He had his famous whirlwind, you
know, we're coming after you speech, but
he's an old man. Absolutely. So you have
the Soros wing with Alexander Soros that
more and more is in charge and is really
making a run uh at escalating
domestic unrest and terrorism uh leading
into some triggering event um
starting things are aligning for this
summer and I know that folks in the
government that are patriots are aware
of that but I think that the
spokespersons and others need to really
get ahead of all this calls for violence
and not just repudiate it uh But talk
about the Democrat leadership and their
talking heads that are pushing it. I
mean, we've seen Coar just last week
say, "Deep State, please, you know, do
something. Stop Trump." And
so that's where we are. So, so, so they
want to expand war to try to take
control of the agenda. Uh, they've been
hyping a new virus being released to try
to stop Trump's reboot of our economy
because they think that would stop this
populist revolution. In Europe, it's
arresting their political opposition
and, you know, stopping elections.
uh they and they also have Europe trying
to sue Elon Musk and billion dollar
fines trying to shut him down like we
saw with Brazil. So those are the
different strategies. They're also doing
big put options and naked shorts trying
to crash the market and then blaming
Trump's tariffs on that. Uh so it's
economic terrorism, the buildup of
domestic terrorism, uh the uh false
flags that can be used, a nuclear false
flag to get us into direct war with
Russia, uh a new viral release. Those
are the things they've got set up, ready
to go, and that they've said before they
would use to maintain control. Everybody
loves and appreciates first responders.
When things go haywire, they're the ones
who show up and make you safe, protect
you, not just you, but the entire
country. Most people agree they're
heroes. But what happens if they can't
show up? First responders cannot be
everywhere all the time. And if there's
an emergency, particularly a big
emergency, there aren't enough to go
around. So, you have to be your own
first responder. Before an ambulance
arrives for a doctor can help, it is up
to you to protect yourself and your
family. And if it's a medical emergency,
you could be out of luck because you
don't have the right medications. Most
people do not have the medications they
need at home. There's an answer to that.
It's called the Jace case. It's a simple
but smart solution to a problem most
people don't even think about. It's a
set of emergency prescriptive
medications created by medical experts.
You've got peace of mind knowing that no
matter what happens, you are totally
prepared. Even if you're a prepared kind
of person with stuff stored in your
cellar, you probably don't have the
right medications. Well, if there's an
infection or any kind of crisis and you
don't have access to first responders,
you're going to want a Jace case.
medications on hand when they matter
most. Go to
jace.com and use code tucker at checkout
for a discount.
Jacej.com. Check out code Tucker. The
first thing uh in countries that descend
into darkness that happens is speech is
controlled and there are political
police who put people who speak out
against the regime in jail. And that's
happening in Brazil as you know. Uh it's
happening in the UK. It's happening in
Germany. Um, we're trying it in Canada.
Well, it's definitely happening in
Canada and these were formerly free
countries in Australia. Um, and so the
one place that it isn't going to happen
right now is the United States because
of the First Amendment. So, how do you
end first amendment protections? Well,
you pick off people like you, um, which
they've been trying to do for over a
decade. And, you know, I happen to be,
as I've told you many times in private,
I happen to be on on a fishing trip when
I worked at Fox the the night that you
were taken off the air. And I thought it
was like one of the greatest threats to
speech in the United States had ever
seen. I wasn't there and Fox News like
prevented my co- my fillin host from
defending you cuz Alex Jones is bad.
Okay, that's when I realized they were
in on it. But um but they need to end
speech in the United States. They need
to shut down X. They have to.
And my guess is, and I hope I'm wrong
that there's there is like legitimate
hate and extremism on social media, you
know, to the point where it makes me
uncomfortable. I'm thinking that maybe a
lot of that is manufactured actually and
that if there is a mass shooting and God
forbid, but if there is a mass shooting
um of the people who've been targeted
for hate on actual hate, it's true on
social media that that will be used as a
pretext to shut it down. Absolutely. And
and has this occurred to you? Yes.
because I see people on on social media
who I know for a fact or I think I know
are being funded by the very people
they're attacking. It's like what? Um
including one of the biggest voices.
Like I know that that's true. And so
like what is this? And it's clearly
um preparatory to some sort of event
that will shut down a violent event that
will be used as a pretext to shut down
free speech. Am I being paranoid? No. I
I that's that's where all the
foundation's been laid. The actually the
superructure has been built. Yeah.
They're just putting the finishing
touches on it. And and so in a way, it's
fortuitous that I'm here today because
you were here. I was talking to my
lawyer right before we started taping.
Uh we got some really big news. Uh that
in Connecticut, the Supreme Court said,
"We're not even hearing your appeal now
because it was so strong the Kangaroo
show trial that I was went through there
a few years ago where the judge had
already found me guilty." Uh wouldn't
let guilty of what? of having an
unauthorized opinion, of being mean or
whatever. Those are all legal under the
US Constitution. Like, you cannot be
punished for giving your opinion. I
don't care how ugly other people think
it is. And and you've contested whether
you even gave that opinion, but it does
it doesn't matter. Under our system,
you're allowed to say what you think.
Period. Well, you're right. Especially
that's what the Bill of Rights is. And
we have the Supreme Court rulings uh you
with the New York Times, Sullivan.
Insane. And and Brandenburgg versus
Ohio. You have a right to your opinion.
and and and what they did was with all
these PR firms and massive thousands of
articles sometimes a month and hundreds
of TV programs a year they built a straw
man once I was censored off the internet
the last seven years still on my website
infworks.com still on some talk radio
but it was the verbotent thing people
had to go you know get underground they
could then build a straw man of things I
had supposedly done I never did and then
when I wasn't defended other than than
people like you it set the president to
then come after everybody else including
President Trump when he was taking off
everything on January 6th so people
couldn't hear him saying be peaceful
before Dar I defended black nationalists
who hate whites obviously don't agree
with them I am white so are my kids like
I reject their program but they were
indicted for giving their opinions and
like we cannot allow that and now the
ACLU is just completely captured it's
like a trainy organization nothing to do
with free speech like where are the
people who will stand up for the
foundational right that separates a free
man from a slave which is the right to
say what you think And why were they all
s may they bask in shame for not
defending you? I mean that. Well, I have
a major update. It it's in the last
seven years of them suing me and this
whole saga. We now have basically all
the pieces of exactly what happened. I I
told you some about it last night. It
would take a few minutes, but I could
just give people a basic summation of
what's happened. Yeah, please. But
first, just an example of free speech in
Texas. There's famous cases where they
take people's small children because the
school secretly convinces them with
grant money. They get paid for it.
public and private that a little boy is
really a girl, little girl's really a
boy. They then the parents find out the
school's been putting him in a database,
giving them a social worker, sending
them to special school times with peer
pressure of other kids that have been
put in the cult for sterilization,
transhumanism, and then they take the
person's child saying it's abuse when
you argue, you know, my son is really a
boy, not a girl. Well, now Colorado in
the House, as you know, just passed uh
the the bill. It's in the Senate, and
they allowed no debate. uh uh saying
that if a parent finds out their kid is
being brainwashed and says, "No, my my
son is a boy, my girl is a girl, that is
abuse and they're going to officially
take your child." Other states have
passed laws like Oregon and Washington.
So, you talk about free speech. This is
beyond that. This is parental rights.
This is everything now say parents can't
argue and say to the state that has
determined that that that that your
child's sex. And then in uh places like
New Jersey and other states, the
hospital systems now have on the form
when your child's born dozens of things,
transgender,
uh all all these other uh names, gender,
queer, all all these things where the
parents pick at birth what the baby's
going to be and say this. So, so if the
state wants to come and say they're
another sex, that's okay. If parents
don't like it, their kid gets taken in
these areas. is that's where this is
going. It's already happening. But if
the parents want to opt in, they can
decide for their child. So, as long as
you decide that we're going to
chemically and then medically sterilize
surgically this this poor little person
is being put into this death cult, then
it's okay. The only thing you're not
allowed to say is no. I say no to this
designation. So, that's where Alex Jones
having his speech massively attack go.
So, it's a long story, but here's the
summation. I didn't understand, even
though I know a lot of things about
politics in the world, I I didn't
understand how PR firms work, how law
firms work, how the deep state was
operating. And and they later admitted
even on MSNBC that a few years ago, oh,
we've been successful with Alex Jones.
Next, we're going to do it with people
like Tucker Carlson. And then and they
mentioned you. So,
Hillary knows she's in trouble. two
months before the election 2016, she
does a 20 plus million dollar ad by
talking about me and twisting what I had
said about that event in Connecticut,
that mass shooting. And in the ad, she
says, "Alex Jones is Trump's brain. This
is the guy that Trump says is an amazing
person. We'll be talking a lot. You're a
great guy." And they show that clip of
Trump on my show saying that. So they
created a demonized version of me to
attack Trump. Then that made me this
huge demon of the left even more. Then
for two years, articles every day,
sometimes dozens a day, TV shows,
programs, PBS, CNN, MSNBC, every
channel, foreign news, uh, Tokyo news,
Russian news. It was just, it was, it
was being pushed over. Alex Jones is
bullying
kids, parents, dead kids. Alex Jones is
sending people to pee on graves. None
that ever even happened, much less me.
And then they sue me. And then they want
all this discovery and they say, "Who do
you work for? Who who's telling you
what's doing the Republicans in all
these depositions?" Of course, it wasn't
there. So, they hold me in default for
saying I didn't give them my secret plan
to get rich off these people that I
barely ever even talked about. They put
22 minutes of evidence in the Texas show
trial where I was found guilty by the
judge and the Connecticut show trial
that were only a month apart in 2022 in
the fall. So, I go in, HBO's producing
it, cameras, putting makeup on the
judges. I I'm given 20 plus things I
can't talk about. My my lawyers are
sanctioned if they try to raise that.
Well, where did Alex Jones say this?
Where did he do this? No evidence could
be showed to counter them. They could
just say whatever they wanted to. And
then they have a billion half dollar
judgment in Connecticut. They have a $50
million judgment total or $49 million in
Texas. Uh because I'm already found
guilty. Then the judge tells them to say
how guilty I am. They lie and totally
exaggerate all the money I have. Say I
got it from these people with no
evidence. And and and so I knew I was
being railroaded for my speech. They
said in the Connecticut trial and in the
Texas show trial and on the courthouse
steps, "We don't want money for Mr.
Jones. we want to shut him down. They
said that in court filings. So I go into
bankruptcy because I'm out of money
personally. Never had all this money.
They said, not even a fraction of it.
And so for three years I'm in
bankruptcy. And they keep going and say,
"We don't want money. We want him
closed." The judge keeps saying, "No,
you have to actually, you know, do a
settlement with him or we have to sell
him for wars." And this is all because
you said something that other people
said they were offended by. Yes. But but
but how how can you I don't understand
in a free country how other people being
offended by what you say can have you
destroyed by the state. Well well it's
more than that. They said I sent people
to their houses. I peed on graves. All
this stuff that nobody did did. Why
weren't you arrested? You can't pee on a
grave. Why weren't you arrested in
Connecticut? Why weren't you arrested
for out of the people that sued me? I
only said the name of one of the people
ever. If you commit a crime, you should
be criminally charged for it and the
state has to prove that you did it at
which point you're convicted and
punished. If the state accuses you of
something but doesn't charge you with
it, they're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] liars. Like, by
definition, they they don't that's not
on the list of options that they can
just discredit you, attack your
character, destroy you. No, no, no. The
state has one option. If you committed a
crime, they charge you with the crime
and they prove you did the crime. It's
that simple. That's right. And I never
got investigated for stalking or
anything cuz I did nothing for any
crime.
So, so, so, so, so here's where it gets
crazy. Here's what we've learned since
they had the show trials. I notice none
of the libertarians defended you either.
Where was the Reason Foundation and KO
and all these supposedly freedom-minded
nonprofits who were just freaking liars?
Like, none of them defended you that I
know of. Bare minimum, they were bought
off or they wanted to keep their head
down. So, so, so, so here's what we
learned. The Democratic Party and the
Justice Department, the FBI, the CIA,
this has come out in court, come out in
documents now. We've got it all. I
published it at InfoWars. They could be
shut down literally in days now. We're
finally up to the wire today with this
big ruling. But it it's the truth's out
there, but they don't want you to know
it. So they come after me to demonize
Trump. Then they run ads on Facebook and
Twitter and everywhere for the two years
before they sue me, 2017, 2018, saying
I'm attacking him, saying I'm coming
after him, using my name to raise money.
Okay? And it turns out hundreds of
millions using my name. This has come
out. Saying I'm victimizing him, and
then never showing what I supposedly
did. just this man's hurting us. Help
us. Help us. Then I was already taken
off the internet after that for other
reasons uh that they cooked up. Uh they
had uh Lester Holt get up on TV and say,
"Alex Jones called for people to get
battle rifles and go attack Democrats."
No, I talked about them antifa attacking
your house and how they were planning to
attack more people's houses. And I said,
"None of us are going to be violent, but
I said everybody needs to have their
battle rifle ready or their shotgun in
their home if the left comes to kill
you." Well, as someone whose house was
attacked by Antifa, I agree completely.
But but but then Holt never showed what
I supposedly said. He just said straight
up. Okay. So, I wasn't even taken off
internet for Sandy Hook cuz I wasn't
even known for that. Okay. Barely ever
talked about it.
Then they sue me. Then they run more PR.
Then they raise more money off of me.
And then when they didn't find anything
in the in their all their discovery
because there was nothing that I did,
then they have the judges both find me
in default, coordinate for both trials
to be held in a month and a half period
in late 2022. And then right after they
win, the jury's fine for all this money.
They come back and they say, "That's not
enough, your honor. We want 2.75
trillion." That's the GDP of India.
People don't believe that. Just type in
Alex Jones, Sandy Hook. 2.75 trillion
and and so the judge said no you just
get 1.5 billion in retrospect did you
ever think when when they awarded a
judgment against you equivalent to the
GDP of India did you ever think like
maybe I should keep my visions to myself
and not like next time I see 9/11 coming
I just shouldn't say anything because
people who predict the future accurately
are always punished for it. I I think
that's I
mean yeah I mean well what I realized
was I've got something important to say
so I better say it even louder because
the evil wants to shut down. But just to
finish the key part I'm telling no no no
it's making me upset hearing this. No no
no I'm saying I haven't gotten to the
big stuff. I'm just giving people the
background. This is not the country I
grew up in at all. Just saying that.
Sorry. Well no no no. You're right.
Thank you for the platform. No. Thank
you Tucker. And I told you all this last
night. It took 30 minutes. Let me just
try to condense it. So I know they're
trying to demonize me to get it Trump. I
know they're trying to set the president
to shut down everybody else and once I'm
demonized, they think nobody will defend
me and that sets the president. They
admitted all that. Then when they win
the show trial that was already fixed,
these PR firms come out in New York,
Connecticut, and go, "We've been doing
this for years. We exposed Jones. We did
this. We helped get this big win, blah
blah blah."
Then this undercover video comes out
that is in a uh predator sexing trolling
operation in DC which the guy was never
implicated in but that's how he got
caught up with the troll trolling
operation. Uh this Obvis
person CIA and FBI uh it's confirmed
says well we investigated Alex Jones for
years at the FBI. Then he went on to
CIA. It's where he's currently. And he
said, "We couldn't find anything
criminal on him. So, we went to the
Sandy Hook people with law firms and we
developed this plan with this narrative
to take him down." And uh now we're in
the process of shutting him down. And
the person says, "Well, are you still
trying to put him in prison?" No, we've
just destroyed his name and destroyed
who he is. You know, it's all on video.
It's online. Just type in FBI CIA uh
agent, you know, admits to running Sandy
Hook uh frame job of Alex Jones.
We recommend you take this moment to do
what we're about to do, which
is enjoy an
[Music]
Alp. Just to kind of refresh our
baseline assumptions here, is the CIA
allowed to destroy people for in the
United States for criticizing? No, it's
illegal. Oh, it's illegal. Okay. Of
course you begging the question, but
absolutely. So, so then then we have
that, but then I go, "Wait a minute. At
the trial last year, they had this FBI
agent. It was the chief counsel
um who on the stand they say it to hide
it in plain view, the Democrat party law
firm, talked to him for like a day and
he goes, "So, you went and got the suit
against Mr. Jones?" "Yes, I went to your
your law firm, Mr. Koskov, and I and I
went to the families, you know, and I I
organized them to do this." So they're
hiding in plain view the chief counsel
of Connecticut that I didn't even pick
up on at the time. Why is he on the
stand? I'm sitting there talking about
how he went and set this up and did this
to me. Then later we have Obis talking
about years ago we criminally
investigated him for a decade. We
couldn't find anything. So we went and
did this civily. So now that's two of
them admitting it on the stand and
undercover video. Now this is where it
gets wild. Then 3 days after Trump's in
office, we done a foyer request two
years ago for my FBI file. We've done it
many times. They never responded back.
Soon as Trump gets in, they send us a
disc in the mail. I got a call from the
FBI saying, "Hey, you be sure you wash
your mail." And and and they send me a
disc of our foyer and it was 196 files,
but it was just the cover sheets. They
said the rest of national security, but
it said Alex Jones, top national
security threat. Obama administration
ordered me to be a level three terror
national security threat in 2013. I had
Kyle Sarapin on who knows how to read
the code documents on the dozens of
pages I got that were attached. He said
probably to thousands
but 196 other investigation packets and
and we're talking weekly and monthly
meetings out of the Boston field office.
And Trump didn't learn about this as
first admin. So we learned this was
going on until I was sent this by the
new FBI director. Okay. or or the new
FBI and and it's just the cover sheets,
but they have codes on it that Kyle
Sarafin, who used to run
counterterrorism, the FBI, you huge
whistleblower, came on my show for hours
and documented what it meant. Then he
talked to his sources currently in DC
and they said, "Yeah, we're actually on
this. It's bad." Okay, so Obama
illegally had me declared a national
security threat, open criminal espionage
investigation with huge resources. Hit
attempted infiltration. That's all the
codes. And that's now makes sense.
people people we'd hire trying to set us
up trying to get us to commit crimes all
this stuff over the years hacking into
our surveillance camera systems trying
to find something dirty all sorts of
sabotage so now I mean I'm living in a
spy movie so so so we so so we get that
like 10 days in the Trump administration
3 days in they they they mail it comes
in the mail like 7 days later so now we
have that so we have Obis admitting it
from the FBI and CIA we have the other
lead council in in Connecticut admitting
it on the stand proud of it hiding in
plain view just because they knew it
would come out Then we get another FBI
contact. They say, "Why don't you go
look at the Federal Register and it look
for money going to these Sandy Hook
Foundations or the people that sued me,
we go look, it's $4 million plus in
payments to them right after they sue me
and then two payments to them during
when both trials started." So one,
payments from whom? From the Justice
Department. So tax dollars. tax dollars
over $4 million from the Justice
Department were paid to the main Sandy
Hook uh foundation that is on the board
and the head of it for the people suing
me that ran it. This is crazy. So, so,
so, so, so, so now we have the Justice
Department. Um, and I'm releasing those
documents. Was actually planning to
release them today, a week ago before
you invited me out here. Uh, so that's
all going to be out today, the
documents, all of but but but it's
online. They don't hide it. Also,
millions and millions and millions more
of COVID money went to them. And you
know what happened to Cy Bush's husband?
I'm not saying it's illegal. It should
be looked into. So, so this is why this
is important. This is the most open and
shut start to finish
operation we've ever seen with all this
money directly from the Justice
Department. With the Justice Department
admitting they initiated it, undercover
tapes with the CIA. Then you have the
FBI admitting on the stand that they
initiated it. Then you have the money
directly from the justice department to
them directly when they're attacking me.
And then it gets worse in the last year
in my bankruptcy. They before that they
attached the US trustee which they do
under federal law to my bankruptcy like
I'm Enron. Most people don't have this
happen. So there's just department
lawyers and agents at my depositions
giving me US code to read before the
deposition when after I'm sworn in that
if I say anything incorrect, they're
going to charge me with felonies. Okay?
But I still don't take the fix. I've
done nothing wrong and I have
accountants and it's all lies. They're
alleging I've stolen hundreds of
millions of dollars from these people.
None of that's true. Don't have hundreds
of millions of dollars. I never had $10
million of extra laying around with
that. You stole money from what people?
They just say I harassed them. I made
money off them. It's their money. It's
just all made up. But I have the Justice
Department there. So then the Justice
Department has the US trustee in May of
last year order a private security
company on a Friday evening to show up
with guns on their sides and say,
"Everybody out of the building." And I
say, "Where's the court order?" And I
say, "Call the head of your security
company." I get on the phone. He goes,
"Hey, I'm telling the people this, too.
We got to have a court order. I'm going
to tell them." They showed up at your
office. They showed up at my office with
guns. Armed security. Yes. Yeah. And And
so I call my lawyers. They don't even
believe it's happening. We get a hearing
and the judge blocks it. Then he has a
full evidentiary hearing June 14th.
Fires the US trustee, removes them,
removes the CRO that did it, okay, in
the bankruptcy. and then appoints a new
one who comes in to be all but buddy
buddy. Then they he says okay we want to
sell it and then that way proceeds of
sold infowars but then we have buyers
that are good that'll keep it going. The
Sandy Hook family is really Democratic
party says we don't want money in court
filings we want it shut down. The judge
says no you will sell it at an auction
but cash auction. Then they have a
auction date set the day before they say
that's canceled. It'll be private bids
turned in on that Monday.
And then the next day we will tell you
who the winner is. Well, then it was the
Bloomberg financing his every town
group, The Onion. Everybody heard The
Onion had gotten in for us. Remember
that? Uh back in um back in uh November.
Uh so all that happened. So we we
counter sue. The judge has hearings on
December 9th and 10th. Says there was
never an auction that was
fraudulent. Uh you know, you guys need
to settle this and you need to get money
for Mr. Jones's buyers and it needs to
stop. They come back to the judge three
times and say, "We don't want money. We
don't ever want it sold. We want it shut
down." So the judge said uh about a
month ago, he said, "Okay, I'm done.
This has gone on three years. Take it to
state court." The state court is Judge
Bellis that did the show trial with HBO.
Um or that that's Judge Gamble in Texas
is Judge uh that's the other judge in
Connecticut. So it's it's Judge Guam. Uh
just like Judge Bellis running the show
trial, finding him guilty. She has said
as soon as she gets that, she's going to
send in the constipables from the county
and just close the doors, lock it cuz
they don't want the money that it can
produce. They don't want any of that.
They, you know, they want it shut down.
Can I just ask you a reality based
question here? So, all of this stems
Sorry, that's such a long story, but no,
no, no, no. It's a it's a shocking
story, but I I just don't want to lose
the basic and it's never been told in in
full. The baseline facts. Okay, so all
of this stems from a school shooting in
Connecticut 12 years ago. 12 years ago
and you suggested on air that there was
something weird about this. I covered
other people saying that. Correct. You
did not commit the school shooting. No,
Adam Lanca did. Adam Lanca did. And I
said for years, I believe it happened
before they sued me. Right. So, we spent
approximately zero time and zero money
as a country trying to figure out why
would Adam Lanza murder all these
children? We're all against murdering
children. Some of us are against
murdering all children, including in
foreign countries. And here in abortion
clinics, we're just against murdering
kids. Okay? So, I'm not going to seed
the moral high ground on kids to ghouls
uh like this. So, okay. But we have no
idea why Adam lands this. No one's
trying to find out. You instead are
being blamed, who are the father of four
kids, uh for the murder of all these
kids when you had literally nothing to
do with the murder at all. And the
actual murderer is probably brain fried
in SSRIs or whatever the cause. Like, no
one cares. That's right. He was on SSRI
like almost all of them. And exactly.
And here's the finale. But like no one
cares. So, like all these people jump up
and down, including some of these
parents, I assume, and like I understand
they're upset their kids are murdered. I
mean, I I have true compassion for them,
but they're blaming you for it. And and
and then raising money, hundreds of
millions off my name and and his mother
bought the gun legally. And then
Remington was bankrupted by it and paid
$73 million to them. Remember that? It
just goes on and on. And after they sued
me, this one foundation's increase went
up while they were suing me and during
the show trials 375
uh uh
percent. Let me give you the actual
numbers. Uh
337% to 119 million just during that
period. And their main fundraiser was
me, not to mention all the Justice
Department 4 plus million they got. But
here's the here's blaming you. When you
say the fundraiser was you, they were
blaming you for a mass murder that you
were horrified by and didn't commit and
ignoring the actual mass murderer,
blaming everyone but the murderer for
political reasons. So like they're they
would just like that meme where Indiana
Jones moves the idol and puts the bag of
sand on there. They remove Lanza and
just put me on there and it was he's
coming, he's harassing us, he made all
this money off of us. Uh he's bullying,
he's sending the stalkers, he's he's
attacking, help with just ads
everywhere. Help help us fight Alex
Jones. Help, help, help. And and I'm and
I hadn't talked about him in years and
years. Only talked about one of their
names. I never even knew who this FBI
agent was. None of my crew said his
name. My lawyer got up and said, "Have
you ever Alex Jones ever said your
name?" "No." "Any of his crew ever said
your name?" "No." "Uh, you ever post
your picture? Ever talk about you?"
"No." "Uh, when's the first time you
heard of Alex Jones?"
2016. And then he goes and does all
this. But, but here's the finale. Here's
the finale. This is what I know when you
talk to Trump and others. This is
important because this needs to be
looked at. This is conspiracy against
rights. We're getting ready to take
action on this legally. This is uh uh
violation of process. This is
racketeering. I mean, cut and dry in my
view, and that's what my legal experts
agree as well. It's cut and dry. Turns
out Paul Weiss, the big law firm that
lost its intelligence uh uh agency
clearances because they targeted Trump
and they admitted to it. They came to
Trump a month ago and they said, "Give
us back 50 plus% of our business. Let us
have our national security clearance. We
promise to stop doing lawfare against
you and your supporters." And this is an
agreement and we'll spend $40 million on
pro bono work that's non-political. It's
it's it's in the agreement. Okay? And
that's by the way in our legal action is
about to come out. They just filed that
40 million of that 20 is their suit of
me. And they list the lawyers. That's
their proono work. And they've been
coordinating the entire bankruptcy
assault. They came up with the fake
auction on record that's come out in our
depositions of them. We're we're suing
them currently, but more is coming. Um,
they came up with the plan with the US
trustees multiple times to have fake
auctions and and the judge said it was a
fake auction. They're the ones that sent
armed security in on a Friday evening. I
was leaving at like 7:00 and there's all
these guys showing up from the security
company we'd already used for eight
years, but all these guys never seen.
They're like, "Hey man, we're told
they're they're closing the doors.
They're kicking you out for good tonight
at 9:00 and we shouldn't have told you
this, but I knew one of the guys and but
but now it's under the court." And then
I get on the phone with the head of the
security company and and he goes,
"Listen, man." He goes, "I'm being I got
this lady saying I'm a Justice
Department official, Melissa Hazelton,
and her lawyer,
um, Freeman, um, Melissa Hazelman, and
Liz Freeman, and they're telling me, "We
are just department officials. You must
close it." He said, "No, I want a court
order." So then I had to sleep up there
because they tried to hire another
security company the next day, and I and
I knew it. And I want to steal your
office from you. Listen, when they did
the fake auction the next day, they came
and turned the internet off because they
knew I was going to appeal it and the
judge shut that down, too. And I was out
of there for a few days. So, there was
such an outcry and the judge ordered to
let us back in the building. We've been
run we've been kicked out repeatedly.
Once I wouldn't leave of your own
building of our own building. So, so but
Paul
Weiss has has been running this whole
thing with Koff and Koff. basically a
total deep state operation uh with
Senator Blumenthal and his son. Okay, so
this is on record and and but
but so so so here they are telling
Trump, oh yes, we'll stop doing lawfare
against you and your people. And then
now they're billing that in the basic
fine they agreed to with Trump. You
know, that's what it is, unofficial
fine. They are telling Trump, we're
going to stop our attacks on your
supporters and you. And now they think
Trump, you know, they know he's busy,
that he won't learn that they've done
this. So, in my view, they need serious
sanctions from the White House. If this
isn't about me, I'm tough. This is about
this saga. Everything I've told you is
even worse than I'm telling you. The the
the insanity of of what they've done and
and the persecution would take days
because they had four court ordered that
my company had to pay for. And then if
the money didn't come in, we wouldn't
make it through those investigations. to
tell listeners, "Hey, buy our products.
We've got to pay to be investigated."
Four different investigations, forensic
accountants looking for dirt. They had
the IRS audit me for a year. We got a
$4.3 million tax return back. The IRS
says, "We never do this. It went into
the bankruptcy because I'd overpaid 4.3
million in 5 years." Cuz I tell my CPAs,
pay overpay. I know because I don't have
a target. So, so there three years of
investigation. I got a $4.3 million
check back. And none of it was true. And
then even the New York Times last year
had to say, "Well, it turns out Jones
had meager resources and never really
had anything." Well, it was all lies.
So, it was all lies I did anything to
him. It was all lies I made money off
of. It was all lies I had all this
money. And the point is is now to last
night the Connecticut Supreme Court
said, "We're not even going to hear uh
your appeal and which is ironclad, abuse
of process, all the rest of it." Uh,
Texas, the judge violated three laws,
cut and dry. Um, I mean, the cap is at
$5 million. She said, "I don't care
about the Texas cap. I'm doing 45." And
with change was 49. They just don't
care. And it's the same in all of this
lawfare. Uh, just like a judge found
Trump, you never did anything. You never
broke any laws. They would have indicted
you. Like, this is all so
hallucinogenic. It's so crazy. Well,
imagine it's like it's like I'm their
chew toy and they just chew on me. But
your crime, look, I just want to refer
you to the very first moments of this
conversation when I pointed out once
again for the hundth time you called
9/11 in detail before 9/11. So that is
like just from my perspective as an
outsider and someone who knows you,
that's like the defining fact of your
life. That's the first sentence of your
obituary. No one did that, only you.
That fact I think is responsible for
everything that has come after. Well,
just exactly. Well, just think of the
scandal on record. Kyle Sarapin and he
showed me the conversations with high
level FBI that say they're investigating
it. He's going to come back on the show
I think tomorrow uh or Friday. You know,
famous whistleblower. Um he read the the
the the documents and and we got a lot
from it. But he explained I I mean this
is like terrorist designation. This is
espionage. So I've had a full espionage
counter espionage operation against me
trying to find something for 10 years.
So where's the DOJ? Where's I mean this
is a test for the new Department of
Justice, you know, brought in on the
explicit promise to end the corruption.
Stop using our justice system, which my
ancestors helped build and yours too, as
a political army mobilized against
domestic political opponents. That's not
allowed. That's like Haiti stuff. We
don't do that. It's not a ton makud.
It's the
FBI. They promised to do that. So, can
they help you? Are they helping you?
Well, I mean, I'll say
this. Trump cut and dry had the same
stuff done to him. He He's the only
person on a wider scale that has had
this. And you'll hear him say, "It's
unbelievable. It would take a long time.
It's unbelievable. I've studied the
case. So have you." It's it's the same
kind of crap. A judge in New York finds
him guilty, doesn't give him a jury
trial. I mean, it goes on and on. So,
what they've done to me, they want to do
to you. But if you want that string that
pulls the whole sweater apart, they
think because of the demonization and
what they said I did to kids I didn't do
that the Republicans will be scared to
ever defend me. Oh, that's for sure. Uh
when in truth, it's like the Mendes
brothers when people found out what they
went through, they learned that they'd
all been lied to about that. Well, this
is like that. This is like what the
story you've heard, folks, from start to
finish isn't that they saw I was famous.
They saw was big. They tied me to Trump
to try to hurt him. Then they raised
hundreds and hundreds of millions of
dollars off of me. Got Justice
Department money. had show trials to put
out all this stuff I didn't do on record
and and and and and then now are not
just trying to kill the second amendment
using these poor dead children who up
God rest their souls but the first
amendment as well. So this is
outrageous and it it's a bellweather
showing that Paul Weiss, that big
Democrat law firm, one of the top ones,
would literally tell Trump, "Okay, we'll
stop doing political persecution. We
admit to it that they confessed to
lawfare against him and his supporters,
his family, and then they're still doing
it to me and they're billing the money
they said that he'd pay in me." So So
it's a sick joke. They think Trump won't
learn about this. And at the end of the
day, I just want it to stop. And
look, we've survived so much. People
say, "Oh, they were going to shut you
down here. They were shut you down
there." It's in the news. They kicked us
out of the building in November. It's in
the news. They kicked us out in or try
to kick us out in in May of last year.
There was a bunch of other stuff that
happened. My big deal is I'm not going
to give up because they've said we want
to get the name InfoWows. We want to
confuse it and have chubacabas and
Bigfoot and we're going to act like
we're Alex Jones. They they claim they
own my ex account. Musk had to sue get
involved and have them back off of that.
The Democrats in their filing in in
bankruptcy 6 months ago said that the
amendment against slavery, what is it 13
or 14? 13 doesn't apply to me. Actually,
you can read it in Bloomberg from the
filing. They said he is a special type
of person. And so just like Prince
signed away his rights to a record
company for his name and his music. I
never signed away my rights. So they're
saying they own the name Alex Jones. In
the court filing they say they know the
name real Alex Jones. They're saying
they own all my catalog of material even
though it's always been free to air and
it's my political views and is open.
They can't do that. I can write a book
and publish it the world and say it's
free. Somebody can't sue me and get a
bankruptcy letter and say they own a
book I gave away copyright free. My show
is owned by the world. But what is it
they don't want? It's because my older
shows going back 30 years are ultra
green. They're not evergreen where they
stay the test of time. They get more
important. And so the system knows that
those clips are getting hundreds of
millions of views, some of them where I
lay out and predict hundreds of subjects
and and and what's going to happen. And
then I explain though, so that
intellectual property is at stake. They
are preposterously this is new law. They
think off of demonized Alex Jones, they
say this, they can set a precedent to
not just censor you, not just take
Tucker Carlson off the air, and they
said you're the next target. Literally,
I show you the clips, you didn't see
them on CNN, MSNBC, that they will then
take your identity, which under the
prohibition of slavery, and under the
prohibition against slavery in the Texas
Constitution, all the others, you can't
take someone's name, you can't even take
someone's tools under state law in
Texas. Uh, and but no, they are saying
that they own the name Alex Jones shows
and they own your archive of content.
Yes. And they say that they want to
twist it and make fun of it. They had
the Onion owner with the Every Town
Bloomberg representative on this. They
met Bloomberg paid for it. The new Onion
owner is just an intel cutout. I mean,
absolutely. From MSNBC, I'm very aware.
Yes. Censorship operator. That was his
job. Yeah. And who has literally no
sense of humor at all. It's the most
humorous drone working on behalf of
entrenched power like in the United
States. And he's running the comedy site
and it's like it's like the Babylon B.
It's also fake. And he's the MSNBC
version of Brian Stelter. I'm aware. I'm
aware. Oh, I know you're the but
Exactly. So, what I'm saying is it's a
constellation of operatives, corporate,
media, government, justice department,
the trustees, all of them. And they just
like an army believe they're still going
to be in America. Oh, I know. And they
see me as a populist firebrand folk
hero. And they said that themselves.
They want to silence and destroy that
person so they can then take the
identity of that and turn me into Satan.
So meanwhile, Adam Lance is the guy who
murdered all those children is totally
forgotten. Yeah. And I almost apologize.
I don't really talk about this a lot on
my own show. It's just come to a head
today and I'm very honored you let me
run on and on. But I mean folks, this is
your country, your world. This was done.
What I've told you is 10% of it. Okay? I
mean, this is an incredible scandal. the
law firm that confessed to Trump to try
to destroy him illegally with lawfare
and said, "Don't worry, sir. We'll do
$40 million of good work non-political."
Half of that in a filing last week is
me. They have gone and filed that half
of our 40 million is what we've done to
Alex Jones. I mean, come on. I mean,
look, I don't care what happens to me. I
just hope Trump takes away their
national security clearance because
they're not going to stop what they're
doing. And those other law firms know
exactly who they are. I agree. And you'd
love to talk to the person who
negotiated that deal and see if he's
aware of it. Oh, I wonder who that is in
the White House. Yeah, maybe they should
be looked at a little bit. Yeah. So, uh,
wonder what they got. Yep. Uh, you know,
I don't know. I'm just speculating here.
That's why we need to investigate
because because I mean, you know this in
raketeering laws they passed. If the
mafia says, "Oh, you better hire my
cousin and pay me 10% or something might
happen to your grocery store." And then
they burn your grocery store down. They
start investigating. learn how the
criminal networks operate. The mob boss
doesn't say go burn it down. He just
says, "Yeah, that guy's not paying." And
and and and that's and they all want to
mount my head on the wall. Like you've
got, you know, that great deer mounted
on the wall over there. They want Alex
Jones's head on the wall as a symbol to
scare everybody else. I mean, they said
that in the courouses and on the
courthouse steps. They said, "Send a
message to everybody else. these patient
zero and we're going to take him off and
destroy him and we're going to scare
every one of these other Americans to
keep I mean literally it's like in Bug's
Life when the head grasshopper says yeah
we got all this grain why are we going
to go beat up the ants cuz one little
ant stood up and he goes yeah one little
grain doesn't hurt but he goes but if
they all stand up and he pulls it and it
floods them he goes if that those little
puny ants outnumber us 100 to one and if
they ever figure that out it's over for
us that's why we're going back to kill
that ant it's exactly Right. That's it.
So, I'm just the ant in Bug's life. You
are. And but it hasn't worked. And so, I
want to make a prediction cuz I just
want to be on tape saying this. I'm say
it again even more clearly this time.
And I of course I hope I'm wrong. I pray
I'm wrong. But I do think a lot of the
the really crazy bitter ethnic hate that
you see on social media is fake. It's
it's people are saying it don't mean it.
Um I think it's like you know the
clansmen you'd see marching and you're
like there no clansmen like what? And of
course, you find out that it's all it's
it's fake and it's designed to convince
people that there's like a lot of roing
ethnic hatred that doesn't really exist
and and that's a predication patriot
front. Exactly. It's it's
Charlottesville, but that's happening
online right now. And I and I know that
it is. And I think that at some point I
pray I'm wrong, but there's going to be
an act of violence, ethnic inspired
violence, of hate, hate inspired
violence, actual hate, like killing
people. And I really hope I'm wrong, but
I I feel like this is real. And that
that event will be used to shut down
free speech on social media. I 100
because that is the threat. And they you
saw with Tik Tok like, "Oh, we need to
ban Tik Tok cuz China owns it." No,
nothing to do with China. It had
everything to do with opinions that the
people in charge didn't like being
expressed there. And it's like, we're
just gonna and and the Congress went
along with it. But if there's an act of
violence and innocents are murdered, and
I pray that doesn't happen because I
hate that above all, but it has
happened. And I feel like it could
happen again. And people will say, and a
lot of good people will go along with it
just like they went along with the
censorship of you and the destruction of
your life because they were told like,
he's bad. He had something to do with
murdering children. And then people just
shut down. They're like, I, you know, I
don't know. Alex Jones has murdering
children. So whatever they do to Alex
Jones like is fine. I can't tell you how
many times in front of my family people
walk up and they go, you killed those
kids. Exactly. And I'll always go,
really? I I did, huh? And why am I
walking around? And then just like,
well, you you know what you did. But but
but what you said is so important. The
last ingredients is the false flag on a
big illegal alien demonstration or a
black church because the Democrats keep
saying Trump's coming to kill the
migrants. We got to rise up. Yeah. Or or
something else like that. But where
innocents are murdered by a crazy
person, a crazy person or maybe an
actual crazy person used or whatever. Or
maybe it just happens organically. Maybe
if you stoke enough ethnic division
online, it's clearly I mean there are
people who have, you know, views that
are, you know, mad at other ethnicities.
I mean, that's that's real. Okay. But
there are also big actors who are not
real. They're doing it on purpose. And
we know who they are. Yes, we do know
who they are and for strategic reasons.
I'm not I don't want to get involved in
all that filth, but um but let's just
say we've seen the documents separately
100% and they're stoking the stuff and
maybe it just organically inspires
someone to commit murder, a mass murder.
And again, I just pray as someone who
hates all violence to say it again. I
pray that's not the case. But well,
let's just say this, the people they're
mainly attacking are the ones financing
them. It's the oldest trick in the book,
Huggalian Dialectic. And so just be
aware of that, ladies and gentlemen.
Yeah. And I just don't Yeah. And I think
you're what and the only reason I bring
that up is because I worry about it
every day. I do too because that's the
next big move. Free speech is the
foundation of a free society. Without
it, it's not a free society. You're a
slave. If you can't say what you think,
you're a slave. It's really simple. And
we don't have slavery in this country.
It's a free country. And when it
happens, I pray it doesn't. That's the
next move. So, we're predicting this so
that there's enough eyes and ears on it
and enough people watching so they don't
pull it off. Because that's the thing.
Everything I used to predict basically
came true because the globalists were
still in power. They're so de
disorganized, have so many problems now.
A lot of times when we're able to get
out ahead of things, you and others and
Trump and Joe Rogan, we're able and and
Elon's with a huge voice, you know,
second only to Trump, we're able to
disrupt what they're doing and enough
people see through it. So if it does
happen, they try to stampede us into
blaming whoever it is. Oh, the crooks
guy, you know, he acted alone. Well,
this will be some right-wing Trump
supporter with the MAGA hat and they'll
get killed by the SWAT team. He was
inspired by hate online. for you're not
allowed to have like legitimate opinions
or your own opinions and you know God
can decide whether they're legitimate or
not but if you're a free man a free
person you have a right to say what you
really believe period and that cannot be
encumbered or else you're a slave
absolutely and and you know you know we
get back to the spiritual battle
here I I just want people to know that
my lawyers just told me you I put put
you on speaker with them they said I
could be shut down within two days two
weeks they are coming to shut down Info
Wars we've survived so much like a long
boxing match. People are like, "Oh,
yeah, right." No, this is very, very
real. This has been very, very serious.
And so, you know, for now, people can
find me on exit, real Alex Jones. Uh,
but but that part doesn't matter. People
understand more and more how things
work. All of your voices are so
important. All of you sharing this
interview, sharing the other great work
Tucker's doing, all the courage he has
and others have to really put it all on
the line. You know, we haven't even
talked about Iran. Well, give me give me
your five minute. I mean that I should
say I think this interview is going up
tonight. We're going to try to get it up
in a few hours, but that's such a
dynamic situation. Um Steve Wickoff
apparently is meeting directly with the
Iranians, which I think is such a a
great that's a blessing. But um and I
hope for the best, but give us your
fiveminute overview like what is that
and where is that going? Well, Iran's
plan B for the globalist and Iran's got
its issues and its Shiite militias and
all that. I'm not I'm not lionizing the
moolas. Oh, you're not? But but but
they've been isolated. Israel has
knocked out their proxy forces in
Lebanon and in Gaza and in the West
Bank. Uh and Netanyahu is extremely
unpopular. He's been indicted and he he
said he doesn't want an investigation of
January
uh excuse me, he doesn't want
investigation of October 7th until the
war is over. But then he never, you
know, is going to have the war be over.
So I'm not even against Netanyahu. I'm
not against Israel. I know most people
in Israel don't war with Iran either,
but we He's been trying to drag us into
war since 9/11. That's how long he's
been around and in power off and on into
this. And they have the most ballistic
missiles in the world. What it 4:1, 5:1,
6:1 to even the Israeli anti-missile
defense system. Israel, as you know,
only has three big cities. They will get
blown off the map by this conventionally
even if Iran doesn't have nukes and uses
them and the word is they do. Israel
will nuke
Iran and then all hell's going to break
loose and in most scenarios India and
Pakistan start nuking each other. Saudi
Arabia's got nukes. Uh there's a lot of
other countries that have nukes that
people don't know about. You don't want
even a limited nuclear war because in
most big threat assessment war games and
Tucker's an expert on this he can attest
to it. He talks to the experts. it it
breaks out, you know, kind of like your
neighbor, you know, has the black
plague. Well, you you might get it. Uh
or you know, you know, your neighbor uh
you know has got syphilis and god forbid
you have sex with them. I mean, this is
a lot worse than syphilis. This is a lot
worse than TB. This is really dangerous.
And Iran does have proxy forces in
Europe and the United States that Oiden
let get in. And they really do have some
of these sleeper cells uh that are here
that if this does go to full war, they
can cause some major problems. and
different foreign intelligence agencies
are famous for spoofing Iranians and and
and Saudi Arabian terror attacks. They
could easily stage a big false flag to
get us into a war with Iran. I'm aware.
Yeah. Uh and and they're also the
Russians have warned before they did. I
warned of attacks on nuclear power
plants in Ukraine and Russia try to
blame Russia. Ukraine's done that, been
caught. Ukraine and NATO tried to blame
Russia for the Nordstream pipeline. How
laughful is that? Of course I's
information has been proven, you know,
that obviously it was the US government
with NATO. I mean, hell, even Biden
said, you know, we'll get rid of the
pipeline if you invade. So, the
globalists are very reckless. Again, 50%
chance. The Pentagon said if they
started bombing Russia, Russia would
nuke, they still roll the dice. So, we
need really cool heads here. This is not
like going into Iraq twice. This is not
like going into Libya. This is not a
cakewalk. Um, even for people that love
to, you know, buy a bottle of bourbon
and sit back and get drunk watching, you
know, a war like so many sick people do.
This this this is the main threat to
civilization. And I mean, Tucker, you
really have all the connections. You
travel the world. You cover these
summits. I don't know any I don't know
anything other than I think the people
in charge of a bunch of different
countries are are like reckless on a
level that's without precedent in the
modern era. And I I don't think they're
serving their own people. By the way,
leaders like that, it's not just like,
you know, you've got a Bellose leader
who's threatening war or whatever.
doesn't necessarily mean the people he
rules are being served. He's putting
their lives at risk. Our leaders have
put our lives at risk for no good
reason. And so, you know, I'm I'm hardly
an expert in anything. I'm just an
observer. And it's just all so obvious.
And I'm really worried about my last
question to you is you get this sense
that there's like a a spirit of dullness
or fantasy. Maybe it's connected to
living digitally or something, but like
smart aware people are no longer smart
or aware. They're sort of sleepwalking
through this incredibly dangerous
uh moment and they don't even
acknowledge any of it. And like what is
that? Well, that was the description I
was going to use. There's like a mist
that settles over all of us and like we
can't it's like no one is even like
awake. What is that? Uh well that's how
I describe it is how you describe it.
We're sleepwalking into Armageddon. The
Bible calls it a spell. Feels that way.
Medically they would call it a trance.
And you know since the advent I say that
sarcastically of television uh and
everybody gathering around it, people
are way more highly suggestible. Most
people are closer to a near dream state
or daydream state pretty much all the
time. It feels that way. You go to a
movie, you see everybody kind of
drooling and and and I've never really
had a lot of suspended disbelief. When I
was a kid, I was always analyzing
things. Me, too. Me, too. And so, I
guess that's a gift, but also it's kind
of torture. It'd be fun to just be go be
able to be mindless sometimes. But yeah,
and and the establishment itself is all
about never actually making a decision
they get in trouble for, having
committees, having groups, having it
kind of be policy where no one can be
accountable. But then that creates a
runaway train scenario uh where then
only the most reckless people that are
the craziest kind of become the
consensus because nobody else wants to
challenge them and through Trump and
Elon you know saying hey we don't want
war we don't want a meat grinder this is
too dangerous this is crazy we want to
stabilize civilization we want to have
more kids not less every actuary shows
we collapse if we don't th those are
conscious you look at Trump conscious
awake sharp Elon conscious aware sharp
you know so many others
and and and then it's a system of kind
of quasi zombies and
zombies run by a few kleptocrat psycho
demonp possessed people uh that that
that that don't want us waking up the
zombies. So that's why they're mad at
me. It's why they're mad at Elon. It's
why they're mad at you is that we are
trying to collectively get people to
wake up because the wheel on the ship is
so heavy and so big a few of us can't
turn it. But if we get more people
politically engaged and aware, together
we're able to turn the wheel as we're
about to go over this waterfall 5,000
feet and get killed. And so it's it's
it's people that are dialed in and
conscious versus people that are
unconscious in the middle versus evil
that is driven by a very nihilistic
destructive
uh force. And and that's what the
transhumanism is about. I mean, I
remember 30 years ago reading government
white papers that were public that
listeners sent me, medical people that
they had human animal hybrids they could
grow in cows for organ harvesting. And
that and of course that's been admitted
for 20 years now. But just last week,
hundreds of articles, oh, we can grow
humanoids for organ harvesting. Don't
worry though, they don't have
consciousness. We've already raised them
at undisclosed laboratories. and then
it's in the MIT, you know, reports that
they've done it. Or I remember 30 years
ago, oh, military bases have goats that
are part spider that produce body armor
out of their milk, but we don't show
them to you. And then later they brought
them out. And then, oh, uh, oh, we have
direwolves living in an undisclosed
location where we spliced 13,000y old
DNA with a regular wolf.
And my point is, the future's been here
for a while. It's just not evenly
distributed. So you've got this super
advanced sectors of technology literally
in underground bases and facilities and
you've got an establishment the very
small technocracy that's even aware of
those systems. Yes. And they don't want
to give the general population access to
that. So to them they want a nuclear
war. They think it's survivable in their
underground bases. And Ian Fleming,
former high level OSS in MI6 wrote the
James Bond books became movies. remember
the ' 80s, Moonrakaker with uh with
uh Roger Moore. And remember, there's a
crazy billionaire with these other
billionaires with underground base in
Brazil that's going to release a
boweapon on the earth to kill everybody,
but it only goes for a year. He's going
to go up to space while everybody dies
on Earth at their space station and then
come back and repopulate the earth. And
he's a eugenicist and they only have the
best specimens of the humans to do it.
their con and the movie Zardas with Sean
Conry in the 70s and Logan's Run and The
Island and uh
THX1138 and then you have Aldis Huxley
who wrote Brave New World in 32. His
brother Julian Huxley was the head of
the World Eugenic Society. When that got
a bad name for World War II, they
changed the World Transhumanist Society.
He was the director general of UNESCO.
Really ran the UN. And his brother
before he died gave that famous Berkeley
speech. an hour long and I've read his
book Brave New World Revisited. That's
non-fiction. Everybody should read it.
And he says, "No, no, no, no. The
world's not going to be like Orwell with
the SWAT teams. That's for the 1% that
might resist. The real plan, the reason
I could write Brave New World is this
was the consensus of the elite in Europe
and and England of the world we're going
to build with genetically engineered
people, a subspecies that serves us,
everyone taking Soma, everyone's
controlled." And he explains in that
Berkeley speech, if you don't read the
book, he gives a synopsis that this is a
real plan that he saw being in place by
2020. And so you have to understand
Brave New World is an instruction manual
of what they want to do. They want to
turn humans into a commodity. That's why
Obama calls it the end of history where
there are no more cycles, where
everything's controlled, where 90% of
the world population is reduced. And
maybe if you serve them right or
whatever, the 10% is here. But there's
these gods on Mount Olympus or these
allesium, you know, demigods that are
the technocrats that control everything.
And everybody is wired into their brains
and the technocrats control the AI. And
and then they play God. Like Ray
Kerszswwell said, "I don't believe in
God yet. I'm going to become one." Uh
you've all know Harrari, I don't believe
in God yet, but there will be one in the
cloud of AI. And so I'll just say this,
the bestlaid plans of mice and men oft,
you know, famous writer said.
And these people are prideful. They're
satanic. Yes. And and and and it's all
going to end in disaster. We have to
choose God. We have to choose Y justice.
We have to choose free will. And we have
to get out of nature more. And we have
to disconnect uh you know from the
systems lies and then only go into the
system to basically tell the truth. And
just know that if if you're fighting
evil, evil's going to come after you.
that that's a blessing and that it's
very rewarding and the experiences you
have in that quest are are are the
greatest experiences of my life and you
find out who's real, you find out who's
not real. I just see the arrogance of
these lawyers. It's warfare. It's
lawfare. And with through the agencies
that are running them and and what
they've done to me, they want to do to
you. Like Trump said a thousand times,
they're not trying to get me. They got
to get through me to get to you. That is
true. And so that's why I I I do want to
see action from the White House. I do
want to see the Justice Department take
action because my case because they felt
like it's free free game on me that you
know it's just open season. They they've
been more transparent. I mean it's
illegal in my view to to to have the
Justice Department fund these lawsuits.
It's illegal to have the FBI go create
these. It's illegal for Obama to list me
as a national security terrorist and
have a drag net for decades and then
they you know all of this concerted is
the stalking. All of this concerted is
the racketeering and that's what it is
by definition conspiracy against rights.
And then they're just sitting back
laughing and and going, "Oh, Trump, 40
million, you know, to help poor people.
We won't be political anymore. We're
using it for Alex Jones." You know, it's
just these people need to be called on
this. They operate in darkness. They
operate because people are too busy.
They operate thinking you're never going
to figure out what they're doing. And
and more and more they're scared. But I
would have thought with all this coming
out they would back off. No, instead
they've gotten scared because the
connected Supreme Court and all them
were going to hear this. Now they said
suddenly they reversed it. No, we're not
hearing it now. Yeah. Uh because because
they think just shut him down, shut him
up. It's not going to work when if they
shut down InfoWars and I and I don't,
you know, throw fights. I'm fighting
right to the end. But if they're able to
do that and everybody sees that it it's
only going to make what I do that much
bigger. But again, like when they, you
know, the establishment tried to kill
Trump, that's when the establishment
went from collapsing to collapsed. So
their order is over. And I liken it in
closing to Japanese soldiers, the last
one, 27 years later, because the
Japanese were losing in the Pacific, as
you know, Tucker, they would dump
soldiers out on islands to frustrate and
harass the uh the allies coming in, the
US, England, and
um the Australians and the New
Zealanders that, you know, fought the
Pivic War. And so the last guy 27 years
later was still on an island shooting at
people and stuff thinking that you know
he still had to fight for the emperor
until he found out no the war has been
over 27 years. So the radicalized death
cult
uh left the Jacabans are just running
around like chickens with their heads
cut off like zombies. Attack, attack,
attack. Everyone's a Nazi. Cutting women
off in traffic. Getting out. Beating up
women because they're driving a Tesla.
Being proud of it. I mean they they have
been radicalized into a cult and and
that's what Claus Schwab said. He said
we're going to collapse Western
civilization by creating an angrier
world. We've got to not target each
other. We've got to target the policies
and ideas of globalists and dismantle
the policies and have a big tent to
unify behind stopping nuclear war. You
you know you you just you pray you live
long enough to affect good in the world.
And I I definitely pray that for you,
Alex Jones. Thank you. Thank you,
Tucker, so You're the best.
[Music]
So, it turns out that YouTube is
suppressing this show. On one level,
that's not surprising. That's what they
do. But on another level, it's shocking.
With everything that's going on in the
world right now, all the change taking
place in our economy and our politics,
with the wars we're on the cusp of
fighting right now, Google has decided
you should have less information rather
than more. And that is totally wrong.
It's immoral. What can you do about it?
Well, we could whine about it. That's a
waste of time. We're not in charge of
Google. Or we could find a way around
it. A way that you could actually get
information that is true, not
intentionally deceptive. The way to do
that on YouTube, we think, is to
subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit
the little bell icon to be notified when
we upload and share this video. That
way, you'll have a much higher chance of
hearing actual news and information. So,
we hope that you'll do