20,000 years ago, there were primitive
people who lived in caves and had
dinosaurs instead of cars. Life was
simple in those days. For cavemen,
exercise consisted of stalking his prey,
and nutrition was something that came
naturally with the seasons. When it came
to their diet, cavemen observed what
foods were available and only chose to
eat those that were good for their body
and overall health. Nowadays, there's
talk about living a healthy lifestyle,
but in reality, most of us are too busy
to really implement it. The world is
always in a hurry. The modern man just
eats only what's convenient. The list of
Americ's top 10 foods includes
hamburgers, donuts, French fries,
chicken nuggets, and ice cream. All
processed foods. But the bottom line is
we're not eating what our bodies were
intended to eat. And it's become a big
problem. In fact, we eat so many
unhealthy foods that obesity in adults
has increased by 60% in the past 20
years. Dr. Jack Kruse didn't want to be
just another statistic. And he was tired
of watching giant cheeseburgers attack
the people around him. He knew that
there had to be a better way, a
healthier way of life. Jack began
thinking and researching about the
neuron pathways in the brain and how
they directly affected weight loss. He
came up with a plan to change his
lifestyle in an effort to live an
optimal life. He tested the plan on
himself. It worked so well that in 3
months, Jack lost 77 lbs. How did he do
it? First, Jack decided to reset the
leptin pathway in his brain. Leptin is a
protein that plays a key role in
regulating energy intake and metabolism.
If you're overweight, you're most likely
leptin resistant. Your body must become
leptin sensitive again in order to shed
those extra pounds and keep them off.
By following an optimal diet, you're
allowing the leptin receptors to become
responsive again. Secondly, he realized
he had to change his diet. Jack began to
eat like a caveman. His diet consisted
of meat along with seasonal fruits and
vegetables. Then he added cold
thermogenesis. What is that, you ask?
Well, imagine a nice bath soak every
night in ice cold water. It sounds
crazy, but before long, Jack could sit
comfortably for hours and became a much
smaller man. Jack had discovered the
perfect formula to improve your health
and add years to your
life. So, reverse the years, shed the
pounds, and get optimal now.