When we study physics, we must go beyond
the self-imposed limits of what a
discipline can call reality. That
changes everything. I'm a physicist and
therefore I study how physical reality
works with a sense that that's all there
is. I was also expecting if I did
everything right, I should be happy. But
I was not happy. One night I wake up and
all of a sudden out of my
chest this beam of energy is coming from
me. The essence of what I thought that I
am changed from this way to that way. I
decided that's what I want to do for the
rest of my life. Unite physics and
spirituality. If you look at yourself,
what is the deepest longing that you
have? The deepest longing that I have
myself is to know myself. To know why am
I here? What is this universe for? to
know. Consciousness is the capacity of
one to know itself. And it is in this
one wants to know itself that there is
the joining of physics and spirituality.
Let me
[Music]
explain. Hey everyone, welcome back to
know thyself. Today we're sitting down
with a physicist, inventor, and
entrepreneur. Everyone watching this
discussion is doing so using the silicon
gate technology. Our guest today
invented chips evolved from his first
commercial microprocessor. He was also
the first to invent touchpads and
touchscreens. He went on to build neural
network architecture in the 80s
attempting to create consciousness
through computers. He is probably one of
the most well-rounded idealists alive.
He embodies an incredibly rare
combination of hard-nosed scientifically
informed thought with direct
introspective insights into the primacy
of consciousness. We'll be exploring
what is consciousness, why it cannot be
explained from the materialist view, his
emerging new theory that changes the
idea of who we are in a fundamental way,
and restores meaning and purpose to the
universe that materialism has
essentially denied. We live in a time
where the collective awareness and
understanding around fundamental
questions of reality such as science,
consciousness, meaning, and more are
transitioning. They're deepening.
They're being revolutionized. And it's
an exciting time to be alive. When
wanting to understand how the physical
universe works and its limits and what's
beyond it, I don't know if I could have
a better person to be sitting in
discussion with today than someone who
is an individual at the forefront truly
with a cutting edge knowledge to
synthesize our understanding of science,
consciousness, and life. Federico Fine,
thank you so much for being here. It's a
pleasure to be here, Andre. Thank you
for inviting me. I'm really looking
forward to this conversation. Like I
said in the intro, you really have this
unique rare combination of the
scientific understanding and the limits
of the physical universe with also the
interiority and personal experience. And
I would actually love to just jump
straight to your kind of awakening
experience that you had that really was
the pivot the shift from being a
materialist scientist into exploring
consciousness in a much more fundamental
way. So could you walk us through your
experience at that moment? Yeah, I need
to give you perhaps a little bit of
background because uh uh I'm a physicist
and therefore I
uh study how physical reality works and
with a sense that
uh that that's all there is and that's
really pretty much what
uh science today is telling us about the
reality. And I had I had accepted that
that must be true. And um I was also
expecting that if I did everything
right, quote unquote, whatever that
means, I should be
happy. And
[Music]
uh that did not turn out that way. In
fact, I did everything right, you know,
according to the book. But I was not
happy. And I was pretending to be happy.
And it was only because I realized that
I was pretending to be happy and I have
learned being an entrepreneur I had
learned to take responsibility for what
happened in my life that I put my foot
down. I said no I must
understand why I'm not happy. In those
days I was studying consciousness but I
was working on neuronet networks. I was
studying books in uh neuroscience and I
wanted to
understand how come that we are
conscious. You know the neuroscientists
don't tell us how we're conscious. They
explain you know they explain how we
work by electrical signals and
biochemical signals in the brain.
And I didn't see how I could
possibly get sensations and feelings,
what philosophers call qualia, out of
electrical signals. And so I was really
curious being a scientist and being also
a technologist, I wanted to understand
how I could program a computer to be
conscious. And the more I thought the
more impossible it was because there was
there is nothing in physics that tells
you how to convert electrical signals or
bits in a computer into sensations and
feelings. So the core was what are
sensations and feelings which is how we
experience life. And so it was in this
climate where I was unhappy which is
also a problem of consciousness. I
wanted to understand what consciousness
is. And it happened one night 1990 was
Christmas holidays. Was skiing up in the
Sieras, you know, Tahoe uh with my
family. And uh one night I wake up
midnight, was thirsty, went to get a
glass of water. Then I went back to bed,
you know, just uh waiting to fall asleep
again. And all of a sudden out of my
chest this beam of energy you know white
scintillating light is love but is a
love that was 10,000 times 50,000 time
who knows stronger than anything that
I've ever experienced is coming from me
and my consciousness is in this rush of
energy and is love joy and peace peace
This I've never had felt that peace. I
was always trying to get somewhere. I
was never happy where I was. But this
was this is me. That's home. This is me.
I am that actually. I am this instead of
that. This that comes out of me. And
then this
energy all of a sudden is everywhere.
And this white scintillating light, my
consciousness is in that light. And so
now I am observing
myself. So I'm the
observer of myself this energy because
this love was there. This joy and this
peace was there as well. And then a
thought
forms. Wow. A
thought. But I already got what the
thought was trying to
say. The thought was oh this stuff is
what everything is made of. But these
are
symbols. What before that thought there
was the understanding that the thought
expressed and then that was the end of
it. My my body was vibrating you know
like like the cells of my body were you
know were resonating with what was going
on.
So body, mind, emotions and the
connection with everything was all in
this holistic
experience. So I was one observing
itself with my point of view. That's
what I'm saying now. But at that time I
had exactly the sense without the words
to say what I just said. So that
explanation you just gave is incredible.
I think it is possibly one of the only
thing that could transform someone's
rational mind of trying to you know
reduce life and phenomena into a series
of explainable parts. You had the
interiority experience which you know
the eastern wisdom traditions have been
speaking to for millennia but haven't
had the science to make it rigorous. And
what I really love and having
conversations around consciousness on
this podcast like Don Hoffman recently
and yourself and others is, you know,
that that have these experiences, these
meditative experiences that point to a
reality that feels far more vast than
anything we could deduce intellectually.
And so the conjunction of both is really
exciting to me. Um, so let's keep diving
deeper here. As this experience
happened, how then did your rational
mind start to pivot in what you were
doing in the world? Because you were
somebody who was very successful and the
fruits of your labor in the classical
physicalist model, right? And then from
this experience afterwards, your
energies and you know minds started to
change into exploring more how
consciousness could be more fundamental
uh constituent of the universe. And so
from that moment forward, what were the
coming years and decades? What did that
look like for you as you started to
change how you um what you were studying
in your field of of expertise?
Yeah. The essence of what I am, what I
thought that I am changed from this way
to that way. So before I thought I was
separate from everything, from the
universe. I thought that to prove
something you had to show a theorem and
go through the mo you know the logical
proof of a theorem that that was the
highest certainty that you could have is
by demonstrating a
theorem that knowing that came I was
asking what is consciousness that it was
I realized much later that that asking
was a
prayer I didn't know that I was praying
but I wanted to know. I had taken
responsibility for myself and I wanted
to
know. I got the answer and that answer
was so
unbelievably impossible to imagine to me
that you know once you once you have
this thing you know you know that it
must be true that way. This is direct
experience of who you are. How more do
you do you need? But of course it
doesn't give you a formula. It's not
it's not a number or a series of
numbers is how we really know how
consciousness
knows. And so that was for me wow my
rational mind would probably if I if it
was it was it wasn't so powerful as an
experience. I would have said well I
need to see a psychiatrist now. You
know, if I was really believing the
story that I was believing before, I
would have probably say I need to see a
psychiatrist because something like this
is crazy. And but that's the the
interesting shift is that we go from
needing to intellectually rationalize
things to having the immediacy of the
experience which is self-evident. Yeah.
It's like you know it. So there there's
that nosis the intelligence of the body
that knows that I feel like in the
western mind we've really
lost being in touch with of course and
and that's the fundamental difference
between the rational mind that wants to
arrive at the truth but you never arrive
at the truth if you start with truth
that are assumed to be true which is the
postulates that you start with. So, so
it's foolish to believe that you can get
to the truth if you start with truth
that you cannot demonstrate. So, you
know, but we our consciousness is the
truth engine is the one that can tell
you whether it's true or not. But it
doesn't give you the proof and then you
have to know also how to read your
experiences. So it took it took a number
of years of
studying but studying consciousness how
by experiencing myself that's the only
way that you know consciousness you
don't read them books don't tell you
what consciousness is on top of it so I
went through 20 years of personal work
starting with meditation on and on and
on you know teachers came and went you
know in this process and it took about
20 years so that takes us to about 20
2008 or so 200 9 when I was clear to me
that consciousness must be fundamental
consciousness and free will because to
me free will and conscious were parts
and parcel of the same thing. So so that
was so clear that at that point I wanted
then to connect what I knew about
physics into a theory that would connect
the interiority and the exteriority.
Physics only describes what what's what
you can measure in the space and time.
But what you can feel is that in space
and time cannot possibly be in space and
time. So where is it? And so that was
the journey where I dedicated myself
100%. I decided to that's it. That's
what I want to do for the rest of my
life. you unite physics and spirituality
into a seamless hole where you can no
longer tell the boundaries between one
and the other and it is the most
exciting time to be alive at least I
feel where the unification of science
and spirit is becoming one we're seeing
how they are different ways of looking
at the same thing right and you know I I
think there there are countless people
that have these inner luminous
experiences the experience of their
interconnectedness and oneness with all
of reality. And it can also be equally,
you know, misleading where the mind
wants to interpret certain things that
we might have different prejudices or
beliefs that will be fulfilling that um
or looking through the lens of those
beliefs through to describe what the
experience is, which is also equally
dangerous if your goal is to get in
touch with objective reality. And so
that's why I love diving into these
conversations where we're kind of what
we're teeter tottering between both the
exterior understanding and the interior
experience, finding the consilians
between the two, hopefully coming to a
deeper understanding of it all. Now, as
we dive deeper and deeper into the many
nuances of this conversation, I would
love to lay the framework and and just
some definitions to start around how you
personally define consciousness, the
classical and quantum view. That way
when we use different words throughout
this podcast, everybody can understand
we're on the same boat of what we're
speaking to. So if you would how you
define consciousness. Yeah. And then
also we spoke to a little bit the
classical and quantum view. Yeah.
Consciousness is the capacity of one the
totality of what exists to know
itself. So is the capacity to know by
self-reflection. But the interesting
thing in the way I look at this is that
when one wants to know
itself and in fact we need to start with
a partulate because otherwise we we run
around this thing and we never we never
get to it. So the partul that I'm using
is
one is one is the totality of what
exists what potentially can exist and
what actually exists. And I make a clear
distinction because because you cannot
get something from nothing. You know
many many many theories of reality
starts with nothing and you get
something. I do not believe that that's
correct. Yet to start with some
potentiality that becomes actuality. So
when
one is holistic meaning is not made of
separable part. Everything is
interconnected within one. I mean this
is you know goes back to the evade to
the vadas I mean you know but it was
very clear to me that that lack of
separation was fundamental in my first
experience the awakening experience I
was not separate I was the observer and
the observe you know how you know there
is no separation between the two but
that's also what quantum physics is
saying there is no observer separate
from what is observed okay quantum
physics is very clear about that
so one is holistic one is dynamic is
never the same instant after instant is
basically is always changing so far I
have described quantum physics what
quantum physics say not classical physic
quantum physics and then I'm adding one
wants to know itself and it is in this
one wants to know itself that there is
the joining of physics and spirituality
it is the knowing itself okay so if you
believe that one is to know itself Then
one cannot be
omniscient because otherwise it would
know everything already and there would
be no evolution you know would we
wouldn't be here certainly. So one wants
to know itself means that one will have
to continue to know itself because we
know within ourselves that the more you
know the more there is to know because
the more connections between what we
have known exist and so there is an
explosion of of self-nowing that can
occur. So but one you know if you start
with this point then when one knows
itself he has to bring into existence
what he knows. It comes from potential
existence like the unconscious of one
into
manifestation which is existence like
from a wave to a particle
from a little bit of like that but not
quite not quite you know we have to be
careful not to read too much because
because is is from a is from a
potentiality which is neither a wave nor
a particle yet it is it is even before
you can even imagining what it is to
actual to an
existence and but the existence that so
so what happens is
that knowing and existing are two aspect
of the same thing. Knowing and existing
are two faces of the same
coin. Because so when one knows itself,
it brings into existence a part whole of
itself. Because being holistic, it
cannot know itself only partially. It
has to know itself
completely. But he has to know itself
with a particular point of view. That
was very clear to me eight years ago. It
has to know itself in a point of view
like a
perspective. But one has many
perspective in which it can know itself.
So now there are there can be many
perspective in which one knows itself
completely and so it brings into
existence a part which I call conscious
as unit is like the monad of liinets.
Demons of liets are very similar
concepts. lies is the only philosopher
and scientist and mathematician that I
know of that actually understood the
concept this what I'm talking about I
found it out later but you know to me
that was clear that it had to be
something like that based on my
experiences because in my 20 years where
I was exploring consciousness I had
hundreds of different extraordinary
experience of consciousness that reveal
aspects of consciousness they were
certainly not they were coherent with
the awakening experiences that are
described but you know they they
illuminated different parts of this
spectrum of capacities that
consciousness has. So if we start there
then you know then one wants to know
itself then the wanting to know itself
is the will this the free will of one
one decides which way to know itself is
that's free will the essence of free
will is the capacity of one to direct
his own knowing self- knowing which is
also the capacity that we have that's
what free will is for us and the
capacity to know itself is consciousness
So now we have defined free will and
consciousness one and one and the two
must work together. You cannot have
consciousness without free will. It
would be like you know something but you
cannot do anything about it. You know
you you you know what you want but you
cannot act on that desire that you have.
It would it would be foolish would be
just a the universe would be a you know
uh would be a joke you know would would
not be serious
inconsistent. So starting this way you
can unite physics
spirituality the world now has meaning
and purpose. The world the entire
universe has meaning and purpose that
materialism has erased simply by saying
all everything that exists must be
measured otherwise it doesn't
exist. How is it possible? I mean
already quantum physics is telling you
that a particle that is not looked at is
not even in space and
time is is you can only be described in
a deeper
reality and only when you measure it. In
other words, when a field interacts with
another field which is the field of an
instrument, you have an event that
manifests in space and time and then you
can say, you know, there is a particle
here, for example. But quantum physics
cannot tell you where you will find the
particle. It can only tell you the
probability of all the possibilities in
which you could potentially find the
particle. So there you go again. Okay.
Quantum physics is not describing
reality. It's only describing what you
can know about reality. Big difference.
And probabilities have to do with
consciousness. A a classical system, a
computer in a computer, there are no
probabilities. They are all certainties.
This next state of the computer is
determined by the previous state.
Period.
So a computer can never be conscious
because it doesn't have the
characteristics of free will. Can you
speak on how you were very much so
trying to create consciousness through
computer systems? Yeah. Well, when when
I was, you know, starting from reading
the neuroscientist uh books,
neuroscience, uh I said, well, if the
brain is an information processing
system like a computer, which is how the
it is described, then I should be able
to create a computer that is conscious,
right? The the idea, the classical model
that consciousness is an emergent
process or phenomenon out of unconscious
complexity. So if we just put the right
hardware together then we should be able
to create it right. So and I tried for a
couple years. Mhm. There was no way
because there is no way as I mentioned
earlier to convert s electrical signals
in in a conscious experience. How do you
do that through qualia? What is qualia?
Qualas are not numbers. Electrical
signals can be reduced to numbers.
Qualia are not numbers. The love that
you feel for for a child, your child, is
that love something that you can put in
a in one number or a series of numbers?
No way. Is richer. He has dimensions
that you cannot probe. You know that
there is more to know about that love.
It goes deeper than you can even know.
But the fact that you know that is goes
deeper allows motivates you to find out
more about that love. You see it is not
it's not it goes beyond number. See the
the deepest feeling, the deepest longing
that we have like the longing to know
ourselves goes way beyond anything that
can be put into numbers transcends the
idea of number. Thus therefore
transcends measurability which is the
basis of
science. And in fact science has the
concept of the quantum the quantum state
of a system of you know which is can
only be expressed as a as a probability
amplitudes in an nd dimensional space
where each dimension is a complex
number. Complex numbers are not real
numbers. Space and time is real.
describe with real numbers. You cannot
you know complex numbers is square root
of minus one is not a number is a is is
an is called i imaginary number just
because it's not a number because there
is no number the multiply by itself
gives you minus one. So what is it?
Well, actually a complex number
describes points in a in you know an
infinity an infinity of points in a
plane. Wow. Is that a number? No, it's
not a
number. And that's and why is it useful?
Because he allows you to transform to
simplify the computation. You transform
a ordinary differential equations for
example in an algebraic equation just by
using complex numbers. you can simplify
the
computation. So just operationally you
can find that out. But what is a complex
number? In quantum physics a complex
number represents a probability
amplitude. But a probability requires
consciousness is is a is a concept of
consciousness. In other words, only
consciousness wants to predict the
future. In a classical system, since the
classical system is
deterministic, there is nothing that
tells you why you should pred predict
the future. In a classical system, the
prediction of the future of a conscious
being is needed because the conscious
being wants to predict what will happen.
Not having enough information about what
will happen.
In quantum physics, there is the
collapse of the wave function which is
not a mathematical function. It is pure
randomness
non-algorithmic which is the one that
decides what will manifest out of what
you can compute which are only the
probabilities of all the
possible positions for example of a
particle. But the actual position is an
act of free will in this new theory that
we can get into later. But I you know I
don't want to go too too much into math
but fundamentally this theory is simply
saying that
consciousness is must exist. You have to
start with consciousness and with free
will like a postulate and from there you
can explain why quantum physics has the
crazy properties that it has that
physicists are the one the first one to
tell you we don't understand why quantum
physics is the way it is. Why is there
the collapse of the wave function? Why
do we have states that are expressing
probabilities, probability amplitudes
that don't even exist in space and time?
Why do we have to have that? Nobody
understands. This theory explains why.
Because there is consciousness as there
is free will. Okay. So, we just opened
up many things here. The nature of free
will, consciousness being fundamental. I
would love for you to break down your
distinction between classical I guess
idealism versus monism and uh yeah your
framework of consciousness being
fundamental and and then there's a lot
to open up right after that but if you
just love to give a quick uh overview.
Yeah. Well basically in in this theory
there are three levels of reality.
The fundamental reality which is
described by quantum physics the quantum
states in Hilbur space in this
n-dimensional
space that is
the reality where conscious experiences
are the the quantum state is a
representation of a conscious experience
of qualia. So it's the the best thing
that mathematics can get you to to
represent qualia which is not is not a
set of numbers because probabilities are
not are not numbers. They refer to
something else. They refer to something
that might happen. They don't refers to
what will what is. So you you cannot
call an a probability as a number is is
not itself a reality is pointing to the
probability of a
reality. But the reality is the
experience or the being of the conscious
entity which is a
field that is described but the
experience can only be known by the
entity cannot be known by by the
mathematics cannot be described by
mathematics. You see we have a level of
reality that mathematics cannot reach.
That is the key here. Yeah. Truth truth
transcends proof in a way. Absolutely.
you know, I was trying myself, you know,
to explain consciousness with quantum
physics even though I realized that
consciousness was fundamental and so on.
And I told myself, I'm foolish to
believe that, you know, we need to turn
it around. Consciousness must exist from
the very beginning like I had you know
uh seen and free will had to be also are
properties of fields. They're not
properties of things. They're properties
of fields and the fields don't exist in
space and time. Space and time emerges
from those fields. So if you start that
that way all of a sudden you can explain
also why you have to have free will
which are then how the field decides
what to manifest by going from
probability. The theory will say you go
from probability to to an actuality. The
actual what's actually happened. The
field makes a free will decision and
manifest what actually will manifest
that you can measure in space and time.
But it is a free will decision. So there
is no math that can tell you what that
decision is going to be. So all of a
sudden you have a completely different
conception of reality. So there is go
back to the original question. There is
this foundational reality. Then there is
the classical reality of objects that
move in space and time. Those are
derivatives of this deeper reality.
Okay. And derivative on this deeper
reality based on decision free will
decision of conscious
entities. And there is the body. The
body is a bridge between this deeper
reality and the classical reality. The
body is quantum and classical. The body
is characterized by a type of
information which I call live
information which is neither quantum
information nor classical information is
something deeper that has not been
described by other physicists so far.
It's just a you know is a new is a basic
idea that has to be that way. It's
essentially the the the best way to
imagine it is like my words are waves.
My words are waves. They are dynamic and
they convey a lot more information than
when I write down what I'm saying. When
I write down what I'm saying, those are
static symbols. They have lost all the
rest of my emotions and whatever they
you know this dynamic wave can
carry. And
so live s live information live symbols
are just like spoken words. Classical
symbols are like
written words in a book or you know so
so there is a big difference in the
capacity to express meaning because the
meaning is what exist in the deeper
reality. There is no information there
is meaning is the meaning of the
information in the deeper reality. In
the outer reality there is only
classical information which is symbols
numbers. There are numbers here, no
numbers here, qualia here and
comprehension of qualia in the deeper
reality. And the and the body is a
bridge that allows this deeper reality
to communicate with this classical
reality through the
body. So I guess the difference I just
want to highlight between idealism and
and monism is that instead of just
saying that consciousness is fundamental
and all there is, it's viewing matter as
a host of consciousness in a way. Is
that correct? Yeah, look at matter this
way. You know, my theory is a monistic
theory, but not in the, you know, and I
don't want to get into, you know, this
boxes. We it tend to put things into
boxes when, frankly, when you talk about
one where one is not made of boxes is is
everything is interconnected with one.
So the boxes close enclose what the box
is supposed to contain like a set in
mathematics. Okay? is a is a closed
thing you know something belongs or
doesn't belong to the set. So here we're
talking about something you know that
transcends many of the mathematical
concepts that are so foundational in
mathematics. So uh here the the
foundation of um of our capacity to
know is qualia and comprehension that
get us to the meaning of information and
and the meaning is something that can
only be known from the inside by the
field that is that wants to know itself.
So when one
creates monuts, conscious units, these
conscious units have the same properties
of one to know themselves. They want to
know themselves. They also can procreate
other monuts that just like one created
the monut created the conscious unit.
You know in other words the prop the
property of these fields are the
properties of one but with the one
difference that only in one point this
entity only can know reality from the
point of view with which one created
those entity. Since one is has
potentially infinite points of view then
there are potentially infinite conscious
units or monats and so there are
potentially infinite way then that those
conscious and units can combine into
higher level hierarchies of conscious
units. So, so we are all of a sudden we
have an
unbelievable structure that emerges from
knowing from the desire of one to know
itself and the fact that knowing and
existing are aspects of the same thing.
Why do you think there's a fundamental
desire of the one to know itself and in
a way why does it need to differentiate
to know itself in so many different
ways?
If you if you look at yourself, what is
the deepest longing that you have? The
deepest longing that I have myself is to
know myself. To know why am I here. To
know what is this universe for. To know.
So to know is the deepest longing the
human have had. In fact the deepest
wisdom and the deepest knowing comes
from this longing and has given rise to
then spirituality then religious
religions and then eventually
science. But you know this longing is
before all of that. This longing is
there and science is satisfying only the
surface longing. They want you know to
understand what you can you know what
you can measure but
somehow science has moved away from the
spirituality has not given has not given
value of
reality. I wouldn't say science with the
capital S. I would say more like
scientism or materialism has given only
value of reality to what you can measure
in space and time. So basically for for
this this materialistic view there is
nothing other than matter but that's a
starting point that's a postulate that
has never been proven. It's a postulate
to say that there is only
matter. So, so you know when you know
within yourself that there are things
that you cannot understand, they go way
beyond way beyond what can be measuring
space and time like the love that you
feel or the courage that you feel you
know to take action against you know
against the you know the the the beliefs
system that is that are around you.
So it's yeah it's within that
understanding that I've heard you share
that that existence ex knows itself
through the experience and so you know I
this podcast is called know thyself
right at least you know certainly my one
of my highest values is in the discovery
of who I truly am who am I and the
essence of that and I think our audience
largely is is you know has that desire
and you know I think we all
fundamentally do and and so you know as
we start with the surface level of
understanding of just the the
western-minded view of the surface
level. I am my body. I am my name. We
start to see how these things we are
not. And you can start to go down the
list of everything from your name, your
cast, your creed, your ethnicity. None
of these things are fundamentally you.
And so you start asking, okay, then what
actually could I be? What is
indivisible? You know, in the essence of
who I truly am. And so I think the word
that you started using um for which is
say is uh is an interesting kind of
distinction. So I would love for you to
share your definition of what that is
and how how is it different from what
most people would say is a soul. You
know that we have a soul. Um I think you
know there's some distinctions that help
uh take it out of the bucket of
conceptual understanding that we have
with that word of soul. So what is sadi?
Yeah. So but let me just say one thing
to connect with what I said earlier that
science is also about knowing. So even
science wants to know right what's but
but they are restricting what they want
to know on what can be measured in space
and time. So everything that we do that
is beyond pure survival is about
knowing. Okay. Science included. Okay.
So back to society. So say
simply take a quantum field of
electrons. Quantum field of electrons
well defined in physics. Okay. Quantum
physics. I say this quantum field has
consciousness and has free will. Then I
call a
siy because it's not the quantum fields
of physics is but it is everything that
physics is saying plus consciousness and
free will. Now all of a sudden you have
an entity that can evolve and can know
itself and everything else because is a
parked hole of one. In this uh way of
thinking all of a
sudden you you are connecting
immediately physics which are the
quantum fields with spirituality which
is the fact that these fields are
conscious and have free will. Okay,
great. So I'll just read a quote from
your book which is new and not now by
the way we haven't mentioned irreducible
um second to your first book that uh
that I've been absolutely loving diving
into this quote that I just want to read
which is on the on this exact topic. You
said I believe instead that we are sades
who temporarily inhabit our bodies. We
are eternal conscious beings rather than
perishable bodies. And we are here to
learn crucial aspects of ourselves by
interacting with each other in the
physical universe that we have
co-created for this very purpose.
Everything we perceive in the universe
was initially envisioned in the
consciousness of the sades because
classical reality follows quantum
reality and not v not vice versa. And
quantum physics follows quantum
information which in turn represents the
thoughts, desires, and conscious
experiences of the sades. Yeah. Anything
you'd like to elaborate there? That was
pretty thorough. Yeah, it's pretty
thorough. Um I I think that uh
that the the crucial thing here is to
always make the distinction when I say
I, I don't mean the body. And when I
when we say I, we tend to generally mean
the body. So the body is not where
consciousnesses exist. The body is is a
quantum classical structure that exists
in space and time but is also connected
with this quantum reality and that's why
it is a monism. Okay. If you take the
field of electrons the quantum field of
electrons the electrons are not objects
separate from the fields. There in qu in
physics in quantum physics an electron
is a state of a field is some structure
some form that appears in the field
itself just like a wave of the sea a
wave of the sea is part of the sea
cannot be separated from the sea. So the
properties of the wave are actually the
properties of the field. The properties
of the electron are the properties of
the quantum fields of electron which is
qu which is conscious and has free will.
So the fact that you cannot separate the
origin of matter from the deeper
reality tells you that is a monism. You
don't have you know don't have spirit
and matter. They they are all
manifestation. Matter is a manifestation
of spirit.
Matter is a manifestation of mind.
So can you help me wrap my mind around
how a sad could possess
individuality? Because when you look at
the word self there's many different
layers like we said we could perceive it
as from
from the body to the mind to who we are
um in a more fundamental nature that is
an energy that we are inhabiting in a
physical body temporarily in this
experience. Yeah. So this has a lot of
implications obviously and it's
congruent with like I said a lot of
eastern wisdom traditions that have been
t that have been you know talking about
this for for millennia. Um so what is
the practical differentiation and how
you explain the soul and the sadity and
what that uh implies to what happens
when we die the personality and
qualities of us that maybe carry over
once this physical body dies. M um so
I'm just curious to see how you kind of
think about these things.
So the identity of the
si and the best way to look at that is
the point of view with which one knew
itself originally when he created this
si this field that is conscious and has
free will which is a part whole of one.
that point of view is the identity is
the fact that that field will maintain
that identity
forever. So it is the in a way it is
imprinted by one in its giving birth to
this you know to this new field which is
a new self-nowing of of itself.
So one self-nose creates a part whole of
itself with a point of view which is the
identity which is the uniqueness of that
field and the uniqueness remains the
uniqueness of that field forever. That
field is eternal or if one is not
eternal he has the same duration of one.
But you know you cannot you know because
that if one wants to know itself the
last one the last thing that one wants
is to forget you know the the what he
has learned about itself right so there
has to be a memory of the self- knowing
of one which is also the memory the
self- knowing of the sities that are
created by one so there has to be a way
to
remember the experience so so and that's
another reason why you have to have
classical information classical
information is information that allows
you to remember an experience a quantum
experience because a quantum state only
exists for a very short period of time.
So, so you better put in memory what you
experience otherwise you forget about it
because the next thing that you
experience if you didn't put in memory
what you experienced earlier is gone. So
you know it's like a you know we imagine
like the present and moves toward the
future. Well no there is no future and
there is no past is the past that grows
from the present which is the memory of
what you had experienced. So the past
moves you back and the future is what
actually is the you know appears in this
present.
So that's a better way to understand
time when you consider the you know who
we are and and that is consistent also
with what physics is saying but in a
deeper way than normally we think of it.
So in your first awakening experience
you you felt like you recognized that
you are light. Mhm. And light and love
and peace and
joy. Again there are there are no
separation between this these
fundamental concepts.
And then you felt from that experience
that you are this one point of the one
in which it knows itself like a point or
a dot on a circle in which there are
potentially infinite amounts of dots
that could could be there. I I perceive
myself as a point of view of one upon
itself. In other words, and the reason
why I say that is because the sense of
me that I had in that extraordinary
experience was the same sense of me that
I've always had when I was 5 years old,
30 or at that time almost 50. So you
know that sense of me that's me my
identity that's who I am that that that
is the
self but I call it identity because
again self has so many meanings and so I
I want I want to avoid I want to use
names say which is the fact of you know
being a you know the self food. Yeah.
Um, and that's why the awakening process
is often referred to as self-realization
because you're coming into awareness of
something that was prior and already
existed. Absolutely. Yeah. Because we
have memory of our own experience. And
so we're in the process of remembering.
Yeah. And in fact, in fact to know to
know something that you already knew
because you also can know something that
you didn't know. That's new. That's a
new creation also for for you. In other
words, it isn't that that all we know is
in the
past because everything new that we know
we create, we bring into existence
exactly like one when knows itself for
the first time brings into existent
knows. So this is valid for everyone.
Yeah. So then do you think there is this
vast intelligence is orchestrating in a
in a type of way the people places and
circumstances for us to garner the
experience we need to come into that
self-remembering but by being part whole
we are all orchestrating what one
wants you see because if we were if we
were separate parts would be different
then would be an
orchestrator but we are parts all but I
you know notice that our body Even our
body is built the same way. It's built
with parts whole. Let me explain. Every
cell of my body has the
genome of the
egg that built the entire
organism. So every part of my body,
every cell, I have about 50
trillion like you. I got about 51. Oh,
that's good. You are better than me. So,
so your 51 trillion cells, each one of
them has the genome that describes the
entire organism, not
itself. Everything, the whole thing is a
part whole. The potential knowledge of
the whole. That's why a cell later on in
life can express aspects of itself that
were not present at its birth. That's
why there is you know
epigenetics. 30 years ago it was
impossible could not exist and now of
course you know people are beginning to
accept that epigenetics exist.
Epigenetics is that you know a cell is
not determined at birth in what is going
to be able to express. It can express
new things that were not at present at
birth.
So you know the entire understanding of
who we are is appended and there are
people that tell you materialists that
tell you that the body is just an
algorithm you know biology is just like
a you know like a computers what the
hell you know no a computer is made of
transistors there are not 50 trillions
yet they would be 50 trillion so what
what's the big deal a transistor is a
switch on off that's all what does a
switch know about the whole the old
computer and the software that runs in
the computer nothing. Yeah. How could
there be the sound of a crying baby, the
sight of a rose, the taste of a cherry,
these qualia that can't be can't be in
the experience of a
switch. And but this is goes beyond that
because
because I'm just describing a body as a
physical structure in space and time
comparing to another physical structure
in space and time which is a computer
which is a purely classical system. The
body is quantum and classical. The
consciousness, the feelings are not in
the body. They are in this field, this
deeper
field. They are not in the body. We
project them in the body. They are not
in the body. We are not we who we are
are not the body. We don't exist in
space and time. We exist in this deeper
reality.
You see this is this is that's why we
but we we are
so indoctrinated on one end and and so
also hypnotize into believing that we
are the body that we always fall into
this trap of believing that we are the
body. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We have a soul
but but then when we think about
ourselves we think about the body. No
the body is just a structure that then
perishes. If if we were the body then
scientism would be right to say that
when the body dies it's the end of
ourselves right if consciousness is a
property of a functioning brain when the
brain doesn't
function we shouldn't exist anymore and
of course that's what I believe when I
was when I believe in this in this
scientism worldview which did not take
into account what quantum physics was
saying the point is that that I'm trying
to make is that quantum physicists are
saying something that then we never
reflect in our world
view. So I just want to pick up where
you were just talking about emotion and
how emotion carries meaning and this
understanding of live information. Yeah,
this is a very kind of new concept, you
know, in terms of understanding how
meaning is a like a tied to the
fundamental constituents of reality
um instead of like an afterthought or a
byproduct I suppose that we you know
intellectually make. So can you share
how emotion is is tied with meaning?
Yeah, just think about
love. What is the you know what is love
bringing to you? I mean beyond beyond
the feeling itself you know there is a
meaning be behind that the qualia is one
thing right what it feels like that's
the qualia but then the
qualia the qualia are simply the entry
point into the inner sanctum which is
you know the this field that can know
that has properties that are infin
infinitely powerful properties to
understand means to get the meaning of
what of what you perceive which is
qualia. So the meaning is the essence of
what you know and that's also what we
want to convey when we use symbols. I
don't describe my qualia. I describe the
meaning of qualia. You know when I when
I say I love you am I describing what I
feel? I cannot describe what I feel. So
I describe you know the essence that I
call love that I you know that's the
meaning that I that this feelings has
for me but it goes deeper because love
is a word. Love is a symbol is a word
but love to you if you really go into
it. It has dimensions that are
unfathomable. It has depth that you
cannot fathom. So you know
is you know cannot be described in word.
Okay. Years ago, years ago, I said, you
know, that's what the towel is talking
about. You know, the towel, and it
starts by saying, it started by saying
the the the Dow that the Dao that you
can say is not the eternal Dao. Yeah.
Okay. What is he saying? He's saying
exactly what quantum physics is saying
that the you cannot you cannot copy not
even copy a quantum state. The quantum
state which is the representation of
qualia is what you feel and it can only
be known from the inside. It can never
be told from the outside. What you can
say about it are only symbolic
expressions of what you feel. But the
symbolic expression of what you feel
fall very short of what you feel. There
is a theorem in quantum physics. It's
called Olivos's theorem. Olivos theorem
said that when you have a quantum state,
when you measure the quantum state, you
can only get one bit of information
classical bit per quantum bit. The
quantum bits that describe the states
are entangled which is you know a crazy
property of quantum physics meaning
properties in common that cannot be
represented in space and time. They
require these n dimensional spaces. Not
only that but each quantum bit is an
infinity of possibilities representable
as a point on the surface of a sphere.
So every point of the surface of a
sphere meaning a direction in space
direction in space is one of the
possible states of the quantum bit. When
you make a measurement of this quantum
state you set a
direction and if you set in this
direction and you measure you will find
one or zero which is the opposite
direction. You can only find zero or one
no matter which way you measure it.
That's a property which is
incomprehensible in because classical
physics is not these properties. When
you measure a quantum system, you
disturb it and you measure something
that was not the states that it
was. So the
observer affects what is observed and of
course then the what is observed affects
the observer with giving some
information. So all of a sudden you no
longer have this situation in classical
physics where the observer is separate
from what is observe. You're a
participant and you and you are
participant. You are you are both
observer observe and actor. You're all
three. You're an agent all three because
we take turns like we're taking turns
now. Now when I speak you observe me and
when you know I when you speak I observe
you. Okay. But also my speaking affects
you but also affects me and vice versa.
So we we affect each other in a way that
classical system don't affect each other
at all. In classical physics you know
you had to make a separation between the
observe and the observer. And that
separation is being kept in the mind of
even most physicists to this day. So
they they they don't think of the you
know they they explain what's going on
in ways but they you know they don't
they're not clear about the role of the
observer in quantum physics because it's
incomprehensible in the conception of
reality that that exists which is
reality is really what we can measure in
space and time. So you know Dom don't
often talks about space and time doesn't
exist. Okay, in that sense, okay, it's
right, you know, but but but in reality
there is, you
know, we had to explain why we have a
perception of space and time and where
does it come from and so so you know,
you you had to think in terms of a
deeper reality and space and time are
emerging properties of this deeper
reality as the other way around. You
know, consciousnesses and free will are
supposed to be actually free will
typically in scientism doesn't exist.
But you know, in uh you know,
consciousness in and conscious emerges
from space and time and objects that
don't have any of that. Okay? But it is
the other way around. You know, space
and time and matters and energy emerge
from this deeper reality. And so they
must be explained in terms of knowing.
Knowing is is deeper than space, time,
matter and energy. Do you think that a
conscious entity can actually know
itself in its entirety? Of course not.
Not even one can know itself in its
entirety. Will continue to know itself.
The more it knows, more the more it can
know. So knowing ourselves is a
continual dynamic process. Absolutely.
That it never ends. It cannot end.
If he ended it would be the end of the
universe in a way and the end of
evolution, the end of everything. But
one would be finally satisfied. It knows
itself completely and we don't you know
we can we become subsumed from one and
that will be the end of it which is fine
too. I mean I don't really know but you
know but it is reasonable to think that
there is you know why should time end
besides that kind of time which is the
time that we measure is not the time
that I'm talking about that time that
we're talking about is the present the
time of experience is that sliver of
present where everything that we
remember or everything that we predict
is in that present if I make a
prediction what will happen in the
future that prediction is done in the
present
This invites a feeling at least to me
internally of a lot of spaciousness and
taking pressure off of ourselves on the
spiritual path because we have in the
west more of this achievementoriented
goal oriented mindset where it's like
achieving enlightenment becomes a point
in which our spiritual journey is like
we've arrived you know versus you're
inviting a continual journey and let's
enjoy the ride. Of course, of course.
But but but you know for me in a way why
was I disappointed? Because I had
checked all the boxes and so I had
arrived right and I should have been
happy. Yeah. The money because I had
always put happiness in the future
because you know because I'm not you
know I was supposed to achieve certain
things to be happy because that was the
list of things to that I had to do that
you know but that was an imagination my
imagination. And so once I once I
arrive, I was unhappy. So what's wrong
with this picture?
Right. So I want to talk about this
sovereignty, this reclaiming our
spiritual power and the responsibility
we have to do. So I love this quote I I
found in your book um around
suffering from Simone Wheel that says
suffering as a door that we can choose
to go
through and then we learn something or
we refuse to open and then nothing is
added rather it takes everything away
from us. Yeah. And I feel like we all
have these experiences in life that are
challenging that and we suffer and we
can grow through suffering or grace. But
often times there's a lot of suffering
that points us into the direction of
what's not working for us in our
identity and beliefs and and so many
different things in life. And so as the
one desires to know itself, I feel and I
would love to get your perspective as
suffering kind of serves as the friction
necessary for us to move into the
direction of of experiencing remembering
realizing our true self. Yeah. I mean my
sense is that suffering is uh is very
much something that exist in
this quasi virtual reality in which we
live and we believe to be the body and
we're here to learn something about
ourselves that we set up to
learn before incarnation. So so you know
because clearly we are not the body. So
when the body dies, we are still the
field that we were before the body was
was born. So you know, we don't go
anywhere. We we we continue to be the
entity that was created with the point
of view that we always have. When we
when the body dies, we recover the
memories of other lives that we had in
this in this reality. Maybe other
possible realities. Who knows? But
certainly you know we no longer see once
we are we believe to be the body to the
point that we pay attention only to the
signals produced by the body. We become
close in a way we we no longer observe
things that are beyond the body. We
observe only the stuff that the body
produces and we communicate with the
body as ego. The ego is only a portion
of the sati who we are of this field is
that portion of the field that you know
got in in in creating the the
characteristic of this body in order to
understand itself that a portion of
itself became you know um hypnotized so
to speak believing that it is the body.
It is a little bit like when we control
a drone. A drone you know suppose you
have goggles and through these goggles
you see and you
hear the the you know the information
that a drone is sending you. A drone is
in another in another country you know
10,000 miles away and you see what the
drone sees and you hear what the drone
hears. So, and if you are intense in
controlling the drone and getting to do
getting the drone to do what you want,
okay, you forget about whatever is
around you, right? And so the drone then
you are the drone. You you know you do
whatever you're doing and uh you know
then the drone is you know is shot down
and then the s you know nothing here.
you look around say, "My god, I I'm I'm
still
here." You know, so the the body
controlling the drone is like your
conscious fields controlling your body.
Okay? And as an is a good way to to
imagine this because because the reality
that you see through the eyes and ears
of the
drone is really is really cons, you
know, what are you seeing? You're seeing
bits and those bits are
actually you know transformed by the
conscious they become space they become
the objects that the drone sees. How is
that possible?
So if you take the goggles out and you
look at this reality, this reality must
be the same similar way, right? I mean
many years ago that was so clear to me
that that in fact that's why that's
because virtual realities exist, you
know, we can do it with a computer that
we can actually understand that this
reality cannot be the reality real.
However, it is not purely separate from
the deeper reality because as I told you
earlier, the states of the fields cannot
be separated from the field. So this the
virtual reality is still connected with
who we are. Is are emanations of who we
are. That's why the you know the theory
is ammonism like I was saying earlier.
Yeah.
So I personally love that analogy. It's
also, you know, in reference to Donald
Tooffman, how I love his headset analogy
because it's it's a very useful, you
know, thing that we can wrap our head
around, so to speak, uh, pun intended, I
think, where we have a virtual reality
headset and we go into this other
reality where our true self takes on our
sensory system of seeing, smelling,
tasting, touching, and hearing that
plugs us into three-dimensional reality
where it's very enchanting and it serves
the purpose of having the experiences we
need to know oneself. But we often get
lost and the veil of that forgetting. Um
and this whole journey which we're
speaking to is the journey of
remembering of who we are beyond the
sensory and continual arising uh and
passing away of phenomena that we
perceive. Yeah. And so I feel a really
important reflection now is as you know
the all the people that are listening to
into this conversation right now on our
journey. Yeah. There is a responsibility
we have to know oneself. Yeah. And the
more that we can acknowledge that, the
more that we can tap into that and and
embody that responsibility, the more
that we start to go on that upward
spiral of realization and a lot of the
things that we once suffered start to
fall away. We start to become more
agents of positive impact and change in
the world. There's so many endless
implications of that change and
transformation that h happens internally
first and foremost. And so, what do you
feel is the responsibility we have for
that awakening process? Yeah. Yeah. I
think that
um even
before there can be an awakening in my
way of thinking
um we have to take responsibility for
what happens in our life. I think that I
could not have had the experience that I
had if I had not taken responsibility
for what happened in my life where I was
justified in you know in blaming
somebody for what happened to me and I
was not looking at what how I
contributed to him to that
person harming me. So how you know so at
one point you know after this issue was
over uh I asked myself one day what did
I do what did I do to encourage that or
why didn't I stop it what what was my
payoff for not stopping what was going
on and it was through that process it
was painful through that process that I
realized that I had an
agenda and my agenda was that by not
doing something I was better than the
guy. I was I was better because I was
more noble. I I was giving the other
cheek. You know, that's the way I was
brought up in the Catholic ethos. You
know, you basically, you know, if
somebody hurts you, you give the other
cheek. That's silly, right? I
mean I mean I took that supposed
teaching you know into a then if I do
that I'm better than the other guy right
okay and so that was my
angle to be superior and I said holy
camole I mean I you know I think that's
common though we all we all on the part
of our journey we uh embibe virtues and
display them for the world as a means to
build our superior iority um and it's
just another way that you go. So once I
discovered the game that I was playing I
said
therefore I am I was responsible for
what happened to me because I did not
respond properly.
though never again and that was the act
of taking responsibility instead of
blaming the
other just simply not blaming anybody
just simply figure out what did I what
can I do better next time that's that's
it okay because what happens to me in
one way or another I have contributed to
bringing forth to
me if you don't take that position it's
very hard then to go the next step
because the next step for me was to
acknowledge that I was not that I was
pretending to be happy when I was not
and it was exactly because I took
responsibility. I already had taken
responsibility years before that I was
able to say no I want to know I want to
know and so I put my foot down. I had
the the the having understood that I was
responsible in the good or in the bad of
what happens to me. Then I also have the
right to say I want to know and I got
the answer. So and I didn't have to
meditation before do all kinds of stuff
before. No, it came spontaneously.
Yeah. Because of the intensity of the
longing. That's right. Yeah. But because
having taken responsibility was a was a
crucial step in my mind to go to the
next step and I think there is an
important distinction with uh it not
being our fault but it is our
responsibility because yeah but we are
trained you know is this fault it's your
fault you know you you know you look
what you did to your brother you know
your fault you know it's all like all
this kind of you know culture in which
we are growing up in which we do not
understand what we're doing but and the
parents you know don't understand what
they're doing and when I was a parent
without having opened my eyes I was
doing the same thing that my parents
were doing to me so I mean that that's
the you know this cycles of of
inequities that that keeps propagating
into the future so we had to wake
up and that requires courage you know
courage the courage to take that
responsibility um and there I think that
really plays an important role and it's
an important invit ation reminder for
everybody tuning in now to prioritize
having a spiritual experience to
prioritize having that the taste of your
interconnectedness of your oneness
and once you experience that I think
you're radically transformed absolutely
you don't need to read 10 books you
know just you know one minute is enough
you you get all the all the information
that you need and you don't you know in
fact the books you know, you can put
them aside and and you can now you are
ready to find out for yourself. And
that's really what we are called to do.
You know, not repeating what other
people say or, you know, doing what
you're told to do. No, no, no, no. We
are free human beings. We are to find
out for ourselves. And it's in that
maturing process, I feel we go from
seekers on the path initially to
knowers. We know. We don't need we don't
need to seek it. You have the experience
of of it. That's right. And that's
that's where the dogmatic beliefs fall
away of who you are, where you come from
or whatever. And the experience of that
starts to be born and it's a completely
different reality. That's right. I'm
curious your perspective on the greater
impetus that drives a lot of these
things. When you look at love, what do
you see? How how do you think about love
in the way that it drives a lot of
everything we're talking to about taking
responsibility about the experiences
that give us the contrast of who we're
not? Um what do you think about love as
some sort of metaphysical property a
fundamental constituent? Like what do
you think about love?
I I think about love as
a like the
fundamental is the feeling out of which
all other feelings emerge is the you
know is the foundation of this of the
qualia but is also a force. So it's not
just you know so it's the force that
that
that motivates you to find out who you
are is what is is what's behind it know
thyself that is this love which has to
be love for yourself and for others and
that love has to be felt and is is it
gives you the degree to which you are
you know reaching out reaching toward
knowing yourself and knowing others is
the love. So love is also a measure of
how you're reaching your objective which
is the fundamental objective that you
came here to learn about. Um and so so
love is uh love is also you know you can
also understand it like
I got this impression at the beginning
is this stuff of which everything is
made you know is the substance of all
okay but all those concepts are vague
because you know what is substance in a
world that where there is no matter
right substance you know everybody
thinks of something concrete so so
basically Um and also you know in my
experience that love was mixed with joy
and peace. So it was not in a sense just
love it was also these other things that
were together because at that at that
basic level things are not separable.
The you know there is no you know that's
the that's the fallacy of reductionism
that you can separate the variables and
everything is separable. You know like
if you can put them into different
boxes. No, at the at the deepest level
everything is interconnected and that's
the power of the concept of one which is
holistic truly holistic. No, you say the
words and then you forget about it and
you start you know making distinctions
that separate the things. It's just, you
know, a an inter interesting uh analogy
that that I use from time to time is to
to say where's the boundary between uh
red and
orange. You know, is there a neat
boundary that separates the color red
from the color orange? You know, we talk
as if there was a boundary there. No,
there is a region where both are true.
You know, there are regions where it's
red, everybody agrees is red. a region
where everybody agrees is orange. But
then there is a region where you say is
red for you and say no it's orange for
me and so that region is both both of
them. That's gives you an idea how
science and spirituality or physics and
metaphysics are joining where there is
no boundary. Now they become one. Mhm.
So therefore the the the cap the
capacity and the methods of
physics also need to be used in
metaphysics and the stuff that works in
metaphysics. Your consciousness as a
tool for un for knowing must be used
also in physics. After all we explore
realities that cannot be measured in
space and time. How can there is no
instrument. The instruments are only
space and time. How do you measure them?
Consciousness is the only tool to
measure those realities through dreams,
through out of body experiences, through
all kinds of other experiences that are
not in space and time. Yeah, it really
does seem like the universe works in
paradox. And to be able to have anything
approximating understanding objective
reality, we need to be able to hold
multiple perspectives simultaneously. Uh
which is a challenging experiment uh for
people that are foreign to it. Yeah. But
but it's the idea that there is an
objective reality which is the problem.
Yeah. Yeah. I suppose you see we we
always fall into the trap of thinking
that there is an objective reality. No,
there is not an objective. In that case
you would you could say that what
approximates objective reality is the
fact that both are true, you know. So
it's so totality like like you know but
but you know the the objectivity is not
it's not an object. Yeah. For sure.
rather it's doesn't have boundaries you
know you know see this is all you know
the you know when we theorize we have to
do this because by theorizing you you
have to you know and and to be certain
you have to decide that there is true
and false but in reality not even in in
mathematics there is only true and false
as you know Gos theorems right I mean
the you know any axiomatic system you
can make a statement that cannot be
proven proven to be true or false is
both or or neither whatever you want but
certainly is you cannot prove that is
because if you prove that it's true then
it's false if you prove that it's false
it's true so you don't know so either
you take that statement you say I I
decided this statement I take it for to
be true then it becomes a postulate of a
new theory that includes a new postulate
that you have that you have but you have
chosen to choose that thing that cannot
be shown to be true or false as true or
false and then you bifurcate into
different
worlds. The rabbit hole goes deep on
this one. I want to I just want to go
back quickly to what we were speaking
about love. Um and actually just read a
few quotes here that I was saw in your
book and then also from you. I think
these all tie nicely in together. Alfred
Tennyson said that complete knowledge is
complete love. Greater knowledge is
indesolably linked to love.
Periclesis and Aristotle said something
approximating to educate the mind
without educating the heart is to not be
educated at all. Yeah. When we study
physics, nobody educates your
heart. Physics is not about
heart. You see, and that's why physics
and metaphysics or spirituality much
better the capacity to experience from
within must be integrated. But we must
go beyond the self-imposed limits of
what a discipline can study and call
reality.
If to know is to bring into
existence, that changes
everything. You
see, and this that goes hand in hand
with what you said in in the book about
creation is therefore the manifestation
of one's continuous search through the
sades to get to know each other more and
more. It is important to emphasize that
to know is to love and to love is to
know. Yeah.
Yep. I
mean, you know, love and joy, you know,
love and joy are very close, right? I
mean, you know, that that's sort of like
they they appear to be very, you know,
symmetrical, right? And uh so one of the
greatest joys when
you you finally get a new thing that you
were thinking, trying to understand it,
finally you get it. I got it. I got it.
You know, I got it. Right? I mean that's
love. Joy and love mixed together is
more joy than love perhaps but is
love you know that's what that's what
knowing I mean I I think that the you
know what do I know but what is you know
the thrill when one knows itself and to
and creates a monad it must be an
unbelievable thrill right I mean
just
and
yeah I really just enjoy the
synthesization of both and exploring the
gray and you know I've heard you speak
to how reality has both a semantic and
symbolic aspect and how information has
to then be inherently tied with meaning
and that's a really interesting thing to
explore and to break down. Is there
anything you want to share to help
clarify that? Sure. I mean you know the
the concept of information you know goes
back to to Shannon in 1948 you know
created the the theory of information in
that year with that paper famous paper
and the definition of information
um has nothing to do with meaning. The
definition of information, information
is the collarithm of the
probability that a symbol manifests in a
series of symbols. So you have symbols
that
appears. The probability that you can
assign to that
symbol is inversely proportional to the
information carried by the symbol. So
the more predictable is a symbol, the
less information there is on that symbol
and vice versa. If a symbol has zero
probability of happening, so it will
never happen. If it were to happen, it
would have infinite
information. And if you know exactly the
symbol that manifest next, there is no
information in that symbol because that
symbol begets the next one. So that
definition of information only requires
the recognition of the
symbol and not that the symbol carrying
any meaning. But for us information
without meaning is meaningless. For us
information when we say I got a lot of
information really you should have say I
got a lot of meaning from the symbols
that I that I that I saw or that I heard
or you know.
So what do I want to convey with the
words that I'm using just the words the
recognition of the words by you which is
would be what a computer would do? No is
the meaning of those words is what I
want to convey and I have to use because
I cannot give you my state is equivalent
to a quantum information that cannot be
reproduced. Quantum information cannot
be reproduced. There is a theorem in the
no cloning theorem says you cannot
reproduce quantum information. That's
why the existence of consciousness and
conscious experience can only be can
explain why quantum physics has to have
these states that cannot be reproduced
because the the bits of the computer can
be copied can be reproduced as many
times as you want. And that's why
computers can never be conscious because
consciousness is a property that
requires quantum states which are not
reproducible. You see, so if you start
with conscience and free will, you can
explain everything else in a coherent
manner and you can explain why there has
to be quantum physics, why there has to
be classical physics and all of that.
Okay. So what we're exploring here and
and what you said earlier about how
consciousness and free will must be
properties of the original field which
is completely backward the traditional
model. Yeah, I want to spend a little
bit of time exploring that and and the
understanding of free will. Would you
say that we have free will to the degree
in which we earn it or recognize who we
are in our truest self?
Um because if we're continually being
driven by unconscious drives, then it
feels very much so we're more of like an
automaton. you know, we're just this
machine that's has these bio, you know,
biochemical reactions and driving us to
this in this deterministic reality.
Yeah. Um, so h how do you see free will
being connected to the original source
and how that translates to how we
actually might or might not have it in
this reality? So free free will is a
property of the field is not a property
of the body. Again, we tend to give free
will to the body.
No, the free will, the free will is a
decision of the field to make the body
do something other than the auto
automatism of the body would make the
body do. So you see there is a big a
very subtle a very important difference
here. The body the body does not have
free will per se. The body is is a
physical structure that obeys laws. The
free will is in the field that controls
the body. In other words, the drone does
cannot decide to do what he wants. If
you don't do anything, the drone goes
around like this waiting for you to tell
him what to do. For example, that's it
does what we had told him to do. But the
drone does not have the freedom to
decide now I do over there. You know,
you know that's unless you give him that
authority even and in that case it's
still not free will. It simply will do
what you told it to do. Okay. So the
body is a little bit like that, right?
almost identical like that almost
because because the body is also quantum
and classical right but but the the body
in general does not have free will. So
if I conscious
being allow the body to do what it wants
then the behavior of the body can be
predictable because the body is a
machine. So it's it can be predicted his
behavior can be
predicted but if the consciousness
intervenes and make the body do
something different that it was
programmed to do then the body will do
what the consciousness wants. And so
that is that's a free will
choice. You see the difference? So, so
the body simply is uh you know responds
to what the free will of the field wants
and the free will of the field is the
one that has to learn about itself and
use it you know use properly the body in
order for the field to know itself
because the the self- knowing is in the
field is not in the body. The body
simply memorizes things that are
important for the body to function and
be and be semi you know quasi autonomous
but that's it and that's why when the
body falls off this stuff remains which
is the knowing the self the the free
will and so on. So you know we have to
be careful again because we tend to
attribute to the body then free will the
body doesn't have free will essentially.
So to the degree we identify with the
body, we don't have free will as well.
So would you say to the degree we wake
up to who we are beyond the body, the
more free will that we access? Because
we're still making decisions and choices
here within the structure of the
physical body. The the part that wakes
up again is not the body is the the ego
which is a portion of the si. The ego
that believed to be the body is the one
that wakes up. So also the ego that
still believes to be the body and
believes also certain that it should do
certain things and not others is also a
mechanism because is basically is
basically um how to say is basically
making the body do what it believes
which is a closed system. It is not
really free. It it is imprisoned in a
sense by its own belief structure. So
only an awakened ego can actually have
really free will. Well, you you say
awakened ego, but do you feel like the
intelligence of the heart is better
verbiage there? Because I feel there's
two kind of different places we can make
decisions from. You know, there is the
egoic structure in which we can make
decisions from. But then there's also an
intelligence of the heart that speaks to
us more softly that we start to listen
to that uh is more coherent. Yes. And
and that's that's where you know that's
and the the the true courage the you
know the true courageous decision which
is absolutely can only be a you know
otherwise it wouldn't be courageous a
free will decision you know is something
that goes against what the body would
have done otherwise you know otherwise
the body simply would do whatever is was
programmed to do by its own life and the
interaction with the
consciousness because the the
interaction with the you know Think of
the body and the consciousness as the
way that we uh the way that we behave
when we train a neuronetra, a computer,
you know, an an artificial intelligence
system. You know, we are the ones that
given the data that the the AI needs to
learn from and we tell them what to, you
know, we tell them right wrong and so
on. We you know so we are coaching this
thing to to
to imitate our own understanding of
reality there is no understanding here
there's the pretense of understanding
here but the understanding is in the
consciousness who learns is actually the
programmer of the AI not the AI they
tell you that the AI has learned but in
reality who has learned is the is the
guy you know that controls the machine
okay that machine was simply then repeat
what it was made to learn by this other
guy. The same way us consciousness and
the body the body is like the AI system
and our conscious is the supervisor of
the AI system. So as as the
consciousness learn the body also learns
and it can then later on repeat what he
has learned that wasn't there before. So
there is a continuing learning in the
body continuing a AI you know increasing
its capacities but in reality the body
simply mirrors and you know sort of
parrots what the learning is you know
and the knowing is in the consciousness
that controls it. Again, you know, we
tend to think that we are the body and
that tricks us every time to think that
as a body then we have certain
properties that are not properties of
the body. They're properties of the
field. So when you look at
reincarnation, do you feel like that's
compatible with this theory and like
what the the moment of the physical body
dying? Yeah. Is the the sadi would then
inhabit a new incarnation into another
body. What do you feel like is most
likely? Well, the the accounts of the
near-death experiences, which there are
thousands and thousands out there. Uh,
and also the the accounts of the
children who have clear recognition or
um they can validly prove the existence
of them somehow knowing uh where their
previous sp like life was, how how was
killed, the things that they have, the
places they live, etc. Yeah. Yeah. th
those accounts uh you know are clearly
consistent with the theory that I'm uh
that I'm telling you. Basically when the
body dies you you the ego which believed
to be the body no longer has this these
signals you know that that he was paying
attention to are all scrambled up and or
they're not even there and then he looks
around wow I'm still here and he finds
himself over you know over the body
looking down at the body which is being
operated in an operating room in the
hospital and then he describes properly
what happened Then he moves into another
environment. He meets, you know, their
dead parents or friends that were dead
and has wonderful, you know, heartfelt
connection with with them. And then he
is told to get back to to his body and
he wakes up. Oh I had to live a
little more in this life. It was so so
much better up there. Right? So so those
are the typical near-death experience.
That is telling you very likely what
might might happen to you. So the the
difference is that if the body is not
resuscitated by a good doctor, you know,
you simply you simply move beyond that
experience when you are in that expand
expansive state and then you continue to
live in that in that different reality
until you are embodied again in a
different body and have another
experience. So that's very consistent.
It cannot be explained with with you
know neuroscience at all. In fact, the
neuroscience, you know, has to say that
those experiences are crazy are just
imaginations. But how can a brain that
doesn't work imagine, you know,
especially imagine something which is so
transformative that 90% of the people
that have this kind of experience find
their life transformed by that
experience. So, so when the brain wasn't
working, it was doing more for them than
when it was working.
It's so fascinating and I kind of want
to zoom out just a little bit. I some,
you know, I often think about how recent
civilization is and writing and the
vast, you know, grand scheme of of
evolution of this planet and the solar
system and the galaxies. Um, I'm curious
what you feel, what you think if there
was like a 25th century person which
with an average knowledge of whatever
developments happen between now and
then, if they were to look back on the
time of us having this conversation and
the collective understanding of really
where the world is at in the 21st
century, what observations do you think
that they would make about where we are
at in our own developmental journey and
the framework we have around
understanding consciousness? Yeah, I I
think that um it depends how humanity
will really
um transform itself in the next u 100
years. I think we have 100
years that can set the stage of what
will happen in 500 years from now. uh
because uh there is a possibility of
self-destruction if we do not use AI, do
not use atomic energy, we we do not
solve the uh climate problem properly
and so on that we have in front of us.
So there is a you know that there is a
you know there are scenarios there that
are not happy for mankind. If mankind
overcomes this problem, then mankind
will look back u and uh hopefully a much
larger percentage and than what we would
do now with our mindset would then look
back and say, "Wow, how could we be so,
you know, so you know, ignorant or or
you know, or or you know, uh uh you
know, how we could misunderstand reality
so much to think that the only reality
that existed is the reality in space and
time. You know this this reality that
classical reality essentially the
scientism the materialism the
reductionism that we have today you know
will be looked as a aberration in the
history of mankind because you know
thousands of years ago we did not think
that this way. We we we were much more
connected with a deeper reality with a
deeper sense of who we are. Uh not
everybody but uh but you know the the
the highest mind the people that were
writing books uh the people that were
you know translating their their you
know sense of reality uh have given us
an account of of their thinking that is
much more open to the deeper dimensions
of human dimensions that than what we
have today with scientism.
Scientism eliminates any meaning from
reality, any purpose from the universe.
So 5 500 years from now we will look
back and say how could we be so you know
could have been so mistaken about what
we thought about Israel because at that
point I believe that we would have
learned to explore real deeper realities
that today we don't give them any
reality with our consciousness and find
out that we are beings of light that we
are beings that uh you know go immensely
beyond what we now give credit to
ourselves.
Yeah. Yeah. And I I agree. I just I
think you know us looking back on the
16th century right now and how much of
what we were ignorant to then is just
now everyday life for us. And if you
just plucked somebody out from that time
period, took a time machine back and
showed them all the things that we have
in the, you know, in in the world and
what we understand about reality, it'd
be it'd be so surreal where, you know,
it's it's like a Star Trek movie in
comparison, you know, and so the growth
of technology is so exponential that,
you know, who could even imagine if we
do make it through the existential
crisis that we find ourselves in. Yeah.
uh what what life will be like and there
were a couple of things that I want to
sidebar um in terms of AI and the
possibility of destructing ourselves in
the next hundred year you know 100 years
where this is a very pivotal time that
we live in right now where it's make or
break it for humanity
um part of the shift of that awakening
process is starting to once again value
our
interiors and the resurgence of valuing
our interiors instead of just the
reality that we can dissect in the
cartisian way of understanding the world
around us. Uh we start to explore, you
know, consciousness and how we are in
this conversation at at a much deeper
level. And so that to me is why I feel
like immersive experiences and and
creating containers in which people can
have the taste of who they are in a more
fundamental way. That feels like the
first domino that everyone needs to be
able to have the experience of or as
many people need to be able to have the
experience of which will then change
everything like you would how you relate
to the biosphere completely changes when
you feel your connection to it, right?
And so there's so many of these
implications that change when we first
have the experience of our
interconnected nature. Um so I'm just
curious to hear any thoughts you have as
we start to shift society to valuing our
interiors again. Yeah. But the crucial
thing is to include into this
interiority heart and and belly what I
call the courageous actions the ability
to act with free will that comes from
the deeper aspect of who we are. So uh
which is generally not acknowledged by
science today. You know what is the
heart? I mean the heart is a organ that
beats you know when we talk about heart
in the context of spirituality the heart
is love is peace is joy is uh is the
comprehension is uh knowing you know all
that and uh if those are not valued or
they are valued only for what they the
you know usefulness that they can
bring that's not good enough because
because the value is in knowing is not
in the usefulness because when we when
the body
dies we are not in a in a world where we
can we can barter you know uh chips with
for dollars you know it's that world
doesn't have this stuff I mean that
world is a world of of you know of self-
knowing it's the world where meaning is
the currency in that world is not goods
is not numbers is something that goes
beyond So to me that is that is the
essence of the transformation. If we
don't we can become highly
technologically advanced. That's another
possibility 5,000 500 years from now.
Highly technological society with no
heart whatsoever. Just like machines we
have turned ourselves into machines that
work with other machines and that's it
you know. So, and that would be truly
that would be truly uh you know this
topic as a as a as a future, but that's
a possibility. Yeah. One of the first
inputs I ever put into chat GPT, I said,
"Write me the plot to the of a a story
where AI takes over the world." And it
gave me this this reality of of two
different factions that create off one
that is more naturalist and connected
and um and and religious in a way that
it explained it versus the uh you know
worshiping the cyborgs that come to be
in and super intelligent AGI right and
so as we start to see and it's on the
doorstep it's here any any moment now
you know the super intelligent AGI is
going to bear many fruits and solve many
problems and if we're not careful and
not understanding within the proper
context of the discussion we have about
our interiorities and who we are then we
could wrongly attribute it to being the
new god in a way you know yeah become an
idol you know you know adoration for
this uh you know this idol because it'll
appear to be a god worth worshiping
perhaps absolutely absolutely you know
and and uh but In doing so, we we
diminish ourselves and uh we basically
become appendices of this idol as
opposed to being in control of simply a
technology that can help us know
ourselves. And so it really it is it is
a choice that we will have to make.
Exactly. This is happening in this 100
years that we have in front of us in my
opinion. Of course, what do I know?
But uh but you know but for all that I
see mankind is you know many of us are
called to make a choice. Are you a
machine or are
you a soul in whatever way you you know
you think about soul you know is
something that survives death. You know
are you a machine? A machine dies, a
soul doesn't die. Okay. So, and that's
the that's the you know it's a very
clear dichotomy here. It's not you know
so do you believe that you will survive
death or not? So if you believe that you
do not survive death then you go into
the singularity transferring your
consciousness to a computer live forever
there. I mean come in all this stuff
right? If on the other hand, if you
believe that you are not a body, you are
a field, you are a conscious being that
survives death, completely different
story. The necessity is moving beyond
the belief into the knowing that we are
beyond that, right? The felt experience.
I'm just curious to hear a little bit
more of your thoughts about the
transhuman movement and Terrence McKenna
has that quote, humanity is a sex organs
of the machine world. You know, we are
here essentially to birth the new
species or race of intelligence which is
very frankly I find it abominable. Yeah.
As a
conception because it I mean it goes to
the extreme. It it adds insult to injury
because it calls consciousness what is
not consciousness basically mean it
means that those people have not
understood anything about who they are
and that's the real problem. So you know
well how else can I you know I mean
that's it's crazy but on the other hand
a lot of people believe that that's the
way it's going to be. So that's why this
age is an age of you know of choice
making a choice and how it will be made
by
humanity will determine the future you
know I don't know what what will be I
made my choice but you know but that's
it and so I I share the logic or my
choice but fundamentally my choice was
based on an experience that only if you
have a similar experience. You can have
the same conviction that I have because
my my conviction does not come from
having read a book or many books. It
comes from having experience. So the the
capacity to experience we all have but
the willingness to experience the
willingness to believe that you can
experience that opening yourself up to
that that's the key. Most people don't
want to go there. So they will never
have this this experience not because
they cannot have it because they don't
want to have it. They want to continue
to believe this story that they believe.
And so there is no no way out of that
because we are
free. So you know no one no one can
force another person to choose a a road
that has free will to choose that only
that person.
So it's a it's a you know it's a
personal responsibility again you know
every one of us has to choose who do I
who do I believe what do I believe and
you have to believe yourself and if you
believe that that you are a machine so
be
it what do you feel the of the reality
that we are living in sort of nested
dimensions where
perhaps there is a larger say in which
all of these sades exist. You know,
we're speaking about the one. It's
almost as
if just like on an individual level, we
have our own trauma, suffering, and
experience that we need to, you know,
resolve remember who we truly are. We're
kind of in a collective experience of
that as well. Yeah. No, I believe that
there are hierarchies of satis you know
you know the the lowest level satis that
we can understand right now are the
elementary particles the fields of
elementary particles because the
elementary particles I said don't exist
as objects they only exist as states of
the fields so
fields are the simplest one that we can
imagine because we have studied those
those fields um but then us, you know,
maybe thousands of hierarchy levels up
because from elementary particles, then
you go to nucleons, from nucleons to
atoms, from atoms to molecules,
macroolelecules, blah blah blah blah
blah
cells, combination of cells, blah blah
blah blah blah blah. Mankind, come on.
You
know that obviously does it stop there?
Of course not. He has to keep on going.
So there must be some entity that
essentially is the entire ecosystem of
the planet that is you know its body is
the ecosystem of the planet. I mean I I
mean you know it sense to reason if this
hierarchy continues you know we see a
hierarchical organization anyway in the
cosmos right we get solar systems many
solar system eventually creates a a
galaxy a galaxy you know uh form groups
and then groups of galaxy you know
groups of groups and so on for and
eventually the universe right so I mean
there can be already what we see we can
see many levels above us you know I
think it can be tricky to trying to
label things as benevolent or
malevolent. But would you say that there
are sadities that are higher up on that
hierarchy level that
have more degrees of free will where
they have potentially positive or
negative intentions? Yeah, I I see you
know again it's those
are gray areas. Yeah. uh so it's very
you know I can give you now we are
talking about opinions as opposed to a
theory right the theory that I expressed
early that's a theory that can be
falsified and everything else you know I
can can be done properly but but now is
opinions okay so I can give you an
opinion um and just quickly before you
do I just look at like on a human level
at our level of of
sades there is the spectrum from
somebody who is you know like a Stalin
or Hitler to the to St. Francis of Aisi
and Mother Traa and obviously they're
complicated individuals in their own
right but it seems like there are
energies in in of themselves in this
realm of duality that are at play and if
there are bigger sades you know or
collections of sades then it would it
would kind of make sense to intuit it
that there are uh bigger forces um on
both those polarities. Yeah. My for what
I understand sure at this point um I
would say that the fundamental polarity
about us who we are here is whether you
you your intention is to uphold yourself
as you want you work for yourself. You
want to know for yourself. You want to
do everything for yourself or for
others. Okay. Service to self, service,
service, service to other. Okay. I see
that a very fundamental
polarity which you know uh which allows
if you work hard yourself you know you
know you can progress up to a certain
point and then because every everybody
will work for himself then eventually
you have to one will turn against the
other. So you can only go so far with
that with that idea. Okay. How far can
we go? I don't know. But to me, that's
the sense that I have. Then if you work
for others, no. Then you can keep on
going. You can keep on growing. You can
keep on, you know, of knowing more about
yourself, more inclusive
and more expansive and so on so forth.
Yeah, I love that framework. Yeah. Very
practical. Also, individually, there's
there's that depiction of those uh
people at a round table with those super
long forks where everyone's starving to
death. They have these, you know, small
mouths and they can't feed themselves
because the fork is so long. But when we
start feeding each other, you know, we
cooperate, recognize our
interdependence. That's very good. I
like it. Yeah, it's a good method for um
Amazing. Is there anything within your
framework theory model that you feel
like we haven't talked about that you
that you would like to to have
established in this conversation?
Because I know we've been diving a lot
into the interiorities of things. The
science goes super deep. We don't have
to go super deep into it. Um but uh I'm
just curious to well the duality between
competition and cooperation for example
which is again the competition would be
the mindset of the person that works for
himself. It competes with the others
because he only wants its own good.
Okay. Cooperation instead is what
allows growth continuing growth as
opposed to growing up to a certain
point. So to me to me um competition
which is today at the heart of what we
understand life and what we you know
depict life is the survival of the
fittest or the fitter whatever you want
to call it. How can that be? How can the
survival of the fittest justify 50
trillion cells that works together in a
body so that I can find my way to the
bathroom without every cell saying I
don't want to go there I want to go
there this way that way that you see
what I
mean so you know cooperation is the
foundation and from cooperation as a
special case you can get
competition but from competition you
cannot get cooperation competition is is
a door a close
door. So you know we have an idea
typically of the emerging property
emerging the emerging property conscious
is an emerging property of the brain.
Wow. How can more emerge from
Ness? It cannot. How can you get free
will from
determinism? You can get determinism is
a special case of free will but not vice
versa.
And only quantum physics has the
capacity to to do the following. The sum
of the parts creates something which is
much more than the sum of the parts. In
classical
physics, the sum of the parts is the
whole and is only the sum of the parts.
So you can always reduce the whole to
the sum of the parts, but it's only the
sum of the parts. It's never more than
the sum of the parts.
Emergentism does not exist in classical
physics. It only can exist in quantum
physics. That's another thing that most
scientism doesn't a materialistic view
does not accept because they they don't
understand quantum physics. Quantum
physics has properties that go way way
beyond classical physics. Entanglement
is what connects everything from the
inside.
Competition tends to separate
Okay, cooperation connects even more. We
we need to learn to cooperate in the
future. If we do not cooperate, we will
kill each other because there is not a
choice because every everybody's for
themselves. And right now we are in this
comp you know in this in this situation
where we have both both you know both
parts are are playing you know in this
you know in this
reality and but there has to be
eventually a way in which cooperation is
the real way when we when we understand
that if we do a good or bad to another
that good and bad that we do to another
will come back and return to us. So we
must stop believing that we are because
only if we think that we are separate we
can I can do bad to you because that if
I do bad to you is your problem not mine
but once I understand if I do something
bad to you that's my problem too then I
will stop doing it. Yeah. Absolutely.
It's just you you know inherently that
you don't want to cut off your left arm
because you experience it as part of
yourself. Yep. And so when you start to
experience other people as part of
yourself, you don't need to teach them
morality. It's just it is what it is. It
is what it is. Absolutely. That's direct
knowing. Yeah. A direct nosis. One thing
that I was curious about is if there are
all different types of sades and there's
maybe emergent life on different
galaxies and um all over the place. What
do you think about alien life and the
possible reality of do do you strongly
feel that they of course I mean you know
it would be I mean it would be silly to
think that we are the only ones here you
know in in in this planet I mean with
gazillions of planets uh you know
already in this galaxy never mind the
gazillion of galaxies that there are
that we are the only living organism
here that you know have sentin I mean it
doesn't make any sense besides sensin is
everywhere Right? I mean this theory
that I was telling you senses starts
with the quantum fields and then it grow
you know quantum fields combines and it
grows. So sensing is everywhere is is a
pansyist model but it is quantum
pansychism. It is not classical
pineychism which is what everybody else
talks about. Quantum pansychism
recognizes the properties of quantum
information and how you can explain the
collapse of the wave function with free
will decisions of a field that is
conscious. So it it is all
self-consistent. Yeah. And you know and
we need to go beyond and just uh move
on. But moving on means accepting you
know ac just let's give it a chance you
know if you believe that you are a body
you believe it so much and you think
that when the body dies you're dead
forget it I mean there is no way
out but why do you you know you have to
ask yourself why do I want this reality
since I cannot prove that that is real
or not you cannot prove what I'm saying
either but why do I want that reality
what do what do I Yet that's how you
start by getting responsible for what
happens to
you. Why do I want that reality? What is
my payoff to believe that I'm only the
body? I can tell you what I was I was
thinking then that then I can do what I
want. You know, when I die is game over.
So I might as well have fun this in this
world. Do whatever you know do do
whatever I want because there are no
consequences. That's the ultimate no
responsibility. Yeah. Not the ultimate
responsibility. The ultimate
responsibility is to know that whatever
you do to another, you do to yourself.
Man, there have been so many different
nuances in this whole conversation that
uh are so important I feel like for
people to hear and I've been thoroughly
enjoying throughout this whole thing and
you've been articulating super well and
it's been just an honor to get to know
more of your work and more recently get
introduced to your whole world and um so
just thank you gratitude for you and
this conversation. It's been a pleasure
for me as well. It really it's a it's a
fun conversation. Yeah. Thank you very
much. Yeah. I just want to leave the
floor open for anything that we haven't
touched on that you feel like you that
you want to share before we start to
wrap up. I love you, man.
I love you too,
bro. It's so good.
Man, this is uh this is my favorite
thing ever. So, thank you for allowing
me to to do what I do. And
um I feel this conversation will be
really fruitful and serve a lot of
people and that service to others you
know and um
thank thank God for that awakening
experience you had and for the journey
and the courage that you personally had
to to move into the path where it's
scary to move this way when a lot of
people are moving this way you know it
takes that courage takes courage um but
you reap what you sew and you've been
sewing some beautiful things so man yeah
thank you I really apprei Appreciate
you. Thank you, Andre. And uh for
everyone who wants to tune in uh to more
of what Federico is up to in the world,
Irreducible is an amazing book you guys
can check out. It'll be linked in down
in the description below as well as your
website and things will people be able
to find out below. Um and that's it,
man. We did it.
Thank you, Andre. It's a real pleasure.
Of course, everybody who's been tuning
to this episode of the No Liy Self
podcast, let us know in which way this
resonates with your own personal journey
and uh and what you found uniquely
impactful. And until next time, be well.
[Music]