Why do we have the experience of being
conscious? Can you build consciousness
just by putting together lots of neurons
in the right way? Or might there be
deeper principles at work? Could quantum
physics have something to do with the
brain and specifically with
consciousness? Is it possible that
consciousness is actually something that
predates biology and there's a sense in
which biology evolved to take advantage
of it? And what are the right ways to
make new theories in neuroscience when
we don't know the answers?
Welcome to Inner Cosmos with me, David
Eagleman. I'm a neuroscientist and
author at Stanford. And in these
episodes, we sail deeply into our
three-pound universe to uncover some of
the most surprising aspects of our
lives.
Today's episode is about consciousness
and quantum mechanics and the question
of whether there could be even possibly
any connection between them. So to get
at this, I'll be talking today with
Roger Penrose, mathematical physicist
and polymath and winner of the 2020
Nobel Prize in physics and also Stuart
Hammeroff, an anesthesiologist who has
collaborated with Penrose for many years
on a theory. Before we dive into those
interviews, I want to set the table by
saying that what we're going to talk
about today are speculative ideas and
many neuroscientists don't even like to
go near them. But the fact is that
despite the thousands of neuroscience
journals and textbooks and laboratories,
there are still fundamental basic
questions that we don't know the answer
to. And one of the most fundamental is
the question of consciousness. Why does
anything feel like something? In other
words, imagine that you built a little
toy out of pulleys and levers and
switches. Would you say that it is
conscious? Presumably, you wouldn't. Now
double your little toy in size with new
levers and switches and pulleys. Is it
conscious now? There's no particular
theoretical reason to think so. Now keep
adding to it. Put on another pulley and
another lever and another little door
and attach a wheel and keep doing this
until you fill a room and then a
stadium. Do you have any reason to
assume that it becomes conscious and has
internal experience just because it's
more and more complex? If you now remove
a pulley, does it feel pain? And if you
put a little molecular detector on it
such that it can recognize molecules of
different shapes, does it have a
different experience like displeasure
for some shapes and pleasure for other
shapes? And where is that happening? I
certainly wouldn't think that your giant
toy is conscious or at least let me say
that I have no theoretical reason to
believe that it suddenly experiences
pain or hunger or longing or pleasure
because it's just pieces and parts. So
this is a fundamental question about the
brain. We look at your 86 billion
neurons which are generally thought of
especially now in this era of AI as
being units that are popping either on
or off one or zero. And so it's not
clear to any of us in neuroscience why
we have private subjective experience.
And this is true whether you have 86
neurons or 86 billion or 86 gajillion of
them. Why do these little electrical
signals and chemical releases give us
the experience of eating a lemon or the
pleasure of an orgasm or the pain of
stubbing your toe?
Now, we don't know the answer, but
here's a speculation that some people
have put forward. Could consciousness,
the most intimate, subjective, elusive
feature of our existence, have something
to do with quantum physics? Now, this is
not a mainstream idea in neuroscience.
You're not going to find it in the
standard textbooks. Most cognitive
scientists, if asked to explain
consciousness, will talk about neurons
and synapses and the emergent properties
of complex systems. the language will be
biological and electrochemical and
computational. But a few scientists have
suggested a hypothesis that there's
something deeper going on, something
much stranger. And that's what we're
going to explore today. I'm not
presenting an argument that quantum
mechanics does explain consciousness,
but it's worth understanding why some
serious minds are entertaining the
hypothesis. So we'll begin with Roger
Penrose who is perhaps an unexpected
figure in this conversation because he's
not a neuroscientist. He's a
mathematical physicist. He's done so
many amazing things in his career. He
worked with Stephven Hawking on black
hole singularities or you might know him
for his geometrical shapes called
Penrose tiles. And you certainly know
him because in 2020 he won the Nobel
Prize in physics for showing that black
holes result naturally from Einstein's
general theory of relativity. And by the
way, he's also the one who
mathematically described black holes in
detail, including their singularity,
where all known laws of nature dissolve.
But especially in the 1980s and 90s,
Roger Penrose turned his attention
toward the brain. Not because he wanted
to build a better theory about
cognition, but because he had a concern
about algorithms. Penrose felt that
consciousness just can't be explained by
any rule-based system. He pointed to an
idea called Girdle's incompleteness
theorem which said look there are
mathematical truths that we can see to
be true but they can't be proven within
mathematics. In other words, there are
many systems where we can see things to
be true but the system itself can't
prove them. You need to somehow step
outside of the system. Now to Penrose,
this was a sign that human understanding
operates in a way that transcends
computation. In other words, he said
brains aren't just computers. And if
they're not just computers, then the
mystery of consciousness might demand a
different kind of physics. So he wrote a
very interesting book called The
Emperor's New Mind, which asserted that
the brain can't just be a computer. So
in your book Emperor's New Mind which I
read as a as a young person and really
loved you. So you argue that
consciousness can't be explained by
algorithms.
So help us to understand that. But it
really means you see an algorithm is
just a sort of technical word for a
computer program if you like. Maybe
people use that term. It just means that
you have a rule
which is a computational rule. Right.
And why why what made you feel that
consciousness can't be explained by
algorithms? Well, it goes back to the
girdle the lecture that steam gave about
girdle theorem and I realized that you
see if you see mathematical proof you
could have a set of rules rule axioms
and rules of procedure and these are of
a nature that you could put them on a
computer. Do you think there are forms
of human insight that fundamentally
cannot be replicated by algorithms? Is
that that's correct? Okay. Yes.
Absolutely right. Okay. Great. And so
and so that made you think that maybe
this mystery of consciousness needed to
be taken seriously by
physicists and mathematicians. So yes,
so how did you how did you start
addressing this? You see, I was trying
to think about the laws of physics
that um we sort of understand and some
of them are very powerful. Well, even
Newtonian mechanics explains an awful
lot. Um Einstein's general theory of
relativity explains a lot more uh and
it's more difficult to apply things, but
it's still computational. What about
quantum mechanics? Now before we go
further, I just want to give a reminder
about what quantum physics is. It's the
branch of physics that describes the
behavior of matter and energy at the
smallest possible scales at the level of
atoms and subatomic particles. And down
there, the world behaves nothing like
what we're used to. Particles can be in
more than one place at once. This is
what's known as superp position.
Particles can become mysteriously linked
across space. in what's called
entanglement. And the most bizarre
feature of all is that the mere act of
measuring a system seems to affect its
outcome. This is what's called the
observer effect. In our current
understanding of quantum mechanics, the
story is that until a particle is
observed, its properties don't exist in
a definite way. They exist only in
probabilities. In other words, a quantum
particle doesn't have a precise location
until you look at it. Until that moment,
it's smeared across a range of
possibilities. And then those
possibilities collapse to one outcome
when you observe. Now, this isn't just a
metaphor. This general idea has been
tested and confirmed for over a century,
and it's built into the fabric of our
technology. Quantum mechanics is the
science that allows the transistors in
your cell phone and the lasers at the
grocery store scanners and the GPS in
your car. Quantum mechanics is real and
it's very counterintuitive. And it seems
to tell us that at the heart of reality
is a kind of indeterminacy, a fuzziness
that only collapses into certainty when
it's observed. So think of it roughly
this way. You toss a coin in the air and
while it's spinning, it's not heads or
tails. It's sort of like it's both at
once. But the instant you catch it and
look, it becomes just one. Heads or
tails. That moment of catching it is
like the wave function collapsing. Now,
here's the thing. In quantum mechanics,
there's no way to predict what the
coin's going to be, heads or tails. And
so that non-computable strangeness,
that's what Penrose was interested in.
He wondered what if that indeterminacy,
that collapse of possibilities into one
real outcome wasn't just a physical
process, but also has to do with a
mental one. In other words, what if the
flicker of consciousness is related in
some way to the collapse of the quantum
wave function?
So back to Penrose talking about his
search for something non-computable and
getting interested in the collapse. What
about quantum mechanics? Then I thought,
well, it's shroing equation. There's no
problem about putting that on. There may
be lots of parameters involved which
make it tricky. But that's a well
determined deterministic equation.
But the Schroinger equation doesn't give
you what happens in the world. Why
doesn't it give you what happens?
Schroinger himself was very keen on
explaining these things and his
well-known cat. He was making the point
this is just an absurdity to have a cat
which is dead and alive at the same time
is a nonsense.
This is point of what he was trying to
make. He was saying this is an
absurdity. His equation he was trying to
say he was saying roughly speaking my
equation does not describe reality.
there is something more and this
something more is what we tend to call
the collapse of the wave function. Your
wave function chugs along and behaves
according to the Schroinger equation
very reliably and honestly and then from
now time to time it says whoops I'm
going to do something else and then it
becomes probabilistic and it's all
hidden in all sorts of mathematical
schemes. So your argument is that
classical computation can't explain
consciousness. And so the question is
then what can and this is where you make
the fascinating proposal that quantum
mechanics and specifically the collapse
of the wave function might be involved
in consciousness. See people say
sometimes I just think well here's a
problem and here's a problem so they're
the same thing. It's not that. is that
we need something which which is not a
computable part of physics. What is it
in the physics that we know that would
not be possible to put on a computer?
Well, you see, if the collapse of the
wave function is purely random, then you
could put it on a computer source off
and it's not perhaps really random. It's
something very subtle and you need that
for the collapse of the wave function.
And the story has developed in other
ways beyond what I had then. You see,
this was the beginning of the story. And
you're asking me about the beginning.
The beginning was the story. It was a
little bit feeble in the sense that I
didn't know really much about what to
do. I could see that in my according to
my viewpoint, the collapse of the wave
function had to be a major part of the
physics which is responsible for evoking
consciousness. So to summarize where we
are, Roger felt certain that
consciousness couldn't be explained just
by classical computation. Again, most of
quantum mechanics you can easily model
on a computer, like the evolution of the
Schroinger wave function. But there's
something very weird about the collapse.
That's the part you can't compute. So
Roger felt he was on to something
interesting there. So he sat down and
wrote The Emperor's New Mind. And the
title, as you might guess, was a
reference to the story of the emperor's
new clothes. The idea being that
everyone is assuming we can explain
consciousness by putting together enough
neurons. But in fact, in his view, the
emperor is naked. Consciousness possibly
can't be explained by just a bunch of
neurons. So I asked Roger what happened
just after he published the book in
1989. I wrote my book, The Emperor's New
Mind, and hoping some young people might
be stimulated, only got old, retired
people. I thought I'd done a sort of
fairly reasonable job as an ignoramist,
but not too bad a job of trying to learn
the main features of neurohysiology. So,
Roger started studying up on the brain,
really as a side gig to his mathematical
physics career. But the more he looked
at it, he thought that maybe the macro
level at which we were able to study the
brain wasn't really revealing its
secrets. But I would say that it has a
genuine
deep purpose
and that purpose is not clearly revealed
in the in the structures, but it's not
something which is obviously like a
computer. Something else going on, but I
didn't know what was going on. I had no
real idea. By the time I got to the end
of my April humor, I I just I could have
stopped writing in this book, but I
thought, well, that's I've written so
much so far, I better go on. And so I
more or less thought of some idea, which
I didn't really believe. I tried to
think of something that might be
non-computable. You see, so that's where
things were for Roger's idea. He
suspected there must be some kind of
quantum effects in the brain, but he
didn't know where to look. But at the
same time in America there was a young
anesthesiologist named Stuart Hammeroff
who was interested in consciousness and
uh I got interested in consciousness and
I went to med school and was interested
in neurology, neurosurgery, psychiatry
but I didn't like those lifestyles uh
particularly what what they got to do.
They didn't actually get to do much. The
surgeons did but the neurologists in
particular didn't have much to do. And
um I took a research elective over a
summer in a cancer lab and studied
mitosis. I figured just try something
different and uh so we uh studying cell
division and as you know the cells
divide the chromosomes are separated by
these spindles which are microtubules.
That's Stuart Hammeroff and while
everyone in that lab was interested in
the chromosomes where the genes are he
found himself interested in the
microtubules. Now what are microtubules?
The starting point here is that all the
cells in the brain like neurons and gal
cells are not empty. Inside every single
brain cell is a bustling inner world.
You've got all kinds of structures that
help the cell keep its shape and
transport materials around. And among
these structures are microtubules, which
are tiny hollow tubes. They're part of
the cell's skeleton. Sometimes people
think of these like the tracks that
guide packages through a warehouse. Now,
these are very, very tiny. Each
microtubule is about 25 nanometers in
diameter, which means you can line up
4,000 of them across the width of a
single human hair. And they're long,
too. So, they stretch like tiny straws
all through the interior of the neuron.
Now, what's amazing is these are
constantly assembling and disassembling
themselves, almost like living Legos,
and this adjusts the internal
architecture of the cell in real time.
So Stuart got interested in these
microtubules and wondered if they were
more than just railroad tracks. Back to
Stuart. Well, microtubules are found in
all cells, including neurons, which are
full of them. And they are like the
skeleton and the scaffolding of the
cell, but they're also the nervous
system of the cell. They organize
things. And their structure I learned
back then is a lattice kind of like a
computer lattice where you have
individual units proteins called
tubulants that I thought back then uh
can be in two two states uh like like
flexing like a peanut open and closed
and that would be like a bit a one or a
zero. So Hamroof was looking carefully
at these and he proposed that
microtubules might be doing something
beyond structural work that instead of
just looking at the microtubule as a
roadway, you might think about the
details of the microtubules and ask
whether this could be a structure that
was a lot more interesting than it first
appeared. So he started modeling
tubulins, the little bricks of
microtubules, and came to the conclusion
that you could store something like 10
to the 16th bits of information in a
single neuron using microtubules. And
this was essentially the number that
people were talking about for the
storage capacity of the entire brain.
Now his colleagues were skeptical. They
didn't want to hear it. Told me to get
lost. So except then one day, fateful
day, this guy said to me, okay, wise
asked, let's say you're right. How would
that explain consciousness? How would
that explain? Love, feelings, pinkness,
joy, blah blah blah. Essentially, the
hard problem 5 years before Dave uh
announced and uh but I, you know, I knew
the knew the problem. I said, "Whoa,
you're right. I have no idea. I was a
reductionist and I didn't I was ashamed
of myself actually." So, wait, actually,
just one second. I want to make sure
everyone's following. So, the hard
problem of consciousness is you've got
all this physical stuff happening in the
brain. Why does it feel like anything?
Why do we have experience? That's the
hard problem. Okay. So, so you were
looking at these microtubules which are
made up of these tubulant peanut shaped
proteins and you're saying hey there's
something really interesting here but um
but it didn't solve the hard problem
right so okay I was just saying more
computation more information processing
so and the guy had a beautiful point and
I was kind of stunned and he said you
should read this book by Roger Penrose
called the emperor's new mind I said
I've kind of heard of that guy so I
bought the book I read it and I was kind
of blown away I mean it's a amazing book
The first half is about why
consciousness is not a computation. He
used something called Girdle's theorem
for mathematics which said a
mathematical theorem cannot prove
itself. You need somebody or something
outside the system like a a
mathematician to say yeah it's true or
not. And he extrapolated that and said
it's like understanding you know to
understand something you need to be
outside the system. Very similar to John
Surl's Chinese room argument. You know
the guy has the Chinese symbols he looks
them up and he translates but he doesn't
understand Chinese. So that's the he's
just doing computer operations and so
that was the difference and Roger so the
second half of the book was Roger's
solution which had something to do with
quantum physics and collapse of the wave
function the measurement problem in
quantum mechanics which is a whole
another mystery and uh but he said the
solution to that mystery is the same as
is for consciousness but Roger didn't
have a biological structure that could
be at the quantum level and he said in
the book I don't know what it is maybe
somebody does so I read the book and I
said holy crap he needs microtubules. I
had been studying for 20 years. So
Stuart wrote Roger a letter. But then
Stuart Hammerov read my book and wrote
back to me and said, "Evidently, you
don't know about microtubules." He was
absolutely right. If I'd known about
right microtubules, I'd say here's a
much better bet.
For various reasons, they are partly
because they're tubes. Actually, it
seemed to me that there is a much better
chance you could isolate quantum
effects. So, they met up in England and
Roger was very taken by the geometry of
these microtubules. Tell us what is
special about microtubules. Well, what's
special about microtubules? There's
several things which excited me about
them. Some of them are sort of
peripheral but not not so stupid maybe.
They are tubes to begin with. And that
struck me as much better chance to
preserve coherence. You see, if you're
going to have the collapse of the wave
function, you've got to have a well-
definfined wave function which isn't
collapsed by the environment. You see,
normally what happens is that that the
environment collapses it. And that's no
use to anybody. The standard, as I say,
land vonoman arguments
you say that the collapse occurs because
the environment gets involved. you have
no control over the environment and so
therefore it behaves randomly in some
way. In other words, he's pointing out
that the environment normally collapses
the wave function very rapidly. But he
appreciated the possibility that
microtubules might serve as a wave
guide, which means there's something
about the particular structure of these
long thin straws that keeps the wave
function uncolapsed for a longer time.
A, they're tubes.
B, they have a very symmetrical
structure of the the the tubulins and
they they combine together in this
particular structure which I found
fascinating
because it has for example symmetries in
three different directions. One is along
the axis, one is twisting one way and
the other is twisting the other way. So
it just struck me what's funny about
these microtubules. You have these
microtubles which have one direction
along the tube and that seems to mirror
what you get in these nano tubes that
they become superconductive. So this
suggested to me that maybe there is some
quantum superconductive effect along the
tubes which is quite different from
nerve transmission and which is
absolutely a quantum effect. So the idea
is you've got these microtubules which
are inside all the neurons and these can
serve as wave guides. One of the
criticisms that people have had about
quantum mechanics in the brain is they
say look it's too warm and noisy in
there. What what do you say uh in
response to that? Well that's a general
comment. You might expect that applies
if you if it hasn't got some very very
specific structure. Um, and the microtub
was I thought much better chance of that
sort of thing. I mean, they're doing a
pretty trick, pretty good trick. You
see, if they actually are preserving
coherence along the tubes, this is a
neat trick that nature allegedly I'm
saying that is to say that's my
viewpoint, must actually have succeeded
and making this trick. I the general
comment is warm and messy sure as a
whole but there are structures within
this warm and messy things. You don't
need the whole thing to be structured in
this way. You just need certain elements
in this complicated structure which as a
whole may be warm and messy and all
sorts of things. But there are things
the claim goes which can preserve
quantum coherence. And the idea is that
maybe microtubules do. And when I heard
about them for Stuart, I thought that
was a much better case than anything I'd
seen before. So Hammeroff and Penrose
got interested in this possible
relationship between microtubules and
quantum mechanics. But what does any of
this have to do with consciousness? Back
to my interview with Stuart. In quantum
mechanics, things can be in different
positions. The wave function predicts
how that moves along nicely. But what
happens is you get a collapse of the
wave function which tells you hey the
let's say the particle is over here over
here and the idea was the collapse that
moment when that happens there's uh some
consciousness in the universe that's
what he predicted that's what he
predicted okay other people were saying
conscious comes to the outside and
causes a collapse but that puts
consciousness outside science it's a
dualist position actually one of the
charmers takes now but other you know
goes back to vigner and vonorman and and
bore um uh early part of the 20th
century and then uh and and others had
many didn't want collapse to deal with
it or consciousness. So they just said
many worlds it's easier to think about
than consciousness and uh and Roger came
up with a solution said the separations
are unstable and will collapse and give
consciousness and due to an objective
threshold given by the indeterminacy
principle one equation okay and so who
is experiencing the consciousness or the
qualia when there's a collapse of the
wave function the collapse itself is
who's is who what is experiencing I
don't think this is controversial I
don't there needs to be a separate self.
Uh other people disagree with me on
that. Um but I think if you have a
sequence of experiences and memory, you
have a self. You know who you are. You
know when you wake up in the morning,
the same person moment to moment. So I
don't think there's any separate entity
as the self. I think just I think you
have a sequence of experiences, complex
experiences. I should go back and say
when when when the u objective reduction
that's his name for objective threshold
quantum state reduction objective
reduction or or uh when that occurs in
the environment in in the chair anywhere
other than uh in particular arrangements
it's the experience is random fleeting
uh disconnected it comes and it goes
it's apparently happening all around us
we never know what it is it's like and
that was protoconcious so that they call
that protoconscious and I liken that to
uh if you go to the symphony and the
musicians are tuning their instruments
before and you hear all this to me noise
to a trained musician it's different but
to me it's like you know it's it's noise
and then they start to play and it's
bronze or beethoven or whatever and uh
and that's what the brain does that's
what the microtubules do orchestrates
the objective reduction hence the theory
is orchestrate objective reduction okay
so when there's the collapse of the wave
function. There's a little bit of
consciousness. Um, but if you build a
device in the right way where you've got
all these microtubules that are guiding
this that are orchestrating this whole
thing, then you get something like our
consciousness and they have to they have
to be entangled. So the superposition
states become part of one one more
complicated state. So when you when
we're collapsing our conscious moments
now, there's a lot of richness in it. I
see you, you see me, I see the stuff
behind you, etc., etc. And so and
there's sound, there's uh different
senses. It's all orchestrated. I would
say integrated, but that's a different
theory. It's it's more orchestrated.
Now, what would that get us to have
entanglement across different regions of
the brain? Well, one example Stuart
turns to is what's called the binding
problem. The binding problem is a long
recognized mystery that different
regions of the brain encode very
different types of information like
movement here and colors here and face
recognition and sound and touch and yet
you enjoy a totally unified experience.
For example, let's say you're watching a
basketball player race down the court
dribbling the ball. Different areas of
your brain are processing the shape and
the movement and the sound of the ball
hitting the court, but you perceive the
whole thing as one guy racing down the
court. The colors and the motions and
the sounds don't separate off from one
another. So, how are these distinct
features processed in totally different
brain regions integrated into one
seamless perception? This remains a
central mystery in neuroscience. So how
might their theory address that spatial
temporal binding? You know, you see
something moving through the sky and it
shape, color, motion, meaning are
processed at different places in
different times in the uh visual cortex
and cortex in general and yet we see one
object. We see a yellow kite fluttering
instead of yellow kite fluttering, we
see one thing instantaneously. So it's
it's integrated or uh orchestrated in
time and uh and also in different
regions of the brain. So I think the
brain needs entanglement one way or the
other. So in other words, neuroscience
traditionally just thinks about neurons
and those are in some sense quite slow.
But maybe Hamarov suggests there are
much faster processes that are binding
things together. It's more like music.
It's more like resonance, harmonics,
interference beats. In fact, to get from
the very fast to the very slow
interference beats is probably what what
does it. So I think the brain is more a
quantum orchestra than a than a
computer. Got it. And so essentially all
our technologies are just measuring what
neurons are doing. Like you dunk an
electrode in and you see the spiking of
the neuron. And so um they're only
listening to the bass and percussion of
the symphony. They're missing the flutes
and the piccolo and the and everything
else. And what makes you think this? The
other theories don't work. All the other
theories are based on a neuron firing is
a bit or a neuron is essentially a one
or a zero. And if you look at a single
cell organism like a parramium, it swims
around. It finds food. It finds a mate.
It has sex. It can learn. If you suck it
into a capillary tube, it gets out
faster and faster each time. It's one
cell. And it does all that with its
microtubules, with its silia and its
internal microtubules. So if a parramium
can do that, are you serious in thinking
a neuron is a one or a zero and that's
it? It's an insult to neurons.
So together, Penrose and Hamoff worked
on their idea of entanglement going on
across the brain. And the hypothesis is
that these deep tubes humming away deep
inside the brain's machinery, these
orchestrate when and what collapses. So
they call this orchestrated objective
reduction. Give me the idea of of
orchestrated objective reduction. What
does that mean? And how does that
explain consciousness potentially? Okay,
think of a I used to I used to play ping
pong when I was at at school for
instance, you see, and I never achieved
any great skill at this, but I can
understand that it's a game where you
have to act very quickly. And the way if
I flick the ball into the right hand
corner as opposed to the leftand corner,
it's because I think by looking at my
opponent that he's not expecting it me
for me to flick it into the left hand
corner. And so I do that flick into that
corner because I think from what I've
just gained a very small fraction of a
second, much less than half a second, I
estimated that this is a good thing to
do.
So I think that was a conscious choice.
Now what is the current view amongst I
believe and I get this from Stuart the
current view amongst neurohysiologists
is that these actions are not conscious
they're much too quick but Stuart's view
and mine is that is conscious but it can
only occur because of the following
mechanism. The argument would be that
you could preserve quantum coherence at
a big level that it's sufficiently
isolated from the outside world that in
this layer you could preserve a lot of
quantum coherence. So that this would
mean that the action of flicking the
ball this way rather than that way and
this choice is it made conscious
consciously the current view is there's
no time that the consciousness come
about much too late for this but our
view is no there is time because the
choice of which action to take can be a
conscious one.
The action taking involves a lot of
nerve transmissions and making your arm
go this way rather than that way and all
these things. You think of a tennis
player deciding to go crosscourt rather
than the down the line and that involves
different muscle muscle actions. Now
those different muscle actions can be in
superp position kept in superp position.
So which one of them is triggered can be
done very quickly and those then the
actions take place and then and the
person does what is decided to be done.
So although the the conscious action to
move all those particular muscles like
this and that's not conscious
what's conscious is I'm going to flick
the ball to the right rather than to the
left and so that is a whole lot of
different motions which are all together
in superp position. So this is the idea
that this collection of motions and that
collection's emotions and which ones are
activated are all there together and
which one is activated is a is a
conscious choice and that conscious
choice as it is at a quantum level
choice in these very specific cells that
you get the coherent superposition of
different actions. I see. It could be
this action is under control
or this one or this one and they're all
there in quantum superposition. So the
choice you make as to which one is
controlled is a quantum choice. And
presumably when when the waveform
collapses
that's when you become conscious of
something. That's that's the idea. Yes.
That's what the consciousness is to do
with the actual collapse. One intriguing
thing is that this proposal
uh seems to blur the line between
physics and philosophy in an interesting
way. So if consciousness arises through
quantum processes,
does that suggest that consciousness is
not just a feature of brains but a more
fundamental property of the universe?
How do you see that? Yes. But you see,
but it might be you got to get it
organized in a very subtle way in order
to reveal. You see, the collapse part of
it might be easy to reveal, but the way
in which it's not quite random and quite
random probably in a very sophisticated
way. Does this hypothesis have
implications for free will?
That's a very good question. You see,
I'm quite recently sort of changed my
view on this question. I often thought
it's a sort of meaningless question in a
way. I mean does it mean that a quantum
effect is brought into play because
quantum thing is not deterministic and
does the fact that it's not
deterministic mean free will? Not
normally because it's random and if it's
random that's not free will. I mean
you're just tossing a toy. It's not
random because it's got to be doing
something. I mean, randomness isn't
beneficial in a way. You see, you could
you could make it random, but that's not
the point of free will. You could say
that. You see, people often say that
free will could be there if it's not
deterministic.
But it doesn't do you any good if it's
just random. Yeah. So, the view I have
is is more or less this. It's not even
my It's a fairly recent view, I think.
But the view is more this.
There is something retrocausal about it.
What free will really means and what I'm
arguing for here is not that you can do
anything you like and you can act
randomly if you like. You're doing what
you think is the right thing to do. So
you have the free will to do what you
think is the right thing to do. Now it
doesn't necessarily mean righteous in
the sense of virtuous. It means the in
your judgment the correct thing to do
whether it's correct just for your own
beneficialness or or for the good as the
whole or whatever that's not the point.
The point is that you are doing it
because you think it's the right thing
to do. Now that means you're
understanding it.
What kind of experimental result would
excite you most in in the coming years?
I think if you're looking at things
plausible within the current technology,
maybe some convincing kind of quantum
coherence within microtubules. I want to
ask you about AI. We've seen such
incredible progress in classical AI
systems. But given your view that
consciousness involves non-computable
processes,
do you think that AI
uh is conscious, could be conscious, or
is it just an impressive simulation? No.
In one word. Okay. It's not conscious.
Okay. and it's not going to be conscious
by having more and more and more uh
elements in your computer. So could a
quantum computer in the future could a
quantum computer be conscious if it were
designed with the right architecture or
is something else still missing? You
have to be careful about what you mean
by a quantum computer because I don't
think quantum computer in the sense that
people use that term does actively
involve using the collapse of the wave
function as part of the mechanism in
quotes because it's not really a
mechanism. That's right. Yeah. Okay. Got
it. So the the kind of quantum computers
that for example Google is working on
now because presumably it doesn't
involve the collapse of the wave
function. You think it wouldn't be
conscious as such? Is that right? Okay,
great. I asked Stuart the same question
about whether contemporary AI could be
conscious, not with the kind of
computers we have now. Uh not with a
siliconbased
and you know, our friend Dave Chamers uh
after uh decades of the hard problem
recently came out and said, "Well, uh AI
consciousness is inevitable
and throwing the heart problem under the
bus." Totally interesting. and then
backing up. And when I questioned him
about it, he said, "Well, what's the
fundament? There's no fundamental
difference between silicon and carbon."
I said, "Wrong answer, Dave. First of
all, it's not carbon. It's organic
carbon, which means aromatic rings,
which means quantum." So that and
there's a huge difference between
organic carbon and silicon. Silicon
can't do that. So, and this organic
carbon aromatic hydrocarbons have been
in the universe right from the start.
So, let's summarize. According to this
idea from Penrose and Hammeroff, the
brain isn't just a network of firing
neurons. It's also a kind of quantum
computer. Inside every single brain cell
is a whole world of microtubules. These
tiny cylindrical structures that are so
small they've traditionally been
ignored. But maybe they suggest these
structures are doing more than
organizing the cell's interior. Maybe
these microtubules are hosting quantum
processes. Maybe they're sustaining
delicate quantum states long enough to
do something meaningful and entangling
across cells and that the collapse of
these states might correspond to moments
of conscious experience. Now I just want
to repeat one point. You might be
thinking, wait, doesn't quantum physics
get washed out in warm, wet environments
like the brain? That's a reasonable
objection. In fact, it's one of the main
reasons that many scientists have been
skeptical of the orchestrated objective
reduction theory. Quantum coherence
usually does not last long in messy
biological environments. It's fragile.
But on the other hand, that skepticism
has been challenged in recent years by
findings in other parts of biology.
Quantum effects have now been observed
in photosynthesis, in bird navigation,
in the sense of smell. Somehow, living
systems might be more hospitable to
quantum phenomenon than we thought. And
if that's the case, then maybe, just
maybe, the brain has found a way to
leverage quantum effects, not just for
computation, but for consciousness
itself. Now, Penrose and Hamroof's
theory and others like it remain highly
speculative. Neuroscience continues to
make great progress without invoking
quantum mechanics. artificial neural
networks which are entirely classical in
their architecture. These have achieved
unbelievable feats like the modern
blossoming of AI.
But so far as we know artificial neural
networks like chat GPT are not
conscious. And so the idea here is that
we need to think not just bigger but
perhaps also submicroscopically
smaller. So, we've just heard from two
thinkers who aren't afraid to step
beyond the comfortable borders of their
fields to probe around in areas that
most scientists won't touch. What I find
so compelling isn't the certainty of the
theory. It's the audacity of the
question. It's the willingness to say,
"Look, perhaps our current tools aren't
enough. Maybe consciousness isn't just a
clever computation, but something much
stranger. Maybe the deepest puzzles in
neuroscience can't be solved without
rethinking everything from the ground
up. There's a long history of big leaps
in science, beginning with questions
that sounded naive or mystical. There
was a time when most of the ideas we
take for granted today were ridiculous.
So, I want to return to one last thought
from Roger. What advice would you give
to young scientists who are drawn to the
big risky questions about consciousness
but are afraid to step too far outside
conventional boundaries to be try and do
the following. You will have some
specialist view that you see in order to
make progress you got to dig deeply in a
certain area and understand that area as
well as you can and better than most
other people. But you also at the same
time should keep a broad outlook of
what's going on in the outside world and
pick up maybe if you see something which
might connect with what you're doing.
There are plenty of critics of this idea
who point out reasonably that there's
not enough experimental evidence to take
this idea with the requisite seriousness
yet. But it's okay to explore the
speculative as long as we keep one foot
planted in the empirical. The key to
making progress in science is balancing
skepticism with curiosity and openness.
All of us in neuroscience like to
believe that we're close to cracking the
puzzle of consciousness. But the fact is
we're probably just at the foot of the
mountain. And it's always possible, just
like in any field, that we're not even
asking the right questions yet. What if
we've been looking at the hardware in an
incomplete way and missing the best
tricks of physics? The fact is that the
central mystery of neuroscience for
which no one has a good answer is the
hard problem of consciousness. Why, if
we have an organ that goes around and
collects information, no different than
a camera or a microphone, why does it
feel like something presumably in a way
that your iPhone does not when it makes
a recording? Why do we have private
subjective experience of the world?
Quantum mechanics may or may not provide
the answer. Maybe we're all just
shooting in the dark until we discover a
new field in a 100 years from now called
schmantum mechanics. But whatever the
case turns out to be, it seems likely to
me that the neuroscience textbooks used
by our great great grandchildren will
have very different stories than we do
today. And future centuries will look
back on our scientific frameworks with
the quaintness that we look back on
ideas of flegiston or spontaneous
generation or that the earth was at the
center of the universe. But the only way
we're going to get there is to keep
digging deeper and asking. By not
falling for the assumption that we've
got it all figured out with our standard
textbook models, but by continuing to
propose and put to the test brave new
hypothesis.
Go to eagleman.com/mpodcast
for more information and to find further
reading. Check out my newsletter on
Substack and be a part of the online
chats there. You can watch the videos of
Inner Cosmos on YouTube or you can leave
comments.
Until next time, I'm David Eagleman and
this is Inner Cosmos.
[Music]