it doesn't matter if you have your coins or your seed phrases.
If they can control everything about the way you think.
does money really matter in think about who Trump put in all these people,
they gave us half truths and half truths always lead to full lies.
Saylor is not who you think he is.
Google uses algorithms to control the way we think.
Remember who owns Google, He's a proxy for the transhumanist technologists,
but also for the bankers.
And when he showed up at Trump's
inauguration, that was a big sign to me that we got a big problem.
our biggest attack vector are the huge
OG bitcoiners You're going to be shocked when you find out.
that many of this cypherpunks are those transhumanist,
and they were funded from Epstein and Israel.
It's no longer survival of the fittest, bro.
It's survival of the wisest.
That's a neurosurgeon
and world renowned decentralized health expert, doctor Jack Cruz.
I warn you, most people aren't ready for his shocking evidence
that could change how you see Bitcoin forever.
In this episode, he exposes the hidden transhumanist agenda
secretly targeting your Bitcoin.
which is exactly what transhumanist technology does,
then you begin to understand the big attack factor.
Why getting cozy with governments was Bitcoin's
biggest mistake and how it's backfiring right now.
kumbaya moment is going to end with the midterms Decades of buried
history revealing exactly what's coming next for your privacy and freedom.
The Bank Secrecy Act happens literally
six months after Lansky is detained by the U.S government.
it starts the process to the Cbdc.
Plus, Doctor Cruz reveals the alarming reason
they want to destroy your health and what you can do about it.
what's the easiest way to be controlled
by a government is when you have bad health.
All right.
Good morning, uncle Jack.
Thank you so much for joining us today.
Very excited to have this conversation.
Just to kind of kick things off, there's always a ton of noise
and distractions going on in the world.
I just want to get a sense of what you're looking at,
what currently has your attention that you think Bitcoiners
should be focused on, that they're actually not at the moment.
I think how the geopolitical,
issues of the day, are going to hit
decentralized living, decentralized money
and decentralized thinking from a first principles basis.
Interesting.
On that note, kind of what is there anything specific?
So like things that have my attention would be along
the lines of this seems to be a growing split on the right.
And so gives people a little bit more open,
a little more skeptical of things going on in the world,
which for me means they might be primed for Bitcoin and decentralized health.
But I wonder if there's anything else that you're seeing.
Well, I think there's actually,
a preexisting split that happened on the left where they went
from conservative moderates to hardcore communists and fascists.
And I think that predated what you're seeing now on the right that I think,
that if you look like you have to realize this, a little bit of a.
A tough one for me to get involved with
because I was an apolitical person prior to three years ago.
And then I became very active in the political scene
because I sense that potentially
I may be able to move the needle
with certain things that, you know, I did here with Kelly,
then, shared with Bobby Kennedy, Nicole Shanahan, and eventually to Trump.
And here we are now in that post epic world
where we now see MAGA is not about my heart.
We also see it's mostly about MAGA.
And I think many of the people in the Bitcoin community,
guys that I know, you guys know, like have been fooled.
David Bailey has been really looked at as, a fool at this point.
Yeah.
it doesn't make me happy to say that because I think David's a good guy.
I think he who truly tries to serve our community
of those who are Orange Caldwell.
But let's also be very frank here.
I think, you know, BTC sessions is also pointing this out.
There's been a huge fallacy with the Treasury companies Yeah.
that's falling apart, like the narratives that we all thought at the beginning
of this cycle that it was good to get governments involved in Bitcoin.
I probably been the lone wolf on this issue.
When I was at Prague, the first year, I had dinner with,
with Michael Saylor and another prominent bitcoin, who, you guys know
Parker Lewis, and we kept our mouths shut the first year.
But from that meeting, I got the sense that there was a huge problem.
At the core of, what I would say was the propaganda
that was behind, you know, Bitcoin at that time.
And you could see that trend was to push bitcoin closer to governments.
I thought that was a mistake.
I still think it's a mistake.
I don't think Bitcoin needs governments.
I think governments make bitcoin more sloppy.
And I think, the last 2 or 3 years you can see it look at this cycle.
Has this cycle followed anybody's, you know, rules.
Has it followed the evolution of previous cycles?
The answer is no. Why?
Because I think we all collectively made a mistake
that we put too much, of our eggs in the political hand basket.
When I really think about my country specifically, Yeah.
when you think about who
Trump put in David Sacks, how he leaned on Lummis, all these people,
they gave us half truths and half truths always lead to full lies.
And then I think about, you know, BT sanctions country.
I think the Commonwealth countries are in far worse shape than we are.
They are clearly headed, down a different path,
with, CBDCs.
I think it's economic, economic fascism.
I was very clear in my work in decentralized medicine
that I told people that I thought Covid was,
you know, a compliance test for a coming economic reset.
And I believe we are firmly in that economic reset.
Now. Geez.
Can you give me a little bit more detail on that?
And one thing that kind of stands out to me is one
I completely agree with you is particularly on Canada,
like Canada from my view, is just being strip
mined for the benefit of Europe right now. Like it's just.
And the worst part is, is the amount of we just say, compliance.
Yeah, the amount of compliance
and the weight of the population, particularly in like Ontario,
is able to just be so easily redirected to whatever message of the day.
It really does feel absolutely hopeless
for Canada at times, like it's just getting worse.
In fact, I even saw it the other day.
Like they're pushing for medical assisted suicide
for even younger and younger ages.
And the one thing that jumped out to me that I found kind of like
if that wasn't sick and disturbing enough because I heard some people claiming
they want to push it as young as ten as ten,
and they're getting the population to go along with this.
But if you can consent to medical assisted suicide,
you can really consent to anything at that point in time.
So it's just getting like darker and darker.
However, I still feel like in the U.S
you're getting at least a little bit of pushback,
or maybe they're not going to be as readily accepting of that.
They're looking for their.
you say that me and this is what I'd like to post here
and, I want you to think about this.
Really? From a 10,000ft, you know, lens.
One of the key things that I've told people in this political life,
you know, in the last three years that I had a conversation with you, Buckley,
at his brother's wedding five days before he was going to give the CPAC speech.
And in there he said, Jack, you know, I'm going to DC.
What do you think I should talk about?
Because I don't have a plan. And I was like, tell him the truth.
So you saw in that speech 23 minutes, he basically use
an analogy of a patient in the ICU sick.
And he linked it back to money, which was, I thought, brilliant.
I think it was the best speech ever given to the United States
populace, by a non president.
I put it up there with Eisenhower speech and Kennedy speech
at American University, but I think it has bigger implications. Why?
Because what happened with Trump?
The thing that he didn't do is he didn't do what Buckley did.
He didn't control the judges or the Department of Justice.
So let's let's cut to the chase.
My, congressman
and district one of Florida, I wrote him eight letters.
That was Matt Gaetz, and I told guts
he needed to come down to El Salvador way before you guys even knew about it.
He came down.
He saw exactly what was going on.
He was the perfect guy to be the AG.
We have an AG now installed because Congress,
meaning, the Senate would not confirm Getz. Why?
Because they knew Getz would put the criminals in jail.
So now we have Pam Bondi, who's been in a year and a half.
Nathan, how many people is she put in jail?
Zero. Yeah.
just tell you something.
If the metric to control and curb corruption is controlled,
what does it matter what the rhetoric says?
In fact, what it all it is is propaganda.
And that's what you're seeing in Canada, UK and really in Australia.
Oh, yeah.
matter what Trump does when he bangs his sword against
the, shark cage any more. Why?
Because we know that he has no teeth.
He's not going to do anything.
And I think this is where David Bailey made his mistake.
He thought that Trump was going to be
the leader, that Buckley was and he's not.
And what does that mean for us?
It means for us, as the orange filled crowd,
that we need to start looking critically at how things go.
So if you follow along, some of the podcasts that I did
later in this three years, especially the one I did with Marty, Ben,
I made the the point to all Bitcoiners that I think
we need to start looking at things differently.
I got really aggressive in Prague this year
when I sat down, with Archie
and I said, look, I think Saylor is not who you think he is.
I think he's a problem.
And, I think, I think we need to build citadels.
I think where you build that citadel, those important.
I think, if you do it in Canada, you got a huge problem.
You know,
I look at guys who I really respect, like, Jeff Booth and I shake my head.
I'm like, I don't understand
how a guy who says the things he says can actually stay in Canada.
I got on Sean Neumann's podcast and said the exact same thing
to the people in Alberta.
Like, they like to think that the bastion of freedom in Canada.
But they're like fucking Plato's slaves in the cave.
You know, they're still compliant with what's going on.
And I have to tell you, the people in MAGA are the same way.
They are compliant with the bullshit that's going on.
And I think the only people that are breaking free are,
I hate to say it, the toxic, toxic maxi Bitcoiners.
We're beginning
to fucking wake up and say, we're not going to put up with this shit anymore.
And the bottom line is, when you realize that Bitcoin gives you
that big issue, let me circle back to your original point.
The left
and the right have one thing in common that Bitcoiners have missed.
They fucking hate privacy.
Both of them.
And that tells you why Bitcoin,
needs to get rid of politicians.
Okay? Because we are about privacy.
We know that the First Amendment in the United States, the Fourth Amendment.
And you know, these are all critical in this privacy issue.
The people that are in power now, they're going to come
after those amendments, just just just as the left.
And the only difference is the slope of the line to getting to fascism.
And, you know, authoritarianism, it's happening even in the United States.
And this is predominantly Nathan, the reason why I'm talking to you
from El Salvador.
I made this call five years ago for myself. Why?
Remember who I am? I'm a brain surgeon.
I'm a diagnostician.
I'm designed to take disparate data and come up
with, a treatment plan.
I don't I no longer trust anybody on the right or the left.
I don't trust any politician out there at all.
So what am I looking for?
I'm looking for an oasis on the oceans of Earth
that actually allow me to be a savage,
to be the ethos of bitcoin that I thought we all were a part of.
And what really is bothered me
is when I look at, you know, the world of Bitcoin,
I see people that have bent at the knee to politicians.
I don't understand that, I don't,
and maybe that makes me even a bigger
maverick in Bitcoin circles now, because I'm saying
I'm calling out some of the guys that, you know, you guys may have,
you know, love in your heart for.
But look, even within a family, when you sit down on Thanksgiving,
you know, there's uncles and and aunts at the table that you can't fucking stand.
Now we're still family.
We can still talk.
But remember, consensus is pseudoscientific.
That's true in science and it's true in Bitcoin.
So if there is a consensus,
in our community that, hey, joining with the governments was a good idea,
joining, hands with Saylor and all the other, you know,
Treasury companies is a good idea.
Well, count me as the bitcoin and that's as fucked up I'm out on that.
I'm not interested in playing that game.
I'm much more interested in saying now.
And Gary and Nathan and talking about
what, what the ethos of Bitcoin really is, you know, and it's about our privacy.
It's about our freedom.
It's about our liberty.
It's about us choosing our free will, our sovereignty.
That's fundamentally the ethos that's never changed for me.
And I don't understand why
in the last 2 to 3 years that it seems to go the other way.
And I'm left with this.
I'm left with what I've told every podcaster that Covid
was the compliance task for this economic reset.
And I hate to say this, I think 50% of Bitcoin has been swept up in that.
I, I largely grew a ton of it.
There is one on one.
I, something I've been talking about lately
is the treasury companies and the government involvement to.
I feel like it neutered a lot of people.
And they got soft kind of in their own success, thinking that this is it.
This is the big moment. We're moving forward.
And we lost that kind of an active
libertarian spirit that that cypherpunk pirate that we needed behind everything.
So I completely agree, because even with this year feeling so incredibly off,
I think it's because a lot of the culture
around Bitcoin again, that Cypherpunk ethos has been lost.
And that's what we need to claw back.
That's what we need to try and push forward.
That's what's going to make the biggest difference.
Am I in my understanding you incorrectly in that
you think that, you know, Canada lost cause?
But do you think the U.S is kind of a lost
cause as a we just say a framework as well to that?
We have to look at building
kind of tangential kind of black market systems
where essentially we're just completely going outside.
We're not trying to recover any one particular area.
Let me, let me let me try to frame it for you.
So you guys really understand what I'm saying.
I think the Founding Fathers in the United States had it right.
It's codified in our documents.
Our government for 250 years has tried to water down and neuter those documents.
I feel the same way about Canada as I do the United States, same way about UK.
This is what I'm saying.
The ideas in those founding documents are not defined by our border.
Same thing is true in Canada.
So I think Bitcoiners are going to make the new country
and we're going to be connected by the idea, not the border.
And I think when you understand that,
then I think you get to the greater point that I try to make to Marty
and that I try to make to you guys that I want us to understand that
we're going to be able to communicate, think about what we're doing today.
We're communicating over a decentralized network.
It's really not decentralized because Google can turn us off
any of the fucking time they want, like they did to me last year in El Salvador.
But the point remains is that we'll be able to still communicate
the ideas that we're communicating right now,
and we can agree or we can disagree with each other.
And that's ultimately, to me, what makes the family a healthy dynamic.
But the key is what are what are our core values?
Our core values are, you know, sovereignty, privacy and freedom
and liberty.
I don't think any Bitcoiners would disagree with that issue.
So then what I say, let's become the change that we seek in the world.
Let's begin to act in that way.
Like so.
If you are going to have a citadel
in Ontario, that seems incredibly incongruent to me.
And it's part of the reason why you find me in El Salvador.
I thought building my, citadel in either
Florida or Louisiana, even though at that time it was still pretty good.
I thought it was,
you know, shortsighted.
I thought it was a time preference problem.
So what did I do?
I became the change that I wanted to see.
And then what did I do?
I resonated that through my antenna
over all these podcasts that I did, and I shared those ideas.
And, you know, there's
some people who, you know, they like Jack Cruz and other people.
I'm not their cup of tea.
And I don't give a fuck either way, because that's not the point.
The point is, is that we're supposed to resonate the message of how we see it.
I have a big tribe that I take care of in decentralized medicine.
Not so much in Bitcoin.
It seems, over the last three years when I've gotten way more vocal,
there's a lot of people in Bitcoin that like what I'm putting down.
So therefore they begin to understand that, hey,
health and wealth are fully decentralized.
Therefore there's got to be some common tie.
So hey, let's sit down and listen to what the sky has to say,
because you can't be a total dumb ass if he's a brain surgeon.
And what do I try to do?
I try to use first principle thinking, you know, in
the things that I share with you guys so that I can give you commentary.
Like, what do I see as the problem?
Because ultimately I care about you.
I mean, you and Gary
are the artificial intelligence that I support.
You're part of your mother, and you're part of your father
that makes you an alien.
I'm not supporting the transhumanist
AI of Peter Thiel and Elon Musk.
I'm supporting you guys.
That's why you saw a couple of weeks ago on Twitter.
I reached out to Breedlove, who's kind of thermonuclear
with a lot of Bitcoiners now because of some of the things he's done in the past.
But I look at it like this.
You know, your son is going to make stupid mistakes here and there.
But the bottom line is, is he still a bitcoin or is he still,
you know, pushing forward? Yeah.
I mean I don't care if people want to make fun of him.
But you know, when you see him struggling to have a kid with his new wife
did that that that to me
makes some sense because that future kid could be the next Jack Dorsey.
That future kid
could be the next Michael Saylor, that kid could be the next Jack Mauler.
And I think when you think about that,
you should look at a tree like the trees behind me.
Some fucking guy planted that tree and I got the benefit from it.
So I look at our kids exactly the same way, and I think,
you know, BTC sanctions, you guys, you've done a great job
of getting the soil ready for those future trees.
And I think my part of this is to kind of
be the default switch to get people back.
What's really important, what's not.
Let's cut out the superfluous and let's focus on what really matters.
And it turns out it's privacy.
And when you understand that the left and the right
are trying to take that away from us in different ways,
then we can all say, fuck you and that's it.
That's that's really how I see it.
So am I worried about your countrymen in Canada?
Yeah, because I don't see them acting rapidly
enough to this environmental change, this government chain that's there.
That means an extinction event is likely headed your way.
Do you think I want the people in Alberta or the
people in Ontario to be left like a T-Rex?
No, I don't, but ultimately, that's your choice.
Okay?
My job is to resonate the message.
You know, when we do podcasts like this.
But look, I just took a world cruise all around
the world to see things in different parts.
I went to all the Commonwealth countries.
I got to be honest, when I came back,
I just talked to a doctor named Brandon Crawford about this.
More on the biology side.
But for you guys, let me tell you what I found.
The situation is far worse than all of you think
on a on a privacy level and all those other countries.
And I got news for you that should really fucking scare bitcoiners.
Because you know what?
We are now as scarce as Bitcoin.
That's the truth.
And that means that we have bigger targets on us.
And it's about time you realize
that the people in government, that's exactly what they want.
Attention on freedom loving Alberta bitcoiners.
Tired of the big six banks, freezing funds, blocking transactions,
or slamming your account shut without warning or explanation
just for dipping into Bitcoin.
Remember the Freedom convoy? The banking nightmare?
Federal government has invoked the Emergencies Act,
but don't let them control your money or risk your financial life.
Join the pioneers over at Bow
Valley Credit Union, a place run by freedom and sound money advocates.
I bank there myself.
They are the first and only traditional bank or credit union in Canada
to directly integrate Bitcoin via their Bitcoin gateway.
If you have to use dollars, why settle for a fiat only account
when you can seamlessly move in and out of Bitcoin?
No hassle, no questions, no rehab. Off vacation, no leverage.
This isn't paper Bitcoin.
Withdraw to Self-custody at any time.
Insured and auditable.
It's perfect for adding Bitcoin to your corporate balance sheet.
If you or your business is in Alberta.
Switch to your Bitcoin refuge at Bow Valley Khou.com.
Scan the QR code or click the link below.
Imagine
mining Bitcoin cheaper than buying on an exchange with direct payouts.
Hitting your wallet like clockwork.
Saves mining. Makes it real. You own the rig?
No gimmicks.
It's your asset pumping up Bitcoin every single day.
No markup on hardware or electricity.
They get paid when you get paid.
Fully aligning incentives.
Mining Bitcoin below exchange cost is a great way to DCA your stack.
It's so simple anyone can do it. No tech skills required.
You get white glove support and education a rig performance guarantee.
Plus, it's powered by 100% carbon free energy prioritizing renewables.
Ready to take control of your Bitcoin future?
Visit Sands mining.com
by scanning the QR code or clicking the link in the description down
below to book a free consult and start mining today.
setup?
Unlock expert guidance from top educators.
Schedule a free chat at Bitcoin, mentor IO and get started.
Hassle free today.
All right, let's jump back into the episode.
Gary, I'll let you jump in a second.
There's one thing I do want to tease out because the extinction event, I,
I unfortunately agree because one of the things
that I can't get out of my mind is with how bad everything was at Covid.
If that wasn't enough to really shake people out of what's
going on here, to wake them up, to even have that moment,
like even to look back and go like, man, I was wrong about that.
To have that sort of self-reflection
really puts a bow on just how bad or how far gone most people are.
And I completely agree
that for anyone out there listening that hasn't spawned privacy tools,
you've got to go down. It.
Particularly in the common with question like if you're in Canada, like me,
you must know how to use Bitcoin.
Probably it's something that's a requirement because like they've
already foretold where they're going.
Australians doing no capital gains tax.
Right.
Canada we're looking at doing our own Cbdc now as well too.
Like and you've got control in Europe in terms of messaging as well.
You need to be aware of these things.
You need to sort of have an exit strategy.
I've got tons more one on pack with Gary.
Let me let you jump in here and get some questions.
Well, not at all. Thanks, Nathan.
And thank you, Doctor Cruz, for joining us.
As a brain surgeon yourself, I feel a natural kinship
as I've played a brain surgeon on TV,
so I feel like there's definitely an understanding between us.
I'm with you.
I, on where you're coming from.
Like Nathan, I'm libertarian.
And, Capp, basically, I've become more and more in camp as I've gotten older.
And for years before I really kind of discovered Bitcoin.
I was kind of black pilled.
I thought, there's no future.
And Bitcoin is this thing that I thought, maybe there's something here
where we could grab on to this and there might be a future for mankind.
But I got to tell you, for a long time
as I was getting into Bitcoin, I thought, this is too good to be true.
And there are too many powerful people in government, banks, companies,
wherever who are not going to willingly let this old system go.
And part of it.
In the back of my mind, I still sort of think that, and it's a bit of a fear.
What do you think is the biggest attack vector for Bitcoin?
Because like I said, I have a difficult time
believing that these people have so much to lose.
They're going to let it go quietly.
I think you're seeing it unfold right now, I think,
it all ties back to some of the things happening in the United States.
I, I tried to lay this out
for even the retards in the audience in in bread loaves
podcasting I did when I gave, the historical lesson of Meyer Lansky
and how it ties to Satoshi and how it frames right to Epstein.
So take a look at what's happening right now in the United States
with Epstein, that they are doing everything in their power to block it.
So many people may not understand how this scales.
I'm not going to go through the litany of what I did in Bread Lows podcast.
You guys can go
look at it and decipher for yourself, but this is what I will tell you.
It's clear that Elon Musk and Sergei Brin were banked
by the same bank that, you know, Epstein was and that was J.P.
Morgan Diamond.
Diamond, was taught everything he knows from, the guy that used to run travelers.
You know, Sandy. Wow.
Who is a known Mossad agent.
So when you see the story that I laid out from Lansky
to Epstein, remember, before Epstein, Lansky had the same playbook, okay?
He was not interested in owning assets.
He was interested in owning people.
That's exactly the DNA that you see in Epstein.
Okay, so now that Epstein's been sidelined,
that information is now hidden somewhere else.
Instead of using a person.
It's now based in the technocracy.
It's based in the algorithms.
It's based in the transhumanist ideas that have been fostered by Who,
namely Peter Thiel.
Now you begin to see how all these points come together.
So I would tell you, our biggest attack vector
are the huge OG bitcoiners that are transhumanist.
You're going to be shocked when you find out.
As I try to point out the last two years
that many of this cypherpunks are those transhumanist,
and they were funded by money from Epstein and Israel.
So then you got to ask yourself the question,
why is it what were they doing?
I come back to the axiom, Gary, that I gave you earlier.
Never forget the DNA of Lansky and Epstein.
They weren't interested in owning assets.
They were interested in owning people. Why?
Because when you own people in the way they think,
which is exactly what transhumanist technology does,
then you begin to understand the big attack factor.
If you can control with a Bitcoin or thinks it doesn't matter if they
own the Bitcoin or not.
You don't believe me, Gary.
But I.
When you get off here, I want you to go listen to,
two things to to really stimulate because I can see it in your face.
Go look at what Robert Epstein said in the Danny Jones podcast.
He then go listen to what Epstein said to Joe Rogan
that Google uses algorithms to control the way we think.
Remember who owns Google, that's Sergey Brin.
Remember where he comes from, goes all the way back to that whole story.
Then this was the thing that just happened recently.
You saw that, Weinstein.
Eric Weinstein, a physicist, asked the the simple question
that Gary doesn't seem to have, asked himself, why is it
that Epstein always shows up in places where science or money was done?
Okay, like, why was he with Pinker?
Why was he with Larry Krauss?
Why was he affiliated with the math department at MIT,
where Weinstein was so Eric is now asking
the question below the surface that the smooth brainers don't ask.
It was about control.
That's what it comes down to.
So when you don't understand where the control vector is
between government and Bitcoin, do you understand how 50% of Bitcoiners
could get sucked into this vortex?
And I hate to say this, but I believe that vortex was led
by Michael Saylor and by, David Bailey.
And all I'm saying to you, Gary, and to Nathan,
I don't want you to take what I'm telling you at face value.
I want you to question what I'm saying to you, okay?
Because it's the mark of an educated mind that takes something you don't believe
and examine it for yourself,
and then you're allowed to come back and call uncle Jack an asshole.
You know, bullshit artist or maybe my diagnostic acumen
just opened up a door for you that you didn't see as an attack factor.
Because let's face it, all Bitcoiners understand the basic attack factors.
They've been laid out through the the last 15 years in Bitcoin
by Bitcoin's Bitcoiners.
Far, far smarter than me.
But this one is a little bit different.
This one goes to the understanding
it doesn't matter if you have your coins or your seed phrases.
If they can control everything about the way you think.
Truly, does money really matter in that case?
That's a question that Breedlove and Bitcoiners really
haven't asked themselves.
And what am I saying to you, Gary?
I'm telling you, it's the biggest risk to us all.
So, and I think it's wonderful you told us to not trust but verify.
Is it true Bitcoin or, the idea that it is about control?
I guess my follow up would be control.
To what end?
Like, what is it that they're pursuing to control for?
Do you know?
Yeah.
They want to go back to feudalism and medievalism.
Just think, about 500 years ago, we were in the Dark Ages. Why?
Because whatever the centralized monarchy said, that's what people did.
And what do you have to understand about some of the other
dark forces that you guys have seen in your world?
And this is where it really connects to my world.
Can you control 8 billion people,
or would it be easier to control 500 million people?
Do you understand why I said what I said on the podcast?
That they're tapering the Ponzi scheme.
That's exactly what's happening.
And when people don't understand
that these forces are all in action, like all the things from the World Health
Organization, all the things from the WEF, all the things from the consensus
one world government that we got from the Trilateral Commission, Council of
Foreign Relations, the Atlantic Society, all the stuff that Bitcoiners know
you don't understand that this is the arrowhead coming to a point.
And believe it or not, Bitcoin is actually part of that story.
And that's the part of the story that Meyer Lansky lost control of.
That's the alloyed title that's still out there.
See the alloy deal title
that they're gaining control over is Russia and the United States.
That's actually what the Zionist bankers are trying to recapture,
and they're doing a pretty good job if you really want to understand it.
But what's the part that they've been struggling with?
The top part they've been struggling
with is when Lansky died and turned it all over to David.
Charm and then charm led him to Lensman.
And Solomon is by by, That is the reason why they needed an Epstein.
They needed a new version of Lansky to gain control of the process,
because they lost it, because it went from closed source
cypherpunks to open source cypherpunks.
And guess what?
That alloy deal title got into the hands of simple
plebs like Gary and Nathan and Uncle Jack,
and we are not as easy to control
as the masses they already control. Why?
Because we truly understand the ethos of what Bitcoin is,
and how it's an anathema to what fiat money really is.
And when you begin to understand that, when you know that they can control you,
even with an iron wrench attached, your seed phrases, you can
they may kill you, but they're not getting your fucking bitcoin.
And they know that that's the colloidal title fact.
So what's the next best thing to do?
You do exactly what Meyer Lansky said in the beginning.
I don't need to control the U.S.
military or General Groves.
With an iron wrench attack.
I can control it by giving them things to think about.
And that's exactly what he did.
It's exactly what he did with the Italian Mafia.
It's what he did with all of Hollywood.
And when you look back at his life and realize
when he died, he really had no assets that anybody could find.
But yet he's the most famous
gangster in the history of the United States. Why?
Because he was the accountant for murder, Inc..
He was smarter than even the fucking Rothschilds.
And he broke the Rothschilds and the Rockefellers
in 1969 to 1971.
He actually told fucking Israel, I'm going to go back
and tell these motherfuckers the truth.
And when they brought him in for a subpoena, he actually flew to Israel.
And then he told the Israeli, the Mossad, he goes, you know,
I decided I'm going to go back and tell them the truth.
So when they brought him back in, he said, okay,
I've had the keys to your kingdom through the IRS computer.
In, in Blacksburg, Virginia, told him everything
he knew, every move ahead of him.
And guess what happened?
Nixon eventually, and his, his attorney general,
I think it's Allen Levi basically let Meyer Lansky go,
because they said he was going to die, wound up living another ten years.
But here's the thing that you should pay attention to.
You have Bitcoiners out there that absolutely think axiomatic that 1971
was the key issue. They're fucking idiots.
1969 was a key issue because that's when they brought Lansky in.
And Lansky told them, you need to debased the base, the money,
you need to close the gold window, because as long as you use fiat money,
I'm ahead of you.
And then he gave him the answer.
He gave him the Cbdc answer.
You said you really want to control people.
Let me tell you how you do it.
You computerized the money.
So guess what happens?
The Bank Secrecy Act happens literally six months
after Lansky is detained by the U.S government.
Okay.
What is the Bank Secrecy Act basically do
it starts the process to the Cbdc.
Now the hardest part.
And Lansky told them, this is computerizing money
is not going to be, an an easy task.
And he warned them, but he says that's the task you must take.
So, Gary, now I need to for you to go back in your history
and pull up something very interesting that you can fact check.
Uncle Jack, do you find it interesting?
After World War Two that cryptography was listed on the Munitions Act?
I don't even know that.
Yes. uncle
lot of books, and there's so much that I don't know that
half the things you're saying, I don't know. Well, guess what.
The reason why this is important for Bitcoin is realize
that the state knew that cryptography was a weapon against them.
And do you know why they knew it?
Because they used it with Alan Turing,
and they had to kill errant Alan Turing to get rid of it.
That's what happened at Hadley Park.
The Enigma machine.
The whole propaganda thing that you learned about is total bullshit.
And how did they take out Turing?
The same way they try to change
girls and boys in Canada, in the United States with hormones.
Got it.
And what happened?
He ate a cyanide laced apple.
And then, magically, Steve Jobs named his company Apple.
Yeah. that interesting?
So when you string all this together, you see the link
back to the war, and you understand that cryptography
is just like a nuclear weapon, that's the key.
And when you understand that they believed they had control of cryptography
all the way up until about 1983
through about 1993, that's when they lost.
And they lost it because there was no Meyer
Lansky, Jeffrey Epstein during that Sean period.
And then who comes in on a Sam's PhD guys?
And that's when Iceman and SAS does some amazing things.
At 18 years old, he's the guy that filled figured out
the TCP IP network that controls what you and
I and Nathan are on right now, which is the the web.
You figured out web addresses.
He actually worked for the federal government.
And then everything in Bitcoin went mainstream.
Although ideal title was lost to murder Inc.
to the accountants that were way ahead of the Rothschilds
and and, Rockefeller bankers.
And you know that those Rothschilds and Rockefeller
bankers to scale right back to what you started this with.
How do I see this happening?
These guys know that Bitcoin is an existential threat
to their business model. Why?
Because they don't have an answer for it.
Their Cbdc is the best answer.
So what do they do?
They're building surveillance and control systems along with the Cbdc
to control you and your Bitcoin.
You'll still have your Bitcoin.
I got news you they're going to make sure it's
really difficult for you to use it.
How susceptible are people to the different kind of manipulations
and control tactics?
And is the Cbdc like basically the pinnacle of that,
or is there anything else going on that we should be aware of?
that's why I told Gary I want him to look into, Epstein like that.
And when I say Epstein, I'm not talking about Jeffrey now.
I'm talking about Robert Robert Epstein.
You know, who's used to be a big lefty.
He controlled a lot of science in the psychology, area.
What he said when he turned to be a whistleblower on Google
is the key, most important thing.
And that's the reason why Sergey Brin is my my true,
ultimate, enemy.
I know that he's the biggest enemy of the state, but who is he a proxy for?
He's a proxy for the the transhumanist
technologists, but also for the bankers.
And when he showed up at Trump's inauguration,
that was a big sign to me that we got a big fucking problem.
And I don't think David Bailey saw this.
I don't think most Bitcoiners saw it.
And I had to be really careful about the things that I said
because of the things that I did over the last three years.
They are very, very, very, how shall we say,
dangerous to the game that's being played right now.
And the thing that I would tell you right now, I just look, I just spoke at
Bitcoin Historico and adopting Bitcoin in the last four days.
And when I was on the stage, two days ago,
I said to people that adopting Bitcoin, this will be the last time
you hear me talk about politics live in a Bitcoin space. Why?
Because I believe we are now
firmly in the time
where warring will begin to happen between Bitcoiners and the state.
We are no longer in the kumbaya moment.
The Kumbaya kumbaya moment is going to end with the midterms
in the United States.
You are going to see the people and the forces
behind Mega exert their power.
Those predominantly the main drag in Tel Aviv is called Rothschilds.
Way far away.
The bankers are going to step up to gas.
What Nathan has felt as an antenna for Canada is exactly that force.
That is the reason why people in Canada are feeling a different vibe.
That's the reason why when we went to Australia, we felt a different vibe.
When we went to Europe, we felt a different vibe.
The only place in Europe that has a pulse right now are the previous Communist
countries like Czechoslovakia, which is part of the reason why I think
the, Bitcoin Prague meeting right now,
it's the most clean signal in the entire Bitcoin community. Why?
Because they've already lived
people
here in the United States that are going all these conferences,
to be honest with you, Gary and Nathan,
I don't want to see any big bitcoiners go to any of those conferences.
Do I know that that message is not a message that David Bailey wants,
you know, resonated? But that's how I feel. Why?
Because I think btt BTC sessions,
Gary and Nathan are more important to what's coming down the road
than you going to share your ideas at a Bitcoin conference with a bunch of people.
And I told Marty Bent the same thing.
And I know that this this message, you may look at it, Gary is being dark.
I don't think it is. I think it's light.
I think it's the light at the end of the tunnel
where I know we're going to win, but it's
going to take good first principles, thinking to fight back.
So I would tell you, every Bitcoin who listens to this
needs to go go out and buy Sun Tzu's book.
And this is the key distillation, Gary, that I want you to
I read that one, by the way, just so you know, pretty pat on the back.
your enemy you must become your enemy.
And that is what uncle Jack has been doing for 20 years.
Why? Why the midterms?
Why now? Because I agree with you that this battle was always coming.
And at the Kumbaya moment I thought would go on longer,
I thought essentially we'd have kind of
USD gold and Bitcoin all rising together
with other fiat currencies and other systems get worse.
And that that would be kind of the the final battle
would be kind of Bitcoin versus the US government.
Why now in the midterms?
I didn't think that they would really.
That's all he is.
Go on. I. lie.
Because if you went straight to Kamala, you went straight to Bolshevik communism,
which is what they want.
That would have happened rapidly.
Was the United States as the global reserve currency ready for that? No.
Was most of America ready for that? No.
So what do you have to do?
Put the hero in and destroy the hero?
And how do they do that? They use make it a do it.
MAGA has become mega.
Look what happened to Maha.
Yeah.
That fell apart really quickly.
It was actually quite disappointing to see. that's.
That's the.
When you read Sun Tzu's book,
you will see this game plan developing right in front of you.
That's how smart these people are.
They've led you straight to the gates of the dungeon.
The actually one thing that just jumped out of me is,
that would that would square the circle on why?
The samurai devs are still getting Max.
Yeah.
Max prosecution.
Even though the even they they submitted a guilty plea,
you would think they would have negotiated for that.
And they got the max sentence possible. And why are they on one side?
They're saying that they're not going after them anymore or not going
after, Bitcoin related stuff any more and more, more favorable
for to take those two guys who are focusing on privacy
and absolutely just just ramrod them.
Do you understand? Now?
Why also you start hearing things out of Trump's mouth?
Well, maybe.
Maybe we can pardon Ghislaine Maxwell.
Maybe we can part a SBF,
yeah.
What was the what was the olive branch?
Oh, well, we'll give you Ros back.
Yeah.
giving you Ros back is also part of the PsyOps.
I fell for that one.
I just quickly I 100% did.
think most of us did.
But what I'm trying to tell you is that you need to see
this more from a 100,000ft lens.
And this is where it's really important.
Where you have to marry, marry decentralized health and wealth.
I don't think bitcoiners have really done that.
I think my tribe has done a better job.
And I would tell you, my tribe is probably more ignorant of Bitcoin
than it is on the health side because what's the easiest way
to be controlled by a government is when you have bad health.
And that's the reason why, you know, Maha became hodja overnight,
why they haven't gone after the big things and, you know, the next big thing.
You know, I've heard Ben, talk about, you know, you know, coinjoin and making
sure, you know, like, if you're in Canada, you're in the UK, you're in Australia.
Boy, you better understand
coinjoin and what the benefit is and nunchuck and all those things. Why?
Because those are actions of privacy.
These if you want to know the truth,
this is the first, second and fourth amendment
that's extended to the Commonwealth countries.
If you want to know the truth, those actions in the Bitcoin community
mirror our first, second and Fourth Amendment.
And I don't think bitcoiners understand that yet.
And that's the reason why I say to you where you put your citadel,
where you go right now, if you want to know the truth,
I think your best bet is to build your citadel.
But make sure you got a 60ft catamaran
parked outside, because you might have to be a traveling Wilbury.
Because I have a funny feeling the Oasis are going to change a lot
in the next 100 years when we go to 2140. Why?
Because if you think this threat, Gary,
this existential threat that I'm I'm painting for you is going to get smaller,
Bitcoiners are going to become huge
enemies of the state going forward. Why?
Because we can't be stopped and the smarter we are, Gary,
we're going to have unbelievable wealth in which to fight the state.
We may be the only people out there
that will be able to buy weaponry
to fight the state, because remember something,
the real reason the state needs bitcoin now is they know fiat is dying.
They no longer can use fiat to buy, you know, stealth farmers and nuclear weapons.
There's going to come a time when Gary and Nathan get together
and spend maybe one Bitcoin and build a thorium nuclear reactor
in their backyard to power all kinds of fucking scientists
that are going to be babies from Bitcoiners
that come up with really cool electromagnetic weapons
to go after the people in the state that are trying to take
our freedom and privacy.
That is the future that is going to happen.
And bringing people to meetings together
where those people that may be the future Ben Franklins, George Washington's and
Abraham Lincoln's or, you know, whoever the fuck you want to put in that group.
We can't do that.
We have to be smarter.
It's no longer survival of the fittest, bro.
It's survival of the wisest.
And I need bitcoiners to take their fucking head
out of their ass and begin to realize that.
We can all fly in the same planes to high risk at this point.
Gary. Go ahead.
I guess what kind of a timeline we're talking about because, Yeah.
Okay. What you want to get us?
We want to prevent this.
Frankly, I'm surprised the government hasn't fought harder up until this point.
Or government haven't fought hard up to this point. But.
Gary, think about it.
Where most of the big OG Bitcoin is in the United States, the United States
still has some degrees of freedom.
Not much, but you're already seeing it.
I made the point to Nathan earlier.
What is Pam Bondi done? Is fucking nothing.
So realize what happened in J6.
Maybe you're forgetting what really happened.
A psyop propaganda issue that the government started with.
The intelligence agencies put fucking Americans in jail.
You know what that was?
That was a compliance task for future Bitcoiners.
Wake up Gary.
Is a very interesting theory in the sense that it's like,
okay, we're going to stoke the flames they had how many federal agents there?
We're going to lock them up without a trial for a year.
And see, is it almost felt like, like a, like a dare, like is
anybody could do anything about this.
Are you would you really be willing to come and get them? And.
about the truckers in Canada.
It's the same.
Look, these are all practice scenarios.
This is agenda.
Agenda 2030 right in front of your face Gary.
And you're looking in the screen going, it's jack fucking crazy.
Or is he seeing something that a target that I don't even know fucking exists?
Well guess what?
I want you to begin to question that.
I want you to think I'm a crazy motherfucker.
So that way you do your due diligence and you start to draw your own conclusions.
No, I completely agree.
I actually want to take that and pivot for sake of the case.
We have even touched on decentralized health at this point.
And if I was to ask you to basically
I almost want like
start the conclusion and work our way backwards
because I want to shock people out of compliance.
I want you to say
I want them to hear something that's a little bit like,
that's too absurd, this too
far out there to make them go and do the research and do the digging.
In terms of the decentralized health aspects, what are some of the highest
ROI activities or things that people should be looking at or considering?
Well, this this one is simple, Nathan.
This is the distillation of every talk I get on a Bitcoin.
Or what good is your fucking bitcoin if your time is finite?
I would like
you to think about how many I'd like you to think about Steve Jobs.
I'd like you to think about Paul Allen.
All billionaires, all dead by the time they're 60, 64 years old.
So what good is your money if you don't have time?
So, in essence,
time is the most valuable asset, not bitcoin.
Yeah. is actually the second rung.
So when you understand that what's the business of the human blockchain.
Time.
That's the key point.
And when you understand
Uncle Jack's perspective I come to you from that perspective.
I need you to see that lens.
And when you see that lens, you start to go, okay, so Jack sees
a future state versus Bitcoin attack.
That means that the savage out there that are OGs
that are going to have dry powder that get it, they have to be smart
and they have to they have to have time to organize the plebs.
And that's the key.
And right now
I see those people organizing around people that are working for the state.
I don't want you behind David Bailey.
I don't want you to behind Saylor
don't want you to behind any of the treasury companies.
You know, I want you to behind I want you behind the savages.
Like who are talking to me in this podcast, who are in the audience,
who may not believe what I'm, laying down here, but begin to question.
Hey, maybe this is a wrench attack.
I didn't see common, and maybe being decentralized in my health
means that I'm a better soldier.
And in the decentralized art of war that's coming.
Beautiful.
I want to tease apart a little bit because I know we've
we haven't even touched on basically blue light
and all that wonderful area as well too, in the importance of basically
getting up to see sunrise and sunset, if you can.
I want to specifically, for anyone that might not be aware,
is it possible for non native EMF to be actually
be used as a offensive weapon or a means of manipulation and control?
And could you give us some more details on that?
Yeah, I mean, I
instead of getting too deep into it, I would tell you, go listen to the Danny
John podcast.
I did the first time in December 2nd and 24,
where I laid out the whole story of MKUltra
and what it, morphed into and the Brain Health Initiative.
But you should also know that in the United States, in East Texas,
between Waco and, Austin,
there's a giant area there that the United States government is born.
That's where they test all their electromagnetic weapons.
So if you don't think DARPA has been working on this for this long,
then you're just a fucking idiot.
And, you know, it's kind of like what Gary said.
Gary said, I don't know about this stuff.
Well, guess what, Gary, if you own Bitcoin, it's time that you have to.
And because those are going to be
the weapons that are going to be used against you,
they're being used against you right now.
And when you understand the power
that the state has, you remember what Sun Tzu said.
To know your enemy, you have to become the enemy.
So that means you have a duty
to understand what their capabilities are at this moment.
And bitcoiners
are not heavily involved in the right science.
They're involved in transhumanist bullshit.
You know, that's the the idea is between Teel and Elon Musk.
Like when you understand fundamentally what Elon Musk is trying to do
as a rocket man, he's trying to go to the nearest planet that's a dead red desert.
That's about the stupidest fucking thing any bitcoin could ever want to do.
Okay?
And he wants to power this by putting bitcoiners in electric cars,
which fucking hurt them.
Well, if you are compliant with that bullshit, then guess what?
Turn this podcast off because it's not for you, okay?
You're part of our problem in Bitcoin, not the solution.
And if you thought it was a good idea to take a jab to travel
because you're a Bitcoin, you have a famous podcast, aka Peter McCormack.
You're also part of our problem doesn't mean
we can't bring you back into the tribe when you understand
what the fuck you're really doing.
But the point is, I need Nathan's babies and Gary's babies
to be as pure blood as possible for freedom and liberty and privacy,
because they're going to be the soldiers
that are going to have to fight the state down the road.
And what is the state doing right now?
They're destroying our children and our families on purpose,
through health care, through transhumanist ideology,
through hormone blocking drugs, through vaccinations,
through supplements, through pills, through food.
That's the link.
And the big one they started with was light.
That's where the blue light part of the story comes in.
It was the ultimate effect that Meyer Lansky showed
General Groves on the docks in Brooklyn
when they found, a surgeon named Plotkin.
And that's the only guy Meyer Lansky didn't kill.
And he turned them over to grows and grows.
Heard a very interesting story.
You said what the Nazis are doing is trying to use Mexican peyote
and mushrooms to control people's behavior.
What happened here in the United States?
MKUltra was born.
Mk-ultra was run by Stanley Gottlieb.
What did Stanley Gottlieb do?
He started with what the surgeon told them.
So what did he do?
He dropped LSD over the whole city of Saint Louis in the 1950s.
Well, it didn't work out so good, but what else did he find?
The guys that were Meyer Lansky's friends in Las
Vegas on happenstance alone
decided to change their casinos lighting because they found
that made them more money.
And guess what Gottlieb did?
He started to use blue ambient lighting in the MKUltra program.
And then what do they do?
They moved it to the Stanford Research, place.
Then they moved it to the Brain Health Initiative.
Now it's firmly entrenched in Washington, DC and DARPA,
and it's being used at scale on every single population out there.
And who's the front man for that rock band?
Sergey Brin and Larry Page now Larry Page on TikTok.
Sergey Brain is in the back controlling every algorithm, an algorithm
out there who's unleashed that playbook?
The guy I told Gary to go read about Robert Epstein.
They're going after him.
Why? Because he pointed out this issue.
These are your enemies, and you have to understand
why this has happened.
That's how they plan on taking Bitcoin apart.
They're not coming after us in an attack that you think
they're using.
Sons use against us appear where your enemy isn't.
Use ops mutation and propaganda.
They're using Edward Bernays on us and y'all don't even realize it.
You're too busy fucking eating steaks, listening to retards
in bitcoin doing the wrong things.
I want to make you a fucking savage.
I want you to understand the battle that's coming in the front,
because everything that I teach you is about one thing time.
I want to put time in your bank account more than you can fucking imagine. Why?
Because I know that's that's when you're going to use your Bitcoin
for the right thing.
When the battle really comes to fruition, and we're going to have to fight
the state collectively, we're going to be a pretty good force.
And if you think, Gary, this is fucking crazy talk, just remember
a bunch of guys who are farmers who left Britain one day,
put their pitchforks down and fucking beat the best army in the fucking world.
So if you tell me that it can't happen, then you tell me you're a moron because
you don't know your history.
But I want to learn history.
Can I listen to the non retards but still eat my steak?
Yeah, you can, but just make sure when you eat the steak,
you just have to see the sunrise every morning. Why?
I go for walk every morning.
Baby, I'm out there.
a walk every morning, you know.
Listen, I said you got to see the sun on your eyes. Why?
Because that controls the two cycles in you
that allow you to use the steak in the fat properly.
It's called the TCA cycle and urea cycle.
If you do that, you just got 80% of the story
so that we can get your genes and your babies and your artificial intelligence
in the game that's coming.
Well, I want that I'm again.
I want individual liberty.
I want to be able to have privacy. I don't want to be controlled.
But you know, you are right to the degree
that it feels like an uphill battle, to say the least.
We talk about how much power the state has and those that support the state.
And I feel like a little tiny, insignificant thing because ultimately,
right now, in the year 2025, November 2025, if the state wants to come after me,
they can do what they want to me.
Yeah, they might not get my bitcoin, but they can cage me.
They can beat me, they can do whatever they want to my family.
So if this battle is going to be fought, it's going to be fought generations later.
I. think about what happened, though, in, in the British revolution
or American Revolution, I mean, the same thing.
You don't think that the Britain that and when you look at a columnist,
the the level of power that they had over those colonists is exactly the same.
But this is the point, Gary.
You're minimizing your effect.
I would say to you that you're far more powerful as a Bitcoin
or in 2025, in November, than the guy who was in Virginia
that was planting tobacco with his pitchfork.
And yet, guess what happened?
The greatest power on the earth lost.
And those motherfuckers are coming after us right now.
Because guess what?
We now have a Lloyd title, and they know how important a loyal title is in Bitcoin.
So I would submit to you that you're already being controlled
because you think you're losing when you're actually winning.
I love to hear that these are the two things that I need to know.
Nathan. I'm sorry.
I, I really still need to wrap my head around,
the idea of the purpose.
Why these people are transhumanists or you've mentioned in previous
podcast, Fabian Society or socialists, whatever.
Why is it that they want to control me?
Is it just control for the sake of control,
like one human being wants to control another?
Or is there like a philosophical thing idea that they are trying
to impose on society writ large?
And my follow up question is,
once I get that answer and maybe I missed it,
maybe you already said it and I'm just retarded.
What are the books?
The most important books that you'd recommend?
I and my fellow Bitcoiners read?
That one's tough.
I mean, you have to read the decentralized history book
and you want to know the truth that's not written yet.
There's some very interesting history books about how the Fabians
morphed from Queen Victoria into, you know, the School of London economics.
In fact, the Fabian, logo is actually
in the stained glass of the London Economic School.
You know, where you see a, a sheep and in wolf's clothing.
And what did that come from?
It actually came from the idea that,
when Queen Victoria came into power in 1837,
she was still her family was still chopped off
so that they lost America in the American Revolution.
And many people believe that the Fabians were behind the genesis of the Civil War,
the killing of Abraham Lincoln, and also the killing of of, McKinley in 1900.
But we
know that the Fabians were behind the Bolshevik revolution.
Those are all the people that were the Zionists that were in the Fabian, fold.
That's, Welles and George Bernard Shaw.
You know what?
You know, those are UK that.
Look, the whole problem has always been the UK royal family.
And what what their modus operandi is, is very simple.
They want to go back to how it was in medievalism, feudalism,
when we were out in the field serving them and giving them their tithes.
That's really what it comes down to.
And they want to have that pyramid balance of power in terms of centralization.
They are not interested in any type of decentralization at all.
And what the Fabians have done over the last I would tell you,
almost 200 years have acted,
at the Crown's behest.
That's what the Bank of England has done.
That's what the Fabians have done.
The Zionists that came out of Saxe Coburn, Goza, who were loyal to Queen Victoria
and her family, who changed to Windsor after the Treaty of resign.
The people who actually did the treaty of resign for America were Fabians.
There were Council of Foreign Relations people.
They were Atlantic society people.
That's who the Dulles brothers were.
Most people don't even know.
The Dulles brothers were involved in the Treaty of Versailles.
But remember, the Dulles brothers were involved in what?
JFK assassination.
What does that go back to it goes back to Dimona, the Apollo affair,
the the the British Zionists who set up Israel
goes back to the Balfour Declaration on November 2nd, 1917.
When you see all these pieces come together, you you start to realize
the Fabians
idea of small incremental changes that lead
to total authoritarianism.
That's the goal of the one world government.
That's what's happening.
And right now, right now, Bitcoin is, an existential risk
to that, political ideology.
I know that's the Fabian idea.
That's the whole idea behind Fabian ism.
But I do want you to clarify something
just briefly, because I've heard you you've touched on Zionism,
I think three times so far in this podcast, and you've mentioned it
elsewhere.
And I want to clarify exactly what you mean when you say that, because obviously
a lot of people hear the term Zionism and they immediately think the Jews.
And I don't think that's what you're talking about when you say that word.
But correct me if I'm wrong. Maybe. wrong.
And I'm glad you brought this up, because that's exactly what the Zionists
want you to think.
They've been using Judaism as their shield for anti-Semites.
Like, for example, you have a guy in the United States, Mark Levin.
Anybody who talks against the Zionists.
He immediately says the Jews.
But you know what?
He doesn't tell you that the guys with the Zionists in Tel Aviv
just killed 680,000 Semites in Gaza.
Those are the real Semites, okay?
Not the guys that stole it.
So the political ideology set up by Theodor Herzl
and B'nai B'rith, there are only 140 years in existence.
The Fabians plugged in to that group
in Britain in the 1870s, and 1890s,
and Lord Balfour was one of those people.
He was heavily influenced by Theodor Herzl.
But do you know about Herzl?
He. He was an atheist,
he identified as a Zionist.
Okay.
And he was one of the key architects of the Bolshevik revolution.
Okay, so Zionism
is a political ideology that's short lived.
That's all about fascism.
And totalitarianism that is hijacked
a religion because it was convenient,
to use the religious story in their text, okay,
to protect themselves so that the Fabians
could operate out in the sunlight.
And that's exactly what it is.
So if you think Zionism and Judith, Judaism
is one in the same and a synonym, you are a smooth brainer.
Okay.
And you certainly you have no business being a Bitcoin or
because this is like Bitcoin one and one knowing your enemy.
Your enemy isn't a Jew.
Your enemy is the Zionists that actually are in the banking system
in the UK, the Rothschilds in the United States, the Rockefellers
who prop up the entire system
that we are in because that Elodie all title
is kind of like Kryptonite to their Superman powers.
Well thank you for clarifying
because I do think that is an important distinction
because I know I don't hate anybody for their religion
or how they were brought up or you know whatever.
And. hate everybody equally
to like That's fair.
different I have a different mindset, but I appreciate what you said,
and I appreciate you asking me to clarify, because I do think
it's important for people to understand, because I do think
you have to know your enemy and part of the reason why the Zionist
have used Judaism as their shield
is because this gives them way more leverage to operate out in society.
And we can't we can't allow that.
We have to call that bullshit out.
I'm sorry Nathan how much time do we have.
I have somebody other questions Keep going.
I got mine, Brendan. Keep going.
You've mentioned you've talked about, you know, the royal families
and wanting to get back that idea of this is feudalism.
We're going to control you.
It's going to be this inverted pyramid.
Do we
do all of royalty or is it just one hive mind?
They all think the same.
And I ask this for a reason, because I recently read only a few weeks ago
that, Queen Elizabeth for years
rejected anybody from the Israeli government.
Which of the Zionists, because she considered them all terrorists
to this day for backing, you know, the King David hotel bombing.
So she didn't seem on board with Zionism, is there?
What am I missing here with the disconnect?
You're missing that.
Her uncle, actually, Edward that abdicated the throne
was, a huge, huge Zionist. He.
That's why he was tied to Adolf Hitler.
That's the reason why he had to retire.
And just so you know, there's pictures that I've posted on Twitter
of Queen Elizabeth as a child, given the Kyle
and it's actually in there.
So what you just repeated, Gary, was the propaganda
that Queen Elizabeth wants you to believe.
So it's a psyops and you have to remember what is the Fabian?
Do they give you the illusion of one thing when they're really something else?
And when you know the history of the abdication,
when you understand how it happened, remember who his father was.
King George.
King George was the guy that put together the Balfour Declaration.
He was the guy that was in bed with the Zionists in the beginning.
We're talking about from a from 1900.
When Queen Victoria dies in 1901, King George takes over.
He took over her mantle.
Okay. And that never changed.
And their goal was to always get back America.
It turns out under King George's reign, he also lost Russia. Why?
Because he never realized that the Zionist
Leo Tolstoy would kill the Romanoffs
and the Romanoffs, or the link to the royal family.
So if you really want to understand why Queen Elizabeth was a little bit
chopped past, it's because the people that her family put in power
actually took Russia away from them to.
Because what's the Zionist mindset?
They're the chosen people, not the royal family.
And what how does this all go back?
Remember how the Rothschilds came in power during the Napoleonic Wars?
What happened there?
They used the king's money to enrich themselves through the bond market.
When you understand
who's really playing the game, what's the famous quote that I know?
Gary knows that one of the the Lord Rothschilds said very famously,
I don't care who sits on the throne, all I need to do is control
the money and I control the world.
Does it not sound like Meyer Lansky 101?
Right?
Yep. 100%.
Epstein was doing to Bill Clinton?
Why, there's a picture of Bill Clinton wearing
Monica Lewinsky's dress and red shoes in his bedroom,
or a picture of George Bush playing a Zenga block
for 911, like, dude,
it's right in front of you, but you still haven't connected the dots.
And I'm going to tell you that the war on money
has always been a British problem.
And the reason why is the Brits brought
the Zionists into the mix from the Napoleonic Wars onward.
Then we added the biggest industrialists in the United States,
which was Rockefeller,
who joined forces with the Rothschilds right around World War One. Why?
Remember what happens when McKinley dies this ties in to the second assassination,
who kills a Serbian refugee who set up McKinley to be president.
The three robber barons Carnegie, Rockefeller and J.P.
Morgan.
Oh, J.P.
Morgan, we're back to the story of the bankers.
So they put McKinley in.
Where did you put or where did politicians put their mortal enemies
back in those days?
As vice president, what happens?
Teddy Roosevelt takes over and what does he do?
He immediately breaks up the Rockefeller clan.
What does Rockefeller do?
He creates Big Pharma from the breakup.
What is Big Pharma done?
Done.
Nothing to help Gary for 120 years, he made the Flexner Report.
You want to know how we got vaccines, drugs, supplements, bad food?
The Rockefeller Foundation after the Flexner Report.
Look, the story is always the same.
Divide and conquer.
They, the Fabians, don't stop.
You think they stop, but they don't.
It's always been about control.
That is the mindset.
And I want you to think about the control of
what was going on in the dark ages.
Okay?
That's where they controlled everything.
The church, science, everything.
Money. It didn't matter.
And that's this, that that's what they want to go back to Gary.
That's all their interest in it.
And they know that one world government is the best way to do it.
Controlling people is good.
Shrinking from 8 billion to 500 million is ideal, idealized.
If you don't think that that was codified somewhere on Earth,
that's what the Georgia Rock stones set on them.
And they knocked those down too, so you wouldn't see it.
They didn't want you to have any reminders of what the plan is.
It's the same way Google does SEO searches
Gary goes and puts a SEO search and for Jack's podcast or Nathan does,
you're going to get two different search engines in two different places.
It's the same thing. It's about control.
It's about the vision.
That's all it is.
And you have to be savage enough to see it for yourself.
The only way you can do that is you have to know the history.
So, Gary, what's the whole idea about AI?
They control the history. Am.
the Zionist controlled the newspapers.
So they controlled what people believed.
Post Versailles.
They're doing the same thing now in technocracy,
they are going to control what you believe.
That's what Google was built to do.
And anybody who supports I support centralization.
If you're a Bitcoin and you're behind AI, you are not part of our tribe.
What about in a decentralized way in a sense that, like having it
actually running on your own servers and having your own libs versus using.
Because I agree, I think the biggest risk with AI is that they.
What do you do?
It'd be something like I forget, right? First, pick this up.
You have some justification for why like this?
Almost like, going back to munitions with cryptography.
AI is too powerful.
Therefore it must be regulated.
Therefore, you've got three options that are all controlled by the government,
and they control exactly what's coming through.
That's why that I love this when we're do this podcast because I see
Gary is playing, you know, bad cop and you playing good cop.
But it's beneficial for the audience what I'm trying to say
to the audience, clearly, I want you to see the idea.
And I agree with you, Nathan.
If you want to know the truth, my website,
my form is the Library of Alexandria for decentralized medicine.
I have no illusions that I'm going to die someday,
and somebody else is going to need to take it over.
But you have to have your own AI lem so that people in the future can come.
Why? Because there's a reason they destroyed the Library of Alexandria.
The same reason that they're building AI right now.
And you have to realize it's going to be a control mechanism.
That's the reason why they've got to try to control Bitcoin
for the exact same reason.
Because if you have unlimited funds, you're going to be
really fucking difficult for the state to control.
Yeah.
It's funny, we had, I want to say who it was.
We had wonderful friend that we were talking
to, and I forget the exact question that we had,
but he had a, like, scripted question regarding Covid,
and that was his check to tell if the AI was, at least somewhat honest or not.
And funny enough, he, he's like, you know, this one lies me,
this one doesn't.
And he went to show us that you can use this to validate.
That will actually tell you the truth of what happened in Covid.
And it was gone. It already figured that out.
That plug, that hole that had moved on.
let me let me plug this hole for you.
Even better for both of you.
Do you know that the real story of Glenn Maxwell
and her father, you may not know this is through Pergamon Press.
Pergamon press I don't know that one.
I know that he was CIA, if I'm not mistaken.
know this is even better because it ties for what you just said.
You may not know this.
How did he go from the news business to peer review?
He controls all peer review everywhere in the United States for science.
Now you begin to understand why Epstein was involved
with funding all the science, because what did they want to do?
They wanted you to believe what the peer reviewed journal showed.
In other words, they distill that down.
So you may not know this, but one of the guys who is a huge champion,
OG Bitcoin like me, Kevin McKiernan, who I gave some evidence to,
he just put the article that he just wrote about the Covid vaccines
with Jessica Rose.
It's on the open timestamps of the Bitcoin blockchain just happened two weeks ago.
So in the future when we do get an, attorney general that will prosecute,
the evidence will always be sitting on the Bitcoin blockchain
because right now no one's willing to do it in the government
because peer review is controlled by the government, by the people there.
So this is the reason why, when you look at AI that your friend did
in Covid, you get the consensus view.
Tell me what fucking consensus is in science.
It's fucking pseudoscientific.
There is no consensus in science.
But guess what they're doing?
They're using SEO and search and peer review to get idiots
to believe their consensus is decentralized when it's not.
Now, I completely agree.
I used to work in universities and anytime I hear someone talk about peer reviewed,
it's like the incentives are so unbelievably skewed.
The only people that are making to the positions to review
them are the ones that already agree with them,
that are part of the club, and they all think the exact same.
It really is like one funeral at a time, if you're lucky,
because they have so much.
I would just say what I observed was there was so much identity wrapped up
in their status and stature in the ivory tower, that there's no way most people
would ever risk that to actually go out on, you know, go out to left field
and have like a difference of opinion that might shatter the current Zeit Geist.
Nathan, just think about what you just said.
You just saw the old system and peer review.
And what did Google do in 1995?
They took the human element out.
They use the human element to build the algorithm.
The algorithm now does it for Gary when he gets on the fucking internet.
I never thought of it applied to search.
I never thought of that same thing applied to search.
That's it. That's how it works.
And you know what the problem is like while you guys are playing checkers.
Uncle Jack's been playing
4D chess for 20 years, trying to point this out to people.
And this is the reason why you'll hear me say on some podcasts.
Like, if you want to start something with uncle Jack, use Yandex.
Why do I pick Yandex versus Google?
Because it's Russian based.
And guess what?
Russian has also been like the United States.
They lost that a cordial title. What does that tell you?
That the people in power through the royal family, through the Vatican,
through the Maxwell,
family tree, they can't control that search.
They don't want anybody to use that.
Because, you know what?
You may trip on your own dick and find the truth.
It reminds me of how we
spoke with, Katie, the Russian from citizen X,
and one of the ideas that
you point out to me was like the idea of, like,
you're going to another passport, maybe get something like Turkey.
The purpose being that you have
two adversarial countries who hopefully will not share information
and will not probably both be pissed off at you at the same time.
Hopefully.
know, it's it's, I think this is the kind of things
that you guys are bringing up now that makes me happy as a Bitcoin,
because that's the kind of information sharing that we need.
Like, in
other words, everybody says, oh, well, it's easier to just get my passport here.
Well, maybe easier isn't the the answer.
Maybe embracing the suck is the answer because you're wiser.
And that's the point.
That's the point really that I try to get to
with people when I'm Agent provocateur, you know?
And, you know, I know that a lot of things I say and do really piss people off,
but I don't think they really understand pissing people off gets people to think.
And like, we have a thing in medicine called Morbidity and Mortality Conference.
When doctors make mistakes, they put us at the front of the room
and they fucking throw arrows on us to make us defend our position.
The goal isn't to take us apart as surgeons, it's
actually to make us fucking better so we don't make the mistakes in the future.
And I would tell you, I think podcasts need to do the same thing.
And I feel like we're doing that on this podcast.
And I hope other podcasters realize that instead of throwing people
fucking softballs, they need to go after people.
And when they have bad ideas, you don't let the bad idea fester.
You go out and say, well, a Bitcoin.
I would say this, you know, dude, if the guy is your friend,
you should be able to disagree with them, just like we disagree
at the Thanksgiving dinner table with Uncle Joe, who's a fucking moron.
Okay, I'll take that and I'll run with that a little bit.
One I completely agree because iron sharpens iron.
And two, the other thing that popped out of me while you were talking was,
you should treat like Nvk says.
You should treat your stack like it's ten times the value.
You should also treat it like the government is going to come after you,
like you're ten times more powerful because you will be and they will.
So if I'm going to go, I'm going to go to uncle Jack a little bit.
I'm gonna go for you should as bitcoiners be not be concerned.
We talked about building a citadel
where we want to go in the world in the best places to be.
And I actually like the idea of, like,
you might have to better be a bit of a pirate.
You're going to have want to have access to water and be able to move around.
You've been in El Salvador for a while now.
Should we be concerned about the IMF new relationship with Kelly
and what's going on there?
What's your take on the ground, or is it still is it a nothing burger?
Or is this thing that we should be worried about?
I think the IMF take is a nothing burger, but do I think there's
other risks that you haven't, laid out there?
Yeah, I do and do do you know that uncle Jack has plans for that kind of stuff?
I do not.
Yeah, well, because I don't talk about them.
And the reason why.
What a smart bitcoiners get on a podcast
and, you know, unleash, you know, the attack.
What is sons you say about things like that?
Yeah, but you can tell us. We're not going to
just so you know, to do stuff like that, that's why
people come to see uncle Jack, at the Citadel. Why?
We don't have any any devices around to listen when we talk about things.
Have to do, like, I'll give you an example.
You guys are tied to Ben.
When Ben talked about, hypothetically, what should Canadians do?
And he talked about Coinjoin and, Chuck and why he's a fan of this.
Not remember what he's doing.
He's giving you a hypothetical so that you can begin to start
thinking about this.
I would tell you, I kind of do the same thing with my Tron.
I said, hypothetically, if this happens, what's your game plan?
What am I doing?
I'm running through game theory with them so they understand.
Do I think it's safer for me right now in the third World?
Because I know that my biggest enemy is in Google, and Google
doesn't have a big footprint in El Salvador.
That should be pretty obvious to you.
Just so you know, what did Sergey Brin try to prove to me last year?
Nathan, when I was on adopting Bitcoin stage, he turned off the internet
for Bitcoin while I gave my talk.
Really? you something else.
I'll share things with you. I'm not scared.
For podcasts that I did, I'm not going to tell you who they are.
Yeah. Sergey Brin this year.
No. man, what are you doing on with us?
truth is, I'm trying to beat you
Well,
using Top Gun against you.
I'm saying to you, Gary, I'm going to force you
to learn some of these lessons because I'm going to bring Google closer to you.
Now, I'm saying this obviously fictitious, but
you realize that it's a lesson in what I'm trying to tell you.
Sometimes, son teaches us,
bring your enemy closer because it's beneficial.
Ultimately, you don't diverge or divulge
what you're really doing and what you're thinking just the same way.
Why did I take a trip all over the world recently?
You think I'm going to tell you all the reasons why I did that?
No, but guess what?
When I do something and it sounds counterintuitive,
you should pay attention to it as a Bitcoin. Why?
So that if you do happen to see me and we're say, on a 60ft
catamaran in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, you say, Jack, what's going on?
And when I tell you, you go, that's fucking interesting.
I think that's a fantastic point.
I do want people to kind of be.
Maybe the word is startled into action a little bit.
Or get there's the can get themselves thinking differently.
Which I think is important.
So my question is 50,000ft view here.
I'd like to know what we can do to try to help our fellow bitcoiners
ask some of these tough questions, because I got to tell you, as you know,
it's very easy to just look at number go up.
I mean, I check it almost every day, and it's silly for me
because in the back of my mind, I know I'm not selling.
It could go down to 10,000.
I'm not selling it. Go up to 500 K, I'm not selling.
I'm in it for the long haul.
And yet this dopamine rush off number go up.
Well, it makes me feel good. I'm getting richer.
I can be a sheep and not worry.
And I don't have to worry about that other stuff because I have money.
But that other stuff is important.
And there are bitcoiners out there who may hear some of what you say,
and they might have a reaction, like maybe Gary.
15 years ago when I used to work in government,
I used to work for congressmen, and we'd sometimes get letters from people
that seemed like crazy conspiracy stuff, and I could just dismiss it.
So there are going to be Bitcoiners out there who might share
some of your trepidations about the state,
and about people trying to come after them.
What can we do to get them to a not
just be sedentary and feel okay by number?
Go up and be not.
Simply be reflexive and say, oh, he's just a conspiracy theorist.
I don't need to listen to him.
Well, I would tell you, Gary, and hopefully you're asking this,
from the goodness I am, it's a genuine question because I
as the more I've grown, I do want to learn and I'm open to all sorts of ideas.
It's a psyops.
And, we're doing it right now.
The best thing that bitcoiners can do is what me,
you and Nathan are doing right now to have this open air discussion
so that we are agent provocateurs for maybe what we should be thinking.
We need to always, I always, I call this the circle of six.
You have to have six people around you, 12 guys that are looking in places
where you're not.
And you have to make sure that you subtract the superfluous in your life.
The superfluous are the things that don't matter.
You need to focus on the things that matter.
You need to direct your attention to those things and focus on them, crazily. Why?
Because in the future, you will be the wisest person
that the state, will want to eliminate.
And the thing is, that information, the single most devastating thing
to the state, is information that has high signal.
And I believe that what we did on this podcast
already was very high signal and very low noise, I believe.
And a lot of the other podcasts that I've done,
I had to inject a lot of noise so that the algorithms would not knock me off.
Why I needed for Bitcoiners to get a lot of traction right now.
I'm not giving you any noise, bro.
I'm actually telling you what the point of my needle is.
And just remember something about this arrow.
In order to get the truth into Bitcoin is the arrow
has to be sharp, really sharp.
And I don't anticipate everybody wanting to know this now.
Not to your last point of being Gary.
That used to be tied to a politician and you could dismiss conspiracy theories.
Here's the greatest benefit to uncle Jack.
What happened in Covid.
The conspiracy theorists remain undefeated.
So maybe, just maybe,
you need to start listening to the people who are the salmon in life.
Maybe the truth lies where the salmon is
and not where the sardines are in the ocean.
You know, in their swarms.
And I look at it, I think I said this to you in the first hour of the podcast
that most of the sardines in Bitcoin have been in.
David Bailey and Michael Saylor's camp.
What I'm telling you, Gary,
is uncle Jack hasn't been in that camp for two years.
And I want you to know why.
And I want you to question why.
And remember, I've been pretty public about how I got into Bitcoin.
Who got me into Bitcoin. That may tell you.
Maybe I'm talking to a different part
of the bitcoin network that you guys maybe should be talking to.
And I would tell you, think about what those guys are doing now
making Bitcoin payments possible
all over the world really easy.
In other words, you watch what they do
and keep focusing on it.
They left the government.
They didn't.
They didn't want to get that 230 section attack.
They said, fuck it, I'll sell Twitter to Elon Mustard Transhumanist,
and I'll go out and focus in on the thing that fucking matters the most,
which is what Bitcoin.
And that's what we're talking about right here.
And Gary I'm okay sitting down
and talking with people who don't believe conspiracy theories.
I'm probably glad that I didn't meet you 15 years ago and I met you now.
But I will tell you one of my cognitive biases,
because I think it's fair to say I no longer want to talk to fucking retards.
I only want to talk to people that have an open mind.
I want to pack parachutes.
I have an open mind. Why?
Because I know how important you're going to be in the future.
Even when I'm dead. Why?
Because you may be the circle of six for my son,
my daughter, my nurses, kids, my nurse, my family.
I look at you as part of my extended family,
Nathan as my brother from another mother.
So I want to make sure that we come on and do a podcast like this,
that you understand the kinship that we have.
It's not through our genetics, it's actually through our mind and how we think
that we're first principle thinkers and we value freedom.
We value sovereignty.
We value, the things that matter
that were codified by Thomas Jefferson and the Declaration of Independence.
And I do think the two most important things for
bitcoiners to read are the Declaration of Independence.
And really look at the words and I think, son, Zeus.
But I think everybody this year you want to do something
to your circle of six, buy them that fucking book.
And if you're really a tool, highlight
the fucking areas that you think that their eyes are really good at,
and then
maybe use a different color and say, these are the things you need to work on.
Why? Because I'm counting on you.
And then tell people what you're good at.
I mean, I think people eventually figure out what you're good or bad at.
I think most people know me that I am a fucking beacon for the truth. Why?
Because I've been fighting centralized medicine.
Who are the biggest fucking criminals on the planet?
Bitcoiners think it's the bankers.
I think it's health care. Why?
Because time is the most valuable asset they steal.
The only thing a bitcoin or a banker can steal from you is your Bitcoin.
the second position.
reason I hold the position that I hold.
And you remember, I've been fighting this fucking animal by myself for 20 years.
So getting involved in Nathan
and Ben in your battle for me, this is just like,
you know, you saying to me, okay, Maverick, fucking engage.
Let's go.
I'm all in, and I want you to understand
how I see this.
I'm a diagnostician.
I use history, and I dig for the truth.
I don't fucking believe anybody.
I don't even believe my own parents.
They're both dead now.
But if they were both alive, they would tell you
I was the most fucking acerbic kid you ever met. Why?
Because when they said black, I'd say I know, were right.
I know, I was the same way for a long time, and I still am to a degree.
So I think that's what makes us different.
I that trait is, I think in Bitcoin is why you don't make
the initial determination to buy money you can't fuck with
until you really have that salmon mindset that you're willing to go up the stream.
I guess what I'm saying to both of you is that I want you to have it everywhere.
I want you to decentralize fucking everything about
your money.
when you do that, you begin to find
the axiom that I just talked
about at Bitcoin historical.
Just don't be wealthy and money
be wealthy in time.
then you're a fucking savage.
That's beautiful that the cruising is the perfect place to put a bow on it.
There's one thing I want to slip in super quick because Gary
you were concerned that the revolution we might not be able to win.
Look into Lucky Palmer.
So I think we'll have a much easier time with the state than you think we will.
And, Doctor Cruz, please tell me, where can people go and find your stuff,
follow your work, all that, all the good information.
The handle on every social media is doctor Jack Cruz.
There's so many fakes out there. Don't believe it.
If you want more of my time, I got a Patreon Patreon.com backslash.
Doctor Jack Cruz got a website.
You want to see the Library of Alexandria for decentralized medicine?
It's on my form.
You could probably put it in the search button there.
Your disease. You'll find out what you got.
And you can follow me on Twitter.
Twitter is probably the highest signal for me right now.
But the problem is, Elon Musk allows,
like, 100 or 200 fake bots to be around me
because he's trying to keep me a little bit muzzled. Why?
Because I don't like electric vehicles.
I don't like AI, and I certainly think going to Mars is the stupidest fucking
all? I am, but I don't use Okay.
Gary, for my work.
I mean, if you've if you've ever followed me,
sometimes I put tweets out and it's lessons on quantum biology.
You can't do that on master.
trying to do?
I'm trying to create the savages that you guys
are going to organize with Bitcoin like we are on the same team.
I look at you and Nathan and Ben as a spider on a mirror.
I'm the mirror image of you.
I'm trying to give people back in time.
I want you to get them
on Bitcoin and secure their Bitcoin and make sure that they're fucking savage.
And I think we're brothers in this and we're going to fight this war.
It's okay if you don't feel like we're going to win.
But Gary I'm telling you we're going to win.
We've done it before.
We just have to realize we we got to put the proof of work in to make it happen.
Hey, you! Yes, you.
Watching the Bitcoin price movements and the latest exciting news.
It's awesome to stay informed,
but the real power of Bitcoin comes from taking control.
Don't just watch. Take action.
Head over to BTC sessions aka
learn for free, step by step tutorials
that guide you through every major skill that you need to know.
Plus full video playlist for deeper dives on any topic you like.
And if you're ready for the ultimate fast track.
Scroll to the bottom and check out Bitcoin mentor.io
for premium one on one experience with my team of Bitcoin experts
to ensure you get it right the first time.
Don't wait.
Secure your Bitcoin future today.
Hit the link in the show notes or scan the QR code on the screen.
If you enjoyed this episode with doctor Jack cruise,
please do like and subscribe and check out the previous episode
on Decentralized Health insurance with Andy Schoon over.