You get intimidated as soon as somebody
puts an ology allergic term on the end.
You've bought that idea. This is the
propaganda that actually can be used to
modify your behavior. So, it's no shock
to me that we have chronic disease. Dr.
Jack Puce is a neurosurgeon and health
optimization expert who has challenged
mainstream health narratives like Andrew
Fuberman, Ryan Johnson, and is here to
challenge everything you thought you
knew about well-being. Why is modern
health so broken? Because our modern
environment is manufactured. It's no
longer native. For example, you have to
have light at the right times and dark
at the other times. That's the whole key
to biologic decentralization. Crazy. A
lot of fighters told me that by not
ejaculating, you will actually be able
to increase your testosterone. That was
the idea in Indian medicine and Chinese
medicine for a long time. Turns out the
more times you have orgasms, the better
off you are. In fact, the more times you
the longer you live. If you want to know
the truth, it's time for us to have a
global revolution against people that
don't put the people first. When you see
that they don't have your interest, you
have a duty not to help them do anything
at all. This is what you tell. What
exactly is the issue with blue light? It
destroys DHA. It destroys melatonin by
liberating vitamin A. Blue light also
can affect different genes in your body.
For example, how would I, as somebody
who's not scientific, figure out what is
actually good for me and what isn't?
It's pretty simple. I think the first
step of fixing this is understanding and
if you don't understand that, then you
don't understand it.
So, thanks for joining the show, Jack.
No problem. Uh, let's jump right into
it. Uh, why is modern health so broken?
Uh, because our modern environment is
manufactured. It's no longer native. So,
the all the technologies we kind of
built around us, you say, are not
connected to the natural habitat. we
actually evolutionary evolve to our
genome is not built for the use of the
the electromagnetic spectrum that we're
on. The part of the electromagnetic
spectrum that we are designed to work
with is pretty simple. It's visible
spectrum from 250 to about I would say
probably 700. We do react up into 3100
for water. But then in the RF range, the
only RF radiation that we're designed to
work with is 7.83 A3 hertz or harmonics
of that because of the Schuman
resonance. And the goal there is that's
what tells our brains and our cells what
uh where we are in terms of seasons for
circadian control. And if you use
anything outside of those boundaries
that leads to mitochondrial heteroplasm
disease and it's axiomatic and it turns
out everything in modern life is outside
those boundaries. So it's no shock to me
why we have chronic disease. So when
people talk about Froot Loops and food
and all this, to me, this is superolous.
It's ridiculous to talk about because
those are like pimples on an an
elephant's ass when you look at big
picture of things, but this is not uh
you know what you've been taught in
school. This is not what you taught in
your house. It's not what you've been
taught there. Because people have a
relationship with food, you know, from
either the farmer or the grocery store.
They don't realize the relationship is
actually the relationship of the sun to
the earth. That's the first
relationship. And if you don't
understand that, then you don't
understand the problem. So the most
important thing which is basically
govern governing our health besides the
food, besides anything you say is light.
Well, it's light and dark. That's the
whole key to biologic decentralization.
Like you have to have light at the right
times and dark at the other times. It
turns out the presence of light even in
those those boundaries that I gave you
can be really toxic at nighttime. And
unfortunately in our modern world that's
what you know your generation has grown
up with. So it's a huge problem. And the
the issue is people act like we don't
know this information. We've known this
information for a really long time. Uh I
would submit that Robert Obecker proved
it beyond a shadow of a doubt in the
50s60s and 70s and then the US military
through DARPA the department of defense
they they shelved his his work but that
was his public work. What did they do
then? Covertly through the intelligence
agencies and and also through the
department of defense and DARPA they
continued his work to prove that. And
what do they do now? because no one has
this awareness. Now you're able to be
controlled very easily. Uh because of
things you know that right now you've
grown up with. You think are normal. You
just told me you're a filmmaker. When
you make a film, you are actually able
to control people. When you use a
screen, you're able to control people.
When you use a cell phone, you're able
to control people. In fact, to make this
so simple for you to understand, just
the fact that you have traffic lights in
every city in the world, that is an
electromagnetic control signal. When you
see a red light, you stop. When you see
a green light, you go. But people don't
realize that that is just another
synonym of how these things happen. Now,
we're just way more fancy about how we
do it. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of like, as
you say, for me growing up, I I never
even questioned uh like medicine,
health, or anything. It was kind of like
I just accepted what the um the norm
was. And then uh because I'm not a
scientist, I don't understand any papers
or scientific terms. And so for me it
kind of I always had the issue of
finding the truth where it lies because
I feel like you can find uh for any bias
which you have which is like okay meat
is good but also veganism is good. You
can find some scientific um studies
which basically yeah confirm that. So,
how how now would I as somebody who's
really not scientific navigate all of
this to figure out what is actually good
for me and what isn't? It's pretty
simple. I think even though you're not a
scientist, you are a scientist. Instead
of focusing on what you don't know, how
about you focus on what you do know? So,
for example, if I took the Garmin chip
out of your iPhone, do you think that
you would be able to navigate around
cities like you do now? The answer is
no. So, guess what? That's exactly the
same thing that happens when the clock
in your eye goes ary. So it should be no
shock to you why this happens. Now can
you go, you know, very simply and read
how Garmin chips work? The answer is
yes. Well, turns out that's exactly how
your supercosmatic nucleus works. So if
you can figure it out in iPhone, why
can't you figure it out in you? It's
pretty easy. The science is the same.
Okay, the science is exactly the same.
The problem is you don't know that. You
get intimidated soon as somebody puts an
ology or, you know, a logic term on the
end. That's ridiculous, you know. Yeah,
it's totally ridiculous idea. But you've
bought that idea. See, this is the
propaganda that actually can be used to
modify your behavior. Again, another
tool of control. Like, it does not have
to just be electromagnetic. But
technically, propaganda is
electromagnetic these days. But I would
even submit to you that the original
propaganda talked about in Bernay's work
in 7 in 1921, you had to open a book and
read it. Well, you can't read it if
there's no reflected light off the page.
So technically, it's still
electromagnetic. And what created the
book? Electricity. Also
electromagnetism. So it's at every
level, but the key is do you see it?
Like for example, when you make a movie,
when you have a projector and it goes to
a screen, right? You can sit in the
movie theater and you see all the light
going to the screen. Can you understand
the movie by looking at the light? The
answer is no. You have to look at the
screen. Can you understand by looking at
the projector? No. So don't tell me
you're not a scientist. Even in your own
expertise, if you if you learn how to
think from first principles, this is not
difficult to get. I if I if I can teach
it to a third grader, I certainly can
teach it to a guy like you. So how would
you teach to me? Uh you said the clock
in the in the eye. It's basically or
light the circadian rhythm is governing
everything. How would you explain to me
how it biologically actually works? It's
very simple. Just what I told you. I
don't think you listened carefully. You
take your iPhone, you take this, you go
do a Google search. How does it tell me
where are you right now? What location
on earth? Mexico City right now. Okay.
So, I want to go from Mexico City to the
Yugatan Peninsula. So, you would put
that in uh Wise or Google Maps or
something else. How does that process
work? You have a microchip in this
computer that connects to a Garmin
device that's about 120,000 kilometers
above the air. It sends light down to
your phone to give the directions. The
clock up there has to work 38
microsconds faster to make up for time
relativity. Whose law is that? Einstein.
You don't have to know that. But that
clock's got to work faster than the one
in your phone. Otherwise, you're going
to wind up in Guatemala. Okay? You're
not going to wind up in the Yucatan. The
clock in your eye has to work faster
than every other clock below your body.
Which is why God or evolution put the
clock in your eye. It's at the top of
your body. It's also the organ that
allows light to come in it for the same
reason. Yeah. Okay. So, I think Jack
makes a great point that incorporating
small changes in your life like wearing
those or touching grass can have a huge
impact on your life. And personally for
me, one of them was actually saving in
Bitcoin. And that's why this episode is
sponsored by Bitcoin Well. And there's a
small cat here as you can see. Say
hello. Yeah. Hello. This episode is
sponsored by Bitcoin Well, who make it
very easy for you to automate your
Bitcoin buys and then get them straight
into your self custody. In that way, you
can actually make sure that you buy real
Bitcoin because every buy that you make
actually also has a transaction ID on
the Bitcoin blockchain. And when you
sign up via this link down below, you
not only help me as a podcaster, but you
also get the chance to earn 1 million
Satoshi's. You get the chance to
actually toss the Bitcoin wishing well
three times, right? Yeah. You want to do
this? Oh. Um, and if you're lucky, you
are one of the few who can earn 1
million Satoshi's straight into your
self custody, into your hardware wallet.
And yeah, this was a wild ad read
because this small little cat joined me
on this one. But it's a wild episode.
So, we got to jump right back into it
with Jack. And then uh because you
mentioned that the artificial light we
have today is basically in in in
interrupting this process which is the
natural clock. So, um you you talk a lot
about blue light and its problems. What
what exactly is the issue with blue
light? Well, blue light has a lot of
problems. It's not just one problem, but
the major problem is that it destroys
DHA. It destroys melatonin. And it does
that by liberating vitamin A from the
chemicals. This is where the science
actually matters. Every option in your
body, which is a nonvisual photo
receptor, this means these are photo
receptors that you don't use to see.
These photo receptors have opsson
proteins associated. When blue light
hits it, the vitamin A is liberated. The
vitamin A is toxic to that system, blows
it up. So, what makes the clock in your
eye run faster? DHA, which is a fat
that's found in marine
um you know, food chain, uh it's called
fish oil. You have more fish oil from
your eye to your into your retina and
behind your retina than any other part
of your brain. Why? Because that's how
the clock runs faster. So if you can
deliver a higher amount of electric
power to the supercosmatic nucleus, this
clock works faster than that. Now it
doesn't have to be 38 microsconds
faster. This is at quantum level time.
It we're just talking on phento and
atosconds. Okay, these are very very
small parts of time. And because there
is that delay, that allows your toes to
know how to work uh with that time
delay. And that's that's the essence of
how the system is built. Blue light also
can affect different genes in your body.
Like for example, the FGF gene, this is
what uh the government found in MK Ultra
that the ultimate stuff that they found
out that I talked about in depth, you
know, in the Danny Jones podcast. I
never got into all the big issues, but I
did tell him that it affects the
dopamine reward tracks in your frontal
lobe. These are the things that allow
you to plan and do things. They affect
your motion. They affect affect your
mental capabilities, cognition, and also
any type of mental illness. These can be
hijacked by certain amounts of blue
light when it's unopposed by red. Turns
out red light actually is the antidote
to blue. But all of the screens that are
made today, they don't have any red
light in them. They've subtracted all
that out. It's really noticeable when
you look at the spectrum of light bulbs.
Light bulbs are the reason that this
program is is been in place. They give
you the excuse in Europe. They give you
excuse everywhere else. Oh, we want to
save energy. So, let's take the UV and
the red light out. That's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] This
is being done by design because they
know how to use optical genetics in the
system to control you. They control the
way you think. And soon uh through the
new uh program that they're using, which
is through vaccination, they're going to
put technology inside your body that's
going to mimic what an iPhone does. So
you'll be controlled from above down
below and they'll be able to send
frequencies down so that if they don't
like the movie that you're making with
Jack Dorsey, they're going to just turn
a little knob on. They're going to find
out you're in in uh Mexico City because
they'll find it from the Google
geoloccator and they will send out a
precision beam and make you ineffective.
very similar to what you saw happen in
uh Havana when the Russians were able to
affect all the Americans in the in the
embassy. That's the games that are going
on, my friend. This is what it's all
about. Crazy. Crazy. Yeah. It's not
crazy when you see this is what bothers
me when people interview me. How How can
you say it's crazy when you know that's
exactly how your phone works? It just
Yeah, that's true. It's not crazy.
What's crazy is that people don't
realize that it's obvious and that's
what they bank on. That's what they bank
on. They bank on that you say it crazy.
But guess what? You have the experience
right now in your life. You can't do
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] without your phone. Yeah. Guess
what? When I grew up, I never had a
phone. I live my life perfectly fine
without a phone. But your generation
believes this. This has become your
generation's heroin. Yeah, that's true.
Is do you think there is any solution to
this or can I can like can normal people
shield themselves from that? Well, I I
told you there's the first step in
fixing this is understanding there's a
problem. I mean, look at yourself right
now. You're like, "Oh, this is crazy. I
I have to have you stop telling me it's
crazy. It can't be crazy a conspiracy
theory when there's patents for it."
Okay? No, that's not true. Then you know
who's crazy? You're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] crazy for
not realizing it. Then once you realize
it's there, then you have to do
everything you can to use technology
wisely. You use it when you need it and
you turn it off when you don't. You know
that you have a safe in the wall for
your valuables, but that other safe is a
Faraday cage. When you don't need it and
you're going to have a date with your
girlfriend or your boyfriend, you put
your phones away so Google and the
government can't hear what you're doing
so that they can't target you. That's
that's it. But know that they're doing
that. If the government wants to listen
to you and and control you and you stay
ignorant that they have this ability,
then that's on you. You're a dumbass.
So, you need to prepare for it. And
should you let anything go in your body
that could put technology in you to make
you an antenna? The answer is no. So,
like when you have surgery, make sure
you don't have elective surgery. You
know, when you eat food, try to make
sure the food is organic grown by a
farmer, not bought at a supermarket.
Okay? make sure it's not Froot Loops,
that it doesn't have self-replicating
messenger RNA technology in it because
that's coming. And the other big problem
that people don't realize, this is the
reason why they geoengineer the sky,
because all the bad stuff that they want
to put in you, all the the chemicals
that are in the air, when you breathe
them in through your lungs, some of that
gets put in there. How do you get rid of
that problem? You make sure that you're
in the sun all the time. So, a lot of
people, you know, always get mad at me
when they see I do a podcast. I never
have a shirt on. I'm always outside.
Today I'm not even in the good sun that
I usually do my podcast in because we
have some people over here right now
visiting and um so I just said we'll set
everything up here and deal with it from
there. But if you have enough melanin
both on your integimement and on your
insides that actually acts to take any
of the technology that they put in you
away. But most people don't realize this
is even a possibility. So then I have to
get them to go on my Twitter feed and
look like you go on my Twitter feed
today, you will see slides with patents
that show that all this stuff works.
This is not like uh Star Wars like that
it doesn't work. They have this
capability. Who's they? Governments all
over the world. Certain governments have
more of it than others. Okay? But if
your country says that you're free, I
can promise you you're not free. Freedom
is also a relative term just like the
truth is. The truth is an approximation
of the data we have today. I would tell
you your freedom is exactly the same
way. It's an approximation of what you
believe to do. But you have to realize
as a human that you shouldn't trust
anybody. And I don't. I just did another
podcast with uh Danny a couple of days
ago and one of the guys that I did the
podcast with is this guy named Cali
Means who I don't trust at all. He goes,
"Why don't you trust me?" I said, "I
don't trust anybody. I grew up in New
York City. I hate everybody equally."
and then I decide who I like and who I
don't like. And it doesn't matter if
you're a billionaire or not. They don't
care. They have the ability to do these
things. So, you need to know this isn't
crazy. You need to know that they have
the capability. Therefore, you need to
plan your life appropriately. So,
there's things you can do. Yeah. There
are people who are trying to build
technologies. For example, that's what
Jack is focusing on right now as well
too. He sees the problems with, for
example, centralized platforms, how they
can control human beings and actually um
everything you talked about. And now
he's trying by integrating Bitcoin and
Noster to basically give humans the
possibility to break away from all of
those issues and hopefully like fight
against uh all of those forces. Yeah. I
mean, I like his plan. I think the plan,
however, very simplistic. I actually
think that the plan where he should be
spending his resources is in different
places. I've got my own ideas about
that. I don't really talk about them
publicly at all. Um but I do talk to my
people about it, things that they need
to be doing, things that they should be
planning for in the next 5 years, 10
years, 15 years, 20 years. I mean, I
famously told people, you know, when you
met me at the Bitcoin adopting
conference about how I came to Bitcoin
and and why I came cuz I knew that was
be going to be important in the battle
to decentralized medicine. In fact,
today's an interesting day. Today is the
day uh the anniversary of when I got my
first Bitcoin in 2013 because of Jack
Dorsey, December 6th. That's great. And
we just hit 100K. Great.
So realize that Bitcoin like Noster is
the story for like now and maybe the
next five or six years. But if you think
that they don't have other plans for us,
that they're going to be able to somehow
break um shall I say Satoshi's
brilliance, you're crazy or I would say
naive. So do you need to be paying
attention to those capabilities? I think
so. Do you think with like um with the
latest presidential election and Robbie
Kennedy for example getting the lead in
the department of health that there is
at least a positive force or is is it um
still that we need to take self-
responsibility and totally shield
ourselves? I think 99% of people feel
that it's a good thing. I'm in the camp
that's 1%. I told you even though I like
Bobby I don't trust anybody. And do I
have trust? No. He's already sitting
down and meeting with executives with
Trump from big pharma. He shouldn't meet
with any of them. He already knows who
they are. He knows what he needs to do.
Now, if he wants to be cordial and nice,
great. But what he should have done
after he met with them, he should have
had a press conference, told the world
why he was meeting them. Be transparent.
But that's not what we got. We just
heard through the news that he met with
the big pharma companies and it's
obvious why they want to meet with him.
What are you going to do to us? Well,
Trump's not going to let him do too
much. Why? because he's very proud of
being Mr. President Operation Warp
Speed. And I just told you that Warp
Speed is tied to this bioweapons
program. And most of the people that got
Trump elected, they like that program.
In fact, most of his picks um are still
linked to that program. A lot of the
people that's around him are linked to
that program. So, while I would tell you
Uncle Jack is optimistic because I do
think Trump and his platform is way
better than Camala Harris. No question
about it. Do I trust anybody in
Washington DC right now? No. I have less
trust in those people than any person
that you'll ever talk to, including Jack
Dorsey, because I know what they're
capable of doing. Yeah. So, you you What
would you do if you would be in uh
Bobby's position to kind of make America
healthy again? I would do everything I
possibly could to get confirmed. I would
tell Trump I would do this, that, and
the other thing, and then I would
unleash my own program. I would make him
fire me. Why? Because then the American
people would know that he's truly
working for us, we the people, and not
for the industrial military complex. And
the other big problem I have with Bobby,
Bobby thinks the law is great. The law
isn't great. And it it was proved in his
candidacy, they use lawfare to ruin him
and Nicole. So if you can use law to do
nefarious things, then you shouldn't use
the law to try to fight against the most
evil corrupt people on the planet. That
this is where I think Jack Dorsey is
absolutely correct. This is where I
think Bitcoin maxis are correct. That
the best most just thing in the world
that we have now, the the tool that
fixes everything is Bitcoin. Why?
Because it's truly decentralized. If you
want to fix the big problems that make
us ill, which is the bankers and big
pharma, I already told you that the use
of the electromagnetic spectrum is where
all the chronic diseases come from. That
means you have to disintermediate the
central bank, the Rockefellers, the
Rothschilds, and you really have to
disintermediate all their friends that
control big pharma and everything below
that. The only thing that does that is
Bitcoin. Now to give Bobby and Trump
some credit, they're the only two
leaders in the world outside of Blly
that u are now saying that we would like
to bring Bitcoin into the fold. I would
tell you that's the most redeeming
quality. That's the most trustworthy
part that I have about Trump and Bobby.
It's not about HS. And I know people
will be surprised to hear that from me,
but I just told you I went to Danny's
podcast to do another one with Cali
Means and a doctor named Mary Tally
Bowen. I actually said that in that
podcast, too. And everybody in the room
was stunned when I said it. They're
like, "Well, I thought that you had
Bobby's ear. I thought you had Nicole's
ear." I said, "Just because you have
someone's ear doesn't mean they're going
to do what they need to do." You know,
if you go back and listen to Bill
Kelly's speech at CPAC, what did he say?
He said, "Doesn't matter who the next
president's going to be. Depends how
good the diagnosis is of the problem and
what they do." You know, and I always
like to point out to people, what did B
Kelly do when he got elected? Everybody
told him he couldn't do what he did.
First thing he did is he made Bitcoin
legal tender. And look at where we are
now. December 6th, you may not know
this, my friend, but December 6th, the
entire bond structure of El Salvador on
Wall Street has been upgraded. This is a
place where nobody wanted to come for 5
years, right? You were you were here a
couple of weeks ago. You saw the country
for yourself. This is the greatest
turnaround ever. And what do we hear
from Bobby and Trump? Oh, well, the
United States is so big. We can't change
it. Well, B Kelly changed his place.
small but in 5 years now we have a guy
that runs a GA country named Malay who
literally in 6 months is changing his
country what is he doing it's getting
rid of all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] all the
corruption now he hasn't gone the way
that Bkelli is gone but he's taking away
100 years of communism with a chainsaw
and shrinking the government down I'd
like to see him make Bitcoin legal
tender like Blly did but I had his
central banker in my house literally 6
months ago and I gave that direct
message to the central banker and he's a
guy who's a Wall Street veteran, worked
on Wall Street for 35 years. His son
actually works for Tether and it's so
funny to see two, you know, two men in
the same family. One is fiat, the other
one is, you know, a Bitcoin player and
to see that they're totally on different
ends of the spectrum, but not for the
same reasons. They they are actually
linked through feedom. are interested in
fixing uh Argentina. But I can tell you
the reason I bring this up is when
people tell me things can't be done,
it's kind of like why I scolded you
before about well I'm not a scientist.
That's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] That is a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
excuse. Why? We have examples now of two
leaders in the Western world that have
come in and made radical changes in
their country and and change has
happened in a big way. Like we just
found out I just found out when I was
flying back from Florida that the same
thing is now going on in France. You
know, they just got a a no vote and
Mcronone is out or not out, but the
prime minister is out. They have a a big
problem. Well, this is good. The France
has a structure where the people can get
rid of people, but you can't get rid of
the president. The president's the
problem. So, guess what? I think it's
time for a revolution. That's what I
think. If you want to know the truth, I
think for people to really protect
themselves from the question you asked
me, it's time for us to have a global
revolution against people that don't put
the people first. So when you see that
they don't have your interest, you have
a duty not to help them do anything at
all. Yeah. This is this is what you tell
ethos. Okay. I I have no interest in
helping the government out at all. Yeah.
and and actually with with Boua you are
actually helping to decentralize uh the
the health system there right so it's
kind of like trying to decouple it right
but I gave him that information a long
time ago and it's been slow to come so
every day it takes longer my trust goes
down remember everybody everybody gets I
treat everybody the same my friend I
give you my best ideas and you don't
execute then you told me how you value
my opinion right so I have a duty to do
the same to you. Like, if you don't
think that this is the way it should be
going, that's great. Then don't ask for
my help. Like, when you want to dance
with a woman, she doesn't move her feet,
are you going to dance with her very
long? No. Nope. Nope. Remember what I
tell you. This is u this is a very
simple exercise that we're having here.
Like, uh, if it wasn't for Jack Dorsey,
I'd probably never get into Bitcoin. And
he told me, he goes, "You need to
decentralize your life." He goes, "If
you want to recapture your power that
you have in centralized medicine," he
says, "Decentralize your practice. First
thing you need to do is understand
Bitcoin." So, guess what I did? I did
that. And the sad part is I didn't do it
as soon as he told me I should start
thinking about it because I thought he
was crazy. Okay? But that shows you how
crazy I am that a guy who is got
probably 181 19 billion dollars now, I
don't have that because I wasn't as
smart as him. So, what am I telling you?
Jack Dorsey clearly was smarter than I
was as a brain surgeon. Why? Because he
saw the future developing. He understood
the problem better than me. But what did
he do since he's my friend? He told me
and it took me a while to listen. Now
the difference with me is I'm a great
white shark, dude. Once I bite into it,
I don't let it go. But do I know what
they try to do to him? Yeah, I know what
they try to do to him. They try to do
the same thing to me. The difference is
I've already lived 60 years of my life.
Jack's still a young man. He still has a
lot of things to do. Um, but I like
stirring the mix up. I like being Asian
provogador. I like giving two [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] I
like giving coming on podcasts and
telling people the truth. Why? Because
the truth is a revolutionary thing when
you live in a world of lies. And the
world of lies is built around this tech
platform. It's built around all the
non-native EMF. Your generation, you're
a young man. You think the tech is
great. The interesting thing is the
conversation you should have with Jack
cuz he's a little bit older than you.
He's now learned that technology has a
nefarious side. He knows that. Why? Cuz
it made him sick. That's the reason why
him and I became friends. That's the
reason why he uses a lot of my stuff
now. Like what he did for me with
Bitcoin, I did for him in his own life.
And you know, I famously told him a long
time ago that yeah, you may have got me
more monetary wealth by doing this, but
I gave you time back. Time is the most
valuable asset you get. And if you
listen to what I said at adopting
Bitcoin, I made the case that that is
the truth. That is an axiomatic truth
because without time, then you become
Steve Jobs. You become Paul Allen. You
become Hal Finny. Yeah, famous guys with
millions of dollars, but you're dead.
What good are you dead? I don't want to
see Jack dead. I want to see Jack
continue to do the things all around the
world to keep sticking his finger in the
government's eye to keep telling the
people wake up put Windex on their glass
eye. Yeah. So with like technology
should we like get it from our kids
completely away because I guess that
when you how the brain works the brain
uh is very sensitive to electromagnetic
radiation because it's not mileelinated
takes 25 to 28 years to happen. So my
answer is yes. Do I think there should
be a law that technology should be
limited very very aggressively till the
21st birthday? Yes, I believe so. Do I
believe schools should go back to books?
Yes. Do I believe the use of technology,
computers, iPads, phones? I think it
should be illegal for anybody below 21
years old to buy technology. Oh wow.
Makes sense. That's what I believe. But
am I okay if they use it because their
parents come up with a program? Yeah. I
mean, you have to realize some parents
let their kids drink uh liquor. Like if
you're in France, it's normal to have a
glass of red wine with your family, you
know, at 6 to 8 years old. That's not
normal in the United States. But do I
think the rule for technology should be
everywhere? Yeah. But, you know, I know
that everybody in the world is not going
to follow those rules. I think when they
understand the biology behind it, then
maybe parents will stop using iPads and
iPhones as digital babysitters because
basically what they're doing is they're
they're making their kids mentally
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] by doing that. And I mean that
literally and figuratively. You are
dumbing children down by doing that. And
if you want the world to be filled with
a bunch of idiots, that's not the world
that I want, my friend. I mean, I I
don't think you want that world either
because No. It's a movie maker. Do you
think idiots are going to want to come
see a movie where you actually have to
think about what you're putting on the
screen? But guess who does want that?
Apple, Microsoft. They just want you so
dumb so that you keep hitting the button
like, like, like, and you go to Amazon
and buy what you have to buy. That's
what the whole game is about, my friend.
It's just like a casino. The casino
doesn't give two shits about you as long
as you keep spending money. Yeah. Yeah.
They want to do they want to manipulate
my dopamine to keep me on there because
the advertisement model and Yeah.
Correct. It's obvious. But what's not
obvious is when I point this out, people
are like, "Oh, yeah. He's right." And
they go right back to the heroin. Yep.
Yep. How How do you How is your
relationship then with social media or
or your phone? How do you uh try to It's
not been good lately. Why? Because I've
come out of my shell the last 18 months.
I never I'm not a political guy, but I
became political, unfortunately, when
one of Jack Dorsey's friends called me
up and said, "Look, I would like you to
come on my podcast and try to teach this
guy from the Stanford Research Institute
a little bit about light because I think
he's missing a lot." And I realized what
that meant. I'm not so sure he did, but
I didn't answer him for six weeks
because I knew if I came out and I
started to talk about this that I was
going to put a target back on my back.
And boy, was I right. Because in the
last 18 months, that podcast opened up
Pandora's box. Now, you see, it's led me
to talk to politicians all over the
world, to make a constitutional
amendment for El Salvador, um, for me to
get really popular talking about what
you're talking to me about now. Um,
people are very, very interested in the
neurosurgeon. 20 years ago, I was only a
problem for centralized medicine. Now,
I'm a problem for everybody. Yeah, I
think it's a good thing because I I
think the message you spread is
something the world needs to hear to
actually figure out. Okay. Like I said,
when I first discovered uh your message
and I dove down this rabbit hole and was
like, "Oh, I need to relearn everything
which I thought is correct and I'm like
keeping learning more every day." And so
I think it's it's very like we we all
can be thankful for you to actually put
out this message although it might put a
target onto your back. Yeah. Well, I
mean I I'll be okay with the target on
my back if you guys do something with
it. You know, the my big thing is uh
it's great to have a good idea, but you
need people to execute on the idea
otherwise it gets deleted. And the truth
is, you know, I'm on the the shoulders
of other scientists that have also been
cancelled. I understand what happened to
Bernice Eddie. I understand what
happened to Robert Obecker. Those are
the people that I have a reverence for
because it happened to them and I know
that it can happen to me. The difference
is that I'm already at the end of my
career. I don't need to do neurosurgery
anymore predominantly because of Jack
Dorsey teaching me about Bitcoin. So I
don't have to go in the rat race and do
spinal fusions like a lot of
neurosurgeons have to do, you know, to
pay their bills, you know, to pay for
all the ex-wives, to pay for all the
kids, to pay for all their habits. I
don't have to do that anymore. In fact,
I've made my life more simple. You know,
everything for me now is about nature. I
am perfectly happy, you know, sitting
around in the sun and cultivating and
learning about nature every day and then
telling guys like you how the story
should unfold and how I do things. It
doesn't mean I want you to do what I do.
I just want you to understand that the
first 40 years of my life, I did
everything wrong. And then had a wakeup
call. I think if you ask Jack the same
thing probably up until maybe eight or
10 years ago when he got sick from what
he did, he built amazing technology. I
mean, we have Twitter because of him. We
have Block. He's got a Bitcoin only
company. But there was a time in his
life that that made him sick and he he
saw me out and he goes, "Look, same
story with Rick, you know, Rick Rubin."
So the thing that makes me happy is that
I could help two guys like Jack and Rick
and then they they in turn make a lot of
other people happy from the things that
they do. To me, that's how I think
society should operate. Just like, you
know, when you make a movie about Jack
or you make a movie about this topic
that you're actually educating people
about, hey, maybe we need to have a
different relationship than we do now.
That's an idea worth spreading. And the
thing is I'm not anti- tech just like
I'm not antiax.
Um but there's a right way and a wrong
way to do it. And the thing is that we
should be able to have that discussion
publicly without being censored right
now. Yeah. I mean you you you are
adopting Bitcoin. I was on the stage and
Sergey Brin turns off the internet
during my talk. Okay. So the guys for
simply Bitcoin had to recapitulate
everything. This is what I'm talking
about. So if you don't think that these
guys are bad actors, this is the proof.
You you experienced it with me. Yeah, it
happened. The only people they wanted to
hear my message was the people that were
in that meeting hall. Now thankfully the
people on the ground, they went the
extra method and now it's out on the
internet. So people can hear what I
said. They can hear the story just like
people will be surprised at what I'm
saying now about the politicians, even
the elections there. It's It's not crazy
for me to say I'm happy that Trump won.
I'm happy that Bobby's doing what he's
doing. But I don't trust either one of
them if they're going to do what they
told us they're going to do in the
campaign. Why? Because what do
politicians do? They tell you one thing
and they very rarely do it. So remember
what I said to you before, ideiation
without execution leads to deletion of
every good idea. I need these [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] to
execute. If they don't execute, I
promise you, I'm going to be as big a
problem for them as I am for everybody
else in centralized medicine. Yeah.
Yeah. It's all about actions. You don't
trust the words, but look at the actions
because this is how you actually see
what kind of person is really there.
Because with words, you can tell
whatever, but actions are the
reflections of what you actually
believe. Yeah. Correct. And that's part
of the reason why, you know, when people
give me [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about Dorsy, I was like,
look, the guy is Bitcoin only. He
doesn't do any [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] coins at all. uh he
got out of Twitter because Twitter was
not serving him. It was not the company
that he built. The board did everything
possible to make his life miserable. And
then the board doesn't go to Congress.
They called Jack to go to Congress. He
goes, "What do you want me to do?" And
then, you know, I don't think anybody
realized from 2016 to 2021. You know,
he's being threatened by Hollywood and
and the government. And that's why the
last Jason Bourne movie is made. It was
a direct threat to him and Zuckerberg.
either play ball with us or we're going
to take you out. Well, I mean, when
somebody tells you that and you're a
billionaire, [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] it. Sell Twitter, go
work on Noster, go work in Nigeria, go
work in Africa, go work in Central
America, and you know what? Teach more
people to be decentralized. When I sat
down with Jack the last time I was
physically with him, I said, "Tell me
what you need me to do." You know what
he said? Decentralize the world. He
goes, "Decentralize everybody that you
come in contact with." He goes, "That's
all I ask you to do." I'm like, "Hold my
beer. I'm ready." That's it. And I feel
the same way about people in medicine,
patients that I deal with. If I can
teach them even one aspect of
decentralization in their life, then I
feel like it's been a success. How can
how can we listening to that like help
to make the the world a more
decentralized way? Like how can we help
your own life? Take something in your
own life. Think about something that you
are expert in and then think about Yeah.
I try to do my movies for example like
decentralized way. I use a lot of Nostra
like because I know I I post mostly on
Noster. All my um like people who follow
me is basically on Noster and I try to
invest so much more time into uh
building Noster than being on on Twitter
and all the other platforms. So this is
kind of for me where I say I can create
content. I can I can use what we talk
about talk. I'll give you I'll give you
an example. When you do that, I want you
to take the example of World War II when
uh the British people would take
propaganda and fly over Germany and put
things down there and say, "Look, come
join us. We're not Hitler. This, that,
and the other thing. Do the same thing
with your movies. Drop your movie and
put it right on X. Say, "Look, this is
what we're doing." In other words,
educate the sleeping. That's kind of
what I do. I mean, if you want to know
the truth, that's what I use Twitter
for. For me, Nostra is really not prime
time yet because of the work that I do.
And I've told Jack that already. I'm
glad that, you know, he's trying to get
it right. So, what do I do? I keep
trying to educate the idiots that are on
Twitter, the people that are on
Facebook, the people on LinkedIn. These
these platforms are the way I look at
it, it's Chernobyl. But, do I know that
there's still some good people on there
that need help? Yeah. So you help those
people, but I'm not under the illusion
that I can help everybody. That's why I
always tell people I'm looking for
savages. Those are the people that I
look to help. Those are the people that
eventually will wind up on Nostar. Um
those will be the people that create
major problems for the government in the
future. That's my tribe. I like that.
Which messages do you think resonate
most with the savages? How do how are
you able to get the right people?
freedom maximalists, people who love
sovereignty, people who like property
laws, people who believe that they
should be able to say whatever they want
anytime they want. We should have
freedom in in our movement. Uh and
remember the government works for us,
not the other way around. But that's
changed in the last 120 years. And it's
changed everywhere, not just, you know,
in Europe, Africa, but really in the
United States. In fact, I think it's
most noticeable in the United States.
Why? Because the United States prior to
probably World War I was truly a
reflection of its founding documents
since the Federal Reserve Act, that's
been completely taken to the woodshed.
Any any American who thinks they're free
is clueless. But do they have more
relative freedom than say somebody in
Nigeria or say someone in South America
or someone in Mexico? Absolutely. I
would never argue that. But just like
time is relative, so is freedom. And we
need to build things actively, which is,
you know, what Jack is doing, what
you're doing. So, we need to support
people who do that. Just like I'm trying
to build decentralized medicine. Why?
Because I think that's going to be
important for your future, for Jack's
future, you know, for the future of the
savages. Everybody, every each one of us
has a tool that we're good at. Like your
tool is making movies. My tool is trying
to heal people from the chronic disease
epidemic. The where I think the disease
epidemic is coming from is radically
different than centralized medicine.
Radically different than the people
around Robert F. Kennedy Jr.. Now they want to
tell you it's Froot Loops and food and
red dye number four. That's it's
important but it's it's like 17th on the
list. It's the electromagnetic spectrum
that's number one. It's not even close.
That's the truth. Okay. So, we all know
how important it is to take care of our
health. eating right, sleeping right,
and making sure that our mental health
is in check. But have you ever thought
about the health of your financial
setup? Keeping your Bitcoin on an
exchange is basically like eating fast
food every day. It might seem
convenient, but the long-term effects
can be tremendously bad. Exchanges get
hacked, can freeze your funds, or
sometimes even go bankrupt. And that's
not the ideal way to save your
hard-earned Bitcoin. That's why Bitbox,
the sponsor of this podcast, created a
solution to help you to safely store
your Bitcoin. Their Bitbox 2.0 hardware
wallet is kind of the whole foods of
Bitcoin security. It helps you to take
control of your Bitcoin with a setup
that is as healthy as a workout is for
your body. It is designed to be
stress-free for you. It has a simple
setup. It is easy to use and secure from
the inside out. It kind of protects your
Bitcoin like a strong immune system.
Your private keys never leave the device
and the Bitbox is fully transparent and
open source. It is Swissade and
therefore you can verify everything you
want yourselves. If I were you and all
of your Bitcoin is still of an exchange,
you got to get it off there as soon as
possible and Bitbox helps you to do so.
So go to
bitbox.swiss and buy your hardware
wallet. So make sure to keep your
bitcoin healthy. And now we're going to
jump back into the episode. What like
you said that uh the technology
basically made uh your patients sick.
What are the symptoms which they which
they have? Uh you name it. Everybody
gets different symptoms. Like for
example let's talk about some of the new
diseases that have occurred in the last
120 years. First new disease Alzheimer's
disease. It was the first paper written
1911. Uh autism unheard of until 1940.
Uh fibromyalgia unheard of until the
70s. How about Lyme disease? Also
unheard of. These these are all new
diseases. How about autoimmune
conditions? They make up 4% of the the
world's problem prior to the electric
power grid. They were unheard of. In
fact, if you look at obesity, which is a
lot what people are doing like right now
in the United States, they want to blame
the food and when we changed when food
politics became a big deal in the United
States, like when we moved from the
European model of small farms to
supermarkets. This happened in the
United States in the 50s and 60s and
then Nixon and McGovern changed all the
food laws in the 70s to make food cheap.
They did it by putting [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] in the food.
The NHANES data, if you look at it, goes
all the way back to 1893 with Tesla's
power grid. People in America started
getting fat then, not in the 1970s. But
why does everybody focus on the 1970s?
Cuz this is something they understand.
Just like you said before, I don't
understand how light could get me sick.
But then when you start to look into it,
you're like, but I do understand how my
cell phone could put me in Guatemala if
the timing is off. And then you're like,
yeah, I did learn about a clock in the
eye. And all of a sudden, and it turns
out that clock in the eye controls all
the engines of my body. Okay, maybe now
this begins to make some sense. It's not
the simple little smooth brain idea that
the food gurus and centralized medicine
do. Because when you believe their
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] then there's a pill for every
ill. That's the reason why big pharma,
that's the reason why the Rockefellers
changed the game with the flection
report in 1911, ironically, the same
year. And this was literally 20 years
after uh the AC power grid is is
discovered. That's that's the crux of
the story, you know. And I'm okay if
people want to focus in on food, but I'm
that guy that tells you where does all
the food come from? Comes from the
relationship of the earth and the sun.
And if the food is made inside a
laboratory with fake light, it shouldn't
take a rocket scientist to figure out
that Froot Loops are no good for you. Of
course they're not. you know, and and if
and the difference that people don't
understand, you have a choice when you
go to the supermarket not to buy Froot
Loops, but you don't have a choice when
you get stuck uh with a vaccine cuz it's
mandated for you to travel or it's
mandated for you to work. That's not
cool. And you don't have a choice either
to buy a a screen on a computer that's
not blue lit until I helped a guy named
Anen Katada build or bring to market the
the daylight computer. Daylight computer
is the first computer in the world that
doesn't have a blue lit screen. And who
tried to block that for 10 years? Sergey
Brin, our friend from Google. Why?
Because he owns the patents for blue
light with Zuckerberg. This this is why
Silicon Valley fought him. And this is
why Nicole Shanahan gave Anen Khan money
to bring this to market so that savages
like you could use this type of
computer. Yeah. Actually seen that
computer. engine has gone down with
Tristan to see that computer. Everybody
in the world, like you want to change
the world, everybody who listens to this
should go buy that damn computer whether
you like it or not. Why? Because what is
it? It's like Bitcoin. It tells Silicon
Valley, "Fuck you." That's what it tells
you. That we need to have choices in
computer screens. The fact that they're
all blue lit, we know blue light's a
problem. To me, this is crazy talk. Just
like when Biden and Obama got rid of the
incandescent bulb, that's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] We
should have a choice. If we want to buy
incandescent bulbs and waste
electricity, let us. That's
decentralization. Yeah. How effective
are like blue light disrespectors like
those when I have like a normal screen?
If you want to know the truth, it's
effective, but not as effective as
having better technology. Like if we had
screens that were better, we wouldn't
have to worry about this. Like not only
do we have to control the frequency, but
we have to control the lux. And it turns
out there's a lot of papers out recently
that show the lux is a bigger problem
for the the SCN. You need much brighter
light for the supercaratic nucleus. But
it turns out the nucleus doesn't need
the lux that the other one does. So that
means even low blue light computer
screens are a problem for mental
illness. But see that message isn't
getting to the psychiatrist. Why?
Because all the psychiatrists are
centralized. Who do they work for? Big
pharma. That's the most centralized part
of medicine. You know, psychiatrists
don't talk to you anymore. They just
write prescriptions. That's all they do.
They give you drugs, right? Yeah. Well,
I've taken shits that are worth more
than psychiatrists, you know, and I felt
that way even when I was centralized
myself. I thought most of what they did
was [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] when I was in medical
school. And uh I actually really feel
that way now. I I put the psychiatrist,
pediatricians, dermatologists, and
opthalmologists. They are the biggest
worthless part of centralized medicine.
They're the people that I would flush.
Like if I was on the Doge committee with
Vivec and uh Elon, I would make it
illegal to pract practice those four
specialties the way it is now. I would
completely take some of their tools in
their toolbox away. I would absolutely
reschool them. I would also ban
sunscreen and sunglasses the first day I
came in because this is one of the
biggest problems and people don't
understand. They when they hear this,
they go, "But Jack, you're
decentralized. You said everything
should be available." Like, I'm okay
with it being available. I just don't
want you to buy it. Like, I want girls
to put the sunglasses on the top of
their head or in between their boobs. It
looks great pictures. Just don't put it
on your eye. You know, if you want
sunglasses, sell the glasses that you
have on your face. That I'm okay with.
Yeah. How how bad are sunglasses? How
much do they disrupt your circadian
rhythm and like this clock in the eye?
I'll make it very simple. Sunglasses are
an oncologist's best friend. It's a
growth machine for oncology practice.
How's that? So So sunglasses slowly kill
you? No. Well, sometimes not slowly at
all. Sometimes pretty quick, especially
if you took the jab. Regarding regarding
vaccines in general, are there like can
you say all vaccines are bad, per se, or
is there I can, but nobody else wants to
hear it. But I think they're all
useless. I think they're based on faulty
science. Okay. And that's the reason
they have no controls. It's all by
design. And I think centralized doctors,
the biggest lie is not statins, it's not
cholesterol, it's actually vaccines. Uh
I personally think they're all useless.
And I didn't have that belief my whole
life. I used to believe believe in the
camp that uh vaccines were wonder drug
like uh penicellin was in from Alexander
Fleming. But then over my career, I
started to notice some very interesting
things. And then I went back and and
looked at the papers. Like for example,
uh when Andy Wakefield got cancelled um
by the British uh uh centralized
doctors, uh I thought it was interesting
what he was saying that the MMR vaccine
had a lot of problems. So I decided to
look into the MMR vaccine and as I told
you before, the most valuable asset we
have is time. So the first thing I did
is I went back and looked at the tables
of when the MMR vaccine and what the
incidence of measles was and when
vaccination came in. The vaccination
program came in after measles was
already rare. So why the hell did we
make a vaccine for a disease that wasn't
a problem? Same thing was true in polio.
And the polio idea is what really opened
my mind to this cuz I learned about that
when I was a young resident and I kind
of laid that whole case out in the Danny
Jones podcast. And when I realized that
there was a big farce behind polio, that
not only was uh some of the people who
we think were were taught in our history
books had polio, I'll give you an
example. Uh Franklin Delanor Roosevelt
FDR, many people sold the idea that he
had polio. I'm not convinced that he had
polio anymore. I think he may have an
autoimmune condition um called Gileian
Beret syndrome uh for a variety of
different reasons. And uh do I think
polio uh as it was sold through the
March of Dimes uh FDR and the industrial
military complex through SOCK did we
really need a polio vaccine? No. I think
the government needed um this program
and big pharma needed the program. It
started out really the Rockefellers
needed it. And this idea I believe came
from World War I from AG Farbin when
they started to make nitrogen mustard
gas and they started to make all these
other chemicals and then Rockefeller
started to look for uses for these
chemicals and then things were done in
different parts of the world where yeast
chemicals were dumped into the
environment and they found out that it
was a very effective way to control
populations. So I'll give you an
example. Uh if you look at the stories
of uh the first uh I would say genocide
linked to the Balf for Declaration, they
were poisoning wells with chemicals, you
know, uh where they didn't want certain
people at. Um that idea has been
magnified throughout the 20th century.
I'd say the the big big year, like the
crazy part for me is most Bitcoiners
think everything is 1971. I wish most of
them would take their head out of their
ass and realize that 1911 is really the
year they need to look. And then if they
look at some of the Nobel prizes that
were g given for the early vaccination
idea, this was done by a French
physician where the where we got the
world anaphilaxis. What did actually he
show? Anytime we inject a young child
with anything, they become hyper
sensitive to this issue. That's actually
where most of the side effects for
vaccines come from. Why? because you're
fine-tuning, you know, the immune system
to react against this. So when
pediatricians ask me, why do all these
kids have food allergies and peanut
allergies now? It's because we've been
vaccinating like crazy this whole time.
It goes back to that original Nobel
Prize, you know, that nobody wants to
talk about. Why? Because how you get
taught this in medical school is
actually built on a curriculum that big
farmer pays for and gives to the medical
school for free. Where did that idea
come from? Rockefeller and the Flexner
report. So, like it's it's almost like
Project Mockingbird except the medicine
version. Let's get the media to lie to
you so you believe all the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Well, Project Mockingbird in in American
medicine and really western medicine is
it starts with the Flexner report. And
what what did the Flex Report
fundamentally do? It took vitalism away
and brought in the idea of there's a
pill for every ill. And those pills were
the pills that all the companies that
were broken up from Standard Oil,
they're all most of them still today, to
this day in New Jersey. Why? Because
that's where Rockefeller decided to use
his waste chemicals. And we see that
story recapitulate, you know, in Nazi
Germany. We find out that a lot of the
people that were linked to the
Rothschilds and Rockefellers in the
banking side, that's what Dr. Kurt
Platner in MK Ultra, who's found by Meer
Lansky on the docks in New York, that's
what he told him. He goes, "Yeah, for
some reason we're getting Rockefeller's
chemicals and BASF's fluoride and we're
giving it to the people in these
concentration camps that were trying to
move to Palestine." There was no mention
that these people were they were giving
it to them to try to kill them. Uh they
were actually doing it to make them more
docile to move them. And then certain
crazy things started to happen in the
concentration camps where people started
to get communicable diseases. Why?
because when you put a group of people
that are dissimilar from all over
Europe, they started getting typhoid
fever, typhus and everything else and it
created a huge problem. Um so when you
see this develop you begin to see that
the ideas of how big farmer works today
actually was born in probably the first
30 years after the balour declaration
the flexner report and the federal
reserve has changed. And if you see the
common tie there, the common tie is the
bankers. Okay, that's the common tie.
Then who sits right below that cantilian
effect is big pharma. And that's the
reason why these companies are so
profitable. But it's also the reason why
as the United States government gets
built out after World War II where the
industrial military complex becomes
important that a link is made between
the bankers, the big pharma and the
industrial military complex. And then
what happens? They take those three
businesses, amalgamate them together and
it becomes global scale. So when you're
European, when the United States gets
sick, everybody else gets sick. Why?
Because we are sending all these bad
ideas everywhere. That's actually what
uh project mockingb bird was originally
about. If you can control the media, you
can control the narrative. You can
control what people believe. And it
really most people think this started
with the media in war actually started
with the Rockefellers, the Flexer report
and and healthcare and it's still going
on to this very day. I would tell you
everything in a medical school
curriculum my opinion is centralized
horseshit. Okay. So so we Bitcoiners we
talk about the gold standard and then
the fiat standard and we kind of see
onto this gold standard as being like
the ideal. Could you say that before
1911 then there was like a gold standard
of medicine? Uh, I wouldn't say there
was a gold standard. You know what I
think it was like? It was the wild west
of both centralization and
decentralization mixed and nobody had a
library of Alexandria to tell the public
what was good or bad. That's why we had
barber surgeons. Like people at one time
thought it was a good idea to bleed
people out. We now know that's kind of
crazy talk, but back then we didn't know
that. And at this time uh there was a
lot of really cool work being done
initially by like a guy named like uh
Dr. uh Alvin Burr in Yale where he found
that all plants have DC electric current
that's like vitalism. Um that work was
kind of taken to the woodshed in this
transition. Why? Because anything that
was based on energy medicine like light
energy, you know, rife machines, you
know, the use of of sunlight to get
people better like people forget this.
Uh Fininsson won the Nobel Prize in
1901. So this is before 1911 for the use
of UV light in treating uh tuberculosis
and pmpocus vulgaras. This is to you
know a bad infectious disease. Do you
know to this very day that when you have
drugresistant TV, the single best thing
that still works is sunlight with UV
light even today. But people when I talk
to doctors, they don't even know that UV
light was given a Nobel Prize before any
drug was. It's shocking, you know, when
I say this stuff to people because like
a young man like you have grown up in a
world where, oh no, no, no, penicellin,
this and that. These are the greatest
things ever. And then I casually point
out to people, well, you you everybody
seems to know about this polio thing,
but they don't know why Jonas Sulk and
and Alfred Sabin didn't get a Nobel
Prize for that. Why? Cuz it harmed a lot
of people because it was tainted with
SV40. Okay? And that's the interesting
thing. And you know, everybody knows
about Alexander Fleming and penicellin,
but penicellin hardly works for anything
at all. Why? because we overuse it and
abuse it because we don't understand the
decentralized nature of man. And that is
the key. And this is the reason why we
have so many different things wrong
because once the paradigm was stolen
from us to centralize medications and
centralize our ideas, all the things
that are found in nature were lossless.
All the people that were interested in
vitalism. And then, you know, magically
in the 1970s and 1980s, we have a guy
come along named Doug Wallace who finds
out that everything in us basically runs
on electric power grid made by
mitochondria. There's a 30 million volt
current made inside by a mitochondria
that works with sunlight and water. It's
the same story that's in plants. But you
know why it was hidden for us for 85
years? Because of the Rockefellers and
Rothchilds. Because they couldn't make
money from it. That's the truth. But now
that information is out. Why? because
they believe they have so many people
socialized in their medical mockingb
bird idea that when you your son or your
daughter gets an ear infection, you're
going to go and mandate they get an
antibiotic instead of doing some things
that you know you haven't been taught
yet about how to take care of an ear
infection with no antibiotics. Those are
the things that are present in
decentralized medicine or you know one
of the classic ones uh maner's disease
tenidis you know problems with the ear
and hearing these are all exploding now
why because Apple makes things you put
right in your ear canal next to your
cookia that destroys the melanin sheets
most people don't even know they have
melanin sheets inside their coia so they
wonder why it's going bad you know and
you know the the heavy metal rockers
they were the first ones that got this
problem in the 60s and 70s their hearing
went. Everybody said, "Oh, it's cuz the
music's so loud." No, it wasn't. It was
because the EMF that they had from their
electric guitars from working at night.
Got it. That's where that makes sense.
Of course, it makes sense. It's always
makes sense when it's decentralized. But
guess what? Project Mockingbird, who
controls the narrative, who controls the
NIH funding, they don't let you study
this stuff. That's why they canled
Becker. It's why they canled Bernice
Eddie. Bernice said he gets canceled so
you never learn about SV40. And you know
people are probably saying what is SV40?
That's where the that's where cancer
comes from. That's where HIV comes from.
Okay. Okay. These are manu problems that
big pharma and the industrial military
complex create. Okay.
Um is there so so that means that there
is basically cancer is manufactured and
we it is there a cure for cancer which
is also being cancer comes a lot of
different ways. So let me explain. I
just had this discussion with somebody
today. The modern world, this is the
most common way. Like I just did the
podcast with Danny Jones, but I did
another one with another doctor named
Mary Tally Bound. You'll be very
interested in in the end of this
podcast. At the end of the podcast, I
show one slide and it's the spike of
cancer and SC40 from the polio vaccine.
And I pointed out to Danny and to Mary.
I said, "Look at this huge spike. Okay,
look how big it is. Now look at what
happens in 2021 soon as we give the co
jab the slope of the line almost
straight up. Wow. So what does that tell
you? It tells you that the real problem
back in the original ones this was a
mistake they made when they put the
whole genome in in the jab in the polio
jab. This one fizer just put the SV40
promoter in their jab and the slope of
the line is even worse. So what does
that tell you? It tells you that they
purified the most toxic part and now we
are going to create huge amounts of
disease my view I think another 50 to 75
years and if you look at what Fiser is
doing right now you'll notice that with
all their partners at Harvard Stanford
and Johns Hopkins they're coming out
with drugs for turbo cancers oh let's
create them and let's have a solution to
solve it so that idiots you know that
are not savages will oh the job is good
for us it's the best thing People don't
look people don't want to hear the
truth. Why? Because it takes them out of
their belief paradigm when they think
like I always tell people for you to
trust your government means you cannot
know history. Well, that's the truth.
And you have to realize this is the
reason why they have to have control of
the media because the victors write the
books. The the history books are written
by the victors. So the truth is never
found in the history books. You have to
be very crafty about how you get your
information. And that's the reason why I
think podcasts like this are important.
I think that's the reason why
documentary is important. I think
alternative media that's not controlled
by the Rothschilds and Rockefellers is
really important because that's where
the truth will be found. You may have a
hard time believing what I'm teaching
you. But when you begin to look in and
go down the rabbit holes I teach you,
you go, "Holy shit." Yeah. Really
happening for me. I'm like, you know,
like I I know that I need to be diving
into those different topics even more
because uh a lot of this is new for me.
I like because I'm at the at the
beginning of this and it almost sounds
like uh for example when I when I look
at ancient civilizations that their
doctors were so much further than ours
because they were in in tune with
nature, in tune with and they were
actually You know what the best example
of that is for you? Like here's the
history lesson and and you'll know that
I'm aimatically true about this and you
should look into it. So there's a guy
well I'll tell you his name in a minute
but I'll tell you the story. How do we
know that the Egyptians knew a lot more
than modern medicine? All the people
that were the poor people that built the
pyramids, they're the healthiest people
from that time. The most unhealthy
people are the pharaohs. How do we know
that? They put the pharaohs in the
sarcophagus and now we've x-rayed them
and found out they have all the same
diseases we have. Where do those people
live? They live inside outside the sun.
Where did we find all the Anubian people
that built the pyramids? They were
buried on the side of the pyramids and
the Sphinx. We pulled their bodies out
in 1980, 1990, and 2000. All the skulls
went to a guy in Arkansas named Peter.
You know what he found? Perfect
dentition, beautiful skulls, perfect
facial features. But it turns out the
pharaohs, all the people buried in a
sarcophagus, they look like modern
humans. So guess what? What does that
tell you? Fire inside when you're in a
temple is just as bad as the electric
power grid. It turns out light at night
is a real problem. Light inside, real
problem. Not going in the sun cuz it's
too [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] hot, which is what they
didn't do. But the people that were
outside who are totally decentralized
building this unbelievable pyramid,
dude, they got the answer right. Right.
It's amazing when you think about it.
But guess what? Nobody else thinks about
like I'm looking at your face when I'm
telling you the story. Now, let me ask
you a question. Do we need a history
book to figure that? No. It's almost
like what I said before. I'm not a
scientist, but like I think with a lot
of those things, you don't really
actually need to understand what it is.
You just need to be like, "Okay, this
feels good. I know uh what it is." And
when I'm inside all day, I feel shitty,
you know? So, yeah. Oh, that I can tell
you I I've just experienced that when I
went back to Tampa to do the podcast
with Danny last few days, my circadian
rhythm was all jacked up. I I didn't
feel good at all. Today's the first day
I felt better. And, you know, the older
you get, the worse it is. The younger
you are, you know, you can go and party
like a rock star five, six, seven days
in a row. have funs with your friends,
drink this and that. But when you get to
be my age, bro, it's you can't do that
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You're accumulating all these
mutations in your mitochondria, that
doesn't allow you to make the light
inside to make the melanin in you to
create the electric power grid in you so
you can do the things you do. This is,
look, this is not rocket scientist, bro.
This is quantum biology. I I lived in
Santa Teresa for one month and there you
are like in a jungle. There's nothing
happening. And after this I went I
believe it was Hong Kong which was like
the the exact concrete jungle. Yes. And
this was the first time where like you
know I I listen to all the podcasts but
this was the first time where I was able
to live according to the circadian
rhythm for a month and then see how
actually [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up it is to live in a
city. And this is what you didn't need
to read a book did you? You did you did
what we call field research. See, so you
are a scientist, you just didn't know
it. True. Yeah. Yeah, that's true. I
also tried, this is maybe interesting
because I tried the carnivore diet for
one month and I was I was on it for I
think in total maybe like two to three
months and I felt good but also my body
was like I'm I I'm not 100% on the
carnivore diet. This is just my personal
like field research. Uh so what is your
take on that? But I know your diet, you
say part of our diet is a wintertime
diet. That's what it is. Okay. Meaning
that you're you're you eat that diet,
you're mimicking what the uh the wolves
in Yellowstone Park are going through
right now. Like they only eat fat and
protein. Uh but remember, when you're in
a very good light environment like this,
you know, right now I have pineapples
growing in my front yard. I have
coconuts right over here. So if it's
growing here, that means that I can eat
it. Okay. Then here things grow
differently than they grow in, you know,
where I'm from. But here's the
interesting thing. Remember the story I
told you about the Schuman resonance,
which is 7.83 hertz. Yeah. That tells
you the seasons. It tells your brain
where the sun is in relation to the
moon. And the other thing that the body
pays attention to is the angle of
inclination of the light that you're in
when you're outside. So your body knows
what latitude you're at. It figures out
what season it is. And then that story,
that electromagnetic story has to marry
to the food you eat. So if you eat a
carnivore diet and you're in the wrong
place, that's a mismatch. So what does a
mismatch cause? What's the name we have
for it in medicine? It's called
inflammation. What is inflammation when
you really get down to it? Positive
charge. It's a proton. So when you
realize that wellness is a collection of
net negative charge, what increases the
net negative charge in you? Electrons
and sunlight. So, how do you offset
inflammation? Anything in centralized
medicine that ends in the word itis, the
answer is the sun. How much does
grounding help there? It's huge. Here,
it's really big. But remember, grounding
works because you are able to absorb
more net negative electrons and also
more sunlight when you're grounded. The
problem is in most modern cities because
they bury power lines under the ground,
it's not safe to ground in those places.
In fact, I tell people this story when
5G first got put into um uh New York
City, there were several horses right on
Fifth Avenue by Central Park. When they
stepped on the manhole cover with their
horseshoes, they got electrocuted. There
were several people that got shocks from
leaning against poles because there's
jump conduction. So, it's a user effect
in cities. Here, since this is mostly
volcanic, grounding here is way better.
You make a better connection. So that
means you don't need to spend as much
time in the sun here as you would
probably need to do say in France or UK
or Denmark. So it's a huge effect. But
do I think people who do live in high
latitude Europe, do you need to ground?
Do you need to embrace the cold? Do you
need to be out, you know, doing a real
geothermal sauna, not [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] sauna you
buy in the store? Absolutely. You want
to be outside. Like the thing I love
about Northern Europeans, they have a
big history uh of taking their babies
and putting them outside when they're
little. This is huge for these children
doing cold thermogenesis. People in
United States think people from
Scandinavia are crazy. They're not. It's
the same thing with the Russians. The
reason I love the Russians, you know,
they go and they jump in the cold water
in the river and everybody thinks, "Oh,
this is just crazy Russians." No,
they're actually This is how modern
humans adapted to harsh environments
that didn't have sun. But people don't
realize this is also a story of of
mitochondrial biology and it's the same
thing is true when you take Somalia put
them in Detroit and and uh and Toronto
and they go crazy or you take people
from equatorial Africa and put them in
Northern Europe and they start raping
Swedish women. This should be totally
expected because of the mechanism I told
you in the eye. But everybody says, "Oh
no, if you say that you're racist and
you know in Europe it's a problem."
Well, I think it's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Why?
Because it's science. It's decentralized
science and you need to know that. And
the problem is who set these policies
up? The global elite is tied to the
Rockefellers in Roths in the World
Economic Forum. Anybody who goes to
Davos, let me just tell you something.
They're the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] enemy. Okay? If you
show up in Davos, you're the enemy. If
you're affiliated with somebody who's in
Davos, you're the enemy. Yeah. What is
uh like with 5G, is it as dangerous as
uh or like how dangerous is it? Yeah,
it's really dangerous for people in
especially when you don't have any
melanin. I mean, when your melanin gets
taken out, forget it. It's probably more
dangerous for northern European hletypes
than anybody else. Do I think equatorial
Africans can uh uh tolerate it better?
Yes. Now, the the real problem is when
you move an equatorial African to
America and they lose all the melanin on
the inside, then they get very unusual
diseases by 5G. The 5G 5G, it's anything
zero to to 5G. You may not know this.
2017, the United States government
studied uh uh zerog, 1G, 2G, and 3G. You
know what they found? All mammals,
nocturnal mammals got cancers. Weird
cancers. This is something the
government paid for. Everybody buried
the re It's called the NTP toxicity
report. You go look at it. The answer's
there, bro. Like I told you, I get so
frustrated. Look at it, right? I get so
frustrated with the food girls and the
functional medicine people. They want to
tell you, "Oh, it's the food. It's the
exercise." I'm like, "You're [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
retarded." Like, this cancer is obvious.
It's been staring us in the face. But
remember, they can't make business by
this message. This is the problem. See,
this is where Jack is unconvenient for
them. Yeah. Supplements. They like to
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] story. They do the same
thing big pharma does, except a little
bit different. They don't use a
prescription pad. They have all the
stuff in their office, the
chiropractors, the functional medicine
doctors. They're they're as guilty snake
oil salesmen as the people who are
pediatricians and and internal medicine
doctors handing out prescriptions for
stats. It's no different to me. Yeah. Do
you um I heard that methylene blue also
helps uh to get rid of some of the EMF
toxicity. Is this true? That's not true.
No. No. That's that's more [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] from
biohackers on the uh internet. They just
don't know how methylene blue works.
Okay. How does it work? I don't like I
don't like telling people how it works
because I think that you need to work
with a doctor to use it. The the story
where this became very very famous is
with Rick Rubin. When I I told Rick he
needed to use it for the surgery that he
had to have. He talked to Peter Aia
who's a centralized MD in the United
States who's got this big longevity
following. He makes millions of dollars
a year by lying to people. He also told
people statins and the jab were good,
just so you know. But he's a longevity
doctor, which to me is the ultimate
irony. But he's a friend of Rick's. And
then when Rick called me up, I said,
"When you're on the heart bypass
machine, they should give you methylene
blue." And he's like, "Why?" I said,
"It's going to protect the the the
melanin sheets in your ear and inside
your brain so that when you're hypoxic,
it won't go away. And then we won't
erase the master tapes from the best
music producer in the world in your
brain." And he looked at me, he's like,
"You're kidding me." To this very day,
he still takes methylene blue because
he's afraid that that's going to happen.
But it's the hypoxy. And does non-native
EMF cause hypoxy? The answer is yes.
Does it decrease water production? Yes.
Does being on a heart lung machine do
that as well? The answer is yes. But you
need to know how to use it. And most
people on the internet, it's kind of
like talking to rejects. They think they
know like they read 17 papers and now
they're experts. Okay. So shouldn't I
like you you can buy it like on the
internet as you say you buy it from an
aquarium maker but no you shouldn't
using it but you should find out why
people use it in aquarium remember you
don't have to read a book now my friend
you said you want to do field research
yeah why do we use it in a fish tank ask
that question then you go oh now I see
what Jack's talking about that we use in
medicine it's pharmaceutical grade and
how we use it is very specific in fact
I've told people this Um, and Mary Tally
Bowen is having a lot of trouble right
now with the Texas Medical Board going
after her license about Ivormectin and
some other drugs that she used. I said,
"Well, if she would have known me then,
I would have told her about methylene
blue because methylene blue is the
precursor chemical for
hydroxychloricquin." So, when they took
hydroxychloricquin way, nobody ever
realized that you could use methylene
blue and you wouldn't have to worry
about COVID at all. You would never go
to a hospital and get intubated. But you
know what the problem is? That's
decentralized magic, not the centralized
magic. Yeah. That's the big key. It's
kind of you have to know. And when you
understand that Methylene Blue is is
really one of those decentralized
stories, that's when you can see me
smile. Yeah. Yeah. There's there's so
much with with like this bro science,
which they say like so so I have like in
my uh I was fighting uh so I had like a
professional Muai fight. So I went into
um like this I had a six-month period
where I was training for this fight and
there was this one thing which a lot of
uh like those fighters told me was
basically semen retention that like um
by not ejaculating that you will
actually be so be able to increase your
testosterone and that again like I was
doing this for quite a while and no does
make sense okay because I would have
said the bro placebo yeah It's uh
something that comes out of believe it
or not uh eastern medicine. That was the
idea in uh Indian medicine and Chinese
medicine for a long time. Turns out the
more times you have orgasms the better
off you are. In fact, the more times you
come the longer you live. So I tell
people I want I want you to go out and
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] as much as you can. Okay. So I'm
exact opposite. That's interesting.
Anything else for longevity other than
coming as much as we we can? Yeah, I
would tell you the probably the number
one thing is seeing the sunrise. Like I
always use this at the end of podcast.
Make like the Sphinx. Look to the east,
all four extremities grounded and then
um eat a diet that's based on your
location. What grows naturally there? If
you're going to drink water, try to
drink water from high latitudes because
it has decreased dutarium. Um I think uh
make good connections with good people
in your life. I I think your circle of
six friends is really important. You
want to have uh 12 other eyes looking at
the world so that when the Department of
Defense, centralized medicine, the CIA,
the NSA, President Obama, um I don't
know who else we can put in there. Maybe
the guy that's running China, they do
something wrong that that if you don't
see it, your friends will and they'll
sit down and have a coffee with you and
say, "Look, you need to think about what
you're doing here. Maybe going to talk
to this person and that person is not a
good idea." Like for example, and I
haven't told them this, I probably
should. Costa Rica is becoming a problem
for Americans. The reason why is uh the
American military has pulled out of
Costa Rica. Now, a lot of the gangs are
coming in to Costa Rica and there's much
more crime. All the crime that used to
be in other places are now there. So, my
American friends who have a lot of
money, who've built, you know, up a nice
place in Costa Rica, I think it's time
for you to think about a different
place. Why? Just like the United States
is not the way it used to be. Neither is
Costa Rica. So, you have to have friends
to tell you that specific issue and you
may not know that's going on. You know,
you may have no idea. And this is why I
think your network's important. It's the
reason why who packs your parachute, I
think, is really a big part, you know,
of people's lives. And I I believe when
we live in a world where data is coming
out in at ridiculous rates, you have to
have a good filter to know what is
superfluous and what is you know real
and what really matters. And
unfortunately I don't believe that a lot
of people have that. And I believe that
critical thinking is the number one way
to do that. So I believe everybody
should begin to think from first
principles. Become a critical thinker
and call [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] out on everything.
Become a skeptic on everything. trust
nobody. Uh, do you diligence? And when
you do that, um, those are where savages
are born. Those are my people. That's my
tribe. That's the way. Let's end it
here. Thank you so much, Jack. And stay
healthy out there. No problem. Take
care. Take care. Awesome.