What type will be this? Do I give you a
short discourse or it's quick? Explain
how it is.
&gt;&gt; Oh, it's No, it's fairly it's fairly
free flowing. So, I'll ask a question
and you can just go on. I'm not going to
do that.
&gt;&gt; That's not good to me. No, it's not
&gt;&gt; because then let's say you ask me a
question and you stop me at 10 to two.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. That's it. If I want to if I
want to come in, I'll just I'll go like
that. No, you should be more like this
innocent general or you should be a
little bit more explicit, you know.
[Music]
&gt;&gt; Slavo Xjac, welcome to How the Light
Gets In. It's an honor for me to be
here. In an age where many say chat GPT
can now outsmart humans, where science
is often woripped as the basis of
knowledge and an advancement in behavior
is studied under psychology. What's the
point of philosophy and how should we
think about the role of philosophy
today? I as I always repeat I don't
think philosophy can provide big
answers. what philosophers can do and I
agree here even with real scientists
like yesterday uh uh uh uh uh Carlo who
was here you know uh uh uh scientists
often operate with a set of inherited
traditional concepts for example precise
precisely with quantum physics what does
it mean for our notion of time of
movement and so on Here philosophy
enters or in ecology. Yeah, abstractly
we all admit we are in deep [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] blah
blah in with nature. But uh the the task
of philosophy is to raise the question
to what extent is the way we formulate a
problem part of the problem? What a for
me truly dialectic leftist whatever uh
uh philosopher would say to ecology is
let's see because you never perceive a
crisis in a general way. Let's see
concretely and you immediately see with
a conservative ecologist who think let's
return to old local communities and so
on. We have state ecologies. They were
very popular in East Germany, Soviet
Union. We need a well organized almost
totalitarian planned state. It didn't
work. We have capitalist ecologist even
some leftist who claim you can simply
regulate it by taxing more products and
so on or that. So my as a philosopher my
point is not some divine platonic ideas
but very practical orientation. Okay,
you are saying this what does it mean in
practice here? Things may get me into
trouble but especially for example with
regard to feminism. I am I think I can
say this honestly with all my bad jokes
totally pro- feminist but I always
suspected that
what we vaguely identify as woke or uh
uh uh cancel culture and so on that
there is something
even upper middle class in it and that
the secret target are ordinary people I
know in United States in a typical
discourse at a university
they of course their secret target is
but you know Hispanics how they treat
women no for me struggle for I always
like to use this example what I didn't
like at me too is do you remember when
it began
began to explode in public
it it was focused usually on one scene
at a party or in a pub, you men try to
pick up a woman and when do you exert
pressure on here? When do you go too
far? And my argument and so many women
accept it joyfully. This is listen.
Okay. Okay. But for me the tragedy is
not if you are a rising movie star and
the producer tells you go to bed with me
otherwise you don't get the role. Okay,
it can hurt your career but isn't it the
true horror? You know who said this once
publicly? Your leftist actress Kirsten
Stewart. She said uh but
why just uh uh the two of them producer
and youngster look around. Imagine there
ordinary cleaning ladies, secretaries
and so on. Imagine a woman that's my you
know you are in early 30s from a male
chauvinist standpoint you are I'm sorry
to say this it's not my I prefer older
women but uh in the dirty sense but uh
you are uh losing your attraction. You
have a husband who doesn't hate you but
more and more ignores you and then of
course it's this silent agreement. You
have to uh do a lot of job at home and
you don't love him, he doesn't love you.
But since he earns at least more money
if you have two children, what hope is
there for you? You cannot leave
children. This is the true horror for
me. you know this everyday con everyday
constellation that's why although they
were fascist I don't like peronists in
Argentina but Avita Peron did one
wonderful thing did you know this in
1950 close to her death it was the first
country in the world she introduced a
law when women have period if they are
employed two days free you know for me
ideology is not something abstract are
you she they or what it's this daily
material practices where the true
subordination and so on and here we
philosophers should enter I think
&gt;&gt; so at the beginning you said that the
role of philosophy or part of the role
is to deconstruct the way we
&gt;&gt; I don't like this term but I get what
you deconstruct not a deconstruct
&gt;&gt; no you're not a deconstruct I won't
accuse you of that but it's to find the
problems with what we think but you can
keep finding problems that exist all the
way down to the point at which you're
not really saying anything or you can't
say anything concrete. So how does um
your understanding of philosophy?
be more precise. What we have to do is
like we all agree, not all there are
people like Trump and so on who deny
ecological crisis but most of us
hypocritically
even agree there is an ecological
crisis.
uh the role of a philosopher is not this
reduction because then you have to do
the other way also this daily practices
how women are treated do they do the
homework and so on it's again and I will
now hypocritically rely on a high
authority which will not be the guy who
was here Corbin but my good friend
Alvaro Garcia Linera the ex Morales vice
president.
His the whole success of the rule of
Morales was that they discovered that
this standard Marxist focus on working
class exploited
no longer works in our countries. If you
have a good position, they're
disappearing. permanent job as a
factory. Okay, formally you are
exploited blah blah but nonetheless you
have a certain level of life you know
you will be retired you will get
something elementary healthcare and so
on it's almost privileged to have this
today the big problem of working class
today for me is uh not just Frederick
Jameson my just good friend had this
that uh we should also talk about
ecological ical exploitation like what
is happening with new forms of mining
where you don't exploit any person you
just ruin their environment no it
happens with Inuit in Canada in in Peru
and so on so this form exploitation then
the unpaid implicit
it's not
women in the strict Marxist sense who
stays at home does the work they are not
exploited in the formal sense
Exploitation mean the capitalist means
the capitalist own the means of
production but their unpaid work is
crucial for the system without their
unpaid work the system wouldn't function
and my mega example is this is where I
up to a point agree with the guy who is
I think already crawling around here
this means if I talk like this of him
that he is my friend Janice Verufakis no
that uh precarious work and then these
agencies the new federal agencies like
Uber and so on who they claim we don't
exploit anyone if you are Uber driver
you own your means of production we just
bring together the two sides you know
people who want what you are offering
and you you know what's so ingenious
here that the ideology is even an Uber
driver. He is a small capitalist. You
know, we are all small capitalists.
And here they misuse terribly the term
of freedom. You are free. You can stay
off just when you want. You so you are
given false freedom. At the same time, I
like this uh you don't perceive the
company as your competitor, but other
drivers. So you know it's as if there is
a struggle among workers themselves.
This is the most ingenious invention of
today's capitalism. It's more brutal
uncertainty exploitation but in a form
of freedom like as a guy who believes in
this explained to me. Let's say you have
$5,000
and you can freely decide will you go to
a holiday, will you put it into
education of your son? Will you whatever
you know this ideology of we are all
small capitalists. So it's very that's
my lesson. It's very important in a
complex social situation which form
do you put forward as the sorry for this
old-fashioned almost salinist term as
the typical one. You know where it was
wonderful ideological operation here.
You are too young to remember when
Tetler was followed by John Major.
You remember all of a sudden when
financial crisis so-called began, one
specific figure was elevated into what I
call in Hegelian terms concrete
universality. A particular case which
embodied what conservatives are young
unmarried
mother woman. Uh there is violence among
the young people. Yeah. because she's
not married cannot control the child.
People are on drugs. Yes. Because she
didn't control them and so on. All of a
sudden, this figure of a young unmarried
mother became the symbol of all that is
wrong. This this is I think most that
philosophy can and should do. We've
talked about the role of philosophy in
politics, but I want to talk a little
bit about the role of philosophy in
science. So you've recently um taken
part in panels with people like Roger
Penrose, Sean Carol.
Roger Penrose was a total failure
unfortunately because we simply and it's
my guilt. They by day they have been
Sabin Hoselder and Roger Penrose they
were narrowly in their space and I like
brutally attacked them with my
generalities. So the problem is without
God can we think is it possible to think
reality as in itself ontologically
simply incomplete not fully structured
&gt;&gt; but I agree sorry to interrupt you
&gt;&gt; no point but um more recently Carlo
Ralli I just
&gt;&gt; there is as you can see could see
yesterday there is a different there is
instant love you know that
&gt;&gt; what have you learned from those debates
or what are you seeking to a lot but and
what are you seeking maybe to teach um
people if you are
&gt;&gt; uh no no no I'm not I'm not that
arrogant philosopher who knows better
than themselves what and so on up to a
point I can do what RLI himself admits
RLI knows with all his good colleagues
Lee Molin
his which is the political terms partner
lover significant other Francesca Vidoto
and so on they are aware that the time
of Copenhagen orthodoxy is over
Copenhagen orthodoxy meant don't even
think about ontological question shut up
and calculate you know but today it
became necessary to raise the question
what is the status of wave function
model
And at this point the worst kind of
philosophy enters many scientists
I don't criticize them for what they are
doing but for how often they adopt the
worst vulgar philosophy like you have
many quantum physicists who claim uh
that was what Carlo was attacking
yesterday observation only constitutes
the reality so we are back in subject
that's one point Second much more
important point is the basic
philosophical one. I try to remain a
materialist but I think that to really
account for human subjectivity
you cannot do it within the frame of
this old notion of materialism which is
very primitive one. Empty space and look
look small balls of matter fly there.
Here I think quantum physics does it and
most important I think that if you apply
the model basic model I simplify to the
utmost of quantum mechanics which is
this idea of superpositions of states
and then collapse which is a contingent
collapse and attached with this the
notion of hologram which means at Every
moment when you after we have a
collapse, other alternatives don't
simply disappear, but they are
retroactively
constructed
as part of a new narrative. This idea of
changing the past, not magically what
happened happened, but part of a this is
what we should apply today to history.
With all my respect for marks, where I'm
critical of Marx is that there still is
very strongly present a kind of
progressive
evolution or teology, you know, like he
is open. We may screwed it up, but
basically history is moving towards
socialism, communism, whatever you say.
No. And it's not even enough what Rosa
Luxmbourg said. Everybody relates to the
future will be uh socialism or
barbarism. No, Stalin proves that it can
be both at the same time. No, sorry to
go back. We are today in a situation
where we precisely in a situation of
superpositions. It's an open situation.
Maybe a new barbarism will prevail where
there will be islands of relative
safety. And in other parts of the world,
what happens now? I know very well the
situation. It may surprise you in uh
Democratic Republic of Congo uh uh Congo
and and not so much Rwanda but Sudan not
just south companies are so society is
in decay there. So I think that we
cannot rely on any higher historical
necessity. We live in an open situation.
It's up to us. History is not
predetermined.
&gt;&gt; You're talking about the
predetermination of history. In 1989,
you said the ideology of progress is the
greatest obstacle to truly progressing.
And more recently, you wrote a series of
essays called Against Progress. What's
the problem that you have with progress?
A couple of levels. First, I think
progress is not a global notion. You
absolutely should avoid this idea. you
know, uh, stones, minerals, crystals,
plants, uh, plants, animals, then
humans. No, all I'm not saying these
narratives are wrong. I'm saying that
they are constructed always
retroactively.
When one orientation wins, it rewrites
history. Markx is here ambiguous but at
some points in Grund he is on the right
track. You know when he said that uh
this sounds very teological you know
that the anatomy of a man is key to the
anatomy of the ape. No this doesn't mean
man was the natural goal of development.
He meant quite by chance
out of apes or whoever humans developed
and once we are humans the past
appears to us as progressive. Mark says
the same about capitalism. It offers us
a clue of all past
history but he is very clear. He says
but the fact that capitalism happened in
Europe etc. it could not have happened
and you would have a totally different
story and so on. I like this idea of how
and I since I'm still a shitty male chau
soist romantic my favorite example here
is love how it's a little bit like love
you know you walk on the street you
sleep on a banana a lady helps you oh
maybe it's the love of your life and
then of course you retroactively
reconstructed everything was predestined
all the life I was waiting to meet you
yes you should say this once it happens
and that's for me also the deepest
aspect of Hegelian dialectics it's not
that everything is necessary is that in
a complex situation when one tendency
wins it establishes itself as necessary
uh necessity is always a contingent
category what in a certain situation
prevails as a necessity ity is
contingent. You know whom I like here he
is very quote close to quantum physic
you know the guy who unfortunately died
uh David Graber his famous analysis for
example of Inca society how they said
it's not just this sacrificing children
brutality no there was also a totally
opposite much more in our terms
democratic tendency and this is my idea
about to going back nonetheless to your
question about uh about uh progress.
Always we should be obsessed by this.
Always raise the question who paid the
price of the progress. This brings me
back even with your I think we you
mentioned this before artificial
intelligence and so on. It's a mega
great thing. But look what is already
happening. And I'm not saying it's
necessarily a catastrophe. Do you know
that all around the world they are
measuring IQ? And I don't want to enter
into this problem. I know it's real. Are
there implicitly racist criteria? The
point is just that they are measuring it
all the time in the same way. Do you
know that according to all data from
India, South Africa, United States, till
2010
the average IQ was slightly getting up.
After 2010, we are getting more and more
stupid. Why? And here is my uh the
danger that I see. It's at the same time
an incredible plasticity and so on.
You know the joke, everybody knows it
that I used what would be ideal sex
today. We It should be a lady. Sorry,
none of you. I don't want to insult you.
We have a date. We say yes, we will do
it. But what happens? I come, you come
with your plastic electric dildo. I come
with the plastic vagina. Both. And what
we do is that's for me ideal sex today.
We sit down.
You put your dildo into my vagina. We
reconnect them and they are buzzing and
we can say wonderful the machine is
doing sex. We can now have a nice chat,
drink tea. Isn't something same doing
today? It's horrible what is happening
in academia. You have all this free
access journals. But you know how they
function already. Some people suspect
the majority of texts are written by
chat
kit. Then many of these journals use
chat they fake reviewers use chat Gibbt
to to to review the text and then the
so-called readers quite a lot of them
use chat GBT to read the review and give
you a one-page summary or whatever. So
all the machine is working. We are out.
Now does this simply mean maybe it's not
bad. We can reflect, do nice things,
listen to music. No. Because the other
side of this machines are doing is that
machines are also including us. Like my
real fear I wrote a book on it is what
Elon Musk calls narrowing but Zuckerberg
is also doing it. This frightens me.
Maybe it will not be so bad. Just know
this idea of a direct link between not
just my brain the flow of my thoughts
and
the digital machine. This means that the
one who controls the machine can up to a
point literally
control my thinking, implant it and so
on. And our basic notion of freedom is
and it's good.
I am here in my thoughts. I am free.
Reality is out there. This will no
longer hold. And sorry for being a dirty
old man, but this will be horrible for
sex, you know. Let's say I exchange
glances with some potential partner. No
flirting. No, we just our brains are
connected. Yes. Yes. Okay. We both want
and so on. It will do something. I'm too
stupid to predict what. But I really
think that those who claim we are
entering into a posthuman era are right
here. I'm not just a pessimist that we
will be robots and so on. I don't know
what I only think that some of the basic
presuppositions
automatic of being a human being will
have to be rethought. So you think
Steven Pinker's notion that you can use
rationality to achieve progress is just
completely off the cards?
&gt;&gt; You know, I am all for rationality. I'm
very even eurosentric and so on. But you
know uh uh it's so typical that
precisely people who refer to
rationality
are usually then in their private line
life so full of superstitions madness
and so on and so on. Uh uh for example
in Slovenia there was a group of people
who tried to this Celtic mysticism build
some sacred sw which will they were all
quantum scientists biologists and so on
you know no I think that precisely to
maintain its rationality
science needs philosophy otherwise it
gets lost. The point is here more
generally definition of rationality.
What do you mean by rationality? It's
just this instrumental rationality. I
want this. For example, I want pleasure,
eat, sex and so on. Here the
philosophical aspect of psychoanalysis
becomes very important. I think as a
Freudian that the most stupid element in
American constitution is that famous you
know pursuit of happiness. No if there
is a definition of human being is we are
beings who systematically self sabotage
their pursuit of happiness. So we have
to ask what do you if you are just a
rationalist
you usually just presuppose that if you
proceed in a rational way problems will
be so blah blah blah but what does it
mean to be rational? How do you as a
rationalist answer the debate that I
have yesterday with Lawson? No like uh
uh uh plurality of truth and so on and
so on. What would you say as a
rationalist? If you are an honest
rationalist, you should accept the
result that
every rational logic has some
implicit presuppositions.
Like if you say only in a rational way
we can reach peace and happiness. Oh oh
oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh
oh
oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh
what do you mean by happiness? Do we
oh what do you mean by happiness? Do we
what do you mean by peace? Do we want
peace at all and so on? So in this sense
I am even for more rationality just
rationality is authentically a
dialectical notion. It has to not just
in this common sense question itself
question its presuppositions. As a
philosopher, I always ask but what is
already secretly implied in what you are
saying and an elementary philosophical
approach tells you immediately that
rationalists uh for example I will give
an example which because of which Steven
Pinker himself I know he doesn't like me
in modern I attacked him when he tries
to explain why uh we don't understand
how our consciousness arrives uh
emerged. And he gives a simple
evolutionary answer which is maybe up to
a point correct that uh uh consciousness
the problems our mind is equipped to
deal with are problems of survival like
we have a good mind to flirt to cheat to
lie in sexual seduction or to
collaborate with others. So that's what
our mind can do. But sorry to know how
our mind works is not part of our
evolutionary program. We don't need it.
And then he uses an totally wrong
metaphor. He says in the same way that a
rabbit cannot understand differential
mathematics because it's not in the
scope of his its survival. You know for
the same reason we cannot understand our
mind and so on. My problem yeah but a
rabbit also doesn't care about
differential mathematics. Why in all the
history of humanity we are obsessed with
so-called impossible metaphysical
questions and it turned out this to be
very productive for science itself. what
be uh began as metaphysical speculation
you go down that's why I celebrate
quantum uh uh mechanics and relativity
theory they even speak in a very nice
way of experimental metaphysics look
till 100 years ago the question like do
we have a free will is the uh universe
infinite or not these were metaphysical
questions now they are experimental
question of quantum ontology and so on.
So again I'm absolutely I treat myself
as a euro centrist proudly but
euroentrist in this reflective sense of
doubting all the time questioning your
presuppositions
&gt;&gt; and to move on to something slightly
different. You're well known for using
humor as you have done in this interview
to express your
&gt;&gt; getting darker and darker
&gt;&gt; getting darker and darker. But what is
the role of humor and philosophy?
&gt;&gt; Uh first I will tell you that all
philosophers
are usually quite good of humor. I know
but I still think he is a serious guy in
philosophy. Uh I know some specialists
who read all of Hyde Martin Hyde letter.
He is the only guy in whose letters not
just big written books you do not find
not even one humorous remark. The only
one that I found is after Hyde met Jacqu
Lon and you know how he characterized
Lon. It's not a big joke but an element.
This is a psychiatrist who himself
obviously needs a psychiatrist.
That's so I think I think that
especially Hegel Hegelian dialectics has
the structure of a joke. This is the
joke I used yesterday. It's very
Hegelian about you know Trump as God
turns around and there is a moment of
reflexive reversal with comical reversal
which is for me uh imminent to
philosophy and today I use it because
what is happening today when terms are
so misused. Did you know when was it a
week or two ago when uh Trump United
States accepted 59 b refugees burst from
South Africa and they claim it's
holocaust there sorry 59 people took
their luggage flew to that's holocaust
and what anduh Gaza is not holocaust or
what we live in such a crazy world where
it's not simply the situation is serious
crazy so that we don't get crazy let's
use dark humor there is literally a
humor dark humor in the sense of crazy
reversals which is part of our reality
today and my final question with the
rise of the self-optimization and
self-improvement industry it's a very
fast growing market you yourself have
written dozens of books hundreds of
articles and attend hundreds of events
Do you have a daily routine for
productivity?
&gt;&gt; Uh, no. First I must tell you I have one
rule. It's very traditional. That's why
of the people here apart from uh
Jeremiah Corbin, you know who is my best
friend, you will never guess. Rowan
Williams. You are saying this as a
Christian.
&gt;&gt; We'll get there. We'll get there. Sorry.
This is the pitch. This is just a pitch
&gt;&gt; because we deeply agree on this and I'm
a materialist. He pretends to be not but
I think he is wrong. You know this idea
that this will sound so horrible. I
believe in a spiritual sense of life but
I don't think you should posit happiness
as your direct goal. You should you
should have a vocation. My god, I'm
ready to die. I have to do this. And
then the the Did you you should invite
him. He hates me, but he's intelligent.
A Norwegian theorist of action, John
just j O Nster.
He developed a wonderful theory of
states which are necessarily a
byproduct. Like for example, if I want
to act with dignity, it should be shown
in how I act. If I say, "Don't you see?
I have dignity." It's ridiculous. And so
I think happiness is something like
that. If you strive directly for
happiness, you ruin it. And I try to
follow it. I am a total workaholic. So
if you ask me are there, this is almost
tragic but it's literally true. Are
there moments when I feel somewhere
close to happiness? Yes. When I finish a
book which I think I may be wrong it's
good the manuscript not then huh then I
have to make a plan some basic notes
what the next book will be and at that
point I can say for a week or two let's
go off and do something totally crazy
this something like crazy with my son we
go to it's better not to say I was in
you know that uh uh that sale like bour
BAB
bull hotel in Dubai. I was there. I was
in Singapore in the most expensive
hotel. I just do it for a couple of
days. This is as much as I tolerate. But
already there in the last days I tell my
son go and play video games. So my idea
is that unfortunately that's my big
problem.
I'm getting old and tired and since I'm
absolutely a Protestant also at the
level of sexuality you know we have a
joke I don't know where you British
whatever you are British third feet my
idea is that both in Catholicism
Protestantism everything is permitted
just in Catholicism you should confess
it at the end of the week in
Protestantism you should feel guilty a
little bit what I want to say is that
I'm absolutely a Protestant
in the sense that I literally cannot
fall asleep if the day was lost and I
didn't do some work by work for me of
course I mean reading writing I need
minimum 1 hour and a half if not then in
an a way I think if God comes what will
I tell him my existence is not justified
thank you very much
&gt;&gt; I was honored to be here thank you very
We did this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you. [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
off. Okay.
[Music]