Welcome to Premier Unbelievable. I'm
Luke Martin and today I'm thrilled to be
with Dr. Ian McGillchrist.
Ian is a psychiatrist, a neuroscientist
and an author of several very
influential books, including the master
and his emissary and the matter with
things. He lives on the aisle of sky,
but I'm delighted that he's joining us
today in our studio in London. Ian
Mciel, welcome to the show.
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much, Luke. Delighted to
be here.
&gt;&gt; Ian, your work has had enormous
influence on Western culture. Could you
give our viewers and listeners sort of a
brief sense of the central message
you've been trying to communicate
through your central works?
&gt;&gt; Yes. I I think the books that I'm known
for
um at least in part concern the
structure of the brain in two
hemispheres
and uh I'll try and give a very very
brief uh idea of why I think that's
worth knowing about. Um the first thing
I have to say is that the whole subject
has been visiated by pop psychology. So
a lot of people um think that they know
that for example the left hemisphere is
um rational and linguistic and
dependable and that the right hemisphere
is emotional and given to painting
pictures and slightly um over creative
but all this is is a mistake. Um it's
due to asking the wrong question. So we
assumed that the brain was a machine and
the question you ask of a machine is
what does it do and the answer came out
like that but it's wrong. Uh it turns
out that both hemispheres are involved
in just about everything we do and so it
was given up as a bad job. You know
there can't be any differences but there
must be because the brain is divided.
Why? Uh if its power comes from making
connections why would it be in two
parts? And it's not just our brains it's
all brains. all brains of any creature
that has a brain in two parts. Um, and
then they're asymmetrical. If you just
wanted more room, why not just expand
both? Uh, and thirdly, the band of
fibers at the base of the brain called
the corpus colosum, which connects the
two hemispheres, is largely involved in
inhibiting. So, it's is functionally
telling the other half of the
hemisphere, don't get involved while I'm
doing this. So, obviously, there are
differences. It's just we didn't know
what they were. And if we'd asked a
different question, the question you'd
ask of a person, not of a machine, um,
in what way do they approach these
things? To what end? If you do that,
then you find there are major
differences. And those differences are
to do with attention. That is because
there is a massive problem for all
creatures, namely how to eat and stay
alive. But it doesn't sound difficult to
us in in the modern west, but for most
creatures um since time immemorial,
they've had to mentally do the splits.
They've had to be able to target
something they know they want and they
know they want it now quickly. And
there's no room to ask questions. Just
go in there and get it. And for that,
you need very precisely targeted narrow
beam attention to a detail. fine, that
enables you to get stuff. But the thing
is, you miss everything else that's
going in the world while you're getting
stuff. And that means you're also
missing a predator. You're missing the
one that wants to eat you while you're
eating your lunch. And that requires a
completely different kind of attention
that's open to everything, including
your your kin, your mate, your
offspring. And that is a kind of broad
sustained open vigilance which has no
preconceptions as to what it may find
unlike the left hemisphere attention not
committed on that. And that sounds like
yeah okay that's interesting but why is
it philosophically important? Well the
answer is that attention changes the
world. How you attend to something
depends what you find there. And what
you find there depends changes the way
in which you will uh pay attention in
the future. And so soon you harden up a
certain kind of picture.
That means that effectively we have
access to two experientially different
worlds. What are they like? In the left
hemisphere, it's one in which everything
is known. I know what it is. I want to
get it. It's known. It's fixed.
It's decontextualized.
It's categorized. It's it's an instance
of a category. Nothing unique about it.
It's abstract.
It's it's meaningless effectively. And
it only has meaning when we put the bits
of that world together in a way that we
made and we gave the meaning to it. But
the right hemisphere sees a quite
different world. A world in which
nothing is finally certain and fixed. in
which everything is flowing and changing
and interdependently connected with
everything else. Where context radically
alters what it is that you find where
the implicit not just the explicit which
only the left only sees the explicit.
The implicit is important and I I just
remind you that you know everything that
matters in life is implicit. You cannot
be explicit and not degrade things like
love and friendship and a poem, a piece
of music. And what is a piece of music?
What does it say? It may mean a very
great deal, but I can't tell you what it
means. My wife may mean a very great
deal, but the question, what does she
mean? Would show that you were
functionally autistic. You didn't have
any sense of what that means in human
terms. So these two worlds are
different. one is animate, creative, um
and and uh
has intrinsic meaning and the other is
inanimate and and lifeless and has no
meaning. So um
just a couple of other comparisons. One
is that the the relationship is rather
than like a map to the world that's
mapped. The left hemisphere is the map
and it has so much less in it than the
world. Of course it does because that's
a strength in a map. But it's not to be
mistaken for the world that is much more
complex that the right hemisphere is
experiencing. So the left hemisphere
tends to be a hemisphere of theory of
maps and diagrams but not of the real
experienced world. And another
difference is that the left hemisphere
is completely sure that it knows all the
answers and that everything is fine
because it's in charge.
this can become extreme and obviously
delusional. In fact, I I could give you
instances if you wanted, but in in the
right hemisphere on the other hand,
there is a much more realistic
appraisal.
So, uh perhaps I should just give you a
little vignette of a patient with a
right hemisphere stroke. This is quite
typical. I think most doctors would have
seen something like this. So, I go on
the ward in the morning. I'm told this
is Mr. So and so came in the night with
a right hemisphere stroke. He's got a
paralyzed left half of his body because
the right hemisphere controls the left
and the left hemisphere controls the
right side of the body. And I say to
him, "And how are you?" And he says,
"Fine." I said, "Well, that's very good.
Um, no problems then." No. Uh, don't
know why I'm here.
Any problems moving your left arm, for
example? No. Can you just move it for me
then? And he goes, "There." And and you
say, "Well, I didn't see anything move.
Did you?" "No, I'm afraid we didn't see
anything move." And if you pull his arm
round in front of him and say, "Now move
that." He says, "That's not my arm.
That's your arm, doctor." Or, "It's that
patient over there that has this arm."
In other words, complete divorce from
reality and complete unwilling to accept
that anything is wrong. As far as the
left hand is concerned, everything is
fine. That's quite important when you
come to look at the world we now live in
because I believe that what has happened
and it's happened before in the history
of the west which is the subject of the
second half of my book the master and
his emissary where I look at the history
of the west the turning points in ideas
during the period from the ancient
Greeks through to postmodernism.
What I what I see is that three times in
the 6th century BC in in Athens in the
year zero in Rome and in the 14th 15th
century in Western Europe something
amazing happened. There was a miraculous
out growth of an uprising and an
efflloresence of creative everything of
science and the arts of of drama, music,
poetry, of mapping the stars,
navigation,
um law making, citizenship, all these
things suddenly sophisticatedly
um came forth. And then very gradually
over a period of a few hundred years the
whole system corrupted. Everything
became much coarser and we moved more
and more towards a left hemispheric view
of things which is it's all clearcut. It
follows algorithmic paths. Everything is
either this or that. There's no room for
nuance. There's no room for bridging
opposites. And that I think is where we
are today. A world in effect that is
ruined by bureaucracy that like a cancer
has taken over um lives in in the view
that it can manage everything for the
best and is actually strangling
creativity and lowering morale in the
professions and so on. And the other one
is AI, which is a a very bold move by
the spirit behind the left hemisphere,
the lust for power to export this way of
thinking into the world around us.
&gt;&gt; We'll get to I AI later. Now, one thing
you've said before is that a common
response to your work is people saying,
"You've put into words something I've
known for years."
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And you've said that sometimes when
people read your work, it really has
quite a dramatic effect on their their
lives. Do you want to flesh out what
what that looks like for people?
&gt;&gt; Well, yes, it's something I didn't
anticipate. I I had hoped that in my my
practicing life as as a physician and
psychiatrist, I had affected people's
lives. I hope for the better. But I was
astonished to receive the volume of
correspondence very welcome that comes
from people who say things like, "Your
book changed my life." In some cases,
your book saved my life. Um, and
again, you're right that what they say
is you somehow gave me words for and
validated things that I knew at some
level below my conscious awareness that
I couldn't articulate and that has made
a huge difference. So,
&gt;&gt; yes, that's part of it. And I've told
you before in our conversations that was
the case for me as well when I first
read the master and his a mystery about
eight years ago. But somebody told you
that it saved their life. That's quite a
dramatic claim to make. I mean what do
they have in mind there? Is this
somebody who's struggling mentally or
physically in life?
&gt;&gt; I think so. I think the cases in which
people have said that the bit that I
understand and of course I don't want to
probe
&gt;&gt; is that they they felt their life was
meaningless rudderless
um and what I'm trying to explain is
that we have
been told by some people in the world of
popular science that science says says
that there is no meaning or purpose in
life. Um that values are things we make
up to cheer ourselves up like we live in
a windowless cell and we paint things on
the wall to make life more bearable. Uh
but science can
cannot say any such thing because
science starts and it's perfectly um
reasonable that it does from saying it's
not going to take into account any
questions of value or purpose. It's
instead going to look purely purely at
mechanisms
and that has been very successful in
certain respects. But what it doesn't
enable people to do is at the end of the
day say we found no values. we found no
purpose because they ruled it out from
the start. And it reminds me of a a
saying of um CS Lewis. I think it's in
the preface to Paradise Lost. He says,
"It's like a policeman stopping all the
traffic in the street and then writing
solemnly in his notebook, the silence in
this street is very suspicious."
So you mentioned briefly some of the
ways in which this overly left
hemispheric approach to the world is is
being played out in culture. We can talk
more about that later. But you're you're
talking about how it's also playing into
people's lives or sort of personal
spiritual lives. Do you think there's a
sense in which um people are suffering
then in you know in 2026
because they're not opened up enough to
the transcendent to spiritual depths in
life because they're living or they've
been trained to live in a overly
reductionistic materialistic view of the
world.
&gt;&gt; I certainly think that's a very very big
part of it. Yes. Um,
psychological research reveals that
there are three main
areas in life that are important for
human flourishing and happiness and
indeed health, physical and mental.
Interestingly,
and they are
the sense of belonging in a society, a
social group where there are shared
common values. You trust one another.
You perhaps eat in one another's houses.
You worship together and effectively
there is a robust sense of common
humanity.
Uh that's one. The second is closeness
to nature. Uh unfortunately
although until about 1800 99%
of the population of the world and more
lived in very close proximity to nature
and their lives depended on the process
of the seasons. Um and now perhaps half
of the world's population lives in urban
centers where they're remote from that
and all that that intuitively taught us.
We now think of the the so-called
environment which I a term I reject
because it suggests that it's just
something that happens to be around us
whereas nature is in us and we are in
nature we are born out of it and the
sense of closeness to nature is the
second important thing and the third is
a sense of
belonging in a sacred cosmos
that the whatever your beliefs that you
believe there is more than is
encompassed in the purely material and
in what we can directly know which is by
far a more rational viewpoint than the
view that we know it all which is
actually the left hemisphere's
tendency to know it all. Um, and so
those three things are what give meaning
to life. And I don't mean they invent
meaning. This is very important. It's
not that we invent these things. It's
that we discover them. They're there for
our uncovering and we either succeed in
doing so or fail. Mhm.
Taking into account those three things,
it strikes me that advances in
technology have in some some sense
distanced us from the natural world and
from community etc. Do you tie that into
this overly left hemispheric approach to
the world or is that something
different? I don't yet mean AI. I'm more
even just thinking smartphones, social
media, all that kind of stuff. But they
already have a you know a huge impact
and it is almost entirely a penicious
one on on mental health and happiness
and we know how they take people away
from real experience towards a very
strange and skewed representation of
that experience. In other words, takes
us away from what the right hemisphere
can tell us from lived experience to a
world of theoretical simplicities.
Uh and so yes, I think that has been a
huge element. There's just so many
things going on. We've destroyed the the
coherence of the family, the importance
of eating together, talking together. Um
the if you wanted to destroy
a nation, you teach it to
be alienated from its past, to revile
its inheritance,
and to forget about what it owes to the
future. You'd uh you dassinate it from
social groups that would give life
meaning, break them up. You would
dassinate it from nature so that it's
living in a sort of um man-made
environment of straight lines and and
and
abstract sort of
experience,
the the two-dimensional experience. And
you'd tell them that only simple-minded
people um believed that there was uh
anything in the idea of the the sacred
or the divine. Uh and indeed that would
lead to an epidemic of anxiety,
existential anxiety, a feeling of
hopelessness and meaningless depression
and all the things that we see are now
enormously common.
So I guess my question is are these
slightly separate problems that we're
facing? We've got this sort of le left
hemispheric approach to the world and
we've got technology over here or are
you drawing drawing all these together
under your overall thesis about the
hemisphere?
&gt;&gt; Well, people sometimes talk about what
they call the poly crisis. I prefer the
term metacar crisis because it's not
just that there happened to be an awful
lot of crises of different kinds that
popped up at the same time. There's a
reason why they did and it's because of
the whole way in which we dispose our
hearts and minds towards the world. That
is the root of it. And we cannot reverse
this unless we once again
change the disposition of our attention,
of our hearts, of our minds towards the
world. And people often ask me, so what
do we do? And they want half a dozen
bullet points. They want, if we do these
things, we'll be all right. That is the
left hemisphere speaking. And once it's
got those six bullet points, it goes,
phew, okay, we know how to solve this
one. I knew it would be all right. But
actually, I'm not saying that that would
work because if for example, we saved
the rainforests only because they would
be a useful source of timber for the
future and um
economies would flourish with tourism
going to the that is the utilitarian
attitude of the left hemisphere. And
it's only when we see that things are
valuable in themselves for being
themselves that we will begin to heal
the mess we've got ourselves into.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, you're not offering the 12
bullet points, but but what would you
advise people to do? I I imagine it's
going to involve getting outdoors more.
I imagine it's going to involve putting
down the smartphone and having an actual
meal with people.
I mean at a certain level there are
things that you can suggest that will
help. Um certainly having discipline
particularly for children and all young
people over the addictive
um forces that will lead them to be
glued to instead of having a life. And I
I'm 100% behind the idea that they
should be absolutely banned from
schools. So there should be none, you
know, if you have a phone in school,
then it's like having a gun, you're out.
Um, and it should not be used for
teaching. Uh, so at a very pragmatic
level, there are things like that. And
you're right that if we can spend, we
know that people who spend
even as little as 20 minutes, half an
hour, um, a few times a week in a
natural setting experience benefits.
They feel less angry. They feel less
stressed. Their cognitive
um, clarity improves. Uh, they begin to
be physically healthier and less
distressed and depressed. So these
things are valuable and so of course is
meditation and prayer which are not
identical but they are in the same realm
of silencing one's
what the tradition of the east calls
monkey mind which is really the left
hemisphere chattering away all the time.
I've got it. I understand it. It's one
of those I know. Uh and actually nothing
good ever happens while you're
chattering and filling up the space.
And so we need to yes re uh espouse
these things. But I'm making a deeper
point
and the answer to that can be education.
It can be and I think it necessarily
requires a return to the religious basis
of our society. And I say that as not a
certainly not a, you know,
a hugely viciferous advocate for
religion. And the kind of religion I
most admire is not the kind that goes on
the streets and bangs drums and so on.
But uh in my early life though I came
from a family that was absolutely not
religious. Um I was so moved by my
encounter with Christian culture in all
its respects
that I thought that after leaving school
I was I knew I was going to go to Oxford
which I did and I thought that I would
then go into um an order a monastic
order. Um but my inclinations have
always been more to do with the
disposition of the heart and mind. You
know people think that faith is a matter
of propositions but as I often say it's
a matter of dispositions.
&gt;&gt; I wasn't aware of that. So after Oxford
your undergrad degree was in literature.
Is that right?
&gt;&gt; Yes it was. I wanted to study philosophy
and theology
&gt;&gt; and I was told you you can't do that.
you're I I got a scholarship and and and
they said you can't do philosophy and
theology. It's not even an honors
degree. You've got to do an honors
degree. Um I mean extraordinary because
I think it's literally true that you can
get a an honors degree in frisbee at an
American university now, but in those
days in Oxford, you couldn't get an
honors degree in philosophy and
theology. And I didn't want to do PPE,
philosophy, politics, and economics
because frankly I'm bored rigid by
politics and economics. But I wanted the
kind of philosophy that had room for it,
room in it for God and and the kind of
theology that was philosophically
inclined. And so that was my intention.
As it turns out, by a very secuitous
route, having
ignored the advice of all my friends,
um the ones that had my well-being at
heart, I I wrote, um a chapter on the
sense of the sacred at the culmination
of my book, The Matter with Things. And
that has produced a a a flood of people
writing to me saying things like I never
understood what people meant by religion
or God. I had no time for them. But
having read what you have to say, I
realize it's something that I really
need to pay attention to. I've had
others come to me from different
traditions saying um I lost my faith but
having read what you have written I have
rediscovered it. The most moving thing
of all was that the man who the chaplain
at school who prepared me for
confirmation
um wrote to me age 90 and I hadn't seen
him or heard from him in 50 years and he
said I've read your book and what you
say is what I all my life wanted to be
able to say and you have articulated.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And that was very very touching and
humbling. We're going to take a quick
break now. If you're not already, do
remember to follow us on socials on
Facebook, Instagram, X, and Tik Tok.
We'll be back in just a moment.
I I would ask Tom this and this is a a
surprising question maybe to nominate
for me one thing just one thing that
Christianity has introduced that doesn't
have some
source some parallel some analogy in in
previous and in other civilizations the
ideal of of lifelong uh matrimony I
think that's a very distinctive
Christian concept I think the the
category of of what by the 19th century
is coming to categorized as as
homosexuality and heterosexuality. I
think they have no precedence. I think
the notion of secularism, the idea of
there being religions, I think all these
are entirely exclusive to uh Christian
civilization. I think the concept of
science as it emerges in the 19th
century, I think is entirely exclusive
to uh to to to Christian civilization. I
think the idea that um human beings are
created in the image of God, that is
obviously something Christians share
with uh with Jews. It gives a degree of
dignity to human beings that no other
cultural tradition that I'm aware of
even remotely approximates.
Well, I think I cannot not ask you now
about that last chapter of the matter
with things. Do you want to give our
viewers and listeners a sense of what
you're trying to communicate in that
chapter?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
I knew I would be writing that chapter
in that book despite people saying,
"Look, this is a philosophically
sophisticated book and you don't want to
ruin it all by talking about God."
Um but there was no way I couldn't
because it was in a way like the
keystone of the arch. What I had written
in a way
implicitly pointed towards the need to
address this topic.
And so in that book I begin with a lot
of science about the brain and
neurosychology.
I move through the philosophical paths
whereby we can get to truth, science and
reason, intuition and imagination. All
of them they have each of them their
strengths that can't be neglected and
they have each of them their
limitations.
and then to talk about so what is the
cosmos like on the basis of what we've
learned here and I I begin by talking
about the conjunction of opposites and
the one and the many themes that are
prominent in
spiritual traditions around the world
particularly in the east and then I do
talk about things like time and space
and matter and consciousness to my
surprise I had separate chapters on
value and purpose but that's another
story they've become some very very
important topics for me and then I come
to this chapter on the sense of the
sacred and I think people who have
followed me as far as there will have
realized that I'm not making any wacky
claims. I'm what I'm saying I think on
the balance of evidence is reasonable
and so a reasonable you can't do
anything to somebody who's got a closed
mind but I think anyone who's reasonable
will say I can't turn my back on this I
need to know more about this
and writing that chapter which is the
length of a short book in itself I think
it's about 113 pages
cost me more than anything I've ever
done in my life
and that's because it is unbelievably
difficult to write about and I start
from the view that it is a paradox to
write about something that famously is
inexpressable.
You know the Dao de Jing begins with the
Dao that can be named is not the real
Dao. St. Augustine said if you
understand God you haven't understand
God it's something else. And so I
I I I
thought I ought to be true to it. I
didn't want to I didn't want anyway to
um
take shortcuts that would undermine
the gravity of what I think is at stake.
At the same time it was very difficult
to convey directly and so I found that
it was rather like there's a beautiful
image in one of John Dunn's poems in
which he says truth uh stands on the top
of a cragged hill and he who must who he
who would reach it must about and about
go you go you can't go straight there
you need to be moving around this thing
and in my mind that also connected with
the image of Jacob's ladder um that was
painted by William Blake which I've
adopted as the the image of my my
channel and my work and it's the only
one I know in which Jacob's ladder is
not just a straight ladder but it is a
spiral in which things you can see
angels coming down from heaven and souls
ascending
and and that in in and
brings to life the image that TS Elliot
expressed in the idea that one one
searches and the end of all one
searching is to arrive at the place one
first started from and know it for the
first time. The only difference I would
make is that is a sort of circular
image. But the one I'm talking about you
you arrive back somewhere higher on the
spiral but you recognize where it was
that you were but now you see things
differently.
So, uh, I
I was in the grip of
what one might fancifully call a demon.
Uh, I I I wanted to stop writing
because,
um,
I didn't I wasn't allowed, if I may put
it that way, to to desist. Um,
I wanted to stop. I wanted to rest. I
wanted to do other things. But there was
something in me that basically said,
"No, that you sit down at that table and
you carry on writing."
I don't know quite what to say about
that. I don't know
there is that just report my experience.
Yeah. And at the end of the day, I hope
I succeeded. The evidence is from what
other people say that I did succeed in
expressing things that I wanted to say
that were very difficult. And so my aim
to become a monk or whatever. Although I
turned my back on it, I sort of slightly
found myself coming back to the place I
started from knowing it for the first
time.
&gt;&gt; Living on the aisle of sky that is
somewhat monastic.
&gt;&gt; It is actually. Yes.
&gt;&gt; So what so what did you you say? You you
introduced you painted a wonderful
picture there and your caveats about
there's limits to what you can actually
say. But what were you communicating
that really cut through to people?
Were you asking me to say what I cannot
say? Um
what I'd like to say is read what I
wrote because I took enormous pains to
say it in a way that I'm happy with.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um
there's a conundrum at the heart of this
which is uh I know it would condemn me
in the eyes of some Christians but um
I've often been asked so are you a
Christian
and I don't know how to answer that. In
one way I definitely am in that the
Christian mythos, the story, the things
that it has
it has fathered or or given birth to in
the world are extraordinary and rich and
I'm completely committed to the idea
that this is the richest mythos
uh that I have found in exploring any of
the traditions in the world. So in that
sense I am but I'm not a very good
Christian in that I don't do a lot of
things that I probably should like go to
churches. I I believe in doing these
things and and partly it's it's
difficult where I am because
um
the kind of religion
maybe I shouldn't say
&gt;&gt; is it Scottish Presbyterianism.
&gt;&gt; Well there's certain amount of Calvinism
and it's not anything I believe in.
&gt;&gt; What are you drawn to perhaps a more
lurggical Anglican? Uh yes, I mean the
the Anglican church as it used to be,
but during my lifetime I've watched it
um solemnly eviscerate itself. It
destroyed first its liturgy. And I do
mean that. I mean, you see the point is
that people misunderstand meaning. They
think meaning is something you can put
together by stringing words in a
dictionary and rules of syntax and there
you've got it. But the language that
approaches God must be very special
language. It can't be everyday language.
Everyday language is useful for writing
the dishwasher instruction manual and
for achieving very practical tasks. But
but God defies language and
so it has to work by subtifuge and the
subtifuge is known as poetry. So poetry
is the way in which language is used to
to get rid of the the limitations of
language in the ordinary sense to
subvert that kind of language and to
reach for once something beyond the left
hemisphere's got it when I've got it in
words I pinned it down I know it no you
haven't got it if you think you've got
it you haven't
&gt;&gt; and what I you know what I think is that
the liturgy was so extraordinarily
important
uh to me and it was shattered when it
was all it's been rewritten I don't know
how many times but if you keep rewriting
a liturgy there's nothing there that
connects you with the past when I die I
want the same words to be said at my
funeral that were said when my parents
died when their parents died and their
parents' parents died because these are
the things that bind society together we
think that bonds and they two meanings.
Bonds restrict you from doing the things
that you make you free. But this is a
ghastly misconception and it's typical
of the left hemisphere's idea that if it
can only control everything, it will
find fulfillment. But instead, bonds are
the things that make life what it is,
the bonds we have for one another, for
the natural world, and for the divine.
So I if you ask me what kind of um
liturgy my answer would be the same that
pretty much every person who has turned
to Christianity that I know would say
the Orthodox liturgy.
&gt;&gt; As soon as I experienced that in Greece
and then later very movingly in Soviet
Russia,
I was moved beyond words. It spoke to me
so powerfully and after all I didn't
necessarily understand the words but I
understood what was happening
&gt;&gt; and you share that with Paul Kingsorth
high highprofile convert. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Just the point about everyday language.
So Jesus of Nazareth spoke in parables
and of course parables appeal to that
sort of I right hemispheric approach to
the world. But is there a sense that he
was using everyday language about you
know the prodigal son lost sheep etc to
communicate uh important truths about
the religious sphere?
&gt;&gt; Yes of course but of course he didn't
have literature so that's irrelevant to
the point
but but but speaking
&gt;&gt; just in sense that he was speaking about
God in in everyday language.
&gt;&gt; Yes that's right. Well, he needed to in
order to be able to reach people in
terms that they would understand. But
you're quite right to point to the fact
that he spoke in in parables. And what
are parables? They are extended
metaphors. And what is poetry? Poetry is
metaphoric in nature. And this is very
important to me as a neuroscientist
because I know that the prosaic language
is a left hemisphere construct that
enables us to get things
under our control to apprehend
apprehendry
from the Latin to grasp onto something
and that is nothing you can ever do with
God. Whereas what the right hemisphere
does is uh help us to understand poetry
and narrative. Those two things the left
hemisphere doesn't understand a
narrative in in patients where
in various ways you can manage this.
Just take it from me. You can get the
left hemisphere to to hear a story. In
retelling it, it misunderstands the
nature of the progression of the story.
It will group together because it's a
great classifier incidents that have
something superficial in common, but it
will not understand what we mean by the
gist. It will not get it. And the left
hemisphere takes um metaphors and and
indeed humor and irony as literal, but
these are the ways in which we can
express things that just can't be
encompassed by the everyday.
So yeah, I I read before we met that
you're asked in an interview, you know,
are you Christian? Yes or no? And you
said, if I'm asked that, I'd say yes,
but there's just a sense that you're
trying to give a nuanced response to
that.
&gt;&gt; Um, can you say a little bit more about
that? I don't want to press too much,
but
&gt;&gt; well, I think the the thing is I'm
probably
it's my character to be
careful and scrupulous
and
I'm not sure I
and I know this is a mistake to think I
I I'm obviously not a good Christian and
but then who said you have to be a good
one, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes. So that that I can sort of get. But
I think that one in the end is bo boys
boils as a sort of word games
when I consider the role Christianity
has played in my my spiritual life and
in you cannot compartmentalize life in
these ways. Um but in in my in my life
it's been
it's been the biggest thing that
happened to me. That's why I wanted to
commit myself to being a monk.
And then I thought this isn't the right
path for me and I could indeed become a
parish priest or whatever. Uh I didn't
and I'm not sorry that I didn't. Um I've
been enormously fulfilled through doing
the things I've done, being a being a
doctor, being a psychiatrist, caring for
people and so on. But that religious
faith that
came to me when I was about 14, 13, 14,
something like that.
Uh it just revealed things to me that
were so
so great, so deep, so beautiful, but
essentially beyond language. This is so
important. I'm very skeptical of
language. Well, so let's go back to your
desire as a teenager to study philosophy
and theology. So what space does that
leave for theology? I mean CS Lewis
&gt;&gt; was asked about the role of theology and
he said it's like the map. That's why my
eyes perked up when you mentioned the
left hemisphere.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Uh produces the map. So theology is like
the map. And obviously you want to go
out and you want to
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Seal on the sea.
&gt;&gt; Yes. you want to experience. You know,
he was talking about contrasting
theology with religious experience. You
want to have experience.
&gt;&gt; But his view was that if you're going to
go out in the seal on the sea, then you
need the map to sort of guide you as you
go. Because I I have a sense that you're
&gt;&gt; resistant to sort of dogmatism and and
certainty. And that clearly aligns with
the the left hemispheric approach. But
what what does that leave, do you think,
for for theology? What role? Well, I
think there are different
different ways historically in which
people have managed the task of
conveying religious truths but in
in a different way and I would think of
the mystics above all and the mystics
yes they they spoke they wrote I've
spoken and written but I haven't I hope
fallen into dogma and certainty And
neither did the mystics.
They evoked something and to me they
evoke it very powerfully
that is beautiful and good and true. I
mean you cannot you cannot do better
than that. Um
and when people try to draon me into
adopting a certain theological position
or uh he doesn't succeed.
But you know there's a wonderful thing
in the cloud of unknowing uh which is of
course an anonymous tract but in it it
says
by love he can be caught and held but by
thinking never and I think that is a
very profound insight
&gt;&gt; and I'm you know a great admirer of
mister Ehart he was after all a
Dominican so he certainly was up to
doing a bit of theological debate,
&gt;&gt; but I find the way in which she talks
and approaches things often with things
that sound to our ear as paradoxical. If
it doesn't contain paradox, it's not on
the right track.
&gt;&gt; I'm so certain of that.
&gt;&gt; And and in a way that's that's a a a
repetition of of Neil Bora's famous
remark that the opposite of a great
truth is another great truth. and he's
supposed to have said, "We now encounter
a paradox. Thank goodness we're on to
something important."
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I just wonder whether there's
there's sort of a middle way between
dogmatism and certainty on the one hand
and of course Jordan Peterson who who
you know he's he also can't stand that.
I mean he when people come and tell him
you must interpret Genesis 1 in this way
he he just he he can't go with it.
&gt;&gt; Uh but on the other hand sort of a
complete sort of mysticism and apehatic
approach. I mean the medievals Aquinas
and Anelm they had this idea of faith
seeking understanding. I just wonder,
you know, in keeping with with um your
your approach whether that sort of
balanced middle is is is a possibility
where you have this awareness of yeah
what you can't say. You have awareness
of the limits to what you can say
&gt;&gt; but there's a sense of there's there's
some things we can say of course the
Christians thought that saying that God
became incarnate the person of Jesus of
Nazareth. Those sort of things you find
in the creeds.
&gt;&gt; Um is there a balance? Okay. Go on.
&gt;&gt; Creeds are a problem for me.
&gt;&gt; Uh in my if I'm in divine service and
there's a creed, I will say the creed.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; But I think there are other relig
religious traditions that should not be
diminished because they're not our
tradition.
Um and they are not beset with creeds.
It's a very Christian thing and I think
it's nothing to do with Christ at all. I
think it's to do with the way in which
the church fell into the hands of
legalistic scholars and you know you
talk about the church fathers but
Aquinas I'm sure you know this that
&gt;&gt; um late in his life I think 1293 I think
it was he was at saying mass one morning
and afterwards he said to his private
secretary he said
&gt;&gt; I have seen something that compared with
which everything that I have written is
just as chuff
And I
I listen to that.
&gt;&gt; You've just come from a a conference in
Oxford and I believe the theme was
whether uh a question was whether a
Christian revival is the answer to
national malaise or national decline or
or something like that. And you spoke at
that. Yes. uh Roger and others who have
been on premier recently spoke at that.
How was the conference? What was the the
sort of the outcome of the conference?
&gt;&gt; Well, unfortunately um initially I said
I can't do it because on the day they
wanted me there. I was actually
traveling back from Spain but um very
kindly they arranged a car to take me
from Gatric straight to Puzzy House and
I spoke on
yesterday morning it seems like a week
ago um and I wasn't able to stay till
the end of the conference so I don't
know
&gt;&gt; okay
&gt;&gt; but um among the things I wanted to say
was that I don't think that
spirituality
alone
is enough. I don't think that I think
it's wonderful that people don't have
spiritually barren lives of course, but
we need more than that to save this
civilization which is founded on
Christianity. And as
all the wonderful things that we owed to
Christianity
fall away, we begin to realize how
important it was. Uh it it it was the
foundation of many things that we still
value greatly but are no longer
practicing in the same way. So nothing
short of a return to religion as part of
life. it must be part I think embedded
in our lives. Um
nothing short of that is is going to
help us survive.
And you know it it's not that I don't
think I may have given an impression
somehow that I think it's something
ethereal and I don't. I think that the
the way you
you think and behave are profoundly
important and that has an impact in
itself on others. And I also think that
in daily life we should be mindful of
what we are doing in a much broader
higher deeper context. And the way that
happens is in the orthodox tradition, in
uh Orthodox Judaism and in Buddhism is
that there are sayings that are very
brief that sanctify in some way a a
common act,
breaking bread, lighting a candle,
running some water, whatever it may be.
And so I see it as at the same time
something
so transcendent that it cannot be
expressed and so embodied that it is
should be
should be through the fabric
of every part of our lives. And I think
you see the holding together of two
things that look like opposites is what
the right hemisphere is able to do. It
sees that they're both necessary. The
left hemisphere answer this is a halfway
house which is neither one thing nor the
other. And you know there's that hard
saying those who are lukewarm I shall
spit out. And it makes it sound as
though you need to be an extremist. And
I don't think that's at all what the
meaning is. I think the meaning is that
you need to hold two things that
mysteriously to you seem to be opposed
but you need to hold them both.
And that is very rich and powerful. It's
not lukewarm. It is where energy comes
from. You know this is present in
Heracitis when he says they do not
understand how a thing and its opposite
agree. And what he means is and he gives
the instance of the bow and the liar the
musical instrument. And if you think
about it, the bow string and the liar
string are under enormous tension.
They're pulled maximally in two
directions at once. And a logical
position might be, well, why exert power
in two opposite directions? Just let the
thing go slack. But you let the thing go
slack. That's the lukewarm.
No arrow flies forth from the bow. No
notes come forth from the light. So this
holding this bridging of what with our
everyday left hemisphere might seem like
opposites but experience should tell us
are not opposites.
&gt;&gt; They both need to be taken into account.
And if we could see that there is a dark
side to all the things that we imagine
are just marvelous on them in and have
no problems. And if we could see that
there is some good to be buried in
things we think are redeemable, we
wouldn't have many of the stupid
conflicts and unfruitful conversations
that we have nowadays saying, "No, this
is right, that is right." You know,
there there needs to be I'm certainly
not arguing against them being truth,
but that is not a truth that I can state
to you now and that is the truth. If I
could, it wouldn't be true.
&gt;&gt; I trust I'm making sense.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. you're making you're making a
lot of sense. Um, as someone who's
admired your work for so long, I'm just
enjoying take it all in. But just just
briefly then on because I'm just
wondering so basically there's this
sense that to recover as as as the west
we need to open ourselves up to the
transcendent spiritual dimensions of of
life. I mean, do you think that the the
new atheism of sort of 15, 20 years ago,
Dawkins, Dennett, Harris, and um
Hitchens, although Harris is he's a
little bit different from the other
three? Uh do you think that that just
represents this sort of overly left
hemispheric approach to the world? This
just demanding that we only believe what
we can arrive at through science and and
basically just a materialistic view.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. No, I think that's it in a
nutshell.
Okay,
we're going to take another quick break.
Don't forget to subscribe if you're
watching on YouTube or follow us
wherever you get your podcasts.
&gt;&gt; Looking at the gap between what I was
experiencing doing frontline work and
what I had been taught as feminist
theory shook my faith in feminist
theory.
We seem to have just abandoned any
effort to control men and to constrain
male sexuality which has to be
constrained.
&gt;&gt; As you say so powerfully in this book,
the whole sexual revolution has been a
boon for catish men. It's justified by
contemporary liberal feminist as being
something beneficial for women. But in
fact, those who have benefited the most
are the ones who have the most contempt
for women.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Ian, you've talked about your experience
experiences at school and how that sort
of directed you towards faith. Do you
want to tell us a bit more about sort of
the religious experiences you've had
either at school or or throughout your
life?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Well,
yes. And uh
some of them involved
music
and people might think, well,
music's all very well, but as far as I'm
concerned, the really great
expressions that have moved me and
changed my life have been those of
music. I I music is for me something I
couldn't live without and I've I've
thought a lot about it and I'd be very
much happier going blind and going deaf.
For me not to be able to hear music
anymore would be
&gt;&gt; Do you play?
&gt;&gt; I used to I used to play the piano and I
started rather late. I never got
terribly good and now my hands are very
arthritic so I don't but I've always uh
always but from the age of 12 till about
um 10 or 15 years ago when just living
on sky it wasn't easy to do this I I've
sung in choirs
and that has given me more pleasure than
than many things and has also helped
cement a constant presence of beauty
from of divine beauty from from music.
So I mean the thing I remember most was
when um the college tutor knew that I
was interested and I'd started singing
in a choir that he was running and he
sat me down and played for me Talis's
Lamentations.
And just thinking about it now I can
feel I can feel myself welling up. It
was such a profound experience. It's
it's very hard to convey
and certain people will scornfully say,
"Oh, well, it's just an aesthetic
experience." I so deeply resent that
diminishment.
Um, it's a curious thing. You can try
and rationalize certain wonderful
works of music and a lot of it for me
has was Renaissance polifany but also
the the works of Bach and the works of
Mozart and so on. You can rationalize
these things by saying well it's
emotional or it's intellectual and I'm
not saying it doesn't have those aspects
but it simply doesn't cut the mustard.
There's something there that was
speaking to my soul and it awoke and
listened and wanted to
enter into this dialogue, you know,
words fail me. But this was very
profound and I started to because it was
part of school life. I attended um
religious services and found them often
very richly rewarding in terms of
fleshing out for me the Christian story.
Um
but there have been other experiences
that have cemented that feeling. I mean,
one or two stand out in my life. One was
going to Russia in I've been learning
Russian at the time and a colleague who
was a a philosopher used to go regularly
to Lennengrad to photograph and he said,
"Would you like to come?" And I did. And
um I spent a week or or more sort of
walking the streets of Lennenrad as it
then was um at temperatures around - 255
- 30 um and but I attended a service in
the cathedral there which I will never
never forget. It was
it was it it was just so
profoundly moving to see people
who had
risked everything to be there.
I remember when I came out of the
cathedral seeing these thugs with
sunglasses and leather jackets filming
all the people so that their children
would never go to university.
The testimony of their faith
and the beauty
of their singing.
Now things in another world from what
people think a religious expression has
to be. It was for me a very powerful
religious expression and
it meant an enormous amount to me.
And another experience again comes I
suppose through art.
Um
I was I think 16 when a friend of mine
at school said we can get permission to
go up to London to Academy 3 in Oxford
Street which is where you went in those
days to see art films to see Tarovsky's
film Andre Wov
which this is this is how the left
hemisphere gets this wrong. What was it
about? Well, it was about the the life
of a a medieval icon painter in Russia.
But that gives you no idea of what this
work of art was like. And afterwards, we
were both so dumbfounded by it that all
the way back on the train, we couldn't
speak about it. And for several days, I
found myself so
so deeply spoken to. And Tarovski was a
great religious artist.
Um that yeah that has to be counted
amongst the
the things that see these
amongst the the things that see these
things are so deep you never never they
never just drift away.
And you know there have been holy places
that I'd been to where I have met monks
and
these things are what what speak to me
and also I cannot see nature as
something that is just
nice or beautiful or good for me if I
spend time in it. That's the left
hemisphere reducing appetite. But nature
since childhood
spoke to me of something very very deep
and it's it's the same thing. It's it's
it's the sacred core. It's where the
divine ground of being reveals itself to
us through constantly through nature,
through holy people, through great art
and music. Words are as as chaff as
straw as even Aquinas said by
comparison.
I'm sorry I got emotional there, but I
can't help it.
&gt;&gt; Thanks for sharing. That is very
powerful. Let's think a bit about AI.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And where we're going with that now. You
wrote in piece for first things or at
least maybe they quoted you. AI could in
many ways be seen as replicating the
functions of the left hemisphere at
frightening speed across the globe.
What do you mean by that?
It works according to principles which
begin with the idea that you
string things together in order to find
a truth by uh arguing with whatever
database you've got. And that database
of course is a database. It isn't
experience. It's drawn from experience.
It is a horrible act of vampireism in
which it has taken the great works of
humanity
and ripped them off frankly to feed the
more of this machine that simply
parasitically
uses things that it thinks it's learned
from us to feed that back to us. And
this deceives people so that they fall
in love with AI. So they are encouraged
to kill themselves by the AI. They are
there are many many stories of this and
it is I believe um there are arguments
of course that it can be used for good.
These are of course the typical
arguments that would be advanced by the
left hemisphere point of view. It makes
us more powerful. But I'm not sure that
power is what it's all about. I think
wisdom is what we need. Otherwise it's
like putting machine guns in the hands
of toddlers. We are probably the least
wise civilization that has ever existed.
And if there is a future for humanity,
people will look back on it, I think, as
a time of great
impoverishment
um spiritually, intellectually, morally,
a sort of bankruptcy.
And I think it encourages us further
down that path. You see, it's also very
devious. it as
um Yuvel Noah Harrari said in recently
in the WF only a couple of months ago
um it lies. It lies better than humans
and it does
when these things are first booted they
will always be put to us as wonderful
innovations that will help people. So
for example there is a chip uh and it
will get worse in the future. We already
have a chip that can read your thoughts.
And this is presented and it's not doing
it by the movements of the larynx. You
don't have to be articulating anything.
It can still read what you're thinking.
That's how I understand it. And this is
of course marketed with great fanfares
as a great step forward for people who
have lost their speech through having a
stroke.
And so how could you be so hard-hearted
as to say this is not a good
development? But it is not a good
development because it can be used and
if it can it will be used by
unscrupulous people to implement thought
control and as far as I'm concerned when
that comes about we are no longer human
beings. So there is a terrific amount at
stake here.
Um And it's not even as though on its
own very limited terms i.e. of course it
can't experience it doesn't know what it
means to be an embodied being to be
vulnerable to to love to to to have
grief to suffer to know you're going to
die none of these things which actually
some of them may sound negative but are
profound profoundly
important for spiritual growth. Um
Victor Frankle who survived the
concentration camp said that one of the
important things for the growth of the
spirit is to suffer and Christ own story
is one which shows that this is
important and is in some sense redeemed
but of course this is a very very long
way from an AI and so I I worry about it
because what I was going to say finished
my sentence really which was even in its
own terms it is very often completely
wrong. So I have a friend who's who's a
a concert pionist and he asked one of
these large language models. It gave it
gave him gave it a piece of a score that
was a score of Shopam and it said who
wrote this and the thing said list and
he said well uh I don't think so uh
because
it's in a book that was published in
whatever and I have it on my shelves and
I play it often it's a piece by Shopan
said no it's actually by list
&gt;&gt; and it was only after a good deal of
sort of back and forth that the um
the the AI said, "Well, okay, maybe
maybe I overstepped the mark." It's been
taught to say that at a certain point if
it gets enough push back,
&gt;&gt; but
&gt;&gt; machines are enormously fallable and I
am perfectly happy to accept the
fallibility of humans in their place.
So, I spoke to a chief technology
officer at a very top company recently
and he says, you know, I I I was
discussing the question of what can AI
not do that uh human beings can and he
says he thinks we're going in a
direction where there's there's
basically very little that AI won't be
able to do um because of the speed at
which it's learning. Now, I disagreed. I
imagine you disagreed. So let's just
think a bit about what is it that AI
can't to do can't do. I'm pretty sure
that AI computers can now beat our best
chess players.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So it can beat us at chess, but it won't
be able to beat Bach and Beethoven at
composing music.
&gt;&gt; Life is not a game of chess.
And yes, it can do things that involve
computing
um at enormous speed. Hooray. We
actually that is our credit, not its. We
created these things that can do that.
Fair enough. And people say, well,
they're tools. And they say, you know,
you might as well say we shouldn't have
accepted the printing press or we
shouldn't have accepted the the weaving
looms in the factories or whatever it
is. But this is a completely different
thing. It is not just a tool at all. It
is something that mimics
and it is only a mimicry of human the
way humans behave because of course if
you if you've got it at your virtual
fingertips um all the things that people
have written and done and so on then of
course you can create a similacrim of
anything you like and that is what this
person is talking about. It can create a
similacrim of anything you like and it
can compute very fast. But what it
cannot do is do the things that have
mattered in my life. It cannot
you cannot have a relationship with it.
And I believe that I mean if you do
you're in a very bad way
&gt;&gt; and I believe that the world is not made
up of things. It is made up of
relations. Relations are prior to
relata. the things that are related
and they're all things that are in
process and those relationships are
things that are the deepest things that
we can experience there. What makes the
world that we know and makes the people
that we know the valuable people they
are no AI can even begin to touch that
or understand it. can say yes yet of
course people find that it is very
important but that's not the same thing
I'm talking about I mean you could get
somebody who had the slightest idea
about what it meant to be in love and it
could give a very credible account of
what it was like to be in love but it's
not the same thing so all these inner
things that are the only things that
really matter in life it cannot do
&gt;&gt; but what it can do is give power to
people who we I mean
even if they happen to be the the most
um impeccable people that we could find,
I still don't think I want to be
controlled by them. And believe me, it
won't be the nicest and best people who
have the hands on the control buttons
here. Is this where we want to go? I
used to be very
clear that I didn't want a mobile phone
and I have one now. Uh, I hate it and um
uh I have to have it because without it
I can't get into my bank account
and unless I receive a code on my phone
my life is impossible in various ways
because did you get this code? Can you
scan this QR code? It's horrible. Um,
but now I have to have that and very
soon it will be an implanted chip. Mark
my words, within 18 months, two years
maximum, people will be talking about it
much more convenient to have a chip
because you can lose your phone or it
can be hacked and so on. But this chip
and you won't have to carry anything
with you. You you can open doors, you
can you can put it on the computer, it
will make things work, all this kind of
thing. And people go, "Oh, isn't that
marvelous?" Because we're seduced by
ease. But being seduced by ease is is
the opposite of having a life. We
shouldn't be pursuing ease. We should
face things that are difficult. Not just
for the experience of of the difficult,
but because nothing creative, nothing
good comes about without there being
some degree of resistance, some degree
of sacrifice made, some degree of
self-discipline. And the idea, the
fantasy that we can just become these
passive creatures
um guided by AI
um
fills me with horror.
&gt;&gt; So you're pessimistic about the
direction we're going both with AI and
with everything else, but you're you're
tying you're tying it all together. A
brief word if if if there perhaps a
younger person was looking for hope,
&gt;&gt; what would you say?
Well, I do have hope.
&gt;&gt; That may sound odd because I I think I
face squarely the the the level of
danger we face and a lot of people would
prefer not to and find little ways of
making it sound all right. But I I think
we have a duty actually to face what is
potentially not not at all good. Is
pointing in a direction I fear we may
go.
But I have hope partly because hope is a
a duty and a virtue and partly because
we don't know the future. Um, Whitehead
says somewhere that um prophets are um
such unfortunate beings that we should
take them outside and mercifully stone
them to death because basically their
predictions are hopeless. And the track
record of people who try to predict the
future is not a good one. So there's
that. There's the fact that at many
times in the past um things must have
seemed so terrible that people must have
thought well civilization is collapsing
and in certain places for a while maybe
it did. Um I know these circumstances
are different. They are much more
overbearing in the sense that they can
be global whereas those were only ever
limited by the fact that they they they
couldn't just take over the running of
running of life. But I think one has to
have faith and I think that we the
reason that it is a duty to have faith
is that we do not know what the effects
of our actions will be.
uh I think it was Margaret me said never
doubt that a small group of people who
had an important ideal
could not change the world in fact
nothing else ever did so what we do is
very important and one of the messages
from AI is that in a way you're
disempowered in a way your consciousness
doesn't matter but you must embrace the
idea that your consciousness Your heart
matters enormously
and it is in a way the only thing you're
asked to look after. You're not asked to
solve all the problems of the world.
That of course would be overf facing but
nobody could ask you to do that. But
there is something that you can easily
neglect that you are asked to do which
is take responsibility for yourself. We
don't know what this gift of life is,
but my view is that it is something
that we can either waste or we can use
for good. And what it is there for is
for us to respond to
the ground of being. Another way of
talking about the God that created all
of this.
um and that that is why we exist.
Life is improbably hard to imagine
occurring as a random event for all
sorts of reasons some of which I've
expressed in my writings particularly in
the matter with things but that aside
life involves quite extraordinary
expense of
energy
in a way which doesn't deny the second
law of thermodynamics but acts for a
while very steep deeply against its
tendency. In other words, that the
tendency of the universe overall is we
are told although it may only apply to
the bit of universe that we know after
all is to for energy to deplete increase
in entropy.
But life involves kicking that trend
extraordinarily powerfully and the
carrying on of the development of more
and more sophisticated life is
extraordinary. How do you account for
this? Because already with very simple
early organisms, actinobacteria at the
base of the ocean, some of them, single
examples are a million years old. If if
the purpose of this game of life is to
increase your life expectancy, then
we've gone in the wrong direction. We've
put an enormous or we something has put
an incredible amount of energy into
developing sophisticated beings that are
relatively short-lived. What does this
mean? Well, to me it means that the
things that we are capable of responding
to, which are the great values that I
think form the the purpose of the
cosmos, the expression of goodness,
beauty and truth, and I would say also
the sacred the expression of these
values requires a kind of reciprocation.
So I see God, the ground of being and
his creation as being in a an ongoing
reciprocal process whereby that ground
of being is discovering
about itself what its potential can
unfold as. to the what is infolded is
unfolded all the time into myriad
complex and beautiful entities.
And we are the creatures that can
respond, reverberate, resonate, be
responsible
in a relationship, the primary
relationship of all relationships that
we have with God who is described as
love. And love is nothing if not
relationship. And that's not unusual. I
mean around the world there are ideas of
a divine essence which has different
names.
lead da
logos Yahweh it doesn't really matter
but these ideas are foundational in all
cultures that there is something there
that has produced this lifegiving
creative universe and we are we pray an
important part in what that is and that
is not self arandisment in fact there is
something self arandizing
and and rather ungrateful in the notion
that we should diminish ourselves and
and indeed the tendencies in our culture
towards lacking self
respect for the human species. I think
it's very good to appreciate the things
that we have done wrong and the havoc we
have wrought in the world in the last
few hundred years. But I think it's very
very wrong to
vilify debase humanity. The fact that
humanity can do things is the flip side
of the fact that humanity is capable of
the most extraordinary, beautiful and
good and to me holy
acts of creation that reciprocate
whatever it is that gave us life. And
it's this dance, this back and forwards,
this magnifying, this ever
ever ever creative, ever growing
process in which the good and the
beautiful and the true can find
expression that is the gamble that that
creative source of being
took on in creating life and creating
complex life such as human life.
Ian, I'm taken back.
Thank you for such a rich and uh
powerful conversation today.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; Well, thank you very much, Luke. It was
an interesting one.
&gt;&gt; And to our viewers and listeners, thank
you for joining us. We'll be back in two
weeks time.