Good afternoon.
Welcome to this much anticipated event,
a debate and discussion with Christopher
Hitchens and Alistister McGrath on the
topic poison or cure religious belief in
the modern world.
My name is Tom Banchoff. I'm director of
the Berkeley Center for Religion, Peace,
and World Affairs here at Georgetown and
the co-convener of this event along with
the Ethics and Public Policy Center.
The Berkeley Center is part of a
universitywide effort to make Georgetown
a global leader in the interdisciplinary
study of religion and in the promotion
of interreligious understanding.
This effort builds off our academic
strengths, our location here in
Washington DC, our international
networks, and Georgetown's Catholic and
Jesuit identity. An identity that
embraces dialogue with other faith
traditions and with the wider secular
world.
What brings us together today is of
course religious secular debate or
dialogue. From one perspective, a kind
of intellectual combat. From another
perspective, a shared quest for truth
marked by a willingness on both sides to
ask and to attempt to a answer very big
questions. And I can think of no
question bigger than the one on your
program today.
I anticipate an engaging conversation,
and I have a sneaking suspicion it will
be entertaining as well.
We have a lot to look forward to. And
with that, I would like to turn it over
to Michael Cromary, vice president of
the Ethics and Public Policy Center and
the real driver behind tonight's event.
Michael, thank you for bringing us
together. I look forward, I know we all
look forward to a stimulating
conversation.
[Applause]
Thank you, Tom.
I'd like to begin by saying thank you to
President Joya of this wonderful
university for allowing us to have this
event in this beautiful setting in
Gaston Hall. I'm also grateful to Tom
and his staff for all their help and
work in making this event possible
uh and to co-host it with the Ethics and
Public Policy Center. Now, on the back
page of your program, you'll see the
names of some individuals and some
foundations
who helped make this event possible. We
of course are very grateful for their
generous support.
I'd like to say a few words uh also
about our format. Mr. Hitchens will go
first for 15 or 20 minutes and then be
followed by Professor McGrath who will
then have the same amount of time. Then
Mr. Hitchens will then have 8 to 10
minutes for rebuttal and then he'll be
followed by Professor McGrath for eight
or 10 minutes. The rebuttals will occur
their presentations will occur from
here. The rebuttals will occur from the
seats.
That way I can moderate.
We'll then open it up to questions from
the audience. And the way we're going to
do that is the following. I believe all
of you have been given I hope 3x5 cards
to write your questions on. They'll be
collected by the ushers and then I will
read the questions. Now there are almost
800 people here. I don't think we'll get
to all 800, but we will get to I hope uh
um a significant amount of them.
Now, I would uh I will not take time
just now to give an extensive
introduction of our speakers because you
have in your brochure elaborate
biographies of each of these gentlemen
and of course I know you're here because
you know their reputations and that's
why you've come.
So, I would like to begin my
introduction um of Christopher Hitchens
this way
by calling your attention to this
cartoon.
In an issue this past June, the New
Yorker magazine ran the following
cartoon.
I'll describe it to you. A woman, the
wife is sitting on the couch reading.
Husband is walking in the door and just
as he's coming in the front door, a bolt
of lightning is striking him right in
the back. And the wife says, "I begged
you not to buy that book by Christopher
Hitchens."
Ladies and gentlemen, he bought the book
and so have many others. Christopher's
book, God is Not Great, has been on the
New York Times bestseller list now for I
think over 20 weeks.
In introducing Christopher Hitchens, I
should at least mention what some others
have said about him and his gifts.
Here's the London Observer who has said
he is one of the most prolific as well
as brilliant journalists of our time. Or
the Los Angeles Times has said this, he
is a political and literary journalist
extraordinaire.
And the New York Magazine, the New
Yorker magazine has said he is an
intellectual willing to show his teeth
in the cause of righteousness.
And finally, Christopher, you would be
interested to know that our mutual
friend, the political philosopher Peter
Burkwoods, who's here tonight, recently
said this about you. Whether you agree
or disagree with what he says or writes,
Christopher is utterly incapable of ever
being boring.
Christopher, thank you for coming. We
trust you will not be boring.
Well,
thank you, Georgetown. Thank you, ladies
and gentlemen, for coming.
Thank you, Michael, for that
suspiciously tur introduction,
which of all the introductions I've
heard to myself is certainly the most um
recent.
Thank you seriously to the ethics and
public policy center and for your work
for for conceiving this idea for
encouraging me to do it for bringing us
Dr. McGrath all the way from our common
alma ma of Oxford and for the regular
seminars that you may not know that
Michael does all the time on these
matters of faith versus reason which is
after all the ground on which we're met.
Um this evening I always uh come before
events like this with antagonists like
Dr. McGrath with a slight sense a very
slight sense hope it doesn't sound
self-pittitying of um
inequality. My views are if I say it for
myself tolerably well advertised and if
they're not it's partly your fault. Um
because what I say is fairly
intelligible very plainly stated. If I
you know what I think if you care to
find out. When I debate with Jews and
Muslims and Christians, I very often
find I say, "Well, do you really believe
there was a virgin birth? Do you really
believe in a Genesis creation? Do you
really believe in bodily resurrection?"
And I get a sort of Montipython reply.
Well, this is a little bit of
metaphorical really. Um
I'm not sure and I'm going to find out.
I'm determined to find out this evening
uh which line on this my antagonist does
take. And I want you to notice and I
want you to test him on it because I
think it's fair. Um, and I'm going to
talk to him and to you as if he did
represent the Christian faith. I can't
do all three monotheisms tonight. I may
get a whack at the other two in the
course of the discussion. I can only
really do his. I'm I'm going to assume
that it means something to him and that
it's not just a humanist metaphysics.
And I think I'm entitled to that
assumption. Um
the the main thing I want to dispute
this evening because I I'm either
drowning in time with 20 minutes. It's
either too much or too little is this.
You hear it very often said by people of
a vague faith that well it may not be
the case that religion is metaphysically
true. Its figures and its stories may be
legendary or or or dwell on the edge of
myth prehistoric.
um its truth claims may be laughable. We
have better claims, excuse me, better
explanations for the origins both of our
cosmos and our species now. So much
better so in fact that had there been
available to begin with, religion would
never have taken root. No one would now
go back to the stage when uh we didn't
have any real philosophy. We only had
mythology. when we thought we lived on a
flat planet or when we thought that our
planet was circulated by the sun instead
of the other way around. When we didn't
know there were microorganisms
as part of creation and that they were
more powerful than us and had dominion
over us rather than we then when we were
fearful the infancy of our species. We
we wouldn't have taken up theism if we'd
known now what we did then. But uh allow
for all that. Allow for all that. You
still have to credit religion with being
the source of ethics and morals. Where
would we get these from if it weren't
for faith? I think if in the time I've
got, I think that's the position I most
want to undermine.
I don't believe that it's true that
religion is moral or ethical. I
certainly don't believe, of course, that
any of its explanations about the origin
of our species or the cosmos or its
ultimate destiny are true either. In
fact, I think most of these have been
conclusively utterly dis credited, but
I'll deal with the remaining claim. Is
it moral,
again, I can only do Christianity this
evening. Is it moral to believe that
your sins, yours and mine, ladies and
gentlemen, brothers and sisters, can be
forgiven
by the punishment of another person? Is
it ethical to believe that? I would
submit that the doctrine of vicarious
redemption by human sacrifice is utterly
immoral. I might if I wished if I knew
any of you, you were my friends or even
if I didn't know you, but I just love
the idea of you. Compulsory love is
another sickly element of Christianity
by the way. But suppose I could say,
"Look, you're in debt. I've just made a
lot of money out of a god bashing book.
I'll pay your debts for you. Maybe
you'll pay me back someday, but for now
I can get you out of trouble. I could
say if I really loved someone who'd been
sentenced to prison, if I could find a
way of saying I'd serve your sentence,
I'd try and do it. I could do what
Sydney Carton does in a tale of two
cities if you like. I'm very unlikely to
do this unless you've been incredibly
sweet to me. I take your place on the
scaffold, but I can't take away your
responsibilities.
I can't forgive what you did. I can't
say you didn't do it. I can't make you
washed clean. The name for that in
primitive Middle Eastern society was was
scapegoating. You pile the sins of the
tribe on a goat. You drive that goat
into the desert to die of thirst and
hunger and you think you've taken away
the sins of the tribe. A positively
immoral doctrine that abolishes the
concept of personal responsibility on
which all ethics and morality must
depend. It has a further implication.
I'm told that I have to have a share in
this human sacrifice, even though it
took place long before I was born. I had
no say in it happening. I wasn't
consulted about it. Had I been present,
I would have been bound to do my best to
stop the public torture and execution of
an eccentric preacher. I would do the
same even now. No. No. I'm implicated in
it. I myself drove in the nails. I was
present at Calvary. It confirms the
original filthy sin in which I was
conceived. and borne the sin of Adam and
Genesis. Again, this may sound a mad
belief, but it is the Christian belief.
Well, it's uh here that we find
something very sinister about monotheism
and about religious practice in general.
It is incipiently at least and I think
often explicitly totalitarian. I have no
say in this.
I am born under a celestial dictatorship
which I could not have had any hand in
choosing. I don't put myself under its
government.
I am told that it can watch me while I
sleep. I'm told that it can convict me
of, here's the definition of
totalitarianism, thought crime for what
I think
I may be convicted and condemned. And
that if I commit a right action, it's
only to evade this punishment. And if I
commit a wrong action, I'm going to be
uh caught up not just with punishment in
life for what I've done, which often
follows aimatically. But no, but even
after I'm dead, in the Old Testament,
gruesome as it is, recommending as it
is, of genocide, racism, tribalism,
slavery, gentle mutilation, and the
displacement and destruction of others,
terrible as the Old Testament gods are,
they don't promise to punish the dead.
There's no talk of torturing you after
the earth has closed over the
Amalachites.
Only till when gentle Jesus meek and
mild makes his appearance are those who
won't accept the message told they must
depart into everlasting fire. Is this
morality? Is this ethics? I submit not
only is it not only does it come with
the false promise of vicarious
redemption, but it is the origin of the
totalitarian principle which has been
such a burden and shame to our species
uh for so long.
Um,
I further think that it undermines us in
our most essential integrity. It
dissolves our obligation to live and
witness in truth.
Which of us would say that we would
believe something because it might cheer
us up or tell our children that
something was true because it might dry
their eyes? Which of us indulges in
wishful thinking? who really cares about
the the pursuit of truth at all costs
and at all hazards.
Can it not be said, do you not in fact
hear it said repeatedly about religion
and by the religious themselves that
well it may not be really true. The
stories may be fairy tales. Uh the
history may be dubious but it provides
consolation.
Can anyone hear themselves say saying
this or have it said of them without
some kind of embarrassment without the
concession that thinking here is
directly wishful that yes it would be
nice if you could throw your sins and
your responsibilities on someone else
and have them dissolved. But it's not
true and it's not morally sound. And
that's the second ground of my
indictment. Michael, you will tell me
when I'm trespassing on the time of uh
Dr. McGrath, won't you? Um, on our
integrity, our basic integrity and
knowing right from wrong and being able
to choose a right action over a wrong
one, I think one must repudiate the
claim that one doesn't have this moral
discrimination innately, that no, it
must come only from the agency of a
celestial dictatorship, which one must
love
and simultaneously fear.
What is it like? I've never tried it.
I've never been a cleric. What is it
like to lie to children for a living and
tell them that they have an authority
that they must love, compulsory love,
what a grotesque idea, and be terrified
of at the same time. What's that like? I
want to know.
And that we don't have an innate sense
of right and wrong. The children don't
have an innate sense of fairness and
decency, which of course they do. What
is it like? I can personalize it to this
extent. My mother's Jewish ancestors are
told that until they got to Si, they've
been dragging themselves around the
desert under the impression that
adultery,
murder, theft, and perjury were all
fine. They get to Mount Si only to be
told it's not kosher after all. I I'm
sorry. Excuse me. We must have more
self-respect than that for us for
ourselves and for others. Of course, the
story is a fiction. It's a fabrication
exposed conclusively by Israeli
archaeology. Never. Nothing of the sort
ever took place. But suppose we take the
metaphor. It's an insult. It's an insult
to us. It's an insult to our deepest
integrity. No. If we'd believed that
perjury, murder, and theft were all
right, we wouldn't have got as far as
the foot of Mount Si or anywhere else.
Um, now we're told what we have to
believe.
And this is coming now to the question
of whether or not science, reason and
religion are compatible or I would
rather say reconcilable. The great
Steven Jay Gould, the late great Steven
Jay Gould said that he believed they
were non-over overlapping magisteria.
You can be both a believer and a person
of faith. Sitting in front of me is a
very distinguished extremely
distinguished scholar Francis Collins
helped us to unlock the human genome
project who is himself a believer. I I
would love to hear from him. I hope we
will hear from him. I don't believe he
says that his discoveries in the genome
convinced him of the truth of religion.
He he holds it as it were independently.
I hope I do you no wrong, sir, in
phrasing it like that. Here's why I, a
non-scientist um a non-scientist will
say that I think it's radically
irreconcilable, I'd rather say than
incompatible. I've taken the best advice
I can on how long homo sapiens has been
on the planet.
Carl Sean, Richard Dawkins, many others
and many discrepant views in theirs
reckon it's not more than 250,000 years,
quarter of a million years. It's not
less either. I think it's roughly
accepted. I think you wouldn't disagree.
100,000 is the lowest I've heard. And
actually, I was about to say again, not
to sound too Jewish, I'll take 100,000.
Um,
I only need 100,000.
Call it a 100.
For a 100,000 years, Homo sapiens was
born. Usually, not usually, very often,
dying in the process or killing its
mother in the process.
Life expectancy probably not much more
than 20, 25 years. Dying probably of the
teeth uh after that very agonizingly
near to the brain as they are. um or of
hunger or of microorganisms that they
didn't know existed or of events such as
volcanic or tsunami uh or earthquake
types that would have been wholly
terrifying and mysterious as well as
from turf wars over women, land,
property, food, other matters. You can
fill in imagine it for yourself what the
first a few tens of thousands of years
were like.
Um,
and we like to think learning a little
bit in the process and certainly having
gods all the way, worshiping bears
fairly early on. I can sort of see why.
Um, sometimes worship worshiping other
human beings. Big mistake. I'm coming
back to that if I have time. Uh, this
and that and the other thing. um but
exponentially perhaps
improving though in some areas of the
world very nearly completely dying out
and a bitter struggle all along.
Call it 100,000 years. According to the
Christian faith,
heaven watches this with folded arms
for 98,000 years
and then decides it's time to intervene.
And the best way of doing that would be
a human sacrifice in primitive Palestine
where the news would take so long to
spread that it still hasn't penetrated
very large parts of the world. And that
would be our redemption of the human
species. Now I submit to you ladies and
gentlemen that that is what I've just
said which you must believe to believe
the Christian revelation is not possible
to believe as well as not decent to
believe. Why is it not possible? Because
a virgin birth is more likely than that.
A resurrection is more likely than that.
And because if it was true, it would
have two further implications. It would
have to mean that the designer of this
plan was unbelievably lazy and inept or
unbelievably callous and cruel and
indifferent and capricious.
And that is the case with every argument
for design and every argument for
revelation and intervention that has
ever been made. But it's now
conclusively so because of the superior
knowledge that we've won for ourselves
by an endless struggle to assert our
reason, our science, our humanity, our
extension of knowledge against the
priests, against the rabbis, against the
mullers who've always wanted us to
consider ourselves as made from dust or
from a clot of blood according to the
Quran or as the Jews are supposed to
pray every morning, at least not female
or gentile.
And here's my final point because I
think it's coming to it. The final
insult that religion delivers to us, the
final poison it jets into our system. It
appeals both to our meanness, our
self-centeredness, and our soypism and
to our masochism. In other words, it's
sato masochistic. I'll put it like this.
You're a clot of blood. You're a piece
of mud. You're lucky to be alive. God
fashioned you for his convenience, even
though you're born in filth and sin. And
even though every religion there's ever
been is distinguished principally by the
idea that we should be disgusted by our
own sexuality. Name me a religion that
does not play upon that fact.
So you're lucky to be here originally
sinful and covered in shame and filth as
you are. You're a wretched creature. But
take heart. The universe is designed
with you in mind.
And heaven has a plan for you. Ladies
and gentlemen, I close by saying, I
can't believe there is a thinking person
here who does not realize that our
species would begin to grow to something
like its full height if it left this
childishness behind, if it emancipated
itself from this sinister, childish
nonsense. And I now commit you to the
good Dr. McGrath. Thank you.
Thank you, Christopher.
Well, besides what you can read in his
bio in your program, I should let you
know that Professor McGrath holds Oxford
two Oxford uh doctorates. one a doctor
of divinity for his work on historical
theology and systematic theology and
another doctorate of philosophy for his
work on molecular biophysics.
Here's what publishers weekly said
recently about his work. Dr. McGrath has
distinguished himself as a historical
theologian and as a generous and witty
writer who brings to life topics that
would turn to dust in others hands.
We're especially grateful that Professor
McGrath has traveled all the way from
Oxford last night to join us for this
evening. Thank you, Dr. McGrath.
Well, thank you very much indeed. It's a
huge pleasure to be here at Georgetown
this afternoon. Now, if someone had told
me when I was growing up that I'd be
here at such a distinguished place as
Georgetown talking about atheism, I'd
have been extremely surprised. I I think
for two reasons. One was I grew up in
Northern Ireland. Now, some of you may
come from this place, but it's a it's a
kind of rather backward place. And uh
the greatest annual event of my youth
was the Donica Donkey Derby. So you can
see you know coming to somewhere like
Washington was just amazing. So you know
it's great to be here but I think what
would surprise me more would have been
if someone to say well you're taking
part in a debate about atheism is I
would have assumed that I would have
been on the atheist side because
certainly as a young man that was what I
believed. I grew up in Northern Ireland
studying the sciences, wanting to go to
Oxford to take this further. And it was
very very clear to me that the sciences
disproved God. They completely eroded
the ground on which faith stood. And of
course, there was violence between
Protestant and Catholic and Northern
Ireland. Therefore, my logic was
invaluable. No Catholics, no
Protestants, no violence between
Catholics and Protestants. So, it seemed
to me to be very, very straightforward.
And certainly uh when I went up to
Oxford to begin to study the sciences in
much more detail, it seemed to me really
I had sorted things out and could relax
for a while. But I found myself being
challenged by a number of things. One
was being challenged by beginning to
read the history and philosophy of
science and reading that the kind of
scientific positivism I'd embi wasn't
quite as straightforward as I had
suggested and also beginning to realize
actually that the evidential basis for
atheism was much weaker than I had
realized and I began to find myself
being excited intellectually and
stimulated far more than I dared to
think by the Christian faith.
And so in the end I I came to faith
swapping my old faith of atheism for my
new one of Christianity. I don't think I
did so as any kind of wish fulfillment
out of any kind of psychological need.
It was much more just a profound
intellectual conviction that this was
right that this made sense in itself and
that this made sense of things as well.
It was like someone I suppose who had
who knew water discovering champagne. So
for me this was really a a very
significant uh event and indeed to this
day I still look back at my atheist days
with great nostalgia even though I no
longer actually hold to those positions
and so it's a very great pleasure to be
able to interact this afternoon with
Christopher Hitchens and I wanted to
make it very very clear that what he is
saying today needs to be respected and I
hope I will behave respectfully towards
him. I want to offer some points of
disagreement, some points of challenge,
some points of agreement, and also some
genuine points of curiosity to try and
get our conversation underway. And so I
want to really focus on his main
argument, which I think you've heard
very, very clearly, that religion is
immoral and leads to immorality, that in
some way it is toxic. And these seem to
me to be very significant arguments,
very significant claims. and therefore I
want to try and engage with them. I
apologize to him and indeed I also
apologize to you in that in the time
available I will not be able to interact
with him properly but at least I hope I
can begin to to get this conversation
moving forward. So an obvious question I
found myself asking as I both read uh
Mr. Hedgeon's book and also listen to
him speak is that I think there are
there are aspects of this that I'd have
loved to have heard more about. For
example, in recent years, especially the
last 15 years, there's been a very
substantial body of scientific research
into the empirical effect that religious
commitment actually has on people. And
as someone who was a scientist and still
remains wedded to evidence-based
thinking, I wondered if this might
actually come into Mr. Hitchen's
presentation. To give you an example, if
we look at Kunig and Cohen's very famous
book published in 2001, the link between
religion and health, we find that the
the overwhelming body of empirical
studies to look at this find a positive
correlation between religious commitment
and well-being. Now, that does not prove
that there is a god and certainly it
does not prove that all forms of
religion are good for you. I will gladly
concede because I think Mr. religions is
right on this that there are some forms
of religion that are pathological that
damage people but there's a need I think
for a real discussion about what is
pathological and what is normal about
what is the center and what are the
fringes and that I think also extends to
Mr. Hitchens analysis of the impact of
religion in general. He makes the point
and I think I want to say he is right to
make this point that religion has done
much damage in history. I regard that
point as being beyond contradiction and
it seems to me that every one of us here
this afternoon needs to say that is
right. But I think we need also to go
further and begin to explore. And the
kind of questions I would like to open
up for discussion would include these.
Yes, religion has done damage, but is
this typical or is this a fringe
element? Who are the normal people who
are the fanatics? And it seems to me
there's a real need to try and make this
kind of adjudication. I grant the
history is there that there have been
some awful things done. But as Michael
Shurmer, who's president of the Skeptic
Society, wrote in a book, How We Believe
Some years ago, for every one of these
atrocities, which must cause all of us
deep concern, there are 10,000
unreported acts of kindness, generosity,
and so forth arising from religious
commitment. and trying to get this
balance right seems to me to of enormous
importance. What is the fringe? What is
the center? So that's one point I think
I'd like to open up for further
discussion. But I'd also like to try and
just make a more general point and that
is that I think world views in general
whether they are religious, irreligious,
whatever they are, have the capacity to
animate people to the extent that they
feel they must go and do things which
many of us would regard as morally
reprehensible. We see this in the Soviet
Union, a rather grim period in modern
history, where we find, for example,
Lenon having said basically that there
is no higher authority by which he may
be judged, feeling able to, I quote, uh,
authorize the protracted use of
brutality against religious believers.
And it seems to me that we have here an
ideology, a worldview which basically is
sanctioning violence. in this case,
anti-religious violence.
Now, I would not argue from that that
this shows that atheism in general or
atheists in particular are violent
people. It's much more about what
movements do to people, about the damage
that worldviews can cause when they
begin to take over and begin to really
animate people to want to do things.
Again, look at uh the period under
Stalin. There are many other examples we
could give of worldviews that may well
have begun with great excitement, great
enthusiasm, a commitment to ideals that
we can all identify with, but something
happens and they go wrong. The French
Revolution, I believe, began with an
outburst of energy for liberty.
But by 1793 it degenerated into the
reign of terror in which an appeal to
liberty sanctioned the most dreadful
acts of violence. And many of you will
know the tragic story of Madame Roland
who was brought to the guillotine on
trumped up charges in 1793. And as she
was led to the guillotine, she pointed
to a statue of liberty in the plas
revolution and said, "Liberty, what
crimes are committed in your name?"
History, I think, discloses a complex
judgment here. I do not believe that it
simply points to religion as being the
cause of evil. I think it points to the
capacity of all worldviews to begin to
do this. It's not so much religion or
indeed anti- relligion. It seems to be
something actually about human nature
itself which means that acts of kindness
can be accompanied by acts of violence.
There's something about us I think that
really needs to be addressed there. So I
don't think it's as threat forward as
this religion poisons everything. I'm
not sure it can do, but so can other
things as well. The real problem, I
think, is extremism. The kinds of
ideologies that force violence upon us,
and those, it seems to me, do need to be
challenged. And on that, I am at one
with Mr. Hitchens. But is it God that's
doing this? Let's move on and talk about
this.
Clearly a very important question here
is how we know what God is like. Can you
imagine God saying go and do violence to
someone? Well, I think some could quite
easily. But I speak from a specific
perspective, namely that of a Christian
theologian. And for Christianity, the
identity, the nature of God is disclosed
in Jesus of Nazareth. He is the image of
the invisible God. He is the fulfillment
of the law and the prophets. And when we
look at Jesus of Nazareth, we see
something I think that is very very
challenging. We have one who refuses to
do violence. Even in Gethsemane, when
some want to raise swords to defend him
as he's about to be betrayed, he bids
them put their swords down. Jesus does
not do violence, but he has violence
done to him. And the point I want to
make is that your vision of what God is
like has a profound impact on what you
think God is urging you to do. And it
seems to me that if one is a good
Christian, then one is going to take the
vision of what God is like and what God
wants us to do that we find disclosed in
Jesus with the utmost seriousness.
Now let me make it absolutely clear. I
concede and I may may well be one of
these that there are many bad Christians
around who failed to live up to this
vision. But I want to draw a clear
distinction between some Christians are
bad and Christianity is bad. There is an
aspiration and inspiration and norm. And
that means one can challenge those who
want in some way to use violence in the
name of God. And of course you can see
this impacting on the way in which
people behave in an episode that
happened a year ago here in the United
States. You've had unfortunately in
recent days some shooting incidents. And
of course what I'm talking about is the
Amish schoolhouse killings of October
2006.
And many of you will know of these. Some
of you may have been affected by them. A
craze gunman broke into an Amish
schoolhouse and shot, I think it was 10
Amish school girls, of whom five died.
The Amish, as I'm sure you all know, are
a very conservative Protestant sect who
wear 17th century clothing, who won't
drive cars, they use horse buggies, and
they also regard the ethical example of
Jesus as absolutely normative.
For them, there will be no retribution
of any kind. The cycle of violence was
broken instantly because for them Christ
ordered them, commanded them to show
forgiveness.
That's a very important point. Religion
or at least in this case Christianity
contains within itself the capacity for
self-criticism. This is not the way God
is. This is not the way we should be
behaving. And I fully concede there are
those who fail to live up to that. But
there is a challenge that can be issued
to them. Why behave like this when there
is the norm before you authorized as
what God would like us to do? So it
seems to me there is a very important
point to make there. Now Mr. Hitchens
made some very interesting points about
the relationship of science and faith.
And of course for me who was studying
science at Oxford uh doing research in
molecular biohysics these were live
questions and I certainly welcome his
challenge to discuss these things
further. But for me there has never been
this opposition between science and
faith. Certainly some say there is but I
would want to make this point uh
building on what Steven J says. uh Gold
in his book Rocks of Ages makes the
point I think fairly that although in
his case he's an atheist he was not an
atheist on account of his science that
in many ways his atheism was already
there he brought it to his science and
he makes this point that science by its
legitimate methods cannot adjudicate the
God question. Certainly we can read
nature in an atheist way. We can read
nature in an agnostic way. We can read
nature in a Christian way. But nature in
itself and of itself does not force us
to any of those positions. And I will
simply say that I found my Christian
faith gave me new intellectual energy
both to engage the natural order. To
engage nature is to learn more about God
and also to energize my understanding of
what I was observing. And I find this
summed up in a quote from CS Lewis which
I am in the habit of quoting I'm afraid.
I believe he writes in Christianity as I
believe the sun has risen not simply
because I see it but because by it I see
everything else. In other words, it
gives you an intellectual lens or
framework through which you can look at
the world, ourselves, culture and see it
in a new light. So for me, science and
religion, there may be tensions, but
there's also a very powerful synergy
which I believe to be both welcome and
also something that can be developed
further.
But let me move on if I may and make a
further point. U Mr. ations makes some
very significant criticisms of religion
which I need I emphasize need to be
taken seriously. But what I wonder does
he offer in its place? In his book he
talks a bit especially at the beginning
and the end of the need for a new
enlightenment.
And I find this puzzling though
nevertheless extremely interesting. I
find it puzzling because for me as an
intellectual historian, the
enlightenment really had been left
behind us as being in the view of many
post-modern critics a worldview that led
to intolerance and a worldview that
actually generated the potential for
conflict and violence. You all know why
postmodernity moved away from modernity
on that point. And also again a point I
would love to discuss further with Mr.
Hitchens, people like Alistister
McIntyre, other critics of modernity
make the point that its foundational
judgments about the nature of reason,
the nature of what is right actually
cannot be sustained on the basis of an
appeal to history and reason itself. For
McIntyre and for many others, the
Enlightenment offers us a vision of a
rationality and morality which actually
are unattainable in practice. Now again,
we might want to have a discussion about
morality and I fully accept that uh Mr.
Hitchens is very committed to the moral
vision, has a real sense of what is
right and what is wrong. But I wonder if
one can sustain that without some sort
of metaphysical basis. And the point I
would want to raise is this is an
evolutionary account of morality
actually adequate to do the job. Richard
Dawkins with whom I disagree on many
things in his selfish gene makes the
point that we alone have the capacity to
react against our genes to offer
something better than we are genetically
landed with. And it seems to me that is
a very significant position. Or again I
discover that both Mr. judges and I are
lapsed Marxists. To take Antonio
Gramps's point, Grampshy made the point
that in culture
moral values are manipulated by interest
groups. How on earth can we defend
ourselves against this? My real
question, Mr. Hitchens, is can one have
a viable moral system without some sort
of transcendent basis of morality? I
make this point not to challenge him as
a moral thinker but simply to ask
whether one can actually do this. So I
must end and I do so if I may by uh
telling you a story based on my own
Northern Ireland. The story is told of
um two Catholic nuns who were driving
along one night when they ran out of
gas. They realized they passed a gas
station about 100 yards back. So they
decided to walk back and fill up with
gas. They rummaged about in the back of
the car and they found a glass container
which would do the job. Unfortunately,
it was a medical specimen jar with the
word urine written all over it, but it
was all they had. They went back, filled
up, and went to the car and started to
pour this into the gas tank. A
Protestant farmer drove by on his
tractor and he looked at them in utter
astonishment and he said, "Ladies, I
don't think much of your religion, but I
certainly admire your faith."
And as I hear Mr. pitch and speak and I
enjoyed his writing. I find myself
wondering if he too is a man of faith, a
man who believes that even though we
cannot absolutely justify certain
beliefs, nevertheless we can trust them.
He says our beliefs are not beliefs, but
I think they are. And the real question
for me is in a world where reason and
science do not deliver what we once
thought they did on what can we base our
lives if we are to know that we are
truly living the good, the beautiful and
the true life. Thank you very much.
[Applause]
Mr. Hitchens will take the podium again.
Michael wanted to do us uh do this
sitting down, but I it's the old
demagogue in me. Um
I need the pullpit. I need the podium.
And if I can't be erect, at least I can
be upright. Um,
by the way, do you know why the why the
Amish girl the Amish girl the Amish girl
was excommunicated?
Two men a night.
Um,
look, I'm going to take the doctor's
excellent points in order if I may, and
you'll you will, I'm sure, have minds
orderly enough to recall the order in
which he made them on the empirical
evidence so-called aduced that a
religious faith can lead to uh greater
health and well-being. I in a sense do
not doubt it. Uh, in other words, I can
easily imagine that those who think they
are the special object of a divine
design feel better for thinking so. I
just think it's going to be very
important for anyone claiming this to
see the dismaying trap door that is
right onto their feet. If you're going
to claim this for one, how you not going
to claim it for all? Do we not hear
incessantly that the Hamas organization
in Gaza is a provider of welfare to the
poorest of the poor? Have we not heard
this? Do we not hear that Lewis
Farrakhan's crackpot racist
organization, the Nation of Islam, gets
young people off drugs? For all I know,
it's true. It not only says nothing
about the truth or validity of their
theology, but it must say a certain
amount at least about our willingness to
think wishfully or cultishly, which was,
if you like, part of my point to begin
with. Um, as to the center versus the
fringe, I get this all the time. don't
judge religion by its fundamentalists
and its extremists. No, why should I? I
don't have to. I judge it by its
foundational texts and I judge it by the
statements of its authorities. Uh, take
a case from the Quran just for once.
Does it actually it's not the Quran.
Excuse me. Take a case from the Muslim
foundational documents, the Hadith,
which have equal canonical authority.
They say if someone becomes an apostate,
leaves or changes their religion, they
must be killed. The sentence is death.
Don't anyone be telling me that's a
metaphor.
No, it's just intended as a sort of
general admonition. No, it means what it
says and it's been applied to a couple
of people who now have to live friends
of mine, as a matter of fact, as
political refugees in Washington DC who
know how true the impact of that hadith.
There's no wiggle room there. So, the
question for a Muslim must be asked, do
you think this is the word of God or
don't you? because if you don't, you're
saying that God shouldn't be able to
tell you to do an evil thing. And if you
do, you're saying he should. In either
case, faith falls as a reinforcement of
ordinary morality.
Um, recently,
Dr. McGrath is a member of the Church of
England, the Anglican Communion, the
Episcopalian Communion, what George
Herbert, what my favorite religious poet
after John Dunn. The sweet mediocrity of
our native church was how he referred to
the Sea of Canterbury.
Everyone thinks it's the mildest of all.
It it not only calls itself a flock, it
looks very sheeplike. Um, however, the
bishop of Carlilele recently tipped, I'm
told, to be the next Archbishop of
Canterbury, said that the floods in
Northern Yorkshire that devastated large
part of England in the summer um, and
killed and dispossessed large number of
people were punishment for
homosexuality.
Now, to connect meteorology to morality
seems to me, I have to say, flatout
idiotic, whichever way you do it. If
there was a connection between
meteorology and morality, which religion
has very often argued that there is, I
don't see why the floods hit northern
Yorkshire. I can think of some parts of
London where they would have done a lot
more good
just as the hurricane that devastated uh
New Orleans, we found punishment for
sin, as it must have been, left the
French Quarter alone. You have to make
up your mind on this. You either think
God intervenes or he doesn't. I'm clear.
I say I don't think so. Will Dr. McGrath
say that he does intervene and that we
can tell when he does or will he not say
so? You have to ask him. You have to
hear his answer. Does he say sometimes
intervenes or does he say he moves in
mysterious ways? My position is clear.
His remains, I think, distinctly opaque.
It was the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Jeffrey Fischer, who said the following
that a nuclear war, thermonuclear war,
would only hasten our transition into a
more blessed state into which we would
bound to eventuate. Anyway, if I had
told you that remark and asked you to
guess, you would have said Makmoud
Abuadinad said it or some other
fanatical verminous Müller. No, the
Archbishop of Canterbury said it. And
why shouldn't he? Because another
immoral and sinister thing about
religion is that lurking under under it
at all times in every one of its
versions is a desire for this life to
come to an end, for this poor world to
be over. The yearning, the secret death
wish that's in all of it. Let this be
gone. let us move to the next stage is
present at all times unless it's
repudiated which I invite Dr. McGrath to
do but if he does so I don't see in what
esqueological sense he can claim to
remain a Christian and he can't take it
alakart
if you claim or accept the one version
you have to accept the other if it's
true in general that religion does one
thing and some people do good from it
then you have to accept all the wicked
acts that are attributable to it as well
and I think you'll find that those don't
quite equalize at the margin depressing
though that conclusion would be I have a
challenge which I have now put in print
on the Christianity Today website in
Holy Blossom Synagogue in Toronto the
night before last in many other places
and on the air and on the web and it's
this. If it's to be argued that our our
morality our ethics can be derived from
the supernatural
um then name me an action
a moral action taken by a believer or a
moral statement uttered by one that
could not have been made or uttered by
an infidel and unbeliever.
I have tried this everywhere on a large
number of people. I've not yet had even
one reply. But if I was to ask you, can
you think of a wicked action that could
only have been performed by someone who
believed they were on an errand from
God? There isn't one of you who would
take 10 seconds to think of an example.
And what does that tell us? I would I
would say it tells us a lot.
And here's the bogus answer to it that
was only very gently mentioned by Dr.
McGrath this evening. Well, what about
atheist nihilism? What about atheist
cruelty? What about 20th century
totalitarianism? I take this seriously
enough to have put a chapter in my book
about it available by the way at fine
bookstores everywhere.
And I I can only summarize it now and
I'll do so very as tlyly as I can.
First, fascism, the original 20th
century totalitarian movement is really
historically another name for the for
the political activity of the Catholic
right-wing. There is no other name for
it. Francoism, Salazarism, what happened
in Croatia, in Austria, in Bavaria and
so on. The church keeps on trying to
apologize for it. Can't apologize for it
enough. It's the Catholic right.
Mussolini. You can't quite say that
about Hitler, National Socialism,
because that's also based on Nordic and
pagan blood myths, leader worship, and
so on. Though Hitler never repudiated
his membership of the church. Um and
prayers were said for him on his
birthday every year till the very end on
the orders of the Vatican. Uh and all of
these facts are well known and the
church still hasn't found another way to
apologize for that enough. And whatever
it is, you can call that you can't call
it secular. You may not call it secular.
By the way, Joseph Gerbles was
excommunicated from the Catholic Church.
50% according to Paul Johnson, the
Catholic historian of the Voffan SS were
confessing Catholics. None of them was
ever threatened with excommunication,
even threatened for it with it for
taking part in the final solution. But
Joseph Gerbles was excommunicated
for
marrying a Protestant. You see, we do
have our standards
now. Okay, moving to Marxism, moving to
Leninism. Okay,
in Russia in 2017, for hundreds of
years, millions of people have been told
the head of the state is a supernatural
power. The Zar is not just the head of
the government, not just a king, but he
stands between heaven and earth. Uh, and
this this has been inculcated in
generations of Russians for hundreds of
years. If you're Joseph Stalin himself,
a seminarian from Georgia, you shouldn't
be in the totalitarianism business if
you can't exploit a ready-made reservoir
of credul and civility that's as big as
that. It's just waiting for you to
capitalize on. So, what do you do? Well,
we'll have an Inquisition for one thing.
We'll have miracles for another.
Lysenko's biology will produce full
harvests a year. We'll have heresy
hunts. We'll tell everyone they must be
grateful only to the leader for what
they get and they must thank him and
praise him all the time and that they
must be aware all the time of the
existence of the counterrevolutionary
devil who waits to You see where I'm
going with this? That's not secularism.
Um, Michael.
Oh, do I need really two? Okay. Um, I'll
tell you my North Korea stories another
time. Here's the it's surrogate. It is
at the very best and the very worst. The
examples I've been talking about are a
surrogate for messianism for the belief
in ultimate history and the end of days
and the conclusion of all things which
is I've tried to argue I hope with some
success the problem to begin with the
replacement of reason by faith. the
discarding of the one thing that makes
us important and useful and different
from other primates in favor of
something that requires no evidence and
just requires incantation. Not good for
you. If Dr. McGrath or anyone else could
come up with an example of a society
which had fallen into slavery and
bankruptcy and beggory and terror and
misery because it had adopted the
teachings and the precepts of Spinoza
and Einstein and Pier Bile and Thomas
Jefferson and Thomas Payne then I'd be
impressed and that would be a fair test
on a level playing field but you will
find no such example indeed the nearest
such example we do have is these great
United States the first country in the
world to have a constitution that
forbids the mention of religion in the
public square except by way of limiting
it and saying that the state can take no
interest in establishment of faith best
known in under the rubric of the wall of
separation my new slogan is Mr.
Jefferson build up that wall
hope you'll join me in it very quickly
in my last minute
yes Dr. McGrath, you're right. There is
something about us as a species that is
problematic. It isn't just explained by
religion. Something about us that tempts
us to do wrong. It's pretty easily
explained. I think we are we are
primates. High primates, but primates.
We are half a chromosome away from
chimpanzees. And it shows.
It especially shows in the number of
religions we invent to console ourselves
or to give us things to quarrel with
other primates about. If anything
demonstrates that God is man-made, not
man godmade, surely it is the religions
erected by this quai chimpanzeee species
and the harm that they're willing to
inflict on that basis. I think on the
point of um of uh christologology that
you closed with, I ought not to take any
more of the audience's time, but be
prepared to discuss and I hope I've
yielded back some of my time to
questions and I'm grateful again for
your indulgence. Thank you.
I think the resurrection is a historical
event, something that happened in
history was seen as intriguing but not
obviously interpreted as something of
dramatic significance. The key question
was not simply the history but also its
meaning. And so in the New Testament for
example, we see debates taking place
around the time of the resurrection
which are primarily concerned what does
this mean? In other words, something
seems to have happened but it's a
historical event. What is the overall
meaning of this event? And so for me
that that second question begins to
emerge as being of major importance. And
in New Testament we see a number of
ideas beginning to emerge. The most
important of these is that in some way
Jesus had been demonstrated to have some
sort of relationship with God that
validated his teaching. In other words,
that authorized him to speak with
authority on what God was like. It's a
bit like, you know, interpreting
something like uh Caesar crossing the
Rubicon. I mean, you can think of that
as having two different elements. On the
one hand, there is the physical event,
the crossing of a river, which of course
in this case is not particularly
difficult. But then there is its
historical significance in that the
Rubicon marked the boundary between um
the Roman colonies and Rome itself. To
cross that with an armory was in effect
a declaration of war. So for me, an
historical event with a deeper
theological significance and that
significance, it seems to me, is
articulated by the New Testament in
terms of first of all who Jesus Christ
is, but secondly also what the
implications of this might be for human
nature. And of course, the Christian
hope of eternal life, the very strong
New Testament declaration that we are
people who have hope is very much
grounded on that particular idea.
Now um Mr. moved on and began to talk I
think very interestingly about God as a
celestial dictator and again I think
there is a very significant idea. Now
certainly I hear what he's saying but
for me God is a celestial liberator and
I wonder if we have a very different
perspective on this same event. Is there
a a real difference here which we can
justify in terms of metaphysics or is
this simply a different perspective on
how we see things? Um Mr.
sorry
uh Mr. Hitchens clearly uh is
emphasizing that religion can do some
bad things and I want to say that I
believe he is right to alert us to that
and to avoid any uncritical evaluation
of religion. But there is this deeper
side which I do want to just emphasize.
The New Testament talks about the truth
setting you free. It talks about the
glorious liberty of the children of God.
And maybe we've lost that. Maybe somehow
we've bound this up with all kinds of
rituals and so on. So have lost sight of
it. But as you read the New Testament, I
think there is this outburst of energy
of liberation that something has
happened which has transformed the human
situation, brought hope and at the same
time liberated us from fear of death and
also to do some very good things.
Certainly we fail, certainly we fall.
But for me, I think the idea of God's
celestial dictator is one that I don't
really recognize myself, although I can
see where it's coming from. And then
went on and issued a very powerful
challenge against religion as any form
of wishful thinking that provides
consolation. And again, he makes a
number of points that I think are
perfectly fair. One of these is that
wishful thinking is precisely that. It's
what we would like to be the case. It
bears no relation to what actually is
the case. And also he makes a point that
consolation is well well I would put
like this. It's for losers isn't it?
Certainly when I was an atheist myself I
very much took the view that religion
was for mad bad or sad people. And
certainly you can see that emphasis and
consolation would correspond very well
with that third group. But I think there
are some points we need to look at. The
historical roots of this argument go
back to Ludvig Foybach in the year 1841
when he wrote his very famous book uh
dealing with the essence of
Christianity. And in that book he argues
very lucidly along the lines Mr.
Hitchens indicated that people believe
in God because in some way this is about
their aspirations, their hopes, their
longings being actualized when of course
there is no God to believe in. It's
simply we wish it were like this but we
know it's not and we're in denial. So
belief in God is seen as a projection of
some imaginary finger figure on some
transcendent screen. Now I think Foyback
does make an important point but I want
to make two points in response. Number
one,
the fact that we might wish something to
be true certainly does not make it true.
But the fact that we wish something to
be true does not make it false for that
reason. I mean, for example, you can
hear my voice is beginning to dry up and
I would very much like there to be some
water and
there is still some left, I'm pleased to
say. But the point is my desire does not
negate the reality. Thank you very much
indeed.
[Applause]
I'll turn away and count to five.
But I think more interestingly is this.
I wonder I wonder if atheism might also
be a form of wishful thinking. Now
again, those who studied cultural
history will know that one of the points
that's very often made is that the the
emergence of atheism as a significant
historical phenomenon in the 18th
century was this deep desire to change
things. If there were no god, we could
do as we please. You all know dsvski's
possessed where um krilof makes this
following comment. If there is a god, I
must do what god wants. But if there is
no god, I do what I want. And again you
can see atheism there as a kind of ethic
of liberation. I'm able to do what I
please. There are no limits. And again
uh you may have come across a very
interesting essay uh by Cheslo Milos in
the New York Times book review about 10
years ago called the discrete charm of
nilism where he says look what has
captivated us today is not the idea of
religion as an escape from reality but
the idea that there is no god and hence
no accountability. So we do what we
please. We are accountable to nobody. So
I wonder if this argument actually works
both ways. I think it's certainly a very
interesting possibility to explore.
Now Mr. Hitchens then moved on to talk
about Mount Si. Uh he made a point which
I think is a is a interesting point and
one that I need to engage with. Mount Si
he said look changed everything. Are we
to understand that people had no moral
sense before this? that somehow this
brought uh morality into being. And I
think what I would say and I think most
Christian theologians would say
something like this is that both the old
and the new testaments are very very
clear that there was human wisdom around
long before Sinai that to use Paul's
imagery that we are judged on the basis
of what we do know where there is no
knowledge of the law. What I would want
to say is that um uh the Old Testament
and indeed the New Testament do not kind
of way throw something down and say
there that's it you didn't know about
this before but to to quote from that
very interesting document Fedzio faith
and reason uh originating from the the
late pope I mean that in some way grace
does not abolish nature but rather
perfects it in other words it brings to
fulfillment these basic human instincts
about what is right and what is wrong.
Correcting them were necessary but still
fulfilling these longings for
righteousness. This desire to do what is
right which I believe to be so
fundamental a part of human nature. And
therefore for me uh the Christian faith
for example does not kind of throw down
a series of arbitrary dictats but rather
it builds on what is already there
precisely because for Christianity we
are all God's creation and God has
planted if you like signals or reminders
of what he is like or to use that
wonderful phrase from Gerard Man Hopkins
in some way nature and humanity is
instressed with the likeness of God. We
then move on to uh talk about uh
something that um I think I touched on
Mr. talked about the tension between
science and faith. I think I may have
touched on that in my own talk. So I
won't repeat that now other than to say
that for me there is a very healthy
convergence and mutual enrichment
between science and faith. But finally
he also uh made a point which is
basically that it seems very unjust that
Christianity teaches that redemption
depends on explicit response to a gospel
that's preached when so many haven't
heard it. And I I would certainly agree
that that does seem very unjust. But
again the Christian tradition down the
ages has been that the proclamation of
the gospel brings things to fulfillment.
But where it has not been heard, we are
judged on the basis of what we do know
and how we respond to it. Again, grace
does not abolish nature but perfects it.
Thank you.
[Applause]
Well, thank you gentlemen. This is where
we now have a conversation and I have
got some questions from the audience and
if there are other questions I'm glad to
receive them but I have some here. The
first question obviously is for you
Christopher uh since Mr. McGrath has
just finished I would put the question
to you which is if if God does not exist
on what basis can anyone say this action
is right or this action is wrong.
So, whoever asked that only just came
into the room, right? I can't believe
that I didn't say what I thought about
it. But, but I won't repeat it because
actually what Dr. McGrath just said I
thought was unusually good on this
point. You'll recall what he said on the
Dossier matter. Um, if God exists, we
have to do what he says. If he doesn't,
we can do what we like. Now, just apply
this for a second in practice and in
theory. Um,
is it not said of God's chosen people
and is it not said to to them by God
in the Pentetuke that they can do
exactly as they like to other people?
They can enslave them. They can take
their land. They can take their women.
They can destroy all their young men.
They can help themselves to all their
virgins. They can do what anyone who had
no sense of anything but their own
rights would be able to do. But this
case with divine permission.
Doesn't that make it somewhat more evil?
In Iran, where I've been, I've been to
all three axes of evil countries. Uh, by
the way, I think I'm the only writer who
can say that. You're not allowed to
sentence a woman who is a virgin to
death. Even though she may have
committed in the eyes of the Müllers a
capital crime, perhaps by showing her
hair too often or her limbs, she can't
be sentenced to death. But religious law
means she can be raped by the
revolutionary guards. and she's not a
virgin anymore. Then they can kill her.
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of
the law used to be considered the motto
of Satanism. As I recall,
divine permission given to people who
think they have God on their side
enables actions that a normal, morally
normal unbeliever would not contemplate
the mutilation of genitalia of children.
Who would do that if it wasn't decided
that God wanted it?
Just as when the poet in England gets
the poet laurate ship, they start to
write dril instead of poetry. For some
reason, it's the it's the king's
scruffula. The other way around, morally
normal and intelligent people find
themselves saying fatuously wicked
things when this subject comes up. The
suicide bombing community is entirely
faith-based.
The gentle mutilation community is
entirely faith-based. Slavery is
mandated by the Bible. People keep you
keep hearing how many abolitionists were
Christians. Well, it was about time that
they took a stand against it, having
mandated it for so long.
So it's it's it's it's not even a
tortology, I think, to say that there's
a that there's a a relationship between
the human impulse to do evil, to be
selfish, to be self-centered, to be
greedy, and a contrast between that and
faith. Because given only faith,
mountains can be moved, and millions of
people who would never normally acquies
in evil are brought to it straight away
and with ease and with
self-righteousness. There, that's my
answer to that. And and the questioner
did not answer my challenge. Name an
ethical statement made or action
performed by a believer in the name of
faith that couldn't have been by an an
infidel and name if you can. This is
easier. A wicked action that could only
be mandated by faith. And then you'll
see how silly your question was whoever
you were.
Well, let me ask it then. Uh,
Christopher, did you you you heard
Professor McGrath also though uh condemn
any form of religious violence?
Well, that's easy to do. I mean, uh I
could say, look, an atheist can be a
nihilist.
No, I think there's a room for agreement
here between the two of you.
I'm I'm not looking for consensus, baby.
I'm just not in the mood.
I'm not in the vein, as King Richard
says. It's not in the vein. No,
I'm glad he condemns religious violence.
Does he condemn the promise of other
people's territory to the chosen people
for example? Does Jesus say or does he
not say I come to bring not peace but a
sword? He does say that. Should I take
it literally or metaphorically? Right?
Is is genital mutilation of small boys
mandated by Jews and is it often
mandated by Muslims or not? Uh is there
a paradise to which people can hope to
get by dying for their faith or isn't
there? Uh, has holy war been proclaimed
by both the pope and by the mullers or
not? Um, you put a lot.
These are problems. Not for me. For me,
it's simple. We're primates. This is
what we would expect to happen if there
was no god.
Let me uh let me
This is what we would expect to see if
there if faith was pointless.
But for but it's a it's an endless
mystery where none exists. If you think
there's an intervening finger from on
high, then it becomes mysterious.
Thank you.
Okay. Question.
You're welcome for Professor McGrath.
Uh, here's a question. I would like to
hear you expound on Mr. Hitchens's claim
that the idea of a vicarious sacrifice
is immoral or unethical. What is
Christianity's explanation of this?
Certainly. Well, the phrase vicarious
sacrifice isn't actually a biblical
phrase. It's a phrase that's used by
some writers to refer to a particular
interpretation of a biblical teaching.
And the key idea in the New Testament is
that in some way the death of Christ,
again, violence done to Christ, not
violence done by Christ, is seen as
having a transformative potential uh for
human beings. And this transformative
potential is articulated using a range
of models, some of which are drawn from
the Old Testament. For example, uh
there's an analogy drawn with animal
sacrifice and that is seen as in some
way uh bring establishing a link between
Christ's death and the bringing of the
possibility of purity to someone. That
is one of the images used. Others
include for example the whole idea of um
healing, the idea of being set in a
right relationship with God. There are
wide range of these. Now Mr. Hitchens uh
particular criticism,
which of them is yours? I'd really like
to know. I'll tell you right now um to
make sure that I um do justice to both
the question asked and your criticism
made. For me, and I will speak now very
personally because I think I've been um
invited to and I'm very happy to do
that. For me, the death of Christ on the
cross means that something that I could
never gain for myself has been done for
me and offered to me. In other words, it
is something that um uh by myself as a a
human being I could never hope to
achieve is achieved on my behalf and
offered to me and I am asked will you
accept what has been done for you. In
other words is about the possibility of
transformation being offered to me but
not being imposed upon me. And for me
that is about a a God who offers but
does not demand that I respond to him in
this way. And I find that to be a very
good summary of what the Christian faith
is trying to say about a God who offers
but does not impose. And again those of
you who are familiar with the New
Testament will think of the imagery of
Revelation chapter 3 which speaks of
Christ knocking on the door and asking
us to open but leaving that action up
open to us.
Okay, Mr. Hitchens,
not imposed. Did you really say not
imposed?
What if you reject this offer? What are
you told by what have you been told for
centuries by Christians? If you reject
this offer that took place by means of a
torture to death of a human being that
you didn't want and should have
prevented if you could. What if you
reject the offer? If you if you accept
it, you can have eternal life and your
sins are forgiven. Oh, great. What a
horrible way to abolish your own
responsibility and get your own bliss. I
don't want it. Oh, you don't? Well, then
you can go to hell. This is not imposed.
This hasn't been preached to children by
by gruesome elderly virgins with back by
force for centuries. Hasn't po hasn't
this hasn't poisoned whole societies. No
imp of course it's not voluntary. The
the pope of Rome as I call the bishop of
Rome Mr. Ratzi Haratza has recently
said, "Actually, it's worse than that.
Only my version of Christianity can get
you salvation. There is only one way. I
say it in Georgetown. There's only one.
You presumably don't believe that
because you're an Anglican, but on what
basis do you tell the Pope that he's a
heretic? Once you grant this stuff, once
you start with this white noise chat
about redemption, where is it going to
end?" Of course, there's nothing
voluntary about it. And I must say the
book of Revelation seems one of the less
uh voluntary texts of the it all it does
is look forward gleefully to apocalypse
um to the to the passing away of this
veil of uh tears and to our ultimate
destruction. This is morality. I don't
think so.
Well, I think if I could just build on
that because I think I think a very
interesting line of discussion has
opened up here. Um number one um I think
um I I do challenge your reading of the
book of revelation. The book of
revelation is very much saying to
Christians who are being persecuted for
their faith by a secular authority who
are in effect being being uh victimized
that this is not the way it's going to
remain that one day there will be an
inversion of the world order. It's in
effect an encouragement to those who are
suffering. And again, I make my point
again that Christianity is saying, look,
here is an offer. It is yours to accept
or not. I I take it you do not believe
in hell or anything like that. And
therefore, I I don't see what the
difficulty is for you personally. It is
not about imposition.
But you're in the right church, but the
wrong peew. I mean, I've Yes, I've of
course I've emancipated myself from all
that nonsense. I I wish you would do,
too. I'm saying what is the belief? And
when you say it's voluntary, it's up to
you. It's entirely optional. I don't
think it's any more optional than
Abraham saying to his son, "Do you want
to come for a long and gloomy walk?"
Because God seems to be telling me to do
something that had better be moral.
Otherwise, it would have to be said that
God had taken a perfectly normal person
and asked him to commit an atrocity.
Now, where else could that have come
from? And millions of people every year
celebrate this act of sedo massochism as
if it proved that God loved us so much
that he'd make us kill our own children.
And then he decides to love us so much
he'll kill one of his own. You said in a
debate with Richard Dawkins, I I have it
down. You said the great thing about God
is he knows what it's like to lose a
son. Now I just want you ladies and
gentlemen to ponder that expression for
just a moment. First, it's
self-evidently if the story is the true,
which I don't think it is, it's
self-evidently not the case. Even in the
narrative, he doesn't lose a son. He
lends one.
He doesn't offer one because no one's
demanded it. There's no problem that has
so far been identified in the human
species that demands a human sacrifice.
For what problem? For what ill is this a
cure? There's no argument. There's no
evidence. No, it's imposed. I'm doing
this because the prophets said I would
and I'm I'm going to have the boy
tortured to death in public to fulfill
ancient screeds of of Bronze Age
Judaism. But but wait, I don't want it.
I don't need it. I don't feel better for
it. I feel very uneasy about it. Well,
that's a pity because then you're going
to be cast into eternal fire.
This is no way to talk. I don't like to
be addressed in that tone of voice. So I
have to to all this I have to return a
slight nonserv if I may be so bold and
take my chances morally that that's the
more ethical thing to do. Don't want
torture. Don't want human sacrifice.
Don't want authoritarian bloodletings,
smoking temples and altars, incantations
of priests and around all. Don't want
it. can't think of a single thing it
will make better about our
Let me see if Professor
Veil of Tears. Oh yes, by all means.
Yes. Thanks. Sorry if I bang on a bit
about this.
No, don't worry. I'll interrupt. Go
ahead.
I don't want those things either and I
think that nobody here really would. I
think that one can interpret these
things in these ways. You you do and I
appreciate that. But I want to make the
point there are many other ways of
looking at these within the Christian
tradition. And that it's very important
to say that um you know there are other
ways of making sense of this and I think
we need to get some of them on the
table. For me uh and again I'd want to
emphasize this point uh the Christian
vision of God is not a God who leaves us
on our own but a God who chooses to
enter into time and history where we are
in order to make possible for us if we
want it a transformation of our
situation
after 98,000 years. I don't see any
of
extension.
I don't see any need to say this needs
to torture anything like that. If it
does, that needs to be challenged. But
the point for me is this is about
something being offered to us with
enormous potential for change.
Let me ask a question of Mr. Hitchens.
As someone who considers himself a high
primate,
it seems strange that you would consider
loving and witnessing the truth an
obligation. Would you explain how a
soulless primate can have any
obligations?
Well, it's a it's a a question one often
asks oneself. U for example, why do I
care? You know, um why do I mind about
other primates? I think I know that
because I hope that they will at the
very lowest I say because I hope they'll
mind about me in return. I mean, I'll
give you an example.
Why should they?
Why indeed? Um why does one do the right
thing or one hopes is the right thing
when no one's looking? Why does a Muslim
cab driver go to all the trouble to come
back to my apartment building when I
didn't have his number to return the
large sum of money I left on his back
seat? Said it was his religious duty.
But if I allow him to say that that's
his religious duty, what am I going to
say when he says it's his religious duty
to veil his wife or to blow himself up
um or to impose Sharia law? If you grant
it once, you have to grant the whole
thing. You can't do it alakart. Now I'll
give you an example from my old
socialist days. It'll bring the moisture
to the eyes of Dr. McGrath as well. Um
it was our favorite example, Professor
Peter Townsen's book on the gift
relationship. You remember why does the
British National Health Service never
run out of blood though you're not
allowed to charge for it. You have to
give it free. Never runs out of blood
because people like to give blood. They
want to feel useful. I like to do it. I
like it very much. Um, and I'm not a
massochist and I don't particularly like
being stuck, but I lose I like the way
that I lose someone gains a pint and I
don't lose one because I replenish it
quite quickly. Someone's instantly
better off. I haven't had to abnigate
myself by giving anything away.
Um, I like the fact that I'm helping
someone who I don't know. And as it
happens, I have a very rare blood group
indeed. And one day I'm going to have to
count on other people feeling the same
way. So human solidarity will get you
quite a long way ethically and there's
every reason why that should be in our
genes in our in our so to speak
inscribed. We wouldn't have got this far
if we didn't have these qualities. To
say we couldn't have them without
celestial permission seems to me to be
simply slavish.
And if we're all made in God's image,
then how come there are so many
sociopaths who don't notice the
existence of other people or so many
psychopaths for whom it's a positive
pleasure to inflict pain?
None of these all of these are easily
easily solved questions. If you make the
assumption of evolution by natural
selection and consider us as an animal
species, if you detect the finger of God
in all this, you invent myriad problems
that do not exist and cannot be solved
and that are actually a waste of our
mentality.
Alhams razor disposes of all the
supernatural assumptions that have ever
been made. We have better and more
elegant explanations for everything that
happens in our cosmos and in our biology
now. And if we'd had these to begin
with, there would never have been a
foothold for the death cult of
Christianity or Islam or Judaism.
Well, perhaps I could just take us on
the stage further. I mean, I think what
you you seem to be saying is that we're
able to offer a a complete scientific
account of things which eliminates any
place for the transcendent. And I I want
if I could
my sorry if I may not I wanted to speak
to this and I will later, but the
transcendent and the numinous are very
important. They're not to be confused
with the supernatural. Um I I would want
to say that the word transcendent means
a number of different things and
certainly the supernatural can be one of
those but it can also mean some sort of
sense that there is something beyond us
and I don't think we need to use the
word supernatural. I'm thinking of Iris
Murdoch's idea in for example the
sovereignty of good which he tries to
posit something which um which though
beyond us nevertheless elicits a
response to us for example in trying to
articulate what the the notion of good
actually is. And it seems to me that
that science actually is extremely good
at clarifying the relationship between
the different levels of material order.
But when it comes to questions of
meaning or value, which might well
include transcendent meanings, it
actually doesn't really help us very
much. And so I would want to suggest
that actually science offers us one
level of explanation of the way things
are, but it does not prevent us from
adding extra levels of meaning on top of
that. And it seems to me that that is
one of the reasons why one can talk
about the dynamic interaction between
science and religion because they are
certainly engaging with the same reality
but they're offering different
perspectives or different levels of
engagement with that same thing.
You have a response to that a bit?
No.
Okay.
I think it should stand alone.
Um, no. Next I would say.
Yes. Okay. Uh, Professor McGrath, here's
the next question. You said that acts of
violence in the name of God come from
the fringes of religion. But God has
ordered many acts of violence for
instance in the Old Testament that
killed thousands. Is God on the fringe
of his own religion? Well, clearly the
way that um question is phrased actually
in effect answers itself. Uh I would not
wish to um uh set out quite like that
and therefore I'd like to try and um
offer an answer which goes like this.
Um, I'm a Christian and obviously I read
the Old Testament and one of the
questions is how on earth do I make
sense of those passages which seem to at
least on the face of it authorize um
acts of killing and so on which I
personally find very very um
disagreeable. And for me as a Christian
as I was saying a fundamental theme here
is that Christ is the fulfillment of the
law and the prophets. In other words,
not simply that he brings to fulfillment
their intentions, but that in some way
he is authorized to show us what these
are really meant to be like. In other
words, that there are other
interpretations, but these are
relativized or placed to one side
because of who Jesus is and what he did.
And therefore, I would want to look at
the Old Testament through this lens and
say that I believe it allows us to to
look at these passages and challenge the
most natural interpretations.
For me, one of the great themes of
Christian history is the idea that of
what you might call progressive
revelation. That we gain a firmer
understanding of what God is like as
time goes on. And above all, for
example, through the revelation of
Christ. And again, whether you're a
Protestant or a Catholic, you might talk
about the uh continued guidance of the
Holy Spirit or indeed continued
reflection on the part of the church.
But the engagement of scripture is
dynamic and ongoing. It's not really
something that that's been ended in the
past.
Okay. For Mr. Hitchens, why would Sorry,
can I comment on that just briefly or
was I not invited to do so?
Please do.
Don't let me. Well,
I mean, some of the early Christian
church fathers, I think you'll correct
me if I'm wrong. I think Marian was was
among them. Did contemplate starting a
movement that was just basically
Christian based on what was understood
or believed about the apparent
very opaque brief life of Jesus of
Nazareth and not inherit not force upon
themselves as St. Paul had suggested uh
the ghastly gruesome uh Jewish books of
the Old Testament to start again. I
think they might have done better to to
do that because having decided that they
inherit all that they do inherit in
particular the the most wicked and
immoral doctrine of the of the lot which
is original sin in Adam and the
expeation by the sacrifice of children
human sacrifice of children than which I
don't think any morally normal person
can think of anything more repulsive
so that it is I'm afraid innate that
there is to be cruelty and violence and
fanaticism
u in in the religion and the the
responsibility is not expableable
bizarrely. I mean many people think well
the Old Testament is true. It's full of
bloodletting. It recommends
genocide, extermination, slavery or
dispossession all these things. The New
Testament is more meek and mild. I've
given you my comment on that. It it's
the first time that hell is mentioned.
But it is in the Christian version that
another whole different kind of
immorality is proposed. worst kind of
immorality yet, which is the the wicked
idea of non-resistance to evil and the
and the deranged idea that we should
love our enemies.
Nothing nothing could be more suicidal
and immoral than that. We we have to
defend ourselves and our children and
our civilization from our enemies. We
have to learn to uh to educate ourselves
in a in a cold steady dislike of them
and a determination to encompass their
destruction. Who who here heard anyone
after September the 11th in holy orders
actually say, "Oh, well, we must turn to
love these people." Did they dare say
that then? Of course not. They saw the
emptiness and the futility and the
immorality of what they would have been
caught saying if they'd even tried it.
Um, we have to bear all this stuff in
mind. This is not moral teaching at all.
We have to survive our enemies. You have
to learn to destroy them. Especially
because they too are motivated by the
hectic maniacal ideas of monotheism
which really seeks and yearns for the
destruction of our planet and the end of
days. That's why it's not moral. That's
why we have to outgrow it and defeat it.
I I have a feeling you want to comment.
Well, I'd like to comment. Um first of
all I do not think that the principle of
trying to love your enemies uh leads to
these things at all. I think it if
anything leads to the obviation of
violence. It does not mean we have to
ignore moral issues. It means that we
see these people as human beings as
someone who in effect be bears same
flesh and blood as us. And it may mean
that we want to try and resolve the
issue saying we believe you are wrong.
But it's also trying to avoid
dehumanization. And it seems to me this
is this really is a very significant
question I'd like to pursue that I mean
I may have misunderstood you but what
you seem to be proposing is to see your
enemies in dehumanized form. And for me
as a Christian I I could not do that
because I have to see even my enemies as
those who God has made and loved. And
therefore even though I I I may dislike
them intensely I have to show that love
and compassion towards them and see them
as human beings not as the other the
enemy. I I I think really there there's
more to this idea.
There's no need to dehumanize people who
had set on dehumanizing themselves and
on the murder of others and on a cult of
death. There's no need to de they've
done all that for themselves.
But what
like someone once accused me of trying
to assassinate his character and I said,
"No, your character committed suicide a
long time ago." Um they've done the
dehumanizing work for us. Thanks. And
they are fellow primates. Of course,
there's no question of redefining them
as another species. But there is a very
important question of whether we intend
to assert our own values as superior to
theirs and is worth defending against
them. And Christianity with the sickly
relativism that you've stressed so often
this evening disarms us for this very
important struggle. That's why the
archbishop of Canterbury is this week
groveling at the feet of uh of the
Müllers in Iran and saying we should
leave them alone in the must try not to
hurt their feelings as he groveled to
the feet of Saddam Hussein as actually
every Christian church has been doing in
the recent past saying well you know fa
faith is better than um no faith any
faith is better than none. They all
agreed to condemn Salman Rushi for
blasphemy rather than the people who
tried to kill him for money for writing
a novel for example. They all condemn
the Danish cartoons because blasphemy
against any faith is an offense to all.
Could I interrupt you here on this?
Okay. Well, this is very serious, ladies
and gentlemen. This stuff could kill
you. Okay.
Yes. Chris, I've heard you yourself at
one of my own conferences expound at
great length on the Christian just war
at the Christian just war tradition. You
seem to have left that whole rich
tradition out of what you just I think
the Christian just war tradition is is a
nonsensical tology. It says you can only
go to war when you're when you're sure
you're in the right, when you're sure
you can win, when you're sure the the
violence is going to be proportional and
so on. You can't know any of this.
Aquinus couldn't have known it. Nor
could the later
thinkers about it like Grocious. They
couldn't have known. They said, "Would
wouldn't it be nice? It's it's just
wishful thinking." Again, I know a just
war when I see one, and we're engaged in
one now, and our faith-based forces are
of no as much use as the Pope's bulls in
this struggle.
Well, we're getting a little off course
here, but u
I know
I had a feeling it might come up.
I wanted this to come up.
You know, we've uh we've actually gone
overtime and I feel like we could stay
till about uh 10:00, but uh
I'm not in a hurry. I got no
My mission statement is I won't go till
if anyone can claim that I didn't answer
a question. So,
well, there are a lot of people here.
Well, we I'll be on the steps outside
having a smoke and a miniature.
I uh we've we've g we were going to go
15 minutes over.
Well, it was for you, but uh I'll tell
you what, I'll let you comment on this
and then we'll let Professor Graph make
some final comments and then I think we
can be in agreement. We should do this
again. I think we just got started.
Would you both be agreeable to doing
that?
Sure.
You all would come back, wouldn't you?
Mr. Hitchens,
my daughter saying that. Oh, sorry.
Why would uh uh uh Mr. Hitchens, why
would scientific discoveries about the
origin of the universe obiate the
existence of God?
Well, they don't in and of themselves,
but it I just would submit I I really
will be quick this time and I I know
I've been a little verbose up till now.
Um,
the likelihood that what Edwin Hubble
saw through that telescope, the red
light escaping at speeds that you, none
of us here are capable of really
imagining, the towards the the ultimate
expansion and collapse of the universe
and the the heat death
that that all that happened so we could
be sitting here is to me in the very
very highest degree improbable.
um that a process of evolution by
natural selection just on our own tiny
little planet which in its own tiny
little solar system is the only one on
which life can be supported. Everywhere
else just in our little system all the
other rocks are either much too hot or
much too cold to support life as is much
of our planet which we know has for a
long time been not recently either on a
climatic knife edge and which is still
cooling only one and on this planet
99.8% 8% of every species that ever
evolved died out. This is an
extraordinary way, I think, to make sure
that homo sapiens comes to Georgetown.
Um, it it is the mo only the most
extraordinarily self-centered species
could imagine that all this was going on
for our sake. That's why I don't like
people saying that their religious faith
is modest or humble. It's the reverse.
It's unbelievably solypistic.
And that's why you get people apparently
abject, much too abject for my taste.
Like Mother Theresa. Oh, I'm so humble I
can hardly bother to feed myself, you
know, but out of my ways I'm on a
mission for God. No, this is arrogance.
As a matter of fact, and it claims to
know what it cannot know. I could say
that Einstein was right when he said,
"The miracle is of the natural order.
The miracle is there are no miracles."
Understand this paradox. The natural
order doesn't interrupt itself. The sun
doesn't stand still at midday. God
doesn't catch a child as the kid falls
out of a window or and he will heal
lepers randomly. And none of that ever
happens. The miracle is there's a force
that holds it all together. That's
consistent and unvaring. That's
wonderful. Okay, he may show there's a
mind somewhere in the universe, but to
say we know what that mind is
to move from the deest position to the
theist one. We know what God wants us to
eat or not eat. We know in what
positions he wants us to make love or
with whom. We know his instructions on
is an unbelievable piece of conceit.
And in my opinion, it's the reason why
um I may be a very poor spokesman for my
side of this argument, but I think
anyone who thinks about it has to vote
that given the amount of uncertainty
that we have and given how much we now
know, how much more we know about how
little we know, the definition of
education and our civilization. The only
people who have to lose in this argument
are those who say they do know and who
claim, "Yes, I do know what God wants. I
do think he sent a son. I do think there
was a resurrection. I do think there's
salvation. Claiming to know things they
cannot conceivably know. I mean, to put
it in a mild way, if Dr. McGrath has
such extraordinary sources of
information as the ones he's claimed to
have available to him, I can't
understand why he's only occupying a
chair at Oxford University.
You should be with with the knowledge
you've got, you should be a real mech.
And uh I'm afraid you don't know any
more than I do about whether there was
ever a Jesus of Nazareth, a
resurrection, a miracle, a virgin birth,
or anything. You couldn't know any more
than I do. You can't. You just claim
that you do. I'm afraid that that that
means I think that you you lose this
round. Well,
if I could respond
um to deal with the first point before
we came on to that second one, I don't
think it's at all so to say let's
reflect on why we are here. Let's
reflect on why there is something rather
than nothing. It's to ask a very
important question about how the
universe came into being. Why is there
something rather than nothing? I mean
for Vickinstein that was a hugely
important question and it seems to me to
be entirely right to answer that
question or at least to try and answer
it on my own status. I mean I appreciate
very much the the compliment you pay. Uh
but I I'm simply making the point that
all of us are interpreters of what we
observe. I made it very very clear. I
was not making any claims to special
knowledge. I was looking at what I saw
what others say. I interpret it in this
way. I claim no privilege. I say it is
my judgment that this is the best
explanation and it means this and I'm
open to challenge on this as you have
challenged me but I am not claiming
anything special. I'm saying there are
public events there. They are open to
interpretation as they were at the time
and the issue really is what is the best
explanation of those and I think that is
a legitimate debate. I've made it very
clear what my conclusion is. I've made
it clear it is a matter of faith in that
I cannot prove this. But I've all
suggested that whatever judgment we make
on this is actually a matter of faith.
And therefore, while I'm very happy to
be challenged on this, I think I'm still
entitled to say that this seems to me to
be the best way of making sense of it
and live my life out on its basis.
Thank you.
Why don't you go?
Thank you for your ch Thank you for
Michael. Good job, buddy.
Hold it. Hold it. Don't leave yet.
Ladies and gentlemen, uh this uh has
been taped. It's been videotaped.
There'll be a DVD. Uh there will be
there will be it'll be up on the
internet site of the Ethics and Public
Policy Center, we think by sometime next
week. So, we encourage you to go to that
site and if you want to watch it again
or tell your friends about it, feel
free. Uh, again, I want to underline, I
think we ought to do this again.
[Applause]