Ladies and gentlemen, Graham Hancock and
John Anthony West.
Thank
you.
Thank you very much. So, so this is
going to take the form of a conversation
or perhaps an argument. Um, because John
is an argumentative sort of fellow. Uh,
and I guess I am too. Um, uh, but we'll
we'll see how it goes. Now, I I want to
tell you about the first time that I met
John Anthony West. Uh, at that time I
had begun research on my book
Fingerprints of the Gods. and John
Anthony West was one of the main reasons
I began uh work on the possibility of a
lost civilization because there is a lot
of woolly nonsense talked in this area
but a number of people are doing really
serious work and John has been at the
leading edge of that for decades. Uh I
reached out to him and the first time I
met him was in Egypt in 1992
and at that time John was leading one of
his guided tours of Egypt. Let me say
now that if any of you, and you should
be, are thinking about making a journey
to Egypt, make it with John Anthony West
because it is an utter revelation.
An utter revelation.
[applause]
This is a man who has immersed himself
in the mystery of ancient Egypt for
decades. and and he shares that mystery
and that enthusiasm and gives you
insights into places that otherwise with
with uh other people you would just pass
by and not realize what they meant. And
so I I met John actually on a cruise
ship on the Nile by pre-arrangement and
then I joined your tour for for a day.
And uh it was an incredible experience.
It really it really was. and you know to
get this uh [snorts] wisdom shared about
Egypt and and the love and the passion
for Egypt is something that nobody else
can replicate. So if you're going to
Egypt go with John. Okay. [laughter]
Okay. How much was that?
Um actually
they supply us each with these dildos
and I don't know what the hell they're
worth. Um the but a couple of things.
One is I I usually start off a lecture
and this was this venue here with Graham
lecturing and then us having a
conversation was the the the brainstorm
of one of my friends who'd been on an
Egypt trip with me which is really good
because otherwise you have two
high-powered non-stop talkers one after
the other and it gets to be exhausting.
Everyone would be falling asleep by the
time they got to me. But this way now we
can go back and forth and tell jokes and
have fun and stuff like that.
And I just want to say that with Egypt,
the difference between Egypt and so many
of the places that Graham was just
talking about
is that it's only in Egypt that we have
that much of that lost civilization
still available to us. And I usually
start a lecture off. I won't now, but
I'll just tell you what I usually
started off with, which is that Egypt is
like sex. And that gets everybody's
attention. But why is it just like sex?
Well, you can read all about it, and
that's informative. And you can look at
pictures, and that's informative in a
different way. But you don't actually
understand it at all until you
experience it. Period. And Egypt is like
that. And the ancient civilizations are
like that. It's possible to go to great
sacred architecture around the globe in
India the great mosques of of Islam and
uh what else
all of these other places Graham has
gone to go you don't really get that
sense of a sacred because yet because
it's only
less than 5% excavated and now it's all
loused up they've covered it over and
it's near enough to the Syrian border
where they can throw gren grenades aids
at you. So, I'm I'm all for taking
chances for archaeology, but not not
those kinds of chances. Anyhow, uh Egypt
Egypt is the two weeks there is a
is an immersion course. It's like a PhD
course in what civilization once was.
And it it's only I won't say only by
doing that because I got led into it
before I got into Egypt, but it is you
understand what civilization once was
and the dramatic difference between what
was civilization and what's now
laughably called progress. And it's only
in Egypt that you can get that. Nowhere
else. I mean, everywhere else has a
temple here and a monument there and so
forth and so on, [snorts] but nothing on
a dayby-day, hourby- hour basis that
gives you that. So, if you think this is
a plug for taking my trip, it is. But
that said, unfortunately, I'm I'm pretty
much the only um pretty much the only
wheel in town in this regard. That, as
Graham said, there a lot of unicorns out
there that are busy feeling the energy
and sniffing the crystals. And I I don't
have anything against that as such,
except you come back not understanding
Egypt. And the the the difference is
that
um there are only a handful of people
that understand symbolist Egypt, that's
Scholola Dubich's Egypt, well enough to
transmit it. And I happen to be the only
one that leads tours. So there's no
competition. It's easy. All you need
anyway. All you have to know is that not
to listen to the prostitutes of the of
CNN or NBC or Fox or anything like has
these wonderful phrases that he coins,
the prostitutes,
the quacademics.
And the quacademics. Yeah. Well, I have,
see, I I I started out not as not as a
scholar. I'm a scholar by default.
Actually, I started out as a novelist,
playwright, mostly satire, and I I still
do that. It's my favorite hat to wear.
But most of the time, for a variety of
reasons, I find myself wearing my
Egyptological path helmet. Now, that's
enough about me. Well, um, actually the
first thing I want to ask, I think it's
I think it's really important that the
legacy of John Anthony West is preserved
for the future, that history does not uh
gloss you over and forget about your
name. So my first question is actually,
what are you doing for yourself? You're
doing a lot for all the rest of us, but
what are you doing for yourself? And to
make sure that your legacy is is
preserved.
I don't I don't actually give a damn
about that. Um, see my legacy car only
only other people give a damn. John just
doesn't care.
That's their job. Um, [laughter]
the Who is it you had up there that was
regretting that it took him so long to
get to get recognized that there was no
one left to gloat over?
Oh, yeah. Jay Hall.
Well, I figure I'm still around for a
while.
Yeah. and and even if I outlive them,
not by that much and apppropo to what
you were talking about and the last few
few times I've heard you Graham is that
we're close. It's it's getting close
now.
Yeah.
Um I don't think they feel the heat yet.
They don't understand the situation. And
I sometimes tell them that when they get
certain kinds of opposition, it makes me
feel the way I imagine a cannibal
chieftain must feel watching a boatload
of missionaries approach. It's
[clears throat] I salivate.
Yes.
And another another image I came up
with. It's it's like a they're living
they are living like a little town in
Russia around 1220. And every once in a
while this crazy horseman comes wheeling
in a cloud of dust, you know, out from
the out from the east telling them they
better pray pay tribute because in a
couple of years this wild man is going
to come and ravish the tear down the
walls and ravish the women and murder
all the men and they want he wants
tribute right then and there and they
just send them on his way and three
years later the great con is at the
gates and that's exact exactly what he
does.
So, in a in in a very real sense, uh
archaeology, even though they may not
know it yet, are under siege. They're
facing Genghaskhan.
They they they don't know it, and I'll
be around to gloat.
So, John, you've um you've written two
two books that that that I'm very
familiar with, which is Serpent in the
Sky and The Traveler's Key to Ancient
Egypt. And again, another plug, The
Traveler's Key to Ancient Egypt. forget
about all the other guide books to
Egypt. The Traveler's Key to Ancient
Egypt is the book to go around Egypt
with and it was the book that I went
around Egypt with on my first journeys
and I'm eternally grateful for that. Any
other books in the works? Any any other
thoughts?
Well, the other one that I've just
published which is edited by me. It's
not written by me, but it it's apppropo
your talk actually where what you what
we you didn't get into and which is more
more my province than yours is the
philosophy. Yes. behind this because
yes, ancient civilization it's very nice
and all of that and it's really good to
know that what we call progress is what
I call shiny barbarism but it doesn't
that in and of itself does not tell you
what a true civilization is and a true
civilization
my own definition is is um what occurs
when a when people not everybody it
can't be everybody I don't think that
the universe is constructed in such a
way that everybody participates in at
that level. But when enough people
understand that they're here for a
purpose and that purpose is spiritual
for lack of a better word or divine for
lack of another better word. Um it's
only then that a civilization arises and
replaces barbarism under whatever name,
smartphones, dump phones, whatever the
hell they are. All of those things are
quite unnecessary. what's necessary is
something that
anchors you to a true philosophy. And
that's the the very interesting thing
about this new book. I you know it was
on David was on your author of the month
and this is good friend of mine who
financed actually our own trip to go
leapy a few years ago
and uh and then was working he was he
was a Christian pastor but a very
unusual Christian. and he actually
practiced it. Very rare. Um, that's
about as rare as an open-minded
scientist or still rarer, a visionary
billionaire with a conscience. I haven't
met any of those yet,
[clears throat] but anyway, David was a
pretty rare bird. And he was doing all
of this very careful scholarship on the
NDE, the near-death experience. There's
a lot of material that's been written on
them by people who have been through
that through that tremendous experience
and without [snorts] going into a long
palava he was collecting a lot of
information and I was saying to him we
didn't we were good friends but not that
close friends and at a distance and I
was telling him David you got to make a
book of this this is he he was going at
it in a particular way of systematically
go
David Solomon
David Solomon yes that's right
systematic ally going at it in such a
way that it wasn't just his personal
experience. He had his own kinds of
personal spiritual experiences, but it
made sense of it in a kind of way. And
my sense of it was sort of like with our
work.
We're on the cusp. It's it's close now.
Anyway,
David was putting all of this material
together and said, "Well, I'm not a
writer. I'm can do it." And then all of
a sudden, he was started. He was a
Taichi apart from being a Christian
pastor, he was a high level Taichi
practitioner
and a bonsai master. He'd studied
bonesai, that wonderful Japanese way of
torturing trees into being works of art.
But I I even David got me understanding
more about bonsai. That's how I always
saw it from the outside. We said, "No,
no, the tree has to allow itself to be
treated that way." Very interesting
philosophy. No, really not getting this
time. Um, anyway, David then started
losing his balance and getting and he
was a physical, you know, guy
and and a taichi practitioner and that's
dependent upon balance and he started
losing his balance and the way the
upshot of it was that he was diagnosed
with a glyobblastoma. Glyoma it's
called, it's what Ted Kennedy died of.
um with a 100% fatal brain cancer. And
then he realized that he had a mission
that he was doing all of this work on
NDEs, but he needed a writer. He was he
was an excellent and meticulous
um scholar, but he wasn't a writer.
Being a writer is something else again.
So he drafted me in and was I I owe I
owed him a big favor anyway. But I also
recognized that this was something that
was
missing as it were from the philosophy
uh the spiritual philosophy as expounded
by I'm I'm in the Gergev society that
it's one way of expressing it. It's not
the only way, but all of the tra the all
of the great traditions, religious
traditions, spiritual traditions have
this as a background and the experience
as it were the the the NDE,
what that actually is when you when you
look at enough of them and understand
what they are, it's not a hallucination,
which the quacademics would have us
believe because they want to make sure
that everybody thinks the world is as
meaningless as they experience it. Um,
and it's not uh we don't have to buy
into their rubbish. And the NDE is
actually a few moments of grace of
something over and above what any
spiritual
discipline or experience
can give to you. In other words, it
comes from out of the blue and it
happens
at the point of death. um or that can be
one time at which it happens and the
power of the NDE in the way that David
puts it together
um is that it it's it's understood that
this is available to all of us. We don't
know about all of us actually. I mean
David doesn't get into that. There are
some really malevolent people. Do they
have it too? Does Dick Cheney have it or
Donald Trump? I don't know. I hate to
think so because I'd like to think that
there is something like divine justice
but um
most of us if you're in this room let's
say should have left long ago if you
don't don't agree with it but most of us
in this room are in it because you think
you're going to learn something or
another that's valuable to you rather
than watch CNN at home or Fox News god
help you even worse the so David had all
of this material and I helped him put it
into into perspective. But in the doing
of it, I realized that this was the sort
of thing, not necessarily the thing
itself, but it's the sort of thing that
could tip the balance that that that's
readily accessible. Graham is talking
about a lot of science in there and so
are we when we're doing our geology. Um,
symbolist Egypt is not for everyone.
Gerjaf is not for everyone. The
hard-nosed hardcore Zen and and Hinduism
and Islam really is special stuff. But
this NDE experience is something that if
everybody understood that that was in
store for them, even even if it were at
the end, of course, those who don't come
back to tell the tale don't come back
and you don't know what their
experiences are. So there are a lot of
there's a lot of spaces left there. But
it's the sort of thing that everyone
I would say everyone can resonate to.
Everyone can resonate to and I have had
a near-death experience myself. So I
totally resonate to it. You
have. Yeah.
Yeah. I was almost killed with an
electric shock and I left my body and
came saw myself from up above. Yeah.
Absolutely. I didn't get the tunnel of
light and the relatives saying you know
it's not your time but I I left my body
and it about the age of 17 and it made a
profound impression upon me
which which has lasted to this day
um which um has the that kind of
experience you're absolutely right that
kind of experience multiplied out enough
people speak about this it brings the
whole materialist reductionist paradigm
down in ruins that that consciousness
cannot be an epiphenomenon of brain
activity there's something else deeper
going on. And that's I mean a thing that
we talk about all the time from various
either scientific or philos excuse me or
philosophical
standpoints but not that experiential
one. That's why I felt it was worth
taking a year and a half out of my life
to work on that book with him. And he
died just as it got published. He was he
was a Christian. He he prayed that he'd
be given enough time to get the book
out. And that's just what he got.
And the book is called
The book is called The Dead Saint,
a Zen Well, he was good at titles. He
wasn't a writer, but he was good at
titles. A Zen Journey through the
Christian Afterlife.
Right. Right.
I have copies back there.
Great.
And if you're wondering why that's back
there with when, you know, my specialty
is Egypt. That's why because it doesn't
seem as though it's connected, but it it
brings home that experience that is
our goal.
And wouldn't you say, I mean, I would
say it is is connected because I mean,
the ancient Egyptians were a people who
put their best minds to work for 3,000
years on considering the mystery of
death. This is um Oh, in that way,
surely central to ancient Egyptian
culture.
Absolutely. talk about the ancient
Egyptian judgment scene a little bit
perhaps.
Well, yeah. I mean that's is um this
becomes
the whole of judgment. Um I mean in
Christianity it's there too but in a in
in a simplified version. Yeah. The the
when you die you you go you you you get
tried in the great court of Ozirus your
heart which is the seat of conscience.
And now in fact, it's very interesting
when scientists recognize what everybody
else knew 4,000 5,000 years ago. Um, the
heart in fact does is not just a muscle
that pumps blood. It has its own
thinking center which those of you who
are familiar with Geraf will know from
his work and the work of his his his own
students. And and so the the heart is
weighed against the feather of Mahat.
Mahat represents cosmic equilibrium,
justice, etc. And if if the heart then
it gets complicated. If the heart has to
be lighter than that feather for you to
pass on to the next um to the next
stage, which is probably reincarnation,
there are two two stages. It gets very
complicated in in the ancient Egyptian
death
ritual or death understanding of death.
And the one is that you you you come the
book of the it's always called the book
of the book of the dead. It's technical
um it's actual translation is the book
of coming forth by day. It's the book of
new life which I take to be
reincarnation. And then there's a second
path described by the genius with the
unpronouncable name Marshwall Dubovich.
Um as the as the path of Horus and Horus
becomes the Christ and the whole thing
Egypt slides into Christianity
almost seamlessly minus the science. The
science the science mostly gets lost
along the way. And even there, if you
read the right books and you look into
it from a particular angle, you see that
even the science was never entirely
lost.
And there's the sense uh in that in that
judgment scene, it's not as moralistic
as it sounds. Um there's the there's the
sense that uh we've been given a
precious gift to live and to live in a
human body and and what have we done
with it actually? What did you do with
that with that? That's the one of the
things I get from the Well, yeah. And
actually, actually, the the problem
nowadays is or one one of the many
problems is that it's next to impossible
to
the way I put it always is it's next to
impossible to make a living out of your
own creativity. And if you manage to do
it by hook or by crook, somehow or
another, you pay a big price. And if
you're not doing that, if what you if
your daily life is spent at something
you hate and you watch the ads say when
you how to retire at 35 and that's what
you want, [sighs and gasps]
you're on the wrong path. But given what
given what we have what we have facing
us, I have I don't know if I talked
about it the last time we were on there
with the the five cowboys. You know,
everyone knows the four horsemen of the
apocalypse, right? Those who don't know
about the four horsemen of the
apocalypse, raise their hand. Everyone
knows or some people are shy. Um anyway,
the four horsemen are death, [sighs]
sorry, wait are are war, that's it. War,
pestilence, famine, and death. And
actually, if you stop to think about it,
that's kind of peculiar because the only
one that would seem to be under human
under human control in any way, shape,
or form is is war. And the rest, more or
less, are beyond our capacity, and death
will come to us all. But I have the five
cowboys of apocalypse 2.0. And they are
in turn and not necessarily in that
order of of of awfulness uh capitalism,
patriotism, democracy, technology and
entertainment. This makes me lots of
friends as you can imagine in the
quadeademic society. [applause]
Yeah. [cheering]
Anyway,
it is next to impossible to escape. It
is next to impossible to escape those
five horsemen or five cowboys I should
say. And bearing them in mind is useful
because you can see where they're in
control in one way or another and
controlling your life and mine and
everyone.
Incredibly mind controlled world that we
live in. It's
subtle. It's clever. And it's everywhere
and it's malignant. Absolutely
malignant. And it separates us from
spirit and and this surely is one of the
great lessons that ancient Egypt has to
teach us.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. And the other the other
civilizations as well. So
really this is
an interesting Thank you, Jonathan. um
an interesting way of of doing this the
venue because you present the ancient
civilization or the the bones of it
anyway and the ongoing work and the very
solid ongoing ongoing material that we
have to work with and then when we we
talk about it we put about we put it in
context without me doing the Egypt side
of things.
This is good. I like this.
Well, let's get uh let's get into this.
I mean, the uh I I associate you more
than any other individual with the the
quest to rewrite history.
That's what you're all about as far as
far as I'm concerned. And you've been
right there in the front lines for a
very very very long time. But
remind me,
how did it start?
How did how did that where did it start
for you?
Started early, actually. I was never one
of these genius kids, you know, that you
watch these tiresome little creatures on
television. Every week there's some
eight-year-old kid who's standing on his
head playing B Beethoven's violin sonata
while he's eating an ice cream cone and
they never hear of him again. Thank God.
And
some other tiresome little girl 8 years
old singing Vsutely
perfectly. So I was never one of those.
But what I was what I was was I was in
retrospect I was I I was psychologically
precocious and I knew at the age of 13
or so which is a long time ago that I've
been brought that I'd been born
How old are you now, John? If you care
to share that with with us. How how old
are you now?
You know perfectly well how old are you?
84. [laughter]
And I'm not telling
84. You got to catch you got a ways to
go to catch up to me. 84.
Anyway,
the
I understood that I'd been born into a
lunatic asylum and it was very very
lonely. And by the time I was 19, I knew
what I wanted to do. I wanted to be the
little boy who says the emperor has no
clothes. And I did that uh to my own
satisfaction. I started out writing
novels and plays and scripts and uh
successfully in that they were published
or produced mostly anyway. Um, but they
never made me any money, which is
probably a good thing in a way because
I'd be sitting at home in a McMansion
somewhere or another, not driving all
the way into New York in this horrible
rain talking to a few hundred people for
a few bucks.
But seriously,
that stayed with me. And then I learned
to my dismay that being the little kid I
wrote a story. What was it? I forget
where it was published. Was it Nova?
That was the magazine put out by Gioni
in in the 70s. Good magazine. Um, and
was called The Emperor's New Clothes
Continued. And it's what happens when
the Emperor gets to back to the palace.
And all of this the the wheels of empire
are put into motion. And everybody gets
together to prove that the empire that
the emperor's new clothes are real. And
everybody in the whole empire conspires
or takes happily engages in the
conspiracy
either design well should I say
designing [snorts] producing marketing
and advertising the emperor's new
clothes and the little kid is by a
philosophical ruse which is absolutely a
testament to what modern fossil
philosophy has become is declared a
non-person who doesn't exist. and
therefore cannot be disproved. And the
emperor's new clothes are real, but the
little child doesn't exist. And in the
end, there's even an upside to that
because when winter comes, only he stays
warm. So anyway, that was my parable of
the emperor's new clothes. And then one
thing led to another living on a visa in
the island.
You you used to live in a bisa southern
Spain. Yes. Um that was
great hippie paradise at a certain
period
in those days. I'm prehippy but it was
it was it was an effort to be there and
get any work done but I did manage one
way or another.
Yeah. Yeah. So tell us about um
Schwaller's one line that
one line. You didn't I was going to
mention that because you made it sound
as though I invented this and I didn't.
I was I got interested first.
Well, my first my first non-fiction book
was called A Case for Astrology. I was
enough interested in it to write a big
book on it, getting putting together all
of the um direct and indirect evidence
that there was something to it.
But [clears throat] that led through
another series of strange
synchronicities or would coincidences
except there aren't coincidences. Uh
that led me to the Gergeef work and then
GI Gerf
GI Gerf. Well, there's only one.
Put up your hands if you haven't heard
of GI Gorge.
Yeah,
a lot
a lot of a lot of people. And I hadn't
heard of GI Gorgef until I met John
Anthony West.
Well, and I didn't read Gf until very
recently, although John continuously
urged me to do so. Finally, I'm about
60% into Billub's tales to his
Did you start off with that?
I did. Yeah. Not with the Spensky.
No.
As as directed.
Well, you [laughter] shouldn't
you shouldn't start off by trying to
read Geraf. It's like taking your first
driving lesson in a Ferrari. You do not
want to do that. Start off with his most
brilliant pupil. Uh PD Uspensky, which
is spelled Ospy.
uh a book called In Search of the
Miraculous, which will talk about
Gergev's system, which was I mean, what
attracted me so much about it, it in a
way it it's like all of the other
genuine spiritual systems. The
difference is that it was designed to be
practiced in the lunatic asylum. And I
knew a lot about the lunatic asylum.
Gerv called it the pain factory. It is
not for everyone. It just plain isn't.
But it's maybe for more people than
given the number of people that raised
their hands not knowing about it and
half of the others were just ashamed to
do that. So that's a lot of people who
didn't had never heard of Gerv. But it
was the difference was when I when I
read him first he was the only person
that I'd come across.
He died in 49. He was the only person
I'd come across who was as contemptuous
of Western civilization as I was. The
difference was that he knew how to live
in it. And I didn't anyway, not very
well.
Yeah.
And I've spent much of the last 40
years, I guess, learning to live in it
reasonably well. Anyway,
learning to live in the lunatic asylum
of our society really
without being one of them.
Without actually being a lunatic. Yeah.
So anyway, that that led me nine years
in a beast had gotten all ruined um and
I knew that when I got there I could see
it happening and uh to begin with and
and I had novel published which is
almost a film on a couple of occasions
but it wasn't and
in doing the first scholarly book the
the case for ast astrology I came across
Ross, the work of this amazing Frenchman
with the unpronouncable name Hares
Dubik.
And
it was his work. I I could tell I had
had to learn French in order to read the
book and then travel all the way across
London every day because it was the only
copy I could find was in the British
Museum library where you couldn't take
books out. So I had to go there to
access it with the dictionary by my
side. And at the end I could understand
schwaller well enough to transmit it.
That's the symbolist Egypt that you
those of you who come on my trip which
this would be about 20 trips I guess
where the people there everyone's going
to come on a trip. Um
this is
this was Schwaller and Schwaller was
talking about ancient Egypt and their
belief I would say not belief but
understanding that their civilization
went back much much much further into
the back into the past and [snorts] he
wrote a long essay on this based mostly
on Greo Roman text that's around the
time of Caesar and and Jesus and he went
into all kinds of texts and so and and
built a case for the for the probability
the probable reality of this older stage
of Egyptian civilization. And then at
the end almost as a throwaway line
he said, "Oh yes, and of course in
French he said the the the great swings
of Giza shows unmistakable signs of
aquatic erosion, water weathering." And
I realized when I read that that that
was the gamecher that all the rest was a
scholarly argument like arguments over
Shakespeare or arguments over a passage
in the Bible. There are better and worse
arguments but none of it really amounts
to science. And um I realized that this
was if you could get if you could get
the backup for it, this could this could
rewrite history in and of itself because
here was the arguably the greatest
statue on the on the face of the earth
and perhaps even more to the point the
temples on either side of it and by now
I' I' I'd been to Egypt anyway I' done a
lot of study and the temples alongside
it which which are built of stones the
ones that is the sort of stones that
Graham was showing. But these are whole
temples full of them. Still in
reasonably good shape. And these stones
weighed 75, 100, 150, 200 tons slotted
in.
If I can just add to that, the the
sphinx is excavated from solid bedrock.
The core body of the Sphinx was created
by cutting a deep trench around it in
the bedrock. But that trench in the
bedrock of the Giza Plateau, they didn't
waste that. They took the material there
and they cut it up into just enormous
blocks of stone, certainly many of them
in excess of a hundred tons and they
raised them up in front of the Sphinx.
So we can say that the Sphinx and the
temples do date from the same period.
And then here's Schwall saying water
erosion on the Sphinx. So, so that I
could see that the that this was all
going to fit together if somebody was if
I could find the geologists to verify
that the Sphinx was weathered by water.
And I had plenty of clues to that. But
I'm not a geologist and nobody would
listen to me. So, it took a long time.
And how much time do we have?
We have an hour.
Oh, you have plenty of time. Um, this is
a fun bit of the story. Um, finally I I
got friendly with with a guy who taught
English at Boston University who had
been teaching English at the University
of Cairo in Egypt. And there he'd got
acquainted with Symbolist Egypt and my
work in Schwaller. And we were having
dinner one day and he said, "Is there
anything I can do from my academic
position to try and get more people
interested in symbolist Egypt?" And
without even thinking twice about it, I
said, "Sure, find me an open-minded
geologist to look into this whole sphinx
theory." And then I laughed and he said,
"What are you laughing?" And I came out
with my line. That's when I invented
that line that finding an open-minded
scientist is like finding a
fundamentalist Christian who loves his
enemies. And he he said, "Wait a minute.
Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait." So he
wouldn't tell me the name of this. He
said, "He's young, but he's got four or
five. He's got four technical books
already published and you don't handle
you stay out of this. You're too
incendiary. Let me handle this. Years
went by and a couple of years. I keep
asking, well, he's very cautious. He's
interested. He he wonders. Anyway, then
finally he said, "Well, listen, he's
he's up for tenure, so he doesn't want
to do anything. He doesn't I can't tell
you his name. But
then I realized of course if you're up
to tenure and they think you're soon as
you say lost civilization everyone
thinks in quacademia everyone thinks ah
the a word and Atlantis. So
[clears throat] I understood that that
was the case. Finally he was he was
actually up for tenure [snorts] and then
he [clears throat] said okay. So we had
a he said let's let's do a uh a talk at
Boston University. So we arranged that
for faculty faculty and uh and friends
and I said okay I will do that. So we
did that in fact and that went over
quite well. Some of the faculty were
shaking their heads and a lot of the
students were thought this is pretty
cool and long and short of it was the
shock. Finally, we wrestled up a few
pennies and got him over there and
initially he just couldn't believe
because it was so obvious that it was
water weathering.
Let's just say a bit a bit about Robert
Shock. So, Robert Shock is a professor
of geology at Boston University,
geology, geoysicist, PhDs and both from
Yale. So, it's about
he's super qualified and and uh also
open-minded
and well he was one of those who was
open-minded. Well, you had to pro him a
bit. And in fact, when he first got into
the This is another point I wanted to
raise with you. When we first got into
the Sphinx enclosure, and I'm not sure
if we got in there legally or used the
what works even better in Egypt is a bit
of baksh and got ourselves in there. And
he looked around. Everybody else sees
the Sphinx, this enormous, unbelievable,
brooding statue looking out at the
horizon. And everybody normally sees the
Sphinx, not Shock. Shock Shock saw the
rocks particularly of the enclosure
wall. And he said, "Wow." He said,
"These rocks look like they're hundreds
of thousands of years old." And then
said, "Don't quote me on that." And
which I wouldn't for years. I would keep
that quiet actually. But that was his
that was his
educated
PhD
geological geoysical
reaction to the enclosure wall of the
swings this fantastic eroded surface and
one thing led to another finally I mean
it we be we would under there under
false circumstances as it were anyway we
couldn't use that as official to break
the news. And so we scratched together a
bit more money. And now this when I go
into this, it'll it'll somewhere in an
autobiography. You can imagine how easy
that's going to be to write because I
can just ramble on forever and just take
out the O's and the O's. Um, and we
we we scratched together enough money
and we got permission to go in there and
use the seismographs. And we didn't get
permission from you.
Permission involves Zahi Hawas.
That sure did involve Zahiwas. Yeah,
that's this is going to be called the
book of Boris actually because between
the two of these guys, I mean that if I
get an opportunity to do do this as a
film script, it's going to be a great
fun because it makes Raiders of the Lost
Arc look [snorts] like I would look like
the
Was Boris say who
Boris. That's right. The famous Boris
say. So Zahi Hawas actually gave
Gangghis Khan the keys to the Sphinx
then.
That's right. He actually [laughter]
did. Yes. Yes, he did. And now we're now
we're okay. Zahi and myself. We buried
the hatch. Very curious character as you
know.
Yes.
And anyway,
so then we broke this news to the to the
because now I had shock behind me to the
GSA. That's Geological Society of
America's annual meeting in San Diego.
This was 91. Was 25 years ago. And
that's the that's you might say it's the
it's the it's it's the Super Bowl of of
geology. Anybody with anything new or
anything good or challenging to say
presents it at the GSA. And Shock and I
spent a whole afternoon at my place
trying to make this sound boring so that
we didn't so we didn't scare them away.
But they still understood that there was
new there was the possibility of of news
through this. And sure enough, we were
the we were the really we were the the
um
we were the head of the show. I mean
with his New York Times and all the
scientific magazines.
I remember the massive coverage.
Yeah. We hadn't even met then yet, but
things could be much older than experts
say.
That's right. And
that really pissed the Egyptologists
off.
Oh, they were furious about this. And in
fact, this is where we come to in the
story. The the science editor of the
Boston Globe, Shock teaches at Boston
University, interviewed us by telephone.
He wasn't there personally. First, he
interviewed Shock. And Shock was his
usual polite [snorts]
academic self who explained carefully
what it was and why they were that
angry. And then he interviewed me and he
said, "Well, you know, the the
geologists are all in favor of this.
what gets them so furious because you
can't imagine what the things that they
were calling us and I said well look
this is about the weathering patterns in
rocks and when it comes to the
weathering patterns in rocks the
opinions of Egyptologists and
archaeologists is no more valid than the
opinions of proctologists and he
published this and
in in the Boston Globe and this did not
have the consiliatory effect upon the
archaeology department of Boston
University. And and there was a a
furious character assassination of
shock. It was really awful by this woman
who doesn't know that we're coming at
her pretty quickly. Um and she wrote
this scandalous character assassination
of Shock. And I said, "Oh, Shock, you
can't let him get away with that. This
is okay. It's an in-house Boston
paper, but still, you know, you can't
let it get away with it. Oh, no. He
said, "Let it slide. It'll pass." I
said, "Well, you do mind if I write
her." And so, she said, "No, you go
ahead. Long as it's just from you and
not from the university." So, I did. And
I said, "You know, I understand you you
guys took umbrage at uh this comp
comparison of Egyptologists and
archaeologists to proctologists." And I
said, "I've got to tell you that the
proctologologist didn't like it either.
They they they they
said their job was to cure sick
at it. Like he didn't like being
compared to them.
[applause]
That that's the end of that chapter, but
it's not the beginning of the next
chapter, which comes along sometime
soon, I think.
Well, I mean, if you're you're there,
it's 1991. You're you're proposing that
probably the single most famous object
of the ancient world, the Sphinx, which
we have been taught in schools and
universities and the media pit, the
Sphinx is supposed to be 4,500 years
old, uh, linked to a known civilization
and culture. And suddenly you're saying,
uh-uh, no, it's thousands of years older
than that. Actually, that throws
everything up into the up into the air.
It's not just a matter of the Sphinx.
Everything we think about the origins of
human civilization is questioned about
that. And a lot of people have vested
interests in preserving the status quo
of the past.
They're they're
break.
It's actually the vested interests are
one on the practical side, on the
professional side, but more on the
personal side. That means that they put
all of their time into these PhDs,
decades probably. They're I mean, let's
face it, as a as an academic, there's
[snorts] there's not much money in it.
And there's very rarely is there any
kind of fame in it. So, the ego of an
academic by and large is concerned with
is is involved with his or her in
certain cases his or her ego. And along
comes a guy from Adela Field and one
gangly tall geologist with all the
credentials from Yale, but this is
Egyptology, not archae archaeology, not
not geology. So what do they care? And
telling them that they're everything
that they've studied and that they're
teaching poor kids who don't know any
better is wrong. So they're not going to
like you very much.
And not only that, but it gets picked up
by the media and and becomes a big story
which they can't just shove under the
carpet. they cannot do anymore. They
could do that in the old days.
Before the internet.
What? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Before the
internet. So, one thing led to another
and we had this Charlton H big video
which was a huge success. Didn't make
any money cuz my partner Boris say, the
famous Boris stole $150,000 out of the
till. Ouch.
So, we couldn't go back to
You're referring to the Mystery of the
Sphinx. Yeah.
NBC
documentary
uh which really took your your work and
spread it to a massive massive audience.
Millions and millions of people who
unfortunately didn't pay anything to
watch it. And what money we
[clears throat] got was stolen by Boris.
Oh dear. To take to get women he was
interested in into bed, which isn't the
worst way to spend money. Boris was not
my money.
Boris was sort of the producer of of the
show.
He was the producer and he was a rally
driver. I remember being terrifyingly
driven up a sandune in Egypt by Boris.
Yeah, he'd been a he'd been a he'd been
in a Formula One driver for Ferrari.
This guy was not physically afraid of
anything um unfortunately and you know
that's where the that's where the money
went and but I'm still without Boris it
wouldn't have happened. I never would
have made this happen.
The documentary had a huge impact. It
was presented by Charlton H as I recall.
Yeah. Yeah.
Not exactly my politics, but
no, but he but he put it he you know he
he put it at that level of of a
superstar.
And he liked it. I mean this is the
funny thing. The righties like these
these kinds of ideas and it's the
lefties in fact who are the who who are
our our actual enemies.
Yes. In in this quest.
Anyway, the so that that made the whole
thing public and it's been going on ever
since. We've been collecting the
evidence and now Gobeclete is the
smoking gun because that they date at
10,000 BC or older. By the way,
it is older because this is not goes for
sure didn't go up in one spell soup and
the part that they've excavated is the
lower part. So, generally speaking, when
they're doing something like this,
whatever they're doing first is the
highest.
And we know that 50 times as much is
still lying under
still there. I didn't think it was that
kind.
What secrets does it have to reveal?
Yes. And and what are the other hills
that are around there like cuz they all
look like hills. That that's another
interesting study coming up there.
So you went to goi when you went with
shock
and what year?
David it must have been what six years
ago before they covered all this stuff
up.
I know.
So it was
put a horrible roof over it now.
What was your what was your feeling when
you got there? When you saw the site,
had a look around. What what what are
you thinking? Put talk us through your
process when you're there.
Well, that that this was correct. I
mean, there was no there was no way in
in which it could be other than it was
the fill was the fill. It had been
filled. You could see that.
They dated the fill. They couldn't they
didn't make a mistake dating the fill to
8,000 BC. And Schmidt [snorts] himself,
who you met, who was, as archaeologists
go, a pretty open-minded guy,
pretty open-minded, I should say, in
certain regards. He was not into the
astronomy. Yeah.
Or the cosmology of it, which has been
handled, I think, very adequately by by
Lar Scranton. And but he was he would he
would stand by the dating and Shock who
was the most careful guy in the world
couldn't fault the way the the various
methods they used for the dating. So
there it is. And actually, Graham, this
was a a point in your talk that I wanted
to that I wanted to bring up. They're
all about their hunter gatherers and
stuff. You know, these are guys who
[snorts]
I mean, most of these people have never
built the dry stone wall in their lives
or done [snorts] anything creative
whatsoever. I mean, they couldn't write
an advertising jingle, which in fact is
difficult to write. But these are very
uncreative people looking at the most
creative people that ever lived. And so
they haven't a clue as to what goes in.
And also they don't know what it's like
to be a hunter gatherer because they
don't hunt and they don't fish and they
don't gather.
They go to the supermarket like
everybody else. and and they
why should anybody learn to plant and
till the land when all you have to do is
go outside the palisades or whatever it
is that keeps you safe and shoot a
rhinoceros or whatever it is and you
have food point in fact hunter gatherer
lifestyles are very satisfying and and
spiritually in nurturing and and ample
in fact.
Yeah. Why should they do anything other
than shoot their rhinoceros? There
aren't that many of them and plenty of
rhinoceroses. When they get tired of
rhinoceros, they can shoot an elephant.
But there's hunter gathering is great.
Who who in their right mind wouldn't
hunt gather?
And same applies, you know, the rough
and crude conditions. Well, we don't
know that.
I mean, they have their bare skins and
they have plenty of stuff to wear and
they have plenty to eat.
Yes.
And we know that the apaleithic cave
artists who definitely were hunter
gatherers were creating this
transcendent art. 30 40,000 years ago.
That was my other point actually that
it's unnecessary.
It should have been unnecessary if there
were such a thing as a as a genuinely
respectable and open-minded.
I almost hate to use the word
open-minded bunch of scientists and
scholars out there because the cave art
itself and now with Chauvet that pushes
it back to 31,000 BC before you had
Altameira and Lasco which they were
dating at 17,000 19,000 BC. These are
geniuses who were painting these these
bare curbed unfinished walls in such a
way that they were heightening the
perspective and all the rest. You didn't
need anything other than that. Yeah. To
prove that it's a sophisticated
civilization. They think that
illumination comes from light
electricity and it has nothing to What
do I put it this way? Illumination
might, but enlightenment doesn't come
from light bulbs.
But I do think there's one point which
is which is that um huntergatherer
societies don't generate surpluses to a
large extent. They are they are living
often very comfortably from day to day.
It's an untold story of hunter gatherers
that actually in famines in South Africa
that have that have occurred. It's the
agriculturalists who starve the hunter
gatherers are just fine in for example
Botswana, Namibia. Yeah, they they they
they do fine. But
I suppose the one difference is that an
agricultural society can set aside and
store surpluses which can then the
argument at any rate is that it can free
people to develop specialist skills in
in areas like stonework and so on. And
that's the explanation of
sting. But this is bologna too because
look at look at those caves. This is at
a time when this there isn't that going
on.
Sure. And somebody was having time to
create these astonishing works of art.
Yeah. Good point.
Picasso learned to paint bulls from I
think Aliro or Lasco or one of those
places. And then along comes
Chau which is exponentially superior to
the other ones. And that they date at
31,000 BC. Indeed.
And they're still talking all this
garbage about that this may have to make
archaeologists change their minds and
blah blah blah. Well, they don't have
any minds to change. It should be easy.
But
this is this is what is frustrating.
Um I think Graham's more frustrated by
this stuff than I am. My my GEF training
teaches me that whoever and whatever
presses your buttons is your master. And
I personally do not like being a slave.
I work very hard at not getting my
buttons pushed to cons fairly with some
success, I must say.
Yeah. Yeah. So, let's move on slightly.
Uh why is it important to get history
right? Why is it important to dig out
these facts that are so unwelcome to the
official arbittors of history? Why why
does it why does it matter? Why should
we care really if the Sphinx is much
older? uh if there was a a deeply wise
and and um spiritually sophisticated
civilization in the remote parts, why
should we care?
Well, we we wouldn't there is be no
reason to care if we had a civilization
of our own worth calling a civilization.
But we don't. We have a we have a
fraudulent religion which they don't
even which they call progress and I call
the church of progress. um that is
absolutely
pernitious
both on the personal and on the cosmic
level. We're in the process of
destroying ourselves with all our stupid
ass technology and getting nothing for
it. I mean the five five cowboys explain
it. Practically everybody, even in this
room, will be spending much of their
time, I bet, doing stuff that does not
in any way enhance or feed your soul or
your or anything other than pay the
rent. I I take bets on that. The number
of us who manage
to actually make a living out of doing
what we want is very small
and usually, as I said, at great cost.
Yeah. So that's why otherwise if we had
a civilization of our own, no, why
bother?
Then it's just an academic question.
But
if you could if you could pick the
lessons, what could we what can we learn
from ancient Egypt? And I agree with you
that ancient Egypt is a well, it's one
of that's one of your famous lines that
that the ancient Egyptians ancient Egypt
is not a development, it's a it's a
legacy. So they are they are bringing
down knowledge from a remoter past. But
what what would be the key elements of
that knowledge which we could apply to
our society today and somehow make
things better if that were possible?
Well, I guess this is where the Dead
Saints Chronicles comes comes in
that probably in very old day ancient
times hunter gatherers. So what they ch
you know they had stone axes and they
chipped away at
things. I mean, you see some of the
things that they've done that they date
very old this I don't know you probably
saw it that Turkish bracelet sure
that dated to 8,000 BC made of obsidian
that employs a very complicated geometry
involved. Well, this is 8,000 BC.
Um and and what we're talking about then
with with these ancient societies is
that they're probably when they talk
about the Garden of Eden, it's probably
not a physical place. It probably is a
condition or a spiritual state I think
and these people are living in something
approaching a state of grace or
something like that
right
and we just have
we have no access to that I mean we
can't even imagine what it is unless we
live with the aboriges or or the or the
so when you cast your mind back I
remember we've had we've had
conversations about the sphinx many
times and I know that you are open to
the possibility that the sphinx is even
much older
much older yeah I'm convinced
of I think I think you're persuaded by
the astronomical argument that you make
the point that the age of Leo recurs
every 26,000 years
and and the Egyptian texts themselves,
the Polarmo stone and the turn papyrus
that talk about these earlier periods
and give the regal years of these
supposedly mythical kings. And when you
put them all together, which is what
Schwer did, you get 34 36,000 years. So
we're closing in on an earlier age of
Leo,
right? Shock's initial reaction of wow
these rocks look like they're hundreds
of thousands of years old. That's
and that's not from a guy who
exaggerates much. I mean that's from
from a cautious guy just
taking a look at this. Yeah.
So this is one of the things really that
we want to do is to get together a a
panel of geologists to go over and study
that which we've never had. We've never
had the opportunity or the money to get
the permissions. Now we think we can get
him cuz now Shock finally 20 years later
has his own university agreeing that
maybe he's worth supporting. So not in
money so they don't have any money but
in terms of prestige all of a sudden the
university is saying to hell with you to
the archaeologist right
and and is being supportive. So maybe
but but what's at stake is as I said is
philosophical and immaterial as it were.
It's not it's not that it's going to
help us make more money or anything of
the sort at whatever it is that we do,
whatever our jobs are. It's that
it changes the whole
way you approach your day on an
individual and in a collective basis.
Sure. That there's
something
worth striving
for. It just isn't the mortgage or the,
you know, the payments on the car,
but that is,
for lack of a better word, soul
fulfilling and soul expanding.
Yes. Yes.
Something of the sort.
When when you consider this the at at
the heart of this is a notion of a lost
civilization. But listening to you now,
you're making very valid points about
hunter gatherer societies that that they
they rightly and properly also deserve
to be called a civilization. But when
you look back on the on the notion of a
lost civilization, are you envisaging
something uh technologically advanced in
the way that we are, we regard ourselves
as certainly. Are you envisaging a a a
complex structured urban-based the the
the whole suite of things that are
associated with the word civilization
today or are you thinking along
huntergatherer lines? Clarify your your
thinking on that
both actually. One doesn't as you
pointed out when you had the the um the
it was that it was the the rainforest
Indians
and who's to say that we're more
civilized than they were? It's it's what
goes on inside them. Yeah.
Really?
Exactly.
So, and you could also, we're so used to
seeing it manifest in terms of buildings
of sophistic what we call
sophistication, but doesn't have to be
that way.
Whole civilizations could last for
thousands of years expressing
their deepest
their deepest feelings and their deepest
knowledge in dance and they wouldn't
leave any church any trace of it
whatsoever. But yet members of those
civilizations would have been deeply
fulfilled and and and had meaningful and
purposeful lives. Yeah.
But then if we consider the Sphinx and
we consider those 100 ton blocks that
are shifted in front of the Sphinx and
turned into two extraordinary temples
that that surely involves something
other than just manpower or or what what
does it involve? What's what does it
come to?
I don't know. It certainly involves
manpower in some way, shape, or form
since men did it and not machines and
not aliens. At least I don't think
aliens. Um, poor aliens. They got a bad
rap all the time about aliens.
Yeah, let's go light on the aliens.
Yeah, I mean I I know some people who I
think are aliens [laughter] and they're
nice and I like them. I just don't think
they built the pyramids.
They I don't know. um whatever impels
them to do that
at [snorts] that stage. You know, we're
now talking, right? We're talking at
least 10,000 years ago, maybe more prior
probably to the younger dryers. We're
talking about what's going on
in ice age times
and they're wheeling and dealing around
these huge blocks. I mean, may maybe
it's just
they're having fun with, you know,
seriously. But doesn't it imply doesn't
it imply some kind of to use the word
technology or or or something and are
you open to the notion that that the
ancients had perhaps a different way of
manipulating matter than we do? What
almost it almost seems a prerequisite
because it doesn't seem possible with
anything that we know about
moving and cutting stones
to do that. I mean, you said you were
talking about not being able to put a
piece of paper between blocks of stone,
you know, bigger than that piano. Yeah.
I mean, a lot bigger than the piano. And
you can't put a piece of paper between
them. Yeah.
Well, it raises more questions than it
than it um than it answers because
a how did they do this? That's complete
mystery. And then why did they even want
to do this to that level of perfection?
That's another huge mystery. I mean
really the more and the more you get
into these things
the more
you say the more wonderful the mystery
becomes because you
at first you don't get it. I mean, you
unless you've unless you've uh even if
you've studied a lot and read a lot of
the books, you can't get it that you see
it in front of your nose and then almost
every day you're looking at things and
say, "Well, God, how how did they
possibly do this?" And then this
question hard on its heels is why would
they want to? And it's something
probably
analogous to it that is that's
commonplace. I mean, why does a runner
try to run, you know, kill himself to
break 2/10 of a second off so that he's
faster than the other guy?
Something of that sort, except probably
not an ego involved. I don't think at
certain level an ego is involved in that
either or the mountain climbers or the
[snorts] the people who are doing all
all of these
people who want to challenge themselves,
who want to challenge themselves in some
way or another. And we do it to this
day, but we don't do it in concert.
No. um to produce works of works of art.
Yeah. I sometimes wonder if if the thing
that we call progress, technology,
civilization, um is really a regression,
um that there are that there are
faculties of the human mind. I'm getting
a bit woo woo here, but sigh power,
which we talk of telepathy, telekinesis,
these these kind of things. Perhaps they
are native faculties of the human mind,
but perhaps they've lapsed with this
huge technological imposition that we
that we are so grateful for, but at the
same time enslaves us.
No, I'm 100% agreed with that. Yeah, I
think I think that's the case.
Yeah.
Um, actually, a couple of funny funny
little stories. Schwraer talks about I
don't know if it was his experience or
not or it was Marcel Greol. Anyway, it's
about 1912 or so and the missionaries
are trying to convert the the uh the
locals wherever they are in Africa
somewhere with the tribes, local
tribesmen into into good Christians. And
he tells the chieftain, you know,
tomorrow look above. He knows that
there's a a plane scheduled a male plane
to go ahead overhead and you'll see
flying men. And the the chieftain is
very interested in that. And so he's
there at the appointed time and he looks
at the plane going overhead and he says,
"Ba machinery,
right?
I like that."
Yeah.
Yeah. So what? It's a machinery.
Yeah.
I feel you know roughly the same way
about space.
I mean there are some accounts I I
forget exactly where I saw them now of
of these huge blocks being sung into
place.
There's a Tibetan that Swedish guy
Yeah. writing in a German newspaper
about them lifting
lifted actually an eyewitness account
from the 1920s of raising a substantial
boulder up into the sky and maybe
something like that would would explain
what we see around the Sphinx
maybe but the again you you're left with
the question of why why would they want
to do it that way
because of the beauty of the thing the
majesty of
well or the power that it it has still
when this is the thing you go to these
There's not much that's intact nowadays
of of of ancient sacred art. But when
it's more or less intact, as it is in
Egypt and it is in the mosques and the
temples of of of India and you've seen
enough of it and your things that that
these things
connect you to
these things connect you to
something higher within you. And maybe
they built these maybe it was in a in a
way I'm just ballparking it but maybe it
was was their way of counteracting a a
descending force in other words a kind
of a set force that was that was making
them more material and this was a way of
spiritualizing that very
right
that very
proclivity that that that that pull
toward
toward the material maybe
you've spoken of symbolist Egypt as a
well given the flood of technology and
the the very real possibility of modern
civilizations literally imploding and
and self-destructing.
You've spoken of symbolist Egypt as a
kind of arc that can
carry us forward through that flood.
Take that a little further. Let's let's
Yeah, I think one of the lines that that
symbolist Egypt is is the blueprint for
an arc. It's it's we would we're not
going to mummify pharaohs again or have
pharaohs probably not or any of those
other things that that they did have.
But the
the principles
that are embodied in their so-called
gods who are not gods, they're
principles and the interaction between
them is their mythology which is full of
astronomy and astrology and all sorts of
things like that. And [snorts]
so it stands I I I would say as a model.
In other words, if they could do it, we
could do it.
But we'd go at it in a different way and
we'd do different things. But let's say
the motivation would be the same, which
is to access those higher powers that we
do in fact have have within us
and to reconnect reconnect to spirit.
Yes.
Yeah,
I would think so. Just as your owasa and
mine experience.
Yeah. talk John into going and doing
some Iawaska sessions in Brazil.
He
didn't have to do much talking actually.
No, I didn't.
Off he went like a rocket.
Yes.
And uh so yeah. So, so but so this whole
thing
the symbolist Egypt adds that adds that
philosophical
side to it which otherwise just looks
like
is mostly science and it's good science
to overthrow our picture of the past.
But the reason to overthrow it is that
the present is such a hell house.
Yeah.
Such a you know such a brothel. It's a
hell house desperately trying to
disguise itself as a paradise.
That's right. Failing. That's that's
actually pretty good. That's that's
about that's about what it is.
Yeah. So that actually adds I mean
there's a there's a reason for doing all
of this and it's not just to make fools
of all the academics which is fun in its
own right but it didn't lead anywhere
all by itself. But it's it's important
to
it's very important as far as I'm
concerned to
um to disempower them.
Yeah.
Because they have a strangle hold on how
people should think. I think this is the
main the main problem and it's something
that we don't
always realize clearly because it seems
a universal good to have an education
system and we're taught things but
actually from birth really or certainly
from the age of one or two actually from
birth we're being channeled into
particular lines of thought.
Yeah.
Uh which which automatically constricts
and limits our our potential to think
otherwise.
Yes. And the purpose of school once you,
you know, they they drop the axe on you
and and they make you go there is
designed to to stifle your creativity.
The first things they cut when they're
looking for budgets and stuff like that
is to cut the is to cut the creativity.
Yeah.
Out the cut out the arts and concentrate
on this stupid economics and
finance and phony science and all the
rest.
Victor Hugo talked about the strongest
thing in the world. What is that?
Yes. Well, he said, "There's one thing
stronger than all the armies in the
world, and that is an idea whose time
has come." Sounds great. And it it's
great. Good line. Um, but what Victor
Hugo didn't think of [snorts] and
probably didn't occur to him is one, the
idea whose time has come is not
necessarily a good idea. Fascism is an
idea whose time came and it's still
lurking around the corner. Even worse,
the second strongest thing in the world
is an idea whose time has not yet gone.
Mhm.
And that's what we're dealing with on a
daily basis on a minuteby-minute by
basis because all of the armies in the
world
literally or de facto are
are in enthralled to or are employed to
or are pledged to defending the idea
whose time has not yet gone. That's our
problem. And if we don't realize that,
we got a problem because a lot, you
know, there's a lot of the newagy stuff
out there. You rub two crystals together
and we're all going to be one. Well,
we're not all going to be one again. Not
not without a lot of work.
Yeah.
From a lot of people.
So, there's this um it's kind of a
battle of ideas in a way between the
idea whose time has come or should have
come and uh the idea whose time is not
yet over. And I think you and I have
found ourselves frequently um in the
firing line of that.
Oh, yeah. Well, we put ourselves there.
I don't mind.
Yeah. We volunteered for volunteered.
Yeah. Yeah.
And if we live long enough, our time
will come.
Yeah. Yeah. [laughter]
So, do you do you sense this that there
is a real shift underway? Things are
things are altering.
I do. It's it's a bit difficult. You
have to be careful about this because
here we have everybody here and they're
all enjoying themselves. At least most
of them are. They're too polite to leave
anyway. Um but they seem to be enjoying
themselves. But you know there are a lot
more people wherever the hell they're
playing something or another tonight who
couldn't care less Yeah.
about what we're talking about.
So we are
numerically
there's quite a number of us
statistically we almost don't exist.
Yes.
But it only it doesn't take a majority
to
turn things around. Then as Mark Twain
said, "Whenever I find myself siding
with the majority, I know it's time to
reconsider my position." [laughter] This
is one of my favorite quotes.
Great piece of advice, actually. Yeah.
Yeah.
So, but yeah, it it seems to be it seems
to be turning or could turn it needs its
you might say it's sort of a a uh what
was the wait the Uncle Tom's? It needs
its Uncle Tom's Cabin moment where a
single book, at least this is the
legend,
really brought on the whole emancipation
proclamation and this civil war, which
is a horrible war, but which
nevertheless did turn things around to a
certain extent anyway, at least here in
Dub Pakistan.
And Dumb Pakistan, that's another John
West.
No, that's not my that's not my not my
original one. Okay. When Bush stole the
second election, um, somebody somebody
published a map and I tried to find out
who it was and I couldn't track it to
its source and the map what I did is I
adjusted the nomenclature. The the map
had the red states and it was a map of
North America. The red states were all
in red and that was marked dumbfakistan
and the blue states and Canada were
marked in blue and that was either the
United States of Canada which is pretty
unsat satisfactory or America as if
there was this big this big a difference
between red states and blue states and I
decided that that I that wasn't good
accurate enough the red [snorts] states
are greater dumbfakistan and the blue
states are lesser dumbfistan but it's
all dumb Pakistan and anybody who
doesn't think so just has to go back to
this last election. [applause]
So I think we should have a few words on
the um how do I pronounce this? Uh Anu
Padeshi
Anu Pades uh the uh tell us what the Anu
Padeshi are.
Anu Padashi. That's Paul Roberts who is
a Sanskrit scholar gave me that. That's
the That's the cast after I forget what
it is. Wait a sec. The Hindu cast system
that goes um
brahins.
It goes brahinss. Uh
no. Yeah. Chhatria, the warriors,
the merchants, the servants, the
untouchables. And below that there are
the unteachables. And that's the Anu
Padeshi. And this is who we deal with.
The untouchables. These are the
unteachables, the Anu Badashi.
Very nice.
That's what we deal with.
Very nice. That is that is what we deal
with. And sometimes dealing with them
can be can be painful. I I you're right.
My buttons get pushed easier than than
yours.
Uh I had a I had a documentary
assassination documentary made about me
um by BBC Horizon.
Horizon. Right. Right.
It was a funny thing actually. A friend
of mine in TV rang me up. He phoned me
at home and he said, "Graham, um, BBC
Horizon are going to ask you for an
interview. Say no."
And 6 weeks later, they phoned me up and
I said yes.
But I didn't take account of what can
happen on the cutting room floor. And
that was a that was just a huge stitch
up. And it was deeply deeply unpleasant.
And it hurt me badly actually. I I kind
of slumped for for a while after that.
I've never really seen you slump. But I
know you've taken a lot of a lot of
pretty heavy blows as well.
Yeah. Well, I see this is this if if you
have satis genes, this [snorts] stuff
is, as I said, it's like the cannibal,
you know, the boatload of cannibals
approaching your island. Sorry, the
other way of missionaries approaching
your your your island.
I I I see it all as an opportunity. And
now I I used to not see it as an
opportunity because it was very hard to
get the word out. But they can get to,
okay, a bigger audience maybe, but I can
get to a smarter audience and a big one
and so can you. Yeah.
So there's there's no And besides, if
you let them push the buttons, they if
you let them push your buttons, you
lose.
You lose. Absolutely. Simple as that.
I'm I'm trying to learn that lesson.
It's hard to It's hard to
Isn't one of the big things that has
changed the the arrival of the internet
and this this huge availability of
information. I mean we used to live in a
time you and I both lived through that
time when information was really
channeled through limited number of
media the big newspapers the big TV
stations that's where people got their
news from and now it's now it's
radically changed there's been a kind of
liberation of information
the downside of that unfortunately are
the unicorns
the you know the woolly end of the
the wishy-washy woolly end of the other
side of the new age movement where
the crystal sniffers and the tree
huggers and they all mean well but they
they make it that much more difficult
to establish anything that is that is
you know that follows the rules as it
were
it's not necessarily all the time to to
follow the rules but you got to make
clear you got to know the rules to know
which ones to break
yeah you're doing this sort of
in a sense we're in an almost in an
overload of information I'm finding now
with because I I post quite regularly on
on Facebook and I find a story I like,
but these days I am going to check out
the background to that story extremely
thoroughly before I share it because
there's such a lot of I mean bogus
information that's put out there. I
think the internet is a great good. I
think it's a I think it's a wonderful
thing. It's allowed communities of ideas
to form uh and it and it and it's made
it impossible for the controlling powers
to really suppress information. That
happened with my TED talk when they took
it offline. I got fortunately advanced
notice three hours. I put out the word
and hundreds of people downloaded it
just in time and then it went out there
and it blew up in Ted's face in a
massive way.
Same thing happened with Rupert actually
with Sheldrake. With Sheldrake, he got
he got the same
Well, we were on the same We were at the
same event,
but he got the same kind of absolutely
reaction to it.
Yeah.
He's too polite though. Rupert is
too Rupert Sheldrake. too too much of a
gentleman
who spoke at the same TED talk as me and
Rbert uh Rupert Sheldrake uh the one
thing that Rbert and I had in common
actually and the one reason why they
took our talks down was was because we
considered the possibility that
consciousness was not local to the
brain.
Right? Yeah.
That defies a fundamental dogma of
materialist reductionist science which
is that consciousness is simply an
artifact.
That's the Church of Progress paradigm.
That's that's it. That's that's one of
its central
Yeah. catechism
and that's what we bumped up against
there and that's what you've been
bumping up against all all your life. So
we live in this time of flux and and
transition and change with with um
availability of of new ideas. We have
the sense that we are speaking of an
idea whose time has come yet
as you rightly say the the the light
that is burning is is relatively small
at the moment. uh what's it going to
take to trigger this to the next level?
What happens?
That's the big qu that's the that's the
big question. That's what I was talking
about. It needs it. It can use its Uncle
Tom's cabin moment and you can't predict
what that's going to be. Yeah.
I'm I'm thinking it's not
because you thought it was going to be
the Sphinx.
Well, could have been. Yeah.
And it can still be in a sense,
but it could have been, but it wasn't.
Yeah.
Um or maybe I mean, go back.
Yeah.
But this is why I think that I don't
know but that something like the dead
saints something like that NDE that's
easy to grasp as it were everyone can
grasp it. Yeah.
Whereas the other the lost civilization
or the sphinx or all of that
is
primarily intellectual
and you have to be willing and able to
at least read or anyway watch the videos
or something of the sort.
what it will do. I you know what will
bring it about? I don't know. I mean the
the one possibility is that they it
up to such an extent which they're in
the process of doing that at least a lot
of people all of a sudden wake up and
say we didn't we didn't bargain for
this.
Yeah.
You let us down the path.
Yeah. Yeah.
But I don't know.
Well, there's clearly already I mean
massive dissatisfaction with the status
quo where things are.
It's not directed toward anything. It
doesn't have a positive side to it.
It's just fury.
It's just anger for for good reason. But
that doesn't do any good.
Yeah.
I don't know. Everybody here go home and
tell everybody you know all about
lecture that you saw and that we have to
do something and maybe you'll find
somebody to talk to or anyway find out
who your friends are. I don't know.
So where does it where does it lead for
for you from from here? What's next for
John Anthony West? Well, what's next for
Graham Hancock and [laughter] more? What
else is there? All you can do is what
you do.
Yeah. Yeah. Just keep on keep on doing
it and and and hope it gels in some way.
You know, hope that the mortgage gets
paid and Yeah.
and and and keep doing it. that
but the bottom the bottom the bottom
line I think you and I are completely on
the same page on this is that is that a
fundamental ailment of the
so-called civilization that surrounds us
today is the complete disconnect from
spirit
absolutely
that that is that is the heart of the
matter and we're sitting of course in a
church but the mainstream monotheistic
faiths aren't really are they providing
us with that reconnection
it's actually they're part of the
problem because there's They are exactly
contrary to what their own teaching is.
Particularly in the west.
Yes.
Look at these crazies were running
around talking about Jesus and stuff.
Who would Jesus bomb next? I saw
somebody had [laughter] a t-shirt and I
saw a t-shirt. Somebody had that. Yeah.
So, they're they're part of the problem
and and and they're currying favor often
with exactly the wrong elements of
science. I mean they the pope was okay
with
he was okay with Darwinian evolution or
something quai or Darwinian evolution.
He was all for that. Or was it? Wait,
some one other thing. He was he was
against something or another. But
nevertheless, the virgin birth was fact,
right?
Well, no, Pope, whatever his name is,
right?
No, you can't say that fact
[clears throat] just because you happen
to believe it. And that of course gains
points when it comes to jerks like
Dawkins and yes
Dennett and as I call them the
co-commonants of the latter day Darwin
Yugan. Um
as Daniel Dennett and Richard Dawkins
Richard Dawkins the author of the God
delusion and the self
they feed into those guys with that kind
of with that kind of commentary.
Yeah.
They have to be attacked. Yes.
Right. Straight straightforwardly. Yeah.
Jacqu and I have idea for a couple of
books that we want to do actually, but
with me around it's it's difficult.
[laughter]
Organization is not one of my strengths.
Yes.
Anyway,
a beautiful adventurous spirit who has
explored the world and raised
fundamental questions that I think have
touched uh everybody in ways some people
don't even realize.
Haven't touched Donald Trump.
Haven't touched Donald Trump. Well, you
never know. You never know. Um on this
on this question of disconnect from
spirit, we um we're we're approaching
the time when we need to stop, but we
agreed we agreed um that uh I would read
a passage from [snorts] the the
John suggested this um and uh it's from
the hermetic texts and it's a text uh
these purport to be dialogues between
the god Thism who the ancient Egyptians
called Hermes
um and his pupils. This is a particular
dialogue. Sorry, the Greeks called him
Hermes.
Thank you for being polite. Um Jihuti.
Yes. Um dialogues uh in which to Hermes
is u uh in dialogue with certain pupils.
And this is this dialogue with Eskeipius
and it contains uh a passage called the
lament. And I think that does I think
you chose it well because it does
actually touch on you know the core
issue that we're raising here that there
is a vital lesson to learn from the past
and that people in the past knew we were
already going wrong. They saw the the
track. So say something while I get my
computer to speak to me. Um
and I'll read this passage.
I'm running out of I'm running out of
ideas.
Never. John West never runs out of
ideas.
I don't run out of babel but I do sort
of run out.
Okay. So, I am going to type in my
password.
I do remember it. Yes.
And I am going to open a file.
Um because I'm 66. I'm going to put on
my reading glasses.
Oh, all this stuff.
And here we go. Essipius. Velment.
Do you know Eskeipius?
Thank you. [laughter]
Suk prompted me to use the microphone.
Yes.
Yes. Do you know Eskeipius that Egypt is
an image of heaven or to speak more
exactly in Egypt all the operations of
the powers which rule and work in heaven
are present in the earth below? In fact,
it should be said that the whole cosmos
dwells in this our land as in a
sanctuary.
And yet, since it is fitting that wise
men should have knowledge of all events
before they come to pass, you must not
be left in ignorance of what I will now
tell you.
There will come a time when it will have
been in vain that Egyptians have honored
the Godhead with heartfelt piety and
service and all our holy worship will be
fruitless and ineffectual.
The gods will return from earth to
heaven. Egypt will be forsaken. And the
land which was once the home of religion
will be left desolate, beereft of the
presence of its deities.
Oh Egypt, Egypt of thy religion nothing
will remain
but an empty tale
which thine own children in time to come
will not believe.
Nothing will be left but graven words
and only the stones will tell of thy
piety.
And in that day, men will be weary of
life, and they will cease to think the
universe worthy of reverent wonder and
worship. They will no longer love this
world around us. This incomparable work
of God, this glorious structure which he
has built, this sum of good made up of
many diverse forms, this instrument
whereby the will of God operates in that
which he has made, ungrudgingly favoring
man's welfare. This combination and
accumulation of all the manifold things
that call forth the veneration, praise
and love of the beholder. Darkness will
be preferred to light and death will be
thought more profitable than life. No
one will raise his eyes to heaven. The
pious will be deemed insane. The impious
wise. The madman will be thought a brave
man. And the wicked will be esteemed as
good.
As for the soul and the belief that it
is immortal by nature or may hope to
attain to immortality as I have taught
you, all this they will mock and even
persuade themselves that it is false. No
word of reverence or piety, no utterance
worthy of heaven will be heard or
believed. And so the gods will depart
from mankind, a grievous thing. And only
evil angels will remain who will mingle
with men and drive the poor wretches
into all manner of reckless crime into
wars and robberies and frauds and all
things hostile to the nature of the
soul. Then the earth will tremble and
the sea bear no ships. Heaven will not
support the stars in their orbits. All
voices of the gods will be forced into
silence. The fruits of the earth will
rot. The soil will turn barren and the
very air will sicken with sullen
stagnation. All things will be
disordered and arry. All good will
disappear.
But when all this has befallen
Eskeipius, then God, the creator of all
things, will look on that which has come
to pass and will stop the disorder by
the counterforce of his will, which is
the good. He will call back to the right
path those who have gone astray. He will
cleanse the world of evil, washing it
away with floods, burning it out with
the fiercest fire, and expelling it with
war and pestilence. And thus he will
bring back his world to its former
aspect, so that the cosmos will once
more be deemed worthy of worship and
wondering reant reverence. And God, the
maker and maintainer of the mighty
fabric, will be adored by the men of
that day with continuous songs of praise
and blessing. Such is the new birth of
the cosmos. It is a making again of all
things good, a holy and awe inspiring
restoration of all nature. And it is
wrought inside the process of time by
the eternal will of the creator.
And that's the lament. [applause]
Yeah, that's
that's worthy of a concentrated study.
Somebody should look at that. The the
ecological environmental side of it is I
mean unbelievable for 2,000 years ago.
The the quacademics like to think that
it's foretelling the downfall of the
Roman Empire, but it's much more than
that. The the reference to the stars may
be an echo from the distant distant past
of that we're talking about of of know
younger dry, older dry and so on.
It's really and it's a it's a
breathtaking piece of pros, I must say.
Piece of pro really. ever whoever
whoever penned that in the first place.
I think it's translated from the Greek.
Yeah.
And that's the only one translation
that's any good. I don't know if you
read any of the others, but they all
they all sound like, you know, trades in
economics or something. But anyway,
that's basically it. That's that that
escapius
um prophecy is is pretty much what we're
what we're going through. We're in the
middle of. And my only my sense of it is
that God's going to need some help.
Yeah,
he's not going to do this on his own or
her, whatever the case may be.
Yeah, it's up to us at the end of the
day. We don't have to put up with the
any longer.
Uh we can take the choice to change
things. It's not easy. It's a difficult
road, but it's the road to follow.
We can do it.
Yeah. So, ladies and gentlemen, I think
we've um we've come to the end of the
formal part of the evening. John and I
will be sitting down here and uh anybody
wants books signed or anything else? I
do
pose for selfies if anybody wants that.
Oh yeah. Right.
No objection at all.
Let's let's charge for selfies.
[laughter] Gra. This is this is a source
of income that we have not yet.
We're here for you. We're here for you.
So anything anything that you want
really.