Wynton: Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Harkin.
Your support of the arts is a gift to our country, and I’m honored that you and Mrs.
Harkin have come here tonight.
I’d also like to thank Bob Lynch and everyone at Americans for the Arts.
Your advocacy keeps us encouraged and reinforces the adage that there is strength and power
in numbers.
The annual Nancy Hanks lecture is one of the most significant events on the national cultural-policy
calendar, so I am deeply honored and humbled to have this opportunity to talk this year.
This is entitled “The Ballad of American Arts.”
Before we sang, we spoke.
Before we danced, we walked.
Before we wrote, we told stories.
Before we told stories, we lived.
Those songs, dances, writings allow us to speak to one another across generations.
They gave us an understanding of our commonality long before that DNA told us we are all part
of one glorious procession.
At any point on the timeline of human history, there are tales to be told of love and loss,
glory and shame, profundity and even profound stupidity; tales that deserve retelling, embellishing,
and, if need be, inventing from whole cloth.
This is our story.
This is our song.
If well sung, it tells us who we are and where we belong.
Well, these people were all kinds of people from everywhere.
Some lived in cities, some on farms.
Educated, ignorant, religious, sacrilegious, enslaved and not, but even the unenslaved
were oppressed, and they all wanted to be free, and the frontier represented freedom.
Well, they sang songs and told stories, and what was in those stories was their exploits,
their humor, and their aspirations.
Some people sang and spoke with such depth that just listening and watching took you
to the frontier of your own soul, picked you up, made you much more alive.
[Band plays “Yankee Doodle”]
But this liberty was not free.
Patrick Henry said, “Give me liberty, or give me death.”
Many experienced death in the pursuit of liberty, and suddenly, all types of people appeared
together, geniuses, a thing never seen again: Virginian Thomas Jefferson; high-minded New
Yorker Alexander Hamilton; Bostonian-turned-Philadelphian Ben Franklin, in the twilight of his brilliance
the living embodiment of downhome sophistication.
Men arguing with epic intensity of money and trade and the rights of states and money and
taxes and political power and money and slavery and religion and money and just about everything
you knew or had ever heard of.
Oh, well, there was a lot of knowledge in that group and a lot of memory and all that
comes with knowledge and memory.
I’m talking about pride, arrogance, stubbornness, but don’t let those wigs fool you.
These men possessed the timeless wisdom and the willingness to act together.
You see, somewhere along the way, they realized that their freedom was linked to other people’s
freedom, and with the art of the pen, they crafted the most flexible and poetic political
document in history, a sterling example of group improvisation on a grand, human theme,
that theme very basic: how in the world can I be me without keeping you from being you?
That constitution, the Bill of Rights…well, it taught us how to negotiate our differences
the same way a good dance band adjusts to find the right tempo for each different room
of dancers.
To be effective, our Founding Fathers had to create a living document that could find
the right tempo across the ages, and when the ink dried on the very last signature,
it was the Constitution that told us how to be, but it was left to the American arts to
tell you who to be, and the who always determines the how.
That’s why this constitution could be amended.
Oh, yes, this freedom had a fine political frame, but it was in need of a cultural engine.
This new American way needed homegrown arts to make us into one people, teach us who we
are.
It’s still revolutionary: the freedom to choose the life of your dreaming, to put yourself
in the situation you wanted to be in or should be in.
Man, this liberty is some serious stuff because once you turn freedom loose, there’s no
telling where it might go.
It showed up suddenly in Minton’s Playhouse in 1940, ’41, up in Harlem.
Geniuses all together, a thing never seen again.
Charlie “Yardbird” Parker, Kansas City, the living embodiment of downhome sophistication
and cool; John “Dizzy” Gillespie from Cheraw, South Carolina, full of rhythmic fire
and intellectual curiosity; I’m talking about Thelonious Monk from Rocky Mount, North
Carolina, mathematician of music and master of thematic improvisation.
Right there were all kinds of knowledge and memory and all the self-absorption that comes
with those attributes.
These men were furiously discussing American fundamentals through a musical style called
bebop, and somewhere along the way, they answered questions about individual freedoms and collective
responsibilities in the language of swing.
When all was said and done, they did nothing less than create the new school of American
virtuosity.
It was for real.
It rose from the bowels of our caste system to demonstrate with sheer brilliance that
who a person is always more definitive than what a person is.
Well, there’s Bird and Dizzy and Monk creating a community of people in service of American
objectives detailed by Jefferson, Madison, and Adams more than 150 years earlier.
The urgency and speed of their music declared “Now is the time.”
[Band plays “Now’s the Time”]
The greatest artists play for history.
Such is their passion, discipline, insight, and belief.
Ben Franklin so believed in the American experiment that upon his death in 1790, he bequeathed
£1,000 to be held in trust for Philadelphia and Boston, and that trust was to be expended
over 200 years.
Now, a financial inheritance can be accurately assessed in dollars, but I want you to tell
me what is the value of an artistic heritage?
Who calculates the value of “Amazing Grace” or “Yankee Doodle” or “Go Down Moses”?
Oh, those spirituals were the first body of identifiable, purely American musical art.
It was all kinds of people from all over made one through tragedy.
Tragedy aside, people still played drums in Congo Square in New Orleans, and all kinds
of people danced to this music because those drums reminded people of who they were, and
what they played told folks “Hey, this is a new land.”
These people knew to mind the drums because those drums are memory, and they carry meaning.
Bostonian Ralph Waldo Emerson told you about the power of individuality.
New Yorker Thelonious Monk had told you “A genius is he who is most himself.”
John Henry was being himself when he said, “A man is a natural man, and before I let
that steam drill beat me down, I’ll fall dead with my hammer in my hand.
I’ll fall dead with my hammer in my hand.”
That’s what artists all over America have thought when extracting the guts of the American
soul for those essences that make us one, that awaken us to who we are.
I’m telling you that Edgar Allan Poe sang the blues before the blues were even born,
and Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote Uncle Tom’s Cabin, and a lot was in it and a lot wasn’t
in it, but things are never important for what they aren’t, especially in art.
That book told people what the Constitution knew: slaves were people, and no matter how
much it was mocked, it really wasn’t funny.
That book made people aware, but oh those stubborn spirituals.
Those spirituals were Asian, they were Irish, African, so many things.
Those spirituals told you every man was one man way before the DNA told you that.
Slaves reaching across time to connect the Old Testament and the New, and Moses and freedom,
and Jesus and freedom, and made it all be right now…
They couldn’t even read.
Couldn’t read, but they knew.
I’m telling you, these songs brought people together because singing gives a community
purpose, and they put everything in those songs, and that music made us believe, and
it called us home.
Oh yes, people were in chains in the land of freedom but would soon be free.
[Sings] Joshua fit the battle of Jericho, Jericho, Jericho; Joshua fit the battle of
Jericho, and the walls came a-tumbling down.
Every one of us here tonight knows these songs.
You didn’t say, “What was that?” when I started singing it.
Count Basie’s Kansas City band was the greatest community organization to ever leave a city.
They swang and stomped the blues from Billingham, Washington, to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and
his two greatest bands were called New and Old Testament.
There’s Lester Young holding his Old Testament saxophone on a 90-degree angle with a leaning
porkpie hat echoing Ralph Waldo Emerson’s “Self-Reliance” talking about “You got
to play your own song if you want to join the throng, baby.”
He poured totally original lyricism into song after song, and all over the country, people
argued about life and love and loss and freedom and God and who they were or who they wanted
to be or who they wanted their kids to be.
Here we are fighting each other over freedom, but we were fighting each other to some good
music.
There’s no two armies on earth ever had better fight songs, and ironically, the music
drummed out in Congo Square in New Orleans was six and four together.
Let’s see what that sounds like.
[Drummer plays beat on high hat] One, two, three, four, one, two, three…one two three
four five six, one two three four five six, one two three four five six, one two three
four five…
You’ve got to watch that six and that four.
Here’s something deeper than that.
The South’s theme “Dixie” is in four, and the North’s “Battle Hymn of the Republic”
is in six.
You know what I’m talking about.
“I wish I was in the land of cotton; old times dar am not forgotten; look away, look
away, Dixieland.”
Let’s hear that four.
[Band plays “Dixie”] Two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
It hurts me to hear it.
[Laughter]
Man: Hurts me to play.
Wynton: But we all still know it.
“The Battle Hymn of the Republic” in six becomes Philip Sousa’s “Washington Post”
march, which becomes the New Orleans parade anthem “Didn’t He Ramble,” which ends
up being the Mickey Mouse theme.
Let’s see.
[Band plays “The Battle Hymn of the Republic,” “Washington Post,” “Didn’t He Ramble,”
and the Mickey Mouse theme] I’m trying to tell you all this stuff was connected before
the DNA told you.
When they finished cursing, blaming, and killing each other, they realized “Hey, we’re
still on this land, and we’re still together,” and we marched in the streets to the tune
of “We Shall Overcome” and “Ain’t Gonna Let Nobody Turn Us Around,” and Mahalia
Jackson sang spirituals and songs that sounded like angels with an approach influenced by
the most devilish blues singer of them all, the Empress Bessie Smith.
Those songs they sang and the way they sang them…well, they were all you knew.
Those songs were all you needed to know and all that you would ever need to know.
Martin Luther King was in jail in Birmingham living Henry David Thoreau’s treatise on
civil disobedience: “Under a government which imprisons any unjustly, the true place
for a just man is also in prison.”
Well, King was using the Constitution and the powerful American art of negotiation to
pursue freedom while Louis Armstrong told President Eisenhower and the nation they’d
been breaking the Constitution down there in the South for years.
This constitution is something, and Dr. King and Louis were not alone.
Americans of all stripes joined the struggle and the people at last became free legally.
I’m trying to tell you, this liberty was serious stuff.
Brother killed brother over it.
Churches were bombed and kids killed.
John Coltrane, with his healing tenor saxophone, brought us together and reminded us of who
we are at our best when he recorded “Alabama.”
[Band plays “Alabama”]
Yes, once you turned this freedom loose, it could go anywhere, and the people used their
freedom to buy entertainment.
They sat to watch burlesque and a vulgar blackface imitation of darkies and coons, and P.T.
Barnum said a sucker was born every minute, and those drums were still beating in Congo
Square, but nobody was minding them.
[Band plays]
Some Americans hated everything homegrown and thought that everything from Europe was
cultured and everything American just had to be unsophisticated.
Ask Cole Porter why the Broadway musical was not sophisticated enough to be art.
Ask cornetist Bix Beiderbecke, lyric hero of the Jazz Age, why his bourgeois Iowa family
disowned him for playing jazz.
But people still sang and danced, and they wrote and nurtured our arts, though it was
underappreciated and thought to reek of snobbery and upper-class airs.
Emily Dickinson stayed home and focused on the everlasting to sweeten the bitterness
of being barely published, and nobody read Melville—they still don’t—and few respected
Poe, but this art, in all its forms, speaks across time.
It calls us home.
Even now tonight, it’s calling us home.
By the time the first of Franklin’s 1790 money was given to Philadelphia and Boston,
some very proud musicians were marching in the streets of New Orleans inventing a new
form of American music.
It brought together marches and minstrelsy, light opera and society dances, Catholics
and the sanctified church, and nasty whorehouse songs and spirituals, too.
It sat all of them right down in the same room with Mardi Gras revelry to hear that
same sermon again about freedom and one person and balance with every person, except now
they weren’t talking, they were playing.
King Buddy Bolden led the way with his cornet.
That music was syncopated, so people danced; and it was the blues, so people danced with
feeling; and it was jazz, so they danced with feeling
and accuracy; and it was improvised, so they danced with feeling, accuracy, and abandon.
[Band plays “Buddy Bolden’s Blues”]
Many people called it the devil’s music, and jazz and the blues were reviled by the
Black church and eschewed by the education system.
Yeah, the American artist has always been in a type of limbo squeezed between three
unsatisfied masters: the critical expert validated by European taste—influences of the education
system—the church, and the court of fickle public opinion.
For the true expert, nothing homegrown was ever good enough.
Let’s ask Whitman, whose eroticism and celebration of the common man and common things and insistence
on his own meter was wholly American but considered unsuitable by experts.
The church, they didn’t want to hear all that stuff about bodies.
And the court of public opinion: “We like him, but he’s a strange fellow.”
His crime?
Telling us who we are: “I hear America singing…Each singing what belongs to her and to no one
else.”
That sounds like Thelonious Monk.
America was singing, and nobody thought nothing of it.
Ask all the Negro preachers who railed against the blues for generations while the blues
was coming out of every decent singer in their choir.
Ask them and all those who wanted to save souls “What were the benefits of denying
what came from our very souls in search of our true selves?”
That’s the Constitution, Walt Whitman, Twain, Duke Ellington, August Wilson.
I played at August Wilson’s funeral.
Do you know what he wanted me to play?
“Danny Boy.”
And you want to know what his stipulation was?
Learn the words.
If an artist sings deeply enough, they take you to the frontiers of your soul, and that
frontier is freedom: freedom to feel, to feel the sensual nature of the is and the is-ness
of things, the “This is what I feel, and you know you feel it too.”
All over this country people argued about life and love and loss and God and freedom
and who we are and want our kids to be, and every arts program was cut from every school,
and a machine came in and replaced the drum.
Those same drums that you got to mind because they are memory, and we forgot.
“Yankee Doodle keep it up, Yankee Doodle dandy; mind the music and the step, and with
the girls be handy.”
Mind the music and the step; W.C.
Handy, father of the blues.
His father was a minister, and young Handy grew up with a religious tension that went
all the way back to Adam and Eve.
Hawthorne told us about this stuff in The Scarlet Letter, and Handy understood what
Whitman understood: living boiled down to love and making love.
Here’s Whitman: “Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands all diffused,
mine too diffused, ebb stung by the flow and flow stung by the ebb, love-flesh swelling
and deliciously aching.”
That’s the same story Handy’s music told the congregation when Aunt Hagar interrupted
her preacher in “Aunt Hagar’s Blues.”
[Band plays “Aunt Hagar’s Blues”]
[Sings] Old Deacon Splivin, his flock was given a way of livin’ right; Said he, “No
wingin’, no ragtime singin’ up here tonight”; Up jumped Aunt Hagar, oh, she shouted with
all her might; “Oh, ain’t no use of preachin’; Oh, t’aint no use of teachin’; Each modulation
of syncopation just tells my feet to dance, and I can’t refuse; When I hear the melody,
oh Lord, the melody they call the blues; Just hear Aunt Hagar’s children harmonizin’
to that old mournful tune; It’s just like a choir from on high broke loose, broke loose;
If the devil brought it, the good Lord sent it right on down here, right on down here
to me; Just let the congregation join while I sing those lovin’ Aunt Hagar’s blues.
Oh, yes.
If the devil brought it, the American artist had the responsibility of developing our taste
for it and putting it before a public opinion that was, as time passed, untutored, then
very willing, briefly learned, and then ultimately exploited.
The artist had to walk a tightrope with an audience whose expectations were first formed
by the minstrel show and the novelty performance, but at least those popular entertainments
were assessed with homegrown taste.
Let’s ask the famous German string quartet who came to the White House to enlighten President
John Tyler in 1841.
After a couple of stirring movements, the president reportedly chased them out with
his cane, and he was heard to shout behind them, “Don’t ye know any Virginia reels?”
Ask all those who think a blinking screen or a new computer program or any other technological
advance is in itself artistic substance.
Artists effortlessly speak across time because the technology of the human soul does not
change.
Ask Eugene O’Neill, who absorbed the spirit of the Greeks through the spirit of Wagner’s
acolyte Nietzsche, who told him what Whitman said was what Buddy Bolden said when he opened
his horn up in New Orleans and set the slaves free and called all his children home: “Wake
up!
Wake up!”
They all spoke the same language—the language of the soul and the mind and of the body—and
they were out on prairies in the West telling tall tales and playing tunes for people to
gather around.
That’s what they were doing, and they just kept on doing it.
As Elvin Jones, great drummer with John Coltrane’s Classic Quartet, once said after being informed
by a patron in New York’s Village Vanguard “A lot of people don’t like your music,”
“Well, they better start liking it, because we’re going to keep on playing it.”
And they did, and their hearts broke as the audience they craved—the audience whose
lives they were playing—would rather hear some fresh-faced, well-meaning musicians from
another country sell a watered-down version of the blues.
Not that they were wrong for playing it, but it had to seem strange to somebody.
[Band plays]
Behind the masks of poet, musician, playwright, dancer, painter, those artists will always
turn your face to the fire because they speak an undeniable truth about who we are.
By 1993, more than 200 years after his death, Benjamin Franklin’s Philadelphia trust was
valued at more than $2.25 million and his Boston trust at almost $5 million.
People in Boston know a little more about money.
[Laughter] Sweeping the country at this same time—1993—was the return of the minstrel
show under the guise of youth culture, and the new plantation was the inner city.
Let’s sample some of the misogynistic similarities between the old minstrel routine and the new.
This is from a Christy Minstrel songbook from 1850: “One evening at a ball, ha, ha; a
thick-lipped wench so rall, ha, ha; she fell in love with me, ha, ha; she fell in love
with me, ha, ha; I danced with her all night, ha, ha; she did my finger bite, ha, ha; I
hit her with all my might, ha, ha; an spoiled the wench’s sight, ha, ha.”
What about the 1992 counterpoint, the rap anthem “Ain’t Nothing but a G Thang”?
[Laughter] “Try to get close, and you’re bound to get smacked; My little homey Snoop
Doggy Dogg has got my back; Never let me slip, ‘cause if I slip, then I’m slippin’;
But if I got my nina, then you know I’m straight trippin’; And Imma continue to
put the rap down, put the mac down, and if your woman wanna trip, I have to put the smack
down; Yeah, and you don’t stop.”
I guess some things don’t stop, and something’s always for sale, and we forgot because those
drums were now machines, and we lost the memory and the meaning, and folks mistakenly thought
it had something to do with being real.
What’s real is the fact that our country has always been enriched and expanded when
the folks who don’t understand one another or just plain don’t like one another figure
out how to come together or are forced together.
What art came from this glorious tension of slavery and freedom; and Europe and Africa;
and New and Old World and Old, Old World.
Those American slaves could have cared less about European tastes.
They were working with basics.
They were working with what they knew had to be adapted to this new situation, so they
transformed everything they touched through improvisation, and because their situation
required so much humor to survive, they syncopated.
[Band plays percussion]
Now, here comes one of the deepest American truths: the minstrel show.
I’ve got to lean over to talk about this.
Let me run us through the progression.
Random black folks on the plantation imitating the ways of white folks are imitated by itinerate
white entertainers who blacken up and create plantation skits.
Plantation owners then cull through their slaves for the most talented who then imitate
the white entertainers’ imitation of black folks imitating white folks.
[Laughter] These selected blacks are then imitated by professional white performers,
and after the Civil War and the rise of black minstrelsy as an enterprise, white professionals
were then imitated by black professionals.
That’s why you can’t separate this stuff.
Don’t have nothing to do with being real or from the hood.
It’ll make Yankee Doodle’s head spin.
He told us “Mind the music and the step,” the dance, and with the music, dance, comedy,
and other variety-show aspects of minstrelsy, generations of American show people were trained.
The minstrel show also allowed white artists to don a mask behind which they could speak
on issues of sex, politics, and race with unprecedented freedom.
Boy, once you turn freedom loose, there’s no telling where it might go.
So, the first generation of free Afro-Americans were introduced to America under the divisive
lyrics and skits of the minstrel show.
It was the blues before the blues.
But when the Fisk Jubilee singers toured Europe, they told no jokes, nor did they dance the
buck-and-wing.
They sang the purest pianissimo anyone had ever heard, and where people came to hear
savages recently freed from the plantations, they heard an ancient and modern human cry
and a yearning for respect and dignity and love.
You know, Scott Joplin, he was studying with the German-born Julius Weiss, and Joplin gave
us the timeless optimism of ragtime.
Well, anyway, ragtime wasn’t nothing but syncopated marches mixed with banjo figures.
The March King, John Philip Sousa, lived near the Washington, DC, neighborhood where James
Reese Europe grew up, and the youngster Europe studied the violin with Sousa’s bandmaster,
Enrico Hurlei.
Europe, who was Afro-American, played music for Vernon and Irene Castle, who popularized
ballroom dancing for white Americans who had come from the farms to the city.
Together, the Castles and Europe came up with the foxtrot, the turkey trot, the quickstep,
the two-step, the twist, the glide: all kinds of stuff.
The Jazz Age, and Duke Ellington is right here in DC playing tight, corny, whiny social
dance music, and he hears Jelly Roll and King Oliver and the Original Dixieland Jazz Band
and all of them down there in New Orleans playing scalding hot jazz coming up north
to Chicago and New York.
He hires some New Orleans musicians to combine high society with the deep down and dirty.
No one remembers the Jazz Age because now it’s the Swing Era, and Duke is burning
up miles of highway all over this land, and everybody is broke.
What they danced and sang, well, that was all they knew, it was all they needed to know,
and it was all they would ever need to know.
After the war, people are running away to the suburbs and running so hard they’re
forgetting all kinds of stuff about who we are, and the people in the cities get lost,
too.
People were trying to bring America’s art to schools, and here’s Duke Ellington at
Ohio State University.
His tenor sax man, Big Al Sears, befriends a student trombonist named Alan Freed, and
they keep in touch.
Freed goes into radio and has a show in Cleveland called The Moondog Show, and Big Al writes
a song called “Castle Rock.”
“Castle Rock”?
“Castle Rock.”
Big Al goes on Freed’s show, and Freed loves Big Al so much he plays the song seven times
in a row.
He starts calling these songs—these blues shuffles—he calls them rock ‘n’ roll.
It wasn’t nothing but what Basie had been playing and Louis Jordan played and Fats Domino
and them down in New Orleans, but pretty soon, Freed started producing rock ‘n’ roll
shows with integrated bands, and he had Big Al in one of these bands.
Well, American Bandstand approaches Freed with a television spot, but they say, “Uh,
you got to lose these colored boys.”
Freed says, “Hey, man, Big Al has been with me since I was in college.
I’m not going to fire this man.
This is my man.”
They say, “Too bad.”
They hired Dick Clark and did away with the band altogether to avoid any unpleasantry.
That’s marketing.
Anyway, black folks had Soul Train on TV, [Laughter] and funk was the rage.
No one remembered that rock ‘n’ roll was a merger of gospel, country, and the blues
played by musicians of all hues influenced by jazz.
No one remembered Alan Freed and Big Al Sears.
No one remembered that Louis Armstrong had played with Jimmy Rodgers on “Blue Yodel
No. 9” and that the country, R&amp;B, and pop charts all had the exact same number-one song
in 1955: Carl Perkins’s “Blue Suede Shoes.”
No one remembers that a two-beat groove is the same in all forms of American music, from
Appalachia to Harlem to Opelousas; so is the blues.
They only remembered slavery and segregation, and they put Chuck Berry in jail for the wrong
kind of integrating, and rock took on a distinctively different face, only to have musicians from
Britain come here in the 1960s to reintroduce to us our own pre-segregated rock ‘n’
roll.
[Laughter] Had the nerve to call it the British Invasion…our own tradition coming back to
us as an echo of the blues draped in sexuality without the blackface.
Nobody remembered that the American arts were integrated long before baseball, but by the
time the dust of the rock revolution had cleared, some kind of way rock ended up being white
and the definitive national music, and the blacks ended up with the minstrel show again.
This new minstrelsy was complex too, as suburban whites imitate the inner-city blacks who embrace
the bourgeois disaffection expressed in heavy metal nihilism fueled by the white misconception
that black people are freer with their emotions and sexuality.
[Laughter] That’s why you can’t separate this stuff.
Mind the music and the dance.
No one remembers how hard-fought the integration of our arts was, and few cared to remember
what any of the dances meant, and the country was in peril.
The stock market crashed because of greed, and all over the country, people argued about
life and love and loss and freedom and God and who they were or who they wanted to be
or who they wanted their kids to be, and some people took their own lives, while other people
became more alive.
It was at our lowest point that we reached for who we were, instead of what we were,
and the classic dimensions of the American experience as expressed in art flourished.
George Gershwin and Jerome Kern, they kept on writing shows, and those songs and shows
spoke to the aspirations of millions of immigrants who came to this country wanting to participate
in the American experience and to millions of Americans.
Here’s Cole Porter, here’s Irving Berlin with that one piano that’s in the same key
that he just does a little something and it moves into different keys.
[Laughter] Here’s Rodgers and Hart to tell us who we are with an enduring body of romantic,
American popular song that still speaks to the matters of the human heart in every type
of human circumstance imaginable.
We made films that defined the genre, and we listened to bands swing all over the country
on radios, and we danced.
Dizzy said dancing never made nobody cry.
We danced all over this land to the living room radio, and then we began to fill ballrooms,
and what glorious music.
In the nation’s most trying economic times, we swang.
This was our thing, and we knew how to do that.
It was the two-beat foxtrot of high society, the four-on-the-floor jump of Kansas City
Swing, the sophistication of Eastern Seaboard stride piano, and an instrumental virtuosity
that came straight from Sousa and all those Crescent City men who sang through horns in
the South.
The sweet ballads of singers like Billie Holliday, Frank Sinatra, Ella Fitzgerald fronting impeccably-clad
jazz orchestras; the call and response of brass and woodwind that echoed democratic
discourse from as far back as the Constitution; and Latin rhythms that put another accent
on the beat.
Intricate orchestrations that defied the norms of instrumentation; Duke Ellington.
Woody Herman.
Glenn Miller.
And they burned up miles and miles of highway bringing their brand of freedom to a populace
in search of true meaning.
Benny Goodman and his orchestra go on tour with a library full of songs arranged by New
York bandleader Fletcher Henderson, who was six years old when his father was freed by
General Sherman, and as the band goes West, fewer and fewer people turn out, and Benny
begins to replace the Henderson arrangements with corny, stock arrangements.
Finally, the band reaches Los Angeles, damn near broke and demoralized.
They are booked for three weeks at the Palomar Ballroom, and to their surprise the room is
packed!
They play those stock arrangements in the first set; 4,000 couples are bored to death.
Drummer Gene Krupa tells Benny “Hey, man, we need to go out swinging.”
They break out the Henderson charts, and that night 8,000 people in the heart of the Depression
lost their minds.
[Laughter] Those people renewed their souls and danced their feet off, launching the Swing
Era.
What they heard was Afro-American.
It was Jewish.
It was Creole.
It was the blues.
It was improvised.
It was syncopated.
It was jazz.
It was the sound of freedom.
I’m telling you that what they played and the way they played it, it was all you knew,
it was all you needed to know, and it was all you would ever need to know.
It was all-American.
In the 1980s, I presented an award to Dizzy Gillespie, and Benny Goodman was presenting
Morton Gould with the same award.
When I met Benny Goodman, there was absolutely no feeling of any mutual experience between
the two of us.
I knew his name and had heard a few of his recordings, but I didn’t know who he was.
With all of my education, I was the perfect product of a disrespectful American youth
culture, a school system segregated by information, and a decade of retrenching under the mind-numbing
philosophies of black nationalism and good-ol’-boy Southern exclusion.
I could only respond with distaste at the fact that he was called the King of Swing.
I knew absolutely nothing of his pioneering integration of American art.
I didn’t understand that I was a part of his legacy.
On the night of my senior prom, I played a gig with Lionel Hampton’s band, big band.
In the trumpet section was Jimmy Maxwell, who played in Benny Goodman’s great bands
from 1939–1943.
I never played in a big band.
I was nervous.
They were all professionals, men.
Jimmy Maxwell took care of me like I was his son.
At the end of the night, he gave me his trumpet stand.
He said, “Here, son, you’re going to be a great trumpet player.
You can play.”
I didn’t know Jimmy Maxwell had played with Benny Goodman.
I was coming from New Orleans.
I knew I was part of Louis Armstrong’s legacy; still, no real understanding of who this man
was and what he meant to the world.
I didn’t like the handkerchief.
[Laughter] I didn’t understand what it took for Winslow Homer to paint black people with
dignity in the 19th century.
I had never heard of Winslow Homer.
I surely didn’t understand why any of this could be important to me.
It was old.
I went to Romare Bearden with a drawing of what I wanted him to put on my album.
[Laughter] He looked at it and said, “That’s what you want me to do?”
The funny part is I was a star product of an American education system.
My father is a teacher and a musician and quite erudite.
I went to a great high school with good teachers, made good grades, and was still totally ignorant
to the riches of my artistic heritage as an American.
We all were.
I didn’t understand how hard-fought the victories of American culture were.
The best of the American arts and the way they’ve been sung and swung provided human
meaning to the questions posed by the Founding Fathers more than 150 years earlier.
It told you to be yourself and love what made you you.
It told you to listen deeply to others and find the beauty of originality in them.
Through swing, the most flexible rhythm ever played, it told you how to balance your individuality
with the desires of the group.
It let you know “Hey, we have a history, a depth, a tradition that requires skill and
study but demands you apply those skills to search the frontiers of your soul.”
It told you that innovation and creativity holds hands with the tried and true.
For 30 years, I have traveled up and down this unpredictable, unruly country.
I have played in elementary schools, in high schools, concert halls, parks, malls, [Laughter]
colleges, prisons, hospitals, community centers, in parades, cathedrals, churches, clubs, dives,
even on a New York City subway, and after almost every performance, people wait: parents,
teachers, kids, grown-ups, grown-up kids.
They wait, they enjoy the easy formality of the occasion, and they ask questions, and
they all want to know the same thing: “Are we together, and is everything gonna be all
right?”
I realize that we all yearn for a new American mythology.
We want to embrace one another, but we just don’t know how, and the answer is not more
education, but more substantive and more culturally rooted education.
[Applause]
Man: That’s it.
Wynton: Thinking about all them kids.
The primary justification for the value of education is not some competition with other
countries for technological jobs or to win the so-called science race or to beat anyone.
Our arts demand and deserve that we recognize the life we have lived on this land together.
[Applause] In this time, we need to be educated in who we are, and with the arts, education
extends far outside the classroom.
In a paraphrase of his 1967 classic, The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual, Harold Cruse could
just have easily spoken not just to Blacks, but to all Americans: “Without a cultural
identity that adequately defines itself, the American cannot even identify with the nation
as a whole.
He is left in the limbo of social marginality, alienated and directionless on the landscape
of America, in a variegated nation not yet decided on its own identity.
The fact of the matter is that Americans, as a whole, are in doubt of their nationality,
as well as their cultural identity.”
Huh, yes, more in doubt because we have forgotten: forgotten to embrace the arts we developed
over hard-fought centuries.
American politics and economics are very flexible, and they can work in any cultural context.
But don’t you let those wigs fool you.
If our political and economic system doesn’t serve our cultural interests, how do we rebuild
those systems when they are in distress or fail?
We have an embarrassment of artistic riches in trust, and we’re not collecting our inheritance.
You better believe Boston and Philly took Franklin’s money, but our arts are of no
value to us, and when you don’t consider the song of yourself, you become lost, and
when you’re lost, you do lost things, and if you’re lost long enough, you stop looking
to be found.
That’s why we’ve become fearful and uncertain about our way of life.
In this time of redefining the American identity, who will teach our young the rituals of romance
through dance, liberating them from a culture which separates kids and parents with phony
rhetoric, sexual exploitation, and an amateurish drum beat?
Who will have the courage to teach the most heroic songs and stories of what we have done
all over this land and demand that the best of who we are is the national story?
Who will teach the music of our country and bring races of people together in practice,
not in slogan, to share our integrated national identity?
Who will sing the living tale of America to our kids to counter-state marketing slogans
and rescue them from the isolation of technological gadgets?
As we rebuild our dismantled arts education piece by piece in response to the lack of
culture and integrity we see in our way of life, let us teach our kids how to be free.
Lyndon Johnson, in addressing civil rights, said, “So, it is the glorious opportunity
of this generation to end the one huge wrong of the American nation and, in doing so, to
find America for ourselves with the same immense thrill of discovery which gripped those who
first began to realize that here, at last, was a home for freedom.”
That generation did what it could to make America the frontier of progressive living
in the world.
Now the challenge of this generation is to find the frontier of our collective souls.
Though it is a soul with a history of slavery and injustice and struggle, it is also a soul
with freedom and striving and great triumph.
You can’t get past the truth of yourself.
It’s always there because it was there, and it is there.
And when you acknowledge that truth, you understand it’s not something you have to hide, it’s
something to proudly show because where you come from ain’t where you’re going, but
if you don’t know where you’ve been, you might just end up where you started or further
back.
As we forward our agendas for our various arts causes, let’s remember there is only
one cause, and whether that cause is expressed in artists visiting schools or museum trips
or arts curricula or master classes or community bands, or artist diplomats, swing dance competitions,
the agenda is larger; the agenda is larger than our individual agendas.
We need to look in our hand to find the key we’ve been searching for.
It’s what the Constitution started, Congo Square ratified, the Civil War sealed, the
repeal of Reconstruction tested, Ellis Island cosigned, the Depression matured, two world
wars proved, the civil rights movement affirmed, Vietnam and Iraq sobered, and now it’s time
to realize this is our story.
This is our song.
If well sung, it tells us who we are and where we belong.
What is in those songs and the way we sing them is all you know, it’s all you need
to know, and it’s all you will ever need to know.
Thank you.
[Applause; band plays]