Hey, this is Daniel Vitalis from
surthrival.com and you're listening to
Justin and Kate on Extreme Health Radio
and I'm just here to remind you to
rewild yourself.
Welcome welcome to Extreme Health Radio.
Extreme Health Radio.
Where natural solutions to almost every
health condition are out there.
Are out there. Join us on our journey to
find them.
Yeah. Now, here are your hosts.
Broadcasting from sunny Southern
California around the world. Justin and
Kate Stillman.
Well, I know I threaten this every time,
but that intro just sounds just way too
extravagant for us, doesn't it? We might
need to work on that.
we're going to need to work on that
intro.
Yeah. That's okay.
explosive.
It is for us, for our style.
Uh thank you everybody for joining us.
My name is Justin and that's my wife
Kate. Hello everyone. Thanks for
joining. And we are broadcasting
worldwide from Southern California. Last
I checked 153 countries.
Yes, we have. That is pretty And
growing.
amazing.
I know. It's great. We are so blessed
and we're broadcasting from Southern
California and it's a beautiful day
here. It's about feels like it's what 70
already. Mhm. It's going to be about 80
I think today.
Is that right? Gosh, for a Friday
November 8th, 2013, that's not too
shabby.
Yeah, you think?
A lot of the country is in snow right
now, so
if you like to follow us on Facebook,
we'd love to have you join our
community. We post all of our shows, our
archive shows, upcoming schedules,
things like that on Facebook, so if you
want to go to
extremehealthradio.com/facebook
you can click the like button and keep
up to date with all of our shows
broadcasting four days a week, so you
want to keep up to date with what we're
doing.
And this is episode number 174.
So, if you go to extremehealthradio.com/
174
you'll be able to check out all the
links that Dr. Kruse mentions. We have a
great show with Dr. Kruse today. Dr.
Jack Kruse, we'll be introducing him in
just a second.
And if you'd like to be on the show, we
are now broadcasting live. Crazy, huh?
Just this week.
Yeah, we are broadcasting live, so if
you want to go to
extremehealthradio.com/live
you can check out the the live show. We
have a chat room there. You can ask
questions. All that good stuff. And with
the holiday season coming up, if you
would like to support our work and I
know many of you purchase on Amazon we
would be very very grateful if you would
go through our link and we would get a
little commission that would help keep
everything free cuz all of our shows are
free for you guys, so if you go to
extremehealthradio.com/amazon
you can support us that way and that's
we're so grateful for people who've been
doing that.
We keep the lights on and keeps
everything running over here and we get
great guests on, so thank you. Great
guests like Dr. Jack Kruse, so
Yes. this is going to be fun today.
Looking at our upcoming show schedule,
if you're interested, we have Emil de
Toffol. I don't know how to say his last
name, but we'll we'll we'll work on
that. He's from LessEMF and he'll be
talking about how to protect ourselves
from cell phones, from wireless
technology and all this kind of
Which is a big recurring theme for all
of us.
Yes.
Having him on is going to be a great
show.
Yes, that'll be a good show. And then we
have Daniel Vitalis. Mhm. He'll be
talking about hormone health.
Mhm. Hormones are always good.
We all have them.
And then we have Dr. Morton Walker and
he'll be talking about cancer and how to
heal cancer naturally, but today I'm
really excited about having Dr. Jack
Kruse on. He's really a fascinating guy
and I've heard many of his interviews on
the internet and on different places,
YouTube and you know how things spread
around online. These days. And he's just
really a fascinating guy. His website is
jackkruse.com j a c k k r u s e .com and
he's a respected neurosurgeon and CEO of
Optimized Life which is a health and
wellness company dedicated to helping
patients avoid the health care burdens
we typically undergo as we age and he's
a member of the American Association of
Neurological Surgeons the Congress of
Neurological Surgeons and Age Management
Medicine Group. Wow, it's quite a
resume, Doctor. Thank you for joining us
today. Ain't no problem. Yeah, wow. So,
how did you get started getting into the
paleo lifestyle and how did you get
started doing this whole thing?
Well, I started from failure and um
probably 10 years ago after I had
finished my residency
I was living the good life and got
really heavy and I was giving a spine
meeting down in Birmingham, Alabama and
I just stood up to give the talk and I
tore my knee meniscus. Didn't realize it
at that time, but I found out about it
five or six days later
and um
the whole process started there. One of
the surgeon's wives happened to work for
a pharmaceutical company and she told me
she goes, I think um
I know why this happened to you and she
sent me six papers and and a book to
read and that kind of set me on the
journey of basically going to the
medical school library in Nashville at
Vanderbilt and spending 18 months
researching all the leads that she had
given me Mhm. and basically what I found
was that my number one problem
was that I was living a a biologic
mismatch life. In other words, I was
uncoupling my biology from circadian
biology and it was causing me to have
problems with my hormones
uh it was causing me to have problems
with decision-making
um
so then I decided well, if that's in
fact the case, I need to figure out how
to fix this. Mhm. Uh I went the
conventional route, you know, all the
stuff that I learned about in medical
school, you know, eat less, exercise
more. That didn't work.
Right.
Yeah. In fact, I gained weight. Mhm. Um
and I even had some of my best friends
who were primary care doctors, you know,
who were my referral docs
uh try to help me and that was an epic
fail.
So, I took, you know, things into my own
hands and over that 18-month period of
time I started to realize
that physics actually dictates biology
and not the other way around and it was
very counterintuitive when I when I
figured it out
but I realized that um
probably about 18 months in that if I
could do things to reset the circadian
cycling in my own brain that I felt that
I could reset, you know, some of the
epigenetic switches in my DNA to cause
me to lose weight, so I believe it was
2006 or 2007. I can't remember which
one. It was day before Thanksgiving I
had gone out to Whole Foods and spent
ridiculous amount of money cuz we're
having all of our friends over Right.
and I told everybody this would be the
last supper and I stood up, you know,
after
Thanksgiving or I should say day before
Thanksgiving there and told my whole
family that in a year
I would be in a speedo and everybody
laughed cuz at the time I was 357 lb.
Oh my gosh.
Wow. At 6'2" and um the only person that
didn't laugh was my wife because
she had seen for literally 18 to 24
months what I was doing in my man cave
that was loaded with and I'm not kidding
you when I tell you this, I had
probably a Ryder truck, 16-ft, 18-ft
truck filled with books and papers.
Real. So, you were just
That's how much stuff that I had was a
real pain in the ass to throw all that
stuff out Oh, I'm sure.
So, you were just
when I was done with it. But you know,
basically what I came up with at that
time was two prescriptions.
The leptin prescription was the first
one and then I came up with the cold
thermogenesis protocol and these were
the two basic prescriptions that I used
to, you know, fix me and and in three
months I lost 77 lb and 11 months I lost
133.
Right now, I've been probably right
right between 200 and 215 lb for almost
eight to 10 years.
And once it worked on me,
at the time my son was going to private
school
and he was a big kid. He was 6'3" and he
was 257 lb at 15 and 1/2 years old.
Well, he came home from school when we
were on a family vacation at Disney
World
Mhm. and he said, Dad, don't give me the
brain surgery spiel. He goes, just tell
me what to do.
And that that's actually the first time
I actually told anybody what the leptin
prescription really was and what cold
thermogenesis was Wow. and he said,
well, how much weight can I lose, Dad,
before I go back to school in six weeks?
And he wound up losing 57 lb in six
weeks. Oh my gosh.
nephew who happened to be sitting there
with him, who who decided not to go on
the rides with the family to listen he
was 21 years old at the time and he was
kind of unemployed, didn't know what he
wanted to do with his life.
Um and his first year
he lost over 100 lb, but he lost a total
of 100 and
I think it was 100
uh 10 lb. He's now in the Navy in um uh
a Navy SEAL program. I think he's right
now on a Trident submarine somewhere in
Hong Kong. Oh my gosh.
But he also did it in one year's time
and
um you know, of course when I went back
to the clinic people started seeing me
shrink and of course everybody asked me,
did you have surgery? You know, what did
you do? Right.
You know, all the doctors were asking me
and I said, look, if I told you, you
wouldn't believe it, so let's just leave
it at that. And you know, I wasn't
really confident in telling people kind
of what I was doing and several of my
patients really were very very
interested and they said, look, just
write down what I need to do. So, I did
and they all started And so
Well. now, does the leptin protocol, I
think I heard you mention on other shows
that it didn't even include any
exercise, did it, for the first year or
for 6 months?
Remember what I said in the beginning
when we started talking that, you know,
the conventional wisdom is
that um
that you need to eat less and exercise
more. The Leptin Prescription is exactly
opposite. You actually eat more and you
exercise less. Oh my god. And that's
that's why it sounds very
counterintuitive. And the reason why
it's counterintuitive, and this is
really a key point, it's not based on
biology, it's based on physics. And
anybody who knows anything about quantum
physics knows that there's a lot of
counterintuitive points in quantum
physics that don't on the surface seem
to make sense.
Mhm. Uh and without, you know, hurting
anybody's head, just let's say that the
six steps that are in the Leptin
Prescription are all tied to some of
those quirky little features that are
present in quantum physics.
Um now, if people want to learn about
all that, trust me, I can split their
head open on my blog. As you know, many
people have known because there's
there's a lot of, you know, I think when
people do this, they want to know how it
works.
Mhm. Um and it's pretty interesting
stuff because I figured this out, you
know, for obesity, but it turns out that
it actually works for lots of other
diseases like autoimmune diseases,
autism,
um and things like that. You just have
to understand
kind of how to apply
the issue and understand what the big
part of the prescription is for the
disease that you're dealing with. So,
it's called the Leptin Protocol. And for
our listeners, talk a little bit about
what exactly Leptin is.
Well, Leptin's a hormone um
that actually is it acts in the
hypothalamus, but how we get it,
interestingly enough, comes from fat
cells. But children are not born with
Leptin. They actually are designed to
get it from their mother when they
breastfeed. So, if you don't breastfeed,
you never get it. The best way to
describe Leptin, to make it really
simple, think about Leptin as the
software program for the hardware in
your brain. And where that Leptin
receptor is in a place of the brain
called the hypothalamus, which basically
controls all of your autonomic functions
in your body, which, you know, feeding
and appetite happen to be one.
Well, Leptin goes and acts there, and
the message that it gives the brain,
it turns the Leptin receptor into an
energy balance accountant. In other
words, it accounts for electrons,
photons, and protons from the sun.
Um what may blow people's minds is that
most people think about food as food.
Uh-huh. I don't. I think of food in
terms of the photoelectric effect
because every bit of food on this planet
grows with some to the sun.
And that's basically how um the whole
protocol works. And if you if the Leptin
receptor does not work because there's
inflammation in the body, then it's just
like having a car with a gas gauge where
you can't tell whether your tank is full
or empty. So, you have no idea when you
need to refuel or not. That's the best
way to describe what Leptin resistance
really is. There's many different ways
to become Leptin resistant, but that
gives you the general gist.
Okay, so generally it's tied more to
towards inflammation than anything else.
Oh, absolutely. I mean, you have to
remember, anytime you have a circadian
mismatch for any reason at all,
it the bottom line in biology is
cytokines. And cytokines are
inflammatory chemicals Uh-huh. that, you
know, start in our plasma, but they go
everywhere. They're in your CSF, they're
in your brain. They they're in the the
the fluid that floats around your spinal
cord and your nerves. And and that has
huge implications
for in terms of actually how your brain
will work because what it does, it
changes the software integration into
the hardware. You know, most people
understand software and hardware. It's
hard to get people to understand uh
these days because my profession, you
know, keeps telling everybody
everything's genetic. Well, I will tell
you nothing's genetic, everything's
epigenetic. And when you understand the
difference
is genetic is just the hardware you come
with. But how we live our life is
determined by our epigenetics. That
means our conditions of existence, how
they are right now. And why that's good
news for us, all of us, is it also means
that we can change our conditions of
existence if we're willing to do things
differently than what we've done before.
So, epigenetic
that's uh that's kind of you know, what
I did with the Leptin Prescription. I I
changed, you know, the structure of my
matter Uh-huh. by changing thoughts in
my head. And, you know, people find that
kind of hard to believe, but that's
actually the physics behind it.
Wow. So, epigenetics is what actually
turns on and off the genes. Maybe we do
have genes for certain things, but it's
epigenetics that turns them on and off.
Is that how it works? Well, I can give
you a a really easy way to understand
it. Most people know that DNA codes for
protein, and that's it. Mhm. And the DNA
code is pretty consistent all the way
across, you know,
uh different, you know, animal kingdoms
and clades. You know, for example, our
nearest ancestors, the chimps or the
monkeys,
they're 99.9%
like us, but anybody who's a, you know,
got two eyeballs in their head can see
that a monkey and a chimp and a human
are radically different. Right. The
interesting thing is that what separates
us both is the noncoding part of our
DNA. And the noncoding part of our DNA
is where the epigenetic software program
exists.
So, what do what do proteins do in the
body? They form the backbone
of what I would say the structure of,
say, the building that the animal will
become.
But the and the instructions to tell you
how to use that protein is what differs.
And the the mechanism in how that
happens,
most people know it's tied to two major
uh platforms. One is called histone
deacetylation, the other one is called
DNA methylation. Uh-huh. But but how
that works, in other words, how you play
that guitar,
is all done on quantum mechanics
principles. And that's where it gets
really difficult. That's when I start
talking about non-native EMF and EMF
factors. Mhm. You know, cuz that's a big
deal on my blog, but I'm getting people
to understand
how these things interact and cause
different problems, you know, for us as
we live our conditions of existence
because how you guys live in California
is radically different than, say, how
I'm going to live down here on the Gulf
Coast. Mhm. And people need to
understand that has a huge implication
of how your DNA is going to be expressed
and how my DNA is going to be expressed.
Interesting. What did you mean a second
ago when you said circadian mismatch?
Well, I'll give you a perfect example
cuz we're all living in one right now.
It's called uh daylight savings time.
Okay. That's probably the most common
one that most people know. There's other
ones, but I guess the other common
mismatch, you guys said you're in
Southern California. I would tell you if
you go in Beverly Hills at 9:00 at
night, it's not dark. Mhm. It's light,
and it's loaded with blue light. Well,
blue light happens to be the part of the
EMF spectrum that turns off melatonin in
your brain. Well, if you turn off
melatonin in your brain, guess what? You
can't sleep. If you can't sleep, you
can't lose weight. That's an example of
having a circadian mismatch. Oh. Have
you heard much about that program called
f.lux that people use? We use it that
turns off the blue light on your
computers and things. Yeah, it doesn't
do a good enough job. I have it on all
my stuff, but you need to do more. And,
you know, I've told all the people on my
site, the best way to handle uh blue
light is actually to have either
blue-blocking glasses or actually use
amber
bulbs in your house at nighttime because
you really need to cut all blue light
exposure. And you know, I I always like
to tell people, think about the Pink
Floyd album back from, you know, the
late '60s and early '70s when he saw the
the light go through the prism and it
breaks light up into, you know, five,
six different spectral patterns.
Sunlight only has 1/6 blue light. Modern
technology, especially where you guys
live, it's 100% blue light coming from
computers, LED TVs,
iPhones, you name it. I mean, it's
everywhere. And, you know, now now
cities, especially like Los Angeles, are
talking about moving from the bulbs that
they have in the street to LED bulbs.
That's not going to be good news for
people who live in major cities.
Uh and people don't understand that this
stuff happens because they don't
appreciate, you know, the details that
are tied to this electromagnetic
spectrum. And I try to point out to
people all the time that the sun,
our visible light, is part of the
electromagnetic spectrum. It happens to
be the part of the spectrum that we
operate optimally in. Mhm. The problem
is these days, we don't live in that
spectrum anymore.
Mhm.
Yeah, all day long we're shielded from
the sun, and then at night we're in
front of TV or, you know, TV screens and
Right. And then that's when you asked
me, "Well, give me an example of a
circadian mismatch." It's almost I would
flip the question around and say, "Why
don't you two tell me when you actually
live a normal life?" You don't. I know,
right?
Oh gosh.
And that's the truth. I mean, it really
is the truth. And when people start to
get, you know, this um realization, they
start to realize why we're seeing
autoimmunity, why we're seeing obesity,
why we're seeing autism, you know,
because these things affect
different aspects of our DNA. You know,
to to to make this even maybe more
germane to what we're talking about, cuz
I know we started talking about obesity,
I want everybody to think about RNA and
DNA as kind of like uh when you open up
a piano and you see all the strings
there? Mhm. Well, the electromagnetic
spectrum plays different strings in that
piano case. So, if it only plays, say,
the lower end, you may wind up with this
disease. If it plays the middle range,
you wind up with that disease. If it
plays the strings on the opposite end,
you will wind up with this with disease.
The key factor is knowing what the
normal spectrum is and what the
non-native spectrum does and how it
alters the expression of the music that
comes from that piano. That's really
where Neolithic disease generation comes
from. Yeah, it's interesting because
I've heard you mention before Steve and
his
uh you know, Apple iPad and you know,
all this blue light and things and
um
Well, look how he died. He's a perfect
example. 56 years old of pancreatic
cancer. No surprise to me. And you know,
another guy out your way that's to me
even a better poster child for the blue
light issue, especially now that all the
data is public, is Michael Jackson. You
know, people realized from Michael
Jackson was the most talented person in
entertainment from the age of 2 to 25.
Uh-huh. He fell apart from 25 to 50. Why
is that? Well, remember, children don't
have myelinated brains. That makes them
more sensitive to electromagnetic
signals. Oh.
Michael Jackson have on his head from
the time he was 2 to 25 constantly? Oh,
God.
Electrified music. And what did they say
in his recent, you know, trial, you
know, the civil lawsuit? They said he
couldn't even remember the words to his
songs and he couldn't sleep. Everybody
wanted to pound the guy in the ground,
you know, saying that, you know, what he
did was crazy. He asked the doctor to
give him anesthetics.
Mhm. I I see a different story there. I
see a story that people need to really
ask, why couldn't he sleep? And guess
what? That's a story of EMF. And that's
what people need to realize. When you
constantly play
with non-native EMF to your brain,
you're not going to sleep. And if you
don't sleep, everything goes wrong. And
think about all the crazy things that
happened to Michael Jackson in that last
25 years. He got vitiligo. He also ate a
bad diet. He continued to make music. He
also jet-setted all over the world. He
created more circadian mismatches than
just about anybody can imagine. And
ironically,
he was correct in saying that he did
need general anesthetics to go to sleep
because his brain was so fried, he
likely had no melatonin left in order to
run sleep.
And that's that's the irony of the
story. Yeah.
That definitely paints a whole different
picture.
Interesting. Yeah, very, very
interesting. We got to take a little
break here, but I'm going to get back to
the Leptin Protocol, but I want to also
ask you, Doctor, after the break about
you know, ways that you protect yourself
from EMF cuz this is a huge issue. So,
we'll talk about that after the break.
We're with Doctor Jack Kruse,
fascinating guy. I highly recommend
checking out his website. He's got a
bunch of webinars on there. We'll be
talking about later and all kinds of
great stuff on jackkruse.com. And to be
honest, I don't know where he has time
to do all this. He's a neurosurgeon.
Right.
So, it's really, really great site. So,
check that out and we'll be right back
after this break. I have been a huge fan
of rebounding for many, many years. And
if you want to get in great
cardiovascular shape, tone your legs,
back, and butt, and stomach, as well as
cleanse your lymphatic system from
toxins and chemicals, you just have to
start rebounding. It's imperative. And
not only will it create endorphins that
quickly become addictive to you, but
it's very low impact as well. It helps
to prevent sicknesses and diseases, as
well as increase bone density, and it
flushes toxins from your lymphatic
system. It's amazing. And not only that,
but it's a ton of fun, also. I do it
every single day for about 15 minutes.
And we found the best rebounder on the
market today in the world, bar none.
It's called the Bellicon Rebounder. It's
the Rolls-Royce of rebounders, in my
opinion. And let's listen to some of
what our guests have had to say about
rebounding. Robert von Sarbacher is a
health researcher and creator of the
Mini Beet Protocol. And Robert, what's
your favorite exercise? Uh in general,
uh okay, probably one of the number one
anti-aging exercises on the planet is is
uh rebounding. So, 15 minutes a day is
good for for that. You can find people
who uh have had a thermography scans on
cancers, uh giant tumors. And when
they're doing a um rebounder, it would
start spewing out and shrinking right in
front of your eyes, the tumor would, as
they're on the rebounder. So, it's
really good for that sort of thing. It's
also very good for exercising internal
organs. It's the only internal organ
exerciser that I know of known to man.
Doctor Lindsey Duncan is the CEO and
founder of Genesis Today. And what's the
best way that you think of to stimulate
the lymphatic system of the body?
Rebounding is incredible because it's
good for the lymphatic system, and
there's more lymph fluid in the body
than there is blood. And the quickest
way and the most effective way to get
the lymphatic system flowing is through
rebounding itself. Yeah, cuz the
lymphatic system can't really detox
itself, can it? I think
No, the heart we have the heart, thank
you, for pumping blood. And we don't
have a heart to pump lymphatic fluid.
The only thing that really can pump
lymphatic fluid is cardiovascular
exercise utilizing the thighs, the thigh
muscles. And that's why rebounding and
getting a burn in that thigh muscle
is so important for the flow and the
stimulation of the lymphatic fluid. Wow,
and they even put cancer patients on
rebounding, don't they? Nutritionists
do. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, but not a
conventional doctor. But yeah, I've been
learning about rebounding lately. It's
quite an amazing thing. Yeah,
rebounding's amazing.
Health researcher and author of Cancer:
Step Outside the Box, Ty Bollinger, what
do you do in your life to prevent
cancer? What do you do to treat cancer?
What do you do to prevent it?
Rebounding is something that I try to do
on a daily basis. A little mini
trampoline for those people that aren't
familiar with the term rebounding, but
it's basically just jumping up and down
on that little mini What that
does is it stimulates the lymphatic
system. Lymphatic system is one of our
primary detoxification systems in our
body. And most folks don't stimulate
their lymph flow, and so their the
toxicity in their body builds up because
their lymph is not stimulated. And the
up-down motion on a rebounder stimulates
the lymph flow better than just about
any other exercise. So, I do that almost
almost on a day probably 5 days a week,
I would say I average doing that.
And finally, author and speaker and
creator of the Longevity Now program,
David Wolfe, do you think the Bellicon
is the best rebounder on the market
today? Absolutely. I I was just with the
crew in Europe that does the Bellicon
Rebounder, which is an incredible
rebounder. My god, what a machine. And
it's it doesn't use metal springs. It
uses like flexi ropes. So, it's very
soft and fun, and it's just great to
play with.
Well, there you have it. The up-and-down
G-force actually stimulates every single
cell in your body. It's incredible. And
as someone who works out in the gym a
lot and does Qigong, I think that the
best physical aerobic exercise, in my
opinion, is rebounding. It's just
absolutely incredible for the human
body. And the Bellicon is silent, and it
comes with a warranty, and you can get
them in several different sizes and
colors. And some of them have bars that
you can hold on to in case you're
worried about balance. It's a
well-worth-it investment in your health
and in your future. So, check them out
in our store, if you'd like, or you can
check out the videos on
extremehealthradio.com/bellicon.
Again, that's
extremehealthradio.com/bellicon.
That's B as in boy, e l l i c o n.
100% listener supported. Extreme Health
Radio. Opening minds and transforming
lives worldwide.
Don't forget to join our thriving
community for health tips, inspiration,
and show updates.
At extremehealthradio.com/facebook.
All right, we are having a really
fascinating conversation here with
Doctor Jack Kruse. And don't forget to
check out his website, too. He's one of
the guys that I follow, Jack Kruse, k r
u s e.com.
And he's always writing really
fascinating things. And
I find it to be very interesting because
he is a neurosurgeon, and he's a person,
a man of authority. And so, when when he
writes these big, long blog posts, it's
really just fascinating information.
Always coming at things from a unique
angle, too. So, yeah, that's at
jackkruse.com. And Doctor Kruse, before
the break, we were talking a little bit
about Michael Jackson and this EMF and
this blue light. Do you have a cell
phone? Do you have these things? And and
if you do, how do you protect yourself
against that kind of stuff? Well, my my
biggest risk is even worse than a cell
phone and a laptop. I happen to be a
surgeon. And if you know anything about
a hospital and an operating room, that
means I'm constantly in blue light, and
I'm always around ionizing radiation.
That part of the electromagnetic
spectrum is much more powerful than your
iPhone and your laptop. So, my risks are
off the chain. Really?
means I have to do some extraordinary
things to offset my risk. Um but that
doesn't mean, you know, that you know,
regular people who just have, you know,
technology don't have to worry.
Uh there's many things that I do, but I
I would tell you uh I could probably sit
and talk to you for about 5 hours about
mitigating EMF in your in your life. But
I wrote a blog post on March 15th, 2013,
called the EMF Prescription. Okay.
And I give people the top 10 EMF FAQs,
you know, to go look. I would strongly
recommend people look at that. But the
single most important thing for people
to realize that they have to drink
non-fluoridated water. That's the best
way for you to mitigate the risk. I
would tell you the second best way is
actually to do some of the cold
thermogenesis protocol. And the reason
why cold is a big issue, and this is
something that I don't think a lot of
people know, but it goes to
the work of a pretty famous surgeon in
in himself named Robert O. Becker. Mhm.
Um he found that human beings, monkeys,
just about every life form out there
uses semi-conduction in their body as a
physiologic response. His work was based
in bone, but there's something called
the Hall effect.
Just remember that in your memory banks,
but I'll give you
the perfect example that everybody
listening to this knows is an absolute
fact.
Mhm. You take your iPhone out and throw
it on the hood of your car, especially
if you're living in
uh Southern California at 80° today.
You'll get a temperature warning and the
phone won't work, right? Take the phone
and throw it right in the freezer and
watch what happens. Magically, it works
beautifully.
Because all things that semi-conduct
work better in cold. Why is that? The
Hall effect increases the current of
flow.
When you begin to understand the same
quantum physics that works in your phone
and your laptop, also works in you,
you'll start to understand why cold is
really important, especially if you
happen to live a life like I do. Uh-huh.
Um and it's really important, and I
would tell anybody my two best
best recommendations for EMF mitigation,
instead of just listening to me,
is go read uh Becker's book uh called
The Body Electric from I think it's from
1989,
but this is the best one. The best one
is Dr. Marino, Andrew Marino, who was
Becker's research assistant. He's also a
physicist. He wrote a book called Going
Somewhere. And if you want to know
everything there is to know about EMF,
about the testimony that these guys gave
to the military, to the federal
government, and also when they were on
60 Minutes protocol, I mean, shouldn't
say program,
after Becker and Marino spoke up, they
had their funding from the NIH pulled.
Really? And just so you guys know,
Becker was nominated twice for a Nobel
Prize. And the reason why, in his day,
no one really knew about this stuff, is
this was happening in the mid-70s. The
only EMF meeting devices then were
microwave ovens. You know, we didn't
have cell phones. We didn't have the use
that we have now, and I can promise you
if when you read Marino's book, you will
absolutely have to pick your jaw
off the ground when you start to realize
how much research has already been done,
but it's been buried by special
interests for a damn good reason. But
this book is a treaty on EMF, and I've
turned all the members on my site onto
the book.
Mhm. I've read it five times, and I'm
not kidding you, every time I read it, I
I it's just mind-boggling. We just had a
guy on our show, and he was talking
about how cell phones, the radiation
coming off from them, and and what they
do to your brain. They they uh break
down the blood-brain barrier, and it
allows toxins to get into your brain and
things like that.
that work is done by uh Allan Frey. You
guys can write that name down. He's uh
one of the people that, believe it or
not, worked with Becker and worked in
the military Interesting.
back in the '70s, and he's the one that
showed that when you use low-frequency
electromagnetic radiation, it opens the
blood-brain barrier. And how they did it
was with a dye called methylene blue.
Mhm. Uh and they found that the
methylene blue went right through into
the brain and turned the the surface of
the brain blue.
Uh and this worked in monkeys, it worked
in lower mammals, and it also happens in
humans. And you know, the data gets
worse because just in the last year,
there's now researchers at the
University of Pennsylvania that have
showed not only does it open the
blood-brain barrier, but it does
something even more detrimental. It
actually upregulates carbohydrate
metabolism, and this is part of the
reason why we're starting to see more
brain tumors because of something called
the Warburg effect. Mhm. Um anytime you
change, remember we talked earlier about
how EMF plays different piano strings on
the piano. Well, when you use non-native
EMF, you stop being able to use your
fat-burning pathways, and you have to
use
your carbohydrate-burning pathways
because that's the way it works, you
know, from a quantum mechanical
perspective. Well, the problem is
biology's not designed to work like
that. And when you force it to have to
live in that pathway,
anytime you eat a carbohydrate diet
24/7, guess what happens? You make
cytokines in the brain, and those
cytokines are called IL-6, tumor
necrosis factor alpha, and NF-kappa
beta. Not important that anybody
remembers that, but in case anybody
wants to fact-check all this, you'll
find all this stuff has been done and
researched extensively by guys like Frey
and Becker. Mhm. Um and this is the
reason why people get sick. So, the more
you use this stuff,
the more you have to do you to mitigate
your risks.
Interesting.
and cold thermogenesis happens to be
one of the ideal things to use. Uh the
problem is most people don't use it
enough. Yeah.
Yeah, can you tell us a little bit about
what that looks like?
Uh what looks like?
To to actually use that that protocol.
Oh, yeah, sure. I mean, I've got the
protocol written out. Uh so, no one
needs to, you know, write all this down.
I would tell you I wrote it, I think, in
February of 2012 on the blog, and it's
called the cold thermogenesis protocol,
and it's only six steps. Okay. Um
basically, what you do, it takes humans
about 2 weeks to cold adapt, doesn't
matter where you live. And this you can
do it in your bathroom at home. Uh
easiest thing to do is you start dunking
your face in, and the reason why you
want to dunk your face in the ice-cold
water first before
you do anything else is mammals have
something called a mammalian dive
reflex, and it ties into neurosurgery,
of course, and quantum mechanics.
Uh there's a a cranial nerve called the
trigeminal nerve that innervates the
face. That's the fastest pathway back
into the brain to give the brain the
information that the environment has
radically changed.
Okay. And that's the reason why you want
to use the face first. Um there's a a
whole the the protocol really goes
in-depth, but that's really the first
step. The second thing I tell people to
do is you may want to consider go out
and buy a uh compression shirt, cuz a
compression shirt um squeezes down all
the surface blood vessels, so that you
can't have good energy transfer, so it
allows you to cold adapt even faster.
And so
it's really easy easy to use.
What is that kind of a shirt? Is that
something you wear while you're in the
bathtub or Well, you can wear it. I I
I'll be honest with you.
Here I am on the Gulf today, and it's a
really nice day here. I've got a
compression shirt on because I happen to
be was in surgery yesterday, and I'm
doing I'm doing my mitigation of EMF
today.
Oh, wow. So,
I can tell you, whatever I do the day
before, I change my behavior the next
day. So, today's going to be a big CT
day for me. So, as soon as I got up, I I
actually was in the cold tank this
morning at my house, but I actually am
wearing when I came into the hospital
before talking to you guys and making
rounds, I have I have actually
compression shirt on right now
because when I get in my car, I turn the
AC all the way up until I'm freezing,
cuz I want to start using this as much
as I possibly can to offset, you know,
the losses that I had yesterday in
surgery. What is Gosh.
What is cold doing on a on a subatomic
level, do you think, inside the body?
What's it doing? That's a great
question, and it's very simple to
understand. I already gave you part of
it. There's two main two main things
that it does from a physics perspective.
The first one, it increases whole
current, which is the semi-conductor
current. So, anytime you have more juice
going through your body, more energy is
good. The second part is probably the
most important part though that not too
many people understand.
And physicists use a word for this
called entropy. Entropy is a synonym for
inflammation, chaos,
molecular crowding. So, cold also
decreases chaos.
So, when you realize that, remember we
talked earlier about how EMF causes
chaos in the brain by raising those
three chemicals. Well, cold reduces
that, and the way this works ties back
to Einstein's, you know, miracle year in
1905, his fourth paper was on Brownian
motion.
And what Brownian motion is is these
small little movements of atoms.
When temperature goes up, meaning when
you're infected or you have cytokines
are elevated, those those particles spin
faster, so they move more. When the
temperature goes down, they move less.
Mhm. So, anytime things move less, that
means that biology can be more certain.
There won't be a mismatch in terms of
time. And that's actually how cold
works. Those are the two main principles
on how CT works. Interesting.
Yeah, it's I mean, I guess there's a
reason why space is so cold, you know,
it it mitigates the chaos, I guess, and
Well, space is a different animal
altogether, because remember, the three
things that control all life on our
planet are the photoelectric effect, the
magnetic field, and water chemistry. In
space, there's no water, and and there's
no magnetic field. There is the
photoelectric effect, but that's it. But
you need to have all three acting in
unison together in order for life to
flourish. And the proof of that, you
know, very bold statement I just made is
any one of us can go outside, look up,
and see our nearest neighbor, which is
Mars. Mars has the photoelectric effect,
Mars has water, but Mars doesn't have a
magnetic field. Mars is a dead red
planet.
Mhm.
And you need to realize that the
details, when it comes to physics,
matter, especially for life. And that's,
you know, the message that I'm trying to
get out to people that, you know, it's
easy to tell you about the Leptin
Prescription, about cold thermogenesis,
about, you know, the EPCOT Treatment
Protocol, why I eat the diet that I do,
but it all filters back to those three
basic fundamental laws of of nature and
life. Photoelectric effect, the magnetic
field, and water chemistry. And I told
you guys before when we talked about
EMF, that drinking non-fluoridated water
is one of the most important things to
do because what does non-native EMF do?
It dehydrates us. Oh.
And that is And anybody knows this
implicitly because, I mean, I'm sure you
guys have thrown a piece of steak into
the microwave, and if you don't put a
piece of wet paper towel on it, what
happens to it? Turns to a piece of shoe
leather. Right. Dries right out.
Right. Well, guess what? If you live in
Southern California and you're on the
50th floor of, you know, an apartment
complex where EMF, remember, the higher
you go off the planet, the worse the EMF
gets,
you're doing the same thing to your
pancreas, to your brain, to your heart,
to your muscles.
And you don't realize it. That's the
reason why, you know, business travelers
who fly all over the place and
businessmen get strokes and they get
pulmonary embolus. You know, these are
the reasons why it happens.
Because you're decreasing uh
um I should say you're increasing
entropy because you're increasing
cytokines, and you're causing these
problems to be much more likely. Wow.
This is just lifestyle stuff that people
don't even think about. You know, we're
all living our lives, and nobody It's
it's a great wake-up call. I think
people need to hear this around the
world.
That's part That's part of the reason
why, you know, I I got into it. I think
the more people get into it, the more
they understand that the details really
do matter.
Yeah, hugely. Wow, this is a good time
to take a break. Hold right there,
everybody. We're going to be right back
with Dr. Jack Kruse, and I've got a lot
more questions for him about cold
thermogenesis. This is really
fascinating. So, we'll be right back
with Jack Kruse. His website is
jackkruse.com,
and we'll be right back after this
break.
I have to say, I have been absolutely
loving this product by Tristan True
Scott and Peter Ragnar called Good
Morning, Good Evening Qigong. You want
to listen to the interview we did with
Tristan, you can go to
extremehealthradio.com
/127.
And Qigong is a great way to de-stress
the body. And as you know, there's a
huge component to disease caused by
stress, and stress is a huge factor in
how we live our lives and the amount of
energy we have and the amount of
vitality we have. And so, Dr. Shade,
what do you think about Qigong? People
come to me and they're really sick, and
they got this blown out neurological
system and all this toxicity, and I tell
them, you need to do Qigong, Tai Chi.
You need to do these things to settle
down and restore your neurology because
it puts together all the parts. It puts
you back into that state where you can
start to detoxify. And so, I I highly,
highly recommend all that.
And what about you, Kit Campbell? What
do you think about Qigong? Do you like
it as well? Qigong is amazing. And the
reason that I believe it to be amazing
is everything here is energy. That is a
scientific fact, if there ever is one.
So, when you're practicing Qigong,
you're actually drawing energy into your
body. Your intention, whatever your
intention is behind any action, will
determine the level of energy, type of
energy that you absorb into your body.
So, your intention behind your is very
important, just like thought. So, when
you're practicing Qigong, you're
actually bringing energy in, and you're
bringing out the stuff that might be a
bit stale. With Tai Chi, it's totally
different. The energy runs underneath
the skin because it's a it's more of a a
martial This is the Chinese
understanding, by the way. It's more of
a martial art. So, Qigong is very, very
good for bringing that energy into the
body, and just fantastic.
If you're interested in picking up this
Qigong course by Tristan True Scott and
Peter Ragnar, go to
extremehealthradio.com/qigong.
That's Q I G O N G, and you can learn
more about it. There's a great video on
that page, and you can learn more about
it on that page, and I highly, highly
recommend this product. I love it
myself, so go ahead and check that out.
extremehealthradio.com/qigong.
Three, three, three. All three shows,
all the time on Extreme Health Radio.
Opening minds and transforming lives
worldwide.
Join our community today. Sign up to our
email list and instantly get our free
gift to you, along with loads of
inspirational content and cutting-edge
tips to help change your life. At
extremehealthradio.com/subscribe.
So, Kate, you and I were talking during
the break. That sounds pretty
fascinating, doesn't it?
I'm going to be talking all day about
this. Yeah.
On and off cuz Cold thermogenesis.
The more I learn about it, it is not for
the the weak, is it?
Not for the weak. So, Dr. Kruse, we were
just talking, Kate and I, during the
break about how some of the mental
approaches that people have to have in
order to do this kind of thing cuz I
think the cold thermogenesis it involves
uh sitting in a bathtub full of ice. Is
that kind of one of the main things that
goes on with that? Well, that that would
happen after you adapt to
the facial
change and also using the compression
shirt, but usually you can go to step
three. You can try showers, or you can
actually do the water ice immersion.
Okay. Uh I tell most people that I think
the showers are way too hard to do. I
mean, I I'm an expert at doing this, and
the thing that people need to realize,
so so that they understand, the
temperature that you're looking to get
your skin to is not, you know,
subfreezing. You're only looking to get
to 50 to 55°.
So, you two, especially, are very lucky
because you happen to have the best
bathtub called the Pacific Ocean next to
you. That's constantly at 50°.
And you never thought about that, did
you?
That's correct. We
We all thought those people polar
bearing on New Year's Day were idiots.
Yeah. Well, they're they're actually
They're brilliant. They're brilliant.
Yeah. It's It's a lot harder to do when
you live in different, you know, parts,
but I would also tell you there's people
on my forum that live up in New York
City that actually go out off of Long
Island Sound in January and do it. You
know, they've posted pictures. There's
guys off of the coast of Cape Hatteras
that have done it.
Um you know, and you can build something
in your own house. You can do it in your
own bathtub. You can build a swimming
pool with a cold deck on it. There's
many different ways to do this, but
again, just so people understand, this
is not You're not trying to create
hypothermia here. You're just trying to
give your peripheral cold receptors the
sensation that your skin is between 50
and 55°. That's all it takes.
Mhm. Wow, okay. I thought it was a lot
colder. So, how long would someone want
to If they did a bathtub uh situation,
how long?
25 minutes. 25 minutes. That's what I
tell you. Read Read the blog post called
the Cold Thermogenesis Protocol. I
pulled it up while we've been talking. I
wrote it on February 11, 2012. Okay. And
the details are all there. It actually
goes into everything in excruciating
details, and it tells you about, you
know, the 50 to 55°, and it also tells
you about how to use the compression
shirt, you know, why you should use
water versus ice because water transmits
heat transfers much better. The best way
to do it is with with metal, but I don't
recommend anybody do that because metal
you can actually really hurt yourself,
and believe it or not, plastic surgeons
are now using cold metal. It's called
CoolSculpting to melt fat away off
women's behinds and bellies. Oh my gosh.
So, this is not, you know, this is not,
you know, some crazy doctor on the
internet that's come up with this. This
actually is now being used for medical
purposes other than what we're talking
about. The key factor is people don't
understand how to use this to help
different disease patterns they have. I
mean, I I used it initially to reverse
my obesity, but does this work for
people with Hashimoto's, uh for kids
with autism? I would tell you just come
on my site and ask the members on my
site. All the different people have used
this for different reasons.
You'd be shocked at how well it works
because remember, every disease that
we've talked about at its underpinning
has inflammatory cytokines behind it.
And that's the key factor. That's the
reason why cold is not hormetic, it's
actually a primordial
um factor that we all evolved with, but
we've gotten so far away from it, um is
it's an issue, you know? Do you think
it's healthier for people to live in
colder environments?
Uh well, that that's an interesting
concept. I would say
in today's world, yes, but when we first
evolved, remember, we evolved around the
East African Rift,
uh around three tectonic plates, but we
evolved near the ocean. And the ocean
there is just like it is in California.
And we evolved eating basically an
Epi-Paleo diet, which is a seafood-laden
diet. That's how we formed a human
brain.
We don't do that anymore, you know? And
if you really look at, you know, the out
of Africa hypothesis in terms of how we
evolved, we used we we got out of Africa
using waterways. Well, today we have
people living in, you know, Kansas, you
know, and we now have figured out how to
make just about every bit of land on
this planet habitable, but I would tell
you to answer your question directly, if
you look
at um
Albert Schweitzer's reports, uh Weston
A. Price's reports, and some of the
Swedish uh uh
uh
explorers who went up to the Inuit at
the turn of the century,
there was no reported cases of cancer or
heart disease in those people
um you know, back in the 1900s. It
didn't start to show up until the 1940s
and '50s when we started to import our
culture and our societal beliefs to
them.
Um so, I would tell you that yeah, I
believe cold is is very healthy.
Um and if you look at Sweden as a
perfect example, they have probably the
longest lifespan of any country on the
planet right now. And look, they're far
away from the equator.
Um they're also one of the the groups of
people that advocate a high-fat,
low-carbohydrate diet, which I think is
is is a smart move, but that's not to
say, you know, that you could not live
on a higher carbohydrate diet if you
live in a strong photoelectric effect
like close to the equator. And that's
the point that I'm trying to make to
people. The type of diet that we need to
eat
is not based on our cultural beliefs or
our societal beliefs. It's based on the
biology and the physics of the
environment we live in now.
And that is the key. So, what I would
tell you is the best diet for us 100
years ago is not the best diet that was
70 years ago is not the best diet that
is for today. And what I advocate today
may change in 20 years when we screw the
environment environment up even more.
And that's the point that I'm trying to
make to people is that
our
the what basically food is is electrons
and photons from the sun. How we move
those photons and electrons across our
inner mitochondrial membrane becomes the
where the rubber meets the road for our
biology. People need to get that
message. If your current of flow
decreases, that means entropy or chaos
goes up. And it's very simple. When you
understand these very simple principles,
our whole goal as a species should be to
increase our current of flow and
decrease the amount of chaos that we
have. So, if you know that you live in
an environment that creates chaos, then
that means you need to do more. If you
don't, then you don't need to do a lot
of these things. You may be perfectly
fine, but the truth is going to be found
in your labs. And if if you're the kind
of person like I am, as I told you, my
risks are really high. I draw my blood
work every 3 months. I don't take
anything for granted. Even though I
think I have a pretty good handle on
this stuff and I understand biology and
physics well, I still do not trust, you
know, my knowledge base right now. I
want to know exactly what's going on in
my body. And guess what? My labs tell me
what's going on right here, right now.
What happens these 3 months doesn't mean
that it's what happened, you know, 4 or
5 months ago or 5 or 6 years ago.
Everything changes every single day. You
can have different labs if you live in a
different room of the same house in in
your family.
That's how that is how specific quantum
mechanics is. Do we know what's going on
with the cooking of food? Does that mess
up the electron and the photon transfer?
Yeah, I mean, I'll give you I'll give
you the the the classic one. One of one
of the the number one proteins to eat
when you have a high EMF life is
cysteine. And cysteine is the rarest
amino acid. Okay.
Uh cysteine is predominantly found in
pork, eggs, but it's found in some
vegetables. So, for example, uh last
night I told you I was um was operating
all day.
I ate a huge plate of Brussels sprouts
soaked in butter with asparagus because
that's loaded with cysteine. Why do you
need cysteine? Cysteine helps us
mitigate EMFs because it it uh is one of
the key proteins in uh glutathione.
Glutathione is the number one thing in
the body that increases our redox
potential. And for those non-scientists
listening, very simple, it improves the
voltage across your inner mitochondrial
membrane. What does that mean? It means
the current the flow of those electrons
from the food is protected.
It's protected. Okay, and that's what
glutathione is doing. You got it. And
that's exactly what helps you stay well.
And what is the ultimate reason I do all
that? Because
it improves energy flow in my body and
it decreases entropy. Anything that
decreases entropy, as we said before,
decreases inflammation. Anytime we have
decreased inflammation, we do better
than if we didn't do that.
That sounds like inflammation is just
really the the main thing that's going
on that people need to worry about,
especially with their diets.
Well,
I'm going to I'll flip the tables on
you. I disagree with you. I think the
number one most important thing is not
food. It's the electromagnetic
environment that we live in. It's the
single number one thing
that has been massively altered in the
last 63 years. And
I would tell both of you and also your
listeners, if you want an eye-opener, go
to my blog and read Energy and
Epigenetics 4. Just read the first
three paragraphs. Basically, what I do
there is I describe to you what the
Earth looked like 63 years ago.
And I start from space and
Oh. you will be shocked when you see
what we were like then and what we are
like now. And then after you read those
first couple of chapters, if you happen
to go and get Andrew Marino's book that
we mentioned earlier, Going Somewhere,
you will begin to understand that it
ain't all about food. In fact, food is
about fourth or fifth on my list.
Really? Really? Wow. Yeah, I mean, it
makes sense cuz our entire lifestyle is
not anywhere near, like we've been
talking about this whole show, is not
anywhere near what it what it should be
or what it was supposed to be.
Well, you guys are probably younger than
me. I I I grew up in a time where there
was no cell phones, there was no
microwave ovens. I remember what it was
like from the time I was 0 to 15, and no
one grows up the way that I grew up. And
it's it's it's ridiculous. If we could
just see EMF, you know, if we had the
ability to see it with our retinas, I
think we would be appalled. I mean, it's
gone up. We have There was something
that came out of NASA that you guys
would be very interested in. We now have
more electric electromagnetic radiation,
non-native, in our ionosphere
than is present on the surface of the
sun.
Oh my god.
about that. Just think about that. And
then then just even if you're not a
biology person or chemistry person or
even a physics person, do you think that
that raise in 63 years would not have
some kind of biological
effect on ourselves? How can it not?
How can it not? Exactly. And that's the
whole point. The point is people don't
want to face this because we all love
our technology. We like the things that
it allows us to do, you know, just like
we're doing now and and sharing these
ideas on the internet. I mean, I get it.
But when people go to the doctor and
they get upset because they don't know
what's causing their type 2 diabetes,
they don't know why their kids are
getting autistic, they don't know why
Alzheimer's disease is exploding in the
last 100 years,
this is the reason why. And it's not
because, you know, you need to eat
better food. Everybody can eat better
food, but you're not going to reverse
these problems because
food is only one part of the equation.
And that's why I try to teach people
slowly, piecemeal, how quantum mechanics
and how quantum physics dictates how our
biology is played.
Wow, interesting stuff. And on Jack
Kruse's website, he's got a series of
different webinars
that you can check out: Quantum Sleep,
Autism, Alzheimer's, and Parkinson's,
Deconstructing the Cause of
Neurodegenerative Disease. Uh he's got
tons of breast cancer screening,
EMF dive deep. And
Dr. Kruse, you've also put together a
little package for people if they want
to learn more about the Leptin protocol
and the Cold Thermogenesis protocol for
our listeners, I think. Is that Is that
correct? Yeah, it is. If we're also
going to throw in a month free
on the silver club membership, so that
way you'll be able to ask me questions
that are pretty direct on the forum. And
you'll actually be able to hear some of
the Q&amp;A like we I just
did the November webinar, which is going
to be actually on the basics of the
quantum cell, how a cell works from a
quantum fashion. But for you guys, if
you if you sign up, you'll get the EPCOT
treatment protocol, which is one of the
best ways to mitigate EMF, and it
actually, believe it or not, talks a lot
about cysteine in there.
And the other one would be the Cold
Thermogenesis protocol as I think we
talked for the whole hour. I I think you
all know it's pretty important to begin
to embrace the cold, and we talk about
doing deep CT in there,
stuff that I can't talk about on the
internet, but things that I've done to
really mitigate my own risk when I've,
you know, been in surgery for 8 or 12
hours around X-rays. Wow. If people are
interested in those two webinars, he's
giving right now to our listeners $157
off. It's normally $206, but it's
going to be $49, and you just got to use
this link. It's
extremehealthradio.com/jackkruse,
and that will redirect you over there to
check out those two webinars uh And
thank you for that Dr. Kruse.
Yeah, thank you for that and just I
think
to spread the news. We got to make
people aware of why they're getting sick
and why they're not getting the goals
that they want. Yeah. Good food is one
way but we need to understand there's
what we're doing to our environment is
the biggest issue. I couldn't agree
more. Me, too.
Yeah, thank you Jack for being on. Is
there anything that you're working on?
I'm sure you're always working on new
things uh anything you want to tell
people about? Well, we got I got two
books two new books coming out. I've got
my book that's already out. It's called
the EPI-Paleo Prescription. You can get
it on Barnes &amp; Noble's
or Amazon but I'm finishing up a book on
on on quantum mechanics and how actually
how physics takes taste biology and then
I'm working on another one
which is a bunch of my quotes that get
people in the right frame of mind so
they're ready for transformational
change.
Oh, wow. Okay. Guys, where do you have
time to do all this stuff?
Well, here's here's the big story. When
you CT a lot my friend and you do the
things that I do, you find that you get
a lot more productive because you
increase the dopamine levels in your
brain. Mhm. Wow. Okay, so Believe it or
not, it does make a difference. So,
really quickly for those listening um
that they want to learn more about the
CT the cold thermogenesis, uh how often
do you do it?
Uh well, this time of the year uh
I would tell you pretty much every day.
Every day? Okay. Yeah, I do it every
day.
Uh in the summertime, I don't do it all
the time but I do lots of other things
in the summertime to mitigate risks. I'd
say probably in the summer
uh probably three to four times a week
um but in the wintertime I'll sometimes
like this weekend I'm off after I finish
with you guys I got to go make rounds
but I'll be out of the hospital but
because I had a pretty busy week in
surgery, I will probably spend at least
12 hours in the next three days doing
CT. Wow.
Wow, fascinating. Well, thank you Jack
for Dr. Kruse for being on. I have to
say this has probably been one of the
most fascinating talks we've had and
we've had a lot of people on so
uh thank you for your work and for
spending some time with us. Anytime. It
was a pleasure talking with you. Okay,
thanks Dr. Kruse. We'll talk soon. Okay,
take care. You, too. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.
Okay, we're still live and Kate, you
have to go so
For some reason on this live by the way,
I'm locked out of um the chat.
communication.
I've been trying to ask people how are
the sound levels? We're still testing
this out. If anybody can hear this right
now, um if you want to send me or Justin
an email later today and let us know how
this one went over as we're still trying
to get the sound figured out. We would
really appreciate it and I'll figure out
how to log back in here. It locked me
out so I'm not sure. It was funny.
The growing pains. The growing pains of
a live show. So, stay tuned to the
podcast. This is episode number
extremehealthradio.com/174
and Kate and I will talk a little bit
about Jack Kruse and
all of that stuff. So, thanks for
listening and here we are on the
podcast. One of the benefits of being on
the or listening to the actual podcast
instead of the live show.
Yeah. Pretty cool. This live show is a
whole
whole new entity, isn't it?
It's a whole new beast in and of itself.
I like it though. Once we get it squared
away which I think it's getting a bit
better. Yeah, we've
we've finally got the sound levels so
they're not blowing out your eardrums
and
yeah. Which is good. Yeah, we're working
on that. Yeah. So, we're not sure how I
think we're going to have to save Kate.
I have to figure out how we're going to
do this. Do what? Do the end of the
show. Okay. Cuz I think that we're going
to have to save our little time together
Mhm.
that we talk about the show after the
guest? after the guest leaves and after
the live show's done. Oh, right.
So, this will probably be a motivating
thing for people to listen to the
podcast cuz they're going to get this
extra little bit at the end. Right.
And that'll work, right?
Yeah, that'll work. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, we
have to be able to cuz I want to I like
to talk to the guests after off the air
and connect with them and things and
Yeah, it's kind of a bummer just have to
hang up and be like, "See you later."
Yeah, you know, after we talk with them
for an hour just hang up and say goodbye
so
Yeah. Uh but what do you think of Dr.
Kruse? Gosh, he's a crazy guy, isn't he?
What He's a crazy guy. No, he's amazing.
What doesn't he know? Yeah, well, that
yeah, starting with that.
Golly. Yeah, he's pretty pretty
interesting guy.
like that was one of my very favorite
interviews. I loved it, didn't you?
Yeah, he was really good. I can't
believe he lost 133 lbs in a year.
Who can say that? Isn't that crazy?
Hardly anybody. I mean, that's
pretty amazing. I look at his picture on
the site though. I can't imagine him
ever being that that big to begin with.
Yeah, that's a lot of weight to lose
without without even exercising.
Mhm. Yeah. You know? I bet you he
watches Celebrity Fit Club and those
Biggest Loser shows
and just thinks, "Man, these people have
no idea."
Oh, I know.
You know what I mean?
I know.
That's why I think he he really values
getting the word out there. The more the
the more people the better because all
these people are just striving and man,
I talk to people every day that always
just doing all kinds of crazy dieting
and you know, the exercises they do.
It's like they cannot lose a pound for
all that they've changed and it's so
frustrating and I don't blame them for
being just feeling really stuck and
there's all these other options out
there to try whether it's you know We
have some friends that we could turn on
to the leptin protocol and the cold
thermogenesis, don't we? We do. You
know? We do. Yeah. You mean just
everyone or you thinking of people in
particular? Just people in our lives
that we know.
I don't know if anybody would do it.
Well, yeah. I'm thinking of one person
that could that might do it.
Really? Yep. Yourself? Well, I'll try
it. You've been talking about it for a
while.
I'll try anything. Yeah, I know. I'll
oh, that gives me the chills thinking
about it. I mean, it's I know it works
and it's fascinating but that seems very
ooh, rigorous. Yeah, probably not a good
time of year to try the cold
thermogenesis in winter.
Right. You know, but I say it's pretty
cool.
to figure out what he's talking about
with that shirt um you wear. Yes, we are
yeah, that's very interesting cuz
we were talking at the break that it's
kind of counterintuitive to what Sid
Singer says. Mhm. Remember? Mhm. Cuz he
was talking about restricting blood flow
when you sit, you fold the body at the
waist and that prevents uh circulation
from happening and
Right. um and so I would imagine that
you know, he he he doesn't even like Sid
Singer doesn't even like wearing clothes
to bed because of that. Even at that
point your body's flat so your
circulation should be even more
um enhanced just by being flat on the
ground.
Mhm.
I don't know.
There's so many different I feel like
every guest we talk to throws a new
uh
wrench in the system. Yeah, I know,
right?
or however you want to say that but I
feel like I
I just take little bits of everything
and I'll try anything once and then
figure out what I think works for me.
Everybody's body's different.
Everybody's comfort level's different
but I do think there's something
throughout the ages about the whole
dipping in the freezing cold water and
and and then also you know, going into
the hot hot saunas and
there's something to that for sure. All
the people that have gone before and
been healthy and didn't have a lot of
problems and
I suspect it would be good to go back
and forth.
That's what I want to do. Go get really
really really cold and then jump in the
sauna and then
I think that's probably really good to
to shock your system that way. It's
probably pretty good. I don't think I
was led to believe that growing up. I
come from a pretty cautious family. They
probably think that would give you a
heart attack but I probably think that's
one of the best things for you. Right,
right. Well, if you're interested in Dr.
Kruse, we're going to have him on again
cuz he is just really really
one of the more interesting guys I we've
spoken to.
You know, I you know, I we didn't even
get to the Paleo diet really. I mean
we kind of just talked about
his protocols and all the different
stuff he's doing but if you're
interested in his protocol, you're going
to get he's set up a special offer for
you guys as Extreme Health Radio
listeners in our community here and it's
a it's pretty good deal. 49 bucks
as opposed to 206 so you're saving $157.
Wow. And you're getting the
EPCOT
uh leptin protocol and the cold
thermogenesis protocol both as webinars.
Then you also get I'm not sure what his
silver club monthly membership access is
but
um
I think that would be a really really
interesting thing if you guys are if
this kind of touches a chord with you.
You might want to be interested in those
things.
That's a really gracious offer from him,
I think. Golly. Yeah, 49 bucks instead
of 206. That's a great deal.
great deal. So, you know, if it's if
it's for you, check that out. You can go
to it if you go to
extremehealthradio.com/
Jack Kruse j a c k k r u s e and that'll
redirect you over there and you can
make the purchase over there. And if
anybody does that, I'd love to get an
email or pictures or anything hear how
your journey with it goes cuz I'm
interested in it. Yeah, we don't get any
financial benefit from that but you
know, this is just something that
you know, we really like Jack and he's
been nice enough to put this together
for people. So, if you you know, if
you're interested in that, check that
out and let us know what you think.
We would love it.
We would love it. So, this is what
episode is this? Episode 174? Yep. Okay,
so if you have any
174. questions, maybe if you try it out
you could go to
extremehealthradio.com/174
and let me know what your results are.
And your experience.
Yeah. Gosh, please send us some emails
and
comment because I am very curious. Yeah,
comment on that if you can. That would
be really cool. No, it seems so
counterintuitive. Like people like me
have poor circulation but maybe it's the
best thing for somebody like me to try
out.
Probably is.
I know. Ooh, well, this next year I have
a feeling it's going to hold a lot of
new I've had quite the year which I'm
sure we'll
as we finish out this year, we'll go
more into detail about the things that
we've done this year, but this is one
more new thing to try and I think it's
exciting.
I know, it's pretty cool.
Mhm. So, this is episode number 174. So,
you can make your comments on that page
and let us know if we can help you guys
in any way. You can always email me
justin@extremehealthradio.com.
Or kate@extremehealthradio.com.
And as you know, all of our shows are
100% free. We work for free for
everybody. So,
um
we want to make sure that our show stay
that way so you can pass them on to
people who need them. So,
we graciously accept your kind
donations. So, uh if you are able to
donate a couple dollars here and there,
5, 10, 15, 20 dollars, if you can or do
so on a monthly basis,
uh that would help offset the costs of
us
um having the monthly costs on the
servers and the equipment and the phone
lines and the internet connection and
so, really does kind of it's starting to
add up the cost here. So, uh if you
could help us out, that would be so
great. We'd be so grateful for that.
We would. Yeah, so if you can send us a
couple dollars, that'd be really great.
Every time we get one, it just touches
us because it enables us to do what we
love doing. We love doing this for you
guys and we love doing it for ourselves
and
just uh hopefully the more people that
can find out about this free
information, the better. So, it just it
really does keep us going and we
couldn't do it without you guys. So,
Yeah. thank you for considering donating
and for those of you that do, we're
really really grateful. Super grateful.
So, thanks guys so much and um you can
always contact us if you want us to help
you in any way and we appreciate you
listening. If you'd like to share the
show with your friends,
we will allow you to do that. Please do.
We'll let you. Yeah, please do. We would
love that. So, thank you for listening
and we'll catch you guys on the next
episode.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for
listening to these episodes. It's time
to go for now, but our mission does not
end with this show.
Justin and Kate will be back with
another interview packed full of ideas,
discoveries, and unique ways to regain
your health. Head on over to
extremehealthradio.com/subscribe
and instantly download our free gift,
too, that contains cutting-edge
strategies to start making healthy
lifestyle changes today.
No material on this blog is intended to
suggest that you should not seek
professional medical care. Always work
with qualified medical professionals,
even as you educate yourself in the
field of live food nutrition and
alternative medicine. I'm not a doctor,
nor am I offering readers or listeners
medical advice of any kind. None of the
information offered here should be
interpreted as a diagnosis of any
disease, nor an attempt to treat or
prevent any disease or condition.
While information in this blog and
during this podcast is discussed in the
context of numerous conditions, it can
be dangerous to take action based on any
of the information on this podcast or in
this blog, or to start any health
program without first consulting a
health professional. The content found
here is