The mystery deepens as cutting edge
research concerning events at the last
glacial termination, especially those
connected to the younger Dus is coming
to light. Two new scientific papers are
soon to be published. With these papers,
it is becoming ever more evident that
the transition from glacial to
interglacial ages encompasses
catastrophic pulses of glacial melting
and destruction. The cause of these
pulses is however unknown with more
pieces of the puzzle revealing
themselves. We realize our human past on
this planet is way more mysterious than
we had imagined.
What role does the younger dus play in
this unfolding landscape of our
cataclysmic past? And what is a Heinrich
event? You might want to know about this
one. Join me as we square the circle and
consider the ramifications of this
growing and overwhelming body of
evidence while remember that the past is
the key to the future.
[Music]
Whoa. Welcome back to square a circle.
I'm your host and guide Randall Carlson.
And I'm going to be joined uh in this
episode by my friend and colleague John
Arthur. And there he is uh who's in the
background handling the technology. So I
can just think about obstruuse and
abstract uh concepts out there in the
ethers and don't need to worry about
what's actually happening down here in
the real world of time and space.
&gt;&gt; Howdy, Randall.
&gt;&gt; Oh, hello John. So,
we've been talking about a number of
things. Let's kind of review some of the
things we've touched on in the last
couple of episodes, primarily the last
episode. I know we've been diving into
the younger dus events around the
glacial termination and we've talked
about the transition from the pleaene
epoch to the holysine epoch. And just
for the sake of we're going to be
encountering this word frequently from
time to time. Quaterary.
The quaterary
is the pleaene
holysine
together. Right? That's eternary
&gt;&gt; because it was the the transition out of
the the the uh the Cretaceous the final
period of the dinosaurs was followed by
the tertiary right which was three
uh three epochs no three periods. Then
that was followed by the fourth which
was the quturnary which consisted of the
pletosene and the plyios uh and the
holysine. And what distinguished those
from the previous pioene
was this oscillating
pulse between glacial and interglacial
ages. All right, just so we've
established that
that we're kind of referring that as our
context for our discussion. These two
new papers that have actually haven't
been published yet. There one's going to
come out in August and the next one in
September. We're going to start with the
one in September. It's um entitled rapid
delaciation
of eastern Maine, northeastern North
America during Hinrich Stadium 1. Uh
published in the quaternary science
reviews. Uh it'll be published this
September 1st. Um
so it defines the unresolved problem
that I've been harping on for decades.
Okay. This article penned by lead author
Brenda Hall with the school of earth and
climate sciences at the University of
Maine and four other uh members of the
team begins by succinctly stating the
problem um in a single second single
sentence right and I quote despite
decades of research we do not have a
complete understanding of what causes
ice age terminations.
Then I go on to comment here. I
certainly agree. We do not have a
complete understanding of ice age
terminations. In fact, we might ask, do
we even have a partial understanding of
what processes are responsible for
causing a planetary shift from a glacial
to an interglacial age? or the converse,
we don't understand the processes
involved in the shift from a warm
interglacial planet into the brutal cold
of an ice age. I have long held that to
get to the bottom of this unexplained
phenomena, we must expand our thinking
to encompass the cosmic domain. With the
publication of the Firestone at al paper
in 2007,
evidence for an extraterrestrial impact
12,900 years ago that contributed to the
megaponal extinctions and the younger
dest cooling. We have made a major
advance I believe towards some kind of
resolution of the ice age conundrum. But
we aren't there yet.
uh the five authors of this new paper go
on to elaborate upon the paradox right
look at the name here rapid delaciation
of eastern Maine okay what they're doing
here is they're saying here uh the
paradox is that well they're about to
define the paradox okay um so it begins
with conflicting proxy records for the
North Atlantic region during glaciation
paradoxically show evidence of both both
extreme cold and warming climate during
classic stadial periods such as Hinrich
Stadial 1
uh which is dated from 18 to 14.7,000
years ago and the younger dus from 12.9
to 11,700
years ago. For example, temperature
proxies from the Greenland ice scores
and perafrost indicators suggest some of
the coldest temperatures of the glacial
cycle during these periods. Whereas
emerging data from glacial
reconstructions and meltwater fluxes
suggest warming climates.
Let's put this in perspective. Uh we've
got Greenland ice cores and perafrost
indicators
together suggest
and oceanic evidence that they don't
mention here but suggest some of the
coldest temperatures of the glacial
cycle during these Hinrich stadials
they're called here. We're going to come
back to what is a Hinrich stadium. Um,
but when you look at the data from
reconstructions of the glacier, the ice
sheets, and you look at the meltwater
fluxes,
that's not consistent with the extreme
cold that they're getting for presumably
the same period of time from these other
proxies.
So, there's the conflicting proxy
records. So, here's the problem in a
nutshell. It seems that there is
evidence for extreme warmth and extreme
cold happening simultaneously
at least within the same year. To
provide some resolution to this still
unanswered question, Hall at Al propose
what they term seasonality,
wherein, as they explain, quote, a
proposed explanation of these seemingly
desperate proxy records is seasonality,
whereby warming summer temperatures
during the termination led to glacier
contraction and high meltwater flux into
the North Atlantic.
In turn, this meltwater from the rapidly
melting glaciers led to ocean
stratification,
increased winter sea ice, and
extraordinarily cold winter
temperatures.
Okay. And you and I discussed where we
thought
this didn't quite add up.
Uh, I go in in my comments here in an
attempt to confirm or refute this idea,
which they acknowledge is still in its
testing phase, quote unquote, they
document the behavior of regional
glacier ice in eastern Maine. But before
proceeding, I'd like to elaborate a bit
on what is meant by Hinrich Stadials.
So, just going to Wikipedia,
this is what they say. And it's it's
suitable for all the shortcomings of
Wikipedia. some some of it's okay,
right? If and this is one where you're
going to find a pretty much consistent
explanation, right? A Heinrich event is
first of all a natural phenomena in
which large groups of icebergs
break off from the Laurentide ice sheet
and traverse the Hudson Strait into the
North Atlantic.
First described by the marine geologist
Hart Heinrich, they occurred during five
of the last seven glacial periods over
the past 640,000 years. Heinrich events
are particularly well documented for the
Wisconsin glaciation. The icebergs
contained rock mass that had been eroded
by glaciers and as they melted the
material was dropped to the sea floor as
ice rafted debris and formed deposits
called Heinrich layers.
So you can picture the the ice is
grinding over the landscape,
incorporating all of that material up
into the ice mass. And now you have
icebergs breaking off of the the main
mass of the ice sheet and floating out
into the North Atlantic. And they're
floating to the south. And as they
float, they melt. And as they melt, all
this cargo of this coarse, grally,
sandy, dirty material
falls to the seafloor, accumulates.
Then thousands of years go by and during
that long period in between Heinrich
events, you have this accumulation
where it's the fine grained limey
material. That's the normal accumulation
from the water column with the with all
the little planktonic and benthic or
bottom dwelling creatures that make
their uh shells and tests out of calcium
carbonate and they die and dissolve down
and this was what eventually becomes
limestone. Right? But you have these
layers where it's very distinct. You can
see the fine grained uh with maybe very
fine grained lamini small particles
composing the layer and then you've got
this layer much thinner layer of this
coarse grally stuff. And we know it had
to be iceberg transported because you
can take that and analyze the prology of
that material and correlate it with
bedrock
regions up in Canada.
When one considers the mass extinctions
of megaponal species in our past, news
stories such as the Mayori team working
to de-extinct the giant moa of New
Zealand, it's important to be able to
decipher the noise between the
proponents and the skeptics. Take for
example one article from Huff Post which
highlighted the celebrity involvement of
Peter Jackson. Yes, the director of the
Lord of the Rings. While on the other
hand, the Express took a different
angle, focusing on concerns about
reintroducing a genetically modified
predator into New Zealand's wildlands.
That's where Ground News comes in. They
scanned these two stories and hundreds
of others and sorted them by political
bias and factual reporting. This lets me
quickly identify the blind spots, filter
out spin, and compare perspectives at a
glance. Now, once upon a time, many
moons ago, I'd start my day with coffee
and a newspaper. In Georgia, we had two,
the Atlanta Journal and the Atlanta
Constitution. One leaned conservative,
one leaned liberal. As an independent
thinker, I read both to get a broader
perspective. Eventually, the two papers
merged, but thankfully they kept
separate editorial pages, so I only had
to buy one paper. But here's the
problem. I'd end up with stacks of old
newspapers to bundle and recycle. And as
the price climbed from 50 cents to two
bucks a copy, I was spending over $60 a
month just to stay informed. So I moved
on to online news. But even then,
getting a full view meant bouncing
between a dozen tabs and honestly losing
precious time. Ground News solved that
problem. With their Vantage plan, I get
clean bias sorted news from across the
spectrum all in one place. Right now,
you can get a 40% off their Vantage plan
for just $5 a month. Click the link
below to subscribe to
groundnews.com/trc.
I hope you'll equip yourself with the
powerful tool of ground news just like I
have and in doing so support our work
here at squaring the circle. So this is
a very interesting idea when you start
to picture this and that's what I want
people I want people to start picturing
that there are these discharges of large
icebergs into the North Atlantic. Um,
so I go on to say, as with so much other
evidence, Heinrich events confirm that
the great ice complexes during the
glacial ages were subject to massive
disruptions, even from time to time
undergoing catastrophic collapse. But
consistent with the seeming paradox of
planetary oscillations between
full-blown glacial ages and
interglacials, the initial cause of
these instabilities are still being
debated. As the authors admit, quote,
various mechanisms have been proposed to
explain Heinrich events, most of which
imply instability of the massive
Laurentide ice sheet.
Instability. Okay. probably something on
a scale we're not observing in
Antarctica or Greenland at present
because we're not seeing either one of
those ice sheets disgorging our modest
of large icebergs into the adjacent
oceans.
Some discharge of course but not on the
scale of Heinrich events as we'll see a
continental ice sheet covering most of
North America during uh the last glacial
period. other, now get this, other
northern hemisphere ice sheets were
potentially involved as well, such as
the Fenoscandic and Iceland, Greenland.
So,
OB that's northwestern Europe. So, it's
it's suggesting here that they were
potentially involved as well in
disgorging icebergs
into the North Atlantic from Greenland,
from Iceland, and from northern Western
Europe. However, the initial cause of
the instability is still de debated,
right? So, don't let anybody tell you
that the science of global change or
climate change, however you want to term
it, is settled science. It's far from
being settled. Um, and as I say once
again, we should take note of the
deficiencies in our understanding of
these extreme climatic environmental
events. They go on to say, "Our data
suggest extremely rapid widespread
thinning and ice marginal recession of
more than 160 kilometers in eastern
Maine centered around this date here.
We'll talk about some of this dating in
the future episodes. Um why some of it
may be suspect in my mind um because of
the un unusual nature of what we might
call the cosmic environment in which the
earth finds itself. I think some of the
uh byproducts of uh changes in solar
output and galactic ray bombardment
may not be so steady state and they may
affect the outcomes of efforts to use
things like burillium tan carbon 14
optically stimulated luminescence for
dating. Okay, but that's not a combinate
not a a conversation for now. uh
combination with offshore ages indicate
that this recession was a continuation
of that documented as being underway
after slightly before 17,000 years ago.
So, one of the points they're making
here is that you've got many miles of uh
continental shelf exposed during the
late glacial maximum and the glaciers
didn't end the the margin of the
glaciers cving off these icebergs were
not at the pro modern coastline but
extended out to near the edge of the
continental shelf. And then when we're
talking now about the recession and
thinning of that ice sheet, it's
actually starting out there 30 40 50
miles further east
uh than than one than the present day
coastline. So all of that has to recede
first before you even start seeing the
evidence of recession on the land which
would show up primarily in recessional
morings, right? the the material that's
left behind as the ice sheet advances
recesses backwards. Um
so
let's see. So you'll notice here that
these chronologic data are consistent
with rapid ice thinning and recession
during Heinrich stage 1
uh 17.5 to 14.5. And I say I would note
that the date for the end of the
thinning and recession phase right here
uh coincides with HS1 very closely with
the date for meltwater pulse 1A. Now if
that's meltwater pulse 1A what it would
suggest is that that that this Heinrich
event was associated with this rapid sea
level rise. So clearly you've got rapid
recession of the glaciers 100 miles
right as it says extremely rapid
widespread thinning ice marginal
recession of more than 160 km which is
about 100 miles. Um and then uh they go
on to say uh that I would note that the
date for the end of the thinning and
recession phase during HS1 coincides
very closely with the date for meltwater
pulse 1A. And I suggest that we need
more in-depth research to what happened
around 145 to 147 years ago. Uh the way
out of this paradox as the authors see
it is that the bitterly cold winters
were accompanied by extremely warm
summers. Uh while summers quote while
summers may have been warming in eastern
Maine abundant evidence indicates that
the winters were bit bitterly cold
during Heinrich one at least at other
circumn North Atlantic sites. So in this
model the warm summers cause accelerated
Laurentide ice sheet melting which then
forms this lid of fresh water upon the
surface of the North Atlantic. And then
as as the authors of this paper explain,
while summers may have been warming in
eastern Maine, abundant evidence
indicates that winters were bitterly
cold during HS1, at least at other
circum north Atlantic sites. Um,
&gt;&gt; so what's their mechanism?
&gt;&gt; Well, they don't really give one.
No, they this is they refer to this as a
concept as se extreme seasonality.
extreme seasonality. A hot hot summer
and a cold cold winter.
&gt;&gt; A hot hot summer and a cold cold winter.
&gt;&gt; Outside of the normal somewhat
homeostatic.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; When it's warm, it's warm when we're in
a cold cycle. We're in a cold cycle. But
somehow you can have your cake and eat
it too.
&gt;&gt; Somehow
&gt;&gt; without a mechanism. One would think
that a signal, a warming signal, at
least certainly as as what you'd
consider like if warming is uh the
result of the sun. If the so warming is
a result of somehow extremely enhanced
concentrations of carbon dioxide and I
don't think there's any evidence of that
showing up during the late glacial
maximum until postwarming then we see
carbon dioxide going up mostly I presume
because of outgassing from the oceans as
the because of the postglacial oceanic
warming right um So, so yeah. Well,
well, this is what I go on to say about
it. A couple of observations are in
order. First of all, it's not possible
to test this hypothesis. Uh, and any
computer model is going to be limited in
its value to the extent we recognize the
appropriate parameters. A problem as I
see it is that if the changing orbital
geometries which are between the earth
and the sun which usually most of the
climate changes panthropogenic are
attributed to these changing orbital
geometries those are slow. They're not
going to be uh and if they're the
dominant process driving long-term
climate change then the warming because
now we're talking about celestial
geometry. The warming should be more or
less consistent throughout the full year
cycle. Why would you have just all the
warming concentrated in the summer and
then completely disappear during the
winter? Is so it all to me comes down
upon this idea that this warm water
melting off the ice sheets goes over the
North Atlantic
and then is consequently frozen because
you in order to to to form the lid it's
talking about it's freezing into ice,
right? So obviously to freeze that into
ice rapidly, which would be implied,
you've got to have a lot of thermal
energy disappear somewhere and go away,
right?
&gt;&gt; And if it's homogeneous across the
entire globe,
&gt;&gt; correct?
&gt;&gt; Wouldn't Wouldn't we see evidence in ice
cores of a very very hot summer with
lots of melt and then a very very cold
winter? Wouldn't you see this?
It doesn't appear to be in the record.
&gt;&gt; I'm going to pause for just a minute to
talk about our partners over at Shipo,
who may save you a significant amount of
headache in your day-to-day business. We
sell a variety of geometry tools and
models like our beautiful Platonic
Solids here at Randall Carlson LLC. And
when it comes to managing shipping,
e-commerce, and returns, we've been
using Shipo for over four years now, and
we're very pleased with their service.
Shipo's interface is intuitive, the
primary order page is easy to navigate,
and we have enjoyed stellar technical
support. If Shipo can help you with your
needs, please use the code below to
partner with a great company while
supporting our work here at Squaring the
Circle. Thanks. And now back to the
show.
So they go on to say this. We attribute
rapid recession during uh Heinrich stage
one to increasing summer temperature at
that time which would have placed ice in
eastern Maine and adjacent areas into a
negative mass balance. In other words,
it's losing mass. It's melting, losing
mass. The contrast between summer
warming as suggested by our data and
evidence for co-eval cold winters in the
circumn North Atlantic region supports
the concept of extreme seasonality
uh during HS1 and likely other North
Atlantic stadial events.
Okay. Does it support that? Well, to
what extent is that extreme seasonality
hypothesis viable? And I don't think
it's viable unless we can
invoke some kind of a mechanism
causing it. Right? Um
then in kind of conclusion I say this
the hypothesis of extreme seasonality is
interesting. The idea that the annual
climate was swinging back and forth
between these extremes of heat and cold.
The fundamental question I would ha
would have concerns what force or forces
are driving the rapid melting in the
first place. Is it the sun? Is it an
extreme uptake and release of carbon
dioxide?
Is more extensive sea ice in the North
Atlantic during the winter months going
to generate a global signal? Or is the
pitching back and forth between extremes
limited to the region of Maine and its
contiguous coastal environment? Would it
not seem that a summer of extreme warmth
would cause the contraction in the time
span of winter climate? Would not spring
come sooner and autumn come later just
as it is is now being asserted for the
modern global warming
which implies less time to affect the
transition from summer to winter
extremes. Well, those transitions now
summer to winter is called autumn and
winter to summer is called spring.
So does that mean that fall, autumn and
spring are contracting? They would have
to be because the differential now in
this model say relative to now is much
more extreme. The cold is colder, the
warm is warmer and the the amount of
energy of thermal energy implied by the
warmth has to be considerable because
we're losing enormous volumes of ice
very rapidly. And in fact, this gets us
right back into the mega flood evidence.
Then I want to know one thing I would
like to know is how fast is the daily
temperature average changing between the
time of extreme warmth and extreme cold
compared to say for now what is take
take Maine now that air that region of
Maine and go what is the coldest average
of the winter and the hottest average of
summer what are the dates so what is the
average increment of of warmth or or
cooling between summer and winter and
winter and summer compared to what this
would imply. Um
so that's a very interesting question
and I I I'm going to and they have more
to say in this too. Uh that's very
interesting particularly deposition of
erratic boulders
which we don't have time to talk about
now but we could probably at some point
we are going to be talking about the
many proxies of how do we reconstruct
and know that there were 6 million cubic
miles of ice that aren't there anymore?
How do we know that? How can we pretty
much prove that beyond any shadow of a
doubt? But there's another paper that's
coming out next month in August also in
quaternary science reviews. Um
it is entitled early holicene
sea level changes along the western
Bohigh sea coast far field response to
meltwater pulses. Now, you looked up
Bohigh Sea Coast and you said it was
&gt;&gt; the Bohigh Sea Coast is just to the
souththeast of Beijing,
&gt;&gt; China. It's in China. China. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, I there's a lot of different
interesting regional studies that
parallel this one, but we'll just do a
short intro to this and then we'll wrap
it up. During the last deglaciation, the
global mean sea level rise
featured rapid short-term increases.
Sea level rapid short-term increases.
Now, compare that what we just learned
from this from the other paper. Rapid
perhaps pulses of melting and discharge
of icebergs into the North Atlantic. So,
we have rapid short-term increases
superimposed on a longer term gradual
trend events commonly referred to as
meltwater pulses or MWPs.
Uh MWP's studies provide insight into
ice sheet melt history and its global
impacts, which is vital for improving
future sea level rise predictions.
Well, and good. meltwater pulses
initially identified through changes in
the growth rate of reef crests,
right? Particularly as one uh in in
Barbados called a palbato. Um its
growth, it tries to stay right up
consistent with sea level rise. So if
sea level's rising, it will rapidly
build its its reef up to stay a
consistent depth. All right. The changes
in the growth rate include two
significant periods of rapid sea level
rise.
Rapid sea level rise right in pulses.
Now these rapid sea level rises are
interpreted as the result of quote
massive massive continental ice melt
following catastrophic
ice sheet collapse.
Now what's being described here is a
very very different model of the models
that prevailed a half a century ago for
the deglaciation process. Taking a
little bit of a detour here to uh tell a
story that I think is going to be
valuable. I was coming down the stairs
and I think somebody just ahead of me
had spilled a little bit. My foot hit
it, slid out from under me and I tumbled
down three or four stairs to the bottom.
I sure banged up my left knee. It was
painful, but uh I was very relieved to
remember that I had brought I happened
to pack my CBD from the God SAV and I
was really grateful that I had
remembered to do that. So I that night I
put some of the SAV on, went to bed.
though I've I've you know being in the
construction and building industry I've
had many falls and in uh injuries and
stuff and I figured I'm going to be laid
up with this for a month. We drove home
I think it was 3 to 4 days later I
continued applying the SAV and I would
say within a week I was getting around
pretty good. I always bring the oil uh
when I travel and I I'm now after this
episode I'm like okay I'm always going
to have the SAB with me too. One of the
interesting I found I think very useful
I've I've saved the abstract here
because I think it is useful
um in some of the insights that preceded
the outrageous hypothesis of a cosmic
impact at the lower younger dus boundary
and uh
it was published in
2004.
Okay, this was uh entitled Impacts into
Marine and Icy Environments, a short
review. Uh Henning,
he's with the He's Swedish. He's with
the University of Oslo. Henning,
it's spelled DYP VIK.
DYP VIK. I don't know how you'd
pronounce that. I'm sorry. Dipic.
Dipicing. Dipic. We'll go with that. Uh
Mark J. Bashelle and Filipe Clays. Okay,
that's a little easier. Uh with the
department of geology at the University
of Oslo. Uh the center for astrophysics
and planetary sciences
uh at the University of K Canterbury
England and the department of geology
uh uh at the V re V re V re V re V re V
re V re V re V re V re V reitat
Brussel in Brussels Belgium. So we got
kind of an intern or a European crew
there that did this work and they're
presenting at this uh uh at this
conference cr uh under the heading of
cratering cratering in marine
environments and on ice. So in this
review we discuss the current knowledge
of impact impact events into marine and
icy targets. This includes the major
consequences of impact in marine
depositional basins and on icy targets.
Uh marine depositional bases and this is
just a a a more convoluted way of saying
in the oceans, right? Um, we also
discussed because I think the reason
they're doing that is because you have
to include the fact that if it's a large
enough impact, it's going to completely
penetrate the water column and produce
some kind some type of a cratering
effect on the the seabed on the ocean
floor. Okay. Uh we also discussed some
of the future fields of research that
could be of interest in particular
questions regarding triggering of
volcanic activity tsunami generation and
impact associated petroleum reservoirs.
That's a very interesting one in my mind
because you know the Cretaceous tertiary
uh boundary the 66 million year old
boundary uh crater was first discovered
because they were drilling PEMX
petroleum Mexico was doing exploratory
drilling looking for uh oil deposits
there in the in the northern Yucatan.
And what did they come up with? Well,
they came up with whatever it was
through a half a kilometer or so of
limestone bedrock that had accumulated
in and filled in the crater over the
past 66 million years. But at the bottom
of this, they discovered this glassy
this vitrius layer. Of course, that was
the melt the the the melt uh byproduct
of the intense heat of the impact. So
they they brought up this glassy layer
and assumed initially that it was
volcanic and I don't remember who how
exactly the the the dots were originally
connected between that glassy layer and
um and the actual confirmation of this
the the uh the subterranean
crater form or astrolene that was hiding
under the bedrock but not completely
right because there is the the ring of
cenotes
that define the outer rim of that huge
crater that's buried. And uh that's
something we should talk about at some
point because uh a lot of those cenotes
became very important to the rise of the
Mayan civilization into northern
Yucatan. They were not only places of of
water and sustenance, but they were also
sacred places that they believed were
interconnected to uh the underworld. Uh
and they had legends about the cenotes
being entrances into the underworld. And
there's another example of what we were
talking about earlier where science is
sort of confirming in its own way that
that underlying a lot of the stories and
myths and even superstitions there may
be an element of of of demonstrable
truth. And in this case um they were
literally performing esquetological
ceremonies at the rims of some of these
cenotes like at Chichinita the the well
of sacrifice. They literally had pipes,
hollow pipes, uh, in the form of
serpents that they would, uh, with a
open mouth on one end, very much like
the the the, um, the ballastrade at the
the Castillo in Chichinita, the the
stepped pyramid with its long
ballastrade and the serpent uh, the
undulating serpent that formed the
ballastrades of the two sides of the
staircase. is going up and the mouths of
them are open like that. And so, uh,
they had these pipes configured very
much like that. The mouths would be open
and they were hollow and then there was
an opening at the other end, the tail,
and they would take the copal resin,
which is which is incendiary. They would
put it into the mouth, feed it into the
mouth of this serpent or dragon,
whatever the case may be. They would
light it on fire and when it was
burning, the smoke would pass through
the hollow of the of the pipe and
discharge over the out the end and they
would throw these
uh these pipes with the burning copal
resin down into the well of sacrifice.
uh you know they're excavated. There
were dozens of these pipes found uh down
on the bottom of be uh because the
bottom doesn't lead into the full extent
of the labyrinth that goes probably
hundreds of square miles. But the well
of sacrifice has been plugged up and
it's got sort of a clay bottom in it. So
all of these uh ceremonial artifacts
that were being thrown into the cenote
have been preserved. A lot of them are
in the CargI Museum. I think they were
um a lot of them were excavated during
the early 20th century. But in any case,
they had this whole ceremonial tradition
to uh try to ward off a repeat of the
cataclysm of the world that had wiped
out their ancestors. And part of this
ceremony would involve lighting these
burning resin and and throwing at the
appropriate time within the ceremony
throwing these burning serpent effiges
with smoke coming out the tail down into
the well.
And it's pretty clear even some of the
mainstream uh uh Mayionists are agreeing
that yeah this undoubtedly
referred to shooting stars, fireballs
and comets, things like that, heavenly
apparitions, etc. Um, but the fact that
they were associating that with
ceremonies that were to uh remind them
to uh to perhaps uh minimize the
potential for them forgetting, right?
Because after all, what did Merlin say
to the knights at the uh when they
gathered in their their final um battle
where they they they won their they had
dispatched their enemies. They had
established the kingdom of Camelot and
the reign of peace and plenty under
Arthur was about to begin. But during
all the celebration and the ceremonies
and things when all of the the knights
are are whooping it up, Merlin was there
with his burning staff sticking it in
their face reminding them that what
&gt;&gt; it is the doom of man that they forget.
&gt;&gt; Yes. It is the doom of men that they
forget. So we're here in our own humble
way to try to remind people, help
people, prevent people from forgetting
or reminding people of that which they
have already forgotten and bringing it
back to memory. So um anyhow,
let's go on with this quote here. Um so
we find it in they presented this paper
at this conference and they say in this
review we discuss the current knowledge
of impact events into marine and ice
sheets and I think we can uh we can
safely conjecture that there's going to
be not only differences but a lot of
similarities because in the tremendous
heat of an impact when you might be
talking 2 to 4,000 degrees centigrade or
hotter at the point of impact you're
going to instantly convert water into
vapor whether that impact is into an an
ocean or an ice sheet either way right.
Um anyways it goes on to say we also
discuss some of the future fields of
research that could be of interest in
particular questions regarding
triggering of volcanic activity
triggering of volcanic activity could
impact trigger volcanic activity and I
think there's some very uh suggestive
evidence to s to that would lead us to
think that in at least some of the cases
yes there is a volcanic response to
impacts just as there's a seismic
response. Um, okay. So, they mentioned
uh particular questions regarding the
triggering of volcanic activity,
tsunami generation, and coming up I'll
be doing this um interview with Dallas
Abbott who's in the forefront of uh
studying tsunami and discovering
evidence for very large tsunamis around
the world's coastlines. Tsunamis whose
scale and magnitude would suggest that
they're not produced by normal seismic
or volcanic activity. Okay. So in
particular questions regarding the
triggering of volcanic activity, tsunami
generation and impact associated
petroleum reservoirs.
In the discussion of the icy impact
craters, a summary of the exploration
history is presented both discussing
comets and icy targets. An updated
schedule for related missions is given
expressing the importance of knowing
these processes also for understanding
the development of the solar system.
Okay. So this as I said came out in
2004.
So it was anticipating the publication
of the Firestone at Alaper by 3 years,
right? Because the implication of the
Firestone at Alaper is that it's largely
going to be at least probably to a great
extent explained the younger dus
explained by the impact of objects into
an ice sheet into an icy environment.
Now that was in then just jumping ahead
to 2007.
Um the most famous paper was preceded by
this one when they discovered
micrometeorite impacts in bingi and
mammoth tusks in the bison skull. And
there's a lot about this on George
Howard's uh cosmic tusk website. So I
don't think we need to uh dive into that
here. I think we'll skip past that and
get right to the like it says here the
paper that started it all uh in 2007 by
Richard B. Firestone, Alan West, James
Kennet, and 23 others.
And in the abstract, which is too small
to read here, so we'll read it together
right here. Very important words. A
carbonri black layer dating to 12.9,000
years ago. K means a thousand. A means
anom or year. So this is a thousand
year. Just a a short uh shortcut way.
It's just an abbreviation. Anybody who
does this kind of work soon knows that
Ka means thousand thousands of years
ago. Uh so this carbonrich black layer
has been previously identified at 50
Clovis age sites across North America
and it appears contemporaneous with the
abrupt onset of younger driest cooling
which I think this is what we kind of d
took a dive into uh the last episode. So
there was already established that
something had happened here at this
boundary layer. The NC2 bones of extinct
pletoine megapona along with clovis tool
assemblages occur below this black layer
but not within or above it. Now I would
say there are a few exceptions to this
but it doesn't undermine the
significance of the fact that the vast
majority of these remains are found
below the black mat layer. Causes for
the extinction, younger driest cooling,
and termination of Clovis culture have
long been controversial. In this paper,
we provide evidence for an
extraterrestrial
or ET impact event at 12.9Ka,
which we hypothesized caused abrupt
environmental changes that contributed
to YD cooling, major ecological
reorganization,
broadscale extinctions, and rapid human
behavioral shifts at the end of the
Clovis period. So, this is the paper
that launched the I think one of the
more preeminent scientific controversies
of our time um and of course it was
immediately savaged by the critics u
before I think long before they had a
chance to even fairly evaluate the
merits of the hypothesis. So we have
another paper that comes out uh in 2008
in the journal quaternary science
reviews
and this is provided evidence that there
was wildfire and abrupt ecosystem
disruption on California's northern
channel islands at the allerd younger
dus boundary 13 point that's mostly a
point or to 12.9 ka Um, so now what
everybody at home listening, go to the
world map you have prominently displayed
on your wall and put a p push pin right
there at the uh California's northern
channel islands. Okay, so what what did
they find there? Well, sedimentary
records from California's northern
Channel Islands and the adjacent Santa
Barbara Basin indicate intense
regional biomass burning or wildfire at
the All Road younger dest.0
0 to 12.9 ka.
Multipproxy records in the Santa Barbara
Basin Ocean Drilling Project site 893
indicate that these wildfires
coincided with the onset of regional
cooling and an abrupt vegetational shift
from a closed montaine forest or
mountain forest to more open habitats.
So before this there was you have to
picture on these islands there's forest
growing there the kinds you would see
forest for forested mountains after this
then it says to more open habitats this
transition was marked by abrupt
ecosystem disruption
which is evident on the northern channel
islands at the allarod younger dus
boundary with the onset of burn biomass
burning and the resulting mass sediment
wasting of the landscape which follows
it. Often times when you have a
landscape that is
stabilized by the vegetation the trees
or whatever form the vegetation happens
to take and that is burned off or even
you know clearcut. Well, now that
landscape becomes uh susceptible to
catastrophic
erosion, right? Because the plants are
not there drawing up the excess surface
runoff. And so there's nothing to to
prevent the water from just flowing at
maximum with the with the least uh
impetence to its forward momentum. And
the the soil is possibly unstabilized
and the result is you have erosion. You
have erosional effects, severe erosional
effects. These wildfires coincide with
the extinction of mammoth exylus or the
pygmy mammoth. The earliest evidence for
human presence on these islands at 13.1
to 12.9
is followed by an apparent 6 to 800year
gap in the archaeological record which
we talked about in the last episode
which is followed by indications of a
larger scale colonization after 12.2,000
years ago. So around 12, uh, 200 years
ago then. So about a six or 700 year
gap, which it looks like the the whole
region that had previously been
populated by 50 sites is now abandoned.
Population is gone. Although a number of
processes could have contributed to a
post 18,000 years ago decline
in pygmy mammoth populations.
Uh we argue that the ultimate demise of
M mammothus exileus was more likely a
result of continental scale ecosystem
disruption
that registered across North America at
the onset of the younger dus cooling
episode contemporaneous with the
extinction of other megaponal taxa
evidence for ecosystem disruption at 13
to 12.9K on these offshore islands is
consistent with the younger dest
boundary cosmic impact hypothesis
uh September 2008. So probably right
about a year later. Okay. Um so I think
we had this picture here. Did we look at
this picture? Right. And then we looked
at this I believe. Now same now this is
in May. So actually this should have
been a little earlier in the sequence of
slides but so in May there was evidence
presented uh by this group uh from
Montana Montana evidence for
extraterrestrial impact event that
caused ice age mammal die off. So this
is at the American Geophysical Union
spring meeting. So this is abstract
number. I imagine you could find this
online, but I'm guessing if this is in
May and the the Firestone paper is is uh
published in 2007
and we said October, so we got November,
December, January, February, March,
April. So, we got about a half a year
there. Now, here's what I'm wondering.
Was this work from Montana
already started? Was it already underway
before the 2007 paper was published or
is this subsequent? This group here
saw that work and said, "Well, we're
going to go look here in Montana." Well,
let's see what they say.
Evidence has been found in Montana for
an extraterrestrial impact event
previously documented in the states of
Arizona, New Mexico, no North Carolina,
South Carolina, and in Alberta and
Manitoba. And I think that's referring
us back to
the Firestone paper we just read. A
mammoth fossil site dated at 11.5,000
years ago before present was described
in 1969
as the last mammoth occurrence in
Montana. The mammoth remains were found
in an organic rich layer, a black mat.
The black mat contains abundant
charcoal, evidence for forest fire,
black carbon glass foam, plant material
deposited in a pond, and unrusted iron
micrometeorites.
Scanning electron microscope photos of
iron micrometeorites reveal fusion
crusts. In other words, some of them
have been fused together, flow lines and
micro impact craters. And we'll see uh
examples of these pictures uh which are
direct evidence for an extraterrestrial
origin. One 140 micron long
micrometeorite is 906% by weight iron
and 4% by weight magnesium. Oh no,
that's manganesees. Another is 71% iron
and 29% titanium.
Mammoth tusks contain rusty pits
consistent with iron micromedorites that
were embedded and then rusted out. Uh a
sample of carbon glass in the black mat
contains 62% carbon, 22% oxygen, 6%
iron, 4% calcium, 4% silica, and 2%
aluminum. I'm sure that everyone already
knew that, but I just thought I would go
ahead and iterate it. At the Indian
Creek archaeological site near towns in
Montana, below the cultural layers and
below a 11.2,000 year ago volcanic ash
layer, there are individual glass
bubbles about 1 millimeter in diameter
with micro impact craters. So you've got
these small little
sphererals and then even on those there
are even smaller evidence of there are
craters that were per created by even
smaller impacting objects. Um the carbon
here's the the the the upshot though.
The carbon glass and micrometeorites
suggest a comet rather than a meteorite
origin for the extraterrestrial
material.
comet rather than a meteor. Right. Okay.
Uh
and then we have at the fall meeting now
we jump from the May meeting to fall uh
in December the meeting. Here we have a
paper another team led by M. Fakk or FEK
evidence of impact material and the
extinction of the megapona 12,900 years
ago.
And they say, this is what they said at
their presentation. Approximately 13,000
years ago, the landscape of North
America was very different from what
exists today. The Clovis people were
hunting mammoths and other megapa that
roamed the land at the close of the
pleaene. Evidence of these large mammals
and the material remains of the Clovis
inhabitants no longer appear in the
geological or archaeological records
after 12,900 years ago. This coincides
with the onset of the younger dus
climatic event. The onset of the YD
appears to have been relatively abrupt
and it lasted for approximately 1,000
years. There have been many theories put
forth to explain the sudden changes in
climate in human culture and the place
to scene megapana extinction that appear
to have coincided with the onset of the
younger dest climatic event. Few
theories however have adequately
explained the concurrence of all three
events.
Nevertheless, few researchers disagree
that something major happened 12,900
years ago.
So then he goes on to say that in 2007
Firestone at Al proposed that an
extraterrestrial event caused the onset
of the younger dus climatic event the
extinction of the megapana and the
collapse of the colum culture. So we've
got those three things now that seem
seem to be happening simultaneous.
Major climate spasm, the younger dest
lower younger dest boundary, the uh
major almost final disappearance of the
megapona, the major final spike of uh
mass extinction and the disappearance of
the Clovis culture.
Now what I want to fit into that
chronology if possible is the relation
of that to the whole sequence of mega
flooding which is now dated to have
occurred actually according to the
prevailing dates for the at least the
mega flooding in the Pacific Northwest
puts it over with at least a at least a
millennia or two before the younger dus.
I'm I'm wary of that and very much
intend and am looking into to more
precision on how the dates were arrived
uh at I know there's burillium 10 dating
has been used OSL dating radioarbon
dating um are they all in agreement if
so to what extent and how does the
dating ing of those uh mega flood events
up in Montana and Washington correlate
with mega flood events elsewhere. And as
we go through, we're going to come back
to these two papers uh that have that
that have yet to be published. One will
be published next month in August and
another one to be published in not until
September. With this paper, skeptics
argue that the ET or extraterrestrial
markers that have been described by
Firestone and others are not sufficient
evidence to prove the occurrence of an
ET event because evidence for an ET
event such as an impact crater,
tectites, shocked quartz, high
temperature minerals, and impact
materials are absent. Now, these are all
considered to be proxies indicative
indicative of cosmic impact. Let's go
through them again. An impact crater,
obviously the most prominent one and
probably the smoking gun in any
controversial uh example that may exist.
Uh tectites. What are tectites? Well,
tectites are part of the splash that
comes back down after an impact into
a a terrain, right? Um, and it usually
includes an ad mixture of both the
melted target material and the melted
impactor material mixed together. And
it's this hybrid nature of the tectites
that's quite unique and and they can be
microact or they can be large things
that you can hold in your hand. Right?
So we have impact crater first tectites
shocked quartz. Now, we'll be learning
about that because that's one of the
important indicators of extremely high
pressure, pressures beyond anything that
otherwise could be produced in nature,
whether it's volcanic, earthquakes, you
know, pressures along fault lines and so
forth. because the the failure of most
rocks is below the temperatures required
to create uh you know the fusion crusts
and the uh the melted microsphererals
and so on. Um, so we've got tectites,
shocked quartz. When the shock wave, if
you have a quartzerrich bedrock and the
shock wave is passing through it, all of
the quartz crystals ends up with this
almost spiderweb like uh formation of
internal cracks that are very distinct.
So you can once you've looked at normal
quartz and shocked quartz the difference
is is is pretty apparent. Um and it is
considered to be very much a a very
convincing proxy for impacts. Um high
temperature minerals and impact
material. Okay. So what he's saying is
that without any of those then you know
you can't prove that this happened.
Right? So they're saying that um because
they're saying where's the impact
crater, where's the tactites, where's
the shock quartz, where's the high
temperature minerals and other impact
material. Where are they? If you can't
come forth with some of that, just get
out of here, right? Well, in this paper
they say, "Here we present for the first
time chemical and textural evidence of
impact material from the Clovis age
Murray Springs black mat layer, Arizona,
USA. The impact material consists of
iron oxide sphirerals, also known as
framboids,
in a glassy iron silica matrix, which is
one indicator of a possible meteorite
impact. Chemical analysis of these
sphererals and the glassy matrices found
in the particles from the larger size
fractions are compared to the chemistry
of carbonacious condrites. Impact
material associated with meteorite
showers and meteorite craters and
tectites. Right. The iron oxide rich
glass matrix has an unusually high
silicon concentration
consistent with the chemistry of impact
material from meteorite showers. The
chemistry of the matrix is not
consistent with terrestrial minerals but
is similar to the composition of a
utctic point. Look that word up for us.
EU TE C TIC
EU TE C TIC utactic point in the silicon
dioxide iron tri what is that FE 304
system with a melting point of
approximately 1500 degrees centigrade
that's the takeaway there uh let's see
what is F
&gt;&gt; Fe is iron
Right. I know that. Fe. And
&gt;&gt; so we've got what is three atoms of
iron, four of oxygen. What does that
give us?
&gt;&gt; Uh that's a well it's an iron oxide.
&gt;&gt; An iron oxide. Let's see. Uh
&gt;&gt; and that's three and four.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Three.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Magnetite.
That's magnetite.
&gt;&gt; Magnetite. There we go. There.
&gt;&gt; So that's magnetite. And the utctic
point is the point the of lowest
temperature in which two materials or
two uh uh substances can be a liquid.
&gt;&gt; The lowest point.
Okay. I am now
&gt;&gt; so wait. So the utctic point for iron
and and something like nickel would be
the the point at which both of those
were still liqufied.
&gt;&gt; Very hot.
So, we've got silicon dioxide and
magnetite
with a melting point of approximately
1500 degrees centigrade.
Such a high formation temperature is
only consistent with impact or full
geridic conditions. That's uh lightning
bolt strikes strikes of lightning bolt.
However, the chemistry of the glassy
matrices of the MS particles is vastly
different from that of terrestrial
materials such as fulgarites.
Okay.
So, oh, and right there I've
conveniently look what I've got down
here at the bottom.
Utactic point.
So, I did my homework and you know what?
I forgot. And you know what else? It's
the doom of men that they forget.
So, I'm I'm demonstrating that right
here.
It was my doom.
No, it wasn't because I had it right
here. I had my backup. The point in a
phase diagram indicating the chemical
composition and temperature
corresponding to the lowest melting
point of a mixture of components. And
that's what you said. All right. and
Fe304,
iron 3, oxygen 4, ferrosopheric acid
oxide or magnetite
and a fulgarite is from the Latin fulgar
which means literally lightning.
their natural tubes, clumps or masses
centered, vitrified and/or fused soil,
sand, rock, organic debris and other ad
sediments that sometimes form when
lightning discharges into the ground.
So, here we go. Okay, so the skeptics
have been saying, "Hey, you guys got to
come up with some impact craters or some
tectites or some shock quartz or some
high temperature minerals or other
impact material and if you ain't got it,
we're not buying it." Okay, so here this
team of
probably should look up these guys. M
FAK one, two, three, four. Oh, there's
Vance Haynes. I recognize his name. El
Bergen. So one, two, three, four, five.
A fivep person team presenting at the
American Geophysical Union fall meeting
presented evidence, maybe the first
salvo of evidence supporting the idea of
a cosmic impact. Well, you asked for uh
high temperature minerals. We've got
some high temperature minerals for you
that we found in Montana. And it looks
like it falls right on that marker.
So then the same year,
here's Ted Bunch, the late Ted Bunch. I
was sorry when he I never met him, but I
was looking forward to meeting him. He
was also one of the the the founding
fathers of uh studying impact proxies
and being able to identify the
signatures of hypervelocity impacts. Um
Whitney, there's Alan West, there's Jim
Kennick. Uh this is probably his son
Q. He SS Walbach. She has done some
really good work. Um let's see. Anybody
else? Well, it's a it's a very
sophisticated uh group of people that
have come together and they're
presenting hexagonal diamonds
which are also called in this particular
form lawn delight. Look up lawns delight
for us. Interesting. Uh named after uh a
great scientist uh what was her name?
Lansdale.
Um,
&gt;&gt; so ln delight is a rare hexagonal form
of carbon, an allotrope of diamond, also
known as the hexag hexagon diamond.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Found in nature primarily in meteorites.
&gt;&gt; There we go.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Formed under extreme pressures and
temperatures
&gt;&gt; such as those found in asteroid impacts.
There you go.
So this which was published in 2008.
You can see what some of these guys are
working on. This is the uh KT or Kracus
tertiary impact layer in Spain. So the
reason this is significant is because
they found these uh shocked hexagonal d
nano diamonds or lawns delight uh found
in concentrations greater than 50 parts
per million at needle points New Zealand
and Caravaka Spain. This is also the
first evidence for KT diamonds of any
kind outside of North America. No
diamonds were detected immediately above
or below the impact layer. Now this is
the KT boundary 66 million years ago.
Cubic diamonds have been reported
earlier from North American KT sediments
by Carlile and Brahman in 1991 and how
and others in 1997
but Lon's delight was not detected.
Carlilele and Brahman suggested that the
cubic diamonds arrived already formed
within the impactor but how argued that
they were shock produced by the impact
with Earth. And I think the consensus
now is that they're produced as a
consequence of the shock impact. Um
hence it is not yet clear that KT cubic
diamonds and that's one of the
characteristics of the LS light is
they're cubic uh were formed through
shock. Lan's delight does not concur
co-occur with terrestrial diamonds but
is found with cubic diamonds in ET
impact craters such as Popagay which is
in Siberia and Sudbury which is up in
Ontario. Uh both also and here's here's
the the the what I should have
underlined both also have been reported
in the impact layer of the proposed
younger dus impact at 129. And in fact,
it turns out that the d nano diamonds
found at the KT boundary, their closest
analog with other impactors and impact
events is the ones found at the KT
boundary 66 million years ago,
which to me is very interesting.
Uh
and this relates to what we were
referring to last discussing last
episode.
Um
this is uh again lot of stuff getting
published in 2008 in the immediate
aftermath of of the Firestone paper.
Look at here. bioratographic evidence
supports paleoindian population
disruption
at 12.9. And this to me is where it gets
really interesting is where it's one
thing to look at these kinds of events
in the abstract, but then when you bring
it home and you go, how did this affect
humans and human populations?
And then you realize, well, it did
probably in really profound ways. Um
let's see. Uh
Buchanan and others interpret an
approximately 40% reduction in the
cumulative probabilities of radiocarbon
dates at the beginning of the younger
dus as noisy data inconsistently
inconsistent with human population
decreases predicted by the
extraterrestrial impact hypothesis. This
reduction is in fact consistent with
other bioratographical evidence
suggesting an abrupt environmental
environmental perturbation at the onset
of the younger dus affecting human
populations. Haynes described a black
sedimentary layer at 70 localities
across North America dating to
approximately 12.9K
as a stratographic marker horizon where
Clovis artifacts and selected Rancho
Labraan fauna occur just below but never
within or above and down below I have
ranchelan uh
a valuable term to know uh it's the
ranchel brand North American land mammal
age on the geological time scale is the
North American fondal stage according to
the North American land mammal ages
chronology typically set from less than
240,000 years to 11,000 years before
present a period of 229
million years. It's named after the
famed Rancho Labra fossil site, more
commonly known as the Labraa tar pits in
Los Angeles, California. The Rancho
Labraan is characterized by the presence
of the genus bison in a placetoene
context often association with other
extinct pleaene forms such as mammoth.
Uh so as he's saying here uh the clovis
and the ranchula labraan fauna occur
below but never within or above this
black mouth layer. So going through this
the the the sake of keep moving here at
a at a good pace um folds some age
material. So this is a different culture
after the abandonment of these sites by
the clovis or 6 hundred years goes by
and then you have what appears to be a
different culture showing up. Um,
so let's see. Of the 11 well-dated
credible Clovis sites, none has
postclovis materials immediately above,
suggesting a potential disruption in
settlement or landscape use. Folsome age
materials occur above the Clovis
materials, but a hiatus of approximately
500 years is suggested by an intervening
stereo sterile deposit.
10 to 35 cm in thickness. So, uh you've
got this sterile deposit, you've got the
black mat layer, Clovis below it,
ranchula brain and other extinct mammals
below it, a sterile layer, and then you
have appearance of a new cultural group
that looks to be in many ways distinct
from the clovis
after this period of five or six hundred
years. Uh,
and it says this is also the case at the
well-dated Clovis deposits at Shauni
Minink
from 12.9 to 12.8,000 years ago in
Pennsylvania,
which are separated from an earlier
archaic dep an early archaic deposit
from 11.5,000 years ago by 171 m of
sterile deposits. So
1.71 m let's convert that to feet. We
get it as accurate 1.71 * 3.28.
So that's over 5 1/2t thick layer of
sterile deposits. But you can also see
that the the span of time before the
reoccupation is longer. What did it say?
Well from until 115
&gt;&gt; 500.
&gt;&gt; So yeah I mean so that's over a thousand
years.
300 years something like that. But the
then the layer of sterile deposits is
obviously thicker more time has passed.
But it says it concludes when
bioratographic and radiocarbon evidence
are taken together. They point to a
postclovis decline in human populations
consistent with the younger dus impact
hypothesis.
Um,
so
want to pause for a minute and make a
few questions.
&gt;&gt; How long before you think this will
actually take take root and form in the
academic circle?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think it's happening, but it
we're probably a decade out. I would
think it has to have been worked its way
through this paradigm shift within a
decade because there's too many it's
getting too well known amongst too many
smart young people that are moving into
the into the fields of geology and
archaeology and astronomy and planetary
geology and paleontology that are
willing to consider ideas beyond the
20th century consensus that had emerged.
Ed out of the late 19 uh late 19th
century gradualist strictly gradualist
models uh that encompassed everything
from geological change, rates and
magnitudes of geological change as it
also applied to uh biological and
zoological change um in that um you know
with the advent of Darwinian evolution
occurred. It's important to realize and
understand that the advent of geological
gradualism/uniformititarianism
and its establishment as an academic
discipline was almost exactly concurrent
with the rise of Darwinian evolution and
its establishment as an academic
discipline that viewed all biological
change in terms of small almost
non-discernable incremental changes. is
uh that ultimately led from one species
to a new end another species. that what
necessarily within that model represents
the two end points of a continuum and
that the accumulation of changes that
differentiates
between two species which are now not
viably able to reproduce anymore which I
think is the primary
fundamental idea now at least
pre-genetics using the genetic code as
definition I think the idea of species
was um if they're the same species, they
can they can co-produce.
Uh when they can't do that anymore, then
they're different species. But it almost
seems that the implication there is that
within these two end points, you've got
this long, slow, almost indicable
accumulation of of incremental changes,
right? Well, that's exactly the same
model it applies to gradualist geology,
right? The landscapes that we're in
looking at now are the end point of a
long continuous process of incremental
change. And sort of the tagline of that
was, you know, geology
uh proceeds by one drop of water and one
grain of sand at a time. This was
literally the model that was promulgated
in textbooks not so long ago. And again
the end result of this is the landscapes
we see today. Conversely as we look at
the landscapes we see today they are the
end result the end product of this long
almost invisible process of slow. Now
yes it can be punctuated by a local
event here and there. Yes. But these are
merely blips within the within the broad
field of of stasis of of continuity.
See,
we know that now is not the case
anymore. And we also know that there are
uh saltation there's there's quantum
leaps inexplicable quantum leaps within
the ascent of life forms on earth that
to me confound the ability to explain
away the presence of life as just being
the long end process of incremental
biological changes happening at random.
Anyways, so this paper was actually
proposing to be a critique of the uh
which appeared in 2009, a critique of
the impact hypothesis, but in my
opinion, it supports
um it's a long team here. uh but
wildfire responses to abrupt climate
change in North America. It is widely
accepted based on data from the last few
decades and on model simulations that
anthropogenic
climate change will cause increased fire
activity. Now let's pause right there
because I think you can see very first
sentence they've established the
parameters of this particular study.
That's a given. See, now working from
that, that's your working premise. Well,
now you can see how I think they kind of
contort the evidence to fit that
premise. But let's go on and see what
they say here. However, less attention
has been paid to the relationship
between abrupt climate changes and
heightened fire activity in the paleo
record.
We use 35 charcoal and pollen records to
assess how fire regimes in North America
changed during the last glacial
interglacial transition from 14 to
10,000 years ago. A time of large and
rapid climate changes. So they're
they're acknowledging the reality of
large and rapid climate changes, right?
But they're immediately by using the
term climate change they're using it
within its restricted meaning which we
know since the 1990s
first global warming got replaced by
which was clearly inferential of human
activity to climate change which could
be a much broader term talking about
anything and everything going back
with no given limit of of time span,
right? Thereby clearly implying
nonthropogenic,
nonhuman cause climate change. But
however, with the hijacking of that term
and all acceptable discussion from that
point on, climate change came to mean
human climate change, human-caused
climate change.
Never mind the rest. Okay,
so they go on here to say we also test
the hypothesis that a comet impact
initiated continental scale wild
wildfires at 12.9K.
And then they say the data do not
support this idea, nor are continentwide
fires indicated at any time during
delaciation.
There are however, now this is this is
where the the caveat I think the
unintentional caveat comes in. There are
however clear links
between large climate changes and fire
activity.
Now there are many oh there are links
clearly discernible links between uh
what do they say uh uh large large
climate changes and fire activity. Okay.
But there's no data to support the idea
that fire activity is associated with an
impact. But there is data to so that
it's associated with large climate
changes. Okay. um
biomass burning gradually increased.
That's one of the important operative
terms gradually. Okay. Uh the uh biomass
burning gradually increased from the
glacial period to the beginning of the
younger dus.
Okay. Then what happened? uh although
there are changes in biomass burning
during the younger dus there is no
systematic trend. There's a further
increase in biomass burning after the
younger dus intervals of rapid climate
change at 13.9
13.2 2 and 11.7,000
years ago are marked by large increases
in fire activity.
The timing of changes in fire is not
coincident with changes in human
population density or the timing of the
extinction of the megapa.
Although these factors could have
contributed to fire regime changes at
individual sites or at specific times,
the charcoal data indicate an important
role for climate and particularly
rapid climate change in determining
broadscale levels of fire activity.
Okay. So they've established pretty
clearly or have concluded that there is
this very strong connection between
large rapid climate changes and
broadcale levels of fire activity. Uh
so uh let's see here.
Uh it goes on to say uh
it is generally asserted that
anthropogenic climate change will lead
to widespread and more frequent fires.
Now I don't necessarily agree with that
but that's a whole another question but
again you can see the inference here.
They are operating from that assumption.
Climate change is being produced by
human activity and it will increase fire
activity in the future. Uh data from
western North America and re recent
decades are consistent with this. Um
they show that increases in the
frequency of wildfire and the duration
of the fire season are linked to
increased spring and summer temperatures
and earlier spring snow melt.
uh but then they mention about changes
in the pattern of precipitation are
likewise affecting fire activity as is
the development and now this is
important because they choose to
downplay this factor that they're about
to mention whereas I hold that this
factor is of preeminent importance right
in the high levels of fire activity so
there may be changes in pattern of
precipitation affecting fire activity
Uh but uh there's also the development
of high fuel loads associated with
long-term fire suppression.
That sink in, right? High fuel loads
associated with long-term fire
suppression. So right there, long-term
fire suppression is referring to the
long-term human activity of suppressing
forest fires as soon as possible, as
soon as they were able soon as uh they
were detected, right? Uh so as a result,
you have high fuel loads. Now in a lot
of the western forests, you know, there
are have been, for example, insect
bllightes. uh northern California, parts
of Oregon have thousands upon thousands
of acres of tree dead trees as a result
of insect blight, right? What happens to
those dead trees? Well, they become part
of the the litter on the forest floor
and that becomes the part of the fuel
load. Now, at this point, it's well
known that Native Americans regularly
burned off excess fuel. Uh this was many
tribes did this. They were it was an
integral part of their life within the
North American ecosystem, right? Well,
you know, the smoky bear,
you know, prevent forest fires. That
whole ethic of suppressing forest fires
and then uh restricting access to these
forests which would have allowed
harvesting of the dead timber.
And the removal of the human from these
forests actually has contributed to the
uh emergence of these catastrophic
firestorms. For example, uh this is not
to say that um you know there's there's
an argument in favor of clear cutting,
although in some limited cases clear
cutting can be very interesting and
valuable for creating the types of
habitats that are uh conducive to
certain species that rely on a mosaic
that you might have naturally occurring.
when you have forest stands interspersed
with um with with meadows areas and open
areas or savannah areas, right? Um
so it's not altogether a bad thing is li
if it's limited but certainly you know
selective cutting as you would do in in
in silva culture for example where
you're actually managing the harvesting
of the forests. the whole environmental
movement since the early 70s has had
this kind of handsoff ethic. So, a lot
of the uh companies that were harvesting
timber up in the Pacific Northwest, for
example, got shut down. Well, they had
they had access roads that they had cut
in that allowed them access for their
harvesting equipment and their trucks
and so on. Well, once that uh the forest
a lot of these forest areas became off
limits, those logging roads that had
existed there, they grew over. Well, a
lot of times during forest fires, um the
fire suppression equipment would be
brought in and they would use those
logging roads, right? Well, now you've
got restricted access and you've got uh
the accumulation of this huge very
incendiary fuel load. And both of those
things are the consequence of policy.
They're human intervention into the
system in ways that are to use a plight
term suboptimal.
Okay. Um so anyways, it's interesting
here to read this um because they're
admitting here uh changes in the pattern
of precipitation are likewise affecting
fire activity as in the development of
high fuel loads associated with
long-term fire suppression. Um
uh
yeah, the effects of climate variability
on fuels and fire regimes on multiple
time scales have received much
attention. And some research has linked
shifts in fire regimes at individual
sites to rapid climate changes.
But clearly we're talking about fires
being linked not with humaninduced
changes but natural. By inference these
are natural these uh rap these
individual sites of rapid climate change
which is now indisputable.
However, the broadscale response of
wildfires to large abrupt climate
changes in the past has received little
attention.
Um,
one period of particular interest, now
get this, one period of particular
interest is the last glacial
interglacial transition
15 to 10,000 years ago when large and
sometimes abrupt,
spanning from decades to centuries,
changes in climate and biota occurred in
many parts of North America. In some
regions, environmental changes at the
beginning and end of the younger dus
chronosone
uh in particular were larger than those
at any subsequent time.
Well, they've just admitted they said
there multiple episodes of widespread
fire activity associated with rapid and
large climate changes. And then they
say, but in some regions, environmental
changes at the beginning and the end of
the younger dus chronosone
in particular were larger than those at
any subsequent time.
So I I'm not seeing here that they have
refuted
any any of the evidence for comet
hypothesis. Um
uh
yeah. So, uh,
&gt;&gt; if anything, it compliments. I wouldn't
use the word support, but it
compliments. There's nothing negative
here.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Even without invoking catastrophic
events such as a comet impact, there are
still reasons to expect a broadscale
response of fire activity in North
America to the abrupt climate changes
during the late glacial
uh interglacial transition.
So,
and then they go on to say this at the
beginning of the younger dus chronos
zone at 129 north atlantic meridian
overturning
overturning slowed
uh or shut down. This led to abrupt
cooling in the circumn North Atlantic
region and general changes in
atmospheric circulation around North
America. Well, this gets us to this
influx, massive influx of meltwater into
the North Atlantic that is considered to
be responsible for the shutdown of the
thermmoaline circulation. So, we can't
just isolate the thermmoiling
circulation shutdown from all the rest
of this stuff that's going on because it
again it brings us back to the question
of why is there so much water melt water
being introduced into the North Atlantic
and that's what these two new papers are
addressing. Um so it goes on to say this
led to abrupt cooling in the circumn
North Atlantic region and general
changes in atmospheric circulation
around North America because atmospheric
circulation affects temperature
precipitation and the position of storm
tracks.
uh the particular particularly abrupt
onset of the younger dus chronosone was
registered across the continent.
A large rapid climate reversal occurred
in regions adjacent to the North
Atlantic.
How is this how is this this I mean I'm
not seeing here how this in any way uh
refutes the idea of an impact. Um
anyhow uh
it seems to me that they're
acknowledging here the particularly
abrupt onset of the younger dus. So
they're saying that that these
broad-based fire regimes are associated
abrupt changes in climate. They're then
saying that the younger dus was a
particularly abrupt onset across the
continent.
So I just find that interesting. But
then uh
fizz.org org in response to this paper
comes out with this and this is why I
think this is significant.
Here's the heading. You can see it right
here. Comet impact theory disproved.
New data published today disproves the
recent theory that a large comet
exploded over North America 12 900 years
ago causing a shock wave that traveled
across North America at hundreds of
kilometers per hour and triggering
continentwide wildfires.
So,
so yeah, you can see the spin right
here. Dr. Sandy Harrison from the
University of Bristol and colleagues
tested the theory by examining charcoal
and pollen records to assess how fire
regimes in North America changed between
15 and 10,000 years ago, a time of large
and rapid climate change. Here we go.
Their results provide no evidence for
continental scale fires, but support the
fact that the increase in largecale
wildfires in all regions of the world
during the past decade is related to an
increase in global warming.
Well, there you go.
I mean, is this legitimate science that
we're looking at here? I mean, we just
went through one of these papers that is
being invoked as proof and where was the
proof in there? I mean, we could have
analyzed the whole paper and I think
even going through the whole paper and
coming up to the conclusions like I've
done, where's the proof,
right? Did in anything that we examined,
did you see anything disproving
the possibility of a cl a comet impact?
I didn't. There's no real delineation
between opinion and fact there,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; It's just their opinion.
&gt;&gt; They're they're acknowledging right here
the end of the younger dus about 11,700
years ago was an interval when
temperature Greenland warmed by over 5
degrees centigrade in less than a few
decades. It may have been in less than
five years and it may actually have been
more than 5 degrees centigrade. But
anyways, uh they used uh 35 records of
charcoal accumulation in lake sediments
from across North America to see whether
fire regimes across the continent showed
any response to such rapid warming. They
did. They found clear changes in biomass
burning and fire frequency whenever
climate changed abruptly and most
particularly when temperatures increased
at the end of the younger dest.
Wait a minute. What?
They found clear changes in biomass
burning and fire frequency whenever
climate changed abruptly and most
particularly
when temperatures increased at the end
of the younger dest phase.
Wait a minute.
&gt;&gt; Chicken or egg, what started the fires?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it just seems to me that uh
Yeah. I mean, having read this paper and
looking at this, you can almost see,
well, yeah, here's evidence that
actually in my mind supports
not necessarily an impact, but supports
the idea of some catastrophic
at this point unexplained catastrophic
event. So I would ask these people what
you say okay you can see fire changes in
the fire regime every time there's an
abrupt climate change well what's
driving these abrupt climate change I
mean I don't think the Clovis culture
are driving SUVs
at least we haven't found any evidence
that they have that they were
&gt;&gt; why is there a change in the fire regime
whereas it's been stable it's at been at
some homeostasis all the way up until
this rapid
episode of climate change.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So,
&gt;&gt; what's what's driving the change?
&gt;&gt; What's driving the change? What gets
back that that gets what gets us back to
the question. Uh
so, uh ah yes, I guess we'll continue on
here. So we've got back to Ted Bunch uh
Whites Kennet summary of impact markers
and potential impact mechanisms for the
younger dest boundary event impact event
at 129. The discussion here is and this
appeared in the at the American
Geohysical Union fall meeting of 2009.
The discussion here is limited to
possible origins of the impact markers
and not with impact consequences such as
climate change or extinction. Several
origins may account for impact materials
in the YDB. One, an extraordinary
accretion of micrometeorites
which was proposed by the two leading
critics Pinter and Ishman. Right.
However, this is inconsistent with
younger dus boundary carbon sphereral
compositions including the large
concentrations of nano nano diamonds
found embedded in those carbon
sphirerals.
two oblique impacts into the Laurentide
ice sheet. This model is consistent with
the lack of a visible crater and
apparent lack of cratering markers above
and yet also provides for shock
production of the many cubic nano
diamonds and lawn delight found in the
younger dest boundary and then three
impact induced aerial burst and I think
it's a combination of both aerial bursts
of the smaller stuff and actual impacts
into the ice sheet.
and possibly into the North Atlantic
itself by the larger macroscale objects
because I I would argue that I think the
evidence is consistent with a
multi-impact event rather than a single
uh isolated random event.
Uh the lack from the same paper uh the
lack of high shock pressures in an
aerial detonation
does not necessarily preclude the
formation of cubic and hexagonal
diamonds as shown by Marayyama
and others in 1993
who made hexagonal and cubic diamonds by
a CVD process. This is carbon vapor
deposition. Let's not go into that right
now. Uh by but anyways by a CVD
processed from a high temperature plasma
atmosphere
13,000 degrees centigrade
under pressure conditions similar to
those in an aerial burst. The Tungusa
event is commonly accepted as a result
of a near surface aerial burst and has
many similarities
to the younger dus event.
That's why I think it's important to
have conversations about the Tangusa
event in the context of the younger dus
event.
Uh then we have uh comet grazing of the
atmosphere involving nearly tangential
entry meaning very low angle right just
skimming through like stone skimming on
water across the atmosphere and we
talked about that last time
&gt;&gt; the 1913 event.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. Exactly. This is why I'm hoping
people will refresh themselves by
actually listening to some of these uh
some of these lectures and presentations
several times to really if that is if
they're really interested in learning
it. And to me, the excitement and the
interest and the mind-blowing interest
is when you really begin to learn and
get the picture of these events in your
in your mind. And I'm hoping this might
inspire a lot of young people to follow
some of these many pathways into the
scientific realms that's going to help
to bring more light on these still
unresolved uh perplexing questions about
planetary changes and their effects on
humans. Um but comet grazing of the
atmosphere involving nearly tangential
entry of a comet into the Earth's
atmosphere with partial detonation and
melting followed by escape of the
unexloded nucleus into space. This has
the net effect of a atmosphere
penetrating aerial burst followed by a
global fallout of detonation products.
Three of the four above scenarios are
plausible.
And this is uh one that I think is going
to devote it be worth devoting more time
to than we'll have for what remains of
this episode. But this was considered to
be one of the the death nail when this
was published came out in 2009.
Uh this was considered to be the death
nail of the impact hypothesis right
here. Um because after this uh Todd
Survival, Vance T. Holiday and the rest
of these people uh published this paper.
The consensus shifted and now pretty
much most of the commentary that you saw
in mainstream media was oh well this
whole theory this whole hypothesis
um has been overthrown because we had an
independent team of experts go out there
and they were not able to replicate the
findings. So because this was used uh
and it's exemplary in its usage as a
means of a debunking without really
debunking and why it it's it's worth
unpacking what happened here and then
the response to this paper and why they
uh it says it's an independent, right?
And we'll we'll just look you can see
where it's going. um based on elevated
concentrations of a set of and they have
them in scare quotes, right? Impact
markers. So, right there, you don't have
to read any further. You know where
they're going with this thing. uh based
on elevated concentrations of a set of
impact markers at the onset of the
younger driest stadium from sedimentary
contexts across North America. Firestone
Kennet West and others have argued that
12.9Ka the Earth experienced an impact
by an extraterrestrial body, an event
that had devastating ecological
consequences for humans, plants, and
animals in the new world. Uh herein we
report the results of an independent
analysis of magnetic minerals and
microsphererals from seven sites
of similar age.
That's an important admission right
there. Of similar age. What do you mean
by similar? Right? I mean, if we're
talking about a very narrow band, a very
narrow stratographic marker horizon,
we're not talking similar age. We we
we're talking we have to be precise
here, right? Because we're looking at
something that's not going to span more
than a few years between the time of the
impact and whatever deposition of
material ends up in the stratographic
record is only going to be a few years.
I mean, it's very possible that if
similar in age means 5 years or 10
years, it might in fact imply that
you're not even sampling from the right
layer. See, and I think we can actually
demonstrate that this was part of why
they were not able to replicate. Um
uh here in we report the results of an
independent analysis of magnetic
minerals and microsphererals from seven
sites of similar age including two
examined by Firestone and Firestone and
others. We were unable
we were un excuse me we were unable to
reduce reproduce any results of the
Firestone at al study
uh and find no support for younger dus
extraterrestrial impact. I'll read that
again. We were unable to reproduce any
results of the Firestone at al study and
find no support for the younger dus
extraterrestrial impact. Well, this was
considered a follow-up article on this
one was actually entitled reququum for
the younger dus impact hypothesis. And I
think it's very instructive to spend a
little bit of time going through this,
right? Because one of the things that's
you can see particularly in those who've
not gone into the level of detail
necessary to have an informed opinion
about these matters are just too ready
to latch on to whatever they happen to
see as the latest proferings of
mainstream media because I saw a lot of
people after this came out going oh well
it's been disproved it's a bunch of bunk
them it's hoie Allen West is a fraud
they were saying that you know on on the
on all of that attacking him personally
um just pure BS, right? But then when
you take a look at the protocols of
their independent evaluation
doesn't tell the same story. And I think
maybe we would do that, spend 15 or 20
minutes in the next episode looking at
that. Um the two new papers that have
come out are not specifically
um
aimed at in proving or disproving the
impact hypothesis because there's been a
tremendous amount of research. We talked
about it in a recently a recent episode
when we talked about the discovery in
Louisiana,
right? And
&gt;&gt; the Perkins impact,
&gt;&gt; the Perkins impact and the one in
Russia. So there were two two new papers
that have come out. One supporting with
more proof and evidence from Louisiana,
another one from Siberia. I cannot
underestimate the significance and
important of importance of this
information for us to understand the
larger scale picture of the terrestrial
and cosmic environment in which we find
ourselves. the particular theater of our
own cultural evolution, if you want to
put it that way, because the history of
civilizations on this planet has not
been this nice smooth logarithmic curve
leading to the ascendancy of our modern
status. What we see, what is emerging
and consistent with the majority of the
evidence now in hand is a saw tooth. We
see civilizations rising, achieving
levels of sophistication and glory and
advancement, and then boom, they're
gone. And usually these we can look at
10 or 12 different cultures and see the
same pattern. Their disappearance is
very rapid and in some p cases very
complete. I would submit that it's
critically important that we understand
the larger natural cycles of which we
are embedded, of which we are an
indelible part. And if we don't
understand those cycles, uh it's going
to seriously abort our future potential
uh for long-term sustainability as a
civilization on this planet. So
therefore, I hope that you're continued
to be willing to explore these topics in
depth. I think what we're doing here is
we're exploring this material really in
a popular format, in a popular venue
more deeply than anybody else that I
know out there. Now, I know there are
others. Yeah. I mean, George is doing a
great job over at um at um
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And there are others. there are
others and we'll be connecting with
those linking to those sites uh and
sharing information. Certainly we have
met you know at the at the cosmic summit
that I just returned from. I met you
know was able to hang out with Malcolm
Lac
um with um uh Steven Collins who's doing
the work at Tal Hamom the very
significant work at Tal Hamom um and
others uh that I've met there that we
will probably be bring uh Dallas Abbott
I think she will be coming on very in a
very near future episode we'll have her
as a guest we can talk about her work
with tsunamis and tsunamis that are
probably too large to have been
generated by uh earthquakes or uh sub uh
submarine volcanic eruptions. So, that's
what we're going to be getting to into.
I hope people stay with us for this. Um
I know there gets a lot of detail in
here, but don't forget God is into
details as has been said. Um so I hope
some of you stick with it and
interestingly the more you stay with it
and the more you understand and and
formulate this picture in your in mind
the more interesting it gets. Um you
know because for one thing this is an
unresolved scientific paradox of
preeminent importance that has not been
solved yet has not been worked out.
We've got some important leads, no
doubt, and I do think that the
extraterrestrial hypothesis is going to
prove to be the viable one in the long
term. But it's still not proven to the
satisfaction of a lot of scientists. And
one of the things I would submit as
before we go here is simply this that I
think that modern science is proving
what maybe has come down to us and is
now called geomthology and astrothology.
that a lot of the ancient stories and
legends and traditions that have been
handed down from old uh contain valuable
insight that can help us get a a better
and deeper understanding of these events
from the scientific perspective. So,
we'll definitely be talking about some
of that as well. So, this is Squaring
the Circle. Please like it and
subscribe. Uh, I got to warn people that
we are going to be starting to do a few
ads coming up um because that's going to
help us uh do more of what we're already
doing uh do bring more material in a
more interesting and powerful way to the
forum of public discussion. That's what
it's going to allow us to do. Um and
plus launching some other very
interesting plans that are in the
pipeline. So, with that, I don't have
anything else to say, John, and I've
done most of the talking tonight. I've
given you a break. Um, do you have any
last final punctuation marks you want to
add?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think you and I were talking
about this before, and we mentioned it
in the middle of this, but I'll say I
I'll leave it to you to say one more
time. What was Merlin's famous quote
after the the everything was said and
done?
What was Merlin's big warning to the men
of the round table?
&gt;&gt; Well, you know, I actually could share a
slide that I modified from a piece of
art that was a book cover of a book that
I would highly recommend.
And the quote is from Merlin and he
says, "It is the doom of men that they
forget."
So on that cliffhanger, we'll adjourn
for this episode, but uh we'll
definitely be coming back around to uh
pick up the baton where we left off.
Pick up the thread in Ariadne's
labyrinth.
[Music]
Hey,
hey,