[music]
All right. Thank you panel for being
here. I really appreciate it. Sorry that
Dr. Jessica Rose couldn't be here with
us. Um, thank you Alexis for stepping
in. My
&gt;&gt; pleasure. So, welcome everyone to this
panel on censorship and free speech and
health. Over the past few years, many of
us, myself included, have experienced
the sharp end of censorship.
Whether speaking out during CO,
questioning pharmaceutical narratives or
challenging state power, we found
ourselves shadowbanned, deplatformed, or
labeled as dangerous or other ridiculous
names. Today I'm joined by four experts
in the fields of medicine, science, and
health who faced similar battles and who
are now building alternatives to resist
suppression.
We've just heard Michael Sailor speaking
just before. He laid out wonderfully how
we should plan our future. Under the
assumption, plan our future with Bitcoin
for the next 21 years under the
assumption we are all healthy and living
a good life in the next 21 years. And
this is I think the underlying
assumption that we want to start with,
right? So let's start with uh you know
Jack, we'll start with you and then
we'll move on. that assumption that
we're all here healthy and able to
function well in the next 21 year 21
years. What is missing in that
assumption and how does this relate to
censorship and to your role in Bitcoin?
&gt;&gt; Well, as I told you guys from the stage
yesterday and in the VIP room for those
who heard it, Bitcoin is not the most
valuable asset you have. It's time. And
if you have no time, the Bitcoin becomes
superolous. And that was the missing
link in Michael's speech. And I want to
reiterate this to you that effectively
when you have time theft, you are being
censored. There's no question that you
will not be able to live the life and
your family will not be able to do
things for you. So I would like to pose
a question to the audience and be very
provocative. And I'd like you to be
honest. How many of you complied and
took the jab?
Nobody wants to raise a hand.
Okay. Well, we were just talking
backstage and with Joe and he shared
some information with us. We think right
now, and this is not hardcore data.
Kevin's probably got more on that, but I
tell my patients, every jab you took,
it's a 20x risk that you're going to die
compared to an age cohort. If you took
two X, you took three, 60x. Now, we know
that the data is going to change. Um,
and we also know that lots that people
took in different companies also are
going to be an issue. So, I know all of
us on the stage are concerned about you
becoming censored by losing time. So,
the key, at least from my perspective,
what do I bring to the table? I'm trying
to figure out ways that you can put time
SATs back in your bank account even if
you took the jab so that you can
experience what Michael Sailor just
presented to the room.
&gt;&gt; Great. Thank you, Alexis.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean I have many thoughts
because I graduated from Princeton with
my PhD in 2021. So, I have a pretty
centralized background, though I was
kind of always a misfit and never really
seen publicly, let's say, as somebody
who was going against the grain. when I
started falling down the rabbit hole on
Jack's work in quantum and light biology
um and posting about this and sharing
this important information that could
change lives especially in the postcoid
era I realized very quickly that
engagement was going just through the
floor with regards to Twitter and
Instagram in particular and it was
really just a wakeup call showing that
you know we could have the best
information and the best research but if
we can't actually get it to the people
and to the physicians to be able to
treat their patients with the actual ual
like ideal standard of care, then what
good is that information? And when we're
looking at like the centralized journal
model and the institutions that are
doing the translational research,
you know, there's this there's a lot of
gatekeeping that goes on, right? Because
you need to have the grants from the
three-letter agencies in order to get
the funding to go and in the you know,
the top journals like nature, cell, and
science. And I always like to tell just
the anecdote that if I as an independent
researcher wanted to publish in the
journal Nature, not affiliated with an
institution, it would cost me $12,000 to
publish in that journal. Which means
that, you know, if I don't have the
capital from these three-letter agencies
and these grants to be able to publish
in these journals, then my research
won't reach the eyeballs that it needs
to reach in order to have the impact
that could actually, you know, help
people around the world. So I think we
have a fundamental flaw in the way that,
you know, we're practicing science as
scientism and not true science and this
curious exploration of reality. Instead,
it's just a cog in the pharmaceutical
medical industrial complex. And we can
see that playing out with just the, you
know, the health care or sick care
spending that we have, especially in the
US, where we spend the most on our
healthcare and yet we have the the
poorest proof of work. So something's
got to give at some point. And I think
building out a decentralized network of
of scientists and physicians is the
first step that we need to take in order
to actually generate the research and
the proof of work to be able to share
with people and begin to wake people up
from this amnesia of centralization that
has just permeated our culture.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. And what brought you to
Bitcoin,
&gt;&gt; Jack? Well, so I got into Bitcoin a bit
before that, but I wasn't like all in.
But learning from Jack and also our
shared friend Sam Parker, I just really
had my eyes opened, especially over my
trip over Thanksgiving in El Salvador
and like now all of our savings are in
Bitcoin. So, we're all in.
&gt;&gt; Tell them the movie we made you watch.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, we watched the big short and
basically like every few minutes, you
know, they were pausing and like
narrating and annotating the whole movie
and it was like one of the best
experiences ever and a great education
through film. I think we can learn a lot
through media. um honestly if you're
paying attention. So it's been a a great
education.
&gt;&gt; What a way in. Wonderful. Thank you,
Kevin.
&gt;&gt; Well, so my entry was back in 2011. I
went to sequence the cannabis genome and
put it public and I realized the banking
system did not want anything to do with
what we were doing. Um and so I was a
reader of the Daily Paul and I started
going down the rabbit hole with all the
freest. So, but I've been experiencing
this censorship for a very long time,
yelling about it and everyone's just
been like, "You're whatever pthead. Go
away. This is not a big deal." And then
the pandemic hits and I'm I'm now that
meme of that guy with a noose around his
neck saying first time uh because
everyone witnessed their uh their papers
getting getting censored or retracted or
or um just flat out um flatout
suffocated in the peer reviewview
process. So I had a paper I wrote with
Peter McCulla on the differences between
the mRNA vaccines and the actual
sequence of the spike sequence in the
virus. And it's a very illuminating
paper because it spelled this all out in
2021 but it got censored from from the
journals we submitted it to. two
reviewers actually signed off on it and
then the editors swept in at the 11th
hour and just shut it down. Uh and so
the editors at these journals are in
fact monitoring and and choosing what
gets to publish and what doesn't. Of
course, they're funded by pharmaceutical
interests for advertisement dollars. So
it's a very centralized system that has
a choke point on it. uh and that creates
an attack surface for all of science and
the entire scientific narrative can get
suddenly politicized and pushed in
directions that are in the interest of
pharmaceutical companies or politicians
and not and not your own health. And
I'll I'll weigh in also for Jessica Rose
who couldn't be here. She was the first
person to have a paper on myocarditis
with Peter McCulla, right? And we now
know that's on the label now and her
paper's still getting battled, you know,
ratted around on retraction watch and
pubsmear. there's still a mob of people
trying to take that paper down despite
the it being acknowledged as being a
problem on on the label of these
vaccines. Um in terms of the the
acceleration of death, I want to fill in
the one point that um that Jack brought
up. There is in at least in the Fiser
lots there is like 4% of the adverse
events are or I'm sorry 4% of the lots
contain like 79% of the adverse events.
So there is a bit of a Russian roulette
on these things. Uh that's something to
consider. uh you may have gotten a good
lot, but I that shouldn't um give you
too much I I think comfort in that
they're going to do this again and
they're going to do it this time with
vaccines that you cannot avoid. They're
going to use self-amplifying ones that
are going to hop personto person. Uh so
there's no way for you to avoid the next
series that they're coming out with.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thanks, Tristan.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, for me um I got into health and
Bitcoin kind of at the same time. So
precoid and I mean I technically bought
a fake ID with Bitcoin 10 years ago but
um I was very primed to have this
perspective during COVID and it was so
obvious what was happening immediately
uh and then I was going deeper and
deeper down the Bitcoin rabbit hole and
I really just spent the last 5 years
researching learning and trying to
connect these two worlds. So for me
censorship was was everywhere. the main
themes that have already been shared is
definitely on the research side of
things and then as an electrical
engineer reading folks like Jack's work
and the research that he cites that's
decades decades old seeing this major
gap in education obviously around any
health recommendations to the general
public but also specifically on the more
electromagnetic side of things and
putting that into the place to where wow
okay I can make a difference learning
about this educating And still it seems
like way too esoteric for anyone to
grasp. And then the major caveat there
is when you tie it to modern technology.
So then that led me to what I do now at
at Daylight Computer and what we think
is you know one of the major reasons why
everyone is so unhealthy today cuz they
have a tech addiction and that will
never be shown to the mainstream. that
is probably the most censored adverse
health I guess
vehicle in modern society outside you
know the pharmaceuticals and the jobs
that we're talking about here. So it's
been it's been a wild ride the past few
years.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. And uh Daylight is just a
miracle. I've been using it. No one told
me to say that. So I've been using it
for about 6 months now and I love it.
And I think that one theme that comes
out of what everyone here said is the
centralization of the medical and health
industry today. And we're sitting in a
room full of people that hopefully
understand the power of decentralization
and want everything to be as
decentralized as possible because they
understand that that's how we reclaim
back our power. And so when we look at
Bitcoiners that understand proof of
work, they are willing to put in the
time and the energy to learn new things
just they have learned about money and
about the fiat monetary system. Probably
everyone sitting in this room now
already has a good understanding of how
fiat works and how money works. What are
they missing about health? What are some
of the things that you would encourage
them to take now and expand that proof
of work into the area of health, of
medicine, of science, please?
&gt;&gt; Everything uh you believe is wrong.
That's what I would tell you. And I know
that is daunting to hear from someone
who's a neurosurgeon at the top of the
pyramid in centralized medicine, but
that's what happened to me 20 years ago
when I decided to go down this rabbit
hole. And for those of you who aren't in
the VIP room, you may not know this. You
know, I happen to have some very wealthy
friends who are in Bitcoin. You know
them. Jack Dorsey is one. He got sick
from his own supply, from technology.
And I was able to help him. I was able
to help Rick Rubin reclaim their health.
And what did I get? Jack is my patient.
Jack is the one that turned me on to
Bitcoin early. And what did I get from
that? That allowed me to be agent
provocator
in centralized medicine because I became
uncancable.
Why? cuz I had [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] you money. And the
thing is it's really difficult
especially in the United States and I'm
sure the same thing is true here in
Europe that if you're very very vocal
and you come out hard against the powers
to be let's make let's make one thing
clear. This is probably the question
that you asked. What's the number one
thing that Bitcoiners really don't
understand is big pharma sits at the
money printer. It's the cantalon effect.
It affects Alexis in science. It affects
Kevin in his business. Kevin used to be
involved in the human genome project.
He's not just a pot guy. He's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
smart guy. Really smart, you know. And
Tristan being an electrical engineer is
trying to bring lights to you guys to
help offset some of the risk so you can
be there in 21 years for Michael Sailor.
The point that I want to make, you know,
to some of you so you understand,
for me, this is a passion. Why? Because
when I found out I was lied to, now I
want to teach you the truth. And the
truth really is this simple. Plugging
back into nature using the decentralized
networks that are tied to the sun, tied
to the moon, tied to earth. It sounds
corny, but the simplest things that are
free will keep you away from the sausage
grinder. That is my profession. Who is
big pharma? McFarma is the Mexican or
Colombian drug cartel in this story. Who
is the real problem? The Department of
Defense and the Pentagon in the United
States. They're the ones that
distributed the jab. What Tristan said a
little while ago,
blue light, non-native EMF, RF,
microwaves, that'll take 40 to 50 years
to kill you. But the three of us right
here, Alexis, Kevin, and myself will
tell you, we've seen people die from the
jab. In literally an hour or two, their
life has been changed completely. So
when you see that type of time
inflation,
you have a duty to tell people like you
who made the smartest decision in in
your life with money. Now we want you to
make the smartest decision in time. Why?
Because health and wealth are
fundamentally linked. And if you make
that decision, you'll be perfectly fine.
And do I try to do my best for free on
Twitter? Because it's my duty to you.
You are my tribe. Whether I like you or
not, I am going to do my best to help
you. These people here, they do the same
thing. Alexis. Alexis, as she told you,
centralized as [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] trained at the best
metabolic lab in the world in the
Rabinuit lab in Princeton University.
You already heard Kevin's chops where he
comes from. There's nothing about any of
us up here. We're not doing this for
money.
We're doing this cuz I think at all of
our cores, we're all pissed off that
we've been lied to. And you guys got
into Bitcoin at one time because you
were pissed off that you were lied to
also about money. So maybe that's the
link that you understand.
&gt;&gt; Thank you so much.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Don't be stingy. [applause]
&gt;&gt; You're the voice is brought to you by
Treasure, the original Bitcoin hardware
wallet company pioneering the
development of self-custody [music]
for crypto assets since 2013. Empowering
individuals [music] with an open-source
device, enabling beginners and experts
to easily and securely [music] hold
their coins. I find my treasure super
easy to use and recommend it to [music]
my friends and family. Enjoy my 5%
discount on treasure products by
clicking the link in the [music] show
notes and using the code a flat. I want
to introduce you to Abundant Mines
because they take a very different
approach to Bitcoin mining. Most people
buy Bitcoin, but the smart ones mine it
straight into self-custody. With
Abundant Minds, you can do it without
giving up your privacy. Abundant Minds
was founded by Bo and Christine Marie
Turner, a couple who lost more than half
a million dollars to providers making
empty [music] promises. Instead of
walking away, they built a company that
raises the industry standard and puts
client first. And that's why I like
them. With Abundant Minds, you own your
machines. They never touch your Bitcoin,
never skim a revenue share, and you
choose your own mining pool. Their
customer care is unusual. Clients speak
to a real person for self-custody
education, privacy, consulting, and even
visiting their site. They serve clients
from around the world, but US investors
specifically enjoy a big tax benefit and
100% bonus depreciation. This is more
than just mining Bitcoin. It's about
freedom, privacy, and purpose. You can
book a free strategy call, see how it
works, and mine some of your first
Bitcoin for free with a special offer
for my audience. Learn more on
abundantminds.com/ephot.
[applause]
Dr. Cohen. Yeah. And I mean, we all just
lived through the embodiment of this
health and wealth link in COVID. Like
how many people rolled up their sleeves
because they were they felt their job
was at risk and so they needed the money
and so they stayed at their job and took
the vaccine and then you know may or may
not have ended up with some health
issues but they didn't have that
sovereignty and that ability to make an
informed consent and a judgment for
themselves because of this pressure put
on by their jobs and put on them by the
government etc. And when it comes to,
you know, Jack's work and what I've so
admired about his work is this emulation
of nature as this ultimate decentralized
system that we're meant to emulate as
well. And so when you look at the
natural light and dark cycles, how we're
meant to receive natural sunlight at
different times of day. We're meant to
receive dark darkness at night. And
that's what fundamentally regulates our
biology. When you look at the
centralized narrative around the sun is
toxic no matter what. Make sure you put
on your sunglasses, which by the way in
Prague, probably 80% of people I've
noticed wearing sunglasses. I don't know
if it's a fashion statement. I don't
know what it is, but this is one of the
worst things that you can do for your
health. You're literally cutting off the
most important signals from the light
environment to interact with your brain
and tell your body what time of day it
is. Regulate your appetite, your energy
expenditure, your hormone production.
And there's so many important things
that happen when that natural light's
interacting with your eye um that so
many people are missing out on because
of UV blocking contacts and glasses and
sunglasses which is only getting worse
by 2050. Predicted myopia or nearsighted
rates are predicted to reach 50%
worldwide which means that most people
are going to be walking around with some
sort of a shield covering their eye
preventing those healing signals from
coming into their bodies. And then
similarly at night time we're supposed
to get that dark darkness. But now in
modernity, we're constantly exposed to
not only bright lights at night. You
know, it's dark out. We turn all the
lights on because we want to go about
our day or whatever, even in the
evening. But also, it's the worst kind
of light as well because it's enriched
in blue light, which directly suppresses
your melatonin production and prevents
you from getting good quality sleep. And
that melatonin production is also an
important antioxidant source for the
body and helps to maintain mitochondrial
function. And so, we're messing up both
sides of the equation. we're getting too
much light at night and not enough
bright sunlight during the day and it's
creating a whole host of health issues.
If you look at the chronic disease
burden, it can all boil back to this
quantum and light biological level. And
so I think when we're thinking about
decentralization
in our health, we need to look back to
nature and see what she's up to in order
to understand how we need to behave and
act in our environments.
&gt;&gt; Awesome. Thank you. And to be honest
with you, yeah,
&gt;&gt; sunglasses are a shitcoin. Even though I
was switched on enough to understand not
to roll up my sleeve, I still didn't
know anything about light until I heard
about you guys and then started
following and then stopped wearing
sunglasses.
So I have a feeling the people you're
seeing in the street wearing sunglasses
or here, they are simply not aware
because of that censorship.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. So what we are doing I mean
today I tried to do my part is really to
push out that message as much as
possible. Decentralized media is as
important as decentralized health and
decentralized money. But we have to have
you guys be the messenger of the of that
information of that knowledge so that we
can continue pushing that forward
because with the censorship that we're
seeing right now we don't stand a chance
in the centralized system. So, thank you
so much for saying that, Kevin. Thank
you. I love how generous you became in
this panel. This is great, Kevin.
&gt;&gt; I want to follow up on your point about
about censorship. This community has the
tools to crack the nut.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; That we have a we have a censorship
resistant money and we have an option
inside that censorship resistant money
to put small bits of information. We're
going to pay for that information on a
sats per bite basis. It's a free market.
I believe I don't believe it's going to
overly bloat the chain with a lot of
gifts and and whatnot. All we need is a
hash for information that we're
publishing and a link to where it exists
somewhere else on Nostra or some
decentralized store. Uh and we can begin
to tear apart the centralized peerreview
system. That in essence is what enables
the centralized medicine clan to go and
steer the mind virus, if you will, in
the direction it needs to. Um so, you
know, you're not to blame if you took
these vaccines. you're not to blame if
you got locked down or if you you know
they they fooled you with masks. They
were feeding you a very potent echo
chamber through social media uh that was
telling you this was the right thing to
do. But now that you're in this
community, you know the the the faults
of a system like that. There's a reason
we don't do that with money. And there's
the absolute same thing we should apply
to science. We cannot have science be
run top down in a fiat manner
particularly when all of our money is on
a system that abhores that. Uh so if you
can help us build that that would be
fantastic. We know lots of scientists
that will begin publishing on this
immediately but we need the help I think
from the community here to start
building the infrastructure and the
interfacing of this system so that uh we
can begin to pull that entire tumor out
of the scientific process. I want to
interject one thing here, Kevin. Tell
them because I want people in Europe to
know Kevin and I have talked to the
people that are now sitting in Trump's
cabinet. They know what we just told you
and they're not doing anything about it.
Kevin just made a key point. It's us. I
no longer believe politics can fix this
problem in medicine. That's not the
message I gave to you last year when I
was here. I believe Bitcoin can. And
that's what Kevin is telling you. We're
going to need to do this together.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think that's that's
[applause] to Jack's point, we are it's
great that they've changed some people
that are at the top, right? We're seeing
we're getting some wins here and there,
but all the people that we know that are
going in there, you can tell that they
cannot fully express what they want to
do inside that system. Luke Skywalker
doesn't walk into the Death Star Death
Star and resteer it. Okay. So, it does
have to happen bottom up in order for
this to to really to really work. Um,
hats off to Bobby and everything he's
going to do. He swapped out the ASIP
committee. I think that's great. Uh, but
we know that that's not going to end the
vaccine today. And as you've posted,
there's 25,000 people getting these
every day. I think there's something
like 3 to 5,000 deaths that are
occurring now. Uh, I don't know if
that's I think that's every week from
these vaccines.
&gt;&gt; Just remember that. Isn't that that's
time theft for you guys in Europe. I
don't know if you know this the stats in
the United States that Kevin is talking
about cuz him and I tweet about it all
the time. 25,000 children a day get
loaded with this boweapon that defines
time theft. These kids are never going
to be normal. I told you that it's a
20x. They get three injections in the
first year of life in the United States.
Total is of 72. If you do this to your
child and you're a Bitcoiner, you're
psychotic.
absolutely psychotic.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it it's uh we're seeing the the
time at which these these adverse events
are occurring is what's really
remarkable is the cancers that we used
to be seeing in the 70s and 80s are now
marching into the 40s. So it is not only
just affecting people from an excess
mortality standpoint, but you have to
look at quality of life adjusted years.
A quality metric is what we use in
healthcare. So when people start dying
at 50 instead of 80, that's actually 30
years of time theft. massive economic
impact and it will have an impact on the
demographics of countries like like
Japan that are inverted right now
because the working class is going to
get wiped out while they're while the
elderly are uh you know are suffering as
well. So uh time theft is important. Uh
you've got 21 years to maximize the time
that Michael Sailor is talking about. Uh
I would advise people take pay very
close attention to the fiat medicine
system because I think that's the
biggest risk to stealing your Bitcoin
between now and then.
&gt;&gt; Great. Thank you so much, Tristan.
[applause]
&gt;&gt; I'm very glad you guys brought that up
because why are you here? You're
Bitcoiners. You believe in proof of
work. No one can do the work to make you
healthy except you. And everyone kind of
touched on it already, but yes, nature
is the OG decentralized network, the
system. It's not Bitcoin. It's it's
nature. It's the natural world. And you
have a choice. you can put in the work
and get healthier and buy that time
back. Uh, Bitcoin is also enabling that
for many of you because a lot of folks
that monetary component is what is
enslaving you to the fiat lifestyle. But
that's how you can break free. Don't
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] stop there. Cuz if you die at 50
or 60 for whatever chronic disease or
because this decisions you made during
COVID, that's pretty [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] outcome for
someone who has the hardest money on the
planet. And it doesn't matter if you
don't have that time. So as an engineer,
how I think about it, how I communicate
it is the input signals you need are in
the natural world. They've been there
for the existence of humanity. All you
have to do is embrace them. No one is
going to enforce you to do that and
people are going to tell you to not do
that. That's crazy and that's the
misinformation and censorship that we're
talking about. But no one's going to do
that for you. So you have to take the
initiative. There's no magic pill. There
is only proof of work. And there's also
no guarantees of anything in nature. So
you have to understand your reality and
then work towards that. And then when
you take those input signals that were
meant to receive your outputs, your
life, the time you can get back will be
optimized. So I think being very honest
with yourself is the best way.
Understanding where you're at and then
being very deliberate about your
lifestyle choices, who you engage with,
and what is important to you is the best
thing you can do. So don't [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] stop
at Bitcoin. Use Bitcoin to enable having
a better life.
&gt;&gt; Amen. Amen. Well said, Tristan. Good
stuff. So, guys, I think you kind of
understand that monetary inflation is
not the only way to do time theft,
right? I think it's quite clear from
what's been said here so far. And since
we only have a few minutes until we wrap
up this amazing discussion, what I'd
like from you guys to do in the last
round is try to give some practical
advice on how do we take this audience
that are entrepreneurial thinkers that
are out of the box thinkers and get them
to start building stuff in the real
world that would help them to
decentralize their health, decentralize
their life and bring that wisdom of
Bitcoin to health in their lives.
&gt;&gt; Well, one the best thing as I said
yesterday is never miss a sunrise the
rest of your life because that's the
paro principle. But the second thing I
tried to hammer in my talk yesterday is
I want to make you guys more productive.
I I think the idea that we have to work
8 to 10 hours a day like I did as a
neurosurgeon to ruin myself for the
first 30 years of my career. I
sacrificed too much to do that. So I
would challenge everybody in the Bitcoin
community. Be smarter with technology.
Go on a tech diet before you go on a
food diet and become wiser. Like you
don't need to have all the meetings you
have. Really use via negativa. Very very
important. You need to cut things out.
You don't need to micromanage everybody.
You need to also hire out, you know,
give menial jobs to people that that
should be doing it. You shouldn't be
doing everything. If you're a control
freak, fix that problem.
&gt;&gt; So, in the same way that Bitcoin is a
decentralized system based ultimately on
nature via proof of work, we also need
to look to nature in order to understand
what kind of technology we should make
as well. We have to look and see what
nature is doing and then do our best to
imitate that when we're developing light
bulbs or screen technologies like the
way that if you actually look at the
spectrum of our modern energy efficient
LED and fluorescent bulbs and device
screens they don't have to be made in
this way but they are highly enriched in
that blue light in the absence of red
and infrared light which provides this
balancing force. So when we're looking
at the way that these technologies
actually were cultivated, it's almost as
if they were intentionally made to harm
us and enslave us to a system that, you
know, basically just just wants to bleed
us dry of our energy um and our
productivity. And so I think when it
comes to developing technology and being
an innovator in the space, I mean,
there's so many areas in our lives where
we're exposed to toxic light. like if
you can innovate in these spaces in you
know televisions and computers and
daylight is of course really pioneering
in this as well which is like the first
blue light free computer that's made in
the US. So, but we can do so much more,
right? We can we can have competition in
the space. Right now, they're the only
one, right? So, it's helpful to actually
have more people on board developing
technology that's actually supporting
our biology instead of detracting from
it. And with regards to grounding, I
don't remember if Jack touched on this
in this talk. I think he did, but
getting your bare feet connected to the
earth is really important to help
balance the charge in your system and
help your biology and your mitochondria
to work optimally. And there are a lot
of ways to bring the grounding force
inside if we have to. Otherwise, working
outside whenever you can is great. Like
instead of spending money on dubious
supplements, spend your money to build
an outdoor space that is conducive to
you working there if you if you work
from home so that it's functional and
it's aesthetic and you actually enjoy
spending time out there. And you know,
Tristan and I actually in a few days are
going to be giving two talks up in New
Hampshire to all of the principles and
the superintendent of the state to help
educate them on how toxic from the, you
know, the fluorescent lights to the
non-native EMS to the fact that students
in public the public school system are
actually given less outdoor time than a
maximum security prisoner. Why all these
things are directly harming our young
children who have no say in the matter
and what we can do about it. So I'm
really hopeful that perhaps New
Hampshire could serve as sort of a
beacon that we can use to propagate this
message across to other states and help
the kids across the country.
&gt;&gt; Well, they do with the first ever
strategic Bitcoin reserve. That's the
first state in the US to do it. So maybe
they will do that too. Kevin.
&gt;&gt; So, our focus has been on looking at
plants and and fungi that you can grow
in your backyard as a pharmaceutical
reservoir because most of the things
that they have illegal, if you look at
them from a therapeutic index
standpoint, which is the LD50 versus the
the ED50, that's the lethal dose 50
versus the effective dose 50, all of the
illegal drugs are vastly safer than the
ones that pharmaceutical companies
currently sell you. All right? So you
look at canabonoids, look at psilocybin.
These things have basically they're
orders of magnitude safer than the vast
majority of the drugs that they have uh
they've regulated through the FDA. So
those are that's a decentralized form of
medicine because people can grow them in
their backyard. They are there thousands
of different canabonoids and
tryptophines that those things make. And
we want to expand that model on every
other medicinal organism out there so
that they're public publicly available
and um they can be the breeding can be
accelerated. I want to make sure we
don't give you a cut you off. You're
noticing the clock. So, I'll shut up
there.
&gt;&gt; If you want to improve your life, you
can take some of the tips given here in
terms of the health aspects. If you want
to support this movement, you can do two
things. Put your Bitcoin to work or
allow yourself the flexibility because
you have Bitcoin and put your time and
energy into something worth supporting.
Whether that's in the local and
community level, starting a group,
getting outside in nature, buying, you
know, a ranch or a farm and enabling
your family to get that flexibility in
terms of reconnecting with the real
world or supporting projects that are
worth supporting or building from ground
up solutions to decentralized scientific
research for funding for technology, for
education, whether it's at the school
level or it's across the board for
corporate or anything. So, Bitcoin
allows you to have that optionality,
which is freedom to make decisions. But
if you are not going to put in the work
or the effort to see that change in the
world that you want to happen, it's not
going to happen. So, that's just the
matter of fact. And that's why all of us
sitting up here are pouring all of our
energy into moving this forward. But we
need your help to actually make that
happen.
&gt;&gt; Awesome. So,
thank you. As much
as much as the truths that you've heard
here today were a little bit
inconvenient for some of you, they are
still truths. And we need you to carry
that forward because looping back to the
name of this panel, censorship and free
speech and health. If we don't have you,
we don't have this information flowing
to other people and there's a pretty
good chance this panel may not be on
YouTube, if you know what I mean. So,
please share this and thank you. Thank
you so much for each and every one of
you. You guys are doing so much for
humanity and for the Bitcoin community.
I appreciate you and I cherish you.
Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Thank [applause] you.
&gt;&gt; Secure your BTC Prague 2026 ticket.
&gt;&gt; [music]