I am the universe observing itself
because my conscious was in this sea of
white scintillating light that was
coming out of me. You know I am both the
source and the observer of of this
thing. What I am is love, joy and peace
which is you know wow I thought I was a
human being a machine which is not true.
I mean you know our cells are quantum in
classical. I am a field. I'm not the
body. The self is much vaster than the
ego which is what we normally think we
are. When we awake like in my first
awakening experience that I described
earlier, once you make a connection with
your vaster self, then you know the
information exchange between the ego and
the vaster self increases dramatically
and and it comes in the form of you know
other extraordinary experiences of
consciousness in more intuitions and so
on. What happens when one of the
greatest technological minds of the 20th
century, the inventor of the
microprocessor itself, has a mystical
experience so profound that it shatters
his belief in material reality? Well,
one night in 1990, Feder Rico Fine, a
physicist, engineer, and Silicon Valley
pioneer, experienced something just that
lifealtering. He found himself bathed in
a mystical light that seemed to dissolve
the boundary between self and cosmos.
And in that moment, he intuitively deep
down knew something that all of his
technical knowledge had never taught
him. That he was not his body. That
consciousness is not a product of the
brain. It is the very ground of reality.
And since then, Fijene has been obsessed
with not building faster computers, but
exploring the very architecture of
consciousness and reality itself. He's
developed a philosophical model in which
each of us is not a biological machine
but what he calls a say a sovereign
spark of the one evolving through
meaning creativity and direct knowing.
He's proposing that deep down we are
like a wave in the ocean of universal
consciousness. In this one, we dive into
this vision where quantum physics hints
at a deeper dimension of being, where
free will is real and where the physical
world is only a shadow cast by something
more real and luminous. And with that,
my friends, all the links that you will
need for Federico Fine and Third Eye
Drops are in the description. If you'd
be so kind, do like, subscribe, comment,
etc., I would greatly appreciate it. Do
look up and sub to Third Eye Drops
wherever you listen to audio podcast.
We've got a rotund back catalog of audio
only mind melds with some truly
brilliant beings and I invite you to
initiate yourself into our YouTube
members patronon
wonder lodge where we have a growing
library of member onlyly content. And by
the way, if you join up on Patreon,
you'll also get access to a patronon
Discord server, monthly Zoom hangs,
stickers, pins, shirts, and more
depending on your um initiation level.
And with that, my friends, let's meld
minds with the truly brilliant Federico
Fine. It's really, really lovely to have
you back on the show, Feder Rico. to me
you're you're one of the most important
thinkers right now in terms of
my philosophical disposition of of you
know this this whole I I think it's like
some new emerging consciousness first
philosophical millu where you know there
are important differences between a lot
of these major thinkers you know
yourself Donald Hoffman Bernardo Castro
but there's this underlying
exciting unity I think too that has just
really reinvigorated me philosophically.
So, so first of all, publicly I want to
thank you for that. Great. Thank you,
Michael.
I'm glad to be to be in the crowd of the
people that I are thinking deeply about
this subject. Yeah. And yeah, obviously
you are in so many ways, but one of the
other things that I really appreciate
about you is that a lot of this was
precipitated by a transformational, I
think what we could call, you know,
mystical non-dual experience. You've
told this story many, many times, but I
think it's such an important story and
such an important example of how
sometimes the most profound kinds of
knowledge are are not like technical
knowledge, right? There are these
they're like these animenesis moments,
these rememberings of a deeper truth
than you can possibly ever convey with
words or mathematics or any kind of um
theory. Yet on the other side of that,
you have no choice but to try to like
reduce those things back down to a
theory, into language, into mathematics.
And you've done all of that. So I guess
let let's start with that experience
again if you don't mind telling that
story for the millionth time. Yeah. Uh
so uh as a as a way of a background
um I had uh uh we are in the late8s
uh at that time I was trying to
understand consciousness. I had sort of
discover for myself. I mean not not
discover consciousness but discover for
myself the issue of consciousness
because I was trying to understand
neuronet networks studying neuroscience
reading uh books of biology and so on.
And uh um and it occurred to me that we
do not recognize things by electrical
signals or or biochemical signals. We
recognize things because we feel we have
experiences and uh you know so that's
what consciousness does. and uh and and
and it dawned on me that it was
impossible to transform electrical
signals uh and biochemical signals into
experience what later philosophers call
qualia. In other words, the experience
is something that goes beyond electrical
signals in the brain. and and that you
know at that time I was trying to
understand could I make a robot or
something some you know some
computational
structure that could uh show
consciousness that could have feelings
and that was impossible and uh I also
was not happy in those days and I wanted
to understand the source of my
unhappiness and uh and unhappiness or
happiness are phenomena or consciousness
not electrical signals in the brain. So,
at least not for me. And uh um and it
was in that climate of searching or
wanting to know uh having already
accepted that I had full responsibility
for whatever happens in my life. And
that's I consider today I consider that
a pre you know a an essential
precondition
to be able to have such experiences. you
you you have to you have to accept that
you are responsible for what happens to
your life otherwise you always will look
for causes outside of yourself. So I was
you know I was unhappy. So I said well I
want to find out why I am unhappy. You
know I caused that to myself. So let's
find out. And uh so with that
preliminary then one night in 1990
during the holiday Christmas holidays I
I was in in Tahoe skiing with the
family. Um, and uh, one night I woke up
uh, midnight or so and uh, I was thirsty
and I wanted I got to the kitchen, got a
glass of water, went back to bed and
while I was just waiting normally with
thinking nothing, you know, to to fall
back asleep, you know, a beam of energy
came out of my chest and it was
physical. It was not a it was it was not
a thought. It was not an image. It was a
physical thing and it was love and it
was perceived as a white scintillating
light. It was love, it was peace and it
was joy all mixed together. And the
peace was actually the most astounding
thing because I never felt peace. peace
was simply the fact that my
consciousness was in this energy and I
finally recognized myself in this energy
which is love, joy and peace. So I am
this you know I am this thing that comes
out of me and of course you know the the
stunning thing was how can I generate
this energy this love? I mean how is
that possible? Then this love exploded.
It went everywhere and all of a sudden I
am you know I am uh immersed in this uh
light why scintillating light. My body
was hot. It was vibrating as if the
cells of my body were you know going
with this scintillation of the light and
uh uh and I recognized that of course my
consciousness was also out in everything
right in this light that cover
everything that I could see. So all of a
sudden I realize that I am both the
observer and the observed.
You know again a completely reversal of
the sense of myself because I am
normally separate from what I observe.
You know the you know observer and
observer are completely different
aspects of reality. Well, now I am the
observer of myself and as I observe
myself be my my sense of self is both in
me and in the world that I am I'm
observing. So this is crazy. Um and and
then a thought comes to mind and a
thought is oh my god this is is a
thought recognition. Uh wow this is the
stuff of which everything is made. So
you know this white scintillating light
is the substance out of which the
universe is made. So the universe is
made of
something like what I felt that observe
itself
and that was the end of the experience.
Uh and and of course that experience
changed me completely because from you
know it was a 180 degrees uh you know
basically I I was the the opposite of
what I had accepted myself to be which
was the you know the the uh you know
studying physics studying science I had
accepted the fact that I'm the body and
uh as as such when the body dies there
is nothing is left on me and all that
kind of u ideas that now I call
scientism because they're not ideas that
that are proven to be true. They're
simply uh extrapolations from a starting
point that accepts only the existence of
what exists in space and time and you
can measure but if you start with that
you know you have eliminated what is
interiority that cannot be measured. So
you know science has started with an
idea of the world that has eliminated a
priori our humanity our sense of who we
are our capacity to understand and all
of that that of course have to preexist
or at least be concurrent in existence
with everything. So in other words,
consciousness and free will cannot be
the cannot derive later from brains of
animals.
It must be right at the very beginning a
part of reality of the fundamental
reality.
that of course you know that kind of I'm
saying what I'm saying now after 35
years of work you know in at that time
it was clear that I had hit
and I had understood at an intuitive
level a kind of understanding intuitive
understanding which is what of course
interiority is about that require a
rational analysis and So you know and
and that experience had such a power
that it directed me to find out you know
just like when you have an you know as
an inventor you have an idea and you you
get it that wow this can work and you
know and then you go and you start
working until you make that idea work.
same way I'm an inventor so I understand
this and so it was like a you know a
flash of insight that told me this is
the way reality is not what you thought
and uh 20 years later I arrived after
working very hard with myself 30 40% of
my time I was running a couple of
companies during that time um so a lot
of work to arrive at the conclusion
which was a conclusion that was the
beginning of a new level of inquiry. The
conclusion which is an hypothesis that
consciousness and free will must come
must be together and uh they must be
they must exist at the beginning of the
universe. They cannot come later. They
have to be part of the nature of
everything. Yeah. All music to my ears.
both the the way you arrived at this
information and the conclusions you
derived from this experience and just to
I'm going to give an intro so maybe it's
I don't need to like give this full
speech but just to really put things in
a proper context for the audience you
know you're a conventionally successful
person a hyper successful person by
pretty much every uh you know societal
measurement yet you yet you in this time
are experiencing this deep existential
angst, unhappiness as you say. And it's
almost as if something hears that disqu
within you and says, "This is what
you're missing." But but but it reveals
it in such a way that it's like
you can only know it intuitively, like I
was saying before. And and it there's
like it's it's almost like handing you
this uh nonduel Rubik's cube, right?
like that this this thing like okay here
here's an intuitive knowledge of
something and and maybe you could zoom
in on some of the things you feel like
you you instantly intuitively knew about
reality in that moment and and then you
as an inventor as a somebody who who
wants to know how things work
technically I would imagine it was just
uh irresistible then for you to try as
hard as you could to language this
unlanguageable experience u but before
we go there what what were some of those
things that you felt like you you
instantaneously knew that you instantly
did a 180 as you said into. Well, I mean
the most important thing is that I am I
am the universe observing itself with my
point of view. You know, I was observing
myself because my conscious was in this
you know sea of white scintillating
light that was coming out of me. So, so
I am you know I am both the source and
the observer. I'm of of this thing you
know that I am observing and and uh and
what I am is love joy and peace which is
you know wow that's crazy you know I I
thought I was a you know I was a human
being a machine uh made of biological
stuff and of course in those days I had
not come to the conclusion that biology
was had to be quantum and classical. I
thought you know I I again I bought the
the idea that life is a classical
phenomenon which is not true. I mean it
you know our cells are quantum in
classical. So we are a collection of
cells that work through principles which
are not principles of classical physics
which are the principles that are that
makes a computer work. The principle of
quantum physics are completely
different. So we are not built like a
computer. In fact, every cell of my body
contains the genome
of the egg that created the entire body.
So the instructions the the the you know
the the the
potential knowledge of the entire
organism is contained within each of its
parts. Our cells are parts whole. They
are both part but also whole because
they have the genome of the entire
organism. This is incredible.
You know, a computer is made of
transistors. On, off, on, off, on, off.
That's it. What does a what does a
switch know about the entire computer
and its workings? Nothing. Maybe just
zero and one, but that's not much.
Yeah. Yeah. I I want to I want to get
more into the theory definitely as as
the conversation goes on, but I know so
your exploration continues after this
experience in a variety of ways. And I
know some of that exploration was
subjective and we talked a little bit
about this last time and I remember you
mentioning at some point um you know
investigating consciousness via a
variety of methods including going to
the Monroe Institute and then I heard
you mention um in your most recent
Asencia interview, Asencia Foundation
interview that you had an an out-of-
body experience at one point. Was was
this just for clarification
was this the same occasion as the night
in 1990 or was this subsequent? I I had
hundreds I had of what you would call
extraordinary experiences
where you know in in they came generally
they came in response to questions that
I had and they were spontaneous just
like the first one. I would have never
imagined that something like what I
experienced existed. I mean if you had
you know so how how can I ask to have an
experience in a certain way if I don't
even know that it's possible to have
such an experience you know for example
I experience my consciousness as a point
of light at the base of my sternum
everything that existed was this point
of light and that was me
then I experienced myself out of body so
I'm I'm I'm not even in the body I'm
outside the body in in this early
experience I was both inside and
outside. But then what was outside was
this light. It was not reality. You know
the real the physical reality. Then I
experienced myself as out inside and
outside. But then this time the outside
was the conventional reality. So my
conscious was in the grass in the trees
and the buildings that were in front of
me and so on. And then I experienced
myself where I you know and this I
believe you know the way that I
interpret this experience is a memory of
something that there was a field. There
was a field and in this field all the
qualia were all in this field of qualia
but there was no observer.
So there was there was a field of stuff
that I recognized as lights, as sounds,
as emotions,
but they were not my emotions because
there was no me yet. So I I perceive,
you know, the way I reconstructed this
later was that it it was an experience
when I was very young maybe one two
weeks old. So these other experience you
know so now now it's before there is
even an observer but there is a field of
stuff
just to give you a few then I was out of
body okay so my conscious is not even in
the body it's you know it's outside and
and on it goes so you know what you know
and it was through these experiences
that I could then construct a theory
because I had to explain what whatever
theory I could put together. He he had
to explain what I experience. I mean
this is science. Science you know you
can experience what happens in the
laboratory.
uh and you can experience what happens
within you. Except that generally
scientism what I call you know now a a a
religion which is what we believe based
on science uh but it's not science
because it goes against the principles
of quantum physics for example scientism
believes that only what ex what exist
can only exist in space and time and and
exist only what you can measure. So if
you believe that then we have eliminated
any kind of inner experience and and
when you do that you eliminate our
humanity the fact that we have a soul
that we have a mind that can intuit it
things and so on. So that this this is
the situation that we have today. My
nemesis is absolutely procrastination. I
sit down to do work suddenly it's an
hour later and I'm just uh down some
ancient aliens rabbit hole and I haven't
done a thing. Caffeine has always been a
go-to coping mechanism. But you know how
it goes. You take a bunch in the morning
and then you crash in the afternoon and
then you're procrastinating in a whole
new way. And on that note, that's why I
was excited when Magic Mind hit me up.
They offered to send me all three of
their formulas, free, original, and max.
And they said, "Try each one for a few
days, see what you think, and if you
like it, we'll be a sponsor." So, why is
Magic Mind different? Many reasons, but
for one, they figured out how to make
caffeine timereleased. It's called
nanoenccapsulation. Basically, instead
of blasting your brain all at once, it
gives you a nice smooth draw of caffeine
over the course of many hours. No big
spike or crash and no procrastination.
Honestly, I love all three formulas, but
nothing beats a max in the morning. I am
a max guy. It gets me into such a nice
buzzy flow state. It has 165 millig of
caffeine, only 4 g of sugar. Gives you
that deep focus and energy. After just a
few days, it absolutely helps me skip
that morning procrastination. But the
caffeine-free free free version in the
blue green bottle is absolutely
fantastic when you're already
caffeinated. I was actually just
traveling with a friend who's caffeine
sensitive and he swears by the free. So
if procrastination is your arch villain
like it is for me, this is your elixir,
my friends. And as they're launching
these new varieties, they've got 60% off
of your first subscription purchase. But
to get that discount, you've got to go
to our link magicmind.comi60
or use the QR code for more info with
code thirdey60. And by the way, 100%
money back guarantee. So you have
nothing to lose except your
procrastination. So I I want to this
this point about out-of- body
experiences is of special interest to me
because since we spoke last in November,
I actually went to Monroe Institute
myself and did a whole Gateway Process
retreat. Um I won't tell the story for
the millionth time but but just to get
to the punchline so so you know I was
having a great experience there really
wonderful group of people um and some
profound experiences during the
meditations you know I was feeling a lot
of those sensation like energetic
sensations in the body they talk about
but I did not think I was going to have
a full-blown out-of- body experience at
all and then on the last day much to my
surprise I did I had the full-blown like
unmistakable
absolutely onlogically quaking
experience of, you know, feeling my
consciousness somehow solidifying into
this, you know, vibrating energetic body
that is like rising above my physical
body. And it was just terrifying,
awesome, surreal, but also hyper real.
Like one of those things where, you
know, there there's no possible way you
could chalk it up to just a dream or
just some experience that I've had
before. Um, and granted, I I didn't get
control of it. I didn't have some great
amazing astral experience, nothing like
that. But just the unmistakable
sensation of separation from physical
body and and feeling yourself as this
like vibrating electrical energetic
body of some sort that I that I couldn't
get control of but it's you know you
have the experience you know it's like
you know that is true you know that is
real in fact in fact most of those the
experiences that I had that I call
extraordinary ary experiences are more
real than what I call the reality of an
ordinary experience. So, so how can that
be? And of course, people that tell you
what you should experience or what you
should think about your experience, you
know, are are not cannot be correct
because you are the judge of your own
experiences, not them that ever had such
experiences. So, shut up.
Exactly.
You know, come on. I mean, you know, you
you want to tell me what I have to what
I had I have experienced.
Yeah. I I brought this up to Bernardo
actually last time I spoke with him and
and he kind of had an issue with it
because he you know, he he's like I I
like but but what are you experiencing
with you know you're you're in you're
out of your physical body. So what do
you have non-physical senses? And I was
and you know I was just kind of like I
don't know non-physical senses. And
that's the old problem you know that you
have you I mean I actually had similar
to yours but actually I was fully out of
body and I was out of body few seconds
but I I I got scared and I was you know
sucking back into my body and this
happened three times and then one night
I woke up and half of my body was out
and half was in and I was awake like and
it was the most crazy thing. Half of me
is out and you know and the rest is in.
Yeah. Yeah. So what what would so so for
did you do did you do a gateway retreat?
What did you do at I did I did uh I did
uh I went to Monroe several times
different you know I did gateway also. I
never went out of body there. I had some
extraordinary experiences there but they
were not out of body they were other
experiences. So it was an environment
that was conducive to have other
experiences you know deepening
experiences but not I did not go out of
body
any you' you'd be willing to share
uh no because I you know I I think I I
think you know I mean we would stay here
for hours and hours you know to to share
I I have shared enough I think that the
important thing is to understand that
there is a there is a theory that can
actually explain is because otherwise
it's all kind of stuff right but I'm a
physicist and I want to understand
what's going on and what is what these
experiences are showing that there is a
deeper reality that science today has
ignored in has ignored because it has
been eliminated at the start by the
misunderstanding of what quantum physics
has been telling us. Quantum physics has
been telling us that the world is not
the way we think the world works.
And you know the interpretation of
quantum physics is still up for grabs
because physicists have not agreed at
all how to interpret the craziness of
quantum physics. So together with a
famous physicist that uh you know is an
expert in quantum physics, I have
created a theory and this theory
explains perfectly
the exactly the stuff that physicists
have never understood. But of course you
know as you know you get you get wedded
to your own way of thinking and so it's
very hard to reach people that believe
that know more than you and so they you
know we are here to talk about this
stuff and I would like to tell you about
this theory because this is really you
know the next step otherwise we keep on
arguing about something that cannot be
checked or understood because there is
no theory even to talk about it.
Absolutely. Yeah. And and you know
though this is your theory, one of the
things that I find so intriguing about
it as someone as we discussed last time,
you know, for me I'm really
philosophically inspired by platonism
and neoplatanism and you know it there
there's almost and you've arrived at
this separately which I find so
fascinating but there there does a lot
with a lot of these core concepts seem
to be an almost onetoone mapping and
same with uh I know you mentioned being
inspired by uh lightnits
And same with as you as you may know
about linenets you know he was
definitely reading Platinus he was
reading uh proclas he was um
corresponding with some of the Cambridge
platonists so it seems like he was also
influenced by that stream as well and
and here you are as someone who arrives
at all of this completely separately
coming to very similar conclusions. So,
so before before we go down the
philosophical route, um let's get into
your theory and the finer points of the
theory because I think you know this one
of the things you you hear people bring
up this notion about the the importance
of quantum you know you know just just
wielding that word irresponsibly. But
you do just the opposite. you you come
to very clear uh definitions of what the
quantum has to do with consciousness and
how it fits into um quantum theory in
general. And so so let's start with why
why is it important to go away from just
the classical interpretation of what a
human being is? You know, why can't it
be bottomup physical epiphenomenal stuff
that we can reduce down to its parts?
Okay. Yeah. So, so a few words of the
distinction between classical and
quantum. So, uh the classical world is
the world of objects which are
microscopic objects. Microscopic means
something you know that you can see with
a optical microscope not with a not with
a you know an electronic microscope. So
composed of lots of atoms and molecules
but there are tiny objects that don't
cannot even see. For example, a living
cell, a living cell, the smallest one,
the uh you know bacteria, the smallest
bacteria has already 10 billion
10 billion atoms. So my goodness, that's
a lot of atoms. Okay, but that's the
smallest one. You need a very very major
microscope to see that. In fact, uh you
can hardly see it with a conventional
microscope. But anyway, so so that world
is deterministic. You know what does it
mean? It means that it can be described
perfectly at least for not for not
forever but for a short period of time.
time that depends on the complexity of
the system and you know how how much
interaction that system how much you can
keep that system isolated from the rest
of the world and so on so forth. But but
basically you can describe you can have
equations mathematical equations that
describe the motions of that object in
space and time. Okay. So that reality is
what today scientism believe is the only
reality. Now there is another physics
quantum physics that describes
particles, atoms and molecules you know
uh very microscopic very small but not
just that because for example there are
microscopic quantum phenomena that are
quite large and quite powerful. For
example, a laser light. Laser light is
quantum light
which appears you know as a very sharp
is monochromatic and all all the photons
are in phase.
So this light m maintains its coherence.
Uh so that even if you beam a beam of
you know a beam of laser light to the
moon at the moon is is only few that
beam is only few meter wide. So I mean
amazing coherence right where if you
beam a a beam of monochromatic light you
know the the beam diverges you know
enough that you wouldn't even you know
you wouldn't even see it in the moon you
know it would never
never stay coherent enough for that and
yet it is purely you know purely
monochromatic light but because he's not
in faith phase and that phase is quantum
phase. It's not necessarily the phase of
of the wave the way you imagine it but
let you know it's it's too complicated
to go into the details. So let's stay at
this level. So sure. So quantum physics
one of the major fundamental difference
between quantum physics and classical
physic is that the laws of quantum
physics only tell you the probabilities
of all the
positions or velocities
that you could determine
a particle to be. for example uh but not
where you will measure that particle or
at what velocity what velocity will have
that particle. It can only tell you the
possibility the probability of the
possibilities.
So it doesn't tell you what what happens
what happens is indeterminate
though it will be with those
probabilities and those possibilities.
So it it can it can tell you what you
can know about but not what you will
know when you make a measurement. And
that is the major problem with quantum
physics is called the collapse of the
wave function. the collapse. It's called
the measurement problem which is
basically uh you know one of the way in
which you explain this
in incomp in incomprehensible
phenomenon is called the collapse of the
wave function which which says that when
you make a measurement uh you will
measure randomly
the the the position or the velocity
that you will find find for that
particle will be a random event non non
uh uh uh uh non-algorithmic
random event that you cannot predict. So
if you prepare a system in you know you
prepare the same system at the same
condition and you repeat the experiment
you can verify that the probabilities
are exactly the way the the way the uh
theory tells you but you had to make
thousands of experiment of the same
experiment and then you find that the
pro that you the profile of
probabilities is actually the behavior
that you observe but is Naturally
because a lot of particles you know
appears where they are highly probable
very few where they're low probable not
nothing when there is zero probability
that something be there and so quantum
physics will cannot tell you what
happens because what happens is not
determined by quantum physics is
determined by something else and the
something else is the collapse of the
wave function which is just a phrase
that means nothing really because you
cannot you cannot tell what happens only
when you do many measurements you will
see that the measurements correlate with
the probability you know uh but the
every every time you measure you do the
experiment again you will find that the
particle appear in different orders in
all these positions in which they appear
and yet they will build up at the end
the same pattern which is the
probability is basically the probability
distribution ution that is computed by
the by the theory is reflected in the
number of particles that are in
different positions.
So saying that can I ask can I ask a
question? Um it some in in my non-expert
understanding sometimes it seems to me
like we're trying to understand
this deeper or or higher quantum reality
backwards because the vantage point that
we are asking from is a classical
vantage point, right? like we're we're
trying to determine the reality of the
quantum realm from our physical realm.
And therefore, we have to collapse the
wave function by taking a measurement.
And then we try to understand this this
deeper realm through what we would call
a particle, which you know, you talk all
the time that there is no particles,
right? It's it's actually a state of a
quantum field that is like existing in
nd dimensional quantum space that's like
everywhere and nowhere at the same time.
So I think a lot of people are try, you
know, they're trying to understand what
is the quantum realm like where where is
it? But but it's like even by trying to
locate it within our lived physical
experience, we're making some kind of
like fundamental epistemological
mistake, right? You see the the Yeah.
What what what is going on is that in
within scientism
quantum physics does not describe
ontology is simply a mathematical theory
is a mathematical theory that makes
predictions about what you can measure
in space and time. That's it. So it
doesn't describe reality. It describe is
a mathematical theory is a constru
mental constructions that allows you to
to tell it tells you all that you can
know about physical reality. That's it.
But in this new theory that I'm talking
about of consciousness and free will,
the quantum physics is actually an is on
is describing ontology. But it describes
ontology in a way that is completely new
because we have never given ontology to
to uh to this type of to to conscious in
free will. In fact, scientism says that
free will doesn't exist. And it's and if
that and free if free will doesn't exist
then consciousness has no purpose. There
is no causality. So it's just a nippy
phenomenon of the brain. I mean that's
what most theories of of of conscious
say. There is no free will and
consciousness is simply a nippy
phenomenon of the brain. But in the
theory that I have with Dariano,
Professor Dariano, we say that
consciousness is a property of a field
of a quantum field
that
I will explain how. And free will is a
property also in you know that you
cannot take apart. It is part of the
workings of the of the quantum field. So
consciousness and free will are aspects
of the field that are integral to to the
operations of the field and they they
exist as the field exist and when I'm
talking about the the quantum field you
know quantum theory describes the fields
for example of the of the particles the
field you know the quantum field of
electrons the quantum field of quarks
the quantum fields of electromagnetic
radiation and so and so on so forth and
so th those are the fundamental fields
and in this theory these fields are
conscious and then free will. So what
does consciousness and free will do then
and why? How can we explain them? All
right. So let's take the field of
electrons. The field of electrons first
of all in quantum field theory uh is the
reality of electrons. Even though you
know even though as I said earlier uh
most scient scientism the scient the
scient uh the scientist
not the not the scient well there is a
problem here with
with language. Yes. With with with in
Italian I can say I can I can actually
distinguish the the scientist that you
the of the of the scientist of science
and the scientist of scientism. I can
use two different words. It's hard to do
it in English at least. I I I they don't
come right right now. So let's forget
about it. But but basically scientism is
saying that uh that you know the the uh
the state of the electron the state of
the electron is actually what we call an
electron and the state of the electron
is not separable from the field of
electrons. So you know it's not like you
know you you can no longer
think of a particle of the of the
electron as a particle because it is
really a manifestation of the fields
inseparable from the field and this is a
this this new way of thinking about
electrons and fields really happened
about 50 years ago. So it's uh not not
in the early days of in the early in the
early days of quantum physics an
electron was considered a wave or a
particle and it would behave either as a
wave or as a particle. But in this new
understanding
uh it is really the the best way to
imagine that is like an like a wave of a
sea. You know the wave of the sea is
like an electron is a something that
happens in the sea but the wave of the
sea cannot be separated from the sea. So
so the same way an electron the electron
is a state and it can appear and
disappear. when he appears it would you
know it would appear in the measurement
you know in space and time and you say
oh I got it I got an electron but in
reality even that appearance will simply
trigger a phen a qu a a quantum to
classical phenomenon in the instrument
and you would eventually say oh there is
an electron over here or over here over
here or there is an electron with this
momentum or whatever but whatever you do
you do not see an electron as a
classical phenomenon. It it's just
impossible to see. Okay. So, so the
electron is a state that engenders some
phenomena that you know you eventually
can see in an instrument. Yeah. So, just
I just want to Yeah. Go ahead. Sorry. I
just want to I just want to emphasize
this point about fields because it's
it's just so mindblowing and and again
it's it it takes some I think adjustment
from you know thinking of a physical
reality with separate stuff as opposed
to there is some ontological reality
where the very reality of electroness
in all of its manifestations exists in
some kind of from our perspective
omniresent way that could manifest an
individual particle
electron
if we do a measurement. But in reality
there's just this there's just this
deeper reality of electrons
that right like like that that's
and then when you extrapolate that when
you extrapolate that into everything
else that must have a field too it
starts to get just unbelievably
mind-blowing. Well, I mean you also have
to consider then you know uh the fields
the the separate fields are not separate
from a right of a field of a of one. The
totality of what exists is fundamentally
a huge field that that out of which you
can you know you have parts whole just
like you know my cell the cell of my
body are part of the body and they are
inseparable in some way from the
environment in which they are part
because you know you know a cell a cell
is not a closed system.
you know it interacts with the
environment which are in the body other
cells. So so we are you know the
separateness the the you know the
reductionism of of scientism and
materialism in which is the other
property of scientism that reductionism
is not what reality is about. Basically
quantum physics is saying that the world
is holistic. The universe is holistic.
Is not made of separable parts.
Everything is interconnected within this
world. This universe that's that's what
entanglement
has shown. Entanglement is a is the
property that particles that interact
they have properties in common that
cannot be known. They cannot be measured
except when you prepare them in a
special way and only for very simple
systems. But but fundamentally
everything is entangled with everything
else in ways which are impossible to
know. And the picture that comes out is
that one the totality of what exists is
not made of separable parts and that is
fundamental.
That's you know what what was my you
know my take-home
you know in my first experience that I
was not separate from the I was not an
observer separate from the observe. I
was part I was observer and observed and
now the fields are observers observed
and agents. In quantum physics they are
all three of those. When you know any
time that there is an interaction you
have a field that asks a question so to
speak the other one that responds to
that question with free will and the
question is asked with free will. And so
you know so the question is the
instrument that we built forces the
field to interact the field of the
observe to interact with with a proper
field within the instrument to create an
interaction
where now you will see then the result
and you then create the theories of
quantum physics. But that's what's going
on. What's going on is not that there
is, you know, that there is a world rule
by by by mathematics. No, that's
scientism
and that's valid only partially within
the classical world. In the classical
world, you can actually predict things
up to a certain level because there is
chaotic behavior and chaotic behavior is
determinism that however requires the
knowledge of the initial conditions to a
precision which is impossible because
quantum physics doesn't allow you to
know those you know position and
velocity for example with infinite
precision and also there is all
continuous disturbance and interaction
between objects and the quantum vacuum.
Quantum physics, the quantum vacuum is
not nothing. Quantum vacuum is an active
participant to the to the world of
quantum physics. So you know all of a
sudden we have a completely different
reality to deal with. But to go back to
the theory then if we start with the
idea that a quantum field is conscious
and has free will then
we can explain the properties of the
quantum fields that otherwise will not
be explainable. What are those
properties? First of all, the state of
the quantum field
is is a vector is a vector with n
components and the components are uh
complex numbers and they represent
probability amplitudes. Don't ask me to
define all these terms because otherwise
we stay here another half an hour. But
right basically what it means is that
this state is exist in a abstract
mathematical space is not in space and
time. Okay is an abstract mathematical
space and but it has two crucial
properties which are exactly the
properties of our conscious experience.
That's why we can say that the quantum
field is conscious because those two
properties are number one the quantum
state cannot be reproduced. There is a
theorem is it called the no cloning
theorem in quantum physics that says
that the state of a field cannot be
reproduced cannot be known. You cannot
make a copy. If you cannot make a copy
you cannot know because to know you have
to make a copy of what you know. You
cannot do that. Not only that, second
theorem, theorem of olivo says that when
you make a measurement of a state,
at the most you can get one bit per
quantum bit. And the quantum bit, you
know, not the the quantum state can be
described by a vast number typically of
a quantum bits that are entangled that
have properties in common that are
unknowable. So an and an an entanglement
exists only in the quantum world. It
does not exist in the classical world.
The classical world can be described by
bits. classical bits zero or one but the
zero or the one are have nothing in
common with each other or with other
with other bits. They are separate in
independent deterministic states.
Not so with the quantum state because if
you measure one of the quantum bits of a
state the ones that are connected are
affected by that measurement. And so
it's impossible to actually make a
measurement without changing what you
measure in a fundamental way. So
so now these are exactly the properties
of a conscious experience. My conscious
experience I am a field and my conscious
experience is private meaning I cannot
reproduce it. I can you know the the
love that I feel I cannot express it as
I as I feel it the I'm the only one to
know the love that I feel for someone or
for myself whatever it is that that the
feelings the qualia
the qualia which are the sensations and
feelings that bring the knowing to me
those qualia are private exactly like
the quantum state the quantum state is
private and what I can say about what I
feel or what someone from the outside
can measure if they if they could
measure what I feel for example opening
up the brain and measuring these signals
in the brain. Okay.
What I you know that measurement will
only give you a small one bit per
quantum bit. So you know and it and also
what I can say is only a small part of
what I feel. So now
so what it what it means then is that
the quantum state of a field is the
mathematical representations
of a conscious of the qualia of the
conscious experience of the qualia. But
the mathematical representation of the
qualia cannot be the qualia. The qualia
is my experience the field that is
conscious. You can represent the quantum
state say that's qualia but only the
field knows within the field its own
experience its own qualia.
That's the ontology. The ontology is
only described by the map of the of of
the territory which is the mathematical
representation.
So the mathematics is the map of a
territory which is the ontological
deeper reality which is the fact that
fields know their own state. Now of
course that's a that's a step that has
to be accepted as you know as a
postulate but if you think for a second
about it you know it explains why you
have states that cannot be measured it
you know and that cannot be copied you
know exactly like we have experience we
experience stuff our qualia cannot be
copied and cannot be measured and all I
can say about what I feel is that you
know when I say I love you to my son
that I love
I'm not transferring what I feel I'm
transferring my interpretation or my
this this the meaning of the qualia that
I feel but the meaning of the qualia
which is what I then put into symbol
don't even exist in science because in
science information is only is only what
you can measure
So is a completely and it is a
probability is associated the amount of
information is associated with the
probability of what you measure. For
example the the you know the higher the
probability that you can measure a
certain symbol the lower is the content
of information
you know the amount of information that
carried by that symbol. That's how
information is is you know is uh
defined. That definition says nothing
about the the meaning of the
information.
For us for us the information is the
meaning carried by symbol. What we call
information is the meaning of the
symbol. Yes. That's not what science
call information. Information says
simply the probability that a symbol
appears
is what
carries information. The probability of
the appearance of symbols is what
carries information. Completely
different. Exactly. Okay. And and it is
by this fundamental difference in
understanding
that is cod that uses the same words
that are deceptive that we are actually
getting you know getting you know thrown
away from the the deeper reality that we
are. The same thing is happening today
with artificial intelligence. We call
intelligence what is not intelligence.
Intelligence is about the meaning of
symbols just like information is about
the meaning of symbols not the symbols
or their appearance or their
correlations.
Really? Yeah. Really that is the major
problem today that confuses everybody
and that's the source of what I call
scientism as it relates to consciousness
and free will. Now I did not explain
free will. So let me say that and then
we can we can go. Sure. Sure. in the
third part. But but at least I
let's also let's also zoom in on some of
the other core components that you talk
about in irreducible too because I think
we were just pointing to like you know
one of these core concepts like say you
know this combination of words like yeah
but let's not do that Michael let's
let's finish the theory otherwise it's
it's uh you know because okay there are
so many new concepts here and and you
know we can you know jump up and down
but but I I I would I would want to at
least say the the theory the core theory
and what it means for quantum physics
and you know the interpretation of
quantum physics and so on. So now now we
have defined consciousness for a field.
So cons consciousness is is a property
that a field has to experience its own
state. That's what consciousness is. And
the state the state of the of the of the
field must have the same properties of
the experience of the state which which
is the experience is private and can can
only be we we can only know a small
portion of it. That's it. But now that
the field is conscious now that field
then is the one that decides what to
manifest when it is measured.
It is the field that decides what to
manifest, not the observer. The observer
is the one that asks a question by
setting up an instrument that is trying
to you know that that that will interact
will force an interaction with the field
that you or the particle that you want
to know about. So, so the the field that
you so for example you're observing an
electron and you set up a an instrument
that wants to determine the position of
an electron in a in a measure you know
in an experiment and so where would the
electron show up?
It would be the collapse of the wave
function. So it would show up in all
possible position where there is
probability that is greater than zero
and with with no no rhyme or reason it
will it will appear you know randomly at
at the various positions
this theory says uh-uh the field decides
where to manifest the electron. So
that's it. The collapse of the wave
function has been explained as a
decision of free will of the field that
is observed by what? By this by this by
the instrument. The instrument is the
one that is observing the field. Uh and
then the observer that set up you know
if it's a human being that set up the
experiment is the one that allowed this
interaction to occur. So there was a
theory many many years ago uh that
attributed the collapse of the wave
function to the consciousness of the
observer which was this the person that
set up the experiment. This is not what
this this uh theory says. This theory
says that the free will is the free will
of the field that you are observing.
That is the free will that this
determines
uh where this because that symbol is a
that symbol is the symbol with which
that field communicates with the field
of the instrument that is interacting
with it because the fundamental reality
is that these fields communicate with
each other their own meaning to know
themselves and the other. Sorry, your
connection got a little choppy for a
second, but th this just helped me
understand a philosophical concept that
I've really struggled to understand,
which is, have you heard of this Greek
concept of hypoxis before? You what?
Indeed.
All right, jump jump jumping back in
from a little technical error, but I was
I was saying to Federico, his
explanation of how it's really this
deeper reality of the field that is
making the free will choice really made
this this kind of uh esoteric Greek uh
philosophy idea make more sense to me,
which is this term of hypoxis. So a lot
of times if you if you're reading
Pltonism, you'll come across these terms
like that are kind of hard to wrap your
mind around. And hypoxis is essentially
this idea of what what is is one sort of
higher on the metaphysical ladder, but
two, it also has more causitive will,
more free will, more agency than
something with less hyperoxis. So it's a
perfect example because in in Feder
Rico's metaphysical view it's the field
that we are physically
manifested from.
Therefore the field should have more
free will and more high parks. So it
kind it kind of made that that whole
thing click for me. So so so thank you
for that. You know in this this way the
my decision which I attribute to the
body. Yeah. But my decision I am a
field. I'm not the body. So the decision
of what I will manifest
uh is basically the decision of the
field. And what but and here we have to
be a little careful because the self or
the field is not is much vaster than the
ego which is what we normally think we
are. We normally think we are the body.
So what we think we are is a you know is
a small portion of the self that we are
is that portion that only pays attention
to the symbols to the information
produced by the body and that's that's
where you know we also don't
understand who we are because we think
we are our body because we are convinced
that We can only experience what the
body is presenting to us. But that is
not true because we also experience
dreams for example which is certainly
when our eyes are closed and everything
else you know where is the dream coming
from? Where is the experience of the
dream coming from? especially some of
the most vivid and most powerful dreams
that are you know precognitive dreams
for example or you know dreams where you
had solutions to problems uh which I had
many of so so you know so we are vaster
being with a vaster consciousness
than what we think we normally are and
when we awake by re re realizing that we
are not the body like in my first
awakening experience that I described
earlier and I realize that I'm I'm the
world observing itself. So I'm certainly
not you know I'm not the body. So when I
in that experience then once you make a
connection with your vaster self then
you know the information exchange
between the ego and the vaster self
increases dramatically and and it comes
in the form of you know other
extraordinary experiences of
consciousness in more intuitions and so
on and and generally a a better
satisfaction in your life. Yeah, that
that makes a lot of sense. And it feels
it feels kind of like we're we're
leading into this third part I wanted to
explore with you, which is which are
like the implications of of this. But do
you do you think you you got through the
core parts of the theory? I got the core
part of the of the theory which is you
know now in summary the we are a field.
The field is conscious and has free
will. And the consciousness of the field
is can be represented
by the state. The state of the field
represents the qualia
of the conscious experience of the
field. And the free will is the ability
of the field to manifest whatever
symbols, whatever, you know, whatever
symbol he wants to express what his
inner state is. And it's the field that
expresses his own inner state. Not
someone that forces or or a randomness
forces an answer or randomness. No,
that's not the case. You know, we are we
have free will. Free will means free
will to express whatever portion of our
own meaning which is the meaning of
qualia is the qualia are the bringers of
meaning. The meaning is the deeper
aspect of the for example of the quantum
information which represents the state
of the field. So so in this type of in
this type of view there are three
aspects which are inseparable. The body,
the mind which is expressed by the
quantum state and the spirit which is
expressed by the meaning of the
experience which is brought by the
quantum by the qualia which is expressed
that you know symbolically by the
quantum state
and this maps on to your concepts of
like CI and P space right yeah the CIP
CIP framework correct yeah so that's
consciousness information and then the
the physical and in my in my notes to to
restate everything he said if if anybody
wants a breakdown of this I have a a
quick one and you can tell me if I'm
right here so consciousness
has sort of a core nature of being the
realm of meaning intention direct
knowing the fundamental substate
substrate of reality um then information
is the actual it's not the symbols
themselves that we use but it's the
realm of symbols
logic
that that actually exists behind
whatever the map of information we're
using is. So the the information, the
language, the mathematics is actually
pointing to this eye space, right? That
actually exists behind
our humanmade symbolic representations.
And then the physical is the sort of
virtual interface that we use to
experience
what we think of as reality which is not
actually the primary reality. It's more
it's like the the headset uh like as Don
Hoffman would say. That's right. the the
it's like a virtual reality
uh that however is not completely
virtual like the virtual reality of a
computer because you know it is based on
states of the fields
that are not separable from the fields
whereas the one and zero of the computer
are conventions that we have created
in making the computer in in such a way
that the computer functions by
maintaining those conventions. But they
are conventions that you will never find
if you don't know the convention. You
don't know where they are inside inside
the operation of the computer. You know
these circuits are designed in such a
way to to uh you know to respect those
conventions and we did that on purpose
of course and and so the computer simply
is another machine not a deterministic
system that does whatever we told him to
do. It has no mind of its own. Even if
we talk as if it did, never mind
consciousness. Because the mind is only
the the information processing.
The see quantum physics is the quantum
information processing of the field that
is actually trying to figure out what's
what is perceiving and and and what it
means. So the mind the mind uh you know
in this body mind spirit that I have
conceptualized here the mind is also the
information processing of the quantum
information. The body is only the
information processing of the classical
information or the bits that happens in
the in the in what I call what we call
the body which is the brain. For
example, the brain is you know the brain
the working of the brain is really the
working of a quantum classical computer
but but deterministic is made of bits
eventually you know it comes out into
bits because it's that's what the
signals in the brain they are all
numbers they they can all be reduced to
bits right but the experience the
experience that we have goes beyond
anything that can be represented
You can only represent symbols. You
cannot represent experience. And that's
a deeper part that scientism eliminated
because there is only what you can
measure. But what you can measure are
numbers.
But the experience is not numbers. The
love that I feel is not numbers. It goes
beyond numbers. Beyond the
representation.
It is the essence of reality.
And the meaning of the experience is
even deeper. And that's the spirit. The
meaning of the experience is wow I
understand now what it means. What that
love that I feel what you know what it
means to me.
That's
that's that's where we are. You know, we
are much deeper beings and we have been
essentially we have been sold, you know,
sold short by by scientism, by this
religion that pretends to be science
because the science with the capital S
has not spoken about this,
you know, but the scientism is the
people that believe that they know and
they they gain power by by, you know, by
you know insisting that what they know
is the truth and so on and so forth and
you know but they don't know because
they they started with with presumptions
that are not correct. They started with
postulates. If you if you start by
saying that reality is all that you can
measure in space and time
you know you have eliminated what is not
in space and time. And now many
scientists are saying well there is not
even space and time and space and time
is emerging property of something
deeper. Well, this is exactly what I'm
saying. But but I'm saying context of
consciousness and free will, which is a
completely different context than what s
you know even science scientists with a
capital S are doing right now because
some of the scientists they want a
physics without space and time like Don
Offman of you know often talks about but
but in for for the physicist that has
nothing to do with consciousness and
free will. It is just another
mathematics. I'm saying that mathematics
is created by consciousness,
not the other way around. You cannot
explain consciousness with mathematics
because consciousness is the one that
creates mathematics as a representation
of its own nature. But the
representation of reality is not
reality.
Consciousness is a fundamental aspect of
reality that cannot be represented by
mathematics or if it can be represented
by mathematics you can only represented
small portion of it because mathematics
doesn't have the you know the
completeness that is necessary to
represent the totality of what exists
which is not made of separable parts.
There are no sets with things that are
either inside the set or outside the set
because there are no boundaries. When
you have something which is made which
is holistic there are no boundaries just
like there is no boundary between red
and orange. Where is the boundary
between red and orange? There isn't.
There is a region where is both red and
orange or neither red nor orange
whatever you want to call it. but is not
is a continum.
Let let me I'm curious about you know
when we're talking about you know
symbols like you know the the Arabic
numbers that we use 1 2 3 4 5 6 or we're
talking about the colors we perceive.
Is there a deeper reality that those
kinds of symbolic manifestations point
to? Like is there is there a logic that
exists behind space and time that this
is pulling from like like some kind of
realm of forms or like some kind of mind
space that that really is the sort of uh
treasure chest of where logic comes
from? Or is that simply how things look
from our perspective trying to
understand like a higher consciousness
that we can't understand from a physical
standpoint? Logic only makes sense in
the world of
space and time and objects in the
classical world and even then is not
sufficient
but it is necessary
uh if you you know
the girdles theorems right that
you know the girdles theorems right that
are shown that uh even in if you have an
axiomatic system, mathematical system.
uh you can make statements that cannot
be proven if they're right or wrong, you
know, if they're true or false, you
know, which means they're either true or
false, you know, but or or if you if you
prove that they're true, then they're
false or but essentially, you know, they
they they you would have to take the
true one and the false one and say they
are both true and you create two
separate theories. For example, you know
the the the axiom of the parallels in in
uh in geometry
uh uh if you say since it cannot be
derived from the other axioms
uh uh you know you can say I don't
believe in this axum and this you know
so I accept that there are parallels
that actually meet or parallel that
actually diverge and what you have
defined N is re remmanian and uh and uh
you know and another geometry which is
lobacheski geometry. So two different
geometries plus the geometry in which
the parallel stay parallel which is you
know the conventional ukidian geometry
but but they are incompatible with each
other. So if you if you say the reality
is Romanian well you cannot then say
that the parallels will will never meet
because they will meet in Romanian
geometry. So you see so you can create
different different realities
based on the fact that logically you
cannot prove that the theorem you know
the the the postulate uh of the
parallels
uh you know is is correct or not. I'm
I'm assuming you're familiar with Mike
Michael Lean the biologist. Yeah. Um so
so he he for instance has this idea of
what he calls platonic morphospace right
like like some kind of non-physical
space that biology
is somehow
you know interfused with that allows a
biological system to for instance know
when to stop growing. Right? Because if
if you you know you have if you look at
it from the materialistic perspective
and you try to make a bottomup
explanation for how complex biological
systems form, you run into all these
logical problems like well well how does
it know when to stop growing? How does a
very you know how does one of Michael
Leven's uh or the these very simple
um organisms that he removes from their
native environment? How does it suddenly
learn how to seemingly learn how to
adapt in a new space? And his argument
or his theory is that there is some
higher order that these things must be
pulling from some kind of higher
meaning. that in my in my in my theory
that that you know the a a cell or or a
animal associated to that cell or animal
there is a field and so that the
comprehension and the decisions are in
the fields I mean that that's what I'm
explaining already you know I'm you know
it's basically it's basically uh you
know the the the the
comprehension the experience of of of
the of the actual
interaction with the world and the
comprehension of it and the and the
decisions are coming from the field that
controls the body. The body is
controlled by a field. So all the uh
spiritual aspects if you want are in the
field
uh and and and some as some of the mind
aspects are also in the field and then
the body is only the portion which is in
space and time. That portion of space
and time is only is is what we observe
with our s with our sensory system and
our in our in our brain that that
processes the information of the sensory
systems that we have. So so but we but
our sensory system doesn't see
everything. Only sees a small portion of
what's out there.
So, so you know and and of course uh uh
if we were to see deeper than than what
we see, we would actually change
dramatically what we see. Um because we
would have to interact quantumly and we
would change what we what we interact
with which is exactly what the fields
do. They they change each other. They
affect each other when they interact.
That makes sense. That makes sense. So
So what does this mean? A question I'm
sure on everybody's mind here now is you
know these very practical questions
about
you know essentially these like root
level existential questions of you know
why do so then why do I as an as as a
manifestation of my particular field or
say or soul or whatever you want to call
it why do I exist what am I doing what
happens to me after my physical death
why did I separate from the one you Why?
What? Um, and I'll stop there because
that's quite a bit to I mean that's
that's that's what in my third book
which is not translated in in English
yet I'm discussing uh you know basically
I start with a postulate which says that
one the totality of what exists.
So one is the universe everything all
that exists
is dynamic is holistic and wants to know
itself.
So you know when I say dynamic and
holistic I have described what quantum
physics is already saying about the
universe but I'm adding wants to know
itself and it is the want
and to know itself. The want is about
the will which becomes the free will of
the fields and the know itself is what
requires consciousness. You know for for
one to know itself you must be conscious
because conscious is what allows us to
know ourselves. So I mean is defined
that way you know that's what allows us
to go is consciousness. So when one
knows itself for the first time in a
certain direction, it creates a field, a
part whole of itself.
It creates a field, a part hole of
itself. So now like a hologram. Yeah.
Just like a cell in my body is a part of
the organism. Same stuff
is my cell is a hologram.
Yes. Yes. See I mean I mean this is what
you know I mean we we are not reading
reality right if we insist that we see
we we we want to see only what we want
reality to be and so we only make test
certain things we don't want to see that
other stuff and so on. So we you know
scientism is restricting
existence and everything that exists
because they project into existence
materialism and reductionism
and is real only what you can measure.
Well when you say that you know
everything else that you cannot measure
everything else that exist in a deeper
reality is eliminated.
Right?
So, so on on this question of, you know,
we we definitely, I think, did a little
lab around a lot of those things I just
posed to you, but I've heard you
speculate about this before, but I would
love for you to share with with this
audience that hasn't heard it. What do
you think happens in terms of like the
continuity of our experience when the
physical body
expires? Well, I I did not have this
experience, but there are many that have
what is called an a uh near-death
experience. So, there are yeah, you
know, thousands and thousands of
accounts of of near-death experiences
and they are very similar and basically
when the body, you know, begins to die,
you know, because if they are
resuscitated means that it it was not
completely dead, but of course, right?
Death is not a switch on off you know is
a process that goes from the heart
stopping then the brain you know is no
longer electrical signals you know in
the brain or uh you know then you know
starts things start breaking down and if
you repair the body fast enough then you
resuscitate what was clinically dead uh
or else it continues you know it goes by
its way right it it becomes irreversibly
dead. But basically as soon as a person
of soon after the person has has um died
uh it may have an experience uh that
that has been recorded many times uh you
know where people see themselves over
the body and they see what's happening
in you know where they are. For example,
if this happening in a hospital, you
know, they see, you know, they see the
operation being done by the team of
doctors and nurses and and they report
properly what happened and then they
move into a different environment where
they they experience uh uh people that
are already dead. They that they knew
their parents perhaps, friends and so
on. They have an experience full of
love, joy, and peace. And they would
like to stay there, but but someone
tells them that they got to go back to
their body because they're not they
haven't finished doing what they came to
this world to do. And uh and so then
they're they wake themselves. They
they're awake and and uh sometimes they
tell what that experience. Sometimes
they keep it for themselves. But the
point is that those experiences are very
similar. So how can a brain that doesn't
work anymore body that is you know shut
down because the heart doesn't doesn't
work has experiences of this sort and by
the way they have done a study and found
that n you know more than 90% of the
people that had this experience are
changed by that experience. In other
words, that experience is transformative
just like uh you know my you know my uh
extraordinary experience of conscious
transformed myself and directed my the
life in a completely different
direction. So to me those are
significant events uh unless you you
know you you care only about what you
can measure but but if you care about
something deeper those are significant
events and and they they are saying they
saying that there is much more then
there are there are other experiments
which are really based on uh hypnotic
regression where
describe tribe having died, having had
experiences like the near-death
experience when they died, but then
finding themselves together with with,
you know, uh in a in an environment
where they had a life review. they had,
you know, there are all kinds of other
stuff and and then remembering other
lives and and so all of a sudden you see
that you know that that what happened
when you when your body dies uh the you
know there is a continuity of experience
and and in many cases if you believe
these stories you know people
connect themselves with prior lives
belie that they had um that they have
forgotten when they were in this life.
So so all of all of this uh uh you know
evidence which is uh you know scientism
doesn't doesn't consider evidence uh all
this evidence is pointing that there is
a deeper reality that uh you know that
that we reconnect with. Now you you can
you can just uh you know throw it away
because because you you don't want it
but uh but if you begin to do a personal
journey uh then you can begin to see
that there is a lot of truth there and
so all of this thing needs to be
explored. I'm not saying that this is
what it is. I'm saying that there is
much deeper realities that are showing
that what we think we know is only a
tiny little bit of what exists. So let's
go find out. Yeah. Well put. Well put.
So one of the ideas that I am always
struggling with with you know my my uh
metaphysical biases of of this idea that
there is like you postulate this deeper
self that is not physical that is you
know indestructible immortal which is
essentially what you know even go back
to uh um you know Socrates saying the
same thing just before he dies before he
he chooses to drink the hemlock you know
he would he would rather destroy and
corrupt his physical form than live out
of tune with what he conceives of to be
higher justice. And he, you know, he
goes into this whole speech of the the
truth of what I am is this immortal,
incorruptible thing anyway. So this
physical body is going to die in a few
years. So I'd rather die in a just way
than just, you know, crumble away and
become a shell of myself. And so so
we've we've collectively and and of
course there's so many correlaries to
this in Eastern philosophy as well. So
so we've collectively it seems like as a
human organism had this intuition. But
then there's always this this more
nuanced question of if that is true, if
there is this deeper reality of this
immortal uncorruptible
thing,
what is that deeper thing trying to do?
How is that deeper thing evolving? I I
know you have this core idea of the one
is trying to know itself. But h how
would something like a say or a field or
a soul? We we have we we are part
Michael. We are part of one. We are we
we are doing the same thing that one
does. We want to know ourselves because
one knows itself by us that have that he
created in the knowing of itself. And so
we are a nation of one that have the
same characteristics of one and
therefore the same you know motivation
to know ourselves and of course the you
know the most evolved human beings all
have wanted to understand what's going
on. So the question that we all ask is
why why are we here? What are we doing?
Why are why this world? What is going
on? is all about knowing. Even science
is about knowing except it's perverted a
bit toward making money with science,
making technology, using it and and not
just for knowing. But but you know, but
science
came from a desire to understand who are
we are, what is this world.
And now is all you know about making
money, you know, that's not true. That
is not correct. That is not what science
should do. I mean there is nothing wrong
with making money or developing
technology to to better humanity but not
to not to kill each other. And that's
exactly what's going on today. And so
the problem that we have in front is a
problem of ethics and a problem of who
are we really and what is right and what
is wrong which is not a you know and and
scientism says that life and the purpose
of life is the survival of the fittest.
So the one that kills you is the fittest
because he survives and you don't. So is
that what is true? I say no, we are here
to know each other. We are here and to
know myself, I need to know the other
because we are parts all the to know
what I have inside of me which is the
whole. I need to I need to know you
because you are part of one and vice
versa. So it is about com cooperation.
This theory says that cooperation is at
the source at the foundation of life at
the foundation of reality not
competition
and you know so that changes from this
to that
yeah right
that yeah that that does make sense to
me completely another thing I'm dying to
ask you about is so so if there's this
deeper reality ity that is non-physical
that the physical is is emanating from.
How do you you know how do you look at
the the ecology once you go behind the
physical realm? Is there a whole ecology
of intelligences that have some degree
of agency that are having some degree of
personalized experience? And you know,
could could those uh could that could
your interpretation of this account for
what people experience as non-human
intelligence or paranormal events or
like uh extraterrestrial encounters?
What what are your thoughts on this?
Yeah, basically there is an hierarchy of
fields you know as fields
uh you know the the hierarchy of fields
the for what we know today would would
start with the fields of the elementary
particles. There is nothing
you know simpler than that. But then you
know the elementary particles combine
and create atoms and then molecules and
and then macroolelecules and blah blah
blah and we have animals and so on.
Right? So there is a hierarchy of fields
associated with each hierarchy of you
know of physical physical structures
which are combined quantumly together
quantumly together because it is the
quantum fields that that are the matter
here. And so for example the the quant
the the my body is a is a is a structure
is a physical structure is a symbol of a
field which is my field who I really am
that is
connected with the essence of who I am
which for what we know today would be
the DNA of the egg that created me. Mhm.
You see, but it may not be I mean this
is the best that we can say with what we
know today. But the point is that the
you know my real my deeper reality is
not the body. The body comes and goes
just like a particle comes and goes. We
thought one time that the particles were
you know they were the conservation of
matter. Well that's not true at all.
Particles electrons come and go. you
know articles com you know they they if
they interact they could even you know
become different particles or or or
different particle may combine and
create something new and so on so forth.
So, so there there is uh but all those
combination that are crucial you know
where there is there are creative
combination where the sum where the the
the whole is more than the sum of the
parts are quantum because in classical
structures the whole is just the sum of
the parts. There is nothing more than
the sum of the parts in classical
physics. But in quantum physics, no.
Just look at an electron and a proton
that combine into an atom of hydrogen.
The atom of hydrogen doesn't have the
sum of the properties of the two parts.
Absolutely not. It's a completely
different structure with unbelievable
properties that are neither in the
electron nor the proton. But they come
from the fact that the deeper reality is
one, is not separate.
So you know the the the the
atom of hydrogen is partaking of that
continuity of properties of this stuff
that are inseparable things and and so
it manifests a little more of that
inseparableness.
Mhm.
So, so if an individual is experiencing
what they perceive to be contact with
some kind of other consciousness that
may appear to have a a a physical
appearance or not?
Do you do you think about that as
something that is extant in a
non-physical place is just a momentary
pertabbation of the one field or or are
you open to this idea like you've said
that there is this hierarchy of fields.
So the the assumption I'm making off of
that would be that each of these fields
could be conscious in its own way and
could have its own experience of reality
that is completely non-physical or is
partially non-physical and that may they
have may have the ability to navigate
this non-physical space in ways we can't
even imagine or what what do you think
about that? Well, I mean for for
example, you know, uh the
the the
experience of my thoughts, right? My
thought
um it's like uh what quantum physics
does, right? In other words, I can have
superposition of states, you know, that
I that I hold in my in my thoughts, not
in physical reality, but in my thoughts
when I when I I'm trying to figure out
different ways in which I could go. I I
must hold the various possibilities in
superposition. They could all be real,
but they're not real yet because they're
not actualized.
there. But then I choose one with my
free will and I actualize that. Okay,
that's that's exactly what I do already.
My thought is just like the collapse of
the wave function and and I have wave
functions that are describing
essentially the mind of the universe
which of which my mind is port is a
portion of it. You see? So, so quantum
physics is really describing something
that is even more real than what is
manifested because what is manifested is
a little small portion of this deeper
reality which is what generates the
reality in space and time and that so so
once you go there I mean
you you can you know you you have so
many other ways to explor explore that
are now forbidden because because
scientism constrain you into space and
time and thinking about you know things
that are real only if you can measure
them. Come on. Right. Yeah. It's it's
like trying to, you know, we can easily
project what it would be like to live on
a two-dimensional plane, but as soon as
you try to take your 3D derived brain
and try to place it into the like try to
put another axis on reality, there's
just something about it that feels
almost impossible to do unless you're
describing it through mathematics in a
in a more uh you know symbolic way or
something. So we can't even imagine what
it would be like to have that kind of an
experience. And I and I would suspect
that when we do have that kind of an
experience, it's like what you
experienced in 1990. Well, yeah. Yeah.
But but your experience will be maybe
completely different than mine. You see,
because you know
the field cannot copy its own state. It
cannot it can only be known by the
field. So this is what quantum physics
is saying.
When when when you say that the quantum
field cannot be cloned, that's what
physicists say. It means that that
quantum field either can be known within
the field by the field itself and then
it becomes its own experience and then
we have a theory of consciousness or is
something that we don't know. That's the
way it is because math says that that's
the way it is which is what physicists
are saying today. There is no reason why
the information the quantum information
cannot be copied other than the
mathematics says that it cannot. But the
the information of a computer, the data
and program of a computer can be copied
perfectly as many times as you want. So
that's not the same information
because that can be copied but the other
one cannot.
Forbidden.
So Mhm. What does it mean? Well, you can
choose to try to figure it out, which is
what I have done, or simply say, I don't
know, and I don't care because I can use
it to make quantum computers or
something, which is what most scientists
do today.
But, you know, but actually that
explains exactly
why I am conscious. If I am a field, my
consciousness has exactly the same
properties. My experience cannot be
copied.
My quantum, my inner state cannot be
copied. There is an inner state that
cannot be copied. Cannot be known. And
if it cannot be known, BS. But if it can
be known, that's define consciousness.
If it can be known is because the field
is conscious.
Now you can choose to accept that or
not. If you don't accept it, good. I
mean you know I'm not saying that you
have to accept it but at least this
explains something with the same having
the same properties of what you are
explaining. You know you cannot explain
consciousness as something that a
computer can have because the
information of a computer can be copied.
It's not private where your experience
which is a conscious experience is
private.
So yeah,
it it it really makes sense. It's a very
it's a very elegant idea and it the more
I listen to you, the more it makes sense
to me and the more I find myself
agreeing and it it really feels like it
explains
almost everything that I can I can think
of. I'm so curious about this third book
though. This one that's not translated
into English yet. Is it is it goes
deeper deeper into what my second book
is talking about and you know it will
come out hopefully soon as soon as I
finish translating it. Yeah. Are you
doing the translation too? Of course. I
I I wrote it partly in English and
partly in Italian. I mean I I'm I'm I'm
bilingual so I you know I use the best
of both worlds.
C can you give me like a a sort of high
level of what this I already told you
that I start with the partul you know
the partul of being I call it the
partial of being which is one the
totality of what exists is dynamic
holistic it wants to know itself and if
you start there then you can explain
quantum physics you can explain
everything.
Mhm.
Okay. Yeah. What what is the what is the
third? And furthermore and furthermore
the this partulate is self-evident
because you are conscious and you also
have a limited free will. So you know
what free will is and you know what
consciousness is. So everybody can
understand it. If you if you read the
postulates of quantum physics you do not
understand it unless you study for five
years. Right. Yeah. and then and then
and then you still don't understand it
but you at least you understand what
they're saying because once you if you
read them before having studied all the
math and all this stuff that is
necessary you will not even understand
it what I'm telling you a child
understands in fact a child will be the
it will be it will more simply accept it
because he's he hasn't got all this
construction that says no no no don't go
there no intuition doesn't exist Oh, you
know, emotions are bad bad for you. I
mean, all this stuff that uh scientism
is saying to us.
Yeah. Yeah. Who do you think of the
legacy quantum physics big intellectuals
was the closest to getting it right? Was
it maybe like Schroinger? Well,
Schroinger, you know, the the uh what is
life is little book, you know, what is
life? Such a such a unbelievable
unbelievable understanding
way beyond what a typical biologist
today understands because a typical
biologist thinks that life is
biochemistry. No. No. It is way beyond.
It's is quantum physics which is really
quantum information and it's is a kind
of quantum and classical information
that we don't even know that I call live
information. a a different kind
something which which we don't know be
and we need to understand because to
explain life living cells how they work
uh we cannot explain them with just with
biochemistry. We got to go beyond we got
to go in in with aformational
informationational theory that
understands quantum and classical
information interacting with each other.
That's what is necessary.
Yeah. Yeah. And for I I haven't read
what is life, but I know that Schroinger
as he got older, he got much more
philosophical and became much more
interested in like Eastern mysticism and
a a lot of these concepts that that you
now talk about. And I've always thought
that that was extremely compelling
because,
you know, you you get to your point
about the complexity of quantum physics.
You have all these different
interpretations, right? That that kind
of points to how how complex it is and
how theoretically
dense it is to even try to get to
understanding the core postulates that
quantum physics is comprised of because
it is so cloaked in in mathematics and
concepts. Um but then when you get one
of the founding fathers of it, one of
the most famous heads in it going in
that d it's it wasn't just him either. I
mean there multiple of them went in this
more mystical direction it seems like
later in life and from everything I've
I've talked to you about it makes
complete sense why that that would be
the case but there's still such a
resistance it seems like in the in the
academy to interpreting quantum physics
in that way like
and I wish I understood the technicals
of it better so that I could personally
speak to that but maybe that would just
get in the way of of um getting to the
deeper truth or something. Well, the the
you know you you have to understand the
mathematical what is mathematics telling
you. Um right but you know uh
but the mathematics
is not God and the mathematics that we
found is the best the best way that we
can describe
information that came via experiments.
It it was experimental. It was
experiments that said uh you know
classical physics tells you gives you
the wrong answer for this for this
thing. So if you use the concept of
quantum you know classical physics you
cannot explain this phenomena and this
phenomena you know could be explained
only with quantum quantum
you know a quant quantum states and
eventually fields and all this stuff
that
have properties which are
incomprehensible.
They are incomprehensible because first
of all, you know,
how come that the mathematics doesn't
tell you what you can measure? He only
tells you the probabilities because
you know how is that
it? If you accept that there is free
will, if you do not accept that there is
free will, then it's incomprehensible.
But if you accept that is free will then
it has to be that way because
mathematics cannot tell you what you are
going to create later on which is cannot
be described by an equation is
nonalgorithmic
a decision that I make later
in my life is not predictable that's it
but if you want a predictable world and
most scientist scientists
Most priest of scientism you know yeah
yeah yeah don't want that don't want
that real they want something which is
predictable because they predictability
gives them power powering
so they you know they can tell you how
reality works
but you know but if you if you look at
this the situation and if you you know
If you ask yourself what do I need in
order to have free will you need a
collapse of the way function the way
manifest itself which is random
and non-algorithmic
that's what you need
but then you know then if you don't want
that you don't want that then you will
never understand why reality has to be
this way this is what you know part part
of the mis understanding and the the
confusion is that most scientists don't
want to go there. They want
deterministic reality. Einstein for
first he wanted he did not like quantum
physics despite his you know his more
mystic kind of appear to be mystic
mindset. You know actually he wanted a
deterministic world which was against
any kind of freedom because determinism
means
you know it is what it is man. And in
fact uh you know uh the only way to
understand uh to understand uh general
relativity is with the block universe
which is which is which basically is
plotting basically is a film where each
photogram is a three-dimensional
universe
and the next universe is the next
instant is next and next and next and
everything is already already exists.
determined. Now you have the block
universe and the block universe is
saying that the universe is static
and it has everything that ever existed
and never will exist is already all
there. That's what explains the you know
what Einstein had in mind. But that's
not what it is. That's not that's not
the reality that we live in. And and you
cannot explain why then do we have a you
know different experiences. They should
the world should be objective completely
objective. You cannot explain
consciousness is a you know is a
completely you know incredible you know
you you have to throw it away you it
shouldn't even exist never mind being a
nap phenomenon scientism says that it is
nappy phenomenon because they cannot
throw it away you know this you know you
are conscious whether you like it or not
so so you got to explain it somehow but
the the to call it a phenomenal means
that it's not a phenomenon that isn't
for studying because it's not even a
phenomenon. We study phenomena you know
we are physicists and consciousness is a
nippy phenomena so we leave it to
somebody else to the philosophers or
somebody else to study you know that's
the that's been the attitude
uh only you know only now there is
enough evidence that people begin to say
well yeah I mean there we probably you
know maybe there is something that we
have overlooked or something like that
but but that's that's all there is now.
There's a little, you know, a little
tentenation, but we'll see. But the the
the point though is that with with the,
you know, with the uh uh with the
incursion of artificial intelligence is
essential to understand who we are.
Because if we think that we are
machines, there will be
and and we don't have any and conscious
doesn't doesn't do any good. Then you
know then machines will the machines of
the future will be better than us
because you know you can always best a
machine with another machine. Yeah. You
know but if we have something that goes
beyond the the classical world of
machines then you know then there's
different story and we do and we are
because we're not the body and even the
body is quantum and classical. Well,
thank you so much for your time, my
friend. This is always such a pleasure.
I mean, we can go I mean, I can I can go
on for for as you know for a long time,
but but I got to go because I I have
another engagement. So, I appreciate
Well, thank you. Was a good It's a good
It's a good You know, you you got to
It's too long, so you got to cut it.
Okay. No problem. No problem. Thank you
for doing it.