Jeremy Lent, glad to present you the
author of the web of meaning. This
webinar is organized by three Belgian
organizations. All of them questioning a
bit dominant narrative living today and
all three helping to create like a new
story that serves the continuing
unfolding of life.
So the three organizations are called
regenerative leaven translated
regenerative life restory
and then imagine life
Jeremy very very happy to have you here
with us.
&gt;&gt; Hey Eddie. Yeah thank you. Thank you.
I'm looking forward to this
conversation.
&gt;&gt; Good to hear your voice and so that
everyone also can hear your voice. Um,
I'm going to ask you an opening question
like introduce yourself. Whatever feels
right for you to share at this moment
and in this setting.
&gt;&gt; Who are you?
&gt;&gt; All right. Well, um,
that's a a good a good question. I used
to call myself um like an author and
integrator. like on my website. I
thought for a while, how how can I
explain who I am? And I like the idea of
saying, well, I'm author, but I'm also
an integrator because a lot of my work
is about um integrating different forms
of meaning or different approaches into
something that really um embraces it
all, but is also um allows for that
differentiation.
But you know honestly what was coming to
me right as you ask right now is
the way I would probably describe myself
at this per at this moment in my own
life is I'm somebody who is has taken
almost like a vow within myself to
devote myself to the flourishing of all
life on this earth and I can truly say
that everything that I'm doing at this
point in my life is really with that
deeper intention is to really move
towards the greatest possible
flourishing of life on this earth right
now.
&gt;&gt; Wow, that was a very good introduction.
I think this is a answer that not that
many people would give if you asked them
who are you? Um so apart from the author
an integrator and with a vow to
help flourishing life and who wrote a
magnificent book and I think many of the
people here read the book passing of all
of them the web of meaning and with a
subtitle integrating science and
traditional wisdom to find our place in
the universe and you do ask some
profound existential questions
who am I So it's regarding the identity
where am I cosmic context what am I
human nature how should I live ethical
question
why am I what's the purpose and where
are we going at the end which is the
collective future
&gt;&gt; what made you
&gt;&gt; yeah
well
ultimately
Um the this entire book is really my the
results of my own inquiries into exactly
these questions that I went through over
a number of years of my own life. Um,
and so I can give you a little bit of a
uh background to where where that all
came from is essentially I spent pretty
much the first half of my life really um
up until some period maybe about 15 or
so years ago doing my life in a very
different way like more along the lines
of of that guy Uncle Bob that I um
mention in in my book. just essentially
part of mainstream culture. Um doing my
thing, I actually
ended up um starting an internet company
and took it public and um that didn't
feel quite like my thing, but I it just
circumstances of life led me to do that.
Um but then things happened in my
personal life that caused basically
everything I built around my life to
sort of crash around me. like my wife at
the time she passed away some years back
um but she began to get quite sick um
and I looked after I left the company to
look after her and then this company
that there was one of it was I founded
it during the dotcom
um boom and all these things happening
and but I really left it when it was too
early in its own development um and I
was staying around as chair as chair of
the company but it it basically crashed
and collapsed And I had to deal with all
the aftermath of that while I was
looking after my wife who was going
through like borderline dementia. And so
I really lost the person that I had
loved all my life. Um even though I
spent years then looking after her. So
it's as if my life had sort of crashed
around me. And I
asked myself like um whatever I do with
the rest of my life, I wanted to make
sure it was truly meaningful to me. But
I realized I'd never really asked my
asked the question like what is meaning?
Um what is actually meaningful? And so I
was you know I end up ended up spending
years in my life really trying to ask
these questions um questions about
meaning. And then um as I did that, I
didn't want to take for granted any
preconceived notions, whatever they were
about God or the soul or what makes
humans human or what is the purpose
we're here for, anything like that. So
sometimes I note and there are people
who give you answers to that and they
might feel good but they don't feel
intellectually valid. Um, and then there
are some people who give you the answers
that seem very rigorous, but they feel
like wrong to my heart. And so I was
looking for some kind of was there a way
to answer these questions that felt
right to not to both my mind and my
heart and my um my spirit like something
within me. It took me years and years of
really going through layers of inquiry
like around um not just history or
philosophy but then more like
anthropology, looking at other cultures
and then looking even deeper at
evolutionary biology and what makes
humans different from other animals and
what is life anyway. Um and as I started
to do all that, it wasn't just an
intellectual exercise. I discovered
things I'd never discovered in my life
like um mindfulness, meditation,
Buddhism and dowoism, embodied practices
and really having spent big part of my
life totally not aware of these things,
these are like revelations to me. And so
a lot of what I was trying to do is was
there a way to make it all make sense?
And as I did all that, I um realized
that part of what I wanted to do was to
share with others this own inquiry that
I did to maybe make it easier for other
people to um answer explore these things
along the way that I did. So I wrote a
couple of books and one before this book
was called the patterning instinct um a
cultural history as humanity's search
for meaning and that book looks more at
this kind of historical investigation I
did like um all the way from uh where
humans were hunter gatherers a long time
before and it looks at the ways in which
different cultures have made sense of
the universe um and how that has
actually shaped the history of humanity
all the way to the present day. And it
kind of also looked at it sort of took
us to this pretty crazed um way in which
we have our lives right now which on one
level seems to be incredibly
sophisticated scientifically,
technologically in another level is like
so fragmented and so alienating and so
devoid of meaning. Um and then this
second book, the web of meaning, uh
really just shares the own my own
sensemaking that I had brought from this
journey. Um and a lot of it is not meant
to be like, oh, I've got the answer.
I've come up with some really is more
than anything about looking at the great
insights that have been shared with all
with all of humanity from these
different traditions both from the
historical traditions, indigenous,
Buddhists, dowist, neo confusion um and
also from modern scientific insights
from system science, evolutionary
biology, cognitive science. And a a big
thing that I came to was realizing that
there's no actual um necessary
distinction between those that some this
distinction that we're told in our
modern world between science and
traditional stuff or wisdom or qualities
um we're told they're two separate
domains and I realized that's a made up
that's part of our worldview of
separation. It's really not actually
true. So a lot of this book looks at
what happens if we unwind that and look
at those deeper interconnections.
&gt;&gt; And did you believe that um personal
experience you went through
&gt;&gt; made you write this book so that you can
connect with what happened in your own
life that you needed that pivotal moment
to make that change between running a
company and and being more
&gt;&gt; I don't know. Yeah, it's a it's a very
good question and I I think this
probably is true. Um and um it's a
really a little bit like um if you look
at Buddhism and the um the sort of
description of the sort of the path that
almost like the beginning of the
spiritual path um it's all of there's
almost a sense in which that um the
first we experience what in Buddhism
they call dooka like a sense of
suffering a sense of something's not
right um but then you there's an
experience of an awareness of that and I
think that is that's almost like the the
beginning of any kind of path of inquiry
is the awareness that there's something
that's not right and then along with
that an intention to do something about
that in one's own life and I think many
people may have been maybe in the
position that I was in before that time
like that I there was a lot of dooka and
suffering that I was experiencing in my
life but I I hadn't gotten to that place
where I could recognize that. So you
sort of do things almost intuitively to
try to reduce the suffering. You try to,
you know, do this, deal with that
problem, have a relationship, try to
make money or whatever it is, uh improve
your status, whatever. But without
realizing that there's something deeper
that is available and in my case and I
think from many people, there is some
sort of crisis that um leads you to have
to begin to answer that question. I do
think some people may be fortunate in a
sense that they just start to naturally
ask that question anyway. I don't think
there's a crisis
&gt;&gt; like path is is true for everyone but
for me and I think for a lot of people
it did require for me it tried a
basically a complete sort of breakdown
of the my of the uh attempts and meaning
making I'd had in my life to really ask
these deeper questions.
&gt;&gt; I like to refer to something which
happened recently here in Anthrop. Um
quite a few people here present probably
know about it. Um we've been cutting or
they have been cutting 62 trees
recently. Um nearby where we live and it
was a lot of protest, demonstrations,
legal actions. Um actually was involved.
They were treated like uh like
gangsters, the people trying to protect
the trees
&gt;&gt; which created a lot of pain for people
because these trees were planted in the
60s. people grew up with them. They were
in front of their house and then
suddenly they disappeared. Um so there's
a lot of anger and and maybe in the
meantime also politicians are start to
realize oh well first thing they said we
badly communicated but of course it's a
lot deeper thing that is missing. This
brings me perhaps to what you call
animated intelligence
&gt;&gt; that that trees have souls all living
creatures and we treat them as I don't
know a piece of garbage actually. Um
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; as a society it seems that quite a few
of us are not really aware of that
intelligence of nature. So you wrote
about it in your book. What does it mean
for you? animated intelligence versus
artificial intelligence for example.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Right. Well, that's um and that
that was one of the discoveries really I
made as I went through this um all this
kind of deeper investigation is
realizing one of the sort of
preconceptions we have in our dominant
worldview today. Um, some people might
call it modernism or whatever, but um,
it's this sort of sense that there's
only one form of intelligence um, which
is the one that we humans display um,
more obviously than any other mammals
that we know of. Um, which, um, often
times neuroscientists call it have
different names for it. I thought the
name that made sense to me, I call it
conceptual intelligence. Sometimes
people call it symbolic intelligence or
whatever, but it's the kind of
intelligence that uh we we have as
humans as a result of my more developed
prefrontal cortex. That's the sort of
evolutionary aspect of it. But it
enables us um as humans to really
develop things like language um which
began to develop more collective um
conceptual intelligence and then pass
that on to new generations. So over time
we got to develop all these technologies
and um um and not just language but a
sense of separation from the rest of
life like we began to realize we can act
on the rest of the world and we we can
think through things and um which is all
wonderful stuff and it's something to
totally celebrate about us as humans.
what happened and that really happened
to the most obvious in most obvious
place with Decart and um the sort of
rise of modern thinking in early modern
Europe that famous statement from Deart
Kato Argo right I think therefore I am
and at that point there was this sense
that that thinking is not just something
that differentiates humans from others
but it's what makes us our actual um it
gives us our essence, our true identity.
And it's as if if you look at the
logical implications of cog erosum, then
the the coral area of that was if
there's another entity that doesn't
think in the way that we humans do, then
they aren't um they don't exist. And
that is actually the very foundation of
this modern world view, which is that
somehow um the only true the only
entities that have true uh value or that
are worth optimizing for have like a
sort of moral rights are human entities.
And the rest of life is just there for
us to do with what we want. And
occasionally maybe there's pets or
whatever that we might have a warm our
heart might open up to a particular
animal or something. But for the most
part as humans as part of this dominant
system we treat animals and we treat the
rest of life as objects as nothing other
than resources for us to exploit. um
which has led I would say in some ways
to maybe the greatest um moral atrocity
that's ever happened on the earth since
life began is like the factory farming
that causes like um something like 70
billion animals to get born into these
horrendous cages and suffer lives of
absolute misery and pain until they're
like murdered. um so that we humans get
to have a nice easy um meal at the end
of the day. Um and that kind of way in
which we just you like feel like all of
nature is there for us to use however we
want is really one of the things that we
have to rethink um in terms of if um
what it really means to be alive in this
um in this world today. And that animate
intelligence is really something that
science has now come to understand. It's
something that indigenous um traditions
everywhere around the world always
understood that we humans we we have our
distinct characteristics just like crows
do or just like trees do. And what um
what we really are is part of a family
of all these other animals and creatures
and recognizing that and coming from a
place of humility around that. um and a
place of recognizing we might have
certain powers that other um entities
don't have and how can we use that for
the benefit of all of our family of all
our relations. That is one of the big
shifts that I think uh is available to
any of us and that as a as a society we
need to do if we're going to have a
long-term future on this earth.
You also talk about um fractal
fractals a lot um well-being across all
scales
in contrast with the main narrative of
today. Can you elaborate a bit on that
one and leading it with animated
intelligence?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Well, that the the very notion of
fractals is something most people might
have a rough sense of what that word is,
but it's it's actually a mathematical
uh concept which is really um
recognizing that there are patterns
sometimes that um then recreate at
larger and larger scales um going on and
on. Sometimes you it can be done almost
infinitely. Um but what's interesting
about patterns is about fractals is that
every time they recreated these larger
scales, they are actually their
principles might be the same, but the
actual exact shape they take is
different. So that's why um some of you
may have looked at some of these uh
pictures of fractals and there are these
amazing videos of where you can sort of
go in and into some of these um
mathematical design patterns and it just
goes on infinitely and it's kind of
blows your mind because you sort of
realize that something you think you're
looking at something and that's what it
is and then you go in and you see
there's a whole universe um below that
or beyond that you didn't even know was
there. And what is fascinating is that
that's one of the uh insights of modern
thinking and modern science that again
was understood by um some great
traditions in the past. So um and this
is a lot of where as I did this uh
research into other traditions I found
that traditional Chinese thought had
these amazing um insights that many of
us are simply not aware of in the west.
Um and one of the concepts they had was
um they actually looked at the entire
universe really in terms of patterns and
um they one the way they described the
sort of the ways in which things connect
with each other the sort of principles
of organization if you will they called
Lee it was just the word they used and
and we're familiar with that uh
traditional Chinese word chi right which
we usually translate as like energy or
matter and and that's in itself is
interesting that their idea of chi was
what Einstein finally discovered with E=
MC² that energy and match were really
the same thing just expressed in
different ways but to them chi was one
thing but the way in whichqi organized
itself was Lee was the patterns and to
me this was one of the great sort of
light bulbs that went off as I did all
this research and I was reading about
traditional Chinese thought as I was
reading about modern system science and
complexity theory um that the in modern
system science and there's a particular
writer called Stuart Calfman just a
great really a profound thinker
mathematician biologist and systems um
thinker and he talks about he writes
books with names like at home in the
universe looking at these patterns and
he's and he was writing at some point
we're discovering this whole new way of
understanding our place in the universe
which has never been experienced or
thought about before. um in in human ex
um experience. And here I was at the
same time reading these great thinkers
from a thousand years ago in traditional
China who essentially were talking about
the same thing. They were saying like we
we all if we if we look at these lee
these patterns of existence they were
describing fractal. They were saying the
the lee of a blade of grass is also
expressed in the whole world. Um, and
then they looked at the universe itself
and said, "We don't know what came
first, but ultimately there must have
been some sort of core underlying
pattern that led to theqi expressing
itself in some some way that allowed all
of this to happen. So their very notion
instead of having a god that they looked
at their very notion of what they called
the supreme ultimate was this sense of a
deep underlying patterning of the
universe that existed even before the
universe itself is there and there is
there in every one of us. The very
concept of what nowadays we think of as
a hologram or whatever. So this is the
incredible insights that um what we're
discovering in like this dis modern
mathematical understanding about
fractals is has been understood in deep
ways from other um deep wisdom
traditions. And to me this has a deep
spiritual implication because we begin
to see ourselves just as part of
something so much bigger. And it once we
begin to really open up to that and and
this has been you know profound part of
my own spiritual journey the sort of
layers of sort of ego identity or layers
of separation begin to fade away. It's
not like I have to break them down or
try to transcend them. They become
almost irrelevant as I begin to sense
that my identity really is a pattern
within a pattern within this larger
larger unfolding um set of patterns that
is our universe.
when you're mentioning these ancient
wisdoms and then you're also referring
to modern science.
I mean what happened with these Asians
wisdoms and they've been replaced by
modern science and now they're trying to
find each other back again or how do you
see that evolution happening if if there
is any evolution in that
&gt;&gt; um this is this is also so interesting
because when we when we talk about
modern science now I think it's
important
to make a distinction that is really not
made enough um between what is
um reductionist science um and uh system
sciences if you will um and I mean maybe
it helps to begin like often times
people who have some of these spiritual
insights that I'm talking about they
look at they they get to sort of reject
science they say yeah science is is
leads to all these problems and these
people don't understand the deeper um
more heartfelt uh spiritual existence
we're talking about. But I don't go to
that place. I don't I think it's
important not to reject science because
if we just think about what science
actually is. I see it, you know, people
often think science is value free. It's
like something separate from values. I
don't believe that's the case. I think
science has some values. Um and it
really these are great values to really
embrace. These are values like um a
desire to understand the world and a
transparency like when you dis when you
um doing an experiment you share it with
others because you're all working
collaboratively to try to get to a
deeper understanding um and open to
empirical evidence. So if you discover
something in a experiment you go back
and you change your understanding. So
there's a humility that comes with true
science a recognition that you may not
be right and you got to and explore
things. So there are core values to
science and that scientific project if
you will over many hundreds of years now
I think is one of the greatest
contributions
uh that has happened to humanity. It's
it's a wonderful treasure that we have.
So that's science. But then a particular
branch of science which is like the one
that day cart um and Francis Baker and
um and Galileo and others uh set going
in that early modern Europe was around
what's called as reductionism. It was
actually Deart who defined reductionism
and he said basically he discovered if
you look at smaller and smaller things
you begin to understand them better. Um
and um let's make science um almost like
the actual word science actually comes
from a Greek or Latin word to do with
cutting. So it's almost let's like cut
things down to smaller and smaller parts
and we can understand them better.
brilliant insights and it led to then
breaking science into things like
biology and science and chemistry and
then as scientists did exactly what he
suggested they discovered molecules and
elements and then they discovered um
forces in physics um and in biology they
discovered cells and then DNA um so
again this is sorry
&gt;&gt; they forgot the whole
&gt;&gt; well this is the thing so it's important
my my point is is there's nothing to
reject about this is some of the great
advances is which has led to us having
things like the germ theory of disease
and me being able to talk to you
thousands of miles away. Um we can all
be grateful to that but they forgot the
whole Exactly Eddie. Um and what is
interesting is that because they were so
successful they got to actually believe
that that is the only approach to the
universe. And so there's um the what
what that led to is what I call like
ontological reductionism which is people
who think that reduction of science is
so good that it's the only way to
understand the universe and also um it
actually enables us to understand the
entire universe and there's nothing else
there and this is what system science
does differently and system science is
every bit um as rigorous and I would say
in a way it's more open-minded because
that reductionist ontology loses some of
those values of science because um it's
it's a leap of faith that they make
which is equivalent to um maybe a
traditional Christian believing in God
just because they want to they're told
they should or whatever. It's the same
sort of thing like in this case um
modern system sciences and complexity
sciences they don't reject reductionism
but they say in addition to that we need
to look also at the ways in which things
connect together and understand that
different emergent layers of those that
complexity new rules apply new
principles apply and it's only by
looking at those you get to understand
basically complex systems such as um h
organisms or nature or essentially
anything that's living which where um
those complex parts interrelating is um
as much if not more important than the
actual stuff they're made of. So that's
what I think is important to understand.
But the problem is that most people are
still in even in today's world even
though system science has been around
now for a hundred years or so and the
and people have explained it absolutely
clearly most scientists still think that
the only science is actually
reductionism. Um and every now and then
a reductionist scientist comes across
systems thinking and they have their own
personal eureka. Um but we have not yet
seen the paradigm shift where science as
a whole has recognized that reductionism
is just one element of a larger project.
If we build on that and we look at the
transformation aspect of it in your book
you also talk about it may start with a
personal transformation
before we go to an organizational
transformation or societal
transformation.
I think this is important to understand
part of this recognition of these deep
sort of interconnection that I'm talking
about is that um we also can't just make
this clear separation between what is
our um our personal experience and
what's happening in the world around us.
So once I recognize that I'm part of
everything that's happening around us um
the the actual transformation itself is
a breaking down of that barrier. So
sometimes people will say you know um we
like before we try to change things in
the world out there let's do our own
internal personal transformation
um which is a wonderful thing to notice
and to be aware of that a lot of us in
fact I'd say pretty much almost every
one of us we've in our way we look at
sort of the colonization of Europe and
the rest of the world we've also had our
own minds colonized by modernism. So um
our very ideas the way we the things we
just take for granted have been imposed
on us through this um this last 500
years of this uh dominant worldview. So
a lot of what we need to do is recognize
that and shed that. But we don't do that
separately from being engaged in the
world. It's not like first I got to fix
myself and then I'll go out and uh try
to do things in the world because it's
by engaging in the world. is by looking
at the um really the terrible harm
that's being done in the world right now
and looking at the ways in which um
these same basically diluted ways of
thinking are coming out in violence
around us all around us by engaging with
that we also get to be discovering about
ourselves. So there's a little bit like
a fractal right there. Like there's a a
certain system of what we can think of
as ourselves. And then there's like all
those around us that are the people we
have direct relationships with. And
there's there's a global system of
society as a whole. And to me the
transformation has to be happening at
all those layers at the same time. And
each each transformation of one layer
helps to impact the transformation of
the other layer rather than one happen
have to happen before the other.
&gt;&gt; I like the expression you said about
colonizing our minds. So we should
decolonize our minds
&gt;&gt; and and how do we do that? How do we
approach that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, that's a great question and
really I think the first place to
approach it um is a little bit like when
I was talking about the Buddhist path
beginning with Duke or whatever. I think
it really to begin with is a recognition
that there are patterns within our own
minds, our own ways of thinking and
acting and being that are destructive
and that um come from the dominant
culture, but ones that we might have
embibed very very early on. in our
years. So we um so there's a a certain
intentionality, a curiosity and an
awareness of that. Um and the intention
then has to be to recognize that with
the orientation towards um working with
that. But a crucial element around that
um is what I really what can simply be
called a quality of kindness. We need to
bring kindness to that recognition
because what tends to happen is without
bringing everything and all that whole
investigation with a sense of um this
really self-compassion and kindness
approaching to it. We look at bad things
within us and then it's painful and then
we can get to almost creates more
separations within us. there's the good
part of me that is trying to be more
intentional and that bad part of me
that's more destructive or causing harm
to others and then um and then I try to
get rid of that bad part of me but then
that part might be very deep within me
and so it and then it reacts and then
maybe it gets the power to say screw
this whole project I'm just going back
to be to be free to be who I am and so
we don't get anywhere but this is where
kindness and compassion play such a part
because we can recognize that any things
we recognize within ourselves. Um
originally were there to try to protect
us against a a lot of the time um
patriarchal ways of being like
upbringing that like uh puts values
around violence or harshness or a
discipline that causes those soft parts
within us to get defensive and then
learn to be hard or whatever. So we have
to learn those parts began um within us
in very um ways to just try to protect
ourselves as an organism. But by
approaching that with kindness, we can
begin to then allow those parts to
unfold and really sort of get trusted
really that they can be seen without
getting told that they're bad. Um, and
that same kindness and compassion can
then be applied to how we we relate to
others, which is crucial because then
when we see others acting in ways that
we think are harmful or destructive
rather than in intuitively getting angry
with them and trying to stop them from
doing this harm and all this stuff, we
can begin to recognize, well, they've
got their parts and how can I how can I
approach that other person from the same
place of kindness? Not that's not saying
that saying it's okay for them to do
harm or it's okay for me to do harm. But
by recognizing the underlying cause of
that we can begin to build bridges and
begin to like heal together rather than
um just create new layers of harm over
the old layers. And based on this
kindness and compassion, you also talk
about why am I like the purpose where
you set yourself that when you want to
have personal transformation, you are
also searching for okay, what's my role
here on earth? Maybe that's a very big
question. But what's the role of humans
on earth? Is that something that is also
one of the questions you've been asking
yourself?
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. And that is very much uh you
know a deep deep inquiry I've I've been
on over the years um primarily you know
from my own personal inquiry why am I
here um uh which but then it can apply
to all of us but each of us obviously
has our own unique way of trying to come
to that and I think this is where in a
way um it comes back to the very first
thing you ask me to say you know who am
I how do I describe myself um for me as
I as I did my own um version of this
very deep inquiry really came to this
place of recognizing at a certain place
what became so clear to me is um uh and
is actually uh there's a quote from the
great uh humanitarian
um um Nobel Prize winner actually Albert
Schwitzer and who lived in the 20th
century and he said at one point I am
life that wills to live in the midst of
life that wills to live um and my own
place came to something very similar. I
realized like I am life. Um when we talk
about this notion of the fractals, it's
not that like I am a living being or um
how I'm you know how can I be good to
life or whatever. It's this realization
that all of us as living entities are
like little edes of um a sort of a
self-organized entity as part of this
stream that's been unfolding this
incredible miraculous stream of life
over billions of years since it um life
came on Earth very early in on Earth's
existence. And when this particular
organism dies and then composts or
whatever um the the very p the the ways
in which I've expressed who I am to
others around me are really like those
patterns those lee patterns I was
talking about earlier that are out there
in life. And so even though this
particular organism might die um those
those lee patterns that I have expressed
in my life continue in like as they sort
of move out into the universe some of
them grow and turns into other things
others merge with other patterns and
become other things but once I begin to
recognize that changes everything and um
what it has done to me is go like well
given that I am life and it's really
this miracle
of this existence that here I am with a
conscious consciousness and able to um
express things and understand life in
the way that others of us as humans can
do. It felt to me there's nothing more
important to do with this particular
embodied existence than to use whatever
skills I have for the benefit of life
which is what I am which is that that
larger entity that I'm part of. And so
to me that became that gave me a a real
sense of absolute clarity. Just whatever
I'm doing with my life is really for the
interests really for the benefit of all
life. I have I'm looking at a screen
behind me on the wall. Um I framed
something that I uh wrote around that
time some years back. It just simply
says what can I do for the greatest
benefit of all life? Um, and to me
that's profoundly meaningful and I'm
very I feel very fortunate because it
gives it gives a sense of meaning in my
life that I never feel I'm having to ask
anymore. Well, what is the meaning? What
am I here for? To me that that was my
answer to my question. What it doesn't
answer though is how you do that
skillfully day by day. So that to me is
a living inquiry. Um and and a key
element we were talking about fractal
flourishing uh before you know a key
element around that is not to interpret
in in the way that says I need to
sacrifice this this um flourishing for
the sake of all things. I got to like
work non-stop and do everything and give
all my money away and um do every single
thing for the benefit of some external.
There's the notion of fractal
flourishing is that by my own organism
feeling alive and healthy and happy and
flourishing in itself, I'm able to then
have the most positive impact fractally
on all those layers of patterns that I'm
connecting with.
&gt;&gt; So,
&gt;&gt; yeah. So, life doesn't become a zero sum
game like I go either look out for me or
look out for somebody else. I'm a good
person or a bad selfish or not. that all
gets to be irrelevant like um what I can
do is like look out for the health and
flourishing of my own being in order
that I can truly serve um the rest of
life in the most powerful way.
&gt;&gt; I'm very curious in me time a lot of
people are listening to what you're
explaining. We're going to ask them a
bit later on to go to breakout rooms and
to reflect a bit not a bit on what
you've been sharing with us. Now there
is something that I really uh in the
beginning of your book your uncle Bob
that says um it's a dog eats dog world
every man for himself.
What if you have such a family member on
the table and we all have this kind of
family members around us. So how do we
tackle that? Because you can say okay it
starts with yourself and we want to take
care of ourel and if we take care of
ourselves we can also take care of
others. But then you have this this
little box around us everywhere and
unfortunately perhaps even more and more
they get more and more media attention.
So how to act react?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. I know. And that's that's
always this ongoing question. And and to
be honest, I really truly did have my
own family member, you know, to pro
protect the innocent, whatever. I I
changed the name, whatever. But it was
there was a um I in this book for people
who don't know the book, the book be
that begins with basically a family
grouping and somebody saying, you know,
we we should be doing this. We can make
the world a better place. we we can and
then um it's uncle Bob comes into the
conversation and says oh let me tell you
all these good ideas you've got forget
about it you know basically it's a doggy
dog world out there you know wins and
that's why capitalism is so good because
everyone looking out for themselves is
actually for the best interest of the
whole world and you know sure we've got
some problems but markets they solve it
all so don't worry about end of
conversation right where it's it's all
over and so I've been I've been there
myself And well, you know, and I
basically said that um when I introduce
a book, this book really the whole book
is really like the reputation to Uncle
Bob that actually there's a completely
different way of seeing ourselves as
human beings of understanding the world
and not just different but actually one
that is scientifically valid more valid
than this Uncle Bob interpretation
people think is true but is just made
out from preconceptions.
But having said that, when you're
actually facing your uncle Bob, they
don't I mean, you can talk to your blue
in the face. Um, and one of the things
that's interesting is really the more
intelligent people are, the harder it is
to actually get them to open their minds
to hear what you've got to say if you
have a different point of view. because
the the people will use that
intelligence to then formulate, you
know, their sort of legal arguments,
smarter and smarter arguments why you're
not right or so that doesn't necessarily
get anywhere. So, I've come to believe
and um this is not to say I always
manage to practice it myself. I can get
frustrated like all of us do, but I've
come to believe that the best thing we
can do is try to sort of going back to
that place of kindness I was talking
about before is to try to um connect
with them at a deeper heart layer
because whatever they might say about
doggy dog and selfishness and
separateness, we kind of know actually
they do have living beating hearts and
they do want to feel connected. Um and
um part of what we can do if we want to
really live into this um way of of
understanding things in this place of
connectedness is to actually look at
where that is coming from. What was it
in their own way of development that led
them to formulate these ideas? Usually
it's their own someplace of their own
suffering or something that they deeply
want that they didn't quite get or
whatever. But if we can ask them
questions to connect with them and hear
them and hear what actually is
meaningful to them, what that tends to
do is has a little bit of an alchemical
kind of effect because then as soon as
they begin to feel heard, they're not
arguing against. So they don't have this
this pain in the ass family member
always arguing with them, but actually
hearing them and caring about them. Then
they begin to soften. And then in that
place to me the the best way to leave
that kind of conversation is not having
won out or scored a point but leaving
them curious and maybe leaving them with
something about oh there's this really
interesting article or really um the
website I I really love that might
answer some of your would you like me to
send you a link just to sort of opening
them up to some possibility that doesn't
seem threatening to them but that might
be a little bit of a in the armor
of that like armor of separation that
might open them up to some other way. So
that's I've come to believe that's the
most skillful way to relate. It's also a
more pleasant way uh to relate, but it
doesn't always work that way. So um you
know I'm good advice my approaches uh
just like we all are but
&gt;&gt; listening asking questions softening
when that way feel the connection and
then they can start thinking themselves
&gt;&gt; right. Yeah,
I'm watching time a bit. Um,
&gt;&gt; I have I heard you're writing a new book
or you're working on a new book. Can you
explain?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Um,
&gt;&gt; because now you make me curious. So,
&gt;&gt; this is actually a um something that's
really become, you know, near and dear
to my heart the last few years. Um, and
it's a book that's going to be published
next May. Um and the the book is going
to be called Ecoivilization
making a world that works for all. And
um but to give a little bit of a sort of
backstory to that. So one of the when I
asked this question of how I can work
for the greatest benefit of all life
it's to me where that led my own
thinking to go is recognizing that our
system right now the dominant system is
so destructive is causing so much harm
through such extreme inequalities
destruction of the natural world um that
it's really heading for really um maybe
total collapse or some kind of very very
devastating outcome uh this century. And
it felt to me like what's crucially
important is to turn things around. And
that book, The Web of Meaning, ends with
this vision of what would the world
actually look like if we organize the
world itself according to the same
principles of this connectedness and
this dignity of all life and recognizing
how we're part of um all human beings
around us and part of all life. And it's
an idea that was not my idea, but one
that I came across that others had been
formulating their thoughts about of
what's called an ecological civilization
or an ecoivilization for short, which is
looking at what would it look like if
our entire system were redesigned around
simply setting the conditions for all
beings to thrive on a regenerated earth.
Such a simple idea, something that makes
sense probably to almost everybody in
the world, but is so different from how
our system is actually designed, which
is really around um the notions of
extraction and exploitation that that
that very world view of modernism really
um is expressed in global capitalism,
which is really about um exploiting and
extracting as much as possible to create
these this kind of wealth pump. to
sucking wealth to a tiny elite at the
very top. Um, and so I spend a number of
years now researching and discovering
that in every aspect of what we call
civilization, um, brilliant people have
done the work already to think through
what a redesigned system might actually
look like. So just like in the web of
meaning I spent a lot of years looking
at the great insights of others and
trying to cohhere it together into um a
coherent form. I've tried to do that
with this book is really um look at the
ideas that again not my ideas but ideas
that are already being developed and
done um and performed in some cases in
communities around the world and seeing
that whether it's in technology or
education or urban design or thinking
about economics or finance or governance
um or rethinking democracy. um put it
all together and there's actually a
vision of there's actually a future
available to us that could truly work.
It's not a utopia. It's not like some
wouldn't it be nice if kind of future.
It's one that's actually available to
us. But the institutional blocks of
course are stopping us actually getting
there right now. But the the thought
behind this book is that if we can all
share um this sense there's a lifeaff
affirming future beckoning um there for
us then the millions and millions of us
of movements all around the world who
are already doing this working on this
stuff can maybe begin to strengthen
their coherence together and actually
help us transform our future towards
that positive approach. So that's the
book that is um coming out in May. I'm
just finishing the manuscript really
right now in the next few weeks and um
so I'm
&gt;&gt; looking forward to reading it I guess
all the people listening here as well
&gt;&gt; because um that's indeed the next step
in
&gt;&gt; what we're going to do now um all people
listening is um I would like to thank
you for this part. It's not finished
yet. We're going to call you back in uh
to answer questions, but I would like to
invite Inia, my my wife, is going to
help me with it. We're going to divide
you in small breakout rooms and we would
like you to just
overthink
the conversation or the interview I did
with you and so what resonated and what
are specific questions you want to ask?
I've seen that in the chat box people
have put some comments and so on and so
forth. But take the time now to chat in
a small group of people about what you
have heard and learned and what are the
things you would like to ask to Jeremy.
So we're going to go into a 50inut
breakout room which is really very
short. So the idea is tell the others
what resonated find out questions you
still have and then afterwards we're
going to ask Jeremy back to answer these
questions.
Okay. Uh thank you very much uh Jeremy
for your um inspiring um explanation.
Um
you remembered us uh of the fact that uh
we are full of um preconcepts and ideas
that are not ours. you remembered us and
we all we felt in our small group that
it it's true
uh and mentally uh we know that. So it
was good
of you to remember us. But the question
is how do we work that? How can we get
through all those conceptions? because
we know that they are there but we now
have we don't know how to tackle it and
how to get through. We we had one
uh way and um that was by going to the
body, returning to the body
&gt;&gt; and feeling
using the the body as a uh sort of
monitoring system
within an certain situation. How can I
contribute to more life in this
situation? by feeling by using the body.
&gt;&gt; Okay, Philip, I'm going to stop you. You
asked the question we're going to ask
now Jeremy to answer it. Yeah, that is a
great um I love where this question is
is going and um yeah, so as as you're
talking this question of like how do we
know uh what we can kind of trust
essentially you know in all these
thoughts that go through us and there is
there are these great um meditations um
in the advita tradition there's this
meditation known as netti netti saying
which is essentially if everything that
comes through you go this is not me this
is not me like um and in um Buddhist
meditations similarly there's this
recognition that uh really none of those
things necessarily are in modern
psychology there's a increasingly um
well-known practice called parts work
which does something similar which um if
so if I have a angry feeling or I'm um I
think this is wrong or whatever it might
be recognizing that's actually a part
within me um and it's something they can
honor and I think this is the crucial
element about it is the all those parts
are to be honored not disparaged within
us but then there is this sense of
something larger and I think the
embodied approach is a very very
important one um because that is
something that we know exists within us
is our embodied feelings but even those
feelings we have to recognize can often
be you can have feelings of anger or
feelings of any kind of feelings good or
bad feelings which are also partial
feelings. There are particular states
that I'm in for one moment to the next.
And there are some sort of non-dual
traditions that um just look at the
really almost like that notion I was
talking about earlier of the um in
confusion thought of the supreme
ultimate or just some sense of the
universe as a whole can hold it all. And
each of us has the ability to connect
with that bigger space and just feel
into like a deeper wisdom which um can
hold all of it and allow really almost
like this deeper level of compassionate
recognition. No matter what we do, no
matter what we think is the right thing
today, we might have moved on for
another thing um the next time. But I to
me one it comes back again to this
notion of kindness and compassion. And
um there was one great statement of
wisdom that came to me uh number of
years back. It essentially said um
something like this like um look around
you on your path on your spiritual path.
Um
look around for kindness. If you don't
see kindness, then maybe you're on the
wrong path basically because that is the
one that's the thing we can always bring
with us in our own investigations and in
how we relate to others that you can
almost always trust.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you. Before I go to an I'm
going to quickly take a short question
from the chat and then we go from chat
to questions. I had a question on
intuition. I've been reading your
chapter three and I agree intuition is
important. I'm still a bit puzzled. Is
it slow or fast intuition? My experience
it can take its time but Gaman polls
it's fast. What's your opinion?
&gt;&gt; Yeah and that is a great question and I
think the answer is both really um
because yeah we do we we have like gut
feelings sometimes but that's the whole
thing is sometimes those gut feelings
can be wrong. um that it's not and we
have to be careful not to just so oh I
just go with my gut I can trust that
because sometimes even that is wrong and
um there there's a biologist a brilliant
uh biologist called Robert Subapolski
who wrote a book called behave um very
very deep um cognitive uh um
understanding and he said something very
important like that when we're dealing
with people in our inroup um it brings
up a lot of our um core human sense of
solidarity, what we can believe and what
we can really trust. When we deal with
people who are an out group who seem
different, they look different or they
speak different language, they have
different ethnicity or whatever, often
times that we what we what feels our
intuition may turn out to be wrong in
that respect. So, um his advice and I
think it's really good advice is when
you're working with people within your
inroup, kind of trust their gut feeling.
But if you're relating to somebody who
you recognize is not in your ingroup,
maybe be a lot more curious um about
where those things are coming from and
try to bring a broader and um wider
perspective before you begin to trust
that gut.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Thanks an
&gt;&gt; Yeah, thank you. Thank you Jeremy for a
wonderful presentation again. uh since
uh you published your book the
patterning instinct hardly any
publication of my hand does not like you
so I've been very inspired but I'm also
I would I would like to join you you
know uh I'm also a member of the top of
Rome so I brought you in there uh yeah
and so um what was also a reflection in
the little breakout group that I was in
that you focus a lot on the the the
worldview and and the mindset but
there's also a material reality that
that
uh sucks us into this, you know,
extractive mindset. And some of it has
to do with the the new media or the the
medical science that is embedded in in
all sorts of um I don't know specialist
uh um practices because you know and
another root cause of that is of course
is the money system which is extractive
by design. We stupidly inherited it from
medieval bankers without ever
questioning it. So there's a whole other
technicality of that and we've been
working with a group of people also here
in Fllanders on making money the money
system realign with life like what you
said at the end we you know life is is
the frame of reference can we imagine
the money system
&gt;&gt; to uh to help us to you know to foster
uh regenerative activities. So this is
just a shout out you know if you would
like to in integrate some of that in
your latest book I'll send you I'll send
you
&gt;&gt; a question an do you have a question too
or just a shout out
&gt;&gt; I just say you know a reaction uh of do
you also you also think we can look into
the money system or into the you know
the financial thing and do you see
alternative pathways there or do you say
no I just
&gt;&gt; yeah absolutely thank you and please do
go ahead and send me um what you are
mentioning and um very My answer is yes
to um possibilities for transforming the
money system. And in this new book,
Ecoivilization
um how um making a world that works for
all I have a chapter on looking
specifically at our money system uh
looking at some of the the fundamental
problems with it. Essentially the whole
notion of debt-based money is a
fundamental um underlying uh foundation
of the requirement for growth which
leads to this massive amount of debt
that is in the world right now which
essentially just so as to make the
elites even wealthier and requires
growth in order for the whole system to
be stable. It's almost like this game of
musical chairs where the chairs keep
getting pulled and every time the music
stops like everyone everyone's what do
we do? And there are ways very
straightforward ways to change the money
system. There's a number of different
ways. One is a centralized way just
having governments issue money not
through this debt finance but to where
it's needed the most. Other ways are
around community currencies, alternative
currencies, things like that. So lot of
different approaches but that's has to
be fundamentally changed. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Another question. Many people
experience neism. So it's a question of
era as a response to personal collective
dissolutionment. Can ancient wisdom
traditions or new worldview grounded in
ecological interconnectness offer a
durable sense of purpose and meaning in
an age of rising nilism?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Um well I think really a big
emphatic yes to that. And um and I think
that this is a real problem. In a way,
nealism
uh relates to some of the major
uh crises we're facing right now in the
world. Um a major one of that is the the
incredible inequalities that have led so
much wealth to get sucked up by such a
tiny elite that people have no longer
feel they feel this whole system is
structured against them. And um so when
people try to say talking about things
like fixing the system, they say
like you know this um this is
not working for me. And then when people
on the progressive side um just are
still trying to work within the system
and trying to make things a little bit
better and then people on the
authoritarian extremist side, the the
only ones with the voices that say this
is all screwed up. um then people begin
to believe these are the people speaking
to me because they're saying what I feel
in my heart is true. The whole system is
is a mess. So then they end up moving
towards um authoritarian ways of
thinking um and those kind of nealistic
ways of thinking. And so I feel what's
absolutely crucial is to recognize that
uh first off from the point of view of
what we call epistemic chaos, the social
media and the sort of breakdown in our
shared understanding. We need to really
come from these questions we're talking
about today like from our heart and from
our real connections. we can trust with
people knowing that that's that's what
we can truly trust is our um our actual
deep heart connections and go from
there. And secondly, we have to be ready
to say that this system does need to be
transformed. Um one of the messages from
this book I'm writing right now um in
relation to people who are trying to fix
the system saying actually the system
isn't broken. The system is actually
doing exactly what it was intended to
do. The system is designed there to
extract and exploit and create this
wealth pump for elites and it's doing a
great job of that until everything
completely destroys. We have to change
our entire system. So what I would want
to do is take the the energy that leads
to that sense of nealism is a true valid
energy is this recognition this is all a
bunch of crap like what I'm being told
but that can be turned into something
that really allows us to work together
towards a truly positive transformed
future
&gt;&gt; maybe a question which is related to it
coming from Neil how collapse accepting
are you given the state and the
planetary predicament
&gt;&gt; how can we use the wisdom and insights
to show up in these moments.
Another very huge very important
question and um around that um I think
that there is a lot that has to be done
to unpack that very word collapse. Um
because I mean I I feel very strongly we
are headed towards this complete
breakdown of our system the way it is
right now. And people who look at that
and say we're headed for collapse
totally my I'm with you in that that
recognition. But there's um when you
actually look at what collapse means,
there's one extreme where the entire
thing like a house of cards totally
collapses. Um which would be really the
greatest devastation ever to happen to
the human race ever since we evolved as
human beings. There'd be billions of
people within days would find themselves
starving, violence, the most terrible
trauma would happen. So that's not
something we can actually look forward
to and saying, "Well, that's good. we
can rebuild from there. Um but I think
what is what I think and I've looked at
this issue in quite some depth. The more
likely um expectation is what we can
think of as an unraveling that the
system is not working. But this kind of
unraveling can take place over decades
when systems move towards collapse. They
generally go through what's called
flickering where it looks like things
are falling apart and they come back
again a little bit better. um and then
it falls apart again and each time
they're getting closer and closer to
what's known as a phase transition. But
in our case of our global civilization,
we might have decades of this kind of
unraveling, this flickering. And it's so
as things get to be worse and worse, it
actually ironically opens up the degrees
of freedom to almost reweave our
society's fabric into a different way
that could be more life affirming. So,
um I'm certainly not somebody who I
certainly don't welcome some sense of
collapse. Um and at the same time, I'm
not uh avoiding the sense of how much
worse things are. But to me, what is
opening up is this possibility in the
years to come to work with this
unraveling as it takes place and
actually create the future we want from
that.
&gt;&gt; See? Yeah.
Um the person who uses Hillonger's u
Zoom you raise your hands.
&gt;&gt; My name is Eve.
I've been working recently on something
similar.
So things like um practicals resonates
with me. um shared wisdom in the past
but also in the present. Um not only in
civilizations but also in nature, in
architecture, in art, symbols,
um in science, in for example physical
laws, things like that. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um
so maybe after the chat I would like to
to to connect but I'm very curious on
your view of
what is our role as an individual, what
is the role of AI, what's the role of
blockchain and what's the role of values
in your um equal civilization you're
writing about.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Thanks. And um well so and
and and I see you we're coming close
towards the end of our of our time and
these are obviously big questions. So
maybe what I'll do is um I think I've
talked somewhat about how I see our role
as individuals. But you raised a very
good question about AI and blockchain
and technology and I think that's really
worth taking a um a a look at right now.
And um so again uh I think it's
important not to reject the incredible
advances that technology offers us. Um
and whereas blockchain is often times
viewed as um cryptocurrencies and people
just trying to get rich quick and all
this stuff, it also opens up
opportunities uh for example for what
are known as Dows like distributed
autonomous organizations which are ways
to decentralize power within groups
allowing um allowing it to move towards
more of the grassroots. I think the
important thing to look at both AI and
um any kind of blockchain type of
technology or whatever is where does the
power reside in that system. Now right
now um as these systems are developed
within the context of global capitalism
for the most part it's all centralized
and the power actually resides in
increasingly um centralized and powerful
groups where whether it's Facebook or um
Google or whatever it might be or Airbnb
or whatever where the information itself
is only held by this group that then
uses the information to give themselves
power at the expense of everybody using
it. I think what's critical in all
technological development that we want
to be truly lifeaff affirming is to
start from a structure that
decentralizes the information so that
for example something like Airbnb or um
any kind of um ride share like um Uber
type of technologies it's it's possible
for rather than the information all
being shared by a centralized group for
the people using it to have the power
over their own information and that's
the kind of technological advance that
can actually allow us to deal to have
technology even AI in a in a way that
actually helps each of us rather than
some gigantic big corporation. So
there's a lot more to talk about
especially in relation to AI. Um, but I
again the um what what I'd say about AI
in general is that we have to recognize
that it's incredibly mesmerizing for us
and the um it's beginning to take over
so much of people's uh ways of being and
relating very very quickly. And it's
really important to recognize that even
when it's giving us these great answers
and amazing uh seeming like insight into
what we're talking about. It's
reflecting back the uh the collective
knowledge that is primarily part of this
modernist western dominated viewpoint.
So no matter what kind of responses we
get, we should be really careful to not
just assume that what we're getting is
this great wisdom or great insight, but
really ask ourselves our own questions.
Um, being very aware of that.
&gt;&gt; We're getting to the end. Um, I see that
there's some good questions still in the
chat and also Eric now raising his hand.
Eric, can you be very brief and I want
to go back to the last question of Bob
in the chat. But Eric, very brief.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Can you hear me? Yes, we do.
&gt;&gt; Yes, I try my best English. So, for for
me, I'm a doctor, a GP,
uh retired and uh I I'm I am resonating
with your good practice on your own. But
when we go together to the system,
that's the only way the the trusted
networks. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So we try to go from illness to
wellness, from I to E is one letter. Um
and but do you I I I believe in
microorganism in microbiome the science
of the microbiome
&gt;&gt; and our identity we are coming from
microbes.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And I believe in food.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. very much the effect of food of of
healthy food
and my question is fun as an example. Um
I can eat very good and very healthy but
when a
food restaurant and fast food
a food restaurant and fast food
restaurant
&gt;&gt; McDonald's is coming to our village with
a new identity
I only I can doing nothing. So I need a
lot of people or trusted networks to
counter the toxic aspects of of what
happens at this moment. So
&gt;&gt; in your new book, how do you face the
the Wii and this and and the networks?
Uh
&gt;&gt; that's my how do you do it
&gt;&gt; without to sacrifice yourself too much?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Um and uh and you know food itself,
food and agriculture is a big issue that
has to be transformed entirely for that
life affirming future. to the point you
say um and and just more generally the
way we look at networks a lot is
actually the more normal human evolved
human way of organizing ourselves is
according to what's known as the
commonsbased uh ways of self-organizing
with not with hierarchies but with
groups that work together and and some
of you may know of the work of Eleanor
Austramm Nobel Prizewinning economist
who looked at the um how commons works.
Um and uh another book I strongly
recommend is by um some Silka Hellfr and
David Bolio called free, fair and alive,
which is a modern rendition of looking
at the commons. But the the theme of the
commons is very much um central to to
the book I'm writing and to our possible
future where we organize ourselves at
local levels. But that doesn't mean then
we ignore those bigger systems. But
those local levels can fractally connect
at larger and larger levels all the way
up to regional and even global levels.
Um and for some of you who may be
familiar within Roa, a uh um region in
Syria uh right now is organized
according to that way. deep radical
democracy. Millions of people in an
entire region where each different group
is making their decisions at that
grassroots level on the street, but it
actually fractally goes all the way up
to um high governmental sort of places.
I think that's a crucial approach that
is available to us.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Bob's last question. All people here are
part of the same bubble. How can we
broaden the awareness and invite other
people to engage the collective
transformation that is necessary to
evolve towards eco civilization?
&gt;&gt; Right? That's a a very simple question
to to ask. Of course, I'm joking. Um
yeah, great great question. I think that
it's almost like what we do once we
realize that we're part of something so
much bigger um it gives us both a one
way we can we can relax a little bit. we
can recognize this is not up to each of
us. None of us alone are going to solve
all these problems. And so rather than
get overwhelmed and everything like
that, we can just say look, I can just
do my part. So that's what one aspect.
But the other aspect of that goes the
other way around. It we realize that
actually each of us does have a very
significant part to play that we can't
just simply say, "Oh, it's such a big
system. I can just relax and do my
thing." um we actually realize that what
we're doing can have like those Lee
ripples I was talking about before can
have impacts even beyond what we even
know. So it brings a certain sense of
responsibility to us that each of us can
ask that question what can I do for the
greatest benefit of all life and in each
case those there will have different
answers and in each case the answers
might change over time for each of us
too. So it's not like there's one fixed
way of relating, but I think that this
is the question that I invite each of
you to bring into your own life day by
day like saying and each of you, you
know, maybe not every single one of you,
but for the most part, I'm guessing it
has economic and cultural privilege. Um
when we look at this world of you know 8
billion plus people um the vast majority
of people um are have are suffering from
so much oppression mostly through
historical injustice. They don't have
the opportunity or the luxury to ask
these questions or be on a call like
this. But most of us have some level of
luxury and privilege and power that
comes from that. And so it's incumbent
on us, every one of us to always be
asking that question. Given the
privilege that I and in the it's not
unearned privilege. We didn't ask to be
born in a certain it just happened to
us. But given this unearned privilege
that each of us has in this global
system which we're part, what can each
of us do most skillfully, most
effectively um to actually begin to be
part of this system for transformational
change that we need so much? What a
beautiful ending and invitation for us
all. Before we go, can I can we all stay
five minutes and to We're going to
switch the camera to the ones who've
been harvesting visually. We're going to
show them what they came up with.
I think
um the idea was to
surrender to whatever was coming um and
draw, doodle, paint, scribble, color,
um things on a page that had to do with
what Jeremy was talking about or what
you were feeling about what he was
talking about or associations that you
had
or because you were bored perhaps. But
um
&gt;&gt; I was noticing self-compassion and
kindness and glad to see that taking a a
central role there. And I'm also just
I'm loving the colors honestly. And
there's a a certain warmth and
vivaciousness like a vibrant quality
that I'm picking up more than anything
as I look at that. Um, so yeah, it's a
feels real pleasure. It's lovely to see
some of the words interspersed within
it, but more than anything like the the
sort of quality of the colors merging
together feels like really both warm and
rich and alive.
&gt;&gt; Can I ask the participants to use now
the chat box to express your feelings or
your gratitude or the things you learned
very briefly for Jeremy? So direct your
comments now in the chat. Um type
quickly. I'll read quickly. So how was
this session for you? And it's going
fast. So gratitude
but love
connected resonance inspiring life hope
inspiring.
So while people are typing, I would like
to thank you Jeremy for this wonderful
session, for the inspiration for us all
um from the three organizations that
organized this session. We wish you all
the best.
&gt;&gt; We wish you good luck with finishing the
book. We look forward to it. We may give
you another call uh in June or July
after the book has been published and
we've read it. So thanks for sharing
that. actually for me also a hopeful
message. So it is possible. I think
there are a lot of people around the
globe who are actively involved in
changing what is needed to be changed.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So um in the name of of us all really
thankful and thank you very much for
what you've done for us today.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you Eddie.
&gt;&gt; And thank you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Everyone's gonna unmute and go
give you a big applause. So unmute
yourself and
[Laughter]
&gt;&gt; okay
&gt;&gt; so we wish everyone a beautiful evening
or whatever time zone you're in um we're
going to share the recordings to all of
you who participated and Jeremy if you
ever I know you don't want to fly so if
you ever take a boat or whatever towards
the continent again Europe we have a big
part in harbor you see it in the
background so your ship can enter
We welcome you there.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. Thank you. It's been a just a
great pleasure to take part in this
today. Thank you.