If you swim, you're a swimmer. If you
run, you're a runner. But if you flow,
then you are a flower.
Everything in the universe is geometric.
Whether it's people, trees, cats,
planets, solar systems, you name it.
Literally everything in the universe can
be measured on a geometric scale. In
this same way, we can actually identify
that creation is also geometric. And
what we're going to look at today is the
pattern of creation and see if we can't
glimpse the source of all things.
Essentially, everything in reality is
said to come out of this single pattern.
I'm not making this up. This single
image will change everything. It's
called the flower of life, and it's said
to be the creation pattern of everything
in existence, even non-tangible things
like emotions and thoughts. Because this
pattern begins with the subtlest
vibrations of consciousness far beyond
anything our current technology can
measure and [music] extends through
every possible frequency and into the
physical material [music] creation. It
is said that there are 13 information
systems that comes out of the flower of
life likely relative to the secret
ancient Egyptian 13 chakra system. No
doubt today we're going to look at how
the physical reality manifests which is
one of the 13 systems. [music]
It's also important to note that at
first this might not make sense. I ask
that you watch with an open mind and try
and see if this resonates with you. As
always, have your own experience.
[music] Take what resonates and leave
the rest behind.
One more thing, by learning about sacred
geometry simply by observing, you're
absorbing only a very small amount of
information. If you want to learn more,
I recommend you draw it yourself. When
you do this, you begin to see things in
a new way. You begin to create new
mental patterns and connect with your
own higher understanding. Promise. The
flower of life has been known around the
world throughout history. [music] It was
found in Ireland, Turkey, Israel, Egypt,
China, Greece, Germany, India, and
Iceland. It's also been recorded to been
found in England, Tibet, Japan, Sweden,
Lapland, the Yucatan, and about 14 other
places. This thing is everywhere. Surely
a pattern of such global significance
must mean something, right? This pattern
is called a flower. Not just because it
looks like a flower, but because it
represents the cycle of a fruit tree. A
fruit tree makes a little flower which
then goes through metamorphosis and
becomes a fruit. Within that fruit
contains a seed which falls to the
ground and grows into another tree. The
cyclical nature of reality is seen as
the flower, fruit, seed, and tree, which
is a pattern created within and through
this very geometry.
We can relate this with many ancient
wisdom teachings that already exist in
more prominence on this planet. For
example, we can see it in Christianity
and the hermetic teachings which spoke
on the word of God. The flower of life
is known as the source of all language,
the primordial root of all vibration
which stems from pure beingness. We can
also see a connection here to the Dao.
The word of which translates to the way.
In one of the shortest verses in the Dao
Deqing, it says, "The Dao moves through
returning. The Dao is used through
[music] yielding. All things are born of
being. Being is born of non-being."
Are you picking up what I'm throwing
down? The flower of life is a cyclical
[music] pattern, part of a greater
whole, the wisdom of which is reflected
in many traditions the world over. In
this we might find an intrinsic unity
and use the flower of life to recognize
that all belief systems are connected if
we are only willing to look and see how.
Now to understand the flower of life
[music] we must discuss how it's formed.
Imagine consciousness or spirit floating
in the void which means it's nothingness
[music] and then consciousness pure
awareness. We cannot possibly put an
actual drawing on it because it's
formless and beyond any image. But let's
use this eye of raw for now. In this
void space, you can't do anything.
You're not falling cuz where would you
fall to? There's just nothing.
From here, this formless, indescribable
perfection decides to do something. So,
it projects a beam of its awareness in
one direction, which naturally leads to
the creation of six spatial directions.
Awareness to the front is mirrored to
the back naturally, then left and right,
and then up and down. also come about
and doing this creates an octahedron of
its own awareness where relative
movement is now possible in relationship
to this shape. This is significant
because the ocahedron is considered
relative to the mind and the
hermeticists would often describe that
all is a creation within the mind of
God. So it would make sense that this
shape would be instrumental in forming
even the first sphere. And that is
actually the next step to spin the
ocahedron with such intensity that it
becomes a perfect sphere. Remember
sacred geometry started when spirit made
its first projection into the void. The
void is nothingness. And these forms
created are also nothing. They're just
imaginary lines made out of
consciousness which gives you an
indication of what reality might
actually be. Nothing. In Hinduism, one
word for the reality field is called
Maya, which means illusion. Now that the
first sphere is created, spirit has an
awareness of what's around itself in
360°.
It moves to the very edge of the sphere
anywhere and repeats what it did the
first time. It creates this image which
contains the vesica Pisces. This is a
particular geometry that is very well
represented in the world as the image of
the Jesus fish reflecting the wisdom of
the word of God from the very geometries
of creation. Mathematically speaking,
within the vesica Pisces is a vast
amount of knowledge about width, [music]
proportion, and depth. Herein we also
have the square roots of 2, 3, and 5,
which are all infinite numbers. And we
also have geometric information about
light. None of this would have existed
with only one sphere. So now you can
probably start to see the significance
of this creation pattern.
From here, spirit continues the creation
process, moving flawlessly to create the
next circle exactly one radius away from
the other circle next to it. With every
new sphere that comes into being, more
and more mathematical knowledge emerges.
The first complete image to be formed is
this, which has two [music] names, the
seed of life or the Genesis pattern. And
for good reason.
Let's actually look at the book of
Genesis for a moment. With each creation
of each sphere, it could be seen as a
day. After the first movement, when the
second sphere was created, we had
information about light come into being.
The opening of Genesis 1 says, "The
earth was without form and void, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep,
and the spirit of God moved upon the
face of the waters, and God said, "Let
there be light." And there was light.
The key here is in the order. The
movement happened first, then light
happened immediately after, just as we
saw with the formation of the seed of
life. And we're not even done. Within
this genesis pattern, after the third
sphere is created, you now have the
pattern known around the world as the
Holy Trinity, depicted in literally
countless churches. [music]
It's also written in the Bible that on
the fourth day of Genesis, exactly 1/
half of creation was completed. Starting
from the first motion, exactly 1/ half
of the circles were formed. on the
fourth day. Now, when we get to the
sixth day, a geometric miracle takes
place. The last circle forms a complete
six-pedal flower. The Bible even says
that creation was formed in six days.
And this fits exactly. You see, this is
the pattern of Genesis. And thus, we may
call it the Genesis pattern, which is
also the beginning of the creation of
reality as we know it. Now, as we
discussed briefly, the pattern of the
flower of life is a living one, not
static. And so, as you continue to
develop it, the seed of life develops a
tree of life, which produces a flower of
life, and the fruit of life emerges
therein.
The tree of life is a very interesting
concept known around the world by
countless traditions. Depicted sometimes
as a tree, sometimes as a geometric
structure, and sometimes as a collection
of dimensions or worlds in which our
physical reality is one of them. The
tree of life is outside of any race or
religion and may be considered one of
the oldest belief systems on the planet,
describing how all of life and creation
are interconnected as branches or roots
of a great tree. And on that subject,
I'll do a bigger video about this at
some point. But for now, let's move on.
Along with the flower, fruit, seed, and
tree cycle, the flower of life also
yields a fifth image which is called the
egg of life. This is a very significant
form that is relative to your physical
body. We discuss it in our spirit
science video called power of the heart
where you can see how your very
existence began with the egg of life
when you were just a clump of cells in
the anunnaki test tube. I I mean um your
mother's belly. Check out our video
called Power of the Heart to learn more.
But for now, before we run out of time,
I want to show you something really
cool. Now, all around the world, the
flower of life was most often depicted
as being completed after 19 circles. Why
that number specifically? Well, in
biology, we have this protective layer
that surrounds most eggs called the zona
palucida, which is like a protective
boundary layer that functions for a
time. And these bigger circles around
the flower of life are like the zona
palucida of the flower of life. If we
remove these and add the final missing
circles, you get this, the fruit of
life. It is said that this pattern of 13
circles is one of the holiest, most
sacred forms in existence. It's called
the fruit because it is the result, the
fruit from which the details of the
fabric of reality were created. Remember
in our previous video about masculine
and feminine energy and how we discussed
masculine energy moves in straight lines
and feminine energy moves in curves.
Well, this image so far is all curves,
baby. But when you combine straight
lines with these curves, you get a very
complex image known as Medatron's cube.
Medatron's cube is significant because
it bears within it all five platonic
[music] solids, which are legendary
shapes discovered by the Greek
philosopher Plato several thousand years
ago. The five platonic solids all have
very specific characteristics by
definition. First, all of its faces are
the same size. Second, the edges are all
about the same length. And third, it
only has one interior angle between each
face. What's more, when put inside of a
sphere, all of the points will touch the
edge of the sphere perfectly. With that
definition, there are only five shapes
that fit that description. These are the
dodcahedron, the tetrahedron, the
ocahedron, the iicosahedron, and the
hexahedron.
These five shapes were considered by the
ancient alchemists to have an elemental
aspect to them as well. The tetrahedrron
was considered fire. The cube was earth.
The ocahedron was air. The iicosahedron
was water. And the dodcahedron was
ether. The sphere itself was voidness.
This understanding of the elements are
different than the periodic table we
know today, but relate instead with the
archetypal forces that reality was
foundationally built upon. With that
said, it is known today that the
periodic table of elements is also
relative to these shapes. In the 1980s,
Professor Robert Moon at the University
of Chicago demonstrated that the entire
periodic table of elements can be
related back to these essential
geometries. You can read an article
about it in the description if you're
super keen to go deeper. You see,
throughout modern physics today, along
with chemistry and biology, the sacred
geometric patterns of creation are being
rediscovered. Another example is the egg
of life that I showed you earlier,
literally showing up in your intrinsic
cellular structure from conception.
Hopefully, this will help you to
understand and witness the beautiful
unity amongst all things. It doesn't
matter what you believe, what religion
you follow, or if you're strictly an
atheist scientist. Bearing witness to
the truth of this pattern of creation
yields understanding that all things are
connected by something greater than any
of us can truly comprehend. Don't
believe or disbelieve anything we
[music] discuss in spirit science.
Simply have your own experience. First,
I want to show you fi and fibonacci.
It's important to understand for what
we're going to talk about. I'll show you
what you need to know to continue. And
if you want to learn more in depth about
these sequences, I will provide sources
in the comments. Fi, also known as the
golden ratio or golden mean, is a very
simple relationship. If you had a rod
and we're going to put a mark on it,
only two places would mark the fi ratio,
which is here [music] or here. The
length of a plus b is equal to the
length of c. This ratio is 1.6180339
and continues on forever. If you
multiply the length of c with five, it
will create the exact same image, only
[music] bigger. C and D is equal to E.
This ratio could then span on forever
going smaller and smaller or bigger and
bigger forever. This ratio is infinite.
It has no beginning and no end. It is
also believed that phi is the
mathematical root of all other
sequences. See, every mathematical
sequence in existence needs a minimum of
three numbers to figure out the
sequence. Pi only needs two. It is the
only one. Similar to how the circle and
square are the source of all shape, but
we'll get to that later on. The next
thing that you need to know is that this
ratio is found in all life everywhere.
Sort of. By sort of, I mean it's really
Fibonacci, but we'll look at that in a
moment. Look at your hand. Not only does
each finger have its own ratio moving up
each finger, which [music] is fi to the
next bone, but it oscillates back and
forth from the tallest finger to the
thumb. You wonder why the human hand is
like that? It's based on fi. [music]
This relationship is found throughout
the body in various ways, moving up the
arms and legs, in your face, throughout
the entire body. This is a Greek statue
that accurately represents this. The
Greeks were very precise when they made
their art because they understood fi
Fibonacci and the importance of these
sequences. When the Romans took over
Greece, you could see the perfection in
statues just completely disappear. I'm
not saying the Romans were bad artists.
They just didn't measure everything to
the same caliber that the Greeks did.
Here is the fire ratio in butterflies.
You can see this ratio everywhere from
the wing size to the body to the
antennas. They're all thigh ratios.
Here's dragonflies. It's the same
[music] story. Pi runs along the entire
body and the relation to the body and
the wings. Here it is in frogs. Fi is
found throughout the body in relation to
the head to the arms to the fingers and
so on. Well, what about fish? You'd
think they wouldn't be found in fish.
Well, here's three kinds of fish. Once
again, the ratios are consistent. It
doesn't just apply to these creatures,
though. Regardless of what mammal,
insect, aven, plant, or living creature
of any kind, you will find this ratio
one way or another. There's a reason for
this, but we'll get to that in a moment.
Let me show you the importance we used
to place on this golden ratio. In
ancient times, we built many structures
based on fi because we understood divine
proportion. This is the pagota of
Yakushiji temple in Japan. It's built
with these same mathematics from the
doorway to the ball on top of the
temple. It is a structural embodiment of
the proportions that all life holds. The
Parthonon in Greece also has the exact
same mathematical structure, but even
more. I recommend watching Nova's
Secrets of the Parthonon if you wish to
learn more about this because the stuff
that they find is really cool. The Great
Pyramid in Giza also has these
proportions. They're incredibly precise,
perfect in every way. You'd think that
by building these structures, using the
logical and mathematical proportions so
carefully that they would hinder the
creativity behind these buildings, but
they really don't. In fact, the left
brain understanding all of this can even
enhance creativity if used correctly. It
makes me wonder about all of the world
famous buildings of the modern world.
Could fi be a large factor in what makes
them stand out? Let's move on to our
next sequence, which is called
Fibonacci. Now the Fibonacci sequence is
life's way of creating the golden mean.
Allow me to explain. This sequence is
continually made from adding the
previous number to the current. 1 and 1
is two. 2 and 1 is 3. 3 and 2 is 5. 5
and 3 is 8. You can see how it
continues. Now, what most people don't
know about Fibonacci is that it actually
continually strives closer [music] and
closer to the five ratio by dividing the
current number into the last. You can
see this happening. 1 into 1 is 1. Well,
that's not close at all. 2 into 1 is 2.
This time it's over five but closer. 3
into 2 is 1.5 which is under but closer
still. 5 into 3 is 1.666. This time it's
over but even closer. Continuing with
that it's 1.6 and then 1.625 1.615384
1.619048
and so on. It continually oscillates
over and under the fi ratio, never quite
making it there, but continuing on
closer and closer every time until
eventually you can't even tell the
difference. Because fi is an infinite
number. This sequence will go on
forever. Let's look at some spirals in
nature. Another way that fi and
Fibonacci can manifest. This is a
nautilus shell. Many people will say
it's fi, but it's really Fibonacci. See
how when it's in its earliest form, it's
crude, not smooth or anything. [music]
One look and you can tell that's not fi.
But as it goes out farther and farther,
it gets closer and closer to fi. It
becomes a nearly perfect fi spiral by
the time it's all the way out here. This
also happens with sunflowers, pine
cones, and many plants in nature. In
many cases, such as the pine cones and
sunflowers, it flows in a double spiral
or more. Much like the spiraling arms of
a galaxy, from the microcosm to the
macrocosm, spirals are always present.
So, fi is basically source or spirits or
god in a mathematical way of thinking.
The math of god. Don't forget that this
sequence is an intimate part of nature
itself. I'm going to call it source. It
is the source of all mathematical
sequences and all life in existence
grows based on fi. However, fi has no
beginning and no end. Life doesn't know
how to deal with that. It's like source
says, "Go and replicate this." And life
says, "We don't know how." Because life
doesn't know how to create from
something that has no beginning. So, it
creates the Fibonacci sequence instead,
which has a beginning, but starts
[music] out crude, very basic, and then
continually goes closer and closer to
source, becoming more divine every step.
[music] It does take steps, too, which
actually has quite a bit to do with
evolution. Let's move on for now,
though. The only other sequence you need
to know for this is binary sequences.
This is a sequence like 2 4 8 16 32.
We're just doubling the last number
instead of adding it to the previous
one. We're all very familiar with this.
Binary sequences are found in life as
well. For example, motic cell divisions
are binary. We go [music] from being a
single cell being to having over a
100red trillion cells in only 46
divisions. Binary sequences are also how
computers work by turning on and off
chips. Computing at its core anyways is
binary. Okay, let's move on to something
different for now, but what we just
looked at will reveal itself in time.
This is how a polar graph usually looks
with 36 radial [music] lines in 10°
increments representing the 360°.
Then concentric circles are drawn each
with the same distance away as the last
creating eight equal demarcations as the
one before counting the [music] inside
circle as one. Think about what this
represents too. It's a two-dimensional
drawing of a three-dimensional sphere,
one of the sacred forms, by projecting
it onto a flat [music] surface. This is
also called a shadow form and casting
shadows is a sacred way to obtain
information. Also, a polaraph has both
straight male lines and circular female
lines, both male and female energies
interacting [music] at once. If you plot
a golden mean spiral at 0° on the polar,
it will loop all the way around before
hitting zero again, exactly at the
eighth circle. You'll find that this
golden mean line crosses five specific
places as it goes out. These places are
where the female circular lines meet the
male [music] lines. It crosses at 120°,
190°, 240°, 280°, and then it jumps to
360, or back at zero, depending on how
you look at it. What's interesting about
this is that it creates both [music] a
binary and Fibonacci sequence. Looking
at the radial increments from the
center, it crosses at 1 2 3 5 and 8.
Well, that's Fibonacci, but it also
crosses at 2 4 and 8. Well, that's a
binary sequence. We're going to look at
the binary sequence in particular,
though, because what you find is very
cool. If you draw lines from the
outermost circles on the lines where the
binary sequence was formed, you get this
image. It is an equilateral triangle. If
you continue the spiral outward, it
would continue to hit these exact same
places and continue to form larger
equilateral triangles. Let's divert yet
again to look at something very
interesting. There was a man named Keith
Kitchlau who discovered something very
important to understanding the geometry
of music. First, he drew a straight line
through an equilateral triangle. And
then he measured from the middle of the
center line and drew a straight line up
to the top edge and back down to the
bottom corner. Then he did the same but
passed through the center line of the
top and back down again. He did this yet
again on the other side. You can keep
doing this on either side as well. By
drawing this funny little form, he
discovered something of great
importance. He writes, "Continuing in
[music] this way, each successive
proportion will be the harmonic mean
between the previous proportion and the
total [music] length. And all of these
proportions will be musically
significant. 1 over2 being the octave, 2
over3 being the fifth, four over 5 being
the major third, 8 over 9 being the
major tone or step, and 16 over 17 being
the half tone or step. In other words,
he discovered the geometries of music,
or at least one aspect of them. Then he
tried measuring it in a different way,
starting at a different point of the
center line. At 3/4s, he found the
measurements were 1 over 7, 1 over 4, 2
over 5, 4 over 7, [music] 8 over 11, and
16 over 19. All of these numbers are
musically significant. This is very
interesting. It means that the harmonics
of music are somehow related to the
proportions of the central line moving
through a tetrahedron. Back to the
polarraph, you can see that this drawing
has a much greater value all of a
sudden. Not only that, but it becomes
even easier to make your measurements
[music] thanks to the polarraph itself.
You can just draw a straight line
through the drawing on the graph and it
will give you the center [music] line.
This information has been taken light
years beyond what I just showed you,
though. A research team found that you
can draw these lines not only from the
center but from any nodal points inside
the upper half of the triangle and
you'll come up with all known harmonics
in existence. [music]
Basically, this means that anywhere the
straight line and curved lines on the
polar cross from 0 to 120° and start
making the pattern, you will come up
with all known harmonic systems. Not
only the western keyboard, [music] but
the eastern and even many unknown
systems that have never been used. As
I'm not a musician, there's not much
more I can show you related to this. But
I would love to see what a musician
could really do with this knowledge. How
far could you take this? All right, I'm
running low on time here, so I'll wrap
up with this unraveling. Remember when
we talked about spirals in nature? They
often travel in twos. Usually, this is
male and female. So, on this polarraph,
if you're going to copy nature, you
don't just plot one spiral, you have to
plot two. When you do that, it gives you
this image, which is a star tetrahedron
inside of a sphere. We mentioned this in
lesson 7, and this image is more
commonly known as the star of David. Do
you remember the face on Mars? NASA
obviously tells us that it's just a
random formation on the surface of the
planet. But right next to the face,
there are also a few pyramids and other
anthropomorphic structures. I know what
you're thinking. Why on earth would I
bring that up all of a sudden? Well,
Richard Hogland and his colleagues have
spent a long time researching [music]
and deciphering a message on the surface
of the red planet. Want to know what
that message was? It was a star
tetrahedron inscribed in a sphere. Holy
balls, right? There's a link in the
comments to a page with all of this
information [music] if you want to learn
more. It's pretty crazy and very eye
opening now that we have this
information about what this really
means. Inside the star tetrahedron,
another one fits perfectly. We can
continue to put more and more star
tetrahedrons inside or outside of the
other star tetrahedrons. The same way
the golden mean spiral can wrap around
the polarraph infinitely [music] big or
infinitely small. You'll notice that
this smaller tetrahedron also happens to
fit perfectly around this sphere. Well,
check this out. If you put this same
size sphere centered on the point of
every single star tetrahedral point,
guess what suddenly reveals itself?
The fruit of life. It's back. According
to the Egyptians as well as the ascended
masters, this is one of the holiest,
most sacred forms in existence. Of
course, we already learned one of its
informationational systems in lesson 6,
and what you just saw was the second,
only in reverse order. What this means
is that all of the information of music,
harmonics, sound, and spirals come out
of this image. Not only that, but light
and the dimensional levels work in the
same way as harmonics, which we've
already discussed in lesson 2, 7, and 9.
Meaning that the geometric information
about light and dimensions are also
related to this star tetrahedron
pattern. So just briefly looking at this
image that we looked at in lesson seven.
This is the fourth unraveling of the
flower of life. It is an infinite
spectrum of never- ending fruits of life
within more fruits of life. This is the
unraveling of dimensions. So it makes a
little more sense now. So what you just
saw was the second unraveling from the
third rotational pattern of Genesis, the
geometry at the heart of creation.
There was a time when through science we
believed that the cell was the smallest
thing, the building block of life.
New discoveries led to the realization
that the [music] cell wasn't in fact the
smallest thing. Instead, the molecule
was.
Now, the molecule was the fundamental
building block of life. But then, new
discoveries revealed that it wasn't the
molecule either. The molecules were made
of atoms. Now the atom was the smallest
thing that you could get. Then you
guessed it, we discovered [music] even
smaller things. Now we have subatomic
particles and they are the most
fundamental building block of all
reality.
Oh, okay. Hold on. Now scientists are
throwing around something called string
[music] theory, which is like vibrating
noodles in hyperspace. Smaller than all
of that other stuff. Okay, [music] so
maybe it does get smaller. It makes me
smile. If there's anything we know for
sure, it ought to be that there's always
going to be something more or less, as
the case may be. With all of our
mathematics, brilliant scientists, and
ever evolving understanding, we can look
and look forever, but we won't be
finding a bottom anytime soon. So, why
are we looking? What is science for?
[music] Is it just to know? Why does it
even matter? Why should it matter to
you? What difference does it make
whether atoms or cells or vibrating
noodles are the smallest thing? Perhaps
it's because our level of understanding
directly relates to the level of reality
that we have control over, which I
suppose could be a [music] very good
thing or a very bad thing, huh?
We'll get into that a little later cuz
this video is about light. Why light?
That seems [music] pretty simple,
doesn't it? It's what powers the earth.
It's what powers me, you, everything
around us. What if we could know the
shape of [music] light, its most basic
characteristics, its smallest building
blocks? What if we could understand the
fundamental geometry and movement that
light moved by? What if it was a
three-dimensional solid form that we
could map [music] as simple as a
tetrahedron or a cube? Would that change
our understanding of reality? You know,
I think that's what scientists and maybe
all of us at some level are searching
for. That one thing that might just
allow us to create our own
self-sustained ball of light. That one
[music] thing that connects everything.
What if we could know that the core
building block of life and everything as
we know it? Would it change our
understanding of what light is? Well,
let's put on our science hats and see
what we can find out.
Einstein said something amazing,
something which has echoed through the
halls of science since his death. He
said that science should be simple,
something that anyone can understand.
Anyone can make things complicated and
complex, but it takes [music] a genius
to make something simple.
While doing research on Wikipedia, you
find pages upon pages with bajillions of
words [music] describing these crazy
formulas revealing the secrets of the
universe, everything we know in modern
science.
Upon seeing these pages, it led me to
ask a whole number of questions about
what I was looking at. [music] Questions
like, why do we believe that light is
what it is? What even is light? What is
particle physics? Why is it relevant to
me? Why is it that for the average Joe,
these ideas about existence and reality
are so hard to understand? Do scientists
make them overly complex for a reason?
Why are we having trouble following
Einstein's brilliant words about
simplicity? Is there a way that we can
use sacred geometry to explain and
simplify these ideas in a way that works
and makes sense?
And most importantly, how can I use this
information in a way to grow as a
person? I don't just want to build up
beliefs about these topics. I want to
expand my ability to create with them.
And how do we do that? Where do we
start? Well, let's start at the
beginning.
It's theorized across the board from
creation myths, the basic geometry of
the flower of life, and even in the big
bang theory that light is among the
first things created at the beginning of
everything. So, exploring discovering
how light works would be a fundamental
piece to understanding everything. Let's
take a look at particle physics and
quantum physics. [music] They may help
us crack this code.
Particle physics is the study of the
basic building blocks of matter and the
forces they exert on each other. [music]
In particle physics, scientists are
trying to find the one the one thing
that creates everything else or at least
the phenomenon that they are observing.
It is very closely related to quantum
physics which is using that same idea to
discover the source of the universe we
live in [music] that ties everything
together.
Scientists in this field have done a lot
of work in demonstrating and [music]
exploring the unified field theory which
shows that everything in the universe is
connected through an infinite web of
something. [music] They're not sure what
it is, but we can see how we are
connected in a grand and mysterious way.
As our sciences have looked smaller and
smaller to find the smallest particle,
we have reached a point where things get
so small that we can no longer define
what they look like.
We try and define what particles are
through [music] abstract concepts in
mathematics because we say that
particles are unseeable and unknowable.
[music]
And yet things are always going to get
smaller and smaller. Everything is made
of something else and it fractals down
to infinity or fractals larger to
infinity.
Some scientists have actually been known
to cut infinite numbers when they find
them because they're deliberately
looking for finitness [music] instead of
embracing the infinite nature of
reality. Check out the movie Black Hole.
to see this happening in action.
Particles are called particles because
they're too small to be seen by
instruments we have in science at this
time. What that means is that we don't
really know what particles even are. If
we knew what they were, they would not
be particles anymore. They would be
described.
There is kind of a broken dichotomy that
is happening in this field. It's
something that scientists all over the
world are trying to figure out. Here's
the problem. Light and other particles
that move at the speed of light are
assumed to have no mass. The speed of
light, also known as the speed of
massless particles, is about 299,792,458
m/s.
What we know in the field of science is
that there is something that translates
these particles from one side of the
equation to the other, from the world of
no mass and into the world of mass. If
you ask the scientist this [music]
question, they would tell you that it's
the Higs field, the ever permeating
field that gives things mass. In
essence, light speeded particles pass
through the Higs field and slow down and
gain a property of mass. The popular
Higs Bzon is the particle that is
created upon the light speeded particle
merging with the Higsfield. [music]
According to our formulas, this Bzon,
this particle is supposed to come out
with it. I think there's an important
piece of information that we're missing
here and [music] it starts with asking
some questions.
First of all, what even is mass? And
second, why do we believe that light
[music] has no mass?
On Wikipedia, mass is said to represent
an amount of matter, but then it goes on
to say that the term matter has no
universally agreed upon definition.
How can we say that light has no mass
when we can't even agree upon a
definition or understanding of what
matter and subsequently mass even
[music] are?
Because of all of our fancy equations as
described earlier, we have kind of
thrown all ideas about what light could
actually look like out the window in
favor of a complex equation that looks
like this.
I want to [music] take it back to
simple.
What if we could know the shape of
light? What if we could actually define
what the structure of light as well as
every particle and thing in existence
[music] were?
What if there was a basic geometry of
the universe that we missed? Even more
interesting, what if light was a
geometric solid [music] and there was no
difference between the geometry of light
and the simplest particle? What if mass
and no mass was not just about the speed
that it traveled, but also the density
of the information held within the
shape? Maybe the speed of the particle
is interdependent upon the information
that was carried in the form. And the
more information it holds, the denser it
becomes. I have a few examples to
demonstrate what I'm talking about. The
first is water vapor. I know that it's
not a light speed particle, but perhaps
they have the same properties. [music]
See, water has a heavy density, but when
it heats up, it translates into vapor
and rises into the air. It takes a 90°
turn into another dimension of form and
it merges together with itself to become
clouds.
As the clouds become packed denser and
[music] denser with so much information
packed within them, eventually they have
no choice but to release and all of the
water comes pouring [music] down. It's
changing from a high-speed particle into
a denser one based on the density of the
[music] information within the droplet
as well as the speed that it was
traveling. Now I recognize that this
only partially works as an example
because the particles I was describing
are [music] not light speeded particles.
But if we can take that idea and apply
it to light, it seems to work in a very
similar way.
Let's think about [music]
photosynthesis. A burst of energy from
the sun travels towards the earth as
both a wave and a particle. It has
properties of both and it's moving at
the speed of light and passes through a
plant. That plant then absorbs the
information and energy that it needed
from the wave particle [music] that
passed through it. The plant then uses
that information, the light speeded
particles that it took from the
sunlight, and uses it to create
something with mass, merging them with
water and other plant matter to create
sugars and other [music] nutrients.
In addition to supporting the theory of
light being a solid and holding
information and even mass, doesn't that
also seem to fit the model of the Higs
Bzon, too? I I could be wrong. It's just
an idea. If light is a solid, it can be
both a wave and a particle
simultaneously.
If light is a solid, it can have both
density or nothing inside it at all. And
if light is a solid, well, what could it
look like? [music] What my friends and I
have come up with is a combination of
three forms, the three simplest shapes
in existence. And as you look at it, ask
yourself, can we simplify it further?
Light is composed of two primary forces.
We call these electricity and magnetism.
Thus, electromagnetic waves and
radiation. Electricity is particles and
magnetism is waves. Remember everything
we've talked about with male and female
energy. Electricity is male, magnetics
are [music] female, curves and points,
both of which are found on this shape.
Looking at the flower of life, which is
the blueprints for life and reality
itself, you can see that's exactly how
[music] it works. You have male energy,
the particles, the dots, and female
energy, the waves, the curves. Now, you
might notice inside the flower of life,
there are two ways you can look at it.
You can see the circles, lots and lots
of circles [music] that make up the
whole image. This is the female
perspective. You can also choose to see
this this little shape that looks like a
seed, which makes up the entire picture
from these seeds aligning themselves
perfectly with each other in beautiful
six-fold symmetry. This is the male
perspective.
This seed is called the Trion ray as
coined by the man who founded Michael
Evans. He is a man who has given a large
part of his life to exploring sacred
geometry and quantum physics. And quite
honestly, his discoveries [music] are
evolutionary.
The flower of life in two dimensions is
a flat 2D representation of the way the
universe fits together in higher
frequencies and higher dimensions.
Michael saw this and asked a big
question. If this is the universe from a
2D [music] perspective, what would it
look like in three? So he began modeling
and molding three-dimensional flower of
life together and discovered some pretty
remarkable things. Everything has
breath. Everything breathes and
everything lives. And so at a level of
basic geometry of particle physics, we
too must have breath. He found that
every geometry we think we know of is a
static and fixed perspective of what it
really is. Tetrahedrin. How about a
tetrine and a tetrax?
An inhale and an exhale of this basic
form icosahedrin. Here's an icosatrine
and an icosatrix.
He developed breathing models for all of
the platonic solids. [music] And then he
found a new solid, one that hadn't been
discovered before.
Energy never travels in straight lines.
It always moves in curves. By
incorporating curves into the basic
geometry of our platonic solids, you
actually discover much simpler particles
that before we never knew existed.
And so we come back to these three
images. [music] The first one, as you
know, is the sphere. This is simply one
of the simplest forms [music] and the
most female. It's all curve. It's not
hard to see how this form is used in the
creation of all things. Just look at a
planet or a star or even an egg.
Next, we have this one, the trinity or
the trion ray. I'd actually like to make
a distinction here. The trinity is three
spheres put together like a vesica
pisces. And the trion ray is 116th of
the volume of that. In three dimensions,
they both come out with three edges,
three [music] faces, and two points
smaller than any other shape. It's a
single shape that contains both
particles and waves.
They're both equally important. And
Michael Evans proposes that with this
Trion theory, he has speculated that
light could in fact be a solid. In fact,
it's highly [music] likely.
This Trion ray is the geometry of a
straight line. For if you were to draw
any of the Platonic solids, you could
replace all of the straight lines with a
Trion ray, and you would get a diagram
of both the inhale and the exhale of
that platonic solid. The great artist
Deloqua once said, [music] "It would be
worthy to investigate whether straight
lines exist only in our brains." The
interesting thing about the Trion ray
and the Vesca Pisces is that they both
have straight lines as well as curves
and it's just a matter of perspective.
One of the most important pieces of
information about all of these shapes
though is that this is how form comes
into manifestation from a geometric
perspective from source to the material
world. The sphere is a ball. It's all
curve. Upon adding a second sphere, you
get the first edge. And so this is
curves and edges. When you add the third
sphere, you get the first points. And
now you have curves, edges, and points
all together in one shape. As you
continue adding circles, you get more
and more shapes and forms that begin to
manifest, such as the Platonic solids
and and everything else we know about.
This is why the Vesica Pisces is so
important. As you know, we've been
looking at this for a long time, and
we're going to continue to. Over the
past year, I've been learning that the
Vesa Pisces is one of the most important
keys for waking up and transformation
[music] on this planet. It is a model
for bringing people together to create
powerful change on this planet. As we
grow together and make powerful
connections with each other, it is our
connections that begin to alter the way
that we do things. [music] We help each
other refine our messages. It is asking
each other questions that allows us to
explore deeper into what something
really means. And then [music] with the
newfound information that we gathered
together, we can set off on a journey to
change the world.
Ladies and gentlemen, these three forms
are what I believe to be the God
particles. We have a male form, a female
form, and [music] a form of a merging
together of both of them. The God
particle is not a matter of scale. It is
not a smallest thing like a Lego block,
but rather the simplest geometry [music]
that we can conceive in this dimension.
It is a geometry that makes up all
manner of things regardless of size and
scale. Just look around you. Most seeds
look like this. Most leaves look like
this. Most fruits look like this. Eggs
look like this. Sperm looks like this.
It's practically impossible not to find
examples of it everywhere. All we need
to do is take a look.
We're going to step into yet another
[music] important topic to lay the
foundation for some major projects
coming down the road. This topic is
called the Cabala which [music] is
commonly titled the tree of life. While
many have heard about it, there are only
a few who truly understand what it
represents. Even then, the real adepts
of the Cabala know that the amount of
information derived from this ancient
teaching is actually one of infinite
depth. It is a fundamental key which
[music] describes the nature of the
universe and how all of creation fits
together.
In the words of Dion Fortune, the
curious symbol system known to us as the
tree of life is an attempt to reduce to
diagrammatic form every force and factor
in the manifested universe and the soul
of man to correlate them one to another
and reveal them spread out [music] as on
a map so that the relative positions of
each unit can be seen and the relations
between them traced. In brief, the tree
of life is a compendium of science,
psychology, philosophy, and theology.
The journey into understanding the tree
of life can begin in many ways. And so
today we will look at an overview of
this system from an extremely basic
perspective in order to bring clarity
and awareness to what it [music] is and
how it works. From there we will deepen
our discussion with greater details of
all of the various compartments of this
mystical system. The tree of life in its
simplest sense is made up of 10 spheres
and 22 interconnecting pathways. [music]
These are often added together and
described as the 32 paths of the tree of
life. The 10 spheres are actually called
Sepharoth. [music]
No, not that Sepharoth. These spheres
represent successive divine emanations
or outpourings of energy in the
continuous flow and evolution of the
universe. They are numbered 1 through
10, [music] each of which holds the
numerological correspondence that you
might expect when studying numerology.
Each Sepharoth represents a unique
perspective of divine power. And by our
awareness of them, [music] we can gain
insights from each level to help us on
our spiritual journey. Balance among
[music] the Sepharoth is of paramount
importance as each positive energy will
turn negative when taken to an
unbalanced extreme. Each of the sapphira
are reflected within all levels of the
universe [music] both in the microcosm
such as within our bodies and the
macrocosm when observing all of creation
as a part of a greater whole. Now the 22
pathways which lay in between these 10
sephroof [music]
are each associated with the 22 letters
of the Hebrew alphabet and also the 22
major arcana in the tarot. Each one
[music] holds a deep spiritual message.
When they are all in harmony together,
they describe that all things from
heaven and earth are fully united in
one, even when we perceive them to be
otherwise. Where the sephro represent
divine powers, the pathways are the
channel of [music] energy between them,
the journey, obstacles and rewards for
moving towards the next [music] sephro.
These energies are all found within us.
And if we are open to it, we consciously
take part in the wisdom and
understanding moving throughout this
tree. By coming to understand these
pathways, [music] which is also called
pathworking, we begin to harmonize and
balance the internal and external worlds
of ourselves. These paths represent
stages of personal development and are
required to pass between the Sepharoth
and are seen as roadways to spiritual
enlightenment.
In addition to the Sephro and the
pathways, there are several other key
ingredients to understand about the
[music] tree. The tree of life is
largely based on the principle of three
unique forces working together. For
instance, [music] male, female, and
child. You can also look at it simply as
the polarity between the two extremes
and then the balance in the middle. The
tree has three pillars which are the
pillar of severity, the pillar of mercy
and the pillar of equilibrium. The left
side [music] is the yin and the right
side is the yang. One of which is
principally formative and constricting
in nature and the other of which is
expansive and illuminating in nature.
The central pillar is the harmonization
and balancer [music] of all of these
polarities. The tree also has three
triangles. The superal triangle is made
up of the top three sapphira and
represent the three states of God. the
supreme oneness from [music] which all
things emerge, the divine masculine and
the divine feminine emanations which go
on to create all things.
The central triangle [music] is called
the abstract or ethical triangle which
is the level of the soul or the part of
us which experiences infinite lifetimes
[music] and continues to evolve our
spirit beyond the understanding of our
physical existence.
The bottommost triangle is the astral or
magical triangle which is the place
where our unique [music] egos and
personalities are formed. The collective
thoughts and feelings of our individual
identity combined together and are
channeled [music] downwards through our
bodies into the bottom sephira and
dictate how we live our lives. There are
also three major barriers within the
tree which symbolize our disconnection
with nature and then how we can
transcend them. The first barrier is
called the 32nd pathway or simply called
the gulf and is the connection between
the physically manifested realm and the
ether. Crossing this barrier is the
realization that we are more than our
physical bodies.
The second barrier is called the veil of
paraca located between the bottom two
triangles [music] and represents the
disconnect between our soul and our
egos. This barrier marks the highest
point to which our normal human
consciousness can [music] rise without
transcendence.
The third barrier is called the abyss
which is between the upper two
triangles. This represents the ultimate
disconnect from spirit that we all
experience and why we believe we are
separate from everything. This abyss was
created in the fall of consciousness.
It is also worth noting that the four
elements [music] play a very symbolic
relationship to the tree of life which
attempts to express the inexpressable
name of God through the tetragrammaton.
[music] Yad he vow yod being fire the
male symbol of forces that set the
creative process in motion. The first he
being the symbol of water the female or
receptive principle which develops the
impulse of the first fire. Vow being
heir, the formative principle of
intellect [music] and mind, the son of
the mother and the father and the final
head being earth, the manifestation and
material principle of the daughter,
[music] the final combined result of the
whole creative process. Together this
combines with what is called the four
worlds of the tree of life. The four
worlds can be depicted in several ways
depending on the varying esoteric
practices. But very simply, it divides
the cabala into four unique planes of
becoming in order to delineate the
various states by which [music] creation
manifests through bringing more detail
to the structure as a whole. At the top
you have the world of emanation which is
fire, the world of creation water, the
world of formation air, [music] and the
world of action earth. These are the
four stages in the process of creation
according to the Cabala.
As we continue our conversation into the
tree of life, it is important to note
that this information can be viewed in
many ways. A living system of spiritual
development, a historical curiosity,
[music] an active esoteric tradition,
any way that you choose. With that in
mind, let me propose this thought. To
understand kabala, to really understand
it, it is not a matter of memorizing
words or philosophies, but rather it is
the practice of meditating upon a
progression of symbols and ideas which
may enable you to develop your
consciousness and climb beyond the
realms of normal human thought. If this
is something that you would like to do,
check out Kabala 102, Meditating on the
Tree of Life, which describes a
meditation practice to do along with the
information which you're about to learn
in this video. I'm certain that we'll
come back around and talk about this
more as we go along too. Now, as
previously discussed, one of the
fundamental aspects of the tree of life
are the 10 spheres called spirat. Today,
we're going to take a look at the 10
spherat. What they do, how they work,
and how they all fit together. Ready,
steady, here we go. Every one of the
spher represent a divine emanation, a
primordial outpouring of pure energy
which evolves and crystallizes as it
descends into denser states of
existence, continually oscillating
between polarities and harmonizing with
itself as it goes. Each of the spira are
contained by those that came before it.
And so the topmost spira titled keter
contains all of the other spher within
it. You might think of it like how those
little wooden Russian nesting dolls each
contain the collective inside of them.
However, the [music] spherat are not
things but rather states by which
consciousness or divine energy moves and
creates reality. By this understanding,
you could disconnect from the idea that
it has to appear in the way that it is
drawn. Although this is the most
conducive to comprehending the tree of
life simply in the teachings of the
Golden Dawn who played a big part in the
harmonization of Kabala with
hermeticism. They depict one particular
representation of the tree where each
layer is overlaid upon each other
beginning with a singularity emanating
outwards and returning back to the
singularity at the bottom of the tree
yet all contained within a single
sphere. That said, we're still going to
use this classical visualization as our
principal diagram. If you remember from
our first video, there are three pillars
within the tree. The pillar of severity,
the pillar of mercy, and the pillar of
equilibrium. As we observe these
following spherat, you will see that
each opposing spida embodies the perfect
balance of its neighbor. In every case,
each individual spira can only truly be
understood by comprehending it with its
partner. And further understanding
manifests when we take into account the
complete triad in sequence. So let us
take a brief look at the spa
individually. Now, this is going to be a
very basic overview because there is
just so much information to cover at
once. And further, please be aware that
the flow through the spat moves both
upwards and downwards. So, while we'll
be looking primarily at the sequence of
manifestation from the highest plane to
the lowest, know that it moves upwards
as well. The more we [music] go through
it and the more that you contemplate the
meaning of this sequence, the more and
more it will make sense.
At the very top, we have keter.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Keter translates to crown indicating the
supreme source and unity, the absolute
divinity. This is the highest sphere
[music] on the tree and acts as a bridge
between the limitless and boundless
creative power of the cosmos [music] and
the highest thing that can be perceived
by our human consciousness. Keter
describes the most supreme source of
energy, the richest [music] potential
for anything to come into being.
However, here nothing has actually
become manifested. [music] It is simply
the pure and infinite potential for
creation doing nothing but existing. In
the ancient Hebrew texts, it says that
[music] keter is the light giving the
power of comprehension of that first
principle which has no beginning. It is
the primal glory because no created
being can attain its essence. So
basically there is no form here only
pure being. The human mind generally has
a [music] hard time grasping no other
mode of existence than form and
activity. So when describing formless
passivity, it's okay if this experience
draws a big question mark in your mind.
In fact, we can't even adequately draw
it. So I hope these visuals might help
you comprehend that ultimately we cannot
define keter. We can only indicate
towards it. Moving on, the second
[music] spirat is called hukma. Hokma
translates to wisdom, describing that
wisdom itself is the first tangible
thing that the human mind can grasp. It
comes as a male energy, positive or
young energetic outpouring from keter,
its [music] source. This is an
uncompensated boundless energy and to
many spiritual traditions is often even
described as the all father. [music]
This is where the energy of the entire
universe comes into manifestation. It is
the purest manifestation of energy
possible. It is in Hokma that we observe
the manifestation of the creative word
let there be light. the impulse of
dynamic creation. Being that Keter was
unmanifested potential of creation,
Hokma is the first creation itself. It
is the pure force of free flowing
energy, primary dynamism, a force which
can give rise to literally every form in
existence, the energetic basis of all
created things. Much like Keter, this is
still very difficult for us to
comprehend, save for these particle
[music] effects. Hokma is not an
organizing speed, but the great
stimulator of the universe. However, it
is only in relationship to its neighbor
Bina that we see how creation can truly
come into being. Bina is the third
sphirat, the mirror of hokma on the left
side of the tree and represents
[clears throat] the womb of creation.
She is the divine mother, the female
potency of the universe. Bina translates
to understanding because it is here that
we find true understanding of what the
purpose of this energy shall become. She
is the one who receives the created
disorganized energy from hokma and
applies the basis of form and
stabilization to it. This is a very
sacred space [music] because without
bina there would be literally nothing in
existence. Nothing could come to have
form. We can see by this analogy the
role that the divine father and divine
mother play in the creation of all
things. While many teachings classify
God as a male figure [music] indicating
hulkma, we must too see that the
feminine is a requirement for life to
come into being and is just as important
as the divine masculine. You might think
[music] of bina as the engine that
translates the raw energy of a burning
fuel into usable power. [music] In a
more natural analogy, hogma could be
likened to a seed which falls to the
ground [music] and then the soil and
earth which nurtures the seed and
supports its growth into a tree would be
likened to the power of bina.
The fourth spir hessed [music] continues
the development of this energy along the
right side of the tree. Hessed
translates to mercy and is also commonly
translated as loving kindness [music]
because it describes the principal
goodness from which all things come from
and are based on. This is the place
where the archetypal ideas of creation
begin to form [music] what we might
comprehend as truth, love and goodness.
This means that where Bina made the
space for form to happen, now the energy
can move into an etheric foundation to
form the conceptual [music] framework by
which our manifested universe may
operate by. From here emanates all
spiritual virtues with the most exalted
essence. You might also think of this as
the stage where cosmic law comes into
being. The perfect ideals of peace,
fairness, and order which uphold the
structure of the universe. Hessed is a
little more comprehensible than the
higher spidat. Meditating upon hessed
might relate to the leadership qualities
by which we live our lives. What do we
stand for and how do we [music] treat,
act and respond towards others? Gura,
the fifth spir [music] is located
underneath bina and partners with hed.
Gavvura translates to strength because
it embodies the sharp and swift power
required to carry out the cosmic order
that was set out by hessed before it.
You might see this as the birth of karma
or cosmic [music] justice. Anytime where
there is an imbalance in the universe,
the energy flowing from this state will
facilitate a corrective rebalancing by
enforcing [music] these cosmic
principles. Gevoda is a force which
fights without malice, [music] spares
the weak and wounded, and does not
destroy the law, only seeking to see
that it is properly fulfilled. In your
personal meditations, [music] you might
experience the speedot of geva as
putting motion to the ideals that you
stand for. If you stand for health for
example, you might find the principle of
gvida [music] calling you to remove the
unhealthier activities from your life to
make room for more healthier ones. But
of course, while hokma and bina get
[music] their balance from keter above,
hed and gura are balanced by the next
spiret.
Tifet is the sixth spir [music] and most
centralized spherat in the kavala
forming a harmonized bridge between
literally every other spherat on [music]
the tree. Tifet translates to beauty
because this is a state of divine
connectedness and unity with all things
yet individually aware of our own unique
souls too. In the awareness of this
supreme oneness we experience and
realize that all things are so
magnificently beautiful and thus it is
here that we strive to reach in our
human consciousness. If hma and bina
represent the divine father and mother
this is their beautiful child [music]
Christ consciousness.
Tifa is very unique and its meaning is
especially deep. This is the sphere of
sacrifice [music] and not so often a
passion of the Christ sense. It is the
center of translation from force into
form and form into force where the
formless energy or consciousness from
above may translate through in order to
become manifest as something real
outside of simple thought form
archetypes and ideas. Further, it is the
same sacrifice moving in the other
direction. the giving up of our physical
and earthly limitations in order to
embody a state of being which is higher.
I believe the term for this is
ascension.
Moving downward [music] on the tree, we
now enter into a realm where we can
actually begin to comprehend, feel and
experience things. [music] These lower
spherat are more related with the
tangible human experience and it begins
with net the seventh emanation. Netag
translates to victory [music] and
describes the principle of victory found
within the triumph over obstacles. Nets
is most commonly [music] described as
the place where the light from Tifet is
broken apart and scattered as if by a
prism into a many raid manifestation but
still hasn't fully individualized. It
represents extreme polarities of energy,
all possibilities of what can exist in
the world or how you might experience,
perceive or feel something and then the
subsequent awareness or balance between
the individual and the collective.
[music]
Thus, we can see that Netsac ultimately
represents the state of freemoving
thought [music] forms, the flux of
energy which move through our body of
consciousness and give rise to our
intuition and our emotional feelings.
[music] It is best understood in
relationship with its partner on the
other side called hod where netsaka is
our intuition and emotions. Hod would be
our thoughts and fixed mental
formations.
The eighth spir hod represents the place
where all of these polarizing energies
of nets all of the feelings intuitions
and subtle energies that move through a
body of consciousness [music] become
tangible concepts in the human mind. It
is the realm of comprehensible mind
forms. For example, if you felt
something, it happened in Nets. But when
you attempted to understand or
rationalize it, that's ho. Together,
they might be seen as the force and form
of the astral or thought form
consciousness. Ho translates to glory
and often splendor because all of the
creations of the cosmos are exalted in
the mind for mankind to perceive and the
glory of the light-filled mind when
mirroring the higher truths of creation.
This spher forms the basis of our mental
understanding of reality. In a nutshell,
Hod plays a large role in the
development of our personality and ego.
The effort of Hod is to mold the
creative energy from above into
comprehensible forms such as by
philosophy, systems, reason, literature,
science, [music] and our mental way of
interacting with the world around us.
However, the power of Hod is only made
real when observed in relationship with
Nets. For example, if you were to give a
speech filled with passion and
enthusiasm, the words that you used will
carry your meaning [music] and it will
be received by all. If you were just to
talk without any sense of care, just
reciting words, the words become empty
and the meaning is lost. As usual, Hod
and Nets are connected by another
balancer on the central pillar like
Tifet but on a lower dimension which is
called Yode, the ninth [music] spir. Yod
translates to foundation because it is
the actual foundation by which all of
the spirat culminate and engage with the
physically manifested realm. This spher
is the stage that completes the link
between mind and matter. [music] Since
the 10th sphere malhoot below is where
the four physical elements manifest, you
might think of yod as the ethereal realm
itself, the vibrations which give
movement to inert matter. In a more
scientific approach, you might think
about it like the electromagnetic
substance that moves through our bodies
and all of life. The dynamo that causes
the physical world to be filled with
motion and life. You see, in order for
our bodies to move, it needs an
energetic signal to charge the muscle.
Yod is the strings that makes the puppet
of Maloot dance, while spirit, tifet,
and the higher forces above yod would be
the sacred puppet master. Now the power
of Yod can be attributed to daily
mundane tasks such as walking or making
a salad. However, its power is
significantly greater than that. [music]
But there is a warning here. Much like
fire, it can be used for good or not so
good. The key here is keeping [music]
our hearts aligned with our higher
selves when we begin connecting to the
ethereal energies of these higher
plains.
Maloot is the final manifestation
matter, the physically created world. It
is the outward visibility of all of the
invisible etheric activity which brings
motion to form. All matter would be
inert and lifeless if not for the spirit
that has installed [music] it and made
it come to be in the first place.
Malhoot translates to kingdom describing
the existence of the kingdom of God in
the present moment in magnificent
splendor and revealing the great truth
that the kingdom of heaven is actually
here and now as Christ proclaimed. This
is the place where physical things
exist, where life happens. [music]
It's what's happening right now. It is
the place where all of the energy
flowing from above finds rest. Where
everything has been decided and put
together to form a permanent vehicle to
be utilized by all consciousness as it
learns and grows. [music] However, the
great secret of Melhoot is that this is
only the halfway point. Upon spirit
being received in Malhoot, life itself
[music] actually begins. The Fibonacci
sequence finds its origins and begins
striving and returning back [music]
towards its source, reaching for the
perfection that which it emerged from.
It is the goal of spirit to create this
physical vessel, fill it with
consciousness, [music] and then have it
return to its source in the light.
In essence, this covers the basics of
the 10 spherat. But the journey is still
only just beginning. All of this
information is really just to get you
started on truly [music] experiencing
the tree because knowing it logically is
only onetenth of the experience of the
cabala. We'll cover exactly what this
means so [music] that you can take your
experience of the tree of life to a
level beyond just mental comprehension
and use it [music] as a powerful tool to
connect with your higher self and evolve
your consciousness. We discussed the 10
sephidote and their significance in the
manifestation of reality. According to
Cababala covers the entire tree of life
from keter, the uppermost sphere of
infinite unmanifested potential all the
way down to malut, the tangible and
physical reality in which we reside. Up
until now, we have briefly mentioned
that there is a connection between the
tree of life and the Hebrew alphabet. At
last, it's time we establish what that
connection is and open the discussion on
the 22 creative forces. On the tree of
life, there are 22 pathways drawn
[music] between the 10 separat,
the most ancient text available on
Jewish esotericism. These are described
as the remaining 22 paths in the 32
paths of wisdom which follow the 10
sephidote. When looking at these
pathways, they would represent the
active movement of energy from one
seafir to another. For example, the path
between [music] keter and hokma is seen
in essence as pure formlessness moving
into the first emanation of creation.
The 22 pathways are most commonly
represented by the Hebrew alphabet which
is said to be a series [music] of sounds
based on the 22 most essential
frequencies of creation through the
sephidote. These frequencies are said to
express the process of creation as it
manifests from the incorporeal realms of
God all the way down into the physical
reality which we are experiencing now.
This is the very same process that
describes how thoughts, feelings, and
inspirations [music]
enter into our consciousness along their
journey from the higher realms and thus
informing our bodies as to the tangible
actions that we [music] perform in our
day-to-day lives. These letters are also
often represented by very abstract
concepts. And so as we go through them
in this video, we encourage you to
practice seeing these not as the image
associated with the letter such as an
ox, a house, a camel, and so on, but
look at what the essence of the idea is.
All of the images that are associated
with the letters should be seen as
[music] simple abstracts used to express
the nature of an idea.
Before we dive in, there are a few other
things we have to look at briefly.
First, the Hebrew alphabet is divided
into three unique groupings. These
[music] are called the mother letters,
the double letters, and the single or
simple letters. In essence, the mothers
are the root forces from which the
remaining letters descend from. The
doubles all have dual natures describing
opposing concepts like [music] life and
death, wisdom and folly, or peace and
war. These all have multiple
pronunciations as well. The single
letters each represent singular ideas
and bear singular pronunciations.
Further, the three mothers represent the
holy trinity as well as the elements
air, water and fire. The seven double
letters correlate to the seven planets,
seven alchemical metals or in hermetic
kabala, the seven chakras.
Finally, the 12 single letters relate to
the 12 signs of the zodiac. Together,
all 22 pathways correlate with the 22
major arcana on the tarot. [music] And
we'll come back around to this topic at
the end of the video. With all of this
in mind, the final item we must discuss
is that as mentioned in a previous
episode, there are principally two tree
of life models which can be looked at.
The standard tree and the luran tree.
Each of these models have their own
unique placement of the 22 pathways
which can be seen as a right and left
brain of each other or the linear and
abstract variations.
In the standard tree, they are placed
linearly from top [music] to bottom and
right to left, starting with the first
letter at the top and ending with the
last letter on the bottom. The Luran
tree, on the other hand, observes the
relationships in a different way. The
three mother letters are the three
horizontal lines. The seven double
letters are placed upon the seven
vertical lines, and the 12 single
letters are placed upon the 12 diagonal
lines. [music]
Each of these versions of the tree bear
a great deal of information and learning
that can be extrapolated within one's
consciousness. For now and just to keep
things simple, we'll be exploring the
traditional Hebrew meanings in
relationship to the standard model of
the tree of life, which is also the
model most commonly used in the tarot.
For those who want to explore the
relationships to the Luran tree, you are
encouraged to dive in as you see fit.
Now, as with the sephidote, each of the
pathways correlate to both the micro and
macrocosm, meaning they bear
significance to our individual lives and
the universe on a greater scale. So
today, we'll do our best to provide a
simple explanation of both the creation
of reality from heaven to earth as well
as their relationship to you personally.
For those who want an even deeper
explanation of these letters, we
encourage you to check out our book, The
Book of Patch, which comes with patch
tarot. We also recommend starting a
daily meditation upon each letter in
sequence to grasp a deeper meaning of
the symbols and gain a more personal
experience of these primary forces.
Finally, please keep in mind that no
matter what, truly connecting with the
love in your heart is the great key to
everything. All of this information, the
pathways and so on may serve as a
powerful tool which we can use to
support connecting our egos with our
higher selves so that we may more fully
comprehend the reality that we are a
part of. Without further ado, here are
the 22 pathways of the tree of life.
The first path, Olaf.
Located between Keter and Hokma, Alf
describes the principal and primary
force of creation. Alf is most commonly
symbolized as an ox implying a great and
powerful force. Thousands of years ago,
the ox was a symbol of the raw power of
the earth and the power that can be
harnessed to do all manner of things.
Alf represents the first and only
creative force where all preceding
creative forces are simply different
states that this original force can move
into. In this primal state of pure
beingness, it is not a force in action.
In fact, [music] it's not doing
anything. It is the essence of infinite
potential in perfect stillness. To us,
it represents perfection beyond human
comprehension.
The second path bet. [music]
The letter bet can be observed as the
start of the story of creation as the
first letter is actually silent. [music]
In this we also have the beginning of
duality seeing both the creator and
created bet is often represented by a
house as it implies the idea of a
container or vessel by which the created
world may come into being just as the
body is the container for the soul. It
is the idea of a container though
nothing yet contained. In a simpler
sense this is the same unmoving power as
alf but now it has become aware that it
may organize itself in some way. To us,
it represents the basis of the awareness
of multiplicity within unity.
The third path, Gimmel. Giml is an
expansion of that which came before it.
The essential consciousness with form
expanding both beyond and inside of
itself. Gimmel emerges as the third and
unifying pathway resolving and
harmonizing the opposites between the
first two, forming a sacred link. Gimmel
relates with camel, the self-sufficient
animal that travels for days across
[music] the desert, which otherwise was
uncrossable in ancient times. Back then,
camels were seen as this sacred golden
creature capable of moving through the
sandy abyss. The camel's journey bears
significance to the tree of life by
representing the pathway which crosses
the barrier between Hulkma and Bina,
[music]
referred to as the abyss. This process
of consciousness traversing the abyss is
also referred to as the dark night of
the soul. A period of suffering or
facing one's own death after which the
soul dissolves into unity and emerges
enlightened. [music] Further, Giml is a
symbol of the expansion of civilization
and creation through different states of
being. To [music] us, it may also
represent the spirit of giving and
receiving, the unification of opposites,
and the deep intuition of just simply
[music] knowing.
The fourth path, Dallet. Dallet is the
pathway of dimension [music] and is also
sometimes seen as the path of humility
and receptiveness.
Dallet relates with a door and embodies
the concept of shape and the idea of
going through. A door is a gateway
through a solid object like a wall.
Essoically, a door is a special kind of
void, so to speak, that you can pass
through from one state to another. This
is a place on the tree of life where we
now have dimension moving between states
where before we only had pure energy and
its expansion. To us, Dallet represents
the nullification of the ego in the
presence of the spirit and how to return
to the source.
The fifth path, hey,
is symbolized by a window and represents
a point of view. It is a window to
divine revelation or a perspective that
has to do with the way that you express
yourself. It's sort of like the concept
of looking yet not specifically looking
at anything [music] because so far
nothing is actually manifested yet in
this region of the tree of life. Put
simply, this path represents the
perspective of the essential observing
capacity within creation. And the
expression of this core perspective
setting things in motion. We can relate
this to our quantum physics double split
experiment where we learned that simply
observing something affects both us and
the result of what becomes manifested.
[music]
From the perspective of God, you might
consider that setting a perspective on
something sets motion to the creative
process. This letter symbolizes the
effortlessness of the world and the
symbol of divinity.
The sixth path, vav.
Vav is the pathway of the learning and
teaching of cosmic law. It is the sixth
path and so the binder or unifier of
energies. Vav often means nail or
sometimes hook or anchor which is meant
to represent the thing that joins other
things together and hold [music] them in
that state. This is the cosmic principle
that allows atoms to form bonds together
and create molecules. However, at this
ethereal level, there is still nothing
manifested yet. Thus, this is the power
of the creator to enter into [music] the
world. To us it represents the geometry
of the merkaba and the connection
[music] between heaven and earth.
The seventh path Zion. Zion commonly
means sword or weapon and also relates
sometimes to the concept of a tool.
Often weapon in our minds bears
significance to war and violence. But
the concept here has more to do with the
essence of power unused like a samurai
who meditates with his sword unmoving
but focused or even the captain or
general whose sword comes as a symbol of
the power that they command. This
commanding aspect also relates to the
carpenter or gardener who commands
various tools to create new things with
virtue and care. And so the ability for
spirit to actually build and materialize
things now exists to us. This is the
concept of movement and the struggle and
balance between opposing forces
including the awareness of being a
unified spirit and an individual soul at
the same time.
The eighth path
has several main descriptors. [music]
The most common is that of a fence or
ladder though sometimes also described
as a hedge. The idea behind the fence or
hedge is that of a boundary layer by
which the creation can become manifested
within. And a ladder is really just a
fence on its side [music] delineating
the multi-dimensional boundary that is
being created. The concept of fence and
ladder are very interesting too because
with a simple twist the idea changes to
that of DNA. This is also relative to
the concept of Jacob's ladder which
comes from a story in the Bible where a
character named Jacob has a vision of an
eternal spiraling pillar [music] of
light which was said to be an insight
into the higher dimensions all the way
to unity consciousness with God. For us
in this way we can connect to the
ability to go above and beyond our
earthly limitations.
The ninth path tet the ninth path is
very curious indeed because of the wide
array of potentials that it can [music]
describe. The two most common relations
are that of a basket and of a serpent.
This is the mystery of Tet in that it
can represent polarities such as good
and evil by the nature of the serpent
being both related to the oraoris, a
symbol of wholeness and infinity and the
serpent in the garden of Eden from
Genesis. The imagery of a basket on the
other hand is often said to represent
the open container as opposed to the
closed container from before and
manifestation of each unique soul in the
process of creation. [music]
Tet also has one more representation
although much less common and that is
mud. This is the birth of density and
mass though still nothing yet is
manifested. But now the [music]
energetic substance for creation comes
into being like the unused clay before
the sculptor gives it form. To us this
letter teaches us to distinguish between
what we perceive to be good and bad and
to strive for the purity of that which
is holy and good in [music] our lives.
The 10th path, Yud. Yud relates with a
hand and speaks to the operation and
operator of the world. Building upon
what came before, there was an ethereal
tool that could be used to create
things, the primordial mud that can now
be shaped. And now, Yud is the hand of
the operator which uses the created
powers and the intelligence to know how
to use the primordial mud which came
before. In a simpler sense, it is the
power of spirit to govern and guide the
materially created. The yud is drawn as
a dot and describes that [music]
creation came from a single point and
that singularity is the essence of all
of life. To us, this may be experienced
as the singularity in our hearts which
brings life to our bodies and this is
the same power of spirit to govern and
guide the material universe.
The 11th [music] path, cuff. Cough
relates to the palm of the hand and may
either be like a cupped [music]
outstretched palm waiting to receive or
an upright palm held high like a
crossing guard moving traffic or like
when you push or invoke something to
happen. It is similar to the idea of a
container but relates more to the
potentials and possibilities of that
which can be received by matter by the
power of spirit [music] and likewise the
ways in which spirit can move matter.
It relates to the beginning of formation
or things made more solidified. Now that
there is primordial mud and the
intelligence of knowing how to use it,
this is the actual motion of creation
itself. This path holds the space for
all created possibilities, including
physical matter. For us, Kauf teaches us
to shape our characters, continually
refine ourselves, and bring spirit into
the material [music] world.
The 12th path, Lamemed. Lamemed relates
with ox code and sometimes staff or
needle. This is a symbol of learning as
lamemed sits at the center of the 22
pathways. It indicates learning at the
level of the soul and teaches that
spiritual learning is at the heart of
human experience. The idea of ox code
relates to the proddding from the higher
forces for the soul to learn. The staff
relates to the learned sage and [music]
the needle relates to the getting into
like the essence of consciousness
entering into its structured creation.
To us, Lamemed simply tells us to strive
[music] to learn everything there is to
learn and never stop attaining new
levels of wisdom. In this, we discover
one of the great meanings of life
itself, the neverending expansion of our
learning consciousness.
The 13th path, mem. The idea of mem is
related to water and describes the
energy which has now become subtly
tangible. This is not physically
tangible but energy that can be felt and
is often described in other systems asqi
[music] life force or vital energy. This
is raw energy which can be shaped but it
still lacks solidification. By following
in this way, mem has the virtue of
consistency and describes a stable
intelligence.
Mem and the element of water is also
often regarded as the divine mother or
shockti. The universe is the womb of
creation and it is out of this substance
of creation which we come to be. Our
bodies are mostly water after all. For
us personally, mem speaks towards
balanced emotion and the power of
humility.
The 14th path nun.
Nun is the path of the fish who travels
through the waters of mem. The idea of
something more solid or tangible within
the fluidity. In this the meaning is
symbolic of the soul who recognizes its
infinite nature. It leaves behind the
desires of life only to be replaced with
the freedom to continually change forms
in all of the ways that it can through
the process of death and rebirth. Non
speaks towards the relationship between
the body which is impermanent and the
soul which is eternal. In this we learn
about flexibility and suppleness going
with the flow adapting [music] to
changes and not resisting the new
experiences that come our way.
The 15th path, samk
[music] describes the essence of support
such as that of a pillar and represents
the pathway of upliftment. In a sense,
[music] the idea here is the support
that the soul uses to uphold its earthly
vessel and vice versa. It is power such
as power unused with Zion previously.
However, this time the power has a
function and this function is standing
still with great strength. The function
is the key. This is the power which
supports all of the processes that led
to something more solid beginning form
within the waters of potentiality so
that it can have the strength and
support to stay manifested. To us, Sak
teaches us circular [music] thinking
both to act for the good of the whole
not solely for the self and
simultaneously that in order to know
spirit [music] we must know ourselves.
The 16th path, ion. The letter ion
relates to an eye and has to do with the
illumination of that which is hidden and
the observation and perception of
images. [music] These are most commonly
thought of as mental or astral images,
the ideas of what could still come to be
formed physically. [music] It also
describes a focus in that there are an
infinite number of things that we may
focus on, but by choosing our focus
carefully, [music] we set our destinies
into action.
Ian also implores us to open our inner
eye and see beyond the physical realm.
It also teaches us to pay attention
[music] for conscious attention may very
well be of the highest skills we can
develop as a species with mind.
The 17th path pay. Pay translates to
mouth and this is the pathway of
communication. In a cosmic sense it is
the power of transmission. the power of
causing something to pass from one state
to another. For us, it is the power of
speech and teaches us to view our words
as being as precious as gold, to treat
them with respect and to recognize the
power that they have in their influence
over ourselves and others.
The 18th path, zadi.
Zadi most commonly relates with fish
hook and this pathway describes the
ability to align the lower personality
with the higher soul. Very commonly this
is described as the angling of the
personality to bring it into resonance
with the spirit. For us the nature of
zari is righteousness and humility
facing our own inner evils and restoring
balance within in order to bring the
greater world around us back into
harmony with nature. [music]
The 19th path cof kof relates with the
back of the head and is associated with
self-awareness. It represents the place
in the mind where visual and mental
images create the reality we conceive,
perceive and quite [music] often
believe. This letter also relates with
the lower or subconscious programming
within [music] manifested life such as
what in our modern times we call the
reptile brain. It describes the need to
reprogram these lower aspects of
ourselves which are very anim
animalistic in nature. [music]
These are our survival instincts and
often quite violent or at the very least
unrefined. In the brain, this action is
all happening in the cerebellum, the
basis of connection between the nervous
system, [music] brain and body.
The 20th path re
was the lower brain, re relates with the
idea of the top of the head and
sometimes face speaking towards the
higher mind and the individual identity.
Here there is power to interact with the
world and structure and shape the world
as we want. This letter speaks towards
identification and definitions because
in order to live in the world we do, we
need to have definitions to work with.
Ultimately, definitions and words
subjectively define the world we live
in, giving structure and meaning to our
experience. This path speaks towards the
ability to choose between greatness and
degradation and upon choosing greatness
embodying the true spirit of the creator
in form.
The 21st path, Shin. Shin relates with
the idea of a tooth, but also represents
the element of fire. It speaks towards
the human ability to change and be
changed by everything in life [music]
within us and our environments
throughout all of time. Further, both a
tooth and fire are symbols of the force
which breaks down and transmutes energy
from one state to another. This is thus
that transformation, the breaking down
of something in order to change its
form. Whether it be breaking down food
[music] to transform it into something
our bodies can digest or firing clay to
solidify it into a pot. For us, this
speaks to balance between opposing
states and extremes.
The 22nd path tough. The final pathway
is called tough, which relates with
ideas such as world, cross, mark, or
seal. The concept here is it is complete
or the [music] work is done. Sort of
like an X marks the spot connotation as
well. The finishing point, the grand
finale. This finished creation is of
course the physical universe as the
process of creation has brought
everything together and into its [music]
final form. However that manifests
physically.
Even you [music] in your wholeness are
an entire ecosystem unto yourself, but
still a part of something much greater.
Much like with the sephiidote to
compounds all of the previous pathways
together, [music]
bringing everything to a close or as we
discussed in a previous video, the
halfway point and the [music] state from
which life is born and strives to return
back to its divine origin point.
This pathway teaches us that from the
very beginning of a journey, the end was
already set out before us. In this way,
[music] we not only create the world we
live in, but the heaven we are moving
towards as well. If you follow Krishna
and ascend in his style, you go to
Krishna's heaven. If you follow Jesus
and accomplish yourself as he did, you
will go to Jesus's heaven. Much in the
same way, if you create your own path to
ascension and others follow it
successfully, they will go to your
heaven. Understanding fully that all of
these heavens are but one in the same,
different vibrations or aspects of a
greater harmonious unified body of
creation.
The end and the beginning are one and
tap is the pathway of completion.
[music]
The moment t is achieved, we begin again
at alf and the end becomes the beginning
and the beginning the end.
We've got another really fun one for you
today. [music] It's one of the most
mind-blowing pieces of content we've
seen in a long time, and it's such an
honor to share it with you. This is an
exclusive episode from Gaia called the
Masters of the Net, diving deep [music]
into the 40 years of research by Dr.
Robert Gilbert, PhD, a former nuclear
biological chemical defense [music]
marine court instructor who went through
his own awakening and became the founder
of the Vesica Institute for Holistic
Studies. His work, as you'll soon see,
offers a new way of understanding the
invisible energy matrix [music] that
underlies everything in the physical
world. While the mainstream
understanding of reality has been
largely restricted by the materialistic
[music] worldview, each day there is an
ever growing body of research that
suggests that [music] we can understand
the underlying foundation of existence
in an entirely new way. And by this
understanding, we may become free to
live harmoniously with ourselves and the
whole world. Once this episode is
complete, if you enjoyed it, please
check out the rest of this series on
Gaia using the link in the description.
It's definitely [music] worth it. Enjoy.
&gt;&gt; There is a pattern behind everything in
your life. It's [music] pain or
pleasure, happiness or misery, success
or failure. The hidden key to
self-empowerment is the knowledge of
these patterns which direct our lives.
Sacred geometry teaches the master
patterns which create our world and
which are the true secret behind all
manifestation.
This series removes the veils of
previously hidden knowledge. You will
learn key subtle energy patterns which
when activated regularly in your own
energy field can change your life.
Welcome. I'm your host, Dr. Robert J.
Gilbert, founder of the Vesica Institute
for Holistic [music] Studies. For over
40 years, I have intensively researched
the patterns behind human life. This
includes scientific studies from my time
as a US Marine Corps instructor in the
field of nuclear, biological, chemical
warfare defense and studies of spiritual
traditions around the world. While
completing my PhD in international
studies, I'm excited to share with you
in this series some of the highlights of
these 40 years of research. We will
explore together the hidden patterns
[music] which manifest everything in
physical existence.
This is a journey of empowerment.
By learning how to work with subtle
energy patterns known to ancient
traditions, you can initiate an
alchemical transformation within
yourself.
This process can empower your individual
evolution of consciousness [music] and
thereby assist the raising of
consciousness on our planet.
We begin with a hidden lineage of
initiates known in ancient Egypt as the
masters of the net.
These initiates knew a great secret that
behind everything in physical existence
is an invisible matrix of energy which
is the [music] source of all physical
manifestation.
It is this invisible energy matrix which
materializes everything in the physical
world through the patterns we call
sacred geometry.
The term sacred geometry is comprised of
geo meaning earth and metri meaning
measurement.
Sacred geometry literally means the
sacred measure of the earth. We can also
think of this in a larger sense of
sacred geometry meaning the divine
blueprints [music] of consciousness and
energy.
In the ancient world, all of the
temples, monuments, and political power
centers were built on the larger power
spots of the Earth's energy grid and
were used for establishing the exact
placement of the central axis of the
building, the walls, the altars, and all
the other features in sacred buildings.
The ancients knew that many of these
large-scale earth grids are connected to
the sacred geometry patterns we know
today as the platonic solids. They're
called platonic solids because they
appeared in the writings of Plato 2500
years ago.
However, these forms were known in
ancient temple sciences long before the
time of Plato.
The platonic solids are the geometric
forms which correspond to the four
elements of earth, water, [music] air
and fire.
Then there is the form of the fifth
element, the universal life force which
the Greeks called ether and was known
asqi, ki, prana and other names in
different traditions.
This is the fifth and final platonic
solid. This fifth element form is the
12sided docahedron
which was considered sacred [music]
and sometimes secret in the Greek
tradition. Plato hints at it when he
described the earth as looking from
above like a 12sided ball. In ancient
traditions, both the earth and the
entire universe were considered to have
the form of a dodcahedron.
It's easy to see why over the entrance
to Plato's initiation school, there was
said to be a sign which read, "No one
ignorant of geometry may enter."
In the 1970s, Ivan Sanderson wrote an
article showing the geometric locations
of physical anomalies on the Earth.
The most famous of these locations is
the Devil's Triangle around Bermuda.
However, Sanderson [music]
found that there was a geometric pattern
of similar sites all around the globe.
Sanderson found these locations were at
the nodal points of the platonic solid
known as the icosahedron.
As we will see in a later episode of
this series, the icosahedron is not only
the sacred geometry shape for this part
of the energy grid of the earth. It is
also known in science today as a key
biological form which appears for
example in the geometric form of
viruses, the most basic form of life.
Researchers discovered that to make
these Earth grid maps align properly to
these sacred geometry patterns, point
number one of the grid needed to be
aligned to one of the world's great
large-scale power spots, Giza Plateau in
Egypt.
And so it is here in the civilization of
ancient Egypt built on this primary
power spot of the earth grid that we
will find evidence of an ancient
initiation system based on the invisible
energy grids
which in ancient texts are often
referred to as [music] nets or the net.
In India, for example, the jeweled net
of Indra is described as a net extending
infinitely [music]
in all directions with jewels which
glitter like stars at every nodal point
of the net. Every jewel reflects all the
other jewels in itself. [music]
Other interpretations include that every
bright jewel at the nodal points of the
net is an atman which is the spirit core
within human beings and [music] all
spiritual beings. Each Atman spirit core
has the same divine essence as all
others but with their own unique
qualities [music] based on the karma
they have generated through acting in
the physical world.
In the highest levels of modern physics,
it is understood that physical matter is
based on both physical particles in
different states of vibration and on
waves.
Waves can collapse into particles.
Particles can disintegrate back into
waves. This is called wave particle
duality in modern physics.
Similarly, ancient traditions based both
their understanding of natural forces
and their healing methods on dynamic
vital energy, not on the physical matter
itself, which is simply a lower, denser
manifestation of the underlying energy
patterns. Ancient traditions understood
that energy in different states is the
core of all existence.
This brings us to an important secret of
sacred geometry. Whenever you see a
physical form, including the forms of
sacred geometry we will explore in this
series, don't think of it as a solid
inert structure. Always keep in mind
that what [music] stands behind this
physical structure is the net.
The vibrational matrix of energy that
this form [music] crystallized out of.
Remember that the physical form can
change immediately when the background
energy [music] matrix changes.
Everything is energy. So sacred geometry
patterns are crystallized forms showing
us the invisible vibrational matrix
which is the higher reality.
This vibrational matrix is the net which
ancient traditions learn to master.
Understanding that the solidity of
physical matter is an illusion that it
can change based on changing the
vibrational matrix behind matter [music]
is the secret of all advanced energy
healing and what we call today
vibrational medicine. It is also the
secret of all advanced spiritual
activation of the human being.
These nets or energy grids work on
higher plane levels in addition to their
work on the physical plane to create
physical form.
Modern physics has allowed materialism
to restrict its understanding of this
larger reality. So that modern
materialism only sees energy manifesting
at two levels, the electromagnetic and
[music] the physical levels.
One of the most popular models of these
higher planes today is the seven planes
model from the Theosophical Society.
This image of the seven planes of nature
is derived from the modern system of
biogeeometry
developed by Dr. Ibrahim Kareem in
Cairo, Egypt. Dr. Kareem found the
geometric shapes which [music] connect
in resonance to each plane which makes
possible very advanced work [music] in
testing or directing energy to these
planes. We will discuss biogeeometry in
more detail in the final episode of this
season. Working with higher planes along
with the net of the vibrational matrix
is a key secret of spiritual initiation.
This makes possible advanced
applications in manifestation,
prosperity work, and the materialization
of energy and thought forms into
physical reality. It is all about
knowing how to work with the patterns of
energy which move from the higher plains
of consciousness into vibrational
matrices [music] and then crystallize
into physical manifestation.
Modern materialistic science doesn't
allow itself to consider any planes
above the physical plane. It bans any
discussion of metaphysics just as
dogmatically as any fundamentalist
religion enforces the suppression of
heretical ideas.
Instead, modern science talks about
dimensions rather than higher planes.
Modern advanced physics is full of
higher dimensions. In fact, modern
physics requires the existence of many
higher dimensions [music] in order for
the mathematics of quantum physics to
work out.
But despite these higher dimensions in
physics equations, materialistic science
continues to insist that this is simply
a mathematical artifact [music] and does
not indicate the existence of any higher
metaphysical realities.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; So let's take just a moment to
understand the basics of what dimensions
are as these have taken the place in
physics today [music]
of the classical ideas of the higher
plains of existence.
Physics [music] today teaches that our
physical reality is literally a
three-dimensional geometric grid
comprised of three axes [music] each at
a 90° angle to the others.
We start with zero dimensions which is a
point an energy center. In physics it is
connected to the idea of the singularity
as the source of all creation.
In spiritual terms, the zerodimensional
point is the gateway to the divine unity
from which all polarity and [music]
manifestation emerges,
which ancient traditions would call the
divine plane.
The zero-dimensional point is literally
the spiritual origin point from which
physical space is created.
To create the first dimension, the point
moves parallel to itself [music] to
create a line. The point then moves on a
new axis, creating lines between the new
point and the two previous points,
making the simplest two-dimensional
straight line form, the triangle. The
point then moves on a new 90° axis which
creates not only new lines between the
now four points but also creates planes
on all sides of this now
three-dimensional form.
This makes the simplest straight line
three-dimensional geometrical form the
tetrahedrin.
We have now moved from the point to the
line to the plane to the solid from zero
dimensions [music] to three dimensions.
If we move the point into another new
axis [music]
away from the existing three dimensions
of space, we then create a
fourthdimensional object. We cannot see
any aspect of fourthdimensional or
higher forms because our human senses
are based on perceiving our
three-dimensional world.
However, it may be that our subtle
organs of spiritual perception
could perceive these higher dimensions
[music] or higher plains.
This realization that beings with sense
organs for only lower dimensions could
only see fragments of higher dimensional
objects was the basis for the concept of
flatland by Edwin Abbott. The flatland
concept shows how a two-dimensional
being could only see [music] simple
two-dimensional or one-dimensional
aspects of three-dimensional objects
moving through the plane of the world
that he perceives.
The lesson of course is that the same is
true for us as three-dimensional beings.
We can only see 3D or lower dimensional
sections of any fourthdimensional or
higher dimensional objects moving
through our world. This flatland concept
of our only perceiving small fragments
of higherdimensional objects moving
through our world opens up new
understandings of mysterious spiritual
manifestations of UFO sightings. etc.
Fifth, sixth and even higherdimensional
forms are also possible and have already
been identified in advanced scientific
mathematics and geometric studies. When
we see these higherdimensional geometric
forms on a flat two-dimensional surface,
they appear as a complex grid pattern,
the net described in the ancient
traditions.
So if we add another point to the
preceding series of dimensional images,
a new point which would now be in the
fourth dimension along an axis shift not
perceivable by a three-dimensional
person. This would create a
fourthdimensional form of [music] which
we would only see a shadow of it in our
dimension.
Note that the fourthdimensional form at
the end of this sequence when shown in a
lower dimensional projection as a flat
2D form from a specific perspective
looks like a five-pointed star,
a pentagram inside a five-sided [music]
enclosure, a pentagon. This opens up the
possibility that forms and sacred
geometry used in [music] ancient
spiritual traditions are actually lower
dimensional projection views of higher
dimensional objects.
These 2D or 3D sacred geometry patterns
may actually have the hidden power to
energetically [music] connect us to
higher dimensional realities.
As we will see in a later episode, the
pentagram form we see here, created by
higherdimensional projection, is a key
sacred geometry pattern for the human
energy body and has been used for
spiritual and magical purposes
throughout recorded human history. This
pentagram within a pentagon is also
related to the large dodcahedron of the
Earth grid we saw earlier in this
episode. The dodcahedron is comprised of
12 pentagons [music]
showing that the energy geometries of
the human body also exist in a larger
macro form in the energy grids of the
earth itself.
This is a profound aspect of sacred
geometry that geometric forms we see may
just be shadows of higher dimensional
forms which most human beings have not
yet developed a sense organ to perceive
directly.
Now that we have explored some basics of
energy grids or what the ancients called
the net as patterns which create the
physical world and which manifest on
multiple planes and dimensions.
We can now explore the hidden tradition
of the masters of the net [music] in
ancient Egypt.
The ancient Egyptian tradition
cultivated [music]
deep hidden knowledge and applications
of the energetic net behind all physical
manifestation both in the human energy
field [music] and in the earth itself.
In modern physics, it is understood that
all physical matter is within an energy
grid of [music] space and time. Today we
see in physics books a representation of
the net of spacetime being distorted by
physical mass.
[music] This net is often shown looking
like a rubber sheet with a squared
geometric grid on it being distorted
[music] and stretched by an object such
as a planet. This means that the net is
malleable and it can be modified.
Over 5,000 years before modern [music]
physics, this same energy grid, which is
today called the net of spacetime, was
known and shown in the ancient Egyptian
mysteries as the net which creates and
sustains [music] all physical existence.
Learning to tap the power of this
geometric energy grid was a key aspect
of the Egyptian temple initiation. Those
initiated into these mysteries were
known as the masters of the net.
Behind the illustrations on the Egyptian
temple walls were geometric grids
constructed first by the artist before
creating the final illustrations we see
on the completed temple walls in Egypt.
These geometric grids used in ancient
Egypt are known to modern Egyptologists.
But with their materialistic viewpoint,
many believe these grids to have only
been a practical method to lay out the
illustrations on the wall. They ignore
the vast literature in ancient Egypt
which describes this net [music] and its
magical power.
There are specific terms used for
different aspects of the geometric net
of energy by the Egyptian initiates of
the temple. Some of those terms are seen
here from hieroglyphic text published by
British researchers in the late 1800s.
There were also direct representations
of the net.
For the public, the net was often
represented metaphorically as a net used
to catch fish or to catch birds.
Initiates were shown learning to master
[music] the net and its powers. Deeper
initiation teachings were also held
within the net imagery. [music]
Ancient Egyptians did not refer to
non-physical beings [music] as gods or
goddesses as they are translated into
English today from ancient text, but
rather they refer to these beings
[music] as nets, the conscious forces of
nature which the initiate learns to
directly communicate with and to direct
their power.
Many negers were shown with animal heads
not because ancient Egyptians worshiped
animals [music] as a sometimes falsely
speculated today but because they
understood that higher divine powers
manifested through specific animals.
Just as today we say clever as a fox.
The ibis headed net was known to the
ancient Egyptians as jee.
But today we know this netter from the
later corrupted Greek name. Thot or thut
was understood to be the being who
created and taught the Egyptian temple
science. The non-physical servants of
Jiote were depicted as baboons casting
nets into water to catch fish.
Now the deeper initiation knowledge
behind this was that these fish caught
in the net were in actuality the souls
of the dead who are unable to
consciously navigate through the
non-physical worlds and so became caught
in the net.
There is a specific teaching about this
in the key Egyptian initiation text
called the book of coming forth into
light which today we often call the
Egyptian book of the dead. In this text
the initiate learns to navigate and
master the net. In chapter 153 the
initiate learns to consciously navigate
through the net as seen in this quote.
Oh you fishermen, you shall not catch me
in your net. You shall not catch me in
your nets in which you catch the unwary.
For I know the net from its upper
heights to its lower depths.
This remarkable initiation text details
all of the aspects of the net from the
earth out into cosmological bodies and
which aspects of the net connect to
specific higher non-physical beings, the
neters.
The true master of the net is the
initiate who has learned how to navigate
through the net and learn how to use the
net of the living energy matrix behind
everything on the physical plane to
develop powers that the uninitiated
considered to be magical.
In ancient Egypt, the net of death and
rebirth was named Azera, a name later
corrupted in Greek to become Osiris.
The sacred geometry form known as the
backbone of Azra in ancient Egypt was
the Jed pillar which was erected each
year in the raising of the Jed ceremony
to connect heaven and earth.
Just as the Egyptian temples connected
[music] power spots on the earth on
which they were built to power spots in
the heavens and just as the human spine
stand erect for us to be held between
earth and heaven to act on the physical
plane.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; The raising of the Jed pillar was the
culmination of the mysteries of Azra or
Osiris.
In the ancient Egyptian document which
is today known as the Westcar Papyrus,
one of the highest masters of the net in
ancient Egypt is described as the Jedi
[music]
based on the Jed pillar being the
backbone of Ozra connecting heaven and
earth.
The Jedi derives extraordinary powers
from using the net to control natural
forces.
One story in the Westcar Papyrus [music]
describes a master of the net, a high
priest for Pharaoh Snoferu who parts the
waters of a lake, [music] making a part
of a lake dry so that a valuable piece
of jewelry can be reclaimed from its
floor.
Today such miracles or magic are
associated with the parting of the Red
Sea by Moses described in the Old
Testament. However, these abilities to
control natural forces were in fact a
part of the masters of the net
initiation lineage from which Moses
derived his knowledge during his
training [music] in the Egyptian
temples. Similarly, the use of the staff
by Moses is directly derived from the
training and the use of the staff in the
Egyptian temples.
The staff acts as an [music] antenna
for detecting and projecting higher
forces based on the designs and shapes
on the staff.
In the Westcar Papyrus, after the story
of the priest who parts the waters for
the pharaoh, the story of the Jedi is
introduced. He is said in this ancient
Egyptian text to specifically have the
power to restore life to the dead and to
know hidden secrets of the ancient
temples. The term used in recent times
in the Star Wars film series of a Jedi
knight who can direct the force
thus carries a powerful subconscious
resonance and attraction for people
today. This is because it comes from the
Heka system of words of power in ancient
Egypt. Specifically, the terms Jed
[music] and Jedi.
The lightsaber in Star Wars sometimes
resembles the form of the Jed pillar as
well.
From ancient Egypt, the hidden knowledge
of the net spread to other cultures in
the western tradition as well.
The foundation of the western
monotheistic tradition is the Old
[music] Testament whose first book
Genesis describes the creation of the
earth from higher spiritual [music]
realms through the use of specific
sacred geometry patterns. The very first
statement in Genesis in Hebrew is beset.
Note that in the Hebrew original text,
[music] there are no divisions of the
letters into words, just an unbroken
stream of letters which can be divided
[music] and interpreted in deeper ways
within the cabalistic mysteries.
Beset is usually translated into English
as meaning in the beginning.
But in the deeper cababalistic
teachings, it also literally means the
net or God creates the net as the
beginning of creation.
This means that the same geometric
energy net we saw previously as the core
of ancient Egyptian initiation which
appears as the matrix of spacetime in
modern physics is also the very first
statement of Genesis which can be
accurately translated as God creates the
net as the very first act of creation.
The Jewish tradition is well known for
avoiding visual images of divine
realities. However, in the Cabala,
there's a powerful discussion of a
specific net of creation manifested by
the 22 flame letters of the Hebrew
alphabet, each of which is a divine
power.
In the modern Jewish Cabala, this net
pattern is referred to as the 231
gates.
Perhaps the best known net pattern from
the Jewish tradition in modern times is
the tree of life. An energy matrix which
is a map connecting multiple dimensions
which also microcosmically manifest as a
powerful energy grid within the human
energy body.
Methods to activate this powerful energy
grid within our human energy [music]
field require real knowledge about this
pattern and its effects.
rather than the inaccurate speculation
which has become so prevalent in recent
[music] times.
This lost knowledge was restored in
modern times by a Greek Christian healer
and initiate known to the public as
Dascalos [music]
who referred to the pattern as the
symbol of life from its ancient Egyptian
roots.
Activating each key part of this net
grid pattern requires regular practice.
We will show you a simplified method
where you will activate this pattern one
section at a time so that by the end of
this series you will have learned how to
activate [music] the full pattern in
your energy field. Please be aware that
this can be an extremely powerful
practice which can accelerate your path
of [music] personal evolution and can
even beneficially transform your
spiritual destiny.
We will in this series refer to this
powerful sacred [music] geometry grid in
the human energy field as the grid of
life design or referred to in short by
the acronym gold. This will help to
remind us that this pattern is indeed
linked to activating the gold energy of
the saints in [music] our energy field.
The same golden radiance which is shown
above the heads or bodies of the great
initiates of every spiritual tradition
around the world.
So let us begin our activation of the
grid of life design or gold with the
activation of the gold energy
surrounding our head, the seat of our
consciousness.
If you'd like to do the practice now,
please see the companion video for this
episode. Otherwise, please set an
intention to come back and do the
practice at a later time.
and join us for our next episode where
we will reveal four [music] of the
deepest secrets within sacred geometry.
We'll explore more of the core hidden
knowledge of the masters of the net from
Egypt and from other great initiation
traditions around the world.
&gt;&gt; Dr. Gilbert shared profound information
about the invisible matrix of energy
underlying our material reality which he
described is based on essential
geometric structures something we often
know as sacred geometry. Today we are
honored to share the second episode in
that series where Dr. Gilbert will take
us further into comprehending four major
secrets of the human energetic field.
When we understand that light and
consciousness are in essence the same
thing, we are able to perceive through
the limitations of the material form to
the underlying spirit from which all
things come. Buckle up. This is an
amazing video.
Welcome. I'm your host Dr. Robert J.
Gilbert. [music] In this episode, we
will explore four major secrets of
sacred geometry.
These secrets will guide us into
learning a very powerful method which
can activate any energy center in your
body or energy field.
You'll learn in this episode how to
apply this method to activate the most
important energy center in the human
head. what in the Himalayan tradition is
called the cave of Brahma.
This exploration will lead us into the
highest sources [music]
of inspiration and spiritual visions
and into the many levels of our
multi-dimensional world.
Our first great secret of sacred
geometry reveals the true source of all
physical manifestation.
This secret is that sacred geometry
patterns are in reality thought forms in
the mind of God which become the divine
blueprints for all of creation.
Let's start with an important
development in human spiritual evolution
that large numbers of human beings are
increasingly experiencing inner visions
of the sacred geometry patterns behind
the physical plane along with visions of
the higher worlds which interact with
the physical.
These sacred geometry thought forms
which more and more people are
experiencing [music]
are in actuality packets of divine
consciousness holding inside of them
pure structural patterns which then move
down from the higher plains to manifest
on every level of creation.
These sacred geometric visions can come
whenever we release our contracted
perception of the physical world [music]
and expand into deeper levels of
awareness.
In my 30 years of publicly teaching
[music] sacred geometry, in every class,
I would have students tell me that the
pattern I had just taught them was one
that they had seen before. Students told
me they had seen the pattern internally
in a dream, in a vision, in an iawaska
journey or other psychotropic
experience,
or in a transmission from a spiritual
teacher. In some cases, they had been
taught a specific sacred geometry
pattern as a private secret of a
tradition into which they received
initiation.
Being told they could never mention it
to anyone outside the tradition and then
being astonished when they found out in
my class that it was actually a part of
the complete sacred geometry pattern
language known to multiple traditions.
Ancient traditions knew that these
sacred geometry patterns which underlly
all of creation are in reality in their
deepest essence thought forms from the
mind of God.
So our visions of these sacred geometry
patterns can at their highest level mean
a literal communion of our human mind
with the divine mind.
This experience can transform our
deepest sense of ourselves and of what
our true potential really is.
This idea that the basis of creation is
sacred geometric patterns is related to
the findings of some modern physicists
who say that the evidence in modern
physics shows that the essence of all
creation is not physical matter but
consciousness.
A key aspect of consciousness being the
foundation of all existence is that
light and consciousness [music]
are the exact same thing.
This is embedded in Genesis with
creation beginning with the statement
let there be light.
Modern physics says that everything is
fundamentally energy and that light
exists both as a physical particle and
as an energy wave.
Light is the fundamental constant of
nature linking the concepts of physical
mass [music]
and energy together in the famous E= MC²
equation of Einstein.
Light sets the speed limit for the
[music] physical plane. Modern physics
says that nothing in the physical world
can travel faster than the speed of
light. This has all led to the concept
that everything physical is actually
made of light and that physical matter
is simply light energy in a specific
state of materialization.
Ancient traditions knew that when
consciousness is experienced externally,
it appears as light.
And when light appears internally inside
of us, we experience it as
consciousness.
This is why auras of brilliant light are
always sewn in classical traditions
around great initiates either just
around their head with the activation of
their consciousness [music]
or around their entire body and energy
field
with higher levels of initiation and
self transformation.
This brings us to what we might call the
first letter in the alphabet of sacred
geometry forms [music] which create the
world.
This is the ancient symbol of the point
in [music] the center of the circle.
This was the hieroglyph for the
spiritual being of the sun [music] raah
in ancient Egypt and became the image
for the sun in astrology.
Just as creation comes from light, the
source of light and life in our earthly
lives is the sun. This same symbol is
used as the sign for gold in alchemy.
Ancient traditions understood gold to be
a physical crystallization
of the same energy quality as in
sunlight.
This pattern is also the sign for the
godhead, the source of creation in both
the Rosacrruian and Masonic traditions.
As seen in this image based on the work
of the Rosacrruian initiate Rudolph
Steiner,
the Godhead is the divine unity, the
original unified field where all is one.
The macrocosm is the higher world which
emerges from that unity. The macrocosm
contains the godhead broken up into
discrete pieces into a multitude of
spiritual beings, worlds, and creative
processes.
The microcosm contains that same
totality of the godhead, but broken up
into pieces of denser, smaller levels of
manifestation, reaching down to the
vital energy, physical and
electromagnetic levels.
We will see in a future episode that the
hexog of the macrocosm and the pentagram
of the microcosm
are sacred geometry keys to unlocking
two essential levels [music] of every
human being. The astral body of
consciousness and the aetheric [music]
or pronic body of vital energy.
These are also key parts of the maraba
the human soul vehicle.
We have to switch our understanding of
sacred geometry from being static forms
to instead focus on the living
dynamically vibrating energy fields
[music] which create these forms.
When dealing with sacred geometry forms
like the point in the center of the
circle, think of these forms [music] as
being similar to electronic circuit
diagrams showing energy patterns which
[music] we can directly apply for
practical purposes. The point in the
center of the circle is a
two-dimensional image. It becomes in
three dimensions the point in the center
of the sphere of creation with dynamic
movement between the center and the
boundary of creation within the sphere.
In modern physics, the so-called big
bang theory is misunderstood by most of
the [music] general public.
The theory does not say that some
unknown explosion filled up an already
existing space and time with physical
things. Rather, it says that an original
outward movement from a zerodimensional
point, the singularity,
created space and time through the
outward expansion of the point, which
created an expanding sphere of the
three-dimensional physical world that we
live in.
In other words, a sacred geometric
movement from the point to the
surrounding sphere is the foundation of
all creation in modern physics.
The concept that the geometric center is
the source of all creation and is a
literal gateway to the divine plane is
found in classical spiritual traditions.
It is prominent in the Indian tradition
as the bindu point of divine light found
in the exact center of Indian yantras
of the mandalas of eastern traditions
and sacred geometric forms in general.
In modern times, Dr. Ibrahim Karim of
Cairo, Egypt has demonstrated that there
is a powerful subtle energy quality that
is literally present [music] in the
center of all geometric forms. This
powerful energy of the center appears in
both two-dimensional geometric drawings
and in three-dimensional forms.
As long as the boundary information of
the geometric form is present in space
like a conducting wire in an electrical
circuit,
this subtle energy appears in the center
of the geometric form.
Dr. Kareem developed methods to directly
[music] detect and apply this powerful
subtle energy of the center leading to
the creation of the new energy science
called biogeeometry.
the subtle energy quality from the
geometric center. Dr. Kareem was able to
demonstrate replicatable biological
effects on living beings at the Egyptian
National Research Center
and in multiple international university
and medical studies.
Classical traditions described [music]
the act of creation from the center as
moving through multiple levels of
densification
which are referred to as spiritual
planes or as the planes of nature.
The initial zerodimensional point of
creation which physics calls the
singularity in metaphysics is known as
the divine plane.
This point of the divine plane is the
key to the unified field beyond any
polarity which exists in lower worlds of
manifestation.
Dr. Kareem has created a new
multi-dimensional wave model describing
the different planes of manifestation
and showing which geometric shapes are
in resonance with each plane.
In practical biogeeometry applications,
these shapes can act like antennas to
focus on a specific plane to either
detect and analyze their energy or to
direct energy to [music] or from that
plane.
The highest plane, the divine, manifests
its energy through the zerodimensional
point, which manifests in the center of
all geometric forms.
The circle and sphere, the perfect
balanced containers for creation,
resonate with the physical plane where
vibrations crystallize into matter. When
we connect the highest and the lowest
planes in Dr. Karim's model, we see the
point in the center of the circle for
what it really is, [music] the divine
unity plane in the center of the
physical world of creation.
Dr. Kareem's discovery is connected to
other scientific discoveries.
Recent experiments using laser light to
create cavitations within water which
are empty spheres or bubbles have shown
incredible effects which cannot be
explained by modern science. When this
water bubble collapses, it releases both
light and sound, a phenomenon known as
sonoluminescence.
The instant the water bubble collapses,
it also releases a tremendous amount of
excess energy. In one experiment, when
linked to a pump with 840 W input, it
produced 2,800
W of power, an increase of over 300% of
the input energy.
considered impossible in modern physics,
but explained in research papers as a
possible release of hidden energy from
the quantum vacuum, which some people
call 0 point energy. Studies of the
collapsing water cavity have found that
this collapse creates for a millisecond
heat of over 5,000 Kelvin. The surface
of the sun is 5,800 Kelvin.
Just as Dr. Kareem's work shows a subtle
energy which affects biological life
coming from the center of the sphere and
all geometric forms. So sonoluminescence
research [music] proves massive
millisecond releases from the center of
collapsing spherical structures in
water.
So we have now [music] explored the
first secret. How the point in the
center of the circle image is a packed
thought form in the mind of God which
holds [music] encoded information about
how the divine geometric center, the
singularity, the unified field manifests
the sphere of physical creation.
We now come to a second [music] great
secret of sacred geometry which is that
every human being can develop the
ability to perceive, create and send
these divine-packed thought forms of
sacred geometry. The precise methods of
how to do this have been hidden in
closed initiation circles for thousands
of years.
In the Cabala, the mind of God is
described as an ocean of fire which is
pure consciousness. Every human being
receives a spark from this ocean of
fire. And this divine spark becomes our
immortal spirit core. Our microcosmic
part of the one universal being.
This flame of our higher spirit core
ignites above our head during advanced
forms of spiritual initiation.
This is seen in the Indian tradition
with the flame appearing above the head
when a person becomes twice born
and in Christianity it is seen in the
flames above the heads of the disciples
led by Mary Magdalene at Pentecost.
In the western spiritual tradition it is
said that humanity is the microcosm of
the macrocosm and that we are the crown
of creation. This means that every human
being has within them all the plains of
creation all the powers of the godhead
but in a latent and sleeping form
[music] which must be awakened.
This is a process of illumination. In
other words, increasing our internal
light which we have seen as the external
manifestation of divine consciousness
itself.
We have this incredible slumbering
potential because we are a direct
emanation of the godhead reduced in
scale to the microcosmic level but with
all the inherent qualities and powers of
the divine.
The law of attraction that you will
attract to yourself what you create in
your consciousness is an example of
modern teachings on the power of the
human mind to create. Science of mind
and related mental healing methods are
examples of the power of the human mind
to heal and to create the fundamental
conditions [music] of both illness and
health depending on how skillfully we
use our minds.
Many healers have found that when they
combine the clear focused creation of a
thought form holding the desired state
of health with whatever method of
healing they are applying
that the results improve. sometimes
miraculously.
This method is very powerful when the
light of our consciousness, our mind
power
is focused [music] and coherent like a
laser light. It is also strengthened
when beneficial spiritual beings and
energies are lovingly asked to help with
the healing.
This ability to perceive or create
thought forms at the higher macrocosmic
level is not based on thinking in words.
It is a higher order thinking in mental
images, in sounds, in internal
vibrational states. It is a thinking
that lives and plays in the vibrational
essence behind physical things.
In humanity's current state of
evolution, we break down information
into thinking in words, one word at a
time, to represent every separate
component of the thought, and then we
slowly build up larger concepts. But
this is a very slow method. But for
angelic beings and more advanced
non-physical beings, they can
communicate through [music] an
instantaneous transmission of a thought
form containing densely packed
information.
We can use the terminology of the late
French medical doctor Samuel Sagon,
founder of the modern clair vision
school, and call these higher level
dense packets of consciousness packed
thought forms.
Every human being has experienced this
[music] type of packed thought form.
When we have been thinking about some
issue and then we get into a relaxed
state [music]
and then in this open state we receive a
packed thought form in an instant which
contains a huge amount of embedded
information.
This is the Eureka moment. This is the
vision received in the vision quest.
This is the transmission received from
the spiritual teacher or an angelic
being. This is the opening of our
awareness to merge with a higher field
of consciousness.
This secret of packed thought forms
brings us to our third [music] secret
that the sacred geometric structures of
the human energy body are keys to access
our latent spiritual powers.
The difference between an ordinary
person and a spiritual adept is that the
latter has an energy field which is
highly activated and sacred
geometrically structured. This makes
available to them higher states of
consciousness and other powers which
appear magical to ordinary people who
are stuck in dense toxic energy fields.
For this reason, hidden traditions of
initiation around the world train their
students to understand where the key
spiritual centers are in their energy
field and how to activate them. This
knowledge of the sacred geometry
structures of the human energy system
opens up a hidden world which controls
health and illness, our mind and
emotions, and our latent spiritual
potential.
There are many different sacred geometry
structures in our energy bodies. It's a
huge science in itself.
Let's clarify now just a few structures
which provide the background we need for
the powerful energy activation practice
[music] you will learn at the end of
this episode.
The primary energy axis of our body is
our central column of energy which runs
in the absolute vertical midline of our
body from the crown center to the
perennium at the base of the abdomen.
This central column is not the same as
the spinal energy circuit described in
many traditions. The very existence of
this midline central column was kept
secret by many traditions and it
features prominently in many of the most
powerful spiritual activation practices.
In the exact [music] center of the
central column runs a golden thread of
divine energy which holds the original
unity energy of the divine plane inside
the central column in our body. The
seven primary energy centers on our
central column are known today by their
Indian name chakras meaning wheel
because they appear on the front and
back of the body as spinning vortices of
energy. For the five chakras from the
third eye or ana center in the head down
to the sexual chakra. The vortices at
each of these five chakras are paired up
in the front and the back of the body.
The tips of the two vortices meet at the
golden thread in the very center of the
central column. The very top and bottom
chakras along the central channel in our
body. The crown or sahas raar center and
the base or muladhara center are
connected together in their own vertical
vortex pair right on the central column
itself. Our central column continues
down from the perennium at the base of
the abdomen to go between our legs and
then below our feet into the earth to
ground us and also continues in the
opposite direction above the human head
[music] to connect us to higher
consciousness centers.
The energy centers in our physical body
can only hold a certain intensity level
of power. Otherwise, their high level of
voltage would burn out the smaller
subtle energy circuits in the human body
which are referred to as nadis in the
Indian tradition.
However, energy centers in our subtle
energy field outside of our physical
body can hold much higher energy
intensity. This means that the true
energy centers we need to activate in
order to fully perceive, create, and
transmit packed thought forms are
actually outside the physical body in
our greater energy field. However,
before we can activate these higher
centers outside of the physical body in
a balanced way, we must activate and
have our spirit fully inhabit the key
chakras in our body. In our modern
culture which is very intellectual and
thinking centric, the third eye chakra
is often the first chakra to be
activated. The third eye chakra is named
in Sanskrit which means both to perceive
and to command. We can use the mind
power and light generated by the
activated third eye chakra to help
activate all the other chakras in the
body and energy field.
The third eye chakra is often
misunderstood in western circles to be
an energy center only in the front of
the head between the eyebrows. But as we
have seen, there's actually a front and
back vortex pair connecting at the third
eye chakra. In reality, the third eye is
a multi-dimensional geometric structure
[music] which runs as a horizontal
cylinder of energy from between the
eyebrows, connects to the central column
in the center of the head, and then
continues through to the back of your
head.
Just as the three 90° axes of space
define the three-dimensional physical
world, so it defines the sacred space in
the center of the third eye cylinder. We
can call the three axes of space the
cubicle cross because it is a cross in
three dimensions rather than just two
dimensions. And this three-axis cross is
the structural infrastructure of the
cube shape connected to
three-dimensional physical
manifestation.
The first axis of the cubicle cross in
the head is the front back axis just
mentioned. The horizontal cylinder of
energy running from between the eyebrows
to the area of the bump in the back of
your head.
The second 90° axis is the top down
vertical line of the central column we
discussed previously.
The third axis is the side to side axis.
This can be experienced by putting your
attention at the top of both ears and
becoming aware of an axis running
through the two brain hemispheres and
the corpus colosum between the
hemispheres.
Where these three axes [music] meet in
the cubicle cross of our head is at the
location of the third ventricle of the
brain. This is a key spiritual center in
the human body called the cave of Brahma
in the Indian tradition. This is a large
open area of the brain through which
flows the cerebrros spinal fluid, a true
water of life. The cerebral spinal fluid
is a completely different bodily fluid
system [music] than the blood or the
lymph systems. It is literally a liquid
ocean which pulses [music]
through the human spine and brain making
life and movement possible in the human
body.
On the periphery of the third ventricle
within this liquid ocean are both the
pineal and the pituitary glands. These
glands are understood in classical
traditions to be the key anchors for
[music] spiritual development in the
human body.
In addition to their powerful physical
functions as sources [music] of
neurotransmitters
and body regulating secretions
by activating the center area of the
cubicle cross in the head, the cave of
Brahma, your entire head system is both
activated and stabilized.
Activating the cave of Brahma also
ignites other energy activations
throughout [music] the entire human
energy field.
This brings us now to a fourth secret
that these hidden practices to activate
the human energy system do so by
applying the exact [music] same sacred
geometry patterns which created our
world. These key patterns move energy in
the major [music] centers and circuits
of the human body and thereby activate
our full spiritual potential.
This fourth secret connects us to the
energetic practice from our first
episode where you learn to activate the
first segment of the powerful net energy
grid of the human body which we call the
grid of life design or gold.
In that first practice, you learn to
connect three powerful energy centers
around your head into a golden triangle
which clears and elevates our
consciousness to higher levels. However,
we perform that practice in a very
simple way. Just putting our attention
on each of the three energy centers and
then mentally connecting them. We can
now make these energy activations much
stronger and more effective by using a
precise sacred geometry pattern.
This advanced method applies the core
manifestation pattern we explored
earlier in this episode. the point in
the center of the circle which is the
dynamic movement from the divine unity
center to the spherical boundary of
creation and back again. To apply this
powerful [music] pattern for energy
activations, we must first understand
that to live and survive in our external
three-dimensional physical world, we
usually move our attention outwards
through our [music] physical senses out
into all directions in the world around
us. This is the movement from the divine
center to the surrounding sphere, the
external boundary. The first part of
this energy activation practice is to
reverse the usual outward movement of
our attention back into the center which
it comes from. To put it very simply,
for physical awareness, we move outwards
to our periphery. For spiritual
awareness, we move the opposite
direction inwards back into the center.
By pulling our attention back into the
very center of any energy center in the
body, we move through layers of the
subtle body until we touch the divine
core [music] at the center, the
zerodimensional point or zero point. By
pulling our energy and consciousness
back into the divine center, we activate
that center.
When activated, this center then
reverses the direction of movement so
that we switch again from going inward
to now having the activated energy
center radiate outwards [music] in all
directions.
This natural counter movement radiates
from the center back out to the
periphery, but with a much stronger
awakened power than before, now pouring
out from that energy center. This
creates in our energy body an expanding
sphere radiating out from that center
point to create a radiant sun [music]
around that energy center. The effect of
this practice is described and
illustrated in virtually every world
tradition showing a radiant sun of
energy around a person's head or their
heart or other activated energy centers.
This is the aura of an awakened master,
an initiate. This method has two stages.
The first stage is the inward movement
of our energy and awareness into the
center point of an energy center. When
our inwardly moving consciousness
touches the divine center, this
profoundly activates the energy center
we are focusing on. This first stage we
will call 0 point centering or ZPC for
short.
The second stage is the outward
expansion from the divine center when it
has been activated.
Turning that energy center we are
focusing on into a radiant sun.
We will call the second stage the
radiance stage.
What we are calling zero point centering
and radiance are known by a variety of
names in different traditions. Center
and periphery, expansion and
contraction, involution and exolution,
divine pulsation,
etc. Unfortunately, when most modern
systems teach this practice, they almost
always teach only one of the two phases,
ignoring or dismissing the other phase.
Eastern systems tend to focus only on
the inward movement, the zero point
centering movement into the center,
whereas western systems tend to focus
only on the outward movement, the
radiance out into the surrounding
sphere.
This is a common metaphysical problem.
Many of our modern spiritual practices
are based on shattered fragments of the
whole with key parts of the practice
missing because we don't understand the
full pattern.
Sacred geometry holds the key to
understanding the complete pattern.
It is essential that both parts of this
practice, the inwards and outwards
movements are used together to create
the optimal balanced activation of any
energy center. Otherwise, it's like
trying to walk and move forward by only
using one foot or breathing by only
using inb breath or outreath which
ignores the healthy rhythm of
alternating the opposite poles of the
practice.
We can perform this practice on any
energy center in the body to activate
it. We could even use this method to
activate an energy center in another
person's [music] body through putting
our mind inside their energy center and
creating this movement pattern.
This activation of an energy center
helps to fully manifest that cent's
inherent powers. This awakens [music]
the slumbering divine powers within any
energy center of our body while also
balancing and restoring harmony and
opening up perception of higher
non-physical realities.
Please keep in mind that external
explanations like these are essential to
understand these deep initiation
processes. However, we must be careful
not to fall into the common trap of
modern spirituality, which is to
intellectually understand a concept, but
to have never really experienced the
full reality of it. Only by experiencing
the practice will you truly know and be
benefited by it.
Previously, we created the golden
triangle around the head in episode 1.
Now we will activate the cave of Brahma
in the center of the three axis cross in
the head. This area is a master
controller of the brain and body of the
entire sacred geometry net of the human
energy field. The cave of Brahma can
activate a wide range of new powers,
abilities and [music] states of
consciousness.
The practice you are about to learn is
almost never described publicly.
Instead, [music] it is encoded in sacred
geometric imagery. The same way many
hidden practices are encoded in sacred
geometry images which are understood by
initiates but are thought to be simply
symbolic by the general public. For
example, this activation of the cave of
Brahma in the cubicle cross of the head
was encoded in the Christian tradition
through the kairo symbol of early
Christianity in which the Greek letter
row which looks like an English capital
P created the vertical axis of the
cubicle cross and the letter kai looking
like an English X created the two
horizontal axes which when flattened
into 2D looks like an X. This was a
symbol for Christ or more precisely for
Christ consciousness. The activation of
the spiritual center in the head into a
radiant sun of divine light. This was
not only a general representation of the
cubicle cross as the three axes of
physical space [music] but was
specifically shown in the classical
images to be inside the head where icons
of Christ show the vertical axis down
through the crown center and the
horizontal axis through the top of the
ears meeting at the cave of Brahma in
the center of the head. This practice is
actually quite simple. However, when you
first perform it, you will have to train
your energy body to learn [music] this
new movement. Just as we have to train
the physical muscles of our body to
perform the movements of a new sport
[music]
or activity, so we have energetic
muscles in our energy field, which most
people have no idea even exist. These
energetic muscles are in an atrophied
state, just as if we had not used a
physical muscle for decades. So in the
beginning we will need to apply more
effort to flex this atrophied energetic
muscle again. But through repeated
practice you will find it easier and
easier each time to make the sacred
geometric energy movement. The practice
becomes in time almost effortless and
more powerful and tangible with every
repetition.
This powerful contraction expansion at
any energy center brings it back to life
and pulsating just as expansion and
contraction of a physical muscle during
weightlifting leads to physical growth.
This practice of zero point centering
and radiance done specifically in the
center of the cubicle cross in the cave
of Brahma may also activate a range of
internal energy circuits in your body
giving rise to sensations or internal
perceptions of [music] light, color and
vibration.
In summary, this is a very effective
practice which will allow you to
powerfully activate any energy center in
your [music] field. If you'd like to do
the practice now, please see the
companion video for this episode.
Otherwise, please set an intention to
come back and do the practice at a later
time. Please join us for our next
episode where we will explore the sacred
geometry secrets of the cup of the Holy
Grail. and you will learn how to use
this form to activate and recharge your
entire energetic field. See you then.
&gt;&gt; So, pretty amazing, right? But as Dr.
Gilbert explained, only
intellectualizing the information
without putting it into practice will
keep us limited from truly experiencing
the awakening within. And so if you're
called to go deeper and do the practice
and watch the [music] rest of the
series, head over to Gaia using the link
in the description and continue the
journey right now.